Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis-targeted cell and drug delivery to tumor.


When tumor cells undergo apoptosis in response to chemotherapy, the
levels of apoptotic biomarkers such as phosphatidylserine and histone H1
are increased at the cell surface. Here we hypothesized that the
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis would amplify in situ apoptotic biomarkers
(homing signals) for apoptosis-targeted drug carriers and enhance drug
delivery. To examine this possibility, we employed a phage
display-identified CQRPPR peptide (ApoPep-1) as a targeting moiety, which
was able to recognize apoptotic cells by binding to histone H1 on the
surface of apoptotic cells. When injected into tumor-bearing mice,
ApoPep-1-labeled, fluorescent liposomes containing doxorubicin inhibited
tumor growth more efficiently than untargeted or folate-labeled
liposomes. Moreover, in vivo fluorescence imaging could enable monitoring
of tumor response during the chemotherapy. The imaging signals at tumor
were increased by the homing of apoptosis-targeted liposomes, which was
correlated with the increase of apoptosis and the amount of doxorubicin
(payloads) at the tumor and, conversely, with the decrease of tumor
volume. Next, we harnessed the chemotherapy-induced apoptosis of tumor
cells as a homing signal for the delivery of apoptosis-targetedT cells to
tumor. When labeled with ApoPep-1 using an oleyl acid-derived membrane
anchor, targeted T cells preferentially bound to apoptotic tumor cells
over living cells. In vivo imaging showed higher levels of tumor homing
of targeted, fluorescent T cells in mice treated with chemotherapy more
than those of untargeted T cells. These results demonstrate that the
apoptosis-targeted delivery can efficiently enhance the delivery of cells
or drugs to tumor and, when combined with imaging of apoptosis, provides
a real-time monitoring of tumor response for cancer theragnosis.

