Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of Sym004, a novel anti-EGFR antibody mixture, against
EGFRvIII positive glioblastoma xenografts.


INTRODUCTIONGlioblastoma (GBM) is the most common intracranial cancer in
adults but despite recent advances in therapy the overall survival
remains about 20 months. The epidermal growth factor receptor variant III
(EGFRvIII) is a truncated, constitutively active, and highly oncogenic
form of the EGFR expressed on approximately 30% of GBMs. Sym004 is a
recombinant IgG1 antibody mixture consisting of two antibodies against
domain III of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Like anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies, Sym004 inhibits cancer cell growth and survival by
blocking ligand-binding and receptor signaling. However, unlike the
monoclonal antibodies, Sym004 induces a rapid and efficient
internalization and degradation of the EGFR. Here, we examine whether the
more efficient removal of the EGFR and the constitutive active EGFRvIII
by Sym004 would translate into increased tumor growth inhibition of
EGFRvIII GBM xenografts.METHODSBoth subcutaneous (sc) and intracranial
(ic) adult brain tumor xenografts were grown in athymic BALB/c mice.
After tumor size reached 200-500 mm3 subcutaneously or 3 days after
intracranial implantation, groups of 10 mice were randomly treated with
either drug vehicle, Sym004 (50 mg/kg) or cetuximab (50 mg/kg) IP twice
weekly for 5 weeks. Tumor responses for sc xenografts were assessed by
tumor growth delay and regression and for ic xenografts by difference in
median survival. Xenograft lines utilized for this study expressed either
primarily EGFR wildtype (D-54 MG) or mutant EGFRvIII (D-270 MG and D-317
MG).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe sc results for D-54 MG did not demonstrate
statistically significant growth delays for either Sym004 or cetuximab.
In sc EGFRvIII models, however, Sym004 produced statistically significant
(pINTRODUCTIONGlioblastoma (GBM) is the most common intracranial cancer
in adults but despite recent advances in therapy the overall survival
remains about 20 months. The epidermal growth factor receptor variant III
(EGFRvIII) is a truncated, constitutively active, and highly oncogenic
form of the EGFR expressed on approximately 30% of GBMs. Sym004 is a
recombinant IgG1 antibody mixture consisting of two antibodies against
domain III of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Like anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies, Sym004 inhibits cancer cell growth and survival by
blocking ligand-binding and receptor signaling. However, unlike the
monoclonal antibodies, Sym004 induces a rapid and efficient
internalization and degradation of the EGFR. Here, we examine whether the
more efficient removal of the EGFR and the constitutive active EGFRvIII
by Sym004 would translate into increased tumor growth inhibition of
EGFRvIII GBM xenografts.METHODSBoth subcutaneous (sc) and intracranial
(ic) adult brain tumor xenografts were grown in athymic BALB/c mice.
After tumor size reached 200-500 mm3 subcutaneously or 3 days after
intracranial implantation, groups of 10 mice were randomly treated with
either drug vehicle, Sym004 (50 mg/kg) or cetuximab (50 mg/kg) IP twice
weekly for 5 weeks. Tumor responses for sc xenografts were assessed by
tumor growth delay and regression and for ic xenografts by difference in
median survival. Xenograft lines utilized for this study expressed either
primarily EGFR wildtype (D-54 MG) or mutant EGFRvIII (D-270 MG and D-317
MG).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe sc results for D-54 MG did not demonstrate
statistically significant growth delays for either Sym004 or cetuximab.
In sc EGFRvIII models, however, Sym004 produced statistically significant
(p<0.001) growth delays of 7.8 and 76.5 days and outperformed cetuximab
by 4.6 and 71.9 days in D-270 MG and D-317 MG, respectively.
Intracranially, Sym004 produced statistically significant
(pINTRODUCTIONGlioblastoma (GBM) is the most common intracranial cancer
in adults but despite recent advances in therapy the overall survival
remains about 20 months. The epidermal growth factor receptor variant III
(EGFRvIII) is a truncated, constitutively active, and highly oncogenic
form of the EGFR expressed on approximately 30% of GBMs. Sym004 is a
recombinant IgG1 antibody mixture consisting of two antibodies against
domain III of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Like anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibodies, Sym004 inhibits cancer cell growth and survival by
blocking ligand-binding and receptor signaling. However, unlike the
monoclonal antibodies, Sym004 induces a rapid and efficient
internalization and degradation of the EGFR. Here, we examine whether the
more efficient removal of the EGFR and the constitutive active EGFRvIII
by Sym004 would translate into increased tumor growth inhibition of
EGFRvIII GBM xenografts.METHODSBoth subcutaneous (sc) and intracranial
(ic) adult brain tumor xenografts were grown in athymic BALB/c mice.
After tumor size reached 200-500 mm3 subcutaneously or 3 days after
intracranial implantation, groups of 10 mice were randomly treated with
either drug vehicle, Sym004 (50 mg/kg) or cetuximab (50 mg/kg) IP twice
weekly for 5 weeks. Tumor responses for sc xenografts were assessed by
tumor growth delay and regression and for ic xenografts by difference in
median survival. Xenograft lines utilized for this study expressed either
primarily EGFR wildtype (D-54 MG) or mutant EGFRvIII (D-270 MG and D-317
MG).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe sc results for D-54 MG did not demonstrate
statistically significant growth delays for either Sym004 or cetuximab.
In sc EGFRvIII models, however, Sym004 produced statistically significant
(p<0.001) growth delays of 7.8 and 76.5 days and outperformed cetuximab
by 4.6 and 71.9 days in D-270 MG and D-317 MG, respectively.
Intracranially, Sym004 produced statistically significant (p<0.001)
increases in survival of 39% and 163% and outperformed cetuximab by 27%
and 115% in D-270 MG and D-317 MG, respectively. We speculate that the
superior effect of the Sym004 antibody mixture compared to the monoclonal
antibody cetuximab in the EGFRvIII models is due to a more efficient
internalization and degradation - and thereby shutdown - of the
constitutively active EGFRvIII. Histological examination of the receptor
status in the tumors following treatment is ongoing.CONCLUSIONSThe novel
strategy to target EGFR demonstrates the significant anti-tumor activity
of Sym004 against adult glioblastoma xenografts that express EGFRvIII.
These results warrant further exploration of Sym004 in clinical trials
for the treatment of EGFRvIII positive brain tumors.Funding for these
studies was provided by Symphogen and the Tisch Preclinical Therapy
Screening Program

