Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SapC-DOPS induces lethal mitophagy in glioblastoma.


The goal of this study is to evaluate SapC-DOPS, a novel cancer
nanotherapeutic, for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). SapC-DOPS delivered
intravenously (i.v) was found to specifically target intracranial tumors
in mice bearing spontaneous brain tumor, as well in nude mice
intracranially implanted with human GBM cells. Treatment of tumor bearing
mice with SapC-DOPS (i.v.) significantly increased survival: 25% and 75%
long-term survivors in U87EGFR-Luc and X12v2 implanted mice, respectively
(P0.05). In contrast, SapC-DOPS treatment increased levels of an
autophagic marker LC3-II via western blot. Autophagosome formation was
also confirmed through transmission electron microscopy. Utilizing a
stable GBM cell line expressing a GFP-LC3 fusion protein, we observed
punctuated GFP expression following treatment, indicative of
autophagosome formation. Quantification of GFP punctated cells showed a
significant increase in SapC-DOPS treated cells compared to control
(P0.05). In contrast, SapC-DOPS treatment increased levels of an
autophagic marker LC3-II via western blot. Autophagosome formation was
also confirmed through transmission electron microscopy. Utilizing a
stable GBM cell line expressing a GFP-LC3 fusion protein, we observed
punctuated GFP expression following treatment, indicative of
autophagosome formation. Quantification of GFP punctated cells showed a
significant increase in SapC-DOPS treated cells compared to control
(P<.001). Analysis of red/green fluorescence following acridine orange
staining showed an induction of acidic vesicular organelles indicative of
autophagolysosomes. In addition, inhibition of autophagosome formation
using 3-methyladeneine or inhibition of auotphagic vacuole maturation
with bafilomycin A1 resulted in a significant rescue of SapC-DOPS-induced
killing (P0.05). In contrast, SapC-DOPS treatment increased levels of an
autophagic marker LC3-II via western blot. Autophagosome formation was
also confirmed through transmission electron microscopy. Utilizing a
stable GBM cell line expressing a GFP-LC3 fusion protein, we observed
punctuated GFP expression following treatment, indicative of
autophagosome formation. Quantification of GFP punctated cells showed a
significant increase in SapC-DOPS treated cells compared to control
(P<.001). Analysis of red/green fluorescence following acridine orange
staining showed an induction of acidic vesicular organelles indicative of
autophagolysosomes. In addition, inhibition of autophagosome formation
using 3-methyladeneine or inhibition of auotphagic vacuole maturation
with bafilomycin A1 resulted in a significant rescue of SapC-DOPS-induced
killing (P<.001). Knockdown of ATG5 using siRNA also resulted in a rescue
of SapC-DOPS-induced cell death and autophagy induction (P0.05). In
contrast, SapC-DOPS treatment increased levels of an autophagic marker
LC3-II via western blot. Autophagosome formation was also confirmed
through transmission electron microscopy. Utilizing a stable GBM cell
line expressing a GFP-LC3 fusion protein, we observed punctuated GFP
expression following treatment, indicative of autophagosome formation.
Quantification of GFP punctated cells showed a significant increase in
SapC-DOPS treated cells compared to control (P<.001). Analysis of
red/green fluorescence following acridine orange staining showed an
induction of acidic vesicular organelles indicative of
autophagolysosomes. In addition, inhibition of autophagosome formation
using 3-methyladeneine or inhibition of auotphagic vacuole maturation
with bafilomycin A1 resulted in a significant rescue of SapC-DOPS-induced
killing (P<.001). Knockdown of ATG5 using siRNA also resulted in a rescue
of SapC-DOPS-induced cell death and autophagy induction (P<.001).
Interestingly, we did not observe a decrease in the activation of mTOR as
determined by the phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and p70S6K which are typically
induced during autophagy. This led us to test the use of rapamycin, a
known inhibitor of mTOR and inducer of autophagy, in combination with
SapC-DOPS. By using the Chou Talalay analysis, we observed strong synergy
for multiple drug combinations in primary GBM neurospheres (combination
index 0.05). In contrast, SapC-DOPS treatment increased levels of an
autophagic marker LC3-II via western blot. Autophagosome formation was
also confirmed through transmission electron microscopy. Utilizing a
stable GBM cell line expressing a GFP-LC3 fusion protein, we observed
punctuated GFP expression following treatment, indicative of
autophagosome formation. Quantification of GFP punctated cells showed a
significant increase in SapC-DOPS treated cells compared to control
(P<.001). Analysis of red/green fluorescence following acridine orange
staining showed an induction of acidic vesicular organelles indicative of
autophagolysosomes. In addition, inhibition of autophagosome formation
using 3-methyladeneine or inhibition of auotphagic vacuole maturation
with bafilomycin A1 resulted in a significant rescue of SapC-DOPS-induced
killing (P<.001). Knockdown of ATG5 using siRNA also resulted in a rescue
of SapC-DOPS-induced cell death and autophagy induction (P<.001).
Interestingly, we did not observe a decrease in the activation of mTOR as
determined by the phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and p70S6K which are typically
induced during autophagy. This led us to test the use of rapamycin, a
known inhibitor of mTOR and inducer of autophagy, in combination with
SapC-DOPS. By using the Chou Talalay analysis, we observed strong synergy
for multiple drug combinations in primary GBM neurospheres (combination
index < .4). To investigate whether SapC-DOPS induced autophagy could be
preferentially targeting mitochondria (mitophagy), we utilized
MitoTracker Green (mitochondria) and LysoTracker Red
(autophagolysosomes). By using confocal microscopy analysis, we were able
to observe a decrease in mitochondrial mass in cells treated with
SapC-DOPS as well as co-localization of mitochondria with
autophagolysosomes. In addition to this, we observed a significant
decrease in ATP levels following SapC-DOPS treatment (P0.05). In
contrast, SapC-DOPS treatment increased levels of an autophagic marker
LC3-II via western blot. Autophagosome formation was also confirmed
through transmission electron microscopy. Utilizing a stable GBM cell
line expressing a GFP-LC3 fusion protein, we observed punctuated GFP
expression following treatment, indicative of autophagosome formation.
Quantification of GFP punctated cells showed a significant increase in
SapC-DOPS treated cells compared to control (P<.001). Analysis of
red/green fluorescence following acridine orange staining showed an
induction of acidic vesicular organelles indicative of
autophagolysosomes. In addition, inhibition of autophagosome formation
using 3-methyladeneine or inhibition of auotphagic vacuole maturation
with bafilomycin A1 resulted in a significant rescue of SapC-DOPS-induced
killing (P<.001). Knockdown of ATG5 using siRNA also resulted in a rescue
of SapC-DOPS-induced cell death and autophagy induction (P<.001).
Interestingly, we did not observe a decrease in the activation of mTOR as
determined by the phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and p70S6K which are typically
induced during autophagy. This led us to test the use of rapamycin, a
known inhibitor of mTOR and inducer of autophagy, in combination with
SapC-DOPS. By using the Chou Talalay analysis, we observed strong synergy
for multiple drug combinations in primary GBM neurospheres (combination
index < .4). To investigate whether SapC-DOPS induced autophagy could be
preferentially targeting mitochondria (mitophagy), we utilized
MitoTracker Green (mitochondria) and LysoTracker Red
(autophagolysosomes). By using confocal microscopy analysis, we were able
to observe a decrease in mitochondrial mass in cells treated with
SapC-DOPS as well as co-localization of mitochondria with
autophagolysosomes. In addition to this, we observed a significant
decrease in ATP levels following SapC-DOPS treatment (P<.01). These
findings suggest therapeutic implications for treating GBM by using
SapC-DOPS alone and in combination with an AKT/mTOR inhibitor.

