Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of NR5A2 in pancreas development and oncogenesis.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains one of the most lethal
cancers today. A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) has
implicated the nuclear receptor NR5A2 in modulating risk for pancreatic
cancer. While a role for this gene in pancreatic cancer has not been
previously recognized, it is known to have an important role in stem cell
pluripotency and metabolism. Using the zebrafish model organism, we
demonstrate that knockdown of nr5a2 results in absence of exocrine
pancreas, while leaving endocrine pancreas unaffected, indicating an
essential role in pancreas organ formation. Further, we localize
expression of nr5a2 to the endodermal bud that gives rise to the exocrine
pancreas, consistent with a role for nr5a2 in regulating differentiation
of pancreas progenitors. In resected human PDAC specimens and in vitro
cell lines, we find that NR5A2 is overexpressed compared to normal ductal
epithelium. Moreover, shRNA knockdown of NR5A2 dramatically slows
proliferation of PDAC cell lines, supporting the hypothesis that NR5A2 is
involved in pancreatic carcinogenesis. These data support a model that
NR5A2 regulates the proliferation and differentiation of exocrine
pancreas progenitor cells during development. We postulate that aberrant
expression of NR5A2 results in dysregulation of these processes in the
adult pancreas by driving ductal epithelial cells to acquire properties
of progenitor cells, and therefore may be an important step in pancreas
oncogenesis.Citation Format: Sahar Nissim, Julia Wucherpfennig, Xiao-Xu
Wang, Alec Kimmelman, Wolfram Goessling. The role of NR5A2 in pancreas
development and oncogenesis. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th
Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr
6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8
Suppl):Abstract nr 2657. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-2657

