Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical relevance of metastasis-related miRNAs in early breast
cancer.


IntroductionIt was recently demonstrated that miRNAs control breast
cancer metastasis by influencing multiple metastatic steps. In this study
we firstly evaluated the clinical relevance of specific miRNAs -recently
shown to correlate with metastasis in breast cancer by exploring their
expression profile in FFPEs samples of early breast cancer patients in
respect to the clinical outcome of the patients. Finally, we investigated
the correlations between the expression of these selected miRNAs and
other parameters such as ER and PR expression.Materials and MethodsOne
hundred and twelve (112) FFPE blocks were obtained from breast tumors of
early breast cancer patients (follow-up period of 11 years) and 13
mammoplasty specimens from healthy tissues which were used as controls.
The median overall survival (OS) and disease free interval (DFI) were 84
and 68 months respectively. We have chosen to quantify the expression of
six metastasis related miRNAs, namely: miR-10b, miR-2,1 miR-205, miR-210,
miR-335 and let-7a by RT-qPCR in the LightCycler (Roche). HER2, ER and PR
expression of the primary tumors was detected by immunohistochemistry
with the monoclonal antibody CB11 and with monoclonal antibodies to ER
and PR, respectively, using the OPTIMAX automated system. For all miRNAs
relative expression was determined using the Cq approach and expression
values were normalized to miR-191 which has been shown to be a suitable
reference miRNA.ResultsKaplan-Meier survival curves demonstrated that
patients with high miR-21 expression (n=56) had a significant shorter DFI
than those with low miR-21 expression (P=0.043). Moreover, patients with
low expression of miR-205 (n=57) had both shorter DFI and OS time than
those with high expression levels (P=0.040 and P=0.047 respectively).
However, the expression levels of the other four miRNAs were not related
with the DFI and OS. We also found that in the ER-negative subgroup
(n=46), disease relapse was more common in patients where miR-10b was
over-expressed (P=0.019), while in the PR-negative subgroup (n=47),
disease relapse was more common in patients with miR-21 overexpression
(PIntroductionIt was recently demonstrated that miRNAs control breast
cancer metastasis by influencing multiple metastatic steps. In this study
we firstly evaluated the clinical relevance of specific miRNAs -recently
shown to correlate with metastasis in breast cancer by exploring their
expression profile in FFPEs samples of early breast cancer patients in
respect to the clinical outcome of the patients. Finally, we investigated
the correlations between the expression of these selected miRNAs and
other parameters such as ER and PR expression.Materials and MethodsOne
hundred and twelve (112) FFPE blocks were obtained from breast tumors of
early breast cancer patients (follow-up period of 11 years) and 13
mammoplasty specimens from healthy tissues which were used as controls.
The median overall survival (OS) and disease free interval (DFI) were 84
and 68 months respectively. We have chosen to quantify the expression of
six metastasis related miRNAs, namely: miR-10b, miR-2,1 miR-205, miR-210,
miR-335 and let-7a by RT-qPCR in the LightCycler (Roche). HER2, ER and PR
expression of the primary tumors was detected by immunohistochemistry
with the monoclonal antibody CB11 and with monoclonal antibodies to ER
and PR, respectively, using the OPTIMAX automated system. For all miRNAs
relative expression was determined using the Cq approach and expression
values were normalized to miR-191 which has been shown to be a suitable
reference miRNA.ResultsKaplan-Meier survival curves demonstrated that
patients with high miR-21 expression (n=56) had a significant shorter DFI
than those with low miR-21 expression (P=0.043). Moreover, patients with
low expression of miR-205 (n=57) had both shorter DFI and OS time than
those with high expression levels (P=0.040 and P=0.047 respectively).
However, the expression levels of the other four miRNAs were not related
with the DFI and OS. We also found that in the ER-negative subgroup
(n=46), disease relapse was more common in patients where miR-10b was
over-expressed (P=0.019), while in the PR-negative subgroup (n=47),
disease relapse was more common in patients with miR-21 overexpression
(P<0.001) or miR-10b overexpression (P =0.016). Finally, in the group of
PR-negative patients we noticed that patients who overexpressed miR-21
had shorter OS (P=0.021).ConclusionsQuantification of metastasis related
miRNAs expression in primary tumors can give important prognostic
information in patients with early breast cancer.

