Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene and environment interactions of height and selected candidate
SNPs in prostate cancer: results from the PRACTICAL consortium.


AbstractWe analysed data from the PRACTICAL (PRostate cancer AssoCiation
group To Investigate Cancer Associated aLterations in the genome)
consortium on height and over 160 selected candidate SNP's predominantly
in growth factor pathways. 12 case-control and nested case-control
studies provided epidemiological data including information on height
(5064 cases and 3074 controls). We present results here on the
associations of height and the selected SNPs on prostate cancer risk and
on their interaction.The mean height was 176.3 cm in cases and 176.9 cm
in controls. Results of meta-analysis of the association between height
and prostate cancer risk indicated study homogeneity and thus data were
pooled to obtain pooled odds ratios (ORs). Mean and standard deviation
(sd) was used to define subjects as normal (mean sd), short (mean+sd).
Analyses were adjusted for age and family history of prostate cancer in
first degree relatives. Height was not significantly associated with risk
in shorter and taller men compared to men with a normal height: OR of
1.08 (95%CI 0.91-1.29) and 0.98 (95% CI 0.84-1.15), respectively.For the
genotyping results, a log additive model was used to assess the
associations between the SNPs and prostate cancer risk and the results
showed that 3 SNPs (rs1509461, OR 1.09 (95%CI 1.01-1.17) in the GHR gene,
rs2946834 OR 1.13 (95%CI 1.04-1.22) and rs1520220 OR 1.10 (95%CI 1.00
-1.22) in the IGF-1 gene) were significantly associated with prostate
cancer after adjusting for age and family history of prostate cancer, all
P-values mean+sd). Analyses were adjusted for age and family history of
prostate cancer in first degree relatives. Height was not significantly
associated with risk in shorter and taller men compared to men with a
normal height: OR of 1.08 (95%CI 0.91-1.29) and 0.98 (95% CI 0.84-1.15),
respectively.For the genotyping results, a log additive model was used to
assess the associations between the SNPs and prostate cancer risk and the
results showed that 3 SNPs (rs1509461, OR 1.09 (95%CI 1.01-1.17) in the
GHR gene, rs2946834 OR 1.13 (95%CI 1.04-1.22) and rs1520220 OR 1.10
(95%CI 1.00 -1.22) in the IGF-1 gene) were significantly associated with
prostate cancer after adjusting for age and family history of prostate
cancer, all P-values <0.05.For gene and environment interaction analyses,
the synergy factor estimation and an empirical Bayes method were used.
Only one SNPs showed a marginal negative interaction with height in tall
statured men (rs1520220 in the IGF-1 gene) with a synergy factor of 0.76,
95% CI 0.59-0.99.In summary, height did not show any significant
association with prostate cancer risk. Three candidates SNP's showed
modest increased risks. Overall there was little indication of an effect
of height and/or its interaction with the candidate SNPs.Citation Format:
Kenneth R. Muir, Artitaya Lophatananon, Rosalind Eeles, Graham G. Giles,
Zsofia Kote Jarai, Richard M. Martin, Jong Park, Gianluca Severi, Janet
Standford, Fredrick Schumacher, Sarah Stewart Brown, Ruth Travis, Fredrik
Wiklund, Douglas Easton, The PRACTICAL CONSORTIUM. Gene and environment
interactions of height and selected candidate SNPs in prostate cancer:
results from the PRACTICAL consortium. [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research;
2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res
2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 4836. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-4836

