Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting small cell lung cancer harboring PIK3CA mutation with a
selective oral PI3K inhibitor, PF-4989216.


Aberrant PI3K/AKT signaling occurs commonly in cancer. Gene mutation,
amplification, and copy number gains in the catalytic p110 of PI3K have
been shown in a variety of human cancers. Tumor suppressor phosphatase
and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) dephosphorylates the
3-phosphoinositides and is frequently mutated, deleted, or down-regulated
in many human cancers to constitutively activate the PI3K pathway. Small
cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients have poor prognosis; response to
second-line chemotherapy for patients with refractory disease is less
than 10%, and survival is 3-4 months. Multiple phase III trials have been
conducted, however the survival of SCLC patients has not significantly
improved over the years. In this study, we characterized a selective PI3K
inhibitor, PF-4989216, in preclinical SCLC models to investigate whether
targeting the PI3K pathway may be a potential therapy for SCLC.
PF-4989216 inhibits phosphorylation of PI3K downstream molecules and
subsequently leads to induction in apoptosis and cell cycle block, as
well as inhibition of cell proliferation, transformation, and xenograft
tumor growth in SCLCs harboring a PIK3CA mutation. Moreover, our results
suggest that there may be different mechanisms of tumorigenesis between
PIK3CA mutation and PTEN loss in SCLCs, and indicate that PF-4989216 is a
potential cancer drug candidate for small-cell lung cancer patients
harboring a PIK3CA mutation.

