Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive value of BRCA1 haplotype for trabectedin efficacy in
patients with advanced soft-tissue sarcoma.


Background: Trabectedin (T) has shown objective response and disease
stabilisation in 5%-10% and 30-40% of unselected patients with advanced
soft tissue sarcoma (STS) failing prior anthracyclines and/or ifosfamide
chemotherapy. Although the precise mechanism of action of T is not fully
elucidated, this drug has been found to be more active in tumor cells
with a deficient homologous recombination (HR) repair system. BRCA1 is a
key player of the HER system. Our aim was to determine whether the status
of 4 single nucleotide polymorphims (SNPs) was associated with clinical
activity of T in advanced STS patients. Methods: We analyzed SNPs
(rs16941, rs16942, rs 1799966, and rs 799917) of BRCA1 in two independent
cohort of patients (training cohort: 113 patients, validation cohort: 84
patients) with advanced STS from nine major referral European centres for
STS. All patients were treated between 1999 and 2011 in phase I-II
clinical trials or in the context of a compassionate-use programme that
was open to advanced STS patients who had failed conventional
chemotherapy. T was given at different doses (0.5-3 mg/m2) with the use
of two different schedules: a 3-h infusion or a 24-h continuous infusion.
Results: Median age of the patients in the training set was 49 years
(range 17-77). The two most frequent histological subtypes were:
leiomyosarcoma (non-uterine: 21, uterine: 10) and liposarcoma (myxoid
round cell: 21, other: 17). 632 cycles of T were administered, with a
median of 4 cycles per patient (range 1-25). The median follow-up was 10
months (range,0.6-96 months). One complete response, 18 partial
responses, and 26 disease stabilizations that lasted for >6 months were
observed. The median PFS was3.5 months (95% confidence interval [CI],
2.7-4.4 months). The median OS was 13.6 months (95% CI, 8.7-18.5 months).
PFS was significantly higher for patients who had at least 1 allele of
the most frequentBRCA1 AAAG haplotype (median PFS: 5.6 months [95% CI,
1.4-9.8 months] vs 2.5 months [95% CI, 1.3-3.6 months]; P =.03). The same
trend was observed for OS (median OS: 14.1 months [95% CI,4.4-23.8
months] vs 5.4 months [95% CI, 1.7-9.0 months]; P = .0095). We observed a
similar association between BRCA1 haptlotype and PFS in the independent
validation cohort (median PFS: 5.2 vs 2.7 months, P = .02).
Conclusion:BRCA1 haplotype may represent a predictive DNA-based biomarker
for trabectedin efficacy in advanced STS patients. Such a biomarker
assessable form paraffin-embedded tumor material could be easily used
into routine practice provided it is validated in a prospective setting.

