Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), cyclooxygenase-2
polymorphisms, and breast cancer risk.


Objective: To investigate the role of anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
breast cancer occurrence, particularly of selective inhibitors of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), enzyme involved in the immune response to
inflammation, as well as the role of genetic polymorphisms in the COX-2
gene and their interactions with NSAIDs in breast cancer risk.Materials
and methods: We conducted a population-based case-control study in two
French dpartements (Cte d'Or, Ille-et-Vilaine) between 2005 and 2008
(CECILE study). An in-person interview was conducted using a standardized
questionnaire to obtain information on recognized or suspected risk
factors for breast cancer. A self-administered questionnaire was used to
obtain information on NSAIDs consumption and was returned by mail by 871
cases (71%) and 915 controls (69%). Blood samples were available for 811
cases and 829 controls and allowed genotyping using a dedicated Illumina
chip. Seven tagged SNPs selected in COX-2 (rs20417, rs689466, rs2206593,
rs5275, rs5277, rs4648261, rs2745557) were included in the analysis. Odds
ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated using unconditional
logistic regression models adjusted for age and dpartement but also for
the known risk factors for breast cancer. The analyses were conducted
using a dominant genetic model for each SNP. A multiplicative interaction
between genetic polymorphisms and NSAIDs use in the risk of breast cancer
was also tested.Results: A negative association was observed between
NSAIDs use and breast cancer (OR = 0.83 [0.68 to 1.01]). This association
was more pronounced among women who consumed selective inhibitors of
COX-2 (OR = 0.60 [0.37 to 0.98]). We observed a negative association
between breast cancer and the absence of the common allele for rs5275 (OR
= 0.73 [0.54 to 0.99]) and a positive association close to statistical
significance for women with at least one rare allele for rs5277 (OR =
1.22 [0.99 to 1.52]). Odds ratios for interaction between NSAID use and
COX-2 polymorphisms was 1.25 (0.96 to 1.64, p = 0.10) for rs20417 and 1.
16 [0.99 to 1.37, p = 0.07) for rs5275.Conclusion: Our results confirm
the negative association between NSAIDs use and the occurrence of breast
cancer and reinforce the hypothesis that this association may be more
specific to selective inhibitors of COX-2. Our results also indicate that
specific polymorphisms of the COX-2 gene may modify the risk of breast
cancer associated with NSAIDs use.

