Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy: a mechanism of resistance to therapy in breast cancer.


Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal pathway for
degradation of cytoplasmic proteins, macromolecules, and organelles. It
is defined as a cell survival pathway which allows cells to survive
nutrient and environmental stress. Tumor initiating cells (TICs) survive
radiation, endocrine therapy, and chemotherapy, making them the primary
cause of relapse in breast cancer patients. Our previous studies have
identified autophagy as the mechanism of survival in these
treatment-resistant populations in letrozole- as well as
chemotherapy-treated patient samples. In this study we confirmed our
previous finding by using a real time PCR low density array of 84 genes
related to autophagy in 9 paired pre- vs. post-letrozole treated clinical
samples, where 60 out of 84 genes demonstrated a statically significant
change (pAutophagy is an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal pathway for
degradation of cytoplasmic proteins, macromolecules, and organelles. It
is defined as a cell survival pathway which allows cells to survive
nutrient and environmental stress. Tumor initiating cells (TICs) survive
radiation, endocrine therapy, and chemotherapy, making them the primary
cause of relapse in breast cancer patients. Our previous studies have
identified autophagy as the mechanism of survival in these
treatment-resistant populations in letrozole- as well as
chemotherapy-treated patient samples. In this study we confirmed our
previous finding by using a real time PCR low density array of 84 genes
related to autophagy in 9 paired pre- vs. post-letrozole treated clinical
samples, where 60 out of 84 genes demonstrated a statically significant
change (p<0.05). Autophagy inhibitors like N-acetyl cysteine and catalase
demonstrate a significant reduction in TICs using mammosphere forming
efficiency (MSFE) (pAutophagy is an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal
pathway for degradation of cytoplasmic proteins, macromolecules, and
organelles. It is defined as a cell survival pathway which allows cells
to survive nutrient and environmental stress. Tumor initiating cells
(TICs) survive radiation, endocrine therapy, and chemotherapy, making
them the primary cause of relapse in breast cancer patients. Our previous
studies have identified autophagy as the mechanism of survival in these
treatment-resistant populations in letrozole- as well as
chemotherapy-treated patient samples. In this study we confirmed our
previous finding by using a real time PCR low density array of 84 genes
related to autophagy in 9 paired pre- vs. post-letrozole treated clinical
samples, where 60 out of 84 genes demonstrated a statically significant
change (p<0.05). Autophagy inhibitors like N-acetyl cysteine and catalase
demonstrate a significant reduction in TICs using mammosphere forming
efficiency (MSFE) (p<0.05) and flow cytometry of CD44+/CD24- (pAutophagy
is an evolutionarily conserved lysosomal pathway for degradation of
cytoplasmic proteins, macromolecules, and organelles. It is defined as a
cell survival pathway which allows cells to survive nutrient and
environmental stress. Tumor initiating cells (TICs) survive radiation,
endocrine therapy, and chemotherapy, making them the primary cause of
relapse in breast cancer patients. Our previous studies have identified
autophagy as the mechanism of survival in these treatment-resistant
populations in letrozole- as well as chemotherapy-treated patient
samples. In this study we confirmed our previous finding by using a real
time PCR low density array of 84 genes related to autophagy in 9 paired
pre- vs. post-letrozole treated clinical samples, where 60 out of 84
genes demonstrated a statically significant change (p<0.05). Autophagy
inhibitors like N-acetyl cysteine and catalase demonstrate a significant
reduction in TICs using mammosphere forming efficiency (MSFE) (p<0.05)
and flow cytometry of CD44+/CD24- (p<0.05) cells in three triple negative
breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB231, SUM159 and BT549). Recent evidence
from our group had determined a role for hypoxia and reactive nitrogen
species in TIC inhibition. Here we demonstrate that both catalase and
N-acetyl cysteine inhibit TICs by a mechanism that significantly reduces
inducible nitric oxide synthase and HIF-1, implicating both hypoxia and
reactive nitrogen species in the process. We will be confirming our
finding in-vivo using patient-derived and cell line human xenografts and
further examine the cross talk between hypoxia and reactive nitrogen
species as it relates to autophagy. The understanding of this process may
allow us to target TICs in a novel mechanistic way.

