Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive markers of the in vitro anticancer effect of the pan
class I PI3K inhibitor BKM120 in primary B-CLL lymphocytes.


B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is characterized by the accumulation
of CD5+ B-lymphocytes that are long-lived in-vivo but die quickly by
apoptosis when cultured in-vitro. The phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
(PI3K) cascade which is a critical component of survival signaling has
increased activity in CLL lymphocytes as compared to normal B
lymphocytes. There are three classes of PI3Ks of which class I is the
most clearly implicated in human cancer. The PI3K- inhibitor, CAL-101,
promotes apoptosis and abrogated protection from spontaneous apoptosis
induced by CD40 in primary CLL lymphocytes in-vitro. Thus the PI3K
pathway appears to play a critical role in B-CLL cell survival. BKM120 is
a pan class I PI3K inhibitor developed by Novartis. Phase I trials
demonstrated that plasma concentrations (Cmax) of 5 M can be obtained. In
view of the critical role of PI3K in CLL homeostasis, the activity of
BKM120 was examined in CLL lymphocytes in-vitro. BKM120 was cytotoxic in
the 3 CLL cell lines and in 78% of the primary B-CLL lymphocytes samples
isolated from 65 B-CLL patients, including patients with del11 and del17.
Interestingly, 60% of the B-CLL samples tested in our study have an IC50
below the Cmax. Furthermore, BKM120 cytotoxicity correlated with the
basal expression of proteins involved in the PI3K/Akt pathway (Akt,
rictor, raptor, p70S6K and 4E-BP1) but not with PTEN, mTor, IgVH or CD38
expression in these primary B-CLL lymphocytes. Further analysis of these
different markers demonstrated that only patients very sensitive to
BKM120 (IC50 3 M) expressed low basal levels of mTor, raptor and p70S6K
simultaneously. Inhibition of PI3K was demonstrated by detection of
phosphorylated Akt (S473) after BKM120 treatment in the cell lines.
Molecular biomarkers such as p70S6K and 4E-BP1 have been used as
indicators of PI3K pathway inhibition in-vivo. We also have demonstrated
that BKM120 decreased the phosphorylation status of 4E-BP1 and p70S6K in
the primary B-CLL lymphocytes tested. As detected by AnnexinV/propidium
iodine staining and analysis of caspase-3 cleavage, BKM120 induced
apoptosis in primary B-CLL cells culture in the presence and absence of
stromal cell support.Taken together, our results demonstrated that the
class I PI3K inhibitor BKM120 may be useful as a single agent in CLL
patients independently of their IgVh mutational status, CD38 expression
or genomic deletions (del11 and del17). Furthermore, a combination of
different biomarkers (expression of mTor, raptor, and p70S6K) may predict
the response to BKM120 treatment. Also, BKM120 abolished the protection
against apoptosis and drug resistance conferred by the microenvironment
to the primary B-CLL lymphocytes in-vitro. Our preclinical study
demonstrated that BKM120, a molecule with acceptable clinical toxicity,
may be useful in the treatment for CLL.

