Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p62/sequestosome 1 regulates caspase-8 activation by the Bcl-2
antagonist ABT-263 to enable crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis.


Background: Autophagy and apoptosis regulate cancer cell viability in
response to cytotoxic stress; however, the functional relationship
between these processes is unclear. During autophagy, the multifunctional
p62/sequestosome 1 protein shuttles ubiquitinated proteins to the
lysosome. Previously, we found that ectopic p62 can promote
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Since Bcl-2 can regulate both autophagy
and apoptosis, we determined whether ABT-263-induced apoptosis is
regulated by p62.Methods: Human colorectal cancer cell lines (HCT116,
DLD1) were incubated with ABT-263 (0-2 M) and caspase cleavage
(immunoblotting), caspase-8 activation (luminescence), apoptosis (annexin
V labeling), and autophagy (localization of GFP-LC3 by confocal
microscopy) were analyzed. Caspase-8 was suppressed by siRNA or using
caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells. P62 mutants were generated by
site-directed mutagenesis. Caspase-8 self aggregation and colocalization
with p62 were studied in cells with lentiviral mCherry-p62, transfected
with a non-cleavable caspase-8 fused with fluorescent Venus proteins
(BiFC).Results: We demonstrate that ABT-263 induces autophagy and a
caspase-8-mediated apoptosis, shown using caspase-8 siRNA or
caspase-8-deficient cells. Regulation of this process by p62 was
demonstrated by the ability of ectopic p62 expression to enhance
apoptosis and caspase-8 activation that were disrupted by mutations at
p62 functional domains. In contrast, p62 shRNA was shown to attenuate
ABT-263-induced apoptosis. ABT-263 treatment enhanced binding between
caspase-8 and p62, and triggered caspase-8 self aggregation that
colocalized with p62, shown by Biomolecular Fluorescence Complementation
(BiFC) assay using confocal microscopy. Consistent with ectopic p62,
accumulation of p62 by the lysosomal autophagy inhibitors, chloroquine or
bafilomycin A1, enhanced ABT-263-mediated caspase cleavage.Conclusion:
p62 can regulate caspase-8 self aggregation/activation by ABT-263 to
enable crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis.

