Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Index-based dietary patterns and risk of esophageal cancer and
gastric cancer in the NIH-AARP diet and health study.


Background Diet may affect esophageal and gastric cancer risk, but
associations have been inconsistent. Due to the complexity of the diet,
studies of dietary patterns may elucidate the associations between diet
and cancer better than studies of individual foods. Yet, studies
evaluating the association between index-based dietary patterns and
incident esophageal and gastric cancers have been sparse. Objectives We
aimed to prospectively evaluate the association between two diet quality
indices, the Healthy Eating Index-2005 (HEI-2005) and the alternate
Mediterranean Diet Score (aMED), and risk of esophageal and gastric
cancers in the United States.Methods In sum, 494,968 participants from
the National Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health study completed a
self-administered baseline food frequency questionnaire which was used to
estimate scores for each index.Results During the follow-up (1995-2006),
we documented 215 esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC), 633
esophageal adenocarcinomas (EAC), 453 gastric cardia adenocarcinomas, and
501 gastric noncardia adenocarcinomas. Higher scores in the HEI-2005,
reflecting healthy eating patterns, were associated with a reduced risk
of ESCC (the highest quintile compared to lowest: hazard ratio (HR)
=0.51, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.31-0.86, Ptrend =0.001), and EAC
(HR=0.75, 95% CI: 0.57-0.98, Ptrend=0.01). We observed an inverse
association of ESCC with higher diet quality as assessed by aMED, but not
for EAC. No significant associations for gastric cardia or noncardia
adenocarcinomas were found with either HEI-2005 or aMED. Conclusions In
this prospective study, the HEI-2005 was inversely associated with risk
of both ESCC and EAC, while the aMED was associated with reduced risk of
ESCC, suggesting that adherence to dietary recommendations may help
prevent esophageal cancer.

