Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo tumor cell radiosensitization by the
competitive mTOR inhibitor INK128.


Radiation-induced translational control of gene expression has been shown
to be a component of the cellular radioresponse. Furthermore, recent data
suggest strategies targeting eIF4E may be effective for tumor cell
radiosensitization. The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a
critical kinase in the regulation of eIF4E and mRNA translation. The
newly developed ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor, INK128, inhibits both
mTORC1 and mTORC2 activity, and is in currently undergoing evaluation in
Phase 1 clinical trials. In the study described here we evaluated the
effects of INK128 treatment on tumor cell radiosensitivity in vitro using
a clonogenic survival assay and in vivo according to tumor growth delay.
For tumor cell lines initiated from different histologic origins in vitro
exposure to INK128 resulted in the complete inhibition of both mTORC1 and
2. Treatment with the same concentration of INK128 immediately after
irradiation increased tumor cell radiosensitivity with DEFs greater than
1.3. To determine whether the INK128 induced radiosensitization could be
extended to an in vivo model we used subcutaneous xenografts initiated
from U251 or PSN1 tumor cells. INK128 treatment (oral gavage) inhibited
mTOR activity in tumors established from both cell lines as defined by
loss of 4E-BP1 phosphorylation. Furthermore, m7-GTP batch chromatography
showed that INK128 treatment decreased cap-binding activity in
xenografts. To evaluate the effects of INK128 on in vivo tumor
radiosensitivity a tumor growth delay assay was performed using mice
bearing U251 tumor xenografts. When tumors reached approximately 210mm3
mice were randomized into 4 groups: vehicle, radiation, INK128, and
INK128 plus radiation. INK128 was delivered once a day (3 mg/kg, oral
gavage) for four days with the tumor locally irradiated (2 Gy) 2h after
each of the four drug treatments. Absolute growth delays were calculated
as the time in days for tumors in treated mice to grow from 210 to
1000mm3 minus the time in days for tumors to reach the same size in
vehicle treated mice. The absolute growth delays for INK128 alone and
radiation alone groups were 1.7 and 12.7 days respectively. The growth
delay in mice treated with the combination of INK128 and radiation was
22.2 days, which is greater than the sum of the growth delays caused by
INK128 and radiation alone. The DEF, obtained by dividing the normalized
tumor growth delay in mice treated with the radiation/PP242 combination
(20.5) by the absolute growth delay in mice treated with radiation only
(12.7), was 1.6. These results suggest that mTOR inhibition by the
clinically relevant ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor, INK128, enhances
tumor cell radiosensitivity both in vitro and in vivo.

