Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Key roles for Gab1, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, COX-2,
prostaglandin E2 and TGF-alpha in linoleic acid-induced upregulation of
lung and breast cancer cell growth.


The omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid, linoleic acid (LA), is prevalent
in Western diets and is known to enhance the tumorigenesis of mammary
cancer models; with previous work demonstrating an upregulation of
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling may play a key role. In
this study, a mechanism for LA's upregulation of cancer cell growth is
defined. High levels of LA in animal diets or cell culture medium
initiates a series of events beginning with increased cyclooxygenase
(COX) activity, which leads to increased prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
production, that subsequently increases matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
levels and transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-). TGF- is a classic
growth factor for the epidermal growth factor receptor 1 (EGFR), which
plays a role in a large number of cancers. The Grb2-associated binding
protein 1 (Gab1) is a scaffolding protein that can complex with EGFR to
activate PI3K signaling. Recent studies in our laboratory reveal LA
supplementation of the breast cancer cell line BT-474 and the lung
adenocarcinoma cell line A549 greatly increases the association between
Gab1 and EGFR, while at the same time dramatically decreasing Gab1
protein levels. These changes are concomitant with increases in activated
Akt (pAkt), a downstream signaling component in the PI3K signaling
pathway. Moreover, inhibitors of EGFR, PI3K and Gab1-specific siRNAs are
capable of reversing LA-induced upregulation of pAkt, as well as observed
increases in cell proliferation for these models. These data establish
Gab1 as major target in LA-induced enhancement of tumorigenesis.

