Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia enhances tumor vascularization by endothelial
differentiation of endometrial cancer stem cells.


Emerging evidence has shown that a small subpopulation of cancer cells
plays critical roles in tumorigenesis, establishing the cancer stem cells
(CSCs) theory. CSCs have properties of tumorigenesis, self-renewal and
multilineage differentiation. Previous our study demonstrated that CD133+
enodometrial cancer cells showed tumorigenic and self-renewal ability,
suggesting that CD133 was a potential CSC marker in endometrial cancer.
In this study, we focused on multilineage differentiation and
investigated an ability of endothelial differentiation in endometrial
CSCs. Immunohistochemistry of subcutaneous xenografts showed that human
endometrial tumors contained human vessels labeled by human-specific
anti-CD31 and vWF antibodies. Endothelial tube formation assay (in vitro
angiogenesis) revealed that isolated CD133+ endometrial cancer cells
could show tube formation while CD133- cells could not. CD133+ cells
expressed CD31 and VEGFR-1 higher than CD133- cells. In some cell types
of endometrial cancer cells, flow cytometric analysis showed expression
of CD31 was high ratio under hypoxia compared to normoxia. Furthermore,
in vitro angiogenesis assay demonstrated hypoxic condition could promote
and keep tube formation in CD133+ cells, but not CD133- cells. These
results suggest that CSCs have potential of endothelial differentiation
and hypoxia enhances endothelial differentiation of CSCs. These findings
shed light on the establishment of new target therapy for endometrial
cancer.

