Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophages foster neoplastic progression of malignant
mesothelioma and limit response to chemotherapy.


We, and others, have previously reported that macrophages infiltrating
mammary adenocarcinomas foster late-stage cancer progression1-3, and that
targeted therapies diminishing macrophage presence in tumors, and improve
response to standard chemotherapy (CTX) resulting in slowed primary tumor
growth, reduced pulmonary metastasis and increased overall survival (OS)
of tumor-bearing mice4,5. These experimental studies correlate with
clinical findings indicating that high densities of CD68+ myeloid cells
correlate with reduced OS in patients with breast cancer6. Malignant
mesotheliomas (MM), a rare cancer that can develop as a result of prior
asbestos exposure, is highly resistant to conventional cytotoxic
therapy7, and in the pleural space is associated with significant
densities of macrophages that also correlate with decreased OS8. To
investigate a functional role for macrophages in fostering neoplastic
progression of MM, and/or in limiting response to CTX, we investigated
the efficacy of several antagonists targeting the colony stimulating
factor-1 (CSF1)/CSF-1 receptor (CSF1-R) CSF-1R signaling cascade to
reveal the functional significance of macrophages in MM, and to determine
if this class of agents exhibited efficacy as monotherapy, or in
combination with CTX, to improve OS of tumor-bearing mice. Using a
syngeneic orthotopic mouse model for MM, our results indicate that
reducing the presence of macrophages in MM significantly slows early, as
well as late-stage MM growth, and improves response to standard-of-care
CTX. These experimental findings indicate a protumoral role for
macrophages in MM, and support clinical investigation of targeted
therapies, in combination with CTX, for treatment of patients with MM.1.
Lin et al., J Exp Med 193, 727-740 (2001).2. DeNardo et al., Cancer Cell
16, 91-102 (2009).3. Gocheva et al., Genes Dev 24, 241-255 (2010).4.
DeNardo et al., Cancer Discov 1, 54-67 (2011).5. Shree et al., Genes and
Development in press(2011).6. Campbell et al., Breast Cancer Res Treat
128, 703-711 (2011).7. Sugarbaker et al., Expert Rev Respir Med 4,
363-372 (2010).8. Burt et al., Cancer 117, 5234-5244 (2011).The authors
acknowledge generous support from the NIH/NCI, Dept of Defense (DoD) Era
of Hope Scholar Award Expansion Award, Susan G. Komen Fndt, Breast Cancer
Research Fndt, and an Investigator-Initiated Research Award in
Mesothelioma from the DoD.

