Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complementary and alternative medicine use among cancer survivors
in the United States.


Background: Although there is little evidence of effectiveness of
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM), there has been an increase
in the number of patients turning to these largely unproven medical
therapies. In this study, we sought to determine if those with a personal
history of cancer were more likely to have utilized CAM as compared to
those without a history of cancer.Methods: We analyzed the 2007 Health
Information National Trends Survey (HINTS) and identified 976 respondents
who were cancer survivors and 6,235 respondents without a personal
history of cancer. We compared the demographic, lifestyle, and healthcare
perceptions of these participants and used logistic regression models to
evaluate the association of personal history of cancer, cancer treatment
and the time since cancer treatment with CAM use. We used survey weights
in all analysis and Taylor series linearization to perform variance
estimations to account for the complex survey design.Results: Overall,
cancer survivors were as likely as those without history of cancer to use
CAM in the previous 12 months (27.1% vs. 25.2%; OR = 1.09; 95%CI:
0.86-1.38). Cancer treatment and time since cancer treatment was not
associated with CAM use (Table 1).Conclusions: Cancer survivors were as
likely as adults without a history of cancer to use complementary and
alternative medicine irrespective of cancer treatment.
The effect of cancer treatment and time since treatment on CAM use among
cancer survivorsAdjusted for respondent's age, sex, marital status, place
of birth, race, income, education level, health insurance status, BMI,
perception of health status, perception of health care quality received,
and confidence in taking care of one's own health

