Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor protects squamous cell carcinoma against
cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity through increased interleukin-1 expression.


The expression of cytokines, such as IL-1, and the activation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are crucial regulators in the
process of carcinogenesis. The correlation between growth factor and
activated cytokine signals in the control of tumor development is a
critical issue to be clarified. In our study, we found that the IL-1 gene
and protein expression were induced by EGF in squamous cell carcinoma. To
clarify the mechanism involved in EGF-regulatedIL-1 expression, we
examined the transcriptional activity and mRNA stability of IL-1 in
EGF-treated cells. We found that EGF induced the expression of IL-1, and
was mediated through transcriptional activation, but not through mRNA
stability. The involvement of Akt and NF-B signaling pathways in the
EGF-induced IL-1 gene expression and promoter activity was confirmed by
treating cells with Akt and NF-B inhibitors, LY294002 and parthenolide,
respectively. Using immunofluorescence staining assay, the EGF-stimulated
nuclear translocation of NF-B (p65) was inhibited by pre-treating cells
withLY294002 and parthenolide. Furthermore, EGF increased the binding of
NF-B to the NF-B binding site of the IL-1 promoter through the activation
of the Akt/NF-B pathway, which resulted in activating IL-1 promoter
activity. The expression and secretion of IL-1 induced by EGF
considerably reduced chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin-induced cell death.
These results showed that EGF enhanced the expression of IL-1, which was
mediated by the Akt/NF-B pathway. The activation of EGF signaling and
increase of IL-1 contributed to chemotherapeutic resistance of cancer
cells, suggesting that the expression of IL-1 may be used as a biomarker
to evaluate successful cancer treatment.

