Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of mammalian Hippo Mst1/2 protein kinase signaling in lung
cancer progression.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a major lung adenocarcinoma observed in
humans. Therapeutic options for patients with NSCLC are very limited and
palliative since the disease mechanism is poorly understood. The Mst1/2
serine-threonine kinase, related to hippo (hpo) in drosophila, has
emerged as an important regulator of tumorigenesis with poorer prognosis.
However, the biological significance of Mst/Hippo in lung cancer
pathogenesis remains to be determined. In this study, we assessed Mst1/2
expression at protein levels by western blots in cultures and in primary
and metastatic lung cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry, and
investigated the potential functional link between EGFR and Mst/Hippo
signaling in well-characterized NSCLC cell models in vitro. We found that
Mst1/2 protein levels were reduced by at least 50% in two out of five
lung tumor cell lines analyzed. Surprisingly, reduction was observed in
Erlotinib resistant H1734 and H1975 lung tumor cells. In agreement with
this observation, Mst1 protein declined in primary lung tumor and was
undetectable in metastatic lung cancer compared to non-cancerous
counterparts. In addition, we showed that enforced Mst1 expression
significantly increased sensitivity to EGFR inhibition by Erlotinib
compared to mock treatment. We also showed that the activation of EGFR by
epidermal growth factor (EGF) attenuated the Mst1 mediation of cell
growth suppression. Taken together, our findings suggest that the loss of
Mst/Hippo functions could contribute to lung tumor progression and
acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitor. A molecular understanding of how
these two opposing signals biochemically and functionally intersect may
improve current EGFR blockade therapy.

