Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalized chemosensitivity profiling of cancers isolated from
genetically-engineered mice.


BACKGROUNDHigh-throughput functional chemosensitivity testing is a
potentially effective way to customize personalized chemotherapy
treatment. This testing requires low-passage patient-specific cancer cell
lines, however, generating such cell lines from patients tumors is
difficult, due in large part, to contaminating fibroblasts that often
overgrow the malignant cells.METHODSWe constructed a series of
hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (hprt) null immunodeficient mice.
These include nude hprt-null, SCID hprt-null and NOD-SCID hprt-null mice.
During growth of xenografted human cancers in these mice, hprt-null
murine stromal cells replace their human counterparts. Tumors from
patients were implanted and expanded in these mice. Explanted tumors were
then grown in tissue culture flasks with selection media (hypoxanthine,
aminopterin, thymidine; HAT media) to eliminate the mouse
biochemically-defective fibroblasts and produce pure human cancer cell
lines. We screened one cell line against the Johns Hopkins Drug Library
containing 3,100 drugs. Selected potent drugs were used for in vivo
xenograft tumor inhibition studies.RESULTSWe successfully established
several pancreatic cancer cell lines from patients using the hprt null
immunodeficient mice. We performed chemosensitivity profiling on one of
the pancreatic cancer cell lines using 3,100 drugs. From the profiling,
we selected potent drugs, which are FDA-approved but are not currently
used for pancreatic cancer. We chose two drugs that demonstrated greater
in vitro chemosensitivity compared to control cell lines. The two drugs
were tested against mouse xenografts where both drugs demonstrated
superior in vivo efficacy to the sensitive cell line tumors compared to
control tumors.CONCLUSIONSChemotherapy for cancer may be personalized
using low passage cell lines derived from patients through biochemically
selectable mice. Further tests are needed to determine whether in vitro
chemosensitivity testing of low-passage patient-specific cancer cell
lines can predict clinical patient response.

