Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor transcriptionally targets the ErbB3 regulator
Nrdp1 in the presence of nuclear Filamin A.


Despite availability of improved androgen receptor (AR) inhibitors for
the treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), resistance
to treatment develops, and has been traced to activation of multiple
signaling pathways suppressed by the AR. We previously showed that the AR
maintained castration sensitivity in prostate cancer (PCa) by
transcriptional regulation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1, which
degrades the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) ErbB3; whereas AR inhibition
suppressed Nrdp1 levels, thereby activating ErbB3. This resulted in CRPC
growth and AR stimulation, but in CRPC, the AR was unable to regulate
Nrdp1 or suppress ErbB3, causing uncontrolled progression. Here, we
investigate the mechanism by which the AR regulates Nrdp1 transcription
and why this regulation is lost in CRPC. Immunohistochemical studies in
human PCa tissue and in PCa mouse models demonstrated Nrdp1 localization
in both nucleus and cytoplasm. In vitro studies determined cytoplasmic
Nrdp1 as 36kDa while nuclear Nrdp1 is 28kDa, the 36kDa form, but not the
28kDa form, negatively correlated with ErbB3 levels, but both forms
positively correlated with AR. We demonstrate that Nrdp1 is a direct
transcriptional target of the AR in androgen-dependent cells expressing a
truncated form of the structural protein Filamin A (FlnA) in the nucleus,
but in CRPC cells which have lost nuclear FlnA expression, the AR is no
longer able to bind to the Nrdp1 promoter. Restoration of nuclear FlnA
restored the ability of AR to regulate Nrdp1 transcription. Thus dual
targeting of ErbB3 and AR will be effective in patients whose tumors
express nuclear FlnA.

