Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation profile of CCNA1, MGMT, HIC1, TIMP3, AIM1, DAPK and
CDH1 genes in head and neck cancer.


Head and neck carcinomas are among the most frequent tumor types
worldwide, with around 500,000 new cases diagnosed per year. The most
common variant is the squamous cell carcinoma from the upper
aerodigestive tract (HNSCC), representing 90% of these malignancies.
Activation of proto-oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes
are the major genetic alterations involved in carcinogenesis. The
increase in methylation in the promoter region of a tumor suppressor
gene, or the lack of methylation of a proto-oncogene promoter region, can
lead to progressive reduction/enhancement of its expression, resulting in
its silencing, thus selecting cells with proliferative advantage.
Promoter hypermethylation is considered a tumor marker in a variety of
malignant neoplasias, including HNSCC. The objective of this work was to
analyze the hypermethylation profile of CCNA1, MGMT, HIC1, TIMP3, AIM1,
DAPK and CDH1 genes in DNA tumor samples of HNSCC patients included in
Head and Neck Genome Project (GENCAPO). In this study, DNA was extracted
from 33 tumor samples from HNSCC patients. Extracted DNA was submitted to
bisulfite treatment and analyzed using Quantitative Methylation-Specific
PCR (Q-MSP), this real-time PCR methodology allows a more objective,
robust, and rapid assessment of promoter methylation status. Criteria for
positive methylation of promoter regions by Q-MSP range from 0.01 to
100%. Our results showed that at least two of these genes were found
methylated in 100% of the samples analyzed. In addition, the presence of
promoter hypermethylation of Cyclin A1 (CCNA1) was significantly
associated to absence of tobacco consumption (P=0.042). However,
methylated DNA tumors were not associated with tumor site (CCNA1, P=0.55;
MGMT, P=0.29; HIC1, P=1.00; TIMP3, P=1.00; AIM1, P=1.00 and DAPK, P=1.00)
nor clinical stage (CCNA1, P=0.64; MGMT, P=0.38; HIC1, P=1.00; TIMP3,
P=0.57; AIM1, P=0.55 and DAPK, P=1.00). In conclusion, the results
suggest that hypermethylation of the CCNA1 gene is significantly
associated to tobacco consumption in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma patients.

