Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol and breast cancer subtypes in a Spanish cohort.


Background Although alcohol intake is an established risk factor for
overall breast cancer, few studies have looked at the relationship
between alcohol use and breast cancer risk by subtype of breast
cancer.Materials and Methods A population-based study was conducted in
Galicia, Spain. A total of 1211 Spanish women diagnosed with operable
invasive breast cancer between 1997 and 2010 and 550 controls
participated in the study. Data on demographics, breast cancer risk
factors, and clinico-pathological characteristics were collected. The
four major breast cancer subtypes [hormone-receptor-positive,
HER2-negative (luminal A); hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-positive
(luminal B); hormone-receptor-negative, HER2-negative (triple-negative);
and hormone-receptor-negative, HER2-positive (HER2 over-expressing)] were
compared on their clinico-pathological characteristics and risk factor
profiles, particularly alcohol intake and reproductive variables.Results
With the exception of Her2 overexpressing, the risk of all subtypes of
breast cancer increased with increasing alcohol intake (luminal A:
OR=2.32, 95%CI:1.43-3.77; luminal B: OR=2.03, 95%CI 1.01-4.06, and triple
negative: OR=2.36, 95%CI 1.11-5.00). The association of alcohol with
breast cancer was similar among women who drank wine exclusively and
other drinkers. The alcohol-breast cancer association appeared to be more
pronounced among lobular breast cancers (OR= 2.70, 95% CI:1.33-5.52) than
among ductal type breast cancers (OR= 2.09, 95%CI:1.33-3-01). It has been
suggested that the association of alcohol intake with breast cancer may
be stronger in women who are current or past users of hormone replacement
therapy compared with never users, or among non-ovariectomized compared
to ovariectomized women, we found no such differences.Conclusions To our
knowledge, no prior study has examined the association of breast cancer
with alcohol intake according to breast cancer subtypes and the type of
wine consumed in Spanish women. Our findings indicate that breast cancer
risk increased with increasing alcohol intakes for three out of the four
major subtypes of breast cancer and that the risk was similar in women
who drank wine, beer and/or liquor exclusively or in mixture.

