Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic control of the prometastatic protein CD147.


Apart from a recent report suggesting that hypoxia upregulates CD147,
little is known about the mechanisms responsible of the tumoral
overexpression of CD147, a transmembrane and secretory glycoprotein known
to promote metastasis through multiple mechanisms. Here, we report that
the total and surface concentration of CD147 appear to be under metabolic
control. Glucose (Glc) deprivation in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 tumor
cells leads to a decrease in the levels of total CD147 and a dramatic
increase in the expression of cell surface CD147. A similar mobilization
of CD147 to the plasma membrane was observed with glutamine (Gln)
deprivation in MDA-MB-435 cells; when the cells were deprived of both
nutrients (Glc and Gln) a dramatic increase (6-fold) in the cell surface
expression of CD147 was observed. Plasma membrane associated CD147 is
known to promote metastasis through homotypic and heterotypic
interactions between cancer and stromal cells. An 80% reduction in the
membrane found CD147 was observed when Gln-deprived cells were treated
with ERG-240, a small molecule that inhibits the cytosolic form of BCAT,
the enzyme responsible for the reversible transamination of leucine
(Leu). On the other hand, Leu deprivation was shown to decrease CD147 by
6-7 fold in both cancer cell lines tested here. Treatment of the cells
with ERG-240 partially reversed the increase in the levels of CD147 seen
after supplementation of the Leu-deprived cells with 105 mg/L Leu. CD147
is known to possess 3 N-glycosylation sites and to exist in forms with
various degrees of glycosylation; the fully glycosylated protein is
associated with an increased prometastatic potential. Inhibitors of
N-glycosylation, such as 2-deoxyglucose (2DG), are known to possess
anticancer properties. In the present study, treatment of MDA-MB-231
cells in vitro with 10 mM 2DG led to 80% reduction of the cell surface
expression of highly glycosylated CD147 without the concomitant reduction
in the total concentration of CD147. In contrast, treatment of athymic
female nude mice, bearing orthotopically implanted MDA-MB-231 tumors,
with 125 mg/Kg 2DG twice a week led to tumors that expressed markedly
increased levels of the highly glycosylated CD147 variant
(Control/Treated or T/C=2.3, p=0.01). The increased expression of the
protein in the 2DG-treated tumors was accompanied with an increase in the
levels of circulating human CD147 (T/C=1.7, p=0.01) normalized per tumor
volume. Collectively, the data point towards a metabolic control of CD147
and suggest that inhibition of tumor growth due to nutrient deprivation
may initiate pathways that promote metastasis.

