Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LKB1 overexpression regulates DNA repair pathway and sensitivity
to radiation in LKB1 mutant non-small cell lung cancer cell lines .


Background: LKB1 is a serine/threonine kinase which is mutated in 20-30%
of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway
activation leads cellular resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of
LKB1 leads NSCLC to be more invasive and resistant to DNA damage based
therapies. We hypothesize that loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage
response. We investigated LKB1- mediated signaling pathways by stably
overexpressing LKB1 in its mutated NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460.
Methods: Expression of 139 proteins was analyzed by reverse phase protein
array (RPPA) in LKB1 overexpressing cell lines along with the appropriate
vector control lines. Differences in protein expression at baseline in
clones with LKB1 versus clones with vector control were assessed by
unpaired T-test with Welch's correction. Ionizing radiation sensitivity
(reproductive cell death) was assessed by clonogenic cell survival assay
(CSA). Results: LKB1 overexpression in A549 and H460 showed a significant
downregulation of genes involved in DNA damage and repair pathway, such
as RAD50 (1.4-fold relative expression, pBackground: LKB1 is a
serine/threonine kinase which is mutated in 20-30% of non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway activation leads cellular
resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of LKB1 leads NSCLC to be more
invasive and resistant to DNA damage based therapies. We hypothesize that
loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage response. We investigated LKB1-
mediated signaling pathways by stably overexpressing LKB1 in its mutated
NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460. Methods: Expression of 139 proteins was
analyzed by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in LKB1 overexpressing
cell lines along with the appropriate vector control lines. Differences
in protein expression at baseline in clones with LKB1 versus clones with
vector control were assessed by unpaired T-test with Welch's correction.
Ionizing radiation sensitivity (reproductive cell death) was assessed by
clonogenic cell survival assay (CSA). Results: LKB1 overexpression in
A549 and H460 showed a significant downregulation of genes involved in
DNA damage and repair pathway, such as RAD50 (1.4-fold relative
expression, p< 0.05 and 1.5-fold relative expression pBackground: LKB1 is
a serine/threonine kinase which is mutated in 20-30% of non-small cell
lung cancers (NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway activation leads
cellular resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of LKB1 leads NSCLC
to be more invasive and resistant to DNA damage based therapies. We
hypothesize that loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage response. We
investigated LKB1- mediated signaling pathways by stably overexpressing
LKB1 in its mutated NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460. Methods: Expression
of 139 proteins was analyzed by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in
LKB1 overexpressing cell lines along with the appropriate vector control
lines. Differences in protein expression at baseline in clones with LKB1
versus clones with vector control were assessed by unpaired T-test with
Welch's correction. Ionizing radiation sensitivity (reproductive cell
death) was assessed by clonogenic cell survival assay (CSA). Results:
LKB1 overexpression in A549 and H460 showed a significant downregulation
of genes involved in DNA damage and repair pathway, such as RAD50
(1.4-fold relative expression, p< 0.05 and 1.5-fold relative expression
p<0.02 respectively), XRCC1 (1.2-fold relative expression pBackground:
LKB1 is a serine/threonine kinase which is mutated in 20-30% of non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway activation leads
cellular resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of LKB1 leads NSCLC
to be more invasive and resistant to DNA damage based therapies. We
hypothesize that loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage response. We
investigated LKB1- mediated signaling pathways by stably overexpressing
LKB1 in its mutated NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460. Methods: Expression
of 139 proteins was analyzed by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in
LKB1 overexpressing cell lines along with the appropriate vector control
lines. Differences in protein expression at baseline in clones with LKB1
versus clones with vector control were assessed by unpaired T-test with
Welch's correction. Ionizing radiation sensitivity (reproductive cell
death) was assessed by clonogenic cell survival assay (CSA). Results:
LKB1 overexpression in A549 and H460 showed a significant downregulation
of genes involved in DNA damage and repair pathway, such as RAD50
(1.4-fold relative expression, p< 0.05 and 1.5-fold relative expression
p<0.02 respectively), XRCC1 (1.2-fold relative expression p<0.005 and
1.1-fold relative expression pBackground: LKB1 is a serine/threonine
kinase which is mutated in 20-30% of non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway activation leads cellular
resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of LKB1 leads NSCLC to be more
invasive and resistant to DNA damage based therapies. We hypothesize that
loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage response. We investigated LKB1-
mediated signaling pathways by stably overexpressing LKB1 in its mutated
NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460. Methods: Expression of 139 proteins was
analyzed by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in LKB1 overexpressing
cell lines along with the appropriate vector control lines. Differences
in protein expression at baseline in clones with LKB1 versus clones with
vector control were assessed by unpaired T-test with Welch's correction.
Ionizing radiation sensitivity (reproductive cell death) was assessed by
clonogenic cell survival assay (CSA). Results: LKB1 overexpression in
A549 and H460 showed a significant downregulation of genes involved in
DNA damage and repair pathway, such as RAD50 (1.4-fold relative
expression, p< 0.05 and 1.5-fold relative expression p<0.02
respectively), XRCC1 (1.2-fold relative expression p<0.005 and 1.1-fold
relative expression p<0.05, respectively), and DNA-PKCS (1.2-fold
relative expression p0.067 and 1.2-fold relative expression pBackground:
LKB1 is a serine/threonine kinase which is mutated in 20-30% of non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway activation leads
cellular resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of LKB1 leads NSCLC
to be more invasive and resistant to DNA damage based therapies. We
hypothesize that loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage response. We
investigated LKB1- mediated signaling pathways by stably overexpressing
LKB1 in its mutated NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460. Methods: Expression
of 139 proteins was analyzed by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in
LKB1 overexpressing cell lines along with the appropriate vector control
lines. Differences in protein expression at baseline in clones with LKB1
versus clones with vector control were assessed by unpaired T-test with
Welch's correction. Ionizing radiation sensitivity (reproductive cell
death) was assessed by clonogenic cell survival assay (CSA). Results:
LKB1 overexpression in A549 and H460 showed a significant downregulation
of genes involved in DNA damage and repair pathway, such as RAD50
(1.4-fold relative expression, p< 0.05 and 1.5-fold relative expression
p<0.02 respectively), XRCC1 (1.2-fold relative expression p<0.005 and
1.1-fold relative expression p<0.05, respectively), and DNA-PKCS
(1.2-fold relative expression p0.067 and 1.2-fold relative expression
p<0.01. Also, CSA showed that A549 with LKB1 overexpression led to
enhanced sensitization of cells to radiation (DER = 2) which is in
consistent with the downregulation of RAD50, XRCC1 and DNA-PKCS.
Furthermore, expression of CHK2 and phosphorylation of CHK1 are
downregulated, H460 with LKB1 overexpression showed a significant
decreasing of CHK1 phosphorylation level (pBackground: LKB1 is a
serine/threonine kinase which is mutated in 20-30% of non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLC).In general, DNA repair pathway activation leads cellular
resistant to DNA damaging agents. The loss of LKB1 leads NSCLC to be more
invasive and resistant to DNA damage based therapies. We hypothesize that
loss of LKB1 may contribute to DNA damage response. We investigated LKB1-
mediated signaling pathways by stably overexpressing LKB1 in its mutated
NSCLC cell lines, A549 and H460. Methods: Expression of 139 proteins was
analyzed by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) in LKB1 overexpressing
cell lines along with the appropriate vector control lines. Differences
in protein expression at baseline in clones with LKB1 versus clones with
vector control were assessed by unpaired T-test with Welch's correction.
Ionizing radiation sensitivity (reproductive cell death) was assessed by
clonogenic cell survival assay (CSA). Results: LKB1 overexpression in
A549 and H460 showed a significant downregulation of genes involved in
DNA damage and repair pathway, such as RAD50 (1.4-fold relative
expression, p< 0.05 and 1.5-fold relative expression p<0.02
respectively), XRCC1 (1.2-fold relative expression p<0.005 and 1.1-fold
relative expression p<0.05, respectively), and DNA-PKCS (1.2-fold
relative expression p0.067 and 1.2-fold relative expression p<0.01. Also,
CSA showed that A549 with LKB1 overexpression led to enhanced
sensitization of cells to radiation (DER = 2) which is in consistent with
the downregulation of RAD50, XRCC1 and DNA-PKCS. Furthermore, expression
of CHK2 and phosphorylation of CHK1 are downregulated, H460 with LKB1
overexpression showed a significant decreasing of CHK1 phosphorylation
level (p<0.05). Conclusion: Our results suggest that LKB1 overexpression
modulates DNA repair capacity through downregulation of RAD50, XRCC1,
DNA-PKCS, CHK1 and CHK2. LKB1 loss may lead to the resistance to DNA
damaging induced cell death.

