Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of chemotherapy on cytokine production by solid tumor cell
lines.


Tumor microenvironment strongly influences cancer progression, regulating
several cellular processes and cancer immune surveillance. Albeit the
influence of cytokines from immune cells on tumor progression has already
been described, little is known on the role of cancer cells on the
production of these cytokines, especially in response to chemotherapy. To
address this aspect of tumor biology, we exposed the serous epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC) cell line A2780, the clear cell EOC cell line
TOV21G, the endometrioid EOC cell line MDAH-2774 (further referred as
2774), the breast cancer (BC) cell line MDA-MB 231, and the non-small
cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell line A549 to cisplatin (CI),
cyclophosphamide (CY), doxorubicin (DO), and paclitaxel (PA) for 5 days,
at their IC50 range, prior to cytokine measurement by ELISA in cell's
conditioned media (CM). Cytokines (IL-17, IFN-, CXCL-1, and TGF-) were
measured in the pool of CM from 3 well after 3 and 5 days of exposure to
each drug or untreated cells (UT). Results were normalized by the mean
protein content of wells and are expressed in pg/mL/g of protein.
Cytokines level varied among UT cell lines, probably reflecting tumor
heterogeneity. IL-17 secretion was higher in 2774, MDA-MB 213 and A549
(4.6, 8.9, and 10.6, respectively). UT TOV21G cells did not secrete
IL-17. In response to CI, IL-17 levels decreased; whereas response to the
other drugs greatly varied. INF- levels showed the lesser variation among
cell lines (0.01 - 0.2). Upon exposure to the drugs, IFN- secretion tend
to increase by all drugs in A2780 and 2774 lines, and in TOV21G exposed
to CY; however it was strongly decreased by PA in this line and in A549.
EOC cells A2780 and 2774 were the only lines secreting CXCL-1 in UT
condition (0.015 on D5). CXCL-1 secretion in most conditions either was
unaltered or decreased. However, CI was the only drug that induced its
secretion in A2780, TOV21G and MDA-MB 231. As this chemokine has already
been described as a factor promoting tumor cell migration and invasion,
the relation between CI and CXCL-1 is worth of further analysis. Worth
noticing, TGF- was highly secreted by NSCLC cells (42.7 on D5); all other
cells level was Tumor microenvironment strongly influences cancer
progression, regulating several cellular processes and cancer immune
surveillance. Albeit the influence of cytokines from immune cells on
tumor progression has already been described, little is known on the role
of cancer cells on the production of these cytokines, especially in
response to chemotherapy. To address this aspect of tumor biology, we
exposed the serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cell line A2780, the
clear cell EOC cell line TOV21G, the endometrioid EOC cell line MDAH-2774
(further referred as 2774), the breast cancer (BC) cell line MDA-MB 231,
and the non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell line A549 to cisplatin
(CI), cyclophosphamide (CY), doxorubicin (DO), and paclitaxel (PA) for 5
days, at their IC50 range, prior to cytokine measurement by ELISA in
cell's conditioned media (CM). Cytokines (IL-17, IFN-, CXCL-1, and TGF-)
were measured in the pool of CM from 3 well after 3 and 5 days of
exposure to each drug or untreated cells (UT). Results were normalized by
the mean protein content of wells and are expressed in pg/mL/g of
protein. Cytokines level varied among UT cell lines, probably reflecting
tumor heterogeneity. IL-17 secretion was higher in 2774, MDA-MB 213 and
A549 (4.6, 8.9, and 10.6, respectively). UT TOV21G cells did not secrete
IL-17. In response to CI, IL-17 levels decreased; whereas response to the
other drugs greatly varied. INF- levels showed the lesser variation among
cell lines (0.01 - 0.2). Upon exposure to the drugs, IFN- secretion tend
to increase by all drugs in A2780 and 2774 lines, and in TOV21G exposed
to CY; however it was strongly decreased by PA in this line and in A549.
EOC cells A2780 and 2774 were the only lines secreting CXCL-1 in UT
condition (0.015 on D5). CXCL-1 secretion in most conditions either was
unaltered or decreased. However, CI was the only drug that induced its
secretion in A2780, TOV21G and MDA-MB 231. As this chemokine has already
been described as a factor promoting tumor cell migration and invasion,
the relation between CI and CXCL-1 is worth of further analysis. Worth
noticing, TGF- was highly secreted by NSCLC cells (42.7 on D5); all other
cells level was < 0.96 on D5. The most striking change was in A540 where
all drugs decreased its levels, especially CI (0.73 on D5). Similar data
were observed in A2780 cells, which is not in concordance with our
previous data. This finding highlights the importance of precisely define
drug dose in cancer therapy and its impact on patients clinical outcome,
as the assays were conducted under distinct CI concentration. Overall,
our data corroborated the great heterogeneity among different cancers and
its response to chemotherapy, also highlighting the importance to
consider the effect of different drugs on tumor immune surveillance,
therefore introducing a novel aspect in predicting tumor responsiveness
to conventional antineoplastic drugs, and ultimately to control cancer
progression.

