Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bmi1 is required for Twist1-mediated breast cancer cell invasion.


Metastasis is the spread of cancer cells from the site of primary tumors
to distant organs and the establishment of secondary tumors there. It is
a multistep process, and the initial step is cancer cell invasion during
which cancer cells move into tissues surrounding the tumor and the
vasculature. Transcription factor Twist1 has been identified as a key
regulator of metastasis in a murine breast tumor model as suppression of
Twist1 expression in metastatic mammary carcinoma cells specifically
inhibits their ability to metastasize, and overexpression of Twist1
induces cell motility and promotes an epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Previous studies have shown that Twist1 works together with
polycomb group protein Bmi1 to promote EMT. Here we show that in breast
cancer cells, Bmi1 acts downstream of Twist1 to promote the cancer cell
invasion. Suppression of Bmi1 in breast cancer cells expressing high
level Twist1 reduces cell motility, and ectopic expression of Bmi1 in
Twist1-knockdown cells promote cell invasion. The results delineate a
novel pathway that leads to cancer cell invasion and metastasis, which
may benefit the development of novel therapeutic approaches to treat
advanced breast cancer.Citation Format: Yu-Huey Lin, Guihua Jing, Junjun
Liu. Bmi1 is required for Twist1-mediated breast cancer cell invasion.
[abstract]. In: Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American
Association for Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC.
Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 1483.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-1483

