Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM pathway upregulation of combination therapy with radiation and
MSC-based IL-12M gene vaccine, Gx-051, in allograft animal model.


PURPOSE: In spite of the powerful therapeutic effects of radiotherapy,
the attempts to combined radiotherapy with others have so far kept going
on to find better therapeutic protocol for patients in the head and neck
cancer. Previously, we announced some part of anticancer effects of
combined radiotherapy with Gx-051 named as mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
expressing modified interleukin-12 (MSCs/IL-12M). It is a novel component
of human immune system to attack cancer cells by the recruitment of
immune cells with a high specificity. Thus, in the present study, we have
tried to reveal another therapeutic effect of combined radiation and
immunotherapy, compared to the treatment with each single modality in
allograft animal model.METHODS AND MATERIALS: AT-84 cells, one of murine
head and neck carcinoma cells, were injected for allograft induction on
C3H/HeN mice. All the mice were randomly divided into 4 groups; control
(non-treated), radiation only-treated, Gx-051 only-treated, and
irradiation with Gx-051-treated. Intra-tumoral injection of Gx-051
(adopted within 24hr after irradiation) as well as 8 Gy-local irradiation
was carried out, totally 4 times (twice a week for 2 weeks). To clarify
the anti-tumoral effect of radiation with Gx-051 administration, we
provided reasonable evidences; tumor volume, levels of IL-12 and IFN-r,
and the changes in signaling pathway related-protein expression
level.RESULTS: In the present study, we could confirm that combined
treatment with radiation and Gx-051 significantly enhanced the anti-tumor
effect. The proliferation of cancer cell was markedly inhibited in all
the treated groups compared to non-treated group (pPURPOSE: In spite of
the powerful therapeutic effects of radiotherapy, the attempts to
combined radiotherapy with others have so far kept going on to find
better therapeutic protocol for patients in the head and neck cancer.
Previously, we announced some part of anticancer effects of combined
radiotherapy with Gx-051 named as mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) expressing
modified interleukin-12 (MSCs/IL-12M). It is a novel component of human
immune system to attack cancer cells by the recruitment of immune cells
with a high specificity. Thus, in the present study, we have tried to
reveal another therapeutic effect of combined radiation and
immunotherapy, compared to the treatment with each single modality in
allograft animal model.METHODS AND MATERIALS: AT-84 cells, one of murine
head and neck carcinoma cells, were injected for allograft induction on
C3H/HeN mice. All the mice were randomly divided into 4 groups; control
(non-treated), radiation only-treated, Gx-051 only-treated, and
irradiation with Gx-051-treated. Intra-tumoral injection of Gx-051
(adopted within 24hr after irradiation) as well as 8 Gy-local irradiation
was carried out, totally 4 times (twice a week for 2 weeks). To clarify
the anti-tumoral effect of radiation with Gx-051 administration, we
provided reasonable evidences; tumor volume, levels of IL-12 and IFN-r,
and the changes in signaling pathway related-protein expression
level.RESULTS: In the present study, we could confirm that combined
treatment with radiation and Gx-051 significantly enhanced the anti-tumor
effect. The proliferation of cancer cell was markedly inhibited in all
the treated groups compared to non-treated group (p<0.05) as
down-regulating of PCNA expression. Also, via mediating the expression of
ATM and CDK2, the combined treatment group (radiotherapy with Gx-051)
significantly enhanced the activation of ATM pathway-related proteins
(pPURPOSE: In spite of the powerful therapeutic effects of radiotherapy,
the attempts to combined radiotherapy with others have so far kept going
on to find better therapeutic protocol for patients in the head and neck
cancer. Previously, we announced some part of anticancer effects of
combined radiotherapy with Gx-051 named as mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
expressing modified interleukin-12 (MSCs/IL-12M). It is a novel component
of human immune system to attack cancer cells by the recruitment of
immune cells with a high specificity. Thus, in the present study, we have
tried to reveal another therapeutic effect of combined radiation and
immunotherapy, compared to the treatment with each single modality in
allograft animal model.METHODS AND MATERIALS: AT-84 cells, one of murine
head and neck carcinoma cells, were injected for allograft induction on
C3H/HeN mice. All the mice were randomly divided into 4 groups; control
(non-treated), radiation only-treated, Gx-051 only-treated, and
irradiation with Gx-051-treated. Intra-tumoral injection of Gx-051
(adopted within 24hr after irradiation) as well as 8 Gy-local irradiation
was carried out, totally 4 times (twice a week for 2 weeks). To clarify
the anti-tumoral effect of radiation with Gx-051 administration, we
provided reasonable evidences; tumor volume, levels of IL-12 and IFN-r,
and the changes in signaling pathway related-protein expression
level.RESULTS: In the present study, we could confirm that combined
treatment with radiation and Gx-051 significantly enhanced the anti-tumor
effect. The proliferation of cancer cell was markedly inhibited in all
the treated groups compared to non-treated group (p<0.05) as
down-regulating of PCNA expression. Also, via mediating the expression of
ATM and CDK2, the combined treatment group (radiotherapy with Gx-051)
significantly enhanced the activation of ATM pathway-related proteins
(p<0.05). The tumor suppress gene, p53, was highly expressed and the one
of typical oncogenes, Met, was suppressed in combined treatment group
compared to others. In addition, expression of p38-MAPk as one of the
cell stress markers was decreased in combined treatment group compared to
others.CONCLUSIONS: We determined the combined radiotherapy with Gx-051
improved the responses to HNSCC by AT-84 via the activation of ATM
pathway that influenced cell proliferation, apoptosis, and regulation of
tumor suppress gene and oncogene. These results gave us the partial
rationale to the further study about the combined therapy of radiation
with Gx-051 for the advanced treatment of human HNSCC.This study was
supported by grant of the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry
of Health & Welfare (A091205) and the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No.
2012-0004140).

