Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum vitamin D, vitamin D binding protein, and incident
colorectal cancer in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer
Screening Trial (PLCO) cohort.


Many, but not all, prospective studies indicate that circulating
25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], the accepted biomarker of vitamin D
status, is inversely associated with colorectal cancer risk. Importantly,
any impact of vitamin D binding protein (DBP), the primary transporter of
vitamin D compounds in the circulation, on the association has not been
examined. Prediagnostic serum concentrations of 25(OH)D and DBP were
measured in 476 incident colorectal cancer cases and 476 controls
(matched on age, gender, race, and date of blood collection) from the
PLCO cohort (baseline age 55-74y). We used a chemiluminescence
immunoassay and a Quantikine Human DBP Immunoassay to measure 25(OH)D and
DBP, with coefficients of variation of 7.8% and 14.9%, respectively.
Conditional logistic regression models, adjusted for body mass index,
provided odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the
associations between both 25(OH)D and DBP concentrations and risk of
colorectal cancer (no other confounders were identified). Season-specific
quintiles of 25(OH)D were calculated separately based on the distribution
of 25(OH)D among controls in winter/spring and summer/autumn, and
combined into one quintile classification that was included in models as
indicator variables; DBP was categorized as quintiles based on the
distribution among controls. 25(OH)D concentrations were significantly
higher among controls compared with cases [median (interquartile range):
56.5 (41.2-71.1) vs. 52.3 (39.6-64.8) nmol/L, p=0.01], while DBP did not
differ by case status [3584 (2715-4938) vs. 3775 (2579-4890) nmol/L, for
controls and cases, respectively; p=0.96]. DBP and 25(OH)D were
positively correlated (r=0.19, pMany, but not all, prospective studies
indicate that circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], the accepted
biomarker of vitamin D status, is inversely associated with colorectal
cancer risk. Importantly, any impact of vitamin D binding protein (DBP),
the primary transporter of vitamin D compounds in the circulation, on the
association has not been examined. Prediagnostic serum concentrations of
25(OH)D and DBP were measured in 476 incident colorectal cancer cases and
476 controls (matched on age, gender, race, and date of blood collection)
from the PLCO cohort (baseline age 55-74y). We used a chemiluminescence
immunoassay and a Quantikine Human DBP Immunoassay to measure 25(OH)D and
DBP, with coefficients of variation of 7.8% and 14.9%, respectively.
Conditional logistic regression models, adjusted for body mass index,
provided odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the
associations between both 25(OH)D and DBP concentrations and risk of
colorectal cancer (no other confounders were identified). Season-specific
quintiles of 25(OH)D were calculated separately based on the distribution
of 25(OH)D among controls in winter/spring and summer/autumn, and
combined into one quintile classification that was included in models as
indicator variables; DBP was categorized as quintiles based on the
distribution among controls. 25(OH)D concentrations were significantly
higher among controls compared with cases [median (interquartile range):
56.5 (41.2-71.1) vs. 52.3 (39.6-64.8) nmol/L, p=0.01], while DBP did not
differ by case status [3584 (2715-4938) vs. 3775 (2579-4890) nmol/L, for
controls and cases, respectively; p=0.96]. DBP and 25(OH)D were
positively correlated (r=0.19, p<0.0001). Circulating 25(OH)D was
significantly inversely associated with colorectal cancer risk (OR =
0.60, 95% CI 0.38-0.94 for highest vs. lowest quintile, p-trend 0.008);
further adjustment for DBP did not change the risk estimates. Additional
analyses using season-adjusted 25(OH)D in quintiles or clinically
pre-defined categories gave similar results. The inverse association for
serum 25(OH)D appeared stronger in women and in participants whose blood
was collected during the winter/spring months. DBP was not associated
with risk of colorectal cancer (OR = 0.82, 95% CI 0.54-1.26 for the
highest vs. lowest quintile, p-trend=0.94), and there was no evidence of
effect modification of the 25(OH)D risk association when stratified by
DBP, or vice versa. For example, OR=0.54 (0.26-1.04) for highest vs.
lowest quintile of 25(OH)D when DBP was below the median, and OR=0.77
(0.41-1.43) when DBP was above the median (p-interaction 0.10). The molar
ratio of 25(OH)D:DBP was also nonsignificantly inversely associated with
risk (p=0.06). In summary, circulating 25(OH)D was inversely associated
with colorectal cancer risk, and not modified by DBP status.

