Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction between DRD1 and childhood exposure to environmental
tobacco smoke modulates lung cancer risk in smokers and never smokers.


In searching for a role for genetic variation in susceptibility to lung
cancer, we postulated that miRNA modulating SNPs within smoking behavior
associated genes, such as the nicotinic acetylcholine and dopamine
receptor families, could modulate susceptibility to tobacco carcinogens
and lung cancer risk. Bioinformatic analyses of these gene families
identified 5 SNPs predicted to modulate a miRNA binding site. We assessed
these SNPs in the National Cancer Institute-MD case-control study
(European American [EA] & African Americans [AA] n=1,438). rs686 in DRD1
(dopamine receptor D1) was associated with a reduced risk of lung cancer
after adjustment for age, gender and race (OR 0.63, 95% C.I. 0.47-0.85;
P=0.002). As DRD1 mediates dopamine signaling following nicotine
exposure, we reasoned that the rs686 variant associates with lung cancer
risk via modulation of the nicotine reward pathway. However, adjustment
for smoking both in terms of smoking status and pack-years did not
significantly modulate the association (OR 0.57, 95% C.I. 0.40-0.81,
P=0002). In addition, age at smoking initiation, pack-years of smoking
and levels of urinary nicotine metabolites (cotinine and hydroxycotinine)
did not vary across rs686 genotypes. Moreover, in an analysis of a never
smoking cohort from Mayo Clinic, rs686 was also associated with a reduced
risk of lung cancer (OR 0.77, 95% C.I. 0.62-0.97; P=0.027; n=629) (pooled
analysis OR 0.61, 95% C.I. 0.47-0.78; PIn searching for a role for
genetic variation in susceptibility to lung cancer, we postulated that
miRNA modulating SNPs within smoking behavior associated genes, such as
the nicotinic acetylcholine and dopamine receptor families, could
modulate susceptibility to tobacco carcinogens and lung cancer risk.
Bioinformatic analyses of these gene families identified 5 SNPs predicted
to modulate a miRNA binding site. We assessed these SNPs in the National
Cancer Institute-MD case-control study (European American [EA] & African
Americans [AA] n=1,438). rs686 in DRD1 (dopamine receptor D1) was
associated with a reduced risk of lung cancer after adjustment for age,
gender and race (OR 0.63, 95% C.I. 0.47-0.85; P=0.002). As DRD1 mediates
dopamine signaling following nicotine exposure, we reasoned that the
rs686 variant associates with lung cancer risk via modulation of the
nicotine reward pathway. However, adjustment for smoking both in terms of
smoking status and pack-years did not significantly modulate the
association (OR 0.57, 95% C.I. 0.40-0.81, P=0002). In addition, age at
smoking initiation, pack-years of smoking and levels of urinary nicotine
metabolites (cotinine and hydroxycotinine) did not vary across rs686
genotypes. Moreover, in an analysis of a never smoking cohort from Mayo
Clinic, rs686 was also associated with a reduced risk of lung cancer (OR
0.77, 95% C.I. 0.62-0.97; P=0.027; n=629) (pooled analysis OR 0.61, 95%
C.I. 0.47-0.78; P<0.0001; n=2,067). Intriguingly, the association between
rs686 and lung cancer risk was only observed in subjects exposed to
tobacco smoke during childhood (EA smokers: [OR 0.63, 95% C.I. 0.45-0.88;
P=0.007] EA never smokers [OR 0.64, 95% C.I. 0.49-0.85; P=0.002] AA
smokers OR 0.31, 95% C.I. 0.11-0.89; P=0.029) (model adjusted as above
and for education, adult-second-hand smoke exposure). To further explore
a relationship between tobacco and DRD1, we exposed lung cancer cell
lines to increasing doses of nicotine and observed a significant increase
in DRD1 expression (P=0.009). As DRD1 lies within a CpG island, we are
currently testing if this regulation occurs via epigenetic modulation of
the DRD1 promoter. While a direct role for DRD1 in lung cancer has not
previously been reported, a recent report linked DRD to the cancer stem
cell hypothesis. Indeed, our work demonstrates that DRD1 is significantly
upregulated in lung cells with cancer stem-like properties. Furthermore,
miR-296, predicted to bind to variant rs686 allele, is increased in
paired lung cancer tissues (P=0.0003), thus linking a decrease in DRD1
with reduced lung cancer risk. Collectively, our work suggests a novel
lung cancer pathway whereby rs686 in DRD1 counteracts the increase in
DRD1 imposed by exposure to tobacco smoke in both current and never
smokers. Furthermore, it hints at a novel role for the dopamine
receptor/signaling pathway in lung carcinogenesis.

