Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic identification of ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2N and
proteasome activator complex subunit 3 as potential biomarkers in
colorectal cancer tissues.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most prevalent cancer worldwide and
has poor prognosis. Recent improvement in methods for proteome analysis
has offered the possibility of identifying disease-associated protein
markers to assist in diagnosis or prognosis, and for selecting potential
targets for specific drug therapy. In current study, the proteome of
colorectal adenocarcinoma and the corresponding normal tissues was
visualized and analyzed a number of proteins to isolate and identify
tumor-specific proteins for CRC. Ten proteins were dominantly expressed
and five proteins were largely repressed in CRC by the analysis of 2-DE
and MALDI-TOF/mass spectrometry. Ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2N, one of
enzyme necessary for ubiquitination, and proteasome activator complex
subunit 3 were focused to be increased in CRC tissues compared with
normal colorectal tissues. The elevated expression of E2N and proteasome
activator complex subunit 3 in CRC was confirmed by Western blot analysis
and real time PCR. Immunohistochemistry also verified largely
up-regulation of E2N and proteasome activator complex subunit 3 in 85 CRC
patients. These findings suggest that ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2N
and proteasome activator complex subunit 3, which are involved in the
ubiquitin-proteasome system, could be possible tumor biomarker candidates
in CRC tissues. [Funding source: NRF grant (R13-2005-012-01003-0)].

