Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of cell death induced by the DNA strand-breaking
nucleoside analogue CNDAC.


The nucleoside analog CNDAC
[2-C-cyano-2-deoxy-1--D-arabino-pentofuranosylcytosine] has a unique
action mechanism of inducing single strand breaks following its
incorporation into DNA through a -elimination process.
Transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (NER) is partially
responsible for repair of such nicks [Cancer Res. 2008, 68:3881-89].
However, DNA replication across the unrepaired nicks generates double
strand breaks (DSBs) which are mainly repaired by the ATM-dependent
homologous recombination (HR) mechanism [Blood, 2010, 116:1737-46]. Both
CNDAC (as DFP-10917) and its orally bioavailable prodrug, sapacitabine
are in clinical trials in AML/MDS. Our goal was to define the mechanism
by which CNDAC-induced DSBs lead to cell death. First, cytogenetic
analysis revealed that chromosomal aberrations (breaks and gaps) in cells
lacking XPF, the key 5-NER endonuclease, increased >2 fold and 16 fold
after one (15 hr) and two (30 hr) cell cycles of treatment with 1 M
(non-arresting concentration) CNDAC, respectively (N60, PThe nucleoside
analog CNDAC [2-C-cyano-2-deoxy-1--D-arabino-pentofuranosylcytosine] has
a unique action mechanism of inducing single strand breaks following its
incorporation into DNA through a -elimination process.
Transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (NER) is partially
responsible for repair of such nicks [Cancer Res. 2008, 68:3881-89].
However, DNA replication across the unrepaired nicks generates double
strand breaks (DSBs) which are mainly repaired by the ATM-dependent
homologous recombination (HR) mechanism [Blood, 2010, 116:1737-46]. Both
CNDAC (as DFP-10917) and its orally bioavailable prodrug, sapacitabine
are in clinical trials in AML/MDS. Our goal was to define the mechanism
by which CNDAC-induced DSBs lead to cell death. First, cytogenetic
analysis revealed that chromosomal aberrations (breaks and gaps) in cells
lacking XPF, the key 5-NER endonuclease, increased >2 fold and 16 fold
after one (15 hr) and two (30 hr) cell cycles of treatment with 1 M
(non-arresting concentration) CNDAC, respectively (N60, P<0.01). However,
the wild type AA8 cells showed no change after one cell cycle exposure,
and only a 5-fold increase in wild types after two cycles (N55, P70%
bearing chromosomal damage too complex to be scored. By contrast, 78% of
Rad51D-complemented cells (N=100) had no aberration, with only 1%
unscorable. Third, post-mitosis nuclear alterations were further studied
in Giemsa-stained AA8 cells after wash out of CNDAC (24 hr). The
percentage of multinucleated cells increased 10 fold (1 M) and 27 fold
(10 M) relative to control 24 hr after wash. Finally, to test the
hypothesis that cells may die from mitotic catastrophe, video microscopy
was used to track the fate of AA8 cells stably expressing H2B-GFP after
CNDAC (0.5, 1 and 10 M, 6-hr exposure) washout. Cells entering the 1st
mitosis within 5 hr after wash presumably had CNDAC incorporation into
DNA and therefore were eligible for analysis. There was no difference in
the duration of 1st mitosis among all three treatments and control (N24,
P>0.05). However, 2nd mitosis was significantly prolonged in a
concentration-dependent manner in all treatments (N37, P70% bearing
chromosomal damage too complex to be scored. By contrast, 78% of
Rad51D-complemented cells (N=100) had no aberration, with only 1%
unscorable. Third, post-mitosis nuclear alterations were further studied
in Giemsa-stained AA8 cells after wash out of CNDAC (24 hr). The
percentage of multinucleated cells increased 10 fold (1 M) and 27 fold
(10 M) relative to control 24 hr after wash. Finally, to test the
hypothesis that cells may die from mitotic catastrophe, video microscopy
was used to track the fate of AA8 cells stably expressing H2B-GFP after
CNDAC (0.5, 1 and 10 M, 6-hr exposure) washout. Cells entering the 1st
mitosis within 5 hr after wash presumably had CNDAC incorporation into
DNA and therefore were eligible for analysis. There was no difference in
the duration of 1st mitosis among all three treatments and control (N24,
P>0.05). However, 2nd mitosis was significantly prolonged in a
concentration-dependent manner in all treatments (N37, P<0.05-0.001). The
interval between 1st and 2nd mitoses was also prolonged markedly (1 and
10 M, P70% bearing chromosomal damage too complex to be scored. By
contrast, 78% of Rad51D-complemented cells (N=100) had no aberration,
with only 1% unscorable. Third, post-mitosis nuclear alterations were
further studied in Giemsa-stained AA8 cells after wash out of CNDAC (24
hr). The percentage of multinucleated cells increased 10 fold (1 M) and
27 fold (10 M) relative to control 24 hr after wash. Finally, to test the
hypothesis that cells may die from mitotic catastrophe, video microscopy
was used to track the fate of AA8 cells stably expressing H2B-GFP after
CNDAC (0.5, 1 and 10 M, 6-hr exposure) washout. Cells entering the 1st
mitosis within 5 hr after wash presumably had CNDAC incorporation into
DNA and therefore were eligible for analysis. There was no difference in
the duration of 1st mitosis among all three treatments and control (N24,
P>0.05). However, 2nd mitosis was significantly prolonged in a
concentration-dependent manner in all treatments (N37, P<0.05-0.001). The
interval between 1st and 2nd mitoses was also prolonged markedly (1 and
10 M, P<0.01-0.001). A similar trend was seen in H2B-GFP transfected lung
cancer line H460. Notably, large numbers of treated AA8 cells became
multinucleated upon completion of an aberrant 2nd mitosis. Frequently
this was coupled with or followed by onset of apoptosis. These results
indicate that CNDAC-induced DSBs, if not repaired, trigger cells to delay
progression after 1st mitosis, and to undergo prolonged 2nd mitosis
resulting in multinucleation and subsequent apoptosis.

