Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Iron upregulates HLA-G mRNA expression of the human MCF-7 breast
cancer cell line.


HLA-G is a nonclassical MHC Class I molecule that protects the fetus from
the maternal immune system, and it also plays a role in immune evasion of
cancer. Previously we have shown that iron can suppress the cytolytic
function of natural killer cells to human breast cancer cell lines. We
have found that breast cancer cells over express HLA-G mRNA and proteins
in both cell lines and breast carcinomas. In order to determine if iron
concentration affects HLA-G expression, we cultured the human breast
cancer cell line MCF-7 in media with 100 mM, 400 mM, and 1600 mM of iron
for 24 hours. We used RT-PCR to examine HLA-G mRNA expression of the
MCF-7 cells. The PCR primers were designed so that they could detect all
alternatively spliced HLA-G mRNA isoforms, 1000 bp (HLA-G1 and HLA-G5),
600 bp (HLA-G2 and HLA-G4), and 300 bp (HLA-G3). RT-PCR showed that the
MCF-7 cells cultured with control medium only had one band of 300 bp mRNA
expression. However, the MCF-7 cells cultured in medium containing 100
mM, 400 mM, and 1600 mM of iron had three bands of 300 bp, 600 bp, and
1000 bp HLA-G mRNA expression. Moreover, the intensity of the 300 bp band
from the iron-treated MCF-7 cells is significantly higher than the cells
cultured with control medium. In summary, iron upregulates the HLA-G mRNA
expression of MCF-7 cells, and this probably contributes to cancer
immunosuppression and to the cytolytic dysfunction of natural killer
cells.

