Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of miR-122 and its target gene cationic amino acid
transporter 1 on colorectal liver metastasis.


Background: Control of liver metastasis has been an important issue in
the treatment of colorectal cancers. Although microRNA (miRNA) has been
shown to be involved in the development of many cancers including
colorectal cancers, only few studies have investigated the roles of
miRNAs in the process of colorectal liver metastasis. In this study, we
compared miRNA expression between primary colorectal cancers and their
corresponding liver metastasis to identify miRNAs involved in colorectal
liver metastasis and to detect novel molecular markers for prediction of
the postoperative prognosis of colorectal cancer patients.Methods: Cancer
cells were isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues
of primary colorectal cancers and their corresponding metastatic liver
tumors in 6 patients using laser capture microdissection methods. miRNA
expression was analyzed using TaqMan miRNA array. Protein levels of
cationic amino acid transporter 1 (CAT1), a negative target gene of
miR-122, in 132 primary colorectal cancers and 22 colorectal liver
metastases were analyzed by immunohistochemical staining. Relationship
between clinicopathological factors and CAT1 expression levels in 132
primary colorectal cancers were evaluated.Results: miR-122 was the most
highly expressed in liver metastasis compared with primary tumor.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression levels of CAT1
were lower in liver metastases than primary tumors (P Background: Control
of liver metastasis has been an important issue in the treatment of
colorectal cancers. Although microRNA (miRNA) has been shown to be
involved in the development of many cancers including colorectal cancers,
only few studies have investigated the roles of miRNAs in the process of
colorectal liver metastasis. In this study, we compared miRNA expression
between primary colorectal cancers and their corresponding liver
metastasis to identify miRNAs involved in colorectal liver metastasis and
to detect novel molecular markers for prediction of the postoperative
prognosis of colorectal cancer patients.Methods: Cancer cells were
isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues of primary
colorectal cancers and their corresponding metastatic liver tumors in 6
patients using laser capture microdissection methods. miRNA expression
was analyzed using TaqMan miRNA array. Protein levels of cationic amino
acid transporter 1 (CAT1), a negative target gene of miR-122, in 132
primary colorectal cancers and 22 colorectal liver metastases were
analyzed by immunohistochemical staining. Relationship between
clinicopathological factors and CAT1 expression levels in 132 primary
colorectal cancers were evaluated.Results: miR-122 was the most highly
expressed in liver metastasis compared with primary tumor.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression levels of CAT1
were lower in liver metastases than primary tumors (P <0.001). Expression
levels of CAT1 in 132 primary tumors were negatively correlated with the
existence of synchronous liver metastasis (P=0.0333) and tumor stage (P
Background: Control of liver metastasis has been an important issue in
the treatment of colorectal cancers. Although microRNA (miRNA) has been
shown to be involved in the development of many cancers including
colorectal cancers, only few studies have investigated the roles of
miRNAs in the process of colorectal liver metastasis. In this study, we
compared miRNA expression between primary colorectal cancers and their
corresponding liver metastasis to identify miRNAs involved in colorectal
liver metastasis and to detect novel molecular markers for prediction of
the postoperative prognosis of colorectal cancer patients.Methods: Cancer
cells were isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues
of primary colorectal cancers and their corresponding metastatic liver
tumors in 6 patients using laser capture microdissection methods. miRNA
expression was analyzed using TaqMan miRNA array. Protein levels of
cationic amino acid transporter 1 (CAT1), a negative target gene of
miR-122, in 132 primary colorectal cancers and 22 colorectal liver
metastases were analyzed by immunohistochemical staining. Relationship
between clinicopathological factors and CAT1 expression levels in 132
primary colorectal cancers were evaluated.Results: miR-122 was the most
highly expressed in liver metastasis compared with primary tumor.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression levels of CAT1
were lower in liver metastases than primary tumors (P <0.001). Expression
levels of CAT1 in 132 primary tumors were negatively correlated with the
existence of synchronous liver metastasis (P=0.0333) and tumor stage (P
<0.0001). In the analysis of 121 colon cancer patients without
synchronous liver metastasis, patients with CAT1-low colon cancer had
significantly shorter liver metastasis-free survival (P=0.0258) but not
overall survival or disease-free survival. Univariate analysis, for
clarifying the risk factors of metachronous colorectal liver metastasis
after primary resection, revealed that the 5-year liver metastasis-free
survival rate was negatively correlated with the existence of lymph node
metastasis and positively correlated with expression levels of CAT1
protein in the primary tumors.Conclusions: Overexpression of miR-122 and
concomitant suppression of CAT1 in the primary tumor appear to play
important roles in the development of colorectal liver metastasis. CAT1
expression in the primary colorectal cancer has a potential to be a novel
biomarker with which to predict the risk of postoperative liver
metastasis of the patients with colorectal cancer.Citation Format:
Ichirota Iino, Hirotoshi Kikuchi, Shinichiro Miyazaki, Yoshihiro
Hiramatsu, Manabu Ohta, Kinji Kamiya, Takanori Sakaguchi, Mitsutoshi
Setou, Hiroyuki Konno. Effect of miR-122 and its target gene cationic
amino acid transporter 1 on colorectal liver metastasis. [abstract]. In:
Proceedings of the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2013 Apr 6-10; Washington, DC. Philadelphia (PA): AACR;
Cancer Res 2013;73(8 Suppl):Abstract nr 404.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2013-404

