Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of intermittent calorie restriction on cancer stem cells.


Effect of intermittent calorie restriction (ICR) on cancer is
controversial. We then examined the effect of ICR and food contents on
cancer using mouse model. CT26 mouse colon cancer cells were inoculated
into the back of syngeneic BALB/c mouse. A 24 hours-fasting was performed
once a week for 4 weeks. A control diet and a high calorie diet were used
for feeding. The body weight at week 4 of mice was not different among
control diet (Group C), control diet+ICR (Group CI) and high fat diet+ICR
(Group FI). The tumor weight, nodal metastasis and CD133-positive cancer
stem cells (CSC) in the tumor were more pronounced in Group CI and FI
than those in Group C and F. Blood CD133 mRNA levels after fasting
breakage were increased in Group CI and FI. We have reported the
prometastatic effect of trans fatty acids in colorectal cancer. Here
effect of oral intake of trans fatty acids on tumor stem cells with ICR
was examined using the same model. Mice fed with 10% elaidic acid diet
with ICR- (Group E) or ICR+ (Group EI) were compared with Group C and CI.
The tumor weight and tumor MIB1 index was Group EI, Group E, Group CI and
Group C in high order. In Group EI, nucleostemin (NS)-positive tumor
cells were transiently increased on the next day of ICR. During 12 ICR
cycle, NS-positive CSCs were gradually increased in Group EI. These
findings suggest that ICR might enhance cancer stem cell-activating
factors.

