Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting interferon-1 with a stabilized dimer of anti-tumor Fab .


Background: The type-III interferons (IFNs), comprising IFN-1, IFN-2, and
IFN-3, are functionally similar to the type-I IFN- in eliciting
anti-viral, anti-tumor, and immune-modulating activities. Due to its more
restricted cellular targets, IFN- is being considered as a potential
alternative to existing therapeutic regimens based on IFN-, whose adverse
effects in patients limit its use. The development of antibody-targeted
IFN- may further improve its safety, potency and pharmacokinetics.
Methods: We generated three DOC-AND-LOCKTM (DNLTM) complexes, designated
(E1)-1, (15)-1, and (C2)-1, by conjugating IFN-1 site-specifically to a
stabilized dimer of humanized Fab derived from hRS7 (anti-Trop-2), hMN-15
(anti-CEACAM6), and hL243 (anti-HLA-DR), respectively, which were
affinity-purified and evaluated in human malignant cell lines of cervix
(ME-180), colon (HT-29), esophagus (TE-11, T.Tn), lung (SK-MES-1, A549),
liver (HepG2, Huh-7), and skin (A375). Results: As determined by flow
cytometry, Trop-2 was highly expressed on the surface of ME-180, TE-11,
and T.Tn; moderately on SK-MES-1 and HT-29; and negligibly on HepG2,
Huh-7, A549, and A375. In comparison, CEACAM6 was undetectable on
SK-MES-1 and A375, but positive on the remaining 7 cell lines, yet at a
considerably lower level than Trop-2. Targeting of these immunocytokines
to antigen-expressing cells markedly increased the amount of IFN-1
localized at the cell surface, as demonstrated by (E1)-1 on ME-180
(Trop-2+), (15)-1 on HepG2 (CEACAM6+), and (C2)-1 on A375 (HLA-DR+),
respectively. In MTS assays, (E1)-1 inhibited the in vitro proliferation
of ME-180, SK-MES-1, and TE-11, with EC50 Background: The type-III
interferons (IFNs), comprising IFN-1, IFN-2, and IFN-3, are functionally
similar to the type-I IFN- in eliciting anti-viral, anti-tumor, and
immune-modulating activities. Due to its more restricted cellular
targets, IFN- is being considered as a potential alternative to existing
therapeutic regimens based on IFN-, whose adverse effects in patients
limit its use. The development of antibody-targeted IFN- may further
improve its safety, potency and pharmacokinetics. Methods: We generated
three DOC-AND-LOCKTM (DNLTM) complexes, designated (E1)-1, (15)-1, and
(C2)-1, by conjugating IFN-1 site-specifically to a stabilized dimer of
humanized Fab derived from hRS7 (anti-Trop-2), hMN-15 (anti-CEACAM6), and
hL243 (anti-HLA-DR), respectively, which were affinity-purified and
evaluated in human malignant cell lines of cervix (ME-180), colon
(HT-29), esophagus (TE-11, T.Tn), lung (SK-MES-1, A549), liver (HepG2,
Huh-7), and skin (A375). Results: As determined by flow cytometry, Trop-2
was highly expressed on the surface of ME-180, TE-11, and T.Tn;
moderately on SK-MES-1 and HT-29; and negligibly on HepG2, Huh-7, A549,
and A375. In comparison, CEACAM6 was undetectable on SK-MES-1 and A375,
but positive on the remaining 7 cell lines, yet at a considerably lower
level than Trop-2. Targeting of these immunocytokines to
antigen-expressing cells markedly increased the amount of IFN-1 localized
at the cell surface, as demonstrated by (E1)-1 on ME-180 (Trop-2+),
(15)-1 on HepG2 (CEACAM6+), and (C2)-1 on A375 (HLA-DR+), respectively.
In MTS assays, (E1)-1 inhibited the in vitro proliferation of ME-180,
SK-MES-1, and TE-11, with EC50 <1 pM, which was 1,000-fold more potent
than commercial IFN-1. Likewise, the anti-proliferation activity of
(15)-1 was enhanced 100-fold in ME-180 and TE-11, but not in
CEACAM6-negative SK-MES-1. The observed potency was further substantiated
by enhanced cell signaling, including STAT phosphorylation and MHC-I
up-regulation induced by (15)-1 in HepG2 cells. In the Pk study, (E1)-1
showed a mean residence time of 12 h with a T1/2 of 8.6 h, and clearance
of 2.2 ml/h in mouse serum, which is comparable to PEG-IFN-1.
Conclusions: These promising results, attributable to increased
localization and stronger binding to antibody-targeted cells, warrant
further exploration of these novel immunocytokines as potential cancer
therapeutics.

