Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of redox state in human breast cancer progression.


We are investigating the role of reduction-oxidation (redox) state in
human breast cancer progression. Physiologic levels of oxidants and
antioxidants within subcellular compartments regulate and coordinate
normal cell functions. Cells in a state of redox imbalance undergo
adaptation and/or altered behavior. We propose to investigate the
thioredoxin 1 (TRX1) redox couple in human breast cancer progression.
This molecule is known to interact with several molecules involved in
breast carcinogenesis, including redox-sensitive transcription factors
and estrogen receptor (ER) alpha. We hypothesize human breast cancer
tissues are in a state of redox imbalance favoring a more reducing
environment, and post-translational redox modifications involving TRX1,
thioredoxin reductase 1 (TRXR1), and thioredoxin interacting protein
(TXNIP) are involved. Preliminary data demonstrated redox imbalance in
comparisons of breast cancers to surrounding tissues. TRX1 protein levels
were 1.5-fold increased, while TRXR1 and TXNIP were 10-fold and 2.4-fold
decreased, respectively. The redox state of TRX1 demonstrated a 4.7-fold
increase in the reduced form versus the oxidized, and TRX1 activity was
2.1-fold increased. Our future plans involve analyzing redox-regulated
protein subcellular distribution patterns of TRX1, TRXR1, TXNIP, and ER
alpha utilizing immunohistochemistry in human breast cancer tissue
microarrays varying in histological grade; determine protein levels of
TRX1, TRXR1, and TXNIP, redox state of TRX1, and activities of TRX1 and
TRXR1 in human breast cancer cell lines relative to normal primary
epithelial cells in cell culture; and investigating the effects of
modulating the extra- and intracellular redox state on cell invasion in
hormone dependent/independent breast cancer cell lines.

