Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of reductases capable of metabolic activation of
hypoxia targeting prodrug SN30000 and hypoxia marker EF5.


Background: SN30000 is a 2nd generation benzotriazine-N-oxide
hypoxia-activated prodrug (tirapazamine analogue) and is currently in
preclinical development. We have previously shown that reductive
activation of the hypoxia marker EF5 and SN30000 are correlated across a
panel of cancer cells under hypoxia (Wang et al, Clin Can Res 18:1684,
2012), suggesting that they are activated by the same reductases. The
identities of these reductases are not known, except NADPH:cytochrome
p450 oxidoreductase (POR). Further, knockout of POR in HCT116 and SiHa
cell lines had little or no effect on reduction of either compound. Here,
we utilise a previously reported panel of HCT116 isogenic cell lines
(Guise et al, Can Res 70:1573, 2010; Mol Pharmacol 81:31, 2012)
over-expressing nine oxidoreductases with known or suspected roles in
bioreductive prodrug metabolism (AKR1C3, CYB5R, FDXR, MTRR, NDOR1, NOS2A,
NQO1, NQO2 and POR) to identify reductases capable of reducing SN30000
and EF5. Methods: Drug metabolism rates under oxic and anoxic conditions
were determined in each cell line. The metabolism of SN 30000 to its
corresponding 1-oxide and nor-oxide metabolites were measured by LC/MS/MS
and the reduction of EF5 by quantifying covalent protein binding of
14C-EF5. SN30000 anoxic cytotoxicity was determined by clonogenic assay.
Oxidoreductase expression profiling in cancer patient samples was
conducted using Oncomine Premium edition. Results: There was minimal
reductive metabolism under oxic conditions (0.1 to 4.8% of anoxic values)
for both compounds in all cell lines. Under anoxic conditions, 4 to 5
fold differences were obtained for EF5 and SN30000 across the 10 isogenic
cell lines. Our results confirmed our previous observations that POR is
one of the reductases capable for SN30000 and EF5 metabolism. In addition
to POR, three other members of the diflavin oxidoreductase family (MTRR,
NOS2A and NDOR1) had increased anoxic metabolism rates compared to the
parental line for both SN30000 and EF5. There was a good correlation
between EF5 binding and SN30000 anoxic metabolism across the cell lines
(R2=0.78, p=0.0015). SN30000 cytotoxicity under anoxic conditions was
also increased in the cells over-expressing POR, NDOR1, MTRR and NOS2A.
Expression of these four reductases showed considerable variation between
individual human tumour biopsies. In general, the ranking of transcript
abundance between the four reductases was POR > MTRR > NOS2A NDOR1 in
most cancer types. In breast cancer, expression of these reductases was
similar in tumours with high and low expression of the hypoxia marker
gene CA9. Conclusion: we have identified 4 flavoreductases (POR, MTRR,
NOS2A and NDOR1) that are capable of activating both SN30000 and EF5
under anoxia when overexpressed in HCT116 cells. However it is not yet
clear whether they play a significant role at basal levels of expression
in cell lines or tumours.

