Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptionalregulation by microRNAs in NSCLC.


Squamous cell lung cancer and adenocarcinoma are the most common subtypes
of the lung tumours.The search for cancer-directed treatments has
increased the need for understanding molecular features of either
histological subtypes. The aim of this study was to identify the
transcriptional regulation differences due to miRNA expression profiles
between SCC and adenocarcinoma. In this work, a total of 44 patients were
evaluated to assess the correlation between the miRNA and messengerRNA
expression levels. We detected changes in 56 mRNAs as well as in 9 miRNAs
between SCC and adenocarcinoma. Nearly 20% of overall deregulated genes
were targeted by at least one of the 9 miRNAs (miR-149, miR-205, miR-375,
miR-378, miR-422a, miR-483-5p, miR-494, miR-601 and miR-708)
differentially expressed between SCC and adenocarcinoma (table 1). Genes
predicted (CEACAM6, CGN, CLDN3, ABCC3, MLPH, ACSL5,TMEM45B, MUC1) to be
targeted by several miRNAs were individually validated by qRT-PCR. We
found genes involved in tight junctions and others involved in resistance
to anticancer agents. These genes were reliable biomarkers to detect
differences between the two most common histological subtypes of lung
cancer. Therefore, transcriptional regulation differences through miRNA
expression play an important role in key hallmarks of non-small cell lung
cancer.

