Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1-regulating microRNAs, miR-146a and miR-638, are
overexpressed in triple negative breast cancer tumors.


microRNAs are non-coding RNA sequences of about 22 nucleotides long that
participate in post transcriptional regulation of mRNAs. Its deregulation
has been associated to breast cancer development and treatment
resistance. Triple negative breast tumors are characterized by its
difficult treatment due to lack of estrogen and progesterone receptors
and ERBB2. In addition, a high proportion do not express BRCA1; a breast
cancer high susceptibility gene. BRCA1 expression can be regulated by
different mechanisms as we have confirmed in our laboratory, such as
methylation of its gene promoter, mutations and deletions due genomic
rearrangements. Although there are tumors that do not present any of
these abnormalities, they express low nuclear BRCA1 levels or they do not
express the protein at all. This is why analyzing levels of microRNAs
that are shown to regulate BRCA1 mRNA expression is an interesting
additional mechanism to be evaluated. There is experimental evidence that
miR-146a and mir-638 regulate BRCA1 expression. We therefore analyzed
miR-146a and miR-638 in triple negative breast cancer tumors (n=41).
Briefly, total RNA was extracted from formalin-fixed tumors. Then, both
microRNAs were evaluated using qPCR TaqMan assay and compared with BRCA1
expression previously determined by immunohistochemistry. Our results
showed overexpression of miR-146a in 68% of the analyzed tumors and
miR-638 in 82%. Among those tumors presenting abnormal BRCA1 expression
(n=24), 50% showed an increase of miR-146a and 75% presented miR-638
overexpression. Both microRNAs showed a discrete overexpression in tumors
with normal levels of BRCA1 (n=16). Finally, this data suggest that
microRNAs might regulate BRCA1 expression in triple negative tumors.

