Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amphiregulin confers trastuzumab resistance by activating PI3K/Akt
pathway in HER2-positive breast cancer.


Background: Amphiregulin is a ligand for the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR). Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) shares
common signal pathways and forms a heterodimer with EGFR. In this study,
we investigated the effect of amphiregulin on trastuzumab therapy in
HER2-positive breast cancer.Methods: We analyzed serum amphiregulin
levels by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) from baseline serum
samples obtained from HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer patients who
received first-line trastuzumab plus taxane chemotherapy. In addition, in
vitro experiments were performed to elucidate the biologic mechanism of
clinical findings related to amphiregulin using SK-BR-3 and BT-474 cell
lines.Results: Between October 2004 and July 2009, a total of 50 women
with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer were consecutively enrolled.
The median age was 47 years (range, 27-72 years). Eighteen patients
(36.0%) received weekly paclitaxel plus trastuzumab, 24 patients (48.0%)
tri-weekly paclitaxel plus trastuzumab, and 8 patients (16.0%) tri-weekly
docetaxel plus trastuzumab. Among 43 patients with measurable lesions,
the response rate (RR) was 76.7%. The median follow-up duration was 29.2
months (range, 0.7-63.3 months). The median progression-free survival
(PFS) was 17.6 months (95% confidence interval (CI), 13.4-21.9 months).
The median overall survival (OS) was 47.0 months (95% CI, 35.3-58.6
months). The median serum amphiregulin level was 1.0 ng/mL with a maximum
level of 4.4 ng/mL. Patients with high serum amphiregulin levels (0.5
ng/mL) had significantly shorter PFS (p=0.018) along with a tendency
toward lower RR (p=0.237) and shorter OS (p=0.529) than the others. The
in vitro colony forming assay demonstrated that the addition of
amphiregulin resulted in increased proliferation of both SK-BR-3 and
BT-474 cells. In addition, the anti-proliferative effect of trastuzumab
was decreased in the presence of amphiregulin in both SK-BR-3 and BT-474
cells. The Western blot analysis showed that amphiregulin increased the
phosphorylation of Akt and its downstream molecules in both SK-BR-3 and
BT-474 cells. In addition, in the presence of amphiregulin, sustained
phosphorylation of Akt and its downstream molecules was observed after
trastuzumab treatment in both SK-BR-3 and BT-474 cells.Conclusions: High
serum amphiregulin levels (0.5 ng/mL) predicted disease progression after
first-line trastuzumab plus taxane chemotherapy in patients with
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. Amphiregulin promoted the
proliferation of HER2-positive breast cancer cells in vitro and induced
trastuzumab resistance by activating PI3K/Akt pathway. Our results
suggest that the measurement of serum amphiregulin levels by ELISA may
provide additional information for the clinical outcome of
trastuzumab-based chemotherapy in patients with HER2-positive breast
cancer.

