Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cancer-associated hyperphosphorylation site on topoisomerase I
serine 506 as a biomarker for camptothecin sensitivity.


Topoisomerase I (topo I) plays a central role in cancer as the target of
a potent class of chemotherapeutic drugs derived from the plant alkaloid
camptothecin that includes irinotecan and topotecan. We have identified a
novel cancer-specific phosphorylation site at serine 506 in topo I
(PS506), targeted by protein kinase CK2, that identifies cancer cells
with elevated CK2, hyperphosphorylated topo I, increased topo I activity,
and increased sensitivity to camptothecin. CK2 treatment of recombinant
topo I in vitro also induces topo I hyperphosphorylation and expression
of the PS506 epitope, and results in increased binding of topo I to
supercoiled plasmid DNA. The hyperphosphorylated, PS506-form of topo I is
more effective than the basal phosphorylated enzyme at relaxing plasmid
supercoils but has a similar catalytic rate as the basal phosphorylated
enzyme once bound to DNA. The PS506 epitope is not detected in normal
cells or cancer cell lines with lower levels of CK2 activity. By
experimentally manipulating CK2 activity in cancer cell lines, we have
demonstrated a cause and effect relationship between CK2 activity, PS506
expression, camptothecin-induced cellular DNA damage, and cellular
camptothecin sensitivity. The PS506 epitope is therefore an indicator of
dysregulated, hyperphosphorylated topo I in cancer cells, and holds
promise as a novel diagnostic biomarker that predicts tumor
responsiveness to widely used topo I-targeted therapies.

