Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting autophagy-related E1 ligase Atg7 increases
chemosensitivity in acute myelogenous leukemia cells and overcomes stroma
mediated resistance.


In the context of chemotherapy (CT), autophagy is a resistance mechanism.
Atg7 is an key autophagy-related E1 ligase that can switch transcription
downstream of p53 between cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction (Lee,
IH et al. Science 2012;336: 225). p53 mutations are infrequent in newly
diagnosed normal karyotype acute myelogenous leukemias (NK-AML) and thus
we used a genetic model to evaluate the potential of targeting Atg7 in
AML therapy in the context of wild type p53. As autophagy is critical for
the mutual metabolic dependence between tumor and stroma
(Martinez-Outschroom et al. Cell Cycle 2010;9:4297), we evaluated, in a
co-culture model, whether ATG7 knockdown in AML can overcome
stroma-mediated chemoresistance. We also correlated expression of Atg7
protein in primary AML blasts to clinical outcome in 511 newly diagnosed
patients (pts).Methods: In a syngeneic background we studied the effect
of stable Atg7 knockdown (shRNA mediated) in p53 wild type (WT) AML cells
on apoptosis (Annexin binding by flowcytometry) after CT and nutrient
deprivation. Role of ATG7 in stroma mediated chemoresistance was tested
by co-culturing AML cells (WT and Atg7 KD) with normal bone marrow
stromal cells and measuring apoptosis after treatment with CT. Finally we
correlated expression of Atg7 protein in the AML blasts of 511 newly
diagnosed pts with AML by reverse phase protein array (RPPA) with
clinical outcomes.Results: Stable knockdown (KD) of Atg7 in OCI-AML3
cells increased apoptosis upon exposure to two CT agents most commonly
used in AML therapy: cytarabine (1 mol for 48 hrs) (33.6% apoptosis in WT
vs 66.2% in Atg7 KD, p=.04) and idarubicin (50 nG/ml for 48 hrs) (33%
apoptosis in WT vs 54% in Atg7 KD, p=.001) as well as serum deprivation
(8.5% apoptosis in WT vs 28% in Atg7 KD, p=.00005). Treatment with
cytarabine was associated with increased induction of pro-apoptotic
protein PUMA and decreased induction of cell cycle arrest mediator p21 in
Atg7 KD OCI-AML3 cells, as compared to WT. In co-culture model,
co-culture with normal marrow stromal cells failed to protect Atg7 KD
cells from apoptosis after treatment with cytarabine (5 mol for 48 hrs)
while the WT cells were protected (27% apoptosis in WT vs 57% in Atg7 KD,
p=0.0007).Finally, reverse-phase protein array demonstrated that abnormal
expression of Atg7 in primary AML blasts (higher or lower compared to
normal CD34+ cells) among 511 newly diagnosed pts was associated with
shorter overall survival (p=.007) and this effect was most prominent
among pts with both good-risk (p=.02) and poor-risk cytogenetics AML
(p=.0005).Conclusion: Our results highlight the role of autophagy as
chemo-resistance mechanism in AML, identify Atg7 as a potential
therapeutic target to enhance CT induced apoptosis and overcome
stroma-mediated resistance to CT.

