Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of an acquired resistance model to the novel AKT
inhibitor CCT129254.


The PI3K/AKT pathway is a key driver of cell growth, proliferation and
survival, and deregulation at many levels of the pathway is observed in
numerous cancers. Given the importance of PI3K/AKT signaling in cancer, a
number of compounds targeting this pathway are currently in clinical
development. Several AKT-targeted compounds, such as the ATP-competitive
inhibitor AZD5363 and the allosteric inhibitor MK2206, have entered
clinical trial. Whilst resistance to AKT inhibition has not yet been well
defined, the development of acquired resistance has been a major barrier
to the success of a number of molecularly targeted therapies, such as
those which target V600E mutant BRAF. Identifying resistance mechanisms
to AKT inhibition prior to the development of resistance in the clinic
may assist in selecting patient populations and generating combination
treatments to overcome resistance, potentially increasing the clinical
utility of these inhibitors. The aims of this study were therefore to
generate and characterize cell lines resistant to AKT
inhibition.CCT129254, a precursor of AZD5363, is a novel ATP-competitive
AKT inhibitor identified in a drug discovery program at The Institute of
Cancer Research, London UK, in collaboration with Astex Therapeutics and
AstraZeneca. CCT129254 is a potent and selective inhibitor of the three
AKT isoforms (IC50 values between 13 and 66 nM), and treatment of cells
with CCT129254 reduced phosphorylation of PRAS40, GSK3 and rpS6,
downstream biomarkers of AKT activity. By exposing PTEN-deficient A2780
ovarian carcinoma cells to escalating doses of inhibitor, we have
successfully generated a cell line with acquired resistance to CCT129254
(A2780 254R). We obtained approximately 4.8-fold resistance to CCT129254
in A2780 254R cells compared to parental A2780 (GI50: A2780 = 2.9 M;
A2780 254R = 14 M). Interestingly, testing against a panel of signal
transduction inhibitors revealed a 10-fold resistance to MK2206 in A2780
254R cells (GI50: A2780 = 0.30 M; A2780 254R = 3.1 M). Minimal
cross-resistance was observed to the PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941 (1.9-fold,
GI50: A2780 = 99 nM; A2780 254R = 185 nM), the mTORC1 inhibitor RAD001
(1.9-fold, GI50: A2780 = 1.65 nM; A2780 254R = 3.18 nM), and the dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI-103 (1.7-fold, GI50: A2780 = 112 nM; A2780 254R =
188 nM). In addition, we have observed changes in PI3K/AKT pathway
signaling biomarkers using western blot analysis. We have also utilized
gene expression microarray analysis and exome sequencing to identify
candidate genes involved in the resistance phenotype. We are currently
validating potential resistance mechanisms identified in our candidate
and global based approaches, and are investigating inhibitor combinations
to overcome resistance.

