Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RSK2/CREB/Fascin-1 signaling is important for tumor metastasis.


Metastasis is the leading cause of death in patients with breast, lung or
head and neck cancers. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
metastases in these cancers remain unclear. We found that the p90
ribosomal S6 kinase 2 (RSK2)-cAMP response element-binding (CREB) pathway
is commonly activated in diverse metastatic human cancer cells, leading
to upregulation of a CREB transcription target Fascin-1. We also observed
that the protein expression patterns of RSK2 and Fascin-1 correlate in
primary human tumor tissue samples from HNSCC patients. Moreover,
knockdown of RSK2 disrupts filopodia formation and bundling in highly
invasive cancer cells, leading to attenuated cancer cell invasion in
vitro and tumor metastasis in vivo, while expression of Fascin-1
significantly rescues these phenotypes. Furthermore, targeting RSK2 by a
small molecule RSK inhibitor FMK-MEA effectively attenuated the invasive
and metastatic potential of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo,
respectively. Together, our findings for the first time link the
RSK2-CREB signaling to filopodia formation and bundling by upregulating
Fascin-1, providing a pro-invasive and pro-metastatic advantage to human
cancers; protein effectors of RSK2-CREB-Fascin-1 pathway represents
promising biomarkers and therapeutic targets in clinical prognosis and
treatment of metastatic human cancers.

