Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative expression of E2F1, EZH2 and SUZ12 response for the
invasive progression of superficial bladder cancers.


A superficial bladder cancer is a noninvasive cancer that is presented as
a good prognosis after receiving treatment, and noninvasive. However,
about 2050% of superficial bladder cancer patients progressed to invasive
tumor which represent the poor survival rates within 5 years. In previous
study, we addressed if the transcriptional characteristics of the
superficial bladder cancer could be used as predictive biomarkers for the
progression of superficial tumors to invasive ones. Using gene expression
data from 165 bladder cancer patients, we identified a gene expression
signature that could predict the likelihood of progression to invasive
tumors. Gene network analyses of the signature revealed that E2F1 and its
downstream effectors EZH2 and SUZ12 could be important mediators for the
invasive and metastatic progression of superficial tumors. In this study,
we investigated how these genes may affect the invasive and metastatic
progression of superficial tumors. We investigated the invasive ability
by these genes in two groups of bladder cancer cell lines: One group (UC5
and UC9) has a superficial signature of bladder cancer, and the other
group (EJ and 5637) has an invasive signature of bladder cancer. We
examined the effects of overexpression or siRNA inhibition of these genes
on cell growth, migration and invasion in bladder cancer cell lines. We
will report the results estimating the roles of these genes for the
invasive and metastatic progression in bladder cancer cell lines.

