Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A reporter mouse to measure drug myelotoxicity in time.


Myelotoxicity is the well known side effect of most anti-cancer
treatments, thus the study of the myelosuppressive effect of a given
treatment is tested routinely during the preclinical phase of
investigation. Current ethodologies require the use of a very large
number of animals to measure the effect of the investigated compound in
time and the study is generally carried out by bone marrow dissection and
subsequent analysis with a myeloid clonogenic assay. The goal of our
study was to apply non invasive imaging technologies to generate a novel,
simple and robust assay to test the state of proliferation of bone marrow
reducing the number of animals to be sacrificed and increasing the power
of the analysis thanks t the possibility to follow in time, in the same
animal the effect of the treatment. To this aim, we have utilized a
trangenic mouse, the repTOPmitoIRE reporter mouse recently developed to
image proliferative events in vivo (Goeman et al 2012, Oliva et al 2012).
This transgenic mouse carries a luciferase reporter gene under the
transcriptional control of a minimal human cyclin B2 promoter.Our in
vitro and in vivo results show that the luciferase expression and photon
emission in the different body regions of the repTOPmitoIRE is strictly
proportional to the proliferative state of the cells in the tissues
examined. Our results demonstrate that the extent of bone marrow
proliferation can be measured by in vivo imaging photon emission of femur
and sternum in each mouse prior the treatment and then monitored during
the longitudinal study.The repTOPmitoIRE mouse model, was successfully
applied to the study of the differential immunosuppressive potential of
several well known anti-neoplastic treatments demonstrating the validity
of the novel test over currently available methodologies: we measured the
differential effects on immunosuppression and on regeneration of
5-fluorouracil, docetaxel, bortezomid, temozolomide and radiotherapy in
dose-response experiments. The results led us to conclude that the
imaging-based test here proposed is reproducible and provides a reliable
measure of bone marrow cell proliferation in time and to propose it as a
routine test in for the pre-clinical of novel anti-neoplastic compounds.

