Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a lung cancer model to evaluate the MoA of L-BLP25.


Introduction. L-BLP25 is an antigen-specific cancer immunotherapeutic
agent targeting human mucin 1 (hMUC1), which has shown promise in a phase
II clinical trial for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
Appropriate animal models are required to dissect the efficacy and immune
activity of long-term treatment with L-BLP25. Here we describe a novel,
long-term, carcinogen-induced lung adenoma model in hMUC1 transgenic
(hMUC1.Tg) mice, which results in multiple tumor foci expressing hMUC1.
The immunomodulatory effect of a single low- or high- dose of
cyclophosphamide (CPA) on L-BLP25-induced immunity was examined in this
model. Methods. To establish the most effective method of carcinogenesis,
tumor incidence was assessed in hMUC1.Tg mice receiving vehicle control,
carcinogen urethane only (0.75 mg/kg, i.p. 10 times weekly), urethane + 7
mg/kg diethylstilbestrol (DES), or urethane + 14 mg/kg DES (8 times
weekly, s.c., starting from week 4 of urethane treatment). A group of WT
mice received urethane alone. Vehicle control, low- (100 mg/kg) and high-
(300 mg/kg) dose of CPA was administered to urethane-treated groups.
L-BLP25 (10 g) was administered s.c., 8 times weekly, either alone or
with low-dose CPA. The treatment groups comprised 6-21 mice. Serum Th1
and Th2 cytokines were quantified by Luminex assay in urethane
only-treated hMUC1.Tg mice. Serum Th1, Th2 and inflammatory cytokines
were quantified in groups treated with L-BLP25 and CPA. Results. Tumor
incidence rates were 0% for vehicle control, 100% (hMUC1.Tg mice) and 80%
(WT mice) in urethane only groups and 50% (DES 7 mg/kg) and 66.7% (14
mg/kg DES) in urethane + DES groups, establishing urethane alone as
sufficient for inducing lung tumors with multiple foci in hMUC1.Tg mice.
hMUC1+ tumors were observed in 100% of hMUC1.Tg mice vs. 0% of WT mice.
Immunohistology revealed normal hMUC1 tissue expression in transgenics.
Urethane dosing during tumorigenesis in the absence of treatment had no
consistent effect upon serum Th1/Th2 cytokines, while it induced a
consistent peak in inflammatory cytokines. Low-dose, but not high-dose,
CPA reduced the incidence of urethane-induced tumors in MUC1.Tg mice
compared to control (p>0.05). Low-dose CPA did not cause a shift towards
a Th1 cytokine profile compared to high-dose CPA. Compared to L-BLP25
alone, low-dose CPA given prior to L-BLP25 induced Th1 cytokine IL-12
(pIntroduction. L-BLP25 is an antigen-specific cancer immunotherapeutic
agent targeting human mucin 1 (hMUC1), which has shown promise in a phase
II clinical trial for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
Appropriate animal models are required to dissect the efficacy and immune
activity of long-term treatment with L-BLP25. Here we describe a novel,
long-term, carcinogen-induced lung adenoma model in hMUC1 transgenic
(hMUC1.Tg) mice, which results in multiple tumor foci expressing hMUC1.
The immunomodulatory effect of a single low- or high- dose of
cyclophosphamide (CPA) on L-BLP25-induced immunity was examined in this
model. Methods. To establish the most effective method of carcinogenesis,
tumor incidence was assessed in hMUC1.Tg mice receiving vehicle control,
carcinogen urethane only (0.75 mg/kg, i.p. 10 times weekly), urethane + 7
mg/kg diethylstilbestrol (DES), or urethane + 14 mg/kg DES (8 times
weekly, s.c., starting from week 4 of urethane treatment). A group of WT
mice received urethane alone. Vehicle control, low- (100 mg/kg) and high-
(300 mg/kg) dose of CPA was administered to urethane-treated groups.
L-BLP25 (10 g) was administered s.c., 8 times weekly, either alone or
with low-dose CPA. The treatment groups comprised 6-21 mice. Serum Th1
and Th2 cytokines were quantified by Luminex assay in urethane
only-treated hMUC1.Tg mice. Serum Th1, Th2 and inflammatory cytokines
were quantified in groups treated with L-BLP25 and CPA. Results. Tumor
incidence rates were 0% for vehicle control, 100% (hMUC1.Tg mice) and 80%
(WT mice) in urethane only groups and 50% (DES 7 mg/kg) and 66.7% (14
mg/kg DES) in urethane + DES groups, establishing urethane alone as
sufficient for inducing lung tumors with multiple foci in hMUC1.Tg mice.
hMUC1+ tumors were observed in 100% of hMUC1.Tg mice vs. 0% of WT mice.
Immunohistology revealed normal hMUC1 tissue expression in transgenics.
Urethane dosing during tumorigenesis in the absence of treatment had no
consistent effect upon serum Th1/Th2 cytokines, while it induced a
consistent peak in inflammatory cytokines. Low-dose, but not high-dose,
CPA reduced the incidence of urethane-induced tumors in MUC1.Tg mice
compared to control (p>0.05). Low-dose CPA did not cause a shift towards
a Th1 cytokine profile compared to high-dose CPA. Compared to L-BLP25
alone, low-dose CPA given prior to L-BLP25 induced Th1 cytokine IL-12
(p<0.0001) and IL-2 and IFN (non-significant) at 24 h after the 8th
L-BLP25 dose. Th2 cytokines were elevated to a lesser extent and some
inflammatory cytokines were increased. Conclusions. Urethane is
sufficient to induce hMUC1-expressing lung tumors with multiple foci in
hMUC1.Tg mice, without skewing the Th1/Th2 cytokine profile. When given
as a low pretreatment dose, CPA potentiates the Th1 cytokine response to
L-BLP25, which might contribute to the reduction of the observed
incidence of urethane-induced tumors.

