Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of black raspberry and related components on
DB[a,l]P-induced DNA adduct formation in mouse oral tissues.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most common cancer of the head
and neck region; in the USA, over 45,000 cases and about 11,000 deaths
from the disease occur annually. Progress in the prevention and control
of OSCC has been hampered by the lack of appropriate animal models that
would reflect human exposure. Tobacco smoking is considered a major
etiological factor in the development of oral cancer. Previous studies
have demonstrated the ability of diets containing 5-10% freeze-dried
black raspberry (BRB) powder to inhibit the development of
chemically-induced cancers in multiple organ sites in rodents including
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) induced squamous cell carcinomas
(SCC) in the hamster cheek pouch. DMBA, however, is not present in the
environment and the hamster cheek pouch model may not be applicable to
humans. Recently, we developed a relevant animal model (Int. J. Cancer,
2012, 2783-90) and showed that dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DB[a,l]P), an
environmental pollutant and a tobacco smoke component, induces SCC in
oral tissues of mice. In the current study, we evaluated the effects of
BRB and related components including kaempferol and resveratrol on DNA
adducts induced by DB[a,l]P in mouse oral cavity as an initial step to
explore the potential preventive activity of BRB and its related
components on DB[a,l]P-induced oral cancer. The DB[a,l]PDE-DNA adduct
levels were quantified by our recently developed LC-MS/MS method (Chem.
Res. Toxicol. 2011, 1297-303). We demonstrated that the administration of
BRB (5%), kaempferol (0.025%) or resveratrol (0.002%) in the diet,
starting 2 weeks before DB[a,l]P (24 nmol, 3 times a week for 5 weeks)
resulted in 27%, 36% or 65% reduction of the level of
(-)-anti-trans-DB[a,l]PDE-dA in murine oral tissues, respectively. In
conclusion, our results support that dietary consumption of BRB and its
related components can inhibit the metabolic activation of DB[a,l]P, and
may prevent the subsequent mutagenesis and carcinogenesis resulting from
exposure to DB[a,l]P.

