Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic miRNA-182-5p targets Smad4 and RECK in human bladder
cancer.


AbstractIntroduction and Objective: Onco-miR-182-5p has been reported to
be over-expressed in bladder cancer (BC) tissues however a detailed
functional analysis of miR-182-5p has not been carried out in BC.
Therefore the purpose of this study was to: 1. conduct a functional
analysis of miR-182-5p in bladder cancer, 2. assess its usefulness as a
tumor marker, 3. identify miR-182-5p target genes in BC. Methods:
Initially we found that miR-182-5p expression was significantly higher in
bladder cancer compared to normal tissues and high miR-182-5p expression
was associated with shorter overall survival in BC patients. To study the
functional significance of miR-182-5p, we over-expressed miR-182-5p with
miR-182-5p precursor. Results: Cell proliferation, migration and invasion
abilities were increased in BC cells. However cell apoptosis was
inhibited by miR-182-5p. We also identified Smad4 and RECK as potential
target genes of miR-182-5p using several algorithms. 3UTR luciferase
activity of these target genes was significantly decreased and protein
expression of these target genes was significantly up-regulated in
miR-182-5p inhibitor transfected bladder cancer cells. MiR-182-5p also
increased nuclear beta-catenin expression and while Smad4 repressed
nuclear beta-catenin expression. Conclusions: Our data suggests that
miR-182-5p plays an important role as an oncogene by knocking down RECK
and Smad4, resulting in activation of the Wnt-beta-catenin signaling
pathway in bladder cancer.Source of Funding: Grants RO1CA138642,
RO1CA130860, RO1CA160079, VA Research Enhancement Award Program (REAP)
and Merit Review grants

