Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ethanol and aging promote pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma
in mice.


Background & Aims: Chronic intake of alcohol increases the risk of
gastrointestinal and hepatic carcinogenesis. The present study was
focused to investigate the incidence and mechanism of pathogenesis of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) during aging and chronic ingestion of
alcohol without any additional hepatic injury.Methods: Ethanol was
administered to ICR male mice through drinking water for 70 weeks at
concentrations of 5% (first week), 10% (next 8 weeks), and 15%
thereafter. The animals were sacrificed at 60 weeks and 70 weeks, the
livers were examined for hepatic tumors, and evaluated for foci of
cellular alteration. Immunohistochemical staining was performed in the
liver sections for cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1), 4-hydroxy-nonenal, and
proto-oncogene, c-MycResults: At 60th week, 40% of mice in the ethanol
group had visible white nodules (5-10 mm) in the liver, but not in
control mice. At 70th week, several larger nodules (5-22 mm) were present
in the livers of 50% mice in ethanol group. In control group, one mouse
developed a single nodule. All nodules were histologically trabecular HCC
composed of eosinophilic and vacuolated cells. In the livers of both
control and ethanol group, several foci with cellular alteration were
present, which were significantly higher in ethanol group. Staining for
CYP2E1, 4-hydroxy-nonenal and c-Myc depicted marked upregulation of all
these molecules in the foci of cellular alteration.Conclusions: Our data
demonstrated that upregulation of CYP2E1 and subsequent production of
reactive oxygen species along with the persistent expression of c-Myc
play a significant role in the pathogenesis of HCC during chronic
ingestion of ethanol. Furthermore, aging is also a risk factor for
development of HCC.* Presenting author

