Meeting: 2013 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing Notch-1 and Notch-3 promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and self-renewal potential in human bladder cancer.


Background:Beside its regulatory functions during development, the Notch
pathway plays an eminent role in the tumorigenesis of malignancies. There
are four different Notch receptors, which demonstrate context-dependent
activity and can work antagonistically to each other. We have previously
described a role for Notch-2 in promoting EMT and invasion in bladder
cancer (BCA). Our objective here was to elucidate the role of Notch-1 and
-3 in EMT and invasion, hypothesizing that both promote the epithelial,
less invasive phenotype.Methods:Immunohistochemistry was performed on a
tissue microarray (TMA) of 104 tumors from patients with muscle invasive
BCA. Notch-1 and -3 expression was assessed in a panel of bladder cancer
cell lines by Western blot (WB) and correlated to previously established
EMT status (based on E-cadherin and ZEB1) and invasive ability. Notch-1
and -3 were silenced by lentiviral shRNA vector in 3 cell lines with high
constitutive Notch-1 and -3 expression (UM-UC1, UM-UC6 and UM-UC15).
Protein and mRNA expression of genes relevant to EMT, invasion and
stemness were profiled by WB, real-time PCR, immunofluorescence and FACS.
Proliferation, migration and invasion were measured by crystal violet,
scratch, and Boyden chamber assays, respectively. Self-renewal potential
was assessed by clonogenic assay and spheroid formation in MammoCult
medium.Results:High expression of Notch-3 receptor was associated with
lower pathological stage (pBackground:Beside its regulatory functions
during development, the Notch pathway plays an eminent role in the
tumorigenesis of malignancies. There are four different Notch receptors,
which demonstrate context-dependent activity and can work
antagonistically to each other. We have previously described a role for
Notch-2 in promoting EMT and invasion in bladder cancer (BCA). Our
objective here was to elucidate the role of Notch-1 and -3 in EMT and
invasion, hypothesizing that both promote the epithelial, less invasive
phenotype.Methods:Immunohistochemistry was performed on a tissue
microarray (TMA) of 104 tumors from patients with muscle invasive BCA.
Notch-1 and -3 expression was assessed in a panel of bladder cancer cell
lines by Western blot (WB) and correlated to previously established EMT
status (based on E-cadherin and ZEB1) and invasive ability. Notch-1 and
-3 were silenced by lentiviral shRNA vector in 3 cell lines with high
constitutive Notch-1 and -3 expression (UM-UC1, UM-UC6 and UM-UC15).
Protein and mRNA expression of genes relevant to EMT, invasion and
stemness were profiled by WB, real-time PCR, immunofluorescence and FACS.
Proliferation, migration and invasion were measured by crystal violet,
scratch, and Boyden chamber assays, respectively. Self-renewal potential
was assessed by clonogenic assay and spheroid formation in MammoCult
medium.Results:High expression of Notch-3 receptor was associated with
lower pathological stage (p<0.05) and absence of lymphovascular invasion
(pBackground:Beside its regulatory functions during development, the
Notch pathway plays an eminent role in the tumorigenesis of malignancies.
There are four different Notch receptors, which demonstrate
context-dependent activity and can work antagonistically to each other.
We have previously described a role for Notch-2 in promoting EMT and
invasion in bladder cancer (BCA). Our objective here was to elucidate the
role of Notch-1 and -3 in EMT and invasion, hypothesizing that both
promote the epithelial, less invasive
phenotype.Methods:Immunohistochemistry was performed on a tissue
microarray (TMA) of 104 tumors from patients with muscle invasive BCA.
Notch-1 and -3 expression was assessed in a panel of bladder cancer cell
lines by Western blot (WB) and correlated to previously established EMT
status (based on E-cadherin and ZEB1) and invasive ability. Notch-1 and
-3 were silenced by lentiviral shRNA vector in 3 cell lines with high
constitutive Notch-1 and -3 expression (UM-UC1, UM-UC6 and UM-UC15).
Protein and mRNA expression of genes relevant to EMT, invasion and
stemness were profiled by WB, real-time PCR, immunofluorescence and FACS.
Proliferation, migration and invasion were measured by crystal violet,
scratch, and Boyden chamber assays, respectively. Self-renewal potential
was assessed by clonogenic assay and spheroid formation in MammoCult
medium.Results:High expression of Notch-3 receptor was associated with
lower pathological stage (p<0.05) and absence of lymphovascular invasion
(p<0.05) in the cystectomy specimens. Notch-1 expression did not
correlate with pathologic variables. WB revealed expression of Notch-1
and -3 in epithelial bladder cancer cell lines only. Silencing of Notch-1
or Notch-3 in the selected epithelial cell lines promoted EMT at the mRNA
and protein levels. Accordingly, phenotypic changes were seen in the form
of enhanced migration and invasion but unaltered proliferation. In
addition, colony and spheroid formation was increased after specific
Notch-3 silencing. The simultaneous knock down of Notch-1 and -3 showed
no additive effect.Conclusion:Our results provide evidence that Notch-1
and Notch-3 are involved in invasion and progression of BCA by
maintaining an epithelial phenotype and inhibiting EMT and self-renewal
potential. This is the opposite of what we have seen previously with
Notch-2. Beside verification of our observations in metastatic xenograft
models, further investigation is needed to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms of these alterations.

