Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing metabolic activity of patient-derived models of
non-small cell lung cancer using stable isotope resolved metabolomics
(SIRM).


Stable Isotope-Resolved Metabolomics (SIRM) has been a useful tool in
interrogating metabolic reprogramming in cancer. We have recently
published several protocols using SIRM in patient-derived models of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)1. In this case study, we compared
central metabolic activity in three different model systems, all derived
from the same patient. Slices from the human tumor (Warburg slices 2,3),
slices from an NSG mouse bearing the human tumor 4, and the
patient-derived cell culture were incubated in [U-13C]-glucose or
[U-13C,15N]-glutamine for 24 hours. Samples were then harvested and
analyzed by gas-chromatography-mass spectrometry and NMR. All three
models displayed similar levels of fractional enrichment after 24 hours,
making metabolic comparison possible, despite their very different 3D
architectures. Glucose metabolism in particular, showed consistent
labeling patterns of metabolites in glycolysis and the Krebs cycle.
Glutamine metabolism, however, was distinct in the cell culture, with a
pattern that indicated upregulation of anaplerotic glutaminolysis.
Activation of glutaminolysis may be an important transformative step in
the establishment of a viable cell culture. We are also in the process of
validating the present finding by comparing multiple patient-derived
models of NSCLC and tracking the evolution of their metabolic activity.

1 Lane, A. N., Higashi, R. M. & Fan, T. W.-M. Preclinical models for
interrogating drug action in human cancers using Stable Isotope Resolved
Metabolomics (SIRM) Metabolomics 12, 1-15 (2016).

2 Fan, T. W.-M. et al. Distinctly perturbed metabolic networks underlie
differential tumor tissue damages induced by immune modulator Î²-glucan
in a two-case ex vivo non-small cell lung cancer study. CSH Molec. Case
Studies J. 2, a00083, (2016).

3 Fan, T. W.-M., Lane, A. N. & Higashi, R. M. Stable Isotope Resolved
Metabolomics Studies in ex vivo Tissue Slices. Bio-protocol 6, e1730
(2016).

4 Lane, A. N., Yan, J. & Fan, T. W.-M. 13C Tracer Studies of Metabolism
in Mouse Tumor Xenografts. Bio-protocol 5, e1650 (2015).


