Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Formation and merger of H69 and H69AR small cell lung cancer
(SCLC) tumor cell clusters (TCCs) in vitro.


A novel manifestation of tumor cell invasiveness, termed mutual cellular
pervasion (MCP), was observed in vitro. It involved TCCs formed by SCLC
cells.

Suspension cultures of H69 and H69AR cells were grown in flavin-free RPMI
1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum as the only source of flavins.
Experiments and subcultivations were performed under light with
wavelengths above 520 nm. TCC morphology was studied by confocal
microscopy and transmission and scanning electron microscopy.
Interactions of TCCs were followed by video microscopy in phase contrast
and fluorescence modes. Data were analyzed using the Definiens software
suite. The interaction of H69AR TCCs with confluent monolayers of human
umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) was visualized.

Freshly subcultivated, singularized tumor cells rapidly formed
aggregates. After two days, solid TCCs prevailed whose surface cells were
connected by desmosome-like junctions. Apoptosis but not necrosis became
obvious in central parts of clusters with diameters above 100 to 150 Î¼m.
TCCs enlarged through both cell proliferation and serial cluster mergers.
In the course of TCC merger, four stages were distinguishable: (1)
directed cluster movement leading to contact of clusters, (2) formation
of a near circular, symmetric structure termed contact disc. It consists
of planar surface areas to which both TCCs involved contribute equally.
(3) Merger of TCCs took place in the contact disc, and was accompanied by
active movement of adjacent cells. (4) Starting from the merger zone,
major surface areas of newly formed clusters were mutually pervaded by
cells from both participating cell clusters. After numerous merger
events, only low numbers of TCCs reaching sizes of up to 2 to 3 mm were
present at subcultivation.

No spontaneous bursting, shrinkage, degeneration, or decay of TCCs has
been observed. However, when TCCs of H69AR cells were confronted with
confluent layers of HUVEC, drastic changes occurred in both formations.
First, intense oscillatory cellular movements were triggered on TCC
surfaces, preceding the release of cell aggregates which moved away from
TCCs to the HUVEC layer. At the same time, HUVEC were disconnected from
each other and started moving either randomly or in an oscillatory
fashion. Individual tumor cells attached to the much larger HUVEC and
spread on their surface, resulting in full covering which secluded HUVEC
from the medium.

To our knowledge, neither formation nor merger of malignant TCCs in vitro
have been described so far. TCC merger involves mutual cellular
penetration of the involved TCC surfaces, i. e. MCP. Contrary to the
invasion of tumor cells into non-tumor tissue, pervasion does not lead to
destruction but results in TCC growth. However, key features of tumor
cell invasion in vivo, such as chemotaxis, spreading and TCC formation as
well as disruption of endothelial layers, manifest under conditions in
vitro, thus facilitating related experimental studies.


