Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic characterization of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
in Korean population.


Objective: Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is a subtype of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Environmental risk factors
such as tobacco, alcohol, and especially, human papillomavirus (HPV) are
known to be associated with HNSCC. Also, large-scale sequencing studies
identified several HNSCC-associated genes such as TP53, EGFR and PIK3CA.
However, still the initiation and progression of OPSCC and mutational
profiles of OPSCC in Korean population are unclear.

Methods: Frozen non-tumor mucosa, tumor tissues and blood were collected
from nine OPSCC patients; 6 HPV positive and 3 negative. Adjacent
non-tumor tissues were obtained about 1 cm apart from the tumor tissue
and were histologically confirmed as non-neoplastic. We then performed
whole exome sequencing with Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon Kit v4+UTR,
yielding average on-target coverage of 100X.

Results: First, we compared somatic alterations of adjacent non-tumor and
tumor tissue to understand the genomic status of non-tumor mucosa.
Comparison of genome-wide copy number alterations (CNA) between non-tumor
and OPSCCs showed that majority of somatic CNA (SCNA) was occurred after
tumor progression. Also, non-tumor mucosa rarely harbored genomic
changes, showing average nonsilent mutations rate of 0.07 per Mb. In
contrast, OPSCC showed 1.0 mutations per Mb with few shared mutations
with non-tumor. These results indicate occurrence of new distinct
subclones after tumor progression. Second, somatic mutations and CNA
analysis of 9 OPSCC identified two distinct groups divided by the HPV
status of tumor. HPV(+) tumors showed lower mutation burden than HPV(-)
tumors (0.63 and 1.73 mutations per Mb, respectively). And TP53 and
CDKN2A mutations were detected exclusively in HPV(-) group, accounting
for 66.6% of HPV(-) tumors. Furthermore, HPV(-) tumors showed greater
degree of chromosomal alterations compared to HPV(+) tumors.

Conclusions: Although there are many studies to understand the
relationships between premalignant and malignant tissue, there is a lack
of understanding for genetic changes further from non-neoplastic mucosa.
Our data show that genetic profile of normal crypt mucosa rarely changes
and tumor develops in distinct subclones. This would provide a glimpse
into the fundamental cellular changes of non-tumor cells of tonsillar
crypts and oral cavity. Also, we provide a mutational landscape in HNSCC
of Korean population. Although our OPSCC showed recurrent mutations and
copy number alterations of genes related to RTK/PI(3)K- and
differentiation-signaling pathways, similar as western, mutation burden
in tumors was relatively lower, and somatic mutations on well-known
HNSCC-associated genes such as PIK3CA, FAT1 and HRAS werenâ€™t detected.
Further investigation and molecular experiments are required to
understand the mechanism of carcinogenesis and to discover early driver
mutations of HNSCC.


