Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between metformin use and the risk of colorectal
adenomas: A systematic review and meta-analysis.


Metformin, the most commonly prescribed drug in type-2 diabetes, has been
evaluated for its potential cancer chemopreventive role. While evidence
from meta-analyses suggests a reduced risk for colorectal cancer in
association with metformin use, recent European studies have reported no
association between metformin and colorectal cancer risk. For precursors
to colorectal cancers such as colorectal adenomas, however, literature
evaluating their relationship with metformin use is sparse. We performed
a systematic review and meta-analysis of available studies to
quantitatively assess the association of metformin use with risk of
colorectal adenomas. In accordance with PRISMA guidelines and using
relevant MeSH terms, we searched the PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of Science
databases through September 30, 2016 to identify full-text articles
investigating the risk for colorectal adenomas associated with the use of
metformin. Overall risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
colorectal adenomas were calculated using a fixed-effects model.
Heterogeneity between studies was evaluated using the Cochrane’s Q-
test and the I2- statistic. Potential publication bias was assessed by
constructing a funnel plot. Sub-group analyses were performed to examine
whether the association with metformin use differed by country/region. Of
the 609 articles identified through searching the three databases, 6
studies were eligible for our meta-analysis (1 randomized trial, 2
case-control, and 3 cohort studies; 4 Asian studies and 2 US-based
studies) and contributed a total of 9613 patients. The meta-analysis
suggested that the risk for colorectal adenomas was significantly lower
among metformin users as compared to non-users [overall RR (95% CI): 0.69
(0.62-0.77), test for overall effect Z =18.52, P-value Metformin, the
most commonly prescribed drug in type-2 diabetes, has been evaluated for
its potential cancer chemopreventive role. While evidence from
meta-analyses suggests a reduced risk for colorectal cancer in
association with metformin use, recent European studies have reported no
association between metformin and colorectal cancer risk. For precursors
to colorectal cancers such as colorectal adenomas, however, literature
evaluating their relationship with metformin use is sparse. We performed
a systematic review and meta-analysis of available studies to
quantitatively assess the association of metformin use with risk of
colorectal adenomas. In accordance with PRISMA guidelines and using
relevant MeSH terms, we searched the PubMed, EMBASE, and Web of Science
databases through September 30, 2016 to identify full-text articles
investigating the risk for colorectal adenomas associated with the use of
metformin. Overall risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
colorectal adenomas were calculated using a fixed-effects model.
Heterogeneity between studies was evaluated using the Cochrane’s Q-
test and the I2- statistic. Potential publication bias was assessed by
constructing a funnel plot. Sub-group analyses were performed to examine
whether the association with metformin use differed by country/region. Of
the 609 articles identified through searching the three databases, 6
studies were eligible for our meta-analysis (1 randomized trial, 2
case-control, and 3 cohort studies; 4 Asian studies and 2 US-based
studies) and contributed a total of 9613 patients. The meta-analysis
suggested that the risk for colorectal adenomas was significantly lower
among metformin users as compared to non-users [overall RR (95% CI): 0.69
(0.62-0.77), test for overall effect Z =18.52, P-value <0.0001]. This
protective risk applied both for studies within the US and Asian regions
[pooled RRs (95% CI): 0.72 (0.64-0.81) and 0.62 (0.47-0.76),
respectively]. There was no heterogeneity observed between studies
(Q-test p= 0.09, I2-statistic 47.3%) and no evidence of any publication
bias on funnel plot visualization. This meta-analysis indicates that the
use of metformin is significantly associated with a lower risk of
colorectal adenomas. As metformin is an affordable and well-tolerated
drug, it has the potential to be an effective agent for polyp
chemoprevention. Further long-term randomized controlled trials are
needed to confirm the anti-neoplastic effects of metformin in reducing
the risk of colorectal polyps, and eventually colorectal cancer, in the
general population.


