Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down regulation of ATP6V1B1 in HER2+ breast cancer leads
resistance against trastuzumab mediated antibody dependent cellular
cytotoxicity and it might be associated with less efficacy of trastuzumab
clinically.


Among several resistant mechanisms of trastuzumab for HER2+ breast cancer
patients, little is clear on resistant mechanism of trastuzumab mediated
ADCC. In the current study, we investigated the role of Vacuolar-ATPase
subunit ATP6V1B1 on the resistant mechanism of trastuzumab mediated ADCC
in HER2+ human breast cancer cell line SK-BR-3. To establish the
trastuzumab mediated ADCC resistant SK-BR-3, PBMCs are co-cultured with
1Âµg/ml of trastuzumab and SK-BR-3 for 4 hours. We removed CD45 positive
PBMC by using MACS separation system and obtained ADCC resistant SK-BR-3.
After we expanded the resistant cells and repeated these processes
several times, we established the ADCC resistant SK-BR-3. The
cytotoxicity of ADCC resistant SK-BR-3, which was evaluated by LDH assay,
was significantly reduced as compared with that of normal SK-BR-3 (38.7%
and 67.4%, respectively). To sort candidate genes for the resistance, we
analyzed the gene expression profile of ADCC resistant SK-BR-3 by using
DNA microarray and we focused on ATP6V1B1 gene that was significantly
reduced on the resistant cells. We investigated ATP6V1B1 mRNA level of
SK-BR-3 and resistant cell by using real time PCR and found the 50%
reduction of ATP6V1B1 mRNA level in ADCC resistant cells. To evaluate the
role of ATP6V1B1 on the trastuzumab mediated ADCC resistant mechanism, we
established ATP6V1B1 knockout SKBR3 by using CRISPR/Cas9 system. We
cultured from small numbers of the knock out cells and expand to obtain
completely knock out cells. We confirmed that the ATP6V1B1 knockout cell
line was knocked out by western blotting and immunohistochemistry. We
found that ATP6V1B1-knockout SK-BR-3 were significantly less ADCC
activity as compared to control SK-BR-3(67.4% and 21.2%, respectively).
Furthermore, as the same as the result of ADCC activity, we found that
ATP6V1B1-knockout SK-BR-3 was less AICC (antibody-independent cellular
cytotoxicity) activity as compared to control SK-BR-3(41.2% and 12.5%,
respectively). Based on the in vitro findings, we evaluated the role of
ATP6V1B1 expression in HER2 positive breast cancer patients who are
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) containing trastuzumab.
Biopsy samples before NAC were stained with ATP6V1B1
immunohistochemically. Four pathological complete response (pCR) cases
after NAC and 4 non pCR cases were included. We found that non pCR cases
showed significantly week expression of the ATP6V1B1 protein as compared
to that of pCR cases. ATP6V1B1 gene is one of the isoforms of the
Vacuolar (V)-ATPase which is located in intracellular membrane that
regulate the cytosolic pH and membrane trafficking. It is hypothesized
that ATP6V1B1 is involved in somewhere through the process of
cytotoxicity mediated by perforin and granzymes and now we are trying to
explore the mechanisms further.


