Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RD3 reprogramming in N-MYC non-amplified neuroblastoma evolution.


N-MYC amplification is restricted to ~30% of the high-risk neuroblastoma
(NB), while the remaining 70% is N-MYC non-amplified (N-MYC-NA), yet
still has a poor outcome with only 37% 5 Year OS and a miserable 9% 10Y
OS. Recently, we demonstrated, Retinal Degeneration Protein 3 (RD3)
regulates metastatic state of NB cells and its loss associates with poor
prognosis. Herein, utilizing bed-to-bench approach coupled with in vitro,
in vivo and ex vivo NB models, we investigated the role of RD3
reprogramming in the evolution of N-MYC-NA-NB. Assessing 15 different
human derived stage-4 N-MYC-NA-NB cell lines demonstrated:
transcriptional/translational loss of RD3 compared to neural crest cells;
cell specific loss and; association of RD3 loss to cellular progressive
disease, cellular therapy resistance and disease relapse. Further, in
silico analysis demonstrated that RD3-loss was intrinsically associated
with reduced OS and abridged relapse-free survival in N-MYC-NA-NB patient
cohorts. We also demonstrated the complete loss of RD3 in metastatic
site-derived aggressive cells (regardless of CSC status) ex vivo and in
reproducible aggressive disease models in vivo. RD3-loss correlated with
the heightened metastatic state (tumor cell migration, invasion and
tumorosphere formation) of the N-MYC-NA-NB cells. Further, re-expressing
RD3 in aggressive cells reverted their metastatic potential both in vitro
and in vivo. These results demonstrate the loss of RD3 in high-risk
N-MYC-NA-NB, its novel tumor evolution stabilization function and further
imply that continuous ongoing acquisition of RD3-loss in therapy
resistant cells may directly relate to tumor progression and poor
clinical outcomes.


