Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous identification of candidate melanoma risk variants
using massively parallel reporter assay.


Recent melanoma Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) has identified 20
common susceptibility loci via meta-analysis of ~15,000 cutaneous
malignant melanoma cases. While GWAS is extremely powerful in identifying
genomic regions contributing to melanoma risk, teasing out functional
variants and unraveling molecular mechanisms by which the risk is
conferred presents a tremendous challenge due to limited resolution of
genetic structure and lack of high-throughput assay system. To
simultaneously identify functional risk variants from multiple GWAS loci,
we employed recently developed Massively-Parallel Reporter Assays (MPRA).
Based on the hypothesis that many GWAS functional variants regulate gene
expression through transcriptional mechanism, we systematically examined
allele-specific transcriptional activities of genetically
indistinguishable candidate variants. Out of ~2,800 melanoma-associated
variants (r2>0.4, EUR) from 16 melanoma loci for which transcriptional
mechanism could be applied, 835 variants were prioritized based on their
relevance as melanocyte-/melanoma-specific cis-element represented by
ENCODE annotation as open chromatin or putative promoter/enhancer histone
marks in melanocytes and melanoma cell lines. Pooled oligoes of 145bp
encompassing each variant with either melanoma risk or protective allele
coupled with 10 different unique sequence tags were cloned into
luciferase vectors and transfected to melanoma cell lines. Resulting
expressed tag counts were subsequently determined using massively
parallel sequencing. We were able to identify ~200 potentially functional
variants displaying allelic transcriptional activity by combining
transfections in a melanoma cell line and HEK293FT cell line. Top
functional SNPs from melanoma GWAS loci were also shown as significant
eQTL SNPs in human melanocytes including MX2 on chromosome 21. Overlaying
MPRA functional SNPs with melanocyte eQTL SNPs further enabled isolation
of a functional risk variant among several highly linked MX2 eQTL SNPs.
The results from this analysis will greatly accelerate the identification
of functional melanoma risk variants and further shed light on molecular
mechanisms of genetic susceptibility of melanoma in population.


