Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of anticancer activity of BPS-001 (lyophilized leech
saliva extract).


Recent studies, investigating the composition and therapeutic potential
of leech saliva have identified many peptides and proteins with multiple
therapeutic properties including anti-thrombotic, antimicrobial and
anti-metastatic. In vitro anti-cancer effects were shown in breast,
prostate and lung cells lines. In vivo anticancer activity of the extract
was shown in multiple breast and prostate cancer xenografts studied by
our lab. In our previous studies, BPS-001 was non-toxic and demonstrated
various activities including pro-apoptotic properties, inhibition of
cellular adhesion, angiogenesis and downregulation of AR expression. To
investigate the affected pathways, mechanistic studies were carried out
using in vivo and in vitro treated samples. Protein expression in samples
was determined by Western blotting of in vitro and in vivo samples. AR
expression was measured using an eGFP reporter assay in LNCaP cells, with
PSA also measured in the media using cobas e 411 analyzer. BPS-001
inhibited Proteinase Activated Receptor 1 (PAR-1) which is responsible
for hormone like cellular signals in different cancer cells including
those of the breast and prostate. Moreover, in LNCaP cells AR activation
and PSA expression were significantly inhibited after treatment with
BPS-001. Inhibition of PI3K and PLCG2 were also observed. It has been
found that BPS-001 modulates a plethora of pathways which makes it a very
promising candidate for treatment of cancer with an important advantage
of low toxicity and potential resistance.


