Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast tumor FOXA1 protein expression and reproductive
characteristics among African-American and European-American women.


Background: Forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) plays a key role in
determining estrogen receptor (ER) function and mammary ductal
development and may repress the basal cell phenotype during
differentiation of breast epithelium. While reproductive factors are
known to influence breast cancer risk depending on the subtypes, data on
the association of tumor FOXA1 protein expression and reproductive
characteristics are very limited.

Methods: Tissue microarrays comprising surgical tumors from 638 women
(466 African-American [AA] and 172 European-American [EA], aged 20-75
years) with primary breast cancer in the Women’s Circle of Health Study
(WCHS) were analyzed for FOXA1 expression by immunohistochemistry and
automated image analysis. In-person interviews were conducted to obtain
data on demographics, medical and family histories, and reproductive and
menstrual histories. Logistic regression was performed for FOXA1
positivity (>10% cells with strong staining) with menopausal status, age
at menarche, age at first live birth, parity, and breastfeeding,
adjusting for age at diagnosis, family history of breast cancer, and
history of benign breast disease.

Results: FOXA1 expression was higher in tumors from EA compared to those
from AA women (80% vs. 70% positivity, P=0.011). FOXA1 expression was
highly correlated with ER positivity (88% positive in ER+ and 26% in ER-
breast cancer among AA women; 90% and 29% respectively among EA women;
both PResults: FOXA1 expression was higher in tumors from EA compared to
those from AA women (80% vs. 70% positivity, P=0.011). FOXA1 expression
was highly correlated with ER positivity (88% positive in ER+ and 26% in
ER- breast cancer among AA women; 90% and 29% respectively among EA
women; both P<0.001). Among AA women, a higher number of live births was
associated with lower FOXA1 expression (odds ratio [OR]=0.45, 95%
confidence interval [CI]=0.22-0.91 for 2 live births and OR=0.44, 95%
CI=0.20-0.91 for ≥3 live births, versus nulliparous). However, the
inverse association was not observed among EA women, potentially due to
the small sample size.

Conclusion: In AA women, a higher number of live births, which has been
related to greater risk of ER- breast cancer, is associated with lower
FOXA1 expression. Because FOXA1 promotes luminal and represses the basal
differentiation, respectively, the effects of parity on expression of
FOXA1 may be the link whereby it increases risk of ER- breast cancer.
(Funding: NIH P01CA151135, R01CA100598, R01CA185623, P30CA072720,
K07CA201334; US Army Medical Research and Material Command
DAMD-17-01-1-0334; the Breast Cancer Research Foundation; and the Philip
L. Hubbell family)


