Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interplay between etiology-dependent genomic and epigenetic
signatures: The paradigm of liver cancer.


The evolutionary theory assumes that occurrence of mutations in cancer is
random. However, recent studies suggest that passenger mutations are not
randomly scattered in cancer genomes and that chromatin organization
dictate mutations profiles. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) serves as a
model of diverse spectrum of cancers, since it is induced by a number of
well-known etiological agents, mainly Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and
Hepatitis B virus (HBV). This provides a unique opportunity to test
whether different etiological agents dictate distinct mutational
landscapes across the genome through a unique epigenetic signature. The
HCC-specific genomic mutations were studied in 80 HCC biopsies from three
etiology groups - HBV, HCV, or other. To explore the mutational signature
we performed target high-resolution sequencing that enables the detection
of low-frequency passenger mutations. By using this strategy we
identified novel distinct etiology-dependent regional mutations signature
in specific genes and pathways in HCC that was not detected previously by
exome sequencing of liver tumors. These observations suggest that viral
infection modulate somatic mutations causing HCC. To explore the link
between genomic signature and genome wide chromatin organization we
studied the epigenetic changes occur following HCV infection. Epigenetic
analysis unraveled known and novel pathways that are controlled by the
virus such as Hepatic lipid metabolism, cell motility, cell cycle and
immunity. Invers correlation between high mutation rate and enrichment of
chromatin modifications associated with active transcription provides a
link between etiology and cancer genome. Our novel approach offers a
perspective into the mechanisms that shape mutational signature
development in cancer.


