Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The HIV shell protein Gp120 stimulates U87 glioma cell
proliferation through the activation of glycolysis.


Patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are more prone
to develop cancers, including glioblastomas (GBM). The median survival of
GBM patients with HIV is significantly shorter compared to HIV-negative
GBM patients, despite the fact that they receive the same treatments.
This indicates that HIV infection is associated with more aggressive
tumor behavior and with treatment resistance. Taking into account that
HIV itself is not found in GBM specimens, the nature of the GBM-HIV
association remains poorly understood and the underlying molecular
mechanism is still unknown. Here we study the effect of Gp120, a
glycoprotein found in the HIV shell, on GBM cell growth and
chemotherapeutic resistance. U87 glioma cells were used in this study.
Flow cytometry analyses based on 7-aminoactinomycin D staining and
viability assays were used for identification of cell cycle,
proliferation rates, and resistance to temozolomide (TMZ). Combined
proteomics, metabolomics, and western blot approaches together with
colorimetric pyruvate kinase activity assays were used for evaluation of
metabolic pathways. U87 cells treated with Gp120 (200ng/ml) for 10 days
showed higher proliferation rates and increased cell survival in response
to treatment with TMZ (100ÂµM) compared to un-treated cells. Quantitative
proteomics studies using isobaric tags and western blot analysis
identified expression up-regulation of several glycolytic enzymes,
including enolase 2, pyruvate kinase, hexokinase, and glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase in Gp120 treated U87 cells. Additionally,
metabolite analysis revealed an increase of pyruvate, amino acid and
lipid synthesis, together with reduction of protein degradation, in
response to treatment with Gp120. In summary, we demonstrated that Gp120
promoted proliferation and resistance to TMZ in U87 cells through the
activation of glycolysis, resulting in increased protein and lipid
synthesis This research was made possible by NIH grant numbers:
1SC2GM102040, R25GM110513, INBRE-PR NIH Grant 8P20GM103475, the UCC RCMI
Biomedical Proteomics Facility grant G12MD007583 and US Department of
Education Grant number P031S130068.


