Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic disruption of Kras sensitizes lung cancer cells to
Fas-mediated apoptosis.


Genetic lesions that activate KRAS account for ~30% of the 1.6 million
annual cases of lung cancer. Despite clinical need, KRAS is still
undruggable using traditional small molecule drugs/inhibitors. When
oncogenic Kras is suppressed by RNA interference, tumors initially
regress but eventually recur and proliferate despite suppression of Kras.
Here we show that tumor cells can survive CRISPR-mediated knockout of
oncogenic Kras, indicating the existence of Kras-independent survival
pathways. Thus even if clinical KRAS inhibitors were available,
resistance would remain an obstacle to treatment. Kras-independent cancer
cells exhibit decreased colony formation in vitro but retain the ability
to form tumors in mice. Comparing the transcriptomes of oncogenic Kras
cells and Kras knockout cells, we identified 603 genes that were
specifically upregulated in Kras knockout cells, including the Fas gene,
which encodes a cell surface death receptor involved in physiological
regulation of apoptosis. Antibodies recognizing Fas-receptor efficiently
induced apoptosis of Kras knockout cells but not oncogenic Kras
expressing cells. Increased Fas expression in Kras knockout cells was
attributed to decreased association of repressive epigenetic marks at the
Fas promoter. Concordant with this observation, treating oncogenic Kras
cells with histone-deacetylase inhibitor and Fas-activating antibody
efficiently induced apoptosis, thus bypassing the need to inhibit Kras.
Our results suggest that activation of Fas could be exploited as an
Achillesâ€™ heel in tumors initiated by oncogenic Kras.


