Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening for BRCA1 founder mutation in Mexican population: an
accessible approach.


Aim: To implement an accessible strategy for detection of the Mexican
founder mutation NG_005905.2:g.118973_133629del, located in BRCA1, which
deletes exons 9-12 (BRCA1 ex9-12del), as part of the health care setting
of patients with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC), from the
National Cancer Institute (Mexico).

Material and methods: We designed a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based
method, for the targeted detection of the deletion of exons 9 through 12,
of the BRCA1 gene. The method was validated with previously verified
results of the deletion by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification assay (MLPA), or deep sequencing of the region. Finally,
the technique was used for the detection of BRCA1 ex9-12del mutation in a
group of 302 HBOC patients, in whom the existence of BRCA1 and BRCA2
point mutations had been ruled by pyrosequencing.

Results: The concordance of our method, with previously reported BRCA1
ex9-12del mutation results, was 100%. Also, we provided a profile of the
clinical and familial characteristics of 302 Mexican patients with
clinical suspicion of HBOC, in whom the detection of BRCA1 ex9-12del
mutation was performed. In this way, 21 patients (6.95%) were identified
as BRCA1 ex9-12del mutation carriers. Among whom, a higher proportion of
triple negative breast cancer was found (73% versus 21%, p=0.0005; two
sided Fisher's exact test) .

Conclusions: A feasible molecular diagnostic strategy for the detection
of BRCA1 ex9-12del mutation was established in Mexican patients, with
HBOC. In this way, we identified 21 (21/302) carriers of the deletion,
who represented the 6.95%. Related to the clinical features, triple
negative breast cancer carriers stood out. It had been reported that
large genomic rearrangements in BRCA1 are associated with an increased
frequency of high risk features.

These type of approach is appropriate in populations where a founder
effect is recognized. For its simplicity and effectiveness, it can be
transferred to other laboratories, for the benefit of a greater number of
Mexican patients and with the aim of minimize costs of testing. Because
of the frequency of BRCA1 ex9-12del mutation, this method has been
implemented as the first line of BRCA1 clinical genetic analysis in
patients with suspected HBOC, at National Cancer Institute (Mexico ).


