Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of somatic mutations in subcutaneous
panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma by whole-exome and -transcriptome
sequencing.


Subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma (SPTCL) is a rarely
differentiated form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This uncommon disease is
triggered by preferential lymphoma infiltration into subcutaneous adipose
tissue, and nodule formation in the fatty tissue. Consequently, the early
stage symptoms of SPTCL is found as multiple subcutaneous nodules beneath
the skin. Due to the low incidence rate and indolent progression of the
disease, the genetic alterations associated with SPTCL still remains
poorly characterized. Genetic profiling of SPTCL by integrated
whole-exome and -transcriptome sequencing will augment the comprehensive
characterization of somatic mutations in SPTCL. To investigate the
genetic alterations associated with the incidence of SPTCL, we performed
whole-exome sequencing of both biopsy sample collected from the
patientâ€™s left shoulder lesion, and matched saliva sample to 200X and
100X read depth of coverage, respectively. Whole-transcriptome sequencing
of the tumor sample was also performed for expression level analysis;
gene fusions are also explored by TopHat-fusion-post. Somatic mutations
were precisely detected by our internally developed somatic variant
caller, which is an adjusted version of VarScan2 with additional filters
based on thresholds of p-value and odds ratio. Overall, we discovered a
total of 158 somatic variants: 139 SNVs and 19 indels, by using somatic
variant detection algorithm of our own. By applying the additional
filters to these variants, two genes were remarkably identified: SQSTM1
and BAGE3. SQSTM1 (sequestosome 1), also known as ubiquitin-binding
protein p62, encodes proteins that regulate ubiquitination, autophagy,
and activation of NFkB1. Through cBioPortal database search, SQSTM1 found
to be highly amplified across the various cancer types, such as
neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC), kidney renal clear cell carcinoma
(RCC), and pancreatic cancer. On the other hand, BAGE3, B melanoma
antigen 3, was reported as a candidate gene encoding tumor antigens. Gene
fusions were identified by comparing the number of spanning reads and
mate pairs, and fusion of NOL7 and RANBP9 on chromosome 6 showed the
highest fusion score of 604.45. Comprehensive characterization of the
initiation, progression, and relapse of subcutaneous panniculitis-like
T-cell lymphoma is yet thoroughly understood. Hence, establishing the
genetic basis and profiling the genomic landscape of SPTCL will broaden
our understanding of SPTCL, and enhance the therapeutic effectiveness in
the pre-diagnosis and treatment of the disease, as well as targeted gene
therapies. Furthermore, to strengthen the statistical power of the
somatic mutation analysis, we are planning to expand the cohort and
conduct functional validation study of selected genes by using secured
paraffin blocks of SPTCL patients.


