Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of biomarkers and anthracycline benefit for hormone
receptor-negative breast cancer: results from a randomized phase 2
neoadjuvant study (KBOG 1101 Study).


AIM: We compared 6 cycles of docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (TC6) with 3
cycles of 5-fluorouracil and epirubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by
3 cycles of docetaxel (FEC-D) as neoadjuvant chemotherapy for patients
with hormone receptor (HR)-negative breast cancer (BC) to identify
biomarkers requiring anthracycline treatment.

Methods: In total, 103 patients with operable HR-negative BC were
administered TC6 or FEC-D. Triple-negative BC was subdivided by CK5/6 and
EGFR into basal- and non-basal BCs. The primary endpoint was pathological
complete response (pCR). Secondary endpoints were safety,
breast-conserving surgery ratio, disease-free survival, overall survival,
and predictive factors (Ki-67, P-53, ALDH1 and TOP2A by IHC and TOP2A by
FISH) for each regimen.

Results: Of the 103 patients, 97 completed the study. Overall pCR was
higher for patients treated with FEC-D (36%) than for those treated with
TC6 (25.5%) (P=0.265). FEC-D was significantly superior to TC6 in basal
BC (42.9% vs 13.6%; P=0.033), while no differences in HER2 and non-basal
BCs. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) positivity was inversely associated
with pCR for both regimens, significantly for FEC-D (FEC-D: p=0.047, TC6:
p=0.085). Patients who achieved pCR tended to have longer DFS (P = 0.287)
and OS (P = 0.069). Patients with basal and non-basal BC treated with
FEC-D had significantly better DFS (P = 0.016) and OS (P = 0.034) than
those with TC6.

Conclusion: We found TC6 was less effective than FEC-D for HR-negative BC
because it was not sufficient to treat basal-BC. This suggests that DNA
damaging agents like anthracyclines are required for treating basal-BC.
Additionally, ALDH1 could be a marker for resistance to conventional
chemotherapy.


