Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analysis reveals mitochondrial gene signature
upregulation in gastric cancers expressing the stem cell marker CD133.


Gastric cancers expressing the stem cell marker CD133 are more aggressive
than those that do not express the marker, and are associated with more
unfavorable clinical outcomes. The CD133-associated aggressive behavior
of gastric cancer remains poorly understood at the molecular level. In
the present study, we performed gene expression profiling of bead-sorted
CD133+ and CD133- KATO III cell lines to derive in vitro molecular
signatures of CD133 expression in gastric cancer. Three expression
signatures associated with CD133 expression ('Mitochondria', 'Cell
cycle', and 'Lipid metabolism') were inferred upon study of a module
association map of the key molecular signatures associated with CD133
expression in gastric cancer. Using the public gene expression profiles,
we show that the patients with overexpression of CD133 show unfavorable
clinical outcomes compared to CD133- patients in the context of
up-regulation of 'Mitochondria' expression signature. We further showed
that CD133+ KATO III cells had a higher mitochondrial function and were
more susceptible to the mitochondrial inhibitors rotenone, antimycin A,
and NaN3, than were CD133- cells. Together, our findings suggest that
transcriptional up-regulation of the 'Mitochondria' gene signature may
identify CD133+ gastric cancers; such data are of clinical and
pharmacological relevance.


