Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profile of sunitinib resistance in clear-cell renal cell
carcinoma.


Background: Sunitinib (SU) is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor used in the
first line setting in metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
Recently, nivolumab, a checkpoint inhibitor, has been approved as a
second line therapy. The identification of biomarkers of resistance to
these drugs may be useful to select patientsâ€™ treatment. In this study
we investigated the molecular and immune profile associated to SU
resistance.

Methods: Forty-four patients (pts) with metastatic ccRCC treated with SU
were included. A global transcriptome analysis (Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0
ST array) on 6 extremely sensitive (ES; progression-free survival (PFS) >
24 months) and 8 refractory (R; ; progression disease as best response)
ccRCC pts treated with SU was performed. Differentially expressed genes
were tested in the whole cohort by qPCR. In silico validation using the
microarray data from 53 SU-treated pts (Beuselinck et al, Clin Cancer Res
2015) was performed. In addition 730 immune-related genes were tested in
the same cohort and in 10 additional pts treated with anti-PD1/PD-L1
therapies as an exploratory analysis.

Results: Differential expression analysis between R and ES pts showed 330
differentially expressed genes: 148 were overexpressed and 182
underexpressed in R pts. Top two deregulated networks were centered in
LYN and NR3C1 (Network 1), and in chemokine ligands and receptors (e.g.
CCL5, CCRL1 and CXCL10) (Network 2). In Beuselinck dataset, 9 genes were
differentially expressed between R and ES pts. The expression of 7 genes
(BST2, CD44, ELK1, FADS2, LYN, NKAP and VEGFC) was correlated with a
lower PFS in both cohorts (Table 1). A different immune-related molecular
profile was shown between resistance to SU and to anti-PD1/PD-L1
therapies. TIM-3 was overexpressed in SU-sensitive pts and in
anti-PD1/PD-L1 refractory pts.

Conclusions: We described a gene expression profile of SU resistance in
ccRCC pts. The value of TIM-3 as a potential biomarker in ccRCC merits
further exploration.

Survival analysis of selected genes in the training and validation set.
*High vs low expression.





HR (Training set)

P

Median PFS, months*

HR (Validation set)

P

Median PFS, months*



ELK1

2.66 (1.1 - 6.2)

0.022

5.2 vs 17.2

2.47 (1.2 - 5.1)

0.014

12 vs 24



BST2

4.87 (1.5 - 15.7)

0.008

4.6 vs 10.6

2.22 (1.1 - 4.6)

0.031

11 vs 15



CD44

2.55 (1.2 - 5.6)

0.023

5 vs 18.9

2.47 (1 - 6)

0.046

9 vs 14



FADS2

2.84 (1.1 - 7.7)

0.039

4.2 vs 6.9

2.1 (1.1 - 4)

0.025

11 vs 19



LYN

5.38 (1.6 - 18.1)

0.006

4.5 vs 17.2

2.35 (1.1 - 4.9)

0.024

8.5 vs 16



NKAP

3 (1.3 - 7.1)

0.012

5.1 vs 17.2

2.27 (1.1 - 4.8)

0.031

11 vs 16



VEGFC

3.02 (1.2 - 7.5)

0.016

4.5 vs 17.2

1.97 (1 - 3.8)

0.045

12 vs 25


