Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic interactions between PLK1 and HDAC inhibitors in
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells occur in vitro and in vivo and proceed
through multiple mechanisms.


The mitotic kinase polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is over-expressed in
neoplastic cells, including non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) cells, but not
in normal cells, prompting development of PLK1 inhibitors e.g.,
volasertib (Boehringer-Ingelheim). PLK1 plays key roles in cell cycle
progression, mitosis, cytokinesis, centriole duplication, and the DNA
damage response (DDR). Notably, volasertib demonstrated preliminary signs
of activity in NHL patients in a phase I trial. HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs)
modify chromatin structure and gene expression, but also induce multiple
mitotic abnormalities including mitotic slippage and DNA damage
checkpoint disruption. Given these complementary mechanisms, we sought to
examine volasertib interactions with the pan-HDACI belinostat (Spectrum
Pharmaceuticals) in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) cells in vitro and in vivo. Exposure of DLBCL cells to
extremely low (e.g., 5-30 nM), minimally toxic concentrations of
volasertib and low (e.g., 100-400 nM), marginally toxic belinostat
concentrations for 48 hr synergistically increased apoptosis in SU-DHL16,
SU-DHL4, SU-DHL8 (GC subtype), HBL-1, U2932 (ABC-subtype), and OCI-LY18,
Carnaval (double hit) DLBCL cells. Similar interactions occurred in
primary lymphoma cells, Granta-519 and Rec-1 (MCL), SU-DHL4/BR and
SU-DHL16/BR (bortezomib-resistant cells exhibiting up-regulation of the
proteasome sub-unit PSMB5 and bortezomib binding site mutation
(Ala49Val). In contrast, identical regimens were minimally toxic to
normal hematopoietic progenitors. Volasertib/belinostat induced massive
M-phase arrest, p-histone H3 up-regulation, a marked increase in mitotic
errors, and pronounced M-phase cell death associated with striking DNA
damage (γH2A.X formation). Belinostat diminished c-Myc mRNA and protein
in DLBCL cells, an effect significantly enhanced by volasertib. Notably,
PLK1 knock-down in DLBCL cells significantly increased belinostat-induced
M-phase accumulation, phospho-histone H3 accumulation, γH2AX generation,
and apoptosis. Analogously, c-Myc knock-down increased DNA damage and
apoptosis in response to volasertib, arguing that c-Myc down-regulation
plays a functional role in lethality. Volasertib/belinostat
co-administration dramatically reduced tumor growth in an ABC-DLBCL flank
model (U2932) and significantly increased survival (56.2 vs 39.7 days; p
The mitotic kinase polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is over-expressed in
neoplastic cells, including non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) cells, but not
in normal cells, prompting development of PLK1 inhibitors e.g.,
volasertib (Boehringer-Ingelheim). PLK1 plays key roles in cell cycle
progression, mitosis, cytokinesis, centriole duplication, and the DNA
damage response (DDR). Notably, volasertib demonstrated preliminary signs
of activity in NHL patients in a phase I trial. HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs)
modify chromatin structure and gene expression, but also induce multiple
mitotic abnormalities including mitotic slippage and DNA damage
checkpoint disruption. Given these complementary mechanisms, we sought to
examine volasertib interactions with the pan-HDACI belinostat (Spectrum
Pharmaceuticals) in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) cells in vitro and in vivo. Exposure of DLBCL cells to
extremely low (e.g., 5-30 nM), minimally toxic concentrations of
volasertib and low (e.g., 100-400 nM), marginally toxic belinostat
concentrations for 48 hr synergistically increased apoptosis in SU-DHL16,
SU-DHL4, SU-DHL8 (GC subtype), HBL-1, U2932 (ABC-subtype), and OCI-LY18,
Carnaval (double hit) DLBCL cells. Similar interactions occurred in
primary lymphoma cells, Granta-519 and Rec-1 (MCL), SU-DHL4/BR and
SU-DHL16/BR (bortezomib-resistant cells exhibiting up-regulation of the
proteasome sub-unit PSMB5 and bortezomib binding site mutation
(Ala49Val). In contrast, identical regimens were minimally toxic to
normal hematopoietic progenitors. Volasertib/belinostat induced massive
M-phase arrest, p-histone H3 up-regulation, a marked increase in mitotic
errors, and pronounced M-phase cell death associated with striking DNA
damage (γH2A.X formation). Belinostat diminished c-Myc mRNA and protein
in DLBCL cells, an effect significantly enhanced by volasertib. Notably,
PLK1 knock-down in DLBCL cells significantly increased belinostat-induced
M-phase accumulation, phospho-histone H3 accumulation, γH2AX generation,
and apoptosis. Analogously, c-Myc knock-down increased DNA damage and
apoptosis in response to volasertib, arguing that c-Myc down-regulation
plays a functional role in lethality. Volasertib/belinostat
co-administration dramatically reduced tumor growth in an ABC-DLBCL flank
model (U2932) and significantly increased survival (56.2 vs 39.7 days; p
< 0.001) without weight loss or other toxicities. The regimen also
enhanced survival and reduced tumor cell bone marrow engraftment in a
systemic double-hit lymphoma model (OCI-Ly18). Together, these findings
indicate that PLK1/HDAC inhibition warrants attention as a therapeutic
strategy in NHL. Accordingly, based on these findings, a phase I
volasertib/belinostat trial in patients with aggressive NHL is planned
(NCT02875002).


