Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of fluid biopsy using the HD-SCA platform to
re-stratify intermediate-risk organ-confined prostate cancer patients.


Recent studies have demonstrated that even with current risk
stratification of intermediate-risk organ-confined prostate cancer
patients, 30-50% of patients are incorrectly categorized and overtreated.
As the second leading cause of cancer in men, 90% of prostate cancer
patients are diagnosed at organ-confined stages, where radical
prostatectomy (RP) is the “golden standard” of treatment. However,
deferring intervention is becoming a more popular option for low-risk
patients, with a 15-year progression-free survival of 95%. High-risk
patients greatly benefit from RP, with a 5-year progression-free survival
of 85%, while the decision to proceed with RP is not so candid for
intermediate-risk patients. Using the high-definition single cell assay
(HD-SCA) platform, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from peripheral blood
(PB) and disseminating tumor cells (DTCs) from bone marrow aspirate (BMA)
will be analyzed for morphological, genomic, and proteomic profiling. We
hypothesize that by using morpho-proteo-genomic parameters we may develop
predictive markers for a more accurate stratification of
intermediate-risk patients, offering a more personalized treatment for
each individual. Preliminary data shows 86% (n=43) of PB samples and 5%
(n=40) of BMA are positive for Cytokeratin (CK) expressing rare
circulating cells, as defined by ≥5 cells/mL. The incidence of CK+
cells in PB did not correlate with PSA, Gleason score, or clinical
parameters. However, incidence of CK+ cells in PB was higher in high-risk
group, though not statistically significant (p=0.784) when compared to
intermediate-risk groups. Additionally, higher levels of CK expression
(pRecent studies have demonstrated that even with current risk
stratification of intermediate-risk organ-confined prostate cancer
patients, 30-50% of patients are incorrectly categorized and overtreated.
As the second leading cause of cancer in men, 90% of prostate cancer
patients are diagnosed at organ-confined stages, where radical
prostatectomy (RP) is the “golden standard” of treatment. However,
deferring intervention is becoming a more popular option for low-risk
patients, with a 15-year progression-free survival of 95%. High-risk
patients greatly benefit from RP, with a 5-year progression-free survival
of 85%, while the decision to proceed with RP is not so candid for
intermediate-risk patients. Using the high-definition single cell assay
(HD-SCA) platform, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from peripheral blood
(PB) and disseminating tumor cells (DTCs) from bone marrow aspirate (BMA)
will be analyzed for morphological, genomic, and proteomic profiling. We
hypothesize that by using morpho-proteo-genomic parameters we may develop
predictive markers for a more accurate stratification of
intermediate-risk patients, offering a more personalized treatment for
each individual. Preliminary data shows 86% (n=43) of PB samples and 5%
(n=40) of BMA are positive for Cytokeratin (CK) expressing rare
circulating cells, as defined by ≥5 cells/mL. The incidence of CK+
cells in PB did not correlate with PSA, Gleason score, or clinical
parameters. However, incidence of CK+ cells in PB was higher in high-risk
group, though not statistically significant (p=0.784) when compared to
intermediate-risk groups. Additionally, higher levels of CK expression
(p<0.0001), as measured by relative intensity of fluorescent staining,
were detected in cells detected in PB of high-risk patients relative to
intermediate- and low-risk groups as measured by an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) statistical model. Low levels of genomic aberrations are observed
in all CK+ rare circulating cells (5%, n=118), which may speak to the
fact that these patients are in early stages of their disease. The use of
the HD-SCA platform to characterize the fluid biopsy may result in the
identification of predictive markers of treatment response for
intermediate-risk patients, resulting in reduction of overtreatment.


