Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiles in gene expression and methylation help define
the molecular characteristics of hairy cell leukemia subtypes.


Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) until recently was characterized as a single
blood and bone marrow malignancy, even though clinically at least two
pathologies seemed to be at work. This study sought to confirm the
clinical observations using genomic evidence. HCL is a chronic mature
B-cell malignancy with distinctive immunophenotype, typically expressing
CD20, CD22, CD25, CD11c, CD103, CD123, annexin A1 (ANXA1), and
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP). Purine analog therapy is
highly effective, with most patients achieving durable remissions. HCL-
variant (HCLv) was first identified by Cawley et al. (1980) and recently
recognized by the World Health Organization as a separate cancer. HCLv
lacks CD25, ANXA1, TRAP, and BRAF V600E expression, and patients respond
poorly to purine analogs. In order to find detailed biological
information involving these two diseases, we studied the genome-wide gene
expression and methylation profiles of 75 HCL patient samples; 67 were
tested by both methods. Our study results indicate that HCL and HCLv show
very distinct gene expression and methylation patterns. Many genes that
are differentially expressed are involved in immunological and
inflammatory response pathways. Several cancer associated genes such as
ANXA1 and FLT3 are down-regulated in HCLv compared to HCL. Correlation
patterns between methylation and gene expression for many genes such as
ANXA1 suggest that methylation plays an import role in gene expression
regulation for these malignancies. This study has begun the process of
identifying better biomarkers for disease discrimination between HCL and
HCLv and providing potential new targets for strongly needed therapies
for HCLv.


