Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the impact of tumor genetics on immune cell
infiltration in major solid cancer types.


With the advent of immune therapies including inhibition of the
PD-1/PD-L1 axis there is an urgent need to identify cancer patients that
benefit from these therapies and to overcome mechanisms of resistance.
Here, we analyzed the impact of tumor genetics on the composition of
tumor microenvironment across 21 solid cancer types from the TCGA
project. Using specific mRNA markers of 10 cell populations (MCPcounter),
we estimated the content of T cells, CD8+ T cells, cytotoxic lymphocytes,
B lineage cells, NK cells, monocytic lineage cells, myeloid dendritic
cells, neutrophils, fibroblasts and endothelial cells in tumor tissues.
Immune cell compositions were correlated with mutational load, the
activity of 27 mutational signatures (MutSigs) and PD-L1 mRNA expression.
Correlation strength was assessed using Spearmanâ€™s rho statistics.
Multiple testing was addressed using the Benjamini-Hochberg method and
FDR control at 5%. MutSig 1 (clock-like, age-related) showed significant
positive correlations with immune cell infiltrations in low-grade
gliomas, negative correlations in breast cancer, melanoma, stomach
cancer, lung and prostate adenocarcinoma, but no significant correlations
in the remaining 15 cancer types. Of the two APOBEC-related signatures,
MutSig 2 showed positive significant correlations with immune cell
infiltrates in cervical cancer, bladder cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, head
and neck cancer and thyroid cancer, MutSig 13 in breast and cervical
cancer. In particular, correlation of MutSig 2 with cytotoxic lymphocytes
was significant in cervical cancer, bladder cancer and lung
adenocarcinoma (R = 0.29, R= 0.17 and R = 0.17), the corresponding
correlation of MutSig 13 in breast cancer (R = 0.17). MutSig 4 (tobacco
smoke-related) showed a positive significant correlation with CD8+ T
cells and NK cells in lung adenocarcinoma (R = 0.15 and R = 0.14). In
contrast, correlation of MutSig 4 with immune cell infiltrates was
non-significant or negative in head and neck cancer. In colorectal
cancer, MutSig 6 (defective mismatch repair) showed significant positive
correlations with NK cells, cytotoxic lymphocytes, monocytic lineage
cells and neutrophils infiltration (R = 0.45, R = 0.37, R = 0.23 and R =
0.19). PD-L1 mRNA expression and immune cell infiltrates correlated
positively in all 21 cancer types. In particular, correlation with
monocytic lineage cells was positive and significant in all cancer types
and strong (R > 0.50) in 12 cancer types. Correlation with T cells was
positive and significant in 18 cancer types and strong in 10 cancer
types. In summary, pan-cancer analysis of DNA and RNAseq data showed that
specific mutational signatures contribute to cancer cell immunogenicity,
while the ubiquitous clock-like mutational process did not positively
correlate with immune cell infiltrates in 20 of 21 cancer types.
Moreover, PD-L1 mRNA expression strongly correlated with infiltrates of
immune cells in the majority of cancer types.


