Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of ITM2A, a novel tumor suppressor of ovarian cancer through
G2/M cell cycle arrest, is a poor prognostic factor of epithelial ovarian
cancer.


Integral membrane protein 2A (ITM2A) is a type 2 transmembrane protein of
unknown function. The aim of this study was to investigate its expression
pattern, clinical significance, and biological function in epithelial
ovarian cancer. ITM2A expression in 35 normal, 20 adenoma, 11 borderline
and 90 cancerous ovarian tissues was measured by immunohistochemistry.
Clinicopathological parameters were obtained from medical records.
Survival data was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier estimates and multivariate
analysis using the Cox-regression method. Anti-tumor activities of ITM2A
were explored by cell proliferation and colony formation assays, flow
cytometry, Western blots and animal studies using ovarian cancer cell
lines. Chemoresponsiveness was evaluated by measuring IC50 and confirmed
by animal studies using an intraperitoneal orthotropic model. ITM2A was
significantly downregulated in invasive carcinomas compared to normal,
adenoma and borderline tumor tissues. ITM2A loss occurred in 45.6% (41 of
90) of invasive carcinomas and was significantly associated with FIGO
stage, type II tumors, suboptimal debulking operation, recurrence and
chemoresistance. ITM2A loss and higher FIGO stage were independent
factors for poor prognosis. Expression of ITM2A inhibited growth and
induced G2/M cell cycle arrest by attenuating cdc2, cyclin B1, cdc25c and
p-cdc2 (Thr 161). In vitro and in vivo experiments showed that ITM2A
expression significantly reduced the paclitaxel and carboplatin IC50 and
tumor mass after paclitaxel treatment. ITM2A is a new biomarker of poor
prognosis in ovarian cancer. It is a novel tumor suppressor that induces
cell cycle arrest, acts as a chemosensitizer, and has therapeutic
potential for ovarian cancer.


