Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of FPA154, a novel tetravalent anti-GITR antibody, for
the treatment of solid tumors.


Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related (GITR, TNFRSF18) is a member of the
TNFR superfamily with pleiotropic T cell modulatory activity. We are
developing a novel anti-GITR antibody with enhanced agonist activity for
the treatment of solid tumors. Our candidate molecule, FPA154, is
constructed with single-domain antibodies (sdAbs) in a tetravalent
format, with an effector-competent IgG1 Fc domain. Both FPA154 and the
mouse-reactive surrogate molecule (cmFPA154, mIgG2a isotype) bind to
cell-surface GITR with high affinity. GITR is most highly expressed in
vivo on activated and intratumoral Treg, and our data indicates that
FPA154 and cmFPA154 potently mediate ADCC activity against Treg
expressing high levels of GITR. In contrast, activated effector T cells
express modest levels of cell-surface GITR, and FPA154 and cmFPA154 drive
GITR-induced NF-ÎºB activation. This activity is independent of
Fc-mediated crosslinking, which is normally required for bivalent GITR
antibodies to induce GITR signaling. cmFPA154 has potent antitumor
activity in several syngeneic mouse tumors, both as a monotherapy
treatment and in combination with anti-PD-1. In summary, FPA154 is a
promising candidate with multiple mechanisms of action that contribute to
generation of an antitumor immune response mediated by different T cell
subsets.


