Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ly6G+ neutrophils and polymorphonuclear myeloid derived suppressor
cells promote the survival of tumor cells.


A heterogeneous group of immature myeloid cells which suppress the immune
system are termed myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC). Collectively a
MDSC population is comprised of monocyte-like MDSC and polymorphonuclear
MDSC (PMN-MDSC). MDSC are increased in the presence of a number of
different tumors. We previously demonstrated that PMN-MDSC represent the
majority of MDSC in tumor-bearing mice. In a mouse model of multiple
myeloma (MM) depletion of myeloid cells in vivo results in increased
survival. Direct co-culture of neutrophils (CD11b+Gr1+ cells from
tumor-free mice) or PMN-MDSC (CD11b+Gr1+ cells from tumor-bearing mice)
and MM cells increases the survival of the MM cells from
chemotherapeutic-induced death. Cell-cell contact is not necessary for
the protective effect. Neutrophil and PMN-MDSC supernatants protect MM
cells from cell death, suggesting the factor protecting tumor cells is
soluble. Results in the mouse were confirmed using human MM cells and
replicated on breast cancer cells with neutrophils or PMN-MDSC. Several
cytokines and growth factors, such as IL-6 and fibroblast growth factor,
are implicated in chemoresistance. The role of these neutrophil and
PMN-MDSC soluble factors and the identification of novel contributors to
chemoresistance are under investigation.


