Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signficant DLX4 expression in inflammatory breast cancer tumors
from African American patients.


Purpose: To examine protein expression characteristics of Distal-less
homeobox4 (DLX4) in inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) cases from an
African-American population to determine if a) DLX4 over-expression
occurs in IBC vs. normal mammary tissue and b) over-expression is
associated with clinico-pathologic features such as ER, PR, HER2.

Experimental Design: Twenty nine blocks of formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues from well-characterized human IBC cases
were used for immuno-histochemical staining (IHC). Tumor tissues were
from African American subjects seen at Howard University Hospital. Normal
breast tissues from 30 mammoplasties were controls. IHC results were
assigned intensity and percentage scores based upon intensity of positive
staining and % of stained cells. Percentage scores were assigned as 0, 1
(0%-25%), 2 (26%-50%), 3 (51%-75%) or 4 (76%-100%) and intensity scores
were assigned 0, 1+, 2+ or 3+. For the analysis of the IHC, a percentage
score of 3 or 4 was considered high and an intensity score of 2+ or 3+
was categorized as high. Chi-square and Fisherâ€™s exact tests were used
for analysis.

Results: The staining pattern for the categorized cohort in which 82.8%
(24 out of 29) of IBC cases showed high percentages of positive cells
staining for DLX4 protein, while 40.0% (12 out of 30) normal breast
tissues demonstrated DLX4 expression (P=0.001). In terms of staining
intensity, 75.9% (22 out of 29) of IBC cases showed a high level of
intensity, compared to 20.0% (6 out of 30) of normal breast tissues
(PResults: The staining pattern for the categorized cohort in which 82.8%
(24 out of 29) of IBC cases showed high percentages of positive cells
staining for DLX4 protein, while 40.0% (12 out of 30) normal breast
tissues demonstrated DLX4 expression (P=0.001). In terms of staining
intensity, 75.9% (22 out of 29) of IBC cases showed a high level of
intensity, compared to 20.0% (6 out of 30) of normal breast tissues
(P<0.001). In terms of the association between breast cancer
characteristics and IHC staining, intensity of DLX4 was higher in HER2-
(87.0%, 20 out of 23) than HER2+ (33.3%, 2 out of 6; P=0.018). Other
associations were not statistically significant in this pilot study.

Conclusions: DLX4 expression is significantly higher in this pilot study
of IBC cases from AA patients than in normal breast tissue cases. In
addition, HER2- is associated with high intensity of DLX4 expression in
IBC.

Associations DLX4 protein expression (IHC) In IBC and normal breast
tissues





Low

High

P-value



Percent positivity

n (%)

n (%)





Controls (n=30)

18 (60.0)

12 (40.0)

0.001



IBCs (n=29)

5 (17.2)

24 (82.8)



Staining intensity

n (%)

n (%)





Controls (n=30)

24 (80.0)

6 (20.0)

<0.001



IBCs (n=29)

7 (24.1)

22 (75.9)


