Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of the interleukin-1 signaling pathway overcomes
erlotinib resistance in head and neck cancer cells.


The EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib has demonstrated poor
clinical response rates for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
to date and the majority of respondents acquire resistance to erlotinib
relatively quickly. Our previous data has shown that erlotinib activated
interleukin-1 (IL-1) expression and signaling in HNSCC cells in vitro. We
therefore investigated if upregulation of IL-1 signaling is involved in
erlotinib resistance in HNSCC cells. We compared gene expression profiles
of erlotinib-resistant (ER) and the parental erlotinib-sensitive (ES)
HNSCC cell lines and observed a deregulation of the IL-1 signaling
pathway in ER versus ES-HNSCC cells using microarray enrichment analysis.
Secretion of IL-1 alpha (IL-1α) and IL-1 beta (IL-1β) were not
significantly different in ER-SQ20B and ER-CAL 27 cells compared to their
respective ES-cells, however secretion of the IL-1 receptor antagonist
(IL-1RA) was significantly reduced in ER-cells compared to ES-cells.
Blockade of IL-1 signaling using a recombinant IL-1R antagonist
(anakinra) was able to significantly suppress the growth of ER-SQ20B but
not ES-SQ20B xenografts as a single agent and in combination with
erlotinib. ER-SQ20B xenografts treated with anakinra with or without
erlotinib were found to be less vascularized (as determined by CD31
staining) than ER-SQ20B xenografts treated with water or erlotinib.
Altogether, blockade of the IL-1 pathway using anakinra overcame
erlotinib resistance in HNSCC xenografts and may represent a novel
strategy to overcome EGFR inhibitor resistance for the treatment of HNSCC
patients.


