Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker-based pooled CRISPR-Cas9 screening: Platform development
and validation.


Functional genomic screening with CRISPR-Cas9 has provided a powerful and
precise new way to interrogate the phenotypic consequences of gene loss
in high-throughput, unbiased analyses. Rapid development of pooled
lentivirus and deep-sequencing-led approaches have allowed us and others
to exploit this technology in target ID, target validation, drug MOA
analysis and patient stratification. Adaptation of the Cas9 nuclease by
domain fusion and catalytic inactivation has further provided a novel way
to both up and down-regulate gene expression using targeted,
high-throughput CRISPRi and CRISPRa tools. To date, the vast majority of
screens have been conducted using sgRNA abundance in surviving cell
populations as an NGS-based proxy for proliferation, for example for in
vitro resistance analysis to a cytotoxic treatment regimen. However,
where cellular pathophysiology is uncoupled from cell health, the
enormous promise of pooled CRISPR-Cas9 screening has been largely
untapped. We now report on the development of a FACS-based platform that
can be used to monitor biomarker-based cellular response in combination
with high-throughput genetic screening. The endogenous interaction
between CD28 and CD80 was used as a proof-of-concept paradigm and the
performance of our platform was measured in screen-simulation conditions.
We find that FACS-linked NGS was able to robustly identify the CD28
deleted cells from a complex population using a FITC-labelled CD80-Fc.
Pseudo-blinding of the data yielded unambiguous identification of the
expected target guides, with robust screening metrics, validating a new
platform for myriad discovery programmes.


