Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of p53 codon 72 SNP upon aging and longevity in mouse
models.


p53 has dual functions on longevity. p53 plays a crucial role in tumor
suppression to prevent early death due to cancer. However, it has been
suggested by animal models that constitutively increased p53 activity
accelerates the decline of stem/progenitor cells’ self-renewal function
during aging process, which leads to a reduced lifespan. In humans, the
role of p53 in aging and longevity has not been well established. As a
haplo-insufficient gene, p53 is under the tight regulation in cells.
Attenuation of p53 function contributes greatly to tumorigenesis. p53
codon 72 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with either an arginine
(R72) or a proline (P72) at codon 72 is a naturally occurring common SNP
that can influence the activity of p53. The P72 allele is weaker than the
R72 allele in inducing apoptosis and suppressing cellular transformation.
Individuals with the P72 allele have increased cancer risk compared to
the R72 allele. However, it is unclear whether the change of p53 activity
in humans by functional SNPs could impact upon longevity. A perspective
study with an aging human population showed that P72 allele is associated
with longer survival despite its increased risk for cancer development.
These findings strongly suggest that p53 activity is reversely associated
with aging, and SNPs in the p53 pathway could impact upon the life span
in humans. In this study, we employed a mouse model system with knock-in
of human p53 gene (Hupki) carrying either R72 or P72 SNP to investigate
the impact of p53 codon 72 SNP upon longevity and its underlying
mechanism. Mice with p53 P72 allele showed weaker transcriptional
activity than the R72 allele toward a subset of p53 target gene,
suggesting that these mice retain the function of p53 codon 72 SNP in
human. We found that although mice with p53 P72 have increased cancer
risk compared to mice with p53 R72, mice with p53 P72 that escaped tumor
development showed longer lifespan compared to mice with p53 R72 that do
not develop tumor. Mice with p53 P72 displayed a delay in aging process
compared to mice with p53 R72; mice with p53 P72 have slower reduction in
bone density, dermal thickness and wound healing ability during aging
process. We compared the effects of p53 codon 72 SNPs on stem cell
population and function as a possible mechanism that contributes to their
difference in longevity. Compared to mice with p53 R72, mice with p53 P72
allele have lower number of long-term stem/progenitor cells and better
self-renewal function during aging process. Consistently, aging mice with
p53 P72 allele exhibited better long-term stem cell ability of
engraftment and repopulation than aging mice with p53 R72 allele as
evaluated by bone marrow transplantation assay. Taken together, results
from this study demonstrate that p53 codon 72 SNP has a direct impact on
aging and longevity, and strongly support the role of p53 in regulation
of stem/progenitor cells’ function and longevity.


