Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arctigenin inhibits prostate tumor growth in vitro and in vivo in
obese state.


Arctigenin is a novel anti-inflammatory lignan derived mainly from the
seeds of Arctium lappa which is an herb widely used in traditional
Chinese medicine to treat inflammation related diseases. We previously
demonstrated that arctigenin strongly inhibited prostate tumor cell
growth in cell culture and mouse models in non-obese state. The present
study investigated the tumor inhibitory effect of arctigenin in obese
state. An in vitro obese setting was created by co-culture of mouse
adipocytes 3T3-L1 with androgen-sensitive LAPC-4 and LNCaP prostate
cancer cells. An ELISA analysis of 3T3-L1 conditioned medium revealed
that three cytokines/growth factors were prominently secreted by 3T3-L1
cells, including IGF-1, VEGF, and MCP-1, and the sensitivity of prostate
cancer cells to arctigenin was decreased in the obese state. However,
arctigenin at a moderate concentration (10 ÂµM) significantly inhibited
the proliferation of both LAPC-4 and LNCaP cell by 40-50% at 96h in the
co-culture system. Male severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice was
implanted subcutaneously with LAPC-4 xenograft tumors to confirm the
tumor-inhibitory effect of arctigenin in vivo. Mice were fed high-fat
diet containing 45% energy from fat, and treated with arctigenin at
50mg/kg b.w. orally or vehicle control for 6 weeks (n=10 per group). The
tumor growth in arctigenin group was significantly inhibited by 40%
compared to control, along with decreased blood concentrations of several
cytokines including IGF-1, VEGF, and MCP-1. Immunohistochemistry analysis
is ongoing to determine the molecular changes involved in tumor cell
proliferation and apoptosis in response to arctigenin treatment. This
study provides a promising natural compound to enhance chemoprevention of
prostate cancer especially in obese patients. These results warrant
future clinical trial studies to confirm the anti-carcinogenic effect of
arctigenin in humans.


