Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PHF5A for the treatment of glioblastoma and other
Myc-driven cancers.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most aggressive and invasive
types of brain cancer, but targeted treatment options remain elusive. The
standard of care (surgery chemotherapy and radiation) falls far short of
where it should be with two-year survival rates less than 10%. Using stem
cell isolates from GBM patients, we found that perturbing PHF5A, a
component of the spliceosome machinery, was lethal and caused hundreds of
genes to be mis-spliced. These mis-splicing events included both exon
skipping and intron inclusions. In contrast, similar levels of PHF5A
suppression in normal control stem cells and astrocytes failed to induce
cell death and mis-splicing, indicating that PHF5A plays a specific role
in the cancer biology. Moreover, when normal astrocytes were transformed
with the Myc oncogene, they became sensitive to PHF5A perturbation. Taken
together, these results suggested that specifically inhibiting PHF5A
would be an effective therapy for glioblastoma and other Myc-driven
cancers. Specifically targeting PHF5A would also likely result in reduced
side-effects seen with general spliceosome inhibitors. Unfortunately,
there are currently no known inhibitors that target PHF5A.

In order to discovery novel PHF5A inhibitors, we created a mini-gene
mis-splicing reporter assay that was sensitive to both general
spliceosome inhibitors and PHF5A perturbation. In a 96-well assay format,
the assay was robust with a 200-fold assay window and Zâ€™ values over
0.8. Following miniaturization to a 1536-well format, we conducted a high
throughput screening (HTS) campaign testing 450,000 small molecule
compounds. The initial hits were retested and counter-screened yielding
381 confirmed actives and we are further interrogating these actives in
secondary and tertiary assays. Future efforts will focus on developing an
SAR of the lead and backup series and identifying potential liabilities
that will be addressed, if necessary, in further lead optimization
efforts. We are enthusiastic about the potential of developing a targeted
PHF5A inhibitor as a novel and effective therapy for patients and their
families fighting GBM and other Myc-driven cancers.


