Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Entacapone and prostate cancer in patients with Parkinson’s
disease: A large Veterans Health Administration study.


Background: An increased risk of prostate cancer was observed in
Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients treated with entacapone during a
pre-approval randomized clinical trial.

Objective: To investigate a potential association between entacapone use
and prostate cancer in an ambulatory setting.

Methods: Using data from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
healthcare system, new-user cohorts were created of PD patients treated
with add-on entacapone or add-on dopamine agonist/monoamine oxidase B
inhibitors between January 2000 and December 2014. Patients were followed
on-treatment for occurrence of prostate cancer, identified via VA cancer
registry linkage. Cox proportional hazards regression with time-dependent
exposure was used to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). Confounding was controlled by using inverse probability
treatment weighting calculated from propensity scores.

Results: Mean follow-up time was 3.1 and 4.0 years in the entacapone and
control cohort, respectively. There were 17,666 subjects meeting study
criteria (mean age, 74 (SD 8.6) years); the group treated with entacapone
comprised 5,257 subjects. Twenty-three prostate cancers occurred in the
entacapone cohort and 97 in the control cohort. The overall incidence of
prostate cancer was 1.8 per 1000 person-years of risk. There was no
difference in risk of prostate cancer between the cohorts for increased
duration of entacapone intake (adjusted HR: 1.08; 95% confidence
interval: 0.46-2.51 for cumulative exposure of ≥2 years). Time since
starting drug therapy and cumulative dose (mg) were also examined.

Conclusion: In this cohort of PD patients, extended duration of
entacapone use was not associated with an increased incidence of prostate
cancer.


