Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of bile duct cancer specific fusion genes in
patient tissues.


Gene fusion occurs when a part of one gene fuses with or attaches to a
part of another gene by genome rearrangement and the result in gene
fusion may possess oncogenic properties; fused gene may be translated
into a unique protein that may promotes cancer properties. Bile duct
cancer are one of the most lethal cancer types with low 5-year survival
rates, but lack of proper diagnostic or prognostic markers. Our aim was
to investigate bile duct cancer specific fusion genes found in
patientâ€™s specimens. We extracted total RNA from five bile duct cancer
tissues and normal tissues from the same patients. We performed RNA
sequencing and the result data was analyzed using ChimeraScan, Jaffa or
Fusionchacher softwares to detect gene fusion. To identify the cancer
somatic fusion gene, the fusion occurred in normal tissues and previously
reported fusion genes found in normal tissues were excluded and the
fusion occurred in coding region was included. As a result, we found 52
bile duct cancer tissue specific- fusion genes. We analyzed the
expression of selected fusion genes in 30 bile duct cancer patients and
cancer cell lines by qRT-PCR. As a result we observed two novel bile duct
cancer specific fusion genes. We cloned one of the fusion genes and
transfected into the bile duct cancer cell lines SNU-1196 to assess, and
increase in cell motility was observed in vitro. These findings indicate
the presence of novel fusion genes as well as its possible application
for the early diagnosis or prognosis of bile duct cancer.


