Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translational regulation of RPA2 via IRES by UNR and eIF3a.


Purpose:

Translation is a critical step in the process of genetic information
expression. Internal ribosome entry site (IRES) element is a RNA sequence
with a complex structure, which plays an important role in cap
independent translation regulation. The activation of RPA2 IRES element
can cause its abnormal expression and finally effects DNA repair pathway.
We conducted series of assays to explore the mechanism of translation
initiation regulation of RPA2 via IRES by UNR and eIF3a

Methods:

Biotin pull down assay was taken to investigate the physical interaction
between RPA2 IRES and UNR. UNR was knocked down and overexpressed in
H1299, A549 and SK-MES cell lines. Western blot and real-time PCR were
used to detect protein level and mRNA level respectively. For interaction
of eIF3a with UNR, CO-IP assay and co-localization assay were conducted.
And GST pull down assay was carried out to further identify their exact
binding domains. RPA2 IRES-interacting domains of UNR and eIF3a were
explored with EMSA assay.

Results:

UNR protein could directly bind to RPA2 IRES as well as to eIF3a, and UNR
regulated the protein expression of RPA2 in H1299, A549 and SK-MES cells,
while the mRNA level of RPA2 remained no change. UNR interacted with the
first domain of eIF3a and with RPA2 IRES via its own first domain.
However, we have not found a clue for the direct interaction of eIF3a
with RPA2 IRES yet.

Conclusion:

UNR cooperated with eIF3a to regulate the RPA2 IRES activity and hence to
regulate the RPA2 protein expression. This might be a regulation
mechanism of cellular internal ribosomal entry site affecting translation
initiation, the rate-limiting step of translation.


