Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targetting proteasome function by inhibition of the proteasome
deubiquitinase USP14.


The 20S proteasome core particle has evolved as an important target for
anti-cancer drug development. We previously identified the small molecule
b-AP15 as a novel class of proteasome inhibitors that function by
abrogating the deubiquitinating (DUB) activity of the 19S regulatory
particle. An optimised lead of b-AP15 (VLX1570) has been approved by the
FDA for clinical studies and is currently in clinical trials for relapsed
multiple myeloma. VLX1570 has also shown promising activity in Ewings
sarcoma and paediatric leukemias. b-AP15 and VLX1570 bind to the
proteasome DUB ubiquitin-specific protease-14 (USP14) in vitro and in
exposed cells (CETSA). Binding and inhibition of enzymatic activity is
believed to be due to targeting Cys114 in the active site. The cell death
response to b-AP15/VLX1570 is distinct from that of 20S proteasome
inhibitors. Thus, the sensitivity to these compounds is unaffected by
overexpression of BCL2-family proteins and unaffected by p53 status. We
here show that b-AP15 induces direct effects on mitochondria, possible
explaining this phenomenon. We also provide additional understanding of
drug-target interactions using a series of compounds identified by
screening. Our findings demonstrate promising antiproliferative
activities of USP14 inhibitors in vitro and in vivo.


