Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A subunit of splicing factor 3b, SF3B4, functions as driver of
liver cancer via aberrant splicing activity on tumor suppressor KLF4.


Alternative splicing is one of the crucial mechanism that contribute to
proteome diversity and, as reported, up to 90% of genes are alternatively
spliced in human. In the last few years, a large number of mRNA isoforms
revealed to contribute many cellular development and disease, including
cancer. SF3B4 is one of six subunits of the splicing factor 3b (SF3b)
complex which is an important protein complex in U2 snRNP super complex.
In this study, we show that SF3B4 expression was overexpressed in a large
cohort of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. SF3B4 knockdown
caused G1/S cell cycle arrest by recovering p27 expression and
simultaneously suppressing cyclins, and CDKs in liver cancer cell.
Consistently, Spliceostatin A, a SF3b complex inhibitor, also suppressed
liver cancer cell growth with similar effect on cell cycle regulation. In
addition, sustained suppression of SF3B4 reduced the in vivo tumor growth
rate in mouse xenograft models. Furthermore, SF3B4 knockdown repressed in
vitro tumor cell motility and invasion of liver cancer cells. Notably, we
observed that SF3B4 knockdown increased alternative transcript splicing
event of a large number of genes in liver cancer cells. From this, we
found that SF3B4 knockdown caused induction of wildtype KLF4 transcript
expression, and thereby exerted anti-tumor growth effect on liver cancer
cells. Indeed, ectopic expression of KLF4 mimicked SF3B4 knockdown effect
on same cells. Our results suggest that aberrant regulation of SF3B4
contribute to malignant transformation and growth of liver cancer cells
by repression of tumor suppressor via unmodulated alternative splicing
activity during liver tumorigenesis.


