Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blocking the DC-HIL receptor reverses the T-cell suppression
induced by proliferating myeloid-derived suppressor cells in common
cancer types.


Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are the most potent suppressors
of T-cell function, and their exponential proliferation in cancer states
counteracts the benefits of immunotherapy given to these patients. Having
discovered the T cell-inhibitory DC-HIL receptor, we showed that DC-HIL
is responsible for MDSC’s T-cell suppressive function. We found that
melanoma patients (but not healthy controls) harbor in the blood an
expanded population of DC-HIL+ MDSC, whose suppressor effects in vitro
can be blocked by our 3D5 anti-DC-HIL mAb. To determine whether similar
outcomes apply to non-melanoma cancers, we recruited patients with
metastases from bladder (BL, n=4), breast (BR, n=11), colon (CO, n=44),
kidney (KI, n=6), lung (LU, n=20), pancreatic (PA, n=17), and prostate
(PR, n=9) cancer. FACS analysis of blood samples showed all cancer types
(except LU) were associated with elevated blood HLA-DRno/low CD14+ MDSC
vs. age-matched controls (n=21, median of 0.5%). % DC-HIL+ MDSC in PBMC
was also significantly high in all cancer types; median of 2.5% for BL;
1.7% for BR; 3.5% for CO; 3.6% for KI; 0.3% for LU; 1.8% for PA; and 4.8%
for PR, vs. 0.04% for healthy controls. MDSC in all cancer types showed
high DC-HIL-positivity (20-90% vs. 8% for controls). We assayed T-cell
suppressor activity by purifying MDSC and T-cells from the same patient
and co-culturing them at varying cell ratios, with co-stimulators.
Activity was determined by % suppression in IFN-γ secretion, which was
correlated with % DC-HIL-positivity of MDSC. MDSC from KI (n=3) were more
suppressive than those from CO and PA, with suppressor activity
correlating with DC-HIL-positivity: Pearson’s r for 0.5 for CO (n=13)
and 0.73 for PA (n=8). We evaluated effects of anti-DC-HIL mAb on
co-cultures of MDSC/ T-cells from cancer patients (n=25). The mAb
restored IFN-γ secretion by >30% in 8/15 cases of CO; 4/8 of PA, and 2/2
of KI. To determine whether DC-HIL+ MDSC migrate into cancer sites,
lesional specimens from CO patients (n=5) with high blood counts of
DC-HIL+ MDSC were immunohistochemically stained for CD14 and DC-HIL
expression: DC-HIL was absent from all cancer cells, but present strongly
in many CD14+ cells surrounding the cancers. This outcome contrasts
starkly with melanoma, in which DC-HIL was expressed highly by the cancer
cells surrounded by only a few DC-HIL+ CD14+ cells. Finally we evaluated
in vivo effects of blocking DC-HIL using a mouse model of MC38 colon
cancer, which is DC-HILneg. MC38 tumor challenge induced DC-HIL+
Gr1lowLy6Chigh MDSC in the tumor site. Intravenous infusion of
anti-DC-HIL mAb into mice with pre-established MC38 tumor significantly
inhibited tumor growth by 50-70%, reduced blood levels of MDSC, and
enhanced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response. Our findings support DC-HIL
blockade as a potential treatment for metastatic cancers, with high blood
levels of DC-HIL+ MDSC as a prognostic marker for the best responders.


