Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The B-cell lymphoma specific aptamer C10.36 binds a
ribonucleoprotein complex on the cell surface of cancer cells.


Aptamers have recently gained prominence for their diagnostic and
therapeutic potential. The DNA aptamer C10.36 forms a G-quadruplex and
has been shown to bind the Ramos Burkittâ€™s lymphoma cell line. However,
its binding partner on the cell surface remains unknown. Here we report
on the identification of the molecular target of C10.36, which suggests
its application in the therapy of B-cell lymphoma and leukaemia.
Aptamer-affinity purification, followed by LC-MS/MS revealed unique
proteins pulled down with C10.36 associated with Ramos cells but not
Jurkat, a T-cell lymphocyte cell line. The majority of the identified
target molecules were found to be associated within ribonucleoprotein
complexes, of which the abundant and consistent ones belong to the
nucleolin complex including nucleolin (NCL) itself and its interacting
partners, i.e. nucleophosmin (NPM1), heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (HNRNP) family members such as HNRNP C1C2 and U, rRNA
2'-O-methyltransferase fibrillarin (FBL), actin (ACTB), nucleolar RNA
helicase 2 (DDX21), and proline- and glutamine-rich splicing factors
(SFPQ). All proteins identified in the above ribonucleoprotein complex
are aberrantly expressed on the surface of several disparate cancer cell
types and have been shown to play an oncogenic role in cancer. Another
G-rich anti-NCL aptamer, AS1411, has been shown to induce cell death in
>100 cancer cell lines. Therefore, we tested the effect of C10.36 on
viability of Ramos and other non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma (NHL) cancer
cell lines. Our results indicate that C10.36 treatment causes specific
cell death of certain lymphoma cell lines such as Ramos but not Jurkat
cells. The present study identifies C10.36 as a novel anti-B cell
lymphoma aptamer and underscores its potential for the development of a
new targeted therapy to treat B-cell lymphomas.


