Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome-mediated ovarian cancer tumorigenesis mediated by
miR1246/Rb/Cav1 axis.


Exosomes are secreted from many cell types and play an important role in
the tumor microenvironment. The most impressive breakthrough in exosomes
research was that they contain the genetic material of the host cell.
However, whether cancer cells use their exosomes to transfer their
oncogenic material to recipient cells, or to get rid of their tumor
suppressor material is not well understood. We previously identified that
miR-1246 was hundreds of folds higher expressed in six different ovarian
cancer exosomes compared to their originating cells. Here, we showed that
miR-1246 co-localized in the exosomes in ovarian cancer cells. miR-1246
act as an oncogenic miRNA and the levels were elevated in ovarian cancer
patients compared to health donors. We also demonstrated that miR-1246
inhibitor treatment in combination with paclitaxel was significantly
inhibited tumor burden in SKOV3-ip1 orthotopic ovarian cancer model. Our
results suggest that miR-1246 inhibited RB tumor suppressor protein and
regulate Cav-1 and platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta precursor
signaling in ovarian cancer. In addition Inhibiting miR-1246 led a
significant decrease in exosome release. Together, our findings provide
strong evidence that oncogenic miR-1246 can be targeted as a potential
novel therapeutic approach in the treatment of ovarian cancer.

.


