Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IND enabling investigations of MVT-1075, a CA19-9 targeting
radioimmunotherapy.


Rationale: The CA19-9 antigen is overexpressed in pancreatic and other GI
tumors. MVT-5873 (HuMab-5B1), a fully human monoclonal antibody currently
in phase I study, targets the sialyl Lewis A (sLea) epitope on CA19-9,
and is a promising platform for development of a targeted
radioimmunotherapy (RIT). MVT-5873 was conjugated with the chelator
CHX-A″-DTPA and radiolabeled with Lutetium-177 (177Lu) to form MVT-1075
(177Lu- CHX-A″-DTPA-HuMAb-5B1). We have completed IND enabling process
development, stability, and characterization investigations and plan to
initiate a phase I trial in patients with pancreatic cancer and other
CA19-9 positive malignancies early in 2017.

Methods: Reproducible conditions to conjugate the chelator
(p-SCN-Bn-CHX-A˝-DTPA) to MVT-5873 were developed by evaluating chelator
to antibody ratios and incubation times. The stability of MVT-1075 was
assessed in formulation buffer at shipping/handling conditions, and in
human serum via thin layer chromatography (iTLC), size exclusion
chromatography (SEC) and ion-exchange chromatography (CEX). The
immunoreactive fraction was determined at each time point using a
microsphere based LINDMO method developed for this program.

Results: MVT-5873 was buffer exchanged into 100mM sodium bicarbonate
buffer at pH9 and combined with p-SCN-Bn-CHX-A˝-DTPA at 32.5⁰C for 90
min. Unincorporated chelator was removed by buffer exchange into 1M
ammonium acetate buffer at pH7. The resulting conjugate, MVT-7814
(CHX-A˝-DTPA-HuMab-5B1), was characterized for degree and location of
conjugation by MS, aggregates, ELISA binding, purity by CEX and pI
determination. These analyses indicated a single CHX-A˝-DTPA on the
heavy chain as the primary conjugate. In vitro binding by ELISA was
comparable to MVT-5873. Purity by SEC was 99% showing minimal
aggregation. MVT-7814 is stored frozen at Results: MVT-5873 was buffer
exchanged into 100mM sodium bicarbonate buffer at pH9 and combined with
p-SCN-Bn-CHX-A˝-DTPA at 32.5⁰C for 90 min. Unincorporated chelator was
removed by buffer exchange into 1M ammonium acetate buffer at pH7. The
resulting conjugate, MVT-7814 (CHX-A˝-DTPA-HuMab-5B1), was characterized
for degree and location of conjugation by MS, aggregates, ELISA binding,
purity by CEX and pI determination. These analyses indicated a single
CHX-A˝-DTPA on the heavy chain as the primary conjugate. In vitro
binding by ELISA was comparable to MVT-5873. Purity by SEC was 99%
showing minimal aggregation. MVT-7814 is stored frozen at <-60°C and
stable to 5 freeze-thaw cycles.

To qualify MVT-1075 for clinical use, MVT-7814 was radiolabeled with
177Lu. Purity data indicate a high degree (>98%) of 177Lu incorporation
by iTLC and stability in formulation buffer up to 120 hours ( 90%) at
both conditions. Serum stability at 37oC showed radiochemical purity >82%
by iTLC and immunoreactivity >62% after 5 days, further supporting the
use of this product in clinical trials.

Conclusions: The conjugation of MVT-5873 with p-SCN-Bn-CHX-A˝-DTPA
reproducibly yields a well characterized bulk intermediate (MVT-7814)
modified on the heavy chain. Radiolabeling with 177Lu and stability
studies in formulation buffer and human serum indicate that MVT-1075
maintains radiochemical purity and target immunoreactivity to support
clinical use. The results of these studies were consistent with
specifications and support the clinical utility and submission of the
MVT-1075 IND application with an expected FIH date early in 2017.


