Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic approaches in the discovery of novel drug targets or
potential biomarkers in breast cancer.


The aim of this study is the detection, identification and quantification
of known and new candidate cell membrane receptors that are overexpressed
in Breast Cancer (BC) cells. In order to achieve this goal we have
developed State-of-the-Art Proteomic approaches. These novel membrane
target receptors can be used either as biomarkers or for the design of
targeted drugs against aggressive disease subtypes with poor prognosis
and therapeutic outcomes, such as Triple Negative BC (TNBC) and HER2
overexpressing BC.

For our study, four well characterized BC epithelial cell lines were
selected: HCC-1954 and SKBR3 (HER2 overexpressing), MDA-MB-231 (TNBC) and
MCF-10A (benign control). We employed a combination of subcellular
fractionation and membrane enrichment protocols and combined those with
quantitative, tandem Mass-Spectrometry (MS) based Proteomics. The
discovery phase of our approach included: the GeLC-MS/MS technique, where
protein fractions were first separated by 1D-gel electrophoresis followed
by In-Gel enzymatic digestion prior to identification by a high
resolution Orbitrap mass analyser. A complementary approach for known
proteins associated with BC that cannot be readily detected in the
discovery phase, such as GPCR receptors, was based on nano LC-MRM
analysis. Proof of Concept experiments, with the use of a Triple
Quadrupole (QqQ) instrument, were based on the detection of standard
peptides derived from the protein of interest after following an in
solution tryptic digestion protocol.

Using GeLC-MS/MS approach we identified the well-known BC involved
receptors, EGFR and HER2, as well as other potential protein targets in
concordance with the literature (e.g. TFR1, EPHA2, GPCR5A). We further
confirmed these results by Western blot analysis. Certain GPCRs expected
to be present in the cell lines tested were not detected in the studies
used on the GeLC-MS/MS analysis, thus we proceeded to the more sensitive
and quantitative nanoLC-MRM approach. As a paradigm target we chose the
GnRH receptor, an established target for personalized therapy known to be
expressed in BC. The quantitative nanoLC-MRM approach revealed GnRHR
significant expression in the MDA-MB-231 BC line and in the WPE-NB26-3
Prostate cancer cell line (used as an overexpressing GNRHR positive
control).

Our results indicate that the strategy of combining and applying various
Proteomic approaches into selected cell lines for the identification of
new protein targets will add more information to the genetic and
histological classification of the tumor in order to achieve our goal,
which is a holistic view of a patientâ€™s molecular profiling that can
ultimately lead to treatment in the most effective way.


