Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EWS-FLI1 represses Rho-actin signaling via MRTFB/YAP-1/TEAD
perturbation in Ewing Sarcoma.


Ewing Sarcoma (EwS) is an aggressive pediatric bone tumor driven by the
aberrant fusion-oncogene EWS-FLI1, which deregulates hundreds of genes by
either activation (EWS-FLI1-correlated genes) or repression
(EWS-FLI1-anticorrelated genes). Several EWS-FLI1-anticorrelated genes
are involved in cytoskeletal processes and typically regulated by
Rho/F-actin signaling. The Rho pathway is a crucial regulator of cell
movement and cellular plasticity. Given the fact that EwS cells are
highly prone to metastasize we were interested in studying a potential
EWS-FLI1-mediated deregulation of Rho signaling. Activation of Rho
triggers G- to F-actin polymerization thereby enabling nuclear
translocation of the myocardin-related transcription factors MRTFA
(MKL-1) and MRTFB (MKL-2). MRTFs typically serve as transcriptional
co-activators of the transcription factor SRF regulating several
cytoskeletal key players. We used the A673/TR/shEF cell line, harboring a
doxycycline inducible sh-EWS-FLI1 plasmid, to interrogate the role of
MRTFA/B in the EwS gene regulatory network upon EWS-FLI1-high and -low
conditions. Strikingly, MRTFB transcriptional activity was overall
repressed by EWS-FLI1. Furthermore, knockdown of MRTFB under EWS-FLI1-low
conditions antagonized the re-activation of EWS-FLI1-anticorrelated
genes. ChIP-seq revealed a strong overlap of MRTFB and EWS-FLI1 chromatin
binding. MRTFB binding was significantly enriched in distal (enhancer)
regions of EWS-FLI1-anticorrelated genes, especially upon EWS-FLI1-low
conditions. Of note, an overrepresentation of TEAD motifs, but not SRF
binding motifs, was observed in these regions suggesting a potential
involvement of TEAD transcription factors in the regulation of the
MRTFB/EWS-FLI1 reciprocally regulated targets. In line with this finding,
target genes of the mechano sensitive YAP/TAZ/TEAD pathway (CTGF, CYR61,
SERPINE1) were found among the MRTFB-bound EWS-FLI1-anticorrelated genes.
Genome-wide expression profiling upon combined knockdown of EWS-FLI1 and
all four TEADs confirmed that TEAD regulates EWS-FLI1 target genes
antagonistically. ChIP-qPCR for selected genes validated this finding
demonstrating increased TEAD binding to shared MRTFB/EWS-FLI1 target
genes upon decreased EWS-FLI1 occupation. Our data suggest that
MRTFB/YAP-1/TEAD directly regulate EWS-FLI1-anticorrelated targets.
Since, in addition, EWS-FLI1 is known to indirectly perturb F-actin
polymerization, we propose a model of dual EWS-FLI1 driven
MRTFB/YAP-1/TEAD perturbation by direct and indirect mechanisms
downstream of Rho/F-actin signaling.


