Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alternative splicing of the MEAF6 gene promotes neuroendocrine
prostate cancer development.


In response to the selection pressures exerted by potent androgen
receptor (AR) pathway inhibitors (ARPI), adenocarcinoma prostate cancer
(PCa) cells can undergo an adaptive process of cellular phenotype
reprogramming termed neuroendocrine trans-differentiation. With this
AR-bypass mechanism of survival emerges a lethal treatment-resistant PCa
subtype called treatment-induced neuroendocrine PCa (t-NEPC). t-NEPC is
becoming a major clinical issue as it is estimated to affect >25% of
advanced-stage PCa patients with the level of incidences predicted to
rise as a result of the extensive applications of ARPI in the clinic.
This underscores the gravity of our aims to delineate the molecular
underpinnings of t-NEPC to inform future therapies that prevent or
mitigate t-NEPC development.

In this study, we have identified a splice variant of the
MYST/Esa1-associated factor 6 (MEAF6) gene, MEAF6-1, that is highly
expressed in t-NEPC tumor biopsies as well as neuroendocrine cell lines
of prostate and lung cancers. We show that the neuronal RNA splicing
factor, SRRM4, stimulates MEAF6-1 splicing. Enhanced MEAF6-1 expression
in prostate adenocarcinoma cell lines does not induce neuroendocrine
trans-differentiation of these cells. Rather, it stimulates cell
proliferation, anchorage-independent cell growth, invasion, and xenograft
tumor growth. Gene microarray identified that these MEAF6-1 actions are
in part mediated by the ID1 and ID3 genes. These findings suggest that
the MEAF6-1 variant does not induce neuroendocrine differentiation of
prostate cancer cells, but facilitates t-NEPC progression through
accelerating proliferation of cells that have acquired neuroendocrine
phenotypes.


