Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of whole food and lifestyle-based inflammation scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease-specific mortality.


Chronically higher levels of inflammation have been implicated in the
etiology of cancer and other major chronic diseases. Contributors to
chronic inflammation likely include diet, physical activity, obesity, and
smoking. We developed dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS)
inflammation scores to characterize the aggregate of pro- and
anti-inflammatory exposures, and investigated associations of the scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific
mortality in the prospective Reasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS) (n=21,426). The components of the
scores were selected based on biological plausibility and previous
literature. The dietary components included processed meats, red meat,
white meat, fish, nuts, legumes, coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and
whole grains, and nine other botanical categories. The lifestyle
components included body mass index, smoking status, alcohol intake, and
exercise level. Associations of each score component with a panel of
biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of 577 male and female, black and
white, chronic disease-free participants in REGARDS were assessed using
multivariable linear regression, and the resulting beta coefficients were
used to weight each score component. For each study participant, the
weighted score components were summed to produce the scores such that a
higher score was more pro-inflammatory. The scores were categorized
according to quintiles of their distributions among all REGARDS
participants at baseline, and their associations with mortality were
assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Over an
average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals died, including 854
from cancer. With increasing levels of each score, there was increasing
risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific mortalities. For those in
the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of the OIS, DIS, and LIS,
the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for
all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49; PtrendChronically higher
levels of inflammation have been implicated in the etiology of cancer and
other major chronic diseases. Contributors to chronic inflammation likely
include diet, physical activity, obesity, and smoking. We developed
dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS) inflammation scores to
characterize the aggregate of pro- and anti-inflammatory exposures, and
investigated associations of the scores with all-cause, cancer- and
cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific mortality in the prospective
Reasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS)
(n=21,426). The components of the scores were selected based on
biological plausibility and previous literature. The dietary components
included processed meats, red meat, white meat, fish, nuts, legumes,
coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and whole grains, and nine other
botanical categories. The lifestyle components included body mass index,
smoking status, alcohol intake, and exercise level. Associations of each
score component with a panel of biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of
577 male and female, black and white, chronic disease-free participants
in REGARDS were assessed using multivariable linear regression, and the
resulting beta coefficients were used to weight each score component. For
each study participant, the weighted score components were summed to
produce the scores such that a higher score was more pro-inflammatory.
The scores were categorized according to quintiles of their distributions
among all REGARDS participants at baseline, and their associations with
mortality were assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards
regression. Over an average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals
died, including 854 from cancer. With increasing levels of each score,
there was increasing risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific
mortalities. For those in the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of
the OIS, DIS, and LIS, the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95%
confidence intervals) for all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10, 1.41; PtrendChronically higher levels of
inflammation have been implicated in the etiology of cancer and other
major chronic diseases. Contributors to chronic inflammation likely
include diet, physical activity, obesity, and smoking. We developed
dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS) inflammation scores to
characterize the aggregate of pro- and anti-inflammatory exposures, and
investigated associations of the scores with all-cause, cancer- and
cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific mortality in the prospective
Reasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS)
(n=21,426). The components of the scores were selected based on
biological plausibility and previous literature. The dietary components
included processed meats, red meat, white meat, fish, nuts, legumes,
coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and whole grains, and nine other
botanical categories. The lifestyle components included body mass index,
smoking status, alcohol intake, and exercise level. Associations of each
score component with a panel of biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of
577 male and female, black and white, chronic disease-free participants
in REGARDS were assessed using multivariable linear regression, and the
resulting beta coefficients were used to weight each score component. For
each study participant, the weighted score components were summed to
produce the scores such that a higher score was more pro-inflammatory.
The scores were categorized according to quintiles of their distributions
among all REGARDS participants at baseline, and their associations with
mortality were assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards
regression. Over an average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals
died, including 854 from cancer. With increasing levels of each score,
there was increasing risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific
mortalities. For those in the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of
the OIS, DIS, and LIS, the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95%
confidence intervals) for all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10, 1.41; Ptrend<0.0001), and 1.94 (1.69, 2.24;
PtrendChronically higher levels of inflammation have been implicated in
the etiology of cancer and other major chronic diseases. Contributors to
chronic inflammation likely include diet, physical activity, obesity, and
smoking. We developed dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS)
inflammation scores to characterize the aggregate of pro- and
anti-inflammatory exposures, and investigated associations of the scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific
mortality in the prospective Reasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS) (n=21,426). The components of the
scores were selected based on biological plausibility and previous
literature. The dietary components included processed meats, red meat,
white meat, fish, nuts, legumes, coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and
whole grains, and nine other botanical categories. The lifestyle
components included body mass index, smoking status, alcohol intake, and
exercise level. Associations of each score component with a panel of
biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of 577 male and female, black and
white, chronic disease-free participants in REGARDS were assessed using
multivariable linear regression, and the resulting beta coefficients were
used to weight each score component. For each study participant, the
weighted score components were summed to produce the scores such that a
higher score was more pro-inflammatory. The scores were categorized
according to quintiles of their distributions among all REGARDS
participants at baseline, and their associations with mortality were
assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Over an
average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals died, including 854
from cancer. With increasing levels of each score, there was increasing
risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific mortalities. For those in
the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of the OIS, DIS, and LIS,
the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for
all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49; Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10,
1.41; Ptrend<0.0001), and 1.94 (1.69, 2.24; Ptrend<0.0001), respectively.
The corresponding findings for cancer mortality were 1.79 (1.38, 2.32;
PtrendChronically higher levels of inflammation have been implicated in
the etiology of cancer and other major chronic diseases. Contributors to
chronic inflammation likely include diet, physical activity, obesity, and
smoking. We developed dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS)
inflammation scores to characterize the aggregate of pro- and
anti-inflammatory exposures, and investigated associations of the scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific
mortality in the prospective Reasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS) (n=21,426). The components of the
scores were selected based on biological plausibility and previous
literature. The dietary components included processed meats, red meat,
white meat, fish, nuts, legumes, coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and
whole grains, and nine other botanical categories. The lifestyle
components included body mass index, smoking status, alcohol intake, and
exercise level. Associations of each score component with a panel of
biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of 577 male and female, black and
white, chronic disease-free participants in REGARDS were assessed using
multivariable linear regression, and the resulting beta coefficients were
used to weight each score component. For each study participant, the
weighted score components were summed to produce the scores such that a
higher score was more pro-inflammatory. The scores were categorized
according to quintiles of their distributions among all REGARDS
participants at baseline, and their associations with mortality were
assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Over an
average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals died, including 854
from cancer. With increasing levels of each score, there was increasing
risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific mortalities. For those in
the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of the OIS, DIS, and LIS,
the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for
all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49; Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10,
1.41; Ptrend<0.0001), and 1.94 (1.69, 2.24; Ptrend<0.0001), respectively.
The corresponding findings for cancer mortality were 1.79 (1.38, 2.32;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.20 (0.95, 1.50; Ptrend=0.10), and 1.83 (1.42, 2.37;
PtrendChronically higher levels of inflammation have been implicated in
the etiology of cancer and other major chronic diseases. Contributors to
chronic inflammation likely include diet, physical activity, obesity, and
smoking. We developed dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS)
inflammation scores to characterize the aggregate of pro- and
anti-inflammatory exposures, and investigated associations of the scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific
mortality in the prospective Reasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS) (n=21,426). The components of the
scores were selected based on biological plausibility and previous
literature. The dietary components included processed meats, red meat,
white meat, fish, nuts, legumes, coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and
whole grains, and nine other botanical categories. The lifestyle
components included body mass index, smoking status, alcohol intake, and
exercise level. Associations of each score component with a panel of
biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of 577 male and female, black and
white, chronic disease-free participants in REGARDS were assessed using
multivariable linear regression, and the resulting beta coefficients were
used to weight each score component. For each study participant, the
weighted score components were summed to produce the scores such that a
higher score was more pro-inflammatory. The scores were categorized
according to quintiles of their distributions among all REGARDS
participants at baseline, and their associations with mortality were
assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Over an
average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals died, including 854
from cancer. With increasing levels of each score, there was increasing
risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific mortalities. For those in
the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of the OIS, DIS, and LIS,
the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for
all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49; Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10,
1.41; Ptrend<0.0001), and 1.94 (1.69, 2.24; Ptrend<0.0001), respectively.
The corresponding findings for cancer mortality were 1.79 (1.38, 2.32;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.20 (0.95, 1.50; Ptrend=0.10), and 1.83 (1.42, 2.37;
Ptrend<0.0001), respectively, and for CVD mortality 2.38 (1.83, 3.09;
PtrendChronically higher levels of inflammation have been implicated in
the etiology of cancer and other major chronic diseases. Contributors to
chronic inflammation likely include diet, physical activity, obesity, and
smoking. We developed dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS)
inflammation scores to characterize the aggregate of pro- and
anti-inflammatory exposures, and investigated associations of the scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific
mortality in the prospective Reasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS) (n=21,426). The components of the
scores were selected based on biological plausibility and previous
literature. The dietary components included processed meats, red meat,
white meat, fish, nuts, legumes, coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and
whole grains, and nine other botanical categories. The lifestyle
components included body mass index, smoking status, alcohol intake, and
exercise level. Associations of each score component with a panel of
biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of 577 male and female, black and
white, chronic disease-free participants in REGARDS were assessed using
multivariable linear regression, and the resulting beta coefficients were
used to weight each score component. For each study participant, the
weighted score components were summed to produce the scores such that a
higher score was more pro-inflammatory. The scores were categorized
according to quintiles of their distributions among all REGARDS
participants at baseline, and their associations with mortality were
assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Over an
average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals died, including 854
from cancer. With increasing levels of each score, there was increasing
risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific mortalities. For those in
the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of the OIS, DIS, and LIS,
the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for
all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49; Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10,
1.41; Ptrend<0.0001), and 1.94 (1.69, 2.24; Ptrend<0.0001), respectively.
The corresponding findings for cancer mortality were 1.79 (1.38, 2.32;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.20 (0.95, 1.50; Ptrend=0.10), and 1.83 (1.42, 2.37;
Ptrend<0.0001), respectively, and for CVD mortality 2.38 (1.83, 3.09;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.28 (1.02, 1.61; Ptrend=0.03), and 1.90 (1.49, 2.42;
PtrendChronically higher levels of inflammation have been implicated in
the etiology of cancer and other major chronic diseases. Contributors to
chronic inflammation likely include diet, physical activity, obesity, and
smoking. We developed dietary (DIS), lifestyle (LIS), and overall (OIS)
inflammation scores to characterize the aggregate of pro- and
anti-inflammatory exposures, and investigated associations of the scores
with all-cause, cancer- and cardiovascular disease (CVD)-specific
mortality in the prospective Reasons for Geographic and Racial
Differences in Stroke Study (REGARDS) (n=21,426). The components of the
scores were selected based on biological plausibility and previous
literature. The dietary components included processed meats, red meat,
white meat, fish, nuts, legumes, coffee, tea, dairy products, refined and
whole grains, and nine other botanical categories. The lifestyle
components included body mass index, smoking status, alcohol intake, and
exercise level. Associations of each score component with a panel of
biomarkers of inflammation in a subset of 577 male and female, black and
white, chronic disease-free participants in REGARDS were assessed using
multivariable linear regression, and the resulting beta coefficients were
used to weight each score component. For each study participant, the
weighted score components were summed to produce the scores such that a
higher score was more pro-inflammatory. The scores were categorized
according to quintiles of their distributions among all REGARDS
participants at baseline, and their associations with mortality were
assessed using multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression. Over an
average of 7.89 years follow-up, 2,964 individuals died, including 854
from cancer. With increasing levels of each score, there was increasing
risk for all-cause, cancer- and CVD-specific mortalities. For those in
the highest relative to the lowest quintiles of the OIS, DIS, and LIS,
the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence intervals) for
all-cause mortality were: 2.16 (1.87, 2.49; Ptrend<0.0001), 1.25 (1.10,
1.41; Ptrend<0.0001), and 1.94 (1.69, 2.24; Ptrend<0.0001), respectively.
The corresponding findings for cancer mortality were 1.79 (1.38, 2.32;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.20 (0.95, 1.50; Ptrend=0.10), and 1.83 (1.42, 2.37;
Ptrend<0.0001), respectively, and for CVD mortality 2.38 (1.83, 3.09;
Ptrend<0.0001), 1.28 (1.02, 1.61; Ptrend=0.03), and 1.90 (1.49, 2.42;
Ptrend<0.0001). These results suggest that pro-inflammatory diets and
lifestyles may be associated with higher risk for all-cause, cancer- and
CVD-specific mortality.


