Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting cellular heterogeneity using single cell RNA sequencing
in human lung tumors.


Intra-tumor heterogeneity is a key determinant of tumor biology,
treatment response and patient survival. It is therefore essential to
comprehensively characterize the phenotypes and interactions of the
diverse cells within the tumor ecosystem. However, traditional molecular
profiling studies have largely relied on bulk-tissue analysis, which
obscures the signatures of distinct cell populations.

We present here an unbiased analysis of functional heterogeneity in NSCLC
(Non Small Cell Lung Cancer) cancers (Lung Adenocarcinoma and Squamous
Cell Carcinoma) and their microenvironment using RNA-seq profiling of
unsorted single cells from 20 primary tumors and matched normal lung
tissue (NL). Using a new clustering algorithm RCA (Reference Component
Analysis), we identified the major cell types composing the normal lung
tissue as well as the tumor ecosystem such as epithelial, fibroblast,
endothelial and immune cells. Notably, we were able to identify resident
alveolar macrophages, in tumor and normal tissue and their single-cell
differential expression analysis revealed substantial differences in
their gene expression. Similarly, we identified blood-vessel endothelial
cells in matched normal and tumor tissue, and identified the
differentially expressed genes in both cell types. Our unbiased approach
allowed us to study the diversity of the epithelial malignant cells
present in different tumors, highlighting the tumor and patient specific
variability. Together, the unbiased study of the NSCLC at the single cell
level by sc-RNAseq offers a powerful tool to provide insights into the
transcriptomic variability within the key cellular players of the
tumorigenesis.


