Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-cancer activity of the imipridone ONC206: A selective
dopamine D2-like receptor antagonist.


DRD2 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is overexpressed in many
cancers, controls an array of pro-survival signaling pathways, and its
antagonism causes anti-cancer effects. ONC201, the founding member of the
imipridone class of anti-cancer compounds, is a small molecule DRD2
antagonist that is in Phase I/II advanced cancer clinical trials. In this
study, we evaluated the binding target and antitumor activity of ONC206,
a chemical analogue of ONC201.

An orphan small molecule target prediction algorithm revealed that
ONC206, like ONC201, antagonizes DRD2. Experimental GPCR profiling using
the PathHunter® β-Arrestin assay, determined that ONC206 selectively
antagonizes the D2-like (DRD2/3/4), but not the D1-like (DRD 1/5),
subfamily of dopamine receptors. ONC206 possesses a ~10-fold increased
affinity for DRD2 compared to ONC201 with a Ki of ~320nM with selectivity
that was superior to approved antipsychotics. The increased association
rate for the ONC206-DRD2 interaction was responsible for the increased
affinity, whereas the dissociation rate was similar to ONC201 and
atypical antipsychotics that are well tolerated.

TCGA analysis and immunohistochemistry of patient-derived tissue
microarrays revealed DRD2 was overexpressed in neuroblastoma, sarcoma and
pheochromocytoma specimens relative to normal tissues. In vitro efficacy
profiling of ONC206 in the Genomic of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer
collection of cell lines revealed broad efficacy across most tumor types
(GI50 5µM). Efficacy evaluations in MHH-ES-1 athymic nude mice
xenografts demonstrated that ONC206 (100 mg/kg PO every 10 days) causes
significant tumor growth inhibition that was comparable to methotrexate
(400 mg/kg, IP) while being better tolerated.

In summary, ONC206 is an imipridone that acts as a selective antagonist
of DRD2 at nanomolar concentrations and has broad-spectrum anti-tumor
activity. ONC206 may address tumor types where the properties of ONC201
do not permit for complete therapeutic engagement in vivo.


