Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RABL6A, a novel critical regulator of Akt-mTOR signaling in
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor cells.


Introduction: A better molecular understanding of pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (PNETs) is needed to improve patient diagnosis and
treatment. Everolimus (mTOR inhibitor) is a standard-of-care therapy for
PNET patients based on aberrant activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR kinase
pathway in tumors. However, sustained mTOR inhibition paradoxically
promotes Akt kinase hyperactivation due to loss of negative feedback
regulation and tumors become drug resistant. Our data reveal that RABL6A,
a novel oncoprotein amplified in PNETs, is a key regulator of this
clinically relevant pathway.

Methods: RABL6A and Akt protein levels were manipulated using viral
shRNAs in BON1 PNET cells. Transcript levels were assayed by microarray
and qRT-PCR, proteins assessed by western blotting, and cell
proliferation and survival measured by cell counts, trypan blue exclusion
and EdU incorporation. Effect of RABL6A expression on sensitivity to
clinically relevant drugs, MK2206 (Akt inhibitor) and everolimus, were
tested.

Results: Silencing of RABL6A in PNET cells causes G1 and G2/M cell cycle
arrest, and pathway analysis of microarray data suggested inactivation of
Akt signaling in the arrested cells. Immunoblotting confirmed dramatic
loss of Akt phosphorylation at Ser-473 along with impaired
phosphorylation and activation of its targets, PRAS40 and FOXO-1/3.
Phosphorylation of S6K, a downstream target of Akt-mTOR signaling, was
also reduced by RABL6A deficiency. The mechanism by which RABL6A controls
Akt-S473 phosphorylation is currently not known although we demonstrated
that mTORC2 (the kinase that phosphorylates Akt at Ser473) remains active
in RABL6A deficient cells since the phosphorylation of other mTORC2
substrates (SGK1 and PKCÎ±) is unaffected. Given the central role of Akt1
in tumorigenesis, we hypothesized that reinstating its activity may
rescue the arrest phenotype caused by RABL6A loss. Restoration of Akt1 in
RABL6A-depleted cells partially rescued the G1 phase arrest and induced S
phase entry but was insufficient to allow mitosis, suggesting RABL6A
regulates other factors required for cell division. Finally, drug
response assays showed that RABL6A loss desensitizes PNET cells to Akt
and mTOR inhibitors.

Conclusion: Our previous work showed RABL6A promotes G1 progression in
PNET cells by inactivating Rb1, an established suppressor of PNET
pathogenesis. We now show that RABL6A also controls Akt phosphorylation
and is essential for Akt-mTOR activation. Thus, RABL6A controls multiple
cancer pathways necessary for PNET cell cycle progression and survival.
We are testing if RABL6A status in PNETs predicts responsiveness to
combination therapies targeting Akt and mTOR. Overall, this work
identifies RABL6A as a new essential activator of Akt1-mTOR signaling,
suggesting it is a new potential biomarker and target for anticancer
therapy in PNET patients.


