Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Innovative approach for isolation of circulating cell-free DNA
from liquid biopsies.


We developed a new approach for isolation of circulating cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) from liquid biopsies (plasma or serum). Our technology is based
on using the proprietary bi-functional substance X (SubX®) that binds
DNA under physiological conditions (e.g. directly in biological liquids),
followed by adsorption of [DNA- SubX®] complex on a solid phase matrix.
Since SubX®) captures DNA via phosphate groups it allows for elimination
of bias related to both AT/CG content and DNA fragments length, thus
improving extraction efficacy and accuracy of downstream applications.
All currently available commercial kits are [silica-chaotropic
salt]-based and exhibit bias for either short or long DNA fragments, as
well as for the GC content. In addition, such systems require at least 4-
fold dilution of starting volume of bio liquid with concentrated (~5.0 M)
guanidine thiocyanate (GTC) to keep resulted GTC concentration at about
least 3.0 M. Thus, already low concentrations of cfDNA are significantly
reduced and may negatively influence extraction efficacy of low abundance
DNA fragments. Since our method does not require chaotropic salt for DNA
capture, no dilution of starting material (and thus cfDNA) takes place.
DNA-binding matrix SubX® allows either scaling the procedure to either
large volumes of starting material or extra low volumes and adaptation of
the protocol for 96/384 well format. Separation of cfDNA from the bulk of
proteins occurs in a single vortex-spin step without employing chaotropic
agents thus speeding-up isolation procedure and reducing the costs. The
whole procedure can be completed within an hour and cfDNA is eluted in
small volume of TE buffer. Average DNA yield from 0.2 ml of double
centrifuged blood plasma from normal donors, cancer and multiple
sclerosis patients was 7.5±4.2 ng (n=96).


