Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The epigenetic landscape of T cell exhaustion.


Exhausted T cells in cancer and chronic viral infection have distinctive
patterns of gene expression, including sustained expression of the
inhibitory receptor PD-1, but the regulation of gene expression in
exhausted T cells is poorly understood. Here we define the accessible
chromatin landscape in mouse and human exhausted CD8+ T cells and show
that it is profoundly different from functional memory CD8+ T cells.
Exhausted CD8+ T cells in a mouse model of chronic viral infection
acquire an extensive, state-specific pattern of enhancers, which are
organized into functional modules. One enhancer, -23.8kb from the Pdcd1
locus, is found only in exhausted T cells and other lymphocytes with
sustained PD-1 expression. Genome editing shows it to be required for
high PD-1 expression. Cas9-mediated in situ saturation mutagenesis of the
enhancer pinpoints critical minimal sequences that correspond to bound
transcription factor motifs for RAR, T-bet and Sox3 in exhausted CD8+ T
cells. State-specific enhancer profiles identified in mouse exhausted
CD8+ T cells are conserved in human exhausted antigen-specific CD8+ T
cells responding to HIV and HCV infection. Detailed functional enhancer
maps of T cell exhaustion reveal state-specific regulatory sequences and
offer targets for genome editing that could alter gene expression
preferentially in exhausted CD8+ T cells.


