Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adoptively transferred CMV-specific T-cells recognizing dominant
and sub-dominant pp65 epitopes demonstrate improved in vivo inhibition of
tumor xenografts in combination with PD-1 inhibition.


Adoptive transfer of transplant donor or third party donor derived
CMV-specific T cells (CMV-CTL) can effectively treat CMV infections in
HSCT recipients. In clinical trials, infusion of partially matched third
party CMV-CTLs, has demonstrated high response rates against persistent
CMV infection. T-cells (TC) generated in vitro or directly selected in
vivo demonstrate a striking preponderance of specificity for 1-2
immunodominant (ID) epitopes presented by specific HLA alleles. ID
epitopes elicit higher TC functional activity in vivo, compared to
sub-dominant (SD) epitopes. The relative clinical efficacy of TC directed
against ID versus SD epitopes in vivo remains undefined. Agents
augmenting activity of TC responsive to SD epitopes are unexplored. When
these alleles are co-inherited in humans, epitopes of CMVpp65 presented
by HLA A*02:01 are ID over HLA A*24:02 presented epitopes. We describe an
in vivo model to assess efficacy of CMV-CTLs using colon carcinoma cells
(coca)transduced to express CMVpp65, as a surrogate system. HLA A*02:01 +
and A*24:02 + human coca cells were transduced to express CMVpp65 and
GFP-firefly luciferase (cocapp65). CMV-CTLs responding to either the
A*0201 presented ID NLV epitope (A2-NLV) or the A*24:02 presented SD QYD
epitope (A24-QYD) were generated from donors co-inheriting HLA A*02:01
and A*24:02 by in vitro stimulation using NIH 3T3 artificial antigen
presenting cells, expressing HLA A*02:01 or A*24:02, B7.1, LFA-3, and
ICAM1. Tumor cells (105 cells) were injected subcutaneously into groups
of 5-6 NSG mice on the R flank, and 105 cells from a pp65 expressing
melanoma cell line (melpp65), lacking expression of HLA A*02:01 or
A*24:02 were injected on the L shoulder as control. 2 Groups each
received 106 of tetramer+ A2-NLV or A24-QYD CMV-CTLs i.v per mouse; one
of each CMV-CTL treated group also received 2 i.v doses ( 200Âµg /dose)
of anti-PD1 antibody (Nivolumab-BMS) at day 2 and 7 post CTL infusion.
Control groups received IL-2, with or without anti-PD1, or HLA mismatched
CMV-CTLs. Tumor growth was monitored by bioluminescent imaging. CMV-CTLs
responsive to SD A24-QYD epitope induced significant cocapp65 growth
suppression compared to controls, but did not eradicate tumors in any
animal. Combined treatment of A24-QYD CMV-CTLs with anti-PD-1 Ab induced
complete cocapp65 eradication in 2 of 5 mice, with minute residual tumors
in 3 mice. Treatment with ID A2-NLV CMV-CTLs induced complete cocapp65
eradication in 2 of 5 mice, and smaller residual tumors compared to SD
A24-QYD CTL treatment. Combined treatment with anti-PD-1 and A2-NLV
CMV-CTLs led to complete cocapp65 eradication in 3 of 5 mice, with minute
tumors in 2 mice. Taken together, these data provide evidence that
blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 interaction may significantly augment the
antiviral activity of both ID and SD CMV-CTLs.


