Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathologic findings at RRSO in germline BRCA mutation carriers
with breast cancer: significance of bilateral RRSO at the optimal age in
germline BRCA mutation carriers.


Objective: Most BRCA1/2 carriers do not undergo risk-reducing
salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) by the recommended age. This study aimed to
find the incidence of precursor lesions and cancer after RRSO.

Methods: We retrospectively reviewed breast cancer patients identified as
BRCA mutation carriers who underwent RRSO at Asan Medical Center, Seoul,
Korea, from 2010 to 2014. From 2013, all cases were examined according to
the SEE/FIM protocol and underwent immunohistochemically (IHC) staining.
RRSO was performed in 63 patients, 27 in 2010-2012 and 36 in 2013-2014.

Results: The median age at RRSO was 46.5 years (32-73 years). Occult
invasive cancer was detected in 8 patients, of ovarian origin in 5 and of
tubal origin in 3. All occult invasive cancer cases with metastasis were
detected in patients older than 40 years. Of the 36 patients from the
2013-2014 cohort, 7 showed p53 overexpression, 1 showed Ki-67
overexpression, 2 showed serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC),
and 3 showed occult cancer. The detection rate of precursor lesions or
cancer was 36.1% (13/36). In the analysis according to age, precursor
lesions were more common in BRCA1 mutation carriers younger than 40 years
old (66.7% vs 20.0%). In BRCA2 mutation carriers, precursor lesions were
only detected in those older than 40 years of age, indicating the
possible faster occurrence of precursor lesions in BRCA1 mutation
carriers.

Conclusions: Many patients still tend to delay RRSO until after they are
40 years old. Our findings support the significance of RRSO before the
age of 40 in germline BRCA mutation carriers.


