Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNAs in plasma of men screened for prostate
cancer.


Introduction: Although microRNAs (miRNAs) have been linked to prostate
cancer risk, their role as a screening biomarker for prostate cancer (PC)
has yet to be determined. We examined whether circulating miRNAs in
plasma could be potential biomarkers for the early detection of PC among
men undergoing prostate needle biopsy. Methods: Men who had a prostate
biopsy due to an abnormal screening test were recruited. Demographics,
medical history, clinical information, and blood processed into plasma
were collected. TaqMan Low Density Arrays were used for the expression
profiling of 733 miRNAs in plasma. Wilcoxon test was used to compare
expression levels between men with and without a PC diagnosis. Logistic
regression was used to examine the association between miRNAs and PC
status, after adjusting for age and Bonferroni-correction. Results: There
were 131 men, aged 46 to 86 years, included in the final analysis, with
66 men diagnosed with PC on prostate biopsy and 65 men without a PC
diagnosis. Majority were white (72.5%) followed by black race (13.5%).
Men with PC were older (median: 64 vs. 62 years; p-value = 0.16) and had
statistically significantly higher serum PSA (median: 5.8 vs. 5.1 ng/mL;
p-value = 0.01) compared to men without a PC diagnosis. The most
statistically significant PC circulating miRNAs in plasma were miR-381,
miR-523, miR-450B-5p, miR-34a, miR-34b, miR-639, and miR-365, after
adjusting for age (p-values â‰¤ 0.05). The detection rate of these miRNAs
in plasma ranged from 23.7% to 83.2%. These miRNAs were no longer
statistically significant with PC diagnosis, after adjusting for multiple
comparison (FDR q-value = 1.00). Conclusion: Among the 733 miRNAs
evaluated, there was no miRNA found to be associated with PC diagnosis
after adjusting for multiple comparison. Studies that examine a larger
number of miRNAs which include the discovery of new miRNAs and their
relationship with PC risk are warranted.


