Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation sequencing of circulating-free DNA from advanced
non small cell lung cancer patients using Gene ReaderÂ®.


Background: Stand alone tests such as PCR-derived techniques, FISH or IHC
are usually employed to determine clinically relevant alterations in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, they target single genes and
proteins. Mutiplex techniques can reduce the turnaround time and quantity
of sample in this setting, but require a careful validation.

Methods: A total of 41 cfDNA samples from serum and plasma from advanced
NSCLC p were analyzed with the Actionable Insights Tumor Panel, which
covers mutations in 15 clinically relevant genes, using the Gene Reader
platform (Qiagen). The samples had been previously genotyped for EGFR,
KRAS and BRAF mutations by stand alone, PNA-Taqman assays. Paired
biopsies were available in 37 cases. The remaining 4 corresponded to
p.T790M-positive blood samples of p progressing to EGFR TKIs.

Results: Of the 41 samples taken into the GeneReader workflow, some had a
DNA input concentration below specifications, in spite of this
limitation, good results were obtained. 14 mutations were fully
concordant between tissue, Taqman and GeneReader and the four p.T790M
mutations were concordant between Taqman and GeneReader. Five mutations
present in tissue were detected by GeneReader and not by Taqman and 11
mutations detected by Taqman were below the 1% detection threshold of
GeneReader. Finally, 12 mutations present in tissue were not detected in
cfDNA by any of the assays. Concordance between the stand alone tests and
the Gene Reader in cfDNA was 64%, raising to 84% if mutations Results: Of
the 41 samples taken into the GeneReader workflow, some had a DNA input
concentration below specifications, in spite of this limitation, good
results were obtained. 14 mutations were fully concordant between tissue,
Taqman and GeneReader and the four p.T790M mutations were concordant
between Taqman and GeneReader. Five mutations present in tissue were
detected by GeneReader and not by Taqman and 11 mutations detected by
Taqman were below the 1% detection threshold of GeneReader. Finally, 12
mutations present in tissue were not detected in cfDNA by any of the
assays. Concordance between the stand alone tests and the Gene Reader in
cfDNA was 64%, raising to 84% if mutations <1% allelic fraction were
excluded.

Conclusions: Application of NGS to liquid biopsies is challenging and
requires a careful validation. However, once fully validated, NGS will
probably become the methodology of choice for cfDNA analysis in NSCLC
patients at presentation and at progression.


