Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of germline BRCA1/2 mutation associated breast and
ovarian tumors reveals distinct pathways of immunosuppression.


BRCA1 and BRCA2 are essential homologous recombination (HR) repair
proteins; germline mutations confer elevated risk for breast and ovarian
cancer. Defects in BRCA can lead to immune-related effects including
depletion of peripheral T-cell pools and increased somatic mutational
burden. We investigated the immunophenotypic properties of breast and
ovarian cancers associated with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We determined
neoantigen load in 16 breast and 26 ovarian tumors with germline BRCA1/2
mutations and 50 non-BRCA tumors for each disease using whole exome
sequencing data from the TCGA. Although neoantigen load (IC50 BRCA1 and
BRCA2 are essential homologous recombination (HR) repair proteins;
germline mutations confer elevated risk for breast and ovarian cancer.
Defects in BRCA can lead to immune-related effects including depletion of
peripheral T-cell pools and increased somatic mutational burden. We
investigated the immunophenotypic properties of breast and ovarian
cancers associated with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We determined
neoantigen load in 16 breast and 26 ovarian tumors with germline BRCA1/2
mutations and 50 non-BRCA tumors for each disease using whole exome
sequencing data from the TCGA. Although neoantigen load (IC50 <500 nM)
was variable across tumors, it did not differ between BRCA1/2 mutant and
non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging RNAseq data from the TCGA, we investigated
immune-related transcriptomic features within each disease. Cytolytic
index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA expression, was higher in non-BRCA
tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast (pBRCA1 and BRCA2 are essential
homologous recombination (HR) repair proteins; germline mutations confer
elevated risk for breast and ovarian cancer. Defects in BRCA can lead to
immune-related effects including depletion of peripheral T-cell pools and
increased somatic mutational burden. We investigated the immunophenotypic
properties of breast and ovarian cancers associated with germline BRCA1/2
mutations. We determined neoantigen load in 16 breast and 26 ovarian
tumors with germline BRCA1/2 mutations and 50 non-BRCA tumors for each
disease using whole exome sequencing data from the TCGA. Although
neoantigen load (IC50 <500 nM) was variable across tumors, it did not
differ between BRCA1/2 mutant and non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging RNAseq data
from the TCGA, we investigated immune-related transcriptomic features
within each disease. Cytolytic index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA
expression, was higher in non-BRCA tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast
(p<0.01) tumors and correlated more closely with neoantigen load than in
non-BRCA tumors (Breast: BRCA r2=-0.15, non-BRCA r2=0.237). Class I HLA
expression also correlated with cytolytic index (pBRCA1 and BRCA2 are
essential homologous recombination (HR) repair proteins; germline
mutations confer elevated risk for breast and ovarian cancer. Defects in
BRCA can lead to immune-related effects including depletion of peripheral
T-cell pools and increased somatic mutational burden. We investigated the
immunophenotypic properties of breast and ovarian cancers associated with
germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We determined neoantigen load in 16 breast
and 26 ovarian tumors with germline BRCA1/2 mutations and 50 non-BRCA
tumors for each disease using whole exome sequencing data from the TCGA.
Although neoantigen load (IC50 <500 nM) was variable across tumors, it
did not differ between BRCA1/2 mutant and non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging
RNAseq data from the TCGA, we investigated immune-related transcriptomic
features within each disease. Cytolytic index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA
expression, was higher in non-BRCA tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast
(p<0.01) tumors and correlated more closely with neoantigen load than in
non-BRCA tumors (Breast: BRCA r2=-0.15, non-BRCA r2=0.237). Class I HLA
expression also correlated with cytolytic index (p<0.05) in non-BRCA
tumors but not BRCA1/2 mutation associated tumors for both breast and
ovarian cancers, suggesting more robust antigen-driven adaptive immunity
in non-BRCA tumors. HLA expression was significantly lower (pBRCA1 and
BRCA2 are essential homologous recombination (HR) repair proteins;
germline mutations confer elevated risk for breast and ovarian cancer.
Defects in BRCA can lead to immune-related effects including depletion of
peripheral T-cell pools and increased somatic mutational burden. We
investigated the immunophenotypic properties of breast and ovarian
cancers associated with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We determined
neoantigen load in 16 breast and 26 ovarian tumors with germline BRCA1/2
mutations and 50 non-BRCA tumors for each disease using whole exome
sequencing data from the TCGA. Although neoantigen load (IC50 <500 nM)
was variable across tumors, it did not differ between BRCA1/2 mutant and
non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging RNAseq data from the TCGA, we investigated
immune-related transcriptomic features within each disease. Cytolytic
index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA expression, was higher in non-BRCA
tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast (p<0.01) tumors and correlated more
closely with neoantigen load than in non-BRCA tumors (Breast: BRCA
r2=-0.15, non-BRCA r2=0.237). Class I HLA expression also correlated with
cytolytic index (p<0.05) in non-BRCA tumors but not BRCA1/2 mutation
associated tumors for both breast and ovarian cancers, suggesting more
robust antigen-driven adaptive immunity in non-BRCA tumors. HLA
expression was significantly lower (p<0.01) among BRCA mutant breast
tumors, indicating immune escape by HLA down-regulation. We classified
non-BRCA breast tumors by their level of HR deficiency (HRD score), as
HRD by both BRCA and non-BRCA mediated mechanisms can lead to increased
somatic mutational burden. Non-BRCA breast tumors irrespective of HRD
score exhibited evidence of a more inflamed phenotype than BRCA1/2 mutant
tumors, indicated by higher inferred immune cell infiltration, immune
checkpoint expression, and chemokine expression (all pBRCA1 and BRCA2 are
essential homologous recombination (HR) repair proteins; germline
mutations confer elevated risk for breast and ovarian cancer. Defects in
BRCA can lead to immune-related effects including depletion of peripheral
T-cell pools and increased somatic mutational burden. We investigated the
immunophenotypic properties of breast and ovarian cancers associated with
germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We determined neoantigen load in 16 breast
and 26 ovarian tumors with germline BRCA1/2 mutations and 50 non-BRCA
tumors for each disease using whole exome sequencing data from the TCGA.
Although neoantigen load (IC50 <500 nM) was variable across tumors, it
did not differ between BRCA1/2 mutant and non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging
RNAseq data from the TCGA, we investigated immune-related transcriptomic
features within each disease. Cytolytic index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA
expression, was higher in non-BRCA tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast
(p<0.01) tumors and correlated more closely with neoantigen load than in
non-BRCA tumors (Breast: BRCA r2=-0.15, non-BRCA r2=0.237). Class I HLA
expression also correlated with cytolytic index (p<0.05) in non-BRCA
tumors but not BRCA1/2 mutation associated tumors for both breast and
ovarian cancers, suggesting more robust antigen-driven adaptive immunity
in non-BRCA tumors. HLA expression was significantly lower (p<0.01) among
BRCA mutant breast tumors, indicating immune escape by HLA
down-regulation. We classified non-BRCA breast tumors by their level of
HR deficiency (HRD score), as HRD by both BRCA and non-BRCA mediated
mechanisms can lead to increased somatic mutational burden. Non-BRCA
breast tumors irrespective of HRD score exhibited evidence of a more
inflamed phenotype than BRCA1/2 mutant tumors, indicated by higher
inferred immune cell infiltration, immune checkpoint expression, and
chemokine expression (all p<0.01). To investigate potential mechanisms of
immune escape in BRCA1/2 vs non-BRCA tumors, we compared canonical gene
sets (MsigDb) across the two cohorts. Expression of extracellular matrix
(ECM) proteins was higher in BRCA1/2 breast and ovarian tumors (qBRCA1
and BRCA2 are essential homologous recombination (HR) repair proteins;
germline mutations confer elevated risk for breast and ovarian cancer.
Defects in BRCA can lead to immune-related effects including depletion of
peripheral T-cell pools and increased somatic mutational burden. We
investigated the immunophenotypic properties of breast and ovarian
cancers associated with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We determined
neoantigen load in 16 breast and 26 ovarian tumors with germline BRCA1/2
mutations and 50 non-BRCA tumors for each disease using whole exome
sequencing data from the TCGA. Although neoantigen load (IC50 <500 nM)
was variable across tumors, it did not differ between BRCA1/2 mutant and
non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging RNAseq data from the TCGA, we investigated
immune-related transcriptomic features within each disease. Cytolytic
index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA expression, was higher in non-BRCA
tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast (p<0.01) tumors and correlated more
closely with neoantigen load than in non-BRCA tumors (Breast: BRCA
r2=-0.15, non-BRCA r2=0.237). Class I HLA expression also correlated with
cytolytic index (p<0.05) in non-BRCA tumors but not BRCA1/2 mutation
associated tumors for both breast and ovarian cancers, suggesting more
robust antigen-driven adaptive immunity in non-BRCA tumors. HLA
expression was significantly lower (p<0.01) among BRCA mutant breast
tumors, indicating immune escape by HLA down-regulation. We classified
non-BRCA breast tumors by their level of HR deficiency (HRD score), as
HRD by both BRCA and non-BRCA mediated mechanisms can lead to increased
somatic mutational burden. Non-BRCA breast tumors irrespective of HRD
score exhibited evidence of a more inflamed phenotype than BRCA1/2 mutant
tumors, indicated by higher inferred immune cell infiltration, immune
checkpoint expression, and chemokine expression (all p<0.01). To
investigate potential mechanisms of immune escape in BRCA1/2 vs non-BRCA
tumors, we compared canonical gene sets (MsigDb) across the two cohorts.
Expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins was higher in BRCA1/2
breast and ovarian tumors (q<0.02), suggesting that BRCA1/2 tumors may
exclude immune cells via a dense ECM as observed for colorectal cancer
and melanoma. Among Penn BRCA1/2 tumors (19 breast, 20 ovarian),
neoantigen load did not differ from TCGA BRCA1/2 tumors. We directly
measured immune cell infiltration via tumor immunohistochemistry in 12
breast and 14 ovarian Penn BRCA1/2 tumors. We found that CD3+ and CD8+ T
cell infiltration was significantly lower in BRCA1/2 tumors with PTEN
deletion (pBRCA1 and BRCA2 are essential homologous recombination (HR)
repair proteins; germline mutations confer elevated risk for breast and
ovarian cancer. Defects in BRCA can lead to immune-related effects
including depletion of peripheral T-cell pools and increased somatic
mutational burden. We investigated the immunophenotypic properties of
breast and ovarian cancers associated with germline BRCA1/2 mutations. We
determined neoantigen load in 16 breast and 26 ovarian tumors with
germline BRCA1/2 mutations and 50 non-BRCA tumors for each disease using
whole exome sequencing data from the TCGA. Although neoantigen load (IC50
<500 nM) was variable across tumors, it did not differ between BRCA1/2
mutant and non-BRCA tumors. Leveraging RNAseq data from the TCGA, we
investigated immune-related transcriptomic features within each disease.
Cytolytic index, a measure of PRF1 and GZMA expression, was higher in
non-BRCA tumors than BRCA1/2 mutant for breast (p<0.01) tumors and
correlated more closely with neoantigen load than in non-BRCA tumors
(Breast: BRCA r2=-0.15, non-BRCA r2=0.237). Class I HLA expression also
correlated with cytolytic index (p<0.05) in non-BRCA tumors but not
BRCA1/2 mutation associated tumors for both breast and ovarian cancers,
suggesting more robust antigen-driven adaptive immunity in non-BRCA
tumors. HLA expression was significantly lower (p<0.01) among BRCA mutant
breast tumors, indicating immune escape by HLA down-regulation. We
classified non-BRCA breast tumors by their level of HR deficiency (HRD
score), as HRD by both BRCA and non-BRCA mediated mechanisms can lead to
increased somatic mutational burden. Non-BRCA breast tumors irrespective
of HRD score exhibited evidence of a more inflamed phenotype than BRCA1/2
mutant tumors, indicated by higher inferred immune cell infiltration,
immune checkpoint expression, and chemokine expression (all p<0.01). To
investigate potential mechanisms of immune escape in BRCA1/2 vs non-BRCA
tumors, we compared canonical gene sets (MsigDb) across the two cohorts.
Expression of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins was higher in BRCA1/2
breast and ovarian tumors (q<0.02), suggesting that BRCA1/2 tumors may
exclude immune cells via a dense ECM as observed for colorectal cancer
and melanoma. Among Penn BRCA1/2 tumors (19 breast, 20 ovarian),
neoantigen load did not differ from TCGA BRCA1/2 tumors. We directly
measured immune cell infiltration via tumor immunohistochemistry in 12
breast and 14 ovarian Penn BRCA1/2 tumors. We found that CD3+ and CD8+ T
cell infiltration was significantly lower in BRCA1/2 tumors with PTEN
deletion (p<0.05), a known correlate of ECM remodeling in breast and
ovarian cancer. Our work provides early evidence that BRCA1/2 breast and
ovarian tumors mitigate intratumoral adaptive immunity by T-cell
exclusion, so that despite higher mutational burden, they may not respond
to checkpoint blockade.


