Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor immune profiling identifies multiple unique therapeutic
targets that improve vaccination + oncolytic virotherapy against
metastatic ovarian cancer.


While spectacular responses to cancer immunotherapy have been observed in
some patients, the majority of responses are short-lived with ultimate
tumor relapse. Therefore, it is crucial to identify strategies that will
effectively synergize with immunotherapy to improve treatment outcome.
Using a pre-clinical mouse model, we explored the use of a potent
heterologous prime/boost vaccine strategy for the treatment of metastatic
intraperitoneal ovarian cancer. Priming with an adjuvant based vaccine
followed by boosting with a novel oncolytic Maraba viral vector elicited
robust tumor-specific CD8+ T cell responses, with high numbers of
therapy-induced CD8+ T cells effectively trafficking to the tumor
microenvironment. While this approach greatly improved tumor control and
long-term survival compared to treatment with the priming vaccine alone,
the combination therapy was not curative and cellular analysis suggested
that T cells within the tumor microenvironment were functionally
suppressed/exhausted. Transcriptional profiling of tumors following
therapy revealed that prime/boost vaccination led to induction of
numerous inflammatory processes, with gene signatures consistent with not
only CD8+ T cell infiltration, but also upregulation of multiple
co-stimulatory and immune checkpoint receptors, induction of chemokine
networks associated with both lymphoid and myeloid cell trafficking, as
well as infiltration of immunosuppressive myeloid cell populations. We
reasoned that these gene signatures could be used to design rational
combination therapies that would have the potential to further enhance
tumor attack following prime/boost vaccination. Using this strategy, we
observed that checkpoint blockade using Î±PD-1 in combination with
prime/boost vaccination resulted in a dramatic improvement in tumor
control, as did transient depletion of granulocytic myeloid cells (but
not monocytes/macrophages) following treatment. Current studies are
underway that combine prime/boost vaccination with relevant
co-stimulatory agonist antibodies, as well as inhibitors of candidate
chemokine networks identified through tumor profiling. These findings
underscore the importance of designing treatment strategies that not only
elicit robust anti-tumor T cell responses, but also improve the duration
and/or magnitude of immune attack within the tumor microenvironment.
Additionally, our data suggest that interrogating the tumor
microenvironment during treatment can identify unique therapeutic targets
that have the potential to further improve therapeutic impact.


