Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Super-enhancer identification via Bru/BrUV-Seq and H3K27Ac
ChIP-Seq.


Transcriptional super-enhancers (SEs) are large clusters of active
enhancers that drive expression of genes critical to cell identity and
function. In cancer and other human diseases, SEs can be acquired through
somatic aberrations. Importantly, SEs and their target genes are
particularly sensitive to perturbation, making this mechanism a promising
target for both diagnosis and therapy. Histone modification H3K27Ac is a
good single predicative marker of active enhancers, though additional
marks would help. Accordingly, a common approach to SE identification is
using H3K27Ac ChIP-Seq. The non-TSS (transcription start site) histone
binding sites (e.g., principally excluding TSSÂ±2.5kb regions) are mapped
to genome and then subject to near-neighbor stitching (e.g., within
12.5kb). From the resulted relatively broad regions, SEs are identified
by exceptional binding enrichment. Another potentially powerful approach
is to use Bru/BrUV-Seq in combination. By directional sequencing of
bromouridine(Bru)-labeled nascent RNAs, Bru-Seq has been developed to
study nascent transcription. In the derivative BrUV-Seq, UV irradiation
is additionally conducted to stabilize transcripts prior to labeling,
thereby allowing more sensitive detection of TSSs and unstable
transcripts, including enhancer RNAs (eRNAs). It has been shown that
eRNAs indicate enhancer activity better than H3K27Ac binding. In this
study, both approaches were used to identify SEs for three colon cancer
cell lines, HCT-116, SW48, and SW620. We have demonstrated that
Bru/BrUV-Seq has advantages in differentiating between mRNAs and eRNAs,
and between overlapping transcripts; the reduced complexity helps prevent
false identifications, which inflated our results obtained from ChIP-Seq.


