Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Necrotic cells promote microglia infiltration in glioblastoma
through regulating MCP-1 and MIP-3α expression.


Glioblastoma multiform (GBM), a grade IV astrocytoma, is most lethal and
common adult primary intracranial tumor. GBM is characterized by diffuse
infiltration into normal brain parenchyma, rapid growth and the presence
of necrosis and microglia/macrophage infiltration. Among these properties
of GBM, necrosis has been implicated to be a strong predictor of poor
prognosis; however, the effect of necrosis on GBM progression is poorly
understood at present. In this study, we examined the effect of necrosis
on glioblastoma cells by exploring molecular mechanisms underlying gene
expression and chemokine expression. Data obtaining from chemokine array
and ELISA showed that CRT-MG human gliomablastoma cells secreted several
chemokines including MCP-1 and MIP-3α in response to necrotic cells.
Expression levels of mRNA and protein of MCP-1 and MIP-3α were also
increased by treatment with necrotic cells in CRT-MG in a dose-dependent
manner. Necrotic cells induced NF-κB/AP-1 activation and their binding
to the MCP-1 and MIP-3α promoter, leading to enhanced MCP-1 and MIP-3α
production in GBM cells. Finally, transwell migration assay showed that
incubation with necrotic cells significantly enhanced the migration of
microglia. Our data demonstrate that when GBM cells are exposed to and
stimulated by necrotic cells, the expression and secretion of MCP-1 and
MIP-3α are enhanced in GBM cells and microglia infiltration/migration to
the tumor site are facilitated.


