Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel SF3B1 deletion mutations result in aberrant RNA splicing in
CLL patients.


Recurrent heterozygous mutations in SF3B1, a component of the U2snRNP
complex involved in branchsite recognition during the first step of
splicing catalysis, are found in various solid tumors and hematologic
cancers including myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL). To provide broader insight into the effects of SF3B1
mutations on RNA splicing in CLL, RNAseq was performed on 215 CLL patient
samples with unknown SF3B1 mutation status. 37 patients (17%)
demonstrated cryptic 3’ splice site usage we and others have previously
reported in patients with known SF3B1 hotspot mutations. Interestingly, 3
patient samples harbored previously unreported in-frame deletions in
SF3B1 around K700, the most common amino acid mutated in hematologic
cancers with SF3B1 mutations. In particular, 2 patient sequences
contained 6 nucleotide (nt) deletions (c.2186 to c.2191) resulting in
replacement of Q698, Q699 and K700 with Q (p.Q698_K700delinsQ:
“p.Q698del”) and 1 patient sequence had a 3 nt deletion (c.2192 to
c.2194) resulting in replacement of K700 and V701 with N
(p.K700_V701delinsN: “p.K700del”) in SF3B1. The variant allele
fraction (VAF) of these deletions was 20-40%. Targeted resequencing of
DNA confirmed presence of these mutations at similar VAFs. Differential
splicing analysis across patients with wild-type SF3B1, mutant SF3B1 and
our novel deletions revealed similar alternative 3’ splice site
patterns. To study the mechanism of alternative 3’ splice site
selection induced by these novel p.Q698del and p.K700del in-frame
deletions we used our ZDHHC16 minigene system with modifications in the
canonical and cryptic 3’ splice sites and respective branchsites. After
confirming expression of these deletion mutants and their incorporation
in the SF3b complex by qPCR and co-immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated
that recognition of both canonical 3’ splice site and alternate
branchsite are important for aberrant splicing. This observation is
identical to the intronic features required for aberrant splicing that we
previously reported for the p.K700E SF3B1 hotspot mutation in CLL and
MDS. By comparing the recent cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray crystal
structures of SF3b complexes (PDB: 5GM6 and 5IFE, respectively), it is
evident that the K700 present at the edge of heat repeat domain 6 is
important for pre-mRNA interactions. Both the in-frame deletions and
substitution mutations at K700 perturb SF3B1 charge, likely affecting a
side-chain interaction with pre-mRNA, thus altering splice-site
recognition through a mechanism that is still not well understood.
Together, these data indicate that small in-frame deletions in SF3B1
around K700 offer a novel mechanism to induce aberrant splicing in
patients with CLL. The common mechanism of action of these mutations and
deletions suggest that they should also be sensitive to splicing
modulators.


