Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clarifying the biological significance of the CHK2 K373E somatic
mutation discovered in The Cancer Genome Atlas database.


Identification of somatic mutations that contribute to cancer development
leads not only to more precise understanding of cancer pathogenesis, but
also development of novel molecular targeted therapies. Analyses of
cancer genomes using high-throughput sequencing technology are currently
conducted as international collaborative research projects, and the
results of those analyses are deposited in public databases, allowing
everyone in the world to access to these data.

To identify a somatic mutation that plays an important role in cancer
pathogenesis, we counted the occurrences of each somatic mutation found
in the TCGA lung adenocarcinoma dataset and became interested in the CHK2
K373E mutation (c1117A>G), which was present in 31 of 542 patients. The
K373E mutation impaired CHK2 autophosphorylation at Thr383 and Ser516. In
vitro kinase assay revealed that the K373E mutation markedly attenuates
CHK2 kinase activity. Growth curves showed that wild-type CHK2
substantially suppressed cell proliferation, but this effect was lost in
the K373E mutant in HCT-15 harboring tetracycline-inducible CHK2.
Clonogenic assays revealed that wild-type CHK2 promoted survival after
ionizing radiation and this pro-survival function was impaired in K373E
CHK2. The results of western blotting and RT-PCR suggested that the
p53-independent induction of p21 by CHK2 might underlie these effects.

Therefore, we identified a somatic mutation that contributes to cancer
pathogenesis, using information in a public database. This kind of
attempt is expected to lead to discovering new 'driver' mutations in the
future.


