Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Separase overexpression defines a new subset of acute myeloma
leukemia patients characterized by high CD34 and MYC levels.


The endopeptidase Separase, encoded by the ESPL1 gene, plays a key role
in faithful segregation of sister chromatids by cleaving the cohesin
complex at the metaphase to anaphase transition. Its overexpression
associates with aneuploidy and bad prognosis in solid tumors. Little is
known in Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML). We profiled the genomic landscape
of 405 and 78 AML cases by SNP array (SNP 6.0 and Cytoscan HD,
Affymetrix) and whole exome sequencing (100 bp, paired-end, Illumina),
respectively. Bone marrow blasts from 61 patients were analyzed by gene
expression profiling (HTA 2.0, Affymetrix). Separase expression was
determined by Immunohistochemistry (1:600 antibody dilution Abnova, clone
6H6) in 44 AML and 4 control bone marrow specimens. One patient exhibited
a nonsynonimous mutation in ESPL1 (1.3%), which was predicted to alter
the protein function. Moreover, ESPL1 copy number gain was observed in
5/405 cases (1.2%): 2 hyperdiploid AML, one trisomy 12 and 2 cases with a
short gain at 12q. Notably, protein level detection in one of the
12q-gain cases confirmed Separase overexpression. To determine the
incidence of Separase overexpression, we performed Immunohistochemistry
on additional 43 AML. Separase was overexpressed in 29/44 AML (66%,
Separase-high), being comparable to control marrow biopsies in the
remaining 15 samples (Separase-low). Sixty-two percent of Separase-high
AML were aneuploid. However, no significative association was observed,
as previously reported for mutations in the cohesin genes in AML.
Separase overexpression correlated with increased patients’ age (median
age 64 vs. 57 years, p=.01), 17-fold upregulation of CD34 (p=.004) and a
trend towards reduced overall survival (6-years follow-up). Separase
overexpression was not mutually esclusive with cohesin gene mutations, it
co-occurred with NPM1 and FLT3 lesions and frequent mutations in genes
involved in protein post-translational modification and ubiquitination
(p=.04). Separase-low cases were enriched for mutations in RAS signaling
pathway (NRAS, KRAS, NF1, RIT1, GRAP2, RALGDS; p=4.5x10-5) and in cell
migration-related genes (LIMS2, S1PR1, PPIA, PLXNB1, FAT1). Separase-high
cases also showed a defined transcriptomic profile, characterized by
reduced expression of HOXA/B family genes, the DNA damage repair gene
ATM, the p53 regulator MDM2 and forced expression of the cell cycle
markers CDC20, AURKB, NUSAP1 and of MYC, independently of chromosome 8
gain. Taken together, our data suggest that genomic lesions targeting
ESPL1 are a rare event in AML. However, Separase overexpression is a
common feature and defines a new subset of AML cases with a distinct gene
expression profile, which may benefit of innovative targeted therapies
including CDC20 and bromodomain inhibitors. Supported by: ELN, AIL, AIRC,
progetto Regione-Università 2010-12 (L. Bolondi), FP7 NGS-PTL project.


