Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical chemokine receptor 1 (ACKR1/DARC) expressing tumors are
associated with distinct recruitment of immune cells and increased
pro-inflammatory chemokines.


Interactions between chemokines and their receptors can improve a
hostâ€™s anti-tumor response by influencing the targeted migration of
immune cells via a chemokine gradient. Atypical Chemokine Receptor 1
(ACKR1/DARC), a genetically diverse transmembrane GPCR, acts as a decoy
receptor for a variety of CXC and CC chemokines, including those with
pro-malignant and pro-inflammatory effects, such as CCL2 (MCP-1, MCAF,
JE) and CXCL8 (IL-8). The purpose of this study is to determine if the
migration of tumor-associated immune cells is unique based on epithelial
ACKR1 expression on breast cancer cells, and if this association is
correlated to an increase in pro-malignant chemokines, better survival
odds, and differences in race. Immunohistochemistry techniques were used
to determine expression levels of ACKR1 on primary breast tumors, along
with relative expression of T-cells, B-cells, dendritic cells, and
macrophages. Concentrations of pro-inflammatory chemokines in circulation
were determined using a Luminex-based immunoassay and matched patient
peripheral blood samples. In silco analyses were performed to determine
associations between ACKR1 tumor expression status, race, and survival.
Finally, using human breast cancer cell lines and immunofluorescence
techniques, co-localization between ACKR1 and selected pro-inflammatory
chemokines was investigated. Results from these tests indicate that there
is differential expression of immune cell types in tumors expressing
ACKR1, and this difference was associated with the migration of B-cells
and dendritic cells, which were not detected in ACKR1 negative tumors.
Significantly increased circulating CCL2 and CXCL8 chemokine levels we
also determined to be positively correlated with ACKR1 expression in
primary breast tumors. Survival analyses showed a significantly increased
relapse free survival in patients having tumors with high ACKR1
expression, while investigations into racial differences revealed a
significant race effect, with Caucasians having higher ACKR1 levels on
their tumors than African-Americans. Finally, co-localization between
ACKR1 with CCL2 and CXCL8 is observed in cultured human breast cancer
cells. Given that the data collected shows a tendency for those tumors
positively expressing ACKR1 to have a more favorable prognosis, we
suggest that a partial role of ACKR1 on breast tumor cells is to
sequester pro-inflammatory chemokines in the tumor microenvironment,
indirectly recruiting a distinct subset of tumor-associated immune cells.


