Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel potential of palbociclib (CDK4/6 inhibitor) in the
treatment of triple-negative breast cancer.


Background: The effectiveness of palbociclib (CDK4/6 inhibitor) for
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer has been demonstrated by
large-scale clinical studies, with the drug garnering attention as a key
drug for breast cancer subtypes with endocrine sensitivity in the future.
According to PALOMA-3 trial, palbociclib has been demonstrated to
contribute to the extension of progression-free survival in patients with
advanced hormone receptor-positive and HER2-negative metastatic breast
cancer after endocrine therapy. On the other hand, in the case of
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), luminal AR (LAR) related to
androgen signaling is believed to have endocrine activity. Previous
clinical data revealed that palbociclib shows high sensitivity in luminal
breast cancer cell lines with endocrine activity, with effectiveness also
expected in LAR. In this study, we created TNBC cell lines that forcibly
express AR and examined the effectiveness of palbociclib for TNBC.

Materials and Methods: MCF-7 and T-47D were used as luminal breast cancer
cell lines, while MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 were used as TNBC cell lines. In
addition, we created TNBC cell lines that forcibly express AR, called
AR-MDA-MB-231, by the transfection of pEGFP-C1-AR Plasmid Vector using
LipofectamineÂ® 3000 Reagent. We confirmed the expression of AR by
qRT-PCR as well as Western blotting and examined the impact of
palbociclib on proliferation as well as apoptosis of breast cancer cell
lines.

Results: AR was found to have been expressed only in luminal breast
cancer cell lines but not TNBC cell lines. It was confirmed that AR was
expressed in AR-MDA-MB-231 which are stable cell lines with the
properties of LAR. In a CCK assay, palbociclib showed high sensitivity in
AR-MDA-MB-231 as in luminal breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, in an
apoptosis assay using FACS and cell cycle assay, apoptosis was induced in
AR-MDA-MB-231 and cell cycle arrest at the G1S check point was confirmed.

Conclusion: palbociclib (CDK4/6 inhibitor) showed effectiveness for TNBC
cell lines that compulsively express AR, suggesting it may be one
treatment option for TNBC in the future.


