Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genomic and transcriptomic analysis of nine widely invasive
follicular thyroid carcinomas (wiFTC) in Korean patients.


Widely invasive follicular thyroid carcinoma (wiFTC) can be characterized
from minimally invasive follicular thyroid carcinoma (miFTC) as it
exhibits poor prognosis with frequent distant metastasis. We have
reported that miFTC shows similar mutational and transcriptional spectrum
when compared to follicular adenoma (FA). Here, we performed whole-exome
and transcriptome sequencing on wiFTC samples to define their aggressive
biological features by comparing with 30 miFTCs and 26 FAs. Well-known
miFTC and FA driver genes, NRAS (66.67%), HRAS (11.11%), and EIF1AX
(11.11%), were identified in wiFTC. TERT mutation was found in all
samples which can explain its aggressive feature. Chromosome 17p/q
amplification was found in most wiFTC samples as well as 22q deletion
that is frequently aberrant in H/K/NRAS mutated thyroid cancers. Most of
wiFTCs were classified as RAS-like (66.67%) and a few were BRAF-like
(22.22%) and NBNR (11.11%) molecular subtypes. From differentially
expressed gene analysis, we found 1,832 and 1,384 up-regulated and
down-regulated genes when wiFTC was compared to miFTC and FA together.
wiFTC had many overlapped down-regulated genes as poorly differentiated
and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma which also supports its aggressiveness.
Through weighted correlation network analysis we have established gene
expression networks, highly associated with wiFTC, that have SIRT6 and
TGFBR2 as the central nodes. In this study, we demonstrated the
distinctive mutational and transcriptional characteristics of wiFTC hence
found the underlying molecular mechanism for its aggressiveness.


