Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel prodrug of indoximod with enhanced pharmacokinetic
properties.


IDO1 catalyzes degradation of tryptophan (Trp) into kynurenines, which
plays an important role in the regulation of immune responses by
triggering anergy on reactive effector T cells and by modulating
differentiation and activation of regulatory T cells (Treg). Indoximod
has been demonstrated to relieve IDO-mediated immunosuppression in vitro
and in vivo, by creation of an artificial Trp-sufficiency signal that
bypasses activation of GCN2 and inhibition of mTOR in conditions of Trp
deprivation. Inhibition of the IDO pathway by indoximod in combination
with immune-stimulatory treatments leads to increased T cell
proliferation, Treg reprogramming and antitumor effect. Indoximod has
demonstrated an excellent safety profile in human clinical trials and is
being dosed orally at 1200 mg bid. Increases in doses above this level do
not generally result in increased plasma concentration or drug exposure
due to limiting dose-dependent oral bioavailability. Animal models
suggest that increased therapeutic benefit could be achieved at higher
levels of exposure. For this reason, we synthesized and tested the
pharmacokinetic profile of several indoximod prodrugs in mice, rat and
monkeys in both liquid and capsule formulations. We selected clinical
development drug candidate NLG802, which increases indoximod exposure and
plasma concentration ~ 2-fold in rats and ~ 5-fold in monkeys dosed with
capsules of comparable formulation to that being used in clinical trials.
NLG802 is rapidly absorbed and metabolized in vivo to indoximod. NLG802
DMPK profile and GLP toxicology studies have been carried out in rats and
monkeys suggesting a safe toxicological profile at predicted therapeutic
doses. In a preclinical tumor model of mice bearing established B16F10
tumors, administration of NLG802 markedly enhanced the anti-tumor
responses of na√Øve, resting pmel-1 cells to vaccination with cognate
hgp100 peptide plus CpG-1826 in IFA. In this tumor model, NLG802 plus
pmel-1/vaccine produced significant tumor size reduction within 4 days of
vaccination. Moreover, the tumor response was achieved at lower doses
than equivalent molar doses of indoximod. In conclusion, NLG802 is a
prodrug of indoximod predicted to increase clinical drug exposure to
indoximod above the current achievable levels and will soon enter Phase 1
safety testing in oncology clinical trials.


