Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated Wnt signaling for the treatment of recurrent
medulloblastoma.


Brain tumors represent the leading cause of childhood cancer mortality,
of which medulloblastoma (MB) is the most frequent malignant pediatric
brain tumor. Current molecular subgroups of MB recognize distinct disease
entities of which activated Wnt signaling (monosomy 6, exon 3 mutations
in CTNNB1, and Wnt gene signature) is associated with a distinct subgroup
and the best overall outcome. In contrast, only non-Wnt MBs are
characterized by metastatic disease, increased rate of recurrence, and
poor overall survivorship. Given the excellent clinical outcome in
patients with Wnt-driven MB, we aimed to convert treatment-resistant MB
subgroups into an ostensibly benign tumor through selective targeting by
small molecules and transgenic patient-derived lines containing a
stabilized beta-catenin mutant. Activated Wnt signaling by way of Wnt
agonists in treatment-refractory MBs resulted in decreased in vitro
self-renewal and promoted differentiation. Comparative gene expression
profiling of control and transgenic lines containing a stabilized
beta-catenin mutant demonstrated a reduction in stem cell self-renewal
genes following beta-catenin overexpression, including Sox2 and Bmi1. In
order to validate the therapy-sensitive nature of Wnt-activated cells, we
developed stable patient-derived lines containing a 7XTOPFlash reporter
for endogenous Wnt signaling. Rare subclonal Wnt-active cells
demonstrated a reduced self-renewal and tumor-initiating capacity through
in vivo limiting dilution assays when compared to bulk Wnt-inactive
cells. The therapeutic relevance of these findings were demonstrated with
an in vivo survival advantage in mice with orthotopic injections of cells
containing a stabilized beta-catenin mutant representative of
constitutively active Wnt signaling or endogenous Wnt-active cells.
Xenografts generated from Wnt-activated tumors were smaller in size,
maintained a lower rate of proliferation, and reduction in MB
self-renewal genes. To further illustrate the clinical utility of
activated Wnt signaling, we modified the Childrenâ€™s Oncology Group
therapy protocol for childhood MB so that xenografts may receive
chemo/radiotherapy. Tumors generated from Wnt-active xenografts were much
more radiosensitive and displayed a significant reduction in spinal
metastasis when compared to mice receiving standard therapy without Wnt
activation. To develop a rationale clinical therapeutic, we developed
unique agonist antibodies that target the Wnt co-receptor LRP5. Treatment
with LRP5 antibodies showed a significant reduction in tumor burden and
increase in survival of patient-derived tumors that were otherwise
treatment-resistant. Our work establishes for the first time activated
Wnt signaling as a novel treatment paradigm in childhood MB, identifies a
rationale therapeutic approach for recurrent MB, and provides evidence
for the context-specific tumor suppressive function of the canonical Wnt
pathway.


