Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventive effects of the sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor
tofogliflozin on liver tumorigenesis in obese and diabetic mice.


Obesity, diabetes mellitus, and their related metabolic abnormalities are
associated with increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Sodium
glucose cotransporter (SGLT)-2 inhibitors, recently approved
anti-diabetic agents, are expected to ameliorate the abnormalities
associated with metabolic syndrome including non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD). In this study, we investigated the effects of the SGLT2
inhibitor tofogliflozin on the development of NAFLD-related liver
tumorigenesis in C57BL/KsJ-+Leprdb/+Leprdb (db/db) obese and diabetic
mice. The direct effects of tofogliflozin on human HCC cell proliferation
were also evaluated. Male db/db mice were administered
diethylnitrosamine-containing water for two weeks and were treated with
tofogliflozin throughout the experiment. Tofogliflozin was kindly
provided by Kowa Co., Ltd. and the chemical structure will be disclosed
at the time of presentation at the meeting. In mice treated with
tofogliflozin, the development of hepatic pre-neoplastic lesions was
markedly suppressed, and hepatic steatosis and inflammation significantly
reduced, as evaluated using the NAFLD activity score, in comparison to
those in the control mice. Serum levels of glucose and free fatty acid
and mRNA expression levels of pro-inflammatory markers in the liver were
reduced by tofogliflozin treatment. Conversely, the proliferation of
SGLT2 protein-expressing HCC cells was not inhibited by this agent. These
findings suggest that tofogliflozin suppressed the early phase of
obesity- and NAFLD-related liver carcinogenesis by attenuating chronic
inflammation and steatosis in the liver, while the agent had no
significant direct effect on the proliferation of HCC cells. Therefore,
SGLT2 inhibitors may have a chemopreventive effect on obesity-related HCC.


