Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of immune cell trafficking into human colorectal cancer
by gut microbiota.


Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of
cancer-related death. CRC infiltration by immune cells, including
cytotoxic CD8+ T cells (CTLs), IFN-gamma-producing T-helper 1 cells
(Th1), Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) and CD16+ MPO+ neutrophils, is
associated with favorable prognosis. However, chemokines driving these
cell populations into the tumor site, their cellular sources and their
microenvironmental triggers remain to be elucidated.

Aim: We investigated the chemokine/chemokine receptor network promoting
CRC infiltration by immune cells associated to favorable prognosis.

Results: CRC infiltration by immune cells was associated with defined
chemokine gene signatures, including CCL5, CXCL9 and CXCL10 for cytotoxic
T lymphocytes and T-helper 1 cells, and CCL17, CCL22 and CXCL12 for
T-helper 1 and regulatory T cells. Most of these chemokine genes were
expressed by tumor cells upon exposure to gut bacteria in vitro and in
vivo. Indeed, chemokine expression levels were significantly higher in
orthotopic xenografts than in intraperitoneal tumors, and were
drastically reduced by antibiotic treatment of tumor-bearing mice.
Importantly, in human CRC samples, extents of chemokine production and
immune cell infiltration was significantly associated with bacterial
loads.

Conclusion: Gut microbiota stimulates chemokine production by CRC cells,
thus favoring T cell recruitment into tumor tissues.


