Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing the use of Vortex technology for investigating
circulating tumor cells in mouse models of breast cancer.


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are precursors of metastatic
disease and are an important indicator of the disease progression and
outcome of many cancers. Though several recent studies have advanced our
understanding of CTCs, many critical areas of CTC biology remain largely
unexplored. Murine models of cancer offer a unique opportunity to address
this issue. However, small sample volumes, low number of CTCs, difficulty
to access ports for blood collection are challenges that diminish the
utility of mouse models for studying CTCs. In our previous studies, we
had validated the use of Vortex technology for the label-free capture of
CTCs from blood samples of different cancers. In this current study, we
now report our recent, unpublished data on the adaptation of Vortex
platform for enriching and characterizing murine and human tumor cells
from mouse blood.

Methods: By spiking tumor cells into small volumes of mouse blood
(200-400 Âµl) from cardiac puncture, we tested the impact of i) different
dilutions of mouse blood (10X, 20X, 40X); ii) varying numbers of tumor
cells; iii) different cell types (MDA-MB-231, 4T1 and EMT6); and iv)
sample recycling on capture efficiency and purity. Blood was processed
through the Vortex plastic chip and, to accurately identify and enumerate
the enriched tumor cells, we developed a staining protocol that labels
human- or murine-specific cytokeratin, vimentin, and CD45.

Results: Our results reveal that over a range of dilutions tested, just
after one cycle, 10X dilution of mouse blood was superior, yielding a
capture efficiency of 38.83% and a purity of 33% for MDA-MB-231 cells,
compared to 20X (34.16% efficiency, 31.1% purity), and 40X (31.83%
efficiency, 31% purity) dilutions. We are currently testing whether
recycling the blood flow-through would increase the recovery. Even when
as many as ~7500 tumor cells were spiked in mouse blood, the Vortex
platform was able to successfully enrich tumor cells with high
consistency and purity. Importantly, we were now able to successfully
isolate human and murine tumor cell lines with varying levels of
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) expression (4T1 - high,
MDA-MB-231 - moderate to low) spiked into mouse blood. Experiments
confirming the viability and growth rate of cancer cells isolated from
mouse blood using MTT assay will also be presented.

Conclusion: In summary, our results reveal the use of the Vortex
technology for studying CTCs in murine models of cancer, with the ability
to handle volumes of blood as low as 200uL while having a capacity to
capture extremely large number of CTCs. While this study was focused on
breast cancer, our workflow is easily adapted to other malignancies.
Studies are underway to grow viable CTCs from tumor bearing animals and
isolated by this platform for subsequent growth in 3D culture systems for
future biologic and drug testing studies.


