Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tapping CD4 T cells for cancer immunotherapy.


T-cell based immunotherapy represents an attractive strategy for the
treatment of cancer. Whereas cellular anti-tumor immune responses have
typically been attributed to CD8 T cells, CD4 T cells play a critical
role in tumor elimination and the priming and maintenance of CD8 T-cell
responses. Recent findings have highlighted new opportunities for CD4 T
cells in cancer immunotherapy. We have isolated CD4+ T cells reactive
against tumor antigens from patients who experienced clinical benefit
from treatment with cancer vaccines targeting antigens such as hTERT,
survivin and frequent neoantigens such as frameshift mutated TGFβRII.
Strong T-cell responses against the vaccine or unrelated cancer antigens
suggesting epitope spreading correlated with enhanced survival and tumor
regression in late stage cancer patients. These HLA class II restricted
T-cell clones recognised target cells loaded with long peptides or
protein and for some CD4+ T cell clones we could also show direct tumor
recognition. TCRs were expressed in expanded third-party T cells by mRNA
electroporation or retroviral transduction and tested for functionality.
Both CD8+ and CD4+ T cells expressing the TCRs produced TNF-α, IFN-γ
and redirected T cells had the capacity to kill following co-incubation
with their targets. Selecting highly functional CD4+ T-cell clones
reactive against tumor-associated or -specific antigens from patients
with clinical responses after treatment with immunotherapy is a
successful method for identifying highly functional HLA class II
restricted TCRs for adoptive immunotherapy. These HLA class II-restricted
TCRs may be of therapeutic value both in haematopoietic malignancies and
in melanoma where tumor cells frequently express HLA class II.
Furthermore, combining HLA class I- and class II-restricted TCRs for
T-cell redirection may provide a more potent therapeutic effect in
adoptive T cell therapy.


