Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role and regulation of Peroxiredoxin antioxidant proteins in K562
leukemia cells.


Peroxiredoxins are a family of antioxidant proteins that have found to
play a key role in many diseases, including cancer. A wide number of
studies have found that Peroxiredoxin levels are elevated in several
cancers, and reducing these levels can aid in inhibiting cell growth of
cancer cells, suggesting that Peroxiredoxins confer resistance to
reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced cellular toxicity in cancer cells.
Specific research has demonstrated that Peroxiredoxin levels are elevated
in leukemia cells, and that targeting and inhibiting Peroxiredoxins in
these cells can induce differentiation. Studies have also shown the use
of doxorubicin as an effective chemotherapy treatment to significantly
decrease cell proliferation and viability in leukemia. The purpose of
this study is to examine Peroxiredoxin levels in K562 cells, a human
chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line, and determine if high levels of
Peroxiredoxins have the ability to protect cells from
chemotherapy-induced death and possibly aid in chemoresistance. We first
demonstrated that serum-deprived K562 cells exhibited significant growth
inhibition over a 72 hour time period, but had no significant effect on
viability. We also showed that treating K562 cells with 50 nM doxorubicin
significantly decreased proliferation and viability. Corresponding
changes in Peroxiredoxin protein levels are currently being analyzed to
determine the effect of both growth-inhibition and chemotherapy-induced
cytotoxicity on the Peroxiredoxin family in K562 cells, and siRNA
experiments are being conducted to examine the protective role of
Peroxiredoxins in these cells. Based on previous studies on MCF-7 cells
conducted in our lab, we predict that Peroxiredoxin levels will be
modified under both conditions, and that suppression of Prdxs by siRNA
will increase chemotherapy susceptibility.


