Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of prostaglandin signaling in human glioblastoma cell
activities and growth in vitro and in vivo.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) constitutes the most frequent and
aggressive form of malignant brain primary tumors. Despite current
combined treatment involving surgery, chemotherapy and radiation therapy,
the median survival of GBM patients is only about one year, with less
than 3-5% of patients surviving over 5 years. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is
overexpressed in glioblastoma, and its expression level is highly
positively correlated with the tumor grade. As a major enzymatic product
of COX-2, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) mediates inflammatory processes within
the brain and facilitates progression of many chronic
inflammation-associated neurological diseases via its four downstream
receptors - EP1-EP4. We hypothesize that selectively targeting these
receptors might provide an alternative therapeutic strategy for GBM with
more specificity than generic blockade of the entire COX-2 cascade. In
this study, two engineered human GBM cells with or without activated
COX-2 were used to explore the PGE2 signaling involved in the development
and progression of GBM. COX-2 activation by LPS or its overexpression
facilitated migration, invasion, and transformation of these GBM cells in
vitro. Moreover, the COX-2-mediated GBM cell activities were
substantially suppressed by selective antagonists of PGE2 receptors that
are highly expressed in these cells. Furthermore, the tested PGE2
receptor selective antagonists also suppressed the growth of GBM cells in
vivo. In sum, our results suggested the inflammatory PGE2 signaling is
involved in human GBM cell inflammation, migration, invasion and
transformation through its downstream receptors, and should be explored
as alternative molecular targets for novel GBM therapies.


