Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early effects of CSF-470 melanoma vaccine plus adjuvants in immune
cell stimulation.


Background: In a Phase II/III clinical trial (CASVAC-0401, NCT01729663),
cutaneous melanoma (CM) patients (pts) stages II/III were randomized to
receive CSF-470 vaccine or IFN-α (2:1). Vaccine CSF-470 is composed of
four lethally-irradiated allogeneic CM cell lines; BCG (Bacillus
Calmette-Guérin) and rhGM-CSF were used as adjuvants. At the end of the
Phase II part of the study (30 pts), a higher
distant-metastases-free-survival was observed in vaccinated pts. All
vaccinated pts developed inflammation at the vaccination site. Therefore,
in an attempt to understand these first steps of immune reaction,
leukocytes migration, cytokines synthesis and monocyte phagocytosis
promoted by the vaccine components were studied in vitro.

Methods: Cell migration of healthy donors’ leukocytes or mononuclear
cells (MN) towards vaccine components was assayed in 0,5 μm transwells.
Cytokines were measured by ELISA in supernatants of CSF-470 vaccine and
MN (1:1, 0,5x106 each) cocultures. For phagocytosis assays, CM cell lines
were labeled with PKH67 lipophilic dye, irradiated, and cocultured with
purified monocytes. After 24 hs, cultures were stained with CD14 and
double staining (CD14+PKH67+) was analyzed by flow cytometry.

Results: In migration assays, CSF-470 vaccine induced higher attraction
of leukocytes as compared to culture medium (p=0.003, unpaired-T-test).
GM-CSF exerted little attraction, although combined with BCG it increased
the migration triggered by CSF-470 (vaccine vs vaccine plus adjuvants,
p=0.034, unpaired-T-test). When using MN, CSF-470 alone or plus
adjuvants, highly attracted monocytes, which represented 10%-65% of the
migrating CD45+ population (before migration 6-15%) (pResults: In
migration assays, CSF-470 vaccine induced higher attraction of leukocytes
as compared to culture medium (p=0.003, unpaired-T-test). GM-CSF exerted
little attraction, although combined with BCG it increased the migration
triggered by CSF-470 (vaccine vs vaccine plus adjuvants, p=0.034,
unpaired-T-test). When using MN, CSF-470 alone or plus adjuvants, highly
attracted monocytes, which represented 10%-65% of the migrating CD45+
population (before migration 6-15%) (p<0.0001, paired-T-test). In the
lymphocyte population, natural killer cells were mainly attracted towards
the vaccine either with or without adjuvants, representing 12%-33% of
total migrated lymphocyte population (before migration 4-25% ) (p=0.002,
paired-T-test). Regarding cytokine production, 6 hs cocultures of CSF-470
vaccine plus adjuvants and MN, promoted TNFα production (385±217
pg/ml). IFNγ release was detected in CSF-470:MN cocultures after 48 hs
(109,2 pg/ml). BCG appears to be the most important adjuvant for
production of these proinflammatory cytokines. IL-10, but not IL-12p70,
was also detected. Interestingly, approximately 60% of monocytes
phagocytosed CSF-470 cells after 24 hs of coculture, either in the
presence or absence of adjuvants.

Conclusions: Our in vitro results suggest that recruitment of leukocytes,
mostly from the innate immune system, is an early event after CSF-470
vaccine + BCG + GM-CSF interaction with immune cells. Also, early release
of TNFα and IFNγ proinflammatory cytokines and efficient vaccine
phagocytosis by monocytes would favor subsequent antigen processing and
presentation. Further experiments will be performed to address the
initial steps triggered after CSF-470 vaccination.


