Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevating adipokine adiponectin level can induce cytotoxic
autophagy in breast cancer cells and potentiate the efficacy of
chemotherapeutic regimens: preclinical studies.


Adiponectin, an adipocytokine secreted by adipocytes in the breast tumor
microenvironment, negatively regulates cancer cell growth hence increased
levels of adiponectin are associated with decreased breast cancer growth.
However, its mechanisms of action remain largely elusive. We report that
adiponectin induces a robust accumulation of autophagosomes, increases
LC3II and decreases p62/SQSTM1 in breast cancer cells.
Adiponectin-treated cells and xenografts exhibit increased expression of
autophagy-related proteins. Lysotracker-Red-staining and
tandem-mCherry-GFP-LC3 assay show that autophagosomes/lysosomes fusion is
augmented upon adiponectin treatment. Adiponectin significantly inhibits
breast cancer growth and induces apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo, and
these events are preceded by autophagy, which is integral for
adiponectin-mediated cell death. Accordingly, blunting
autophagosomes-formation, blocking autophagosomes-autolysosome fusion or
genetic-knockout of BECN1/Beclin1/ATG7 effectively impedes adiponectin
induced growth-inhibition and apoptosis-induction. Mechanistic studies
show that adiponectin reduces intracellular ATP levels and increases AMPK
phosphorylation leading to ATG1 activation. AMPK-inhibition abrogates
adiponectin-induced ATG1-activation, LC3II-turnover and p62-degradation
while AMPK-activation potentiates adiponectinâ€™s effects. Further,
adiponectin-mediated AMPK-activation and autophagy-induction are
regulated by upstream master-kinase LKB1, which is a key node in
anti-tumor function of adiponectin as LKB1-knockout abrogates
adiponectin-mediated inhibition of breast tumorigenesis and molecular
analyses of tumors corroborate in vitro mechanistic findings. Adiponectin
increases the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents. Notably, high
expression of adiponectin receptor, adiponectin and BECN1 significantly
correlates with increased overall survival in chemotherapy-treated breast
cancer patients. Collectively, these data uncover that adiponectin
induces autophagic cell death in breast cancer and provide in vitroa and
in vivo evidence for the integral role of LKB1-AMPK-ATG1 axis in
adiponectin-mediated cytotoxic-autophagy.


