Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CEACAM1-blockade for T-cell activation and antitumor T-cell
response.


Immune checkpoint blockade became the most powerful way to control cancer
without causing tremendous side effects, since anti-PD-1 blocking
antibodies proved their superiority in clinical outcomes to those of
traditional chemo- or targeted therapeutics. CEACAM1 (CCM1) is one of the
several immune checkpoint receptors expressed on T cells that mediate
suppression of inflammatory T cell response. CCM1 caught our attention
for a cancer immune-therapeutic target, because of its inhibitory role in
TCR proximal signaling complex. The anti-cancer therapeutic potential of
CCM1-blockade has already been studied in mouse models, and one of the
anti-human CCM1 antibody clones recently emerged in clinical Phase I
studies. CCM1-targeting antibody candidates were screened out of our
in-house synthetic libraries, among which a few of the clones stood out
showing their significant blocking activities against CCM1-CCM1
homophilic interaction, enhancement of T cell activation, cytokine
release, NFAT signaling, and tumor lysis. One of the clones (C25) showed
its strongest efficacy equivalent to that of a reference Ab in
CCM1-dependent T cell activation, proliferation, and IL-2 release, in
parental Jurkat cells as well as in CCM1-overexpressing stable Jurkat
cells. Moreover, C25 also enhanced tumor lysis by CCM1+ NK cells or CCM1+
cytotoxic T cells in a CCM1-dependent manner. In addition, C25 shows
distinct characteristics in binding to CCM family from those of a
reference Ab. Thus, C25 is thought to have a strong therapeutic potential
on CCM1+ cancer.


