Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth inhibition of the crude extracts of Musa basjoo in human
colon carcinoma cells.


Musa basjoo (MB) is a tropical evergreen tree growing mainly in
subtropical or tropical countries. MB has been used globally as a folk
medicine such as antipyretic, diuretic, and hemostatic drugs for
centuries but evidence-based biological activities and molecular
mechanism of action of MB are unknown. Therefore, in the current study we
examined whether the crude extracts of MB exert anticancer activity in
HT29 and HCT116 human colon carcinoma cell lines. Dried leaves of MB
samples were extracted with acetone or methanol. Crude extracts of MB
were then dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and used for the
following experiments. Growth inhibition was determined by colony or MTT
assays in these cell lines. Cells were treated with increasing
concentrations (12.5 to 200 μg/mL in colony assays, 25 to 400 μg/mL in
MTT assays) of acetone/methanol extracts of MB in DMEM/5%FBS. Untreated
control cells were treated with DMSO alone. Crude extracts of MB
inhibited the growth of cells with IC50 values of 118 µg/mL (acetone
extract, HT29), 75 µg/mL (acetone extract, HCT116), >200 µg/mL
(methanol extract, HT29), 141 µg/mL (methanol extract, HCT116) in colony
assays, and with IC50 values of 137 µg/mL (acetone extract, HT29), 73
µg/mL (acetone extract, HCT116), 240 µg/mL (methanol extract, HT29),
248 µg/mL (methanol extract, HCT116) in MTT assays. Acetone extract was
used in the flowcytometry and western blot analyses because it showed
stronger growth inhibition than methanol extract in both cell lines.
Flowcytometry analysis indicated that when HT29 and HCT116 cells were
treated with 100 µg/mL acetone extract of MB for 96h, the percentage of
cells in G1 increased by 5.4% and this was associated with a concomitant
decrease of cells in the S and G2-M phases of the cell cycle. Acetone
extract of MB did not cause subG1 fraction in either HT29 or HCT116 cell
lines. The results indicate that acetone extract of MB causes carcinoma
cells to arrest in the G1 phase. We then performed western blot analysis
to determine whether treatment of carcinoma cells with acetone extract of
MB alters cellular levels of the G1 cell cycle control proteins cyclin
D1, cdk4 and the cell cycle inhibitor protein p21CIP1. When HT29 and
HCT116 cells were treated with 50 and 100 µg/mL acetone extract of MB
for 96h, there was a marked decrease in the levels of expression of the
cyclin D1 and cdk4 proteins and a marked increase in the levels of
expression of the p21CIP1 protein. Thus, a decrease in cyclin D1 may
cooperate with the induction of p21CIP1 to arrest cells in G1 and thereby
further contribute to MB-induced growth inhibition. Taken together, the
crude extracts of MB contain active component(s) that exert growth
inhibition of human colon carcinoma cells. The current study is the first
systematic examination of the anticancer activity of MB and may provide a
novel approach to the chemoprevention and/or chemotherapy of human colon
carcinoma.


