Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Slide-based multi-parametric immunophenotyping of human blood
samples by cyclic immunofluorescence using the Accucyte-CyteFinder system.


Immunophenotyping is an approach to measuring the abundance and
functional state of immune cells as a means to understand mechanisms of
homeostasis, identify biomarkers of disease, and measure therapeutic and
adverse responses to drugs such as immune checkpoint inhibitors. Such
studies are conventionally performed using flow cytometry together with
combinations of immunomarkers that allow for identification of cell type,
maturation state, and activation status. Here we describe a method for
profiling circulating human leukocytes with highly-multiplexed
immunofluorescence microscopy. The method has distinct advantages over
flow cytometry in that it has greater sensitivity for detecting rare cell
populations, allows for repeat analysis and long-term storage of precious
biological samples, and obviates the requirement for spectral
deconvolution. Using an open-source multiplexed immunofluorescence
protocol referred to as cyclic immunofluorescence (CycIF), and
commercially available reagents and instruments (AccuCyte and CyteFinder;
RareCyte Inc.), we show that imaging can provide 16-plex, single-cell
intensity data in addition to information on cellular morphology.
Analytic technologies borrowed from the field of mass cytometry, such as
ViSNE and Phenograph, allow for downstream phenotypic analysis and
high-dimensional biomarker discovery. Current efforts now aim to expand
the number of validated immune targets and combine imaging with
single-cell picking and sequencing technologies.


