Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer immunogenomics for the development of personalized ovarian
cancer vaccine.


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in the
United States with approximately 20,000 women being diagnosed every year.
Since OC development is mainly asymptomatic, patients are often diagnosed
at late stage and present local and distal metastases. This offers a
clinical challenge, as roughly 70% of the patients develop chemoresistant
disease. With the advent of cancer immunogenomics it is now possible to
identify tumor specific mutations, or neoantigens/neoepitopes, that can
be exploited for the development of personalized T cell therapies via DC
vaccines or adoptive cell therapy (ACT). We therefore hypothesize that
tumor cells isolated from malignant ascites reflect the genomic landscape
of the primary tumor, offering a unique opportunity to identify
clinically actionable tumor neoantigens. We utilized primary tumor, tumor
cells isolated from malignant ascites and metastatic samples to create
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) mice and to interrogate the tumor
mutational landscape. Somatic mutations were identified by whole exome
sequencing (WES) and RNASeq analysis in tumor samples, using PBMCs as
germline control. In parallel 20 PDX of ovarian cancer were established
in NSG mice by injecting 2Ã—106 cells/mouse subcutaneously (SQ, n=10) and
intraperitoneally (IP, n=10). Tumor growth was monitored weekly via
caliper measurement for mice injected SQ and via abdominal circumference
for mice injected IP. Mutational analysis and prediction of high affinity
peptides was done using bioinformatics approach. We have utilized
different algorithms that are based on Artificial Neural Networks or
published motifs for predicting binding of 8-11 mer peptides to number of
Human MHC alleles (HLA) and out of 168 mutated peptides identified, 30
were found to have high affinity for different HLAs compared to wild type
peptide. Mutated and wild type peptides were pulsed into dendritic cells
and co-cultured with CD8+ T cells for 20 days. Validation of stimulated
CD8+ T cells by these mutated peptides using ELISPOT is underway. TCR
specific for neoantigen from CD8+T cells will be identified and cloned
using retroviral vectors. Transfected CD8+ T cells with neoantigen
specific TCR will be confirmed by co-culturing them with dendritic cells
pulsed with wild type and mutated peptides. Further engineered CD8+ T
cells specific for neoantigens will be tested for adoptive cell therapy
in the established PDX models of ovarian cancer.


