Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression signature of Gleason score is associated with
prostate cancer outcomes in a radical prostatectomy cohort.


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is a leading cause of cancer-related
mortality worldwide. Many men treated for clinically localized PCa will
be cured, however, 20 to 30% of men will relapse and some will experience
metastatic-lethal (ML) progression. Gleason score (GS) is one of the best
predictors of PCa aggressiveness, but additional tumor biomarkers may
improve its prognostic accuracy. We developed a gene expression signature
of GS to enhance prediction of PCa outcomes.

Methods: Elastic Net regularization was used to construct a gene
expression signature by contrasting tumors with GS 8-10 (high) vs. ≤6
(low) in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Tumor tissue samples obtained at
radical prostatectomy for a Fred Hutchinson (FH) patient cohort of men
with localized PCa were used to generate genome-wide gene expression
data. The gene expression signature was then evaluated for its ability to
predict recurrence and ML progression in the FH patient cohort (N=503;
NRecurrence=106; NML progression=27; mean follow-up for recurrence=8
years).

Results: The expression signature includes transcripts representing 49
genes. In the FH cohort, the signature was associated with recurrence and
ML progression with hazard ratios (HRs) for a 25% increase in the
signature of 1.51 (95% CI: 1.24-1.82; P=2.7×10-5) and 2.41 (95% CI:
1.51-3.85; P=0.0002), respectively. Among patients with GS 7 tumors, the
signature was also significantly associated with PCa recurrence (HR=1.38,
95% CI: 1.09-1.76; P=0.008) and ML progression (HR=2.42, 95% CI:
1.30-4.52; P=0.006). The signature’s area under the curve (AUC) for
predicting recurrence and ML progression was 0.68 and 0.76, respectively.
Compared to a model with pathological stage and GS only, the gene
expression signature significantly improved the AUC for overall
recurrence (3%, P=0.0003) and ML progression (7%, P=0.0004), particularly
among patients with GS 7 tumors (recurrence: 5%, P=0.01; ML progression:
13%,

P=0.009). Higher levels of the signature were associated with increased
expression of genes in cell cycle-related pathways including G2M
checkpoint, epithelial mesenchymal transition, and E2F targets pathways,
and decreased expression of genes in several pathways including androgen
response, estrogen response, oxidative phosphorylation, and apoptosis.

Conclusion: The gene expression signature based on GS may improve the
prediction of overall recurrence as well as ML progression in PCa
patients after radical prostatectomy, in particular among men with GS 7
tumors.


