Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic effect of tumor-infiltrating immune cell composition in
non-small cell lung cancer by histology.


Introduction: The immune system plays an important role in tumor
progression and treatment response, for example with the new immune
modulating therapies. In lung cancer the effect of the individual immune
cell types is unclear. In our study, we used publicly available
expression data to find evidence whether there are differences in the
composition of immune cell fractions within the microenvironment between
squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Methods: We searched the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) for human NSCLC
samples. Analysis was confined to samples hybridized to the Affymetrix
HG-U133 Plus 2.0 (GEO accession number GPL570) platforms. Expression
profiles were downloaded and curated for duplicates and corrupt files.
Different immune cell fractions were estimated using CIBERSORT and the
LM22 leukocyte signature matrix. We combined this information with
available clinical data. We used Cox regression analyses to evaluate the
prognostic impact of the different immune fractions and Mann-Whitney U
tests to test significant differences.

Results: Comparing the immune cell composition of adenocarcinoma (n=587)
and squamous cell carcinoma (n=254), we observed in adenocarcinoma
increased percentages of naïve and memory B-cells, resting and active
CD4+ T-cells, regulatory T-cells, active NK cells, monocytes, M2
macrophages, resting dendritic cells and resting mast cells, and
decreased percentages of plasma cells , CD8+ T-cells, follicular helper
cells, resting NK cells, gamma delta T-cells, M0 and M1 macrophages and
active mast cells. In adenocarcinoma, a higher percentage of memory
B-cells in the immune infiltrate was associated with increased survival
(HR 0.97, 95% CI 0.95-0.99, p=0.02), while higher percentages of
neutrophils (HR of 1.07, 95% CI 1.01-1.13, p=0.02), M0 macrophages (1.02,
95% CI 1.01-1.04, p=0.01) and follicular helper cells (1.07, 95% CI
1.02-1.13, p=0.01) were associated with a worse survival. In both
histologies, the resting mast cell immune fraction showed a positive
association with survival (adenocarcinoma HR 0.96, 95% CI 0.93-0.99,
squamous cell carcinoma HR 0.93, 95% CI 0.89-0.98, pResults: Comparing
the immune cell composition of adenocarcinoma (n=587) and squamous cell
carcinoma (n=254), we observed in adenocarcinoma increased percentages of
naïve and memory B-cells, resting and active CD4+ T-cells, regulatory
T-cells, active NK cells, monocytes, M2 macrophages, resting dendritic
cells and resting mast cells, and decreased percentages of plasma cells ,
CD8+ T-cells, follicular helper cells, resting NK cells, gamma delta
T-cells, M0 and M1 macrophages and active mast cells. In adenocarcinoma,
a higher percentage of memory B-cells in the immune infiltrate was
associated with increased survival (HR 0.97, 95% CI 0.95-0.99, p=0.02),
while higher percentages of neutrophils (HR of 1.07, 95% CI 1.01-1.13,
p=0.02), M0 macrophages (1.02, 95% CI 1.01-1.04, p=0.01) and follicular
helper cells (1.07, 95% CI 1.02-1.13, p=0.01) were associated with a
worse survival. In both histologies, the resting mast cell immune
fraction showed a positive association with survival (adenocarcinoma HR
0.96, 95% CI 0.93-0.99, squamous cell carcinoma HR 0.93, 95% CI
0.89-0.98, p<0.01 in both histologies).In squamous cell carcinoma, a
borderline association with a worse prognosis was observed with the
naïve CD4+ T-cell fraction (HR of 1.1, 95% CI 1.00-1.22, p=0.053) and
the regulatory T-cell fraction (HR of 1.11, 95% CI 0.99-1.24, p=0.067).

Conclusion: In NSCLC significant differences in intratumoral immune cell
composition were observed between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma.


