Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ube2v1 promotes epithelial mesenchymal transition and metastasis
in colorectal cancer by epigenetically transcriptional suppression of
autophagy.


Ubiquitination is one of the basic post-translational modifications for
cellular homeostasis. The conjugating enzyme (E2) family plays as a
bridge linking the first step mediated by E1 with the final step mediated
by E3 in the ubiquitin-proteasomesystem. However, the role of Ube2v1, one
of Ubiquitin-conjugating E2 enzyme variant proteins (Ube2v), in
colorectal cancer (CRC) and autophagy is unclear. Here, we found that
Ube2v1 is elevated in tumor samples of CRC patients and correlated with
poorer survival of CRC patients. Furthermore, Ube2v1 promotes migration
and invasion of CRC cells in vitro and boosts tumor growth and metastasis
of CRC cells in vivo. Interestingly, Ube2v1 suppresses autophagy program
and promotes EMT and metastasis of CRC cells in an autophagy dependent
pattern in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, Rapamycin attenuates the enhanced
in vitro migration and invasion and in vivo lung metastasis of Ube2v1
overexpression by inducing the autophagy pathway. Mechanistically, Ube2v1
increases histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation by down-regulating expression
of Sirt1 and epigenetically suppresses gene expression of autophagy genes
in colorectal cancer. In conclusion, Ube2v1 functions as a
globalregulator for autophagy by epigenetically transcriptional
suppression of autophagy, and consequently promotes EMT and metastasis of
CRC. Our study functionally links Ube2v1, one member of E2 family in the
ubiquitin-proteasome system toautophagy program in CRC progression and
metastasis.


