Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting SHP-1 mediated VEGF signaling to block the migration of
human triple negative breast cancer.


Patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) had an increased
likelihood of distant recurrence and death, as compared with those with
non-TNBC subtype. Regorafenib is a multi-receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
inhibitor targeting oncogenesis and has been approved for metastatic
colorectal cancer and advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumor. Recently,
scientists have suggested that regorafenib also acts as a SHP-1
phosphatase agonist. In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of
regorafenib in suppressing metastasis of TNBC cells through targeting the
SHP-1/p-STAT3/VEGF-A axis. We first observed a significant correlation
between migration ability and SHP-1/p-STAT3/VEGF-A expression in several
human TNBC cell lines. Importantly, we also demonstrated that VEGF-A
expression is correlated with worse disease-free and distant
metastasis-free survival in clinical TNBC patients. Furthermore, we
showed that regorafenib could inhibit the migration of human TNBC cells,
which was related to downregulation of p-STAT3 and VEGF-A. To exclude the
role of RTK inhibition in regorafenib-induced anti-metastasis, we
synthesized a regorafenib derivative, SC-78, that had minimal effect on
VEGFR2 and PDGFR kinase inhibition, while having more potent effects on
SHP-1 activation. SC-78 demonstrated superior in vitro and in vivo
anti-migration to regorafenib. This study indicated that the
SHP-1/p-STAT3/VEGF-A axis is a potential therapeutic target for
metastatic TNBC, and SC-78 may be a promising lead compound for
suppressing metastasis of TNBC. (Grant supported by MOST
104-2628-B-075-001-MY3, MOST 105-2325-B-010-007, 105F026 )


