Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of cis-eQTLs in normal and tumor-derived pancreatic
tissues reveals functional insights, including for the 9q34.1 ABO
pancreatic cancer risk locus.


Objective: To elucidate the genetic architecture of gene expression in
pancreatic tissues.

Design: We performed expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) and
allele specific expression (ASE) analyses using RNA-sequence data and
1000 Genomes (1000G) imputed GWAS genotypes from 95 fresh frozen
histologically normal pancreatic tissue samples. Data from 115 pancreatic
tumor-derived tissue samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was
included for comparison.

Results: We identified 38,615 cis-eQTLs (corresponding to 484 Genes) in
histologically normal tissues and 39,713 cis-eQTL (corresponding to 237
Genes) in tumor tissues (FDRResults: We identified 38,615 cis-eQTLs
(corresponding to 484 Genes) in histologically normal tissues and 39,713
cis-eQTL (corresponding to 237 Genes) in tumor tissues (FDR<0.1), with
the strongest effects seen near transcriptional start sites (TSS).
Approximately 23% and 42% of genes with significant cis-eQTLs (eGenes)
appeared to be specific for tumor and normal derived tissues,
respectively. Significant enrichment of cis-eQTL variants was noted in
noncoding regulatory regions marked by modified histones, DNAse
hypersensitivity and bound transcription factors, in particular for
pancreatic tissues (1.53-3.12 fold, P≤0.0001), indicating
tissue-specific functional relevance. A common pancreatic cancer risk
locus on 9q34.2 in the ABO gene (rs687289) was associated with ABO
expression in histologically normal (P=5.8x10-8) and tumor-derived
(P=8.3x10-5) pancreatic tissues. The high linkage disequilibrium (LD)
between this variant and the O blood group generating deletion variant in
exon 6 of ABO suggested that nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) of the “O”
mRNA could explain the eQTL. However, knock-down of crucial NMD
regulators did not influence decay of the ABO “O” mRNA, indicating
that a gene regulatory element influenced by pancreatic cancer risk
alleles may underlie the eQTL.

Conclusions: We have identified cis-eQTLs representing potential
functional regulatory variants in the pancreas and generated a rich
dataset for further studies on gene expression and regulation in
pancreatic tissues.


