Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid droplets, a novel metabolic target in glioblastoma.


Lipid metabolism reprogramming is a novel feature of malignancies.
Identifying the vulnerability of lipid alteration in tumor cells provides
a new window to treat cancer. Here, we unraveled that glioblastoma (GBM)
patients containing high levels of lipid droplets (LDs), special
organelles storing cholesterol esters and triglycerides in cells,
presented poor survival. We found that LDs largely formed in tumor
tissues from GBM patients, but rarely in low grade of gliomas and normal
brain tissues, demonstrating that LDs might serve as a novel diagnostic
biomarker and prognostic marker for GBM. We further revealed that sterol
O-acyltransferase 1 (SOAT1), the key enzyme controlling cholesterol
esterification and LD formation, is highly expressed and correlated with
LD prevalence in tumor tissues from GBM patients. Genetic or
pharmacologic inhibition SOAT1 using avasimibe, a phase III clinical
trial drug in human atherosclerosis patients, significantly suppressed
GBM growth and prolongs survival in xenograft models. Moreover, we found
that inhibiting SOAT1 suppressed sterol regulatory element-binding
protein-1 (SREBP-1), a key transcription factor playing a central role in
lipid synthesis, underlying the molecular mechanism of targeting
SOAT1-mediated GBM growth suppression. In summary, our data demonstrate
that LDs/cholesterol esters uniquely formed in tumor tissues provides an
ideal target to specifically inhibit GBM cells whereas sparing normal
brain tissues, and reveal that blocking cholesterol storage via targeting
SOAT1 represents a promising strategy for GBM treatment.


