Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel RNA in situ hybridization approach highly sensitive for
detection of Merkel cell polyomavirus.


Background: Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a highly aggressive
neuroendocrine tumor of the skin. Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) plays
an oncogenic role in the majority of MCC tumors. Detection of MCPyV in
MCC tumors has diagnostic utility, and potentially prognostic and
therapeutic implications. We investigated whether RNAscope, a novel RNA
in situ hybridization (ISH) method for detection of RNA transcripts in
tissues at the single-cell/single-molecule level, is useful for MCPyV
detection.

Methods: We applied an RNAscope probe targeting MCPyV T antigen
transcripts on tissue microarrays (TMAs) and full tissue sections
encompassing 91 MCC tumors from 75 patients, 14 carcinomas of other
types, and various normal tissues. qPCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
for MCPyV were performed on 58 and 88 cases, respectively. qPCR was also
performed on 18 cases of normal skin to establish background levels of
MCPyV in non-tumor tissues.

Results: RNA-ISH demonstrated the presence of MCPyV in 46.2% (42/91) of
cases. A total of 58 samples had data from all the three detection
modalities (qPCR, RNA-ISH and IHC). RNA-ISH demonstrated 100% concordance
with qPCR results, whereas IHC had a slightly lower concordance (96.6%).
RNA-ISH demonstrated higher agreement than IHC among TMA cores from the
same case, and between TMA cores and matched full tissue sections. Of
samples with background inflammatory cells, 5 of 37 (15.6%) showed
moderate nonspecific staining of lymphocytes by IHC, whereas RNA-ISH
lacked background.

Conclusions: RNA-ISH is comparably sensitive to qPCR for detection of
MCPyV, and allows for correlation with tissue morphology. Our findings
support RNA-ISH as a highly effective method for MCPyV detection in
tumors.


