Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal cell sub-populations selectively modulate paracrine
hedgehog signaling in triple negative breast cancer.


Recent studies correlate Hedgehog (Hh) signaling with reduced survival
rates in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Activation of
hedgehog signaling in the adjacent mesenchyme has been shown to promote
tumor growth and it is a poor prognosis factor for TNBC. We developed a
novel tumor-mesenchymal in vitro model of hedgehog signaling in TNBC to
evaluate the role of mesenchymal cell sub-populations in the
proliferative potential and stem cell markers of breast cancer cells
using a custom designed multiwell array. As a source of mesenchymal cell
sub-populations we evaluated myofibroblasts, mesenchymal stem cells
derived from bone marrow or adipose tissue and tumor cells that undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Tumor cells were culture with 1
or 2 mesenchymal cell sub-populations in adjacent compartments +/- SHH
ligand for 72-96hrs. Active Hh signaling was confirmed by up-regulation
of main Hh target genes (e.g. Gli1, Patch1). Paracrine Hh signaling only
in bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell and EMT significantly
increased proliferation (10-15%) of TNBC and normal breast cancer cell
lines. Addition of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells or
pharmacological Hh inhibitors (Cyclopamine and Gant61) partially
abolished tumor growth indicating that other non-canonical signals are
involve in paracrine Hh-driven tumors. Cancer stem cell markers were
selectively modulated in co-cultures. Our results suggest that paracrine
Hh signaling-driven by bone marrow and EMT mesenchymal are potential
therapeutic targets to treating TNBC.


