Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exclusive delivery of mazF in cancer cells by Listeria
monocytogenes.


Programmed cell death (PCD), an active process that leads to cell
suicide, is a critical mechanism in every organism. MazF, a bacterial
ribonuclease protein, can trigger PCD in bacterial cells and also induce
Bak-dependent apoptosis in mammalian cells. This bacterial ribonuclease
cleaves mRNAs at ACA sequences leading to inhibition of protein synthesis
in cells. Hence, we hypothesized that the overexpression of MazF proteins
in cancer cells could result in the induction of apoptosis. In the
present study, the ACA-less mazF gene was inserted downstream of the
Internal Ribosome Entry Site (IRES) and under the control of T7 promoter.
The plasmid was electroporated into Listeria monocytogenes harboring
pCSA1 that encodes T7 RNA polymerase under the control of the listeria
actA promoter. Subsequently, the bacteria were functionalized with
Trastuzumab (HerceptinÂ®) to deliver the mazF mRNA into HER2/neu breast
cancer cells. The results showed that MazF protein has an ability to
induce apoptosis in HER2/neu breast cancer cells. This finding is the
first report of the application and delivery of MazF as an anti-cancer
agent for the induction of apoptosis in HER2/neu breast cancer cell line.
This research suggests cancer therapy that targets only cancer cells but
not healthy cells and offers more advantages, e.g., inexpensiveness,
target tissue specificity, easy and safe delivery, in comparison to other
gene therapy vectors or direct protein administration.


