Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CIP2A can be a therapeutic target of rapamycin in radioresistant
head and neck cancer with P53 mutation.


The presence of p53 mutation was associated with poor survival in various
tumors. The involvement of p53 in apoptosis and cell-cycle control makes
it a plausible biomarker of prognosis . Classifying TP53 mutations in
HNSCC described disruptive TP53 mutation in either the L2 or L3 loop of
the DNA binding domain, resulting in polarity change within the protein,
or stop cordon. Disruptive TP53 mutation in HNSCC tumors predicts for
locoregional recurrence, due to increased radioresistance via the
inhibition of senescence. Senescence induction contributes to cancer
therapy responses and is crucial for p53-mediated tumor suppression.
However, whether p53 inactivation actively suppresses senescence
induction has been unclear. Here, we found that overexpression CIP2A
(cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A) positively correlated
with presence of p53 mutation in head and neck cancer and mediates
radioresistance through suppression of radiation induced senescence. And
we demonstrated that rapamycin could induce senescence via CIP2A
downregulation and increase radiosensitivity in p53 disruptive mutation
cell line. This is the first investigation to analyze the role of CI2A in
resistance to the radiotherapy of head and neck cancer. As a consequence,
a greater understanding of radioresistance mechanisms through our results
in head and neck cancer with p53 mutation will enable the rational design
of combination regimens and sequential treatment algorithms to improve
clinical outcomes and points to the usefulness of CIP2A as a biomarker to
predict clinical response to rapamycin in head and neck cancer.


