Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting myeloma cell-derived runx2 by miRNAs suppresses multiple
myeloma growth and progression.


In Multiple myeloma (MM), abnormal plasma cells accumulate in the bone
marrow and spread to new bone sites. However, the mechanisms underlying
this spread of MM cells remain unclear. Runx2 is a bone specific
transcription factor upregulated in various human tumors, including MM.
Our studies have previously demonstrated that Runx2 is a major driver of
MM progression in bone. In the present study, our goal was to identify
miRNAs targeting Runx2 to reduce tumor growth and dissemination of MM to
new bone sites and asses their therapeutic potential. Expression analysis
of a panel of miRNA's regulating Runx2 revealed an inverse relationship
between Runx2 expression and two miRNAs: miR-342 and miR-363. miRNA
expression analysis using the Gene Expression Omnibus database showed
that miR-342 and miR-363 are highly expressed in plasma cells of normal
donors (n= 3), while Runx2 is detected at very low levels. In contrast,
MM cells of patients with newly diagnosed (n=23) and relapsed MM (n=17)
expressed very little miR-342 and miR-363 but showed high levels of Runx2
expression. Reconstituting CAG human MM cells with synthetic miR-342,
miR-363 or miR-342+miR-363 in combination reduced the expression of Runx2
and the metastasis-promoting Runx2 target genes RANKL, DKK1 and DMP1.
Tumor cell viability and migration were also decreased compared to
control in vitro. We then transfected miR-342, miR-363 or miR-342+miR-363
in mouse 5TGM1 MM cells expressing high levels of Runx2 and tested
bone-homing and growth in syngenic C57Bl/KaLwRij mice by intravenous
injection. Mouse sera were collected at week 2 and 4 after tumor cell
injection and the levels of IgG2bκ, a marker of 5TGM1 cells, were
measured by ELISA. The results showed significantly decreased IgG2bκ
levels in mice bearing miR-342 or miR-363 transfected tumors compared to
mice bearing control miR-scramble tumors. Additionally, miR-342+miR-363
co-transfection produced a synergistic effect on reducing tumor growth.
Mechanistic studies demonstrated that miR-342 and miR-363 induced Runx2
suppression, results in inhibition of Runx2-downstream signaling pathways
Akt/β-catenin/survivin, which are required for MM tumor progression. In
conclusion, we have identified two novel miRNAs, miR-342 and miR-363,
that negatively regulate Runx2 expression in MM cells. We further
demonstrated that enhanced expression of miR-342 or miR-363 in MM cells
inhibits MM growth in vivo. Thus, miR-342 and miR-363 are potential novel
markers of MM prognosis and can be developed as new therapeutic drugs for
MM treatment.


