Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a 4-sample version of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
for evaluating the temporal physiology of cells treated with test
compounds in a label-free, high content, platform for quantitative
analysis of adherent cell-culture models.


Our objective is to develop multi-functional nanotechnology-based
anti-tumor drug delivery systems for improving the efficacy of treatments
and reducing undesirable side effects. The essential part of this process
is the development and validation of un-biased, quantitative analytical
techniques. We employed a newly developed holographic imaging cytometry
system HoloMonitorÂ® M4 for label-free time-lapse cellular analysis
(Phase Holographic Imaging, Sweden).In previous work we have demonstrated
our ability to obtain quantitative, high content cellular feature data
congruent to data obtained from traditional label-based systems. We
applied a modified version of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov 2-sample test. The
classic test takes control and test frequency distributions (histograms),
and converts them to probability functions. The maximum vertical
displacement between the two is reported as the D-value, to determine if
the two distributions are significantly different. In modified versions
of the test, it is a comparator; instead of a single value, we obtain
histograms of the difference between the control and test normalized
probability functions. These histograms are termed Brownian Bridges,
where the end points are fixed at a value of zero, and the function is
free to vary in between, in either up-going, down-going or mixed. Now, we
report the development of a 4-sample Kolmogorov based method. Two
modified K.S. tests are performed to compare distributions A to Ac and B
to Bc. It is assumed that all the distributions have the same time basis,
and each time point is processed sequentially. The resulting time point
pairs are plotted as a vector in a two parameter scattergram, tracing the
outlines of the probability distribution of the cell populations through
time. Unlike, the Brownian Bridge histograms, here, the starting and the
ending points are both at the same location (0,0), within the two
dimensional scattergram, but are free to move in both positive and
negative directions away from the origin. HeLa cells in a 12-well MatTek
plate were adhered and treated with Paclitaxel (PCT) in concentrations
from 0 to 40 nM in 5-fold increments, either pulsed for 4 hrs. followed
by 48 hours of imaging or with continuous exposure for 48 hours of
imaging. We obtained a variety of different plot types, including
continuous vs. pulsed comparisons, inter dosage comparisons, as well as
the ability to compare multiple features to each other. Of particular
significance is the fact that in comparative dosage experiments over 10
nM, the pulsed and continuous probability zones are completely separated,
reflecting live and dead cells, and allowing complex pharmacodynamic
tracking.


