Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic deregulation of SOCS5 expression in T cell lineage
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


For children, adolescents and young adults with T-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, event free survival following relapse is For
children, adolescents and young adults with T-lineage acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, event free survival following relapse is <10%. A variety of
hematologic malignancies activate JAK-STAT signaling through activating
mutations in JAK1-3, IL7R and downregulation of negative regulators.
SOCS5 belongs to the suppressor of the cytokine signaling (SOCS) family,
which are known cytokine-inducible negative regulators of JAK-STAT and
other signaling pathways. SOCS5 is involved in negative regulation of Th2
development. However, the roles of SOCS5 in blood cancer, in particular
T-ALL have not been elucidated so far. Using Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0
microarray we assessed SOCS5 expression levels in a cohort of 100 T-ALL
samples derived from AALL0434 COG study. SOCS5 was deregulated in T-ALL
cells, and its expression was lowered in cases harboring MLL gene
rearrangements (MLL-R) compared to the remaining cases (P For children,
adolescents and young adults with T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
event free survival following relapse is <10%. A variety of hematologic
malignancies activate JAK-STAT signaling through activating mutations in
JAK1-3, IL7R and downregulation of negative regulators. SOCS5 belongs to
the suppressor of the cytokine signaling (SOCS) family, which are known
cytokine-inducible negative regulators of JAK-STAT and other signaling
pathways. SOCS5 is involved in negative regulation of Th2 development.
However, the roles of SOCS5 in blood cancer, in particular T-ALL have not
been elucidated so far. Using Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarray we
assessed SOCS5 expression levels in a cohort of 100 T-ALL samples derived
from AALL0434 COG study. SOCS5 was deregulated in T-ALL cells, and its
expression was lowered in cases harboring MLL gene rearrangements (MLL-R)
compared to the remaining cases (P < 0.0001). Because we did not identify
any mutations in SOCS5 gene in the cohort of 100 cases, we hypothesized
that SOCS5 expression is regulated by aberrant DNA methylation in T-ALL.
Using methyl-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and bisulfite sequencing we found that
SOCS5 expression is regulated by promoter/1st exon CpG island methylation
in T-ALL. CCRF-CEM and ALL-SIL cells, and selected primary T-ALL samples
showed hypermethylation in promoter/1st exon region corresponding to
lower levels of SOCS5 expression. In contrary, Koptk1 and PF382 cells,
and T-ALL samples with higher levels of SOCS5 had hypomethylated SOCS5
promoter/1st region. SOCS5 transcript and protein expression were induced
by DNA demethylating agent, 5-azacitidine in ALL-SIL and CCRF-CEM cells
(P For children, adolescents and young adults with T-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, event free survival following relapse is <10%. A
variety of hematologic malignancies activate JAK-STAT signaling through
activating mutations in JAK1-3, IL7R and downregulation of negative
regulators. SOCS5 belongs to the suppressor of the cytokine signaling
(SOCS) family, which are known cytokine-inducible negative regulators of
JAK-STAT and other signaling pathways. SOCS5 is involved in negative
regulation of Th2 development. However, the roles of SOCS5 in blood
cancer, in particular T-ALL have not been elucidated so far. Using
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarray we assessed SOCS5 expression levels
in a cohort of 100 T-ALL samples derived from AALL0434 COG study. SOCS5
was deregulated in T-ALL cells, and its expression was lowered in cases
harboring MLL gene rearrangements (MLL-R) compared to the remaining cases
(P < 0.0001). Because we did not identify any mutations in SOCS5 gene in
the cohort of 100 cases, we hypothesized that SOCS5 expression is
regulated by aberrant DNA methylation in T-ALL. Using methyl-specific PCR
(MS-PCR) and bisulfite sequencing we found that SOCS5 expression is
regulated by promoter/1st exon CpG island methylation in T-ALL. CCRF-CEM
and ALL-SIL cells, and selected primary T-ALL samples showed
hypermethylation in promoter/1st exon region corresponding to lower
levels of SOCS5 expression. In contrary, Koptk1 and PF382 cells, and
T-ALL samples with higher levels of SOCS5 had hypomethylated SOCS5
promoter/1st region. SOCS5 transcript and protein expression were induced
by DNA demethylating agent, 5-azacitidine in ALL-SIL and CCRF-CEM cells
(P < 0.0001). The increase in SOCS5 expression was correlated with its
promoter demethylation as shown by MS-PCR. SOCS5 mRNA and protein levels
were also increased in ALL-SIL cells transduced with DNMT1 shRNA compared
to negative control (P For children, adolescents and young adults with
T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia, event free survival following
relapse is <10%. A variety of hematologic malignancies activate JAK-STAT
signaling through activating mutations in JAK1-3, IL7R and downregulation
of negative regulators. SOCS5 belongs to the suppressor of the cytokine
signaling (SOCS) family, which are known cytokine-inducible negative
regulators of JAK-STAT and other signaling pathways. SOCS5 is involved in
negative regulation of Th2 development. However, the roles of SOCS5 in
blood cancer, in particular T-ALL have not been elucidated so far. Using
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarray we assessed SOCS5 expression levels
in a cohort of 100 T-ALL samples derived from AALL0434 COG study. SOCS5
was deregulated in T-ALL cells, and its expression was lowered in cases
harboring MLL gene rearrangements (MLL-R) compared to the remaining cases
(P < 0.0001). Because we did not identify any mutations in SOCS5 gene in
the cohort of 100 cases, we hypothesized that SOCS5 expression is
regulated by aberrant DNA methylation in T-ALL. Using methyl-specific PCR
(MS-PCR) and bisulfite sequencing we found that SOCS5 expression is
regulated by promoter/1st exon CpG island methylation in T-ALL. CCRF-CEM
and ALL-SIL cells, and selected primary T-ALL samples showed
hypermethylation in promoter/1st exon region corresponding to lower
levels of SOCS5 expression. In contrary, Koptk1 and PF382 cells, and
T-ALL samples with higher levels of SOCS5 had hypomethylated SOCS5
promoter/1st region. SOCS5 transcript and protein expression were induced
by DNA demethylating agent, 5-azacitidine in ALL-SIL and CCRF-CEM cells
(P < 0.0001). The increase in SOCS5 expression was correlated with its
promoter demethylation as shown by MS-PCR. SOCS5 mRNA and protein levels
were also increased in ALL-SIL cells transduced with DNMT1 shRNA compared
to negative control (P < 0.0001) indicating that inhibition of DNA
methyltransferase activity restores SOCS5 expression in T-ALL. To assess
whether histone deacetylation is involved in epigenetic regulation of
SOCS5 expression, we treated CCRF-CEM and ALL-SIL cells with deacetylase
inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA). Treatment with TSA restored histone
acetylation and caused upregulation of SOCS5 (P For children, adolescents
and young adults with T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia, event free
survival following relapse is <10%. A variety of hematologic malignancies
activate JAK-STAT signaling through activating mutations in JAK1-3, IL7R
and downregulation of negative regulators. SOCS5 belongs to the
suppressor of the cytokine signaling (SOCS) family, which are known
cytokine-inducible negative regulators of JAK-STAT and other signaling
pathways. SOCS5 is involved in negative regulation of Th2 development.
However, the roles of SOCS5 in blood cancer, in particular T-ALL have not
been elucidated so far. Using Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarray we
assessed SOCS5 expression levels in a cohort of 100 T-ALL samples derived
from AALL0434 COG study. SOCS5 was deregulated in T-ALL cells, and its
expression was lowered in cases harboring MLL gene rearrangements (MLL-R)
compared to the remaining cases (P < 0.0001). Because we did not identify
any mutations in SOCS5 gene in the cohort of 100 cases, we hypothesized
that SOCS5 expression is regulated by aberrant DNA methylation in T-ALL.
Using methyl-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and bisulfite sequencing we found that
SOCS5 expression is regulated by promoter/1st exon CpG island methylation
in T-ALL. CCRF-CEM and ALL-SIL cells, and selected primary T-ALL samples
showed hypermethylation in promoter/1st exon region corresponding to
lower levels of SOCS5 expression. In contrary, Koptk1 and PF382 cells,
and T-ALL samples with higher levels of SOCS5 had hypomethylated SOCS5
promoter/1st region. SOCS5 transcript and protein expression were induced
by DNA demethylating agent, 5-azacitidine in ALL-SIL and CCRF-CEM cells
(P < 0.0001). The increase in SOCS5 expression was correlated with its
promoter demethylation as shown by MS-PCR. SOCS5 mRNA and protein levels
were also increased in ALL-SIL cells transduced with DNMT1 shRNA compared
to negative control (P < 0.0001) indicating that inhibition of DNA
methyltransferase activity restores SOCS5 expression in T-ALL. To assess
whether histone deacetylation is involved in epigenetic regulation of
SOCS5 expression, we treated CCRF-CEM and ALL-SIL cells with deacetylase
inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA). Treatment with TSA restored histone
acetylation and caused upregulation of SOCS5 (P < 0.0001). We next
examined the effects of SOCS5 on leukemogenesis by shRNA-mediated knock
down of SOCS5 in KoptK1 and PF382 cells. Silencing of SOCS5 increased
cellular proliferation as shown by an increase in T-ALL cell number (P
For children, adolescents and young adults with T-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, event free survival following relapse is <10%. A
variety of hematologic malignancies activate JAK-STAT signaling through
activating mutations in JAK1-3, IL7R and downregulation of negative
regulators. SOCS5 belongs to the suppressor of the cytokine signaling
(SOCS) family, which are known cytokine-inducible negative regulators of
JAK-STAT and other signaling pathways. SOCS5 is involved in negative
regulation of Th2 development. However, the roles of SOCS5 in blood
cancer, in particular T-ALL have not been elucidated so far. Using
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarray we assessed SOCS5 expression levels
in a cohort of 100 T-ALL samples derived from AALL0434 COG study. SOCS5
was deregulated in T-ALL cells, and its expression was lowered in cases
harboring MLL gene rearrangements (MLL-R) compared to the remaining cases
(P < 0.0001). Because we did not identify any mutations in SOCS5 gene in
the cohort of 100 cases, we hypothesized that SOCS5 expression is
regulated by aberrant DNA methylation in T-ALL. Using methyl-specific PCR
(MS-PCR) and bisulfite sequencing we found that SOCS5 expression is
regulated by promoter/1st exon CpG island methylation in T-ALL. CCRF-CEM
and ALL-SIL cells, and selected primary T-ALL samples showed
hypermethylation in promoter/1st exon region corresponding to lower
levels of SOCS5 expression. In contrary, Koptk1 and PF382 cells, and
T-ALL samples with higher levels of SOCS5 had hypomethylated SOCS5
promoter/1st region. SOCS5 transcript and protein expression were induced
by DNA demethylating agent, 5-azacitidine in ALL-SIL and CCRF-CEM cells
(P < 0.0001). The increase in SOCS5 expression was correlated with its
promoter demethylation as shown by MS-PCR. SOCS5 mRNA and protein levels
were also increased in ALL-SIL cells transduced with DNMT1 shRNA compared
to negative control (P < 0.0001) indicating that inhibition of DNA
methyltransferase activity restores SOCS5 expression in T-ALL. To assess
whether histone deacetylation is involved in epigenetic regulation of
SOCS5 expression, we treated CCRF-CEM and ALL-SIL cells with deacetylase
inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA). Treatment with TSA restored histone
acetylation and caused upregulation of SOCS5 (P < 0.0001). We next
examined the effects of SOCS5 on leukemogenesis by shRNA-mediated knock
down of SOCS5 in KoptK1 and PF382 cells. Silencing of SOCS5 increased
cellular proliferation as shown by an increase in T-ALL cell number (P <
0.0001). Reduced expression of SOCS5 led to an increase in MYC, IL4,
IL4Rα, IL7R expression and STAT6 activation. These results indicate that
SOCS5 is epigenetically deregulated in T-ALL. Future studies are required
to evaluate the tumor suppressor roles of SOCS5 in a subset of T-ALL, in
particular, in MLL-R cases via the regulatory effect on cytokine and
growth factor receptor signaling.


