Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross-platform detection and quantification of actionable
mutations in cell-free DNA shows high concordance and correlation between
next-generation sequencing and droplet digital PCR.


Background: Non-invasive genotyping of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) provides
physicians with the ability to identify genomic alterations, evaluate
response to treatment, and uncover potential mechanisms of resistance.
Here, we analyze the concordance of next-generation sequencing (NGS) and
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) in detecting and quantifying actionable
mutations from cfDNA of lung, colorectal, and breast cancer patients.

Methods: We studied a cohort of 221 advanced cancer cfDNA samples with
completed Guardant360 digital sequencing results. Variant allele
frequencies (% AFs) ranged from less than 0.2% to greater than 90% for
common driver and resistance mutations. Blinded to plasma NGS results, we
performed ddPCR using our validated assays for EGFR L858R, exon19 del,
T790M (113 presumed lung cases); BRAF V600E, KRAS G12X (77 colorectal
cases); ESR1 D538G, Y537C and PIK3CA H1047R (31 breast cases). Following
unblinding, qualitative and quantitative accuracy were compared.

Results: Qualitative results (Table 1) show a high concordance between
NGS and ddPCR, with 98.3% (576/586) of all assays run being concordant.
9/22 of samples that had an AF below 0.4% were discordant, while only one
sample above 0.4% AF was discordant. AFs calculated by NGS and ddPCR were
strongly correlated by linear regression (R between 0.951 and 0.999).
Notably, the slope of the ddPCR AF versus NGS AF graph for EGFR ex19del
was 0.725, which improved to 0.95 with the adoption of an alternate
calling method.

Conclusions: This interlaboratory comparison of actionable mutations in
cfDNA from lung, colorectal, and breast cancers by orthogonal genotyping
platforms demonstrates a substantial concordance in detection and
quantification between NGS and ddPCR. Our cross-platform study
establishes the feasibility of standardization of qualitative and
quantitative measurements of cfDNA-detected alterations.

Table 1



Lung

EGFR L858R

EGFR Ex19 del

EGFR T790M



(n=113)

G360+

G360-

G360+

G360-

G360+

G360-



ddPCR+

58

0

51

0

53

0



ddPCR-

0

55

4

58

4

56



Breast

ESR1 Y537C

ESR1 D538G

PIK3CA H1047R



(n=31)

G360+

G360-

G360+

G360-

G360+

G360-



ddPCR+

1

0

22

0

2

0



ddPCR-

0

30

0

9

0

29



Colorectal

BRAF V600E

KRAS G12X





(n=78)

G360+

G360-

G360+

G360-





ddPCR+

22

0

57

1



ddPCR-

0

55

1

18


