Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Health-related quality of life among long-term prostate cancer
survivors by primary treatment: A systematic review.


Introduction: Due to improving prognosis for prostate cancer survivors
and increased

awareness of late- or long-term treatment effects, monitoring long-term
well-being among

prostate cancer survivors has gained increasing attention. In this
systematic review, we

identified and synthesized studies comparing health-related quality of
life (HRQoL) among

long-term prostate cancer (PC) survivors (i.e. â‰¥5 years past diagnosis)
by primary treatment.

Methods: In order to summarize current literature research results, we
searched multiple

databases, including Pubmed, Medline, Embase, PsychInfo, Cinahl, Web of
Science and

Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials to identify all relevant
articles. Studies had to

assess at least overall/ general HRQoL plus one HRQoL domain or a minimum
of two HRQoL

domains. Two independent reviewers systematically extracted the content
of the included

studies.

Results: A total of twelve studies were identified (2 from US, 3 from
Japan, 6 from Europe, 1

from US/UK); the majority were observational prospective cohort studies
(n=7), and two

were RCTs. HRQoL was assessed using the SF-36 (n=7) or EORTC QLQ-C30
(n=5). Instruments

to assess symptoms included various questionnaires (e.g., EPIC, IPSS,
UCLA and EORTC PR

25). The sample size (all arms combined) was below 100 in 6 studies,
between 100 and 200

in 5 studies, and 780 in one study. Comparison groups differed across
studies.

Although, long-term prostate cancer survivors reported comparable HRQoL
to the general

population, survivors treated using external beam radiation therapy
(EBRT) reported poorer

role, social and role physical functioning and a higher burden of
diarrhea, pain, sleep

disturbance and nausea/vomiting.

Results for comparisons of different therapies were not consistent.
Whereas studies using

the EORTC QLQ-c30 questionnaire did not reveal any statistically or
clinically significant

results, studies using the SF-36 showed that survivors treated with a
radical prostatectomy

reported better physical and role functioning as well as higher vitality
than survivors treated

with AS/WW, ADT and EBRT. However, the latter results were only based on
one study. No

clear associations were seen between EBRT and OM.

Conclusion: This review suggests that HRQol among long-term prostate
cancer survivors

varies according to primary treatment. However, it remains unclear which
treatment options

are superior with respect to HRQoL since studies yielded conflicting
results, used different

comparison groups, or did not have enough power to draw any firm
conclusions.


