Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic wide microarray analysis identifies novel copy number
alterations in adult acute myeloid leukemia.


Introduction: Novel array-based technique as SNP microarray can detect
losses or gains of chromosomic material, which could be predictive of
response and can help define therapeutic strategies. The aim of this
study is to improve conventional cytogenetic analysis and identify new
genetic alterations relevant to leukemogenesis, by a SNP array-based
genotyping approach.

Materials and Methods: We performed SNP 6.0 or Cytoscan HD (Affymetrix)
in 235 Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) patients at diagnosis.
Seventy-eight/235 samples were also performed by Whole Exome Sequencing,
WES (HiSeq,Illumina). SNP Array data were analyzed by Nexus Copy Number
v8.0 (BioDiscovery) and R Core Team.

Results: Copy Number Alterations (CNAs) were scattered across all
chromosomes and all pts showed CNA events. SNP array analysis showed that
several genes were preferentially deleted, including MRPS5 (14.8%), PHF6
(9.3%), SCAPER (7.2%), CASK (5.9%), WNK (4.6%), STAG2 (4.2%), LRRK1
(3.4%), PALB2 (3.4%), while the genes preferentially amplified were
RABL2B (16.1%), NF2 (10.2%), NBPF9 (7.6%), JAK2 (6.8%), RB1, NF1 and
KMT2A (4.2%), PTEN (3.4%), TP73 and SMAD2 (2.5%). Single-copy losses and
deletions were enriched (pResults: Copy Number Alterations (CNAs) were
scattered across all chromosomes and all pts showed CNA events. SNP array
analysis showed that several genes were preferentially deleted, including
MRPS5 (14.8%), PHF6 (9.3%), SCAPER (7.2%), CASK (5.9%), WNK (4.6%), STAG2
(4.2%), LRRK1 (3.4%), PALB2 (3.4%), while the genes preferentially
amplified were RABL2B (16.1%), NF2 (10.2%), NBPF9 (7.6%), JAK2 (6.8%),
RB1, NF1 and KMT2A (4.2%), PTEN (3.4%), TP73 and SMAD2 (2.5%).
Single-copy losses and deletions were enriched (p<.001) for genes mapping
into the following pathways: aberrant PD-1 signaling, loss of function of
SMAD4 in cancer and SMAD4 MH2 Domain mutants in cancer. The functional
pathways significantly (pResults: Copy Number Alterations (CNAs) were
scattered across all chromosomes and all pts showed CNA events. SNP array
analysis showed that several genes were preferentially deleted, including
MRPS5 (14.8%), PHF6 (9.3%), SCAPER (7.2%), CASK (5.9%), WNK (4.6%), STAG2
(4.2%), LRRK1 (3.4%), PALB2 (3.4%), while the genes preferentially
amplified were RABL2B (16.1%), NF2 (10.2%), NBPF9 (7.6%), JAK2 (6.8%),
RB1, NF1 and KMT2A (4.2%), PTEN (3.4%), TP73 and SMAD2 (2.5%).
Single-copy losses and deletions were enriched (p<.001) for genes mapping
into the following pathways: aberrant PD-1 signaling, loss of function of
SMAD4 in cancer and SMAD4 MH2 Domain mutants in cancer. The functional
pathways significantly (p<.001) deregulated in our cohort with single
copy gain and homozygous amplification were: regulation of transcription
and nucleic acid, negative regulation of metabolic processes,
constitutive signaling by aberrant PI3K in cancer and PI3K/AKT network.
Finally, in order to define driver alterations, we correlate deletions
and losses with mutational data. Interestingly, we found losses which are
also targeted by mutations (BRCA2, LRRK1). Moreover, some deleted genes,
as CASK, CDK6 and MAPT, were involved in pathways affected by genomic
mutations (CASK deletion and MPP6 mutation, CDK6 deletion and PPM1D
mutation, MAPT deletion and SPAG5 mutation).

Conclusion: We have identified new CNAs and pathways involving novel
potential leukemia-related genes. Our results suggest that the comparison
between SNP and WES data could provide important findings on prognosis of
AML patients. Minimal deleted regions of genes implicated in deregulated
pathways deserve further investigation in order to identify new candidate
genes which could be relevant AML biomarkers. Acknowledgements:
ELN,AIL,AIRC,progetto Regione-UniversitÃ  2010-12 (L. Bolondi),FP7
NGS-PTL project,HARMONY.


