Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omics data integration analysis in high grade serous ovarian
cancer: results from three studies.


High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is a complex disease in which
initiation and progression have been associated with gene mutation, DNA
methylation changes, genetic variation, and epigenetic processes.
Variation in several susceptibility regions and cancer-typical global
methylation patterns have been observed in HGSOC; however, this knowledge
has not been compelling in understanding HGSOC intiation or progression.
As ingetration of genomic, epigenomic, and transcriptomic data has
increased mechanistic understanding in other cancers, we hypothesized
that tumor methylation alone or in combination with germline genetic
variation influences tumor gene expression in HGSOC. We examined three
nested models using an Elastnic Net (ENET) penalized regression method
while adjusting for somatic copy number (CNV): a) germline genotype and
tumor DNA methylation (full model), b) genotype only, and c) DNA
methylation only. We included 339 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), 54 cases from Mayo Clinic, and 78 cases from the Australian
Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS). Genotyping and copy number calls on germline
DNA, expression, methylation and copy number on somatic samples were
collected and analyzed on different platforms separately at each study
site. We excluded genes with low overall expression and thus analyzed a
total of 11,922 genes available in three datasets ( Ensembl IDs, 500kb
window up- and downstream). In general, combining genomic data in HGSOC
did not reveal a role for germline genetic variation in altering gene
expression. However, in methylation only models 79 genes were associated
with differential expression in the TCGA cases (permutation multiple
testing adjusted p-val High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is a
complex disease in which initiation and progression have been associated
with gene mutation, DNA methylation changes, genetic variation, and
epigenetic processes. Variation in several susceptibility regions and
cancer-typical global methylation patterns have been observed in HGSOC;
however, this knowledge has not been compelling in understanding HGSOC
intiation or progression. As ingetration of genomic, epigenomic, and
transcriptomic data has increased mechanistic understanding in other
cancers, we hypothesized that tumor methylation alone or in combination
with germline genetic variation influences tumor gene expression in
HGSOC. We examined three nested models using an Elastnic Net (ENET)
penalized regression method while adjusting for somatic copy number
(CNV): a) germline genotype and tumor DNA methylation (full model), b)
genotype only, and c) DNA methylation only. We included 339 cases from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 54 cases from Mayo Clinic, and 78 cases
from the Australian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS). Genotyping and copy
number calls on germline DNA, expression, methylation and copy number on
somatic samples were collected and analyzed on different platforms
separately at each study site. We excluded genes with low overall
expression and thus analyzed a total of 11,922 genes available in three
datasets ( Ensembl IDs, 500kb window up- and downstream). In general,
combining genomic data in HGSOC did not reveal a role for germline
genetic variation in altering gene expression. However, in methylation
only models 79 genes were associated with differential expression in the
TCGA cases (permutation multiple testing adjusted p-val <0.05), in the
Mayo cases (unadjusted p-val High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is
a complex disease in which initiation and progression have been
associated with gene mutation, DNA methylation changes, genetic
variation, and epigenetic processes. Variation in several susceptibility
regions and cancer-typical global methylation patterns have been observed
in HGSOC; however, this knowledge has not been compelling in
understanding HGSOC intiation or progression. As ingetration of genomic,
epigenomic, and transcriptomic data has increased mechanistic
understanding in other cancers, we hypothesized that tumor methylation
alone or in combination with germline genetic variation influences tumor
gene expression in HGSOC. We examined three nested models using an
Elastnic Net (ENET) penalized regression method while adjusting for
somatic copy number (CNV): a) germline genotype and tumor DNA methylation
(full model), b) genotype only, and c) DNA methylation only. We included
339 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 54 cases from Mayo Clinic,
and 78 cases from the Australian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS). Genotyping
and copy number calls on germline DNA, expression, methylation and copy
number on somatic samples were collected and analyzed on different
platforms separately at each study site. We excluded genes with low
overall expression and thus analyzed a total of 11,922 genes available in
three datasets ( Ensembl IDs, 500kb window up- and downstream). In
general, combining genomic data in HGSOC did not reveal a role for
germline genetic variation in altering gene expression. However, in
methylation only models 79 genes were associated with differential
expression in the TCGA cases (permutation multiple testing adjusted p-val
<0.05), in the Mayo cases (unadjusted p-val <0.05) and AOCS cases
(unadjusted p-val High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is a complex
disease in which initiation and progression have been associated with
gene mutation, DNA methylation changes, genetic variation, and epigenetic
processes. Variation in several susceptibility regions and cancer-typical
global methylation patterns have been observed in HGSOC; however, this
knowledge has not been compelling in understanding HGSOC intiation or
progression. As ingetration of genomic, epigenomic, and transcriptomic
data has increased mechanistic understanding in other cancers, we
hypothesized that tumor methylation alone or in combination with germline
genetic variation influences tumor gene expression in HGSOC. We examined
three nested models using an Elastnic Net (ENET) penalized regression
method while adjusting for somatic copy number (CNV): a) germline
genotype and tumor DNA methylation (full model), b) genotype only, and c)
DNA methylation only. We included 339 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), 54 cases from Mayo Clinic, and 78 cases from the Australian
Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS). Genotyping and copy number calls on germline
DNA, expression, methylation and copy number on somatic samples were
collected and analyzed on different platforms separately at each study
site. We excluded genes with low overall expression and thus analyzed a
total of 11,922 genes available in three datasets ( Ensembl IDs, 500kb
window up- and downstream). In general, combining genomic data in HGSOC
did not reveal a role for germline genetic variation in altering gene
expression. However, in methylation only models 79 genes were associated
with differential expression in the TCGA cases (permutation multiple
testing adjusted p-val <0.05), in the Mayo cases (unadjusted p-val <0.05)
and AOCS cases (unadjusted p-val <0.05). A known tummor suppressor
(FBXW7) was associated with differential expression in the three datasets
at p-val High grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is a complex disease in
which initiation and progression have been associated with gene mutation,
DNA methylation changes, genetic variation, and epigenetic processes.
Variation in several susceptibility regions and cancer-typical global
methylation patterns have been observed in HGSOC; however, this knowledge
has not been compelling in understanding HGSOC intiation or progression.
As ingetration of genomic, epigenomic, and transcriptomic data has
increased mechanistic understanding in other cancers, we hypothesized
that tumor methylation alone or in combination with germline genetic
variation influences tumor gene expression in HGSOC. We examined three
nested models using an Elastnic Net (ENET) penalized regression method
while adjusting for somatic copy number (CNV): a) germline genotype and
tumor DNA methylation (full model), b) genotype only, and c) DNA
methylation only. We included 339 cases from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), 54 cases from Mayo Clinic, and 78 cases from the Australian
Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS). Genotyping and copy number calls on germline
DNA, expression, methylation and copy number on somatic samples were
collected and analyzed on different platforms separately at each study
site. We excluded genes with low overall expression and thus analyzed a
total of 11,922 genes available in three datasets ( Ensembl IDs, 500kb
window up- and downstream). In general, combining genomic data in HGSOC
did not reveal a role for germline genetic variation in altering gene
expression. However, in methylation only models 79 genes were associated
with differential expression in the TCGA cases (permutation multiple
testing adjusted p-val <0.05), in the Mayo cases (unadjusted p-val <0.05)
and AOCS cases (unadjusted p-val <0.05). A known tummor suppressor
(FBXW7) was associated with differential expression in the three datasets
at p-val <0.01. This work demonstrates the feasibility, utility, and
statistical power of ENET gene-level analyses incoporating maximal
genomic information.


