Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSMB8 as a candidate marker of responsiveness to preoperative
radiotherapy in rectal cancer patients.


Prediction of individual responsiveness is urgently needed, specifically
in locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) patients who underwent
preoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT). The present study, RNA-Seq was used
to compare the basal expression profile between responders and
non-responders to preoperative CRT, in correlation with the tumor
regression grade (TRG) among 22 LARC patients. Eight differentially
expressed genes (B3GALT4, HSPA1B, KRBOX1, PPBP, PPP1R18, PSMB8, SLC39A7,
and TAP2) associated with preoperative CRT responses were primarily
identified among the 22 LARC patients by RNA-Seq (p16-fold difference).
Among these genes, PSMB8 and SLC39A7 were upregulated in the responsive
group in the other 40 LARC patients (p16-fold difference). Among these
genes, PSMB8 and SLC39A7 were upregulated in the responsive group in the
other 40 LARC patients (p<0.05). PSMB8 overexpression significantly
reduced colony formation and increased apoptosis-inducing molecules like
cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP in irradiated CRC cells after 6 Gy
irradiation. PSMB8 knockdown increased colony formation and decreased
caspase-3 activation and cleaved PARP levels after irradiation. In mice
treated with ionizing radiation, tumor growth suppression was
significantly greater in HCT116/PSMB8-xenografts (81%) than in
HCT116/vector-xenografts (53%) (p=0.001). However, SLC39A7 overexpression
had no significant effect on irradiated CRC cells. These results suggest
that PSMB8 appears to predict radiosensitivity in LARC patients with
preoperative CRT, although further clinical validation is needed in a
larger cohort.


