Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impairment of DNA double strand break repair in human primary
alveolar type II cells in emphysema.


Rationale Emphysema is caused by the destruction of alveolar wall septa.
The major risk factor for this disease is cigarette smoke and effective
therapies are very limited. Alveolar type II (ATII) cells are in the gas
exchange portion of the lung. They make and secrete pulmonary surfactant,
and proliferate to restore the epithelium after damage to the more
sensitive alveolar type I cells.

Methods Control ATII cells were isolated from deidentified control
non-smoker and smoker organ donors whose lungs were not suitable for
transplantation and donated for medical research. Furthermore, as a
unique approach, we have developed a new method on how to isolate ATII
cells from excess tissue from lung transplants obtained from patients
with emphysema using magnetic microbeads. We determined DNA damage, DNA
repair, oxidative stress, injury, and inflammation in human primary ATII
cells isolated from these individuals in comparison with controls.

Results Our data indicates high oxidative stress in human ATII cells
induced by cigarette smoke extract in vitro as measured by 4-HNE staining
by immunocytofluorescence. We also observed DNA double strand breaks,
high DNA damage, and low DNA repair in these cells. Moreover, we found
greater proinflammatory response as determined by IL-8 and IL-6 levels by
ELISA. Furthermore, ATII cells obtained from patients with emphysema had
greater injury compared to cells obtained from control non-smokers and
smokers.

Conclusion Our results indicate oxidative ATII cell damage induced by
cigarette smoke and in emphysema. Observed DNA damage/repair imbalance
may contribute to cell death in this disease. The study of ATII cell
injury may improve our knowledge on this disease pathogenesis and may
lead to novel therapeutic strategies to slow the progression of emphysema.


