Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of prostate cancer circulating tumor cells at the mRNA
and protein level using a microfluidic graphene oxide chip.


While the relative five-year survival rate for men with localized
prostate cancer is nearly 100%, it plummets to 28% in the case of distant
metastases. This underscores the importance of investigating those cells
able to spread and form these metastases: circulating tumor cells (CTCs).
Though rare and surrounded by other blood cells, CTCs can be isolated
using the sensitive nanomaterial-based microfluidic technology the
graphene oxide (GO) Chip. Whole blood samples from 54 prostate cancer
patients were obtained with consent and processed on parallel chips for
immunofluorescence and RNA analysis. All of the samples were analyzed for
CTC enumeration, where captured cells were stained for cytokeratin 7/8
(CK), CD45, and DAPI. CTCs were identified as DAPI+/CK+/CD45- cells. CTCs
were detected in all of the samples. Interestingly, 25 samples showed CTC
clusters ranging from 2-10 CTCs per cluster. To explore the potential
role of EGFR in metastatic progression and CTC survival, a subset of
samples was also assayed for EGFR expression with 9/10 samples showing
EGFR+ CTCs. RNA extracted from a parallel device was reverse transcribed
to cDNA. The cDNA was analyzed via qPCR for expression levels of 96 genes
of interest, including housekeeping genes; epithelial and mesenchymal
genes; oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes; prostate specific genes;
extracellular matrix and inflammatory genes; and others. The results show
our ability to examine RNA from CTCs to examine the role of relevant
pathways in the cells in transit. With analysis capabilities at both the
RNA and protein levels, the GO Chip is an example of a clinically
relevant microfluidic technology.


