Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Focal 22q11.22 deletions combined with IKZF1 alterations are
associated with worse clinical outcome in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Introduction: Prognostic biomarkers in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) are vital for risk-stratification and intensifying therapy
for children at high risk for remission induction failure or relapse.
Copy number alterations in genes such as IKZF1 and VPREB1 have been shown
to correlate with poor outcome in ALL, highlighting genetic alterations
as prognostic markers (NEJM 360:470, 2009, Leukemia 28(1):216-20, 2014).
A second focal deletion in chromosome 22q11.22, 200 kilobases (Kb) in
length, occurs more frequently and in the same IGLL region as VPREB1 and
is distinct from deletions associated with physiologic IGLL
rearrangement. We further investigated this novel genomic lesion,
22q11.22, and the prevalence of co-occurrence with IKZF1.

Methods: 22q11.22 deletions were characterized in a compiled childhood
ALL cohort (N=832) and correlated with available clinical outcome using
multiple previously published studies (Clinical outcome total N=730; Utah
Cohort [N=56], TARGET P9906 cohort [N=215], St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital cohort [SJCRH, N=236], Childrenâ€™s Hospital of Philadelphia
cohort [CHOP, N=160], and Down Syndrome cohort [DS, N=63]). Microarray
data was analyzed (Utah = Molecular Inversion Probe 330K [Affymetrix];
TARGET = SNP 500K [Affymetrix]; SJCRH = SNP 500K/6.0 [Affymetrix], CHOP =
850K, 610K, and Omni Quadv1 [Illumina], DS = SNP 500K, MIP 330K
[Affymetrix]) by Nexus Copy Number (BioDiscovery, Inc.).

Results: ALL patients that harbored copy number deletion 22q11.22 were
present in about 30-45% of each cohort: Utah = 42.8%, TARGET = 29%, SJCRH
= 40%, CHOP = 34%, DS = 46.7%. The majority of deletions, 93%, had a
common recurring region just under 12 Kb in length. The 12 Kb deleted
segment encodes no known genes. Patients that harbored a combined
deletion in both IKZF1 and 22q11.22 (IKZF1+22q) were present in about
10-15% of each cohort: Utah = 12.5%, TARGET = 18%, SJCRH = 8.4%, CHOP =
6.3%, DS = 14.4%. IKZF1+22q conferred worse event-free survival (N=730,
P=0.0062) compared to those with only IKZF1 deletions and worse overall
survival (N=507, P=0.0365). Additionally, those patients with IKZF1+22q
losses had a median decrease in event-free survival compared to those
patients with neither deletion (normal cases): TARGET (high risk cohort)
= 0.63 years, P=Results: ALL patients that harbored copy number deletion
22q11.22 were present in about 30-45% of each cohort: Utah = 42.8%,
TARGET = 29%, SJCRH = 40%, CHOP = 34%, DS = 46.7%. The majority of
deletions, 93%, had a common recurring region just under 12 Kb in length.
The 12 Kb deleted segment encodes no known genes. Patients that harbored
a combined deletion in both IKZF1 and 22q11.22 (IKZF1+22q) were present
in about 10-15% of each cohort: Utah = 12.5%, TARGET = 18%, SJCRH = 8.4%,
CHOP = 6.3%, DS = 14.4%. IKZF1+22q conferred worse event-free survival
(N=730, P=0.0062) compared to those with only IKZF1 deletions and worse
overall survival (N=507, P=0.0365). Additionally, those patients with
IKZF1+22q losses had a median decrease in event-free survival compared to
those patients with neither deletion (normal cases): TARGET (high risk
cohort) = 0.63 years, P=<0.0001, SJCRH (standard, low risk cohort) = 10
years, P=Results: ALL patients that harbored copy number deletion
22q11.22 were present in about 30-45% of each cohort: Utah = 42.8%,
TARGET = 29%, SJCRH = 40%, CHOP = 34%, DS = 46.7%. The majority of
deletions, 93%, had a common recurring region just under 12 Kb in length.
The 12 Kb deleted segment encodes no known genes. Patients that harbored
a combined deletion in both IKZF1 and 22q11.22 (IKZF1+22q) were present
in about 10-15% of each cohort: Utah = 12.5%, TARGET = 18%, SJCRH = 8.4%,
CHOP = 6.3%, DS = 14.4%. IKZF1+22q conferred worse event-free survival
(N=730, P=0.0062) compared to those with only IKZF1 deletions and worse
overall survival (N=507, P=0.0365). Additionally, those patients with
IKZF1+22q losses had a median decrease in event-free survival compared to
those patients with neither deletion (normal cases): TARGET (high risk
cohort) = 0.63 years, P=<0.0001, SJCRH (standard, low risk cohort) = 10
years, P=<0.0001, DS = 2.3 years, P=Results: ALL patients that harbored
copy number deletion 22q11.22 were present in about 30-45% of each
cohort: Utah = 42.8%, TARGET = 29%, SJCRH = 40%, CHOP = 34%, DS = 46.7%.
The majority of deletions, 93%, had a common recurring region just under
12 Kb in length. The 12 Kb deleted segment encodes no known genes.
Patients that harbored a combined deletion in both IKZF1 and 22q11.22
(IKZF1+22q) were present in about 10-15% of each cohort: Utah = 12.5%,
TARGET = 18%, SJCRH = 8.4%, CHOP = 6.3%, DS = 14.4%. IKZF1+22q conferred
worse event-free survival (N=730, P=0.0062) compared to those with only
IKZF1 deletions and worse overall survival (N=507, P=0.0365).
Additionally, those patients with IKZF1+22q losses had a median decrease
in event-free survival compared to those patients with neither deletion
(normal cases): TARGET (high risk cohort) = 0.63 years, P=<0.0001, SJCRH
(standard, low risk cohort) = 10 years, P=<0.0001, DS = 2.3 years,
P=<0.0001.

Conclusion: We present further evidence that non-physiological deletions
within the IGLL locus is associated with worse outcome in pediatric ALL
and combined with IKZF1, these double deletions identify a population of
patients with very poor outcomes. These combined alterations may be
useful to identify patients in the future for high risk stratification
and further work is now needed to understand the mechanism and biological
consequence of this common loss at 22q11.22 in childhood ALL.


