Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early development of GMC1, a novel molecule targeting FKBP52 for
the treatment of hormone-refractory prostate cancer.


Purpose: GMC1 directly inhibits FKBP52, effectively blocking androgen
receptor dependent gene expression and androgen-stimulated proliferation.
This make it an attractive option for the treatment of hormone-dependent
and hormone-independent prostate cancer. This study investigated an
analytical method for GMC1 quantification, pre-formulation
characteristics of GMC1, and developed intravenous formulations for the
evaluation of GMC1 in animal models.

Method: An LC/MS/MS method for the quantification of GMC1 in solution,
plasma and urine was developed, validated and applied to the
determination of the stability, log P, plasma protein binding and
solubility of GMC1 in various solvents. Liposomal formulations and
co-solvent systems with various ratios of high capacity vehicles were
formulated and the optimal formulation applied, at 2 mg/kg single IV
bolus dose, to the pharmacokinetic study of GMC1 in a rat model.

Result: The intra- and inter-day accuracy (%RE) and precision (%CV) of
the LC/MS/MS method ranged from 1.6 – 11.7 % and 1.4 – 8.8 %,
respectively. GMC1 is stable in solid and solution state, moderately
lipophilic (log P = 1.38 ± 0.05), poorly water soluble (0.4 ± 0.01
mg/mL), and highly plasma protein bound (>71%). The optimal formulation
consisting of PEG 300 and Labrasol ® (1:1, v/v) allowed us to achieve a
GMC1 concentration of 10 mg/mL, and tolerated an aqueous environment.
GMC1 has a tri-exponential disposition with a Cmax of 7.6 ± 1.97 mg/L,
clearance of 0.53 L/kg/hr, α-distribution, β-phase and terminal
elimination half-lives of 0.1 ± 0.04 hr, 1.2 ± 0.34 hr, and 19.7 ±
5.09 hr respectively.

Conclusion: The LC/MS/MS method, formulations and pharmacokinetic study
can be applied to the pre-clinical and clinical development of GMC1.

Grant Support: This work was performed under funding from NIH/NIGMS grant
(5SC3GM102018) and NIH/NIMHD/RCMI grant (5G12MD007605).


