Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Volumetric reconstruction of targeted nanoparticles for
superparamagnetic relaxometry.


Superparamagnetic relaxometry (SPMR) is an emerging technology that uses
the unique magnetic properties of superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles (SPIONs) to detect cancer cells. In order to estimate tumor
locations from raw MRX data, we developed an L1 reconstruction algorithm
under the assumption that early stage disease is sparsely distributed
throughout the anatomy. The approach was previously validated in phantom
datasets of known signal locations. Advantages of our method are that the
solver does not require the user to input prior information regarding the
expected number of tumors or their approximate locations. Additionally,
the solver reconstructs a volumetric distribution of detected sources
within the field of view. To validate the algorithm for use in
preclinical settings, SPMR was performed on SKOV3 ovarian tumor bearing
mice (n = 3) with the MRX device over time following an intratumoral
injection of anti-Her2 antibody-conjugated 25nm SPIONs (Senior Scientific
LLC). The SPMR data was reconstructed with our sparse solver and was
found to be highly correlated (r = 0.9978) with the results generated by
the commercial software that accompanies the MRX instrument (MSA).
Additionally, segmentation of the reconstruction revealed a strong signal
(2.0Â·106 pJ/T) in the area of the tumor and almost no signal in areas
outside of the tumor (0.077 pJ/T) at four hours after injection. This
result was consistent with our prior observations which have revealed
that a large fraction of intratumorally-injected nanoparticles remain
localized within the tumor for several hours after injection.
Furthermore, these results were consistent with SPMR data collected by
measuring tissue samples excised 24 hours after injection, of which the
tumor had the highest signal. Thus, our sparse reconstruction algorithm
was able to return the expected results without prior information
regarding the location of nanoparticles. Future work will focus on
quantifying the uncertainty in our reconstruction method, as well as
characterizing its stability with increasingly complex nanoparticle
distributions and detectability limits. In conclusion, this work
represents an important advancement of the SPMR technology by allowing
for volumetric reconstructions of bound nanoparticles from in vivo data.


