Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer chemoprevention by dietary isothiocyanates is
associated with suppression of lipogenesis.


Isothiocyanates (ITCs), including sulforaphane (SFN) and phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC), have been studied extensively for chemoprevention
of prostate cancer using both in vitro and in vivo models, but the
underlying mechanism is not fully understood. Dependence on fatty acid
metabolism is progressively recognized as a unique trait of prostate
cancer. Using in vitro and in vivo prostate cancer models, we demonstrate
for the first time, that prostate cancer chemoprevention by ITCs is
associated with suppression of fatty acid metabolism. Exposure of human
prostate cancer cells to plasma achievable concentrations of SFN resulted
in a marked decrease in levels of key fatty acid metabolism proteins,
including acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1), fatty acid synthase (FASN),
and carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1A (CPT1A), that was accompanied by
suppression of their transcription. Consistent with the in vitro results,
oral administration of prostate cancer chemopreventive concentrations of
SFN (6 Âµmol per mouse, three times per week) resulted in downregulation
of ACC1, FASN, and CPT1A proteins in prostate adenocarcinoma of TRAMP
transgenic mice when compared with control. Levels of fatty acid
metabolites (free fatty acid, triglycerides and phospholipids), lactate,
and acetyl-CoA were also lower in the plasma and/or prostate
adenocarcinoma of SFN-treated TRAMP mice in comparison with controls.
Because fatty acid oxidation is an important step to supply energy to the
prostate cancer cells, we explored the possibility of whether SFN could
affect the fatty acid oxidation in prostate cancer cells. Indeed, SFN
exposure significantly decreased the level of proteins involved in fatty
acid oxidation in prostate cancer cells. Many of these changes were also
observed with PEITC. In conclusion, it is reasonable to propose that
suppression of fatty acid metabolism is an important mechanism in
prostate cancer chemoprevention by ITCs. This study was supported by the
grants RO1 CA115498-10 and RO1 CA101753-12 awarded by the National Cancer
Institute.


