Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-1207-3p regulates c-Myc in aggressive prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common non-skin cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer-related death for men in the U.S. A major
challenge is understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in the
progression from the asymptomatic androgen-dependent PCa to the lethal
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). The chromosomal region 8q24
is associated with aggressive PCa and variants of this region have been
identified to interact with the PVT1 non-coding gene in PCa. In previous
work we demonstrated that microRNA-1207-3p (miR-1207-3p) has prognostic
value in PCa, and directly binds to the 3â€™ UTR of Fibronectin type III
domain containing 1 (FNDC1) to regulate a novel FNDC1/fibronectin
(FN1)/androgen receptor (AR) pathway upregulated in metastatic PCa.
miR-1207-3p is encoded at the PVT1 gene locus, which is located
downstream of c-Myc on the 8q24 human chromosomal region. Studies have
suggested amplification at the 8q24 human chromosomal region, which
includes C-Myc, as a possible prognostic factor for CRPC. c-Myc is a
well-established proto-oncogene that is commonly found to be amplified in
up to 72% of CRPCs significant amplication of c-myc has been a
consequence of antiandrogen treatment, and c-Myc is downstream of AR in
some PCa. miRNAs have also been implicated in the regulation of c-Myc.
Nevertheless, the mechanisms regulating c-Myc remain unclear in PCa.
Using a panel of five PCa cell lines we discovered that c-Myc expression
is higher in aggressive CRPC cell lines compared to non-aggressive CRPC
and androgen-dependent prostate cancer cell lines. Furthermore, our data
reveals that c-Myc expression is higher in the aggressive E006AA-hT PCa
cell line when compared to the indolent E006AA PCa cell line. This
suggests that c-Myc is associated with aggressive PCa. Moreover,
overexpression of miR-1207-3p suppresses the expression of c-Myc in
E006AA-hT PCa cells but not E006AA PCa cell line in which c-Myc is
underexpressed compared to the normal prostate epithelial cell line,
RWPE-1. Next, using a synthetic biotinylated miR-1207-3p duplex, we
discovered that overexpression of miR-1207-3p more effictively inhibited
migration, inhibited proliferation and increased apoptosis in the
aggressive E006AA-hT PCa cell line with increased c-Myc expression when
compared to the indolent E006AA PCa cell line with decreased c-Myc
expression. These data demonstrate that the miR-1207-3p/FNDC1/FN1/AR
pathway may regulate c-Myc in aggressive PCa.


