Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of ZFP42/REX1 as a regulator of cancer stemness in
CD133+ liver cancer stem cells by genome-wide DNA methylation analysis.


The existence of a cancer stem cell (CSCs) subset is well established in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). This subset can be characterized by its
CD133 expression. Since the discovery of this marker, studies have
revealed deregulated pathways and epigenetic alterations associated with
this subset, but few have focused on changes in DNA methylation. This
study aims to fill this research gap by discovering aberrant DNA
methylation patterns governing CD133+ CSC-driven HCC. Results from
Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (HuMet450 BeadChip) have led to the
discovery of differential methylation patterns between CD133+ liver CSCs
and matched CD133- differentiated samples. ZFP42/REX1 is one of the
top-ranking differentially methylated candidates. Probes corresponding to
its promoter are extensively hypermethylated in the CD133+ samples. To
explore the hypothesis that promoter DNA hypermethylation modulates REX1
expression, REX1 mRNA levels were first validated to be down regulated in
sorted CD133+ HCC cell lines (n=2) and HCC samples (n=46, p<0.05) by
RT-qPCR. Upon 5-AZA treatment, only low-REX1-expressing cells
re-expressed REX1. By in silico prediction, a CpG island of interest
located in the REX1 promoter region was selected for further
investigation. Results of pyrosequencing of this CpG island show that
REX1 expression appears to be negatively correlated with the degree of
DNA methylation in HCC cell lines (n=3); and that HCC samples (n=13)
exhibit a predominantly hypermethylated state compared to the matched
non-tumor samples. To add onto the clinical relevance of REX1, two
HuMet450 BeadChip datasets of HCC sample cohorts (GSE54503 and GSE60753)
were obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). In these cohorts, the
CpG probes corresponding to the REX1 promoter region are significantly
hypermethylated (p<0.01) in HCC samples compared to the adjacent
non-tumor tissues. Lentiviral-based approaches were adopted to establish
stable REX1 overexpressing and knockdown cells in HCC cell lines. REX1
expression appears to be negatively correlated with the cellsâ€™
abilities to migrate, invade, and form foci in vitro; and tumorigenicity
in vivo. ChIP-seq has been adopted to study the DNA-binding property of
REX1 in HCC cells. These findings suggest that REX1 may play a part in
mediating various cancer properties in HCC.


