Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor URB937 ameliorates
radiation-induced lung injury in a mouse model.


Radiation-induced lung injury (RILI) is a common and potentially serious
complication from radiotherapy to the thoracic region. In the current
study, we examined the potential protective effects of URB937, an
inhibitor of fatty acid amide hydrolase in a mouse model of RILI. Here we
challenged male C57BL/6 mice with irradiation (16Gy to the thoracic
region), and then injected intraperitonealy either URB937 (1 mg/kg) or
vehicle three times a week for 30 days. Mice were sacrificed at either
the end of treatment or120 days from irradiation to evaluate the extent
of RILI and mice survival. Potential effects of URB937 on irradiation
induced tumor growth inhibition were also evaluated. We found URB937
increased endocannabinoids in the lungs, attenuated the extent of RILI,
prolonged the survival,inhibited mice developed pathological alterations
of pneumonitis and lung fibrosis. Irradiation-induced increases of
proinflammatory and profibrotic cytokines were decreased, including
interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α, transforming
growth factor-β1 in plasma and lung tissue. Moreover, malondialdehyde in
plasma and inflammation cells in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were lower
in mice treated with irradiation plus URB937. URB937 did not affect tumor
growth inhibition caused by irradiation. These results suggested that
inhibiting fatty acid amide hydrolase through URB937 could ameliorate the
RILI, without affecting the efficacy of irradiation on tumor control.


