Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity, physical activity, and breast cancer survival among older
breast cancer survivors in the CPS-II Nutrition Cohort.


Background: Body mass index (BMI) and physical activity and their
relation to breast cancer-specific survival have not been well-studied in
older survivors (≥65 years of age at diagnosis), despite their
comprising nearly half of today’s 3.5 million breast cancer survivors.
Additional data are needed to determine if specific guidelines for older
survivors are warranted.

Objective: To examine the associations of pre- and post-diagnosis BMI and
recreational physical activity with breast cancer-specific and all-cause
mortality among women with non-metastatic breast cancer, overall and
stratified by age 65 years at diagnosis.

Methods: In the Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition Cohort, 4,927 women
diagnosed with breast cancer between 1992 and 2011 completed biennial
surveys and were followed for cause-specific mortality. Pre-diagnosis
exposures were assessed at the questionnaire completed ≥6 months before
diagnosis, and post-diagnosis exposures were assessed at the first
questionnaire completed ≥2 years after diagnosis to avoid capturing
short-term changes due to treatment. BMI was computed as weight (kg)
divided by height squared (m2). Physical activity was based on the
summary MET-hours/week of recreational activity. Multivariable Cox
proportional hazards models were used to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and
95% confidence intervals (CI).

Results: Over a mean follow-up time of 9.8 years after diagnosis, 1,394
deaths, including 452 from breast cancer, occurred. The median age at
diagnosis was 70 years (77% ≥65 years). Compared with normal weight
(BMI 18.5-Results: Over a mean follow-up time of 9.8 years after
diagnosis, 1,394 deaths, including 452 from breast cancer, occurred. The
median age at diagnosis was 70 years (77% ≥65 years). Compared with
normal weight (BMI 18.5-<25 kg/m2), class II-III obesity (BMI ≥35
kg/m2) was associated with higher risk of breast cancer-specific
mortality in pre-diagnosis (HR: 2.2; 95% CI: 1.5-3.2) and post-diagnosis
analyses (HR: 1.6; 95% CI: 1.0, 2.5), although the association was
limited to women ≥65 years of age at diagnosis. Pre-diagnosis but not
post-diagnosis BMI was positively associated with all-cause mortality
among both age groups (P-trend Results: Over a mean follow-up time of 9.8
years after diagnosis, 1,394 deaths, including 452 from breast cancer,
occurred. The median age at diagnosis was 70 years (77% ≥65 years).
Compared with normal weight (BMI 18.5-<25 kg/m2), class II-III obesity
(BMI ≥35 kg/m2) was associated with higher risk of breast
cancer-specific mortality in pre-diagnosis (HR: 2.2; 95% CI: 1.5-3.2) and
post-diagnosis analyses (HR: 1.6; 95% CI: 1.0, 2.5), although the
association was limited to women ≥65 years of age at diagnosis.
Pre-diagnosis but not post-diagnosis BMI was positively associated with
all-cause mortality among both age groups (P-trend <0.0001).
Pre-diagnosis physical activity was not associated with breast
cancer-specific mortality overall or in either age group. There was a
significant inverse trend for post-diagnosis physical activity and breast
cancer-specific mortality overall (P-trend=0.03) and among women Results:
Over a mean follow-up time of 9.8 years after diagnosis, 1,394 deaths,
including 452 from breast cancer, occurred. The median age at diagnosis
was 70 years (77% ≥65 years). Compared with normal weight (BMI 18.5-<25
kg/m2), class II-III obesity (BMI ≥35 kg/m2) was associated with higher
risk of breast cancer-specific mortality in pre-diagnosis (HR: 2.2; 95%
CI: 1.5-3.2) and post-diagnosis analyses (HR: 1.6; 95% CI: 1.0, 2.5),
although the association was limited to women ≥65 years of age at
diagnosis. Pre-diagnosis but not post-diagnosis BMI was positively
associated with all-cause mortality among both age groups (P-trend
<0.0001). Pre-diagnosis physical activity was not associated with breast
cancer-specific mortality overall or in either age group. There was a
significant inverse trend for post-diagnosis physical activity and breast
cancer-specific mortality overall (P-trend=0.03) and among women <65
years of age at diagnosis (P-trend=0.01) but not among women ≥65 years
of age at diagnosis (P-trend=0.21). Pre- and post-diagnosis physical
activity were significantly associated with reduced all-cause mortality
in both age strata.

Conclusion: Our results suggest that pre- and post-diagnostic morbid
obesity is associated with increased risk of death from breast cancer in
older, but not younger, breast cancer survivors. Conversely, physical
activity may reduce risk of breast cancer death in survivors Conclusion:
Our results suggest that pre- and post-diagnostic morbid obesity is
associated with increased risk of death from breast cancer in older, but
not younger, breast cancer survivors. Conversely, physical activity may
reduce risk of breast cancer death in survivors <65 years of age at
diagnosis. However, both were associated with overall longevity,
regardless of age.


