Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor (i) copanlisib
is active in preclinical models of B-cell lymphomas as single agent and
in combination with conventional and targeted agents including venetoclax
and palbociclib.


Introduction

Copanlisib (BAY 80 6946) is a highly selective pan class I PI3K-i with
predominant inhibitory activity against PI3Kδ and PI3Kα, in clinical
development as single agent and in combination for lymphoma patients. To
address single agent antitumor activity in different lymphomas and to
understand the molecular basis of resistance mechanisms for rational
combination, we performed a screening of copanlisib as single agent and
in combination with 15 other anticancer agents in 17 cell lines derived
from mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).

Methods

MCL (Jeko1, Rec1, JVM2, Granta519, Maver1, Mino1, SP-49, SP-53, UPN1,
Z138), MZL (Karpas1718, VL51, SSK41, ESKOL, HAIR-M, HC-1) and CLL (MEC1)
cell lines were exposed to increasing doses of copanlisib alone and in
combination with other compounds using the fixed ratio set-up. Tested
compounds included approved and experimental inhibitors of key regulatory
pathways. Synergy was assessed via Chou-Talalay combination index (CI).
Gene expression profiling (GEP) was done using Illumina Human
HT12Expression BeadChips and GSEA (FDRMCL (Jeko1, Rec1, JVM2, Granta519,
Maver1, Mino1, SP-49, SP-53, UPN1, Z138), MZL (Karpas1718, VL51, SSK41,
ESKOL, HAIR-M, HC-1) and CLL (MEC1) cell lines were exposed to increasing
doses of copanlisib alone and in combination with other compounds using
the fixed ratio set-up. Tested compounds included approved and
experimental inhibitors of key regulatory pathways. Synergy was assessed
via Chou-Talalay combination index (CI). Gene expression profiling (GEP)
was done using Illumina Human HT12Expression BeadChips and GSEA
(FDR<0.25).

Results

Copanlisib showed antitumor activity in most cell lines (median
IC50=22nM; 95%C.I.: 15-98). The other most active drugs were bortezomib
(5nM; 5-7), romidepsin (34nM; 2-94), roniciclib (23nM; 18-29),
panobinostat (161nM; 11-1263), MI2 (490nM; 224-1000). The remaining had
median IC50s >500nM.

Copanlisib-containing combinations often gave synergy/additive effects:
copanlisib with venetoclax was beneficial in 16/17; with MI2 in 15; with
palbociclib or ibrutinib in 14; with BAY 1125976 or panobinostat in 13;
with lenalidomide or BAY 1238097 in 12; with rituximab in 11; with
romidepsin in 10; with roniciclib in 9; with bortezomib in 8; with BAY
1143572 in 7; with bendamustine in 6; with ruxolitinib in 2. Combinations
with venetoclax and with palbociclib were the most promising, achieving
CI values Copanlisib-containing combinations often gave synergy/additive
effects: copanlisib with venetoclax was beneficial in 16/17; with MI2 in
15; with palbociclib or ibrutinib in 14; with BAY 1125976 or panobinostat
in 13; with lenalidomide or BAY 1238097 in 12; with rituximab in 11; with
romidepsin in 10; with roniciclib in 9; with bortezomib in 8; with BAY
1143572 in 7; with bendamustine in 6; with ruxolitinib in 2. Combinations
with venetoclax and with palbociclib were the most promising, achieving
CI values <0.5 in 7 and 6 cell lines, respectively. GEP before treatment
identified genesets associated with different sensitivity to these 2
combinations. High expression of genes involved in IFN signaling,
oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid metabolism, apoptosis,
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and IL6/JAK/STAT signaling and low expression of cell cycle
genes were associated with synergism to copanlisib/venetoclax. Largely
the opposite was observed for the palbociclib combination, more active
with high expression of E2F/MYC targets and cell cycle genes and low
expression of genes involved in IFN PI3K/AKT/mTOR and IL6/JAK/STAT
signaling.

Conclusion

Copanlisib was active in MCL, MZL and CLL models. Combinations with
BCL2-i venetoclax and CDK4/CDK6-i palbociclib were the most synergistic.
Specific GEP features might predict lymphomas that could benefit from
these regimens.


