Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Omx a hypoxia modulator reverses the immunosuppressive
glioblastoma microenvironment by stimulating T cell infiltration and
activation that results in increased number of long-term survivors.


Oxygen is one of the key modulators of tumor microenvironment whereby low
oxygen or hypoxia is associated with resistance to chemo- and radio-
therapies and poor patient outcomes. Hypoxia favors an immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment by promoting Treg recruitment and activation and
suppressing T cell and NK cell proliferation and effector function and
pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion. Therefore, reversing tumor hypoxia
could create an immunopermissive microenvironment and improve the
efficacy of several immunotherapies. Omniox has developed an oxygen
carrier OMX that can specifically deliver oxygen to hypoxic tumor regions
without affecting oxygenation of tissues within physiologic oxygen
levels. Due to its biochemical features, OMX is well tolerated in small
(rats and mice) and large (sheep and dogs) animals. Following intravenous
administration, OMX extravasates through leaky tumor vasculature and
accumulates within immunocompetent rodent orthotopic glioblastoma models
as well as spontaneous canine brain tumors. Consequently, OMX decreases
hypoxia levels in the tumor tissue measured directly using oxygen sensor
probes and indirectly with exogenous hypoxia markers using ELISA,
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry methods. Here we evaluated OMXâ€™
activity in reversing the immunosupressive tumor microenvironment using a
combination of immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry and Luminex methods.
Moreover, we investigated the efficacy of OMX in improving mouse survival
and effectiveness of checkpoint inhibitors (CPI). Similar to previously
published findings, we demonstrated that T lymphocytes are mostly
excluded from hypoxic tumor areas in the GL261 model. A single OMX
treatment in GL261 tumor-bearing mice reduces tumor hypoxia, enhances T
cell localization in previously hypoxic tumor areas, and increases CD8
accumulation by ~4-fold. Specifically, OMX treatment increased the
activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) fraction by ~2 fold and reduced
the immunosuppressive Treg fraction by 2-fold, resulting in a 3-fold
increase of Teff/Treg ratio, which indicates a switch from an
immunosupressive to an immunopermissive microenvironment. When combined
with CPI, OMX reverses the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment by
increasing CD8 T cell infiltration, proliferation and cytotoxic activity,
and modulating IFNg and IFNg-inducible cytokines that may polarize T
cells towards a Th1 phenotype. Furthermore, treatment of late-stage GL261
tumor-bearing mice with the combination of OMX-CPI increases mouse
survival by 80%. By delivering oxygen specifically to the hypoxic tumor
microenvironment, OMX may restore anti-cancer immune responses in
glioblastoma patients and synergize with radiotherapy and immunotherapy
to enhance tumor control and improve patient outcomes.


