Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNAs involved in LY6K and estrogen receptor-α contribute to
tamoxifen susceptibility in breast cancer.


Estrogen receptor-alpha is a clinically important therapeutic target for
breast cancer. However, tumors that lose ERα are less responsive to
anti-estrogens such as tamoxifen. MicroRNAs are small RNAs that regulate
expression of their target gene and dysregulations of miRNA has been
identified in many diseases including human cancer. However, only a few
miRNAs associated with tamoxifen resistance has been reported. In this
study, we found that lymphocyte antigen 6 complex, which is a member of
the Ly-6/μPAR superfamily and related to breast cancer progression and
metastasis, is inversely correlated with ERα expression. We, for the
first time, found miRNAs involved in the regulatory molecular mechanism
between ERα and LY6K and related to tamoxifen susceptibility in breast
cancer. miR-192-5p, induced by LY6K, downregulates ERα directly and
induced tamoxifen resistance in ERα-positive breast cancer cells. In
addition, re-expression of ERα in ERα-negative breast cancer cells
increased miR-500a-3p expression and directly inhibits LY6K expression.
Ectopic expression of miR-500a-3p sensitized ERα-negative cells to
tamoxifen by increasing apoptosis. Finally, we observed an inverse
correlation between LY6K and ERα in primary breast cancer samples. We
found that patients with recurrence showed high expression of miR-192-5p
after tamoxifen treatments. In addition, expression of miR-500a-3p was
significantly correlated to survival outcome. As miRNAs involved in the
regulatory mechanism between LY6K and ERα can affect tamoxifen
resistance, downregulating miR-192-5p or re-expressing miR-500a-3p could
be a potential therapeutic approach for treating tamoxifen resistant
patients.


