Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel humanized anti-Sialyl-Tn, anti-CD3 bispecific antibodies
demonstrate tumor and T-cell specificity for immune activation at the
tumor site.


Tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) historically have been
challenging targets for antibody therapeutics. Sialyl-Tn (STn) is a
cancer specific antigen that is expressed on the surface of carcinomas
including ovarian, colon, prostate, and pancreatic tumors but is rarely
present in normal tissue. STn expression has been linked to innate immune
suppression, a chemoresistant phenotype, metastasis, and poor prognosis.
Previous attempts to target this antigen in the clinic with synthetic
glycan vaccines proved safe but lacked efficacy. We have developed
humanized bispecific antibodies targeting STn and CD3 for T-cell
recruitment and activation at the tumor site. These bispecific antibodies
were selected for optimal tumor targeting using our glycan microarray
that enriches for candidates whose binding is protein-independent and
glycan specific. STn-selective binding was demonstrated. Current lead
candidates exhibited low nanomolar EC50 binding in flow cytometric assays
against both STn expressing tumor cells and T cells. Quantification of
T-cell activation and T-cell induced tumor killing in vitro provides a
basis for the further clinical development of these bispecific antibody
candidates.


