Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association studies of breast cancer prognosis.


Introduction:

The prognosis and response to treatment in women with breast cancer
varies considerably after taking into account clinic-pathological
variables. Other factors such as host genotype are also likely to be
important. We therefore investigated the role of germline genetic
variation on survival after breast cancer using data from the Breast
Cancer Association Consortium.

Materials and methods:

We included data from ten projects in which breast cancer case cohorts
were genotyped using arrays providing genome-wide coverage of common
variants. The majority of samples was genotyped using the Illumina custom
iCOGS or OncoArray chips. Data were imputed using the 1000 Genome phase 3
as a reference panel using a two-stage procedure. We assessed the
association between genotype and 10-year breast cancer specific survival
for each SNP using Cox proportional hazards regression adjusted for
principle components and stratified by country. Genotype data from 87,877
breast cancer cases, 63,170 ER-positive and 20,297 ER-negative, with
6,511 known breast cancer deaths were included in the analyses.

Results:

Preliminary analyses shows that in all invasive cases, ER-positive and
ER-negative disease 123, 110, and 212 variants respectively, were
associated with breast cancer-specific mortality at PPreliminary analyses
shows that in all invasive cases, ER-positive and ER-negative disease
123, 110, and 212 variants respectively, were associated with breast
cancer-specific mortality at P<5x10-5. A single variant, rs1295683, was
associated with higher mortality at genome-wide significance in all
patients: HR=1.16 (95%CI:1.10-1.22); P=2.8x10-8 (risk allele frequency:
0.12). We identified four variants to be associated with mortality in
ER-negative disease at PPreliminary analyses shows that in all invasive
cases, ER-positive and ER-negative disease 123, 110, and 212 variants
respectively, were associated with breast cancer-specific mortality at
P<5x10-5. A single variant, rs1295683, was associated with higher
mortality at genome-wide significance in all patients: HR=1.16
(95%CI:1.10-1.22); P=2.8x10-8 (risk allele frequency: 0.12). We
identified four variants to be associated with mortality in ER-negative
disease at P<5x10-8. The strongest association was for rs145963877:
HR=1.32 (95%CI:1.20-1.46); P=2.3x10-8. No variant reached genome-wide
significance for ER-positive disease; the most significant variant was
chr7:41400313 with an HR=1.17 (95%CI:1.10-1.24); P=1.8x10-7. In addition,
using OncoArray data, we provided independent validation of higher
mortality of CHEK2 c.1100delC carriers compared with non-carriers
(HR=1.56 (95%CI:1.22-2.01)), previously reported in Weischer et al JCO
2012. Using iCOGS data, we evaluated the association between mortality
and the polygenic risk score (PRS) based on 77 known breast cancer
susceptibility SNPs. A higher PRS was significantly associated with lower
breast cancer-specific mortality: HR=0.87(95%CI:0.81-0.93) (per unit of
PRS) with a similar association in ER-negative and ER-positive disease.
The association was attenuated after adjusting for tumor grade.

Conclusion:

We have identified a novel set of germline genetic variants that are
associated with breast cancer prognosis. The effect sizes are small for
each of the variants and unlikely to be of immediate clinical relevance.
However, understanding of the biology that underlies the associations may
identify novel pathways and targets for therapy. Being at higher risk of
breast cancer, as defined by the breast cancer susceptibility PRS, is not
associated with an adverse prognosis.


