Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide enhancer identify signature predictive of metastatic
phenotypes in bladder cancers.


In urothelial bladder cancer accurate identification of grade and stage
is critical for optimal treatment to achieve robust disease control and
long-term survival. However, among the initially superficial tumors,
which are non-invasive and highly treatable, 20 to 25 % recur, progress
to invasive tumors, and metastasize during the patientsâ€™ lifetime.
Thus, the challenge is to provide risk stratification during the initial
diagnosis in order to identify those patients who are unlikely to
progress while offering radical therapy to those who are at risk. To
address this issue, the field has heavily focused on the discovery of few
mutations in potential driver genes. However, recent findings indicate
that deregulation of enhancers can play a major role in cancer
progression. In this study, we employed DNase-Seq to detect enhancer
activities genome-wide in 16 bladder cancer cell lines (BLCs) that
included three lineages (T24, UMUC3, 253J lineages) with different
tumorigenic and metastatic potentials, and thus represent models of
cancer progression and metastasis development. We analyzed the gain and
loss of enhancer activity in each BLC lineages as well as in metastatic
cell lines relative to non-metastatic cell lines. Our analysis in the T24
lineage revealed a striking feature, a dramatic loss of intronic and
distal DHSs (DNase I Hypersensitive sites), during the initial transition
to tumorigenic type. During metastatic progression, new enhancer classes
emerged and there was an enrichment for association with target
organ-specific genes. The analysis of differential DHSs between
metastatic and non-metastatic BLCs identified an enhancer signature
enriched with lost DHSs in metastatic BLCs where nearby genes were
associated with cellular movement/invasion functions. Lost DHSs were also
present near key factors such as PPARG, RXRA, FOXA1, TP63, and GATA3,
which play a role in urothelial development and differentiation, and the
transcription activity of those genes were correlated with the change of
enhancer activity. This study identified a set of DHSs that are
associated with cancer progression in bladder cancer, and provides a
potential clinical application for developing prognostic markers to
predict the risk of developing aggressive disease.


