Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of MPS1: Discovery of CCT289346, a highly potent,
selective and orally available preclinical candidate.


MPS1 (also known as TTK), is a dual-specificity protein kinase and one of
the main components of the spindle assembly checkpoint. Cancer cells
heavily rely on MPS1 to cope with aneuploidy resulting from aberrant
numbers of chromosomes and MPS1 has been found to be upregulated in a
large number of tumor types. Extensive work by us and other groups has
shown that MPS1 inhibitors are effective against a variety of cancers,
particularly when used in combination with other drugs, for example,
tubulin-targeting agents. We recently reported the structure-based design
and discovery of a series of pyrido[3,4-d]pyrimidines inhibitors of MPS1
(1). Advanced compounds showed very potent inhibition of MPS1 in
biochemical and cellular assays. However, these compounds suffered from
high lipophilicity and pronounced metabolism in human liver microsomes
preventing progression into preclinical development. Here we report the
optimisation of this series ultimately yielding CCT289346, our
preclinical candidate. CCT289346 shows excellent potency, kinase
selectivity, and ADME properties including stability in human liver
microsomes. The compound has been produced on a kilogram scale and is
currently undergoing preclinical development. We will discuss our design
approach and hypotheses leading to the discovery of CCT289346 and
disclose in vivo efficacy data. References 1. Innocenti P et al. Rapid
Discovery of Pyrido[3,4-d]pyrimidine Inhibitors of Monopolar Spindle
Kinase 1 (MPS1) Using a Structure-Based Hybridization Approach. Journal
of Medicinal Chemistry. 2016; 59(8):3671-88.


