Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma interleukin-6 level predicts prognosis of patients who
received sorafenib for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: No biomarker has been proven to predict the treatment
outcomes of sorafenib, the only approved first-line therapy for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We explored predictive and prognostic
values of plasma interleukin (IL)-6 levels for patients who received
sorafenib as first-line therapy for advanced HCC.

Methods: This study had 2 patient cohorts. The exploration cohort
consisted of patients who were previously enrolled in a phase 2 clinical
trial that examined sorafenib with tegafur/uracil as first-line therapy
for advanced HCC. The validation cohort consisted of patients who
received sorafenib alone as first-line therapy for advanced HCC under
reimbursement of National Health Insurance of Taiwan. Pretreatment plasma
IL-6 levels were determined. We used the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve in the exploration cohort to determine the
best cut point for IL-6 levels to predict overall survival (OS). We then
confirmed the cut point in the validation cohort.

Results: There were 55 and 73 patients in the exploration and validation
cohort, respectively. In the exploration cohort, there was no complete
response but 3 (6%) partial response. The median OS was 8.1 months. In
the validation cohort, there was no complete response but 7 (10%) partial
response. The median OS was 10.3 months. In the exploration cohort, we
found 4.28 pg/ml was the best cut point in defining high and low IL-6
levels because it could differentiate OS (p = 0.042) with the best
sensitivity and specificity. Applying the cut point on the validation
cohort, patients with high pretreatment plasma IL-6 levels, compared with
patients with low IL-6 levels, exhibited significantly poorer OS (median,
8.0 vs. 13.9 months, p = 0.031). After adjusting for age, gender,
hepatitis etiology, tumor characteristics, Î±-fetoprotein level,
performance status, and prior treatment, a high plasma IL-6 level
remained an independent predictor for poor OS (hazard ratio 2.594, p =
0.005). By contrast, the plasma IL-6 level was not associated with
progression-free survival, treatment response, disease control, or other
patient characteristics.

Conclusion: High pretreatment plasma IL-6 level predicted prognosis of
patients who received sorafenib as first-line therapy for advanced HCC.


