Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of spheroids with long-term incubation for
high-throughput screening.


The OncoPanel™ service has established 100 genomically-characterized
human tumor cell lines as targets for the screening of compounds in 3D
spheroid models. We sought to (1) expand the cell line capability of the
service and (2) validate the cell lines in a long-term (10-day) assay.
For the cell line expansion, cells were plated at two densities in
384-well, spheroid-promoting plates, and were incubated for 3 days to
allow formation of spheroids. The growth media were then removed and
replaced with media containing the hypoxia probe, Lox-1. Twenty-four
hours later, the ability to form spheroids was determined by
bright-field, high-content imaging, and fluorescent detection of the
Lox-1 probe in the hypoxic core of the spheroids. Cells were then seeded
in assay plates at pre-determined densities, along with a time zero (T0)
plate, and were incubated for 4 days to allow spheroid formation.
Spheroid formation was verified by bright-field, high-content imaging, as
previously mentioned. The growth media were removed and replaced with
fresh media, followed by the addition of staurosporine over a range of 10
concentrations, using acoustic liquid transfer. At this time, the T0
plate was processed for subsequent doubling calculations. The assay
plates were incubated for 10 days, re-imaged, and the spheroids were
lysed using CellTiter-Glo® 3D viability reagent. Data were analyzed as
the relative cell count, where the measured bioluminescence intensity was
transformed to percent of control, as compared with a vehicle-treated
control. Cellular response parameters were calculated using nonlinear
regression to a sigmoidal single-site dose response model. A vehicle CV
of The OncoPanel™ service has established 100 genomically-characterized
human tumor cell lines as targets for the screening of compounds in 3D
spheroid models. We sought to (1) expand the cell line capability of the
service and (2) validate the cell lines in a long-term (10-day) assay.
For the cell line expansion, cells were plated at two densities in
384-well, spheroid-promoting plates, and were incubated for 3 days to
allow formation of spheroids. The growth media were then removed and
replaced with media containing the hypoxia probe, Lox-1. Twenty-four
hours later, the ability to form spheroids was determined by
bright-field, high-content imaging, and fluorescent detection of the
Lox-1 probe in the hypoxic core of the spheroids. Cells were then seeded
in assay plates at pre-determined densities, along with a time zero (T0)
plate, and were incubated for 4 days to allow spheroid formation.
Spheroid formation was verified by bright-field, high-content imaging, as
previously mentioned. The growth media were removed and replaced with
fresh media, followed by the addition of staurosporine over a range of 10
concentrations, using acoustic liquid transfer. At this time, the T0
plate was processed for subsequent doubling calculations. The assay
plates were incubated for 10 days, re-imaged, and the spheroids were
lysed using CellTiter-Glo® 3D viability reagent. Data were analyzed as
the relative cell count, where the measured bioluminescence intensity was
transformed to percent of control, as compared with a vehicle-treated
control. Cellular response parameters were calculated using nonlinear
regression to a sigmoidal single-site dose response model. A vehicle CV
of <30% was required, as one criterion, for each cell line to pass
quality control. Based on our tests of spheroid formation in the
expansion cell lines, we have added 36 cell lines to the spheroid- or
loose aggregate-forming cell line panel, with 20 cell lines validated in
the long-term assay. Through the use of high-throughput screening and
high-content imaging, we can verify and validate spheroid formation and
growth in a 384-well format, with which we can test agents for drug
discovery projects and provide value for potentially greater therapeutic
outcomes.


