Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gut microbiome controls liver metastasis.


Aim: The gut microbiome can modify tumor immunity and has been suggested
to be involved in the development of liver cancer. However, it remains
unknown how the gut microbiome controls hepatic immune responses. This
study was designed to exam the effect of the gut microbiome on liver
antitumor immunity, and to study potential mechanism.

Experimental procedure: Antibiotic cocktail in drinking water was given
to remove mouse gut microbiota. Control mice were kept on regular water.
EL4 thymoma cells were injected s.c. to induce spontaneous liver
metastasis. B16 melanoma and CT26 colon cancer cells were injected
intrasplenically to form liver metastasis. Lung metastasis was induced by
tail injection of tumor cells.

Results: Antibiotic cocktail efficiently depleted gut bacteria. Removing
gut commensal bacteria did not affect the growth of primary s.c. tumors,
but impaired formation of liver metastasis in different models. The
inhibitory effect on liver metastasis by removing gut microbiome was
found after intrasplenic injection of tumor cells to form liver
metastasis using both B16 melanoma and CT26 colon cancer tumor cells.
Interestingly, formation of lung metastasis caused by tail vein injection
of B16 cells was not impaired by antibiotics treatment, suggesting a
liver specific effect. The inhibition of liver metastasis by antibiotic
treatment was absent in Rag1 knockout mice, suggesting that the mechanism
is mediated by the adaptive immune system.

Conclusion: Our results suggest that the gut microbiome affects the liver
immune microenvironment and modulates antitumor immunity.


