Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local adjuvant treatment of clinical stage I-II melanoma with low
dose CpG-B and/or GM-CSF: Long-term follow-up of three randomized
controlled phase II trials.


Introduction: Currently, there is no widely used adjuvant treatment
available to improve survival after surgical excision of localized
melanoma. Here, we present the clinical outcome of patients who
participated in three randomized phase-II trials and received low-dose
local immunotherapy, which was shown to be safe and to boost
loco-regional and systemic anti-melanoma T cell immunity.

Patients and Methods: In three single-center, single-blinded, randomized
and placebo (saline) controlled phase-II clinical trials, patients with
early stage melanoma were treated with 1) Granulocyte/Macrophage-Colony
Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF), 2) unmethylated CpG type-B
oligodeoxynucleotide CpG7909 (CpG-B), and 3) CpG-B, alone or combined
with GM-CSF, through 1-4 intradermal injections at the site of the
primary melanoma excision scar, within 7 days preceding re-excision and
sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy. For clinical follow-up analysis, all
treated patients were grouped together (treated group n=36) as were the
patients who received saline (saline group n=28).

Results: 10-year recurrence-free survival rate in the treated group was
94% (95% CI 78-98) versus 48% (95% CI 21-71) in the saline group
(P=0.005), hazard ratio (HR) for recurrence was 0.15 (95% CI 0.06-0.60)
for the treated group. This apparent antitumor efficacy was in line with
the observation upon pathological examination of less tumor positive SLN
in the treated group (P=0.05). The 10-year distant recurrence-free
survival rate in treated patients was also higher (94%, 78-98 versus 59%,
28-81, HR 0.22, 0.07-0.93; P=0.04).

Conclusion: Local low-dose immunotherapy in patients with early-stage
melanoma may offer durable protection against distant recurrences. These
findings warrant further clinical exploration of this local non-toxic
immune potentiating regimen.


