Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apigenin overcomes drug resistance by blocking signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling in breast cancer.


Drug resistance in chemotherapy is a major obstacle for successful
treatment of cancer. Drug resistance is caused by various reasons
including the overexpression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp, MDR1). Development
of new useful compound which overcomes drug resistance is urgent.
Apigenin, a dietary flavonoid, is reported as an anti-cancer drug in vivo
and in vitro. In the present study, we investigated whether apigenin is
able to reverse drug resistance using adriamycin-resistant breast cancer
cells (MCF-7/ADR) and xenograft mouse model. As a result, apigenin
significantly decreased cell growth and colony formation in MCF-7/ADR and
its parental MCF-7 cells. This growth inhibition was related with
accumulation of subG0/G1 apoptotic population and increase of apoptosis
cell number. Apigenin reduced the mRNA expressions of multi-drug
resistance 1 (MDR1) and multi-drug resistance associated proteins (MRPs)
in MCF-7/ADR cells. Apigenin also down-regulated the expression of P-gp.
Apigenin reversed drug efflux from MCF-7/ADR cells resulting in Rho123
accumulation. Inhibition of drug resistance by apigenin is related with
suppression of STAT3 signaling pathway. Apigenin decreased STAT-3
activation (p-STAT3) and its nuclear translocation, and inhibited the
secretion of VEGF and MMP-9 which are STAT3 target genes. STAT3
inhibitor, JAK inhibitor I and HIF-1Î± inhibitor decreased cell growth in
MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells. In conclusion, apigenin overcomes drug
resistance, and this study advances human health.


