Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trametinib, a MEK inhibitor, augments nab-paclitaxel based
chemotherapy response in preclinical models of pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is currently the third leading
cause of cancer related deaths in the USA with a 5-year survival less
than 6%. Nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel (nab-paclitaxel, NPT) has
demonstrated 8.5 months median survival in combination with gemcitabine,
and now represents a standard of care for PDAC patients. Genetic
alterations of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK (MAPK) signaling pathway yielding
constitutive activation of the ERK cascade have been implicated in many
human cancers. In PDAC, activating K-ras mutations occur at a frequency
of 90%, rendering this a potential therapeutic target. Efforts to develop
drugs that directly target mutant KRAS protein remain challenging due to
target specificity issues. Alternative strategies therefore focus towards
inhibition of downstream targets in the RAS-MAPK cascade such as MEK.
Trametinib (Tra) is a potent and highly selective small molecule
inhibitor of MEK1/2 kinase activity. We evaluated efficacy of trametinib
to enhance antitumor response of nab-paclitaxel based chemotherapy
regimens in preclinical models of PDAC using K-ras mutant cell lines.

In subcutaneous PDAC xenografts using AsPC-1 cells, net tumor growth in
different therapy groups was 432.6 mm3 in controls, 105.3 mm3 after NPT
(p=0.0023), 184 mm3 after Tra (p=0.0018), 81 mm3 after NPT+Tra
(p=0.0003), 37.3 mm3 after NPT+Gem (p=0.0025) and -8.1 mm3 (tumor
regression) after NPT+Gem+Tra (pIn subcutaneous PDAC xenografts using
AsPC-1 cells, net tumor growth in different therapy groups was 432.6 mm3
in controls, 105.3 mm3 after NPT (p=0.0023), 184 mm3 after Tra
(p=0.0018), 81 mm3 after NPT+Tra (p=0.0003), 37.3 mm3 after NPT+Gem
(p=0.0025) and -8.1 mm3 (tumor regression) after NPT+Gem+Tra (p<0.0001).
In another subcutaneous PDAC xenografts using Panc-1 cells, net tumor
growth in different therapy groups was: 274.1 mm3 in controls, 80.8 mm3
after NPT (p=0.0002), 150.6 mm3 after Tra (p=0.0047), 75.1 mm3 after
NPT+Tra (p=0.0002), 48.4 mm3 after NPT+Gem (p=0.0004) and 3.8 mm3 after
NPT+Gem+Tra (pIn subcutaneous PDAC xenografts using AsPC-1 cells, net
tumor growth in different therapy groups was 432.6 mm3 in controls, 105.3
mm3 after NPT (p=0.0023), 184 mm3 after Tra (p=0.0018), 81 mm3 after
NPT+Tra (p=0.0003), 37.3 mm3 after NPT+Gem (p=0.0025) and -8.1 mm3 (tumor
regression) after NPT+Gem+Tra (p<0.0001). In another subcutaneous PDAC
xenografts using Panc-1 cells, net tumor growth in different therapy
groups was: 274.1 mm3 in controls, 80.8 mm3 after NPT (p=0.0002), 150.6
mm3 after Tra (p=0.0047), 75.1 mm3 after NPT+Tra (p=0.0002), 48.4 mm3
after NPT+Gem (p=0.0004) and 3.8 mm3 after NPT+Gem+Tra (p<0.0001). In
PDAC peritoneal dissemination model using AsPC-1 cells, median animal
survival compared to controls (20 days) was increased after therapy with
NPT (33 days, a 65% increase, p=0.0004), Tra (31 days, a 55% increase,
p=0.0004), NPT+Tra (37 days, a 85% increase, p=0.0001), NPT+Gem (39 days,
a 95% increase, p=0.0001) and NPT+Gem+Tra (49 days, a 145% increase, pIn
subcutaneous PDAC xenografts using AsPC-1 cells, net tumor growth in
different therapy groups was 432.6 mm3 in controls, 105.3 mm3 after NPT
(p=0.0023), 184 mm3 after Tra (p=0.0018), 81 mm3 after NPT+Tra
(p=0.0003), 37.3 mm3 after NPT+Gem (p=0.0025) and -8.1 mm3 (tumor
regression) after NPT+Gem+Tra (p<0.0001). In another subcutaneous PDAC
xenografts using Panc-1 cells, net tumor growth in different therapy
groups was: 274.1 mm3 in controls, 80.8 mm3 after NPT (p=0.0002), 150.6
mm3 after Tra (p=0.0047), 75.1 mm3 after NPT+Tra (p=0.0002), 48.4 mm3
after NPT+Gem (p=0.0004) and 3.8 mm3 after NPT+Gem+Tra (p<0.0001). In
PDAC peritoneal dissemination model using AsPC-1 cells, median animal
survival compared to controls (20 days) was increased after therapy with
NPT (33 days, a 65% increase, p=0.0004), Tra (31 days, a 55% increase,
p=0.0004), NPT+Tra (37 days, a 85% increase, p=0.0001), NPT+Gem (39 days,
a 95% increase, p=0.0001) and NPT+Gem+Tra (49 days, a 145% increase,
p<0.0001). Effects of therapy on intratumoral proliferation and apoptosis
corresponded with tumor growth inhibition data. In vitro studies
demonstrated inhibition in PDAC cell (AsPC-1, Panc-1, Mia PaCa-2, CFPAC)
proliferation by NPT+Gem, Tra, and combination. Immunoblot analysis
revealed that trametinib effects were specifically accompanied by
decrease in phospho-ERK expression and increase in the expression of
apoptosis-related cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP-1 proteins. These
findings suggest that the effects of nab-paclitaxel based chemotherapy
regimens can be enhanced through specific inhibition of MEK1/2 kinase
activity, which clinically could lead to improved PDAC therapy effects.


