Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of AIB1 Δ -4 in malignant progression of breast cancer.


The nuclear co activator AIB1 is amplified and/or overexpressed in up to
60 % of breast cancers. We have previously described a splice variant of
AIB1 (Δ4) missing exon 4 that results in an N-terminally truncated
protein. Full length AIB1 transcriptional function can be repressed by
the tumor supressor ANCO1/ANKRD11. However, Δ4 is missing the ANCO1
binding domain and is not transcriptionally suppressed. More metastatic
variants of isogenic breast or colon cancer cell lines have significantly
increased levels of Δ4 relative to full length protein. Δ4 levels also
increase in breast tissue samples as they transition in malignant
progression. We conjectured that small increases in Δ4 protein in the
cell could have potent effects on malignant progression. To determine the
functional significance of Δ4 in malignant progression we developed DCIS
(ductal carcinoma in situ) cell lines that only express this isoform and
not the full length protein. We engineered these lines by using CRISPR
technology targeted at the exon 3/4 splice junction. The resulting lines
were significantly more invasive in ECIS endothelial invasion assays. In
vivo, intracardiac zebrafish injections of the Δ4-DCIS lines showed
higher extravasation from the tail vasculature compared to the parental
line. Subcutaneous xenografts in athymic nude mice grew larger tumors,
presented more invasive lesions and metastases. Also, Δ4-DCIS spheres
growing in matrigel, showed disorganization and enhanced invasion into
the matrix. In conclusion these data suggest a model where the increased
splicing of AIB1 to the Δ4 variant alters transcription at specific
target genes and contributes to the metastatic phenotype.


