Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESRP1 overexpression and its role in ovarian cancer.


Epithelial splicing regulatory protein 1 (ESRP1) and 2 (ESRP2) are RNA
binding proteins which are recently known to be involved in tumor
progression via regulation of alternative splicing of cancer-associated
genes. However, their expression and clinical significance in ovarian
cancer remain unclear. Here, we found that ESRP1 and ESRP2 gene
expression is upregulated in ovarian cancer cells compared with
immortalized ovarian surface epithelial (IOSE) cells and their
overexpression at protein level was also confirmed in ovarian cancer
tissues. Consistent with TCGA data of ESRP1 gene amplification, higher
ESRP1 gene copy number was observed in ovarian cancer cells compared with
IOSE cells, whereas there was little correlation between gene copy number
and gene expression in ovarian cancer cells. Importantly, their gene
expression was inversely correlated with DNA methylation in ovarian
cancer cells and ESRP2 overexpression in ovarian cancer was significantly
associated with DNA hypomethylation (P= 0.036). Of note, TCGA data
analysis showed that high ESRP1 gene expression is significantly
associated with shorter 5-year survival of patients with ovarian cancer.
Ectopic expression of ESRP1 in ESRP1 low-expressing mesenchymal type
ovarian cancer cells increased cell proliferation, whereas it suppresses
cell migration. Furthermore, our results revealed that the effect of
ESRP1 overexpression on cell proliferation and migration is related to
activation of the Akt/CyclinD pathway and increased of E-cadherin
expression. In conclusion, our findings suggest that ESRP1 overexpression
is associated with poor outcome of patients and ESRP1 may play a
cancer-promoting role in ovarian cancer.


