Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local irradiation promotes antitumor immunity and abscopal effect
of antigen-specific immunotherapy by enhancing dendritic cell maturation.


Background: Ionizing radiation therapy (RT) is a well-established method
to eradicate locally advanced tumors. Whether or no local RT can enhance
the potency of an antigen-specific DNA vaccine and the possible
underlying mechanism were evaluated.

Materials and Methods: The number of E7-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T cell
precursors and anti-E7 Abs from Tumor-bearing mice treated with local RT
(6Gy twice per week) and the CTGF/E7 DNA vaccine were evaluated. Abscopal
effects were also monitored. HMGB-1and DC maturation from local
irradiation were analyzed by flow cytometry. The ratio of
effector-to-suppressor cells in the tumor microenvironment was also
investigated.

Results: Tumor-bearing mice treated with local RT (6Gy twice per week)
and the CTGF/E7 DNA vaccine exhibited a dramatic increase in the number
of E7-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T cell precursors, higher titers of anti-E7
Abs, a significant reduction of tumor size, and longer survival. The
combination of local RT and the CTGF/E7 vaccine also elicited abscopal
effects on non-irradiated local subcutaneous and distant pulmonary
metastatic tumors. Local irradiation can induce the expression of HMGB-1
in apoptotic tumor cells and stimulate DC maturation, which results in
inducing antigen-specific immune responses. In addition, local
irradiation, although inducing Treg cells, can eventually increase a
higher ratio of effector-to-suppressor cells in the tumor
microenvironment.

Conclusions: Local irradiation can enhance the antigen-specific immunity
and antitumor effects on local and distant metastatic tumors generated by
an antigen-specific DNA vaccine. Irradiation combined with
antigen-specific immunotherapy is a potential new strategy for cancer
therapy.


