Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoproteomic evaluation of target engagement in clinical samples.


One of the challenges during the clinical development of kinase
inhibitors is understanding whether or not a compound is actually binding
the kinase of interest, in the appropriate tissue, during the course of
compound treatment. While compound concentration in blood can be
determined from pharmacodynamics, there are very few approaches that
directly measure whether or not the compound is binding the target
kinase. Herein, we apply a chemoproteomics platform (KiNativ®) using a
desthiobiotin ATP acyl phosphate probe (ATP probe), to monitor target
engagement in clinical samples. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate
that compound can be added to whole blood, after which peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are isolated, lysed, labeled with the ATP
probe, and analyzed by mass spectrometry to determine whether or not
compound treatment blocks the probe-labeling of the target. We
successfully applied this approach in the analysis of both the reversible
JNK inhibitor CC-930, as well as the covalent BTK inhibitor Ibrutinib
(Imbruvica®). We then extended the study to monitor the inhibition of
BTK by Ibrutinib in PBMCs isolated from patients undergoing drug
treatment. Finally, we demonstrate that in addition to profiling kinases
in PBMCs isolated from whole blood, this method can also be used to
profile kinases in solid tumors. Thus, the chemoproteomics approach
described here could be applied as a general method to monitor target
engagement for inhibitors developed against a variety of different
kinases in clinical samples.


