Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring the impact on metabolic flux in vivo of a newly
developed LDH inhibitor using hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance
spectroscopic imaging.


[aim] Increased lactate production is a feature of many neoplasms, and
Lactate Dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) plays a key role in conversion of
pyruvate to lactate. LDHA inhibition, therefore, is considered to be a
promising approach toward developing a new therapeutic strategy for
cancer treatment focused on targeting cancer metabolism. Non-invasive
imaging approaches able to monitor metabolic fluxes in vivo will be
useful for this purpose.

Hyperpolarized 13C Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has been well known
as a valuable technology to investigate metabolic processes in tumor
xenografts, allowing us to perform dynamic 13C-metabolic flux analysis in
vivo. Use of [1-13C]pyruvate with this technology provides the ability to
monitor LDHA activity in real time through dynamic observation of
conversion of [1-13C]pyruvate to [1-13C]lactate.

This study aimed to monitor drug efficacy of a newly developed LDH
inhibitor (LDHI, obtained from National Cancer Institute Experimental
Therapeutics Program, NExT) in a xenograft tumor model using 13C MRI
technology with hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate.

[Results] Hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate MR studies were performed before
and after LDHI administration to assess the impact on metabolic flux in
vivo. Using hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate MR Spectroscopy (MRS), we
found that lactate production was significantly suppressed by LDHI
administration in MiaPaca (a glycolytic pancreatic cancer cell line)
tumors, as was the [1-13C]lactate to [1-13C]pyruvate ratio
([1-13C]-Lac/Pyr), which was calculated from the areas under the curves
(AUC) using time-intensity data. This ratio decreased from 1.08 to 0.128
(88.1% decrease) 30 minutes after intravenous administration of the LDHI.
In addition, hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate MRS revealed that LDHI
significantly suppressed lactate production in a dose dependent manner.
Furthermore, Chemical Shift Imaging with 13C MRI demonstrated that the
[1-13C]lactate signal in each voxel clearly decreased, compared to that
before LDHI administration. The sum of [1-13C]lactate signals in the
tumor region decreased after LDHI administration, resulting in a
significant decrease in the tumor-specific [1-13C] Lac/Pyr ratio
(1.463±0.31 before LDHI to 0.134±0.036 30 minutes after LDHI
administration, a 90.67±2.56% decrease, n=3, p[Results] Hyperpolarized
[1-13C]pyruvate MR studies were performed before and after LDHI
administration to assess the impact on metabolic flux in vivo. Using
hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate MR Spectroscopy (MRS), we found that
lactate production was significantly suppressed by LDHI administration in
MiaPaca (a glycolytic pancreatic cancer cell line) tumors, as was the
[1-13C]lactate to [1-13C]pyruvate ratio ([1-13C]-Lac/Pyr), which was
calculated from the areas under the curves (AUC) using time-intensity
data. This ratio decreased from 1.08 to 0.128 (88.1% decrease) 30 minutes
after intravenous administration of the LDHI. In addition, hyperpolarized
[1-13C]pyruvate MRS revealed that LDHI significantly suppressed lactate
production in a dose dependent manner. Furthermore, Chemical Shift
Imaging with 13C MRI demonstrated that the [1-13C]lactate signal in each
voxel clearly decreased, compared to that before LDHI administration. The
sum of [1-13C]lactate signals in the tumor region decreased after LDHI
administration, resulting in a significant decrease in the tumor-specific
[1-13C] Lac/Pyr ratio (1.463±0.31 before LDHI to 0.134±0.036 30 minutes
after LDHI administration, a 90.67±2.56% decrease, n=3, p<0.01).

[Conclusions] These results indicate that hyperpolarized 13C-MRI is a
useful method to evaluate on-target efficacy of novel LDH inhibitors in
vivo, and this technique can be used to determine optimum dose and
exposure time of the LDHI in the tumor region. The current method can be
of great value in providing an in vivo pharmacodynamic biomarker for this
novel anti-cancer therapeutic targeting deregulated tumor metabolism.


