Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic diagnosis of multiple hepatocellular carcinoma.


Multiple hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is categorized into two types;
multicentric hepatocarcinogenesis (MC) and intrahepatic metastasis (IM).
Although discrimination of the types of multiple HCC is of clinical
importance, it is quite difficult to determine it correctly even after
histological diagnosis. In order to determine multiple HCC as MC or IM,
we compared pairs of multiple HCC samples from 40 patients with multiple
HCC and 2 patients with pairs of primary HCC and extrahepatic metastasis
such as adrenal grand and lung metastasis with regard to molecular
aberrations. Exome sequence showed that more than 70% of somatic
mutations were common in the pairs of IM, which were consistent with the
result of a pair of primary HCC and extrahepatic metastasis, while no
common somatic mutations was detected in genomic-MC (gMC) pairs. Notably,
more than 60% of clinically metachronous-MC cases were diagnosed as
genomic-IM (gIM) due to the concordance of mutation and shows
significantly frequent tumor thrombus, suggesting that gIM pairs
developed from the common ancestor. In addition, cell-free DNA was
analyzed using exome sequence in five patients with recurrent HCC, and
found that somatic mutations of cell free DNA were similar to the primary
HCC only in gIM but not in gMC cases. Taken together, comparison of
mutations in a pair of HCCs makes it possible to classify multiple HCCs
into MC and IM, which is difficult to be correctly determined in clinical
practice. Furthermore liquid biopsy for mutation analysis is available to
make treatment plans for multiple HCC patients.


