Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dimethylaminoparthenolide (DMAPT), an oral nuclear factor kappa B
inhibitor (NFκB), enhances radiation therapy and enhances epidermal
growth factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR TKI) activity.


Introduction: NFκB can promote cancer and resistance to therapy as well
as mediate tissue injury in response to radiation (XRT). We assessed
DMAPT efficacy alone and in combination with XRT, and also with an EGFR
TKI, and assessed whether it can mitigate XRT side effects.

Methods: Six-week old male TRAMP (Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of the Mouse
Prostate) mice received DMAPT (100 mg/kg) orally or vehicle control
3x/week until palpable tumors formed and lung metastases were analyzed
histologically. In separate studies, 16 week old TRAMP mice were treated
with 100 mg/kg DMAPT 3x over 1 week before 6 Gy whole-body XRT. Cancer
and normal tissues were analyzed for apoptosis for up to 72 hours
post-XRT. NCr nude mice were inoculated with H1975 (T790M mutation non
small cell lung cancer, NSCLC) subcutaneously. When tumors reached 200
mm3, treatment (Rx) commenced: vehicle, DMAPT 100mg/kg/day, EGF
TKI-AZD9291 25mg/kg/day, combination.

Results: Long-term Rx with DMAPT extended the median time to palpable
prostate tumor by 41.3 (p = 0.0013) days. Chronic DMAPT Rx reduced the
number of metastatic lesions/mm2 in TRAMP lungs 20-fold (0.077 ± 0.12
SD) compared to a vehicle control (1.47 ± 1.28 SD) (p = 0.0004).
XRT-induced apoptosis doubled in TRAMP prostates (with moderate to high
grade PIN lesions) treated with DMAPT prior to 6 Gy XRT (101.3 %
increase, p = 0.039). DMAPT induced the greatest radiosensitivity in
TRAMP prostates with higher grade PIN (R2 = 0.79, p = 0.0001), while
apoptosis frequency in tissues with lower grades of PIN was the same as
vehicle control TRAMP mice (R2 = 0.024, p = 0.3). DMAPT also reduced
XRT-induced apoptosis in healthy TRAMP spleen (32.9 % reduction, p =
0.003) and rectum (28.7 % reduction, p = 0.0001). In the H1975
experiment, DMAPT monotherapy did not differ from the vehicle controls.
In the single agent AZD9291 group, 2 of the 8 mice had resistance emerge
during Rx and adding DMAPT to AZD9291 reversed resistance in one of
these. Rx was held at Day 220 in 3 remaining AZD9291 treated mice with no
evidence of tumor and only 1 mouse was alive with no tumor at day 260.
For mice receiving Rx with AZD9291 and DMAPT from D1, resistance emerged
in 1 mouse, and at D140 all remaining mice with no evidence of tumor had
Rx stopped, and 3 mice were still tumor free at D260. Two mice had
regrowth, were retreated, and at D200 without evidence of tumors had Rx
held, and one had no tumor at D260 at the end of the experiment. In
total, 4 of 8 mice in the AZD9291 and DMAPT had no tumor off therapy at
D260.

Conclusion: Radiation and EGFR TKI resistance has been linked to NFκB
activation. DMAPT slows down cancer progression and decreases metastatic
lesions in a prostate cancer mouse model, protects normal tissue from
radiation induced apoptosis, augments radiation induced apoptosis in
prostate cancer and augments EGFR TKI efficacy in T790M mutant NSCLC.


