Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathogenic mutations and variants of unknown significance (VUS) in
cancer predisposition genes are associated with over 10% of pediatric
rhabdomyosarcoma: a report from the Childrenâ€™s Oncology Group.


Approximately 5% of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cases are due to known cancer
predisposition syndromes (e.g., Li-Fraumeni syndrome,
Neurofibromatosis-1), but these estimates have not been confirmed in
large-scale studies. Furthermore, no recommended germline testing
protocols exist for RMS. We tested the hypothesis that germline mutation
burden is greater than previously reported and present several new
predisposition genes as potential drivers of pediatric RMS. We sequenced
59 cancer susceptibility genes in 213 children with RMS enrolled on one
clinical trial (COG ARST0531), unselected for family history of cancer.
Validation was performed with Sanger sequencing. Our analysis included
determining the incidence of pathogenic variants in known RMS
predisposition genes, followed by other cancer predisposition genes on
our panel but not previously associated with RMS. In our cohort, 3.9% of
unselected RMS cases harbor a pathogenic variant in a known
predisposition gene (Table 1). Using VAAST, we next identified the top 10
genes possibly associated with RMS. Variants of uncertain significance
(VUS) were restricted to rare variants (Approximately 5% of
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cases are due to known cancer predisposition
syndromes (e.g., Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Neurofibromatosis-1), but these
estimates have not been confirmed in large-scale studies. Furthermore, no
recommended germline testing protocols exist for RMS. We tested the
hypothesis that germline mutation burden is greater than previously
reported and present several new predisposition genes as potential
drivers of pediatric RMS. We sequenced 59 cancer susceptibility genes in
213 children with RMS enrolled on one clinical trial (COG ARST0531),
unselected for family history of cancer. Validation was performed with
Sanger sequencing. Our analysis included determining the incidence of
pathogenic variants in known RMS predisposition genes, followed by other
cancer predisposition genes on our panel but not previously associated
with RMS. In our cohort, 3.9% of unselected RMS cases harbor a pathogenic
variant in a known predisposition gene (Table 1). Using VAAST, we next
identified the top 10 genes possibly associated with RMS. Variants of
uncertain significance (VUS) were restricted to rare variants (<0.1%)
with severe CADD and Polyphen2 scores, which added 16 additional patients
(7.4%). To distinguish incidental findings from true correlations, we
compared our allele frequencies to those in the GnomAD database (126,216
exome sequences and 15,136 whole-genome sequences). Including both
pathogenic mutations and rare VUS, 10.8% of RMS cases carry a variant
with potentially important clinical implications, suggesting that newly
diagnosed RMS would benefit from multigene genetic testing. Future
directions include linkage to clinical data such as family history, age
at diagnosis, tumor stage/location/histology, and clinical outcome, as
well as expanding both the RMS and control cohorts.

Table 1. List of genes with numbers of carriers identified in 213
rhabdomyosarcoma cases



Gene

Carriers

%

% of carriers in GnomAD

SIR

95% CI

P=value



Truncating Variants and Known Pathogenic Missense



ATM

0



0.42%

-

-

-



BAP1

0

0.87%

0.05%

-

-

-



BRCA2

2

0.87%

0.85%

1.01

(0.12-3.66)

1.1736



DICER1

1

0.43%

0.06%

7.75

(0.20-43.19)

0.2421



MSH2

1

0.43%

0.15%

2.93

(0.07-16.30)

0.5790



NF1

2

0.87%

0.88%

0.98

(0.12-3.54)

1.2088



PMS2

0

0.87%

0.18%

-

-

-



PTCH1

0



0.15%

-

-

-



TP53

3

1.30%

0.13%

10.10

(2.08-29.51)

0.0070



WT1

0

1.30%

0.02%

-

-

-



Total

9

3.90%

3.42%

1.14

(0.52-2.16)

0.7882



Combined Analysis of Pathogenic Variants plus Variants of Uncertain
Significance (VUS)



ATM

2

0.87%

0.78%

1.11

(0.13-4.02)

1.0734



BAP1

2

0.87%

0.22%

3.89

(0.47-14.05)

0.1891



BRCA2

2

0.87%

1.52%

0.57

(0.07-2.06)

1.7286



DICER1

7

3.03%

0.86%

3.52

(1.41-7.24)

0.0089



MSH2

1

0.43%

0.78%

0.56

(0.01-3.10)

1.6690



NF1

2

0.87%

1.70%

0.51

(0.06-1.84)

1.8062



PMS2

1

0.43%

0.64%

0.68

(0.02-3.78)

1.5425



PTCH1

3

1.30%

0.86%

1.52

(0.31-4.43)

0.6348



TP53

4

1.73%

0.25%

6.93

(1.89-17.76)

0.0058



WT1

1

0.43%

0.31%

1.40

(0.04-7.81)

1.0197



Total

25

10.82%

9.94%

1.09

(0.70-1.61)

0.7232


