Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization of cervical cancer cells by HDAC inhibitors.


Introduction: While histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have
demonstrated in vitro and in vivo radiosensitization in several human
cancer cell lines, the efficacy and mechanism of action of HDAC
inhibitors in HPV-positive cancers are poorly understood. We hypothesize
that HDAC inhibitors can be used to treat HPV-positive squamous cell
carcinomas by enhancing radiation sensitivity.

Methods: The cellular cytotoxicity of ten HDAC inhibitors was examined in
HPV-positive (CaSki, SiHa, HeLa) and HPV-negative (C33a) cervical cancer
cell lines by the WST-8
[2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tet
razolium, monosodium salt] assay, and the drug with the highest
cytotoxicity (pan-HDAC inhibitor SP-1-161) was selected for further
analysis. SAHA was used as a control. Evaluation of the cell cycle phase
distribution was performed by flow cytometry using FACS analysis
following treatment with drugs at 24, 48, and 72 hours as well as in
combination with radiation in CaSki cells (HPV-16 positive). The extent
of radiation sensitization was confirmed by cellular clonogenic assays in
CaSki cells.

Results: Of all drugs tested, cytotoxicity was demonstrated in a
dose-dependent manner. The values of IC50s were at 1.071, 1.567, 1.71,
and 0.929 μM (SAHA) and 0.054, 0.3554, 0.0994, and 0.095 μM (SP-1-161)
for CaSki, SiHa, HeLa, and C33a cell lines, respectively. SP-1-161
conferred significant cytotoxicity (0.054 μM) in CaSki cells. Cellular
radiation sensitivity is tightly associated with cell cycle phases and
varies as a function of the position in the cell cycle. To assess the
effects of HDAC inhibitors on the cell cycle, CaSki cells were treated
with IC50 dosage (SP-1-161 at 0.054 μM, SAHA at 1 μM) for 24 hours, 48
hours, and 72 hours and then treated with radiation. The drugs alone
arrested cells primarily in the G1 phase of cell cycle (77.3% for
SP-1-161, 84% for SAHA), a relatively radiation sensitive phase.
Pre-treatment of SP-1-161 for 24 hours prior to radiation (5 Gy)
increased cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase as well. To determine the
radiosensitization property of SP-1-161, the radiation clonogenic
survival assay was performed following pre-treatment of SP-1-161 for 24
hours. Cells were exposed to graded doses of γ-radiation, and the data
were fitted using the single-hit multitarget and the linear-quadratic
models. Comparisons of survival curves revealed smaller D0 (D0 ratio
1.43) for cells irradiated in the presence of SP-1-161 (D0 = 1.4) than
for controls (D0 = 2.0). Interestingly, treatment with SAHA did not
impact radiosensitization (D0 = 1.9, D0 ratio 1.05).

Conclusion: SP-1-161 conferred significant toxicity in CaSki cells and
primarily arrested cells in the G1 phase of cell cycle. Furthermore,
treatment with SP-1-161 enhanced radiosensitization, while SAHA showed
little change despite cell cycle arrest primarily in the G1 phase.
Together, our results support SP-1-161 as a new therapeutic agent with
potential for cervical cancer.


