Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PSMA-targeted alpha radioimmunotherapy for prostate cancer with
225Ac-J591.


Background: Prostate cancer (PC) is a radiosensitive disease. In addition
to external beam and brachytherapy, systemic bone-seeking radioisotopes
have been utilized clinically for many years, with radium-223 leading to
overall survival benefits. However, the available beta and alpha emitting
particles in the clinic target tumors / stroma in bone only. Biologically
targeted radiopharmaceutical treatment has shown promising results in our
earlier multiple clinical trials using beta-emitting anti-PSMA therapy
with Leutetium-177 radiolabeled anti-PSMA monoclonal antibody (mAb) J591,
with accurate targeting and tumor response, but treatment is limited by
myelosuppression. Both beta and alpha-small molecule PSMA ligand directed
therapy has been utilized anecdotally outside of the US, but has not been
systemically studied. Based upon their biodistribution, targeting of
salivary glands and potentially proximal renal tubules may pose longer
term toxicity issues. mAb-based targeted alpha-particle delivery may be
advantageous with less expected myelosuppression than seen with
Î²-emitters.

Experimental procedures: To optimize labeling of humanized DOTA-J591 mAb,
actinium-225 (225Ac) nitrate was obtained from Oak Ridge National
Laboratories and was dissolved in HCl solution and then mixed with
trimethyl ammonium acetate and L-ascorbic acid. This preparation was
incubated with DOTA-J591. The labeling efficiency (LE) was determined by
ITLC-SG. If the LE is >60%, 225Ac-DOTA-J591 mAb was purified by gel
filtration and sterilized by membrane filtration. In a pilot pre-clinical
study, we studied the toxicity in non-tumor bearing BALB/c mice.

Results: The radiochemical purity is >95% and the immunoreactivity was
>80%. Twenty-five BALB/c mice received from 2.1 to 6.3 KBq of 225Ac-J591.
Treatment was well tolerated, with all mice alive and healthy at Day 26.

Conclusions: A stable alpha emitting-antibody complex has been produced
with 225Ac-J591. Initial mouse safety experiments have been successful. A
RIT dose escalation study of PSMA-targeted alpha emitter in a LNCaP
xenograft model is underway.


