Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using a genome-wide shRNA screen to investigate the mechanism of
stroma-conferred gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.


The purpose of this study is to identify mechanisms of resistance to
gemcitabine in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) using an in vitro
coculture system. The inherent resistance of PDAC to first line
treatments such as gemcitabine has been attributed to the dense fibrotic
stroma. Targeting stromal components, in particular cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs), the activated form of pancreatic stellate cells
(PSCs), is a promising avenue for therapeutic intervention. We have
demonstrated previously the induction of gemcitabine resistance when
co-culturing KRAS G12D; p53 R172H; Pdx-cre (KPC) mouse PDAC-derived
tumour cells with Î±SMA+ fibroblast-like cells from PDAC tumour (FLCs),
in comparison to PDAC cells co-cultured with PSCs or in monoculture. This
resistance-inducing effect is specific to cells of mesenchymal phenotype,
is transient in nature and a product of cell-cell contact. To investigate
the exact mechanism by which PDAC cells become resistant to gemcitabine
in coculture, we undertook a genome-wide shRNA depletion viability
screen, infecting KPC mouse PDAC cells with a pooled shERWOOD UltramiR
shRNA library both in mono- and co-culture with FLCs, in the presence and
absence of gemcitabine. Next-generation sequencing and differential
expression analysis, using DESeq2, identified shRNAs depleted through 6
cycles of gemcitabine treatment in coculture, indicating they target
genes driving the resistance effect. Pathway analysis of differential
expression using MetaCore implicated DNA damage repair and protein
modification pathways in the gemcitabine resistance effect. Depletion of
p97, ATR, or Chk1 all sensitised PDAC cells to gemcitabine in coculture,
corroborating findings with translational value in previous studies.
Further evaluation is ongoing using validation shRNA dropout assays in
combination with targeted literature reviews to collate a candidate list
of targetable genes with translational value in preventing and combating
chemotherapy resistance in patients with PDAC.


