Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative imaging of metabolic changes in macrophage subsets.


Macrophages play an important role in tumor therapeutic response.
However, current methods cannot image heterogeneities in macrophage
activity on a single-cell level over time within intact, living samples.
Macrophage metabolism is closely linked to macrophage function, as
M1-like macrophages rely on aerobic glycolysis and M2-like macrophages
rely on fatty acid oxidation and oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, we
propose to develop optical metabolic imaging (OMI) using two-photon
microscopy to monitor cell-level changes in macrophage polarization and
functional activity. OMI exploits the auto-fluorescence intensities and
lifetimes of the metabolic co-enzymes NAD(P)H and FAD, and has been
previously used to dynamically image in vivo tumors with cell-level
resolution. The optical redox ratio (fluorescence intensity of NAD(P)H
divided by FAD) provides a global measure of redox balance within
individual cells. The fluorescence lifetimes of NAD(P)H and FAD provide
information in protein-binding activities in metabolic reactions. OMI was
used to monitor metabolic changes in macrophages on a single-cell level
during polarization and after metabolic perturbations. RAW 264.7
macrophages were stimulated towards an M1- or M2-like phenotype, and
imaged with OMI at 24, 48, and 72 hours post-polarization. M1- and
M2-like macrophages exhibited significant differences (pMacrophages play
an important role in tumor therapeutic response. However, current methods
cannot image heterogeneities in macrophage activity on a single-cell
level over time within intact, living samples. Macrophage metabolism is
closely linked to macrophage function, as M1-like macrophages rely on
aerobic glycolysis and M2-like macrophages rely on fatty acid oxidation
and oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, we propose to develop optical
metabolic imaging (OMI) using two-photon microscopy to monitor cell-level
changes in macrophage polarization and functional activity. OMI exploits
the auto-fluorescence intensities and lifetimes of the metabolic
co-enzymes NAD(P)H and FAD, and has been previously used to dynamically
image in vivo tumors with cell-level resolution. The optical redox ratio
(fluorescence intensity of NAD(P)H divided by FAD) provides a global
measure of redox balance within individual cells. The fluorescence
lifetimes of NAD(P)H and FAD provide information in protein-binding
activities in metabolic reactions. OMI was used to monitor metabolic
changes in macrophages on a single-cell level during polarization and
after metabolic perturbations. RAW 264.7 macrophages were stimulated
towards an M1- or M2-like phenotype, and imaged with OMI at 24, 48, and
72 hours post-polarization. M1- and M2-like macrophages exhibited
significant differences (p<0.05) in redox ratio and FAD fluorescence
lifetime values at 48 and 72 hours post-polarization. The M1-like and
M2-like character of the macrophages were validated with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis. Population density modeling of
single-cell metabolism established differences in intra-sample
heterogeneity across subsets over time. M1- and M2-like macrophages were
also treated with 2-deoxy-glucose (glycolysis inhibitor), etomoxir (fatty
acid oxidation inhibitor), and cyanide (oxidative phosphorylation
inhibitor. Treatment with etomoxir caused a significant decrease in redox
ratio in M2-like macrophages (pMacrophages play an important role in
tumor therapeutic response. However, current methods cannot image
heterogeneities in macrophage activity on a single-cell level over time
within intact, living samples. Macrophage metabolism is closely linked to
macrophage function, as M1-like macrophages rely on aerobic glycolysis
and M2-like macrophages rely on fatty acid oxidation and oxidative
phosphorylation. Thus, we propose to develop optical metabolic imaging
(OMI) using two-photon microscopy to monitor cell-level changes in
macrophage polarization and functional activity. OMI exploits the
auto-fluorescence intensities and lifetimes of the metabolic co-enzymes
NAD(P)H and FAD, and has been previously used to dynamically image in
vivo tumors with cell-level resolution. The optical redox ratio
(fluorescence intensity of NAD(P)H divided by FAD) provides a global
measure of redox balance within individual cells. The fluorescence
lifetimes of NAD(P)H and FAD provide information in protein-binding
activities in metabolic reactions. OMI was used to monitor metabolic
changes in macrophages on a single-cell level during polarization and
after metabolic perturbations. RAW 264.7 macrophages were stimulated
towards an M1- or M2-like phenotype, and imaged with OMI at 24, 48, and
72 hours post-polarization. M1- and M2-like macrophages exhibited
significant differences (p<0.05) in redox ratio and FAD fluorescence
lifetime values at 48 and 72 hours post-polarization. The M1-like and
M2-like character of the macrophages were validated with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis. Population density modeling of
single-cell metabolism established differences in intra-sample
heterogeneity across subsets over time. M1- and M2-like macrophages were
also treated with 2-deoxy-glucose (glycolysis inhibitor), etomoxir (fatty
acid oxidation inhibitor), and cyanide (oxidative phosphorylation
inhibitor. Treatment with etomoxir caused a significant decrease in redox
ratio in M2-like macrophages (p<0.05) with no significant effect on
M1-like macrophages. In contrast, the redox ratio decreased in M1-like
macrophages upon inhibition of glycolysis (pMacrophages play an important
role in tumor therapeutic response. However, current methods cannot image
heterogeneities in macrophage activity on a single-cell level over time
within intact, living samples. Macrophage metabolism is closely linked to
macrophage function, as M1-like macrophages rely on aerobic glycolysis
and M2-like macrophages rely on fatty acid oxidation and oxidative
phosphorylation. Thus, we propose to develop optical metabolic imaging
(OMI) using two-photon microscopy to monitor cell-level changes in
macrophage polarization and functional activity. OMI exploits the
auto-fluorescence intensities and lifetimes of the metabolic co-enzymes
NAD(P)H and FAD, and has been previously used to dynamically image in
vivo tumors with cell-level resolution. The optical redox ratio
(fluorescence intensity of NAD(P)H divided by FAD) provides a global
measure of redox balance within individual cells. The fluorescence
lifetimes of NAD(P)H and FAD provide information in protein-binding
activities in metabolic reactions. OMI was used to monitor metabolic
changes in macrophages on a single-cell level during polarization and
after metabolic perturbations. RAW 264.7 macrophages were stimulated
towards an M1- or M2-like phenotype, and imaged with OMI at 24, 48, and
72 hours post-polarization. M1- and M2-like macrophages exhibited
significant differences (p<0.05) in redox ratio and FAD fluorescence
lifetime values at 48 and 72 hours post-polarization. The M1-like and
M2-like character of the macrophages were validated with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis. Population density modeling of
single-cell metabolism established differences in intra-sample
heterogeneity across subsets over time. M1- and M2-like macrophages were
also treated with 2-deoxy-glucose (glycolysis inhibitor), etomoxir (fatty
acid oxidation inhibitor), and cyanide (oxidative phosphorylation
inhibitor. Treatment with etomoxir caused a significant decrease in redox
ratio in M2-like macrophages (p<0.05) with no significant effect on
M1-like macrophages. In contrast, the redox ratio decreased in M1-like
macrophages upon inhibition of glycolysis (p<0.05). Comparable to
previously published data, inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation in
both groups yielded a decreased NAD(P)H mean lifetimes (pMacrophages play
an important role in tumor therapeutic response. However, current methods
cannot image heterogeneities in macrophage activity on a single-cell
level over time within intact, living samples. Macrophage metabolism is
closely linked to macrophage function, as M1-like macrophages rely on
aerobic glycolysis and M2-like macrophages rely on fatty acid oxidation
and oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, we propose to develop optical
metabolic imaging (OMI) using two-photon microscopy to monitor cell-level
changes in macrophage polarization and functional activity. OMI exploits
the auto-fluorescence intensities and lifetimes of the metabolic
co-enzymes NAD(P)H and FAD, and has been previously used to dynamically
image in vivo tumors with cell-level resolution. The optical redox ratio
(fluorescence intensity of NAD(P)H divided by FAD) provides a global
measure of redox balance within individual cells. The fluorescence
lifetimes of NAD(P)H and FAD provide information in protein-binding
activities in metabolic reactions. OMI was used to monitor metabolic
changes in macrophages on a single-cell level during polarization and
after metabolic perturbations. RAW 264.7 macrophages were stimulated
towards an M1- or M2-like phenotype, and imaged with OMI at 24, 48, and
72 hours post-polarization. M1- and M2-like macrophages exhibited
significant differences (p<0.05) in redox ratio and FAD fluorescence
lifetime values at 48 and 72 hours post-polarization. The M1-like and
M2-like character of the macrophages were validated with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis. Population density modeling of
single-cell metabolism established differences in intra-sample
heterogeneity across subsets over time. M1- and M2-like macrophages were
also treated with 2-deoxy-glucose (glycolysis inhibitor), etomoxir (fatty
acid oxidation inhibitor), and cyanide (oxidative phosphorylation
inhibitor. Treatment with etomoxir caused a significant decrease in redox
ratio in M2-like macrophages (p<0.05) with no significant effect on
M1-like macrophages. In contrast, the redox ratio decreased in M1-like
macrophages upon inhibition of glycolysis (p<0.05). Comparable to
previously published data, inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation in
both groups yielded a decreased NAD(P)H mean lifetimes (p<0.05) and
increased FAD mean lifetimes (pMacrophages play an important role in
tumor therapeutic response. However, current methods cannot image
heterogeneities in macrophage activity on a single-cell level over time
within intact, living samples. Macrophage metabolism is closely linked to
macrophage function, as M1-like macrophages rely on aerobic glycolysis
and M2-like macrophages rely on fatty acid oxidation and oxidative
phosphorylation. Thus, we propose to develop optical metabolic imaging
(OMI) using two-photon microscopy to monitor cell-level changes in
macrophage polarization and functional activity. OMI exploits the
auto-fluorescence intensities and lifetimes of the metabolic co-enzymes
NAD(P)H and FAD, and has been previously used to dynamically image in
vivo tumors with cell-level resolution. The optical redox ratio
(fluorescence intensity of NAD(P)H divided by FAD) provides a global
measure of redox balance within individual cells. The fluorescence
lifetimes of NAD(P)H and FAD provide information in protein-binding
activities in metabolic reactions. OMI was used to monitor metabolic
changes in macrophages on a single-cell level during polarization and
after metabolic perturbations. RAW 264.7 macrophages were stimulated
towards an M1- or M2-like phenotype, and imaged with OMI at 24, 48, and
72 hours post-polarization. M1- and M2-like macrophages exhibited
significant differences (p<0.05) in redox ratio and FAD fluorescence
lifetime values at 48 and 72 hours post-polarization. The M1-like and
M2-like character of the macrophages were validated with quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis. Population density modeling of
single-cell metabolism established differences in intra-sample
heterogeneity across subsets over time. M1- and M2-like macrophages were
also treated with 2-deoxy-glucose (glycolysis inhibitor), etomoxir (fatty
acid oxidation inhibitor), and cyanide (oxidative phosphorylation
inhibitor. Treatment with etomoxir caused a significant decrease in redox
ratio in M2-like macrophages (p<0.05) with no significant effect on
M1-like macrophages. In contrast, the redox ratio decreased in M1-like
macrophages upon inhibition of glycolysis (p<0.05). Comparable to
previously published data, inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation in
both groups yielded a decreased NAD(P)H mean lifetimes (p<0.05) and
increased FAD mean lifetimes (p<0.05). These results establish OMI as a
method to image heterogeneity in macrophage populations within intact,
living samples. This method could be used to understand macrophage
interactions in the microenvironment of intact in vivo tumors.


