Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A case series of vitreoretinal lymphoma in New York City with
exposure to Chernobyl nuclear disaster decades earlier.


Background: Vitreoretinal lymphoma (VRL) is an unusual presentation of
primary central nervous system lymphoma and a subcategory of intraocular
lymphoma (IOL). The etiology and epidemiology of this rare malignancy is
unknown.

Methods: We diagnosed 10 subjects with VRL in our clinical practices in
New York City (NYC) during 2010-2013. Upon systematic collection of
demographic and exposure history, 6 patients reported residence in
regions proximal to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster (4 Ukraine, 1 Poland,
1 Moldova). We studied clinical variables including presentation,
diagnostic parameters, therapies and survival of this case series. To
provide context, we examined population-based incidence data from the
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program to determine
age-adjusted incidence rates of IOL (there is no unique code for VRL) per
100,000 person-years in the United States (US) during 1992-2013. New York
State (NYS) rates are not reported to SEER and were examined separately
using NYS Cancer Registry (NYSCR). Incidence trends using 10-year
intervals (1992-2002 and 2003-2013) were also analyzed.

Results: All six subjects (5 females) were diagnosed with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma with bilateral presentation. Diagnosis in all cases was
made by immunohistochemical analysis on tumor specimen obtained by
vitreous fine needle aspiration, vitreous biopsy or stereotactic brain
biopsy. Median age at diagnosis was 76 years (range, 62-84 years). Median
interval from Chernobyl accident (1986) to diagnosis was 26 years (range,
24-27 years). We identified no other common exposure or environmental
risk factor. There were 68 cases of primary IOL during 1992-2013 in the
13 SEER areas. IOL rates per 100,000 person-years for both sexes were
highest among Asian/Pacific Islanders (0.010 for males and 0.014 for
females) followed by whites (0.009 for males and 0.008 for females) and
(based on small numbers) by blacks. Analysis of incidence trends showed
an increase in rates among Asian/Pacific Islander females from 0.005 in
1992-2002 to 0.018 in 2003-2013 and among males from 0.006 to 0.013.
Rates among whites increased for both genders. Analysis of NYSCR data
revealed 44 cases of primary IOL. IOL rates per 100,000 person-years for
both genders were highest among whites (0.010 for males and 0.012 for
females) followed by Asian/Pacific Islanders (0.007 for males and
females). Analysis of trends revealed increase in rates for both genders
and racial groups.

Conclusions: Our analyses highlight the rarity of VRL and reveal an
increase in incidence, particularly among Asian/Pacific Islanders where
IOL rates tripled within two decades. Based on incidence rates, 8 cases
of IOL (with a subset being VRL) are expected in 4 years in NYS. Our
observation of 10 cases of VRL in 4 years in our practices in NYC is
unanticipated. The sole common environmental factor we identified was
residence in regions proximal to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.


