Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of CDODA-Me, a glycyrrhetinic acid derivative, and
Erlotinib overcomes chemo-resistance in NSCLC PDX spheroids and 3D
bio-printed cells.


Patient-derived Xenografts (PDXs) are considered as relevant preclinical
model for anticancer drug development due to original recapitulation of
patient genetic profile, gene expression patterns and tissue histology.
In this study, we investigated combination efficacy of CDODA-Me (Methyl
2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate) and TKI inhibitor
Erlotinib (ERL) against Lung NSCLC PDX spheroids and 3D bio-printed PDX
cells. NSCLC PDX cells (EGFR T790M mutants) were obtained from Dr.
Rishi’s Laboratory. PDX spheroids were grown in DMEM/ F12 media
supplemented with L-glutamine, B27 supplement, recombinant human
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and recombinant human basic fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF). Spheroids were treated with CDODA-Me, ERL alone and
in combination. Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. Western blot
analysis was used to study the modulation of Bcl-xL, MDR1 and ABCG2 in
treated PDX spheroids. For 3D bio-printing of PDX cells, hydrogels were
prepared by partial cross-linking of sodium alginate (4.5% w/v) and
gelatin (1% w/v) mixture with 40mM CaCl2 solution. PDX Cells were mixed
with partially cross-linked hydrogel and printed with Inkredible 3D
bio-printer (CELLINK, Sweden). Bio-printed scaffolds were fully
cross-linked by 160 mM CaCl2 solution and then incubated overnight with
cell culture media. The scaffolds were treated with CDODA-Me and ERL
alone and in combination. After 48 h cell viabilities were determined by
live/dead assay using fluorescence microscopy.

MTT assay showed that approximately 65% and 74% viability was observed at
10 µM ERL and 2.5 µM CDODA-Me respectively. Decreased spheroid cell
viability was observed in ERL and CDODA-Me combination treatment. Our
western blot studies showed down-regulation of Bcl-xL, MDR1 and ABCG2 in
combination group. Further, 81.04 ± 5.65, 78.65 ± 3.98 and 74.35 ±
4.24 percent viable PDX cells were observed in the bio-printed scaffolds
after 48, 72 and 96 h respectively. Higher percentage of dead cells
(52.62 ± 1.66) were found in the combination group than CDODA-Me (28.39
± 1.60) and ERL (29.62 ± 4.91) alone.

In conclusion, CDODA-Me in combination with ERL was found to be effective
against human lung PDX spheroids and bio-printed PDX cells by decreasing
the cell viability and overcoming drug resistance. Partially cross-linked
sodium alginate-gelatin hydrogel enhances the possibility of PDX cell
bio-printing with high cell survival rate. CDODA-Me can be considered as
an effective neo-adjuvant to improve ERL efficacy in human NSCLC.


