Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHK1 inhibition synergizes with cisplatin to promote mitotic cell
death via activation of caspase 2 and downregulation of E2F1 in small
cell lung cancer.


Platinum-based chemotherapy remains the standard treatment for patients
with small cell lung cancer (SCLC), one of the deadliest cancers, but the
benefit of such therapy is often hampered by rapid emergence of drug
resistance. Thus far, there is no targeted therapy available for SCLC,
mainly due to the lack of targetable oncogenic driver alterations;
nevertheless, over 90% of SCLC tumors harbor inactivating mutations in
tumor suppressor p53, an important checkpoint regulator for the control
of cell cycle progression in the event of DNA damage. SCLC cells with
p53-deficiency heavily rely on the checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1), a key
checkpoint regulator, to prevent the progression of cell cycle through
G2/M in the presence of damaged DNA. Using CHK1 inhibitors and siRNA
knockdown approaches, we explored the potential therapeutic benefit of
CHK1 inhibition in SCLC models in combination with cisplatin, a DNA
damaging agent. We demonstrated that CHK1 inhibition was able to release
G2/M cell cycle arrest induced by cisplatin, and synergized with
cisplatin to induce mitotic cell death especially in the p53-deficient
SCLC cell lines. CHK1 inhibition activated caspase 2 and downregulated
the expression of E2F1 transcription factor in these cells. We showed
that activation of caspase 2 was required for the mitotic cell death
induced by the combination of cisplatin and CHK1 inhibition.
Interestingly, the upregulation of E2F1 induced by CHK1 inhibition was
mediated in part by caspase 2, and E2F1 played a role in the DNA damage
checkpoint control as knockdown of E2F1 enhanced cytotoxicity induced by
cisplatin or CHK1 inhibitor in GLC4 cells. However, ectopic
overexpression of E2F1 also led to increase of phospho-histone H3, Î³H2AX
and cleaved PARP, and significantly enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity,
indicating that proper dosage of E2F1 is critical for DNA damage
checkpoint response. These data provide a mechanistic insight of
CHK1-mediated DNA damage checkpoint control and the anticancer effect of
CHK1 inhibition against SCLC. In tumor samples derived from SCLC patients
treated with platinum based chemotherapy, we found that high expression
of CHK1 and E2F1 significantly correlated with poorer overall survival,
further suggesting a link between CHK1 and E2F1 and potentially
collaborative roles of these two factors in DNA damage checkpoint
response. Moreover, we showed that CHK1 inhibition resensitized
cisplatin-resistant cells to cisplatin treatment and induced mitotic cell
death via caspase activation in these cells. These data indicate that
CHK1 inhibition may enhance the benefit of cisplatin treatment for SCLC
and overcome cisplatin resistance. We are presently confirming the in
vitro results of CHK1 inhibition in combination with cisplatin treatment
in xenograft tumor models in athymic nude mice.


