Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High nuclear FTH1 protein expression predicts early disease
recurrence for BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.


FTH1 is a 21kD subunit of the ferritin complex, which is involved in
intracellular iron storage. In a previous study we found that FTH1
proteins can be located either in the cytoplasm or nucleus and, depending
on its cellular localization, is associated with good or poor prognosis
in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). Furthermore, cytoplasmic
localization of cFTH1 was associated with an increased anti-tumor (CD8+)
T-cell / tumor-promoting (CD4+) T-cell ratio suggesting an immune
modulatory role for FTH1. In the current study we have assessed the
prognostic value of FTH1 expression for BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. FTH1
proteins were visualized by immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray
containing primary breast cancer specimens from 222 BRCA1/2 mutation
carriers that were diagnosed between 1982 and 2008. Primary breast
cancers from BRCA1 carriers were predominantly of the TNBC subtype,
whereas primary breast cancers from BRCA2 mutation carriers were mainly
ER-positive. The association between FTH1 expression and clinical outcome
was evaluated by a Cox proportional hazards regression model using left
truncation to adjust for study inclusion bias. The median follow-up time
of the study was 9.2 years. High nuclear FTH1 (nFTH1), but not
cytoplasmic FTH1 (cFTH1), was associated with decreased metastasis-free
and disease-free survival as compared with low nFTH1 (multivariable
HR=3.54, 95% CI=1.45-8.66, P=0.0056 adjusted for tumor size and nodal
status; multivariable HR=2.71, 95% CI=1.49-4.92, P=0.0011 adjusted for
tumor size). Neither nFTH1 nor cFTH1 were associated with breast
cancer-specific or overall survival. This suggests that high nFTH1
expression in primary breast cancer predicts earlier disease recurrence
for BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Since we had observed that CD4+:CD8+
T-cell ratios were increased among TNBCs with high nFTH1, we hypothesize
that nFTH1 promotes recruitment of immune suppressive CD4+/FOXP3+
regulatory T-cells in TNBC and BRCA1/2-associated tumors, suppressing
CD4+/FOXP3- and CD8+ T-cell anti-tumor immunity.


