Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting osteosarcoma with graphene oxide-associated anti-HER2
antibodies.


Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary cancer of the bone affecting
children and adolescents. While over the last two decades the neoadjuvant
chemotherapy has improved survival of the patients with resectable OS,
the prognosis for unresectable or recurrent tumors remains poor due to
the lack of effective treatment. Given that a majority osteosarcomas
overexpress HER2, a phase II clinical trial of anti-HER2 antibody
trastuzumab in conjunction with chemotherapy has been carried out to
treat metastatic OS. However, no significant therapeutic benefit was
observed. We recently reported that association of anti-CD20 antibody
rituximab with a nanomaterial graphene oxide (GO) substantially enhances
the anti-lymphoma activity of the antibody. Here we have studied
antitumor activity of GO-associated trastuzumab (TRA). Similar to RTX,
TRA could be stably associated with functionalized GO through
non-covalent interactions, and GO-associated TRA (TRA/GO) showed markedly
enhanced HER2 binding activity with capacity to aggregate (cap) HER2 on
the target cells. Treating HER2+ OS as well as Ewingâ€™s sarcoma cell
lines in culture with TRA/GO resulted in rapid sarcoma cell death within
12 hr, while free TRA or the cytotoxin-conjugated TRA (ado-trastuzumab
emtansine) showed no significant cytotoxic effects. TRA/GO manifested no
cytotoxicity to human lymphocytes, in contrast to chemotherapeutic drugs
such as doxorubicin and oxaliplatin. We find that the ability to kill the
sarcoma cells results from the unique capacity of TRA/GO to
simultaneously induce oxidative stress as well as intense detrimental
HER2 signaling, which leads to a complete disappearance of a major
tyrosine-phosphorylated protein and caspase 8, and a partial loss of
RIPK1 along with an increase in RIPK3 levels within 5 min, followed by
necroptosis of the target cells. Intravenous administration of TRA/GO
rapidly eradicated established xenograft human OS in the lung as well as
at subcutaneous locations in NOD/ragko/gko immunodeficient mice in the
absence of chemotherapy, resulting in indefinite survival of the animals.
In contrast, free TRA treatment failed to do so. No appreciable side
effects were observed of TRA/GO in vivo. These results therefore
demonstrate a novel strategy to substantially enhance the therapeutic
capacity of anti-cancer antibodies. Given the increasing variety of human
malignancies that are found to overexpress Her2, including sarcomas,
carcinomas and neurological malignancies, our findings should have broad
therapeutic implications. As TRA/GO does not harm lymphocytes,
TRA/GO-based therapy may constitute a unique opportunity to implement
immunotherapy that is now known to play an important role in control
tumor progression.


