Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ON 123300, an orally administered novel CDK4/6 + ARK5 inhibitor,
exhibits potent antitumor activity in vivo: comparative studies with
Palbociclib.


Background: The overexpression of cyclin-dependent kinases 4/6 (CDK4/6)
is known to cause cell cycle dysregulation in certain cancer types,
making these cell cycle kinases attractive targets for pharmacological
inhibition. The effectiveness of first-generation non-selective
cyclin-dependent kinases, such as roscovitine and flavopiridol, was
hampered by toxicities, leading to the development of second-generation
compounds like IBRANCE®/Palbociclib that specifically inhibit CDK4 and
6. ON 123300 is a third-generation potent CDK4/6 inhibitor that also
inhibits ARK5 with low nanomolar potency and has the potential to improve
upon second-generation compounds. Previous studies have demonstrated the
inhibitory effect of single-agent ON 123300 in various pre-clinical
cancer models of MM and leukemia. In this study, we investigated the
comparative therapeutic potential of ON 123300 as an oral anticancer
agent and a second-generation inhibitor, Palbociclib, in xenografted
Rb+ve mouse models.

Methods: MDA-MB-435S xenografted mice were treated once a day for 21 days
with ON 123300 (125mg/kg) or Palbociclib (125mg/kg). Tumor volumes were
measured and peripheral blood was gathered to evaluate the effects on
hematological parameters. Separately, Western blot analyses were
performed to determine the effect of CDK4/6 inhibition on p-Rb following
intra-tumoral treatment with ON 123300 (2.5µM) or Palbociclib (2.5µM).

Results: ON 123300 and Palbociclib reduced tumor growth with an
equivalent magnitude during the 21-day treatment period, suggesting that
the two compounds were equally effective in this model. Both compounds
decreased RBC and platelet counts, however Palbociclib had a

more prominent and statistically significant (P≤0.05) inhibitory effect
on neutrophil counts when compared to ON 123300 (30.70 ± 3.55 vs. 45.10
± 2.04). Western blot analysis of tumor tissues demonstrated equivalent
effects on p-Rb for both compounds.

Conclusions: Xenograft data indicates that a third-generation CDK4/6
inhibitor, ON 123300, is as effective as Palbociclib in an Rb+ve
xenograft model. Moreover, this study also suggests that ON 123300 may
have the added advantage of reduced neutropenia compared to Palbociclib.
Prior preclinical data suggest that ON 123300 may be efficacious in Rb-ve
tumors, where second-generation compounds have diminished single-agent

activity, and our ongoing studies are aimed at further characterizing the
in vivo activity of ON 123300 in this setting.


