Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncologist use and perception of large panel next generation tumor
sequencing.


At Memorial Sloan Kettering, we have used a clinically validated custom
hybridization capture-based NGS assay (MSK-IMPACT) to sequence the tumors
of more than 10,000 patients. We sought to determine physician perception
and use of these results, including whether they changed management and
the reasoning behind this decision-making. All physicians who ordered
MSK-IMPACT testing for patients where it was not considered routine were
asked to complete a questionnaire quarterly (Table). Physician
determination of genomic “actionability” was compared to OncoKB, a
curated knowledge base of somatic variants (OncoKB.org).

Responses were received from 146 of 258 physicians emailed (57%)
regarding 1932 of 9147 patients (21%). Physician respondents comprised a
diversity of cancer specialties including medical oncology (67%),
pediatric oncology (8%), surgery (6%), radiation oncology (5%), and
neuro-oncology (5%). A total of 49 cancer types were represented.
Physicians indicated that sequencing altered management in 331 (20%) of
profiled patients in need of a treatment change. Among those in whom
treatment was reportedly not altered, physicians indicated the presence
of at least one actionable alteration in 55% (805/1474) of cases.
However, only 45% of these cases harbored a genomic variant annotated as
actionable by OncoKB. Among patients in whom physicians deemed the report
non-actionable, 12% had OncoKB annotated actionable variants. Across the
cases annotated as potentially actionable by OncoKB, physicians
identified an actionable alteration in 81% of cases. At the time of data
analysis, 297 (15%) patients had been enrolled in at least one clinical
trial of targeted therapy at MSKCC including 224 (12%) patients on
genomically-matched trials, 76% of whom participated after IMPACT
profiling. As the clinical adoption of NGS panels expands, continued
education of physicians as well as maintained knowledge bases for
annotation will be necessary to expand the utility of this approach and
the opportunity for precision medicine.

TABLE





Questions

Responses, N (%)



DID alter treatment, as follows:





1. Patient enrolled to a therapeutic protocol at MSKCC

265 (14)



2. Patient enrolled to a therapeutic protocol at another institution

15 (1)



3. Patient treated with off-label use of an FDA approved therapy

43 (2)



DID NOT alter treatment, as follows:





4. Actionable mutation(s) identified, but no therapeutic protocol was
available

175 (9)



5. Actionable mutation(s) identified, but patient declined participation
in, or was ineligible for, available therapeutic protocol

115 (6)



6. Actionable mutation(s) identified, but patient deteriorated,
progressed, or died before results could be used

176 (9)



7. Actionable mutation(s) identified and therapeutic study available, but
patient has not recurred/progressed since MSK-IMPACT result

339 (18)



8. No actionable mutation identified

669 (35)



Other

135 (7)



TOTAL

1932


