Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The circadian clock of glioma cells undergoing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.


Highly invasive gliomas contain many cells that have changed to an
enhanced migratory state through an epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). These cells have the phenotype of glioma stem cells (GSCs).
Similar to GSCs, glioma cells undergoing EMT show phenotypic
heterogeneity, altered gene expression, and resistance to anticancer
drugs along with increased invasiveness. Circadian rhythms in tumor cells
influence the progression and severity of cancer and appear to regulate
cell division cycles. Increased cancer incidence and progression have
often been linked to disruption or deregulation of the molecular
mechanism of the circadian clock. One of the major clock proteins, PER2,
has been shown to play a regulatory role as a tumor and EMT suppressor in
metastatic breast cancer cell lines. GSCs in tumorsphere cultures contain
circadian clocks that may regulate their cancer properties. The
possibility of a regulatory role for circadian rhythms in EMT was
examined here. We used a standard method to induce EMT in the C6 rat
glioma cell line that has known circadian rhythms in gene expression
generated by the circadian clocks within its cells. EMT was induced by
exchanging the cell culture medium with a serum-free stem cell medium
(SCM) containing growth factors (EGF, FGF2, PDGF-alpha-beta). Cell
cultures were imaged continuously with a microscope and digital camera in
a cell incubator to monitor cell shape, cell death, migration, and
apoptosis. During EMT, cells changed from an extended flat state to
rounded and spindle shapes, ceased proliferating, and expressed EMT
markers ZEB1 and vimentin. At the end of two days in SCM, 33.4% of the
cells were ZEB1-positive and only 1.26% were GFAP-positive (n=3
cultures). Cell diameters after EMT were within the size range of C6 GSCs
described as Hoechst-negative cells positive for stem cell markers nestin
and CD133. Following EMT, small tumorspheres began to form. After
initiating EMT, the rounded cells were counted at hourly intervals for up
to four days after the medium exchange. As the number of post-EMT cells
increased, the population size oscillated, and when examined by
Lomb-Scargle periodogram analysis, four cultures had a significant period
within the circadian range, 19-29 hours, (average 22.20 ±2.45 SD,
pHighly invasive gliomas contain many cells that have changed to an
enhanced migratory state through an epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). These cells have the phenotype of glioma stem cells (GSCs).
Similar to GSCs, glioma cells undergoing EMT show phenotypic
heterogeneity, altered gene expression, and resistance to anticancer
drugs along with increased invasiveness. Circadian rhythms in tumor cells
influence the progression and severity of cancer and appear to regulate
cell division cycles. Increased cancer incidence and progression have
often been linked to disruption or deregulation of the molecular
mechanism of the circadian clock. One of the major clock proteins, PER2,
has been shown to play a regulatory role as a tumor and EMT suppressor in
metastatic breast cancer cell lines. GSCs in tumorsphere cultures contain
circadian clocks that may regulate their cancer properties. The
possibility of a regulatory role for circadian rhythms in EMT was
examined here. We used a standard method to induce EMT in the C6 rat
glioma cell line that has known circadian rhythms in gene expression
generated by the circadian clocks within its cells. EMT was induced by
exchanging the cell culture medium with a serum-free stem cell medium
(SCM) containing growth factors (EGF, FGF2, PDGF-alpha-beta). Cell
cultures were imaged continuously with a microscope and digital camera in
a cell incubator to monitor cell shape, cell death, migration, and
apoptosis. During EMT, cells changed from an extended flat state to
rounded and spindle shapes, ceased proliferating, and expressed EMT
markers ZEB1 and vimentin. At the end of two days in SCM, 33.4% of the
cells were ZEB1-positive and only 1.26% were GFAP-positive (n=3
cultures). Cell diameters after EMT were within the size range of C6 GSCs
described as Hoechst-negative cells positive for stem cell markers nestin
and CD133. Following EMT, small tumorspheres began to form. After
initiating EMT, the rounded cells were counted at hourly intervals for up
to four days after the medium exchange. As the number of post-EMT cells
increased, the population size oscillated, and when examined by
Lomb-Scargle periodogram analysis, four cultures had a significant period
within the circadian range, 19-29 hours, (average 22.20 ±2.45 SD,
p<0.05). One had a 16-hour period and one lacked a significant rhythm.
Rhythms were present even when circadian clocks in the cultures were not
synchronized with an initial forskolin treatment. We conclude that EMT
may be timed by endogenous circadian oscillators in gliomas that favor
larger numbers of post-EMT cells at a particular time of day. These
results suggest that pharmacological treatments that suppress EMT or
target GSCs would be more effective when delivered at particular times
during the circadian cycle of the tumor.


