Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational landscape of chemo-refractory Burkitt lymphoma.


Background: Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) is characterized by rapid cellular
proliferation driven by the canonical IG-MYC translocation. BL can evade
apoptosis by silencing the tumor suppressor TP53 or by mutating MYC.
Other mutations contribute to the pathogenesis of BL, including TCF3 or
ID3, which stimulate PI3K/MAPK/MTOR signaling, or mutations in CCND3,
which accelerate cell cycle progression. While BL is curable in 90% of
patients, the prognosis for relapsed BL is dismal. The mutational
landscape of relapsed BL (rBL) is not well characterized because it is
rarely re-biopsied at the time of relapse. Two young men at our
institution experienced a BL relapse within 3 months of completing
intensive chemotherapy. We hypothesized that mutations implicated in
therapeutic resistance would be enriched in the tumor cells taken at the
time of relapse. Our aim was to identify these mutations and develop cell
lines from these patients to study these tumours in more detail.

Methods: Both patients had whole exome sequencing (WES) performed on
tumor cells obtained at the time of diagnosis (T1) and relapse (T2),
using unaffected peripheral blood to exclude germline variants. The novel
cell lines (CL) derived from T2 were also sequenced and karyotyped.

Results: The total number of coding mutations in patient 509 was: T1 =
78, T2 = 84 and CL= 63, and in patient 533: T1= 43, T2 = 66 and CL= 70.
All samples had multiple missense mutations (5 to 7) in MYC and had
evidence of clonal heterogeneity. Patient 509 had a TP53 (R248) mutation
that was clearly selected for during chemotherapy, where the variant
allele fraction (VAF) increased from 2% at T1 to 93% at T2. 19 genes had
acquired missense mutations at T2 including: CD14, GSTM3, BCR and ELMO3.
The following genomic rearrangements were observed in the 509CL by
karyotype:-Y,t(8;14)(q24.21;q32),der(10)t(10;22)(p1?3;q11.2),t(13;17)(q3?2;
q11.2), del(17)(p11.2) and -22. Patient 533 had multiple frameshift
mutations that occurred in all three samples (T1, T2 and CL), including
in CCND3, BAX, ARID1A, ARID1B, DDX5, DETD1B, TSFM, SP3 and TFAP4. T2 and
the CL had additional acquired missense or nonsense mutations in ZFP36L2,
CCL7, FAM13C and IKBKB. The 533CL had 3 dominant clones by karytope, The
rearrangements observed were: del(2)(p21p23), t(8;14)(q24.21;q32)
,t(1;12)(q12;q24) and +7. The frameshift mutations in ZFP36L2 and BAX
were homozygous in the 533CL.

Conclusions: Multiple genes are implicated in the pathogenesis of
chemotherapy-resistant BL, many of which had not been appreciated in
studies focused on sequencing de novo BL (e.g. BAX, ARID1A). To our
knowledge, these are the first BL cell lines that have been
well-characterized with respect to the serial acquisition of mutations
after exposure to chemotherapy and with knowledge of germline variants.
These are useful resources to study oncogene cooperation, clonal
evolution, chromatin remodelling (ARID1A), RNA processing (DDX5, ZFP36L2)
and apoptosis (P53 and BAX null) in BL.


