Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel anti-Sialyl-Tn monoclonal antibodies and antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs) demonstrate tumor specificity in vitro and in vivo
antitumor efficacy.


Tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) historically have been
challenging targets for antibody therapeutics. Sialyl-Tn (STn) is a
cancer specific antigen that is expressed on the cell surface of
carcinomas including ovarian, colon, prostate, and pancreatic tumors but
is rarely present in normal tissue. STn expression has been linked to
innate immune suppression, a chemoresistant phenotype, metastasis, and
poor prognosis. Previous attempts to target this antigen in the clinic
with synthetic glycan vaccines proved safe but lacked efficacy. We have
developed highly selective humanized monoclonal antibodies and antibody
drug conjugates (ADCs) targeting TACAs, such as STn. Remarkable sequence
homology across all anti-STn mAbs was observed in both heavy and light
chains, and hot spots for hypermutation were identified. These antibodies
were selected using our glycan microarray that enriches for candidates
whose binding is protein-independent, highly selective and demonstrates
exceptional target affinity.

Lead humanized candidates demonstrated single digit nanomolar EC50s in
ELISA/flow cytometric assays, STn selective cell internalization, and STn
specific glycan binding on Siamabâ€™s proprietary glycan array. STn
binding sites in common tumor lines (ovarian, gastric and breast) were
determined per cell and subsequent cytotoxicity assays in these lines
demonstrated in vitro efficacy. Tumor microarray experiments revealed
membranous staining in cancerous tissues of various indications. Binding
studies of anti-STn antibodies to primary human cancer samples by flow
cytometry demonstrated that both tumor and Myeloid-Derived Suppressor
Cells (MDSC, both myeloid and granulocytic) express STn. In an OVCAR3
xenograft model, 30 days after the last anti-STn ADC dose was given,
groups treated (Q7Dx4) exhibited mean tumor volumes below the Day 1
pre-treatment mean tumor volumes (155mm3). Flow cytometric analysis of
tumors from these mice demonstrated that anti-STn ADC treatment reduces
STn expression on the primary tumor in a dose-dependent manner (Q7Dx4 vs.
single dose) compared to the isotype-ADC control. Our data demonstrates
that high-affinity, STn-selective mAbs show promise as therapies for
solid tumors and could also target MDSCs to promote antitumor immune
responses.


