Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncostatin M elicits cellular plasticity through cooperative
STAT3-SMAD3 signaling.


Increasing evidence suggests that tumor cell plasticity promotes
metastasis and tumor recurrence, resulting in cancer patient mortality.
While it is clear that the tumor microenvironment (TME) contributes to
tumor cell plasticity, the specific TME factors that actively generate
tumor cell plasticity are largely unknown. Here, we identify TME
cytokines that promote epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity, and acquisition
of cancer stem-cell (CSC) properties. A screen of 27 TME cytokines
identified multiple Interleukin-6 family members as inducers of
mesenchymal/CSC properties, with Oncostatin M (OSM) being the most
potent. Importantly, OSM induced plasticity was mediated by STAT3, but
also dependent on TGF-β signaling and downstream SMAD3. Inhibition of
functional TGF-β/SMAD signaling by expressing a dominant-negative TGF-β
receptor, treating with a TGF-β receptor inhibitor, or suppressing SMAD3
expression using a SMAD3-shRNA prevented the OSM-induced mesenchymal/CSC
properties. OSM-activated STAT3 binds to SMAD3 and promotes SMAD3 nuclear
localization and binding to the SNAIL promoter, increasing transcription
of the SNAIL gene. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition induced by the
STAT3/SMAD3 axis results in a highly invasive and metastatic phenotype
and the emergence of CSC properties, including therapeutic resistance.
Importantly, maintenance of the OSM-induced mesenchymal/CSC state
requires sustained exposure to the cytokine, as removal of OSM results in
a marked phenotypic reversion. A high-throughput screen for small
molecule inhibitors of the OSM-induced mesenchymal/CSC phenotype has been
performed and are currently being confirmed. We propose that, targeted
blockade of the STAT3/SMAD3 axis in tumor cells may represent a novel
therapeutic approach to prevent the plasticity associated with metastasis
and tumor recurrence.


