Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The selective bromodomain inhibitor, INCB054329 targets both
cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment in the KC inflammatory
preclinical model of ductal pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is expected to become the second most deadly cancer by
2030, with few effective therapeutic options available to improve patient
survival. The Kras gene is mutated in over 90% of pancreatic cancers, but
the Kras protein is considered to be an undruggable target. p-Erk is a
downstream effector of Kras and has been shown to be essential for the
progression and maintenance of pancreatic cancer. The LSL-KrasG12D/+;
Pdx-1-Cre (KC) mouse model is used to study pancreatic cancer, especially
cancer progression, after stimulation with an inflammatory agent, such as
caerulein or LPS. Bromodomain inhibitors are a new generation of drugs
that target BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) proteins, impairing
their ability to bind to acetylated lysines and therefore interfering
with transcriptional initiation and elongation. BET proteins regulate
several genes responsible for cell growth, apoptosis and inflammation.
INCB54329 is a novel, orally bioavailable BET inhibitor that is currently
being investigated in Phase 1 clinical trials.INCB054329 inhibits cell
growth in murine pancreatic cancer cells harboring Kras mutations,
derived from a KrasG12D/+; Trp53R172H/+; Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) mouse with an
IC50 values less than 100 nM. Moreover, INCB054329 reduces the levels of
p-ERK 1/2 in these cells lines. When KC mice are injected with LPS to
induce inflammation and pancreatitis, p-Stat3 protein levels are
significantly increased, but this pro-survival protein is reduced by more
than 50%, in mice that were pre-treated with INCB054329. Tumor cells can
use epigenetic modulation to evade immune recognition and to shape the
TME (tumor microenvironment) toward an immunosuppressive phenotype. Since
epigenetic modulation is a mechanism used by tumors to regulate the TME,
using small molecules as epigenetic modulators to activate immune
recognition is a therapeutically desirable approach. Within the TME,
several cytokines and chemokines play crucial roles, recruiting and
regulating inflammatory cells [macrophages, T cells and Myeloid derived
suppressor cells]. KC mice stimulated with LPS have higher levels of CCL2
(1947 ± 591 ng/mL) and IL-6 (2459 ± 577 pg/mL) than unstimulated mice;
these increased levels of inflammatory cytokines and the subsequent
immune cell infiltration can be modulated by treatment with INCB054329,
with INCB054329 demonstrating >50% inhibition of both cytokines (IL-6:
1063 ± 502 pg/mL; CCL2: 713 ± 134 ng/mL). These data suggest that
INCB054329 has a dual activity, targeting cancer cells and modulating the
TME; both activities may prove beneficial for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer. Moreover, this work suggests that additional mechanisms may
underlie the beneficial effects of bromodomain inhibitors.


