Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of FGFR4 by INCB062079 is efficacious in
models of FGF19- and FGFR4-dependent cancers.


Aberrant signaling through Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptors (FGFR) has
been reported in multiple types of human cancers. FGFR4 signaling
contributes to the development and progression of subsets of cancer: in
approximately 10 percent of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), genetic
amplification of FGF19, encoding an endocrine FGF ligand that activates
FGFR4-KLB receptors, has been reported. In models with this alteration,
FGF19-FGFR4 signaling is oncogenic and antagonism of the FGF19-FGFR4 axis
has been shown to be efficacious suggesting that selective targeting of
FGFR4 may be an effective strategy for malignancies with FGFR4 activation.

We describe the preclinical characterization of INCB062079 a potent and
selective inhibitor of the FGFR4 kinase. In biochemical assays INCB062079
inhibited FGFR4 with low nM potency and exhibited at least 250-fold
selectivity against other FGFR kinases and greater than 800-fold
selectivity against a large kinase panel. This selectivity derives from
the ability of INCB062079 to bind irreversibly to Cys552, a residue
within the active site of FGFR4 that is non-conserved among other FGFR
receptors. Covalent binding of INCB062079 to Cys552 was demonstrated
using a LC/MS/MS-based proteomic analysis that confirmed specificity for
the target Cys. In assays using HCC cells with autocrine production of
FGF19, INCB062079 inhibited the autophosphorylation of FGFR4 and blocked
signal transduction by FGFR4 to downstream markers of pathway activation.
Cancer cell lines that have amplification and expression of FGF19 are
uniquely sensitive to growth inhibition by INCB062079 (EC50 less than 200
nM) compared with HCC cell lines or normal cells without FGF19-FGFR4
dependence (EC50 > 5000 nM) confirming selectivity for FGFR4. In vivo,
oral administration of INCB062079 inhibited the growth and induced
significant regressions of subcutaneous xenograft tumors dependent upon
FGFR4 activity at doses that were well-tolerated (10-30 mg/kg BID) and
did not result in a significant increase in serum phosphate levels which
is observed with FGFR1/2/3 inhibition. Suppression of tumor growth
correlated with pharmacodynamic inhibition of FGFR4 signaling.
Collectively, these preclinical studies demonstrate that INCB062079
potently and selectively inhibits models of FGF19-FGFR4-dependent cancers
in vitro and in vivo, supporting clinical evaluation in patients
harboring oncogenic FGFR4 activation.


