Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ASN002: A novel dual SYK/JAK inhibitor with strong antitumor
activity in both hematological and solid tumor xenograft models.


Spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) and Janus kinase (JAK) play important roles
in the pathogenesis of various types of lymphomas, solid tumors, and
myeloproliferative and inflammation disorders. Inhibition of both SYK and
JAK kinases has been shown to suppress tumor growth in various
preclinical and/or clinical studies. ASN002 is a novel and potent dual
inhibitor of SYK and JAK kinases with IC50 values of 4-46 nM in
biochemical assays. In mechanistic cell-based studies, ASN002 strongly
suppressed the SYK and JAK family kinase signaling pathways as measured
in pLAT and pSTAT assays, respectively. When profiled in a panel of 178
cell lines, the compound showed strong anti-proliferative activity in
many lymphoid/leukemia cell lines, including SU-DHL-6, SU-DHL-4,
OCI-LY10, H929 and Pfeiffer. The proliferation of many solid tumor cell
lines representing bladder, lung and colorectal cancer tumor types was
also potently inhibited. Importantly, it also strongly inhibited the
growth of ibrutinib and idelalisib resistant cell lines. ASN002 was
highly efficacious in inhibiting the tumor growth in several tumor
xenograft models which include Pfeiffer (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
DLBCL), SU-DHL-6 (DLBCL), H929 (myeloma), HEL (erythroleukemia), and
RT112 (bladder). ASN002 shows little to no inhibition of CYP450 isozymes
suggesting low potential for drug-drug interactions. ASN002 is currently
being evaluated in a Phase I/II clinical study in patients with lymphomas
(DLBCL, mantle cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma) and solid tumors.


