Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction between hedgehog and EMT pathway in non-small cell
lung cancer and its prognostic implication.


Introduction: The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays essential role in
transcription regulation and embryonic development. In many cancers
including lung cancer, it is related to carcinogenesis and poor
prognosis. This signaling also mediates epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) by paracrine mechanism in various diseases. We aim to
study the interaction between Hedgehog and EMT pathway and its clinical
implication in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

Method: Total 271 cases of NSCLC who received surgical resection in
Yeouido St. Mary’s Hospital between 1997 and 2011 were included. For
immunohistochemical analysis of Hh and EMT related proteins, 4um sections
were sliced from tissue microarray. Hh signaling proteins including Sonig
hedgehog (Shh), Patched (Ptch), Smoothened (Smo), Glioma-associated
oncogene (Gli-1) and Suppressor of fused (Sufu), and EMT associated
molecules including E-cadherin and vimentin were analyzed. Staining
intensity (IS) was estimated as follows 0 (no staining), +1 (weak), +2
(distinct), +3 (strong). Intensity score (IS) ≥1 was defined as
positive. Medical record was retrospectively reviewed. The study was
approved by the institutional review board the hospital.

Result: The median age was 63 (18-84) years, and 65.3% were male.
Squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed in 113 (41.7%), adenocarcinoma in
153 (56.5%), and mixed type in 153 (56.5%). Stage 1 and 2 were 46.9% and
30.6%, respectively, and 8 cases had distant metastasis. The Hh proteins
showed positive correlation each other. For EMT, the expressions of Hh
protein was significantly correlated with tumoral and stromal positivity
of vimentin, and inversely with positivity of E-cadherin (P = 0.002 and P
= 0.028, respectively). The expression of Hh proteins were significantly
associated with lymph node metastasis along with large tumor size (P =
0.021 and P = 0.035, respectively). In survival analysis, expressions of
Shh and Gli1 were independent predictor of disease free survival and
cancer-specific survival (P = 0.007 and P = 0.025, respectively).

Conclusion: Expression of Hh protein is associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and associated with poor prognosis in
NSCLC.


