Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extranuclear ERα-mTOR signaling rewires cancer cell metabolism
during obesity-associated breast cancer.


Obesity is a preventable risk factor for post-menopausal ERα-(+) breast
cancer. We hypothesized that serum from obese post-menopausal women
contain factors that would increase tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells
and increase risk of ERα-(+) breast cancer. Using whole metabolite
profiling and OLINK biomarker panel of about 400 proteins associated with
cancer, inflammation and cardiovascular disease, we identified biomarkers
that were differentially present in serum from 50 obese v.s. 50 non-obese
postmenopausal women. Next, using in vitro cell based assays as proxy we
identified certain free fatty acids (FFAs) as factors from serum that
correlate with increased cell proliferation, motility and mTOR activation
in ERα(+) breast cancer cells. We performed RNA-Seq, ERα ChIP-Seq and
metabolomics analysis in breast cancer cells that are exposed to
conditions that mimic serum from obese postmenopausal women. This
integrative -omics approach enabled us to uncover ERα and mTOR
pathway-dependent metabolic rewiring in breast cancer cells under these
conditions. Pathway preferential estrogens (PaPEs), which target ERα and
mTOR signaling, were able to block free fatty acid-dependent
proliferation of breast cancer cells. In fact, efficient cancer cell
killing by PaPEs was achieved only in the presence of FFAs, suggesting a
role for obesity-associated metabolic rewiring in providing new
vulnerabilities for the breast cancer cells. In summary, we uncovered a
novel role for extranuclear-initiated ERα signaling in rewiring breast
cancer cell metabolism in response to obesity-associated factors in the
serum. Our findings provide a basis for preventing or inhibiting
obesity-associated breast cancer by using PaPEs that would exploit new
metabolic vulnerabilities of breast tumors in obese postmenopausal women.


