Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Luteolin inhibits metastasis of triple-negative breast cancer
cells to the lungs.


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are basal-like tumors which lack
the traditional pharmaceutical targets ER, PR and Her2neu. Most TNBC
related deaths occur following metastasis of cancer cells, and
development of tumors at secondary sites such as the lungs and bones.
Since TNBC lacks ER, PR and Her2neu, toxic non-specific chemotherapeutic
agents are administered to these women, who generally present with early
metastatic lesions that originate from drug-resistant residual cells, and
have poor prognosis. Consequently, novel therapeutic strategies are
sought. Luteolin (LU) is a naturally occurring, non-toxic plant compound
that has proven effective against several types of cancer, though its
effects against cancers of the breast remain unknown. With this in mind
we conducted studies, both in vivo and in vitro, to determine whether LU
might suppress metastasis of TNBC. In vivo studies were performed using
MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells, a subpopulation of clinically relevant cells
(kindly provided by Dr. J. Massagué; Minn et al. Nature. 2005,
436:518-24). MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 is a particularly aggressive TNBC
breast cancer cell line with a molecular signature preferential for lung
metastasis. Herein we report that LU effectively suppressed metastasis of
MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells to lung. Compared with animals given
MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells alone, which developed 67.6 ± 27.1
metastatic lung colonies, treatment with 40 mg/kg LU reduced colony
formation to 22.8 ± 3.6 (P = 0.035). Confirmation of the anti-metastatic
effect of LU was achieved by inoculating animals with an alternative,
less aggressive TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-435. Administration of 20 mg/kg LU
to animals treated with MDA-MB-435 cells reduced the number of lung
colonies from 14.1 ± 1.6 to 5.3 ± 0.5; P Triple-negative breast cancers
(TNBC) are basal-like tumors which lack the traditional pharmaceutical
targets ER, PR and Her2neu. Most TNBC related deaths occur following
metastasis of cancer cells, and development of tumors at secondary sites
such as the lungs and bones. Since TNBC lacks ER, PR and Her2neu, toxic
non-specific chemotherapeutic agents are administered to these women, who
generally present with early metastatic lesions that originate from
drug-resistant residual cells, and have poor prognosis. Consequently,
novel therapeutic strategies are sought. Luteolin (LU) is a naturally
occurring, non-toxic plant compound that has proven effective against
several types of cancer, though its effects against cancers of the breast
remain unknown. With this in mind we conducted studies, both in vivo and
in vitro, to determine whether LU might suppress metastasis of TNBC. In
vivo studies were performed using MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells, a
subpopulation of clinically relevant cells (kindly provided by Dr. J.
Massagué; Minn et al. Nature. 2005, 436:518-24). MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2
is a particularly aggressive TNBC breast cancer cell line with a
molecular signature preferential for lung metastasis. Herein we report
that LU effectively suppressed metastasis of MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells
to lung. Compared with animals given MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells alone,
which developed 67.6 ± 27.1 metastatic lung colonies, treatment with 40
mg/kg LU reduced colony formation to 22.8 ± 3.6 (P = 0.035).
Confirmation of the anti-metastatic effect of LU was achieved by
inoculating animals with an alternative, less aggressive TNBC cell line,
MDA-MB-435. Administration of 20 mg/kg LU to animals treated with
MDA-MB-435 cells reduced the number of lung colonies from 14.1 ± 1.6 to
5.3 ± 0.5; P < 0.05. When tumor cells were incubated in vitro with
different concentrations (0-50 µM) of LU, we observed a significant
dose-dependent reduction in cell viability, induction of apoptosis (P =
Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are basal-like tumors which lack
the traditional pharmaceutical targets ER, PR and Her2neu. Most TNBC
related deaths occur following metastasis of cancer cells, and
development of tumors at secondary sites such as the lungs and bones.
Since TNBC lacks ER, PR and Her2neu, toxic non-specific chemotherapeutic
agents are administered to these women, who generally present with early
metastatic lesions that originate from drug-resistant residual cells, and
have poor prognosis. Consequently, novel therapeutic strategies are
sought. Luteolin (LU) is a naturally occurring, non-toxic plant compound
that has proven effective against several types of cancer, though its
effects against cancers of the breast remain unknown. With this in mind
we conducted studies, both in vivo and in vitro, to determine whether LU
might suppress metastasis of TNBC. In vivo studies were performed using
MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells, a subpopulation of clinically relevant cells
(kindly provided by Dr. J. Massagué; Minn et al. Nature. 2005,
436:518-24). MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 is a particularly aggressive TNBC
breast cancer cell line with a molecular signature preferential for lung
metastasis. Herein we report that LU effectively suppressed metastasis of
MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells to lung. Compared with animals given
MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells alone, which developed 67.6 ± 27.1
metastatic lung colonies, treatment with 40 mg/kg LU reduced colony
formation to 22.8 ± 3.6 (P = 0.035). Confirmation of the anti-metastatic
effect of LU was achieved by inoculating animals with an alternative,
less aggressive TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-435. Administration of 20 mg/kg LU
to animals treated with MDA-MB-435 cells reduced the number of lung
colonies from 14.1 ± 1.6 to 5.3 ± 0.5; P < 0.05. When tumor cells were
incubated in vitro with different concentrations (0-50 µM) of LU, we
observed a significant dose-dependent reduction in cell viability,
induction of apoptosis (P = <0.001), and decreased tumor cell migration.
These data suggest that LU suppresses several steps of the metastatic
process. Furthermore, relatively low levels (10 μM) of LU significantly
inhibited VEGF secretion from tumor cells (P = Triple-negative breast
cancers (TNBC) are basal-like tumors which lack the traditional
pharmaceutical targets ER, PR and Her2neu. Most TNBC related deaths occur
following metastasis of cancer cells, and development of tumors at
secondary sites such as the lungs and bones. Since TNBC lacks ER, PR and
Her2neu, toxic non-specific chemotherapeutic agents are administered to
these women, who generally present with early metastatic lesions that
originate from drug-resistant residual cells, and have poor prognosis.
Consequently, novel therapeutic strategies are sought. Luteolin (LU) is a
naturally occurring, non-toxic plant compound that has proven effective
against several types of cancer, though its effects against cancers of
the breast remain unknown. With this in mind we conducted studies, both
in vivo and in vitro, to determine whether LU might suppress metastasis
of TNBC. In vivo studies were performed using MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2
cells, a subpopulation of clinically relevant cells (kindly provided by
Dr. J. Massagué; Minn et al. Nature. 2005, 436:518-24). MDA-MB-231
(4175) LM2 is a particularly aggressive TNBC breast cancer cell line with
a molecular signature preferential for lung metastasis. Herein we report
that LU effectively suppressed metastasis of MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells
to lung. Compared with animals given MDA-MB-231 (4175) LM2 cells alone,
which developed 67.6 ± 27.1 metastatic lung colonies, treatment with 40
mg/kg LU reduced colony formation to 22.8 ± 3.6 (P = 0.035).
Confirmation of the anti-metastatic effect of LU was achieved by
inoculating animals with an alternative, less aggressive TNBC cell line,
MDA-MB-435. Administration of 20 mg/kg LU to animals treated with
MDA-MB-435 cells reduced the number of lung colonies from 14.1 ± 1.6 to
5.3 ± 0.5; P < 0.05. When tumor cells were incubated in vitro with
different concentrations (0-50 µM) of LU, we observed a significant
dose-dependent reduction in cell viability, induction of apoptosis (P =
<0.001), and decreased tumor cell migration. These data suggest that LU
suppresses several steps of the metastatic process. Furthermore,
relatively low levels (10 μM) of LU significantly inhibited VEGF
secretion from tumor cells (P = <0.001), suggesting that the flavonoid
has the ability to suppress a potent angiogenic and cell survival factor.
In addition, when tumor cells were exposed to either LU or VEGF receptor
(KDR) antibody, a similar reduction in TNBC migration potential was
observed. This suggests that the anti-tumor actions of LU may, in part,
be due to its ability to reduce VEGF levels and block KDR
receptor-mediated activity, thereby inhibiting tumor cell migration.
These studies demonstrate that the use of LU, a non-toxic, plant derived
compound, deserves further investigation as a treatment option for women
with TNBC.Supported by a COR award from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, and in part by funds from generous donors to the Ellis Fischel
Cancer Center, University of Missouri.


