Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human embryonic stem cells exhibit altruistic cell death that
release death signals having potent anti-cancer activity.


Background: We recently described the altruistic stem cell (ASC)
phenotype in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) as well as in mesenchymal
stem cells (1, 2). The ASC phenotype was characterized by altered state
of p53/MDM2 feedback system that permitted the cells to transiently
acquire an unstable state of low p53 allowing the cells to survive in
extreme microenvironment (1). Interestingly, we noted that ASCs
spontaneously returned to its basal state of high p53 after a period of
two weeks (1, 2). In this study, we speculate that this return of p53
levels to basal state could be a safety mechanism to prevent malignant
transformation of ASCs. We also speculate that ASCs may release soluble
factors like high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB-1) that could
selectively target the cells exhibiting abnormal p53 e.g. cancer cells.
Here, we further characterized ASC phenotype and its fate.

Methods: hESC, BG01 cells were exposed to extreme hypoxia followed by
reoxygenation and then ABCG2+/SSEA3+ cells were flow cytometry sorted.
This specific subpopulation is enriched in ASCs and could be cultured in
vitro for two weeks (1). The post- hypoxia treated ABCG2+/SSEA3+ cells
were maintained in serum free media, and subjected to apoptosis, and
senescence assays. The conditioned media (CM) of these cells and
subjected to HMGB-1 measurement by ELISA. To measure bystander apoptosis,
teratocarcinoma cells (Tera-2) were treated with the CM followed by
measurement of apoptosis.

Results: Here we confirmed that p53 and MDM2 in ABCG2+/SSEA3+ cells
exhibited return of oscillation between days 19-24. This was associated
increase in apoptosis, and senescence of these cells.
Apoptosis/senescence was decreased when treated with either Pifithrin Î±,
an inhibitor of p53, or by siRNA silencing of p53, suggesting
p53-dependent apoptosis. Additionally, treatment with Nutlin-3, an
inhibitor of MDM2 (1) led to a 10-fold increase in apoptosis indicating
that high MDM2 was required to prevent the apoptosis of ASCs. Thus, ASCs
underwent spontaneous apoptosis (altruistic cell death) due to the return
of p53/MDMD2 oscillation. We suggest that this return of p53 and
associated apoptosis could be a safety mechanism to prevent malignant
transformation of ASCs. Next, we found that the CM of ABCG2+/SSEA3+ cells
contained high levels of HMGB-1 compared to the parental BG01 cells.
Importantly, CM treatment led to p53 dependent apoptosis of Tera-2 cells.
Furthermore, CM treatment also inhibited the growth of Tera-2 xenografts
in NOD/SCID mice.

Conclusion: Our results indicate that ASCs undergoes altruistic cell
death, and releases death signal mediated by HMGB1 that can target
neighboring cells exhibiting abnormal p53 including cancer cells. We
suggest that this unique property of ASCs could be exploited as a novel
cancer therapeutic.

1. Das B et al, Stem Cells, 2012; 30(8):1685-95.

2. Pal B et al, Cancer Research, 2016; Volume 76, Issue 14 Supplement,
pp. 251


