Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 regulates PARP-1 expression by suppressing the let-7a
microRNA in HER2+ breast cancer.


Background:

HER2+ breast cancers are sensitive to PARP inhibition and express
elevated levels of the PARP-1 protein. However, the mode of regulation of
PARP-1 expression by HER2 is not well understood. MicroRNAs are small
non-coding RNAs that function in RNA silencing and post-transcriptional
regulation of gene expression. In this study, we investigate whether
PARP1 expression in human breast cancer cells is regulated by HER2
regulation of microRNAs.

Methods:

Human HER2+ breast cancer cell lines BT-474 and SKBR3 were used in this
study. MDA-MB-231 (non-HER2 expressing breast cancer cells) stably
transfected with a HER2 wild-type plasmid (231 HER2) or the vector
control (231 NEO) were also utilized. To identify candidate microRNAs
regulated by HER2 overexpression, we performed the nCounter miRNA
Expression Assay. MicroRNA and mRNA expression were validated via qRT-PCR
analysis in breast cancer cell lines or patient primary tumors. Cells
were also transfected with a HER2 siRNA, a let-7a mimic, and an inhibitor
of let-7a as well as their respective controls. Western blot analysis and
firefly luciferase assays were used to determine whether the 3â€™UTR of
PARP1 was being directly targeted by the let-7a microRNA.

Results:

HER2 did not regulate PARP-1 at the mRNA level but increased PARP-1
protein in HER2+ breast cancer cells. Specifically, ectopic HER2
overexpression correlated with increased PARP-1 protein levels in the 231
HER2 cell line. Conversely, silencing HER2

reduced PARP-1 protein levels in the BT-474 and SKBR3 cell lines.
NanoString nCounter analysis revealed that the HER2+ breast cancer cell
lines expressed low levels of the let-7a microRNA. Further, let-7a
expression was upregulated after HER2 knockdown in the two native HER2+
breast cancer cell lines. The let-7a mimic also reduced both PARP1
protein expression and luciferase activity in the 231 HER2 and BT-474
cell lines, whereas the let-7a inhibitor reversed these effects in the
231 NEO cell line. Importantly, human HER2+ breast tumors expressed
higher levels of PARP-1 and lower levels of let-7a; whereas, the HER2-
breast tumors expressed lower levels of PARP-1 and higher levels of
let-7a. Further, overexpression of the let-7a mimic reduced cell
proliferation in HER2+ breast cancer cells.

Conclusions:

These results suggest that let-7a regulates PARP-1 expression in HER2+
breast tumors. Let-7a may also be a potential therapeutic target and
predictive biomarker of PARPi sensitivity in HER2+ breast cancer patients.


