Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET inhibitors suppress PD-L1 expression in pancreatic stellate
cells.


Single agent treatment with T-cell checkpoint inhibitors has not been
effective in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients. The PDAC
stroma, which can account for as much as 80-90% of the tumor mass, can
act as a physical and an immunologic barrier to T-cell-mediated
therapies. Transgenic mouse models have shown that ablation of pancreatic
stellate cells (PSCs), key regulators of fibrosis in vivo, can sensitize
PDAC tumors to immune checkpoint therapies. Recently, inhibitors
targeting bromodomains and extra-terminal (BET) proteins, a number of
which are currently being evaluated in clinical trials for solid tumors,
were shown to induce stellate cells to become quiescent and decrease
collagen production. The BET family of proteins binds to acetylation
motifs present in histones and enables recruitment of transcription
factors and other chromatin regulators during RNA transcription. We have
found that PSCs express significantly increased PD-L1 levels compared to
pancreatic cancer cell lines. We show that BET inhibitors, and in
particular specific knockdown of BRD4 protein, decrease basal and
IFN-γ-mediated PD-L1 expression in primary stellate cells. We also show
that, in contrast to a recent report using cancer cells, c-MYC does not
mediate basal or IFN-γ-mediated PD-L1 expression in stellate cells.
Instead, we show that the IFN-γ-mediated PD-L1 expression is regulated
by IRF1, suggesting cross talk between BRD4 and IRF1 in the regulation of
PD-L1 expression. Ongoing in vivo experiments will evaluate the role of
BET inhibitors in the regulation of PD-L1 in mouse models of pancreatic
cancer.


