Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced radiosenistivity of EGFR-TKI sensitive and resistant
NSCLC cells by abemaciclib is mediated by altered DNA repair and
metabolic pathways.


Dysregulation of the p16(INK4a)-CyclinD-CDK4/6-Rb pathways in patients
with NSCLC (Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer) is a rational therapeutic target.
The current study investigated the radiosensitizing potential of a novel
CDK4/6 inhibitor, LY2835219 (LY, Abemaciclib) in NSCLC cell lines with
varied genomic context to identify genomic and metabolic biomarkers that
are predictive of a response over conventional EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy. NSCLC cell lines were exposed to LY
(0-10uM) for 24 hr immediately after 0-10 Gy radiation. Cell survival was
assessed by clonogenic assay and cell cycle distribution was quantified
by flow cytometry. Dose modifying factors (DMF) were calculated at 10%
survival from radiation survival curves. Altered DNA repair pathways and
metabolic profiling of cells post LY treatment was assessed by immunoblot
and LC/MS mass spectrometry analysis. LY treatment enhanced
radiosensitivity of EGFR-TKI sensitive (HCC827, PC9) and EGFR-TKI
resistant (H820 and H1975) cell lines with DMF of 1.3 (±0.06), 1.4
(±0.30), 1.5 (±0.51) and 1.3 (±0.02), respectively. Values in the
parenthesis indicates standard deviation. Wild type EGFR expressing cells
(A549 and H460) also showed enhanced radiosensitivity by LY with DMF of
1.6 (±0.09) and 1.75(±0.15), respectively. Interestingly, no radiation
enhancement by LY was observed for cells deficient in functional PTEN
(H1650), Rb (H82) and p53 (H460 DNp53 and H1299) protein.
Radiosensitization was also observed for cells made resistant to third
generation EGFR-TKI, AZD9291. Flow cytometry analysis of majority of cell
types exposed to LY exhibited 55% to 94% G1 arrest (depending on cell
type). Mechanistically, the combinatorial treatment in radiosensitive
cells showed elevated phosphorylated-γH2Ax. Combination treatment also
reduced expression of ATR, ATM, DNA-PK, Rad51 and Chk-2 suggestive of
reduced DNA repair compared to radiation alone. LY treatment brought
major changes in the glycolysis/TCA/ total amino acids. LY increased
significantly Acetyl-CoA, fumarate and malate, indicating enhanced
oxidative phosphorylation. LY significantly elevated Uric acid levels
suggestive of oxidative stress and elevated nucleotide degradation.
Finally, administration of 100mg/kg LY2835219 for five days in
combination with fractionated dose of radiation (3 Gy) significantly
delayed tumor regrowth in H460 xenograft (pDysregulation of the
p16(INK4a)-CyclinD-CDK4/6-Rb pathways in patients with NSCLC (Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer) is a rational therapeutic target. The current study
investigated the radiosensitizing potential of a novel CDK4/6 inhibitor,
LY2835219 (LY, Abemaciclib) in NSCLC cell lines with varied genomic
context to identify genomic and metabolic biomarkers that are predictive
of a response over conventional EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)
therapy. NSCLC cell lines were exposed to LY (0-10uM) for 24 hr
immediately after 0-10 Gy radiation. Cell survival was assessed by
clonogenic assay and cell cycle distribution was quantified by flow
cytometry. Dose modifying factors (DMF) were calculated at 10% survival
from radiation survival curves. Altered DNA repair pathways and metabolic
profiling of cells post LY treatment was assessed by immunoblot and LC/MS
mass spectrometry analysis. LY treatment enhanced radiosensitivity of
EGFR-TKI sensitive (HCC827, PC9) and EGFR-TKI resistant (H820 and H1975)
cell lines with DMF of 1.3 (±0.06), 1.4 (±0.30), 1.5 (±0.51) and 1.3
(±0.02), respectively. Values in the parenthesis indicates standard
deviation. Wild type EGFR expressing cells (A549 and H460) also showed
enhanced radiosensitivity by LY with DMF of 1.6 (±0.09) and
1.75(±0.15), respectively. Interestingly, no radiation enhancement by LY
was observed for cells deficient in functional PTEN (H1650), Rb (H82) and
p53 (H460 DNp53 and H1299) protein. Radiosensitization was also observed
for cells made resistant to third generation EGFR-TKI, AZD9291. Flow
cytometry analysis of majority of cell types exposed to LY exhibited 55%
to 94% G1 arrest (depending on cell type). Mechanistically, the
combinatorial treatment in radiosensitive cells showed elevated
phosphorylated-γH2Ax. Combination treatment also reduced expression of
ATR, ATM, DNA-PK, Rad51 and Chk-2 suggestive of reduced DNA repair
compared to radiation alone. LY treatment brought major changes in the
glycolysis/TCA/ total amino acids. LY increased significantly Acetyl-CoA,
fumarate and malate, indicating enhanced oxidative phosphorylation. LY
significantly elevated Uric acid levels suggestive of oxidative stress
and elevated nucleotide degradation. Finally, administration of 100mg/kg
LY2835219 for five days in combination with fractionated dose of
radiation (3 Gy) significantly delayed tumor regrowth in H460 xenograft
(p< 0.014). Collectively, our pre-clinical data indicates altered Rb, p53
and PTEN status are distinct predictive biomarkers of response for LY
mediated radiosensitivity and provides an alternative therapeutic option
in overcoming EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC.


