Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local irradiation with systemic anti-PD1 antibody may effectively
suppress the micrometastasis in distant organ through the induction of
abscopal effects.


Background: Tumor shrinkage in response to radiotherapy (RT) is partially
dependent on host immunity. Recent clinical results have suggested that
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade markedly augments the antitumor immune response
especially in case of numerous genetic mutations. Here, in this study, we
evaluated if anti-PD-1 mAb can induce abscopal effects of local RT in
murine model.

Method: Murine colon cancer cell, LuM-1, is a highly metastatic clone of
colon 26. After subcutaneous (s.c) inoculation of LuM-1, micro- and
macro- metastases were observed in bilateral lung at 1 and 2 weeks,
respectively. Then, LuM-1 (2×105 per mouse) was s.c implanted
subcutaneously in the left flanks of BALB/c mice. At day 8, mice were
divided into 4 (control, RT, anti-PD-1 mAb, RT+anti-PD-1 mA) groups with
each group containing 5 mice. In RT group, mice received local RT at day
9 and 17. In brief, anesthetized mice were held in the decubitus
position, with the whole body except left flank tumor protected by a lead
shield and the ionizing irradiation (X-ray, 8Gy) was selectively
delivered to s.c. tumor using MBR-1505R2 (Hitachi Medical Co.) Anti-PD-1
mAb (J43) or control hamster mAb (0.5mg) was given at day 9,11,13 and
17,19,21 At day 28, mice were sacrificed and s.c tumor and lung
metastases were quantified with tumor size and lung weight, respectively.

Results: S.c tumor was significantly reduced by RT and/or PD-1 mAb with
additive effects. The whole lung weight in PD-1 mAb group was 120±64.0
gr, which was significantly less than control mAb group (306±38.4 gr,
pResults: S.c tumor was significantly reduced by RT and/or PD-1 mAb with
additive effects. The whole lung weight in PD-1 mAb group was 120±64.0
gr, which was significantly less than control mAb group (306±38.4 gr,
p<0.05) RT alone did not affect the lung weight (298±40.0 gr), however,
RT if combined withPD-1 mAb, tended to further reduce the lung metastases
(69.0±31.5gr,. p=0.12).

Conclusion: Local RT and PD-1 mAb is effective to prevent the growth of
micrometastasis in non-irradiated sites through the augmentation of
abscopal effects. Combination of RT and immune checkpoint inhibitors can
be a new treatment strategy for locally advanced rectal cancer.


