Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation-mediated silenced PYCARD plays a key role in human
prostate cancer.


Epigenetic gene silencing by aberrant DNA methylation leads to loss of
key cellular pathways in tumorigenesis. In order to analyze effects of
DNA methylation in prostate cancer, we constructed LNCaP-derived human
prostate cancer cells that can induce global reactivation of
hypermethylated genes by the methyl-CpG targeted transcriptional
activation (MeTA) method. In MeTA, a cassette construct of MBD2-derived
methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) with NFκB-derived transcriptional
activation domain is transfected into cancer cells. Then expressed MBD
domain specifically binds to the hypermethylated promoter regions, and
NFκB transcriptional activation domain recruits p300/CREB-binding
protein (CBP) and reactivates hypermethylation-mediated silenced genes. A
cell proliferation assay indicated that MeTA suppressed the growth of
LNCaP cells. Furthermore, both flow cytometry and TUNEL assays
demonstrated that MeTA induced apoptosis. In order to search genes
responsible for apoptosis, we performed gene expression microarray
analysis of MeTA-uninduced and -induced LNCaP cells: Five genes encoding
apoptosis-inducing factors upregulated two-fold or more in accordance
with the induction of MeTA; PYCARD (PYD and CARD domain containing),
TNFRSF25 (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily 25), HRK (harakiri,
BCL2 interacting protein), BIK (BCL2 interacting killer), and CIDEA (cell
death-inducing DFFA-like effector a). These genes also contained CpG
islands (CGIs) within ± 1,000-bp of the transcription start site. We
focused on PYCARD and TNFRSF25 because these two genes upregulated
10-fold or more in accordance with the induction of MeTA. We found that
both genes were hypermethylated and showed low expression levels in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells, whereas only PYCARD was unmethylated in RWPE-1
normal prostate epithelial cells. We further analyzed primary prostate
cancer tissues and found tumor-specific promoter hypermethylation of
PYCARD in 53.8% (7/13; P Epigenetic gene silencing by aberrant DNA
methylation leads to loss of key cellular pathways in tumorigenesis. In
order to analyze effects of DNA methylation in prostate cancer, we
constructed LNCaP-derived human prostate cancer cells that can induce
global reactivation of hypermethylated genes by the methyl-CpG targeted
transcriptional activation (MeTA) method. In MeTA, a cassette construct
of MBD2-derived methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) with NFκB-derived
transcriptional activation domain is transfected into cancer cells. Then
expressed MBD domain specifically binds to the hypermethylated promoter
regions, and NFκB transcriptional activation domain recruits
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) and reactivates hypermethylation-mediated
silenced genes. A cell proliferation assay indicated that MeTA suppressed
the growth of LNCaP cells. Furthermore, both flow cytometry and TUNEL
assays demonstrated that MeTA induced apoptosis. In order to search genes
responsible for apoptosis, we performed gene expression microarray
analysis of MeTA-uninduced and -induced LNCaP cells: Five genes encoding
apoptosis-inducing factors upregulated two-fold or more in accordance
with the induction of MeTA; PYCARD (PYD and CARD domain containing),
TNFRSF25 (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily 25), HRK (harakiri,
BCL2 interacting protein), BIK (BCL2 interacting killer), and CIDEA (cell
death-inducing DFFA-like effector a). These genes also contained CpG
islands (CGIs) within ± 1,000-bp of the transcription start site. We
focused on PYCARD and TNFRSF25 because these two genes upregulated
10-fold or more in accordance with the induction of MeTA. We found that
both genes were hypermethylated and showed low expression levels in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells, whereas only PYCARD was unmethylated in RWPE-1
normal prostate epithelial cells. We further analyzed primary prostate
cancer tissues and found tumor-specific promoter hypermethylation of
PYCARD in 53.8% (7/13; P < 0.01). These results suggest that
methylation-mediated silencing of PYCARD contributes to escape from
apoptosis in human prostate cancer, and MeTA may provide important clues
to analyze changes in cancer cell phenotypes by DNA methylation
alterations.


