Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single domain antibody (sdAb) localizes in cancer cells to inhibit
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) resulting in
therapeutic inhibition of multiple cancers.


STAT3 is involved in the pathogenesis of many malignancies, so we
developed an anti-STAT3 VHH (variable region of the heavy chain),
SBT-100, that internalizes in cancer cells and binds unphosphorylated
STAT3 (U-STAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (P-STAT3) and results in
significant inhibition of multiple cancers. ATCC cell lines for triple
negative breast cancers (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453), ER+/PR+
breast cancer (MCF-7), HER2+ breast cancer (BT474), pancreatic cancers
(PANC-1, BX-PC3), murine mammary cancer (4T1), STAT3 null cells (PC-3),
and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (DU145) were tested. Athymic nude
mice were obtained from Envigo. The IL-6 Reporter Cell Assay was obtained
from Promega. VEGF inhibition ELISA was done using retinal epithelial
cells (ATCC). In vitro growth inhibition was done using a MTT assay.
Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blot studies in MDA-MB-231, PANC-1,
HeLa, DU145, 4T1 and PC-3 showed that SBT-100 binds U-STAT3 and P-STAT3.
No STAT3 binding was seen in PC-3. Binding to P-STAT3 was seen in lysates
from the 4T1 cells, which have constitutively activated STAT3. Since
rodent and human STAT3 have a 99% homology, rodents are excellent models
for extrapolating to human disease for over production of P-STAT3. Within
24 hrs IL-6 assay showed that SBT-100 blocked the production of IL-6
(pSTAT3 is involved in the pathogenesis of many malignancies, so we
developed an anti-STAT3 VHH (variable region of the heavy chain),
SBT-100, that internalizes in cancer cells and binds unphosphorylated
STAT3 (U-STAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (P-STAT3) and results in
significant inhibition of multiple cancers. ATCC cell lines for triple
negative breast cancers (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453), ER+/PR+
breast cancer (MCF-7), HER2+ breast cancer (BT474), pancreatic cancers
(PANC-1, BX-PC3), murine mammary cancer (4T1), STAT3 null cells (PC-3),
and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (DU145) were tested. Athymic nude
mice were obtained from Envigo. The IL-6 Reporter Cell Assay was obtained
from Promega. VEGF inhibition ELISA was done using retinal epithelial
cells (ATCC). In vitro growth inhibition was done using a MTT assay.
Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blot studies in MDA-MB-231, PANC-1,
HeLa, DU145, 4T1 and PC-3 showed that SBT-100 binds U-STAT3 and P-STAT3.
No STAT3 binding was seen in PC-3. Binding to P-STAT3 was seen in lysates
from the 4T1 cells, which have constitutively activated STAT3. Since
rodent and human STAT3 have a 99% homology, rodents are excellent models
for extrapolating to human disease for over production of P-STAT3. Within
24 hrs IL-6 assay showed that SBT-100 blocked the production of IL-6
(p<0.0001) compared to control. The degree of IL-6 suppression was
comparable to the negative control, BB1608 (STAT3 inhibitor). VEGF ELISA
showed significant (pSTAT3 is involved in the pathogenesis of many
malignancies, so we developed an anti-STAT3 VHH (variable region of the
heavy chain), SBT-100, that internalizes in cancer cells and binds
unphosphorylated STAT3 (U-STAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (P-STAT3) and
results in significant inhibition of multiple cancers. ATCC cell lines
for triple negative breast cancers (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453),
ER+/PR+ breast cancer (MCF-7), HER2+ breast cancer (BT474), pancreatic
cancers (PANC-1, BX-PC3), murine mammary cancer (4T1), STAT3 null cells
(PC-3), and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (DU145) were tested.
Athymic nude mice were obtained from Envigo. The IL-6 Reporter Cell Assay
was obtained from Promega. VEGF inhibition ELISA was done using retinal
epithelial cells (ATCC). In vitro growth inhibition was done using a MTT
assay. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blot studies in MDA-MB-231,
PANC-1, HeLa, DU145, 4T1 and PC-3 showed that SBT-100 binds U-STAT3 and
P-STAT3. No STAT3 binding was seen in PC-3. Binding to P-STAT3 was seen
in lysates from the 4T1 cells, which have constitutively activated STAT3.
Since rodent and human STAT3 have a 99% homology, rodents are excellent
models for extrapolating to human disease for over production of P-STAT3.
Within 24 hrs IL-6 assay showed that SBT-100 blocked the production of
IL-6 (p<0.0001) compared to control. The degree of IL-6 suppression was
comparable to the negative control, BB1608 (STAT3 inhibitor). VEGF ELISA
showed significant (p<0.0001) inhibition of VEGF production within 12 hrs
and was maintained for up to 48 hrs. After 3 days with SBT-100 the MTT
assay showed growth inhibition (pSTAT3 is involved in the pathogenesis of
many malignancies, so we developed an anti-STAT3 VHH (variable region of
the heavy chain), SBT-100, that internalizes in cancer cells and binds
unphosphorylated STAT3 (U-STAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (P-STAT3) and
results in significant inhibition of multiple cancers. ATCC cell lines
for triple negative breast cancers (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453),
ER+/PR+ breast cancer (MCF-7), HER2+ breast cancer (BT474), pancreatic
cancers (PANC-1, BX-PC3), murine mammary cancer (4T1), STAT3 null cells
(PC-3), and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (DU145) were tested.
Athymic nude mice were obtained from Envigo. The IL-6 Reporter Cell Assay
was obtained from Promega. VEGF inhibition ELISA was done using retinal
epithelial cells (ATCC). In vitro growth inhibition was done using a MTT
assay. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blot studies in MDA-MB-231,
PANC-1, HeLa, DU145, 4T1 and PC-3 showed that SBT-100 binds U-STAT3 and
P-STAT3. No STAT3 binding was seen in PC-3. Binding to P-STAT3 was seen
in lysates from the 4T1 cells, which have constitutively activated STAT3.
Since rodent and human STAT3 have a 99% homology, rodents are excellent
models for extrapolating to human disease for over production of P-STAT3.
Within 24 hrs IL-6 assay showed that SBT-100 blocked the production of
IL-6 (p<0.0001) compared to control. The degree of IL-6 suppression was
comparable to the negative control, BB1608 (STAT3 inhibitor). VEGF ELISA
showed significant (p<0.0001) inhibition of VEGF production within 12 hrs
and was maintained for up to 48 hrs. After 3 days with SBT-100 the MTT
assay showed growth inhibition (p<0.001) in BT474 (93%), MCF-7 (93%),
MDA-MB-231 (77%), MDA-MB-468 (85%), MDA-MB-453 (64%), PANC-1 (79%),
BX-PC3 (90%), and DU145 (92%). MDA-MB-231 tumors grown in xenograft
athymic mice showed suppression (pSTAT3 is involved in the pathogenesis
of many malignancies, so we developed an anti-STAT3 VHH (variable region
of the heavy chain), SBT-100, that internalizes in cancer cells and binds
unphosphorylated STAT3 (U-STAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (P-STAT3) and
results in significant inhibition of multiple cancers. ATCC cell lines
for triple negative breast cancers (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453),
ER+/PR+ breast cancer (MCF-7), HER2+ breast cancer (BT474), pancreatic
cancers (PANC-1, BX-PC3), murine mammary cancer (4T1), STAT3 null cells
(PC-3), and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (DU145) were tested.
Athymic nude mice were obtained from Envigo. The IL-6 Reporter Cell Assay
was obtained from Promega. VEGF inhibition ELISA was done using retinal
epithelial cells (ATCC). In vitro growth inhibition was done using a MTT
assay. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blot studies in MDA-MB-231,
PANC-1, HeLa, DU145, 4T1 and PC-3 showed that SBT-100 binds U-STAT3 and
P-STAT3. No STAT3 binding was seen in PC-3. Binding to P-STAT3 was seen
in lysates from the 4T1 cells, which have constitutively activated STAT3.
Since rodent and human STAT3 have a 99% homology, rodents are excellent
models for extrapolating to human disease for over production of P-STAT3.
Within 24 hrs IL-6 assay showed that SBT-100 blocked the production of
IL-6 (p<0.0001) compared to control. The degree of IL-6 suppression was
comparable to the negative control, BB1608 (STAT3 inhibitor). VEGF ELISA
showed significant (p<0.0001) inhibition of VEGF production within 12 hrs
and was maintained for up to 48 hrs. After 3 days with SBT-100 the MTT
assay showed growth inhibition (p<0.001) in BT474 (93%), MCF-7 (93%),
MDA-MB-231 (77%), MDA-MB-468 (85%), MDA-MB-453 (64%), PANC-1 (79%),
BX-PC3 (90%), and DU145 (92%). MDA-MB-231 tumors grown in xenograft
athymic mice showed suppression (p<0.001), IHC staining in the cytoplasm,
and nucleus after 7 days of SBT-100 treatment. U-STAT3 and P-STAT3
activate genes that promote growth, proliferation, angiogenesis, immune
suppression, cancer stem cells, metastasis, and apoptosis inhibition.
SBT-100 enters the cancers cells, binds STAT3 and P-STAT3 causing growth
inhibition (pSTAT3 is involved in the pathogenesis of many malignancies,
so we developed an anti-STAT3 VHH (variable region of the heavy chain),
SBT-100, that internalizes in cancer cells and binds unphosphorylated
STAT3 (U-STAT3) and phosphorylated STAT3 (P-STAT3) and results in
significant inhibition of multiple cancers. ATCC cell lines for triple
negative breast cancers (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453), ER+/PR+
breast cancer (MCF-7), HER2+ breast cancer (BT474), pancreatic cancers
(PANC-1, BX-PC3), murine mammary cancer (4T1), STAT3 null cells (PC-3),
and castrate-resistant prostate cancer (DU145) were tested. Athymic nude
mice were obtained from Envigo. The IL-6 Reporter Cell Assay was obtained
from Promega. VEGF inhibition ELISA was done using retinal epithelial
cells (ATCC). In vitro growth inhibition was done using a MTT assay.
Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blot studies in MDA-MB-231, PANC-1,
HeLa, DU145, 4T1 and PC-3 showed that SBT-100 binds U-STAT3 and P-STAT3.
No STAT3 binding was seen in PC-3. Binding to P-STAT3 was seen in lysates
from the 4T1 cells, which have constitutively activated STAT3. Since
rodent and human STAT3 have a 99% homology, rodents are excellent models
for extrapolating to human disease for over production of P-STAT3. Within
24 hrs IL-6 assay showed that SBT-100 blocked the production of IL-6
(p<0.0001) compared to control. The degree of IL-6 suppression was
comparable to the negative control, BB1608 (STAT3 inhibitor). VEGF ELISA
showed significant (p<0.0001) inhibition of VEGF production within 12 hrs
and was maintained for up to 48 hrs. After 3 days with SBT-100 the MTT
assay showed growth inhibition (p<0.001) in BT474 (93%), MCF-7 (93%),
MDA-MB-231 (77%), MDA-MB-468 (85%), MDA-MB-453 (64%), PANC-1 (79%),
BX-PC3 (90%), and DU145 (92%). MDA-MB-231 tumors grown in xenograft
athymic mice showed suppression (p<0.001), IHC staining in the cytoplasm,
and nucleus after 7 days of SBT-100 treatment. U-STAT3 and P-STAT3
activate genes that promote growth, proliferation, angiogenesis, immune
suppression, cancer stem cells, metastasis, and apoptosis inhibition.
SBT-100 enters the cancers cells, binds STAT3 and P-STAT3 causing growth
inhibition (p<0.001) in MCF-7, BT474, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-453,
PANC-1, BX-PC3, and DU145. These results suggest that SBT-100 can be
developed as a therapeutic for cancers expressing either STAT3 or P-STAT3.


