Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small molecules related to adrenomedullin reduce tumor burden in a
mouse model of colitis-associated colon cancer.


Adrenomedullin (AM) expression is elevated in colon cancer patients and a
correlation between higher AM levels and lower disease-free survival has
been described in Japan. Nevertheless, the influence of AM in colon
cancer is somewhat controversial: on the one hand, antibodies against
either the peptide or the receptor reduce the growth of xenografted
tumors, whereas application of the peptide clearly reduces inflammation
and clinical severity in human and mouse models of colitis, which is an
important risk factor for colon cancer. To investigate the contribution
of AM and its gene-related peptide, proadrenomedullin N-terminal 20
peptide (PAMP), to the progression and potential treatment of colon
cancer we have studied the effects of several small molecules (SM)
related to AM and PAMP on a mouse model of colon cancer. Colon tumors
were induced by intraperitoneal injection of a carcinogen: 10 mg/Kg
azoxymethane, followed by 3 cycles of a colitis-inducing chemical: 2.5%
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in the drinking water for a week followed by
2 weeks of regular water. Four SM were tested: 16311 (a negative
modulator of AM), 145425 (a positive modulator of AM), 87877 (a negative
modulator of PAMP), and 106221 (a positive modulator of PAMP). For each
SM, 4 experimental groups of male C57BL6 mice were used: i) Control group
(injected with vehicle and drank regular water); ii) Control+SM (vehicle,
regular water, and injected with the SM 3 times a week at a concentration
of 20 nm/Kg); iii) Cancer group (injected with AOM and drank DSS); and
iv) Cancer+SM (treated with AOM, DSS, and the SM). At the end of the
experimental procedures, animals were sacrificed and the colon was
extracted and analyzed. None of the mice belonging to groups i and ii
developed any tumor or had any pathological finding, indicating that the
SMs do not present overt toxicity. All mice in groups iii and iv
developed colon neoplasias ranging from carcinomas in situ to
adenocarcinomas. No significant differences were found among mice treated
with PAMP modulators indicating that PAMP may not play a major role in
colon cancer or that the PAMP-related SMs were not very effective. On the
other hand, mice that received SM 16311 had a higher severity index
(pAdrenomedullin (AM) expression is elevated in colon cancer patients and
a correlation between higher AM levels and lower disease-free survival
has been described in Japan. Nevertheless, the influence of AM in colon
cancer is somewhat controversial: on the one hand, antibodies against
either the peptide or the receptor reduce the growth of xenografted
tumors, whereas application of the peptide clearly reduces inflammation
and clinical severity in human and mouse models of colitis, which is an
important risk factor for colon cancer. To investigate the contribution
of AM and its gene-related peptide, proadrenomedullin N-terminal 20
peptide (PAMP), to the progression and potential treatment of colon
cancer we have studied the effects of several small molecules (SM)
related to AM and PAMP on a mouse model of colon cancer. Colon tumors
were induced by intraperitoneal injection of a carcinogen: 10 mg/Kg
azoxymethane, followed by 3 cycles of a colitis-inducing chemical: 2.5%
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in the drinking water for a week followed by
2 weeks of regular water. Four SM were tested: 16311 (a negative
modulator of AM), 145425 (a positive modulator of AM), 87877 (a negative
modulator of PAMP), and 106221 (a positive modulator of PAMP). For each
SM, 4 experimental groups of male C57BL6 mice were used: i) Control group
(injected with vehicle and drank regular water); ii) Control+SM (vehicle,
regular water, and injected with the SM 3 times a week at a concentration
of 20 nm/Kg); iii) Cancer group (injected with AOM and drank DSS); and
iv) Cancer+SM (treated with AOM, DSS, and the SM). At the end of the
experimental procedures, animals were sacrificed and the colon was
extracted and analyzed. None of the mice belonging to groups i and ii
developed any tumor or had any pathological finding, indicating that the
SMs do not present overt toxicity. All mice in groups iii and iv
developed colon neoplasias ranging from carcinomas in situ to
adenocarcinomas. No significant differences were found among mice treated
with PAMP modulators indicating that PAMP may not play a major role in
colon cancer or that the PAMP-related SMs were not very effective. On the
other hand, mice that received SM 16311 had a higher severity index
(p<0.001) and weight loss (pAdrenomedullin (AM) expression is elevated in
colon cancer patients and a correlation between higher AM levels and
lower disease-free survival has been described in Japan. Nevertheless,
the influence of AM in colon cancer is somewhat controversial: on the one
hand, antibodies against either the peptide or the receptor reduce the
growth of xenografted tumors, whereas application of the peptide clearly
reduces inflammation and clinical severity in human and mouse models of
colitis, which is an important risk factor for colon cancer. To
investigate the contribution of AM and its gene-related peptide,
proadrenomedullin N-terminal 20 peptide (PAMP), to the progression and
potential treatment of colon cancer we have studied the effects of
several small molecules (SM) related to AM and PAMP on a mouse model of
colon cancer. Colon tumors were induced by intraperitoneal injection of a
carcinogen: 10 mg/Kg azoxymethane, followed by 3 cycles of a
colitis-inducing chemical: 2.5% dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in the
drinking water for a week followed by 2 weeks of regular water. Four SM
were tested: 16311 (a negative modulator of AM), 145425 (a positive
modulator of AM), 87877 (a negative modulator of PAMP), and 106221 (a
positive modulator of PAMP). For each SM, 4 experimental groups of male
C57BL6 mice were used: i) Control group (injected with vehicle and drank
regular water); ii) Control+SM (vehicle, regular water, and injected with
the SM 3 times a week at a concentration of 20 nm/Kg); iii) Cancer group
(injected with AOM and drank DSS); and iv) Cancer+SM (treated with AOM,
DSS, and the SM). At the end of the experimental procedures, animals were
sacrificed and the colon was extracted and analyzed. None of the mice
belonging to groups i and ii developed any tumor or had any pathological
finding, indicating that the SMs do not present overt toxicity. All mice
in groups iii and iv developed colon neoplasias ranging from carcinomas
in situ to adenocarcinomas. No significant differences were found among
mice treated with PAMP modulators indicating that PAMP may not play a
major role in colon cancer or that the PAMP-related SMs were not very
effective. On the other hand, mice that received SM 16311 had a higher
severity index (p<0.001) and weight loss (p<0.05) than their control
counterparts, whereas mice injected with SM 145425 had a lower number of
tumors than their controls (pAdrenomedullin (AM) expression is elevated
in colon cancer patients and a correlation between higher AM levels and
lower disease-free survival has been described in Japan. Nevertheless,
the influence of AM in colon cancer is somewhat controversial: on the one
hand, antibodies against either the peptide or the receptor reduce the
growth of xenografted tumors, whereas application of the peptide clearly
reduces inflammation and clinical severity in human and mouse models of
colitis, which is an important risk factor for colon cancer. To
investigate the contribution of AM and its gene-related peptide,
proadrenomedullin N-terminal 20 peptide (PAMP), to the progression and
potential treatment of colon cancer we have studied the effects of
several small molecules (SM) related to AM and PAMP on a mouse model of
colon cancer. Colon tumors were induced by intraperitoneal injection of a
carcinogen: 10 mg/Kg azoxymethane, followed by 3 cycles of a
colitis-inducing chemical: 2.5% dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) in the
drinking water for a week followed by 2 weeks of regular water. Four SM
were tested: 16311 (a negative modulator of AM), 145425 (a positive
modulator of AM), 87877 (a negative modulator of PAMP), and 106221 (a
positive modulator of PAMP). For each SM, 4 experimental groups of male
C57BL6 mice were used: i) Control group (injected with vehicle and drank
regular water); ii) Control+SM (vehicle, regular water, and injected with
the SM 3 times a week at a concentration of 20 nm/Kg); iii) Cancer group
(injected with AOM and drank DSS); and iv) Cancer+SM (treated with AOM,
DSS, and the SM). At the end of the experimental procedures, animals were
sacrificed and the colon was extracted and analyzed. None of the mice
belonging to groups i and ii developed any tumor or had any pathological
finding, indicating that the SMs do not present overt toxicity. All mice
in groups iii and iv developed colon neoplasias ranging from carcinomas
in situ to adenocarcinomas. No significant differences were found among
mice treated with PAMP modulators indicating that PAMP may not play a
major role in colon cancer or that the PAMP-related SMs were not very
effective. On the other hand, mice that received SM 16311 had a higher
severity index (p<0.001) and weight loss (p<0.05) than their control
counterparts, whereas mice injected with SM 145425 had a lower number of
tumors than their controls (p<0.001). These results suggest that AM may
have a protective role during the progression phase of colon cancer, and
that treatment with AM or with positive modulator SMs may represent a
novel treatment for colon cancer. This study was funded by Instituto de
Salud Carlos III (PI13/02166), FEDER, and Junta Provincial de La Rioja de
la Asociación Española Contra el Cáncer (AECC).


