Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phloridzin docosahexaenoate (PZ-DHA) inhibits breast cancer cell
invasion and angiogenesis.


In our previous studies, we showed the selective cytotoxicity, in vitro
anti-proliferative and anti-metastatic activities of phloridzin
docosahexaenoate (PZ-DHA). PZ-DHA combines phloridzin (PZ), a
dihydrochalcone found in apple peels, and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), an
Ï‰-3 fatty acid found in fish oil, through an acylation reaction.
Significant suppression of tumor growth resulted from the intratumoral
administration of PZ-DHA to non-obese diabetic severe combined
immunodeficient (NOD-SCID) female mice xenografted with MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells. Examination of haematoxylin and eosin-stained tumor
sections confirmed that PZ-DHA caused tumor cell death. PZ-DHA also
suppressed the invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells through membranes coated with
extra cellular matrix proteins, fibronectin and gelatin, in a Boyden
chamber assay. The effect of PZ-DHA on the mRNA transcription of the
gelatinase, matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2,) was measured in RT-qPCR
analysis, which showed that MMP-2 mRNA expression was inhibited at 12 h
and 24 h following PZ-DHA treatments. Furthermore, suppression of MMP-2
protein expression was shown by western blot analysis of cell lysates of
PZ-DHA-treated MDA-MB-231 cells. Intraperitoneal administration of PZ-DHA
suppressed the growth of primary tumors and metastasis of 4T1 and green
fluorescence protein (GFP)-tagged-MDA-MB-231 cells to lungs of BALB/c and
NOD-SCID female mice, respectively. Anti-angiogenic activity of PZ-DHA
was investigated using human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).
PZ-DHA suppressed the metabolic activity of HUVECs in MTS assays and the
cell death was confirmed using flow cytometric analysis of 7-AAD and
Annexin-V-FLUOS/propidium iodide-stained HUVECs. Anti-proliferative
activity of PZ-DHA was shown using Oregon Green 488 stained-HUVECs by
flow cytometry. PZ-DHA treatment arrested the HUVEC cell cycle at
S-phase. PZ-DHA also suppressed the migration of HUVECs in a gap closure
assay and inhibited HUVEC tubule formation on a matrigel matrix. For
comparison purposes, PZ and DHA were included in all experiments, but in
all cases were less effective than PZ-DHA. Taken together, these findings
reveal the potential of PZ-DHA to inhibit triple-negative breast cancer
progression. We are currently working on identifying potential phase I
and II metabolites of PZ-DHA and understanding its pharmacokinetic
parameters.


