Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heat shock protein 90 inhibitors suppress PDGFRA reactivation and
other receptor tyrosine kinase activation important in drug resistant
gastrointestinal stromal tumors.


Background: Inhibition of KIT oncoproteins by imatinib induces clinical
responses in most gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) patients.
However, many patients develop imatinib resistance due to secondary KIT
mutations. The drug resistance mechanism has only been partially
elucidated, and the sunitinib resistance mechanism is also unknown. In
this study, we elucidate the new imatinib resistant mechanism and find
effective inhibitors.

Methods: We have established imatinib-resistant cells GIST-T1R by
culturing cells with increasing concentrations of imatinib. We analyzed
receptor tyrosine kinase and intracellular signal protein strongly
expressed in resistant cells using Western blotting and Phosphorylation
Array. Then, the antitumor effect was examined using an agent that
inhibits strongly expressed molecules of the resistant cells.

Results: The IC50 of imatinib in the sensitive cells(GIST-T1) and the
resistant cells(GIST-T1R) was 10 nM and 20 Î¼M, respectively, which
demonstrated 2000-fold difference. These imatinib resistant cells were
also cross-resistant to sunitinib. In western blotting, PDGFRA
phosphorylation and protein expression were enhanced in GIST-T1R compared
to GIST-T1. When GIST-T1 was treated with imatinib, KIT phosphorylation
was suppressed but PDGFRA phosphorylation was enhanced. Imatinib
treatment of GIST-T1R enhanced PDGFRA phosphorylation and protein
expression as compared to before imatinib treatment. Phosphorylation of
PDGFRA in these resistant cells could not be suppressed by regorafenib.
Furthermore, in the protein phosphorylated array, in addition to
phosphorylation of PDGFRA in resistant cells, phosphorylation of multiple
RTKs was also enhanced. An HSP90 inhibitor AUY922 capable of
simultaneously suppressing a plurality of proteins was used. AUY922
suppressed GIST-T1 and GIST-T1R cell proliferation at low concentrations
and was more effective than regorafenib. Furthermore, AUY922 inhibited
phosphorylation and protein expression of PDGFRA in drug-resistant cells,
as well as phosphorylation of other several receptor tyrosine kinases.

Conclusion: Activation of PDGFRA was considered to be important for the
mechanism of drug resistance of GIST. Furthermore, since activation of
multiple receptor tyrosine kinases can be observed simultaneously in drug
resistance, it is considered that inhibiting a single target is not
effective. Since HSP90 inhibition suppresses PDGFRA protein expression
and possibly inhibits multiple target proteins at the same time, it is
the most effective treatment for drug resistant GIST.


