Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of metabolic reprogramming by zerumbone alters the
tumorigenic potential of hepatocellular cancer.


Incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) that represents ~90% of all
cases of primary liver cancer is on the rise worldwide. Sorafenib, the
only approved targeted therapy, prolongs median survival only by âˆ¼3
months. Thus, new therapeutic strategies are urgently needed. In this
study, we investigated therapeutic potential of zerumbone, a
sesquiterpene from an edible ginger, against HCC. Zerumbone inhibited
proliferation and clonogenic survival of HCC cells by blocking glycolysis
and pentose phosphate pathway, arresting cells at G2/M phase of cell
cycle and inducing apoptosis. To uncover the underlying molecular
mechanisms of its action on HCC cells, we employed several unbiased
approaches. First, phosphokinase array showed significant inhibition
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and STAT3 signaling in zerumbone-treated HCC cells. Gene
Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of
the microarray data revealed that zerumbone-deregulated genes showed
positive correlation with PI3/AKT/mTOR and STAT3 pathways and those
involved in metabolism, apoptosis and cell cycle. Notably, the alteration
in expression of genes regulated by PI3/AKT/mTOR or STAT3 pathways and
downregulated by zerumbone in HCCs is associated with poor patient
survival. These results implicate that treatment with this dietary
sesquiterpene might lead to a better outcome in HCC patients. Indeed,
zerumbone treatment significantly inhibited growth and lung metastasis of
orthotopic HCC xenografts in NSG mice. These findings reveal novel
therapeutic strategies targeting cancer metabolism. Collectively, these
observations underscore the therapeutic potential of zerumbone in HCC.


