Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ESR1 methylation in circulating tumor cells, ctDNA and primary
tumors of breast cancer patients.


Background: Estrogen receptor (ER) is an important prognostic biomarker
in breast cancer. Epigenetic silencing of ESR1 could be of important
clinical significance especially for its potential impact on endocrine
treatment efficacy. Liquid biopsy provides real-time monitoring of tumor
evolution and response to therapy through analysis of CTCs and ctDNA. Our
group has evaluated for the first time epigenetic silencing of tumor and
metastasis suppressor genes in CTCs and corresponding ctDNA. In this
study, we evaluated for the first time ESR1 methylation in CTCs, paired
ctDNA and primary tumors of breast cancer patients.

Methods: We developed and validated a highly sensitive and specific
real-time MSP assay for ESR1 methylation. We further applied the
developed assay in sodium bisulfite (SB) treated DNA samples from: a)
FFPEs from 40 patients with operable breast cancer, 25 patients with
metastasis, 30 mammoplasties and 15 fibroadenomas, b) EpCAM+
immunomagnetically isolated CTCs fractions, from 74 early breast cancer
patients, 48 patients with metastasis and 30 healthy donors, c)
CellSearch® cartridges from 36 early breast cancer patients, 22 patients
with metastasis, d) ctDNA isolated from plasma of matched samples and 54
healthy donors as a control group.

Results: By using this highly specific and sensitive assay (sensitivity
0.1%) we detected methylation of ESR1 in: a) FFPEs: 16/40(40%) early
breast cancer patients, 9/25(36%) patients with verified metastasis,
7/30(23.3%) mammoplasties and 5/15(33.3%) fibroadenomas. A statistically
significant negative correlation was observed between ESR1 methylation
status and ER protein expression (56/65 samples, 86%, pResults: By using
this highly specific and sensitive assay (sensitivity 0.1%) we detected
methylation of ESR1 in: a) FFPEs: 16/40(40%) early breast cancer
patients, 9/25(36%) patients with verified metastasis, 7/30(23.3%)
mammoplasties and 5/15(33.3%) fibroadenomas. A statistically significant
negative correlation was observed between ESR1 methylation status and ER
protein expression (56/65 samples, 86%, p<0.001). b) In EpCAM+ CTCs
fraction samples: ESR1 was found methylated in 16/74(21.6%) operable
breast cancer patients, 10/48(20.8%) patients with metastasis, but only
in 1/30(3.3%) healthy donors. c) CTC+ CellSearch® cartridges:
3/13(23.1%) in early breast cancer and 2/7(28.6%) in patients with
metastasis. d) In ctDNA: ESR1 methylation was observed in 3/36(8.3%)
early breast cancer patients, 3/22(13.6%) patients with metastasis and
2/54(3.7%) samples in the control group. ESR1 methylation status was
highly correlated when paired DNA from CellSearch® cartridges and
corresponding ctDNA samples were compared; 36/36 (100%, pResults: By
using this highly specific and sensitive assay (sensitivity 0.1%) we
detected methylation of ESR1 in: a) FFPEs: 16/40(40%) early breast cancer
patients, 9/25(36%) patients with verified metastasis, 7/30(23.3%)
mammoplasties and 5/15(33.3%) fibroadenomas. A statistically significant
negative correlation was observed between ESR1 methylation status and ER
protein expression (56/65 samples, 86%, p<0.001). b) In EpCAM+ CTCs
fraction samples: ESR1 was found methylated in 16/74(21.6%) operable
breast cancer patients, 10/48(20.8%) patients with metastasis, but only
in 1/30(3.3%) healthy donors. c) CTC+ CellSearch® cartridges:
3/13(23.1%) in early breast cancer and 2/7(28.6%) in patients with
metastasis. d) In ctDNA: ESR1 methylation was observed in 3/36(8.3%)
early breast cancer patients, 3/22(13.6%) patients with metastasis and
2/54(3.7%) samples in the control group. ESR1 methylation status was
highly correlated when paired DNA from CellSearch® cartridges and
corresponding ctDNA samples were compared; 36/36 (100%, p<0.001) in early
breast cancer and 21/22 (95.5%, pResults: By using this highly specific
and sensitive assay (sensitivity 0.1%) we detected methylation of ESR1
in: a) FFPEs: 16/40(40%) early breast cancer patients, 9/25(36%) patients
with verified metastasis, 7/30(23.3%) mammoplasties and 5/15(33.3%)
fibroadenomas. A statistically significant negative correlation was
observed between ESR1 methylation status and ER protein expression (56/65
samples, 86%, p<0.001). b) In EpCAM+ CTCs fraction samples: ESR1 was
found methylated in 16/74(21.6%) operable breast cancer patients,
10/48(20.8%) patients with metastasis, but only in 1/30(3.3%) healthy
donors. c) CTC+ CellSearch® cartridges: 3/13(23.1%) in early breast
cancer and 2/7(28.6%) in patients with metastasis. d) In ctDNA: ESR1
methylation was observed in 3/36(8.3%) early breast cancer patients,
3/22(13.6%) patients with metastasis and 2/54(3.7%) samples in the
control group. ESR1 methylation status was highly correlated when paired
DNA from CellSearch® cartridges and corresponding ctDNA samples were
compared; 36/36 (100%, p<0.001) in early breast cancer and 21/22 (95.5%,
p<0.001) in metastasis.

Conclusions: ER expression and ESR1 methylation were found 100% inversely
correlated in primary tissues. The EpCAM+ CTC fraction of patients with
breast cancer was found methylated for ESR1. Interestingly, ESR1
methylation was detected exclusively in CTC+ samples as analyzed from
CellSearch® cartridges but in none of CTC- samples. In paired plasma
samples, ESR1 methylation showed a high concordance (pConclusions: ER
expression and ESR1 methylation were found 100% inversely correlated in
primary tissues. The EpCAM+ CTC fraction of patients with breast cancer
was found methylated for ESR1. Interestingly, ESR1 methylation was
detected exclusively in CTC+ samples as analyzed from CellSearch®
cartridges but in none of CTC- samples. In paired plasma samples, ESR1
methylation showed a high concordance (p<0.001) with ESR1 methylation in
CTCs. Additional studies are needed to further evaluate the clinical
significance of our findings.


