Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liquid biopsy using extracellular vesicular DNA for EGFR mutation
testing in the patients with NSCLC.


Background Tumor-derived extracelluar vesicles (EV) have been proved to
carry double-stranded DNA including oncogenic mutants and expected to be
a novel biomarker in cancer detection. Liquid biopsy using cell-free (cf)
DNA for EGFR mutation testing is being actively investigated. In this
study, we investigated whether liquid biopsy using EV DNA is superior to
cf DNA for EGFR mutation testing in the patients with NSCLC.

Methods EV was isolated using ultracentrifugation and confirmed by
transmission electron microscopy and zetasizer in 20 plasma samples (all
tissue-proven EGFR mutated) and 32 bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)
samples (23 EGFR-mutated including 14 TKI-na√Øve and 9 TKI resistant, and
9 wild-type). EV and cf DNA was separately extracted from each samples
and EGFR mutation testing was performed by peptide nucleic acid
(PNA)-clamping method.

Results In 20 plasma samples, the concordance rate of EV DNA for tissue
EGFR genotyping was 55% (11/20), while 30% (6/20) in cf DNA. In 32 BALF
samples, however, the sensitivity, specificity and concordance rate of EV
DNA for activating EGFR mutations was 100% (23/23), 100% (9/9), and 100%
(32/32), while cf DNA showed 73.9% (17/23), 100% (9/9) and 81.3% (26/32),
respectively. The kappa value (p-value) of EV DNA was 1.0 (Results In 20
plasma samples, the concordance rate of EV DNA for tissue EGFR genotyping
was 55% (11/20), while 30% (6/20) in cf DNA. In 32 BALF samples, however,
the sensitivity, specificity and concordance rate of EV DNA for
activating EGFR mutations was 100% (23/23), 100% (9/9), and 100% (32/32),
while cf DNA showed 73.9% (17/23), 100% (9/9) and 81.3% (26/32),
respectively. The kappa value (p-value) of EV DNA was 1.0 (<0.001), while
it was 0.714 (p,0.001) in the case of cf DNA. As for 9 re-biopsy cases
for T790M detection in which only 3 patients (33%) was proved as positive
T790M, BALF EV DNA identified 2 more T790M patients (total 5 among 9
patients, 56%) without non-matching with tissue typing, while BALF cf DNA
found 1 more T790M positive patient with missing 1 tissue proven case
(total 3 among 9 patients, 33%)

Conclusions Liquid biopsy using EV DNA is significantly superior to cf
DNA in both plasma and BALF. A little low sensitivity in plasma EV DNA is
supposed to be improved with much more sensitive method such as ddPCR or
BEAMing. Liquid biopsy using BALF EV DNA showed almost 100% matching with
tissue EGFR typing and seems to be highly promising for T790M detection.
A large number of clinical trials should be prompted.


