Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sildenafil suppresses tumorigenesis in ApcMin/+ mouse model.


The cGMP signaling pathway regulates homeostasis in the colon epithelium
and has been implicated in the suppression of colorectal cancer.
Exisulind is a weak phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitor that was
previously shown to reduce polyp formation in familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP) patients. Despite this validation of PDE5 as a
therapeutic target, the failure of Exisulind due to toxicity halted
further trials of cGMP elevating agents. The present study tested the
effect of the PDE5 inhibitor sildenafil, and the receptor
guanylyl-cyclase C (GCC) agonist linaclotide on tumorigenesis in the
ApcMin/+ mouse model of colon cancer. Administration of either sildenafil
or linaclotide to both wild type and ApcMin/+ mice caused dramatic
effects on homeostasis that included reduced proliferation and increased
goblet cell differentiation. With treatment beginning at 4 weeks,
sildenafil and linaclotide caused a 50% and 67% (respectively) reduction
in the number of polyps per mouse. Furthermore, the polyps in sildenafil
and linaclotide treated animals exhibited a reduced proliferative index
and increased mucus density compared to polyps from untreated mice. The
mean polyp size was not changed by treatment with either drug. In support
of a tumor-suppressive role for cGMP signaling in the intestine, the
ApcMin/+ mice showed reduced levels of endogenous GCC agonists in the
intestinal mucosa compared to wild type animals. This suggests that part
of the tumor preventative effects observed here could be due to
compensation for this deficit by augmenting cGMP signaling with PDE5
inhibitors or GCC agonists. While the tumor suppressive mechanism is not
fully understood, the results presented here demonstrate in a preclinical
model, that increasing intestinal cGMP levels by targeting PDE5 or GCC
may be a viable chemoprevention strategy for human FAP patients.


