Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of subsidies on cancer genetic testing uptake in Singapore.


Purpose: Previous reports cite high costs of clinical cancer genetic
testing as main barriers to patient’s willingness to test. We report
findings of a pilot study that evaluates how different subsidy schemes
impact genetic testing uptake and total cost of cancer management.

Methods:We included all patients who attended the Cancer Genetics Service
at the National Cancer Centre Singapore ( January 2014-May 2016). Two
subsidy schemes, the blanket scheme (100% subsidy to all eligible
patients), and the varied scheme (patients received 50%-100% subsidy
dependent on financial status) were compared. We estimated total spending
on cancer management from government’s perspective using a decision
model.

Results: 445 patients were included. Contrasting against the blanket
scheme, the varied scheme observed a higher attendance of patients (34 vs
8 patients per month), of which a higher proportion underwent genetic
testing (5% vs 38%), while lowering subsidy spending per person (S$1098
vs S$1161). The varied scheme may potentially save cost by reducing
unnecessary cancer surveillance when first-degree relatives uptake rate
is above 36%.

Findings :Provision of subsidy leads to a considerable increase in
genetic testing uptake rate. From the government’s perspective,
subsidising genetic testing may potentially reduce total costs on cancer
management. Understanding and overcoming barriers for cascade testing in
first degree relatives can improve cost-savings.


