Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the efficacy of limiting heme availability on growth
and progression of lung tumor.


Numerous studies support the importance of mitochondrial respiration in
tumorigenesis. Studies from our lab have demonstrated that mitochondrial
respiration is intensified, and the levels of intracellular heme and
hemoproteins are elevated in Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. We
also demonstrated that lowering intracellular heme levels selectively
decreases oxygen consumption in NSCLC cells and inhibits cell migration
and colony formation. Heme is a central molecule for mitochondrial
function and for all processes involved in oxygen utilization. It serves
as a prosthetic group in several oxidative phosphorylation enzymes and
other oxygen-utilizing hemoproteins. Most human cells can synthesize heme
de novo and uptake heme from the circulation. Further, a number of
epidemiological studies have shown that high heme intake is associated
with increased risk of several cancers, including lung cancer. The
purpose of the study is to determine the extent to which altering heme
availability impacts NSCLC tumor growth and development.

To this end, we devised a two-pronged approach to target both heme intake
and heme synthesis to limit the heme available to cells. Our lab
synthesized a peptide to sequester heme from circulation and thereby
limit heme available for uptake. A well-known inhibitor of heme synthesis
is used to limit heme synthesis. NSCLC cells that express luciferase were
implanted in NOD/SCID mice to generate subcutaneous and lung orthotopic
xenografts. The mice were treated with the peptide alone and in
combination with an inhibitor. The tumor growth was monitored by
non-invasive bioluminescence imaging (BLI) using Perkin Elmerâ€™s IVIS
Lumina III Imager.

In subcutaneously implanted xenografts, our BLI data show that there is a
considerable reduction in radiance (total flux in photons per second) in
the treatment groups that received the peptide and a combination of
peptide and inhibitor. This trend was also observed in tumor volumes
measured by calipers. This observation is further corroborated in lung
orthotopic xenografts, where there is a significant reduction in radiance
in the treatment groups that received the peptide and peptide-inhibitor
combination. In all the cases the combination of the peptide and the
inhibitor had a greater effect than the peptide alone.

Our results indicate that combination of heme lowering agents works
effectively in limiting lung tumor growth and progression by limiting
both heme uptake and synthesis. Further studies are underway to discern
the role of heme in lung cancer growth and progression.


