Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel function of p21-activated kinase 3 (PAK3) in regulating Akt
phosphorylation and pancreatic cancer stem cell phenotypes.


p21-activated kinases (PAKs) are important effectors of the Rho family
GTPases and has been implicated in cytoskelestal remodeling, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and transformation. Based on the sequence,
structure homology, and activation mechanism, six PAKs are classified
into two groups, PAK 1-3 (group I) and PAK 4-6 (group II). PAK kinases
are frequently overexpressed in various human tumors and represent
therapeutically relevant targets for cancer treatments. Previous studies
have shown that PAK1 and PAK4 are upregulated and/or hyperactivated in
pancreatic cancer, and promotes pancreatic cancer cell motility and
invasion. In our study, we showed that knockdown of PAK3, but not that of
PAK1 or PAK2, inhibited pancreatic cancer cell proliferation in vitro,
and tumor growth in vivo. In addition, our data showed that PAK3
regulated the protein stability of β-catenin via Akt/GSK-3β signaling
pathway in pancreatic cancer cells. The role of PAK3 in regulating
Akt/GSK-3β phosphorylation was further confirmed by the ectopic
expression of wild-type versus kinase-dead (K297L) PAK3. Equally
important, the mammosphere formation, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity and cancer stem cell-associated markers, were also
down-regulated in PAK3 knockdown cells, suggesting the involvement of
PAK3 in regulating cancer stem cell-like properties in pancreatic cancer
cells. Together, these findings suggested that PAK3 as a primary
regulator of Akt/GSK-3β/β-catenin signaling for maintaining cancer stem
cell phenotypes and promoting tumor growth, which underlies the potential
of targeting PAK3 in fostering new therapeutic strategies for pancreatic
cancer.


