Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EPHA2-targeted therapy enhances the cytotoxicity of
eicosapentaenoic acid against triple-negative inflammatory breast cancer.


Background: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive form
of breast cancer. We have previously reported that mediators of
inflammation, such as COX-2, promote the growth of Triple-Negative
receptor (TN) IBC xenografts; therefore, inflammation in TN-IBC has a
unique opportunity as a therapeutic strategy. Eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA), a non-toxic omega-3 fatty acid with anti-inflammatory properties,
has partially reduced tumor growth in pre-clinical models of TN-IBC.
Therefore, our goal is to develop a novel non-toxic approach that
enhances EPA efficacy against TN-IBC in combination with targeted therapy.

Methods and Results: Using a high-throughput, siRNA screen (939 genes) in
the TN-IBC cell line SUM149PT, we identified Ephrin type-A receptor 2
(EPHA2), an oncogenic cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase, as a target
that modulates the sensitivity of TN-IBC cells to EPA treatment. To
determine the clinical relevance of EPHA2, we interrogated a
meta-analysis of breast cancer mRNA expression data sets, and found that
high EPHA2 tumor expression was significantly correlated with poor
overall survival in TN-IBC patients, compared to low EPHA2 expressing
tumors (P = 0.01). We observed no significant correlations to other
breast cancer subtypes. Similar findings were observed in vitro were
EPHA2 expression predominantly occurred in the TN-IBC subtypes (19 of 30)
among 49 breast cancer cell lines. Gain/loss-of-expression studies were
performed to functionally validate EPHA2 as a synergistic combinational
target with EPA in two EPHA2-expressing TN-IBC models, SUM149PT and
BCX010, using proliferation and apoptosis assays in vitro and established
tumor xenografts in vivo. EPHA2 gene silencing significantly reduced cell
growth and induced apoptosis in combination with EPA when compared with
untreated control and monotherapy in vitro (P Methods and Results: Using
a high-throughput, siRNA screen (939 genes) in the TN-IBC cell line
SUM149PT, we identified Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EPHA2), an oncogenic
cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase, as a target that modulates the
sensitivity of TN-IBC cells to EPA treatment. To determine the clinical
relevance of EPHA2, we interrogated a meta-analysis of breast cancer mRNA
expression data sets, and found that high EPHA2 tumor expression was
significantly correlated with poor overall survival in TN-IBC patients,
compared to low EPHA2 expressing tumors (P = 0.01). We observed no
significant correlations to other breast cancer subtypes. Similar
findings were observed in vitro were EPHA2 expression predominantly
occurred in the TN-IBC subtypes (19 of 30) among 49 breast cancer cell
lines. Gain/loss-of-expression studies were performed to functionally
validate EPHA2 as a synergistic combinational target with EPA in two
EPHA2-expressing TN-IBC models, SUM149PT and BCX010, using proliferation
and apoptosis assays in vitro and established tumor xenografts in vivo.
EPHA2 gene silencing significantly reduced cell growth and induced
apoptosis in combination with EPA when compared with untreated control
and monotherapy in vitro (P < 0.05) and in vivo (P Methods and Results:
Using a high-throughput, siRNA screen (939 genes) in the TN-IBC cell line
SUM149PT, we identified Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EPHA2), an oncogenic
cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase, as a target that modulates the
sensitivity of TN-IBC cells to EPA treatment. To determine the clinical
relevance of EPHA2, we interrogated a meta-analysis of breast cancer mRNA
expression data sets, and found that high EPHA2 tumor expression was
significantly correlated with poor overall survival in TN-IBC patients,
compared to low EPHA2 expressing tumors (P = 0.01). We observed no
significant correlations to other breast cancer subtypes. Similar
findings were observed in vitro were EPHA2 expression predominantly
occurred in the TN-IBC subtypes (19 of 30) among 49 breast cancer cell
lines. Gain/loss-of-expression studies were performed to functionally
validate EPHA2 as a synergistic combinational target with EPA in two
EPHA2-expressing TN-IBC models, SUM149PT and BCX010, using proliferation
and apoptosis assays in vitro and established tumor xenografts in vivo.
EPHA2 gene silencing significantly reduced cell growth and induced
apoptosis in combination with EPA when compared with untreated control
and monotherapy in vitro (P < 0.05) and in vivo (P < 0.001), while
vector-induced EPHA2 expression reversed cell growth reduction and
apoptosis induction following combination treatment with EPA in vitro (P
Methods and Results: Using a high-throughput, siRNA screen (939 genes) in
the TN-IBC cell line SUM149PT, we identified Ephrin type-A receptor 2
(EPHA2), an oncogenic cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase, as a target
that modulates the sensitivity of TN-IBC cells to EPA treatment. To
determine the clinical relevance of EPHA2, we interrogated a
meta-analysis of breast cancer mRNA expression data sets, and found that
high EPHA2 tumor expression was significantly correlated with poor
overall survival in TN-IBC patients, compared to low EPHA2 expressing
tumors (P = 0.01). We observed no significant correlations to other
breast cancer subtypes. Similar findings were observed in vitro were
EPHA2 expression predominantly occurred in the TN-IBC subtypes (19 of 30)
among 49 breast cancer cell lines. Gain/loss-of-expression studies were
performed to functionally validate EPHA2 as a synergistic combinational
target with EPA in two EPHA2-expressing TN-IBC models, SUM149PT and
BCX010, using proliferation and apoptosis assays in vitro and established
tumor xenografts in vivo. EPHA2 gene silencing significantly reduced cell
growth and induced apoptosis in combination with EPA when compared with
untreated control and monotherapy in vitro (P < 0.05) and in vivo (P <
0.001), while vector-induced EPHA2 expression reversed cell growth
reduction and apoptosis induction following combination treatment with
EPA in vitro (P < 0.05). To translate our findings to the clinic, we
validated that dasatinib, a small molecule inhibitor of EPHA2, in
combination with EPA significantly enhanced cell death of SUM149PT and
BCX010 cells in vitro when compared to non-treated and monotherapy (P
Methods and Results: Using a high-throughput, siRNA screen (939 genes) in
the TN-IBC cell line SUM149PT, we identified Ephrin type-A receptor 2
(EPHA2), an oncogenic cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase, as a target
that modulates the sensitivity of TN-IBC cells to EPA treatment. To
determine the clinical relevance of EPHA2, we interrogated a
meta-analysis of breast cancer mRNA expression data sets, and found that
high EPHA2 tumor expression was significantly correlated with poor
overall survival in TN-IBC patients, compared to low EPHA2 expressing
tumors (P = 0.01). We observed no significant correlations to other
breast cancer subtypes. Similar findings were observed in vitro were
EPHA2 expression predominantly occurred in the TN-IBC subtypes (19 of 30)
among 49 breast cancer cell lines. Gain/loss-of-expression studies were
performed to functionally validate EPHA2 as a synergistic combinational
target with EPA in two EPHA2-expressing TN-IBC models, SUM149PT and
BCX010, using proliferation and apoptosis assays in vitro and established
tumor xenografts in vivo. EPHA2 gene silencing significantly reduced cell
growth and induced apoptosis in combination with EPA when compared with
untreated control and monotherapy in vitro (P < 0.05) and in vivo (P <
0.001), while vector-induced EPHA2 expression reversed cell growth
reduction and apoptosis induction following combination treatment with
EPA in vitro (P < 0.05). To translate our findings to the clinic, we
validated that dasatinib, a small molecule inhibitor of EPHA2, in
combination with EPA significantly enhanced cell death of SUM149PT and
BCX010 cells in vitro when compared to non-treated and monotherapy (P <
0.05). Finally, using membrane fluidity assessment and reverse-phase
protein array (300 antibodies), we determined that combination treatment
efficacy depended on EPA/EPHA2 inhibition-mediated increase in cell
membrane rigidity (P Methods and Results: Using a high-throughput, siRNA
screen (939 genes) in the TN-IBC cell line SUM149PT, we identified Ephrin
type-A receptor 2 (EPHA2), an oncogenic cell-surface receptor tyrosine
kinase, as a target that modulates the sensitivity of TN-IBC cells to EPA
treatment. To determine the clinical relevance of EPHA2, we interrogated
a meta-analysis of breast cancer mRNA expression data sets, and found
that high EPHA2 tumor expression was significantly correlated with poor
overall survival in TN-IBC patients, compared to low EPHA2 expressing
tumors (P = 0.01). We observed no significant correlations to other
breast cancer subtypes. Similar findings were observed in vitro were
EPHA2 expression predominantly occurred in the TN-IBC subtypes (19 of 30)
among 49 breast cancer cell lines. Gain/loss-of-expression studies were
performed to functionally validate EPHA2 as a synergistic combinational
target with EPA in two EPHA2-expressing TN-IBC models, SUM149PT and
BCX010, using proliferation and apoptosis assays in vitro and established
tumor xenografts in vivo. EPHA2 gene silencing significantly reduced cell
growth and induced apoptosis in combination with EPA when compared with
untreated control and monotherapy in vitro (P < 0.05) and in vivo (P <
0.001), while vector-induced EPHA2 expression reversed cell growth
reduction and apoptosis induction following combination treatment with
EPA in vitro (P < 0.05). To translate our findings to the clinic, we
validated that dasatinib, a small molecule inhibitor of EPHA2, in
combination with EPA significantly enhanced cell death of SUM149PT and
BCX010 cells in vitro when compared to non-treated and monotherapy (P <
0.05). Finally, using membrane fluidity assessment and reverse-phase
protein array (300 antibodies), we determined that combination treatment
efficacy depended on EPA/EPHA2 inhibition-mediated increase in cell
membrane rigidity (P < 0.001, compared to monotherapy), which
subsequently inhibited receptor tyrosine kinase signaling activity,
potentially resulting in induction of apoptosis.

Conclusions: Our preclinical findings provide a rationale for the
development of a phase 1 clinical trial investigating combination EPA and
EPHA2-inhibitors in patients with EPHA2-positive TN-IBC.


