Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lung cancer risk and scarring on imaging and histology in the
National Lung Screening Trial.


Background: The contribution of pulmonary scars to lung cancer
development and the degree to which lung cancers cause a scarring
response are unclear. Also unknown is how lung scarring impacts lung
cancer screening.

Methods: We evaluated associations between scarring and lung cancer in
the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), a lung cancer screening trial
among current or former, heavy smokers, 55-74 years-old. Baseline
scarring (presence vs. absence) on screening low dose computed tomography
(LDCT) scan was assessed at baseline (T0). Associations of T0 scarring
with screen-detected lung cancers and with interval-detected lung cancers
missed on screening within 3 years of T0 screen were analyzed using
multinomial logistic regression. Cox proportional hazards models were
used to analyze the relationship between T0 scarring and incident lung
cancers diagnosed >3 years after T0. Regression models included age, sex,
race, smoking history, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, history of
pneumonia, and family history of lung cancer. A thoracic pathologist
(first author) evaluated lung cancer pathology slides from the Lung
Screening Study (LSS) subset of NLST for scar grade (none, sparse, dense)
and maturity (none, immature, intermediate, mature). Associations between
T0 scarring on LDCT and histological scarring were examined by logistic
regression.

Results: NLSTâ€™s LDCT arm enrolled 26,722 participants (65% from the
LSS). T0 scars were present in 132 (22%) screen-detected, 12 (29%)
interval-detected, and 94 (26%) incident lung cancer cases. T0 scarring
did not increase or decrease screen-detection of cancers [odds ratio (OR)
95% CI: 1.03 (0.84-1.26)]. However, scarring might increase the chance of
an interval-detected cancer [OR (95% CI): 1.54 (0.76-3.12)]. After
screening stopped, T0 scarring was associated with increased incident
lung cancer risk [hazard ratio (HR) (95% CI): 1.27 (1.00-1.62); P=0.048].
Pathology slides were available for 258 (38%) lung cancers in LSS. Lung
scarring was found in 172 (67%) of these cancers with 58 (22%) being
characterized as mature scars. On microscopic review, scars were found in
80 (66%) ADC, 46 (82%) squamous cell carcinomas, and 20 (51%)
bronchioloalveolar carcinomas. Microscopic scarring tended to be more
frequent among cases with T0 scarring than those without T0 scarring (75%
vs. 64%; P=0.10) [OR (95% CI): 1.89 (0.98-3.86)].

Conclusion: The association between T0 scarring and incident lung cancer
over a period of more than 3 years is consistent with an etiologic
contribution of scarring to development of lung cancer. The relationship
between T0 scarring and scarring on microscopic evaluation suggests that
scarring preceded the cancer, further supporting an etiologic
relationship. Finally, the borderline association of T0 scarring and
interval cancers suggests that scarring may decrease the sensitivity of
screening.


