Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic action of sorafenib and carfilzomib against
hepatocellular carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.


Background: Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, is currently the only
approved systemic drug for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but
has demonstrated limited survival benefits for patients. Carfilzomib
(CFZ) is a second-generation proteasome inhibitor approved for the
treatment of multiple myeloma. In this study, we aim to investigate the
synergistic antitumor effect of the combined treatment of sorafenib and
CFZ in hepatocellular carcinoma and the underlying molecular mechanisms.

Methods: Hep3B and Bel-7402 HCC cell lines were treated with sorafenib
and/or CFZ at clinically relevant concentrations, after which effects on
cell viability and proliferation were analyzed using MTS method; cell
migration and invasion were evaluated in transwell assay; cell apoptosis
were monitored by flow cytometry. Western blot assay was used to
investigate the potential molecular mechanism of the synergistic
antitumor effect of the combined treatment. In vivo efficacy was
determined in nude mice with Hep3B xenografts.

Results: MTS results showed that CFZ could improve the drug sensitivities
of sorafenib in Hep3B and Bel-7402 cells when combined these two drugs
together. Moreover, cell proliferation was more significantly suppressed
in combinational treatment compared to single agent (p Results: MTS
results showed that CFZ could improve the drug sensitivities of sorafenib
in Hep3B and Bel-7402 cells when combined these two drugs together.
Moreover, cell proliferation was more significantly suppressed in
combinational treatment compared to single agent (p < 0.01) in the two
tested cell lines. The colony formation assay showed similar results with
the MTS assay. The results from flow cytometry showed that sorafenib or
CFZ alone induced about 11% apoptotic cells in Hep3B, when administered
in combination the percentage of apoptotic cells significantly increased
to about 20.78% (p Results: MTS results showed that CFZ could improve the
drug sensitivities of sorafenib in Hep3B and Bel-7402 cells when combined
these two drugs together. Moreover, cell proliferation was more
significantly suppressed in combinational treatment compared to single
agent (p < 0.01) in the two tested cell lines. The colony formation assay
showed similar results with the MTS assay. The results from flow
cytometry showed that sorafenib or CFZ alone induced about 11% apoptotic
cells in Hep3B, when administered in combination the percentage of
apoptotic cells significantly increased to about 20.78% (p < 0.01).
Similar results were observed in Bel-7402. Results of transwell assay
demonstrated that cell migration and invasion ability were inhibited when
treated with sorafenib or CFZ alone; and cells treated with the
combinational therapy migrated and invaded even less (p Results: MTS
results showed that CFZ could improve the drug sensitivities of sorafenib
in Hep3B and Bel-7402 cells when combined these two drugs together.
Moreover, cell proliferation was more significantly suppressed in
combinational treatment compared to single agent (p < 0.01) in the two
tested cell lines. The colony formation assay showed similar results with
the MTS assay. The results from flow cytometry showed that sorafenib or
CFZ alone induced about 11% apoptotic cells in Hep3B, when administered
in combination the percentage of apoptotic cells significantly increased
to about 20.78% (p < 0.01). Similar results were observed in Bel-7402.
Results of transwell assay demonstrated that cell migration and invasion
ability were inhibited when treated with sorafenib or CFZ alone; and
cells treated with the combinational therapy migrated and invaded even
less (p < 0.05). The in vivo xenograft tumor model showed that treatment
with sorafenib or CFZ inhibited Hep3B tumor growth (p Results: MTS
results showed that CFZ could improve the drug sensitivities of sorafenib
in Hep3B and Bel-7402 cells when combined these two drugs together.
Moreover, cell proliferation was more significantly suppressed in
combinational treatment compared to single agent (p < 0.01) in the two
tested cell lines. The colony formation assay showed similar results with
the MTS assay. The results from flow cytometry showed that sorafenib or
CFZ alone induced about 11% apoptotic cells in Hep3B, when administered
in combination the percentage of apoptotic cells significantly increased
to about 20.78% (p < 0.01). Similar results were observed in Bel-7402.
Results of transwell assay demonstrated that cell migration and invasion
ability were inhibited when treated with sorafenib or CFZ alone; and
cells treated with the combinational therapy migrated and invaded even
less (p < 0.05). The in vivo xenograft tumor model showed that treatment
with sorafenib or CFZ inhibited Hep3B tumor growth (p < 0.05); moreover,
treatment with the combination more significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p Results: MTS results showed that CFZ could improve the drug
sensitivities of sorafenib in Hep3B and Bel-7402 cells when combined
these two drugs together. Moreover, cell proliferation was more
significantly suppressed in combinational treatment compared to single
agent (p < 0.01) in the two tested cell lines. The colony formation assay
showed similar results with the MTS assay. The results from flow
cytometry showed that sorafenib or CFZ alone induced about 11% apoptotic
cells in Hep3B, when administered in combination the percentage of
apoptotic cells significantly increased to about 20.78% (p < 0.01).
Similar results were observed in Bel-7402. Results of transwell assay
demonstrated that cell migration and invasion ability were inhibited when
treated with sorafenib or CFZ alone; and cells treated with the
combinational therapy migrated and invaded even less (p < 0.05). The in
vivo xenograft tumor model showed that treatment with sorafenib or CFZ
inhibited Hep3B tumor growth (p < 0.05); moreover, treatment with the
combination more significantly inhibited tumor growth (p < 0.01).
Mechanistically, combined treatment of the two drugs suppressed the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition process by increasing E-cadherin and
decreasing N-cadherin and β-catenin. Furthermore, the drug combination
activated the mitochondria-related apoptosis pathway, showing
up-regulation of cleaved caspase 3/7/9. Up-regulations of
PERK/eIF2α/ATF4/CHOP pathway implicated the involvement of ER
stress-mediated apoptotic pathway following the drug combination
treatment.

Conclusion: In conclusion, these findings suggest that the combination of
sorafenib and CFZ shows synergistic antitumor activities in HCC,
potentially providing a novel therapeutic strategy for patients with
advanced hepatocellular carcinoma.


