Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of dual function small molecules as therapeutic agents
for cancer treatment.


Inhibitors of histone deactylases (HDACs) are emerging as potent
anti-cancer agents for treatment of patients with hematopoietic and solid
tumors. However, most of these compounds exhibit limitations, including
off-targets and toxicity. To improve the efficacy and target specificity
of drugs, we developed the compound, SP-1-161 conferring HDAC inhibition
activity and ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activation. The purpose
of this study is to develop a therapy that optimizes the protective
effects of ATM activation in normal tissue with the sensitizing effects
of HDAC inhibition in cancerous tissue into a single molecule. The
compound SP-1-161 was rationally designed by optimizing ATM activation by
the cap domain of a hydroximic acid, screened against a panel of Class I
and Class II HDAC enzymes, and identified as a pan-HDAC inhibitor with
nanomolar potency (IC50 = 8 nM). Western analysis confirms that SP-1-161
increases acetylated histone H3/H4 and Î±-tubulin and ATM activation in
MCF7 cells. Phosphorylated ATM was gradually increased within 1 - 4 hrs
in a time-dependent manner. SP-1-161 was then tested in normal breast
epithelial (184A1) and breast cancer (MCF7) cell lines to determine its
cytotoxicity and effect on radiation clonogenic survival in combination
with graded radiation exposure. The data showed that the cytotoxicity
values (IC50) were low micro-molar ranges. Furthermore, SP-1-161
protected 184A1 cells (from D0 = 1 Gy to D0 = 1.4 Gy) while increasing
sensitivity of MCF7 cells to IR (from D0=1.6 Gy to D0=1.12 Gy). Together,
our results demonstrate that SP-1-161 is an unprecedented radio-chemo
therapeutic agent for treatment of cancers while protecting normal cells.


