Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic analysis of melanoma evolution following a 30 year
disease-free interval.


The rate of ultra-late recurrence (beyond 10-15 years) of cutaneous
melanoma has been estimated to be between 2.0-6.9% from large case
series. Two major factors complicate the interpretation of these data.
Firstly, the risk of second primary melanoma is approximately 5% creating
uncertainty about whether at least some of these late onset tumors might
be independent of the original lesion. Secondly, in the majority of
cases, the original pathology specimen is no longer available for
comparative analysis. Accordingly, putative late recurrences are
difficult to unambiguously distinguish from a new primary melanoma. We
identified a patient with a second melanoma diagnosed after a 30 year
disease-free interval, and sought to determine if this new lesion was a
recurrence of the original melanoma. We report the genomic sequence
analysis of the exomes of two melanoma lesions isolated from the same
individual in 1985 and 2015, and their comparison to each other and to
the germline DNA of the patient. Identification of many shared somatic
mutations between these lesions prove a lineal relationship spanning 30
years. Unlike prior reports of ultra-late melanoma recurrence, the
availability of the original tumor and the use of comprehensive genomic
analysis allowed us to confirm that the second lesion is truly a
recurrence. We demonstrate the acquisition of numerous additional
mutations during the three decade asymptomatic period. This is, to our
knowledge, the longest disease-free interval that has been rigorously
confirmed in melanoma or any other solid tumor type. These data highlight
the low but very long-lasting risk of recurrence in this patient
population.


