Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of NMS-E194, a selective and potent PERK
inhibitor with efficacy in the KMS-11 multiple myeloma.


PERK (PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase) is a serine-threonine kinase
associated to endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Together with ATF6 and
IRE1, PERK is a key effector of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR), a
network of signaling pathways that ensures protein homeostasis in the
endoplasmic reticulum. Multiple Myeloma (MM) and other protein-secreting
tumors are highly dependent on UPR for survival, and inhibition of PERK
may be an effective strategy to inhibit growth of these tumors. Here we
describe the in vitro and in vivo properties of NMS-E194, a novel potent
and selective ATP-competitive PERK inhibitor belonging to the
arylsulfonamide chemical class. NMS-E194 inhibits PERK kinase with a Ki
of ca 1.5 nM in biochemical assay and possesses high selectivity towards
a panel of 54 kinases. When tested in cell proliferation assays, NMS-E194
is preferentially active on multiple myeloma (MM) and diffuse large B
cell lymphoma cell lines. In mechanism of action studies, NMS-E194 shows
a bi-phasic behaviour: at low nanomolar doses it activates PERK, causing
ATF4 accumulation, while at >200 nM it inhibits PERK and downstream
pathway, inducing apoptosis. NMS-E194 possesses a favourable in vitro
ADME profile and has promising PK properties in the mouse. NMS-E194
demonstrated strong anti-tumor activity following oral administration at
25 mg/kg daily to mice harbouring luciferized KMS-11 cells in a
disseminated growth model of MM, with no overt toxicity. Overall, the
data available so far warrant further development of NMS-E194 and support
PERK inhibition as a novel therapeutic approach in MM and other
PERK-dependent tumors.


