Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 methyltransferase regulates disseminating tumor cells in
breast cancer metastasis.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC, ER-, PR-, HER2-) exhibits the worst
outcome due to higher rates of metastasis compared to non TNBC subtypes.
Despite this clinical significance, there is a conspicuous lack of FDA
approved molecularly targeted anti-metastatic therapies for TNBC. The
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a catalytic core subunit of the
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) with histone methyltransferase (HMT)
activity is associated with the worst clinical outcome in breast cancer
patients. Using a combination of genetic and pharmacological approaches,
we show that EZH2 HMT blockade did not impact primary tumor growth, but
significantly reduced distal metastases. Metastasis suppression was
associated with a marked reduction of tumor-initiating cells (TICs) in
primary tumor, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in the blood and impaired
lung colonization. Using a SOX2/OCT4 promoter reporter system, we
identified EZH2-sensitive metastatic cells with GATA3 low luminal
progenitor phenotypes in the primary tumor, and EZH2 HMT blockade
restored GATA3 expression, promoted differentiation of luminal
progenitors and impaired metastasis. These key preliminary findings have
led to the hypothesis that EZH2 promotes metastasis, and that inhibition
of EZH2 HMT may constitute a viable anti-metastatic approach. We will
also discuss the potential of EZH2 inhibition in combination with
chemotherapy as an effective strategy against TNBC metastasis.


