Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time trending for the ratio of rural and urban patients with
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in a single institute in northern
China over the past 30 years.


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has been well characterized as
a major histological type in China and occurred predominantly in the
mountain rural region with poor economics. Nutritional deficiencies have
been recognized as major risk for esophageal carcinogenesis in these
rural regions. In the past decades, the rural economic status in China
has improved apparently. However, the time trending for ESCC in rural
regions has not been characterized. The present study was thus undertaken
to determine the time trending for the ratio of rural and urban patients
with ESCC in a single institute in northern China over the past 30 years
(1985-2014). All the 66,515 ESCC patients in this study were derived from
the esophageal and gastric cardia carcinoma databases of 500 thousands
patients (1973-2015) established by Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal
Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
in Henan, China. Of the ESCC patients, 50,313 patients had been recorded
with detailed address. Based on the diagnosed time, these patients were
divided into three groups with periods of 1985-1994, 1995-2004 and
2005-2014. The rural and urban regions were recognized based on the
government administrative division of China. The rural region in China
refers to the farmer village with hundreds to thousands population.
Chi-Square test was used to analyze the different distributions of ESCC
patients with a p-value of less than 0.05 as significant. The results
demonstrated that more than 84% of the ESCC patients occurred in rural
regions with an overall ratio of 5:1 for rural and urban regions (p
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has been well characterized as
a major histological type in China and occurred predominantly in the
mountain rural region with poor economics. Nutritional deficiencies have
been recognized as major risk for esophageal carcinogenesis in these
rural regions. In the past decades, the rural economic status in China
has improved apparently. However, the time trending for ESCC in rural
regions has not been characterized. The present study was thus undertaken
to determine the time trending for the ratio of rural and urban patients
with ESCC in a single institute in northern China over the past 30 years
(1985-2014). All the 66,515 ESCC patients in this study were derived from
the esophageal and gastric cardia carcinoma databases of 500 thousands
patients (1973-2015) established by Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal
Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
in Henan, China. Of the ESCC patients, 50,313 patients had been recorded
with detailed address. Based on the diagnosed time, these patients were
divided into three groups with periods of 1985-1994, 1995-2004 and
2005-2014. The rural and urban regions were recognized based on the
government administrative division of China. The rural region in China
refers to the farmer village with hundreds to thousands population.
Chi-Square test was used to analyze the different distributions of ESCC
patients with a p-value of less than 0.05 as significant. The results
demonstrated that more than 84% of the ESCC patients occurred in rural
regions with an overall ratio of 5:1 for rural and urban regions (p <
0.0001). Moreover, over the past 30 years with three periods, the ratios
for rural and urban regions were 5.4:1, 5.5:1 and 5.4:1, respectively.
The present results also demonstrated that over the past 30 years with
three periods, ESCC occurred predominantly in males with ratios for male
and female as 1.5:1, 1.4:1 and 1.5:1, respectively in rural regions and
1.6:1, 1.6:1 and 1.8:1, respectively in urban regions. Interestingly, the
mean age both in male and female in urban regions was slightly older than
that in rural regions (urban vs. rural: 60.7±9.86 vs. 59.8±9.38 in male
and 62.2±9.57 vs. 60.6±9.47 in female, respectively). The present study
demonstrated that ESCC remains the major healthy burden in rural regions
in China. Considering the relative low socioeconomic status in China, the
prevention and control of ESCC should be enhanced in rural regions in
terms of more control programs, medical and education resources.
[Supported by National High-Tech Research and Development Program of
China (SQ2015AA0202183), Project for Characteristic and Advantage
Discipline of Henan Province (20151208)]


