Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-density array-CGH with targeted NGS unmask multiple
non-contiguous minute deletions on chromosome 3p21 in mesothelioma.


We used a custom-made comparative genomic hybridization-array (aCGH;
average probe interval 254 bp) to screen 33 malignant mesothelioma (MM)
biopsies for somatic copy number loss throughout the 3p21 region (10.7
Mb) that harbors 251 genes, including BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1),
the most commonly mutated gene in MM. We identified frequent minute
biallelic deletions (We used a custom-made comparative genomic
hybridization-array (aCGH; average probe interval 254 bp) to screen 33
malignant mesothelioma (MM) biopsies for somatic copy number loss
throughout the 3p21 region (10.7 Mb) that harbors 251 genes, including
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1), the most commonly mutated gene in MM.
We identified frequent minute biallelic deletions (<3 Kb) in 46/251
genes: four were cancer associated genes: SETD2 (7/33), BAP1 (8/33),
PBRM1 (3/33) and SMARCC1 (2/33). These four genes were further
investigated by targeted Next Generation Sequencing (tNGS), which
revealed sequence-level mutations causing biallelic inactivation.
Combined high-density aCGH and tNGS revealed biallelic gene inactivation
in SETD2 (9/33, 27%), BAP1 (16/33, 48%), PBRM1 (5/33, 15%) and SMARCC1
(2/33, 6%). The incidence of genetic alterations detected is much higher
than reported in the literature because minute deletions are not detected
by NGS or commercial aCGH. Many of these minute deletions were not
contiguous but rather they alternated with segments showing oscillating
copy number changes along the 3p21 region. Functional assays revealed
that SETD2, PBRM1 and SMARCC1 act as tumor suppressor in MM. In summary,
we found that in MM: 1) multiple minute simultaneous biallelic deletions
are frequent in chromosome 3p21, where they occur as distinct events
involving multiple genes; 2) in addition to BAP1, mutations of SETD2,
PBRM1 and SMARCC1 are frequent in MM; 3) our results suggest that
high-density aCGH combined with tNGS provide a more precise estimate of
the frequency and types of genes inactivated in human cancer, than
approaches based exclusively on NGS strategy.


