Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pappalysin-1 is a suitable target for T cell receptor transgenic T
cells to kill Ewing sarcoma in vivo and in vitro.


Pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPPA), also known as pappalysin,
is a member of the insulin like growth factor (IGF) family. PAPPA acts as
a protease, cleaving IGF inhibitors, i.e. IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs),
thereby releasing IGFs from IGFBPs. The insulin/IGF-axis is involved in
cancer in general and in Ewing sarcoma (ES) in particular. ES is a highly
malignant bone tumor characterized by early metastatic spread. PAPPA
stimulates normal bone growth, and is also associated with various
cancers. In particular, PAPPA is overexpressed and required for
proliferation in ES. We isolated HLA-A*02:01+/peptide restricted T cells
from A*02:01- healthy donors directed against PAPPA, generated by priming
with A*02:01+ PAPPA peptide-loaded dendritic cells. After T cell receptor
(TCR) identification, retrovirally TCR transduced CD8+ T cells were
assessed for their in vitro specificity and in vivo efficacy in human ES
bearing Rag2-/-γc-/- mice. Engraftment in mice and tumor infiltration of
TCR transgenic T cells in the mice was evaluated. The TCR transgenic T
cell clone PAPPA-2G6 demonstrated specific reactivity towards
HLA-A*02:01+/PAPPA+ ES cell lines. We furthermore detected circulating
TCR transgenic T cells in the blood in Rag2-/-γc-/- mice and in vivo
engraftment of the in bone marrow. Tumor growth in mice with xenografted
ES was significantly reduced after treatment with PAPPA-2G6 TCR
transgenic T cells compared to controls, and tumors from treated mice
revealed tumor infiltrating PAPPA-2G6 TCR transgenic T cells. In summary,
we demonstrate that PAPPA is a promising target for TCR based
immunotherapy of ES. We demonstrate that TCR transgenic T cells recognize
this target, home to the tumor, and causes tumor regression in a
preclinical mouse model.


