Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-dose versus low-dose fractionated ionizing radiation to
enhance antigen-specific antitumor immunity.


Ionizing radiation (IR) has variable effects on the solid tumor immune
microenvironment. While many report additive or synergistic effects
between IR and immune activating therapies, most studies utilize single
fractions or hypofractionated high-dose radiation of 8 Gy or greater. For
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), 30 or more low-dose
fractions of 1.8-2Gy are utilized as standard-of-care for the up-front
treatment of early stage or advanced disease. Preliminary experiments
from our laboratory have demonstrated that 10 fractions of 2Gy IR
decreased the rate of rejection of T-cell inflamed syngeneic carcinomas
in wild-type B6 mice when combined with cyclic dinucleotide (CDN)
compared to CDN treatment alone (10% rejection rate with low-dose
fractionated IR plus CDN vs. 50% with CDN alone). Immune suppression
following IR in mice is mediated by at least galectin-1. Further, HNSCC
patients treated with standard fractionated low-dose IR develop durable
neutropenia. Thus, we hypothesized that low-dose fractionated IR is
immunosuppressive and does not result in additive or synergistic effects
when combined with cyclic dinucleotide. To test this hypothesis, we
performed a time-course analysis of tumor immune infiltration and
tumor-draining lymph node antigen-specific T-lymphocyte activation in
three syngeneic models of carcinoma with defined tumor rejection antigens
(MOC1-p15E, B16-OVA and MC38-CEA) following exposure to two different IR
regimens of 8Gy x 2 fractions or 2Gy x 10 fractions. Analysis of effector
immune infiltration and antigen-specific activation pre-IR and at 5, 10,
and 20 days post-IR revealed consistent trends of profound
immunosuppression with the low-dose fractionated IR regimen (2Gy x 10)
but preserved or enhanced immune activation with the high-dose
hypofractionated regimen (8Gy x 2). Galectin-1 levels will be measured
from whole tumor lysates. We plan to perform nano-string RNA array
analysis on irradiated tissues to serve as correlative immune analysis
and also to validate this technology against well-defined immune
read-outs for potential use in the clinical trial setting. We also plan
to combine both IR regimens with intra-lesional CDN (20 Î¼g x 3
injections) to determine if either IR regimen results in additive or
synergistic tumor control. This work has profound implications for future
pre-clinical studies and clinical trials combining IR and immune
activating therapies, such as CDN or checkpoint inhibitors.


