Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EpCAM/EpEX regulate tumor progression through EGFR signaling in
colon cancer cells.


Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is highly expressed in advanced
epithelial cancers and tumor-initiated cells (TICs), but its roles in
cancer progression remain to be elucidated. Here, we showed that the
extracellular domain of EpCAM (EpEX) could bind to EGFR through EGF-like
domain I, and subsequently activated its downstream molecules, ERK1/2 and
Akt. EGFR inhibitor and knockdown of EGFR by shRNA ablated EpEX-induced
ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) of
EpCAM was induced similarly by EpEX and EGF through EGFR-dependent
activation of ERK pathway. MEK inhibitor, U0126, could abolish ADAM17 and
PS2 phosphorylation induced by EpEX. EpAb2-6, an anti-EpEX neutralizing
monoclonal antibody, inhibits EpEX-activated EGFR-PI3K-AKT pathway in
detached colon cancer cells. Moreover, intracellular domain of EpCAM
(EpICD), the product of RIP-induced cleavage of EpCAM, is necessary for
nuclear accumulation of Î²-catenin, and their target gene expressions in
vitro and in mouse xenograft models. We also found that an increase of
nuclear EpICD observed in CRCs predicted metastasis and poor prognosis in
CRC patients. Finally, in animal model studies, EpAb2-6 therapy exhibited
an enhanced antitumor effect and markedly extended the survival time of
mice with human colorectal cancer in metastatic and orthotopic models.
These results demonstrate that EpEX works as a growth factor in
activating EGFR-mediated signaling, and as a potential target for
treatment of colon cancer. This research was supported by grants from
Academia Sinica and Ministry of Science and Technology [MOST
104-0210-01-09-02,MOST 105-0210-01-13-01], and the National Science
Council (NSC103-2321-B-001-064), Taiwan (to H-C Wu).


