Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dihydroartemisinin oxime dimer (NSC735847) displays a
selective toxicity in colon cancer cells which is potentially mediated by
endoplasmic reticulum stress.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the United States. Common chemotherapeutic regimens for CRC
include a combination of chemotherapeutic agents to produce synergistic
drug activity and reduce adverse effects. However, adverse effects due to
lack of selective toxicity is still a major problem with many
chemotherapeutic agents. Novel drugs that display tumor selective
toxicity are desperately needed. Several studies have shown that
artemisinin monomers (Clinically used anti-malarial agent) possess
antineoplastic activity with minimal toxicity. Interestingly, artemisinin
dimers showed more potent antineoplastic activity compared to the
monomers. However, few studies have fully characterized the activity of
these molecules. In this study, we tested the antitumor activity of five
chemically-synthesized dihydroartemisinin (DHA) dimers using the human
colon cancer cell lines, HT29 and HCT116 and the non-tumorigenic colon
cell line, FHC. Compared to other tested dimers, the DHA oxime dimer,
NSC735847 showed pronounced selective toxicity in HT29 and HCT116 cells.
Using MTS cell viability assays, NSC735847caused a preferential reduction
in the viability of HT29 and HCT116 colon cancer cells compared to the
non-tumorigenic FHC cells. In addition, NSC735847 significantly increased
caspase 3/7 activity in HT29 and HCT116 cells but not in FHC cells which
suggests that this compound causes selective apoptosis in these colon
cancer cell lines. The combination of NSC735847 and the topoisomerase I
inhibitor, irinotecan (commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for
colorectal cancer) showed synergistic antitumor activity in HT29 cells.
The combination of the two drugs caused a significant increase in cell
death and caspase 3/7 activity which were greater than those caused by
the individual drugs. Previous studies using other tumorigenic cell
lines, suggested that NSC735847 induces oxidative and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. To gain insight into the potential mechanisms of
anti-colorectal cancer activity of NSC735847, we tested if this compound
causes ER stress and/ or oxidative stress in HT29 cells and whether ER
stress was required for NSC735847-induced apoptotic cell death. NSC735847
increased the expression of ER stress marker C/EBP homologous protein 10
(CHOP10) in HT29 cells and the use of ER stress inhibitor, salubrinal,
significantly decreased NSC735847-induced cell death and apoptosis.
Additionally, NSC735847 caused oxidative stress in HT29 cells which was
inhibited by pretreatment of the cells with the antioxidant, trolox. The
crosstalk between oxidative stress and ER stress in NSC735847-induced
apoptosis in colon cancer cells is still under investigation. Our results
suggest that NSC735847 causes ER stress in HT29 cells which plays a major
role in drug-induced cell death and apoptosis in these cells.


