Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diminished microRNA-29b results in overexpression of BRD4 and
BRD4-regulated oncogenes in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.


Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a CD4+ T-cell malignancy that affects
the skin but may disseminate systemically, and there are no long-term
effective therapeutic strategies. Here, we characterized the therapeutic
efficacy of manipulating the tumor suppressor microRNA-29b (miR-29b) and
its target bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) in CTCL pathogenesis.
Using primary CD4+ T-cells we determined that miR-29b expression is
significantly decreased in patients compared to healthy controls
(0.007±0.002, n=9 vs 1.008±0.052, n=6, pCutaneous T-cell lymphoma
(CTCL) is a CD4+ T-cell malignancy that affects the skin but may
disseminate systemically, and there are no long-term effective
therapeutic strategies. Here, we characterized the therapeutic efficacy
of manipulating the tumor suppressor microRNA-29b (miR-29b) and its
target bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) in CTCL pathogenesis.
Using primary CD4+ T-cells we determined that miR-29b expression is
significantly decreased in patients compared to healthy controls
(0.007±0.002, n=9 vs 1.008±0.052, n=6, p<0.0001). We utilized
miR-29b-/- mice and bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor known to increase
miR-29b levels, to confirm the inverse relationship between miR-29b and
BRD4 (Mishra, A. et al. Cancer Cell, 2012). Diminished miR-29b level
resulted in increased BRD4 protein expression (1.87±0.29, p=0.014),
while increase in miR-29b, as in bortezomib-treated CTCL cell lines,
results in nearly undetectable BRD4 protein. We also observed increased
genome-wide occupancy of BRD4 at regulatory regions in CTCL patients, an
effect that is reversed with BRD4 inhibitor, JQ1, to similar levels as
observed in healthy control CD4+ T-cells. Specifically, oncogene loci of
NOTCH1 and RBPJ demonstrated enhanced BRD4 binding in CTCL patients, with
resultant increases in mRNA in patient vs normal donors (4.16±0.98,
p=0.024; 3.02±0.54, p=0.012). Further, in vivo treatment of
interleukin-15 (IL-15) transgenic mice (Mishra, A. et al. Cancer
Discovery, 2016) with JQ1 prevented CTCL development and decreased lesion
severity (3.37±0.49, n=8 vs 6.0±0.45, n=5, p=0.004). Skin from
JQ1-treated mice demonstrated decreased protein expression of BRD4,
NOTCH1, and RBPJ, consistent with our findings in patients and CTCL cell
lines. Bortezomib treatment of CTCL mice yielded similar results to JQ1
in vivo, while miR-29b levels were elevated in treated mice vs control
animals. Since IL-15 signals through its receptor complex, we evaluated
and observed increased BRD4 binding at IL-15 receptor αβγ gene loci in
CTCL patients, which was reversed with both JQ1 and bortezomib treatment.
Thus, we conclude that diminished miR-29b results in increased expression
and subsequent binding of BRD4 at regulatory regions of known oncogenes
in CTCL cells including NOTCH1, RBPJ, and the IL-15 receptor complex. We
confirm the potential therapeutic utility of targeting this pathway in
vivo, by direct displacement of BRD4 by JQ1, or by rescue of miR-29b
expression by bortezomib. We therefore describe a novel targetable
oncogenic pathway featuring IL-15, miR-29b, and BRD4 in CTCL.


