Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor microenvironment heterogeneity is not identified across
multiple histologically similar tumors from the same patient.


Introduction: Tumor heterogeneity has been well documented for mutational
analysis in virtually all types of tumors and is accepted as a true
finding. Heterogeneity of the tumor microenvironment (TME) in the context
of response to checkpoint inhibitors has not been well studied; the
belief is that variation will be identified across multiple tumors from
the same patient. The expectation is that multiple tumors from a single
patient would demonstrate extensive TME heterogeneity driven by the
neoplasm.

Methods: We validated and utilized a targeted RNA-seq immune panel of
>350 genes to interrogate the TME of 49 different tumors from 17 unique
patients. These samples for one patient represented primary and
metastatic tumors that were separated by multiple years. Prior to this
study we built a reference database of RNA-seq immune results for this
panel of 167 samples. An in-depth analysis of genes associated with
checkpoint inhibition (CPI) and tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
were the focus of the comparative analysis. Unsupervised analysis and
gene rank by RNA-seq were the primary modes of comparison.

Results: For more than one-half of these patients the different tumors
for a single patient separated by multiple years more closely resembled
the other tumors from that patient than the reference population by
unsupervised clustering. When ranked by LOW, MODERATE, or HIGH expression
of genes associated with TILs or CPI the results for the majority of
patients were highly concordant: LOW TILs / LOW CPI associated gene
expression.

Conclusion: Our results support a paradigm shift in the influence of the
host on TME heterogeneity with evidence that the host and not the
neoplastic cells are the primary determining factor. TME heterogeneity is
not identified across multiple tumors of the same histology collected
from different sites across time points from the same patient. This study
does not evaluate multiple primary tumors from the same patient, but is
an additional study we have planned.





Subject ID

M-Path

T-Path

PMR

Specimen Year

TILs Score

TILs Interpretation

CPI Score

CPI Interpretation



1

Melanoma

Lymph node NOS

Metastatic

2009

45

LOW

13

LOW



1

Melanoma

Subcutaneous tissue NOS

Metastatic

2010

8

LOW

2

LOW



2

Bladder cancer

Urinary bladder NOS

Primary

2012

37

LOW

16

LOW



2

Bladder cancer

Urinary bladder NOS

Primary

2013

10

LOW

11

LOW



2

Bladder cancer

Soft Tissue

Metastatic

2014

14

LOW

23

LOW



3

Melanoma

Brain NOS

Metastatic

2010

58

MODERATE

37

LOW



3

Melanoma

Duodenum NOS

Metastatic

2012

51

MODERATE

41

LOW



4

Melanoma

Soft Tissue NOS

Metastatic

2005

98

HIGH

88

HIGH



4

Melanoma

Soft Tissue NOS

Metastatic

2005

22

LOW

3

LOW



5

Melanoma

Mesentery NOS

Metastatic

2012

45

LOW

35

LOW



5

Melanoma

Peritoneum NOS

Metastatic

2014

87

HIGH

86

HIGH



6

Bladder cancer

Urinary bladder NOS

Primary

2009

5

LOW

4

LOW



6

Bladder cancer

Lung NOS

Metastatic

2012

43

LOW

41

LOW



7

Melanoma

Skin of Trunk NOS

Metastatic

2011

4

LOW

4

LOW



7

Melanoma

Chest wall NOS

Metastatic

2012

2

LOW

1

LOW



7

Melanoma

Soft Tissue

Metastatic

2012

25

LOW

25

LOW



8

Lung adenocarcinoma

Lung right upper lobe of, NOS

Primary

2009

99

HIGH

88

HIGH



8

Lung adenocarcinoma

Lung right upper lobe of, NOS

Primary

2016

88

HIGH

80

HIGH



9

Melanoma

Lymph node NOS

Metastatic

2009

2

LOW

5

LOW



9

Melanoma

Small intestine NOS

Metastatic

2011

0

LOW

1

LOW



10

Melanoma

Skin of Lower Extremity NOS

Metastatic

2012

16

LOW

8

LOW



10

Melanoma

Lymph node NOS

Metastatic

2012

43

LOW

31

LOW



10

Melanoma

Skin of Lower Leg NOS

Metastatic

2013

4

LOW

13

LOW



11

Melanoma

Lung left lower lobe of, NOS

Metastatic

2012

14

LOW

5

LOW



11

Melanoma

Skin of Scalp NOS

Primary

2010

22

LOW

20

LOW



12

Lung adenocarcinoma

Lung NOS

Primary

2010

89

HIGH

77

HIGH



12

Lung adenocarcinoma

Brain NOS

Metastatic

2014

41

LOW

13

LOW



13

Melanoma

Liver NOS

Metastatic

2011

66

MODERATE

51

MODERATE



13

Melanoma

Lymph node NOS

Metastatic

2011

47

LOW

13

LOW



14

Renal cell carcinoma

Lung right lower lobe of, NOS

Metastatic

2013

95

HIGH

87

HIGH



14

Renal cell carcinoma

Adrenal gland NOS

Metastatic

2014

65

MODERATE

71

MODERATE



15

Lung adenocarcinoma

Lung right middle lobe of, NOS

Primary

2014

88

HIGH

75

HIGH



15

Lung adenocarcinoma

Brain NOS

Metastatic

2015

26

LOW

1

LOW



16

Melanoma

Tonsil NOS

Metastatic

2014

62

MODERATE

53

MODERATE



16

Melanoma

Soft Tissue

Metastatic

2015

13

LOW

1

LOW



17

Melanoma

Dura Mater NOS

Metastatic

2015

53

MODERATE

16

LOW



17

Melanoma

Lymph node NOS

Metastatic

2015

99

HIGH

88

HIGH


