Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insertion mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of FLT3 display
a higher oncogenic potential than the D835Y mutation in acute myeloid
leukemia.


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains the most common form of acute
leukemia among adults and accounts for a large number of deaths. Mutation
in FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is one of the most prevalent factor
in this heterogeneous disease. The major mutations in FLT3 can be
categories as internal tandem duplications (ITD) and point mutations.
Recent studies suggest that ITDs are subdivided in to two groups
depending on their location: the juxtamembrane domain (ITD-JM) and the
tyrosine kinase domain (ITD-TDK). Although, ITD-JM has been characterized
well the ITD-TKD has not yet been studied well due to its recent
discovery. For this reason, we compared ITD mutations in TKD and JM, as
well as the most frequently occurring point mutation located in the TKD,
D835Y. The purpose of this study was to understand whether it is the
mutationâ€™s nature or location that plays the driving role in
leukemogenesis. We used a cytokine-dependent mouse pro-B cell line, BaF3,
to overexpress different FLT3 mutants. We first examined the colony
formation capacity in semisolid cytokine- and serum-free medium. The
assay resulted in indistinguishable number and size of colonies for both
ITD-JM and ITD-TKD, while D835Y-TKD transfected cells failed to form
colonies suggesting that the ITD-TKD mutations have stronger transforming
potential than other TKD mutations. In addition to colony formation
assays, cell proliferation and survival was significantly higher in
ITD-TKD expressing cells compared to cells expressing D835Y-TKD. Finally,
we showed that phosphorylation of STAT5 and AKT is increased in ITD-TKD,
while other FLT3 downstream signaling remained unaffected. All together,
our data suggest that ITD-TKD displays higher oncogenic potential than
other TKD mutants.


