Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developed operation method for patient-drived orthotopic xenograft
model of hepatocellular carcinoma.


Patient-drived xenograft(PDX) model is a biological organized platform
and a patient substitute. Recent studies use the ectopic model for
hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) but this model donâ€™t reflect likewise the
tumor state of patient. For exact prognosis, it is need to establish
patient-derived orthotopic xenograft(PDOX) mouse model of hepatocellular
carcinoma using direct injection technique. Additionally, secretion of
growth factor from bone marrow stem cells is promoted after partial
hepatectomy. This mechanism is helpful to not only general liver
regeneration but also tumorigenesis. Based on former PDX research, we
develop the new protocol using direct injection technique. From January
2015 to June 2016, consent about getting tumor pieces to the patient of
hepatocellular carcinoma. The pieces is stored in RPMI1640 and moved from
operation room to research room immediately. For PDOX and PDX to
subcutaneous model, 8~10weeks old NOD SCID and NSG male mouse is used.
The tumor pieces cutted to the cube size 1mm. For stop the bleeding,
inferior vena cava is blocked using Bulldog Clamp and the cube is
directly injected median lobe to 3 places randomly. After clear the
Bulldog Clamp, a left lobe is removed using tie and weighted. After 3
months, the PDOX mouse is checked for cancer growth using MRI or PET-CT.
Successful PDOX or PDX to subcutaneous model is sacrificed and succeeded
a generation to another Balb/C-nude male mouse 8~10weeks old. The rate of
success of PDOX model and PDX to subcutaneous model is about 10%
respectively. Formed tumor is verified by H&E staining. Based on protocol
established, further study plan is required for improving on the rate of
success to establish PDOX model and clinical application.


