Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate and other nutrients related to one-carbon metabolism and
risk of melanoma.


Background: Nutrients involved in one-carbon metabolism - folate,
vitamins B6 and B12, methionine, choline, and betaine - have been
associated with multiple cancer sites. However, no study has assessed the
association between these nutrients and risk of melanoma. Thus, the aim
of this study was to evaluate the association between intake of these
nutrients and melanoma risk within two prospective cohorts: the Nursesâ€™
Health Study (NHS) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS).

Methods: The cohorts included a total of 81,685 women in the NHS (1984 to
2010) and 49,617 men in the HPFS (1986 to 2010). We assessed nutrient
intakes using a semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire every 2 to
4 years. Total nutrient intake included both dietary and supplemental
intake. Dietary intake included intake from food only. Study physicians
reviewed medical and pathological records to confirm self-reported cases
of invasive melanoma. We used Cox proportional hazards regression to
estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and then
pooled the HRs for both cohorts using a random effects model.

Results: Over 24 to 26 years of follow-up, we documented 1,321 cases (641
men and 680 women) of invasive melanoma. Higher intake of folate from
food only, but not total folate, was associated with increased risk of
melanoma. The pooled multivariable HRs for the top versus bottom
quintiles were 1.17 (95 % CI: 0.98-1.41; P for trend = 0.17) for total
folate and 1.37 (95 % CI: 1.13-1.65; P for trend = 0.001) for folate from
food only. The association was statistically significant in men, but not
in women. Higher intake of vitamins B6 and B12, choline, betaine, and
methionine was not associated with risk of melanoma.

Conclusion: We found some evidence that folate from food only, but not
total folate, was associated with a modest increased risk of melanoma - a
finding that warrants further investigation. Conversely, our findings
suggest that other nutrients involved in one-carbon metabolism do not
play an important role in the etiology of melanoma.


