Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of germline susceptibility to male breast cancer.


Male breast cancer (MBC) accounts for approximately 1% of all breast
cancer cases. Family history is an established risk factor for MBC and
10% of cases have germline BRCA2 mutations. We recently demonstrated that
common germline polymorphisms contribute to MBC predisposition and that
there is overlap between genetic susceptibility loci for MBC and female
breast cancer (FBC).

Here we report a comprehensive evaluation of all 107 known FBC
predisposition loci in an association analysis of 1,032 MBC cases and
2,795 population matched controls. A total of 21 FBC predisposition
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) showed evidence of association
with risk of MBC. For approximately a third of these SNPs, the risk
estimates were significantly larger in MBC than FBC. The magnitude of
effects observed suggest that common susceptibility variants may be of
value for risk stratification in men who have a high absolute risk of
breast cancer such as BRCA2 mutation carriers. Although our data suggests
that MBC predisposition shares many features in common with FBC, there
are striking differences. Surprisingly, given the predominance of hormone
receptor positive tumors in MBC, we observed no evidence of association
between SNPs at FGFR2 and MBC risk suggesting that the estrogen receptor
status of MBC tumors does not explain the observed SNP associations.

In summary, the data presented in this abstract significantly advance our
understanding of genetic factors that contribute to MBC predisposition
and further underscore the growing consensus that male breast cancer is
not simply analogous to hormone receptor positive female breast cancer.


