Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKM2 promotes tumor angiogenesis by regulating HIF-1alpha through
NF-kappaB activation.


Initially identified as a molecule that catalyzes the phosphorylation
from phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate in the final step of glycolysis, the
M2 isoform of pyruvate kinase (PKM2) was recently reported to have a
central role in the metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells as well as
participating in the regulation of apoptosis and proliferation. In this
study, we have identified PKM2 as a crucial molecule for progression of
pancreatic cancer in which tumor microenvironment has been reported to be
highly hypoxic. Our data show moderate to strong PKM2 expression in all
examined human pancreatic adenocarcinoma samples. Depletion of PKM2 was
associated with impaired proliferation and augmented tumor cell death in
vitro, while the in vivo tumor xenograft experiments revealed a close
association between impaired tumor growth and decreased blood vessel
formation. Furthermore, abrogation of PKM2 prevented hypoxia-mediated
HIF-1alpha accumulation and HIF-1alpha promoter activity, which
negatively impacted VEGF secretion by pancreatic cancer cells deprived of
oxygen. Interestingly, PKM2 expression arrest was also mirrored by
impaired hypoxia-driven promoter activity of NF-kappaB which also drives
the transcription of VEGF. Ectopic expression of p65 restored VEGF
transcription after PKM2 ablation inferring that the kinase regulates
VEGF via NF-kappaB/p65 subunit. Altogether, our study suggests that in
hypoxic pancreatic tumors PKM2 interferes both with NF-kappaB/p65 and
HIF-1alpha activation that ultimately triggers VEGF-A secretion and
subsequent blood vessel formation.


