Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of Galunisertib to DC101 increased angiogenesis
inhibition and tumor growth control in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).


Introduction: Galunisertib is a selective ATP-mimetic TGF-β receptor
(TGFβR)-I inhibitor and DC101 is a rat antagonist antibody to mouse
VEGFR-2 and is used to model VEGFR-2 blockade in murine tumor models.
Ramucirumab and galunisertib being independently under clinical
investigation in HCC patients, our study aimed at exploring the
anti-tumoral potency of a combination of galunisertib and DC101 in an in
vivo transgenic model of HCC.

Methods: Transgenic mice developing stage-defined HCC were treated for 8
weeks (W) from W8 to W16 with either vehicle, DC101 (40mg/kg, twice
weekly, IP), galunisertib (100mg/kg, daily, oral gavage) or DC101 plus
galunisertib. Tumor growth was evaluated by ultrasound (liver size) and
by the number of macronodules at sacrifice. Angiogenesis was evaluated by
doppler (blood flow in the coeliac trunk) and by CD31 staining.

Results: Liver size and the number of liver tumor macronodules were
significantly lower in all treatment arms compared to placebo control at
both the W12 intermediary sacrifice and W16 final sacrifice; the
combination of galunisertib and DC101 showing increased tumor control at
W16 (4,43±0,55 mean liver volume (in mm3) in the combination arm vs
5,22±0,86, 5,68±0,78, 7,09±1,54 in the DC101, galunisertib and placebo
arms respectively). Angiogenesis assessed by measuring the mean blood
flow in the coeliac trunk (TCm), decreased in all treatment arms compared
to placebo. At W16, galunisetib potentiated the effect of DC101 with a
TCm decrease of 66% compared to 59% and 10% in the DC101 and
galunisertib, respectively. These results will be confirmed by the
assessment of micronodules number on HPS section for tumor growth and
CD31 staining for angiogenesis analysis (number of vessels and the vessel
lumen area). The effects of the combination versus monotherapies will be
evaluated on the immune landscape.

Conclusion: The combination of galunisertib and DC101 showed promising
anti-tumor activities that were associated with decreased angiogenesis.


