Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Essential role for cyclic-AMP responsive element binding protein 1
(CREB1) phosphorylation in the survival of medulloblastoma patients.


Prognosis for recurrent medulloblastoma patients is extremely poor, with
a median survival of 26.8 months. Treatment options for recurrent
medulloblastoma patients are limited and ineffective due to resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents and radiotherapy. Therefore, more research is
required to address the high mortality of medulloblastoma patients that
have therapy-resistant medulloblastoma. In a previous, study, we showed
that cyclic-AMP responsive element binding protein (CREB1) was highly
phosphorylated in primary medulloblastoma specimens. CREB is an important
transcription factor involved in cerebellar cell proliferation and
survival. In various cancers types, the expression of CREB is associated
with prognosis. Untill now, CREB expression and its relation with overall
survival has not been studied in medulloblastoma patients. In this study,
we determined CREB phosphorylation levels and mRNA levels of CREB and its
transcriptional co-activators CREBBP and EP300 using peptide
phosphorylation and gene expression arrays in a cohort of 50 pediatric
medulloblastoma patients. Furthermore, we performed shRNA-mediated
knockdown of CREB, CREBBP and EP300 mRNA levels in medulloblastoma cell
line DAOY. Knockdown was confirmed by means of qRT-PCR and western
blotting. Next, cell viability assays were used to investigate the effect
of chemotherapeutic reagents (etoposide and/or cisplatin) on cell
viability in CREB, CREBBP or EP300 knockdown cells or in combination with
a small molecule CREB inhibitor (KG-501).Low CREB phosphorylation levels
in combination with low CREBBP and EP300 mRNA levels was significantly
associated with poor overall survival (p=0.0001) with a median survival
of 11.7 months in medulloblastoma patients. High CREB phosphorylation in
combination with high CREBBP and EP300 mRNA levels was associated with a
favourable prognosis (5 year-overall survival: 91%). Supervised
clustering of gene expression data based upon low versus high CREB
phosphorylation and CREBBP/EP300 mRNA levels and subsequent gene ontology
analysis showed significant enrichment of genes associated with
cerebellar and neuronal differentiation and development. Furthermore,
knockdown with shCREB.3, shCBP.1-2 or shEP300A completely rescued DAOY
cells from the etoposide-induced decrease in cell viability that was
observed in the scrambled control. Similarly, addition of the CREB
inhibitor KG-501 (2Î¼M) completely rescued DAOY cells from the
etoposide-induced decrease in cell viability and partially rescued DAOY
cells from the cisplatin-induced decrease in cell viability.Together,
these findings support an important role for CREB in neuronal
differentiation, chemosensitivity and in the overall survival of
pediatric medulloblastoma patients.


