Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro collapsing human and murine colon cancer cells by
selectivity of disulfiram-loaded charge switchable nanoparticles against
cancer stem cells.


The different therapeutic strategies against colon cancer (CC) had led to
treatment failure, due to resistance to drugs which can be toxic to
normal cells in healthy tissues and effectively eradicate bulk tumor
populations, but not cancer stem cells (CSCs). So, we targeted
mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 1B1 (ALDH1B1) as marker of CSC
stemness, by loading of ALDH1B1 inhibitor (disulfiram, DS) on positively
charged chitosan nanoparticles (NPs) and coating them with negative
charges of serum albumin (SA). The prepared NPs were characterized by
measuring of particle size, zeta potential, encapsulation efficiency,
loading capacity, release kinetics and cellular uptake as well as
analyzed by scanning electron microscope and surface-enhanced Raman
scattering. The selectivity of these NPs against in vitro chemically
induced mice colon cancer cells (CDCECs) and human colon cancer cell line
(Caco-2) comparing to normal mice colon cells was determined. The
investigation of their selectivity was evaluated by MTT assay, detecting
ALDH1B1 activity, flow cytometric analysis of CD133+ expression and
quantification of cleaved-caspase 3 level (as targets for CC treatment).
The zeta potential of coated NPs confirmed that SA-layering confers
negative charge (-10.3 mv) for the cationic DS-loaded chitosan NPs (52.9
mv). In slightly acidic medium of tumor, the ionic bond between SA and
the loaded chitosan hydrolyzed then the positive charge was reversed
(47.6 mv). Thus coated NPs showed more controlled slow release for DS in
slightly acidic pH (tumor microenvironment) than in neutral pH
(microenvironment of normal cells) and their uptake were higher in both
CC cells (>70%) than normal cells (4.1±0.2%) in a time-dependent manner.
This interpreted the highest selectivity of coated NPs for inhibiting
cellular growth by apoptosis and suppressing ALDH1B1 activity, oxidizing
cellular environment, eliminating CD133+CSCs and activation of caspase 3
only in CDCECs and Caco-2 cells. Hence the coated NPs possessed the
efficient eradicating effect for colon CSCs (>40%) without a significant
insult (The different therapeutic strategies against colon cancer (CC)
had led to treatment failure, due to resistance to drugs which can be
toxic to normal cells in healthy tissues and effectively eradicate bulk
tumor populations, but not cancer stem cells (CSCs). So, we targeted
mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase 1B1 (ALDH1B1) as marker of CSC
stemness, by loading of ALDH1B1 inhibitor (disulfiram, DS) on positively
charged chitosan nanoparticles (NPs) and coating them with negative
charges of serum albumin (SA). The prepared NPs were characterized by
measuring of particle size, zeta potential, encapsulation efficiency,
loading capacity, release kinetics and cellular uptake as well as
analyzed by scanning electron microscope and surface-enhanced Raman
scattering. The selectivity of these NPs against in vitro chemically
induced mice colon cancer cells (CDCECs) and human colon cancer cell line
(Caco-2) comparing to normal mice colon cells was determined. The
investigation of their selectivity was evaluated by MTT assay, detecting
ALDH1B1 activity, flow cytometric analysis of CD133+ expression and
quantification of cleaved-caspase 3 level (as targets for CC treatment).
The zeta potential of coated NPs confirmed that SA-layering confers
negative charge (-10.3 mv) for the cationic DS-loaded chitosan NPs (52.9
mv). In slightly acidic medium of tumor, the ionic bond between SA and
the loaded chitosan hydrolyzed then the positive charge was reversed
(47.6 mv). Thus coated NPs showed more controlled slow release for DS in
slightly acidic pH (tumor microenvironment) than in neutral pH
(microenvironment of normal cells) and their uptake were higher in both
CC cells (>70%) than normal cells (4.1±0.2%) in a time-dependent manner.
This interpreted the highest selectivity of coated NPs for inhibiting
cellular growth by apoptosis and suppressing ALDH1B1 activity, oxidizing
cellular environment, eliminating CD133+CSCs and activation of caspase 3
only in CDCECs and Caco-2 cells. Hence the coated NPs possessed the
efficient eradicating effect for colon CSCs (>40%) without a significant
insult (< 5%) for normal stem cells in comparison with DS which was toxic
to both normal and CSCs (90%). Because of the coated NPs safety for
healthy tissues, they may be promising therapy by their efficient
collapsing CSCs of tumor cells. These results of this novel study that
was used charge switchable (hydrophilic) NPs to load DS for targeting
colon CSCs may be represent a basis for future in vivo studies.


