Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delivery of 2`F-PS2 PTGER3 siRNA-DOPC enhances anti-tumoral
activity in cisplatin resistant ovarian cancer model.


RNAi-based therapeutics approaches holds a big promise for clinical
translation. However, siRNAs are very weak and highly susceptible to
degradation by nucleases. Nanoparticle delivery systems and chemical
modifications of small interfering RNA (siRNA) can enhance efficient
intracellular delivery and resistance to degradation for various siRNAs
resulting in an increase in their clinical therapeutic potential. Here,
we hypothesized that DOPC nanoparticles incorporated with a chemically
fluoro phosphorodithioate (2`F-PS2) modified-PTGER3 siRNA will enhance
the stability, prolong the silencing effect in vitro and increase the
anti-tumoral effect when is combined with cisplatin in vivo. We screened
51 different chemically modified PTGER3-siRNAs which have 2'-F-PS2 or
2'-O-methyl modification on selectively protected nuclease-sensitive
sites. We determined PTGER3 gene expression after siRNA-2'-F-PS2 or
2'-O-methyl modified mediated silencing, stability, time-response
silencing effect and the therapeutic effect in xenograft OC in vivo
model. We demonstrated that siRNA-2'-F-PS2 prolong the stability for more
than 24 hours and enhance the silencing for more than 96 hours. Moreover,
we found that PTGER3-silencing effect can control the expression of CFTR
multidrug resistant pump by regulating ERK-ELK1-ETS1-CFTR axis, resulting
in an increase of the cisplatin uptake, decreased the tumor-associated
angiogenesis and tumor growth in xenograft OC in vivo model.
SiRNA-PTGER3-2'-F-PS2 modification increase the stability and
time-response silencing effect, leading to a synergistic anti-tumor in
combination with cisplatin in ovarian cancer models.


