Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of tumor generated acidity in immune stromal interactions
during prostate carcinogenesis.


Insufficiency in tumor perfusion and high rate glycolysis combine to
reduce the pH of tumor microenvironment. In a TRAMP model of prostate
cancer, we had shown that carcinogenesis is associated with increasing
acidification of the microenvironment and that neutralization of this
acidity can prevent cancer emergence or metastases. Carcinogenesis in the
TRAMP model is also associated with increased fibrosis and immune cells
infiltration. We thus sought to determine if fibrosis drives immune
infiltration in early tumorigenesis or vice-versa; and whether this
dynamics is affected by tumor acidity. To investigate this, we harvested
prostates from TRAMP mice or their matching non-transgenic controls at
different time points and stained serial prostate tissue sections with
F4/80 (macrophages), SMA (cancer-associated fibroblasts, CAFs), and
Massonâ€™s Trichome (collagen). Quantitative image analysis reveals that
increase in fibrosis occur prior to macrophage infiltration and that both
events preceded tumor development. However, the relative amount of
collagen fibers was unchanged across all time points. Notably, neither
fibrosis nor macrophage infiltration occurred in mice treated with
buffer, suggesting an involvement of acidity in this immune stromal
interactions. Interestingly, macrophages isolated from latter time points
in the untreated group as well as macrophages co-cultured with prostate
tumor cells at acidic pH, possessed an M2-like phenotype by expressing
immunosuppressive genes (e.g. Arginase 1, Arg1) and a range of scavenging
receptors (e.g. mannose receptor, Cd206), as well as releasing more
angiogenic factors (e.g. VEGF and MMPs). Similar results were
recapitulated when M2 macrophages were stimulated at acidic pH by showing
enhanced Cd206 and Arg1 expression. On the functional level, macrophages
activated at acidic pH had a higher ability to uptake fluorescently
labelled ovalbumin and collagen, as examples of mannosylated ligands that
prevail the fibrotic microenvironment. In summary, these results suggest
that tumor acidity may promote fibrosis, with subsequent macrophage
infiltration and phenotypic switching, leading to increased collagen
turnover. It is suspected that this extracellular matrix remodeling may
be permissive for tumor progression.


