Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of ALKS 4230, a novel immunotherapeutic agent, in murine
syngeneic tumor models alone and in combination with immune checkpoint
inhibitors.


ALKS 4230 is a novel immunotherapeutic agent being tested in an ongoing
phase 1 study to evaluate safety and tolerability in the treatment of
patients with refractory solid tumors. ALKS 4230 is a selective agonist
of the intermediate-affinity interleukin 2 (IL-2) receptor that when
administered to mice results in a significant increase in numbers of
memory CD8+ T cells and NK cells with no expansion of CD4+ regulatory T
cells (Tregs). The selectivity achieved by ALKS 4230 is due to the fact
that the molecule is a fusion of circularly permuted IL-2 to the
extracellular portion of the IL-2 receptor Î±, and the resulting fusion
protein is sterically prevented from binding to the high-affinity IL-2
receptor expressed on Tregs. The efficacy of ALKS 4230 was compared to
recombinant human IL-2 in a B16F10 lung tumor metastasis model. ALKS 4230
treatment resulted in dose-dependent reduction of lung tumor
colonization, with 100% inhibition at the highest dose tested. In
contrast, while IL-2 was able to reduce lung tumor colonization, the
maximal level of inhibition achieved was 60-70% at multiple dose levels
such that increasing doses did not result in greater inhibition. Thus,
the activation and expansion of effector cells without expansion of Tregs
in response to ALKS 4230 treatment correlates with its improved efficacy
over IL-2, which non-selectively expands both effector cells and Tregs.
The antitumor efficacy mediated by ALKS 4230 was further evaluated in
several murine subcutaneous syngeneic tumor models, including B16F10,
MC38 and EMT6. Treatment with ALKS 4230 or its murine ortholog resulted
in inhibition of tumor growth and improved survival in multiple models.
When dosed in combination with anti-CTLA-4 or anti-PD-1 antibodies, ALKS
4230 resulted in further improvement of tumor growth inhibition and
survival. These results demonstrate the murine antitumor efficacy of ALKS
4230 alone and in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors and
support the ongoing clinical evaluation of ALKS 4230 as an immunotherapy
for cancer.


