Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of combination therapy with dasatinib and
sorafenib for the treatment of brain metastases.


Brain metastases, the most common type of intracranial tumors in adults,
carry a dismal prognosis with a median survival of less than 18 months
regardless of primary status or treatment given. As part of an ongoing
project, this study is concerned with the preclinical evaluation of
targeted combination therapy for the treatment of brain metastases. The
cell line used in this study was the H1915 (ATCCÂ® CRL-5904TM) human lung
cancer cell line, which was originally derived from a brain metastasis
from primary lung adenocarcinoma. The cell line was stably transfected
with a plasmid that allows expression of firefly luciferase (i.e.,
H1915-luc) so that the tumor growth in a mouse orthotopic model of brain
metastases can be assessed in real time using the Xenogen in vivo
bioluminescence imaging (BLI). Our previous study has demonstrated that
the synergistic effect of combined dasatinib and sorafenib treatment was
cell-line dependent. In this study, the cytotoxicity of dasatinib and
sorafenib, when used alone or in combination at the fixed molar ratios of
3:1, 1:1 and 1:3 (dasatinib:sorafenib), was further examined in H1915-luc
cells using the MTT assay. The results demonstrated that simultaneous and
continuous exposure of H1915-luc cells to dasatinib and sorafenib at the
fixed concentration ratio of 1:1 and 1:3 for 72 h showed synergism (the
combination index value between 0.7 and 0.8) at effect levels of 40 and
80% inhibition of cell viability. For the in vivo study, an orthotopic
mouse model of brain metastases was established by injecting H1915-luc
cells into the right general carotid artery of individual athymic nude
mice followed by permanent ligation. The preliminary study showed that
following the intracarotid injection of H1915-luc cells, brain metastases
were formed and readily to be detected by BLI. The obtained whole brain
samples were fixed in OCT and stored at -80oC. The brain sections are to
be subjected to the immunofluorescence double staining of CD31 and
firefly luciferase to assess the potential effect of the
dasatinib-sorafenib combination on microscopic brain metastasis formation
and progression and vessel co-option. Given the fact that brain
metastases usually have a poor response to chemotherapeutic agents in
part due to the presence of blood-brain barrier, a pharmacokinetic study
is underway to characterize the distribution of sorafenib and dasatinib
in normal brain tissues and brain metastases using the serial blood
sampling and brain microdialysis technique. Overall, results from the in
vitro cytotoxicity study demonstrated the synergistic effect of dasatinib
and sorafenib on H1915-luc human lung cancer cells, providing a rationale
for the in vivo evaluation the potential of this combination for the
treatment of brain metastases from lung carcinomas.


