Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long intergenic non-coding RNAs: a new independent risk predictors
in multiple myeloma.


RNA has diverse sets of regulatory functions and a recent analysis of RNA
repertoire has identified a large numbers of non-coding transcripts. One
of which, long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA) with transcripts
longer than 200 nucleotides, are located between the protein coding genes
and do not overlap exons of either protein-coding or other non-lincRNA
genes. lincRNAs have been considered to provide regulatory functions,
however, their precise role in cellular biology remains unclear. Here, we
have studied lincRNAs using uniformly treated patients to show their
impact on survival outcome in MM. We performed RNA-seq on CD138+ MM cells
from 360 newly-diagnosed patients and 18 normal plasma cells (NPM) and
analyzed for lincRNA and protein coding genes. MM patient data for
clinical characteristics, cytogenetic and FISH as well as clinical
survival outcomes were also analyzed and correlated with lincRNA data.
Our data showed expression of 951 lincRNAs (median TPM > 1) with 351
lincRNAs differentially expressed between MM and normal plasma cells.
Using only the expressed lincRNAs, we applied log rank tests for quartile
1 (Q1) versus Q2 through Q4 and Q4 versus Q1 through Q3 in order to
identify under- and overexpressed prognostic genes, respectively. Four
under and seven overexpressed genes were selected for final model. We
used MÃ¡s-o-menos for final predictive model, which simply calculates the
risk score, by using expression values. The Kaplan-Meier estimates of EFS
at 4 years were 53.3% (95% CI, 45.1% to 63.1%) and 32.6% (95% CI, 25.1%
to 42.2%), and OS at 4 years were 93.2% (95% CI, 88.9% to 97.6%) and
71.1% (95% CI, 62.9% to 80.3%) in our patients having a low or high risk
score. When applied to patient cohort separated by other risk
categorization including minimal residual disease status (MRD),
cytogenetic risk status (del17p, t(4;14) and t(14;16)) and International
Staging System (ISS), lincRNA signature was able to further identify
patients with significant differential survival outcomes. In summary, we
report that lincRNAs have an independent effect on survival outcome in MM
and provides rational for its use in risk stratification as well as to
understand biological impact.


