Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic differential expression analysis of fusion proteins
incorporating the pro-apoptotic molecule Granzyme B reveals new potential
targets for treatment of breast cancer.


Granzyme B (GrB) is a member of the serine protease family of enzymes
that play a critical role in the bodyâ€™s defense against viral infection
and tumor development. Cytotoxic T lymphocyctes (CTL) and natural killer
(NK) cells directly deliver granzymes to target cells, which induces
apoptosis through both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent
multiple-cascade mechanisms. Anti-tumor efficacy studies have suggested
that the targeted delivery of human Granzyme B to tumor cells has a
significant potential for cancer treatment. We had previously developed a
novel fusion construct composed of the VEGF121 growth factor and human
GrB. The GrB/VEGF121 construct was found to be highly cytotoxic to
vascular endothelial cells expressing the R2 (KDR) receptor for VEGF. In
this study, we examined the mechanism of GrB/VEGF121-induced cytotoxicity
against cells in culture at the genomic level. The TNBC cell line
MDA-MB-231 was treated with an IC50 dose of GrB/VEGF121 for 24 hours; the
cells were then harvested and the effect of GrB/VEGF121 on intracellular
events was examined by extraction of mRNA followed by microarray
analysis. Gene-level differential expression analysis revealed that a
total of twenty genes were upregulated by over 3-fold, while 25 were
downregulated 3-fold or more. These included genes involved in signal
transduction, stress response, cell cycle control, hypoxia and
metastasis. Particularly impacted were the Nuclear Receptors Meta
pathway, NRF2 pathway, nuclear receptors in lipid metabolism and
toxicity, matrix metalloproteinases, and the notch signaling pathway.
Validated data will be reported following complete analysis of gene level
differential expression and alternative splicing. Our data suggests that
GrB/VEGF121 induces expression of genes known to be induced by VEGF
alone, as well as molecules previously not associated with either
Granzyme B or VEGF.This data suggests a previously unsuspected impact of
the serine protease GrB on various molecular pathways within the cell and
may lead to a new understanding of how these agents operate at the
molecular level. Research conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation
for Research.


