Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of mutant p53 in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a highly aggressive cancer
characterized by a high rate of metastasis, limited therapeutic options,
and a poor prognosis. However, there is limited information regarding the
molecular mechanisms underlying the metastatic properties of ESCC. p53 is
one of the most commonly mutated genes in ESCC, and our group has shown
that esophageal cells lines expressing a mutation in human p53 shows
signs of malignancy and increased invasion in 3D organotypic culture. A
mouse model of mutant p53 (R172H) in ESCC is lacking in the field. To
elucidate the role of mutant p53 in ESCC we developed a novel mouse model
utilizing a genetic and carcinogenic approach. L2cre;p53-/- and
p53R172H/- mice were generated and treated with 4NQO in their drinking
water for 16 weeks, which resulted in the development of ESCC. Compared
to wildtype mice, p53R172H/- mice and p53-/- mice exhibited a decreased
tumor latency time, increased tumor frequency and a more severe tumor
diagnosis. However, p53R172H/- mice and p53-/- mice displayed similar
tumorigenic properties. RNA-seq was performed on cell lines established
from wildtype and p53 mouse models and reveled different gene expression
profiles between wildtype, p53R172H/-, and p53-/- cells. p53R172H/- cells
displayed an increase in mesenchymal and decrease in epithelial marker
expression, supporting the idea that they are undergoing EMT. In
addition, several endocytic recycling related genes, including
Rab11-fip1, Rab25, and Myo5b were downregulated in mutant and null p53
compared to wildtype cells. Further examination of the differing genetic
profiles in our mouse models can provide novel insight into the role of
mutant p53 in ESCC tumorigenesis and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.


