Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of genetic alterations to predict the chemotherapeutic
responses in unresectable pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas.


Background & Aims: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) that enables the
analyses of massively parallel sequences of DNA can advance the
understanding of the underlying molecular pathophysiologies of cancer.
Such recent genomic analyses have revealed a complex mutational landscape
for PDACs. The aims of this study were to investigate the genomic profile
to predict the chemotherapy response in unresectable PDACs.

Methods: The total of 80 pathologically confirmed PDACs were enrolled and
genomic DNA was extracted and quality control metrics of DNA analytes
were measured. The specimens that passed a quality control test underwent
targeted deep sequencing using a customized cancer panel (CancerSCAN)
enriched in the exons of 83 genes.

Results: Clinical prognostic factors associated with survival in PDAC
were gender, tumor mass size, stage and chemotherapy response rate.
(P=0.078, 0.009, 0.052 and Results: Clinical prognostic factors
associated with survival in PDAC were gender, tumor mass size, stage and
chemotherapy response rate. (P=0.078, 0.009, 0.052 and <0.001,
respectively). Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards analysis revealed
chemotherapy response rate (P Results: Clinical prognostic factors
associated with survival in PDAC were gender, tumor mass size, stage and
chemotherapy response rate. (P=0.078, 0.009, 0.052 and <0.001,
respectively). Multivariate Cox proportional-hazards analysis revealed
chemotherapy response rate (P < 0.001, hazard ratio (HR) = 1.908, 95% CI,
1.281 to 2.840) is an independent prognostic factor. There were 56 (71%)
and 9 (11%) study patients who underwent gemcitabine based chemotherapy
and FOLFIRINOX respectively. Response rate of study patients were as
follows; CR+PR 14 (20%), SD (27%) and PD 28 (41%). There were only 9
(16%) and 4 (50%) patients who had CR+PR response gemcitabine based
chemotherapy and FOLFIRINOX respectively.

Conclusion: Targeted sequencing using EUS-FNA specimens in PDAC showed
excellent compatibilities to analyze genomic profiles of PDACs.
Furthermore, novel genes associated with survival, metastasis and
chemotherapy response in PDAC were identified.


