Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNF receptor 2 is essential for RIP1-dependent cell death in
refractory leukemia.


The identification of molecular determinants that regulate sensitivity to
specific agents is essential for the development of new therapeutic
approaches in cancer. We have earlier shown that a subset of refractory
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) samples respond to SMAC-mimetic (SM)
induced IAP depletion by concurrently inducing RIP1-dependent apoptosis
and necroptosis. Comparative gene expression profiling indicated a
correlation of sensitivity to SM with the expression of TNF receptor 2
(TNFR2) in primary ALL. Using an independent cohort of primary
chemotherapy-resistant ALL samples, we found that presence of high TNFR2
expression identified by qPCR predicted ex vivo-sensitivity to SM. High
TNFR2 levels also correlated with higher expression of TNFR1. Deletion of
either TNFR1 or TNFR2 using CRISPR/Cas9 in primary ALL conferred
resistance to treatment with SM, indicating that TNFR1 and 2 are both
functionally required for cell death. Concomitant with an important role
for TNFR2 in the response to SM, the overexpression of TNFR2 leads to
increased sensitivity to TNF through increased activation of the
TNFR1/RIP1 death axis. On the mechanistic level, SM induced recruitment
of RIP1 to TNFR1, which was abolished in cells deficient for TNFR2. Taken
together, our data reveal a novel function of TNFR2 in cell death
signalling, as TNFR2 predicts sensitivity to SMAC mimetics and plays a
key role in modulating a switch from RIP1-controlled cell survival to
cell death.


