Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stem-like colorectal cancer cell lines show response to the ERK1/2
inhibitor, SCH772984, alone and in combination with neratinib.


Background: We have recently shown an association of colorectal tumor
subtypes with differential response to chemotherapy in patients (pts),
and to targeted therapy in cell lines. Pts enrolled in NSABP/NRG C-07
with stem-like tumors had a poor prognosis regardless of stage or
treatment, highlighting the importance of finding new treatments for
stem-like tumors. Our in-vitro data showed that KRAS mutant (mt) cell
lines of the intrinsic inflammatory subtype were sensitive to the
combination of MEK-162 and neratinib, but stem-like subtype cell lines
were resistant regardless of KRAS mt status. The purpose of this study
was to extend our observations to xenograft models and to identify new
agents that target the stem-like subtype.

Methods: KRAS mt cell lines of the inflammatory (NCI-H747) or stem-like
(SW-480) subtype were used in xenograft models to test inhibition of
tumor growth by MEK-162 and neratinib, alone or in combination. Five
stem-like cell lines with KRAS wt (C2BBE1, HS675T) or KRAS mt (SW480,
SW620, HCT116), and two KRAS mt inflammatory cell lines (NCI-H747, SW837)
were tested for cell viability after treatment with SCH772984 alone or in
combination with neratinib.

Results: In vivo analysis showed that treatment of NCI-H747 xenografts
with a combination of MEK-162 (3mg/kg) and neratinib (10mg/kg) led to
significant tumor regression compared to treatment with either drug alone
(p ≥0.0001 v neratinib alone; p ≥0.002 v MEK-162 alone). In contrast,
MEK-162 alone was able to inhibit tumor growth of stem-like cell line
(SW480) xenografts (p ≥0.0061 v control) but neratinib was ineffective
(p ≥0.145 v control) as a single agent and did not add to MEK-162. Our
in-vitro and in-vivo data showed that inhibition of p-ERK directly
correlated with sensitivity to the MEK and neratinib combination in
inflammatory subtype. SCH772984 significantly inhibited cell viability of
both inflammatory (IC50 1-2 μM) and stem-like subtype (IC50 1-2 μM)
cell lines. The combination of neratinib (0.125 μM) and SCH772984 (1
μM) was effective at decreasing cell viability by 60-70% in both
inflammatory and stem-like cell lines. Inhibition of ERK phosphorylation
was correlated with loss of cell viability.

Conclusion: The combination of MEK-162 and neratinib work synergistically
to decrease tumor growth in inflammatory but not stem-like colorectal
cancer subtypes. We demonstrate that SCH772984 decreases the viability of
stem-like colon cancer cell lines, and works synergistically with
neratinib. The use of SCH772984 alone, but more potently in combination
with neratinib, may represent a therapeutic approach for pts with
stem-like tumors, a finding that underscores the potential importance of
employing subtype analysis in the diagnosis of colon cancer and
potentially as to a guide to new therapies. Support: PA DoH, which
disclaims certain responsibility.


