Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The trending of lymph node dissection for esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma over 40 years in China.


The accumulated evidences have indicated the importance of lymph node
dissection (LND) in improving survival for esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC). However, it is largely unclear in terms of standard
lymph node dissection, e.g., how many is suitable and which node station
is more important, etc. The present study was undertaken to summarize the
trending of lymph node dissection for ESCC over 40 years at a single
institute in northern China. A total of 27,260 ESCC patients were
enrolled in this study from 1974 to 2016, including 16,565 males with a
mean age of 59.72±7.82 and 10695 females with a mean age of 60.3±8.51.
All the patients were from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for
Esophageal Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou
University (1973-2016). All the patients had pathological LND records,
including the number dissected. The patients were classified into four
period groups based on the diagnosed time, group I (1974 to 1986,
367/1.3%), group II (1987 to 1996, 3182/11.7%), group III (1997 to 2006,
10, 494/38.5%) and group IV (2007 to 2016, 13,217/48.5%). The SPSS21.0
software was used to evaluate the trending changes of LND at different
periods. The results showed that the total number of LND/the mean number
by each patient from group I to group IV was 3,000/8.43, 22,001/7.07,
87,740/8.36, and 159,340/12.06, respectively (pThe accumulated evidences
have indicated the importance of lymph node dissection (LND) in improving
survival for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, it is
largely unclear in terms of standard lymph node dissection, e.g., how
many is suitable and which node station is more important, etc. The
present study was undertaken to summarize the trending of lymph node
dissection for ESCC over 40 years at a single institute in northern
China. A total of 27,260 ESCC patients were enrolled in this study from
1974 to 2016, including 16,565 males with a mean age of 59.72±7.82 and
10695 females with a mean age of 60.3±8.51. All the patients were from
the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer Research
of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University (1973-2016). All
the patients had pathological LND records, including the number
dissected. The patients were classified into four period groups based on
the diagnosed time, group I (1974 to 1986, 367/1.3%), group II (1987 to
1996, 3182/11.7%), group III (1997 to 2006, 10, 494/38.5%) and group IV
(2007 to 2016, 13,217/48.5%). The SPSS21.0 software was used to evaluate
the trending changes of LND at different periods. The results showed that
the total number of LND/the mean number by each patient from group I to
group IV was 3,000/8.43, 22,001/7.07, 87,740/8.36, and 159,340/12.06,
respectively (p<0.0001). Further analysis indicated that the total number
of LND/the mean number by each patient from group I to group IV in males
was 1,634/7.93, 13,428/6.99, 53,143/8.53 and 100,073/12.19, respectively
and 1,366/8.48, 8,573/6.80, 34,597/8.11, 59,267/11.83, respectively in
females. The present results indicate an apparent increasing in number of
LND from 1987 to 2016 for esophageal cancer surgical treatment in China.
Further analysis is needed to correlate the LND and metastasis and
survival. [National High-Tech Research and Development Program of China
(SQ2015AA0202183), Major Science and Technology Projects of Henan
Province (161100311300).]


