Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A computational approach to predict tissue level cell cycle
regulatory network for normal proliferating and cancer cells.


Cell cycle control and regulation has been widely studied in terms of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) activities, while only limited
information are available on tissue contexts and signaling. In this
study, we adopted a systems biology approach aiming to comprehensively
capture how tissue level signaling events orchestrate cell cycle phases
in a CDKs activities independent manner in both of normal and tumor
tissues. We have applied our in house gene co-expression and
bi-clustering analysis on a collection of 8 single cell transcriptomic
sequencing datasets of normal proliferating human embryonic cells, 17
RNA-seq transcriptomic datasets of inflammatory tissues and 30 microarray
data sets of chronic inflammatory diseases as normal proliferating
reference and TCGA RNA-seq data for 20 cancer types aiming to identify
cell cycle associated gene co-expression modules. Our results suggest
that the tissue level signaling events are generally show distinct
regulatory structures between tumor and normal tissues: 1) the Rho GTPase
signaling pathways that control cell polarity, activate in G2/M
transition phase in normal tissue, while mainly in G1 and S phases in
tumor. 2) Focal adhesion kinases (FAK) drives G1/S transition in normal
tissues, while activated in multiple phases in tumor. 3) Hippo signaling
for cell size control activates at G2/M transition phase in normal tissue
while in multiple phases in tumor. In addition, we have also generated
tissue level regulatory networks for cell cycle controls by predicting
possible collective effects of extra- and intra-cellular signaling for
both normal proliferating and cancer cells.


