Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Usp9x inhibition and depletion overcomes SOX2 dependent resistance
to BRAF inhibition in melanoma.


Melanoma tumors often show limited response to BRAF/MEK/ERK pathway
inhibitors currently used in melanoma treatment. One mechanism of
resistance to current melanoma treatments is upregulation of SOX2, a
transcription factor that is essential for tumor growth and expansion,
particularly in tumors with BRAF mutation in melanoma. Targeting drugs to
transcription factors has been elusive and limits treatment options. Here
we report that the deubiquitinating enzyme Usp9x controls SOX2. We show
that ubiquitin-specific peptidase 9, X-linked (Usp9x), a deubiquitinases
(DUB) enzyme, binds SOX2 in melanoma and deubiquitinates SOX2 in vitro.
Usp9x knockdown results in increased levels of ubiquitinated SOX2 in
melanoma, is coupled with depletion of SOX2 and promotes apoptosis
synergistically with vemurafenib in melanoma cell lines. Protein levels
in primary melanoma tumor samples demonstrated moderately elevated
Usp9x/SOX2 protein expression in metastatic melanoma compared to primary
melanoma patient tumors. Further, Usp9x knockdown or inhibition with G9,
a DUB inhibitor, blocked BRAF/MEK kinase inhibitor-induced induction of
SOX2 and fully suppressed in vitro colony growth of BRAF-mutant melanoma
cells and promoted apoptosis. We discovered a novel mechanism of
targeting SOX2, transcription factor by inhibition of Usp9x. Thus,
development of DUB inhibitors will add to the limited repertoire of
current melanoma treatments.


