Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical validation of a prognostic model integrating Breast
Cancer Index (BCI) with tumor size and grade for prediction of late
distant recurrence in hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer with
1-3 positive nodes.


Background: The Breast Cancer Index (BCI) 11-gene expression signature
has been previously demonstrated to significantly predict risk of overall
(10y), early (0-5y), and late (≥5y) distant recurrence in patients with
HR+, node negative breast cancer. A distinct BCI model that integrated
tumor size and grade (BCIN+) was developed and validated for prediction
of distant recurrence in HR+ women with 1-3 positive nodes (N1) (Sestak
et al., SABCS 2015, P2-08-12; Zhang et al, ASCO 2016, abstract no. 541).
The objective of this analysis was to evaluate BCIN+ performance in the
subset of patients that were treated with no more than 5 years of
adjuvant endocrine therapy.

Methods: The validation study included 402 HR+ N1 patients diagnosed
between 1993 to 2007 with ≥5y follow-up and available tumor blocks.
Patients treated with ≤5y of endocrine therapy ± chemotherapy (n=276)
were included in this analysis. BCIN+ risk scores and categories (low vs
high, using a pre-defined cutpoint) were determined blinded to clinical
outcome. Kaplan-Meier estimates of overall (0‐15y) and late (≥5y)
distant recurrence, hazard ratios and 95% CIs were estimated.
Multivariate analysis adjusting for standard prognostic factors (age,
tumor type, surgery type, PR and HER2 status) was performed using Cox
proportional hazards model.

Results: Mean age was 53y. 99% were ER+, 89% PR+, and 14% HER2+. The
majority of tumors were T1 (61%) or T2 (34%), and 16%, 53%, and 31% were
grade 1, 2, and 3, respectively. 79% of patients were treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy. BCIN+ significantly separated patients into low
and high risk groups for both overall (PResults: Mean age was 53y. 99%
were ER+, 89% PR+, and 14% HER2+. The majority of tumors were T1 (61%) or
T2 (34%), and 16%, 53%, and 31% were grade 1, 2, and 3, respectively. 79%
of patients were treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. BCIN+ significantly
separated patients into low and high risk groups for both overall
(P<0.0001) and late (P=0.0067) distant recurrence. For overall distant
recurrence, BCIN+ classified 18% of patients into the low risk group. The
15y risk of distant recurrence was 2.1% (95% CI: 0.0-6.0%) in the BCIN+
low risk group vs 36.8% (95% CI: 29.3-43.4%) in the high risk group (HR:
21.88; 95% CI: 3.04-157.32). Of patients that were distant
recurrence-free for at least 5y, 22% were classified as BCIN+ low risk.
The risk of distant recurrence at year 15 was 2.1% (95% CI: 0.0-6.0%) in
the BCIN+ low risk group vs 19.0% (11.6-25.8%) in the high risk group
(HR: 9.49; 95% CI: 1.29-69.7).

Conclusions: In this subset analysis from an independent validation
study, BCIN+ identified a significant proportion of N1 patients that were
associated with a considerably low 15y risk of distant recurrence after
≤5 years of endocrine therapy ± chemotherapy. BCIN+ may provide
additional prognostic information to facilitate selection of N+ patients
for extended endocrine treatment wherein patients identified as BCIN+ low
may be considered adequately treated with adjuvant therapy alone.


