Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time- and exposure-dependent pharmacodynamic changes induced by
the BTK inhibitor GS-4059 in healthy subjects.


Brutonâ€™s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) plays an important role in B-cell
signaling, cell proliferation and survival and is an established drug
target in B-cell malignancies. GS-4059 (ONO-4059) is an irreversible,
small molecule inhibitor of BTK, which is in development for
hematological malignancies and rheumatoid arthritis. A Phase 1 study to
evaluate the effect of organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) 1B1
and 1B3 inhibitors and inducers of cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) on GS-4059
Pharmacokinetics (PK) was performed in healthy subjects (N=15). Subjects
were administered a single dose of 100 mg GS-4059 alone or in combination
with a single or multiple doses of rifampin (600mg) and blood samples
were collected up to 48 hours post dose to evaluate PK and
Pharmacodynamic (PD) markers in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs). PD biomarkers were exploratory endpoints and are reported here.
PD was evaluated using the BTK occupancy assay and the Basophil
Activation Test (BAT). A novel duplex homogeneous BTK occupancy assay was
used to quantitatively measure GS-4059 binding to human BTK to assess
target coverage. The assay is based on Time-Resolved Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer (TR-FRET) and simultaneously measures the level
of free BTK as well as total BTK protein in PBMCs collected from subjects
in the study. Free BTK levels in PBMCs decreased rapidly on treatment
with GS-4059 with no detectable free BTK 3-24 hours post dose and no
notable changes in total BTK. All subjects had free BTK levels below the
limit of detection (LOD 6.8 ng/mL) 3-24 hours after dosing. Free BTK
levels started to increase after 48 hours. Free BTK levels on treatment
with multiple doses of rifampin plus GS-4059 followed a similar trend
with no free BTK detectable 3-6 hours post dose but resulted in shorter
duration of inhibition and more rapid recovery of free BTK levels.
GS-4059 plasma exposure (Cmax and AUC) was ~70% lower after multiple
doses of rifampin, due to a drug-drug interaction. As a second PD marker,
inhibition of CD63+ basophil activation in the BAT was measured. In this
functional assay the median inhibition of CD63+ basophil activation was
between 90% and 100% at the time of maximum inhibition (3 hours post
dose). At the peak of inhibition 13 of the 14 subjects had inhibition of
basophil activation higher than 97%. In line with the BTK occupancy data,
inhibition of CD63+ basophil activation was significantly lower with
reduced GS-4059 plasma exposure. BTK occupancy as a direct measure of
target binding and the functional assay measuring the inhibition of
basophil activation showed a similar time course with maximum effect in
both assays achieved at 3-6 hours post dose. These data demonstrate that
a single 100 mg dose of GS-4059 results in full BTK occupancy in healthy
subject PBMCs as well as functional changes measured in basophil
activation as a surrogate for BTK signaling pathway inhibition.


