Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein 1 (TRAP1) as a
potential target for glutamine addicted cancer cells.


Glutamine, a non-essential amino acid, is an important nutrient which is
involved in many biochemical pathways such as energy production,
macromolecular synthesis, and oxidative stress scavenging. Glutamine
metabolism is dysregulated in many cancers which mostly display glutamine
addiction for cell proliferation. Thus, glutamine metabolism has become a
potential target for treating cancer. Here we report that
glutamine-dependent cancer cells are more susceptible for inhibiting cell
proliferation with inhibitor treatment of Tumor Necrosis Factor
Receptor-Associated Protein 1 (TRAP1), a downstream factor of oncogenic
c-Myc involved in glutamine metabolism. Using cell proliferation and cell
viability assays, we examined growth inhibitory effects of TRAP1
inhibitor, gamitrinib-triphenylphosphonium (G-TPP), on two groups of cell
lines, glutamine-deprivation sensitive versus resistant cell lines.
Included are cell lines for each group: HCC827 acquired gefitinib
resistance and A549 for the sensitive; HuH7 for the resistant group.
Glutamine-deprivation sensitive cell lines showed significant growth
inhibition with TRAP1 inhibitor treatment while the corresponding
resistant group of cell lines showed no growth inhibitory effects in the
same treatment condition. This suggests a potential mechanistic
connection of TRAP1 to c-Myc regulation in glutamine metabolism. Taken
together, this finding provides a better understanding of oncogene-driven
glutamine metabolism as well as evidence that TRAP1 is a promising
therapeutic target for glutamine addicted cancer cells.


