Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted molecular profiling of tumor and matched circulating
tumor DNA in patients with early stage endometrioid type endometrial
adenocarcinoma.


Endometrioid-type endometrial adenocarcinoma (EEA) is the most common
type of gynecological cancer in the USA and the fourth most common cancer
in women. Contrary to other cancer types, its incidence is rising, likely
due to its tight association with obesity. A major clinical problem for
EEA patients presenting with early stage disease is identifying those at
risk of recurrence, as extra-vaginal recurrence is incurable. If these
at-risk patients could be identified up-front, they could receive more
aggressive surgical treatment and adjuvant radiation
therapy/chemotherapy/targeted therapy to help prevent the development of
incurable recurrences. The long-term goal of our work is to develop a
blood-based molecular diagnostics platform that can help to identify
women with early stage EEA who are at highest risk for tumor recurrence.
To achieve this goal, we designed a proof-of-principal study to determine
if it was possible to detect common EEA associated mutations in
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) of early stage EEA patients. From our
previous work, we have shown that 98% (43/44) of EEA patientâ€™s tumors
have somatic mutations in CTNNB1, KRAS, PTEN, and/or PIK3CA. Using a
custom panel designed by Swift Biosciences targeting 30 amplicons in
these 4 genes, MiSeq NGS analysis was performed on ctDNA extracted from
3mL of frozen plasma using QIAamp circulating nucleic acid kit and on the
matching tumor DNA (tDNA) extracted from FFPE slides using an Arcturus
Pico Pure DNA extraction kit from 33 stage I and II EEA patients (stages
in which tumor is confined to the uterus). NGS data were analyzed using a
custom bioinformatics pipeline. Using a cutoff of 0.5% allelic frequency
(AF) in the ctDNA and 5% in the tDNA, at least one EEA associated
mutation was detected in both ctDNA and tDNA in 5/33 (15%) of cases.
Mutations with more than 5% AF in the tumor and 0.02-0.49% AF in the
cfDNA (total coverage >250X and variant coverage >25) were also detected
in another 6/33 patients. Each of these 11 cases was re-sequenced at a
higher depth (>20,000X), with comparable results. For the remaining 22
patients at least one EEA associated mutation was detected only in the
tDNA, with no mutation detected in ctDNA. Primary tumor size may play a
role in detection of mutations in ctDNA, as mean tumor size in the group
with mutations in both tDNA and ctDNA was significantly larger (mean 10.4
cm) compared to the group in which mutations were only present in tDNA
(mean 3.6 cm; p=0.005). To improve the analytical sensitivity in the
ctDNA and confirm the current findings, all cases will be analyzed using
digital droplet PCR. Molecular barcodes will also be incorporated into
our custom panel. In this proof-of-principal study, we have demonstrated
that relevant mutations can be detected in the plasma of a subset of
patients when endometrial carcinomas are confined to the uterus.


