Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trastuzumab and C6.5 diabody armed with deBouganin overcome drug
resistance to ADCs comprised of anti-microtubule agents.


DeBouganin (deB) is a de-immunized form of bouganin, a Ribosome
Inactivating Protein (RIP) that when internalized blocks protein
synthesis thereby leading to cell death. When conjugated to trastuzumab
(T-deB) or genetically attached to the C6.5 diabody, deBouganin was more
potent than DM1 and unaffected by mechanisms of resistance to which DM1
is susceptible. To further highlight the differentiating mechanism of
action of deBouganin, HCC1419 and BT-474 tumor cells that survived T-DM1
or trastuzumab-MMAE (T-MMAE) treatment in vitro were re-exposed to T-DM1,
T-MMAE, or treated with T-deB or an anti-HER2 C6.5 diabody-deBouganin
fusion protein. C6.5 diabody-deBouganin and T-deB were potent against
HCC1419 and BT-474 cells surviving T-DM1 or T-MMAE treatment. However,
the surviving cell populations were resistant to T-DM1, T-MMAE, DM1, MMAE
and taxol treatment. In addition, cross-resistance was seen against
trastuzumab-duocarmycin which contains a payload with a cell cycle
independent mechanism of action. The contribution of multi-drug
resistance, Bcl-2 family members and other survival pathways accounting
for the resistant phenotype will be discussed. Overall, the data suggest
that treatment with chemotherapeutics or ADCs comprised of small molecule
compounds such as anti-microtubule agents, can lead to the outgrowth of
tumor cells resistant to similar agents. In contrast, antibodies and
antibody fragments armed with deBouganin can overcome these mechanisms of
resistance and may therefore represent a more effective treatment option.


