Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Routine testing for KRAS mutations in cfDNA from blood of advanced
cancer patients.


Background: Mutations in the KRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase (KRAS) are
driver alterations in several tumors, such as non-small-cell lung (NSCLC)
and colorectal cancer (CRC). However, their role as a prognostic marker
in liquid biopsies is unclear. We studied the status of KRAS mutations in
the peripheral blood of advanced NSCLC and colorectal cancer patients
visited in our hospital and evaluated its potential value as a monitoring
marker in the clinical practice.

Methods: We developed a sensitive TaqMan assay, in the presence of a PNA
clamp, for the determination of KRAS mutations (codons 12, 13 and 61) in
circulating-free DNA (cfDNA). The assay detected 2.5 pg mutated DNA/µL
and a ratio of KRAS mutated versus wild type allele of 1:20000 and was
validated in 80 cancer patients previously genotyped in tumor tissue
showing a clinical sensitivity of 72.5% and specificity of 100%. cfDNA
was isolated from serum and plasma specimens, using an automatic
extractor and mutational analyses were performed in quadruplicates
samples. Serum and plasma samples were drawn at diagnosis, during
follow-up and progression.

Results: 239 NSCLC and 11 colorectal cancer patients were screened for
KRAS mutations in cfDNA at presentation in the period of 2013 to 2016. In
addition, 160 cfDNA samples collected during disease monitoring of 61
patients were analyzed. Paired biopsies were available from 110/250 p at
diagnosis (60 positive for KRAS in FFPE and 50 WT). The KRAS mutation was
detected in the cfDNA of 76.6% (46/60) p positive in tumor tissue vs.
only in 1/50 WT patients where a G12C was detected in cfDNA in a
consistent manner, probably associated with a heterogeneity of the tumor.
In patients with no biopsy available, we detected KRAS mutations in cfDNA
in 14.3% (20/140) cases at diagnosis. The most prevalent mutations
observed in cfDNA were G12C (44.7 %), G12V (22.4%) and G12D (10.4%) for
NSCLC patients and G13D (5.9%) for colorectal patients. The Q61H mutation
was detected in the cfDNA of one NSCLC and one CRC p. Of the 67
patient’s positive in cfDNA at presentation, KRAS mutations were
detected in serum and plasma in 38 patients, only in plasma in 24 and
only in serum in 5. Regarding the 61 patients with serial blood samples,
we observed a correlation between the KRAS mutation load in cfDNA and the
course of the disease, with a decrease in patients responding to
chemotherapy and an increase during disease progression.

Conclusions: Our results demonstrate the feasibility of KRAS mutation
analysis in the cfDNA of advanced NSCLC and colorectal patients. Analysis
of KRAS mutations in the blood of mutated patients can have a value in
patients with no biopsy available and to monitor the course of the
disease.


