Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Examination of DNA looping near oncogenes reveals variable
patterns of epigenetic landscapes in cancer.


INTRODUCTION:

The compaction of chromatin in the nucleus into hierarchical
three-dimensional (3D) structures plays a key role in the regulation of
gene expression. Advancements in high-throughput chromatin conformation
capture assays have enabled the determination of this hierarchical
structure in a variety of cell states, including cancer. Of note, recent
studies have implicated pathogenic alterations in 3D topology of the
genome with the activation of proto-oncogenes in a multitude of cancers.

METHODS:

To characterize the topological changes associated with different cancer
phenotypes, we examine publically available epigenetic profiles from the
ENCODE Project, including 3D data from Chromatin Interaction Analysis by
Paired-End Tag Sequencing (ChIA-PET) from breast cancer and leukemia cell
lines. Integrating the chromatin topology data with transcription factor
binding, DNase accessibility, and histone modification data, we uncover
variable epigenetic landscapes associated with differentially active
oncogenes in these cancer cell lines.

RESULTS:

We provide evidence of topological variability influencing differentially
expressed oncogenes and tie these observations to other epigenetic
changes. In particular, we show insulated-neighborhoods mediated by CTCF
looping partition segments of the genome containing active oncogenes away
from repressive markings like H3K4me3. Additionally, we show that
variation in topology differentially localizes H3K27ac in distal
regulatory regions to promoters of oncogenes, providing a means for gene
activation in non-coding regions.

CONCLUSIONS:

Variable patterns of chromatin topology provide a unique signature and
mechanism of oncogenes for cancerous phenotypes. We use publically
available data to show mechanisms of activity associated with chromatin
topology variation.


