Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triphenylmethanol conjugates of leuprorelin asanti-cancer prodrugs.


Leuprorelin (LEP) is a synthetic analogue of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH), first was approved by the FDA for treatment of advanced
prostate cancer and endometriosis in 1985. The initial effect of
administration LEP is to stimulate the pituitary secretion of FSH and LH.
After a prolonged stimulation (constant concentration of LEP in the
blood) pituitary becomes insensitive to the action of GnRH. This reduces
the level of gonadotropin in the blood, resulting in decreased levels of
sex hormones to postcastration or menopausal levels. In addition to the
usual side effects of this agonist analogs of LH-RH, other reported
adverse effects include transient hypertension, dry mouth, excessive
salivation, paraesthesia and increased dysuria. Improving the biological
activity of LEP by increasing the cellular uptake and retention is a
remedy to this end.

In this study, a prodrug strategy has been introduced to optimize the
hydrophobicity of LEP by using an appropriate hydrophobic linker attached
to tris(4-methoxyphenyl)methanol (TPM) derivatives with the expectation
to improve the cellular uptake. In this regard, several LEP conjugates of
TPM derivatives with optimized hydrophobicity were synthesized by the
reaction of methoxy benzenes (e.g. anisole, 2-fluoroanisole,
2-methylanisole 1,2-dimethoxybenzene or methyl 2-methoxybenzoate and
1,3,5-trioxane, followed by the conjugation with LEP and dodecanedioic
acid in the presence of HBTU/DIPEA/DIC in moderate yields.

Comparative antiproliferative assays between TPM-LEP conjugates and the
corresponding non-covalent physical mixtures of the TPM derivatives and
LEP were performed against human Caucasian prostate adenocarcinoma (PC3),
human breast cancer cell line (BT549) and mouse pre-adipocytes (3T3-L1)
cells and indicated moderare to high inhibition of the cell proliferation
at a concentration of 5-100 ÂµM after 24-72 h of incubation. These data
suggest that TPM-LEP derivatives with optimized hydrophobicity can be
used to improve the biological activity of LEP.


