Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular glutamine pool size change in response to glutaminase
inhibition detected by kinetic analysis of [18F](2S,4R)4-fluoroglutamine
PET.


INTRODUCTION

Oncogene-dependent reliance on glutamine is a cancer vulnerability that
can be exploited for therapeutic gain. Inhibitors of glutaminase, the
enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of glutamine to glutamate, have been
developed and have shown antitumor effects in several tumor models. The
specific and potent glutaminase inhibitor CB-839 demonstrated marked
antitumor efficacy in a triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell line
with inherently high glutaminase activity (HCC-1806), but not in an
estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) cell line with inherently low
glutaminase activity. An early phase 1 clinical trial of CB-839 in
combination with paclitaxel has shown encouraging results in TNBC
patients. Cell-line specific efficacy of glutaminase inhibitors supports
the need for clinical biomarkers that can predict and evaluate
therapeutic efficacy.

As a minimally metabolized glutamine analog with similar transport
properties, [18F](2S,4R)4-Fluoroglutamine ([18F]4F-Gln) is an ideal
radiotracer to infer glutamine pool size through estimates of tracer
distribution volume (DV). In this study, we demonstrate differences in DV
of [18F]4F-Gln in two xenografts with different levels of glutaminolysis
(TNBC vs. ER+) using dynamic PET imaging, as well as show the effect of
anti-glutaminase therapy on [18F]4F-Gln DV.

METHODS

TNBC (HCC-1806) and ER+ (MCF-7) xenografts were established in athymic
nu/nu mice. Mice were scanned in a dedicated animal PET scanner at
baseline and after CB-839 administration. Dynamic imaging was obtained
for one hour upon injection of [18F]4F-Gln (300-350 Î¼Ci) via the tail
vein. Kinetic analysis was performed with PMOD.

RESULTS

[18F]4F-Gln uptake was largely reversible with Logan plots demonstrating
late linearity and k3 in a two-compartment (trapping) model was low (less
than 0.01/min in most cases). Strong correlation was seen in DV estimates
by Logan plot and a single-compartmental model (R2>0.9), but not with
estimates from a two-compartment model. MCF-7 xenografts demonstrated
greater than 60% larger DV at baseline than TNBC xenografts indicative of
increased cellular glutamine concentrations in MCF-7 xenografts. An
increase in DV was detected in TNBC xenografts post-glutaminase
inhibition (>30% mean change), but not in MCF-7 xenografts.

CONCLUSION

Estimates of [18F]4F-Gln DV offer the ability to non-invasively infer
tumor glutaminolysis. Low [18F]4F-Gln uptake in highly glutaminolytic
tumors and an increase in [18F]4F-Gln uptake with glutaminase inhibition
is concordant with changes in cellular glutamine concentration as
measured by MR spectroscopy of tumor extracts. Our studies indicate
promise for the use of [18F]4F-Gln as a predictive and pharmacodynamic
marker for glutaminase-targeted therapy.

Supported by: Komen SAC130060, DE-SE0012476, R21-CA198563

We thank Calithera Inc. for providing CB-839 and Dr. Susan Demo for
discussions.


