Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for the long non-coding RNA GHRLOS in cancer.


Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) genes are abundant in the human genome, and
many are now recognized as oncogenes and/or tumor suppressors. We
previously characterized the structure of GHRLOS, an antisense gene on
the opposite strand of the multifunctional ghrelin gene (GHRL), however,
its expression and function in disease has not been described.

To this end, using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data set, we revealed
that GHRLOS is differentially expressed in a number of cancers. In
particular, expression was elevated in endometrial cancer (1.2 - fold; P
= 7.1 x 10-3 Welch's two-sample t-test; n = 24 vs. n = 175) and prostate
cancer (1.2-fold; P = 3.7 x 10-6; n = 52 vs. n = 498) compared to normal
tissues. Using qRT-PCR (and commercial cDNA panels) we confirmed that
GHRLOS expression was upregulated in endometrial cancer (1.96-fold, P =
0.005 Welch’s two-sample t-test, n = 5 vs. n = 17) and prostate cancer
(2.46-fold, P = 0.0045 Welch’s two-sample t-test, n = 5 vs. n = 21)
compared to normal tissues.

Initial studies, using siRNA designed to silence endogenous GHRLOS
expression, significantly reduced cell migration in the PC3 prostate
cancer cell line (0.47-fold change, P = 0.042 Kruskal-Wallis test, n = 2)
conversely, preliminary data using forced GHRLOS overexpression increased
migration and proliferation.

Taken together, we show that the long non-coding RNA GHRLOS is
differentially expressed in tumor tissue and regulates cell migration and
proliferation; possibly by modulating alternative splicing of the
overlapping, multifunctional ghrelin gene locus. Targeting GHRLOS could
provide a valuable and novel way to target the ghrelin axis in disease.
Ongoing studies aim to validate in vitro functional results in
complementary mouse xenograft models and identify genes and pathways
regulated by this novel lncRNA.


