Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A distinct CD8+ tumor infiltrating lymphocyte subset is associated
with high TIL density, enhanced cytotoxicity and improved survival in
patients with lung cancer.


High tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) density predicts for good
prognosis in several cancers and therapies that boost the anti-tumor
responses of cytotoxic lymphocytes (CTLs) have shown promise in the
clinic. However, clinical responses to currently available
immunotherapeutic agents vary considerably, the molecular basis of which
is unclear. We performed global transcriptional profiling of CTLs in
tumors and adjacent non-tumor tissue from 36 patients with early stage
lung cancer to define the molecular features associated with robustness
and heterogeneity of anti-tumor immune responses. We observed major
differences in the transcriptional program of tumor-infiltrating CTLs
(CD8+ TILs) that is shared across tumor subtypes. Pathway analysis
revealed enrichment of genes in cell cycle, TCR activation and
co-stimulation pathways, indicating tumor-driven expansion of presumed
tumor antigen-specific CTLs. We also observed marked heterogeneity in the
expression of molecules associated with TCR activation and immune
checkpoints, and their expression was positively correlated with the
density of tumor-infiltrating CTLs. Interestingly, TILhigh tumors were
also enriched for a distinct CD8+ tumor infiltrating lymphocyte subset
that appeared to have enhanced cytotoxicity and independently predicted
improved survival in patients with lung cancer. In summary, we define the
molecular fingerprint of tumor-infiltrating CTLs and identify a number of
novel targets that may be important in modulating the magnitude and
specificity of anti-tumor immune responses in lung cancer.


