Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cells-related microRNAs have prognostic implications
in non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: Lung cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small population of
stem-like cells that remains largely unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
regulation of CSCs gene expression has been reported, constituting a
promising therapeutic target. The aim of this study was to isolate and
analyze differential expression of a set of miRNAs in tumorspheres from
lung cancer cell lines and tumor tissue from resectable non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and to determine the prognostic implications
of these miRNAs in a cohort of resected-NSCLC patients. Methods: Lung
CSC-related miRNAs (miR-145-5p, miR-188-5p, miR-218-5p, miR-34a-5p,
miR-21-5p and miR-125a-5p) were analyzed in cells from seven NSCLC tumor
samples and six cell lines (H1650, H1993, H480, H358, A549 and PC9) grown
in monolayer and as spheroids by RTqPCR using TaqMan® microRNA assays.
The expression levels of these six miRNAs were also analyzed in paired
fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung tissue samples (N=178) from
resected-NSCLC patients. Statistical analyses were considered significant
at pBackground: Lung cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small population of
stem-like cells that remains largely unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
regulation of CSCs gene expression has been reported, constituting a
promising therapeutic target. The aim of this study was to isolate and
analyze differential expression of a set of miRNAs in tumorspheres from
lung cancer cell lines and tumor tissue from resectable non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and to determine the prognostic implications
of these miRNAs in a cohort of resected-NSCLC patients. Methods: Lung
CSC-related miRNAs (miR-145-5p, miR-188-5p, miR-218-5p, miR-34a-5p,
miR-21-5p and miR-125a-5p) were analyzed in cells from seven NSCLC tumor
samples and six cell lines (H1650, H1993, H480, H358, A549 and PC9) grown
in monolayer and as spheroids by RTqPCR using TaqMan® microRNA assays.
The expression levels of these six miRNAs were also analyzed in paired
fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung tissue samples (N=178) from
resected-NSCLC patients. Statistical analyses were considered significant
at p<0.05. Results: miRNA expression analysis of cultured cells revealed
an increased expression of miR-125a (p=0.04) and miR-188 (p=0.05) in lung
tumorspheres from tumor samples and cell lines compared to their
paired-adherent cells. Moreover, lungspheres from patients showed
elevated expression levels of miR-21 when compared with their paired
monolayer-cell cultures (p= 0.028). Interestingly, miR-125a, miR-188 and
miR-21 had prognostic value when were analyzed in patients’ tissue
samples. We found that those patients with higher levels (above the
median) of miR-188 and miR-21 had a significant reduction in relapse-free
survival (RFS, 23.67 vs 66.97 months; p= 0.009 and 24.03 vs 56.83 months,
p= 0.042, respectively) and overall survival (OS, 42.9 vs NR months; p=
0.002 and 42.6 vs 82.60 months; p= 0.043, respectively), whereas the
group of patients with higher levels of miR-125a had a worse outcome (OS
51.90 vs NR; p= 0.014). A signature combining the expression of miR-188
and miR-21 was able to give more significant prognostic information (RFS,
16.97 vs. 56.83 months; p= 0.006 and OS, 29.90 vs. NR; pBackground: Lung
cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small population of stem-like cells that
remains largely unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulation of CSCs gene
expression has been reported, constituting a promising therapeutic
target. The aim of this study was to isolate and analyze differential
expression of a set of miRNAs in tumorspheres from lung cancer cell lines
and tumor tissue from resectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients and to determine the prognostic implications of these miRNAs in
a cohort of resected-NSCLC patients. Methods: Lung CSC-related miRNAs
(miR-145-5p, miR-188-5p, miR-218-5p, miR-34a-5p, miR-21-5p and
miR-125a-5p) were analyzed in cells from seven NSCLC tumor samples and
six cell lines (H1650, H1993, H480, H358, A549 and PC9) grown in
monolayer and as spheroids by RTqPCR using TaqMan® microRNA assays. The
expression levels of these six miRNAs were also analyzed in paired
fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung tissue samples (N=178) from
resected-NSCLC patients. Statistical analyses were considered significant
at p<0.05. Results: miRNA expression analysis of cultured cells revealed
an increased expression of miR-125a (p=0.04) and miR-188 (p=0.05) in lung
tumorspheres from tumor samples and cell lines compared to their
paired-adherent cells. Moreover, lungspheres from patients showed
elevated expression levels of miR-21 when compared with their paired
monolayer-cell cultures (p= 0.028). Interestingly, miR-125a, miR-188 and
miR-21 had prognostic value when were analyzed in patients’ tissue
samples. We found that those patients with higher levels (above the
median) of miR-188 and miR-21 had a significant reduction in relapse-free
survival (RFS, 23.67 vs 66.97 months; p= 0.009 and 24.03 vs 56.83 months,
p= 0.042, respectively) and overall survival (OS, 42.9 vs NR months; p=
0.002 and 42.6 vs 82.60 months; p= 0.043, respectively), whereas the
group of patients with higher levels of miR-125a had a worse outcome (OS
51.90 vs NR; p= 0.014). A signature combining the expression of miR-188
and miR-21 was able to give more significant prognostic information (RFS,
16.97 vs. 56.83 months; p= 0.006 and OS, 29.90 vs. NR; p<0.0001). The
multivariate analysis including clinico-pathological and analytical
variables revealed this miRNAs signature as an independent prognostic
biomarker for RFS (HR 2.170 [1.372-3.431]; p= 0.001) and OS (HR 3.256
[1.907-5.561]; pBackground: Lung cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small
population of stem-like cells that remains largely unknown. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) regulation of CSCs gene expression has been reported,
constituting a promising therapeutic target. The aim of this study was to
isolate and analyze differential expression of a set of miRNAs in
tumorspheres from lung cancer cell lines and tumor tissue from resectable
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and to determine the
prognostic implications of these miRNAs in a cohort of resected-NSCLC
patients. Methods: Lung CSC-related miRNAs (miR-145-5p, miR-188-5p,
miR-218-5p, miR-34a-5p, miR-21-5p and miR-125a-5p) were analyzed in cells
from seven NSCLC tumor samples and six cell lines (H1650, H1993, H480,
H358, A549 and PC9) grown in monolayer and as spheroids by RTqPCR using
TaqMan® microRNA assays. The expression levels of these six miRNAs were
also analyzed in paired fresh-frozen tumor and normal adjacent lung
tissue samples (N=178) from resected-NSCLC patients. Statistical analyses
were considered significant at p<0.05. Results: miRNA expression analysis
of cultured cells revealed an increased expression of miR-125a (p=0.04)
and miR-188 (p=0.05) in lung tumorspheres from tumor samples and cell
lines compared to their paired-adherent cells. Moreover, lungspheres from
patients showed elevated expression levels of miR-21 when compared with
their paired monolayer-cell cultures (p= 0.028). Interestingly, miR-125a,
miR-188 and miR-21 had prognostic value when were analyzed in patients’
tissue samples. We found that those patients with higher levels (above
the median) of miR-188 and miR-21 had a significant reduction in
relapse-free survival (RFS, 23.67 vs 66.97 months; p= 0.009 and 24.03 vs
56.83 months, p= 0.042, respectively) and overall survival (OS, 42.9 vs
NR months; p= 0.002 and 42.6 vs 82.60 months; p= 0.043, respectively),
whereas the group of patients with higher levels of miR-125a had a worse
outcome (OS 51.90 vs NR; p= 0.014). A signature combining the expression
of miR-188 and miR-21 was able to give more significant prognostic
information (RFS, 16.97 vs. 56.83 months; p= 0.006 and OS, 29.90 vs. NR;
p<0.0001). The multivariate analysis including clinico-pathological and
analytical variables revealed this miRNAs signature as an independent
prognostic biomarker for RFS (HR 2.170 [1.372-3.431]; p= 0.001) and OS
(HR 3.256 [1.907-5.561]; p<0.0001). Conclusions: Lung tumorspheres had
increased levels of the CSC-related miRNAs miR-125a, miR-188 and miR-21,
highlighting their role in the CSC biology. The analyses performed in a
large cohort of resectable NSCLC patients show that a two
miRNAs-signature (miR-188 and miR-21) was an independent prognostic
marker for RFS and OS. Supported by grants RD06/0020/1024 and
RD12/0036/0025 from RTICC-FEDER, PI12-02838 and PI15-00753 from ISCIII,
TRACE (TRA09-0132) and Beca Roche Oncohematología.


