Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of MiXenoTM humanized mouse model for
immuno-oncological therapy evaluation.


Backgrounds: Despite the unprecedented success of immune checkpoint
antibody therapy in patients with various cancer types, lack of stable
experimental immunotherapy models is still a big challenge in development
of effective new immune-therapeutics. Different strategies of humanized
mouse model system, including human hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) or
human PBMC humanization in immune-deficient mice, or chimeric models
harboring human immune checkpoint targets in immune-competent mice have
been reported. CrownBio has successfully established a number of human
PBMC-humanized xenograft models MiXenoTM for in vivo IO therapy
evaluation, which has been shown to be a rapid and simple strategy of
humanization. However, several outstanding questions, e.g. the optimal
PBMC injection route and cell number, the donor dependence of the
efficacy result and impact of donor HLA type on the efficacy, etc., need
to be further addressed.

Results: PBMC number was titrated in one of our MiXenoTM model HCC827,
and PBMC injection via i.p. vs. i.v. was compared. Tumor growth curve,
graft versus host disease (GVHD), and blood immunophenotyping were
followed under different settings. Furthermore, the antitumor activity of
PD-1 antibody pembrolizumab in a panel of PBMC donor context that bears
diversified HLA types was precisely analyzed. We found that the efficacy
was highly donor dependent, and there was lack of correlation between
efficacy and donor/tumor HLA match.

Conclusion: The MiXenoTM model provides an alternative to the full stem
cell reconstitution approach. Better understanding on the characteristics
of the model may allow a rational model selection and study design in the
discovery IO therapeutics.


