Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hormophysa triquerta polyphenol, an elixir that deters CXCR4- and
COX2-dependent dissemination destiny of treatment-resistant pancreatic
cancer cells.


Therapy resistant pancreatic cancer (PC) cells play a crucial role in
tumor relapse, recurrence, and metastasis. Recently, we showed the
anti-PC potential of an array of seaweed polyphenols and identified
efficient drug deliverables. Herein, we investigated the benefit of one
such deliverable, Hormophysa triquerta polyphenol (HT-EA), in regulating
the dissemination physiognomy of therapy resistant PC cells in vitro, and
residual PC in vivo. Human PC cells exposed to clinical radiation (FIR),
with/without HT-EA pretreatment were examined for the alterations in the
tumor invasion/metastasis (TIM) transcriptome (93 genes, QPCR-profiling).
Utilizing a mouse model of residual PC, we investigated the benefit of
HT-EA in the translation regulation of crucial TIM targets (TMA-IHC).
Radiation activated 30, 50, 15, and 38 TIM molecules in surviving Panc-1,
Panc-3.27, BxPC3, and MiaPaCa-2 cells. Of these, 15, 44, 12, and 26
molecules were suppressed with HT-EA pretreatment. CXCR4 and COX2
exhibited cell line-independent increases after FIR, and was completely
suppressed with HT-EA, across all PC cells. HT-EA treatment resulted in
translational repression of FIR-induced CXCR4, COX2, Î²-catenin, MMP9,
Ki-67, BAPX, PhPT-1, MEGF10, and GRB10 in residual PC. Muting CXCR4 or
COX2 regulated the migration/invasion potential of IR-surviving cells,
while forced expression of CXCR4 or COX2 significantly increased
migration/invasion capabilities of PC cells. Further, treatment with
HT-EA significantly inhibited IR-induced and, CXCR4/COX2 forced
expression-induced PC cell migration/invasion. This study (i) documents
the TIM blueprint in radiotherapy-resistant PC cells, (ii) defines the
role of CXCR4 and COX2 in induced metastatic potential, and (iii)
recognizes the potential of HT-EA in deterring the CXCR4/COX2-dependent
dissemination destiny of therapy resistant residual PC cells.


