Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The AroCell TK 210 ELISA may complement Pro PSA and the Prostate
Health Index in differentiating pre cancerous and cancerous conditions in
prostate cancer.


Background: Thymidine Kinase 1 (TK1) is a cytosolic enzyme that plays an
important role in DNA precursor synthesis and TK1 enzyme activity in
serum is an established biomarker for prognosis and treatment monitoring,
particularly for haematological malignancies. The AroCell TK 210 ELISA
determines TK1 protein levels, in contrast to TK1 activity, and it has
demonstrated superior sensitivity in distinguishing between subjects with
solid tumours and controls.

Pro PSA, free PSA and the prostate health index (PHI) have been proposed
as more discriminating tests than PSA in distinguishing between benign
and cancerous prostate changes. The purpose of this study was to compare
the AroCell TK 210 ELISA with PSA, free PSA, pro PSA and PHI in men with
pre-cancerous conditions, and patients with confirmed prostate cancer.

Experimental Procedures: Serum samples from 94 patients with known PSA
values (in the range 2 to 10 µg/L) that were under investigation for
prostate cancer were collected at the University Medical Centre,
Ljubljana. TK1 protein levels were determined using the AroCell TK 210
ELISA. PSA, fPSA and pro PSA levels were analysed with commercial assays
(Hybritech PSA, Hybritech Free PSA and Access 2pPSA - Beckman Coulter
USA) analysed on the Access 2 Beckman Coulter analyzer.

Results: Overall, 16/94 patients had serum TK1 protein levels above the
estimated cut-off value for age-matched healthy men (0.45µg/L). 65/94
men had pre-cancerous prostate conditions, including benign prostate
hyperplasia, prostatitis and high grade prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia, while 29 patients had confirmed prostate cancer (PCa). Only 7
/65 in the pre-cancerous group (11%) had TK1 protein levels above the
cut-off, whereas in the prostate cancer group 9 out of 29 (31%) were
positive. Moreover, the TK1 protein values in the PCa group
(mean=0.41µg/L) differed significantly from those with pre-cancerous
conditions (mean=0.31µg/L, P=0.01). Further analysis showed that pro PSA
and PHI also differentiated the prostate cancer group from those with
pre-cancerous conditions (P= 0.01 and PResults: Overall, 16/94 patients
had serum TK1 protein levels above the estimated cut-off value for
age-matched healthy men (0.45µg/L). 65/94 men had pre-cancerous prostate
conditions, including benign prostate hyperplasia, prostatitis and high
grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, while 29 patients had
confirmed prostate cancer (PCa). Only 7 /65 in the pre-cancerous group
(11%) had TK1 protein levels above the cut-off, whereas in the prostate
cancer group 9 out of 29 (31%) were positive. Moreover, the TK1 protein
values in the PCa group (mean=0.41µg/L) differed significantly from
those with pre-cancerous conditions (mean=0.31µg/L, P=0.01). Further
analysis showed that pro PSA and PHI also differentiated the prostate
cancer group from those with pre-cancerous conditions (P= 0.01 and
P<0.001, respectively). This was not observed for fPSA and PSA. Overall,
the AroCell TK 210 ELISA showed significant correlation with PHI (r=0.32,
P=0.0017) and pro PSA (r=0.21 P=0.044) but not with fPSA or PSA.

Conclusions: This preliminary study has demonstrated that serum TK1
assayed with the AroCell TK 210 ELISA can differentiate between
pre-cancerous and prostate cancer patients with a similar accuracy to
that of pro PSA. Further clinical studies will establish the capacity of
the AroCell TK 210 ELISA to complement pro PSA and PHI in distinguishing
between pre-cancerous and prostate cancer, potentially providing another
tool in prostate cancer management.


