Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitizing effect of lapatinib in HER2-overexpressing breast
cancer cells: scientific rationale for RTOG1119 study.


Trastuzumab has been widely used for the treatment of human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-overexpressing breast cancer, however, it
cannot easily cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and is known to
increase the incidence of brain metastases. In contrast, lapatinib has a
low molecular weight and can cross the BBB and it could be useful to
treat brain metastases in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer. To
explore the impact of lapatinib on radiation response, we conducted an in
vitro experiment using SKBR3 and BT474 breast carcinoma cells exhibiting
HER2/neu amplification. Lapatinib down-regulated phosphorylated p-HER2,
p-EGFR, p-AKT, and p-ERK. Pretreatment of lapatinib increased the
radiosensitivity of SKBR3 (sensitizer enhancement ratio [SER]: 1.21 at a
surviving fraction of 0.5) and BT474 (SER: 1.26 at a surviving fraction
of 0.5) cells and hindered the repair of DNA damage, as suggested by the
prolongation of radiation-induced Î³H2AX foci and the down-regulation of
phosphorylated DNAdependent protein kinase, catalytic subunit
(p-DNAPKcs). Increases in radiation-induced apoptosis and senescence were
suggested to be the major modes of cell death induced by the combination
of lapatinib and radiation. Furthermore, lapatinib did not radiosensitize
a HER2- negative breast cancer cell line or normal human astrocytes.
These results suggest that lapatinib can potentiate radiation-induced
cell death in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells and may increase
the efficacy of radiotherapy. Based on these findings, RTOG1119 study
which is a phase II randomized study for lapatinib combined with
radiation therapy in patients with brain metastases from HER2-positive
breast cancer is ongoing (NCT 01622868).


