Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel peptide-suppressing M2 polarized tumor-associated
macrophages enhances tumor response to chemotherapy.


Introduction: Multiple reports have demonstrated that M2-polarized tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs) play a significant role in promoting tumor
metastasis, survival and resistance to chemotherapy. Thus, limiting the
pro-tumorigenic activity of TAMs may hold great therapeutic promise.
Objective: To determine whether targeting the Cluster of Differentiation
206 (CD206) receptor on TAMs with an engineered peptides having both
CD206 specificity and apoptotic activity, will limit the protumorigenic
effects of TAMs and enhance cancer cells response to chemotherapy.
Method: A class of engineered peptides were designed to stimulate
phagocytosis via the CD206 receptor, and to initiate apopotic cell death
once endocytosed. Primary cells were isolated from C57BL/6J mice from
Jackson Laboratory and were polarized to M1 and M2 phenotypes by treating
with IL-4 (20ng/ml) and IFN-Î³ (10ng/ml) respectively from R&D
Biosciences for 24 hrs. CD206 targeting peptide was biotin-labeled and
utilized to treat M2-polarized cells. Precipitated proteins were analyzed
by mass spectrometry analysis, and informatics software. In vitro
proliferation and confirmation of apoptosis was assessed using Annexin/PI
staining and Western blot analysis for Caspase 8 expression and activity.
In xenograft models of triple negative breast cancer (MDA-MB-231), mice
were treated with CD206 peptide and gemcitabine, singly or in combination
Results: Mass spectrometry analysis of gel bands from the biotin /
streptavidin pull down assay confirmed CD206 as a cell surface target.
Bioinformatics analysis of the proteomics data from the pull down assay
further confirmed that apoptotic proteins were highly expressed in the M2
populations than in the M1 populations. Treatment with CD206 peptide
produced a significant decrease in cell proliferation only in M2
macrophages. FACS analysis of Annexin/PI staining and Caspase 8 activity,
demonstrated by Western blot, showed that CD206 targeting peptide caused
apoptosis specifically in M2 macrophages. In xenograft models of triple
negative breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) mice treated with peptide alone (10
mg/kg qD subcu), there was a 39% reduction in tumor growth; gemcitabine @
40 mg/kg q4D produced a 68% reduction; however, peptide in combination
with gemcitabine completely blocked tumor growth. Moreover,
immunohistochemistry staining of treated tumors showed a decrease in the
expression of CD206 positive M2 macrophages and CD45/CD25 positive Treg
cells, and an increase in CD86 positive M1 macrophages. These results
were consistent with the in vitro results obtained. Discussion and
Conclusion: These results suggest that a targeting CD206 peptide
engineered to promote apoptosis, enhances the tumor response to
chemotherapy by limiting the pro-tumorigenic activity of TAMs.


