Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional outcome and socio-psychological problems for bone &
soft tissue sarcoma patients in childhood & AYA generation.


[Objective] To elucidate the problems between functional and sociological
outcomes in patients of bone and soft tissue sarcomas in childhood and
adolescent/young adult (AYA) generation.

[Method] Clinical (prognostic and functional) and socio-psychological
outcomes were retrospectively analyzed in 50 patients with bone and soft
tissue sarcomas under 29 years old treated in our institute from 1998 to
2014.

[Results] Twenty-two patients under 15 and 28 of AYA generation (15 to 29
years old) (28 male and 22 female) were subjected, including 35 cases of
bone and 15 cases of soft tissue sarcomas, and 39 of extremity cases.
Most common diagnosis was osteosarcoma of 27 cases. Limb-sparing surgery
was performed in 30 cases, including 14 of prosthetic and 8 of biological
reconstruction for bone tumors. Overall Survival rates were 79% for 2
year and 61% for 5 year follow-up periods. 70% of the patients
experienced limited activities; 50% in high school and college students
experienced drop-out or delay, suspension and repeating the same class;
56% faced to their job lost or limitation of job search; 20% experienced
changes of relationship with families and partners (Table). Most taken
palliative care intervention was the counseling for family members and
caregivers, besides pain management and psychological care. Correlation
coefficient failed to show a significant correlation between functional
score and sociological disability score both in all limb sparing cases
(R2 = 0.2664) and in osteosarcoma cases ((R2 = 0.1757) .

[Conclusion] The sociological problems for patients in this particular
group could be focused on school life, job search and relationship with
families and partners. QOL is a multidimensional measure with various
domains, such as physical, psychological, social well-being, spiritual
health as well as functional ability, therefore, multi-disciplinary care
for socio-physiological and psychological disadvantage must be taken for
this group of patients at earliest convenience.

Reletionship between physiological and socio-psychological problems



Subject

All patients

Limb-spared patinets



Limitation of activities

70% (30/43)

75% (21/28)



School dropout/delay in high-schoolers & college students

50% (14/28)

32% (8/25)



Lost jobs/job search difficulties

56% (9/16)

33% (3/9)



Changing social reletions with families & partners

20% (8/40)

21% (3/28)


