Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of 53BP1 by the structural nuclear protein NuMA.


Cells repair DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) through two major pathways:
homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). The
choice between these two pathways is critical to cell survival and is
altered in cancers. 53BP1 is a protein with an important role in this
choice: it promotes NHEJ by blocking CtIP-dependent DNA resection. Here,
we present a new negative regulation mechanism of 53BP1 that relies on
the structural protein NuMA. This protein participates in mitotic spindle
assembly, influences chromatin organization during the interphase and
modulates the chromatin response to DNA damage. We identified NuMA in a
proteomics analysis of a 53BP1-interacting proteins. The interaction was
confirmed by reciprocal immunoprecipitation and with a FRET assay. In
response to DSB, we measured greater than 50% decreased 53BP1-NuMA
binding, which suggests that NuMA may restrain 53BP1 diffusion in the
absence of DNA damage. Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS)
measurements in cells expressing GFP-tagged 53BP1 support this
hypothesis. Moreover, NuMA overexpression inhibited 53BP1 recruitment at
DNA damage sites in laser microirradiation assays, whereas NuMA silencing
had the opposite effect. 53BP1 plays an essential role in B cell class
switch recombination and mediates PARP inhibitor sensitivity in
BRCA1-null cells. NuMA overexpression prevented immunoglobulin switching,
and overwrote cancer cell sensitivity to PARP inhibitors to the same
extent as 53BP1 loss of function. Our results help understand how 53BP1
is controlled, and shed light on the mechanisms regulating PARPi
sensitivity.


