Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapeutical agent triggers transient resistance of cancer
cells by promoting ABCB1 intercellular transfer.


Multidrug resistance remains a major impediment to successful
chemotherapy. In clinical chemotherapy, some patients often develop
chemoresistance quite rapidly, the underlying mechanism remains elusive.
Herein, we report that a transient exposure to chemotherapeutic agents
can acutely promote the intercellular transfer of ABCB1 through
stimulating Rab8B-mediated secretion of microvesicles (MVs) containing
ABCB1 in drug-resistant donor cells, and promoting parallelly the
endocytic recycling of ABCB1 in recipient tumor cells via the
downregulation of Rab5. Sensitive recipient cells take up these
ABCB1-incorporated MVs by a clathrin- and dynamin 2- dependent endocytic
pathway, thereby acquiring a transient resistance to chemotherapeutic
agents which are ABCB1 substrates. More fascinatingly, ABCB1 molecules
can locally or distantly transfer to recipient tumor cells and respond to
chemotherapeutical drug in the xenograft tumor models. In some cases of
patients with NSCLC, a variable increase of ABCB1 surface expression was
also detected in the peripheral blood monocyte subpopulations after they
received the first chemotherapy. Our findings proposed a novel molecular
mechanism of how sensitive cancer cells rapidly acquire the emergency
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents by stimulating intercellular
transfer of ABCB1. The precise modulation of this process may provide a
valid therapeutic strategy to alleviate the MDR phenotype for successful
treatment.


