Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of ECP1014 and anti-PD-L1 reduces tumor growth in the
CT26 murine colon carcinoma model of a cold tumor.


Objective: The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of
ECP1014, a new selective COX2 inhibitor, in combination with a PDL1
inhibitor on tumor growth in a CT26 murine colon carcinoma model. Colon
cancer has been described as a “cold tumor” and antiPDL1monotherapy
has shown limited or no benefit. In addition, many colon cancer cell
lines produce high levels of PGE2, which may in turn dampen the immune
system. The hypothesis was that combining ECP1014, which we have shown
potently decreases PGE2 in CT26, with a checkpoint inhibitor would
increase immune response to the tumor, turning it “hot” and producing
superior tumor control versus either agent alone.

Methods: Balb/C mice were implanted with CT26 cells and randomly assigned
to 7 treatment groups; vehicle (G1), 10mg/kg rat IgG2b control (G2),
10mg/kg antiPDL1 (G3), 10mg/kg ECP1014 (G4), 10mg/kg ECP1014+10mg/kg rat
IgG2b (G5), 10mg/kg ECP1014+10mg/kg antiPDL1 (G6), 1mg/kg ECP1014+10mg/kg
antiPDL1(G7). ECP1014 was given daily by oral gavage; rat IgG2b and
antiPDL1 (clone 10F.9G2) were administered IP. Treatment was started on
day 3 post implant and mice were followed for 16 days. Tumor measurements
were taken every 2 to 3 days, and a nonparametric approach was taken to
assess the pairwise differences among groups using day 16 tumor volumes.
In addition, a responder analysis was used. Tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TIL) were also assessed by flow cytometry on day 16.

Results: All animals developed tumors. G4 to 7 demonstrated statistically
significantly (pResults: All animals developed tumors. G4 to 7
demonstrated statistically significantly (p<0.05) slowing of tumor growth
when compared to vehicle (G1). In particular, G7 produced an 87%
suppression of tumor growth compared to vehicle. Three animals in G7
showed regression of tumor growth and one additional animal had no
detectable growth until day 16. G6 produced 65% suppression of tumor
growth compared to G1. G2 to 5 produced 30, 54, 73 and 50% suppression of
tumor growth respectively when compared to G1. G7 had the highest number
of responders 75% vs. 62.5% for G6 and G4, with all other groups having
Results: All animals developed tumors. G4 to 7 demonstrated statistically
significantly (p<0.05) slowing of tumor growth when compared to vehicle
(G1). In particular, G7 produced an 87% suppression of tumor growth
compared to vehicle. Three animals in G7 showed regression of tumor
growth and one additional animal had no detectable growth until day 16.
G6 produced 65% suppression of tumor growth compared to G1. G2 to 5
produced 30, 54, 73 and 50% suppression of tumor growth respectively when
compared to G1. G7 had the highest number of responders 75% vs. 62.5% for
G6 and G4, with all other groups having < 25% responders. TIL analysis
from G4, G6 and G7 also displayed the highest levels of CD8+ Tcells
(6.3%, 6.8%, and 6.7% respectively, versus 3.8% for antiPDL1 and 2.5% for
vehicle groups).

Summary: ECP1014 alone was superior to antiPDL1 in slowing tumor growth.
However, the combination of ECP1014+antiPDL1showed the greatest tumor
response and growth suppression and markedly increased CD8+ Tcells
infiltrating into the tumor vs. single agent anti-PDL1 treatment.


