Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do Wnt3A-mediated canonical Wnt/Beta-catenin signals regulate stem
cell phenotypes in brain metastasis-specific TNBC.


Introduction: Triple negative (TN) and basal-like subtypes portend one of
the worst prognoses in BC and have the most challenging diagnosis among
patients due to the aggressive nature of the disease. BC stem cells
(BCSCs) have a distinct role in breast oncogenesis and CD44(+)/CD24(-)
BCSCs play an important role in the clinical behavior of TNBC. Unique
growth abilities of BCSCs including self-renewal, differentiation
potential and resistance to anti-cancer agents contribute to the
development and overall aggressiveness of recurrent metastatic lesions.
Patients with TNBC as compared to non-TNBC have significantly higher
incidences of recurrence or distant metastasis and the poorer outcome has
been associated with increased frequency of BCSCs phenotypes. Aim: We
previously reported that Wnt pathway (WP) is associated with metastasis
(Dey et al., 2013) and controls metastasis-associated (MA) tumor cell
phenotypes in TNBC (De et al., 2016) and here we tested the role of WP in
the regulation of BCSCs and MA tumor cell phenotypes using
brain-metastasis specific TNBC model (MDA-MB231BR).

Methods: MDA-MB231BR cells were stimulated with WP specific ligand or
LWnt3A conditioned media (CM) and MA tumor cell phenotypes were tested
following WP inhibition. To model distant metastasis in vitro, we have
used a long-term 3D-matrigel assay in the presence of LWnt3ACM. Four
BCSCs markers, CD44, CD44V6, CD24 and CD133 were selected for the flow
cytometric analyses of cells following LWnt3ACM stimulation and
downregulation of WP by sulindac sulfide.

Results: Specific stimulation of WP by LWnt3ACM led to the clonogenic
growth from a single cell. Inhibition of WP blocked micro-metastatic
growth of these colonies. Although WP stimulation alone did not alter %
of CD44(+)/CD24(-) population in 2D format, inhibition of WP following
treatment with sulindac sulfide caused a significant decrease in the % of
CD44(+)/CD24(-) population (66%) as compared to the control (79%). To
further understand the mechanistic long-term role of BCSCs during the
micro-metastatic 3D growth of colonies, we have developed a novel method
to identify the % of BCSCs in the micro-metastatic 3D colonies. After 15
days of 3D colony growth, cells are recovered from matrigel and the live
cell fraction is analyzed for CD24, CD44, CD44v6 and CD133 by flow
cytometric analysis. We previously presented data demonstrating the
CD44+/CD24- fraction is enriched in 3D colonies as compared to
correspoding 2D cells. Here weâ€™ve extended our analysis and examined 3D
colonies following either stimulation or inhibition of WP.

Conclusion: Our data demonstrates that WP mediates the BCSCs phenotype(s)
of TNBC in a context-dependent manner. Studies are on-going to delineate
the mechanistic role of different BCSCs markers particularily CD44 and
CD44v6 in signaling the formation of WP-mediated micro-metastatic 3D
colonies, the results of which will be presented at the meeting.


