Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel curcumin derivative inhibits active ras and its downstream
pathway in pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic Cancer’s (PC’s) 5-year survival rate of only 6.7% indicate
the need to improve treatment modalities. Despite decades of research,
current chemotherapy and radiation therapy regimens offer minimal or no
help. It is critical to develop new agents for the effective management
of PC. Given that Kras mutations initiate and maintain PC, inhibition of
this pathway is widely considered a therapeutic target of exceptional
importance. Our laboratory is currently exploring the chemotherapeutic
efficacy of a novel Chemically-Modified Curcumin (CMC2.24) as a potential
chemotherapeutic agent for PC. Preliminary studies have shown that
CMC2.24 has higher bioavailability than curcumin, as shown in
pharmacokinetic studies in rats, and inhibits PC growth in vitro and in
vivo. However, the exact mechanism on how CMC2.24 reduces cell growth
remains unidentified. The objective of this work was to determine the
mechanism of CMC2.24 in PC. Using human PC MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cell
lines and pancreatic acinar explants from Kras mutant mice, we explored
the effects of CMC2.24 on Ras activation, ERK phosphorylation,
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial ATP production, and
intrinsic apoptosis. In human PC MIA PaCa-2 cells CMC2.24 inhibited Ras
activation by 90% (pPancreatic Cancer’s (PC’s) 5-year survival rate
of only 6.7% indicate the need to improve treatment modalities. Despite
decades of research, current chemotherapy and radiation therapy regimens
offer minimal or no help. It is critical to develop new agents for the
effective management of PC. Given that Kras mutations initiate and
maintain PC, inhibition of this pathway is widely considered a
therapeutic target of exceptional importance. Our laboratory is currently
exploring the chemotherapeutic efficacy of a novel Chemically-Modified
Curcumin (CMC2.24) as a potential chemotherapeutic agent for PC.
Preliminary studies have shown that CMC2.24 has higher bioavailability
than curcumin, as shown in pharmacokinetic studies in rats, and inhibits
PC growth in vitro and in vivo. However, the exact mechanism on how
CMC2.24 reduces cell growth remains unidentified. The objective of this
work was to determine the mechanism of CMC2.24 in PC. Using human PC MIA
PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cell lines and pancreatic acinar explants from Kras
mutant mice, we explored the effects of CMC2.24 on Ras activation, ERK
phosphorylation, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial ATP
production, and intrinsic apoptosis. In human PC MIA PaCa-2 cells CMC2.24
inhibited Ras activation by 90% (p<0.05). This was confirmed in primary
acinar explants isolated from Kras mutant mice in which CMC treatment
reduced Ras activation by 70%, compared to control. Furthermore, CMC 2.24
treatment reduced the phosphorylation MEK, ERK and c-Raf, down-stream
pathway of Ras, both in vitro and in vivo. The effect of CMC2.24 on ERK
phosphorylation was confirmed by Immunofluorescence, showing a
significant decrease in ERK phosphorylation (47.8%; pPancreatic
Cancer’s (PC’s) 5-year survival rate of only 6.7% indicate the need
to improve treatment modalities. Despite decades of research, current
chemotherapy and radiation therapy regimens offer minimal or no help. It
is critical to develop new agents for the effective management of PC.
Given that Kras mutations initiate and maintain PC, inhibition of this
pathway is widely considered a therapeutic target of exceptional
importance. Our laboratory is currently exploring the chemotherapeutic
efficacy of a novel Chemically-Modified Curcumin (CMC2.24) as a potential
chemotherapeutic agent for PC. Preliminary studies have shown that
CMC2.24 has higher bioavailability than curcumin, as shown in
pharmacokinetic studies in rats, and inhibits PC growth in vitro and in
vivo. However, the exact mechanism on how CMC2.24 reduces cell growth
remains unidentified. The objective of this work was to determine the
mechanism of CMC2.24 in PC. Using human PC MIA PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cell
lines and pancreatic acinar explants from Kras mutant mice, we explored
the effects of CMC2.24 on Ras activation, ERK phosphorylation,
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial ATP production, and
intrinsic apoptosis. In human PC MIA PaCa-2 cells CMC2.24 inhibited Ras
activation by 90% (p<0.05). This was confirmed in primary acinar explants
isolated from Kras mutant mice in which CMC treatment reduced Ras
activation by 70%, compared to control. Furthermore, CMC 2.24 treatment
reduced the phosphorylation MEK, ERK and c-Raf, down-stream pathway of
Ras, both in vitro and in vivo. The effect of CMC2.24 on ERK
phosphorylation was confirmed by Immunofluorescence, showing a
significant decrease in ERK phosphorylation (47.8%; p<0.05). Moreover,
CMC2.24 treatment enhanced the levels of superoxide anion in mitochondria
by 200% (pPancreatic Cancer’s (PC’s) 5-year survival rate of only
6.7% indicate the need to improve treatment modalities. Despite decades
of research, current chemotherapy and radiation therapy regimens offer
minimal or no help. It is critical to develop new agents for the
effective management of PC. Given that Kras mutations initiate and
maintain PC, inhibition of this pathway is widely considered a
therapeutic target of exceptional importance. Our laboratory is currently
exploring the chemotherapeutic efficacy of a novel Chemically-Modified
Curcumin (CMC2.24) as a potential chemotherapeutic agent for PC.
Preliminary studies have shown that CMC2.24 has higher bioavailability
than curcumin, as shown in pharmacokinetic studies in rats, and inhibits
PC growth in vitro and in vivo. However, the exact mechanism on how
CMC2.24 reduces cell growth remains unidentified. The objective of this
work was to determine the mechanism of CMC2.24 in PC. Using human PC MIA
PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cell lines and pancreatic acinar explants from Kras
mutant mice, we explored the effects of CMC2.24 on Ras activation, ERK
phosphorylation, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial ATP
production, and intrinsic apoptosis. In human PC MIA PaCa-2 cells CMC2.24
inhibited Ras activation by 90% (p<0.05). This was confirmed in primary
acinar explants isolated from Kras mutant mice in which CMC treatment
reduced Ras activation by 70%, compared to control. Furthermore, CMC 2.24
treatment reduced the phosphorylation MEK, ERK and c-Raf, down-stream
pathway of Ras, both in vitro and in vivo. The effect of CMC2.24 on ERK
phosphorylation was confirmed by Immunofluorescence, showing a
significant decrease in ERK phosphorylation (47.8%; p<0.05). Moreover,
CMC2.24 treatment enhanced the levels of superoxide anion in mitochondria
by 200% (p<0.02), decreased ATP levels in a concentration-dependent
manner (pPancreatic Cancer’s (PC’s) 5-year survival rate of only 6.7%
indicate the need to improve treatment modalities. Despite decades of
research, current chemotherapy and radiation therapy regimens offer
minimal or no help. It is critical to develop new agents for the
effective management of PC. Given that Kras mutations initiate and
maintain PC, inhibition of this pathway is widely considered a
therapeutic target of exceptional importance. Our laboratory is currently
exploring the chemotherapeutic efficacy of a novel Chemically-Modified
Curcumin (CMC2.24) as a potential chemotherapeutic agent for PC.
Preliminary studies have shown that CMC2.24 has higher bioavailability
than curcumin, as shown in pharmacokinetic studies in rats, and inhibits
PC growth in vitro and in vivo. However, the exact mechanism on how
CMC2.24 reduces cell growth remains unidentified. The objective of this
work was to determine the mechanism of CMC2.24 in PC. Using human PC MIA
PaCa-2 and Panc-1 cell lines and pancreatic acinar explants from Kras
mutant mice, we explored the effects of CMC2.24 on Ras activation, ERK
phosphorylation, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, mitochondrial ATP
production, and intrinsic apoptosis. In human PC MIA PaCa-2 cells CMC2.24
inhibited Ras activation by 90% (p<0.05). This was confirmed in primary
acinar explants isolated from Kras mutant mice in which CMC treatment
reduced Ras activation by 70%, compared to control. Furthermore, CMC 2.24
treatment reduced the phosphorylation MEK, ERK and c-Raf, down-stream
pathway of Ras, both in vitro and in vivo. The effect of CMC2.24 on ERK
phosphorylation was confirmed by Immunofluorescence, showing a
significant decrease in ERK phosphorylation (47.8%; p<0.05). Moreover,
CMC2.24 treatment enhanced the levels of superoxide anion in mitochondria
by 200% (p<0.02), decreased ATP levels in a concentration-dependent
manner (p<0.05), and induced intrinsic apoptosis, as shown by the
increase in caspase 9 and Parp cleavage downstream of cytochrome C
cytosolic release. In conclusion, our results indicate that the Ras
pathway is a key molecular target for CMC2.24 and that CMC induces
apoptosis in PC cells through the intrinsic pathway.

This research was supported by the Stony Brook Cancer Center and a URECA
Summer Grant.


