Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay of human MGMT DNA repair protein with PCNA / p21cip1 and
MGMTâ€™s novel role as an S-phase checkpoint.


O6-Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a critical antimutagenic
DNA repair protein that protects the genome and an established target for
improving the efficacy of alkylating agents. In contrast with the
stoichiometric repair reaction performed by a single small MW protein, we
show for the first time that MGMT in human glioblastoma cells
specifically associates with PCNA, p21cip1, and undergoes selective
degradation at mid-S-phase along with replication-licensing components to
maintain genomic integrity. First, we identified a PCNA-Interacting
Protein (PIP box) motif between amino acids 61-70, QCTAWLNAYF in the MGMT
protein. PCNA encircles the DNA and functions as a sliding clamp by
interacting with DNA metabolic proteins having a PIP-box to make the
replication processive. In p53-null H1299 lung cancer cells engineered to
express the p21cip1, either by Tet-off conditional or lentiviral stable
transfections, a reciprocal immunoprecipitation/western blot analyses
using antibodies to PCNA or MGMT confirmed the specific association of
MGMT and PCNA proteins. Expression of the CDK inhibitor p21 disrupted the
interaction between PCNA and MGMT in cells, indicating its regulatory
role in DNA repair during cell cycle blockade. Confocal
immunofluorescence imaging in glioblastoma cells and isogenic HCT116
cells with and without p21cip1 expression, showed a co-localization of
MGMT and PCNA proteins in glioma cells; when cells were subjected to
alkylation DNA damage, the co-localization pattern was punctate and more
prominent, suggesting that PCNA functions to recruit the repair protein
to the damage sites. To probe the cell-cycle dependent regulation of
MGMT, we used synchronized human GBM cells at the G1/S boundary using
double thymidine-block or single thymidine-mimosine blocks. Cells
released into the S-phase showed that the MGMT disassociates from PCNA
during the late S-phase and undergoes specific degradation before
re-accumulating in G2/M. The replication-licensing protein Cdt1 and
p21cip1 were also observed to undergo co-degradation in S-phase, which
has been established as a key step in marking the replication origin
sites. MGMT inhibition, either by O6-benzylguanine or specific shRNAs
greatly impeded the progression of cells into the S-phase in synchronized
cells. DNA synthesis measured by 3H-thymidine or BrdU incorporation was
also curtailed significantly by MGMT inhibition. Furthermore, enforced
expression of MGMT in two GBM cell lines led to a moderate
endo-reduplication of the genome. Collectively, we show new non-repair
functions for MGMT, its requirement for cell cycle progression and timed
elimination to maintain genomic stability. On the clinical front, the
observations provide a clear biochemical rationale for combining MGMT
inhibitors (apart from the alkylators) with antimetabolites [supported by
CPRIT grants RP130266 & RP170207 to KSS].


