Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of FLT3 and Src pathways by ON150030, a type 1
inhibitor, as a novel strategy for relapsed and refractory AML therapy.


Approximately one third of patients suffering from Acute Myeloid Leukemia
harbor a FLT3 Internal tandem duplication mutation (FLT3-ITD). When
mutated, this receptor tyrosine kinase increases the activity of pathways
for proliferation and blocks apoptosis. Quizartinib is a 2nd generation
FLT3 inhibitor that inhibits FLT3-ITD in AML, but has a median duration
response of 12.1 weeks. Studies revealed a secondary mutation in FLT3 at
the aspartate of codon 835 (D835X) is responsible for relapse. The D835
substitution renders FLT3 constitutively active. Type 2 inhibitors like
Quizartinib bind to FLT3 in its inactive state and fail to inhibit
FLT3-ITD harboring a D835 mutation. Here, we tested the utility of
ON150030, developed by our group, as a novel therapeutic agent to treat
AML. Structural studies suggest ON150030 binds to the active form of FLT3
(Type 1 inhibitor) so mutations such as D835X do not affect the
inhibitory activity of the compound. In vitro kinase assays demonstrate
that ON150030 potently inhibits Wildtype and FLT3-D835Y forms, while
Quizartinib fails to inhibit FLT3-D835Y. Additionally, ON150030
demonstrated time and temperature dependent inhibition of FLT3,
suggesting that the compound is an irreversible inhibitor of FLT3.
Biological studies reveal that ON150030 specifically inhibits the growth
of MV4-11 cells harboring the FLT3-ITD mutation (GI50: 10nM). Western
blot analysis demonstrates that MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways in these cells
are inhibited with increasing dose of ON150030. The JAK independent
phosphorylation of STAT5 seen in the context of FLT3-ITD is also reduced
in response to ON150030. Future goals are to introduce FLT3 and its
various mutant isoforms into the mouse myeloid cells (32Dcl3) and examine
how it affects proliferation and differentiation, and then compare the
effects of ON150030 and Quizartinib. In addition to strongly inhibiting
FLT3, ON150030 inhibits SRC, which was shown to induce resistance to
targeted therapies in several leukemias including AML. We will introduce
SRC into the 32D-FLT3-ITD cell lines sensitive to ON150030 and test
whether these cells retain their sensitivity to the drug. Next, we will
perform cytotoxicity and biochemical assays on patient-derived primary
AML cells using ON150030. Mouse xenograft models will be used to
determine if ON150030 synergizes with standard chemotherapy agents and
inhibits cancer progression in vivo. At the conclusion of this project,
we hope to demonstrate that ON150030 can be used in combination therapies
in all AML patients harboring a FLT3 mutation, and result in sustained
remission of disease.


