Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel myogenic differentiation transcription factor CASZ1
suppresses rhabdomyosarcoma tumor growth.


Disruption of muscle regulatory factors (MRFs) in muscle progenitor cells
results in a failure to withdraw from cell cycle and terminal
differentiation and is proposed to contribute to rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS)
tumorigenesis. Zinc finger transcription factor CASZ1 is a tumor
suppressor gene and regulates normal nervous system and heart
development. CASZ1 is known to regulate a subset of genes that are
involved in skeletal muscle development although the function of CASZ1 in
normal myogenesis and RMS tumorigenesis is unknown. CASZ1 levels increase
over 20-fold when C2C12 myoblasts differentiate into myotubes. To probe
its role in normal myogenesis we performed genetic knockdown or
overexpression experiments in C2C12 myoblasts. When CASZ1 expression is
silenced using RNAi, there is a significant reduction in myotubes upon
induction of differentiation. Realtime PCR shows that knockdown of CASZ1
increases Myf5, a MRF that determines early commitment of muscle
precursor cells, but decreases Myogenin (2-fold, p 2-fold, p 2-fold,
p<0.01). Overexpression of CASZ1 induces expression of Myogenin, Acta1,
Ckm and Tnnt1, represses Myf5 and accelerates myotube formation. This
indicates that CASZ1 regulates genes important in the transition from
early to late myogenic differentiation. To investigate the role of CASZ1
in RMS, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS tumors
using public available microarray database. CASZ1 mRNA levels are
~1.5-fold lower in embryonal RMS (ERMS) samples compared to normal muscle
(p 2-fold, p<0.01). Overexpression of CASZ1 induces expression of
Myogenin, Acta1, Ckm and Tnnt1, represses Myf5 and accelerates myotube
formation. This indicates that CASZ1 regulates genes important in the
transition from early to late myogenic differentiation. To investigate
the role of CASZ1 in RMS, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in
primary RMS tumors using public available microarray database. CASZ1 mRNA
levels are ~1.5-fold lower in embryonal RMS (ERMS) samples compared to
normal muscle (p<0.001), while levels of CASZ1 in alveolar (ARMS) are
similar to levels in normal muscle. CASZ1 levels increase over 3-fold
when RD cells (ERMS) were cultured in differentiation medium (100 nM
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA). Knockdown of CASZ1 in the RD
cells suppressed TPA induced expression of myogenic markers TNNT1 and
TNNI2 while CASZ1 overexpression stimulated expression of TNNT1 and TNNI2
(all p 2-fold, p<0.01). Overexpression of CASZ1 induces expression of
Myogenin, Acta1, Ckm and Tnnt1, represses Myf5 and accelerates myotube
formation. This indicates that CASZ1 regulates genes important in the
transition from early to late myogenic differentiation. To investigate
the role of CASZ1 in RMS, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in
primary RMS tumors using public available microarray database. CASZ1 mRNA
levels are ~1.5-fold lower in embryonal RMS (ERMS) samples compared to
normal muscle (p<0.001), while levels of CASZ1 in alveolar (ARMS) are
similar to levels in normal muscle. CASZ1 levels increase over 3-fold
when RD cells (ERMS) were cultured in differentiation medium (100 nM
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA). Knockdown of CASZ1 in the RD
cells suppressed TPA induced expression of myogenic markers TNNT1 and
TNNI2 while CASZ1 overexpression stimulated expression of TNNT1 and TNNI2
(all p<0.05). An in vivo spontaneous xenograft model showed that
overexpression of CASZ1 significantly suppressed RD tumor growth (p
2-fold, p<0.01). Overexpression of CASZ1 induces expression of Myogenin,
Acta1, Ckm and Tnnt1, represses Myf5 and accelerates myotube formation.
This indicates that CASZ1 regulates genes important in the transition
from early to late myogenic differentiation. To investigate the role of
CASZ1 in RMS, we first evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS
tumors using public available microarray database. CASZ1 mRNA levels are
~1.5-fold lower in embryonal RMS (ERMS) samples compared to normal muscle
(p<0.001), while levels of CASZ1 in alveolar (ARMS) are similar to levels
in normal muscle. CASZ1 levels increase over 3-fold when RD cells (ERMS)
were cultured in differentiation medium (100 nM
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA). Knockdown of CASZ1 in the RD
cells suppressed TPA induced expression of myogenic markers TNNT1 and
TNNI2 while CASZ1 overexpression stimulated expression of TNNT1 and TNNI2
(all p<0.05). An in vivo spontaneous xenograft model showed that
overexpression of CASZ1 significantly suppressed RD tumor growth
(p<0.005). In RMS patients, NexGen sequencing of 85 tumors identified 4
samples with nonsynonymous single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in CASZ1
that were absent in the 1000 Genomes databases. We engineered these SNVs
into CASZ1 construct and transfected them into C2C12 cells. We found that
the R25C SNV had impaired nuclear localization and failed to activate
skeletal muscle gene transcription (p 2-fold, p<0.01). Overexpression of
CASZ1 induces expression of Myogenin, Acta1, Ckm and Tnnt1, represses
Myf5 and accelerates myotube formation. This indicates that CASZ1
regulates genes important in the transition from early to late myogenic
differentiation. To investigate the role of CASZ1 in RMS, we first
evaluated the expression of CASZ1 in primary RMS tumors using public
available microarray database. CASZ1 mRNA levels are ~1.5-fold lower in
embryonal RMS (ERMS) samples compared to normal muscle (p<0.001), while
levels of CASZ1 in alveolar (ARMS) are similar to levels in normal
muscle. CASZ1 levels increase over 3-fold when RD cells (ERMS) were
cultured in differentiation medium (100 nM
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA). Knockdown of CASZ1 in the RD
cells suppressed TPA induced expression of myogenic markers TNNT1 and
TNNI2 while CASZ1 overexpression stimulated expression of TNNT1 and TNNI2
(all p<0.05). An in vivo spontaneous xenograft model showed that
overexpression of CASZ1 significantly suppressed RD tumor growth
(p<0.005). In RMS patients, NexGen sequencing of 85 tumors identified 4
samples with nonsynonymous single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in CASZ1
that were absent in the 1000 Genomes databases. We engineered these SNVs
into CASZ1 construct and transfected them into C2C12 cells. We found that
the R25C SNV had impaired nuclear localization and failed to activate
skeletal muscle gene transcription (p<0.03). Taken together, our results
suggest that the regulation of muscle differentiation program by CASZ1 in
C2C12 is integral to proper myogenic differentiation, and genetic
variants of CASZ1 disrupt early myogenesis and may contribute to ERMS
tumorigenesis and progression.


