Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of prorenin receptor PRR knock down and telmisartan on
endometrial cancer growth.


Endometrial cancer is the most common gynaecological malignancy and its
incidence is increasing. Tissue renin angiotensin systems (RAS) are known
to stimulate angiogenesis, cell proliferation and migration. All of these
actions potentiate cancer growth and spread. We have previously
demonstrated that endometrioid endometrial cancers express both prorenin
and prorenin receptor ((P)RR) mRNA and have significantly greater levels
of these proteins than normal adjacent endometrial tissue. Prorenin
acting via the (P)RR can activate both RAS dependent and independent
signalling pathways. Therefore we hypothesized that endometrial cancer
growth can be inhibited by drugs that block Ang II/AT1R interactions and
prorenin/(P)RR mediated signaling pathways. To determine the functional
role of (P)RR in endometrial cancer growth, we used siRNA transfection to
knock down (P)RR expression in three endometrial cancer cell lines
(Ishikawa, HEC-1A and AN3CA) at 24h, 48h, 72h & 96h. The effect of RAS
blockers on cell viability was also assessed by Resazurin assay at 48h in
the three endometrial cancer cell lines.

All three of the endometrial cancer cell lines examined (Ishikawa, HEC-1A
and AN3CA) expressed (P)RR and prorenin mRNA, however levels of (P)RR
were much higher in Ishikawa cells. Transfection of the three cell lines
with a (P)RR siRNA resulted in 90% knockdown of (P)RR mRNA expression and
reduced the cell viability of both Ishikawa and AN3CA but not HEC-1A
cells, as measured by a resazurin assay after 48h incubation. Aliskiren
(a renin inhibitor) inhibited Ishikawa cell growth by 20%. There was no
effect of Aliskiren on cell viability in HEC-1A and AN3CA cell lines.
Perindoprilat (an ACE inhibitor) and Losartan (an angiotensin II type 1
receptor (AT1R) inhibitor) had no effect on cell viability in any cell
line. Another AT1R antagonist, telmisartan, which also acts as a
selective agonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR-Î³), did however significantly reduce cell viability in all cell
lines (Ishikawa 75%, HEC-1A 50% and AN3CA 60%).

Removal of the prorenin receptor inhibits the growth and development of
some endometrial cancer cell lines. Only telmisartan, which has
properties additional to Ang II antagonism, was effective in inhibiting
endometrial cancer cell growth. (P)RR knockdown and telmisartan are
therefore potential therapeutic drugs for the treatment of endometrial
cancer.


