Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of E-selectin or E-selectin together with CXCR4
resensitizes multiple myeloma to treatment.


INTRODUCTION: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell malignancy localized
in the bone marrow. Selectins and CXCR4 play a pivotal role in homing,
adhesion, and proliferation of MM. Herein, we tested the role of
E-selectin in the pathophysiology of MM by using a specific E-selectin
antagonist (GMI-1271) and a dual E-selectin/CXCR4 antagonist (GMI-1359)
on the proliferation and cell trafficking of MM in vitro and in vivo.

PROCEDURES: Endothelial cells (HUVECs), stromal cells (HS5), MM
patient-derived stromal cells (MSP1), and MM cell lines (MM1s, H929, U266
and RPMI8226) were tested for expression of E-selectin, CLA (E-selectin
ligand) and CXCR4 by flow cytometry. The effect of GMI-1271 and GMI-1359
was studied on MM cell adhesion to stroma; chemotaxis to stromal media or
SDF1; and MM cell survival by MTT assay, where MM cells were treated with
lenalidomide or carfilzomib; in the presence, or absence of GMI-1271 or
-1359. In a xenograft mouse model, the sensitivity of MM was tested in
mice treated with vehicle, lenalidomide, GMI-1271, or a combination of
GMI-1271 and lenalidomide (n=10 mice/group); and tumor growth was
monitored weekly using bioluminescence imaging.

SUMMARY: Expression of E-selectin was high in HUVECs, MSP1 and HS5; CLA
was high only in RPMI8226; and CXCR4 was high in all MM cells. MM1s cell
adhesion to stroma was decreased by GMI-1271 and even more profoundly
decreased by GMI-1359 in a dose-dependent manner. Chemotaxis of MM1s
cells towards conditioned media or SDF1 was modestly affected by
GMI-1271, but greatly reduced by GMI-1359. MM cell proliferation was
significantly inhibited by GMI-1359, only when MM cells were co-cultured
with stroma, but not alone. Stroma-induced drug resistance of MM cells to
carfilzomib and lenalidomide was reduced in the presence of the GMI
compounds, while the effect of GMI-1359 was stronger than GMI-1271. In
vivo, GMI-1271 and lenalidomide as single agents delayed tumor growth
compared to vehicle by 40% and 35%, respectively; however, a combination
treatment delayed tumor growth more profoundly than vehicle by 64%
(p=0.04).

CONCLUSIONS: GMI-1271 and GMI-1359 disrupt the interaction between MM
cells and bone marrow microenvironment as determined by reduction of
adhesion, chemotaxis and microenvironment-induced drug resistance in
vitro. However, the dual inhibition of E-selectin and CXCR4 produced more
profound effects compared to E-selectin alone. Moreover, GMI-1271
sensitized MM cells to lenalidomide by alleviating chemoresistance and
delayed tumor growth in vivo.


