Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) promotes progression of
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.


Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is a keratinocyte-derived
invasive and metastatic tumor of the skin. It is the second-most commonly
diagnosed form of skin cancer (16%) striking 200,000 Americans annually.
Increased understanding of the mechanisms involved in pathogeneses of
cSCC could identify means to prevent, inhibit and reverse this process.
In our previous studies, inhibition of Fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGFR) significantly decreased Ultraviolet B-induced (UVB) epidermal
hyperplasia and hyperproliferation in SKH-1 mice suggesting an important
role of FGFR signaling in skin cancer prevention. However, the role of
FGFR signaling in the progression of cSCC is not yet elucidated. Analysis
of the expression of FGFR2 in cSCC cells and normal epidermal
keratinocytes revealed overexpression and increased FGFR2 activity in
cSCC cells. Tumor cell-specific overexpression of FGFR2 was detected in
human cSCCs and in UVB-induced mouse cSCCs, whereas the expression of
FGFR2 was low in premalignant lesions and normal skin. Further, treatment
with a selective FGFR inhibitor; AZD4547 significantly decreased
proliferation, migration, and invasion of cSCC cells in culture. The
decrease in FGFR activation was associated with an inhibition of mTORC1
and mTORC2 signaling markers. Our studies provide mechanistic evidence
for the role of FGFR2 in early progression of cSCC and identify FGFR as a
putative therapeutic target in the treatment of skin cancer.


