Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCR5 inhibition: macrophage repolarization therapy for colorectal
cancer.


In patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC), the local immune
response influences the clinical course. An in-depth analysis of the
invasive margin of human CRC liver metastases revealed a distinct
immunological microenvironment. Within this microenvironment, two
distinct subsets of myeloid cells induce an influx of T cells into the
invasive margin via CXCL9/CXCL10. CCL5 is produced by these T cells and
stimulates pro-tumoral effects via CCR5, creating an exploitive loop.
CCR5 was found on macrophages, lymphocytes and on the vast majority of
tumor cells. Inhibition of CCR5 in patient-derived functional in vitro
organotypic culture models showed a promising macrophage repolarization
with anti-tumoral effects. These effects are mediated by activation of an
antiviral program in macrophages, leading to interferon and reactive
oxygen species production and subsequent selective tumor cell death.
These anti-tumoral effects were confirmed in a phase I trial with a CCR5
antagonist in 14 patients with liver metastases of advanced refractory
CRC. Treatment with the oral CCR5 Inhibitor was very well tolerated and
objective responses were seen, especially in combination with previously
ineffective chemotherapy. Biopsies revealed mitigation of tumor-promoting
inflammation within the tumor tissue, confirming the validity of the
explant model and highlighting the feasbility of this approach. It
furthermore shows the proof-of-concept for macrophage repolarization in
cancer patients.


