Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NFATc2 in non-small cell lung cancer mediates inhibition of
peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. While genetic
mutations that provide growth advantages to cancer cells are fundamental
to malignant transformation, ability to evade the immune system is also
crucial in tumorigenesis. We have previously shown that human lung
cancers with high expression of nuclear factor of activated T cells,
cytoplasmic 2, (NFATc2) are associated with reduced recurrence-free and
overall survival. NFATc2 is expressed in most immune cells and has been
extensively studied in immune cells. However, its function in cancer
development is not completely understood. In this study, the role of
NFATc2 in lung cancer on immune escape is explored. Lung cancer cell
lines with high NFATc2 expression were co-cultured with peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) and a significant inhibition of PBMC
proliferation was observed compared to PBMC only control. However, the
inhibitory effect of PBMC proliferation was reversed in co-culture with
NFATc2 knockdown cancer cells. When cancer cells and PBMC were separated
by a membrane using Transwell inserts, the anti-proliferative effect on
PBMC was not observed suggesting that cell-cell contact was required for
the NFATc2-mediated inhibition. Moreover, interleukin-2 (IL-2) was
produced by PBMC irrespective of the presence or absence of lung cancer
cells. These results showed that the inhibition of proliferation was
independent of the activation of PBMC. Taken together, we have shown
NFATc2 in lung cancer plays a role in immune modulation by inhibiting
PBMC proliferation and this could be a novel mechanism of immune evasion
in lung cancer.


