Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome-derived miR-429 contributes to prostate cancer
chemoresistance.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer in men and the 2nd
leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States. Certain
miRNAs, act as tumor promoting or inhibiting factors in tumor
development, function primarily by targeting specific mRNAs for
degradation or inhibition of translation of their targeted proteins.
Emerging evidence indicates that exosomes play a key role in tumor-host
crosstalk, and exosome secretion, composition, and functional capacity
are altered as tumors progress to aggressive phenotypes. From our prior
report, we have constructed a potential network of 29 deregulated miRNAs,
including 19 up and 10 down, in exosome samples derived from two kinds of
paclitaxel resistant PCa cells (PC3-TXR and DU145-TXR) compared with
their parental cells (PC3 and DU145). In this study, to further determine
the roles of certain miRNAs derived from exosomes in chemoresistant
cells, we firstly confirmed the lower expression level of miR-429 miRNA
in the exosomes derived from the paclitaxel resistant PCa cells compared
to their parental cells. In addition, when the miR-429 was over-expressed
in PC3-TXR and DU145-TXR cells by stable transfection,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers significantly altered
together with morphological changes. Overexpression of miR-429 decreased
the tumor cell migration and invasion that associated with inactivation
of PI-3K/AKT and Notch signaling pathways since the pathway specific
inhibitors significantly diminished the transfected tumor cell migration
and invasion. Finally, we found that overexpression of miRNA-429
significantly enhanced chemo-sensitivity of the chemoresistant PCa cells.
These data suggested that exosome-derived miR-429 contributes to PCa
chemoresistance and miR-429 may become a potential therapeutic target for
PCa patients. This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) Key Project (81130046); NSFC (81171993; 81272415); Guangxi
Projects of China (2013GXNSFEA053004; 2012GXNSFCB053004;
2013GXNSFBA019177; 1355004-5; 201201ZD004; GZPT13-35; 14122008-22;
11-031-05-K2; KY2015YB057; 14-045-12-K2).


