Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redox-mediated inactivation of MGMT DNA repair through thiolation
or nitrosylation of the active site cysteine145 sensitizes human gliomas
to alkylating agents in vitro and in xenograft models.


O6-Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a simple and unique
antimutagenic DNA repair protein that plays a crucial role in conferring
tumor resistance to various alkylating agents in brain tumor therapy.
MGMT repairs O6-alkylguanines by transferring the alkyl groups to its
active site cysteine (Cys145) in a stoichiometric/suicidal reaction
thereby restoring the original nucleotide sequence in a single step.
Although O6-benzylguanine (BG), a pseudosubstrate inhibitor, currently in
clinical trials, potently inhibits MGMT and improves the efficacy of
alkylating agents, unacceptable levels of bone marrow toxicity has been a
great concern. For developing new MGMT inhibitors, we exploited the
reactive nature of the active site Cys145 (pKa 4.5) and its
susceptibility for thiolation and nitrosylation, both of which inactivate
the MGMT. A new strategy involving inhibition of S-nitosoglutathione
reductase (GSNOR) was also explored to increase the steady-state levels
of nitrosylated MGMT. First, we designed a redox perturbing glutathione
mimetic, a homoglutathione disulfide (hGTX) that has been stabilized with
the addition of small amounts of cisplatin (1000:10). Spermine NONOate
and S-nitroso penicillamine (SNAP) served as the protein-nitrosylating
agents. N6022, a specific and reversible inhibitor of GSNOR was used with
nitrosylators in some assays. Both the hGTX and spermine NONOate at
100-400 ÂµM concentrations for 24 h inhibited the repair activity of MGMT
>75% in HT29, SF188, and T98G cells. The NONOate strongly curtailed the
DNA repair activity of recombinant MGMT showing a direct interaction. The
inactivated MGMT protein was promptly eliminated from glioma cells. MGMT
disappeared from cells much faster in spermine NONOate +N6022 treated
cells, suggesting an extended steady-state of nitrosylated MGMT and its
subsequent degradation. MGMT depletion was accompanied by 4-6 fold
increases in cell killing by BCNU or temozolomide (TMZ). Binding of the
biotinylated-O6-benzylguanine to the MGMT protein was prevented by hGTX
and spermine NONOate treatments indicating the Cys145 was indeed the site
of modification. In the nude mice bearing T98G or HT29-luc2 xenografts,
combinations of hGTX and TMZ or spermine NONOate +TMZ produced markedly
synergistic tumor regressions compared with TMZ alone. A reduction of
MGMT protein as by immunoblotting and diminished MGMT activity levels in
tumor tissues was verified. Apoptosis regulatory proteins were
upregulated in excised tumors and H&E staining confirmed no discernible
host organ toxicities. Our studies highlight the options for redox-driven
therapeutic strategies for MGMT [supported by CPRIT grants RP130266 and
RP170207 to KSS].


