Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Partial knockdown of RLIP76 prevents cancer susceptibility of p53
null mice.


P53 is a stress-responsive, genome protective, tumor suppressor whose
functions are lost or altered in nearly all neoplasia. P53 homozygous
knockout mice (p53-/-) develop spontaneous lymphoma and other
malignancies in nearly 100% of cases by 6 months of life. In stark
contrast, homozygous gene knockout of the stress-responsive,
anti-apoptotic, mercapturic acid pathway transporter protein, RLIP76,
results in marked protection from chemical carcinogenesis. P53 expression
and activation is regulated by intermediary metabolites of this pathway,
and p53 regulates the expression of key enzymes of this pathway. P53 can
directly bind to RLIP76 through a CDK-interaction domain, and inhibit its
transport activity as well as endocytosis stimulatory activity. These
results indicate that RLIP76 is an effector of p53 in a manner analogous
to its known function as the first known effector of the Ral pathways
that regulate membrane plasticity, motility and invasion. This translates
into reduced kinase signaling down-stream of membrane-receptor/ligand
interactions. An inverse relationship between RLIP76 and p53 protein and
mRNA expression has been observed in-vitro, and is confirmed by analysis
of human cancer genomic analyses in the COH database. RLIP76 depletion
causes apoptosis in cancer cells independent of p53 status, strengthening
the view that RLIP76 is key down-stream effector of p53. We reasoned that
if RLIP76 is necessary for cancer to develop in p53-deficient animals,
its suppression will reduce the incidence of malignancy in 12-week old
p53-/- mice treated with COHSA007 phosphorothioated antisense, 200 Î¼g
i.p.q.2wk till age 8 months. Results of our studies confirmed these
predictions, since 4/4 scrambled antisense treated p53-/- mice developed
T-cell lymphoma whereas 8/8 COHSA007 treated p53-/- mice survived to the
end of the experiment without development of any malignancy. These
findings demonstrate that RLIP76 is required for malignancy in the p53-/-
mice. Taken in context of our previous studies showing that RLIP76-/-
mice are highly resistant to inflammation and carcinogenesis in chemical
carcinogenesis models of the skin and lung, the present findings strongly
support the idea of an existential role of RLIP76 in the malignant
phenotype, and strengthen the rationale for using targeted systemic
depletion of RLIP76 for treatment of human neoplasia (Supported in part
by the Department of Defense grant (W81XWH-16-1-0641) and USPHS grant CA
77495).


