Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of PALB2-BRCA1 interaction in tumor suppression.


Homologous recombination (HR) is the only error-free pathway for the
repair of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). BRCA1 and BRCA2, the two major
breast cancer suppressor proteins, play essential roles in HR-mediated
repair of DSBs by promoting the recruitment of RAD51, the recombination
enzyme, to DNA damage sites for the initiation of HR. PALB2 (partner and
localizer of BRCA2) plays a key role in this pathway by acting as a
chromatin adaptor for BRCA2 and a linker between BRCA1 and BRCA2. Like
BRCA1 and BRCA2, PALB2 is a tumor suppressor gene itself. Germline,
heterozygous mutations in the gene increase the risk of breast, ovarian
and pancreatic cancers. However, its mechanism is not fully understood.
To investigate the in vivo role of the PALB2-BRCA1 interaction, we
previously generated a Palb2 knockin mouse strain which contains a
mutation that disrupts BRCA1 binding. This mouse model also allows us to
bypass the embryonic lethality of the Palb2 KO mice. In this study, we
hypothesized that the direct communication between the two proteins is
critical for proper DNA damage repair and response in vivo and for
suppression of tumorigenesis. Indeed, both immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
immunofluorescence (IF) demonstrated that different tissues of the mutant
mice have higher levels of endogenous DSBs (Î³H2AX foci) and slower DSB
repair kinetics after ionizing radiation (IR). Yet, mutant cells were
more resistant to cell death. When aged under normal conditions, mutant
mice showed increased tumor incidence in multiple tissues, particularly
in the liver. When challenged by IR, mutant mice quickly developed thymic
lymphoma and later in other tissues including liver and ovary, etc.
Interestingly, when crossed with Trp53 mutant mice, the resulting
Palb2m/m;Trp53+/- mice showed greatly accelerated development of thymic
lymphoma and osteosarcoma, which are typically associated with Trp53 but
not Palb2 mutations. Exome sequencing revealed focal deletion of the
wild-type allele of Trp53 in the majority of the tumors, suggesting that
disruption of BRCA1-PALB2/BRCA2 axis promotes regional genomic deletions
that may lead to loss of other tumor suppressors such as p53. Our results
underscore the importance of the BRCA1-PALB2/BRCA2 pathway for tumor
suppression and suggest a potentially novel mechanism for
BRCA1/PALB2-mediated tumor suppression, which is by preventing Trp53/TP53
loss of heterozygosity (LOH), which allows for tumor development.


