Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KLF4-dependent perivascular plasticity enhances pre-metastatic
niche formation and metastasis.


Metastasis causes most cancer deaths, and new therapies that are based on
a deeper understanding of this process are required to improve patient
survival. Metastatic tumor cell colonization and growth is facilitated by
a pre-metastatic niche microenvironment composed of hematopoietic cells,
stromal cells, and extracellular matrix that support tumor survival and
growth. Perivascular cells, including vascular smooth muscle cells
(vSMCs) and pericytes, are a key cell population involved in new vessel
formation critical to primary tumor development. Given the well-described
plasticity of perivascular cells, we sought to determine whether
perivascular cells regulate tumor cell survival and proliferation at
metastatic sites. Using perivascular cell-specific and pericyte-specific
lineage tracing models, we demonstrated that perivascular cells lose
traditional vSMC/pericyte marker expression in response to tumor-secreted
factors, and exhibit increased proliferation, migration and extracellular
matrix (ECM) synthesis. Expression of the pluripotency gene Klf4 is
increased and is critical for this phenotypic transition to a less
differentiated state characterized by increased proliferation and ECM
production. Genetic inactivation of Klf4 specifically in perivascular
cells decreases pre-metastatic perivascular cell proliferation and
consequently integrin-fibronectin dependent tumor metastasis. Our data
reveal a previously unidentified role for perivascular cells in
pre-metastatic niche formation, and suggest that modulation of stromal
cell plasticity may provide a novel strategy for limiting metastasis.


