Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of OX40L fusion protein with an anti-tumor vaccine
reduces lung metastasis and prolongs survival in a murine model of
metastatic triple negative breast cancer.


OX40 is a costimulatory receptor on activated T-cells that potentiates
the proliferation, survival, and memory formation of the CD4+ and CD8+
immune populations upon its interaction with OX40L on antigen presenting
cells. The engagement of OX40 on regulatory T-cells (Tregs) with its
ligand has also been shown to inhibit their suppressive capabilities. The
use of exogenous OX40L agonists for cancer immunotherapy is particularly
attractive in combination with cancer vaccines in order to boost the
immune activity of antigen specific T-cells and overcome self-tolerance
and immunosuppressive mechanisms of the tumor. We investigated the
efficacy of this strategy in the 4T1 murine mammary tumor model of
metastatic triple-negative breast cancer by combining an OX40L fusion
protein (OX40L-FP) with a poxvirus-based cancer vaccine
(MVA-Twist-TRICOM) that induces T-cell responses specific to the tumor
antigen Twist, a transcription factor highly expressed in lung
metastases. OX40L-FP was administered 3 and 6 days after the prime and
boost vaccinations to maximize its interaction with OX40 on activated
T-cells. As single agents, OX40L-FP and MVA-Twist-TRICOM had minimal
effect on the formation of lung metastases in 4T1 tumor-bearing mice.
However, when combined, the two immunotherapies significantly decreased
the number of metastatic colonies per lung, and prolonged survival after
surgical resection of the primary tumor. Antibody depletion studies
demonstrated that the observed anti-tumor effects were mediated by both
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells. Immune subset analysis revealed that the
combination therapy increased the total number of CD4+Foxp3- and CD4+
effector memory T-cells in both the lung and periphery compared to the
monotherapy controls. More importantly, the two agents synergistically
induced greater CD4+ Twist-specific T-cell responses, as determined by ex
vivo proliferation assays using T-cells isolated from the lung and spleen
that were stimulated with Twist protein. Although the combination had no
added effect on the number of total CD8+ and CD8+ effector memory T-cells
in relation to the vaccine monotherapy, tetramer staining revealed a
significant increase in CD8+ T-cells that were specific for Twist. We
also observed a greater number of CD8+ T-cell memory precursors, as well
as a greater number of IFNÎ³-producing CD8+ T-cells in both the lung and
periphery. Tregs isolated from the lung and splenic tissue were found to
be significantly less suppressive following the combination therapy,
compared to those isolated from mice that received the OX40L-FP and
MVA-Twist-TRICOM single agent treatments. This study provides the
rationale for pairing OX40 agonists with cancer vaccines to stimulate
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses, while inhibiting Treg function, as a way
to induce specific immunity and clearance of metastatic tumors.


