Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytoskeletal modulation results in increased tumor survival and
drug resistance through attenuation of p53 dependent apoptosis.


One of the major challenges to eradicating cancer involves the evolution
of drug resistant clones and persistence of residual disease that escapes
our current limit of detection but may proliferate upon cessation of
therapy. These microscopic foci of residual diseases often exhibit
stem-cell like properties and are intrinsically more resistant to drug
therapy. A better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the innate
drug resistance of these cellular populations may lead to improved
treatment strategies, resulting in more durable remissions and ultimately
improved patient survival.

We utilize functional genomic platforms to identify mechanisms
responsible for the persistence of drug tolerant cells. A genome wide
shRNA enrichment screen was performed using the c-Met addicted cell line
GTL-16 to identify genes whose knockdown conferred DTP survival.
Inhibition of the RhoA-ROCK-myosin pathway promotes drug resistance in a
variety of tumor models, including those treated with either targeted
therapy or conventional chemotherapy. Furthermore, pharmacological
validation using multiple small molecule inhibitors of ROCK1 phenocopied
both myosin heavy chain (MYH9) and light chain (MYL12) shRNA knockdown.
More recently, utilizing a combination of gene expression and biochemical
approaches, we have identified attenuation of p53 induced apoptosis to be
a key event in mediating survival of these drug tolerant persisters.
Reactivation of p53 using nutlin results in increased cell death.

These findings demonstrate that modulation of cytoskeleton is an
important, but underappreciated, mechanism of drug resistance across many
tumor types. These downstream effectors may serve as novel therapeutic
targets for intervention and also biomarkers to stratify patients and
their response to treatment.


