Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New predictive and preventive biomarkers for preclinical
hepatocellular carcinoma in Egyptian population by detection of serum
miRNAs.


The hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignant
tumors and carries a poor survival rate. Prognosis, survival and
management of patients at risk for developing HCC remain challenging in
Egypt and worldwide. Furthermore, poor prognosis of patients with
symptomatic (HCC) diagnosed clinically at advanced stages suggests an
urgent need for new biomarkers detection that can be used for
pre-clinical screening for early detection of premalignant lesions and
tumors in high risk to hepatitis C infection.

In the present study we used novel formulated anticancer compound(s),
combined with or without Sorafenib treatment to exert their
antiproliferative effects by eliciting concomitant expression of known or
novel biomarkers, including different serum miRNAs, which can be
quantitatively analyzed for differences in the levels of metabolites and
proteins in the blood and liver tissues of treated HCC xenografts and
liver cirrhosis animal models. In addition, circulating miRNAs levels
were measured as promising markers in 12 month interval-serum samples
that were collected from normal, chronic hepatitis C virus infected
patient cohorts at the pre-malignant or pre-clinical stages and liver
cirrhotic patients that did not develop cancer. Different serum miRNAs,
including miR-21, miR-142, let-7a, let-7b, miR-429 and miR-34a were
detected in pre-clinical HCC patients and have the potential to screen
for hepatitis C virus infected patients at high risk to develop HCC 12
months after miRNAs detection. Our data of detected serum miRNAs from
animal models and patient samples can be used to confirm and correlate
histological and histochemical results at various time points with serum
or imaging biomarkers, which may have a great promise for the prediction
and prevention of HCC in high risk Egyptian populations.


