Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation and mechanistic characterization of M7824
(MSB0011359C), a novel bifunctional fusion protein targeting the PD-L1
and TGFβ pathways.


Dual targeting of the programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and transforming
growth factor β (TGFβ) pathways, 2 key mediators of tumor immune
evasion, may provide synergistic antitumor activity. The novel
bifunctional fusion protein M7824 (MSB0011359C) is a fully human IgG1
monoclonal antibody against PD-L1, fused via a glycine-serine linker at
the CH3-C terminus to the extracellular domain of human TGFβ receptor
II, which functions as a TGFβ “trap.” Thus, M7824 is designed to
exert independent and complementary anti-immunosuppressive functions by
simultaneously blocking the PD-L1 and TGFβ pathways. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate M7824 preclinically. M7824 was efficacious in
multiple syngeneic tumor models (EMT-6, MC38, PANC02, 4T1, CT26, and
GL261). In orthotopic EMT-6 and intramuscular MC38 models, M7824 showed
superior additive antitumor effects compared to anti-PD-L1 antibody or
TGFβ trap monotherapy. M7824 also inhibited spontaneous metastases in
EMT-6 and 4T1 models. Furthermore, M7824 extended survival and conferred
long-term protective antitumor immunity, as demonstrated by protection of
cured mice against tumor cell rechallenge. Mechanistically, the dual
anti-immunosuppressive activity of M7824 in the MC38 model resulted in
unique activation of both the adaptive and innate immune systems,
including increased tumor infiltration, proliferation, and cytotoxicity
of CD8+ T cells; increased prevalence of splenic tumor antigen-specific
CD8+ T cells; increased CD8+ TEM infiltration and CD8+ TEM/naïve ratio;
increased tumor-infiltrated natural killer (NK) cells; increased ratio of
M1/M2 macrophages; and decreased infiltration of tumor-associated
neutrophils and myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Similar
immunophenotypic changes were observed in the EMT-6 model. Activation of
both the adaptive and innate immune systems contributed to the antitumor
activity of M7824 in the MC38 model, as depletion of CD8+ T cells and NK
cells led to a substantial decrease in M7824-mediated tumor regression;
CD4+ T cells and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, however,
appeared dispensable. Toxicologic evaluation in cynomolgus monkeys
indicated M7824 was well tolerated, with only minor hematologic effects
observed. Although M7824 is a bifunctional molecule, its antitumor
activity can be further improved by combination with standard-of-care
therapies: in the MC38 model, combining M7824 with radiotherapy or
chemotherapy resulted in more effective inhibition of tumor growth and an
increased frequency of tumor antigen-specific IFN-γ-producing CD8+ T
cells vs either monotherapy. Collectively, our preclinical data suggest
that M7824 elicits potent and synergistic antitumor activity via the
simultaneous blockade of the PD-L1 and TGFβ pathways. Phase 1 clinical
trials with M7824 are under way in patients with solid tumors.


