Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two distinct regulatory mechanisms underlie estrogen receptor
negative breast cancer susceptibility at the 2p23.2 locus.


Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) are designed to identify single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) mapping to genomic regions associated
with a particular trait or disease. Currently, 19 genomic loci associated
with risk for estrogen receptor negative breast cancer have been
identified. However, for most of these loci the mechanisms driving
susceptibility have remained elusive. The 2p23.2 locus, defined by SNP
rs67073037 (p = 4.76 x 10-9), contains 79 SNPs exhibiting genome-wide
significant associations as well as four candidate genes: SPDYA, TRMT61B,
WDR43, and FAM179A. Post-GWAS functional analysis revealed two candidate
causal regulatory elements: an enhancer-like element defined by SNP
rs44017214 located in the first intron of the WDR43 gene; and a segment
in the 3’-UTR region of WDR43 defined by SNPs rs11680458 and rs11331880
which are predicted to have allele specific binding of non-coding
microRNAs miR-548 and miR-376, respectively. We validated allele specific
transcription factor binding to rs44017214 using competitive binding of
USF1/USF2 to the risk allele in both MCF10A and CAL51 cell lines in
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays (EMSA). Additionally, rs44017214
was removed using CRISPR-cas9, and expression of neighboring genes was
evaluated by qRT-PCR. No change in expression was found for any gene in a
2 Mb region surrounding the SNP, with the exception of PLB1. This
suggests that the enhancer element in the intron of WDR43 has PLB1 as its
target. To assess the miRNA binding site impact on WDR43 expression the
pMIR-REPORT Luciferase allele-specific vector was co-transfected with
miR-141/200, miR548, or miR-376 in MCF10A cells. The rs1131880 allele C
in the WDR43 3’-UTR lead to the suppression of luciferase expression by
miR-376 compared to the G allele. This study reveals two independent
regulatory mechanisms within the 2p23.2 locus; (i) modulation of enhancer
activity by allele specific binding of transcription factors USF1/USF2 to
rs4401714, and (ii) decreasing the expression of WDR43 through the
formation of a miR-376 binding site at the 3’-UTR of the WDR43 gene.
Elucidating the functional significance of these common variants in the
novel susceptibility loci 2p23.2 furthers our knowledge of the etiology
of estrogen receptor negative breast cancer.


