Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: H3B6527, a selective and potent FGFR4 inhibitor for FGF19-driven
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has limited treatment options and
generally poor prognosis. Recent genomic studies have identified FGF19 as
a driver oncogene in HCC. FGF19 is a gut secreted hormone that acts in
the liver through FGFR4 to regulate bile acid synthesis. Consistent with
the notion that FGF19 is a driver oncogene in HCC, transgenic mice
overexpressing FGF19 form liver tumors and genetic ablation of FGFR4
prevented tumor formation. These data suggest targeting FGFR4 would have
therapeutic benefit in HCC with altered FGF19 signaling. While a number
of Pan-FGFR inhibitors are being clinically evaluated, their application
to FGF19-driven HCC may be limited by their FGFR1-3 related dose limiting
toxicities. Using structure guided drug design, we have generated a
highly selective covalent FGFR4 inhibitor, H3B-6527. Biochemical and
cellular selectivity assays showed that H3B-6527 is >300 fold selective
towards FGFR4 compared to other FGFR isoforms. Addition of H3B-6527 to
FGF19 amplified HCC cell lines led to dose dependent inhibition of
FGF19/FGFR4 signaling and concomitant reduction in cell viability. In a
panel of 40 HCC cell lines, H3B-6527 selectively reduced the viability of
cells that harbor FGF19 amplification and showed no effect in FGF19
non-amplified HCC cell line models. Oral dosing of H3B-6527 to mice led
to dose-dependent pharmacodynamic modulation of FGFR4 signaling and tumor
regression in FGF19 altered HCC cell line derived xenograft models.
H3B-6527 demonstrated inhibition of tumor growth in an orthotopic liver
xenograft model of FGF19 altered HCC grown in nude mice. Importantly, the
inhibition of tumor growth occurred at doses that were well tolerated in
mice and no evidence of FGFR1-3 related toxicities were observed at
efficacious doses. In a panel of 30 HCC patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
models, H3B-6527 demonstrated tumor regressions in the context of
FGF19-amplified tumors. In addition, H3B-6527 showed antitumor activity
and tumor regressions in PDX models with high FGF19 expression but no
FGF19 amplification. The mechanism for FGF19 overexpression in the
absence of gene amplification is under investigation. In conclusion, our
preclinical studies demonstrate that FGF19 expression is a predictive
biomarker for response to FGFR4 inhibitor therapy. Genomic analysis of
public and proprietary data sets indicates that at least approximately
30% of HCC patients exhibit altered FGF19 expression and could
potentially benefit from H3B-6527 monotherapy treatment.


