Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MDSC depletion combined with CTLA-4 blockade cause tumor
regression in a syngeneic model of oral cavity cancer.


Carcinogen-associated head and neck cancers are a heterogeneous group of
aggressive cancers with a high recurrence rate and poor 5-year survival.
Many of these cancers are T-cell inflamed but only a subset of patients
respond to checkpoint blocking immunotherapy. Local immunosuppression
mediated by both the tumor cells and other infiltrating immune cells are
likely a major mechanism of resistance to immunotherapy. The mouse oral
cancer (MOC) model includes genetically defined cell lines derived from
carcinogen-induced tumors that generate tumors with variable T-cell
inflamed phenotypes when transplanted into wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Mice
bearing MOC1 tumors display a T-cell inflamed phenotype but do not
significantly respond to PD-L1 checkpoint inhibition alone, which models
a significant subset of human cancers from the oral cavity. Conversely,
MOC2 tumors are non-T-cell inflamed. Using these MOC models, we have
demonstrated an inverse relationship between accumulation of granulocytic
MDSCs (gMDSCs) and effector immune cells (CD8/4+ T-cells, and NK cells)
in the tumor microenvironment. Functionally, these gMDSCs suppressed CD8+
T-cell proliferation, IFNÎ³ production, and antigen-specific killing.
Depletion of these gMDSCs with a systemic anti-Ly6G antibody (1A8) did
not change CD8/4+ T-cell or NK cell accumulation but restored tumor
T-cell and NK cell activation and draining lymph node antigen-specific
T-lymphocyte activation that was lost with tumor progression. Depletion
of gMDSCs also significantly sensitized established MOC1 tumors to
CTLA4-based checkpoint inhibition. CTLA-4 blockade alone induced tumor
regression in a subset of mice and a marked delay in others. However,
gMDSC depletion plus CTLA-4 blockade resulted in complete tumor rejection
and development of immunologic memory in all treated mice. Peripheral
gMDSCs were found to express the chemokine receptor CXCR2 but no other
myeloid chemokine receptors, and expression of CXCR2 ligands CXCL1 and
CXCL2 increased within the tumor microenvironment during tumor
progression. Macrophage chemotaxis components CSF1R and CSF1 were not
significantly expressed in these models. TCGA data analysis demonstrated
an MDSC-rich gene expression profile in >60% of head and neck cancers,
along with significant CTLA4, CXCR2, CXCL1, and CXCL8 (IL-8) expression
within both HPV-positive and negative head and neck cancers. Functional
inhibition or elimination of MDSCs from the tumor microenvironment may
significantly reverse local immunosuppression and enhance responses to
checkpoint inhibition in patients with head and neck cancer.


