Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic inflammation and sarcopenia predict colorectal cancer
survival.


Importance: A higher neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR, indicating
systemic inflammation), and sarcopenia (reduced skeletal muscle mass)
predict morbidity/mortality in a variety of cancers, but no prior
research examines associations of pre-diagnostic NLR with at-diagnosis
sarcopenia, nor whether NLR and sarcopenia combined identify early-stage
patients with poor prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC).Objective: To
evaluate the association between pre-diagnosis NLR and at-diagnosis
sarcopenia and of their combination with CRC survival, controlling for
age, ethnicity, sex, body mass index, stage, and cancer site.

Design, Setting, and Participants: This observational cohort with
prospectively-collected data included 2470 patients diagnosed with stage
I-III CRC at Kaiser Permanente from 2006-2011 with computed tomography
(CT) scans from clinical care (mean days pre-diagnosis=6).

Exposures: Systemic inflammation measured via average NLR in the 24
months pre-diagnosis (mean count=3 measures, mean months
pre-diagnosis=7). The reference value was NLR below 3, indicating low/no
inflammation.

Main Outcomes and Measures: Sarcopenia, defined by published cutoffs for
skeletal muscle index (CT muscle area in cm2 at the third lumbar vertebra
divided by squared height in m2; below 52-cm2/m2 and 38-cm2/m2 for
normal/overweight men and women, respectively, and below 54-cm2/m2 and
47-cm2/m2 for obese men and women, respectively), and incident death
(overall or CRC-related).

Results: Average age was 63 years; half of patients were female. NLR
above 3 and sarcopenia were common (46% and 44%, respectively). Over a
median of 6 years, we observed 656 deaths, 357 from CRC. Elevated NLR was
associated with sarcopenia in a dose-response manner (compared to NLR
below 3, Odds Ratio [OR]=1.35; 95%CI:1.10-1.67 for NLR 3-5; OR=1.47;
95%CI:1.16-1.85 for NLR above 5). NLR above 3 and sarcopenia were also
independently associated with survival (Hazard Ratio [HR]=1.65;
95%CI:1.45-1.98 for overall death and HR=1.29; 95%CI:1.09-1.53 for CRC
death); patients with both sarcopenia and NLR above 3 (versus neither),
had double the risk of death overall (HR=2.53; 95%CI:1.87-3.41) and from
CRC (HR=2.19; 95%CI:1.74-2.75).

Conclusions and Relevance: Host inflammatory/immune response shortly
prior to diagnosis predicts muscularity at diagnosis. Low muscle combined
with systemic inflammation predicts worse CRC prognosis regardless of
stage. A better understanding of the crosstalk between
inflammatory/immune responses and the onset of changes in skeletal muscle
may open new therapeutic avenues to improve cancer outcomes.


