Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of zyxin in mitosis and colon cancer.


Zyxin is a LIM domain protein that is concentrated at sites of cell-cell
adhesion, where it is proposed to dock proteins involved in cytoskeletal
dynamics and signaling. Recently, Zyxin has been shown to promote LATS
degradation and YAP activation in Hippo Pathway. Here, We have identified
a novel mechanism for phospho-regulation of Zyxin in mitosis and its
biological significance in colon cancer. We found that the mitotic kinase
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) phosphorylates Zyxin in vitro and in
vivo at serine 281, serine 308 and serine 344 during antimitotic
drug-induced G2/M phase arrest and unperturbed mitosis. Moreover, Zyxin
mitotic phosphorylation-deficient mutant (Zyxin3A, harboring
S281A/S308A/S344A) was sufficient to suppress colon cancer cell
proliferation and migration. We further demonstrated that depletion of
Zyxin resulted in impaired colon cancer tumorigenesis in vitro and in
vivo through inhibiting F-actin cytoskeleton and YAP activity.
Importantly, these observations could be fully rescued by re-expression
of wild type Zyxin, but not Zyxin-3A mutant. Expression profile analysis
revealed CDK8 (cyclin-dependent kinase 8) as a mediator downstream
Zyxin/YAP. Inhibition of CDK8 phenocopied knockdown of Zyxin in colon
cancer cells. Ectopic expression of CDK8 substantially restored the
tumorigenic ability of Zyxin depletion cells in vitro and in vivo.
Expression levels of Zyxin and CDK8 are both elevated in colon tumors and
are negatively correlated with survival. Together, our findings reveal a
novel layer of regulation for Zyxin in mitosis and define the
Zyxin-YAP-CDK8 axis as a novel oncogenic regulator in colon cancer.


