Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automated, high throughput mass spectrometry imaging of serial
sections for investigation of tumor heterogeneity in three dimensions.


For the purpose of investigating the potential of automation and high
throughput mass spectrometry imaging, we have combined a desorption
electrospray ionisation (DESI) MS system with a robotic slide loader. The
analysis of tissue sections on multiple slides could allow, for example,
large patient cohorts to be analysed with almost no input from the
operator. Here we present another use of such a system, the mapping and
visualisation of tissues in 3D from serial sections.

All experiments were carried out on a Waters Xevo G2-XS Q-ToF equipped
with a Prosolia (Indianapolis) 2D DESI stage. The automated slide loader
and modified plate holder were provided by Prior Scientific (Cambridge).
As an ambient ionisation technique, the DESI sampling procedure occurs
outside of the vacuum of the instrument and is therefore suited to
accommodate slide handling devices. A modified top plate was created
that, once in place, allows the Prior PL200 microscope slide loader to
load slides from the holding cassettes to the stage and back. A snapshot
of the slide being taken and object definition algorithms is used to
identify the location of the tissue(s) on the slide. These co-ordinates
are then written to the experiment file and the acquisition commences.
This process will continue until all slides are analysed.

Recent technological advances have led to the time taken for a single MS
tissue image being reduced from the region of hours to minutes. This then
opens up the possibility of automatic sample loading and high throughput
usage. Fifteen sections taken at 120Âµm steps through a human glioma were
analysed automatically by the DESI system. Data was collected in both
positive and negative ion mode from the same tissue to increase the
molecular coverage. Sections taken from between those use for the imaging
were used for H&E staining and CA-9, Ki67 and SCD immunohistochemistry
staining. Once all sections were analysed, recently developed software
allowed for the reconstruction of the sections into a three dimensional
representation of the chemically distinct regions within the whole tissue
volume. This process which involves peak picking, object alignment and
rotation as well as a non negative matrix factorisation step is all done
automatically. When these regions identified from the 3D mass
spectrometry mapping are compared to the CA-9 and Ki67 IHC stains the
regions of hypoxia and proliferation clearly correlate indicating that
mass spectrometry imaging could be a useful tool for the determination of
hypoxia within excised tissue. Further to these identified regions was
the discovery of molecular signals that were only present on the boundary
between the hypoxic and normoxic regions; the identities and roles of
which are currently under investigation.

Faster and automated mass spectrometry imaging allows whole tissues to be
chemically mapped in three dimensions in a few hours providing insights
into tumour heterogeneity.


