Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of 2nd generation indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1)
selective inhibitors.


Harnessing the immune system via immune checkpoint blockade (e.g. anti
PD-1, anti PD-L1, anti CTLA4) has led to fast and long lived responses in
cancer patients. Response rates however are low and new treatments that
enhance these rates are needed. Recent studies have shown that the
administration of immune checkpoint blockers is associated with the
overexpression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1). The resulting
immunoregulatory phenotype counteracts immune checkpoint blockade and
allows for cancer progression. The discovery of IDO1 inhibitors, and the
potential to combine them with immune checkpoint blockers, therefore
represents an attractive strategy to fight cancer. We carried out a
ligand-based virtual screen with > 1,000,000 commercially available small
molecules. In vitro screening of the resulting 610 virtual hits provided
us with 2 IDO1-selective, 2 TDO2-selective and 2 IDO1/TDO2-dual confirmed
hits. (TDO2 is a protein with similar biochemical activity to IDO1 that
is essential to tryptophan homeostasis.) A subsequent Hit to Lead
campaign led to the identification of novel chemotypes that display
potency similar or superior to IDO1 inhibitors currently under clinical
investigation in IFN-Î³ stimulated (i.e. IDO1+) HeLa cells, with no sign
of cytotoxicity. We have demonstrated that these compounds are >
1000-fold selective for IDO1 over TDO2 using cellular assays. IDO1
upregulation by cancer cells is known to be one of the mechanisms by
which cancer cells evade the immune system. In an in vitro co-culture
assay of cancer cells and T cells we have demonstrated our compounds can
rescue T cell proliferation with EC50 values between 10 and 50 nM. We
have also demonstrated that our compounds inhibit IDO1 in monocyte
derived human dendritic cells. Interestingly, despite this potent
cellular activity demonstrated in multiple disease relevant cellular
assays, this chemotype failed to inhibit recombinant IDO1 in an isolated
biochemical assay performed under reducing conditions, whereas the
reference compound epacadostat provided activity comparable to literature
values. In order to confirm our cellular effects were due to direct
inhibition of IDO1 we set up thermal shift assays. Thermal shift assays
using purified IDO1 protein have demonstrated that our compounds directly
bind IDO1, and cellular thermal shift assays have confirmed direct target
engagement in intact cells (stimulated for IDO1 expression). These
compounds have physicochemical properties that would support oral dosing
and display low in vitro CYP450 and hERG inhibition, thus reducing the
risk of toxicity in the clinic. Our IDO1 inhibitors show a novel
differentiated mode of action at the cellular level, and the consequences
of this profile in terms of in vivo characterisation is ongoing.


