Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probing the cancer epigenome: empowering target validation by open
innovation.


Low reproducibility of published target validation studies as well as the
frequent failure of genetic knock-down effects to phenocopy those of
small molecule inhibitors have been recognized as road blocks for cancer
drug discovery. Academic and industrial institutions have started to
address these issues by providing access to high quality small molecular
probes for novel targets of interest. Here we discuss probe discovery
challenges and quality criteria based on the generation of three novel
inhibitors for epigenetic targets.

ATAD2 (ATPase family AAA-domain containing protein 2) is an epigenetic
regulator that binds to chromatin through its bromodomain (BD). ATAD2 has
been proposed to act as a co-factor for oncogenic transcription factors
such as ERÎ± and Myc. A more thorough validation of ATAD2 as a
therapeutic target has been hampered by the lack of appropriate ATAD2
inhibitors. Here we disclose a structurally unprecedented series of ATAD2
BD inhibitors identified from a DNA-encoded library screen. Optimization
delivered BAY-850, a highly potent and exceptionally selective ATAD2 BD
inhibitor, which fully recapitulates effects seen by genetic mutagenesis
studies in a cellular assay.

The three BD and PHD-finger (BRPF) family members are found in histone
acetyltransferase complexes. Whereas bromodomain inhibitors with dual
activity against BRPF1 and 2 have been described before, we now disclose
BAY-299, the first nanomolar inhibitor of the BRPF2 BD with high
selectivity against its paralogs. Isoform selectivity was confirmed in
cellular protein-protein interaction assays and rationalized based on
X-Ray structures.

BAY-598, a highly selective, cellularly active and orally bioavailable
inhibitor of the protein lysine methyl transferase SMYD2, had been
disclosed previously (Stresemann et al., AACR 2015). Development of
BAY-598 allowed the identification of new methylation targets of SMYD2 as
well as a proposed role of SMYD2 in pancreatic cancer.

These results support further development of small molecule inhibitors as
research tools to probe the functional role of novel epigenetic targets
and underscore the power of open innovation for advancing our
understanding of cancer target biology.


