Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Notch directly represses transcription by recruitment of PRC2 to
the ternary complex.


It is well established that Notch functions as a transcriptional
activator through the formation of a ternary complex that comprises
Notch, Maml and CSL. This ternary complex then serves to recruit
additional transcriptional cofactors that link to higher order
transcriptional complexes. The mechanistic details of these events remain
unclear. In this study, we report that the Notch ternary complex can also
serve to direct the formation of a repressor complex to terminate genes
expression of select target genes. Herein we demonstrate that p19Arf and
Klf4 are transcriptionally repressed directly by Notch. Data indicate
that Notch recruits PRC2 and Lsd1 to these promoters, which leads to
changes in the state of the epigenetic landscape and repression of
transcription. The demethylase activity of Lsd1 is a pre-requisite for
Notch-mediate transcriptional repression. Furthermore, we identified a
stable Notch transcriptional repressor complex containing Lsd1, PRC2 and
the Notch ternary complex. This study demonstrates proof of concept for a
novel function of Notch and provides further insight into the mechanisms
of Notch mediated tumorigenesis. This finding provides rationale for the
targeting of epigenetic enzymes to inhibit Notch activity or use in
combinatorial therapy to provide a more profound therapeutic response.


