Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen-responsive miRNAs as modulators of E2-induced apoptosis
in AI-resistant breast cancer.


Long-term estrogen deprivation with tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors
(AI) is the basic principle of endocrine treatment of ER-positive breast
cancer. Acquired resistance is however a major obstacle in treatment
success. Based on clinical observations and in vitro as well as animal in
vivo experiments it has been suggested that tumor cell clones evolve over
time and become vulnerable to E2-induced apoptosis, thereby potentially
providing a promising second line treatment option. In vitro, this
vulnerability is mimicked in the AI-resistant breast cancer models
MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A, which during long-term E2-deprivation reconfigure
their survival signaling including endoplasmic reticulum, oxidative and
inflammatory stress related pathways. E2-stimulation of these cells
initiates an unfolded protein response which in turn triggers apoptosis
through the intrinsic and subsequently extrinsic pathway (Jordan VC
2015). Recently, we identified miRNA profiles matching the biology of AI
resistance and vulnerability to E2-induced apoptosis (Hoppe R et al.
2016). Here we investigate the modulatory role of miRNAs in E2-induced
apoptosis through the identification of their global expression changes
in E2-stimulated 5C and 2A models compared to MCF-7:WS8 reference. Each
cell line was treated with 10-9 M E2 or vehicle over a 72h time course
(6, 12, 24, 72 h). miRNA profiles were generated using Affymetrix
GeneChip miRNA2.0 arrays. At each time point relative miRNA expression
changes (E2/control) were evaluated resulting in a total of 72 (5C), 104
(2A) and 94 (WS8) differentially expressed miRNAs (FC > 1.5 or Long-term
estrogen deprivation with tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors (AI) is the
basic principle of endocrine treatment of ER-positive breast cancer.
Acquired resistance is however a major obstacle in treatment success.
Based on clinical observations and in vitro as well as animal in vivo
experiments it has been suggested that tumor cell clones evolve over time
and become vulnerable to E2-induced apoptosis, thereby potentially
providing a promising second line treatment option. In vitro, this
vulnerability is mimicked in the AI-resistant breast cancer models
MCF-7:5C and MCF-7:2A, which during long-term E2-deprivation reconfigure
their survival signaling including endoplasmic reticulum, oxidative and
inflammatory stress related pathways. E2-stimulation of these cells
initiates an unfolded protein response which in turn triggers apoptosis
through the intrinsic and subsequently extrinsic pathway (Jordan VC
2015). Recently, we identified miRNA profiles matching the biology of AI
resistance and vulnerability to E2-induced apoptosis (Hoppe R et al.
2016). Here we investigate the modulatory role of miRNAs in E2-induced
apoptosis through the identification of their global expression changes
in E2-stimulated 5C and 2A models compared to MCF-7:WS8 reference. Each
cell line was treated with 10-9 M E2 or vehicle over a 72h time course
(6, 12, 24, 72 h). miRNA profiles were generated using Affymetrix
GeneChip miRNA2.0 arrays. At each time point relative miRNA expression
changes (E2/control) were evaluated resulting in a total of 72 (5C), 104
(2A) and 94 (WS8) differentially expressed miRNAs (FC > 1.5 or < 1/1.5,
Pt-test 1.5, PF-test 1.5, PF-test < 0.05). Differential area under the
curve (dAUC) analyses at 6-72, 6-24, and 24-72 h mined the overall,
early, and late-responding miRNAs of the different phenotypes
(Ppermutation test 1.5, PF-test < 0.05). Differential area under the
curve (dAUC) analyses at 6-72, 6-24, and 24-72 h mined the overall,
early, and late-responding miRNAs of the different phenotypes
(Ppermutation test < 0.05). Representative early down-regulated miRNA
candidates potentially modulating E2-induced apoptosis in 5C cells are
miR-543 and miR-432 of the DLK1-DIO3 locus on Chr. 14q32.31. Late
responding up-regulated miRNA candidates are miR-150* and miR-149* the
low expression of which in tumor tissues registered in The Cancer Genome
Atlas (miRNA-Seq v. 3.1.17.0) was associated with worse outcome in all
PAM50 breast cancer subtypes and Lum B, respectively (HR = 2.1, 95% CI:
1.4-3.2; P = 0.00017; HR = 6.8, 95% CI: 1.5-3.0; P = 0.0036). We are
currently in the process to subject respective miRNA sets to functional
enrichment analyses (KEGG, GO) and to correlate E2-responsive miRNA
candidates with respective transcriptome signatures. In summary, we will
present miRNAs matching to the biological processes inherent to
E2-induced apoptosis. These may serve as potential targets for the
amplification of the apoptotic trigger upon E2-treatment.


