Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of tumor angiogenesis by low dose Aspirin.


Background and Objective: Tumor angiogenesis is a pathophysiological
process in which new blood vessels are formed in the primary tumor site
or distant organs for the nourishment of cancer cells and metastatic
growth. Thereby, targeting tumor angiogenesis is an important area of
research for cancer therapy. Abnormal structure of blood vessels (i.e.
leakiness due to abnormal lining of pericytes on the microvessels) is one
of the critical features of tumor angiogenesis that sensitizes vascular
cells to cytokines and helps circulating tumor cells to metastasize to
distant organs. Our long term goal is to repurpose the drugs that may
prevent tumor angiogenesis or normalize the vessels by repairing
leakiness via recruiting pericytes or both. Our recent studies found that
Aspirin (ASA) has the potency to inhibit breast cancer growth and
metastasis, as well as reprogram the mesenchymal to epithelial transition
(MET). Given the importance of ASA, we tested whether ASA may be able to
regulate tumor angiogenesis.

Methods: To do so, we determined the effect of low dose ASA (1mM, which
is equivalent to 80mg human dose), ASA-treated (2.5mM) conditioned media
(231-CMASA) or vehicle-treated conditioned media (231-CMVT) of MDA-MB-231
cells on different endothelial cell physiology. These include endothelial
cellsâ€™ migration towards serum using 3D modified Boyden chamber assay,
in vitro capillary-like structure formation on Matrigel, cell
permeability using in vitro endothelial permeability assay and
interactions of pericytes-endothelial cells. We also determined the
effect of ASA on various angiogenic factors associated with tumor
angiogenesis. Finally, we determined the effect of ASA on in vivo tumor
angiogenesis using in vivo Angiogenesis Assay (Trevigen)

Results and Conclusions: We found that 231-CMASA significantly blocks in
vitro migration, the formation of in vitro capillary-like structures
parallel with leakiness via incomplete interaction of pericytes and
endothelial cells as compared to 231-CMASA. The antiangiogenic effect of
ASA was also documented in in vivo assays. Mechanistically, ASA treatment
blocks several angiogenic factors including VEGF-A that are associated
with these three events, implicating a low dose of Aspirin is potentially
therapeutic for breast cancer via blocking and normalizing tumor
angiogenesis.


