Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin increases PDH and suppresses HIF1A under hypoxic
conditions and induces cell death in oral squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: Metformin is a biguanide, belonging to the oral hypoglycemic
agents and is a widely used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Evidence
indicate that Metformin inhibits cell proliferation in several human
cancers and inhibits the Warburg phenomenon in tumor cells.

Objective: The present study aims to explore the effects of Metformin in
hypoxic conditions. Specifically, we focused on pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH), (hypoxia-inducible factor 1α) HIF-1α levels and the oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell phenotype. Additionally, we also
investigated a theoretical consequence of Metformin treatment.

Methods: PDH levels in patients with OSCC and oral dysplasia were
evaluated. Metformin was administered in vitro to test the effect of
Metformin under hypoxic conditions. The results were complemented by
Bioinformatics analyses.

Results: Low PDH levels were observed in OSCC, and Metformin promotes an
increase in PDH levels in hypoxic conditions. Metformin also reduced
HIF-1α mRNA and protein levels. Metformin demonstrated antiproliferative
effects, inhibited migration, increased the number of apoptotic cells and
increased the transcription of caspase 3.

Conclusions: In conclusion, our current findings show that Metformin
reduces HIF-1α gene expression and increases PDH expression. Metformin
inhibits cell proliferation and migration in the OSCC cell line model.
Additionally, Metformin enhances the number of apoptotic cells and
caspase 3 levels. Interestingly enough, Metformin did not increase the
mutant p53 levels under hypoxic conditions.


