Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL1-CXCR2 signaling might recruit the bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal cells to the carcinoma-associated fibroblasts of gastric
cancer.


Background & Aims: Activated fibroblasts in the tumor stroma, also termed
carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), play a critical role in the
progression of cancer. In our previous studies, we identified CAFs as
playing an important role in cancer progression in the development of
gastric cancer. However, it remains unclear which factor recruit and
promote CAFs. The aim of this study is to clarify from where CAFs
originate and which factor recruits them into the gastric cancer
microenvironment.

Methods: In vitro study analyzed the chemotaxis-stimulating factor from
gastric cancer cells using bone marrow-derived mesenchymal cells
(BM-MCs). The nude mice with bone marrow transplantation from CAG-EGFP
mice were used for the in vivo gastric cancer experiments. The influences
of chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 2 (CXCR2) inhibitor on the migration
of BM-MCs were examined in vitro and in vivo.

Results: BM-MCs migrated into tumor stroma of in vivo gastric cancer. The
number of BM-MCs was much greater in the gastric tumor than in normal
tissue from three days after inoculation of cancer cells. C-X-C motif
ligand 1 (CXCL1) from gastric cancer cells significantly (pResults:
BM-MCs migrated into tumor stroma of in vivo gastric cancer. The number
of BM-MCs was much greater in the gastric tumor than in normal tissue
from three days after inoculation of cancer cells. C-X-C motif ligand 1
(CXCL1) from gastric cancer cells significantly (p<0.001) stimulated the
chemoattractant ability of BM-MCs in vitro. Anti-CXCL1 antibody and CXCR2
inhibitor significantly (pResults: BM-MCs migrated into tumor stroma of
in vivo gastric cancer. The number of BM-MCs was much greater in the
gastric tumor than in normal tissue from three days after inoculation of
cancer cells. C-X-C motif ligand 1 (CXCL1) from gastric cancer cells
significantly (p<0.001) stimulated the chemoattractant ability of BM-MCs
in vitro. Anti-CXCL1 antibody and CXCR2 inhibitor significantly (p<0.05)
decreased the migration-stimulating activity of gastric cancer cells. A
CXCR2 inhibitor, SB225002, decreased tumor size and lymph node metastasis
of gastric tumor, and significantly (p=0.039) prolonged survival of
gastric-tumor bearing mice. The histologic findings indicated that
SB225002 decreased the recruitment of BM-MCs into the tumor stroma,
resulting in the reduction of CAFs.

Conclusions: BM-MSCs recruit into gastric tumor and differentiate into
CAFs. CXCL1 from gastric cancer cells stimulates the recruitment of
BM-MCs into gastric cancer locus via CXCR2 signalling. Inhibition of
BM-MCsâ€™ recruitment appears a promising therapy for gastric cancer.


