Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of lncRNA-ATB and miR-21 as a biomarker in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) including microRNAs (miRNAs) and long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as novel gene-regulators. The aim of this
study was to determine the clinical relevancies of 2 lncRNAs (lncRNA-ATB
and MEG3) and 2 miRNAs (miR-21 and miR-31) in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). We analyzed clinical specimens from 100 pairs of HCC and matched
normal liver (NL) tissues. MiRNAs and lncRNAs expression levels were
evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR. In addition, we determined the
clinical significance of the ncRNAs expression in matching tissue and
serum exosome samples from HCC patients. MiR-21 significantly increased
in HCC (PNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) including microRNAs (miRNAs) and long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as novel gene-regulators. The aim
of this study was to determine the clinical relevancies of 2 lncRNAs
(lncRNA-ATB and MEG3) and 2 miRNAs (miR-21 and miR-31) in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We analyzed clinical specimens from 100 pairs of HCC and
matched normal liver (NL) tissues. MiRNAs and lncRNAs expression levels
were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR. In addition, we determined
the clinical significance of the ncRNAs expression in matching tissue and
serum exosome samples from HCC patients. MiR-21 significantly increased
in HCC (P<0.01) compared to corresponding NL tissues. LncRNA-ATB was
significantly up-regulated in HCC (PNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) including
microRNAs (miRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as
novel gene-regulators. The aim of this study was to determine the
clinical relevancies of 2 lncRNAs (lncRNA-ATB and MEG3) and 2 miRNAs
(miR-21 and miR-31) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We analyzed
clinical specimens from 100 pairs of HCC and matched normal liver (NL)
tissues. MiRNAs and lncRNAs expression levels were evaluated by
quantitative real-time PCR. In addition, we determined the clinical
significance of the ncRNAs expression in matching tissue and serum
exosome samples from HCC patients. MiR-21 significantly increased in HCC
(P<0.01) compared to corresponding NL tissues. LncRNA-ATB was
significantly up-regulated in HCC (P<0.05); however, lncRNA-MEG3 was
down-regulated in HCC (PNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) including microRNAs
(miRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as novel
gene-regulators. The aim of this study was to determine the clinical
relevancies of 2 lncRNAs (lncRNA-ATB and MEG3) and 2 miRNAs (miR-21 and
miR-31) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We analyzed clinical specimens
from 100 pairs of HCC and matched normal liver (NL) tissues. MiRNAs and
lncRNAs expression levels were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR.
In addition, we determined the clinical significance of the ncRNAs
expression in matching tissue and serum exosome samples from HCC
patients. MiR-21 significantly increased in HCC (P<0.01) compared to
corresponding NL tissues. LncRNA-ATB was significantly up-regulated in
HCC (P<0.05); however, lncRNA-MEG3 was down-regulated in HCC (P<0.05)
tissues. In addition, expression of miR-21 and lncRNA-ATB was
significantly associated with the tumor size and poor prognosis of HCC
patients. More importantly, expression of serum exosomal lncRNA-ATB and
miR-21 was more significantly associated with HCC progression and poor
patients survival compared to itsâ€™ tissue expression. We conclude that
non-coding RNAs (lncRNA-ATB and miR-21) expression has the potential to
serve as biomarkers for prognosis and targeted therapy in HCC patients.


