Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation of mitochondrial biogenesis regulating genes: A
possible link between telomeres, mitochondria, and cancer incidence.


Background: PGC1A and PGC1B encode transcriptional factors that regulate
mitochondrial biogenesis and have been implicated as a link between
telomeric and mitochondrial functions. Telomere dysfunction is associated
with impaired mitochondrial biogenesis and increased generation of
reactive oxygen species. Animal studies have also shown that loss of
PGC1A protects against cancer as mitochondrial function is required for
transformation and tumor growth. No human studies have examined the role
of these genes in relation to cancer incidence. Our objective was to
examine associations between PGC1A and PGC1B methylation in relation to
cancer incidence.

Methods: We studied 491 Normative Aging Study participants who had blood
drawn 1-4 times from 1999 through 2012. After median 10.2-year follow-up,
there were 125 incident cancers including 36 prostate. PGC1A and PGC1B
methylation was measured at 30 and 27 sites, respectively, using the
HumanMethylation450k assay. We used Cox proportional hazards models to
examine associations between CpG methylation and cancer incidence
measured at first blood draw as well as in time-dependent associations.
All models adjusted for age, race, smoking status and pack-years, alcohol
consumption, blood cell composition, and processing batch.

Results: In single-site adjusted time-dependent models, we identified 13
instances of 11 individual loci (10 from PGC1A and 1 from PGC1B)
significantly associated with all-cancer and prostate cancer incidence.
In multi-site adjusted models, we showed cg0677257 from the 3’ UTR of
PGC1A was inversely associated with first-visit (HR: 0.41; 95% CI: 0.21,
0.79) and time-dependent all-cancer incidence (HR: 0.42; 95% CI: 0.22,
0.81). Similarly, we showed cg0942771 and cg03281309 from the gene body
of PGC1A were inversely associated with time-dependent all-cancer
incidence (HR: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.30, 0.88; HR: 0.74; 95% CI: 0.56, 0.98,
respectively). Finally, we found that cg1521939 from the 5’ UTR region
of PGC1B was positively associated with time-dependent all-cancer
incidence (HR: 3.27; 95% CI: 1.55, 6.90).

Conclusion: This is the first study in humans to show site-specific PGC1A
and PGC1B methylation is a significant predictor of cancer incidence.
These findings point to a possible interplay between telomere and
mitochondrial dysfunction, and epigenetics in carcinogenesis. Additional
studies should also examine these associations in larger cohorts with
greater racial/ethnic, gender, and socioeconomic diversity to validate
these findings.


