Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor tissue gene expression in association with survival of
triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive type of cancer with
limited treatment options. Previous studies have shown that gene
expression profiles were associated with TNBC prognosis. Information on
specific genes that are predictive of TNBC outcome is limited. Using data
and samples from a cohort of 469 TNBC cases from Shanghai Breast Cancer
Survival Study (SBCSS), we systematically evaluated expressions of 302
genes in tumor tissue with survival of TNBC. Genes included in the study
are PAM50 genes, genes encoding drug metabolizing enzymes and, genes
implicated in TNBC biology and progression based on literature reviews.
Gene expression levels were measured in total RNA isolated from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues using the
NanoString nCounter assay. Cox regression was applied to evaluate
disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) in association with
gene expression. Analysis was adjusted for known predictors of TNBC
outcome, including age, disease stage, basal like subtype and DUSP4 gene
expression. During a median follow-up of 5.3 years (range: 0.7-8.9
years), 100 deaths and 92 recurrences/breast cancer deaths were
documented. Expression levels of 17 genes were significantly associated
with OS, and 15 genes with DFS (PTriple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is
an aggressive type of cancer with limited treatment options. Previous
studies have shown that gene expression profiles were associated with
TNBC prognosis. Information on specific genes that are predictive of TNBC
outcome is limited. Using data and samples from a cohort of 469 TNBC
cases from Shanghai Breast Cancer Survival Study (SBCSS), we
systematically evaluated expressions of 302 genes in tumor tissue with
survival of TNBC. Genes included in the study are PAM50 genes, genes
encoding drug metabolizing enzymes and, genes implicated in TNBC biology
and progression based on literature reviews. Gene expression levels were
measured in total RNA isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
breast cancer tissues using the NanoString nCounter assay. Cox regression
was applied to evaluate disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival
(OS) in association with gene expression. Analysis was adjusted for known
predictors of TNBC outcome, including age, disease stage, basal like
subtype and DUSP4 gene expression. During a median follow-up of 5.3 years
(range: 0.7-8.9 years), 100 deaths and 92 recurrences/breast cancer
deaths were documented. Expression levels of 17 genes were significantly
associated with OS, and 15 genes with DFS (P<0.05). The top 5 most
significant genes are EOMES (Hazard Ratio, HR = 0.88; 95% Confidence
Interval, 95% CI: 0.82-0.96), GZMK (HR = 0.91, 95% CI: 0.85-0.97), TUBB3
(HR = 1.12, 95% CI: 1.03-1.21), SIT1 (HR = 0.90, 95% CI: 0.83-0.98) and
ZNF224 (HR = 0.89, 95% CI: 0.81-0.97) for OS, and TUBB3 (HR = 1.14, 95%
CI: 1.05-1.24), KRT14 (HR = 1.08, 95% CI: 1.02-1.14), BAG1 (HR = 1.19,
95% CI: 1.05-1.35), CD44 (HR = 0.73, 95% CI: 0.58-0.92) and EOMES (HR =
0.89, 95% CI: 0.82-0.97) for DFS. Study is on-going to replicate the
findings of this study.


