Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PF562271, a Pyk2 inhibitor, reduces glioma tumor growth and
invasion in C57Bl6-Gl261 mouse glioma model.


Glioblastoma is an extraordinarily aggressive type of brain cancer due to
its invasive and proliferative nature. The tumor microenvironment, with
microglia as a critical player, has an important role in tumor
progression. Microglia infiltrate majority of gliomas and release
factors, which favor tumor growth and invasion. Previously we
demonstrated that microglia residing within the tumor stimulate glioma
cell invasion through the proline rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2) signaling
cascade. We hypothesize that the use of pharmacological inhibitors of
Pyk2 together with currently applied chemotherapy can significantly
reduce invasiveness of glioblastoma tumor and improve the outcome of the
treatment. Using C57Bl/6-Gl261 mouse glioma implantation model we
investigated the effect of the combined treatment for glioblastoma with
temozolomide (TMZ, 50 mg/kg, once/day, orally) together with a Pyk2
inhibitor PF562271 (twice/daily, 25 mg/kg, orally) vs. TMZ monotherapy.
Treatment was provided during 14 days, beginning the 5th day after glioma
implantation. For the assessment of the effectiveness of treatment
animalsâ€™ survival, tumor size, and invasion area were evaluated.
Western blot were used for the evaluation of the level of Pyk2
phosphorylation in tumor cells. For the purification of glioma cells from
total tumor tissue Percol gradients were used. The study revealed that
treatment with PF562271 reduced invasion of glioma cells at the tumor
edge, while TMZ reduced the tumor growth. Combined treatment showed
significantly more prominent effect on reduction of tumors growth
compared to TMZ monotherapy and additionally reduced invasiveness of
tumors similar to PF562271 monotherapy. In both PF562271 monotherapy and
combined treatments the downregulation of Pyk2 phosphorylation in glioma
cells has been recorded. Survival analysis demonstrated a significance
increase of survival of animals received combined treatment compare to
TMZ monotherapy. In conclusion, we can state that combined treatment with
TMZ together with PF562271 reduced Pyk2-related tumor growth and
invasiveness and increased animal survival. This research was made
possible by NIH grant numbers: 1SC2GM102040, G12MD007583, R25GM110513,
Puerto Rico Science, Technology, and Research Trust grant number
2016-00157, and US Department of Education Grant number P031S130068.


