Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dynamic mechanism of SARAH domain in RASSF5 activation by
K-Ras4B.


RASSF5 is a tumor suppressor, which acts as an adaptor linking Ras and
the Hippo pathways. RASSF5 activates MST1/2, a key upstream protein of
the Hippo pathway, through SARAH domain heterodimerization, resulting in
Hippo signaling. Signaling stimulates YAP1 phosphorylation, leading to
its degradation and thereby cell apoptosis. Association with K-Ras4B
promotes RASSF5 to release its SARAH which heterodimerizes with MST1/2.
We aim to reveal how K-Ras4B regulates the Hippo pathway through RASSF5
by resolving the structure and conformational dynamics of RASSF5
complexes. Our modeling and simulations help elucidate the intrinsic
dynamic interactions of RASSF5 RA (Ras binding) and SARAH domains.
Surprisingly, we found that the residue E388 on RASSF5 SARAH plays a
significant role in the dynamic mechanism of SARAH homo-/hetero-
dimerization and the RA-SARAH association. The mutants E388A and E388K
dramatically decrease the strength of RASSF5 homo-SARAH and RASSF5-MST2
hetero-SARAH, suggesting that the E388 mutation may be oncogenic.
Simulations of selected RASSF5 configurations with GTP-bound K-Ras4B
indicate that the interactions between RA and SARAH are reduced. We
conclude that Ras binding weakens the RA-SARAH association, increasing
the SARAH dynamic fluctuation. The released RASSF5 SARAH has high
propensity to dimerize with MST1/2 SARAH, activating Hippo signaling thus
cancer suppression. Funded in whole or in part with Federal funds from
the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, NIH under contract
HHSN261200800001E.


