Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis and recovery of functionally defined single immune cell
clones through opto-electro-positioning technology.


Cancer patients mount protective innate and adaptive immune responses
against tumor cells. Such responses are able to control or even eliminate
tumor burden if harnessed properly. Identifying clonal adaptive immune
cells targeting tumor cells with designated function is extremely
valuable as these cells are able to either fight the tumor directly or
provide tumor targeting immune receptors to engineer other effector cells
like autologous CD8 T cells or NK cells. The process of isolating cancer
specific immune cells and their receptors, however, remains technically
challenging and labor intensive.

Opto-Electro-Positioning (OEP) technology employs a light actuated
dielectrophoretic force to maneuver live cells in their culture
environment. We have combined OEP with a nanofluidic cell culture system
to produce an integrated microfluidic platform that enables
multi-dimensional investigation of lymphocyte specificity and function.
The system is able to 1) deterministically capture designated
lymphocytes, 2) actively maintain and observe colony growth, and 3)
conduct cytokine release assays, all in a single enclosed microfluidic
chip. The new platform is suitable for high throughput screening to
identify and harvest antigen specific and/or functionally defined T
cells. We have successfully applied it to isolate primary human T cells
targeting either EBV/Tetanus toxin antigens or tumor associated antigens
such as MART-1 through tetramer staining or a proliferation assay. The
system is also exceptionally efficient for investigating immune cells
from clinical specimens typically of low cellularity. From tumor
biopsies, we are able to capture tumor infiltrating T cells, stimulate
proliferation, investigate their TNF-Î± secretion on chip, and obtain
full transcriptomic analysis after export.

Overall, our data suggest the OEP nano-fluidic environment provides a
powerful high throughput screening tool to identify rare lymphocytes
against tumor associate antigens or neo-antigens and to investigate
precious clinical samples for biomarker discovery.


