Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The BRIP1 DNA helicase is a 17q dosage sensitive cooperative
driver in neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is an aggressive pediatric tumor arising from
sympathetic neuronal progenitors. NBs have a low mutation burden while
copy number alterations are highly recurrent: MYCN amplification is
present in half of high risk tumors often accompanied by 1p deletions
while MYCN non-amplified aggressive NB frequently exhibit 11q deletions.
Remarkably, both high risk groups show almost invariably chromosome 17q
gain and we also reported that the mouse syntenic chromosome 11 region
was gained during MYCN driven tumor formation. We propose that one or
more dosage sensitive genes on 17q act as cooperative drivers during NB
development. Using an integrated bioinformatics analysis, we identified
several candidate drivers implicated in DNA repair including BRIP1, also
known as FANCJ and located on 17q23.2. BRIP1 acts as a DNA helicase in
unwinding of stable G-quadruplex (G4) structures in single stranded DNA
during replication ensuring timely progression through S-phase. We show
that BRIP1 knock down causes increased replicative stress in MYCN
overexpressing NB cells as evidenced as shown by increased RPA32 levels
and reduced replication fork velocity. Overexpression of BRIP1 in
dÎ²h-MYCN-eGFP transgenic zebrafish caused accelerated tumor formation
supporting its role as cooperative driver gene. Gene expression profiling
after BRIP1 knock down confirmed enrichment for gene sets implicated in
DNA replication and repair and are indicative for perturbation of G4
enriched genes. We also identified further additional 17q dosage
sensitive genes implicated in replication fork dynamics including BRCA1,
BRCA2, EME1 and TOP2A. We propose that 17q gain acts as an amplifier for
expression of multiple genes implicated in control of replicative stress
and replication fork dynamics. Finally, we explored whether this
replicative stress resistance phenotype could represent a novel
therapeutic vulnerability for NB cells or other MYC(N) driven tumor
entities. To this end, we tested several compounds for synergistic
interaction with G4 stabilizing ligands such as TMPYP4, pyridostatin and
BRACO-19 with promising results. In conclusion, we identified BRIP1 as
17q cooperative driver in NB through relief from G4 induced replication
fork stalling in rapidly dividing tumor cells. Further, NB cells exhibit
replicative stress resistance through upregulation of multiple critical
regulators of replication fork dynamics, offering a new venue for
therapeutic interventions.


