Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53 control of the survivin-mediated radio-adaptive response in
human tumors.


Doses of ionizing radiation ≤100 mGy induce changes in radiation
sensitivity expressed by cells exposed to subsequent higher doses. This
is referred to as an adaptive effect. We describe a unique
survivin-associated adaptive response in which increased radiation
resistance or sensitization of cells can be induced by exposure to doses
as low as 5 mGy and is controlled by p53 expression. Experiments were
performed using ten human cancer cell lines: HCT116 TP53 wild type (WT)
colorectal carcinoma and its isogenic TP53 null mutant (Mut); RKO
colorectal carcinoma TP53 WT and associated isogenic TP53 null Mut;
breast adenocarcinomas MCF7 (TP53 WT) and MDA-MB-231 (TP53 Mut); lung
carcinomas A549 (TP53 WT) and NCI-H1975 (TP53 Mut); and pancreatic
carcinomas Hs766T (TP53 WT) and Panc-1 (TP53 Mut). Doses of 5 mGy were
used to induce changes in the response of these tumor cells to higher
therapy doses using a multi-dosing paradigm. Effects on radiation
sensitivity were associated with changes in both survivin concentration
and its translocation to the cytoplasm (TP53 WT) and nucleus (TP53 null
or point mutant). In vitro survival (2 Gy per fraction, two once daily
fractions) studies were performed on all tumor cell lines. Intracellular
localization of survivin was determined by ELISA and correlated to
survival response. 2 Gy alone had no significant effect on intracellular
translocation of survivin. When preceded 15 min earlier by a 5 mGy
exposure, survivin increased in the cytoplasm of all TP53 WT tumor cell
lines as compared to the nuclei of their counterpart isogenic TP53 null
lines (HCT116 and RKO) or those carrying TP53 point mutations
(MDA-MB-231, NCI-H1975, Panc-1). All TP53 WT tumor lines were
significantly protected P Doses of ionizing radiation ≤100 mGy induce
changes in radiation sensitivity expressed by cells exposed to subsequent
higher doses. This is referred to as an adaptive effect. We describe a
unique survivin-associated adaptive response in which increased radiation
resistance or sensitization of cells can be induced by exposure to doses
as low as 5 mGy and is controlled by p53 expression. Experiments were
performed using ten human cancer cell lines: HCT116 TP53 wild type (WT)
colorectal carcinoma and its isogenic TP53 null mutant (Mut); RKO
colorectal carcinoma TP53 WT and associated isogenic TP53 null Mut;
breast adenocarcinomas MCF7 (TP53 WT) and MDA-MB-231 (TP53 Mut); lung
carcinomas A549 (TP53 WT) and NCI-H1975 (TP53 Mut); and pancreatic
carcinomas Hs766T (TP53 WT) and Panc-1 (TP53 Mut). Doses of 5 mGy were
used to induce changes in the response of these tumor cells to higher
therapy doses using a multi-dosing paradigm. Effects on radiation
sensitivity were associated with changes in both survivin concentration
and its translocation to the cytoplasm (TP53 WT) and nucleus (TP53 null
or point mutant). In vitro survival (2 Gy per fraction, two once daily
fractions) studies were performed on all tumor cell lines. Intracellular
localization of survivin was determined by ELISA and correlated to
survival response. 2 Gy alone had no significant effect on intracellular
translocation of survivin. When preceded 15 min earlier by a 5 mGy
exposure, survivin increased in the cytoplasm of all TP53 WT tumor cell
lines as compared to the nuclei of their counterpart isogenic TP53 null
lines (HCT116 and RKO) or those carrying TP53 point mutations
(MDA-MB-231, NCI-H1975, Panc-1). All TP53 WT tumor lines were
significantly protected P < 0.001 by the addition of a 5 mGy dose while
TP53 Mut lines, isogenic null or point mutated, were sensitized P Doses
of ionizing radiation ≤100 mGy induce changes in radiation sensitivity
expressed by cells exposed to subsequent higher doses. This is referred
to as an adaptive effect. We describe a unique survivin-associated
adaptive response in which increased radiation resistance or
sensitization of cells can be induced by exposure to doses as low as 5
mGy and is controlled by p53 expression. Experiments were performed using
ten human cancer cell lines: HCT116 TP53 wild type (WT) colorectal
carcinoma and its isogenic TP53 null mutant (Mut); RKO colorectal
carcinoma TP53 WT and associated isogenic TP53 null Mut; breast
adenocarcinomas MCF7 (TP53 WT) and MDA-MB-231 (TP53 Mut); lung carcinomas
A549 (TP53 WT) and NCI-H1975 (TP53 Mut); and pancreatic carcinomas Hs766T
(TP53 WT) and Panc-1 (TP53 Mut). Doses of 5 mGy were used to induce
changes in the response of these tumor cells to higher therapy doses
using a multi-dosing paradigm. Effects on radiation sensitivity were
associated with changes in both survivin concentration and its
translocation to the cytoplasm (TP53 WT) and nucleus (TP53 null or point
mutant). In vitro survival (2 Gy per fraction, two once daily fractions)
studies were performed on all tumor cell lines. Intracellular
localization of survivin was determined by ELISA and correlated to
survival response. 2 Gy alone had no significant effect on intracellular
translocation of survivin. When preceded 15 min earlier by a 5 mGy
exposure, survivin increased in the cytoplasm of all TP53 WT tumor cell
lines as compared to the nuclei of their counterpart isogenic TP53 null
lines (HCT116 and RKO) or those carrying TP53 point mutations
(MDA-MB-231, NCI-H1975, Panc-1). All TP53 WT tumor lines were
significantly protected P < 0.001 by the addition of a 5 mGy dose while
TP53 Mut lines, isogenic null or point mutated, were sensitized P <
0.001. HCT116 and RKO TP53 WT cells were admixed and grown with their
respective isogenic TP53 null counterpart at ratios of 1:3, 1:1, and 3:1.
Under each of these growth conditions, the mixed cultures expressed an
enhanced sensitization (P ≤ 0.035) characteristic of that expressed by
cultures of 100% TP53 Mut tumor cells suggesting cell to cell
communication and/or a diffusible factor(s) affected by TP53 Mut cells is
playing an important role in the expression of this survivin-mediated
radio-adaptive response. We have identified a very low radiation
dose-induced survivin-mediated radio-adaptive response whose expression
is linked to TP53 mutational status that could affect therapeutic
outcomes associated with the routine usage of imaging procedures in
conventional radiation therapy. This work was supported in part by
NIH/NCI grant R01 CA132998 and DOE Low Dose Program/Project Grant
DE-SC0001271 (D.J.G.)


