Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity and resistance to cell cycle and IGF-1R inhibitors in
rhabdomyosarcoma.


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children
and young adults. The five-year survival rate for RMS has hardly improved
over the last three decades despite intensive and toxic chemotherapy,
radiotherapy with surgery. Therefore, novel treatment approaches are
required to change these outcomes. RMS has two major subtypes, embryonal
RMS (ERMS) and alveolar RMS (ARMS). ARMS, the more aggressive subtype, is
characterized by translocations that fuse two transcription
factor-encoding genes; creating novel PAX3/PAX7-FOXO1 fusion proteins.
The PAX3-FOXO1 is highly expressed in the G2 phase of the cell cycle,
allowing the cell to divide following a sustained checkpoint arrest
despite DNA damage induced by chemotherapy, suggesting that PAX3-FOXO1
may enhance the survival of tumor cells in response to chemotherapy. Many
cell cycle regulators are altered in RMS, including CDK2, CDK4 and p53.
Furthermore, RMS cells are highly dependent on the insulin-like growth
factor -1 receptor (IGF-1R) signaling, however, IGF-1R targeting was not
successful in the clinic. Therefore, targeting key cell cycle regulators
individually or in combination with IGF-1R inhibition may expand the
available therapeutic options for RMS.

Purpose: The goal of the present study was to investigate the
cytotoxicity of 15 small molecule inhibitors targeting the IGF-1R and
cell cycle regulators in RMS cell lines and to determine potential
mechanisms of drug sensitivity or resistance.

Methods and Results: Seven RMS cell lines including ERMS and ARMS were
studied. The IC50 values were determined for the following targeting
compounds: linsitinib, BMS-754807 and picropodophyllin (PPP) (IGF-1R),
riobociclib and palbociclib (CDK4/6), dinaciclib and flavopiridol (pan
CDK inhibitors), BS-181HCL (CDK7), MK-1775 (WEE-1), MK-8776 (CHK1),
alisertib (AURKA) and volasertib (PLK1). The most potent compounds with
IC50Methods and Results: Seven RMS cell lines including ERMS and ARMS
were studied. The IC50 values were determined for the following targeting
compounds: linsitinib, BMS-754807 and picropodophyllin (PPP) (IGF-1R),
riobociclib and palbociclib (CDK4/6), dinaciclib and flavopiridol (pan
CDK inhibitors), BS-181HCL (CDK7), MK-1775 (WEE-1), MK-8776 (CHK1),
alisertib (AURKA) and volasertib (PLK1). The most potent compounds with
IC50< 10 nM were dinaciclib and volasertib. The ARMS cell lines were
resistant to alisertib in comparison to the ERMS cell lines. Most cell
lines were sensitive to flavopiridol, MK-1775, BMS-754807 and PPP with
IC50Methods and Results: Seven RMS cell lines including ERMS and ARMS
were studied. The IC50 values were determined for the following targeting
compounds: linsitinib, BMS-754807 and picropodophyllin (PPP) (IGF-1R),
riobociclib and palbociclib (CDK4/6), dinaciclib and flavopiridol (pan
CDK inhibitors), BS-181HCL (CDK7), MK-1775 (WEE-1), MK-8776 (CHK1),
alisertib (AURKA) and volasertib (PLK1). The most potent compounds with
IC50< 10 nM were dinaciclib and volasertib. The ARMS cell lines were
resistant to alisertib in comparison to the ERMS cell lines. Most cell
lines were sensitive to flavopiridol, MK-1775, BMS-754807 and PPP with
IC50< 100 nM, and relatively resistant to BS-181 HCL, linsitinib, R0-3306
and MK-8776 with IC50 (1-70 Î¼M). Palbociclib and BMS-754807 showed a
synergistic effect in some RMS cell lines. Ongoing studies are focusing
on determining the mechanisms of interaction of these two compounds
through studying cell cycle, apoptosis, and mRNA and protein expression
of key regulators in the IGF-1R and RB pathways.

Conclusion: These data demonstrate that dinaciclib, volasertib,
flavopiridol, MK-1775, BMS-754807 and PPP are highly cytotoxic in RMS
cell lines. The CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib may sensitize selected RMS
cell lines to IGF-1R inhibitors. Targeting selected cell cycle regulators
individually, or in combination with IGF-1R inhibitors may thus provide
an efficacious treatment approach to be further validated in RMS patients
with poor outcome.


