Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetylation of survivin represses transactivation of STAT3 to
induce sodium butyrate-induced apoptosis in human mucoepidermoid
carcinoma cell lines.


Sodium butyrate (NaBu) is one of histone deacetylase inhibitors and
possesses anticancer activity. Here, the aim of this study is to
determine the molecular mechanism by which NaBu controls apoptosis in MC3
and YD15 human mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) cell lines. NaBu caused
growth inhibition and induced apoptosis in both cell lines accompanied by
the acetylation of histone proteins H2A and H3. NaBu clearly increased
survivin and cleaved caspase 3 evidenced by human apoptosis array and it
regulated survivin molecule at a post-transcriptional level. NaBu caused
nuclear translocation of survivin protein and increased survivin
acetylation in both cell lines. In addition, STAT3 and survivin were
co-localized in nucleus by NaBu resulting in the decrease in the
expression level of Bcl-XL mRNA which is one of STAT3 downstream
molecules. In addition, NaBu induced caspase-dependent apoptosis in human
MEC cells. Taken together, these results suggest that NaBu is a potent
apoptosis inducer in human MEC cell lines through survivin-STAT3
signaling cascades and these findings provide the basis of its clinical
application for the treatment of human MEC.

This abstract is supported by SNU Invitation Program for Distinguished
Scholar and the Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education
(2014R1A12055874)


