Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A critical role of PARylation in regulating the functions of OVOL2.


Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) is one of the post-translational
modifications, by which the ADP-ribose (PAR) polymers are added to the
specific protein by a PAR polymerase (PARP). In the about 50 years'
studies, this specific modification has been verified to be related to
multiple important biological functions including cell death, cell
differentiation, histone modification, transcriptional regulation, DNA
repair and genome stability. Ovo-like 2 (OVOL2), a novel zinc finger
transcriptional factor, contains a Snail/Gli (SNAG) motif at the
N-terminal to possess a transcriptional regulatory activity and four
DNA-binding Cys2-His2 (C2H2) zinc finger domains at the C-terminal to
bind with DNA. OVOL2 is demonstrated to be involved in the cranial neural
tube, angiogenesis, heart and placental development. In addition, OVOL2
can also suppress cell cycle and terminate differentiation of
keratinocyte by directly inhibiting of c-Myc and Notch1. However, the
regulation and biological function of OVOL2 are still largely unknown. In
this study, we identify the binding targets, PARP1 and NPM1, of OVOL2. In
addition, we report that the function of OVOL2 is regulated by PARP1
through PARylation, which modifies on C2H2 zinc finger domains and plays
an important role in the regulation of OVOL2 functions. PARylated OVOL2,
but not the 3K mutant, alters focal adhesion and cell cycle, resulting in
the formation of polyploidy in cells. Our findings not only have
significant implications for the cellular functions of OVOL2, but also
provide a better understanding on the multiple biological functions of
the PARylation.


