Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin represses esophageal carcinogenesis in NMBzA-treated rat
model through inhibiting AMPK/mTOR and Stat3 signaling pathways.


Esophageal cancer is one of the most aggressive tumor types because of
its invasiveness and metastatic potential. Metformin is one of the most
used diabetic drugs for the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the
world. The role of metformin in prevention of the development and
progression of a variety of human tumors has been studied. However, the
detailed mechanisms have not yet been fully understood. In the present
study, we investigated the effects of metformin on the suppression of
esophageal carcinogenesis in a rat model, in which F344 rats were treated
with N-nitroso-N-methylbenzylamine (NMBzA 0.30 mg/kg s.c.) three times
per week for 35 weeks to induce esophageal tumors. To monitor the effects
of metformin in this model, one group of rats were administered with
metformin (3 g/L) in the drinking water at the first NMBzA injection. Our
results showed that although there was no significant difference in body
weight in rats of different groups, rats treated with NMBzA and metformin
together significantly reduced the tumor formation and tumor volume when
compared with rats treated with NMBzA alone. Statistic analyses
demonstrated that the tumor numbers was reduced in NMBzA-treated rats
received metformin to an average of 1.85 ± 1.09 tumors per rat when
compared with 10.85 ± 3.86 (P Esophageal cancer is one of the most
aggressive tumor types because of its invasiveness and metastatic
potential. Metformin is one of the most used diabetic drugs for the
management of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the world. The role of
metformin in prevention of the development and progression of a variety
of human tumors has been studied. However, the detailed mechanisms have
not yet been fully understood. In the present study, we investigated the
effects of metformin on the suppression of esophageal carcinogenesis in a
rat model, in which F344 rats were treated with
N-nitroso-N-methylbenzylamine (NMBzA 0.30 mg/kg s.c.) three times per
week for 35 weeks to induce esophageal tumors. To monitor the effects of
metformin in this model, one group of rats were administered with
metformin (3 g/L) in the drinking water at the first NMBzA injection. Our
results showed that although there was no significant difference in body
weight in rats of different groups, rats treated with NMBzA and metformin
together significantly reduced the tumor formation and tumor volume when
compared with rats treated with NMBzA alone. Statistic analyses
demonstrated that the tumor numbers was reduced in NMBzA-treated rats
received metformin to an average of 1.85 ± 1.09 tumors per rat when
compared with 10.85 ± 3.86 (P < 0.001) in rats without metformin, while
the tumor volume was decreased from 70.79 ± 41.65 mm3 per rat without
metformin administration to 8.64 ± 13.45 mm3 (P Esophageal cancer is one
of the most aggressive tumor types because of its invasiveness and
metastatic potential. Metformin is one of the most used diabetic drugs
for the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the world. The role of
metformin in prevention of the development and progression of a variety
of human tumors has been studied. However, the detailed mechanisms have
not yet been fully understood. In the present study, we investigated the
effects of metformin on the suppression of esophageal carcinogenesis in a
rat model, in which F344 rats were treated with
N-nitroso-N-methylbenzylamine (NMBzA 0.30 mg/kg s.c.) three times per
week for 35 weeks to induce esophageal tumors. To monitor the effects of
metformin in this model, one group of rats were administered with
metformin (3 g/L) in the drinking water at the first NMBzA injection. Our
results showed that although there was no significant difference in body
weight in rats of different groups, rats treated with NMBzA and metformin
together significantly reduced the tumor formation and tumor volume when
compared with rats treated with NMBzA alone. Statistic analyses
demonstrated that the tumor numbers was reduced in NMBzA-treated rats
received metformin to an average of 1.85 ± 1.09 tumors per rat when
compared with 10.85 ± 3.86 (P < 0.001) in rats without metformin, while
the tumor volume was decreased from 70.79 ± 41.65 mm3 per rat without
metformin administration to 8.64 ± 13.45 mm3 (P < 0.001) with metformin
administration. In addition, 7 out of 24 rats in the NMBzA-treated group
died before week 35 but no rats died in the other groups. Furthermore,
immunoblotting analysis indicated that p-mTORSer2448, p-Stat3Tyr705, and
Cyclin D1 protein levels significantly decreased, while p-AMPKThr172
significantly increased in tumors obtained from rats treated with NMBzA
and metformin when compared with tumors obtained from rats treated with
NMBzA alone. Thus, our results indicated that metformin suppressed
NMBzA-induced esophageal carcinogenesis via inhibition of the AMPK/mTOR
and Stat3 signaling pathways. Together, our study suggested that
metformin might have a potential use for treatment and prevention of
esophageal cancer.


