Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ctDNA use in molecular diagnostics.


The analysis of circulating cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA), which can be
obtained from plasma by non-invasive procedures, is expected to provide
useful biomarkers in the management of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. Indeed, several studies have assessed ctDNA prognostic and
predictive value as source of key data for therapeutic targets and drug
resistance in carcinoma patients. The expanding number of targeted
therapeutics for NSCLC always expects a real-time wider tumor genotyping,
and the use of ctDNA as either a complement or an alternative to tumor
tissue DNA (ttDNA) could be a valid option for Next-Generation Sequencing
(NGS) of key cancer genes.

However, isolation and enrichment of ctDNA is a big challenge because of
its high degree of fragmentation and its low concentration against the
normally occurring background of cell-free DNA derived from healthy
cells. Therefore standardized methods for ctDNA extraction and analysis
are crucial aspects in the setting-up of a molecular diagnostic approach.

In this study we aimed to evaluate the ctDNA use for molecular profiling,
also analyzing the impact of both pre-analytical and analytical variables
on DNA yield and mutation detection.

Matched ttDNA and ctDNA from 30 NSCLC patients were extracted, quantified
and quality-controlled, and then investigated by different standard
methods (real-time PCR, digital PCR, Mass Spectrometry genotyping) for
EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA status. Mutational screening of ctDNA samples by
IonTorrent NGS (Oncomineâ„¢ Lung cfDNA Assay, ThermoFisher) was also
performed. Further, we extended ctDNA evaluation to additional 30 lung
cancer patients with no available tumor sample.

We found that cell free DNA concentration in plasma correlated with both
stage and number of metastatic sites. Analyzing matched ttDNA and ctDNA
by standard methods, we identified mutations in EGFR, KRAS, PIK3CA genes,
with an overall concordance of 77%. Interestingly, Oncomine Lung cfDNA
assay detected these same mutations with the same allelic frequency of
standard methods; mutations in TP53 and ALK genes were also found.

In the 30 patients with no available tumor sample, we found EGFR (10%)
and KRAS (7%) mutations on ctDNA by standard methods; NGS analysis is
under evaluation.

This study evaluated the use of multiple different methods to detect
mutations in NSCLC and showed that ctDNA can be a feasible option for
clinical monitoring of lung cancers, including for those patients who
cannot undergo invasive diagnostic procedures, due to either
comorbidities or absence of biopsable tumor lesions.


