Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potent, highly selective and orally available
ATR inhibitor BAY 1895344 with favorable PK properties and promising
efficacy in monotherapy and combination in preclinical tumor models.


The integrity of the genome of eukaryotic cells is secured by complex
signaling pathways, known as DNA damage response (DDR). Recognition of
DNA damage activates DDR pathways resulting in cell cycle arrest,
suppression of general translation, induction of DNA repair, cell
survival or even cell death. Proteins that directly recognize aberrant
DNA structures recruit and activate kinases of the DDR pathway, such as
ATR (ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related). ATR responds to a broad
spectrum of DNA damage, including double-strand breaks (DSB) and lesions
derived from interference with DNA replication as well as increased
replication stress (e.g. in oncogene-driven tumor cells). Therefore,
inhibition of ATR kinase activity could be the basis for a novel
anti-cancer therapy in tumors with increased DNA damage, deficiency in
DNA damage repair or replication stress. Herein we report the
identification of the potent, highly selective and orally available ATR
inhibitor BAY 1895344 by a collaborative effort involving medicinal
chemistry, pharmacology, DMPK and computational chemistry. The chemical
structures of lead compound BAY-937 and clinical candidate BAY 1895344 as
well as the main SAR trends within this novel class of naphthyridine
derivatives will be disclosed for the first time. The novel lead compound
BAY-937 revealed promising inhibition of ATR (IC50 = 78 nM) and high
kinase selectivity in vitro. In cellular mechanistic assays BAY-937
inhibited hydroxyurea-induced H2AX phosphorylation (IC50 = 380 nM)
demonstrating the anticipated mode of action. Moreover, BAY-937 was shown
to inhibit proliferation of a variety of tumor cell lines with low- to
sub-micromolar IC50 values. In initial xenograft studies, BAY-937
revealed moderate activity in monotherapy and in combination with
cis-platin. However, BAY-937 also revealed low aqueous solubility, low
bioavailability (rat) and activity in the hERG patch clamp assay.
Extensive lead optimization efforts led to the identification of the
novel, orally available ATR inhibitor BAY 1895344. In vitro, BAY 1895344
was shown to be a very potent and highly selective ATR inhibitor (IC50 =
7 nM), which potently inhibits proliferation of a broad spectrum of human
tumor cell lines (median IC50 = 78 nM). In cellular mechanistic assays
BAY 1895344 potently inhibited hydroxyurea-induced H2AX phosphorylation
(IC50 = 36 nM). Moreover, BAY 1895344 revealed significantly improved
aqueous solubility, bioavailability across species and no activity in the
hERG patch-clamp assay. BAY 1895344 also demonstrated very promising
efficacy in monotherapy in DNA damage deficient tumor models as well as
combination treatment with DNA damage inducing therapies. The start of
clinical investigation of BAY 1895344 is planned for early 2017.


