Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of miR29c-ID2 axis in tumor initiating cells of breast
ductal carcinoma in situ.


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is an early-stage form of breast cancer
that accounts for over 20% of all breast cancers in the US. Therefore,
prevention of DCIS is a major goal for reducing breast cancer incidence.
However, the underlying molecular and pathological mechanisms of DCIS
remain poorly understood. It is believed that tumor-initiating cells are
formed at a very early stage of tumorigenesis, which then leads to the
progression of DCIS. Our recent work that focused on tumor-initiating
cells of DCIS revealed that the expression of miR29c in tumor-initiating
cells was significantly down-regulated in DCIS cells compared to that in
normal cells. Furthermore, we found that the ID2 gene is one of the
targets of miR29c in tumor-initiating cells and that miR29c suppresses
the ID2 gene by directly binding to the 3â€™-UTR sequence. ID2 is a
well-known dedifferentiation factor in embryonic development, and the ID
family is involved in progression of cancer by affecting cell
differentiation and proliferation. We also found that ectopic expression
of ID2 in premalignant cells accelerated tumor growth and promoted
self-renewal of tumor-initiating cells in DCIS, suggesting that ID2 also
controls cancer cell dedifferentiation and promotes tumor-initiating
cells formation. These results indicate that the miR29c-ID2 axis plays a
critical role in self-renewal of DICS in vivo and that ID2 is a potential
biomarker for tumor-initiating cells in DCIS. ID2 is thought to sequester
E-protein transcription factors and thus regulates a wide range of gene
expression. Our data suggest that ID2 upregulates expression of several
cancers stem cell genes including SOX2, which is a well- known
self-renewal regulator of stem cells. ID2 also upregulates the fatty acid
synthase gene (FASN), which promotes cancer cell proliferation and
survival. We also found that FASN expression was significantly suppressed
by pterostilbene, indicating potential utility of this natural compound
for preventing DCIS formation. Taken together, these results suggest that
miR29c-ID2 functions as master regulators in forming DCIS. ID2 promotes
self-renewal of tumor-initiating cells by regulating expression of the
SOX2 and FASN genes.


