Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological inhibition of histone methylation attenuates TGFβ
induced EMT characteristics in pancreatic cancer.


Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is a tumor cell remodeling
process that drives progression of several epithelial solid tumors
including pancreatic tumors. Transforming growth factor (TGF) β
signaling is a key promoter of EMT pathway and remains an attractive
target for curtailing tumor progression. Here we present a strategy for
investigating inhibitors of TGFβ signaling in pancreatic cancer via
reprograming of miRNAs. We find a carbocyclic adenosine analog and
histone methyl transferase inhibitor, 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) to
significantly attenuate the TGFβ signaling induced EMT characteristics
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Specifically, we find DZNep
treatment to restore expression of selective epigenetically silenced
miRNAs (mir-663a, miR-4787-5p, and miR-202) that inhibit endogenous
TGFβ1 ligand and receptor expression via RNA interference. Consequently,
DZNep significantly attenuated both exogenous and endogenous
TGFβ-induced EMT response. Lentiviral overexpression of mir-663a,
miR-4787-5p or miR-202 reduced tumor cellular proliferation and EMT
phenotypic characteristics similar to DZNep in cultured pancreatic cancer
cells, whereas locked nucleic acids inhibition of miRNAs abrogated such
effects. In an orthotopic pancreatic cancer mouse model, DZNep and all
three miRs reduced overall tumor burden in pancreas and metastatic load
in liver, lungs and spleen. Together, these findings suggest epigenetic
reprograming of miRNAs by synthetic histone methylation reversal agents
as a potentially viable approach for attenuating TGFβ signaling pathway
involved in pancreatic cancer progression.


