Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy protects ovarian cancer cells from olaparib-induced
toxicity.


Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy.
Persistence of dormant, drug resistant cancer cells is one of the major
factors that contribute to poor outcomes. The Poly (ADP) ribose
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, olaparib, has shown promising anti-cancer
activity and has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of ovarian
cancer with BRCA1/2 mutations. Olaparib targets DNA repair mechanisms
within cancer cells and induces apoptosis. Both preclinical and clinical
data indicate that efficacy of olaparib can be decreased by acquired
resistance. One mechanism of resistance involves autophagy. Autophagy can
degrade organelles and long-lived proteins to provide energy for cancer
cells under nutrient poor conditions or in the presence of stress. The
energy provided from autophagy is used to fuel the DNA repair process and
metabolic needs in cancer cells. Autophagy can protect cancer cells from
chemotherapy or can enhance the response to certain drugs. In this study,
we have asked whether autophagy protects OC cells against the cytotoxic
effects of olaparib or augments damage.

We first determined PARP activity using a modified PARP activity assay in
different OC cell lines. Olaparib-induced autophagy was determined by
punctate localization of GFP-LC3, conversion of LC3I to LC3II on protein
blots and electron microscopy. To test whether autophagy contributes to
the resistance of OC cells to olaparib, we determined the impact of
autophagy inhibition on the sensitivity of OC cells to olaparib by either
using the pharmacologic inhibitors chloroquine (CQ), LYS05 or short
interfering RNA (siRNA) against ATG7. Upon investigation of a potential
mechanism of olaparib-induced autophagy we evaluated the production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the expression of JNK,
Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), mTOR and p70S6K.

Inhibition of PARP by olaparib treatment, decreased PARP activity in a
dose- dependent manner, leading to DNA damage judged by phosphorylation
of É£-H2AX. Olaparib treatment decreased cell growth, caused cell cycle
arrest and significantly enhanced apoptosis in 5 of 5 OC cell lines.
Olaparib induced autophagy in 8 of 8 OC cell lines. Both pharmacologic
and genetic inhibition of autophagy increased OC cells sensitivity to
olaparib and induced apoptosis in 5 of 6 OC cell lines. Furthermore, flow
cytometry and western blot analysis demonstrated that olaparib treatment
increased ROS production and increased the phosphorylation of JNK and ATM
while decreasing the phosphorylation of mTOR and p70S6K.

Taken together, our data described autophagy as a potential mechanism of
olaparib resistance in OC that may depend upon the activation of ATM and
JNK by ROS downregulating pmTOR and p70S6K. Combination of olaparib with
CQ, LYS05 or other autophagy inhibitor may provide a novel strategy to
increase the efficacy of olaparib in OC. Current studies are underway to
test our hypothesis in vivo.


