Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osimertinib, an irreversible mutant selective EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, exerts anti tumor activity in NSCLC harbouring exon 20
insertion mutant-EGFR.


EGFR exon 20 insertion (Ex20Ins) mutations represent a combination of
in-frame insertions and/or duplications that account for 4-10% of all
EGFR mutants in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). To date, more than
one hundred different Ex20Ins mutations have been identified. With the
notable exception of the rare A763_Y764insFQEA insertion (EGFR exon 20
insertion (Ex20Ins) mutations represent a combination of in-frame
insertions and/or duplications that account for 4-10% of all EGFR mutants
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). To date, more than one hundred
different Ex20Ins mutations have been identified. With the notable
exception of the rare A763_Y764insFQEA insertion (<1%), EGFR Ex20Ins
mutations are clinically unresponsive to early generation EGFR
inhibitors, the standard of care for NSCLC patients with EGFR Ex20Ins
mutations is chemotherapy. Therefore, a significant unmet need remains
requiring the development of an EGFR TKI agent that can more effectively
target NSCLC with EGFR Ex20Ins mutations. Osimertinib is a newly
developed EGFR TKI approved for the treatment of advanced NSCLC with EGFR
T790M tumors. This work describes the potential of osimertinib and
AZ5104, a circulating metabolite of osimertinib, in Ex20Ins tumours.

Using CRISPR-Cas 9 genome editing technology, we engineered cellular
disease relevant models carrying the most prevalent Ex20Ins mutations,
namely Ex20Ins D770_N771InsSVD (22%) or Ex20Ins V769_D770InsASV (17%).

Using these models, we show that osimertinib and AZ5104 inhibit
signalling pathways and cellular growth of Ex20Ins CRISPR-Cas9 engineered
cell lines in vitro. This translates into sustained tumor growth
inhibition in vivo in both the Ex20Ins SVD (65%, pUsing these models, we
show that osimertinib and AZ5104 inhibit signalling pathways and cellular
growth of Ex20Ins CRISPR-Cas9 engineered cell lines in vitro. This
translates into sustained tumor growth inhibition in vivo in both the
Ex20Ins SVD (65%, p<0.001 & 95%, pUsing these models, we show that
osimertinib and AZ5104 inhibit signalling pathways and cellular growth of
Ex20Ins CRISPR-Cas9 engineered cell lines in vitro. This translates into
sustained tumor growth inhibition in vivo in both the Ex20Ins SVD (65%,
p<0.001 & 95%, p<0.001 respectively at day 14) and Ex20Ins ASV (82%,
pUsing these models, we show that osimertinib and AZ5104 inhibit
signalling pathways and cellular growth of Ex20Ins CRISPR-Cas9 engineered
cell lines in vitro. This translates into sustained tumor growth
inhibition in vivo in both the Ex20Ins SVD (65%, p<0.001 & 95%, p<0.001
respectively at day 14) and Ex20Ins ASV (82%, p<0.001 & 95%, pUsing these
models, we show that osimertinib and AZ5104 inhibit signalling pathways
and cellular growth of Ex20Ins CRISPR-Cas9 engineered cell lines in
vitro. This translates into sustained tumor growth inhibition in vivo in
both the Ex20Ins SVD (65%, p<0.001 & 95%, p<0.001 respectively at day 14)
and Ex20Ins ASV (82%, p<0.001 & 95%, p<0.001 respectively at day 14)
xenograft models when compared to the control group. Importantly in vivo
osimertinib was dosed at exposures consistent with the 80 mg osimertinib
clinical dose. Moreover, a dual EGFR blockade strategy combining
osimertinib or AZ5104 with cetuximab (an EGFR antibody) improved the anti
tumor effect further. We also describe the anti-tumor activity of
osimertinib and AZ5104 using a series of patient derived xenograft models
harbouring the rarer Ex20Ins H773-V774insNPH and M766-A767insASV
mutations. In addition, we performed pharmacodynamic studies to explore
the relationship between efficacy and target/pathway modulation. These
studies establish a clear relationship between depth and duration of
phospho-EGFR inhibition and anti tumor efficacy. Interestingly, we
observed that downstream signalling molecules displayed a more transient
inhibition than the phospho

EGFR signal. Two patients from the AURA Phase 2 osimertinib trials with
plasma positive Ex20Ins (concurrent with Ex19del and T790M) had durable
PFS responses of 6.4 and 13.9 months, supporting the premise that
osimertinib has the potential to be clinically beneficial in tumors
harboring Ex20Ins.

The work presented herein demonstrates that osimertinib has the potential
to improve upon the current treatment options for NSCLC patients whose
tumors harbour an Ex20Ins mutation, and warrants its further clinical
investigation.


