Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for FGFR4 in growth and survival of Ewing sarcoma cells.


Ewing sarcoma is the second most common cancer of bone and soft tissue
arising in children and young adults. Although the survival rate has
improved for patients treated for localized disease, the survival rate
for patients with metastatic tumor remains lower than 30%. In order to
identify novel therapeutic targets and to better understand the genes
involved in growth and survival of Ewing sarcoma, we employed a
functional genomics approach based on siRNA screening. Four Ewing sarcoma
cell lines, TC-32, TC-71, SK-ES-1 and RD-ES, were transfected with a
library of siRNA targeting 287 cancer-associated genes. The resulting
siRNA screening data for each cell line were normalized and statistical
cut-offs were determined. The results indicated that siRNAs targeting
Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 4, FGFR4 were among the most effective
in reducing cell viability in all four of the Ewing sarcoma cell lines.
Validation of the siRNA screens showed that siRNAs to FGFR4, reduced
viability much greater that those to FGFR1, FGFR2, or FGFR3. Furthermore,
siRNA targeting FGFR4 were able to induce caspase 3 activity. FGFR4
protein is expressed on Ewing sarcoma cells as determined by western blot
analysis, although expression levels were lower compared to FGFR4
expression on rhabdomyosarcoma cells. Targeting FGFR activity in Ewing
sarcoma cells using a pan-FGFR inhibitors PD-173074 and BGJ-398
demonstrated that Ewing sarcoma cells were sensitive to FGFR inhibition.
Furthermore, treatment of Ewing sarcoma cells with the selective FGFR4
inhibitor BLU9931 resulted in growth inhibition and decreased ERK
signaling. These results indicate that FGFR4 may play an important role
in growth and survival of Ewing sarcoma and could serve as a potential
therapeutic target for this disease.


