Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polo-like kinase 1 as a new molecular target for small cell lung
carcinoma.




No target therapies are presently available in the treatment of
small-cell lung cancer of Lung (SCLC). Therefore there is a need to
develop new therapeutic agents. The protein kinases are a family of genes
that play critical roles in various signaling pathways. Some cancer cells
show addiction to constitutive activation of certain signaling pathways
for proliferation and survival. To identify new drug targets for SCLC, we
screened a panel of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that target 720 genes
encoding human protein kinases and related proteins using SBC5 SCLC cell
(SN38 (irinotecan hydrochloride) resistant cell). PLK1 inhibition
suppressed cell proliferation strongest among 20 significant promising
total genes using different 5 SCLC cells as a varidation study). PLK1
mRNA expression was significantly higher than other pathological
phenotypes among 20 celllines and the 200 clinical samples consist of
three independent cohorts. The patients with high PLK1 expresssion was
significantly associated with poor prognosis in SCLC patients.
Furthermore we investigated the change of SN 38 sensitivity and
preventing from SN38 resistance after knockdown PLK1.

Our results indicated that PLK1 inhibitor as BI 2536 and Volasertib, was
a promising molecular target therapy for pharmacologic intervention in
SCLC in both monotherapy and the combination therapy with SN38.


