Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: U3-1402a, a novel HER3-targeting ADC with a novel DNA
topoisomerase I inhibitor, demonstrates a potent antitumor efficacy.


Background HER3 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 3) is a member of
HER family, and overexpressed in breast cancer, NSCLC, melanoma, gastric
cancer and pancreatic cancer patients` tissues. U3-1402a is an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) comprised of a fully human anti-HER3
monoclonal immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) antibody (U3-1287) covalently
conjugated via a cleavable peptide linker to exatecan derivative (DXd).
The DXd is released after internalization of U3-1402a and leads to
apoptosis of the target tumor cells by the inhibition of topoisomerase I.
This ADC achieves a high drug-to-antibody-ratio (DAR 7 to 8) with
homogeneous conjugation with the topoisomerase I inhibitor. The aim of
this study was to preclinically evaluate the efficacy of U3-1402a in
breast cancer models.

Materials and methods In order to evaluate the pharmacological potential
of U3-1402a, in vitro and in vivo studies were performed. In vitro growth
inhibition assay evaluated the sensitivity of U3-1402a in HER3-positive
human breast cancer cell line (HCC1569) and HER3-negative human cervical
carcinoma cell line (C33A). Cells were treated with U3-1402a or MAAA-1181
(payload of U3-1402a) depending on its concentration (U3-1402a: 0.153 to
10 000 ng/mL, MAAA-1181: 2.44 to 160,000 pg/mL). In vivo growth
inhibition study evaluated the dose-dependent sensitivity of U3-1402a in
HER3-positive breast cancer xenograft model, MDA-MB-453. In addition,
several xenograft models with different HER3 expression were tested with
its sensitivity to U3-1402a. These models were HCC1569 (human breast
cancer cell line, HER3 IHC score 3+), MDA-MB-453 (human breast cancer
cell line, HER3 IHC score 2+), NIBIO-G016 (human gastric cancer
patient-derived xenograft, HER3 IHC score 1+) and MDA-MB-231 (human
breast cancer cell line, HER3 IHC score 0). R

esults In vitro study, U3-1402a exhibited anti-tumor killing activity in
HER3-positive human breast cancer cell line, HCC1569. C-33A human
cervical carcinoma cell line was not sensitive to U3-1402a even MAAA-1181
itself exhibited anti-tumor killing activity to this cell line. In vivo
study, U3-1402a showed dose-dependent anti-tumor killing activity in a
HER3-positive breast cancer MDA-MB-453 xenograft model. Finally, in vivo
tumor regression was only observed in HER3 2+ and 3+ models.

Conclusions U3-1402a preclinically exhibited its efficacy in breast
cancer model in vitro and in vivo. In vivo efficacy was correlated with
HER3 expression. These studies suggest that U3-1402a, a novel
HER3-targeting ADC, would be efficacious in a broader patient population
with HER3 expression like breast cancer, melanoma, NSCLC, gastric cancer
and pancreatic cancer.


