Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-Fos drives non-tumorigenic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
cells to tumorigenic by promoting cancer stem cells like properties.


Purposes of the study: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is
the sixth most widespread cancer and leading cause of cancer related
death world widely. Regardless of the advancement in treatment processes
the overall survival rate of patients having this cancer has not
substantially improved in the past few decades. Development of tumor and
its progression exclusively resides in a small population of cancer
cells, termed as cancer stem cells (CSCs). This population of cells can
self-renew and re-form the ordered organization of tumors. CSCs
contribute to HNSCC and may offer prominent therapeutic strategy for the
management of HNSCC. We previously observed that c-Fos was highly
up-regulated in the HNSCC sphere forming cells. In the present study, we
explored the role of c-Fos in the tumor initiation in relation with
cancer stemness and EMT.

Experimental procedures: We examined whether overexpression of c-Fos has
an effect on tumorigenicity and stemness. For this, c-Fos was
overexpressed in non-tumorigenic HNSCC cell lines and tumor growth was
investigated. We also examined the expression of different CSC marker
genes expression by Western blot analysis.

Summary: Our results demonstrated that exogenous expression of c-Fos in
non-tumorigenic MDA1386Tu cells makes the cells tumorigenic in nude mice.
Mechanistic investigations showed that c-Fos overexpression in MDA1386Tu
cells enhanced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)/CSC properties and
increased numbers of oralspheres when grown in ultra-low binding plate.

Conclusions: Collectively, our data strongly demonstrate that c-Fos plays
a critical role in the modulation of EMT and cancer stem cell
reprogramming in HNSCC cells and enhance tumor growth.


