Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel strategy to overcome platinum resistance in uterine
leiomyosarcoma; blocking ATP7B by copper ion.


Objective: Resistance to platinum drugs remains a significant problem.
Our objective is to elucidate the role of ATP7B, a copper transporter
which excretes intracellular platinum giving drug resistance, in
gynecologic malignancies and to develop a method which can overcome the
platinum resistance.

Methods: The expression of ATP7B was evaluated in 3 uterine
leiomyosarcoma (LMS) cell lines (SK-LMS, SK-UT1 and SKN) and 26 clinical
samples of LMS by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining, respectively. The
IC50 values of cisplatin were measured by modified MTT assay.
Intracellular platinum accumulation was determined by ICP-MS analysis in
SK-LMS cells and ATP7B-stably suppressed cells (SK-LMS-7B cells), which
transfected the pRS ATP7B shRNA vector. To analyze in vivo platinum
sensitivity, SK-LMS and SK-LMS-7B cells were subcutaneously injected into
nude mice. Cisplatin (3 mg/kg) or PBS was administered i.p. to
xenografted mice twice weekly for 28 days. Further, we attempted to show
the improvement of platinum sensitivity by using premedication for CuSO4
before cisplatin treatment in vitro and in vivo model.

Results: Expression of ATP7B was observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In
clinical samples, ATP7B was over expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In
drug resistance analysis, significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin
were observed in SK-LMS-7B cells (4.3μM, p Results: Expression of ATP7B
was observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In clinical samples, ATP7B was over
expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In drug resistance analysis,
significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin were observed in SK-LMS-7B
cells (4.3μM, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells (17μM) indicating
knockdown of ATP7B improved platinum sensitivity. Also, significantly
higher platinum accumulation was detected in SK-LMS-7B cells (7.2ng/dish,
p Results: Expression of ATP7B was observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In
clinical samples, ATP7B was over expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In
drug resistance analysis, significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin
were observed in SK-LMS-7B cells (4.3μM, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS
cells (17μM) indicating knockdown of ATP7B improved platinum
sensitivity. Also, significantly higher platinum accumulation was
detected in SK-LMS-7B cells (7.2ng/dish, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS
cells (52ng/dish). In in vivo analyses, a significantly higher anti-tumor
effect of cisplatin was observed in SK-LMS-7B-xenografted mice compared
with SK-LMS-xenografted mice (56±27 μg vs 214±68 μg, pResults:
Expression of ATP7B was observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In clinical
samples, ATP7B was over expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In drug
resistance analysis, significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin were
observed in SK-LMS-7B cells (4.3μM, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells
(17μM) indicating knockdown of ATP7B improved platinum sensitivity.
Also, significantly higher platinum accumulation was detected in
SK-LMS-7B cells (7.2ng/dish, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells
(52ng/dish). In in vivo analyses, a significantly higher anti-tumor
effect of cisplatin was observed in SK-LMS-7B-xenografted mice compared
with SK-LMS-xenografted mice (56±27 μg vs 214±68 μg, p<0.05).
Pretreatment with CuSO4 (15μM) before cisplatin treatment for SK-LMS
cells significantly reduced IC50-values (17 μM to 3.9 μM, pResults:
Expression of ATP7B was observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In clinical
samples, ATP7B was over expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In drug
resistance analysis, significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin were
observed in SK-LMS-7B cells (4.3μM, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells
(17μM) indicating knockdown of ATP7B improved platinum sensitivity.
Also, significantly higher platinum accumulation was detected in
SK-LMS-7B cells (7.2ng/dish, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells
(52ng/dish). In in vivo analyses, a significantly higher anti-tumor
effect of cisplatin was observed in SK-LMS-7B-xenografted mice compared
with SK-LMS-xenografted mice (56±27 μg vs 214±68 μg, p<0.05).
Pretreatment with CuSO4 (15μM) before cisplatin treatment for SK-LMS
cells significantly reduced IC50-values (17 μM to 3.9 μM, p<0.05). In
addition, an elevated intracellular platinum accumulation was observed in
cells from pretreatment group (15.0 to 68.4 ng/dish, pResults: Expression
of ATP7B was observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In clinical samples, ATP7B
was over expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In drug resistance
analysis, significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin were observed in
SK-LMS-7B cells (4.3μM, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells (17μM)
indicating knockdown of ATP7B improved platinum sensitivity. Also,
significantly higher platinum accumulation was detected in SK-LMS-7B
cells (7.2ng/dish, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells (52ng/dish). In
in vivo analyses, a significantly higher anti-tumor effect of cisplatin
was observed in SK-LMS-7B-xenografted mice compared with
SK-LMS-xenografted mice (56±27 μg vs 214±68 μg, p<0.05). Pretreatment
with CuSO4 (15μM) before cisplatin treatment for SK-LMS cells
significantly reduced IC50-values (17 μM to 3.9 μM, p<0.05). In
addition, an elevated intracellular platinum accumulation was observed in
cells from pretreatment group (15.0 to 68.4 ng/dish, p<0.05). A
significant improvement of platinum sensitivity was observed in the
premedication group (CuSO4 premedication group; 65±40 μg vs no
pretreatment group; 230±60 μg, pResults: Expression of ATP7B was
observed in all 3 LMS cell lines. In clinical samples, ATP7B was over
expressed in 14 of 26 (53.8%) cases. In drug resistance analysis,
significantly lower IC50 values of cisplatin were observed in SK-LMS-7B
cells (4.3μM, p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells (17μM) indicating
knockdown of ATP7B improved platinum sensitivity. Also, significantly
higher platinum accumulation was detected in SK-LMS-7B cells (7.2ng/dish,
p < 0.01) compared with SK-LMS cells (52ng/dish). In in vivo analyses, a
significantly higher anti-tumor effect of cisplatin was observed in
SK-LMS-7B-xenografted mice compared with SK-LMS-xenografted mice (56±27
μg vs 214±68 μg, p<0.05). Pretreatment with CuSO4 (15μM) before
cisplatin treatment for SK-LMS cells significantly reduced IC50-values
(17 μM to 3.9 μM, p<0.05). In addition, an elevated intracellular
platinum accumulation was observed in cells from pretreatment group (15.0
to 68.4 ng/dish, p<0.05). A significant improvement of platinum
sensitivity was observed in the premedication group (CuSO4 premedication
group; 65±40 μg vs no pretreatment group; 230±60 μg, p<0.05).

Conclusion: ATP7B contributes platinum resistance in LMS. Presumably,
ATB7B preferentially excrete copper ion thereby platinum can be
accumulate in cells. Thus, pretreatment with CuO4 effectively improved
platinum sensitivity in vitro and in vivo by blocking ATP7B.


