Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET protein proteolysis targeting chimera (BETP-PROTACs) exert
more potent activity than BETP bromodomain inhibitor (BETi) against
post-myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) secondary (s) AML cells.


In BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms with myelofibrosis
(MPN-MF) transformation to AML (sAML) occurs in up to 20% of patients.
Ruxolitinib (R) is a type I, ATP-competitive, JAK1 & 2 inhibitor (JAKi),
which is effective in the therapy of MPN-MF but does not significantly
impact the clinical outcome in post-MPN sAML. We have previously reported
that treatment with BETi, e.g. JQ1 or OTX015 inhibits growth and induces
apoptosis of cultured sAML cells, including those that express JAK2 V617F
and mutant TP53, e.g. HEL92.1.7 and SET2, as well as patient-derived (PD)
CD34+ sAML cells. BETi treatment attenuated the protein expressions of
c-MYC, p-STAT5, Bcl-xL, CDK4/6, PIM1 and IL-7R, while concomitantly
inducing the levels of HEXIM1, p21, NOXA and BIM in the sAML cells.
However, treatment with BETi leads to the accumulation of BETP, e.g.
BRD4, which may reduce BETi-mediated repression of c-MYC, NFÎºB and
BETP-regulated oncoproteins. In contrast, BETP-PROTACs (proteolysis
targeting chimera) ARV-825 and ARV-771 (Arvinas Inc.) degrade BETPs
(including BRD4) in the cultured and PD CD34+ sAML cells. At equimolar
concentrations, BETP-PROTACs were significantly more potent than the BETi
in inducing apoptosis of cultured and PD sAML cells (p 90%) in the sAML
cells. BETP-PROTAC treatment caused more up and down regulation of mRNA
and protein expressions than BETi, as determined by RNA-Seq and reversed
phase protein array (RPPA) analyses, respectively. As compared to
treatment with BETi, BETP-PROTAC caused greater depletion of c-MYC, JAK2,
p-STAT5, STAT5, p-STAT3, STAT3, PIM1 and Bcl-xL, whereas the protein
levels of p21 and p27 were upregulated. CyTOF or mass-cytometry also
showed that BETP-PROTAC, more than OTX015 treatment, reduced BRD4, c-MYC
and p-Rb, while inducing p21 levels in the CD34+ sAML stem/progenitor
cells expressing CD90, CD244, CD123 and TIM3-Fc. Compared to treatment
with each agent alone, co-treatment with BETP-PROTAC and R was
synergistically lethal against the cultured and PD CD34+ sAML cells.
Additionally, co-treatment with BETP-PROTAC and HSP90 inhibitor AUY922 or
BCL2/BcL-xL antagonist ABT263 was synergistically lethal against
R-sensitive and R-resistant sAML cells. As compared to treatment with
vehicle control, R treatment alone, treatment with BETP-PROTAC ARV-771
alone or in combination with R significantly reduced the in vivo sAML
burden and improved the median survival of the immune-depleted mice
engrafted with luciferase-transduced HEL92.1.7 cells. These findings
strongly support further in vivo development of the novel
BETP-PROTACs-based combinations against post-MPN sAML.


