Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of environmental influences, behavioral risk factors
and genetic differences among a cohort of 819 African American community
members.


Objectives: This study was designed to address genetic, environmental and
lifestyle risk factors for cancer in populations of African Ancestry. We
have established a non-cancer control registry which involves the
collection of epidemiological, lifestyle, culture and cancer prevention
behaviors (such as cancer screening and diet, etc).

Methods: Data was coded and analyzed using Stata from initial study
surveys.

Results: At analysis, the cohort consisted of 819 participants. The
cohort was 65.9% female, ages 18-89 (23.5% within 50-59 age group), 35.9%
college graduates, and 17.4% with income level $20,000-$25,000.
Two-thirds of the cohort had BMI greater than 25, indicating overweight
or obese. When stratified by country of birth, participants born in the
US & Territories were more likely to be current smokers (23.3%) and have
higher rates of environmental exposure to smoking than any other region
of birth analyzed. Participants from US & Territories had the highest
access to health care (85.9%). Pap smears were the only screening test
with statistically significant difference between the regions, with US &
Territories having the highest rates of screening (p Results: At
analysis, the cohort consisted of 819 participants. The cohort was 65.9%
female, ages 18-89 (23.5% within 50-59 age group), 35.9% college
graduates, and 17.4% with income level $20,000-$25,000. Two-thirds of the
cohort had BMI greater than 25, indicating overweight or obese. When
stratified by country of birth, participants born in the US & Territories
were more likely to be current smokers (23.3%) and have higher rates of
environmental exposure to smoking than any other region of birth
analyzed. Participants from US & Territories had the highest access to
health care (85.9%). Pap smears were the only screening test with
statistically significant difference between the regions, with US &
Territories having the highest rates of screening (p < 0.001).

Conclusions & Implications: Overall, the cohort and its data provide
researchers with a resource to further investigate health disparities in
cancer as well as other chronic diseases and tailor culturally relevant
education materials to help decrease the rates of cancer in this
vulnerable population.


