Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair capacity in colon cancer patients - The effect on the
response to treatment and long-term survival.


Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide with
the highest incidence in Central Europe. It is the fourth leading cause
of cancer related deaths mainly due to the late diagnosis and low
efficacy of treatment. CRC diagnosed in early stage has a five-year
survival rate about 90% which drops to near 12% once distant metastases
occur. It is a heterogenous disease with different molecular and
clinicopathological features depending on the tumor location. Therefore,
different treatment strategies are required. A standard treatment of
locally advanced rectal cancer includes neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy
followed by surgery, whereas colon cancer treatment consists of surgical
resection of the tumor and/or subsequent adjuvant chemotherapy based on
disease characteristics. 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) alone or in combination
with other compounds is the most used treatment in CRC. The mechanism of
5-FU on molecular level is either its incorporation into DNA or it
imbalances the synthesis of thymidine from uracil resulting in false
uracil DNA incorporation. These DNA lesions are repaired by base excision
(BER) and mismatch repair (MMR) pathways.

An effective DNA damage response (DDR) is essential for the maintenance
of genome stability in healthy cells, whereas in malignant cells, the
suppression of DNA repair capacity (DRC) would increase the effectiveness
of chemotherapy through DNA damage accumulation and consequent apoptosis.
In contrary the cells with high DRC may show better survival and
therefore patients with these molecular characteristics may contend with
poor response, resistance to treatment and decreased survival.

The aim of our present study was to investigate DRC of BER and MMR in
target tissue as a predictive marker for a treatment strategy and
long-term survival. In order to minimize a bias by heterogenous therapy
we focused only on patients with newly diagnosed colon cancer. Our set of
patients was selected based on the criteria of follow-up at minimum 30
months, subsequent treatment with 5-FU and microsatellite stable tumor
tissue characteristics. Tumor and adjacent non-affected tissue samples
were obtained from one hundred patients at surgical resection. Protein
extracts from tissues were isolated both for protein expression analysis
and for measurement of DRC. DNA repair and DDR protein expression levels
were tested by Western Blot. Functional assessments of DRC were performed
by comet assay-based in vitro DNA repair assay.

The analysis is running and the data will be statistically analyzed and
compared with clinical data (TNM stage, type and course of treatment,
presence of recurrence, patientÂ´s performance, etc.). Understanding DRC
effect on the treatment response might contribute to the concept assuming
that targeted modulating of DNA repair processes can achieve clinical
benefit in cancer treatment.

Acknowledgements: GA UK 800216, COST LD14050, GACR P303/15/14789S and AZV
15-27580A.


