Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the efficacy of targeting mitochondrial respiration in
delaying lung tumor growth by using subcutaneous xenografts in mouse
models.


Previously, studies have focused mainly on the precept that tumors depend
on glycolysis for energy and growth (the Warburg effect) and that the
mitochondria are dysfunctional in cancer cells. However, there is
mounting evidence that some cancer cells exhibit elevated mitochondrial
respiration. Recent studies in our lab have demonstrated that Non-Small
Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) cells exhibit intensified mitochondrial
respiration and oxygen consumption. We further demonstrated that
targeting increased mitochondrial respiration by a therapeutic agent
effectively hampers proliferation of Non-Small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells in vitro. The purpose of the study is to determine to what extent
mitochondrial respiration is affected by the therapeutic agent in vivo.

In order to achieve this goal, NSCLC cells were transduced with
lentiviral particles carrying luciferase sequence. NSCLC cells expressing
luciferase cells were implanted on the right flank of 4-6 weeks old
female NOD/SCID mice to generate subcutaneous xenografts. The therapeutic
agent was administered intravenously. Tumor implantation and growth were
monitored by bioluminescence imaging (BLI) using Perkin Elmerâ€™s IVIS
Lumina III Imager. On sacrificing the mice, the tumors were harvested,
formalin fixed and paraffin embedded for Immunohistochemistry (IHC).

Our BLI data suggest that there is a considerable reduction in radiance
(total flux in photons per second) in the group of mice that were treated
with therapeutic agent in comparison to control. Further, there is a
significant reduction in tumor volume in mice that received treatment.
Our IHC data suggest that there is a reduction in expression of a vital
enzyme involved in heme synthesis and hemoproteins involved in
mitochondrial respiration.

Our BLI and IHC data suggest that the therapeutic agent affects
mitochondrial respiration by affecting mitochondrial complexes in vivo.
Additional experiments to corroborate the results are underway.


