Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET1 over expression contributes to lung cancer malignancy.


Epigenetic alterations are a leading cause of lung carcinogenesis and
malignancy. While the role of enzymes catalyzing cytosine-guanine (CpG)
island methylation and chromatin modifications has been extensively
studied, the role of the recently discovered demethylating enzymes
represented by ten-eleven translocation methylcytosine dioxygenases
(TETs) remains unknown. The goal of this study was to investigate the
expression and functional significance of the TET1 gene in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). QRT-PCR revealed 2- to 30-fold over expression of
TET1 in 52% of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and 40% of adenocarcinoma
(AdC) tumors compared to paired normal lung tissue. This result was
validated using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database with TET1 over
expressed in 72% of SCCs and 53% of AdCs. Elevated levels of TET1
transcript were associated with increased protein levels in NSCLC cell
lines compared to normal human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs). A
reporter assay analysis defined the promoter region critical for elevated
transcription of the TET1 gene using lung cancer cell lines, and studies
to identify the transcription factors underlying the increase in
expression are underway. Transient knock down of TET1 expression in NSCLC
cell lines caused global changes in the transcriptome, reduced cell
proliferation, colony formation, and inhibited growth of tumor xenografts
in nude mice. Cellular senescence mediated by p21 signaling and
associated with Î²-galactosidase activation was identified as one
mechanism underlying growth inhibition. This study suggests that TET1 may
function as an oncogene contributing to the lung cancer malignant
phenotype and thus, could serve as a potential new target for treatment.
(Supported by R01 CA183296)


