Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FoxO3a activation by HDAC class IIa inhibition induces cell cycle
arrest in pancreatic cancer cells.


Pancreatic cancer is highly chemo-resistant associated with oncogenic
mutations such as KRAS and/or p53. The effect of conventional
chemotherapy is not sufficient and new target and strategy is urgently
needed.

The forkhead box (Fox) proteins are multidirectional transcriptional
factors strongly implicated in malignancies. Although Fox O (FoxO)
protein, and particularly FoxO3a, works as negative regulator of cell
proliferation by repressing cyclin proteins and inducing cell cycle
inhibitors such as p21Waf1/Cip1, its expression is consistently
suppressed by several oncogenic pathways including phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase (PI3K) / AKT pathway, constitutively activated in pancreatic
cancer. Thus, upregulating FoxO3a activity could be a promising target of
pancreatic cancer treatment without impact of underlying oncogenic
mutations.

Class IIa Histone deacetylase (HDAC) is a subgroup of HDAC. Though HDAC
inhibitors (HDACi) have been extensively investigated as a cancer target,
its action mechanism is considered due to histone modification by class
I. Biological significance of class IIa HDACs which have minimal histone
deacetylation activity have not been elucidated yet. Recent studies show
class IIa HDACs act as a transcriptional regulator including FoxO3a. In
this study, we investigate the biologic impact of HDAC class IIa
inhibition on FoxO3a and anti-tumor effect against pancreatic cancer cell
line using selective class IIa HDACi TMP269.

TMP269 treatment showed increased FoxO3a expression in a dose dependent
manner with immunoblotting and modest cell growth inhibition effect at
57.5 Î¼M of IC50 dose for 48-hour treatment against AsPC-1 in MTT. G1/S
arrest was observed with cell cycle assay. Upregulated p21Waf1/Cip1 and
downregulated CDK2 and 4/6 and cyclin D1 and D2 expressions were further
observed, consistent with inducing G1/S arrest and transcriptionally
activated FoxO3a. Importantly, upregulated p21Waf1/Cip1 was observed in
AsPC-1 p53 null cell line, suggesting independent with p53 pathway. These
findings suggest upregulated FoxO3a induced by HDAC class IIa inhibition
activated its transcription and resulted in cell growth inhibition.

Because PI3K/AKT leads FoxO3a to the ubiquitylation-mediated proteasome
degradation, we examined irreversible proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib
(CFZ) combined with TMP269, aiming synergistic FoxO3a upregulating. As
expected, FoxO3a expression was further increased in TMP269 combined with
CFZ compared with TMP269 or CFZ alone. Following the activated FoxO3a,
p21Waf1/Cip1 expression was upregulated and cell growth inhibition was
dramatically enhanced.

In conclusion, HDAC class IIa inhibition modified FoxO3a transcriptional
activation and upregulating FoxO3 by dual inhibition of HDAC class IIa
and proteasome is promising target against pancreas cancer.


