Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GULP1 is an epigenetically altered and functional tumor suppressor
in urothelial carcinoma through regulation of Nrf2-Keap1 signaling axis.


We identified GULP1 as a novel tumor suppressor gene (TSG) selectively
silenced during urothelial cancer (UC) progression through promoter
hypermethylation (PH) analyzed by quantitative methylation specific PCR
(QMSP) and novel methylation specific digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) assay.
Numerous cell based assays revealed that GULP1 silencing confers growth
advantage to tumor cells. Correspondently, in vivo tumorigenicity after
xenotransplantation of GULP1 knockdown T24 cells was significantly higher
than control cells. Further mechanistic analysis revealed that GULP1 has
a crucial role in the regulation of Nrf2-Keap1 axis, maintaining actin
cytoskeleton architecture and helping Keap1 to scaffold Nrf2 in the
cytoplasm. Moreover, GULP1 silencing induces constitutive activation of
Nrf2 target signature, responsible for chemoresistance of UCs.
Additionally, we analyzed GULP1 PH and expression in cisplatin-based
therapy responsive and resistant primary UC samples, and in isogenic
cisplatin sensitive and resistant T24 cell lines. Interestingly, GULP1
expression at transcription level was lower in both resistant primary UC
samples and resistant T24 cell line. Cell lines with lower expressions of
GULP1 (SW780 and UM-UC-3) also showed higher resistance to cisplatin than
those with higher expression (T24 and BFTC905). Altogether, our findings
determined that GULP1 is an epigenetically silenced potential TSG in UC
and GULP1 expression and/or PH may guide in selecting candidate patients
for cisplatin based neo-adjuvant therapy.


