Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDX-1402, a dendritic cell targeted fusion protein designed to
elicit immunity to mesothelin and HER2 expressing tumors.


The use of mAbs to target antigens to the endocytic receptor Dec205 on
dendritic cells (DC) is an effective means to elicit helper and cytolytic
T cell responses in the presence of appropriate adjuvants to activate DC.
We have translated this concept to clinical studies using a fully human
Dec205-specific mAb genetically altered to include the entire NY-ESO-1
cancer antigen (CDX-1401), which when combined with TLR agonists results
in effective stimulation of both cellular and humoral NY-ESO-1-specific
responses in cancer patients (Dhodapkar MV et al., Sci. Transl. Med.
6:232-251, 2014). Building on this concept, we developed a new fusion
protein in which the Dec205 mAb is engineered to carry two tumor-related
antigens in tandem [ECDs of mesothelin (MSLN) and HER2]. HER2 and MSLN
are broadly expressed in selected tumor types and provide an expanded
opportunity for this immunotherapy approach. We previously generated an
anti-mouse DC-targeted HER2 vaccine (αDec205-HER2) and a MSLN vaccine
(αDec205-MSLN) and demonstrated in mouse studies that they were potent
in eliciting strong and broad CD4 T cell immunity, cross priming of CD8 T
cells and humoral responses specific for HER2 or MSLN antigens,
respectively. In this work we tested the impact of expressing two tumor
antigens in the same construct on the immune responses to each antigen.
Mice of various genetic backgrounds were immunized with equimolar amount
of αDec205-HER2 (6.8 μg), αDec205-MSLN (5 μg) or αDec205-MSLN-HER2
(8.3 μg) in combination with poly IC-LC plus anti-CD40 or anti-CD27 as
adjuvant. Similar levels of CD4 and CD8 T cell responses upon single or
dual antigen vaccination were observed in the assessment of intracellular
cytokines and IFNγ-ELISPOT after ex vivo stimulation with peptide pools
derived from either HER2 or MSLN. High titers of anti-HER2 and anti-MSLN
IgG, including IgG1 and IgG2a, were elicited upon αDec205-MSLN-HER2
vaccination. Both humoral and cellular responses were boosted by multiple
dosing of the vaccine. Based on these data we developed CDX-1402 using
our anti-human Dec205 mAb genetically fused to MSLN and HER2. CDX-1402
was shown to effectively deliver these antigens to human DC in vitro for
activation of antigen-specific T cells. In vitro stimulation of healthy
volunteer circulating T cells with autologous DC treated with CDX-1402
plus TLR agonist resulted in T cell cultures that produced IFNγ only
when presented with CDX-1402-treated DCs or DC loaded with a select panel
of HLA-I/II synthetic peptides derived from either MSLN or HER2 but not
with control peptides. We also observed that T cells sensitized to
CDX-1402 recognize cancer cell lines that express the vaccine antigen and
HLA. Altogether, the data lend support for the use of CDX-1402 as a novel
immunotherapeutic for treatment of multiple cancer types expressing MSLN
and/or HER2.


