Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do physician-reported toxicities accurately reflect
patient-reported symptom burden? An analysis of ESAS and CTCAE for
patients with lung cancer.


Purpose/Objectives: Symptom adverse events can be quantitatively
monitored by oncologists with the U.S. National Cancer Instituteâ€™s
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). Symptoms can also
be reported by patients through the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale
(ESAS). There is increasing recognition of the importance of assessing
patient-reported symptoms as part of clinical care. The aim of this study
is to examine correlation between patient-reported and physician-graded
symptoms in patients with lung cancer who underwent external beam
thoracic radiotherapy, in an attempt to identify gaps between these
parameters.

Materials/Methods: Between August 2015 and July 2016, 265 patients with
diagnosis of lung cancer had completed ESAS and CTCAE data obtained
during weekly clinic visit while undergoing thoracic radiotherapy.The
following stratification for symptom severity was used: ESAS (none, 0;
mild 1-3, moderate 4-6, severe 7-10) and CTCAE scores (none, 0; mild, 1;
moderate, 2; and severe, 3-4). Five associated symptoms were compared:
tiredness, nausea, shortness of breath, and other (cough and dysphagia)
from ESAS and fatigue, nausea, dyspnea, cough and esophagitis from CTCAE.
Frequency tables and boxplots combined with the scatter plots were used
to assess the distribution, correlation and to identify possible
outliers. Spearman correlation coefficients were analyzed to evaluate
rank-associated correlations between associated ESAS domains and CTCAE
toxicities.

Results: Statistical analysis showed that the associated ESAS symptoms
and CTCAE toxicity pairs (tiredness/fatigue, nausea, shortness of
breath/dyspnea, dysphagia/esophagitis, cough) were highly correlated
(pResults: Statistical analysis showed that the associated ESAS symptoms
and CTCAE toxicity pairs (tiredness/fatigue, nausea, shortness of
breath/dyspnea, dysphagia/esophagitis, cough) were highly correlated
(p<0.05), However, analysis showed that ESAS reported by patients screens
for more severe symptoms than the toxicities graded by physicians using
the CTCAE; this includes fatigue (16.1% as opposed to 0.5%), nausea (5.0%
as opposed to 0.0%), dyspnea (11.8% as opposed to 2.4%), cough (2.1% as
opposed to 0.2%), and esophagitis (1.5% as opposed to 0.5%). ESAS
collected additional symptom domains including overall wellbeing
symptoms, depression, anxiety, and spiritual wellbeing, which are not
included on CTCAE. ESAS detected 6.2% of patients reporting severe
depression, 8.3% with severe anxiety, 9.7% marking severe for poor
overall wellbeing, and 8.3% marking severe for poor spiritual wellbeing.

Conclusion: This studied demonstrated that while ESAS and CTCAE reports
are correlated, patients reported more severe symptoms through ESAS
compared to physician-graded toxicities from CTCAE in this group of lung
cancer patients who underwent thoracic radiotherapy. Systematic
acquisition of patient-reported symptoms is important to optimize
clinical care and symptom management.


