Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical validation and clinical utility of an
immunohistochemical PD-L1 diagnostic assay for treatment with durvalumab
in urothelial carcinoma patients.


Background: A high quality programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
diagnostic may help to identify patients (pts) most likely to respond to
anti-PD-L1/programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) therapy. Here we describe a
PD-L1 immunohistochemical (IHC) diagnostic test developed for urothelial
carcinoma (UC) pts treated with durvalumab.

Methods: The IHC assay uses an anti-human PD-L1 rabbit mAb optimized for
detection of both tumor cell (TC) and tumor-associated immune cell (IC)
PD-L1 expression with the OptiView DAB IHC Detection Kit on the automated
VENTANA BenchMark ULTRA platform. The assay was validated for intended
use in UC formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples in a series of
studies that addressed sensitivity, specificity, robustness and precision
and implemented in Study CD-ON-MEDI4736-1108 (NCT01693562). Pts were
evaluated using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay at a prespecified PD-L1
expression cut-off. Efficacy was analyzed in pts with PD-L1 low/negative
(defined as TC Methods: The IHC assay uses an anti-human PD-L1 rabbit mAb
optimized for detection of both tumor cell (TC) and tumor-associated
immune cell (IC) PD-L1 expression with the OptiView DAB IHC Detection Kit
on the automated VENTANA BenchMark ULTRA platform. The assay was
validated for intended use in UC formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
samples in a series of studies that addressed sensitivity, specificity,
robustness and precision and implemented in Study CD-ON-MEDI4736-1108
(NCT01693562). Pts were evaluated using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay
at a prespecified PD-L1 expression cut-off. Efficacy was analyzed in pts
with PD-L1 low/negative (defined as TC <25% and IC Methods: The IHC assay
uses an anti-human PD-L1 rabbit mAb optimized for detection of both tumor
cell (TC) and tumor-associated immune cell (IC) PD-L1 expression with the
OptiView DAB IHC Detection Kit on the automated VENTANA BenchMark ULTRA
platform. The assay was validated for intended use in UC formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded samples in a series of studies that addressed
sensitivity, specificity, robustness and precision and implemented in
Study CD-ON-MEDI4736-1108 (NCT01693562). Pts were evaluated using the
VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay at a prespecified PD-L1 expression cut-off.
Efficacy was analyzed in pts with PD-L1 low/negative (defined as TC <25%
and IC <25%) UC and in pts with PD-L1 high (defined as TC ≥25% or IC
≥25%) UC.

Results: The VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay met all the predefined
acceptance criteria (average positive agreement and average negative
agreement >85%), showing analytical specificity, sensitivity and
precision. It demonstrated ≥97% and ≥85% inter-reader precision
agreement for TC and IC respectively. For intra-reader precision, it
demonstrated >96% and >87% agreement for TC and IC respectively. For
intra-day performance, the assay demonstrated ≥96% agreement for TC and
IC and for inter-day performance, it demonstrated ≥98% and 100%
agreement for TC and IC respectively. Precision studies for
inter-antibody lot, inter-detection kit lot and intra-platform
demonstrated >97% agreement for both TC and IC. Inter-laboratory testing
was performed at 3 external laboratories and demonstrated an overall
agreement rate of 92.3%. The VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay was implemented
in Study CD-ON-MEDI4736-1108 and durvalumab demonstrated clinical
activity and durability of response in both PD-L1 high and PD-L1
low/negative subgroups, yet with different response rates. In addition,
given the high negative predictive value of the assay, it is especially
helpful in evaluating the likelihood of response to durvalumab; pts who
were classified as PD-L1 high with the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay tended
to have a higher objective response rate per RECIST v1.1 than pts who
were PD-L1 low/negative.

Conclusions: These data show that determination of PD-L1 expression in TC
and IC in UC pts using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay is precise and
highly reproducible and highlight the utility of the assay in a clinical
setting. The VENTANA SP263 Assay is especially helpful in informing pts
and physicians on the likelihood of response to durvalumab, but not for
the purpose of restricting treatment to only PD-L1 high pts.


