Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates bearing pyrrolobenzodiazepine or
tubulysin payloads alter the tumor immune microenvironment and synergize
with multiple immunotherapies.


Immunogenic cell death (ICD) is the process by which certain cytotoxic
drugs induce apoptosis of tumor cells in a manner that stimulates the
immune system. In this study, we investigated whether ADCs conjugated
with pyrrolobenzodiazepine dimer (PBD) or tubulysin payloads induced ICD,
modulated the immune microenvironment, and could combine with IO drugs to
enhance antitumor activity. We show that these payloads on their own
induced an immune response that prevented the growth of tumors following
subsequent tumor cell challenge. ADCs had greater antitumor activity in
immunocompetent vs. immunodeficient mice, demonstrating a contribution of
the immune system to the antitumor activity of these ADCs. These ADCs
also induced immunological memory. In the CT26 model, depletion of CD8+ T
cells abrogated the activity of these ADCs when used alone or in
combination with a PD-L1 antibody, confirming a role for T cells in the
antitumor activity. Combinations of ADCs in different tumor models with
IO drugs including PD-1 or PD-L1 antibodies, or OX40 ligand or GITR
ligand fusion proteins produced synergistic antitumor responses.
Importantly, synergy was observed in some cases with suboptimal doses of
ADCs, potentially providing an approach to achieve potent antitumor
responses while minimizing ADC-induced toxicity. Immunophenotyping
studies in different tumor models revealed broad immunomodulation of
lymphoid and myeloid cells by ADCs and ADC/IO combinations. These results
suggest that it may be possible to develop novel combinatorial therapies
with PBD- and tubulysin-based ADCs and IO drugs that may increase
clinical responses.


