Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-1 and TIGIT are major immune checkpoint receptors expressed in
breast cancer-infiltrating T cells.


Immune checkpoint blockers, which target co-inhibitory receptors of T
cells, have provided promising responses against various tumors. However,
the expression of immune checkpoint receptors (ICRs) in breast cancer
remains poorly understood. We aimed to investigate the expression pattern
of multiple ICRs in tumor-infiltrating and peripheral blood (PB)
lymphocytes in human breast cancer.

We isolated lymphocytes from fresh breast tumor and paired PB from 21
patients who underwent surgery between July 2016 and November 2016.
Multi-color flow cytometry was performed primarily focusing on expression
of multiple ICRs in CD8+ T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs).

In CD8+ T cell subsets, PD-1+ or TIGIT+ cells were more frequently
observed in tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells than in PB CD8+ T cells (p70%
of PD-1+ tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells co-expressed TIGIT, indicating
that functional exhaustion of breast tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells
might be mediated not by PD-1 alone but by multiple receptors including
TIGIT. However, the expression of PD-1 and TIGIT showed different
patterns in detail. PD-1 was frequently expressed by CCR7-CD45RA-
effector memory T cells (TEM) (p=0.001) whereas TIGIT was frequently
expressed by CCR7-CD45RA+ effector memory RA T cells (TEMRA) (p=0.03),
suggesting that TIGIT is expressed during terminal differentiation of
CD8+ T cells.

Next, we examined breast tumor-infiltrating Tregs. The frequency of
CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs among CD4+ T cells were higher in tumor than in PB
(16.60% vs. 7.86%; p=0.002). In particular, CD45RA-FoxP3hi activated
suppressive Tregs account for 77.6% of tumor-infiltrating Tregs (vs. PB
32.2%; p=0.005). Tumor-infiltrating Tregs showed higher expression of
CD39 (p=0.005), a marker of the suppressive activity of Tregs. We also
examined the expression of ICRs on Tregs as upregulation of these
receptors is associated with enhanced suppressive activity of Tregs.
CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs in tumors showed higher expression levels of PD-1,
TIGIT and CTLA-4 compared to PB Tregs (pNext, we examined breast
tumor-infiltrating Tregs. The frequency of CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs among CD4+ T
cells were higher in tumor than in PB (16.60% vs. 7.86%; p=0.002). In
particular, CD45RA-FoxP3hi activated suppressive Tregs account for 77.6%
of tumor-infiltrating Tregs (vs. PB 32.2%; p=0.005). Tumor-infiltrating
Tregs showed higher expression of CD39 (p=0.005), a marker of the
suppressive activity of Tregs. We also examined the expression of ICRs on
Tregs as upregulation of these receptors is associated with enhanced
suppressive activity of Tregs. CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs in tumors showed
higher expression levels of PD-1, TIGIT and CTLA-4 compared to PB Tregs
(p<0.05).

There were no noteworthy correlations between ICR expression and clinical
features, such as age, stage and subtype.

We show that PD-1 and TIGIT are major ICRs expressed in breast
tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells. Moreover, we found that CD4+CD25+FoxP3+
Tregs are abundant in breast tumors and overexpress PD-1, TIGIT and
CTLA-4. Our data provide an understanding of comprehensive phenotypes of
immune checkpoint expression on T cells in breast cancer. Functional
changes of CD8+ T cells and Tregs by blocking of single or multiple ICRs
are being investigated.


