Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: pH-regulated hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity-, surface
charge-reversible and redox sensitive nanogels for anticancer drug
delivery.


Long circulation in blood, enhanced tumor accumulation and penetration,
efficient cellular internalization and intracellular drug release are
major challenges in the development of ideal anticancer drug delivery
systems. Although several strategies have been reported to improve
therapeutic efficacy, they mainly meet one or a few features which can
not circumvent all the barriers. Here the stimuli-responsive zwitterionic
nanogels were developed to overcome the sequential physiological barriers
in cancer chemotherapy. The nanogels were constructed via a simple
precipitation polymerization method by using temperature-sensitive
monomer N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) pH-responsive monomer methylallyl
amine (MAA) and betaine-based zwitterionic monomer sulfobetaine
methacrylate (SBMA) with in vivo anti-protein adsorption property as
comonomers, and disulfide bonds-containing N, N'-bis(acryloyl) cystamine
(BAC) as crosslinker. Volume phase transition temperature (VPTT) and
surface charge of the prepared nanogels were precisely controlled by
altering the feeding molar ratio of these comonomers. Remarkably, The
nanogels possess ultra-pH sensitive hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity
reversible property, in which the nanogels were hydrophilic in the blood
(pH 7.4, 37 Â°C) for prolonged circulation, while they were rapidly
switched to hydrophobic with similar size and surface charge at acidic
tumor pH, resulting in enhanced tumor accumulation and penetration and
strong internalization by normal cancer cells and CSCs. For efficient
lysosomal escape and intracellular drug release, the nanogels were
positively charged at lysosome pH, which allowed them to be transported
into the cytosol where the loaded cargo DOX was released from the
nanogels with the introduction of intracellular high GSH concentration to
exert cytotoxicity. This study indicated that pH-dependent
hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity-, surface charge-reversible and redox
sensitive nanogels might be used as potential carriers for anticancer
drugs, which provided a foundation for designing an effective drug
delivery system for cancer therapy.


