Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved image-guided surgical resection of glioblastoma with
[18F]-fluoroethyltyrosine Cerenkov luminescence imaging.


The ability of a surgeon to completely resect a tumor is directly related
to outcome in high- and low-grade gliomas. However current intraoperative
navigational tools are useful only in a subset of glioma patients and do
not detect the full extent of disease.

We modelled orthotopic brain tumors by stereotactically implanting human
U87, rat F98 and C6 glioblastoma cells into the forebrains of rats. We
show here that a new hybrid PET-Cerenkov luminescence imaging approach
using O-(2-[18F]fluoroethyl)-L-tyrosine (FET) can accurately delineate
tumor margins pre- and intra-operatively. We demonstrate consistency in
the successful localisation and quantification of tumor burden using PET
and Cerenkov luminescence imaging. The Cerenkov signal in individual
tumors was directly proportional to the signal detected in corresponding
FET PET scans (y = 1.06x - 0.01; R2 = 0.98; p We modelled orthotopic
brain tumors by stereotactically implanting human U87, rat F98 and C6
glioblastoma cells into the forebrains of rats. We show here that a new
hybrid PET-Cerenkov luminescence imaging approach using
O-(2-[18F]fluoroethyl)-L-tyrosine (FET) can accurately delineate tumor
margins pre- and intra-operatively. We demonstrate consistency in the
successful localisation and quantification of tumor burden using PET and
Cerenkov luminescence imaging. The Cerenkov signal in individual tumors
was directly proportional to the signal detected in corresponding FET PET
scans (y = 1.06x - 0.01; R2 = 0.98; p < 0.0001) and subsequent
autoradiography indicated equivalence between modalities. Cerenkov
luminescence was better able to discriminate tumor from healthy brain
tissue than the current ‘gold standard’ for intraoperative mapping,
5-ALA (5-aminolevulinic acid), indicated by a greater area under the ROC
curve in human xenograft (0.968 ± 0.003 vs. 0.893 ± 0.019; p = 0.003)
and syngeneic rat glioma models (0.970 ± 0.010 vs. 0.774 ± 0.046; p =
0.006). The quantitative accuracy of Cerenkov luminescence enabled us to
determine a threshold of 2.1 x 102 p-1 sec-1 cm-2 sr-1 MBq-1 that
separated U87 human glioblastoma and normal brain tissue, more precisely
guiding tumor excision than 5-ALA. At the optimal threshold the
specificity for detecting syngeneic rat and human xenograft gliomas was
better with FET Cerenkov than 5-ALA (91.1 ± 2.7 % vs. 67.2 ± 5.2 %; p =
0.007 and 91.2 ± 1.0 % vs. 82.9 ± 1.8 %; p = 0.005 respectively). We
confirmed and extended these findings at higher spatial resolution on
cryosections using FET autoradiography and 5-ALA confocal microscopy,
with FET demonstrating higher specificity and sensitivity for tumor
detection than 5-ALA.

FET PET-Cerenkov luminescence imaging has the potential for guiding
resections in a much broader range of glioma patients than current
approaches. Previous clinical experience with FET offers a facile route
for clinical translation of this technology.


