Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forced expression of GITRL in cancer cells enhances
adenovirus-mediated in situ vaccination.


Our approach involves a platform of killing cancer using more potent
oncolytic viruses-based immunotherapy strategies. These replication
competent adenoviruses are targeted to the Rb pathway to generate
tumor-selectivity. The second generation of these therapeutic agents,
Delta-24-RGD, was successfully translated to the clinical setting and is
currently been tested in Phase I studies in several institutions in the
USA and in Europe for the treatment of patients suffering from recurrent
gliomas. Preliminary data from these clinical trials showed that 10 to
15% of Delta-24-RGD-treated tumors undergo complete regression. Agonistic
treatments targeting co-stimulatory tumor necrosis factor receptor
superfamily (TNFRSF), such as GITR (CD357), have been shown to enhance
the proliferation and activation of T cells. Moreover, in preclinical
tumor efficacy studies, these agonistic signals have shown potent
tumoricidal activity. Different from antibodies, co-stimulatory ligands
can be easily incorporated into replication competent oncolytic
adenoviruses. Infection of cancer cells with these armed viruses will
lead to the expression in their cell membranes of the co-stimulatory
molecule that will directly interact with the tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes to amplify and enhance the anti-tumor T-cell activity. In
this study, we have developed an armed Delta-24-RGD carrying the cDNA of
the mouse GITRL, Delta-24-GREAT. Treatment of glioma-bearing mice with
intracranial injection of Delta-24-GREAT increased mice survival (P Our
approach involves a platform of killing cancer using more potent
oncolytic viruses-based immunotherapy strategies. These replication
competent adenoviruses are targeted to the Rb pathway to generate
tumor-selectivity. The second generation of these therapeutic agents,
Delta-24-RGD, was successfully translated to the clinical setting and is
currently been tested in Phase I studies in several institutions in the
USA and in Europe for the treatment of patients suffering from recurrent
gliomas. Preliminary data from these clinical trials showed that 10 to
15% of Delta-24-RGD-treated tumors undergo complete regression. Agonistic
treatments targeting co-stimulatory tumor necrosis factor receptor
superfamily (TNFRSF), such as GITR (CD357), have been shown to enhance
the proliferation and activation of T cells. Moreover, in preclinical
tumor efficacy studies, these agonistic signals have shown potent
tumoricidal activity. Different from antibodies, co-stimulatory ligands
can be easily incorporated into replication competent oncolytic
adenoviruses. Infection of cancer cells with these armed viruses will
lead to the expression in their cell membranes of the co-stimulatory
molecule that will directly interact with the tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes to amplify and enhance the anti-tumor T-cell activity. In
this study, we have developed an armed Delta-24-RGD carrying the cDNA of
the mouse GITRL, Delta-24-GREAT. Treatment of glioma-bearing mice with
intracranial injection of Delta-24-GREAT increased mice survival (P <
0.0001, long-rank test) and inhibited lung cancer growth in subcutaneous
models. Infection of the tumor elicited an inflammatory response
increasing the populations of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells versus treated
controls. Importantly, 2 weeks after the adenovirus treatment a subset of
brain hemispheric cells were positive for GITRL. In addition, co-culture
experiments with tumor cells infected with viruses and splenocytes
isolated from treated glioma-bearing mice demonstrated a response against
the cancer cells as assessed by ELISA analyses of IFN-Î³. Demonstrating
the generation of anti-tumor memory, the surviving animals did not show
evidence of tumor growth after re-challenging with GL261 glioma cell
implantation in the contralateral hemisphere. However, survivors of GL261
tumors did not survive after the re-challenge was performed by
intracranial implantation of B16/F10 melanoma cells, strongly indicating
that the immune response was specific for GL261 glioma antigens. This is
the first study with an oncolytic adenovirus expressing GITRL and our
results strongly indicate that oncolytic adenoviruses armed with
molecules of the TNFRSF may be of future clinical interest for the
treatment of patients with cancer.


