Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of cell specific expression signatures using NGS
global gene expression profiles from LCM procured breast carcinoma and
adjacent stromal cells.


Our goal is to determine relationships of gene expression profiles to
patient-associated characteristics, breast carcinoma pathology and
biomarker status with clinical outcome to improve assessment of prognosis
and therapy selection.

Procedures: De-identified frozen tissue biopsies of human breast
carcinomas which were collected and stored under stringently controlled
conditions were employed. Patient-related features (e.g., age, race,
menopausal status, nodal status, clinical treatment and response) and
results from biochemical analyses of established tumor markers (e.g.,
estrogen and progestin receptors, EGF receptor, HER-2/neu oncoprotein)
guided tissue selection. Structural integrity of a tissue was first
evaluated by light microscopy of H&E stained sections. To decipher
uniqueness and clinical utility of gene expression profiles from specific
cell types, Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM) with a PixCell IIeTM
(ArcturusÂ®, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to non-destructively
collect either carcinoma cells or adjacent stromal cells on CapSureTM LCM
caps. A second intact serial tissue section was processed identically to
that of the section used for LCM as a control. Each of the two
independent cell captures from the same tissue section and the second
intact tissue section were independently extracted for RNA. RNA was
assessed for integrity, purified and subjected to novel analyses using
the Ion AmpliSeqTM RNA Breast Cancer Research Panel containing 1174
genes. Sequencing workflow included templating on the Ion Chef TM System
and multiplexed sequencing on the Ion S5TM XL sequencing system and Ion
540TM chip.

Results: Each sequencing library yielded approximately 4-5 million reads
with a mapping rate of >98% that was achieved after alignment to the
human transcriptome. Each sample was sequenced in triplicate with
technical reproducibility near 99% with a mean of 1035 genes classified
as detected. Cluster analyses of gene expression profiles revealed clear
distinctions between stromal and carcinoma cells procured by LCM compared
to intact tissue driven by strongly differentially expressed genes such
as vimentin (VIM), MPRIP, stanniocalcin-2 (STC2) and estrogen receptor
beta (ESR2).

Conclusions: Collectively, the results indicate that molecular signatures
of breast carcinoma cells procured by LCM reveal unique gene expression
profiles compared to those of the intact tissue section or the adjacent
stromal cells. These novel findings are likely to discern molecular
features unique to a breast carcinoma that may be related to clinical
outcome to improve assessment of patient prognosis and therapy selection.
Supported in part by a grant from the Phi Beta Psi Charity Trust (JLW &
SAA) and a CTSP Award from the Commonwealth of Kentucky (JLW). For
research use only.


