Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time genomic characterization of metastatic pancreatic cancer
to enable precision medicine.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is currently the fourth-leading
cause of cancer-related death in the United States and is projected to
become the second leading cause by 2030. Most patients present with
advanced disease and die within 12 months of diagnosis. Recent genomic
studies of primary pancreatic cancer resection specimens have identified
several molecular alterations and genomic subtypes of the disease that
may guide precision medicine approaches to clinical management. However,
the molecular landscape of metastatic PDAC has been less well
characterized. Moreover, biopsy-driven studies in metastatic PDAC have
been historically very challenging due to the aggressive course of this
disease as well as the low-volume and heterogeneous nature of biopsies
that makes deep molecular characterization difficult. Insufficient
genomic analysis of a patientâ€™s tumor early in their disease course is
a major barrier to enrollment on clinical trials of targeted therapies.
To address these limitations, we have implemented a multi-disciplinary
clinical and research biopsy protocol to enable real time comprehensive
molecular characterization of metastatic PDAC biopsy specimens. We have
performed core needle biopsies of metastatic lesions in the liver or
peritoneal cavity in 42 patients at the time of initial presentation. A
low rate of complications was observed, with only a single patient having
a self-limited hemorrhagic complication after liver biopsy. On average,
4-6 separate biopsy specimens were collected from each patient for
histopathology and genomic analysis. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was
performed in a CLIA-certified laboratory and a comprehensive molecular
report of somatic alterations and selected pathogenic germline variants
was returned to the referring clinician with a typical turn-around time
of 3-5 weeks. We observed a striking incidence of recurrent germline and
somatic alterations in DNA-damage repair genes, such as BRCA2, ATM and
CHEK2. We also observed alterations in genes with known therapeutic
implications, such as BRAF, RNF43, STK11 and ROS, and in select cases,
these results guided choice of second or third line therapy. In parallel
to WES, we performed RNA sequencing on bulk tumor tissue and readily
identified expression signatures defining multiple subtypes of tumor and
stroma that may have prognostic or therapeutic implications for tumor- or
stroma-directed therapies. Collectively, these results demonstrate the
feasibility and value of real-time genomic characterization of metastatic
PDAC and provide a path forward for improved stratification and
enrollment of PDAC patients on molecularly defined clinical trials.


