Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The miR-200b-ZEB1 circuit regulates diverse stemness of human
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background & aims: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) can be derived from
cancer stem cells (CSCs), which contribute to tumor initiation,
metastasis, chemoresistance, and post-treatment recurrence. A great
variety of HCC CSCs resulting in diverse clinical manifestations have
been reported. We aimed to elucidate how CSC diversity is regulated.

Methods: MicroRNAs deregulated in HCC were identified by using
array-based microRNA profiling. Diversity of HCC CSCs was assayed by
flow-cytometry, in vitro and in vivo assays for tumorigenicity.

Results: MiR-200b downregulation occurred in early HCC and associated
with shorter disease-free and overall survival. Ectopic expression of
miR-200b or silencing of ZEB1 led to a decrease in CD13+ and CD24+ HCC
CSCs and an increase in EpCAM+ HCC CSCs. MiR-200b directly suppressed
BMI1 and ZEB1 expressions. ZEB1 transcriptionally upregulated CD13 and
CD24 expression and downregulated EpCAM expression via directly targeting
their promoters. Neither miR-200b nor ZEB1 had obvious effects on CD133
or CD90 expression. Silencing CD13 or CD24 expression suppressed
tumorigenicity of HCC cells. Ectopic expression of CD24 reversed the
suppression of tumorigenicity when these HCC cells had been ectopically
expressing miR-200b. Clinically, miR-200b downregulation was coupled with
ZEB1 upregulation in approximately two-thirds of HCC patients. ZEB1
expression was positively correlated with CD13 and CD24 expressions,
while EpCAM expression was positively correlated with miR-200b expression
in HCCs.

Conclusions: The miR-200b-ZEB1 circuit is a master regulator of diverse
stemness of HCC, which distincts HCCs into those containing CD13+/CD24+
CSCs from those containing EpCAM+ CSCs, and a thus potential target for
anti-HCC therapy.


