Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Jak3 mutations in colorectal neoplasia- Preliminary data on a not
so silent minority.


As a tumorigenesis model, colorectal cancer is associated with multiple
gene mutations accumulating progressively but also has mutations that may
alter disease course and provide a therapeutic target. Good examples of
this are EGFR and VEGF. In melanoma, PD-1 interactions involving the
immunobiome are therapeutically important. We conducted a study to detect
potential mutations that might enhance therapy in colorectal cancer
guided by expression of p87, a product of innate immune system Paneth
cells. Methods: Adnab-9 immunohistochemistry or ELISA was used to define
significant p87 Adenoma-associated antigen field effects (FE) in 10
patients with >1cm large high grade dysplastic adenomas (LHiGDA) and 3
with smaller high grade dysplastic adenomas (SHiGDA). We postulated that
SHiGDA are not immunologically recognized by host defenses leading to
negative outcomes. We used Ion Torrentâ„¢ sequencing (ITS) to find
mutations in DNA (QiaAmp kit) extracted from 4 normal-appearing colonic
segments taken from 1 patient in each group. Novel mutations found on ITS
would then be sought using PCR with appropriate primers and subsequent
sequencing of the PCR product circulating DNA extracted from available
serum samples. These samples were taken from the Large- and SHiGDA groups
described above and from 17 patients undergoing colonoscopy for diverse
indications. Results: p87 FE were found in 40% of 10 LHiGDA and 0% of 3
SHiGDA patients. The ITS in the 2 representative patients showed unique
mutational fields in: KRAS, APC, p53 in the LHiGDA and Jak3, PIK3Ca, p53,
APC in the SHiGDA patient, both of whom lacked p87 FE. PCR using the Jak3
primers used in the ITS and subsequent sequencing revealed the same
non-synonymous mutation in the serum of a FAP patient after colonic
resection and an additional colonic segment of the selected ShiGDA
patient but not in his serum. Other Jak3 mutations were found in 1 of 8
LHiGDA, 1 (the selected patient) of 3 SHiGDA, 1 of 7 patients with FAP
and 1 of 10 colonoscopy patients with a family history of colorectal
cancer with a FE and an untoward outcome. The selected SHiGDA patient
subsequently contracted and died of NSCLC adenocarcinoma. The positive
LHiGDA and FAP patients had a severely dysplastic anal condyloma and
severe pancreatitis, respectively. Overall, the non-synonymous mutation
occurring in the non-FAP SHiGDA patient occurred in the absence of p87
FE. Conclusions: In this pilot study we demonstrate the presence of Jak3
mutations likely associated with the lack of p87 expression in patients
with high grade dysplastic adenomas and 1 FAP patient. Most of these
patients had a clinical course which may have differed from their group
members suggesting an altered immune system milieu. If confirmed in
SHiGDA and FAP, Jak 3 mutations, associated with the SCID and late onset
combined immunodeficiency, may allow for intervention with currently
available medications to potentially avert a deleterious clinical outcome.


