Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of miR-34b and androgen receptor pathway
regulate prostate cancer aggressiveness between African Americans and
Caucasians.


African-Americans are diagnosed with more aggressive prostate cancers and
have worse survival than Caucasians, however a comprehensive
understanding of this health disparity remains unclear. To clarify the
mechanisms leading to this disparity, we analyzed the potential
involvement of miR-34b expression in African-Americans and Caucasians. We
found that miR-34b expression is lower in human prostate cancer tissues
from African-Americans compared to Caucasians. DNA hypermethylation of
the miR-34b-3p promoter region showed significantly higher methylation in
prostate cancer compared to normal tissues. We found that AR and ETV1
genes are differentially expressed in MDA-PCa-2b and DU-145 cells after
overexpression of miR-34b. Direct interaction of miR-34b with the 3â€™
untranslated region of AR and ETV1 was validated by luciferase reporter
assay. We found that miR-34b downregulation in African-Americans is
inversely correlated with high AR levels that lead to increased cell
proliferation. Overexpression of miR-34b in cell lines showed higher
inhibition of cell proliferation, apoptosis and G1 arrest in
African-American cells (MDA-PCa-2b) compared to the Caucasian cell line
(DU-145). Taken together, our results show that differential expression
of miR-34b and AR are associated with prostate cancer aggressiveness in
African-Americans.


