Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Presence of genotoxic and/or pro-inflammatory bacterial genes in
stool is associated with colorectal neoplasia.


Despite increasing adherence to routine screening and advances in
therapeutic strategies, CRC is the 1st and 3rd leading cause of
cancer-related death in Puerto Rico and the United States (US),
respectively. Currently, CRC screening is the primary means for
prevention; however, 60% of CRC patients are diagnosed at more advanced,
less treatable stages, which emphasize the need for novel CRC prevention
and risk stratification strategies. The etiology of CRC is complex and
still incompletely understood. However, environmental factors including
diet, the gut microbiota, and inflammation are accepted as major
contributors to colorectal carcinogenesis. It has been shown that
individuals with CRC have a distinct gut microbiota, but the mechanisms
by which gut bacteria exert their CRC-promoting effects remains elusive.
Certain pathogenic bacterial strains carry genes encoding toxins that
promote DNA damage and perpetuate inflammation, yet the association of
these toxins to CRC remains poorly understood. The aim of this study was
to gain insight into the association and possible mechanisms by which a
subset of the gut microbiota contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by
profiling six genes encoding genotoxic and/or pro-inflammatory bacterial
toxins in stool from individuals with and without colorectal neoplasia
(adenoma and CRC). The association between the genes encoding toxins and
CRC was examined by characterizing the toxic colonic bacterial gene
profile in stool samples from healthy individuals (controls) and
individuals with colorectal neoplasia (cases). Stool samples from
individuals in the mainland US (n= 20) and Caribbean Hispanics (n=33)
living in Puerto Rico were provided by the NCI Early Detection Research
Network and the Puerto Rico Familial Colorectal Cancer Registry,
respectively. Detection pks, TcPC, GelE, cnf-1, murB, and usp in stool
was performed by qPCR using gene-specific primers. Associations were
assessed using odds ratios. Four of the six toxic genes were detected
more frequently in stool samples from individuals from the US with
colorectal neoplasia (controls=10; adenoma=10). Results show borderline
statistical significant associations (p=0.07) with the presence of usp
and >2 genes and a higher odds of colorectal neoplasia (OR=5.44 and
OR=9.33, respectively). In the cohort from our Caribbean Hispanic
subjects (controls=13; adenomas=12; CRC=8), individuals with the presence
GelE weres 8.6-times ore likely to have adenomas (p=.07) and individuals
with â‰¥ 2 of the genes were 11.3-times more likely to have CRC than
individuals without these genes (p=0.04). Analysis with a larger number
of samples will be necessary to determine a more definite association
between the presence of the toxic genes in this panel in stool and
colorectal neoplasia. Additional mechanistic analysis will be required to
fully understand how these bacterial toxins contribute to colorectal
carcinogenesis.


