Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The consomic xenograft model identifies genetic changes in the
tumor microenvironment that alter the growth and metastasis of head and
neck cancers.


Background: The tumor microenvironment (TME) is known to impact tumor
growth, metastatic potential, and treatment response. Nearly all studies
of head and neck cancer (HNC) have focused on somatic mutations in the
malignant cells. We hypothesized that genetic determinants limited to the
microenvironment would influence HNC growth and metastatic potential.

Approach: To demonstrate the impact of genetic differences in the TME on
HNC cell line in vivo growth we utilized a novel tool, the consomic
xenograft model (CXM). A consomic rat has an entire chromosome
substituted into the isogenic background of another inbred strain by
selective breeding. Use of immunodeficient (IL2RÎ³-/-) consomic rats
allows one to study the influence of stromal genetics on tumor biology
without the confounding effect of differences in the immune system
through the orthotopic implantation of cancer cells into different
consomic rat strains. In this system, any differences in tumor growth or
metastases are due to differences in the TME rather than cancer cells or
immune response. We utilized SS and SS.BN3 consomic rat strains,
previously shown to affect the growth of breast tumors, to study the
effects of the TME on HNC tumor growth using two well-characterized HPV
negative HNC cell lines, SCC-6 (base of tongue derived) and SCC-22b
(derived from a hypopharyngeal cancer that had metastasized to lymph
nodes). Both cell lines were modified to stably express luciferase. HNC
cells were inoculated into the tongue of SS and SS.BN3 animals and tumor
growth was monitored by biophotonic imaging after luciferin injection.

Results: A significant difference in the tumor growth was seen between
rat strains for both cell lines, with the SS.BN3 rats exhibiting less
tumor growth and metastasis. Median luciferase activity from baseline
increased by 4.1-fold vs. 1.1 fold in SCC-6 tumors in SS vs SS.BN3 rats,
respectively (pResults: A significant difference in the tumor growth was
seen between rat strains for both cell lines, with the SS.BN3 rats
exhibiting less tumor growth and metastasis. Median luciferase activity
from baseline increased by 4.1-fold vs. 1.1 fold in SCC-6 tumors in SS vs
SS.BN3 rats, respectively (p<0.03). SCC-22B tumors demonstrated a
significant difference in tumor size as well, with median luciferase
activity from baseline 12.7 vs 4.4 fold on day 26, for SS vs SS.BN3,
respectively (pResults: A significant difference in the tumor growth was
seen between rat strains for both cell lines, with the SS.BN3 rats
exhibiting less tumor growth and metastasis. Median luciferase activity
from baseline increased by 4.1-fold vs. 1.1 fold in SCC-6 tumors in SS vs
SS.BN3 rats, respectively (p<0.03). SCC-22B tumors demonstrated a
significant difference in tumor size as well, with median luciferase
activity from baseline 12.7 vs 4.4 fold on day 26, for SS vs SS.BN3,
respectively (p<0.05). A significant differences in lung metastases was
also seen between strains. Lung metastases were seen in 88% of SS and 0%
of SS.BN3 rats (n=6 per group) inoculated with SCC-6 (pResults: A
significant difference in the tumor growth was seen between rat strains
for both cell lines, with the SS.BN3 rats exhibiting less tumor growth
and metastasis. Median luciferase activity from baseline increased by
4.1-fold vs. 1.1 fold in SCC-6 tumors in SS vs SS.BN3 rats, respectively
(p<0.03). SCC-22B tumors demonstrated a significant difference in tumor
size as well, with median luciferase activity from baseline 12.7 vs 4.4
fold on day 26, for SS vs SS.BN3, respectively (p<0.05). A significant
differences in lung metastases was also seen between strains. Lung
metastases were seen in 88% of SS and 0% of SS.BN3 rats (n=6 per group)
inoculated with SCC-6 (p<0.02) and in 75% of SS and 30% of SS.BN3 rats
(n=10 per group) inoculated with SCC-22b (pResults: A significant
difference in the tumor growth was seen between rat strains for both cell
lines, with the SS.BN3 rats exhibiting less tumor growth and metastasis.
Median luciferase activity from baseline increased by 4.1-fold vs. 1.1
fold in SCC-6 tumors in SS vs SS.BN3 rats, respectively (p<0.03). SCC-22B
tumors demonstrated a significant difference in tumor size as well, with
median luciferase activity from baseline 12.7 vs 4.4 fold on day 26, for
SS vs SS.BN3, respectively (p<0.05). A significant differences in lung
metastases was also seen between strains. Lung metastases were seen in
88% of SS and 0% of SS.BN3 rats (n=6 per group) inoculated with SCC-6
(p<0.02) and in 75% of SS and 30% of SS.BN3 rats (n=10 per group)
inoculated with SCC-22b (p<0.08). Despite a non-statistically significant
difference in the number of SCC-22b inoculated animals with lung
metastases, there was a significantly higher metastatic burden as
measured by luciferase signal, with the median signal 6.8 fold higher in
SS as compared to SS.BN3 (pResults: A significant difference in the tumor
growth was seen between rat strains for both cell lines, with the SS.BN3
rats exhibiting less tumor growth and metastasis. Median luciferase
activity from baseline increased by 4.1-fold vs. 1.1 fold in SCC-6 tumors
in SS vs SS.BN3 rats, respectively (p<0.03). SCC-22B tumors demonstrated
a significant difference in tumor size as well, with median luciferase
activity from baseline 12.7 vs 4.4 fold on day 26, for SS vs SS.BN3,
respectively (p<0.05). A significant differences in lung metastases was
also seen between strains. Lung metastases were seen in 88% of SS and 0%
of SS.BN3 rats (n=6 per group) inoculated with SCC-6 (p<0.02) and in 75%
of SS and 30% of SS.BN3 rats (n=10 per group) inoculated with SCC-22b
(p<0.08). Despite a non-statistically significant difference in the
number of SCC-22b inoculated animals with lung metastases, there was a
significantly higher metastatic burden as measured by luciferase signal,
with the median signal 6.8 fold higher in SS as compared to SS.BN3
(p<0.03).

Conclusions: The use of the CXM model demonstrates an important role for
the TME in the growth and metastatic spread of HNC cell lines. This model
allows for future congenic mapping to identify the causative genetic
variants in the TME mediating the HNC changes in tumor growth and
metastasis.


