Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered STING-targeting immunotherapy delays B16 melanoma tumor
growth and significantly improves animal survival as compared to an
immune-checkpoint inhibitor.


Background: The stimulator of interferon genes (STING) is a cytosolic
innate sensor activated by cyclic di-nucleotides (CDNs) including the
bacterially derived bis-(3′-5′)-cyclic-dimeric-guanosine
monophosphate (c-di-GMP), leading to the induction of type I interferons.
We recently published that an engineered adenovirus (Ad) vector
delivering a potent, bacterially derived diguanylate cyclase (AdVCA0848)
in vivo can generate sustained c-di-GMP levels in vivo and induce
beneficial immune responses, including induction of IFN-β, activation of
NK cells and DCs, as well as enhance antigen-specific T cell responses.
Here, we determined if in vivo use of AdVCA0848 can also induce potent
anti-tumor responses. Methods: Experiments to be presented include those
that subcutaneously placed 150,000 B16F10 melanoma cells into C57BL/6
mice. On day 7 post tumor implant (PTI), tumor-bearing mice were randomly
divided into control groups (receiving intra-tumoral (i.t.) vehicle
treatments or Ad controls, ± i.p administration of non-specific
antibodies) and experimental groups, (single i.t. administrations with
2x1010 vps of AdVCA0848 alone, or in combination with repeated i.p.
administrations of 200 μg of an anti-PD1 antibody (RMP-1-14) on days
7,11,15 and 19 PTI. Results: As compared to appropriate controls, we have
repeatedly found that a single i.t. injection of AdVCA0848 significantly
slowed B16 tumor growth (pBackground: The stimulator of interferon genes
(STING) is a cytosolic innate sensor activated by cyclic di-nucleotides
(CDNs) including the bacterially derived
bis-(3′-5′)-cyclic-dimeric-guanosine monophosphate (c-di-GMP),
leading to the induction of type I interferons. We recently published
that an engineered adenovirus (Ad) vector delivering a potent,
bacterially derived diguanylate cyclase (AdVCA0848) in vivo can generate
sustained c-di-GMP levels in vivo and induce beneficial immune responses,
including induction of IFN-β, activation of NK cells and DCs, as well as
enhance antigen-specific T cell responses. Here, we determined if in vivo
use of AdVCA0848 can also induce potent anti-tumor responses. Methods:
Experiments to be presented include those that subcutaneously placed
150,000 B16F10 melanoma cells into C57BL/6 mice. On day 7 post tumor
implant (PTI), tumor-bearing mice were randomly divided into control
groups (receiving intra-tumoral (i.t.) vehicle treatments or Ad controls,
± i.p administration of non-specific antibodies) and experimental
groups, (single i.t. administrations with 2x1010 vps of AdVCA0848 alone,
or in combination with repeated i.p. administrations of 200 μg of an
anti-PD1 antibody (RMP-1-14) on days 7,11,15 and 19 PTI. Results: As
compared to appropriate controls, we have repeatedly found that a single
i.t. injection of AdVCA0848 significantly slowed B16 tumor growth
(p<0.01), a result that correlated with high levels of animal survival
(pBackground: The stimulator of interferon genes (STING) is a cytosolic
innate sensor activated by cyclic di-nucleotides (CDNs) including the
bacterially derived bis-(3′-5′)-cyclic-dimeric-guanosine
monophosphate (c-di-GMP), leading to the induction of type I interferons.
We recently published that an engineered adenovirus (Ad) vector
delivering a potent, bacterially derived diguanylate cyclase (AdVCA0848)
in vivo can generate sustained c-di-GMP levels in vivo and induce
beneficial immune responses, including induction of IFN-β, activation of
NK cells and DCs, as well as enhance antigen-specific T cell responses.
Here, we determined if in vivo use of AdVCA0848 can also induce potent
anti-tumor responses. Methods: Experiments to be presented include those
that subcutaneously placed 150,000 B16F10 melanoma cells into C57BL/6
mice. On day 7 post tumor implant (PTI), tumor-bearing mice were randomly
divided into control groups (receiving intra-tumoral (i.t.) vehicle
treatments or Ad controls, ± i.p administration of non-specific
antibodies) and experimental groups, (single i.t. administrations with
2x1010 vps of AdVCA0848 alone, or in combination with repeated i.p.
administrations of 200 μg of an anti-PD1 antibody (RMP-1-14) on days
7,11,15 and 19 PTI. Results: As compared to appropriate controls, we have
repeatedly found that a single i.t. injection of AdVCA0848 significantly
slowed B16 tumor growth (p<0.01), a result that correlated with high
levels of animal survival (p<0.001). These levels of efficacy
significantly exceeded those achieved with lone use of a PD-1 inhibitor.
Under these same conditions, combined use of the AdVCA0848 therapy with
anti-PD1 treatments trended to further improve animal survival (50%
survival at day 27 PTI), as compared to lone use of either therapy (36.4%
and 26.7% survival at day 27 PTI for AdVCA0848 and PD-1 treatments,
respectively). Multiple innate and adaptive immune response readouts and
immunohistological evaluations will be presented. Conclusions: The growth
of established B16 melanoma tumors was rapidly inhibited after a single
i.t. treatment with the engineered STING activator AdVCA0848, and this
efficacy resulted in significant improvements in animal survival, at
rates that were also significantly better than those achieved using a
PD-1 antagonist. Furthermore, the i.t. administration of AdVCA0848
trended to show further improved efficacy when combined with a PD-1
antagonist, suggesting synergy. The AdVCA0848 platform is a novel, off
the shelf immune-therapeutic that can now be justified for use to improve
anti-tumor responses in melanoma, augment currently approved FDA immune
therapies for melanoma (such as PD-1 targeted therapies), as well may
show efficacy in other aggressive cancers.


