Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerated BRAF mutation analysis using a fully automated PCR
platform improves the management of patients with metastatic melanoma :
MELFAST trial.


Background : Molecular diagnosis has become a standard of care in many
cancers and BRAF mutations analysis in FFPE tumor specimens is needed to
initiate personalized therapy using BRAF tyrosine kinase inhibitor
(vemurafenib, dabrafenib) in BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma.
Accelerated BRAF mutation analysis is achievable using CE-IVD fully
automated (FA) PCR-based platform (Idylla, Biocartis) and enables the
determination of BRAF mutational status in less than 2 hours including
sample preparation and proved suitable for routine molecular diagnosis of
metastatic melanoma (Harl√© et al. PloS ONE 11(4); e0153576).

Patients and methods : MELFAST trial is an observational monocentric
study aiming at evaluating the clinical impact of reducing BRAF status
determination delay in patients with metastatic melanoma. 40 patients
(pts) were included in MELFAST trial, 31 pts were included
retrospectively with BRAF mutation analysis being performed according to
standard operating procedures (SOP) using conventional PCR, 10 pts were
included prospectively with BRAF mutation analysis being performed using
FA-PCR.

Results : Among the 40 pts included, 3 pts were excluded because of
violation of inclusion criteria. 37 pts that were analyzed (29 pts with
retrospective inclusion and 8 pts with prospective inclusion). BRAF
mutational status was not known at the time of treatment decision in
11/29 (38%) pts included retrospectively and in all the pts included
prospectively. Using FA-PCR enables to provide BRAF mutational status
within the same day for most of the samples and the reporting delay was
significantly reduced using FA-PCR as compared to SOP (0 vs 7 days,
pResults : Among the 40 pts included, 3 pts were excluded because of
violation of inclusion criteria. 37 pts that were analyzed (29 pts with
retrospective inclusion and 8 pts with prospective inclusion). BRAF
mutational status was not known at the time of treatment decision in
11/29 (38%) pts included retrospectively and in all the pts included
prospectively. Using FA-PCR enables to provide BRAF mutational status
within the same day for most of the samples and the reporting delay was
significantly reduced using FA-PCR as compared to SOP (0 vs 7 days,
p<0.001) and the delay of initiation of anti-BRAF therapy was
subsequently reduced (16 vs 26 days, p=0.035). This reduced delay was
found to be consistent with that observed when BRAF mutational status had
been anticipated and was already available at the time of treatment line
decision (20 days, p=0.798).

Conclusion: As compared to conventional SOP, using FA-PCR accelerates
BRAF mutation analysis reporting and significantly reduces the delay
before initiation of personalized therapy in pts with metastatic
melanoma. This warrants the investigation of the impact on the patients
outcome i.e. progression free and overall survival.


