Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational approach for discovery of regulatory noncoding
variants in cancer.


Noncoding mutations in the cancer genome have historically been poorly
understood. Recent studies have shown however that mutations in
intergenic regions may play an important role in cancer by introducing de
novo regulatory elements and thus cis-regulating target gene expression.
While mono-allelic expression of the dysregulated gene is an important
signature of regulatory noncoding mutations, recognition of this feature
has not been implemented by any methods evaluating noncoding mutations to
date.

To perform genome-wide detection of noncoding mutations with a potential
regulatory function, we developed a novel computational approach
implementing this allelic specific expression signature (ASE) as a core
component, using WGS and RNAseq data as input. We first searched for
genes showing ASE across the tumor genome by comparing the minor allele
frequency of heterozygous markers between WGS and RNAseq data. We
excluded genes known to be in an imprinted locus, as well as sites
matching a precomputed set of 5,576,857 problematic polymorphism markers
(estimated by analyzing WGS data from 625 normal genomes). Next, the
somatic mutations were filtered for regulatory candidates that could
introduce a transcription factor (TF) binding motif absent from the
reference sequence. We included 614 TF binding motifs from the HOCOMOCO
database and performed motif analysis with the FIMO package. Finally, the
somatic mutations were assigned to dysregulated genes in the same
topologically associating domains in human defined by public Hi-C data
and prioritized by open chromatin state defined by DNaseI
hypersensitivity regions (ENCODE project).

We applied our approach to 22 T-ALL tumor samples collected at Shanghai
Childrenâ€™s Medical Center in a pilot study consisting of 13 diagnosis
and 9 relapse samples (9 of these were trios). WGS was performed on both
tumor and normal samples and RNAseq was performed for the tumor sample
only. We predicted 213 regulatory noncoding mutations (157 unique
variants) in total from this cohort, potentially targeting 119 genes.
Among the dysregulated targets we found TAL1 and LMO2, which are known
TFs playing a key role in T-ALL. TAL1 mutations were identified in a
total of 6 tumors (3 trios). Besides the known oncogenic insertion at
~7kb upstream of TAL1 (1 trio), we also discovered a novel mutation in
the first intron of TAL1 (2 trios) that may potentially drive ectopic
TAL1 expression. Novel LMO2 mutations were found in 6 tumors (3 trios) at
3 different sites. This approach also identified novel targets such as
GPSM1 and PTPRN2, shedding light on heretofore unknown players in T-ALL
targeted by noncoding mutations.

By integrating WGS and RNAseq data, our novel computational framework can
identify somatic noncoding mutations in cancer that may introduce de novo
regulatory elements, thus driving target gene expression. Wider
application of this approach will expand our understanding of the role of
noncoding mutations in the cancer genome.


