Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of Ran binding protein 6 as a novel negative
regulator of EGFR and candidate tumor suppressor in glioblastoma.


Amplification and overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) are common in glioblastoma (GBM) and frequently associated with
silencing of the phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) tumor
suppressor. PTEN silencing has been associated with clinical resistance
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, in part by raising EGFR levels. Here,
we investigated the effect of PTEN on the EGFR signaling complex by EGFR
affinity immunopurification and mass spectrometry with and without PTEN
knockdown. We identified Ran binding protein 6 (RanBP6), a 125-kDa
protein of previously unknown functions, as EGFR interacting protein in
PTEN expressing, but not PTEN knockdown cells. Further studies of the
effect of RanBP6 on EGFR revealed that RanBP6 depletion by shRNA or
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene silencing resulted in increased EGFR mRNA
levels and upregulation of EGFR promoter activity. Consistent with a
model of a negative EGFR regulation by RanBP6, we observed an inverse
correlation between RanBP6 and EGFR mRNA levels in PTEN wildtype but not
PTEN altered cancer cells in a large panel of human cancer cell lines
(Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia). To further understand the mechanism of
how RanBP6 negatively regulates EGFR mRNA level, we found that RanBP6
interacted with nuclear Ran-GTPase and repressed EGFR transcription by
promoting nuclear import of Signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3). Lastly, RanBP6 appeared to be frequently deleted
on chromosome 9p in GBM. We showed that RanBP6 silencing raised EGFR
levels and signal output and accelerated in-vivo glioma growth. Our
results establish a novel function of RanBP6 as a link between EGFR
signaling and the Ran-mediated nuclear import pathway, and identify
RanBP6 as candidate tumor suppressor on chromosome 9p.


