Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential role of Pik3caH1047R and Pten-/- mutations in thyroid
cancer development.


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is one of the most lethal malignancies,
with a median survival of less than 6 months from time of diagnosis.

Molecular changes that characterize ATC involve most often p53 loss or
inactivation (up to 80%), activation of the PI3K cascade through PTEN
loss (12%) and PIK3CA activating mutations (20%) or gene amplification
(30-60%), RAS family members activation (6-50%), and BRAF activation
(25-50%).

Studies performed in endometrial and breast cancer suggest that although
PI3K activating mutations and PTEN loss of function both enhance PI3K
signaling, these mutations are not equivalent.

We have tested whether Pik3caH1047R and Pten-/- mutations have the same
impact on thyroid cancer development and if these two mutations differ in
their ability to cooperate with additional genetic alterations, such as
p53 deletion and the KrasG12D activating mutation.

We have generated a series of mouse models and cell lines carrying
thyroid-restricted p53-/-, KrasG12D, Pten-/-, and Pik3caH1047R alleles.

Analysis of single and compound mutants has revealed important and
striking differences between Pten and PI3K abilities to control the PI3K
signaling pathway.

Tumor development analysis in Pten-/- and Pik3caH1047R mice has revealed
that Pik3ca activation is less potent in inducing thyroid hyperplasia and
subsequent transformation than Pten loss, even though the two mutations
appear to have similar ability to induce AKT activation. This
differential activity correlates with lower levels of PIP3 found in the
thyroids of Pik3caH1047R mice, compared to that of Pten-/- mice.

We also observed that while Pten loss synergizes with Trp53 loss to
induce anaplastic thyroid cancer, activation of Pik3ca leads to the
development of a smaller and well differentiated tumors.

On the other hand, Pten loss and Pik3ca activation are equivalent in
inducing poorly differentiated tumors in the presence of a Kras
activating mutation.

However, KrasG12D, Pik3caH1047R cell lines are more sensitive to PI3K,
MEK and combined PI3K/MEK inhibition than KrasG12D, Pten-/- cell lines.

Accordingly, tumors developing in mice carrying the KrasG12D,
Pik3caH1047R alleles are more sensitive than KrasG12D, Pten-/- mice to a
dual PI3K/mTor inhibitor as well as a MEK inhibitor.

All together these results suggest that Pten loss has a stronger impact
than Pik3ca activation to thyroid cancer development and resistance to
small molecule inhibitors.


