Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of anticancer aptamers targeting cancer stem cells.


Background: Cancer stem cells (CSC), also called tumor initiating cells
(TIC), are a small population of cancer cells within a tumor that drive
the tumor initiation, metastasis, and resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs. An effective cancer stem cell targeting strategy by
oligonucleotide-based approaches such as aptamers in diagnosis and
treatment are urgently needed. In this study, we aimed to develop an
effective aptamer-based biomarker for CSCs in cancer detection and
therapy.

Material and methods: E-cadherin-null lung cancer cells, shEcad-A549, was
confirmed with stemness properties and used as targeting cells. The
isolation of DNA aptamers binding to CSCs was by using a Cell-SELEX
(systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment). By combining
the aptamer-pull-down approach with proteomics, we identified the
potential binding proteins of CSC-aptamer. Flow cytometry, gene silencing
and lung cancer xenograft models were used to explore the functions of
CSC-aptamer and its targeted protein in lung cancer formation.

Results: The aptamer AP-9R was identified to bind lung CSCs with high
affinity and specificity. AP-9R reduced lung cancer cell stemness and
migration but no apparent cytotoxicity. By using proteomic approaches,
the target protein of AP-9R in non-small cell lung cancer was further
identified and characterized its important role in cancer stemness. For
CSCs detection, we developed AP-9R conjugated beads and confirmed their
effective captured rate of lung CSCs in vitro. Moreover, administration
of AP-9R significantly reduced lung tumor growth in the xenograft model.

Conclusions: Our data are moving closer to understand the significance of
cancer stem cells during cancer progression and demonstrate that
aptamer-based therapies will be useful as therapeutic and diagnostic
agents for lung cancer.


