Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanism of action of BCL6 in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and most deadly brain tumor to
occur in adults. Initially patients respond to radiation and
chemotherapy, which primarily work by causing large amounts of DNA
damage, causing apoptosis of the cells. However, this process does not
happen effectively in GBM and understanding how these cells resist cell
death in response to therapy is key to improving the efficacy of
treatment. BCL6 is a transcription factor that stops cell death in
response to DNA damage. Recent work in our lab has shown BCL6 to be
present in untreated GBM tumors and up-regulated in treated GBM cells.
This evidence indicates that BCL6 may be used as a mechanism of therapy
resistance by GBM cells. In this study, the objective was to determine
the mechanism of action of BCL6 in GBM cells using luciferase reporter
assays, quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (qChIP) and RNA
sequencing. We observed that BCL6 was transcriptionally active in GBM as
shown by a reduction in luciferase activity when BCL6 was present. qChIP
experiments revealed that BCL6 binding changed over time and was
different with different types of DNA-damaging treatment. Preliminary
analysis of our RNA sequencing data has identified a unique subset of
genes which are upregulated when BCL6 is inhibited and downregulated in
response to chemotherapy. These changes indicate that these genes may be
regulated by BCL6 in chemotherapy treated cells. All of these results
illustrate that BCL6 appears to have an active and relevant function in
GBM cells, which demonstrates that BCL6 is an attractive therapeutic
target in GBM.


