Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAF kinase inhibition synergizes with MEK inhibitors in KRAS
mutant tumors.


While activating mutations in the KRAS oncogene frequently drive
tumorigenesis in human cancers (40% CRC, 20% NSCLC) through constitutive
activation of the MAPK pathway, there are currently no targeted
treatments available for KRAS mutant cancers. Inhibitors of the
individual nodes of the MAPK pathway have been developed, but these
molecules have been largely ineffective against KRAS mutant tumors in the
clinic. Multiple studies have shown rational combinations of MAPK
inhibitors may have anti-tumor activity in KRAS mutant models. In order
to understand the versatility of combining RAF inhibitors in this
context, we conducted a library screen consisting of 430 small molecule
tool compounds in combination with RAF inhibitor AZ-628. Here we show:
RAF inhibitors combine especially well with other MAPK pathway inhibitors
in KRAS mutant tumor cells. In particular, Type II RAF inhibitors are
synergistic with the MEK inhibitor Cobimetinib in vitro and exhibit tumor
regressing efficacy in xenograft mouse model studies in vivo.
Mechanistically, we have found the MEK inhibitor disables ERK induced
negative feedback on the MAPK pathway resulting in activation of CRAF in
a KRAS dependent manner. The combination of RAF with MEK inhibition
blunts KRAS-dependent activation of CRAF kinase activity and robustly
inhibits MAPK signaling, thereby driving efficacy in KRAS mutant tumors.
Broad cell line profiling with the combination of RAF and MEK inhibitors
demonstrates that a majority of KRAS mutant lung and colorectal tumor
lines exhibit synergy with the combination. Therefore, combining a Type
II pan-RAF inhibitor with a MEK inhibitor has the potential to improve
the therapeutic outcome in KRAS mutant cancers.


