Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The link between NRF2 and mitochondria through the regulation of
miR-181c/mitochondria-encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunit-1.


The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) pathway is
involved in the environmental resistance of cancers by enhancing the
antioxidant capacity. In the current study, we investigated the potential
link between NRF2 and mitochondrial function in cancer cells. Global
miRNA expression analysis of HT29 and HCT116 identified miR-181c as an
NRF2-silencing-inducible miRNA, and miR-181c elevation was associated
with the decrease in mitochondria-encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunit-1
(MT-CO1), a mitochondrial genome-encoded complex IV subunit of the
electron transport chain. As a result of decreased complex IV activity,
NRF2-silenced cancer cells exhibited reduced levels of mitochondrial
membrane potential (MMP), oxygen consumption rate, and ATP production.
Notably, these changes induced adaptive activation of AMP-activated
protein kinase-α (AMPKα) and thereby, NRF2-silenced cells were more
vulnerable to AMPK inhibitor-induced growth suppression. Similarly, mouse
tumor xenografts derived from NRF2-silenced HT29 exhibited MT-CO1
reduction and AMPKα activation, thereby increasing responsiveness to the
AMPK inhibitor treatment. Collectively, we showed a novel link of NRF2 to
cancer mitochondria and AMPK signaling by elucidating miR-181c/MT-CO1
signaling as an underlying molecular mechanism. These results also
suggest that it may an effective strategy to inhibit both NRF2 and AMPK
to control adaptive tumor responses.


