Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-200b targets ARHGAP18 and suppresses triple negative breast
cancer metastasis.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) refers to a group of highly
heterogeneous malignant tumors that lack estrogen receptor and
progesterone receptor expression, and human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 amplification, accounting for 10-20% of newly diagnosed breast
cancer cases. Compared to other subtypes of breast cancer, TNBCs usually
show worse clinical features such as rapid tumor growth, earlier
recurrence, and more aggressive metastasis. Unfortunately, the mechanism
of TNBC metastatic behavior has not been well understood. Moreover, no
efficient targeted therapies for TNBCs are currently available,
representing a real unmet need for effective new therapies. MiR-200
family members are among the first miRNAs reported to function as potent
inhibitors of cancer metastasis. However, the mechanism of miR-200 family
on cancer metastasis has not been well understood. In this study, we
investigated the effect of miR-200b, one member of the miR-200 family, on
TNBC metastasis using cell culture and mouse orthotopic mammary xenograft
tumor models. We found that the expression level of miR-200b is
significantly lower in TNBC cells and tissues than that in other types of
breast cancer. Stably expressing miR-200b significantly reduced TNBC cell
migration and invasion and suppressed TNBC metastasis in a mouse
orthotopic mammary xenograft tumor model. Mechanistic studies revealed
that miR-200b overexpression in TNBC cells caused drastic changes in
cellular actin cytoskeleton organization patterns as evidenced by reduced
lamellipodia formation but increased stress fiber formation. In
consistent with these findings, Rho GTPase pulldown assays demonstrated
that stably expressing miR-200b significantly increased the Rho GTPase
Rho A activation, but reduced the Rho GTPase Rac1 activation. Moreover,
inhibition of Rho A signaling impaired the inhibitory effect of miR-200b
on TNBC cell migration. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that ARHGAP18,
a specific Rho A GTPase activating protein (GAP), is a predicate target
of miR-200b. Further Q-PCR, Western blot and 3â€™UTR reporter analysis
confirmed that ARHGAP18 is a target of miR-200b. Knocking down ARHGAP18
in TNBC cells using siRNAs significantly increased Rho A activation but
reduced Rac1 activation. To further determine the role of ARHGAP18 in
TNBC, ARHGAP knockout TNBC cells were generated using the CRISPR
technology. It was found that knockout ARHGAP18 phenocopied the effect of
miR-200b overexpression. Moreover, overexpressing ARHGAP18 in miR-200b
stable expression cells overcome the inhibitory effect of miR-200b on
TNBC metastasis. Together, these findings suggest that miR-200b
suppresses triple negative breast cancer metastasis by targeting ARHGAP18
and enhancing Rho A activation.


