Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel combination therapy targeting BCL6 and phospho-STAT3
defeats intratumor heterogeneity in a subset of non-small cell lung
cancers.


Purpose: Lung cancer is a disease of great oncogenotype complexity
(oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene alterations). These alterations can
appear in different combinations even within histologically defined lung
cancer subtypes. The success of targeted therapy has led to a search for
oncogenotype-specific therapies. But, no one therapy fits all
oncogenotypes. Here, we investigate whether characterization of
oncogene-specific alterations in cellular signaling at single cell level
indicate heterogeneity even within cells from the same patient with
defined oncogenotype, and whether they can suggest new targets to deal
with this heterogeneity.

Methods: We compared signaling alterations in single cells for
Î²-CATENIN, SMAD2/3, phospho-STAT3, P65, FOXO1 and phospho-ERK1/2 among a
collection of Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells (HBECs) that have been
oncogenically transformed with combinations of TP53, K-RAS, and MYC,
commonly found alterations in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We
studied ~3000 cells/signaling marker/HBEC oncogenotype variant using
immunofluorescence assays and single-cell image analysis (>1M data
points). For downstream target identification and validation we utilized
gene expression, Western blot and siRNA mediated knockdown assays. We
utilized inhibitors to STAT3 and BCL6 in MTT drug sensitivity and colony
formation assay in a panel of NSCLC lines. We used xenografted
subcutaneous tumors for the in vivo validation of our results.

Results: When all three oncogenic changes were present and the HBECs were
tumorigenic, we observed STAT3 upregulation and SMAD2/3 downregulation.
Interestingly, these STAT3 and SMAD2/3 signaling changes were found to be
mutually exclusive in single cells within the transformed HBEC strain. We
targeted the STAT3 upregulated subpopulation with the STAT3 inhibitor
Stattic. But, Stattic treatment failed to eliminate the SMAD2/3
downregulated subpopulation. To target the SMAD2/3 down-regulated
subpopulation, we identified BCL6, a downstream gene of SMAD2/3, as a
novel target in transformed HBECs. Next, to test the generality of BCL6
as a target, we studied 5 NSCLC cell lines with various level of BCL6
expression: H1693, H1819, H1993, HCC827 and H2009. Our data suggests that
BCL6 can also be a therapeutic target in a subset of NSCLC lines. Then we
tested the response of these NSCLC lines to a combination of BBI608
(potent STAT3 inhibitor) and FX1 (BCL6 inhibitor). The combination
treatment eliminated more cancer cells than the single treatments alone.
Finally, we confirmed the benefit of the combination therapy in H1993
xenografted tumors.

Conclusions: We conclude that BCL6 is a new therapeutic target in NSCLC
and combination therapy that targets multiple vulnerabilities
(Phospho-STAT3 and BCL6) downstream of common oncogenes and tumor
suppressors (TP53, K-RAS, and MYC) may provide a potent way to defeat
intra-tumor heterogeneity.


