Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non canonical activation of Sonic Hedgehog pathway in uterine
leiomyosarcoma.


Background: Uterine leiomyoma (ULM) and leiomyosarcoma (ULMS) are smooth
muscle tumors with distinct clinical and biological behavior. They can be
a cause of infertility and even death. Little is known about the factors
that can to influence these tumors behavior and biology. Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway components were previously implicated in the ULMS
malignancy risk; however its activation mechanism is unknown. In this
study, we investigated the gene expression profile of Sonic Hedgehog
Signaling and pathway upstream genes in myometrium (MM), ULM and LMS cell
lines.

Methods: Total RNA obtained from cell lines were submitted to cDNA
synthesis and quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR), using 7500 System
(Life Technologies, USA). Gene expression of SHH, PTCH1, SMO, SUFU, GLI
1-3, CCND1, BCL-2 and BMP4 were assessed.

Results: Gene expression data showed an upregulation of SMO, SUFU, GLI1,
BCL-2 and BMP4 in LMS cells when compared to MM. GLI1 (RQ=11) and BCL-2
(RQ=20) genes had higher expression. In the other side, SHH, PTCH1, GLI2
and GLI3 showed upregulation in MM cells.

Conclusion: Our results showed that the Sonic hedgehog pathway is
activated in LMS cells but by SHH independent form (non-canonical
pathway). This could be explained by the downexpression of SHH ligand and
the PTCH1 receptor, and by the upexpression of SMO, GLI1 and pathway
target genes as BCL-2 and BMP4 in uterine LMS cells compared to LM and
MM. These results suggest a new therapeutic perspective for LMS by target
drugs to inhibit SMO and GLI1 molecules.


