Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparison between quantitative ultrasound and histology in
heterogeneous tumor structure.


Background: To investigate how QUS (Quantitative Ultrasound) maps reflect
regional variations in heterogeneous tumor microstructure, we compared
like-regions of QUS effective scatterer diameter (ESD, μm) and effective
acoustic concentration (EAC, dB/cm) maps to whole-slice, virtual
histology sections stained for vascular, cellular and other
microstructural features.

Methods: An ectopic model of murine colorectal carcinoma (CT26) was
implanted in 7 mice (BALB/c). US radiofrequency data were acquired for
the longitudinal plane of tumors in vivo (SSI, Aixplorer, SL15-4 probe,
research mode) on days 6 and 14 after start of therapy with an
anti-angiogenic (AA: n = 3) or placebo (P: n = 4). The AA used is
Pazopanib, an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor of VEGF receptors 1/-2/-3,
platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDGFR) -alfa/-beta, and c-KIT.
A daily dose of 2 mg of AA, diluted in 100µl of solution, was
administered per os. Average backscattered power spectra were calculated
(FFT, 512 pts, Rectangular gated RF), normalized with respect to a
reference phantom and corrected for attenuation (0.4 dB/cm/MHz). ESD and
EAC were mapped (2 x 2 mm blocks, with 75% axial and lateral overlap).
Tumors were excised and marked to conserve orientation and approximate
position relative to US imaging plane. Whole-slice, histological sections
were prepared with fluorescent immunohistochemical markers at D6 and D14
for invasive assessment of cell nuclei, apoptosis and vascular
endothelium. The Number of Nuclei (NU), the % area of Apoptosis (AP) and
% area of Vascular (VA) marker were calculated with image analysis
processing for each 333µm by 333µm region of histological sections. QUS
and histological maps of each tumor were manually segmented and
coregistered using an affine registration method so that matched regions
could be compared.

Results: The absolute value of the non-parametric Spearman correlation
coefficient (RS) was computed separately for each mouse to study the
correlation between histological parameters and QUS parameters. Two mice
of the AA group showed a moderate correlation (0.4Results: The absolute
value of the non-parametric Spearman correlation coefficient (RS) was
computed separately for each mouse to study the correlation between
histological parameters and QUS parameters. Two mice of the AA group
showed a moderate correlation (0.4<=RSResults: The absolute value of the
non-parametric Spearman correlation coefficient (RS) was computed
separately for each mouse to study the correlation between histological
parameters and QUS parameters. Two mice of the AA group showed a moderate
correlation (0.4<=RS<0.6) between NU and EAC. Only one mouse in the P
group showed strong correlation (0.6Results: The absolute value of the
non-parametric Spearman correlation coefficient (RS) was computed
separately for each mouse to study the correlation between histological
parameters and QUS parameters. Two mice of the AA group showed a moderate
correlation (0.4<=RS<0.6) between NU and EAC. Only one mouse in the P
group showed strong correlation (0.6<=RS) for [AP vs. ESD], [AP vs. EAC],
[VA vs. ESD] and [VA vs. EAC]. The other tumors (1 from AA group and 3
from P group) showed poor correlation (RSResults: The absolute value of
the non-parametric Spearman correlation coefficient (RS) was computed
separately for each mouse to study the correlation between histological
parameters and QUS parameters. Two mice of the AA group showed a moderate
correlation (0.4<=RS<0.6) between NU and EAC. Only one mouse in the P
group showed strong correlation (0.6<=RS) for [AP vs. ESD], [AP vs. EAC],
[VA vs. ESD] and [VA vs. EAC]. The other tumors (1 from AA group and 3
from P group) showed poor correlation (RS<0,4). Additional data is
available from 14 other mice (7 from AA group and 7 from P group) and
will be analyzed to more fully investigate correlation between the QUS
parameters and the histological parameters.

Conclusions: This original technique to compare QUS parameter maps and
whole slice histology analysis shows a promising evolution for this
non-invasive imaging technique. Complete results on 21 mice will be
presented in April.


