Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of prostate cancer risk variants by CRISPR/Cas9
mediated genome editing at the MSMB locus.


Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified nuermous single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with prostate cancer risk.
While numerous in silico analyses suggest that the majority of these SNPs
may function through regulation of gene expression, wet lab experiments
to distinguish the causative variants from their linkage disequilibrium
(LD) partners is still needed. Here, we demonstrate how genome editing
can investigate the role of individual polymorphisms on gene expression.

Here, we focus on the prostate cancer-associated SNP rs10993994, which is
in the promoter of the MSMB gene that encodes for the prostate-secreted
protein beta-MSP. This SNP is notable because it associates with seminal
and serum levels of beta-MSP, PSA, and hK2; mRNA levels of MSMB and the
nearby androgen receptor co-activator NCOA4 in the prostate; and mRNA
levels of MSMB in the stomach. Intriguingly, rs10993994 is not a gastric
cancer risk SNP suggesting that there may be other variants with
prostate-specific function responsible for the observed prostate cancer
association.

Using data from the FANTOM5 project, we show that rs7098889, in LD with
rs10993994, is located in one of the most prostate-specific enhancers. We
had previously shown that this SNP is associated with beta-MSP
independent of rs10993994.

To distinguish the effects of these two SNPs on gene expression, we
generated a series of double gRNA mediated CRISPR/Cas9 deletions of the
relevant regulatory elements. Removing the element containing rs7098889
flanking region results in ~10 to 20 fold increase of MSMB expression in
the prostate cancer LNCaP cell line but not in the gastric cancer AGS
cell line. There is no change in NCOA4 in either cell line. Removing
rs10993994 flanking region results in over 10 fold increase of MSMB
expression and ~50% decrease of NCOA4 in LNCaP.

As both LNCaP and AGS are heterozygous for both SNPs, we then generated
single clones in which only one allele was removed. For rs7098889, an
over 300 fold increase of MSMB expression was observed in two out of the
three clones with the T but not the C allele. Transcripts from high
expressers all came from one allele. Similarly, single clone analysis
showed 40 to 60 fold up-regulation of MSMB expression in two out of three
clones with the C but not the T allele of rs10993994. This is consistent
with the observation for rs7098889 since rs7098889T and rs10993994C are
on the same haplotype.

Our work demonstrates dramatic and locus specific effect of individual
polymorphisms on gene expression, which strongly support the notion that
an important function of disease risk variants is through regulation of
gene expression.


