Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural evaluation of mutations identified on Cue domain of
FANCD2.


Fanconi anemia complementation group D2 (FANCD2) protein plays pivotal
role in DNA interstrand crosslink (ICL) repair and genome stability.
FANCD2 comprises conserved CUE domain at N terminus, which is important
for DNA ICL repair and protein stability. However, molecular mechanism
associated to genetic alteration has not well characterized. Here, we
have carried out multimodal approaches to explore folding pattern of
FANCD2 Cue domain and functionally relevant mutations. Dynamic Light
Scattering and Mass Spectrometry data of purified proteins could revealed
that wild- type protein is predominantly monomeric, but mutated
counterparts are exhibiting oligomeric properties. Secondary, tertiary
structure assessment and their thermal stability of wild- type, mutants
were studied by Circular Dichroism (CD) and Fluorescence spectroscopy.
Furthermore, binding affinity and kinetics of Cue domain and mutants with
monoubiquitin was evaluated by surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Molecular
modelling, simulation, normal mode analysis, principal component analysis
and docking studies were carried out to understand in-depth
conformational dynamics and interactions. References:- 1. Regulation of
the Fanconi anemia pathway by a CUE ubiquitin-binding domain in the
FANCD2 protein. Rego, M. A. et al, Blood 120: 2109-2117,(2012). 2.
Hypomorphic mutations in the gene encoding a key Fanconi anemia protein,
FANCD2, sustain a significant group of FA-D2 patients with severe
phenotype. Kalb et al, Am J Hum Genet 80: 895-910, (2007)


