Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of epithelial mesenchymal transition mediated TKI
resistanc NSCLC cells containing wild type EGFR and mutant EGFR.


Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a vital process in
development and of metastasis and occurs when epithelial cell lose their
polarized structure, by reducing adherent junction proteins E-cadherin,
Claudin and ZO-1 on the membrane. Cells with EMT are elongated spindle
like structures due to upregulation of mesenchymal markers Vimentin and
N-cadherin. EMT may be responsible for resistance to molecular targeted
therapies such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against EGFR which is
used in patients with activated EGFR mutations. However, these patients
acquire resistance to TKIs after prolonged use. This acquired resistance
to TKIs may also be due to a secondary T790M mutation in the kinase
domain which could be responsible for inducing EMT. EMT is regulated by
p120-catenin which interacts with the Kaiso factor in the cell nucleus
and inhibits the transcriptional repressor activity of Kaiso factor.
Kaiso factor represses Wnt target genes such as ZEB-1. The binding of
p120-catenin to Kaiso factor also increases Wnt signaling which results
in loss of E-cadherin. Cells undergoing EMT can acquire cancer stem-cell
like characteristics by expressing stem-cell marker ABCB1. Thus we
investigated EMT characteristics in TKI-resistant NSCLC cells, H2170 ER
(Erlotinib resistant), H358 ER and H1975. To determine modulation of EMT
biomarkers in TKI-resistant cells, H1975 with L858R and T790M mutations
was compared to TKI-sensitive cell line H3255 with L858R mutation, using
immunoblotting, and qPCR. Expression of stem-cell markers ABCB1 and EMT
biomarker E-cadherin are measured using flow cytometry. Key EMT-related
proteins such as PRMT-1, Slug, Snail, Twist, p120-catenin, and Vimentin
were upregulated by 3.2, 3.18, 6.2, 1.68, 4 and 6.5 fold, respectively,
and E-cadherin, Claudin and ZO-1 were downregulated by 89%, 90% and 99%
fold as compared to the H3255 TKI-sensitive cell line. We also observed
upregulation of N-cadherin, ZEB-1 and Vimentin by 2.4, 2.6, and 12 fold
and downregulation of E-cadherin by 50% in H1975 by qPCR.
Immunofluorescence studies for Vimentin showed that H1975 cells were more
elongated and stratified as compared to the H3255 that had polarized
structures. 90% colocalization of p120-catenin and Kaiso factor was seen
H1975 cells whereas 10% colocalization was seen in H3255 cells. Flow
cytometry results indicated that there was significant increase in
expression of stem cell marker ABCB1 in TKI resistant cells H2170 ER,
H358 ER and H1975 in comparison to H2170 P(Parental), H358 P and H3255
TKI sensitive cells. In conclusion, our results indicate that EMT is
mediated through PRMT-1, which methylates Twist, transcriptional
repressor of E-cadherin along with Slug and Snail in H1975 cells with
T790M mutation. Cancer stem-cell marker ABCB1 is specific for TKI
resistant NSCLC cells which exhibit EMT.


