Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deguelin-derivative, L80 suppresses tumor growth and metastasis
via inhibition of STAT3 activation in triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer TNBC is associated with aggressive
metastasis and poor clinical outcomes due to a lack of effective
treatment options. Therefore, new drugs that effectively target both
cancer cell proliferation and metastasis are needed to improve clinical
outcomes. The 90-kDa molecular chaperone heat-shock protein, HSP90 has
been implicated in cancer progression and metastasis by modulating the
stabilization and maturation of many oncogenic proteins. Our objective
was to investigate the mechanism of action of C-terminal HSP90 inhibitor,
deguelin-derivative L80 on TNBC proliferation and metastasis in vitro and
in vivo. L80 induced apoptosis and suppression of cell viability in TNBC
cell lines via inhibition of Akt activation with concomitant nuclear
accumulation of p27. L80 treatment also caused a marked suppression of
cell migration and invasion. These responses were associated with
inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation (Tyr705) as evidenced by
downregulation of STAT3 downstream target genes including cyclin D1 and
survivin. The syngeneic orthotopic mouse model with 4T1 cells, L80
administration resulted in significant reduction in tumor growth together
with decreased number of Ki-67-positive cells and downregulation of
phospho-STAT3. Double-label immunofluorescence analysis showed that
individuals receiving L80 exhibited a marked reduction in co-localization
and expression of HIF-1Î± and HSP90 compared to their control groups in
vivo. Finally, we observed that L80 administration significantly
suppressed lung metastasis, as determined by in vivo bioluminescent
imaging system. Our findings suggest that L80 may be potentially
effective for the treatment for metastatic TNBC patients.


