Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long non-coding RNA GHSROS mediates expression of genes
associated with tumor growth, metastasis and adverse disease outcome.


Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play key regulatory roles in cancer
progression and are emerging therapeutic targets. The objective of this
study was to investigate the expression and function of the lncRNA GHSROS
in prostate cancer. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that GHSROS is highly
expressed in a subset of prostate cancers (Gleason score 8-10; z-score
>1; Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test P=0.0021). Forced overexpression of the
lncRNA stimulated cell migration in vitro in the PC3 (1.82 ± 0.35,
P=0.006; Student’s t-test), DU145 (1.94 ± 0.34, P=0.017), and LNCaP
(1.27 ± 0.02, P=0.0002) prostate cancer cell lines. Cell proliferation
was increased in GHSROS overexpressing PC3 (3.36 ± 1.91, P=0.029), DU145
(1.749 ± 0.59, P=0.026), and LNCaP (1.39 ± 0.26, P=0.040) prostate
cancer cell lines. These results were recapitulated in NOD/SCID mice,
with increased tumor growth and Ki67 immunohistochemical staining in PC3
(P=0.0040) and DU145 (P = 0.036) xenografts overexpressing the
lncRNA.High-throughput transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) identified 400
differentially expressed genes in GHSROS overexpressing PC3 cells, with
enrichment of genes associated with motility, migration and regulation of
cell growth. Further interrogation of the 400 gene set using Oncomine
concept mapping, and interrogation of publicly-available clinical
prostate cancer data sets, revealed a 34-gene signature associated with
poorer disease outcome and metastatic progression. Preliminary analysis
of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data, suggest that the signature has
potential as a prognostic indicator for disease free- or overall survival
in numerous cancers. Finally, locked antisense oligonucleotide (LNA-ASO)
inhibition of endogenous GHSROS reciprocally regulated cell growth
(Student’s t-test; RNV124: -1.14 ± 0.06, P=0.049 and RNV104L: -1.18 ±
0.05, P=0.030, migration (RNV124: -1.96 ± 0.11, P=0.004) and gene
expression changes, supporting the observations from forced GHSROS
overexpression experiments.In summary, we provide evidence that GHSROS is
a prostate cancer associated lncRNA that promotes a gene expression
signature which enhances the propensity for metastasis and adverse
disease outcomes. We also demonstrate that GHSROS can be targeted using
antisense oligonucleotides. Further studies on this lncRNA may provide
new prognostic and therapeutic opportunities.


