Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identify potential kinetochore protein inhibitors to overcome
cisplatin resistance.


Cisplain is the most commonly used chemotherapeutic drug for cancer,
while the resistance causes treatment failure. Cisplatin resistance may
involve in many molecular changes so identify aberrations in
cisplatin-resistant (CR) genes and find new therapeutic strategies could
provide valuable information to reduce therapeutic resistance. The aim of
this study is to search CR genes and identify potential novel drugs to
overcome cisplatin resistance. To identify aberrations in CR genes, three
CR genetic signatures were collected and analyzed differential expression
genes from lung, ovarian and oral cancer cells. After integration of CR
signatures, the kinetochore associated proteins, including NUF2, SPC25,
PC24, DSN1, SKA2, KNTC1, MIS18A and SKA1 were up-regulated in various CR
cells. Silencing of kinetochore associated proteins increased cisplatin
sensitivity. For identification of kinetochore associated protein
inhibitors to overcome cisplatin resistance, CR signatures were queried
to the Connectivity map (Cmap) database to search for potential drugs
which may reverse cisplatin resistance. 3 compounds exhibited
cytotoxicity effect on the cisplatin-resistant cells and reduced
kinetochore associated proteins expression level. Taking together, this
study demonstrates kinetochore associated proteins participate in
cisplatin resistance and identify potential inhibitors to overcome
cisplatin resistance.


