Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of anti-PD-1 therapy on immune cells in the peripheral
blood of non-small cell lung cancer patients.


Background: Programmed cell death-1 (PD-1), an inhibitory immune
check-point, plays a pivotal role in tumor immune escape. The interaction
of PD-1 with its ligand (PD-L1) results in T cells exhaustion, and the
blockade of this interaction can partially restore T cell function.
Recently, antibodies targeting PD-1 and PD-L1 have been approved for
treatment of advanced Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). In this pilot
study, we aimed to investigate the effect of anti-PD1 treatment or
chemotherapy on the frequencies of circulating PD-1+ T cells and PD-L1+
immunosuppressive cells in NSCLC patients. Patients & Methods: Peripheral
blood samples were collected from 35 advanced NSCLC patients before
initiation of treatment and after 3 cycles. Twelve treatment-na√Øve
patients received front-line chemotherapy, whereas 23 patients received
anti-PD1 treatment in the second-line setting. Flow cytometry was used to
quantify PD-1- and PD-L1-expressing immune cells. Changes in the
frequencies of these cells were compared between the two settings and
correlated with the clinical outcome. Results: Chemotherapy had no effect
on the percentages of PD-1+CD4+ and PD-1+CD8+ T cells after 3 cycles,
whereas there was a significant decrease in PD-1+CD4+ and PD-1+CD8+ T
cells in patients who received 3 administrations of anti-PD1 antibody
(p=0.007 and p=0.05, respectively). Moreover, the levels of PD-1-CD4+
(p=0.009) and PD-1-CD8+ (p=0.009) were augmented in response to anti-PD-1
therapy. The frequencies of both peripheral CD4+ Tregs
(CD3+CD4+CD25highCD127-/lowCD152+FoxP3+) and granulocytic MDSCs (G-MDSC;
CD14-CD15+CD33+CD11b+HLA-DR-Lin-) expressing PD-L1 were decreased
following anti-PD1 therapy (p=0.01 and p=0.02, respectively). In
contrast, chemotherapy affected only the PD-L1+CD4+ Tregs, but not the
PD-L1+G-MDSC, by increasing their levels after 3 cycles (p=0.04).
Anti-PD-1 treatment induced a superior reduction of the PD-1+CD4+,
PD-1+CD8+ T cells, PD-L1+CD4+ Tregs and PD-L1+G-MDSCs percentages
compared to the effect of first line chemotherapy (p=0.04, p=0.05,
p=0.002 and p=0.01, respectively). Furthermore, a significant decrease in
PD-1+CD8+ T cells, PD-L1+CD4+ Tregs and PD-L1+G-MDSCs after 3 doses of
anti-PD-1 was observed in patients who experienced stable disease
compared to baseline (p=0.006, p=0.05 and p=0.03, respectively). At the
time of response evaluation to chemotherapy, the percentage of the
PD-L1+CD4+ Tregs after 3 cycles was significantly inferior compared to
baseline, in disease progressors (p=0.04). Conclusion: These data
indicate that although chemotherapy affected the levels of PD-L1+CD4+
Tregs, anti-PD1 therapy seems to exert an effect on both PD1+ T cells and
PD-L1+ immunosuppressive cells. Additional studies are needed in a larger
cohort in order to document its impact on their clinical relevance in
NSCLC patients. This study is ongoing and updated data will be presented
at the meeting.


