Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of ESR1 D538G mutation in circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
and paired circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) samples of breast cancer
patients.


AIMS: Molecular characterization of CTCs and ctDNA analysis holds promise
as an extremely powerful tool for the molecular profiling of cancer
patients in real time. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) is expressed in
approximately 70% of all breast cancers and endocrine therapy represents
a major treatment modality in ERα-positive disease. Recently, somatic
mutations in the ERα gene (ESR1) were linked to acquired resistance to
endocrine therapies in breast cancer. In this study, we analyzed the most
frequent ERS1 mutation (D538G) in CTCs (DNA samples isolated from
CellSearch cartridges), corresponding ctDNA from early and metastatic
breast cancer patients and healthy donors.

METHODS: We first developed a highly sensitive and specific methodology
for the detection of ESR1 D538G hotspot mutation, based on a combination
of allele-specific PCR, asymmetric rapid PCR and high resolution melting
analysis. We analyzed DNAs isolated from CTCs (CellSearch) and the
corresponding ctDNA before and/or after therapy in: a) 25 patients with
ER+ operable breast cancer, b) 11 patients with ER+ metastatic breast
cancer, c) 13 patients with ER- early breast cancer, d) 5 patients with
ER- metastatic breast cancer and e) 80 healthy female volunteers. In all
cases ctDNA (extracted from 2 ml plasma) and DNA from CTCs were first
examined for their DNA quality before analysis.

RESULTS: The assay is highly sensitive (analytical sensitivity: 0.05%)
and specific (0/80 healthy donors). ERS1 D538G hotspot mutation was
identified in ctDNA in 4/18 (22.2%) of ER+ metastasis-verified and in
5/33 (15.2%) of ER+ early breast cancer. In CTCs, ERS1 D538G mutation was
identified in 6/18 (33.3%) of ER+ metastasis-verified and 5/33 (15.2%) of
ER+ early breast cancer. In ER-pos metastasis-verified breast cancer, the
concordance for D538G mutation between CTCs and ctDNA was 10/18 (55.6%),
whereas the corresponding concordance for ER+ operable breast cancer was
25/33 (75.8%). Moreover, ERS1 D538G hotspot mutation was identified in
ctDNA in 2/9 (22.2%) of ER- metastasis-verified breast cancer and 2/16
(12.5%) of ER- early breast cancer. ERS1 D538G hotspot mutation was
identified in CTCs in 3/16 (18.8%) of ER- operable breast cancer, whereas
none of ER- metastasis-verified breast cancer patients (0/9) were
positive. In ER- metastasis-verified breast cancer patients, the
concordance between CTCs and ctDNA for D538G mutation was 7/9(77.8%),
whereas the corresponding concordance for ER- early breast cancer was
15/16 (93.8%).

CONCLUSIONS: We developed and validated an ultrasensitive and highly
specific methodology for the detection of ERS1 D538G hotspot mutation.
This mutation was detected not only in the ER+ group, but also in the ER-
group of breast cancer patients. We will further evaluate our findings in
a large cohort of patients before and after treatment, to evaluate
response to endocrine therapies in breast cancer.


