Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET inhibits prostate cancer tumor growth, progression and
metastasis in TRAMP mice.


Introduction: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the 2nd most common malignancy in
USA. Novel agents for treatment of advanced PCa are warranted. Transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) is an autochthonous mouse
model exhibits both histological and morphological features that mimic
human prostate carcinogenesis. Herein, for the first time, we evaluated
the in vivo effects of TET, a derivative of Tetrandrine in TRAMP model.

Methods: Beginning 12 weeks of age, male TRAMP mice were administrated
with TET (30 mgm/kg body weight, orally, alternative days) in PBS or PBS
alone (Control) till 30 weeks of age. Body weight (B) of animals was
recorded weekly. At various time points animals were euthanized,
genitourinary tract (G) were weighed. Prostate tissue was subjected to
immunohistochemical analyses for SV40-TAg, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), proliferation, neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) and
apoptosis. Multiple organs were examined for drug toxicity and lungs were
analyzed for metastasis.

Results: TRAMP mice exhibit to high-grade prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) by 12 weeks and progresses to poorly differentiated
adeno-carcinoma by 30 weeks with distant metastasis to lungs. TET feeding
did not show any considerable difference body weight loss profiles during
the entire treatment regimen. At the time of necropsy, there was no
evidence of edema, abnormal organ size or appearance in non-target
organs. TET gavage group showed (pResults: TRAMP mice exhibit to
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) by 12 weeks and
progresses to poorly differentiated adeno-carcinoma by 30 weeks with
distant metastasis to lungs. TET feeding did not show any considerable
difference body weight loss profiles during the entire treatment regimen.
At the time of necropsy, there was no evidence of edema, abnormal organ
size or appearance in non-target organs. TET gavage group showed
(p<0.005) lower G/B ratio compared to the PBS treated group. These
findings clearly indicate that TET dosing is non-toxic and restricts the
abnormal growth of the prostate in TRAMP mice. TET repress the EMT as
well as NED transition and inhibits cell proliferation (pResults: TRAMP
mice exhibit to high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) by
12 weeks and progresses to poorly differentiated adeno-carcinoma by 30
weeks with distant metastasis to lungs. TET feeding did not show any
considerable difference body weight loss profiles during the entire
treatment regimen. At the time of necropsy, there was no evidence of
edema, abnormal organ size or appearance in non-target organs. TET gavage
group showed (p<0.005) lower G/B ratio compared to the PBS treated group.
These findings clearly indicate that TET dosing is non-toxic and
restricts the abnormal growth of the prostate in TRAMP mice. TET repress
the EMT as well as NED transition and inhibits cell proliferation
(p<0.005) by Ki-67 staining. Oral administration of TET inhibits PCa
growth and progression by increases (pResults: TRAMP mice exhibit to
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) by 12 weeks and
progresses to poorly differentiated adeno-carcinoma by 30 weeks with
distant metastasis to lungs. TET feeding did not show any considerable
difference body weight loss profiles during the entire treatment regimen.
At the time of necropsy, there was no evidence of edema, abnormal organ
size or appearance in non-target organs. TET gavage group showed
(p<0.005) lower G/B ratio compared to the PBS treated group. These
findings clearly indicate that TET dosing is non-toxic and restricts the
abnormal growth of the prostate in TRAMP mice. TET repress the EMT as
well as NED transition and inhibits cell proliferation (p<0.005) by Ki-67
staining. Oral administration of TET inhibits PCa growth and progression
by increases (p<0.005) apoptosis in tumor tissues. Further, TET inhibited
metastasis as there was significant (pResults: TRAMP mice exhibit to
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) by 12 weeks and
progresses to poorly differentiated adeno-carcinoma by 30 weeks with
distant metastasis to lungs. TET feeding did not show any considerable
difference body weight loss profiles during the entire treatment regimen.
At the time of necropsy, there was no evidence of edema, abnormal organ
size or appearance in non-target organs. TET gavage group showed
(p<0.005) lower G/B ratio compared to the PBS treated group. These
findings clearly indicate that TET dosing is non-toxic and restricts the
abnormal growth of the prostate in TRAMP mice. TET repress the EMT as
well as NED transition and inhibits cell proliferation (p<0.005) by Ki-67
staining. Oral administration of TET inhibits PCa growth and progression
by increases (p<0.005) apoptosis in tumor tissues. Further, TET inhibited
metastasis as there was significant (p<0.005) decrease in metastasis to
lungs in TET treated animals.

Conclusion: Human achievable dose of TET treatment to TRAMP mice bearing
prostate tumor, exhibited no-observed-adverse-effect-level in toxicology
evaluations and also significantly inhibited tumor growth, progression,
local invasion and distant metastasis involving suppression of tumor, and
thus could have potential against human PCa.


