Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of novel markers of transitional cell carcinoma of the
ovary, the TCC-like variant of high grade serous carcinoma, using
proteomics and immunohistochemistry.


Background: The current WHO classification does not separate transitional
carcinoma of the ovary (TCCO) from conventional high grade serous
carcinoma of the ovary (HGSC). TCCO has a better prognosis, possibly due
to better chemosensitivity or less infiltrative growth pattern. The
available immunohistochemical (IHC) markers do not differentiate between
the two subtypes. Therefore, we sought to compare the proteomic profiles
of conventional HGSC and TCCO to identify surrogate biomarkers of good
prognosis from TCCO that could identify conventional HGSC tumors with a
better prognosis.

Design: Full proteome analysis of 12 cases of TCCO and 12 cases of HGSC
was performed using SP3-clinical proteomics, run on an ThermoFisher
Orbitrap Fusion. For validation, tissue microarrays of TCCO (n=89) and
HGSC (n=237) were immunostained with antibodies against proteins found to
be enriched in TCCO. All cases and immunostains were scored by a
gynecologic pathologist. Univariate analysis was performed comparing IHC
expression in TCCO vs. HGSC.

Results: We identified 1220 proteins that were significantly enriched in
TCCO over HGSC. Claudin 4 and Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1
(UCHL1) were selected as potential markers of TCCO-like biology
(p=0.0017, 0.0322). By IHC, Claudin 4 (95% confidence interval (CI)
0.171, 0.430) and UCHL1 (95% CI 0.291, 0.550) showed a significantly
higher expression in TCCO as compared to HGSC (see table).





% of tumors with high immunoreactivity scores





Claudin 4

UCHL1



Pure TCCO

34/59 (58%)

26/59 (44%)



Mixed TCCO-HGSC, TCCO component

14/29 (48%)

8/29 (28%)



Mixed TCCO-HGSC, HGSC component

19/28 (68%)

6/28 (21%)



Conventional HGSC

33/235 (14%)

32/237 (14%)





Legend: Mixed TCCO: TCCO with minor component of conventional HGSC

Conclusion: Proteomic analysis showed differing protein profiles for TCCO
and HGSC. By IHC, Claudin 4 and UCHL1 were identified as potential
markers for TCC-like differentiation of high-grade serous carcinomas.
Further studies will focus on the prognostic significance of these and
other markers in larger cohorts of HGSC. This study presents a novel
approach at identifying potential diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers as
well as therapeutic targets.


