Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEGylated recombinant hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) enhances tumor
infiltrating CD8+ T cell accumulation and improves checkpoint inhibitor
efficacy in murine syngeneic breast cancer models.


Hyaluronan (HA) is an extracellular glycosaminoglycan that accumulates in
the tumor microenvironment (TME) of many solid tumors and is associated
with rapid tumor progression and poor prognosis. In preclinical studies,
enzymatic degradation of TME HA by intravenous PEGylated recombinant
human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) remodels the TME, reduces tumor
interstitial fluid pressure, decompresses tumor blood vessels, and
facilitates delivery of chemotherapeutics. We have previously shown that
PEGPH20-mediated HA degradation enhances anti-PD-L1 and anti-PD1 efficacy
in an HA accumulating murine pancreatic tumor model (Rosengren, AACR 2016
poster #4886). Accordingly, we aimed to extend these checkpoint blockade
studies into orthotopic breast cancer models; while further elucidating
the effect of PEGPH20-mediated HA degradation on modulating tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). The mammary fat pads of BALB/c mice were
inoculated with either EMT-6 cells or 4T1/HAS3, a 4T1 cell line
engineered to over-express hyaluronan synthase-3. During tumor
progression, both EMT-6 and 4T1/HAS3 mammary carcinomas accumulate high
levels of HA (average 730 ng/mg and 1408 ng/mg, respectively). When
treated with PEGPH20 alone (0.0375mg/kg), EMT-6 tumor growth was
inhibited by ≥30% (p=0.01). Additional EMT-6 studies were conducted to
evaluate PEGPH20 in combination with anti-PD-L1. PEGPH20 increased
anti-PD-L1 efficacy by 38% relative to anti-PD-L1 alone (86% vs 62.4%
tumor growth inhibition (TGI), p=0.0024). Comparable tumor growth
experiments were conducted in the 4T1/HAS3 model. TILs were evaluated by
flow cytometry. PEGPH20-mediated HA removal enhanced both checkpoint
efficacy and CD8+ T cell recruitment. Specifically, PEGPH20 alone
(1mg/kg) increased anti-PD-L1 efficacy by 411% relative to anti-PD-L1
alone (93% vs 18.2% TGI, pHyaluronan (HA) is an extracellular
glycosaminoglycan that accumulates in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of
many solid tumors and is associated with rapid tumor progression and poor
prognosis. In preclinical studies, enzymatic degradation of TME HA by
intravenous PEGylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20)
remodels the TME, reduces tumor interstitial fluid pressure, decompresses
tumor blood vessels, and facilitates delivery of chemotherapeutics. We
have previously shown that PEGPH20-mediated HA degradation enhances
anti-PD-L1 and anti-PD1 efficacy in an HA accumulating murine pancreatic
tumor model (Rosengren, AACR 2016 poster #4886). Accordingly, we aimed to
extend these checkpoint blockade studies into orthotopic breast cancer
models; while further elucidating the effect of PEGPH20-mediated HA
degradation on modulating tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). The
mammary fat pads of BALB/c mice were inoculated with either EMT-6 cells
or 4T1/HAS3, a 4T1 cell line engineered to over-express hyaluronan
synthase-3. During tumor progression, both EMT-6 and 4T1/HAS3 mammary
carcinomas accumulate high levels of HA (average 730 ng/mg and 1408
ng/mg, respectively). When treated with PEGPH20 alone (0.0375mg/kg),
EMT-6 tumor growth was inhibited by ≥30% (p=0.01). Additional EMT-6
studies were conducted to evaluate PEGPH20 in combination with
anti-PD-L1. PEGPH20 increased anti-PD-L1 efficacy by 38% relative to
anti-PD-L1 alone (86% vs 62.4% tumor growth inhibition (TGI), p=0.0024).
Comparable tumor growth experiments were conducted in the 4T1/HAS3 model.
TILs were evaluated by flow cytometry. PEGPH20-mediated HA removal
enhanced both checkpoint efficacy and CD8+ T cell recruitment.
Specifically, PEGPH20 alone (1mg/kg) increased anti-PD-L1 efficacy by
411% relative to anti-PD-L1 alone (93% vs 18.2% TGI, p<0.0001) and
increased the accumulation of CD8+ TIL by 176% (p=0.0025). Taken
together, the data suggest that tumor HA accumulation may act as a
barrier to immune cell access and negatively modulate CD8+ TILs, and that
PEGPH20-mediated HA reduction facilitates increased access of CD8+ T
cells. This increased recruitment may contribute to the enhanced
anti-PD-L1 efficacy observed when combined with PEGPH20. A Phase 1 trial
is ongoing to evaluate PEGPH20 plus checkpoint blockade in patients with
advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer and in patients with
locally advanced or metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma (NCT02563548).


