Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancers develop metabolic resistance pathways to
glutaminase inhibition.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an extremely aggressive
disease with poor prognosis. Therefore, novel treatment options are
essential to combat this highly refractory disease. Oncogenic Kras can
promote a metabolic rewiring of pancreatic cancers, including the
non-canonical use of glutamine to support growth and proliferation
through redox homeostasis. Indeed, inhibition of downstream components of
glutamine metabolism leads to a decrease in tumor growth. The first step
in glutamine metabolism is mediated by the enzyme glutaminase (GLS) which
catalyzes the conversion of glutamine to glutamate in the mitochondria
where, in PDAC, glutamine-derived glutamate is metabolized ultimately
resulting in increased reducing potential in the form of increased NADPH
and GSH. An outstanding question in pancreatic cancer is whether GLS
inhibition is a viable therapeutic strategy given it is the most proximal
enzyme in the PDAC-specific glutamine metabolism pathway, and how this
may differ from targeting distal parts of the pathway. Using a
combination of in vitro and in vivo models of pancreatic cancer, we
tested whether recently developed highly potent inhibitors of GLS are an
effective therapy for PDAC. We demonstrate that despite dramatic early
effects on in vitro proliferation caused by GLS inhibition, pancreatic
cancer cells have adaptive metabolic networks that allow them to sustain
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Through an integrated proteomic and
metabolomic analysis, we identify multiple compensatory pathways that may
explain the resistance to GLS inhibition and show as proof of concept
that combining inhibitors to these pathways with GLS inhibitors may have
therapeutic utility.


