Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-1 blockade in combination with zoledronic acid to enhance the
antitumor efficacy in the breast cancer mouse model.


Purpose: Blockade of PD-1 receptor may provide proof of concepts for the
activity of an immune-modulation approach for the treatment of a breast
cancer (BC). Zoledronic acid (ZA) has been proven to inhibit
angiogenesis, invasion, and adhesion of tumor cells. The aim of this
study was to investigate the potential of antibody treatment towards the
T-cell checkpoint inhibitor PD-1 alone or in combination with ZA in BC
mouse model.

Experimental Design: The 4T1-Luc mouse mammary tumor model was used in
this study. The anti-tumor efficacy of anti-PD-1 antibody alone or in
combination with ZA was monitored by measuring tumor volume and
bioluminescence imaging (BLI). At the end of study, the tumor
immunohistochemistry was performed to confirm the in vivo observation and
flow cytometry was used to determine the immune cell population in
tumors. The survival rate was also calculated to evaluate the treatment
efficacy.

Results: The results showed that mice treated with the combination
therapy exhibited the best antitumor response compared to untreated
controls or single therapy. Furthermore, Combination therapy inhibited
tumor regrowth as determined by BLI imaging, and thus significantly
improved the median overall survival compared to other groups.

Conclusions: Our study provides evidence for enhanced clinical BC
treatment benefit from targeting co-signal molecules by combining PD-1
blockade with ZA treatment.


