Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic exposure to nitric oxide drives human breast epithelial
cells to malignant-like features.


The small endogenous signaling molecule, nitric oxide (NO) influences
numerous physiological conditions including cancers. We have previously
shown that different steady state NO levels activate pro-tumor signaling
cascades. In this study, we explored the effect(s) of chronic NO exposure
on breast epithelial cells as defined by changes in genomic stability,
RNA and protein expression, and mostly importantly altered cell
phenotype. Human breast epithelial cells (MCF10A) were chronically
exposed to various concentrations of the NO donor DETA/NO for a three
weeks. Distinct patterns of genomic alteration in the target genes (TP53,
KRAS & PIK3CA) of exposed cells as compared to the background mutations
were observed. In addition, quantitative real time PCR revealed increased
expression of cancer stem cell (CSC) markers including NANOG, CD44, CXCR4
and OCT4 at 300 μM DETA/NO exposure. While altered cell morphology was
observed in cells chronically exposed to 300-500 μM DETA/NO, increased
motility occurred in cells cultured in 100 μM DETA/NO. Strikingly, these
100 μM NO-exposed cells grew in serum-free media; selected clonal
populations as well as pooled cells formed colonies in soft agar that
were disorganized and resembled cancer-like-clusters. In conclusion,
these results implicate a precise tuning of microenvironmental NO levels
that shift non-transformed breast epithelial cells toward cancerous
phenotypes. The elucidation of underlying mechanisms may lend a new
perspective regarding therapeutic approaches that redirect the cellular
response(s) of tumor cells.


