Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor phosphatase PHLPP1 regulates transcription factor
activity and gene expression in inflammation.


Epigenetic mechanisms play a key role in cancer and are a major
contributor in driving the aberrantly high levels of oncogenic receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTK) in cancer. Understanding mechanisms leading to
altered transcription of oncogenes and tumor suppressors has the
potential to provide new therapeutic targets. Here we show that the PH
domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase 1 (PHLPP1), a tumor
suppressor that directly dephosphorylates and inactivates Akt, has an
additional function of regulating approximately 10% of the transcriptome.
Specifically, we used non-biased high-throughput RNA-sequencing and
chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing techniques to analyze
genome-wide mRNA levels and acetylation patterns of genes in cells from
wild-type and PHLPP1 knockout mice. De novo motif analysis of the
promoter for the genes regulated by PHLPP1 identified enrichment in the
recognition motifs for a number of transcription factors, including ones
involved in inflammatory signaling. Biochemical analysis revealed that
PHLPP1 regulates the phosphorylation and activation of these
transcription factors, such that loss of PHLPP1 leads to enhanced
inflammatory signaling. Our data support a model in which PHLPP1
dephosphorylates specific transcription factors to act as the brakes to
inflammatory signaling, a hallmark of cancer.


