Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating translocation renal cell carcinoma oncogenesis in
cells harboring TFE3 fusion with spliceosome machinery associated genes.


Background: Translocation Renal Cell Carcinoma (tRCC) represents an
aggressive subtype of kidney cancer associated with various gene fusions
involving translocation of one of two members of micropthalmia
transcription factor (MiT) family, TFE3 or TFEB. Despite identification
of multiple TFE3 gene fusions in tRCC, heterogeneous phenotype and
various dysregulated signaling pathway resulting from variety of gene
fusion partners pose a challenge to establish effective treatments for
these patients. In this work, we sought to study the biology underlying
oncogenesis in tRCC involving TFE3 fusion with genes associated with
pre-mRNA splicing factor machinery; NONO, SFPQ and PRCC.

Methods: To investigate the biology of different TFE3 fusion proteins,
oncogenic phenotypes and oncogenic signaling were compared among cells
with distinct endogenous expression of TFE3 fusions such as SFPQ-TFE3,
NONO-TFE3, PRCC-TFE3. Endogenous SFPQ-TFE3 expressing cells, RP-RO7, were
generated from patient derived xenograft. UOK-109 and UOK-146 (kindly
provided by Dr. Marston Lenehan, NCI) were used as endogenous NONO-TFE3
and PRCC-TFE3 expressing cells, respectively. TFE3 fusion transcripts
were identified with RT-PCR. TFE3 fusion preferential DNA binding was
assessed with ChIP-sequencing. Oncogenic phenotype assessment was done in
2D culture and two different 3D models; 1) Solid tumor model, in which
cancer cell interaction with extracellular matrix and stromal cells, were
represented in multiculture-spheroid system, 2) Invasion model, in which
cell ability to invade basement membrane barrier was modeled with matrix
restricted spheroid.

Results: Dissimilar oncogenic phenotypes were seen among RP-R07, UOK-109
and UOK-146 in 2D and 3D culture. The presence of nuclear E-Cadherin was
observed in all three cells model, with increasing level of nuclear
expression in fusion partner dependent manner (PResults: Dissimilar
oncogenic phenotypes were seen among RP-R07, UOK-109 and UOK-146 in 2D
and 3D culture. The presence of nuclear E-Cadherin was observed in all
three cells model, with increasing level of nuclear expression in fusion
partner dependent manner (P<0.05). Distinctive profiles of global
phosphotyrosine and global phosphoserine were observed in cells model
harboring different TFE3 fusions, despite common nuclear signal of TFE3.
Nuclear expression of selected kinases and phosphokinases such as AKT,
FAK, mTOR, VGEFR-2 were identified among TFE3 fusion cells with different
level of expression (PResults: Dissimilar oncogenic phenotypes were seen
among RP-R07, UOK-109 and UOK-146 in 2D and 3D culture. The presence of
nuclear E-Cadherin was observed in all three cells model, with increasing
level of nuclear expression in fusion partner dependent manner (P<0.05).
Distinctive profiles of global phosphotyrosine and global phosphoserine
were observed in cells model harboring different TFE3 fusions, despite
common nuclear signal of TFE3. Nuclear expression of selected kinases and
phosphokinases such as AKT, FAK, mTOR, VGEFR-2 were identified among TFE3
fusion cells with different level of expression (P<0.05). These results
suggest distinct alteration of kinases nucleocytoplasmic shuttling
regulation in tRCC cells (PResults: Dissimilar oncogenic phenotypes were
seen among RP-R07, UOK-109 and UOK-146 in 2D and 3D culture. The presence
of nuclear E-Cadherin was observed in all three cells model, with
increasing level of nuclear expression in fusion partner dependent manner
(P<0.05). Distinctive profiles of global phosphotyrosine and global
phosphoserine were observed in cells model harboring different TFE3
fusions, despite common nuclear signal of TFE3. Nuclear expression of
selected kinases and phosphokinases such as AKT, FAK, mTOR, VGEFR-2 were
identified among TFE3 fusion cells with different level of expression
(P<0.05). These results suggest distinct alteration of kinases
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling regulation in tRCC cells (P<0.05), as
compared to non TFE3 fusion cells. TFE3 ChIP-seq data in RP-R07 indicate
novel DNA target involving metabolism and TGF-Î² signaling related genes.

Conclusions: Our results indicate a distinct biology underlying tRCC
oncogenesis in different TFE3 fusion models involving kinase reprograming
and nucleocytoplasmic shuttling regulation. These differences also
suggest the possibility of generating personalized treatments targeting
specific TFE3 fusion genes associated with the spliceosome machinery.


