Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of the injection site on the dissemination pattern and
drug sensitivity of patient derived leukemia cells in vivo.


The aim of this study was to determine the influence of the engraftment
site on the tumor biology and drug sensitivity of a panel of
hematological patient derived xenografts (PDX). PDX cells (3x10e6
cells/mouse) were injected intratibialy (i.t.), intrasplenal (i.s.) or
subcutaneously (s.c.) into NOG (NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull) mice. Tumor
engraftment was determined by flow cytometry (FC) in bone marrow (BM),
peripheral blood (PB) and spleen during the course of engraftment and at
the end of a study. Overall survival (OS) served as an additional
read-out. In 3 models sensitivity towards cytarabine (Cy) was evaluated.
Our group has established 18 PDX of acute leukemia (16 AML, 1 ALL, 1
APL). 16/17 lines engrafted when injected i.t., 10/12 developed tumors
after i.s. implantation and 13/14 established tumors post s.c. cell
injection. Thus, the overall engraftment capacity was for most of the
models not depending on the injection site. Nevertheless, some models
could only be propagated in a specific setting: LEXFAM 2713, grew
exclusively i.t. or i.s., whereas LEXFAM 2824 could be propagated solely
when injected s.c.. The implantation site did influence tumor growth
rate: Mean OS ranged from 151.4 (±25.21) days for i.t. to 89.2 (±16.82)
days for s.c. propagation. I.s. transplanted mice had to be sacrificed
after 91.9 (±17.33) days. The dissemination pattern of individual lines
was affected by the injection site. In general, infiltration of the
hematopoietic organs was higher when cells were engrafted i.t. or i.s..
Nevertheless, also s.c. implanted, AML cells infiltrated murine PB,
spleen and BM, although not consistently and to a much lower extent.
Interestingly, the expression pattern of the 6 investigated surface
markers (CD45, CD3, CD34, CD33, CD38 & HLA-ABC) was not influences by the
application route. Every model depicted its distinct expression pattern
irrespective of the application route. Cy was highly active in 1 AML
(LEXFAM 2531) and 1 ALL (LEXFAL 2665) model. OS was significantly
prolonged in the s.c. as well as in the disseminated setting (pThe aim of
this study was to determine the influence of the engraftment site on the
tumor biology and drug sensitivity of a panel of hematological patient
derived xenografts (PDX). PDX cells (3x10e6 cells/mouse) were injected
intratibialy (i.t.), intrasplenal (i.s.) or subcutaneously (s.c.) into
NOG (NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull) mice. Tumor engraftment was determined by
flow cytometry (FC) in bone marrow (BM), peripheral blood (PB) and spleen
during the course of engraftment and at the end of a study. Overall
survival (OS) served as an additional read-out. In 3 models sensitivity
towards cytarabine (Cy) was evaluated. Our group has established 18 PDX
of acute leukemia (16 AML, 1 ALL, 1 APL). 16/17 lines engrafted when
injected i.t., 10/12 developed tumors after i.s. implantation and 13/14
established tumors post s.c. cell injection. Thus, the overall
engraftment capacity was for most of the models not depending on the
injection site. Nevertheless, some models could only be propagated in a
specific setting: LEXFAM 2713, grew exclusively i.t. or i.s., whereas
LEXFAM 2824 could be propagated solely when injected s.c.. The
implantation site did influence tumor growth rate: Mean OS ranged from
151.4 (±25.21) days for i.t. to 89.2 (±16.82) days for s.c.
propagation. I.s. transplanted mice had to be sacrificed after 91.9
(±17.33) days. The dissemination pattern of individual lines was
affected by the injection site. In general, infiltration of the
hematopoietic organs was higher when cells were engrafted i.t. or i.s..
Nevertheless, also s.c. implanted, AML cells infiltrated murine PB,
spleen and BM, although not consistently and to a much lower extent.
Interestingly, the expression pattern of the 6 investigated surface
markers (CD45, CD3, CD34, CD33, CD38 & HLA-ABC) was not influences by the
application route. Every model depicted its distinct expression pattern
irrespective of the application route. Cy was highly active in 1 AML
(LEXFAM 2531) and 1 ALL (LEXFAL 2665) model. OS was significantly
prolonged in the s.c. as well as in the disseminated setting (p< 0.003,
Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test). Another AML line (LEXFAM 2734) depicted a
less pronounced sensitivity towards Cy (pThe aim of this study was to
determine the influence of the engraftment site on the tumor biology and
drug sensitivity of a panel of hematological patient derived xenografts
(PDX). PDX cells (3x10e6 cells/mouse) were injected intratibialy (i.t.),
intrasplenal (i.s.) or subcutaneously (s.c.) into NOG
(NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull) mice. Tumor engraftment was determined by flow
cytometry (FC) in bone marrow (BM), peripheral blood (PB) and spleen
during the course of engraftment and at the end of a study. Overall
survival (OS) served as an additional read-out. In 3 models sensitivity
towards cytarabine (Cy) was evaluated. Our group has established 18 PDX
of acute leukemia (16 AML, 1 ALL, 1 APL). 16/17 lines engrafted when
injected i.t., 10/12 developed tumors after i.s. implantation and 13/14
established tumors post s.c. cell injection. Thus, the overall
engraftment capacity was for most of the models not depending on the
injection site. Nevertheless, some models could only be propagated in a
specific setting: LEXFAM 2713, grew exclusively i.t. or i.s., whereas
LEXFAM 2824 could be propagated solely when injected s.c.. The
implantation site did influence tumor growth rate: Mean OS ranged from
151.4 (±25.21) days for i.t. to 89.2 (±16.82) days for s.c.
propagation. I.s. transplanted mice had to be sacrificed after 91.9
(±17.33) days. The dissemination pattern of individual lines was
affected by the injection site. In general, infiltration of the
hematopoietic organs was higher when cells were engrafted i.t. or i.s..
Nevertheless, also s.c. implanted, AML cells infiltrated murine PB,
spleen and BM, although not consistently and to a much lower extent.
Interestingly, the expression pattern of the 6 investigated surface
markers (CD45, CD3, CD34, CD33, CD38 & HLA-ABC) was not influences by the
application route. Every model depicted its distinct expression pattern
irrespective of the application route. Cy was highly active in 1 AML
(LEXFAM 2531) and 1 ALL (LEXFAL 2665) model. OS was significantly
prolonged in the s.c. as well as in the disseminated setting (p< 0.003,
Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test). Another AML line (LEXFAM 2734) depicted a
less pronounced sensitivity towards Cy (p< 0.007, Log-rank (Mantel-Cox)
test) both growing s.c. or i.t.. Thus, drug sensitivity was not
influenced by the injection site of the leukemic cells. Of note, the PDX
drug responses mimicked the responsiveness of the respective donor
patient. Taken together the leukemia PDX panel represents the molecular
diversity of the disease and mirrors sensitivity towards standard of
care. Our recent careful investigation of the subcutaneous approach in
these models highlights their suitability for this type of studies. This
enhances the value of the platform as it combines the possibilities of a
mid-throughput screening enabled by the subcutaneous approach with the
general advantages of a patient-derived leukemia model.


