Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk of SOX2 and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition on
EGFR-TKI resistance.


EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been shown to produce
profound therapeutic responses in lung adenocarcinoma harboring EGFR
mutations. Despite this initial response, patients with EGFR-mutated lung
adenocarcinoma ultimately developed resistance to EGFR-TKIs. Although
both SOX2 and epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) have been linked to the
EGFR-TKI resistance in lung adenocarcinoma, the interplay between SOX2
and EMT in EGFR-TKI resistance is not known. Here, we report that cancer
plasticity switched by SOX2 and EMT regulates EGFR-TKI resistance. We
found that the selection of EGFR-TKI resistant cells induced EMT while
attenuating SOX2 expression. We observed that EGFR-TKI treatment induced
SOX2 expression in EGFR-mutated lung cancer cells, and SOX2 silencing
encouraged EGFR-TKI resistance. Preselection of EGFR-mutated lung cancer
cells with the EMT feature endowed cells with EGFR-TKI resistance but
suppressed SOX2 expression. We found that TGF-Î² induced EMT but
attenuated SOX2 expression, resulting in increased EGFR-TKI resistance.
Pharmacological inhibition of HDACs in EGFR-mutated cells attenuated SOX2
expression but induced EMT, causing increased EGFR-TKI resistance.
Enriching SOX2 expression in EGFR-mutated cells attenuated EMT and
rendered cells more sensitive to EGFR-TKIs. Correlation analysis
exhibited negative correlations between SOX2 and EMT markers in primary
non-small cell lung cancer. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that a SOX2
low/Vimentin high signature predicted a poor survival in EGFR-mutated
lung adenocarcinoma. Our findings support the notion that the cancer
plasticity regulated by SOX2 and EMT plays a critical role in EGFR-TKI
resistance, and SOX2 and Vimentin can function as prognostic biomarkers
in lung cancer progression.


