Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell analysis reveals cancer stem cell heterogeneities in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Tumor heterogeneity represents a major obstacle to effective cancer
treatment and personalized medicine. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
clinically and biologically heterogeneous, which is partly attributed to
the presence of hepatic cancer stem cells (CSCs). CSC surface makers can
have overlapping expression or exclusive expression of different
subpopulations of hepatic CSCs, and these cells may contain different
oncogenic changes. The existence of various CSC surface-marked
subpopulations might pose a problem for CSC targeted therapeutics. Little
is known about whether there are shared or distinct pathways in different
subpopulations. Moreover, it remains unknown whether heterogeneity exists
within certain subpopulations. Thus, we propose to profile the global
transcriptome of surface-marked CSCs (EpCAM+, CD133+ and CD24+) at the
single-cell level using index flow cytometric sorting and single-cell RNA
sequencing technology.

We statistically compared mRNA transcriptomes of individual single cells
of triple positive (EpCAM+/ CD133+ /CD24+) CSCs and triple negative
(EpCAM-/ CD133- /CD24-) cells. Further, we compared the triple positive
and the triple negative cells at the single cell level in terms of their
self-renew capability in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Our
results show that at the single cell level, the transcriptomic profiles
show a high-degree of heterogeneity in HCC cell lines, meanwhile, there
is a dramatic difference between triple positive and triple negative
cells in their transcriptomic profiles. There is a high-degree of
intra-tumor and inter-tumor heterogeneity observed in single cell
transcriptomes of HCC patientsâ€™ samples. Triple positive CSC single
cells show continuous rather than discrete stemness-related gene
expression patterns. In parallel, the self-renewal capability of triple
positive cells also exhibits heterogeneity, while triple negative cells
show little self-renewal capability. Thus, our single cell analysis study
reveals molecular and biological heterogeneity of cancer stem cells in
HCC, which may provide insight into the underlying mechanisms of how CSCs
contribute to tumor heterogeneity and underscore key pathways and novel
targets for hepatic CSC therapy.


