Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A clinically validated multiplex immunofluorescence assay for the
quantitative assessment of changes in EMT phenotypes in FFPE tumor
tissues in response to cancer therapeutics.


Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical process implicated
in metastasis. Despite extensive research, the clinical significance of
EMT remains unclear, and a quantitative evaluation of this process in
human tumors has yet to be demonstrated. We previously reported a
validated EMT immunofluorescence assay (EMT-IFA), that utilizes
Î²-catenin as a tumor segmentation marker to delineate tumor tissue from
surrounding stroma in FFPE tumor biopsies. The assay accurately
quantifies individual expression and co-localization of E-cadherin (E)
and vimentin (V) in tumor cells (Navas et al. NCI-EORTC 2015). We used
this assay to measure changes in both the total number and the
corresponding EMT phenotypes of tumor cells in xenograft tissues
following treatment with various anticancer agents currently in clinical
trials at the NCI. Daily treatment for 14 days with the multikinase
inhibitor pazopanib caused significant tumor regression and delayed
regrowth in the epithelial (E+) gastric cancer xenograft model MKN45, and
the tumor cells remaining after treatment were significantly shifted
toward a mesenchymal (V+) phenotype. In contrast, pazopanib (QDx15) had
less anti-tumor efficacy in the mesenchymal gastric cancer xenograft
model SNU5. In another instance, daily treatment of the MDA-MB-468 breast
cancer xenograft model with the BCR-Abl kinase inhibitor nilotinib for 19
days did not demonstrate any significant anti-tumor efficacy or change in
the predominance of the E+ phenotype, whereas a cycle of treatment with
the anti-tubulin agent paclitaxel (Q3Dx4) led to MDA-MB-468 tumor
regression and delayed tumor regrowth after completion of the treatment
cycle. Furthermore, the combination of nilotinib with paclitaxel not only
significantly diminished the total MDA-MB-468 tumor cell number compared
to single-agent arms, but also effectively transformed the EMT phenotype
of the tumor, with only a subset of cancer cells surviving by the last
day of treatment, which were mostly CD44+CD133+ mesenchymal cells and
potential cancer stem cells. The changes in EMT phenotype brought on by
effective drug treatments occurred via preferential killing of cells with
E+ phenotype, suggesting that V+ and V+E+ tumor cells may be more
resistant to therapy. The EMT-IFA provides a much-needed analysis tool
suitable for clinical investigation of the proposed role of EMT in tumor
progression, metastasis, and acquired drug resistance, and is able to
detect changes in EMT signature which may serve as early indicators of
treatment efficacy and tumor resistance. Funded by NCI Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E.


