Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel inhibitor of GBM stem cells targets unique CREB &
Myc-mediated self-renewal pathways regulated by CDK5.


Cancer stem cells exert enormous influence on neoplastic behavior, in
part by governing asymmetric cell division and the balance between
self-renewal & multipotent differentiation. Growth is favored by
deregulated stem cell division, which enhances the self-renewing
population & diminishes the differentiation program. To uncover
mechanisms relevant to deregulated cell division in human glioma stem
cells, we first developed a novel adult Drosophila brain tumor model,
100% enriched with tumor stem cells. Using this model, we performed a
suppressor screen for kinases and found brain-specific dCdk5 partially
reverses the tumor phenotype. dCdk5 and its human ortholog CDK5 (79%
identity) are atypical protein kinases because they do not regulate cell
cycle in normal cells, but are critical for neurogenesis & survival of
mature neurons. Interestingly, many cancers show overactivation of CDK5
signaling, regulating cell cycle & leading to uncontrolled proliferation.
Our analysis of TCGA data shows that IDH wt GBM has significantly high
level of CDK5 compared to the IDH wt lower grade glioma. Additionally, we
found a strong positive correlation between CDK5 & several stem cell
markers in GBM. To date, not much is known about the role of CDK5 in
glioblastoma GBM) & glioma stem cell self-renewal. Using patient-derived
(GBM) neurosphere cultures & in vivo xenograft tumors in mice, we further
demonstrated that a novel pharmaceutical suppressor of CDK5 signaling
axis can suppress self-renewal properties through a new CDK5
phosphorylation site on CREB and Myc. Together, our results show that the
CDK5 signaling pathway is important for glioma stem cell survival & that
suppressing CDK5 could be a novel therapeutic approach to eliminate
glioma stem cells.


