Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nedd8-activating enzyme inhibitor pevonedistat synergizes with
cisplatin and carboplatin through interference with nucleotide excision
repair and interstrand cross-link repair mechanisms in non-small cell
lung cancer.


Platins are one of the most widely used classes of chemotherapeutic
drugs. Although used as part of first-line standard of care regimens for
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), their effectiveness remains
limited, with a 5-year survival rate of 18%. Therefore, combination
therapy to overcome resistance and improve survival is needed.
Pevonedistat (TAK-924/MLN4924) is an investigational first-in-class
Nedd8-activating enzyme (NAE) inhibitor that blocks activation of the
cullin family of E3 ubiquitin ligases by preventing cullin conjugation
with Nedd8, a ubiquitin-like protein. In vitro, pevonedistat is
synergistic with carboplatin in a cell viability assay in 6 out of 20
NSCLC cell lines either with or without paclitaxel. In vivo studies using
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models showed a combination effect in a
carboplatin-insensitive but not carboplatin-sensitive model. To evaluate
the mechanism of the synergy between pevonedistat and platinum, RNAi of
320 DNA-damage response genes was performed in 4 cell lines in vitro.
Depletion of genes involved in TC-NER (transcription-coupled nucleotide
excision repair) and ICR (interstrand crosslink repair) reduced the
synergy between pevonedistat and platinum, with the contribution of each
pathway varying by cell line. Since TC-NER and ICR are also involved in
the repair of DNA damage by platins, the results suggest that delaying
completion of platin induced DNA repair by pevonedistat results in
enhanced cell death. Pevonedistat may impede TC-NER by inhibition of
neddylation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase CUL4-RBX1-DDB1-ERCC8, thereby
possibly providing a direct reversal of resistance to platins.


