Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HuPBL humanized models as a tool to evaluate the efficacy and
immune regulation of immune checkpoint inhibitors.


After the success of PD-1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4 antibodies, a number of
immune-checkpoint inhibitors are already in advanced stages. Meanwhile,
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) are well recognized as features of
tumor progression and keys to effective cancer immunotherapy. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to establish an effective pre-clinical platform
for the evaluation of therapeutical outcomes in the human immune-system
and the understanding of TILs. Either traditional syngeneic models or
human target knockin models have their drawbacks: syngeneic models
disable the development of antibodies that do not recognize mouse
receptors; neither of them can achieve a good clinical prediction due to
their inherent property as a murine system. To get a reconstitution of
the human immune system in murine models, we have established several
customized Human peripheral blood lymphocytes (hu-PBL) humanized models
in NOG (NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2RÎ³null) mice either systemically or focalized
in tumors. Those models were validated by immune-checkpoint inhibitors
for efficacy and by conducting TIL analysis with the support of
sophisticated Flow Cytometry-Based Approach.

Here we report that the engrafted human cells can expand and infiltrate
in tumors in response to xenogenic stimulation with functional Th and Tc
detected. The cell lineages are mainly CD3+ T lymphocytes (90%) and to
lesser extent NK/NKT cells; the redistribution in tumors is unique not
only compared to splenic and peripheral blood T cells, but also varies
among different cancer cell lines when the same donor was applied. In
addition, cell surface expression of immune checkpoint targets showed
unique redistributions. We further investigated the correlation between
the efficacy and the immune-regulation in these models: Models with more
dense infiltration at the early phase usually grew more slowly than its
NON-PBMC control, which also are prone to be better responders to
immunotherapy due to the higher Effector cell: Target cell ratio (E:T
ratio). When compared the efficacy of 2 different hPD-1 test antibodies
in A375 systemic humanized model, the one with better efficacy also
achieved stronger inhibition on PD-1 expression in TILs. Treatment with
the clinically used Opdivo showed not only different responses in HCC827,
A375 and A431 xenograft models but also unique profiles in TILs subsets
and related immune-checkpoint expression.

These models can be used for the purpose of pre-clinical
immune-checkpoint inhibitor and bi-specific antibody screening under
human background, as well as for further investigations regarding
distinct functions of TILs subsets and target expression.


