Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel candidate driver genes of colorectal
cancer on chromosome 7p.


Background

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent types of cancer. The
high mortality rate of CRC is a serious problem. Hence it is urgently
necessary to identify novel molecular target to improve the mortality
rate. Amplification of chromosome 7p is frequent in CRC, and it has been
considered to harbor driver genes that promote tumorigenesis or tumor
progression by the gain of function. The aim of this study is to identify
novel candidate driver genes on chromosome 7p and to clarify the clinical
significance of their expression in CRC.

Material and Methods

1. We selected the candidate genes that satisfied the following criteria
using CRC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). 1) The DNA copy
number and mRNA expression is positively correlated with each other, 2)
overexpressed in the tumor tissues compared to the normal tissues. 2. The
mRNA expression of the candidate genes was measured in 108
surgically-resected CRC tissues and the paired normal tissues in our
hospital by quantitative RT-PCR. The differences of mRNA expression
between CRC tissues and normal tissues were analyzed by Mann Whitney
U-test. 3. Survival analysis between high and low expression group of the
candidate genes was performed by Kaplan-Meier method. Correlation between
the mRNA expression of the candidate genes and the clinicopathological
factors were analyzed by Fisherâ€™s exact test. 4. We performed Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in CRC data from TCGA to clarify the
correlation between the candidate genes and gene sets that are associated
with tumorigenesis or tumor progression.

Results

DEAD Box Helicase56 (DDX56), ATP-dependent RNA helicases involved in
several aspects of RNA metabolism including mRNA splicing and transport,
transcription, translation and remodeling of ribonucleoprotein complexes,
was satisfied with the criteria. The expression of DDX56 was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues (pDEAD
Box Helicase56 (DDX56), ATP-dependent RNA helicases involved in several
aspects of RNA metabolism including mRNA splicing and transport,
transcription, translation and remodeling of ribonucleoprotein complexes,
was satisfied with the criteria. The expression of DDX56 was
significantly higher in CRC tissues than in normal colon tissues
(p<0.005), and it correlated with lymphatic invasion (p=0.02), and
distant metastasis (p=0.03). The high DDX56 expression group had a
significantly poorer prognosis than the low expression group (p=0.03). On
multivariate analysis, high DDX56 expression was an independent
prognostic factor affecting OS (p=0.013) with hazard ratios (95% CI) of
2.32 (1.20-4.48) among clinicopathological factors. GSEA showed that
DDX56 expression was positively correlated with mitotic cell cycle
progression and spliceosome.

Conclusions

We identified DDX56 as a promising driver gene of CRC on chromosome 7p.
DDX56 expression was positively associated with lymphatic invasion and
distant metastasis, and was an independent poor prognostic factor.
Furthermore, DDX56 may be involved in tumor progression through
stimulating cell-cycle. DDX56 could be a therapeutic target as well as a
poor prognostic biomarker in CRC.


