Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of detrimental aneuploidy in basal breast cancer cells
treated by MPS1 inhibitors in combination with paclitaxel.


Basal-like breast cancer has received considerable attention in recent
years, but despite all efforts, conventional chemotherapy remains the
main therapeutic option in the clinic with taxane therapy, the most
frequently prescribed treatment. A significant reason for the lack of
effective therapeutics may be related to the high degree of heterogeneity
and aneuploidy which is characteristic for basal-like breast cancer. A
new approach in this field is the concept that cancer cells may be
targeted by the introduction of a detrimental level of aneuploidy.
Inhibition of one of the main spindle assembly checkpoint kinases, MPS1
is a rational choice to achieve this goal. We report here the
identification of a synergistic effect between the novel, oral, highly
potent and selective MPS1 inhibitor CCT289346 and paclitaxel. We
demonstrate robust synergism in multiple basal-like breast cancer cell
lines and provide mechanistic insights into how both compoundsâ€™
individual properties work together to maximise mitotic defects thereby
increasing aneuploidy and cell death in a single round of mitosis.
Additionally, in vivo studies in basal-like breast cancer xenograft
models, including patient derived xenografts and systemic metastatic
models, using clinically relevant doses of paclitaxel with well-tolerated
doses of CCT289346, demonstrate significant benefit of combination of the
two agents in comparison to paclitaxel alone.


