Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of USP10 and p14ARF protein expression is associated with
poor prognosis patients with small intestinal adenocarcinoma.


Ubiquitin Specific Peptidase 10 (USP10) is a member of the
ubiquitin-specific protease family and its related pathways are
apoptosis, autophagy and DNA damage. P14ARF is encoded by an alternative
reading frame within the INK4a/ARF locus at chromosome 9p21, which is
related with cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Recently, ablation of USP10
prevented c-myc induced cellular senescence by destabilization of p14ARF
and p53, and accelerated hyper-proliferation and transformation of normal
cells, suggesting USP10 have a crucial role in oncogenes induced
senescence by keeping the stability of p14ARF and p53, key regulator of
cellular senescence. However, knowledge on the clinical and prognostic
significance of USP10 and p14ARF expression in patients with small
intestine adenocarcinoma is limited. In the present study, we
investigated the prognostic significance of USP10 and p14ARF by
immunohistochemistry. 195 of resected small intestine adenocarcinomas
were retrieved from 22 South Korean institutions by Korean Small
Intestinal Cancer Study Group. Tissue microarrays were constructed using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimen. 70 (35.9 %) out of 195
patients showed immunoreactivity for USP10 and 124 (63.6 %) showed loss
of immunoreactivity for USP10. 120 (61.5 %) of 195 patients were
immunopositive for p14ARF and 75 (38.5 %) patients showed loss of
immunoreactivity for p14ARF. Loss of USP 10 was correlated with male
predominancy (p=0.014), higher pT stage (p=0.044), presence of lymphatic
invasion (p=0.033), absences of sporadic adenoma (p=0.024) and absences
of peritumoral dyplasia (p=0.019). On multivariate survival analysis,
loss of USP10 expression was independent poor prognostic factor (
HR=3.04, 95% CI= 1.79-5.18, p Ubiquitin Specific Peptidase 10 (USP10) is
a member of the ubiquitin-specific protease family and its related
pathways are apoptosis, autophagy and DNA damage. P14ARF is encoded by an
alternative reading frame within the INK4a/ARF locus at chromosome 9p21,
which is related with cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Recently, ablation
of USP10 prevented c-myc induced cellular senescence by destabilization
of p14ARF and p53, and accelerated hyper-proliferation and transformation
of normal cells, suggesting USP10 have a crucial role in oncogenes
induced senescence by keeping the stability of p14ARF and p53, key
regulator of cellular senescence. However, knowledge on the clinical and
prognostic significance of USP10 and p14ARF expression in patients with
small intestine adenocarcinoma is limited. In the present study, we
investigated the prognostic significance of USP10 and p14ARF by
immunohistochemistry. 195 of resected small intestine adenocarcinomas
were retrieved from 22 South Korean institutions by Korean Small
Intestinal Cancer Study Group. Tissue microarrays were constructed using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimen. 70 (35.9 %) out of 195
patients showed immunoreactivity for USP10 and 124 (63.6 %) showed loss
of immunoreactivity for USP10. 120 (61.5 %) of 195 patients were
immunopositive for p14ARF and 75 (38.5 %) patients showed loss of
immunoreactivity for p14ARF. Loss of USP 10 was correlated with male
predominancy (p=0.014), higher pT stage (p=0.044), presence of lymphatic
invasion (p=0.033), absences of sporadic adenoma (p=0.024) and absences
of peritumoral dyplasia (p=0.019). On multivariate survival analysis,
loss of USP10 expression was independent poor prognostic factor (
HR=3.04, 95% CI= 1.79-5.18, p < 0.001) and also both loss of USP10 and
p14ARF expressions showed similar result ( HR=3.76, 95% CI= 1.93-7.23, p
Ubiquitin Specific Peptidase 10 (USP10) is a member of the
ubiquitin-specific protease family and its related pathways are
apoptosis, autophagy and DNA damage. P14ARF is encoded by an alternative
reading frame within the INK4a/ARF locus at chromosome 9p21, which is
related with cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Recently, ablation of USP10
prevented c-myc induced cellular senescence by destabilization of p14ARF
and p53, and accelerated hyper-proliferation and transformation of normal
cells, suggesting USP10 have a crucial role in oncogenes induced
senescence by keeping the stability of p14ARF and p53, key regulator of
cellular senescence. However, knowledge on the clinical and prognostic
significance of USP10 and p14ARF expression in patients with small
intestine adenocarcinoma is limited. In the present study, we
investigated the prognostic significance of USP10 and p14ARF by
immunohistochemistry. 195 of resected small intestine adenocarcinomas
were retrieved from 22 South Korean institutions by Korean Small
Intestinal Cancer Study Group. Tissue microarrays were constructed using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimen. 70 (35.9 %) out of 195
patients showed immunoreactivity for USP10 and 124 (63.6 %) showed loss
of immunoreactivity for USP10. 120 (61.5 %) of 195 patients were
immunopositive for p14ARF and 75 (38.5 %) patients showed loss of
immunoreactivity for p14ARF. Loss of USP 10 was correlated with male
predominancy (p=0.014), higher pT stage (p=0.044), presence of lymphatic
invasion (p=0.033), absences of sporadic adenoma (p=0.024) and absences
of peritumoral dyplasia (p=0.019). On multivariate survival analysis,
loss of USP10 expression was independent poor prognostic factor (
HR=3.04, 95% CI= 1.79-5.18, p < 0.001) and also both loss of USP10 and
p14ARF expressions showed similar result ( HR=3.76, 95% CI= 1.93-7.23, p
< 0.001) while loss of p14ARF was not an independent prognostic factor (
p= 0.587). Our findings indicate that loss of USP10, associated with loss
of p14ARF protein expression, could be poor prognostic factors in small
intestine adenocarcinoma.


