Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel long non-coding RNA TALNEC2, regulates tumor cell growth
and the stemness and radiation response of glioma stem cells.


Despite advances in novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of
glioblastoma (GBM), the median survival of 12-14 months has not changed
significantly. Therefore, there is an imperative need to identify
molecular mechanisms that play a role in patient survival. Here, we
analyzed the expression and functions of a novel lncRNA, TALNEC2 that was
identified using RNA seq of E2F1-regulated lncRNAs. TALNEC2 was localized
to the cytosol and its expression was E2F1-regulated and cell-cycle
dependent. TALNEC2 was highly expressed in GBM with poor prognosis, in
GBM specimens derived from short-term survivors and in glioma cells and
glioma stem cells (GSCs). Silencing of TALNEC2 inhibited cell
proliferation and arrested the cells in the G1\S phase of the cell cycle
in various cancer cell lines. In addition, silencing of TALNEC2 decreased
the self-renewal and mesenchymal transformation of GSCs, increased
sensitivity of these cells to radiation and prolonged survival of mice
bearing GSC-derived xenografts. Using miRNA array analysis, we identified
specific miRNAs that were altered in the silenced cells that were
associated with cell-cycle progression, proliferation and mesenchymal
transformation. Two of the downregulated miRNAs, miR-21 and miR-191,
mediated some of TALNEC2 effects on the stemness and mesenchymal
transformation of GSCs. In conclusion, we identified a novel
E2F1-regulated lncRNA that is highly expressed in GBM and in tumors from
patients of short-term survival. The expression of TALNEC2 is associated
with the increased tumorigenic potential of GSCs and their resistance to
radiation. We conclude that TALNEC2 is an attractive therapeutic target
for the treatment of GBM.


