Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of fibrosis and TGF-beta delay tumor xenograft growth
and reduce ascites in ovarian cancer models.


Background: Most ovarian cancer (OC) patients present with advanced
disease and ultimately develop chemo-resistant relapses. Stroma plays a
significant role in OC behavior including invasiveness, fibrosis and
chemoresistance. TGF-β is important for crosstalk between stroma and
cancer cells, and stromal activation in cancer has similarities to matrix
remodeling in fibrosis. We have shown that TGF-β and fibrosis-inhibitors
can suppress OC cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Such
inhibitors are available for clinical use, and we have begun to test
their efficacy in OC in vivo.

Methods: Animal experiments were approved by Mayo Clinic IACUC.
Intraperitoneal xenograft models were derived from OVCAR8 (5×106) cells
(OV8-CDX) or 0.1 gm OC patient tumor tissue (PDX) in NSG mice. OV8-CDX
and PDX PH003 (an aggressive, chemoresistant and ascites-prone model)
(n=5-10 mice/arm) were treated with 2 agents and compared to untreated
controls (C): 1) C vs. the fibrosis inhibitor Pirfenidone (P, 200 mg/kg,
BID, provided by Genentech); 2) C vs. TGF-β receptor I inhibitor
Galunisertib (G, 75 mg/kg, BID, provided by Eli Lily). Mice were
pretreated for 2 days before xenografting and treated for 4 weeks with
ultrasound (US) to measure tumor growth. At day (d) 28, we i) collected
tumor (OV8-CDX); or ii) observed until progression (PH003, PH053).
OV8-CDX tumors were used for target gene analysis.

Results: P treatment delayed tumor growth in OV8-CDX relative to control
(C): tumors established in 0/5 (P) vs. 1/5 (C), and 1/5 (P) vs. 4/5 (C)
of mice at d14 and d28, respectively. The reduced tumor weight (g) at d28
was also confirmed (0.20±0.10 vs. 0.54±0.23, p=0.02). Similarly, P
treatment in PH003 inhibited the tumor growth (tumor area (cm2) at d28:
0.74±0.43 vs. 1.04±0.51, p=0.28), ascites development (volume (ml):
1.14±0.54 vs. 3.37±0.62, p=0.05) and prolonged survival time (p=0.04).

G treatment was also associated with delayed tumor establishment in
OV8-CDX relative to C: tumors presented in 0/5 (G) vs. 1/5 (C), and 1/5
(G) vs. 4/5 (C) of mice at d14 and d28, respectively. Associated d28
tumor weight was significantly reduced (0.20±0.10 vs. 0.54±0.23,
p=0.02) as well. For PH003, G treatment was associated with delayed tumor
growth (tumor area at d28: 0.57±0.27 vs. 1.04±0.51, p=0.05), a marked
reduction in ascites (volume: 1.25±0.56 vs. 3.37±0.62, p=0.05) and a
prolonged survival time (p=0.04)

We identified down-regulation of TGF-β signaling-related genes (e.g.
TGFB1, TGFBR2) and fibrosis-related biomarkers (e.g. FAP, COL11A1)
following drug treatment confirming inhibition of relevant pathways.

Conclusion: We report that 2 currently available inhibitors targeting
either fibrosis or TGF-β appear to have efficacy in vivo and delay tumor
growth in OC PDX models. These results suggest promise for a strategy of
targeting the stromal component of OC.


