Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between MET gene amplification and TP53 mutation in
upregulating PD-L1 expression in EGFR wild-type lung cancer.


Introduction: MET gene activation has been reported to be associated with
resistance to EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer. Resistance to EGFR
inhibitors is also reported to be associated with upregulation of PD-L1.
We studied PD-L1 expression levels with MET gene amplification and
mutation in EGFR, KRAS, or TP53 in a large number of primary untreated
lung cancers.

Methods: Tissue samples collected from 397 core biopsies or resections
from lung cancers were studied for MET gene amplification by fluorescent
in-situ hybridization (FISH) using MET (7q31) probe and centromere 7 as a
control. Signals were quantified. PD-L1 expression on the same samples
was evaluated using clone SP142 and standard immunohistochemistry (IHC)
procedure. Samples were also sequenced using next generation sequencing
(NGS) for mutations in TP53, KRAS, and EGFR.

Results: PD-L1 expression was detected in 166 patients (42%). Twenty
seven (7%) had expression between 1% and 5%, 61 (15%) between 1% and 20%,
92 (23%) between 1% and 50%, and 105 (26%) had PD-L1 > 50% in tumor
cells. Ratio of MET: centromere signals was > 1.5 in 16 (4%) of patients.
Patients with MET ratio > 1.5% had significantly higher (P=0.004)
percentage of PD-L1 as a continuous variable as well as when cut-off
points of 5% (P=0.01), 20% (P=0.0006), and 50% (P=0.01) were used.
Patients with EGFR mutation had significantly lower levels of PD-L1
expression (P=0.003). When a cut-off point of 50% is used for PD-L1
expression, the EGFR-mutant cases had significantly less number of
positive cases (P=0.0003). There was no correlation between the presence
of High MET: Ratio and EGFR mutation. There was no correlation between
KRAS mutation and overall PD-L1 expression (P=0.4). There was no
correlation between MET ratio and KRAS mutation. Patients with TP53
mutation had significantly higher MET ratio when a cut-off at 1.5 is used
(P=0.01). Also there was significant correlation between TP53 mutation
and overall PD-L1 expression (P=0.0001). This remained significant when
cut-off point of 50% or 5% are used (P=0.0004 and P=0.007, respectively).
TP53 mutation was significantly more common in EGFR wild-type cases
(P=0.0002).

Conclusions: Extra copies of MET gene as detected by FISH testing in
therapy-na√Øve lung cancer patients is associated with higher expression
of PD-L1, while EGFR-mutant lung cancers had significantly lower
expression of PD-L1 when clone SP142 is used and NGS is used for
detecting EGFR mutations. Patients with TP53 mutation had strikingly high
expression of PD-L1 using SP142 clone and higher copy number of MET gene.
This data suggests that in lung cancer, both MET and TP53 genes play a
direct role in regulating PD-L1 expression opposing the EGFR gene, which
appears to suppress PD-L1 expression. KRAS gene may not be involved in
PD-L1 expression in lung cancer.


