Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering glypican-3 targeting immunotoxins for the treatment of
liver cancer.


The expression of glypican-3 (GPC3) in hepatocellular carcinoma offers a
target with high tissue specificity and cell signaling implications. A
human single domain antibody discovered by phage display technology, HN3,
was fused to domain II and domain III of Pseudomonas exotoxin A. This
protein (HN3-PE38) showed a high level of cytotoxic activity with a IC50
of 0.4 nM on Hep3B cells, but a relatively low maximum tolerated dose of
0.8 mg/kg in mice. In order to produce an immunotoxin with reduced
toxicity, a new version was constructed that removed domain II and seven
B cell epitopes from the Pseudomonas toxin. This deimmunized immunotoxin
(HN3-mPE24) was shown to have a similar IC50 of 0.2 nM on Hep3B cells. To
determine if further deimmunization was possible, three new versions have
been generated with T cell epitopes or a series of both B and T cell
epitopes removed. These include the HN3-T20 immunotoxin which had six T
cell epitopes removed, HN3-T19 with 4 B cell, 4 T cell and 2 shared
epitopes, and HN3-M11 with 5 B cell, 4 T cell and 2 shared epitopes. A
comparative analysis of these immunotoxins was made using in vitro cell
proliferation assays using Hep3B. Both the HN3-T20 (IC50 = 0.6 nM) and
HN3-T19 (IC50 = 0.8 nM) immunotoxins had similar activity to HN3-mPE24
(IC50 = 0.7 nM) in a side by side comparison. The HN3-M11 variant had
poor cytotoxicity and was excluded from in vivo examination. A Hep3B
subcutaneous xenograft model was generated in athymic nude mice and was
followed by nine rounds of intravenous immunotoxin treatments. The mPE24,
T20 and T19 immunotoxins all showed an increase in average survival rate
70 days (mPE24), 76 days (T20) and 72 days (T19) when compared to the 55
days for PE38 and the 41 days for PBS alone. Additionally, the T20 and
the T19 showed a maximum tolerated dose that was similar to that of the
mPE24 with dosages as high as 10 mg/kg being well tolerated. This data
would suggest that the HN3-T19 immunotoxins has potential clinical
applications because it represents the most deimmunized immunotoxin to
date.


