Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of immune co-stimulatory molecule OX40 and outcome in
trastuzumab treated HER2-positive breast cancer patients in the
NCCTG-N9831.


Background: Trastuzumab (H), a monoclonal antibody against HER2, has
revolutionized the treatment for HER2-positive breast cancer. Besides
inhibiting downstream signaling of HER2, several studies showed that H
also exerts its anti-tumor activity via immune-related mechanisms. While
H is quite effective in preventing recurrence, significant numbers of
patients still develop recurrence despite adjuvant H-based chemotherapy.
In this study, we analyzed immune-related genes that were associated with
poor outcome in N9831.

Methods: NanoStringTM technology was used to quantify mRNA of
immune-related genes in baseline samples from 1,280 patients in N9831. In
N9831, patients in arm A were treated with chemotherapy alone (AC-T), arm
B received chemotherapy followed by sequential H (AC-T-H), and arm C
received H concurrently with chemotherapy (AC-TH). Cox proportional
hazard ratio (HR) was used to determine the association of each
immune-related gene with recurrence free survival (RFS). Different immune
subset signatures, including CD45, CD8, cytotoxic-cells, and T-cells were
analyzed using algorithms developed by NanoString.

Results: With the median follow up of 10.6 years, we identified a total
77 genes that were associated with improved outcome in arm C. Among these
77 genes, there were 20 tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related genes. Of
those, only OX40 (TNFRSF4) and its ligand TNFSF4 have interaction p
Results: With the median follow up of 10.6 years, we identified a total
77 genes that were associated with improved outcome in arm C. Among these
77 genes, there were 20 tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related genes. Of
those, only OX40 (TNFRSF4) and its ligand TNFSF4 have interaction p <
0.10. Interestingly, we found uneven distribution of OX40 expression in
the N9831 specimens. Approximately, 9.5% of HER2-positive breast cancer
expressed OX40 at distinctly low level. Low expression of OX40 was
significantly associated with HR positivity (OX40 low 61% vs. OX40 high
51%, p 0.003) and larger tumor size but not patientsâ€™ age, tumor grade,
and lymph node status. Low expression of OX40 was significantly
associated with low mTIL-CD45, CD8, cytotoxic-cells, and T-cells immune
signature scores. Tumors with low OX40 expression had significantly lower
levels of CTLA4 (p 9.11e-71) and PD-L1 expressions (p 2.49e-92). Low
expression of OX40 is associated with poorer outcome among patients
treated with H in both sequential (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.79-0.98, p 0.022)
and concurrent arms (HR 0.86, 95%CI 0.76-0.98, p 0.027) but not in
chemotherapy only arm (HR 0.9, 95%CI 0.90-1.09, p 0.8). Similar findings
were observed with its ligand TNFSF4 in arm A (HR 1.02, 95%CI 0.92-1.15,
p 0.68), arm B (HR 0.87, 95%CI 0.76-0.99, p 0.04), and arm C (HR 0.81,
95%CI 0.68-0.95, p 0.01).

Conclusion: Our study suggests that pre-existing expression of OX40 and
its ligand TNFSF4 are prognostic and may also be predictive of adjuvant H
benefit. Patients with distinctly low level of OX40 had poor outcome
despite adjuvant H-based adjuvant chemotherapy. Our study provides a
rationale to further evaluate the strategy to increase immune activation
to improve outcome in this group of patients.


