Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of PD-L1/PD-1 on circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and on
primary tumor in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Introduction: Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) are responsible for the
metastatic dissemination of the tumor. They have been shown to express
Programmed Death-Ligand1 (PD-L1) to escape from the immune system
surveillance through its ligation with the PD-1receptor on the surface of
effector immune cells. We investigated the expression of PD-1/PD-L1 on
CTCs isolated from NSCLC patients treated with chemotherapy.

Methods: CTCs were isolated based on their size using the ISET platform
from 30 stage IV chemo-naïve NSCLC patients (before and after
chemotherapy). CTCs were detected after staining with Giemsa and
immunofluorescence (IF). Double and triple staining experiments with
different combination of antibodies: [Cytokeratins(CK)/PD-1/CD45 and
CK/PD-L1/CD45] were performed and the samples were analyzed with the
ARIOL system.

Results Giemsa staining showed that twenty-three (77%) out of 30 and six
(54.5%) out of 11 patients had detectable CTCs at baseline and after the
3rd cycle of front-line chemotherapy. IF staining revealed seventeen out
of 30 (56.7%) patients positive for CTCs at baseline level and 8 out of
11 (72.7%) samples after the 3rd cycle of treatment. PD-1 and PD-L1
expression was observed in 53% (9/17) and in 47% of the CTC-positive
patients at baseline; in addition, 13% (1/8) and 63% (5/8) patients had
PD-1 and PD-L1, respectively after the 3rd cycle. Among the total number
of detected CTCs, 67% were PD-1(+) at baseline and 25% after the 3rd
cycle (p=0.069). In addition, 26% and 80% were PD-L1(+) at baseline and
after the 3rd cycle, respectively. Patients with more than 3 PD-1
positive CTCs showed shorter PFS (p=0.022). Primary tissue from ten of
the examined patients was also available. More than 5% of PD-L1 (+) tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were observed in 20% (2/10) of the
patients. More than 5% PD-L1 positive cells in the primary tumor were
observed in 20%. However the two group of the patients were different. In
addition both patients with PD-L1 (+) TILs harvested CTCs with PD-1
expression and one of them had also PD-L1 positive CTCs.

Conclusion: PD-1- and PD-L1-positive CTCs could be detected before and
during 1st line treatment in metastatic NSCLC. This expression was
related to patients’ prognosis, implying that these molecules can be
served as targets for metastasis restoration. Furthermore the expression
of PD-1 on CTCs suggests a bilateral cross-talk between tumor and immune
cells.


