Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment of NVP-BSK805 highly sensitizes drug-resistant cancer
cells by increasing P-gp inhibition.


The high expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is consistently observed in
multidrug resistance (MDR) cancer cells. The purpose of our study is to
identify conditions that could increase the sensitivity of
P-gp-overexpressing the drug-resistant KBV20C cancer cell line. We have
used the commercially-available epigenetic library, which includes 128
compounds. Using the cellular viability test, we also identified that
NVP-BSK805 is highly sensitized to KBV20C-resistant cells and vincristine
treatment. However, NVP-BSK805-induced sensitization was not observed in
vincristine-treated sensitive KB parent cells, suggesting that the
effects are specific to resistant cancer cells. Using FACS analysis,
western blot, and Annexin V staining, we identified that NVP-BSK805
sensitized vincristine-treated KBV20C cells arrest via apoptosis and G2.
Furthermore, sensitization potency of NVP-BSK805, in combination with
vincristine, was measured in KBV20C cells when comparing them with P-gp
inhibitor verapamil or another Jak2 inhibitor CEP-33779. We further
investigated the mechanisms of NVP-BSK805 against sensitization of
vincristine-treated KBV20C cells. The sensitization mechanism of
NVP-BSK805 was mainly dependent on the inhibition of P-gp. In addition,
ATPase activity was conducted to identify its potential role in
NVP-BSK805 for P-gp inhibition. Both NVP-BSK805 and CEP-33779 showed high
binding affinity docking scores -9.1 and -7.4, respectively, against the
ABCB1 receptor protein. Collectively, inhibition of P-gp by NVP-BSK805
can increase vincristine-sensitivity in MDR cancer cells through
increased apoptosis and G2 arrest. Our findings indicate that the Jak2
inhibitor may be a promising target in the treatment of patients
resistant to antimitotic drugs.


