Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional role of Ring Finger Protein 43 in intestinal stem cell
during colorectal tumorigenesis.


Background: Colorectal cancer is one of the most general causes of cancer
related death. Ring Finger Protein 43(RNF43) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase
that suppresses the Wint signaling pathway and is known as a tumor
suppressor gene. Previous studies reported RNF43 mutation leads to
inactivation of RNF43 in pancreatic, ovarian, colorectal cancer and so
on. Subsequently, Wnt signaling activation is associtated with tumor
progression in these types of cancers. However, functional role of RNF43
for tumor formation is not clear in colorectal cancer.

Aim: To investigate the functional role of RNF43 in colorectal cancer by
using RNF43 knockout mice.

Method: We prepared RNF43 knockout mice by using CRISPR/Cas9 system. To
induce colorectal tumor in mice, we used Azoxymethane-Dextran sulfate
sodium (AOM-DSS) model. First, we injected AOM 10mg/kg into the
peritoneal cavity. After 7days from injection, drunk 2% DSS water to mice
for 7days. We sacrificed the mice and evaluated the tumor incidence and
tumor size after 8, 10, 12, and 16 weeks from injection. Next, we
prepared the small intestine organoid from RNF43 wild and knockout mice.
Then we compared the organoid size and formation rate. In vitro analysis,
we prepared colon cancer cell lines (COLO205, SW620, HCT116) and
evaluated the effect on cell proliferation in suppression of RNF43 and
normal condition.

Result: There was no significant difference in the tumor incidence and
tumor size at 8, 10, and 12weeks after AOM injection. However, at 16
weeks, the tumor size of RNF43 knockout mice was significantly bigger
than that of RNF43 wild type mice. (pResult: There was no significant
difference in the tumor incidence and tumor size at 8, 10, and 12weeks
after AOM injection. However, at 16 weeks, the tumor size of RNF43
knockout mice was significantly bigger than that of RNF43 wild type mice.
(p<0.001) Further examination of the intestinal organoid revealed that
the organoids derived from RNF43 knockout mice tended to get bigger than
those from wild type mice. In vitro analysis, cell proliferation of RNF43
mutant cell line (HCT116) was significantly increased compared with RNF43
wild type cell lines (COLO205, SW620). RNF43 silencing significantly
increased cell proliferation in RNF43 wild type cell lines (pResult:
There was no significant difference in the tumor incidence and tumor size
at 8, 10, and 12weeks after AOM injection. However, at 16 weeks, the
tumor size of RNF43 knockout mice was significantly bigger than that of
RNF43 wild type mice. (p<0.001) Further examination of the intestinal
organoid revealed that the organoids derived from RNF43 knockout mice
tended to get bigger than those from wild type mice. In vitro analysis,
cell proliferation of RNF43 mutant cell line (HCT116) was significantly
increased compared with RNF43 wild type cell lines (COLO205, SW620).
RNF43 silencing significantly increased cell proliferation in RNF43 wild
type cell lines (p<0.001), whereas did not affected in RNF43 mutant cell
line.

Conclusion: Our results suggest that RNF43 expression suppresses
epithelial cell growth in the intestine, and the dysregulation of Wint
signaling via RNF43 disruption promote intestinal stem cell expansion and
colorectal tumorigenesis.


