Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel Ras inhibitor DC070-547 potently and selectively blocks
Ras-RBD binding, EGFR binding to Ras signaling complex, EGFR activation
of Ras signaling, and growth of Ras-driven lung tumor cells.


A novel series of compounds that potently and selectively inhibits the
growth of tumor cells harboring constitutively activated Ras relative to
cells lacking activated Ras were identified by screening a proprietary
library of indene derivatives in a phenotypic, cell-based assay.
Lead-optimization produced a drug development candidate, DC070-547, which
showed strong antitumor activity at doses not causing any discernible
toxicity in preclinical mouse models. Here we characterize the underlying
mechanism of growth inhibition in lung tumor cells. A panel of non-small
cell lung cancer lines with constitutively activated Ras were highly
sensitive to DC070-547 with IC50 values as low as 2 nM, while normal
airway epithelial cells were essentially insensitive. Transfection of
wild-type ras H322 bronchioalveolar tumor cells with mutant ras (G12V)
confirmed that activated Ras is required for the selective growth
inhibitory activity of DC070-547. Ras-RBD binding assays showed that
DC070-547 disrupts Ras-RBD binding at low nanomolar concentrations that
parallel those required to inhibit the growth of lung tumor cells with
activated Ras. Similar concentrations of DC070-547 were found to inhibit
the binding of phosphorylated EGFR (Y1068) to Ras immunoprecipitates in
mutant ras transfected H322 cells, but not in control H322 cells.
DC070-547 also inhibited the binding of SOS, Grb2, Gab1, S338
phosphorylated c-Raf (pc-Raf), S473 phosphorylated Akt-1 (pAkt-1) and
T202/Y204 phosphorylated Erk1/2 (pERK1/2) to Ras or EGFR
immunoprecipitates. To determine if DC070-547 can inhibit EGF-stimulated
Ras signaling, serum-starved mutant ras transfected H322 cells were
treated with EGF and probed for effects on Ras signaling components.
DC070-547 caused a concentration-dependent inhibition of EGF-induced
Y1068-EGFR as measured in Ras immunoprecipitates, and also reduced
pc-Raf, pAkt-1, pErk1/2 and pGab1 (Y627) levels in Ras or EGFR
immunoprecipitates. In addition, DC070-547 caused a
concentration-dependent decrease in Erk1/2 and Akt-1-mediated
phosphorylation of Bad proteins (S112, S136 and S155) to induce
apoptosis. These results show that DC070-547 prevents Ras-RBD binding to
block EGF-induced Raf/MAPK and Akt signaling to potently and selectively
inhibit the growth of lung tumor cells harboring constitutively activated
Ras. Support provided by NCI grants 1R01CA197147 and 1R21CA182941.


