Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profiling the metabolic effects of AGI-5198 treatment on
IDH1-mutated gliomas.


Background: AGI-5198 (a specific IDH1mut inhibitor) inhibits the
formation of D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG) typically produced in
millimolar quantities by the R132H mutation of isocitrate dehydrogenase I
(IDH1). AGI-5198 was found to delay growth, to promote differentiation in
cells and to decrease tumor volume in IDH1-mutant (IDH1mut) mice
xenographs, and as a result, has been advanced to clinical trials in
humans with IDH1mut glioblastomas. However, no metabolic study of this
drug has been reported to date. Here, we investigated the metabolic
changes induced by AGI-5198 treatment in order to determine if the drug
restores the normal metabolic status once D-2HG concentration is
decreased. Methods: We treated glioma cells carrying an IDH1 mutation
with 10 Î¼M AGI-5198 for 72 h. Metabolic changes were explored using an
untargeted metabolomics approach. Cell viability analysis verified that
the concentration of drug does not lead to significant cell death. NMR
and MS-linked metabolomics together with in vivo cell imaging using RAMAN
were used. Principal component analysis was employed to explore the
differences in the metabolic profiles comparing treated and untreated
glioma cells. Results and Conclusions: We confirmed that AGI5198
treatment reduced D-2HG levels in the cell lines investigated, validating
previous reports. Moreover, we observed a decrease in phospholipid levels
upon AGI-5198 treatment, which suggests a decreased proliferative
potential for these cells; of particular importance for clinical
application. Our preliminary analysis also suggests that metabolites
involved in one carbon metabolism are altered upon AGI-5198 treatment.
This pathway provides the methyl group for the DNA methylation by DNA
methylases producing a hypermethylated phenotype. Our findings suggest
that combining the AGI-5198 treatment with a DNA methylase inhibitor may
improve outcomes in IDH1-mutated gliomas.


