Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug repurposing of topiramate in obesity-driven endometrial
cancer.


Introduction: Topiramate (TPM) is a B-D-fructopyranose sulfamate that
acts by inhibiting carbonic anhydrases (CAs) and has been implicated as a
novel inhibitor of angiogenesis. TPM is commonly used for the treatment
of epilepsy and migraine headaches; however, when combined with
phentermine, TPM can induce weight loss. Due to its weight loss and
anti-angiogenic properties, we assessed TPMâ€™s potential as an
anti-tumorigenic agent in endometrial cancer (EC), a highly
obesity-driven disease.

Methods: Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT assay after exposure to
TPM for 72 hours in the HEC-1A, KLE, Ishikawa and ECC-1 EC cell lines.
Two representative cell lines, ECC-1 and Ishikawa, were used to analyze
apoptosis, cell cycle progression, cell adhesion and invasion. Apoptosis
was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC assay. Inhibition of adhesion and invasion
by TPM were assessed by ELISA and transwell assay, respectively. Cell
cycle progression was evaluated by Cellometer. Western immunoblotting was
performed to assess downstream targets of the MAPK and mTOR pathways. The
LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl EC mouse model was utilized to assess the in vivo
effects of TPM. AdCre was injected at six weeks of age to induce invasive
EC. Eight wks following AdCre injection, mice (N=10 per group) were
treated with placebo or TPM (200 mg/kg/day, oral) for four weeks. The
expression of phosphorylated-S6 and Ki-67 was assessed by IHC.

Results: TPM inhibited cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner in
all four EC cell lines (IC50 range=1500-3000 mM). Treatment with TPM
resulted in G1 arrest and induction of apoptosis (pResults: TPM inhibited
cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner in all four EC cell lines
(IC50 range=1500-3000 mM). Treatment with TPM resulted in G1 arrest and
induction of apoptosis (p<0.05). TPM also reduced adhesion and invasion
in the EC cell lines (p=0.05), with a corresponding decrease in VEGF
expression. In addition, TPM significantly inhibited phosphorylation of
p42/44 and S6 in the EC cell lines. Lastly, TPM decreased tumor weight in
the LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice by 68% compared to those treated with placebo
(pResults: TPM inhibited cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner in
all four EC cell lines (IC50 range=1500-3000 mM). Treatment with TPM
resulted in G1 arrest and induction of apoptosis (p<0.05). TPM also
reduced adhesion and invasion in the EC cell lines (p=0.05), with a
corresponding decrease in VEGF expression. In addition, TPM significantly
inhibited phosphorylation of p42/44 and S6 in the EC cell lines. Lastly,
TPM decreased tumor weight in the LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice by 68% compared
to those treated with placebo (p<0.05), accompanied by a reduction in
Ki-67 and phosphorylated-S6 expression (pResults: TPM inhibited cell
proliferation in a dose dependent manner in all four EC cell lines (IC50
range=1500-3000 mM). Treatment with TPM resulted in G1 arrest and
induction of apoptosis (p<0.05). TPM also reduced adhesion and invasion
in the EC cell lines (p=0.05), with a corresponding decrease in VEGF
expression. In addition, TPM significantly inhibited phosphorylation of
p42/44 and S6 in the EC cell lines. Lastly, TPM decreased tumor weight in
the LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice by 68% compared to those treated with placebo
(p<0.05), accompanied by a reduction in Ki-67 and phosphorylated-S6
expression (p<0.05).

Conclusion: TPM inhibited cell proliferation and tumor growth in EC cell
lines and an EC mouse model. Therefore, TPM may be worthy of drug
repurposing as an anti-tumorigenic agent in EC, with the potential added
benefit of weight loss in this obesity-linked disease.


