Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational status, expression and functional behaviors of FAM134B
in colorectal cancer.


Background: Family with sequence similarity 134B (FAM134B) is an
ER-autophagy regulator and involved in the pathogenesis of neuronal
disorders, vascular diseases and carcinomas. In colorectal carcinomas,
FAM134B plays important role in the pathogenesis and associated with
aggressiveness of the disease. However, the frequency of mutations,
expression pattern and functional roles in cell have never been studied
in colorectal cancer.

Objectives: To investigate FAM134B mutations in tissues samples from
patients with colorectal cancer and cell lines. Also, the expression of
FAM134B at protein and mRNA levels were examined. In addition, functional
roles of FAM134B in colon cancer were studied.

Methods: Mutations in FAM134B sequence in eighty-eight cancer tissues and
matched non-cancer samples was studied by high-resolution melt curve
analysis followed by Sanger sequencing. FAM134B expression was studied
and quantified in cell lines and cancer tissues samples using
immunofluorescence, immunocytochemistry, Western blot and real-time PCR.
In vitro functional assays were performed to unveil the molecular roles
of FAM134B in colon cancer pathogenesis followed by shRNA-mediated
silencing in cells. Mouse xenotransplantation model was used to confirm
the functional behavior of FAM134B in colon cancer.

Results: In this study, 46.5% (41/88) patients with colorectal cancer
were identified as FAM134B mutations positive. Thirty-one novel
pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31 mutations, 8 novel
frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and associated
with gender of the patients, presence of metachronous cancer, size, T
staging, presence of distant metastases and positivity of microsatellite
instability (MSI) in the cancer (p Results: In this study, 46.5% (41/88)
patients with colorectal cancer were identified as FAM134B mutations
positive. Thirty-one novel pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31
mutations, 8 novel frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay and associated with gender of the patients, presence of
metachronous cancer, size, T staging, presence of distant metastases and
positivity of microsatellite instability (MSI) in the cancer (p < 0.05).
FAM134B expression in cancer cells derived from advanced stages (stage
III; SW48 and stage IV; HCT116) of colon cancer was significantly
(pResults: In this study, 46.5% (41/88) patients with colorectal cancer
were identified as FAM134B mutations positive. Thirty-one novel
pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31 mutations, 8 novel
frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and associated
with gender of the patients, presence of metachronous cancer, size, T
staging, presence of distant metastases and positivity of microsatellite
instability (MSI) in the cancer (p < 0.05). FAM134B expression in cancer
cells derived from advanced stages (stage III; SW48 and stage IV; HCT116)
of colon cancer was significantly (p<0.01) reduced when compared to
non-neoplastic colon cells (FHC) and cancer cells derived from stage II
colon cancer (SW480). Expression of FAM134B mRNA in cancer tissues was
noted significantly (pResults: In this study, 46.5% (41/88) patients with
colorectal cancer were identified as FAM134B mutations positive.
Thirty-one novel pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31 mutations,
8 novel frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and
associated with gender of the patients, presence of metachronous cancer,
size, T staging, presence of distant metastases and positivity of
microsatellite instability (MSI) in the cancer (p < 0.05). FAM134B
expression in cancer cells derived from advanced stages (stage III; SW48
and stage IV; HCT116) of colon cancer was significantly (p<0.01) reduced
when compared to non-neoplastic colon cells (FHC) and cancer cells
derived from stage II colon cancer (SW480). Expression of FAM134B mRNA in
cancer tissues was noted significantly (p<0.001) downregulated when
compared to that of non-cancer tissues samples. FAM134B suppression
significantly (pResults: In this study, 46.5% (41/88) patients with
colorectal cancer were identified as FAM134B mutations positive.
Thirty-one novel pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31 mutations,
8 novel frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and
associated with gender of the patients, presence of metachronous cancer,
size, T staging, presence of distant metastases and positivity of
microsatellite instability (MSI) in the cancer (p < 0.05). FAM134B
expression in cancer cells derived from advanced stages (stage III; SW48
and stage IV; HCT116) of colon cancer was significantly (p<0.01) reduced
when compared to non-neoplastic colon cells (FHC) and cancer cells
derived from stage II colon cancer (SW480). Expression of FAM134B mRNA in
cancer tissues was noted significantly (p<0.001) downregulated when
compared to that of non-cancer tissues samples. FAM134B suppression
significantly (p<0.05) increased the proliferation of colon cancer cells,
remarkably increased (34-52%; pResults: In this study, 46.5% (41/88)
patients with colorectal cancer were identified as FAM134B mutations
positive. Thirty-one novel pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31
mutations, 8 novel frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay and associated with gender of the patients, presence of
metachronous cancer, size, T staging, presence of distant metastases and
positivity of microsatellite instability (MSI) in the cancer (p < 0.05).
FAM134B expression in cancer cells derived from advanced stages (stage
III; SW48 and stage IV; HCT116) of colon cancer was significantly
(p<0.01) reduced when compared to non-neoplastic colon cells (FHC) and
cancer cells derived from stage II colon cancer (SW480). Expression of
FAM134B mRNA in cancer tissues was noted significantly (p<0.001)
downregulated when compared to that of non-cancer tissues samples.
FAM134B suppression significantly (p<0.05) increased the proliferation of
colon cancer cells, remarkably increased (34-52%; p<0.05) the clonogenic,
migration capacity, and increases the proportion of cells in S phase of
cell-cycle (pResults: In this study, 46.5% (41/88) patients with
colorectal cancer were identified as FAM134B mutations positive.
Thirty-one novel pathogenic mutations were detected. Of the 31 mutations,
8 novel frameshift mutations caused nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and
associated with gender of the patients, presence of metachronous cancer,
size, T staging, presence of distant metastases and positivity of
microsatellite instability (MSI) in the cancer (p < 0.05). FAM134B
expression in cancer cells derived from advanced stages (stage III; SW48
and stage IV; HCT116) of colon cancer was significantly (p<0.01) reduced
when compared to non-neoplastic colon cells (FHC) and cancer cells
derived from stage II colon cancer (SW480). Expression of FAM134B mRNA in
cancer tissues was noted significantly (p<0.001) downregulated when
compared to that of non-cancer tissues samples. FAM134B suppression
significantly (p<0.05) increased the proliferation of colon cancer cells,
remarkably increased (34-52%; p<0.05) the clonogenic, migration capacity,
and increases the proportion of cells in S phase of cell-cycle (p<0.01).
Xenotransplantation model showed that larger and higher-grade tumors were
formed in mice treated with FAM134B knockdown cells.

Conclusion: In vitro and in vivo functional studies implied that FAM134B
acts as a cancer inhibitor in colon cancer. Also, FAM134B mutation is
common in colorectal cancer and the association of mutation with adverse
clinical and pathological parameters are in concur with the tumour
suppressive property of the gene.


