Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) biomarkers on
outcomes in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients treated with AC
chemotherapy (SWOG S9313).


Introduction: There is a critical need to develop biomarkers of response
and resistance to adjuvant chemotherapy for TNBC. In preliminary studies,
homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)-causing alterations have been
reported in TNBC patients. HRD may impact response to standard
chemotherapy as well as investigational therapies, such as PARP
inhibitors and platinum agents. We report on the prognostic impact of two
such markers in a large cohort of early stage TNBC patients who were
uniformly treated with adjuvant doxorubicin (A) and cyclophosphamide (C).

Aims: To investigate BRCA1 promoter methylation (PM) and HRD score as
prognostic markers in TNBC patients treated with adjuvant AC on S9313.

Methods: SWOG protocol S9313 accrued 3,125 women with early stage breast
cancer to two alternative dose schedules of AC with no difference in
outcomes between the two arms (J Clin Oncol 2007). We identified 425
(14%) patients with centrally determined TNBC status for whom tissue was
available. BRCA1 PM (methylation specific PCR) and HRD score (composite
of loss of heterozygosity, telomeric allelic imbalance and large-scale
state transitions, Myriad Genetics Inc.) were performed on genomic DNA
isolated from pre-treatment FFPE breast tumor tissue. HRD was classified
as positive if there was either a deleterious tumor(t) BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation and/or a pre-defined HRD score > 42. The markers were tested for
prognostic effect on DFS and OS using a Cox regression model with
adjustment for randomized treatment assignment.

Results: For 425 TNBC patients median age was 45 years (range 22-74) and
at a median follow up of 10.2 years there are 166 DFS and 129 OS events
(5 year DFS and OS = 74% and 82%, respectively; 10-year DFS and OS = 66%
and 73%). BRCA1 PM was determined in 82% (348/425) and was detected in
32% of patients. Presence of BRCA1 PM was suggestive of better DFS, but
not statistically significant (HR=0.74; 95% CI 0.50-1.08, p=0.12). HRD
results were determined in 91% (379/425) and 67% were HRD positive (27%
with tBRCA mutation and 40% tBRCA negative but HRD score >42). HRD
positive status was associated with a better DFS (HR = 0.69; 95% CI
0.49-0.96 (p=0.027)) and OS (HR= 0.67; 95% CI 0.47-0.97 (p=0.032)). High
HRD score (â‰¥42) in tBRCA negative patients (n=274) was also associated
with better DFS (HR = 0.62; 95% CI 0.42-0.92). tBRCA status (positive
versus negative) did not impact DFS (p = 0.78).

Conclusions: Two thirds of TNBC patients receiving adjuvant AC
chemotherapy had tumor HRD positivity. HRD was associated with better DFS
and OS, perhaps due to high responses to AC. HRD status has the potential
to be used as a selection criterion to identify TNBC patients who receive
significant benefit from anthracycline chemotherapy, and may also be of
value in selecting patients suitable for treatment with other DNA
damaging agents like platinum salts/PARP-inhibitors.


