Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-206-mediated c-MET suppression modulates BCRP/ABCG2 levels in
NRF2-silenced cancer cells.


Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2), a xenobiotic efflux
transporter, is responsible for anticancer resistance in tumors.
NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2) is a critical transcription factor in
cellular defense system by regulating the expression of antioxidant and
detoxifying enzymes; however, its overexpression is often associated with
tumor resistance to chemotherapy. In the present study, we demonstrate
that NRF2 modulation affects the expression of hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (HGFR/c-MET) and consequently suppresses BCRP/ABCG2 activity in
cancer cells. Interfering RNA-mediated stable inhibition of NRF2 in both
ovarian carcinoma SKOV3 and renal carcinoma A498 cell lines reduced the
expression of c-MET and this was accompanied by BCRP/ABCG2
down-regulation. The treatment of cells with pharmacological or genetic
inhibitor of c-MET decreased BCRP/ABCG2 level and subsequently increased
intracellular accumulation of doxorubicin and Hoechst 33342, indicating a
link between c-MET and BCRP/ABCG2 activity. As a potential molecular
mechanism of altered c-MET expression, miR-206 was identified as a
predictive regulator of c-MET. As experimental evidence, transient and
stable expressions of miR-206 in SKOV3 and A498 cells repressed c-MET and
BCRP/ABCG2 levels. In addition, NRF2-knockdown cancer cells expressed
higher levels of miR-206 compared to the control cells, and the treatment
of NRF2 knockdown cells with the miR-206 inhibitor could restore c-MET
and BCRP/ABCG levels. Collectively, our results showed that the NRF2
silencing-mediated miR-206 regulation could suppress BCRP/ABCG2 levels
through c-MET modulation, which is providing an additional evidence of
chemosensitization of tumor cells by NRF2 inhibition.


