Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forecast of the incidence and etiology of liver cancer in Taiwan,
Japan, United States, and United Kingdom: toward harmonization of East
and West.


Background The global epidemiology of primary liver cancer (PLC),
primarily hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), has evolved significantly in
the past decades because of improved control of viral hepatitis and the
growing prevalence of metabolic factors. We conducted a quantitative
forecast of the incidence and etiology of PLC. Methods Incidence rates of
PLC were projected in two endemic Asian countries (Taiwan and Japan) and
two Western countries (the United States and United Kingdom) with
rigorous cancer registry. The annual incidence of PLC (ICD-10 C22.0)
between 1980 and 2013 were obtained from the Taiwan Cancer Registry
Database, the Japan National Cancer Center, the US SEER 9 database,
Cancer Research UK, and the European Network of Cancer Registry.
Incidence rates were projected to year 2035 by an age-period-cohort model
with a power link function. The population attributable fractions (PAF)
of chronic hepatitis B (HBV), chronic hepatitis C (HCV), alcohol
consumption, obesity, and diabetes mellitus (DM) for HCC in Taiwan were
projected to 2045. The prevalence of each risk factor was obtained from
national surveys and projected inferentially by using a log-linear model
or simple linear assumption. The relative risk of each factor was derived
from pooled literature data. Results From 2013 to 2035, incidence rates
of PLC in Taiwan are estimated to decrease by more than 50% in both men
(49.3 to 24.2/100,000) and women (19.7 to 9.2/100,000). In Japan,
incidence rates have plateaued in the 1990s, and are expected to continue
to decline to 17.0/100,000 for men and 6.3/100,000 for women. Conversely,
rates in the UK are projected to increase by more than 30% in both men
(13.5 to 18.2/100,000) and women (6.0 to 8.1/100,000). A more modest
increase is expected in the US, from 10.2 to 12.5/100,000 for men and 3.3
to 3.5/100,000 for women. In Taiwan, the PAF of HBV, the predominant risk
factor of HCC, is predicted to decrease from 54.3% in 2015 to 34.4% in
2045. By 2045, the PAFs of obesity and DM are estimated to reach 11.9%
and 15.4%, respectively, the latter similar to that of HCV (15.0%).
Conclusion PLC incidence rates are forecast to follow a trend of
convergence in four representative countries. Metabolic factors are
expected to play increasingly important etiologic role in HCC even in
regions currently endemic for viral hepatitis.


