Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of macrophages in the antitumor activity of an
anti-transferrin receptor 1 antibody ch128.1 in a xenograft model of
multiple myeloma.


The transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1), also known as CD71, is a membrane
glycoprotein involved in cellular iron uptake and regulation of cell
growth. The high level of TfR1 expression on malignant cells and its key
role in cancer cell pathology make this receptor an attractive target for
antibody cancer therapy. We previously developed a mouse/human chimeric
IgG3 specific for human TfR1 (ch128.1). This antibody exhibits direct
cytotoxicity against certain human malignant B cells in vitro through
TfR1 degradation and iron deprivation. Importantly, ch128.1 shows
remarkable anti-tumor activity in xenograft models of disseminated
multiple myeloma (MM) in immunosuppressed mice (SCID-Beige).
Interestingly, this anti-tumor protection was observed even against MM
cells (KMS-11 cells) that show no sensitivity to this antibody in vitro,
suggesting the in vivo contributions of antibody effector functions. This
possibility was supported by the lack of anti-tumor protection observed
using a ch128.1 Fc mutant with impaired binding to FcÎ³Rs and to the
complement component C1q. To examine host effector functions involved in
ch128.1-mediated protection in our mouse model bearing KMS-11 tumors,
depletion studies of complement and macrophages were performed.
Complement depletion using cobra venom factor (CVF) did not affect
protection, suggesting that complement-mediated cytotoxicity (CDC) is not
a relevant mechanism of action. Notably, we now report that macrophage
depletion using clodronate liposomes (clodrolip) significantly reduced
protection, suggesting that these effector cells play a relevant role in
the anti-tumor activity. Consistent with this result, we also report that
ch128.1 is capable of eliciting antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) and antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis
(ADCP) against KMS-11 cells in the presence of the murine macrophage cell
line J774.2 or murine bone marrow-derived macrophages. To examine the
role of iron deprivation in ch128.1-mediated tumor death in vivo, animals
treated with ch128.1 were systemically supplemented with iron in a
preliminary study. However, no difference in survival was observed,
suggesting that iron deprivation is not a contributor to the effects of
ch128.1 in our in vivo model or the iron dose tested was not optimal. Our
results suggest that macrophages play a key role in ch128.1-mediated
anti-tumor protection in our model and that ch128.1 can be an effective
therapy of incurable human B-cell malignancies such as MM.


