Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GeoSurveillance of invasive cervical cancer incidence by counties
in the state of Maryland.


Background: Invasive cervical cancer (ICC) is a highly preventable cancer
whose rates have dramatically declined over the past few decades. In
spite of the progress made, new ICC cases are recorded annually in
Maryland and in other parts of the United Sates. We assessed if ICC
incidence varied significantly 2005-2012 and across counties within the
state of Maryland.

Methods: Using a discrete Poisson model we evaluated significant
space-time clusters of both high and low ICC incidence rates over a
retrospective 10-year period. All analyses were conducted at the county
level, using 2-year aggregates of time. We adjusted for age, percent
minority, cervical cancer screening rates, median income, obesity as well
as smoking rates within each county in our final cluster detection

analysis.

Results: ICC was 13.1 per 100,000 female population and did vary by
county and over the 10-year period assessed. We identified five
significant space-time clusters of ICC incidence, three of which were
clusters of higher than expected rates. The most likely cluster
identified was a cluster of low ICC incidence [aRR=0.08, p-valueResults:
ICC was 13.1 per 100,000 female population and did vary by county and
over the 10-year period assessed. We identified five significant
space-time clusters of ICC incidence, three of which were clusters of
higher than expected rates. The most likely cluster identified was a
cluster of low ICC incidence [aRR=0.08, p-value<0.01] observed for the
period 2009-2012 and comprised six high-income suburban counties. The
other cluster of low rate [aRR=0.41, p-valueResults: ICC was 13.1 per
100,000 female population and did vary by county and over the 10-year
period assessed. We identified five significant space-time clusters of
ICC incidence, three of which were clusters of higher than expected
rates. The most likely cluster identified was a cluster of low ICC
incidence [aRR=0.08, p-value<0.01] observed for the period 2009-2012 and
comprised six high-income suburban counties. The other cluster of low
rate [aRR=0.41, p-value<0.01], which was a secondary cluster, was
observed for the same time period, 2009-2012 in three high to
moderate-income suburban counties. There were two clusters of high ICC
incidence, observed for recent time periods. One cluster [aRR=1.74,
p-valueResults: ICC was 13.1 per 100,000 female population and did vary
by county and over the 10-year period assessed. We identified five
significant space-time clusters of ICC incidence, three of which were
clusters of higher than expected rates. The most likely cluster
identified was a cluster of low ICC incidence [aRR=0.08, p-value<0.01]
observed for the period 2009-2012 and comprised six high-income suburban
counties. The other cluster of low rate [aRR=0.41, p-value<0.01], which
was a secondary cluster, was observed for the same time period, 2009-2012
in three high to moderate-income suburban counties. There were two
clusters of high ICC incidence, observed for recent time periods. One
cluster [aRR=1.74, p-value<0.01], which was made up of a single moderate
to low-income urban county was identified for the period 2009-2012. The
other cluster of elevated rates [aRR=2.47, p-valueResults: ICC was 13.1
per 100,000 female population and did vary by county and over the 10-year
period assessed. We identified five significant space-time clusters of
ICC incidence, three of which were clusters of higher than expected
rates. The most likely cluster identified was a cluster of low ICC
incidence [aRR=0.08, p-value<0.01] observed for the period 2009-2012 and
comprised six high-income suburban counties. The other cluster of low
rate [aRR=0.41, p-value<0.01], which was a secondary cluster, was
observed for the same time period, 2009-2012 in three high to
moderate-income suburban counties. There were two clusters of high ICC
incidence, observed for recent time periods. One cluster [aRR=1.74,
p-value<0.01], which was made up of a single moderate to low-income urban
county was identified for the period 2009-2012. The other cluster of
elevated rates [aRR=2.47, p-value<0.01] was identified in a suburban
moderate-income county for the period 2011-2012. Additionally, for the
period 2005-2008 we identified a historical cluster of elevated incidence
[aRR=2.53, p-valueResults: ICC was 13.1 per 100,000 female population and
did vary by county and over the 10-year period assessed. We identified
five significant space-time clusters of ICC incidence, three of which
were clusters of higher than expected rates. The most likely cluster
identified was a cluster of low ICC incidence [aRR=0.08, p-value<0.01]
observed for the period 2009-2012 and comprised six high-income suburban
counties. The other cluster of low rate [aRR=0.41, p-value<0.01], which
was a secondary cluster, was observed for the same time period, 2009-2012
in three high to moderate-income suburban counties. There were two
clusters of high ICC incidence, observed for recent time periods. One
cluster [aRR=1.74, p-value<0.01], which was made up of a single moderate
to low-income urban county was identified for the period 2009-2012. The
other cluster of elevated rates [aRR=2.47, p-value<0.01] was identified
in a suburban moderate-income county for the period 2011-2012.
Additionally, for the period 2005-2008 we identified a historical cluster
of elevated incidence [aRR=2.53, p-value<0.01].

Conclusion: Overtime some counties in Maryland have experienced
significantly lower rates of disease than expected. However there are
more recent clusters of higher than expected rates of disease, which are
not explained by the county level variables adjusted for. These clusters
of high rates need to be further examined and addressed.


