Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of Vortex-enriched CTCs using whole genome
amplification and multiplex PCR-based targeted next generation sequencing.


Background: Genomic characterization of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)
provides insights into cancer genetic changes, and might be utilized for
cancer prognosis, diagnosis, as well as monitoring of therapeutic
efficacy. Targeted Panel Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) enables
analyzing CTC genetic variants of a focused gene panel at a relatively
lower cost1. However, CTCs are rare, often resulting in very limited DNA
quantities available that require whole genome amplification (WGA). In
previous studies, we introduced the Vortex technology, a platform
enabling label-free enrichment of CTCs from blood samples of colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients and their use for genomic assays downstream2. In
this study, we developed a simple and efficient NGS workflow for CTC
samples collected by this technology.

Method: An optimized workflow using the Qiagen GeneRead DNAseq targeted
panel and Illumina MiSeq NGS was first verified on HCT116 CRC cell line
before being applied on patient CTCs. For patient blood samples, CTCs
were collected with the Vortex technology, immunostained (CK, Vimentin,
CD45) and enumerated. Matched white blood cell (WBC) DNA was included to
subtract germline background. Fresh frozen liver metastasis tissue was
collected and analyzed using the same NGS workflow. DNA from CTCs was
extracted and amplified using Qiagen REPLI-g single cell WGA kit.
Mutation detection on the WGA amplified DNA was performed using the
GeneRead DNAseq CRC targeted panel of 38 genes and MiSeq sequencing. The
sequencing data were analyzed by QIAGEN NGS Data Analysis Web Portal and
Ingenuity Variant Analysis software.

Results: The Vortex technology was validated for the capture of CTCs from
CRC patients. REPLI-g performed a uniform, unbiased amplification on
fresh rare cells with a coverage of 97.7%, which enabled further targeted
panel NGS. Blood from 3 CRC patients (P1, P2, P3) and 2 healthy donors
(HD1, HD2) was processed with Vortex platform. Less than 1 CTCs/mL blood
were found in HD1 and HD2. P1 and P2 had 66 and 20 CTCs/ mL of blood
respectively, with many vimentin positive CTC clusters. P3 had 2 CTCs/mL
of blood. No somatic mutation was found in healthy donors. Somatic
variants were only detected in the CTCs from patient samples that were
not present in matched germline WBCs. For P1, more mutations were found
in the CTCs than in the liver metastasis while it was the opposite for P2
and P3.

Conclusion: For each patient, variants in CTCs and germline WBCs were
analyzed from one blood sample using an optimized targeted NGS workflow
and compared to liver mets. Our optimized workflow, using the Qiagen
REPLIg and GeneRead DNAseq Targeted Panel NGS enabled the detection of
CTC mutations for 38 CRC-focused genes. The inclusion of a germline WBC
control in the workflow allowed the detection of mutations from pooled
CTC samples collected using the Vortex technology.

Altm√ºller J, et al. (2014). Biol Chem.

Kidess-Sigal E, et al. (2016). Oncotarget.


