Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of USP18 represses invasion and metastasis of lung cancer.


Metastasis is a major cause of human lung cancer mortality. Uncovering
novel targets and mechanisms involved in regulating metastasis is
critical for developing effective ways to improve lung cancer survival.
It is reported that ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like pathways can regulate
invasion and metastasis. We previously found that USP18 (Ubiquitin
Specific Peptidase 18) is substantially upregulated in several cancers,
including lung cancer. Engineered repression of the deubiquitinase USP18
decreased growth, increased apoptosis and augmented chemotherapeutic
agent response of lung cancer cells. Our prior work showed that loss of
USP18 can destabilize specific oncogenic proteins and this results in the
marked reduction of lung cancer cell growth and in vivo tumorigenicity.
This study sought to explore the precise role of USP18 expression in
invasion, migration and metastasis of lung cancer. In murine (KC2 and
344SQ) and human (A549 and H1299) lung cancer cells with varying degrees
of metastatic potential, knock-down of USP18 by different short hairpin
RNAs (shRNAs) decreased cell growth and increased cell death as compared
to vector control transfectants. The findings from wound-healing
migration and Transwell invasion assays established that USP18 knock-down
in all studied lung cancer cell lines conferred substantial reduction of
migration and invasion versus vector control transfected cell lines (p
Metastasis is a major cause of human lung cancer mortality. Uncovering
novel targets and mechanisms involved in regulating metastasis is
critical for developing effective ways to improve lung cancer survival.
It is reported that ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like pathways can regulate
invasion and metastasis. We previously found that USP18 (Ubiquitin
Specific Peptidase 18) is substantially upregulated in several cancers,
including lung cancer. Engineered repression of the deubiquitinase USP18
decreased growth, increased apoptosis and augmented chemotherapeutic
agent response of lung cancer cells. Our prior work showed that loss of
USP18 can destabilize specific oncogenic proteins and this results in the
marked reduction of lung cancer cell growth and in vivo tumorigenicity.
This study sought to explore the precise role of USP18 expression in
invasion, migration and metastasis of lung cancer. In murine (KC2 and
344SQ) and human (A549 and H1299) lung cancer cells with varying degrees
of metastatic potential, knock-down of USP18 by different short hairpin
RNAs (shRNAs) decreased cell growth and increased cell death as compared
to vector control transfectants. The findings from wound-healing
migration and Transwell invasion assays established that USP18 knock-down
in all studied lung cancer cell lines conferred substantial reduction of
migration and invasion versus vector control transfected cell lines (p <
0.001). In mouse models, USP18 knock-down of lung cancer cell lines
displayed a lower number of lung cancer metastasis in vivo. To discern
engaged mechanisms, Reverse Phase Protein Arrays (RPPAs) were performed
to interrogate over 300 growth-regulatory proteins in murine (344SQ and
KC2) and human (A549 and H1299) lung cancer cells following USP18
knock-down. Using RPPAs, potential targets identified were differentially
expressed between USP18 knock-down and vector control transfected lung
cancer cells. Highlighted species included Myc, eEF2K (Eukaryotic
Elongation Factor 2 Kinase), Programmed Cell Death 4 (PDCD4), Hes Family
BHLH Transcription Factor 1 (Hes) and Polo Like Kinase 1 (PLK1), among
other species. In addition, phosphorylated Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase (ACC),
a key component of the 5'-adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase (AMPK) pathway, was significantly affected in lung cancer cell
lines following USP18 knock-down (p Metastasis is a major cause of human
lung cancer mortality. Uncovering novel targets and mechanisms involved
in regulating metastasis is critical for developing effective ways to
improve lung cancer survival. It is reported that ubiquitin and
ubiquitin-like pathways can regulate invasion and metastasis. We
previously found that USP18 (Ubiquitin Specific Peptidase 18) is
substantially upregulated in several cancers, including lung cancer.
Engineered repression of the deubiquitinase USP18 decreased growth,
increased apoptosis and augmented chemotherapeutic agent response of lung
cancer cells. Our prior work showed that loss of USP18 can destabilize
specific oncogenic proteins and this results in the marked reduction of
lung cancer cell growth and in vivo tumorigenicity. This study sought to
explore the precise role of USP18 expression in invasion, migration and
metastasis of lung cancer. In murine (KC2 and 344SQ) and human (A549 and
H1299) lung cancer cells with varying degrees of metastatic potential,
knock-down of USP18 by different short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) decreased
cell growth and increased cell death as compared to vector control
transfectants. The findings from wound-healing migration and Transwell
invasion assays established that USP18 knock-down in all studied lung
cancer cell lines conferred substantial reduction of migration and
invasion versus vector control transfected cell lines (p < 0.001). In
mouse models, USP18 knock-down of lung cancer cell lines displayed a
lower number of lung cancer metastasis in vivo. To discern engaged
mechanisms, Reverse Phase Protein Arrays (RPPAs) were performed to
interrogate over 300 growth-regulatory proteins in murine (344SQ and KC2)
and human (A549 and H1299) lung cancer cells following USP18 knock-down.
Using RPPAs, potential targets identified were differentially expressed
between USP18 knock-down and vector control transfected lung cancer
cells. Highlighted species included Myc, eEF2K (Eukaryotic Elongation
Factor 2 Kinase), Programmed Cell Death 4 (PDCD4), Hes Family BHLH
Transcription Factor 1 (Hes) and Polo Like Kinase 1 (PLK1), among other
species. In addition, phosphorylated Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase (ACC), a key
component of the 5'-adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) pathway, was significantly affected in lung cancer cell lines
following USP18 knock-down (p < 0.05). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and
functional validation are now underway to uncover specific pathways
directly involved in the observed reduction of lung cancer metastases.
Taken together, this study implicates the deubiquitinase USP18 as a
molecular target to combat lung cancer metastases.


