Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of small molecule inhibitors of the notch
transcriptional activation complex.


Deregulation of the Notch pathway underlies many aspects of cancer
physiology depending on cell type and context. In many human cancers,
aberrant Notch activity has been demonstrated to play a role in the
initiation and maintenance of the neoplastic phenotype. Notch also plays
a central role in cancer stem cells, which may underlie a role in
metastasis and resistance to therapy. The important and diverse role
played by Notch in cancer makes it an exceedingly attractive target for
anti-neoplastic therapeutics. However, the full range of potential
targets in the pathway have been under-explored. Through computer-aided
drug design we explored potential ligand binding sites and screened for
compounds that could disrupt the assembly of the Notch transcriptional
activation complex. An in vitro assay that quantitatively measures the
assembly of the Notch transcriptional complex on DNA was used for
screening. We have recently reported the identification and
characterization of a small molecule inhibitor of the Notch
transcriptional activation complex, termed Inhibitor of Mastermind
Recruitment-1 (IMR-1). Herein we report the characterization of small
molecule inhibitors of Notch derived from IMR-1 that were identified
through a combination of structure-activity relationship studies and
molecular docking simulations. We demonstrate that these compounds
inhibit the growth of Notch dependent cell lines and decrease Notch
target gene transcription.


