Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A broad approach for the selection of therapeutic mAbs to
TNFR-superfamily members for use in combination with an anti-PD-1 mAb.


The rise of therapeutic antibodies directed towards T cell checkpoint
inhibitors has paved the way to a novel and exciting frontier of cancer
treatments. Spearheaded by anti-CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors, many
investigators have strived to uncover combinatory therapies that could
synergize with CTLA-4 and PD-1 inhibitors to improve the overall survival
of cancer patients. The TNFR-superfamily has been seen as an ideal
combinatory target in providing co-stimulatory T cell signals in sync
with the unleashing of T cells from their CTLA-4 and PD-1 brakes. The
ideal outcome of these combinations is the induction of T cell memory and
effector function towards tumour cells. Current clinical-stage agents
against TNFR-superfamily targets include conventional or Fc-engineered
therapeutic antibodies and multimeric ligands that aim to cluster and
activate targets such as OX40, 4-1BB, GITR, and CD27. For OX40 and GITR,
wildtype IgG1 variants offer target cell depletion of OX40/GITR-high
expressing Treg cells, and also provide agonism through FcgR-mediated
crosslinking. We have taken a broad approach of screening IgG1, IgG2,
Fc-engineered and tetravalent antibodies to select for potent therapeutic
antibody candidates to TNFR-superfamily targets, and conducted humanized
mouse studies as a screen for candidate potency.


