Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive value of LRP8, KPNA2 and GDF15 expression to
anthracycline/taxane based chemotherapy response in patients with locally
advanced breast cancer.


Background: Chemotherapy plays a major role in its treatment, though
overtreatment is frequent since its choice is based on
clinicopathological prognostic data. The identification and validation of
new predictive profiles or markers continues to be relevant. New findings
may contribute to achieve better results in this area, as well as to
provide new targets of the pathways involved in chemoresistance.
Karyopherin Î±2 (KPNA2), low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
8 (LRP8) and growth and differentiation factor 15 (GDF15), are three
candidate predictive biomarkers in breast cancer, previously identified
on DNA microarrays reports.

Methods: Using tissue microarrays technology and immunohistochemistry, we
compared the expression of these three markers between cases of breast
cancer with response to chemotherapy (absence of recurrence), and those
with failure (with recurrence). All patients received chemotherapy based
on anthracyclines and taxanes. Potential confounding factors, as known
recurrence and progression risk factors, were controlled for during the
comparison.

Results: 20 out of 63 patients had tumor recurrence. Potential
confounding factors were similar among cases with response and failure to
chemotherapy. For KPNA2 no differences were found between cases with
response or failure. LRP8 showed higher expression in cases with failure
to chemotherapy (mean 7.22 vs 14.01%, p =0.025). In Cox multivariable
regression analysis, which included potential confounding factors as
covariates, only LRP8 remained as a significant predictive factor (HR
1.28, p=0.016). GDF15 showed no expression in our cases, nor in an
external set of cases.

Conclusions: We demonstrated increased expression of LRP8 in breast
cancer cases recurring after chemotherapy. KPNA2 and GDF 15 showed no
predictive value for chemotherapy response in our study. LRP8 is a
potential predictive marker worth of further investigation for its role
in chemoresistance as well as for its potential validation.


