Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidines with fluorinated phenyl side
chains as antitumor agents.


The reduced folate carrier (RFC) is ubiquitously expressed in tissues and
tumors and is the major tissue transporter for folate cofactors. Folate
receptor (FR) α and β, as well as the proton-coupled folate transporter
(PCFT), exhibit narrower patterns of tissue expression and are likely to
serve more specialized physiologic roles. FRs are expressed in a subset
of cancer cells (e.g., ovarian and non-small cell lung cancer for FRα,
acute myelogenous leukemia for FRβ), whereas PCFT is expressed in a wide
range of human solid tumors but not leukemias. Earlier generations of
glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARFTase) and de novo
purine nucleotide biosynthesis (e.g., Lometrexol) have shown promise as
antitumor drugs. However, these compounds are excellent substrates for
RFC and thus are non-selective for tumors, leading to dose-limiting
toxicities. We previously reported a novel class of 6-substituted
thieno[2,3-d] pyrimidines with a phenyl side chain and 3- and 4-carbon
bridge lengths (AGF17 and AGF23, respectively) which selectively targeted
FRs but not RFC or PCFT. To increase antitumor efficacy, we synthesized
fluorinated analogs of AGF17 and AGF23, designated as AGF309 and AGF304,
respectively. AGF309 and AGF304 potently inhibited proliferation of
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines engineered to individually express
human FRα (IC50s of 1.08 and 2.27 nM, respectively) or FRβ (IC50s 0.48
and 1.14 nM, respectively). AGF304 and AGF309 showed nominal activity
toward RFC- and PCFT-expressing CHO cells. Both AGF309 and AGF304 were
also potently inhibitory toward FRα-expressing human KB human tumor
cells (IC50s of 7.19 and 5.27nM, respectively). By analogy with previous
iterations of 6-substituted thieno [2,3-d] pyrimidine compounds, growth
inhibitory activity by AGF309 and AGF304 likely involves inhibition of de
novo purine biosynthesis at GARFTase and potentially a secondary
intracellular target. Collectively, our in vitro findings of the potent
and selective antitumor activity and FR selectivity suggest that further
preclinical evaluation of AGF309 and AGF304 as potential antitumor agents
is warranted.


