Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NCI 8628 - A randomized phase II study of Ziv-aflibercept (Z) and
high dose Interleukin-2 (IL-2) or IL-2 alone for inoperable stage III or
IV melanoma.


Background: IL-2 plays a central role in antitumor immunity. VEGF plays a
critical role in angiogenesis and host innate and adaptive immunity. High
baseline serum VEGF was associated with non-response to IL-2. Z, a
high-affinity soluble decoy VEGF receptor, may deplete VEGF prior to IL-2
to reverse the immunosuppressive impact of VEGF and enhance antitumor T
cell response.

Methods: NCI8628 was a phase II trial of Z and IL-2 (A) versus IL-2 alone
(B) randomized 2:1. Eligible patients (pts): Stage III inoperable or
Stage IV melanoma. Up to two prior regimens for metastatic melanoma and
stable treated brain metastases were allowed. The primary endpoint was
progression-free survival (PFS).

Results: A total of 89 pts were enrolled, but 5 who never started study
treatment were excluded. Six pts (4 in A and 2 in B) who were treated but
withdrew early without a response assessment were considered
non-responders in this analysis. Pt and disease characteristics are
summarized in Table 1. Median number of IL2 cycles was 3 (A) and 2 (B)
and of Z cycles in A was 3 (1 - 31). Median follow up for all alive
patients was 19 months. Among 84 treated pts (55 in A and 29 in B), there
was significant improvement in PFS in favor of A: median and 95% CI of
6.9 (4.2 - 8.8) months vs 2.1 (1.7 - 4.1), logrank p Results: A total of
89 pts were enrolled, but 5 who never started study treatment were
excluded. Six pts (4 in A and 2 in B) who were treated but withdrew early
without a response assessment were considered non-responders in this
analysis. Pt and disease characteristics are summarized in Table 1.
Median number of IL2 cycles was 3 (A) and 2 (B) and of Z cycles in A was
3 (1 - 31). Median follow up for all alive patients was 19 months. Among
84 treated pts (55 in A and 29 in B), there was significant improvement
in PFS in favor of A: median and 95% CI of 6.9 (4.2 - 8.8) months vs 2.1
(1.7 - 4.1), logrank p <0.001. No significant difference in OS: median
and 95% CI of 23.1 (14.4 - 35.0) months (A) vs 22.3 (12.6 - NA). Response
rate (RECIST) was 22% in A (5CR, 7PR) and 17% in B (5PR). Stable disease
or PR or CRwas seen in 69% in A and 48% in B. Adverse events were
consistent with the AE profiles of monotherapy with IL2 and Z. Grade 4
events in A included decreased lymphocytes (41 pts) and platelets (6),
renal (1), hypophosphatemia (4), hypertension (2) and thromboembolism (1).

Table 1

Arm A (N=55)

Arm B (N=29)



Age (median and range)

55 (26-73)

55 (31-74)



Gender





Female

22

11



Male

33

18



Cutaneous primary

36

16



Mucosal

5

4



Uveal Unknown

6 8

4 5



AJCC Stage





III (N3) M1a

9 10

3 5



M1b

11

6



M1c

25

15





Conclusions: The combination of Z and IL2 significantly improved PFS over
IL2 alone, meeting the studyâ€™s primary endpoint. The regimen was
relatively safe and manageable. Correlative and mechanistic studies are
ongoing.


