Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative stress and hepatotoxicity induced by graphene oxide in
Sprague-Dawley Rats.


Graphene oxide (GO) has been extensively explored as a promising
nanomaterial for applications in biology because of its unique
properties. Therefore, systematic investigation of GO toxicity is
essential to determine its fate in the environment and potential adverse
health effect. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of
graphene oxide on the induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the
activity of certain liver enzymes (Alanine ALT, Aspartate AST, alkaline
phosphatases ALP), and concentration of lipid hydroperoxide (LHP) in
serum and histopathological evaluation of liver tissue in Sprague-Dawley
rats. Four groups of five male rats were orally administered GOs, once a
day for five days, with doses of 0, 10, 20 and 40 mg/Kg GO. A control
group was also made of five rats. Blood and liver were collected 24 h
after the last treatment following standard protocols. GO’s exposure
increased the induction of ROS, the activities of the liver enzymes (ALT,
AST, ALP), concentration of lipid hydroperoxide (LHP) and morphological
alterations of the liver tissue in exposed groups compared to control.
The highest two doses, 20 and 40 mg/kg, showed statistically significant
(p Graphene oxide (GO) has been extensively explored as a promising
nanomaterial for applications in biology because of its unique
properties. Therefore, systematic investigation of GO toxicity is
essential to determine its fate in the environment and potential adverse
health effect. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of
graphene oxide on the induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the
activity of certain liver enzymes (Alanine ALT, Aspartate AST, alkaline
phosphatases ALP), and concentration of lipid hydroperoxide (LHP) in
serum and histopathological evaluation of liver tissue in Sprague-Dawley
rats. Four groups of five male rats were orally administered GOs, once a
day for five days, with doses of 0, 10, 20 and 40 mg/Kg GO. A control
group was also made of five rats. Blood and liver were collected 24 h
after the last treatment following standard protocols. GO’s exposure
increased the induction of ROS, the activities of the liver enzymes (ALT,
AST, ALP), concentration of lipid hydroperoxide (LHP) and morphological
alterations of the liver tissue in exposed groups compared to control.
The highest two doses, 20 and 40 mg/kg, showed statistically significant
(p < 0.05) increases in the induction of ROS, activities of ALT, ALP ,
LHP concentration, and morphological alterations of liver tissue compared
to control. However, AST activity showed no effect. Taken together, the
results of this study demonstrate that GO is hepatotoxic, and its
toxicity may be mediated through oxidative stress.


