Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetic resonance imaging based analysis of tumor growth and
vascular parameters in animal model of GBM following IV formulated of
HET0016 treatments.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a hypervascular primary brain tumor with poor
prognosis. HET0016 a selective CYP450 inhibitor has been shown to inhibit
angiogenesis and tumor growth. Therefore, to explore novel treatments, we
have generated an improved intravenous (IV) formulation of HET0016 with
HPßCD and tested in animal models of human and syngeneic GBM. Tumor
growth and vascular parameters (tumor blood volume, permeability and,
extravascular and extracellular space volume) were determined by in vivo
dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The
pharmacokinetics of HPßCD-HET0016 were evaluated in plasma and tumor
tissues using IV and IP routes of administration. IV treatment with
HPßCD-HET0016 decreased tumor growth, tumor blood volume, permeability
and, extravascular and extracellular space volume, when compared with the
vehicle group (pGlioblastoma (GBM) is a hypervascular primary brain tumor
with poor prognosis. HET0016 a selective CYP450 inhibitor has been shown
to inhibit angiogenesis and tumor growth. Therefore, to explore novel
treatments, we have generated an improved intravenous (IV) formulation of
HET0016 with HPßCD and tested in animal models of human and syngeneic
GBM. Tumor growth and vascular parameters (tumor blood volume,
permeability and, extravascular and extracellular space volume) were
determined by in vivo dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). The pharmacokinetics of HPßCD-HET0016 were evaluated in
plasma and tumor tissues using IV and IP routes of administration. IV
treatment with HPßCD-HET0016 decreased tumor growth, tumor blood volume,
permeability and, extravascular and extracellular space volume, when
compared with the vehicle group (p<0.05). Similar growth inhibition was
also observed in syngeneic GL261 GBM (pGlioblastoma (GBM) is a
hypervascular primary brain tumor with poor prognosis. HET0016 a
selective CYP450 inhibitor has been shown to inhibit angiogenesis and
tumor growth. Therefore, to explore novel treatments, we have generated
an improved intravenous (IV) formulation of HET0016 with HPßCD and
tested in animal models of human and syngeneic GBM. Tumor growth and
vascular parameters (tumor blood volume, permeability and, extravascular
and extracellular space volume) were determined by in vivo dynamic
contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The
pharmacokinetics of HPßCD-HET0016 were evaluated in plasma and tumor
tissues using IV and IP routes of administration. IV treatment with
HPßCD-HET0016 decreased tumor growth, tumor blood volume, permeability
and, extravascular and extracellular space volume, when compared with the
vehicle group (p<0.05). Similar growth inhibition was also observed in
syngeneic GL261 GBM (p<0.05). Survival studies using patient derived
xenografts of GBM (PDX), showed prolonged survival to 25-27 weeks in
animals treated combinedly with focal radiation, IV HET0016 and TMZ
(pGlioblastoma (GBM) is a hypervascular primary brain tumor with poor
prognosis. HET0016 a selective CYP450 inhibitor has been shown to inhibit
angiogenesis and tumor growth. Therefore, to explore novel treatments, we
have generated an improved intravenous (IV) formulation of HET0016 with
HPßCD and tested in animal models of human and syngeneic GBM. Tumor
growth and vascular parameters (tumor blood volume, permeability and,
extravascular and extracellular space volume) were determined by in vivo
dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The
pharmacokinetics of HPßCD-HET0016 were evaluated in plasma and tumor
tissues using IV and IP routes of administration. IV treatment with
HPßCD-HET0016 decreased tumor growth, tumor blood volume, permeability
and, extravascular and extracellular space volume, when compared with the
vehicle group (p<0.05). Similar growth inhibition was also observed in
syngeneic GL261 GBM (p<0.05). Survival studies using patient derived
xenografts of GBM (PDX), showed prolonged survival to 25-27 weeks in
animals treated combinedly with focal radiation, IV HET0016 and TMZ
(p<0.05). Administration of a single dose resulted in 7-fold higher
levels of HET0016 in the IV group in plasma and 3.6-fold higher levels in
tumor tissue at 60 min compared to that of IP route. We observed reduced
expression of markers of cell proliferation (Ki-67), decreased
neovascularization (laminin and αSMA) and migration (MHC-1) in the
treated group (pGlioblastoma (GBM) is a hypervascular primary brain tumor
with poor prognosis. HET0016 a selective CYP450 inhibitor has been shown
to inhibit angiogenesis and tumor growth. Therefore, to explore novel
treatments, we have generated an improved intravenous (IV) formulation of
HET0016 with HPßCD and tested in animal models of human and syngeneic
GBM. Tumor growth and vascular parameters (tumor blood volume,
permeability and, extravascular and extracellular space volume) were
determined by in vivo dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). The pharmacokinetics of HPßCD-HET0016 were evaluated in
plasma and tumor tissues using IV and IP routes of administration. IV
treatment with HPßCD-HET0016 decreased tumor growth, tumor blood volume,
permeability and, extravascular and extracellular space volume, when
compared with the vehicle group (p<0.05). Similar growth inhibition was
also observed in syngeneic GL261 GBM (p<0.05). Survival studies using
patient derived xenografts of GBM (PDX), showed prolonged survival to
25-27 weeks in animals treated combinedly with focal radiation, IV
HET0016 and TMZ (p<0.05). Administration of a single dose resulted in
7-fold higher levels of HET0016 in the IV group in plasma and 3.6-fold
higher levels in tumor tissue at 60 min compared to that of IP route. We
observed reduced expression of markers of cell proliferation (Ki-67),
decreased neovascularization (laminin and αSMA) and migration (MHC-1) in
the treated group (p<0.05). Decreased tumor growth was associated with
reduced expression of pro-angiogenic markers (IL-8, MCP-1, VEGF, HIF-1α,
and VE-Cadherin), inflammation (p-NFκB), intermediates of MAPK pathway
(p-AKT, p-ERK and p-STAT1, EGFR), arachidonic acid metabolism (COX-1,
CYP4A11) and increased expression of anti-angiogenic markers (Ang2,
Angiostatin and Tie-2). Our results indicate that the improved IV
formulation of HPßCD-HET0016 is effective in inhibiting tumor growth
through decreasing proliferation, migration, and neovascularization.
Furthermore, HET0016 significantly enhanced sensitivity of TMZ and
prolonged survival in PDX GBM.


