Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epstein-Barr virus BART noncoding RNAs modulate host gene
expression for virus latency leading to oncogenesis in epithelial cells.


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) efficiently establishes and maintains a state of
latency in resting B cells, with persistent asymptomatic infections
occurring in more than 95% of the human population worldwide. Besides
causing lifelong infections in resting B cells in the majority of people,
EBV has been found to associate with several human cancers occurring in
immune competent individuals, in which the virus expresses very few viral
proteins in EBV infected cancer cells through a distinct viral latency
program. It is believed that this type of mechanism has been adopted by
EBV to allow the virus to evade host immune surveillance. Nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) is prevalent in southern China, Southeast Asian countries
and some African countries but uncommon in rest of the world. In NPC 100%
of cancer cells are infected with EBV, and EBV is recognized one of the
major etiological factors. However, the details of how EBV maintains
latency and contributes to the oncogenesis of NPC remain mostly elusive.
Notably, EBV abundantly expresses a family of non-coding RNAs derived
from the BamHI A region of the viral genome (BARTs). It is hypothesized
that this family of viral non-coding RNAs is key to maintaining viral
latency, evading immune surveillance and triggering oncogenesis in EBV
associated tumors. We have shown a mechanism for the regulation of the
abundant expression of BARTs in NPC which involves the constitutive
activation of NF-ÎºB signaling typically observed in NPC cells and have
also identified a regulatory loop through which BARTs support EBV latency
in NPC. Using high throughput RNA-seq analysis we further demonstrated
that BART RNAs modulate expression of cellular genes associated with
anti-inflammatory and immune-modulating properties, oxidoreductase
activity, and cell migration and invasion in NPC cells. BART non-coding
RNAs are predominantly localized in the nucleus and associate with the
CBP/p300 complex. Our data showed that EBV BARTs modulate genes
responsive to the mitochondria-associated adapter molecule (MAVS) through
halting cellular Pol II in the promoter region and downregulating gene
expression. In the nucleus, BART non-coding RNAs modulate chromatin
acetylation through interaction with CBP/p300. We have generated a
working model with evidence showing that Epstein-Barr virus shuts off
most of the viral proteins to evade immune surveillance, but through
expression of high levels of BART non-coding RNAs can modulate cellular
gene expression to provide an optimal environment for maintenance of
viral latency in cancer cells. Alteration of cellular gene expression by
EBV BART non-coding RNAs for establishment and maintenance of EBV latency
in epithelial cells can therefore lead to the oncogenic process for EBV
associated tumors.


