Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanistic role of polyamines in DNA double-strand break
repair.


Polyamines are essential organic cations for cell growth, proliferation
and tissue remodeling. The rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of
polyamines is catalyzed by ornithine decarboxylase (ODC). The activity of
ODC and the level of intracellular polyamines significantly increase in
many cancers, indicating the critical role of polyamines in
tumorigenesis. Depletion of polyamines sensitizes cells to DNA damage
agents that lead to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), suggesting that
endogenous polyamines may participate in DNA repair process. However, the
mechanistic role of polyamines in DSB repair remains largely unknown.
Here, we wish to ascertain the role of polyamines in DSBs repair pathway
and to delineate the underlying mechanism by combining biochemical
analyses, cell-based and animal approaches. Our cell-based experiments
demonstrated that polyamines indeed participate in DNA double-strand
break repair. Specifically, the level of intracellular polyamines
regulates homologous recombination (HR) repair pathway rather than
non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Furthermore, our in vitro
reconstitution system and functional analyses demonstrated that
polyamines significantly enhance RAD51-mediated DNA strand exchange
reaction. Importantly, we reveal that the stimulatory effect of
polyamines by RAD51 stems from the enhancement of duplex DNA captures in
the DNA exchange reaction. Finally, the physiological role of polyamines
in DSBs repair was examined by using mouse hair follicle as a model
system. The animal model clearly highlights the significant contribution
of polyamines to the DNA repair in vivo. Our findings thus furnish
valuable insight into the mechanistic basis of polyamines in DNA repair.


