Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analysis of astrocytoma versus non-neoplastic human
microglia.


Diffuse gliomas are primary brain tumors characterized by infiltrative
growth and high heterogeneity, rendering the disease mostly incurable.
Advances in genetic analysis revealed that molecular alterations predict
patientsâ€™ overall survival and clinical outcome. However, glioma
tumorigenicity is not exclusively caused by its genetic alterations. The
crosstalk between tumor cells and the surrounding microenvironment plays
a crucial role in modulating glioma growth and aggressiveness. The most
abundant non-neoplastic cells in this microenvironment belong to the
myeloid lineage, comprising CNS-resident microglia and infiltrating
monocytes/macrophages (iTAMs). Understanding the dynamics between tumor
and myeloid cells and the changes leading to pro-tumorigenic activation
of innate immunity cells would elucidate potential treatment alternatives.

Microglia were isolated from the parietal cortex of 16 autopsy samples of
cognitively intact humans (non-neoplastic, NN) and from 6 glioma samples
(three GBMs, one anaplastic astrocytoma and two low grade astrocytoma,
TU-glia), and their mRNA expression profile was determined by deep
sequencing. The comparison of these transcriptome datasets provided an
incomparable landscape of the crosstalk between immune and tumor cells.

Our preliminary analysis shows that differences between NN microglia and
TU-uglia go beyond inflammation specific genes. While there is
overexpression of anti-inflammatory markers (CD163, IL2RA, CXCL2 and
TGFB1), implying pro-tumorigenic characteristics, there is also high
expression of genes indicative of an acute, pro-inflammatory response,
such as IL1B, CCL5, CCR7 and TNFA. Further analysis showed that TU-uglia
expressed high levels of genes related to extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling, such as fibronectin (FN1) and tenascin-C (TNC), as well as
their ligands (ITGA4 and ITGB1), indicating that microglia, and not tumor
cells, might be the main source for those proteins in the tumor
microenvironment. We were also able to collect one sample of iTAMs from a
GBM case. Despite not providing a significant number for statistical
analysis, we can already see major differences in gene expression between
this sample and our TU-uglia cohort. We identified surface receptors
differentially expressed between both cell types (i.e.: ROBO1 and PDGFRA
for TU-uglia, MARCO and MET for iTAMs), as well as transcription factors
associated with stemness and proliferation, such as KLF4, SOX2 and OCT4
(the last two exclusive for TU-uglia). These results demonstrate that
different activation signaling pathways occur within the same tumor
sample. Microglia and iTAMs are subject to a number of signals from
different clones of tumor cells, driving different responses along the
progression of the disease, increasing its tumorigenicity. Better
knowledge of this dynamics will help improve our understanding of gliomas
and alternative treatment options.


