Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel relationships of expression of methylxanthine alkaloid
receptor genes and risk of breast carcinoma recurrence.


Consumption of methylxanthine alkaloids such as caffeine, theophylline
and theobromine may induce breast pain. Caffeine appears to induce its
biological activities by antagonizing adenosine receptors, which have
been implicated in breast cancer cell behavior in vitro. Our goal is to
evaluate expression of genes for methylxanthine receptors and
metabolizing enzymes for assessing risk of breast cancer recurrence.

Procedures: De-identified primary cancers previously collected, stored
and analyzed under stringent conditions were employed to amass an
IRB-approved, de-identified comprehensive Database. Patient-related
properties (e.g., nodal status, clinical outcome) and results from
estrogen (ER) and progestin receptor (PR) analyses and gene expression
assays guided selection. To decode clinical utility of gene expression
profiles, Laser Capture Microdissection (PixCell IIeâ„¢ Arcturus/Thermo
Fisher) was used previously to non-destructively collect carcinoma cells.
RNA was extracted, amplified and analyzed by microarray (~ 22,000 genes).

Results: Gene expression levels of 8 methylxanthine receptors, 8
metabolizing enzymes and various phosphodiesterases were retrieved from
microarray results of 247 breast biopsies. Univariable Cox regressions
and Kaplan Meier plots were determined for each candidate gene with R
software. Kaplan-Meier plots of PDE4A, CYP2A6 or CYP2E individually
indicated lower expression was related to decreased progression free
(PFS) and overall survival (OS) while PDE1A over-expression predicted
decreased PFS and OS. ADORA2B and RYR1 over-expression was associated
with lower OS. Gene expression was examined with ER or PR status without
regard to clinical outcome. Breast cancers that were ER+ exhibited lower
ADORA1, ADORA2B and RYR1 expression and elevated expression of PDE4A,
CYP2A6 and CYP2E. PR+ carcinomas also exhibited decreased expression of
ADORA2B and RYR1 expression. However, over-expression of ADORA3, PDE4A,
CYP2C8 and CYP2E was observed in PR+ cancers. Analysis of variance
(ANOVA) of carcinomas according to ER/PR status indicated ADORA2B
expression was elevated in ER- cancers regardless of PR status. ANOVA
also showed PDE4A was over expressed in ER+ carcinomas regardless of PR
status. LASSO analysis revealed CYP2E, PDE1A and PDE4A expression taken
jointly predicted PFS which was validated externally (Breast Cancer
Meta-base) with SurvExpress.

Conclusions: Collectively, results suggest expression of genes involved
in methylxanthine action and metabolism may be used to predict breast
cancer behavior. Significantly, we identified gene expression signatures
in single cell types that were highly associated with clinical outcome
suggesting promise for development of novel prognostic tests for breast
carcinoma management and design of new therapeutics.


