Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of bromodomain and extra-terminal proteins
degradation in triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer represents the most clinically challenging
subtypes of breast cancer for which targeted therapeutics are still
lacking. BET proteins have emerged as new therapeutic targets for human
cancer and other diseases.We have developed a highly potent BET degrader,
BETd-246, with an exceptional selectivity based upon a new class of BET
inhibitor, BETi-211, and investigated its therapeutic potential and
mechanisms of action in TNBC. BETd-246 induces degradation of BET
proteins at low nanomolar concentrations within 1 hour, leading to potent
anti-proliferative activity and strong apoptosis induction in the
majority of TNBC cell lines, and is much more effective than the BETi-211
treatment. RNA-seq analysis reveals that degradation of BET proteins by
BETd-246 elicits distinct transcriptional response than BET BD inhibition
in TNBC cell lines. Transcriptomic analysis also shows a number of
proliferation and survival-related genes were differentially regulated by
BETd-246 and BETi-211 which were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR.
Mechanistically, down-regulation of MCL1 by BETd-246 plays a key role in
the robust apoptosis induction in TNBC cell lines. In in vivo models,
BETd-246 effectively degrades BET proteins and suppresses MCL1 expression
in xenograft tumor tissues and exhibits a strong antitumor activity at
well-tolerated dose-schedules in mice. Our data strongly suggest that
targeting BET protein degradation is an exciting therapeutic strategy for
TNBC.


