Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-24 as a race-related genetic factor in prostate
cancer.


The incidence of prostate cancer (PCa) among African-Americans (AfA) is
significantly higher than Caucasian-Americans (CaA) but the genetic basis
for this disparity is not known. To address this problem, we analyzed
miRNA expression in AfA (n=81) and CaA (n=51) PCa patients. Here, we
found that miR-24 is differentially expressed in AfA and CaA PCa patients
and attempt to clarify its role in AfA patients. Also, the public
sequencing data of the miR-24 promoter confirmed that it was highly
methylated and down-regulated in PCa patients. Utilizing a VAMCSF and
NDRI patient cohorts, we discovered that miR-24 expression was linked to
a racial difference between AfA/CaA PCa patients. Interestingly, miR-24
was restored after treatment of PCa cells with 5Aza-CdR in an AfA cell
line (MDA-PCa-2b), while restoration of miR-24 was not observed in CaA
cells, DU-145. Ectopic expression of miR-24 showed decreased growth and
induced apoptosis, though the effect was less in the CaA cell line
compared to the AfA cell line. Finally, we found unique changes in
biological pathways and processes associated with miR-24 transfected AfA
cells by quantitative PCR-based gene expression array. Evaluation of the
altered pathways showed that AR, PDPK1, IGF1, and IGFBP5 were markedly
decreased in the AfA derived cell line compared with CaA cells, and there
was a reciprocal regulatory relationship of miR-24/target expression in
prostate cancer patients. These results demonstrate that miR-24 may be a
central regulator of key events that contribute to race-related
tumorigenesis and has potential to be a therapeutic agent for PCa
treatment.


