Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A serological biopsy using five stomach-specific circulating
biomarkers for gastric cancer risk assessment: a multi-phase study.


Objective: We aimed to assess a serological biopsy using five
stomach-specific circulating biomarkers—pepsinogen I (PGI), PGII,
PGI/II ratio, anti-Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) antibody, and
gastrin-17 (G-17)—for identifying high-risk individuals and predicting
risk of developing gastric cancer (GC).

Methods: Among 12112 participants with prospective follow-up from an
ongoing population-based screening program using both serology and
gastroscopy in China, we conducted a multi-phase study involving a
cross-sectional analysis, a follow-up analysis, and an integrative risk
prediction modeling analysis.

Results: In the cross-sectional analysis, the five biomarkers (especially
PGII, the PGI/II ratio, and H. pylori sero-positivity) were associated
with the presence of precancerous gastric lesions or GC at enrollment. In
the follow-up analysis, low PGI levels and PGI/II ratios were associated
with higher risk of developing GC, and both low (4.7 pmol/L) G-17 levels
were associated with higher risk of developing GC, suggesting a J-shaped
association. In the risk prediction modeling analysis, the five
biomarkers combined yielded a C statistic of 0.801 (95% CI=0.787-0.815)
and improved prediction beyond traditional risk factors (C statistic from
0.580 to 0.811, P4.7 pmol/L) G-17 levels were associated with higher risk
of developing GC, suggesting a J-shaped association. In the risk
prediction modeling analysis, the five biomarkers combined yielded a C
statistic of 0.801 (95% CI=0.787-0.815) and improved prediction beyond
traditional risk factors (C statistic from 0.580 to 0.811, P<0.001) for
identifying precancerous lesions at enrollment, and higher serological
biopsy score based on the five biomarkers at enrollment were associated
with higher risk of developing GC during follow-up (P for trend 4.7
pmol/L) G-17 levels were associated with higher risk of developing GC,
suggesting a J-shaped association. In the risk prediction modeling
analysis, the five biomarkers combined yielded a C statistic of 0.801
(95% CI=0.787-0.815) and improved prediction beyond traditional risk
factors (C statistic from 0.580 to 0.811, P<0.001) for identifying
precancerous lesions at enrollment, and higher serological biopsy score
based on the five biomarkers at enrollment were associated with higher
risk of developing GC during follow-up (P for trend <0.001).

Conclusions: A serological biopsy composed of the five stomach-specific
circulating biomarkers could be used to identify high-risk individuals
for further diagnostic gastroscopy, and to stratify individuals’ risk
of developing GC and thus to guide targeted screening/precision
prevention.


