Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTA1 promotes tumor progression and bone metastasis in prostate
cancer via positive regulation of MUC1 and CTSB.


About 80% of the time that prostate cancer cells metastasize, they spread
to the bones. Metastasis involves activation of invasive programs through
genetic and epigenetic alterations, including changes in expression of
chromatin remodeler proteins. We have previously identified
metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), a chromatin remodeler, as a
component of vicious cycle of bone metastasis and confirmed significantly
higher expression of MTA1 in bone metastatic samples from patients. In an
attempt to dissect molecular mechanisms of MTA1 action, we performed
integrative analysis of our bone metastasis signature data along with
MTA1 ChIP-Seq data, which revealed mucin 1 (MUC1) and cathepsin B (CTSB)
as strong potential candidates responsible for MTA1-driven
invasiveness.Here, we show that loss of function studies with MTA1 in
PC3M cells exhibit reduced expression for MUC1 and CTSB. We also
demonstrate that depletion of MTA1 in PC3M aggressive prostate cancer
cellsdoes not affect cell proliferation but leads to decrease in colony
forming ability, invasive and migratory property of these cells. When
PC3M cells silenced for MTA1 and tagged with luciferase are used to
generate subcutaneous or intracardiac xenografts, it leads to reduced
tumor progression or decreased metastasis to bone, respectively as
evident by bioluminescent measurements and histology of tumors. Ongoing
experiments aim to validate the role of MUC1 and CTSB in MTA1-driven
invasiveness and metastasis in prostate cancer.


