Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel drug candidates cep1430 and cep1507 for targeting pancreatic
patient-derived xenograft cancer stem cell and circulating tumor cell
models.


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality in the
US, despite significant improvements in diagnostic imaging and operative
mortality rates. The 5-year survival rate remains less than 6% because of
microscopic or gross metastatic disease at time of diagnosis. Although
the treatment of pancreatic cancer remains a challenge, it is entering
new era with development of new strategies and trial designs. Because
there is an increasing number of novel therapeutic agents and potential
combinations available to test in patients with pancreatic cancer and in
their PDX models, the identification of robust prognostic and predictive
markers for Cancer Stem Cells (CSC) PDX and Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC)
PDX and of new targets and relevant pathways is a top priority as well as
the design of adequate trials incorporating molecular-driven hypothesis.
Here, we examined the efficacy of combined treatments of CEP1430 and
CEP1507 in human pancreatic patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cancer cells,
and pancreatic PDX CSCs models from the same donors. CEP1430 inhibited
the growth of CSCs and CEP1507 inhibited growth of CTCs, while
gemcitabine suppressed the viability of non-CSCs [70%] (differentiated
tumor Cells). Consistently, in vivo studies showed that CEP1507 when
combined with gemcitabine could eliminate the engraftment of human
pancreatic cancer CTCs [85%(n=50,pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading
cause of cancer mortality in the US, despite significant improvements in
diagnostic imaging and operative mortality rates. The 5-year survival
rate remains less than 6% because of microscopic or gross metastatic
disease at time of diagnosis. Although the treatment of pancreatic cancer
remains a challenge, it is entering new era with development of new
strategies and trial designs. Because there is an increasing number of
novel therapeutic agents and potential combinations available to test in
patients with pancreatic cancer and in their PDX models, the
identification of robust prognostic and predictive markers for Cancer
Stem Cells (CSC) PDX and Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC) PDX and of new
targets and relevant pathways is a top priority as well as the design of
adequate trials incorporating molecular-driven hypothesis. Here, we
examined the efficacy of combined treatments of CEP1430 and CEP1507 in
human pancreatic patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cancer cells, and
pancreatic PDX CSCs models from the same donors. CEP1430 inhibited the
growth of CSCs and CEP1507 inhibited growth of CTCs, while gemcitabine
suppressed the viability of non-CSCs [70%] (differentiated tumor Cells).
Consistently, in vivo studies showed that CEP1507 when combined with
gemcitabine could eliminate the engraftment of human pancreatic cancer
CTCs [85%(n=50,p<0.001) and CEP1430 with gemcitabine selectively
inhibited [80%] CSCs(n=50,pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause
of cancer mortality in the US, despite significant improvements in
diagnostic imaging and operative mortality rates. The 5-year survival
rate remains less than 6% because of microscopic or gross metastatic
disease at time of diagnosis. Although the treatment of pancreatic cancer
remains a challenge, it is entering new era with development of new
strategies and trial designs. Because there is an increasing number of
novel therapeutic agents and potential combinations available to test in
patients with pancreatic cancer and in their PDX models, the
identification of robust prognostic and predictive markers for Cancer
Stem Cells (CSC) PDX and Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC) PDX and of new
targets and relevant pathways is a top priority as well as the design of
adequate trials incorporating molecular-driven hypothesis. Here, we
examined the efficacy of combined treatments of CEP1430 and CEP1507 in
human pancreatic patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cancer cells, and
pancreatic PDX CSCs models from the same donors. CEP1430 inhibited the
growth of CSCs and CEP1507 inhibited growth of CTCs, while gemcitabine
suppressed the viability of non-CSCs [70%] (differentiated tumor Cells).
Consistently, in vivo studies showed that CEP1507 when combined with
gemcitabine could eliminate the engraftment of human pancreatic cancer
CTCs [85%(n=50,p<0.001) and CEP1430 with gemcitabine selectively
inhibited [80%] CSCs(n=50,p<0.001), more effectively than the individual
agents. These data indicated that administration of CEP1430, which
targets CSCs and CEP1507 targets CTCs, may constitute a potential
therapeutic strategy for improving the efficacy of gemcitabine to
eradicate advanced pancreatic cancer. This study has indicated the
potential molecular therapeutic targets to eradicate the tumor â€“ and
metastasis-initiating cells (CTCs) and their progenies and development of
new effective combination therapies against locally advanced and
metastatic pancreatic cancer. Using PDX models, we confirmed the
effectiveness and selectivity of the identified treatment responses with
TGI at 97% with CEP1430.


