Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of a novel ERK1/2 inhibitor (LY3214996) with CDK4 and
CDK6 inhibitor (abemaciclib) enhances antitumor efficacy in KRAS mutant
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


ERK1/2, a key downstream effector of RAS mutations, is involved in the
signaling network which drives cell proliferation, survival, metastasis
and cancer resistance to drug treatment (including MEK and BRAF
inhibitors). Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide.
KRAS mutation present in up to 30% of NSCLC patients is associated with a
poor prognosis and represents an unmet medical need. In KRAS mutant
NSCLC, enhanced ERK activation cooperates with dysregulation of the cell
cycle checkpoint (e.g., cyclin D, CDK4 and CDK6 complex), and contributes
to tumor progression; thus, the simultaneous inhibition of ERK and the
CDK4/6 pathway is hypothesized to augment tumor growth inhibition.
LY3214996, a novel and highly selective small molecule inhibitor of ERK1
and ERK2, is currently in phase I clinical trial and has been shown to
inhibit cell proliferation in RAS or BRAF mutant tumor cells in vitro and
xenograft tumor growth in vivo. Abemaciclib, a CDK4 and CDK6-selective
inhibitor is currently in phase III studies for ER positive breast cancer
and KRAS mutant NSCLC. In this study we explore the potential efficacy of
combined inhibition of ERK1/2 and CDK4 and CDK6 in KRAS mutant NSCLC. The
combination of LY3214996 and abemaciclib synergistically inhibited cell
proliferation in 85% of KRAS mutant cells in an unbiased NSCLC panel.
Combination treatment with LY3214996 and abemaciclib significantly
decreased levels of phospho- p90RSK, phospho-Rb, phospho-S6 and Ki67; and
synergistically inhibited cell proliferation and survival in KRAS mutant
NSCLC cell lines including NCI-H2122 (G-12C), A549 (G-12S) and NCI-H441
(G-12V). Subsequent in vivo studies showed that the combination treatment
with LY3214996 and abemaciclib was well tolerated and led to more robust
tumor growth inhibition or regression in all KRAS mutant NSCLC xenograft
models (H2122, A549 and H441) compared with either single agent treatment
(pâ‰¤0.002). Furthermore, in xenograft tumors the combination of
LY3214996 and abemaciclib resulted in more significant reduction of
phospho-p90RSK, phospho-Rb, phospho-S6 and Ki67 in H2122 tumors compared
with either single agent. Overall, the combined inhibition of ERK1/2 and
CDK4 and CDK6 was tolerated and enhanced antitumor efficacy in several
KRAS mutant NSCLC preclinical models. These data support the feasibility
of combining ERK inhibitor LY3214996 with CDK4 and CDK6 inhibitor
abemaciclib as a promising strategy for the treatment of KRAS mutant
NSCLC patients, and provides the rationale for the combination study in
the on-going phase I LY3214996 clinic trial (NCT02857270).


