Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of active enhancers as potential biomarkers of
aggressive colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer and second leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. Tumor metastasis is
the primary cause of mortality. Even with aggressive surgical and
therapeutic management approaches, more than one third of patients will
develop metastatic disease. Understanding the molecular changes that
drive tumor cells to the metastatic state is key to developing targeted
therapies and identifying early-stage markers for progression. To
identify changes that promote cell invasiveness, a hallmark of tumor
progression, we exposed the pre-metastatic SW-480 colorectal cancer cell
line to multiple rounds of selection for the capacity to invade through a
synthetic extra-cellular matrix. Following repeated selection,
invasiveness increased by more than 10-fold. Epithelial markers, such as
E-cadherin, were repressed and markers commonly associated with tumor
cells that have undergone epithelial-mesenchymal transition, such as
N-cadherin and Vimentin, were upregulated. Likewise, invasive cells
showed increased affinity for ECM components. Paired ChIP-seq and RNA-seq
revealed likely roles for epigenetic alterations in driving gene
expression changes. Furthermore, the epigenetic changes followed ordered
patterns of activation and inactivation, suggesting that these epigenetic
signatures may provide insight into early mechanisms associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Collectively, our data suggest that
early epigenetic markers may be better early predictors of colorectal
cancer aggressiveness than gene expression patterns and support the use
of this in vitro metastasis model to study the molecular mechanisms of
cancer progression.


