Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRK3 is a direct target of ADT-induced CREB1 activation and it
promotes neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer cells.


Treatment-related neuroendocrine prostate cancer (t-NEPC) is an
aggressive subtype of prostate cancer that is believed to arise through
neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) from prostate adenocarcinoma (PAC)
upon castration resistance to androgen deprivation treatment (ADT).
t-NEPC is highly metastatic with poor prognosis. With the recent
introduction of potent ADT drugs in clinic, the incidence of t-NEPC is
expected to increase dramatically. No effective therapeutic is available
for t-NEPC and its molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. We
reported that GRK3 (G protein-coupled receptor kinase 3) promotes
prostate cancer progression. We further demonstrated that the ADT
activates CREB1 (cAMP response element binding protein 1), which directly
targets and induces GRK3. GRK3 expression is higher in t-NEPC than in PAC
cells and mouse models, and it positively correlates with the expression
and activity of CREB1 in human prostate cancers. Notably, overexpression
of GRK3 in PAC cells increased the expression of NE markers. Conversely,
silencing GRK3 blocked CREB1-induced NED in PAC cells, reversed NE
phenotypes and inhibited proliferation of t-NEPC cells in culture and in
xenograft. Currently, we are investigating the mechanisms underlying NEPC
progression promoted by the CREB1/GRK3 axis. Taken together, these
results indicate that GRK3 is a new critical activator of NE phenotypes
and mediator of CREB1 activation in promoting NED of prostate cancer
cells.


