Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of cancer stem cell like characteristics by
overexpression of CDX1.


Intestinal metaplasia (IM) has been regarded as the most significant risk
factor for gastric cancer (GC). However, the molecular mechanisms of the
pathogenesis of IM and the progression of GC remain unclear. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the role of CDX1 in IM and GC using stable
CDX1 overexpression in HFE 145 gastric epithelial cells, and its
expression in patient samples. For CDX1 overexpression, we generated
lentiviral CDX1 and infected is to HFE 145 cells. We found that CDX1
overexpression induced an increase of IM related markers such as villin
and SI and a decrease of gastric epithelial marker such as MUC 5AC.
Overexpression of CDX1 in HFE 145 cells caused an increase in cell
proliferation (PIntestinal metaplasia (IM) has been regarded as the most
significant risk factor for gastric cancer (GC). However, the molecular
mechanisms of the pathogenesis of IM and the progression of GC remain
unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of CDX1 in IM and
GC using stable CDX1 overexpression in HFE 145 gastric epithelial cells,
and its expression in patient samples. For CDX1 overexpression, we
generated lentiviral CDX1 and infected is to HFE 145 cells. We found that
CDX1 overexpression induced an increase of IM related markers such as
villin and SI and a decrease of gastric epithelial marker such as MUC
5AC. Overexpression of CDX1 in HFE 145 cells caused an increase in cell
proliferation (P<0.05) and showed 2.7-fold higher clonogenic ability than
that of control cells. The expression of CDX1 induced in vitro
invasiveness 1.9-fold higher compared to HFE 145 control cells with
statistical significance (p=0.004), augmented the expression of MMP-9 and
phosphorylation of FAK and paxillin. Overexpression of CDX1 also induced
anchorage-independent colony formation and spheroid formation, and
enhanced the expression of stem cell markers including SOX2, Oct4, NANOG
and c-Myc in HFE 145 cells, suggesting CDX1-induced stem cell like
phenotype of gastric epithelial cells. HFE 145 cells infected with
CagA-positive Helicobacter pylori (G27 wild type) caused an increase in
expression of CDX1 compared to HFE145 cells infected with CagA-negative
H. pylori (G27 Î”CagE). Using luciferase promoter assay, we confirmed
that the expression of CDX1 was regulated by the CagA secreted from H.
pylori. In clinical practice, the Operative Link on Gastric Intestinal
Metaplasia Assessment (OLGIM) staging system is often used to evaluate
the degree of IM in biopsy samples or surgical specimen. We measured
expression of CDX1, SI, and villin adjusted by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase expression using densitometry in 9 patients with various
OLGIM stage (2 in stage 0, 1 in stage 1, 2 in stage 2, 1 in stage 3, 3 in
stage 4). We were able to find out that the patients with higher OLGIM
stage (stage 3-4) tended to have higher expression of CDX1 (3.935 vs.
0.416, p=0.160), SI (9.739 vs. 0.311, p=0.088), and villin (7.785 vs.
0.868, p=0.119) compared to patients with lower OLGIM stage (stage 0-2).
Taken together, these results suggest that CDX1 overexpression could be
one of the causes of GC tumorigenesis and progression. Further
investigation on CDX1 molecule would encourage development of specific
target for cancer treatment.


