Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer activity of the RAD51 inhibitor IBR2 with
inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinases and microtubule protein.


Although cancer cell genetic instability contributes to characteristics
that mediate tumorigenicity, it also contributes to the selective
toxicity that some chemotherapy drugs have for cancer cells. This
"synthetic lethality" (Nature 434:913, ‘05) can be enhanced by agents
that inhibit DNA repair (Mol Onc 8:1429, ‘14; Proc AACR 57:3718,
‘16). To exploit this potential "Achilles heel", we tested the ability
of a small molecule inhibitor of RAD51 to potentiate the cytotoxicity of
established chemotherapy drugs.
2-(benzylsulfonyl)-1-(1H-indol-3-yl)-1,2-dihydroisoquinoline (IBR2) was
obtained from Drs. J-W Zhu and W-H Lee (Univ. California - Irvine). IBR2
inhibits RAD51-mediated double-strand DNA break repair, but also enhances
induction of apoptosis by the ABL inhibitor imatinib against K562 cells
(EMBO Mol Med 5:353, ‘13). There is potential value of such synergistic
interaction among other tumor types and with other drugs. IBR2-drug
combinations were therefore examined across a spectrum of cancer cell
lines from various tissues (AML, CML, carcinoma of breast, colon,
stomach, lung, and head) representing a range of oncogenic drivers (ABL,
c-kit, Raf, Ras, ER, mutant p53). Cells were exposed to IBR2
simultaneously with inhibitors of various tyrosine kinase receptors,
DNA-damaging agents, or inhibitors of microtubule function. Cells were
cultured in 96-well plates, exposed to drugs alone and in combination,
and cell density determined by viability staining (alamarBlue or neutral
red) 4 days later. Inhibition of proliferation by drug combinations was
normalized to that of IBR2 alone. Depending on the drug sensitivity of
the cell line, IBR2, at concentrations that inhibited proliferation
between 0% and 75% as a single agent, enhanced toxicity of imatinib by up
to 80%. IBR2 also greatly enhanced antiproliferative activity of
regorafenib (targets RAF, kit, others), EGFR inhibitors erlotinib,
gefitinib, afatinib and osimertinib, and microtubule inhibitor
vincristine (VCR). However, IBR2 was antagonistic with VP-16, cisplatin,
irinotecan, melphalan, and olaparib. To determine a possible mechanism of
the observed synergy, the interaction between IBR2 and imatinib or VCR
was compared with that between verapamil, a P-glycoprotein inhibitor, and
the latter 2 drugs. The VCR-resistant head and neck cell line HN-5a/V15e
was not cross-resistant to imatinib, but IBR2 enhanced imatinib toxicity
in this cell line, its HN-5a parent, and HT-29 by up to 60%, much better
than verapamil (up to 40% at similar concentrations, PAlthough cancer
cell genetic instability contributes to characteristics that mediate
tumorigenicity, it also contributes to the selective toxicity that some
chemotherapy drugs have for cancer cells. This "synthetic lethality"
(Nature 434:913, ‘05) can be enhanced by agents that inhibit DNA repair
(Mol Onc 8:1429, ‘14; Proc AACR 57:3718, ‘16). To exploit this
potential "Achilles heel", we tested the ability of a small molecule
inhibitor of RAD51 to potentiate the cytotoxicity of established
chemotherapy drugs.
2-(benzylsulfonyl)-1-(1H-indol-3-yl)-1,2-dihydroisoquinoline (IBR2) was
obtained from Drs. J-W Zhu and W-H Lee (Univ. California - Irvine). IBR2
inhibits RAD51-mediated double-strand DNA break repair, but also enhances
induction of apoptosis by the ABL inhibitor imatinib against K562 cells
(EMBO Mol Med 5:353, ‘13). There is potential value of such synergistic
interaction among other tumor types and with other drugs. IBR2-drug
combinations were therefore examined across a spectrum of cancer cell
lines from various tissues (AML, CML, carcinoma of breast, colon,
stomach, lung, and head) representing a range of oncogenic drivers (ABL,
c-kit, Raf, Ras, ER, mutant p53). Cells were exposed to IBR2
simultaneously with inhibitors of various tyrosine kinase receptors,
DNA-damaging agents, or inhibitors of microtubule function. Cells were
cultured in 96-well plates, exposed to drugs alone and in combination,
and cell density determined by viability staining (alamarBlue or neutral
red) 4 days later. Inhibition of proliferation by drug combinations was
normalized to that of IBR2 alone. Depending on the drug sensitivity of
the cell line, IBR2, at concentrations that inhibited proliferation
between 0% and 75% as a single agent, enhanced toxicity of imatinib by up
to 80%. IBR2 also greatly enhanced antiproliferative activity of
regorafenib (targets RAF, kit, others), EGFR inhibitors erlotinib,
gefitinib, afatinib and osimertinib, and microtubule inhibitor
vincristine (VCR). However, IBR2 was antagonistic with VP-16, cisplatin,
irinotecan, melphalan, and olaparib. To determine a possible mechanism of
the observed synergy, the interaction between IBR2 and imatinib or VCR
was compared with that between verapamil, a P-glycoprotein inhibitor, and
the latter 2 drugs. The VCR-resistant head and neck cell line HN-5a/V15e
was not cross-resistant to imatinib, but IBR2 enhanced imatinib toxicity
in this cell line, its HN-5a parent, and HT-29 by up to 60%, much better
than verapamil (up to 40% at similar concentrations, P<0.05). IBR2
enhanced VCR toxicity in these 3 lines to degree similar to verapamil,
decreasing the IC50 by up to 90%. IBR2 appears to enhance drug toxicities
via mechanisms other than just inhibition of RAD51 and may potentially
interfere with microtubule function. The results indicate that this agent
may be useful as a clinical adjuvant to numerous cytotoxic drugs.


