Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of papillary thyroid cancer cells progression by
targeting skp2 via ros-erk-chop-dr5 pathways.


S-phase kinase protein 2 (SKP2), is an F-box protein with proteasomal
properties and has been found to be overexpressed in a variety of
cancers. However its role in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) has not been
elucidated. Therefore, inactivation of SKP2 could be a viable strategy
for the treatment of PTC. In the present study, we investigated the role
of SKP2 and its ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in PTC using a tissue
microarray cohort of 1022 PTC samples, PTC cell lines and Nude mouse
model. Our immunohistochemistry data showed that SKP2 was over-expressed
in 75.1% of PTC cases and was clinically, significantly associated with
extra thyroidal extension (p=0.0331), Tall cell variant (p=0.0070), and
presence in surgical margins (p=0.0347). Bortezomib as well as SKP2
specific siRNA caused downregulation of SKP2 leading to dose-dependent
growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis via mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway in PTC cell lines. Furthermore, we found that treatment of PTC
cells with Bortezomib caused up-regulation of DR5 via generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Finally, Bortezomib treatment augmented
TRAIL mediated anti-cancer effect on PTC xenograft tumor growth in nude
mice. These data suggest that Bortezomib is a viable therapeutic option
for the treatment of PTC either alone or in combination with other
apoptotic agents such as TRAIL.


