Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LPA stimulates glycolytic shift in ovarian cancer.


Cancer cells resort to aerobic glycolysis to meet the increased energy
consumption and growth requirement during active proliferation. While it
has been observed that the cancer cells preferentially shift to aerobic
glycolysis, the extraneous growth factors involved in this process is
largely unknown. Since our previous studies have shown that
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) plays a critical role in the pathophysiology
of ovarian cancers, we investigated the role of LPA in the metabolic
reprogramming of ovarian cancer cells. Our results using XFe96 analyzer
indicate that LPA stimulates aerobic glycolysis in multiple ovarian
cancer cell lines as well as in patient-derived ovarian cancer cells.
Physiological role for LPA in this process is demonstrated by the
observation that the inhibitors of LPA-receptors attenuate the glycolytic
shift stimulated by the ascitic fluid derived cancer patients. We further
demonstrate that the silencing Gαi2, a downstream signaling mediator for
LPA, inhibits LPA-stimulated glycolytic shift in ovarian cancer cells.
Further analyses indicated that LPA-stimulated metabolic reprogramming
involves the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Treatment of
cells with N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC), a ROS-scavenger, inhibited the
glycolytic shift stimulated by LPA. In addition, our studies point to a
role for LPA-stimulated HIF1α activation in this process. These results
indicate that LPA-stimulated metabolic reprogramming in ovarian cancer
cells involve ROS-generation via LPA-Gαi2-HIF1α-dependent signaling
pathway. Together with the findings that the glycolytic shift is
crucially involved in tumor cell survival our studies point to
LPA-Gαi2-HIF1α signaling axis as a potential target for therapy in
ovarian cancer.


