Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of personalized active agents in pediatric gliomas
through high-throughput drug screening in matching pairs of patient
derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) neurosphere and monolayer cells.


Objective: Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the deadliest brain tumors both
in adults and children. While next-generation sequencing rapidly
identifies whole exome/genome gene mutations, the efficacy of targeting
mutated genes/pathways has not been systematically analyzed.
Additionally, it remains unknown if neurospheres (enriched with cancer
stem cells) and non-stem monolayer tumor cells will respond equally to
the same target therapies.

Methods: Matching pairs of neurosphere and monolayer cell cultures from 4
molecularly characterized PDOX mouse models established from distinct
clinical stages of pediatric glioma (treatment-naïve, early recurrent,
terminal, and radiation-induced) were treated with 7,913 drugs (mostly in
clinical use or trials) at 4 doses (0-10 uM) for 3 and 7 days.
Dose-response curves and active area under the curve (AAUC) were
constructed to identify active drugs and correlate with model-specific
gene mutations.

Results: Relatively long-term treatment (7 day screening) was achieved
for high-throughput drug screening and revealed time- and dose-dependent
effects in most of the 4,629 compounds that were active in at least one
culture at one time point. When gene mutations were druggable, not all
inhibitors of the same family were active. In IC-4687GBM (a
treatment-naïve GBM), high NF1 mutation (>76-99% allele) frequency was
found in patient tumor, xenografts, and cultured cells, but only 3/17 MEK
inhibitors were active in neurospheres and 2/17 in monolayer cells
(GDC0980 and PI-103 were active in both) on day 7. In IC-R0315GBM (from
an autopsied terminal GBM) that carried PI3KCA mutation (allele frequency
22-27%), 5/33 PI3K inhibitors were active in neurospheres and 8/33 in
monolayer cells (only Tremetinib was active in both) after 7 days. In
IC-3752GBM (recurrent GBM) and ICb-1127AA (radiation-induced anaplastic
astrocytoma), no druggable mutations were detected. The number of active
drugs on day 7 was 366 in IC-4768GBM, 406 in IC-3752GBM, 284 in
IC-R0315GBM, and 305 in ICb-1277AA. When the 4 matching pairs of
neurospheres and monolayers were compared, the agents active in both
cultures ranged from 36% to 60%, active only in neurosphere from 10.3% to
25%, and active only in monolayer cells from 14.8% to 53%. Subsequent in
vivo validation using MLN8327 in IC-4687GBM and IC-R0315GBM showed that
effective targeting of both neurosphere and monolayer was required for
significantly-improved animal survival times.

Conclusion: We showed that long-term treatment is feasible for
high-throughput drug screening. Targeting druggable mutations can be
achieved but only by a fraction of specific agents. Neurospheres and
monolayer cells do not always respond equally toward the same drugs, and
effective targeting of both subpopulations is needed to generate
prolonged animal survival times.


