Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of LKB1 activity on the sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR inhibitor
in non-small-cell lung cancer.


The serine-threonine liver kinase B1 (LKB1, also called STK11) is a tumor
suppressor that functions as master regulator of cell growth, metabolism,
survival and polarity. Germline mutation of LKB1 causes Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome, which is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by
mucocutaneous pigmentation and hamartomatous polyps. In non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), LKB1 is frequently rendered non-functional, either
through mutation or down regulation. As a tumor suppressor and a protein
whose function is lost, identifying pathways that are activated with LKB1
loss may be the only way to target such tumors. Some previous studies
have suggested that inhibition of mTOR, a growth promoting pathway
negatively regulated by LKB1, as a potential target in LKB1 mutant NSCLC.
In this study, we investigated the effect of LKB1 activity on the
sensitivity to a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor using four LKB1 mutant NSCLC cell
lines to which LKB1 gene was transduced and one LKB1 wild type NSCLC cell
line in which LKB1 gene was knocked out by CRISPR technology.
Transduction of LKB1 resulted in significant resistance to a PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor in two of the four LKB1 add-back cell lines, while knocking out
LKB1 in the LKB1 wild type cell line induced PI3K/mTOR inhibitor
sensitivity. The mechanism behind these observed results appears to be
through regulation of phosphorylation of AKT. The presence of LKB1 led to
a persistent AKT phosphorylation even in the presence of the PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor, both in add back cell and wild type cells. Our data suggest
that the identification of LKB1 activity may be a promising biomarker for
the sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR inhibition. Further investigation into the
mechanism of LKB1 loss and increased sensitivity to inhibition of the
PI3K and mTOR pathways is warranted.


