Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing combination therapy against antiestrogen-resistance in
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.


Approximately 75% of breast cancer incidences are Estrogen Receptor
positive (ER+). Treatment of ER+ breast cancer with antiestrogen
endocrine therapy targets the proliferative mechanisms of ER using
selective ER modulators (SERMs), such as tamoxifen, and selective ER
downregulators (SERDs), such as fulvestrant. The resistance to endocrine
therapy, either innate or acquired, is clinically diagnosed in up to 50%
of patients within 5 years of treatment. Antiestrogen therapy of ER+
mammary cancer cells in vitro and in xenografts does not cause complete
cell death or regression. Through the use of combination therapy to
target the remaining sub-population of cells, complete regression can be
predicted. Our lab has developed endocrine tamoxifen-resistant models
through prolonged exposure to tamoxifen, estrogen deprivation, and
overexpression of PKCÎ±, a pro-survival pathway component, in addition to
a fulvestrant-resistant model through prolonged exposure to fulvestrant.
Investigation of the resistance mechanisms will provide insight into
potential, combinatorial targets for overcoming endocrine resistance in
ER+ breast cancer. Use of spheroidal 3D cell culture provides a
physiologically relevant model with sufficient throughput for drug
discovery. Establishing spheroids and subsequent treatment predicts the
efficacy of combination treatment on tumor regression. Targeting pathways
associated with increased prevalence of resistance, such as CDK 4/6, can
be employed for clinical therapy. Using both novel in-house and clinical
SERMs and SERDs, we have used these multiple cell lines to discover
combinatorial targets using both mechanistic and unbiased screening
approaches. The use of combination endocrine therapy in
tamoxifen-resistant models has shown antiproliferative synergy, and is
able to enhance tumor regression in xenografts. By optimizing
combinatorial endocrine treatment against both fulvestrant- and
tamoxifen-resistance, novel therapeutic approaches are being developed
for ER+ breast cancer.


