Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of angiotensin system inhibitors is associated with longer
overall survival in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients who
underwent pancreatectomy.


Introduction: Angiotensin system inhibitors (ASI) are widely used to
manage hypertension. Laboratory and retrospective clinical data suggests
that ASIs can improve cancer prognosis. The aim of this study is to
investigate the effect of ASIs on overall survival in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients.

Methods: We performed a retrospective review of the clinicopathologic
records of patients with PDAC seen at the Massachusetts General Hospital
(MGH) between 1/2006 - 12/2010. Patients on angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACEi) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) were included as
ASI users. We performed RNAseq and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of
primary tumor samples from patients with or without chronic ASI use. We
also identified a surrogate signature of differentially expressed genes
and we measured the extent of angiotensin inhibition in GEO and TCGA
datasets. The extent of inhibition was used to correlate with survival.
Statistical analysis was performed using Kaplan-Meier estimator and Cox
proportional hazards ratio model.

Results: A total of 794 consecutive PDAC patients were included, of whom
297 (37.4%) were on ASIs and 183 (23.0%) were on non-ASI antihypertensive
drug therapy. In resected patients, ASI users had a significantly longer
overall survival on univariate (median OS: 36.3 vs. 19.3 months, p=0.011)
and multivariate analysis (HR, 0.49; 95%CI, 0.333-0.734; pResults: A
total of 794 consecutive PDAC patients were included, of whom 297 (37.4%)
were on ASIs and 183 (23.0%) were on non-ASI antihypertensive drug
therapy. In resected patients, ASI users had a significantly longer
overall survival on univariate (median OS: 36.3 vs. 19.3 months, p=0.011)
and multivariate analysis (HR, 0.49; 95%CI, 0.333-0.734; p<0.001). In our
sub-group analysis of resected hypertensive patients treated with
chemotherapy, chronic ASI users had a significantly longer overall
survival than ASI-naïve patients (p=0.048) (28.7 vs 12.3 months,
pResults: A total of 794 consecutive PDAC patients were included, of whom
297 (37.4%) were on ASIs and 183 (23.0%) were on non-ASI antihypertensive
drug therapy. In resected patients, ASI users had a significantly longer
overall survival on univariate (median OS: 36.3 vs. 19.3 months, p=0.011)
and multivariate analysis (HR, 0.49; 95%CI, 0.333-0.734; p<0.001). In our
sub-group analysis of resected hypertensive patients treated with
chemotherapy, chronic ASI users had a significantly longer overall
survival than ASI-naïve patients (p=0.048) (28.7 vs 12.3 months, p<
0.05). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis revealed that the ASI lisinopril
down-regulated genes which stimulate the mitotic cell cycle, WNT and
Notch signaling and the interaction between integrins and the
extracellular matrix. Lisinopril also enhanced gene sets linked with
oxidative phosphorylation, antigen processing and presentation and the
cytotoxic activity of T cells. In unresected patients, the effect of ASI
was only significant in patients with locally advanced disease in
multivariate analysis (HR, 0.572; 95%CI, 0.386-0.847; p=0.005), but not
in metastatic patients. The low expression of genes down-regulated by
ACEi was also significantly associated with longer survival in the TCGA
and GSE71729 datasets.

Conclusion: In patients with PDAC, ASI use is associated with longer
overall survival in resected patients and may benefit patients with
locally advanced disease. These findings suggest the need for a
prospective study to determine the efficacy of ASI in PDAC patients.


