Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multigene panel testing and risk estimates in 10,233 ovarian
cancer cases.


Germline pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for 10% of
ovarian cancer (OC), including ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary
peritoneal carcinomas. Pathogenic variants in BRIP1, RAD51C, RAD51D, and
other cancer predisposition genes have been observed in another 2% to 5%
of OCs. However, the specific genes associated with OC and estimates of
risk associated with pathogenic variants in the individual genes are not
well defined. We sought to determine the relevance of multigene panel
testing results for OC cases. The study was focused on 140,449
individuals, including 10,233 OC cases, receiving clinical panel testing
of cancer predisposition genes. Standardized relative risks (SRR) for
pathogenic variants in 18 cancer predisposition genes were estimated
using reference controls from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC).
The median (range) age at diagnosis of OC was 57 (21-90) years. OC cases
were 76.2% Caucasian, 3.6% African American, 4.6% Asian, 4.7% Hispanic,
and 10.9% unknown/other. Among the 10,233 OC cases, 1391 (13.6%) had
pathogenic mutations, including 1032 pathogenic mutations among the 7793
Caucasian OC cases (13.2%). Using the non-Finnish European ExAC
(excluding TCGA samples) reference controls, the allele frequency for all
pathogenic variants in each gene was summed and compared to the frequency
of mutations in the Caucasian OC cases. Pathogenic variants in the known
OC predisposition genes: BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, MSH2, MSH6, RAD51C, and
RAD51D were associated with a high risk of OC (SRR>4.0). Additionally,
significant associations were observed for pathogenic variants in
suspected OC risk genes ATM and PALB2 (SRR=2.06 and 2.78, respectively).
This study identified several genes routinely screened on multigene panel
testing that confer high or moderate risks of OC. Associations with known
OC predisposition genes were confirmed. In addition, this study provides
evidence that PALB2 is a moderate risk OC gene, and that ATM may confer
lower to moderate risks of OC. If confirmed in future studies, these
risks should be carefully considered in future screening and management
of OC patients. In contrast, BARD1 and genes in the MRN complex were not
associated with clinically relevant risks of OC.


