Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uncovering novel signaling pathways that mediate tumor cell
killing by T effector cells.


Recent advances in the understanding of tumor immunology have led to the
development of various immunotherapeutic strategies, some of which show
unprecedented clinical efficacies. Two of the most effective treatments,
ipilimumab and pembrolizumab / nivolumab target the immune checkpoints
factors CTLA-4 and PD-1, respectively. While not all patients respond to
immunotherapy, those that do frequently show long-lasting clinical
responses. These accomplishments have led to a surge in research focusing
on the question how the immune system can be stimulated for more common
durable therapy responses.

A current focus of tumor immunological research is the identification of
mechanisms allowing cancer cells to evade recognition and/or killing by
the immune system while facing immunotherapy. For example, abrogation of
interferon-É£ signaling pathway has been shown to result in escape of
immune surveillance after pembrolizumab treatment. However, it is likely
that other tumor cell-intrinsic mechanisms play a role, too.

To uncover novel pathways that are involved in resistance to immune
checkpoint inhibitors, we aim to identify transcriptional changes in
tumor cells that result from effector T-cell exposure. To this end, we
established a co-culture platform of a panel of Mart1-expressing melanoma
cell lines with primary CD8+ T cells expressing a matching TCR. The cell
lines display varying degrees of sensitivity to T cells, allowing us to
bioinformatically uncover differential expression depending on this range
of sensitivities. Rather than concentrating on single genes, we have
focused on pathways, gene sets and ontologies. These analyses have been
integrated with various publically available transcriptomic data sets to
identify a set of mechanisms that may contribute to T-cell mediated
killing. We will systematically abrogate key factors using CRISPR
technology in our co-culture platform and assess whether this affects
T-cell mediated killing. Our ultimate goal is to test whether these
factors, or their signaling pathways, are involved in resistance to
immunotherapy in patients, and to develop new strategies to prevent
immunotherapy resistance.


