Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin suppresses bladder cancer through down-regulation of
actin cytoskeleton and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.


Silibinin is the major active constituent of silymarin, an extract of
milk thistle seeds. Silibinin has been shown to have significant
anti-cancer effects in a variety of malignancies. However, the molecular
mechanisms of silibinin action in bladder cancer have not been studied
extensively. In the present study, we found that silibinin (10 Î¼M)
significantly suppressed proliferation and invasion of T24 and UM-UC-3
human bladder cancer cells. In this study, we investigated the molecular
mechanisms underlying these effects of silibinin. Our results showed that
silibinin down-regulates actin cytoskeleton-related Ras-Rac-PAK1 pathways
and the phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway in
these bladder cancer cell lines. These pathways were found to promote
cellular transformation and cancer development and have crosstalk through
Ras cascades. We investigated the role of silibinin on Ras, and found
that silibinin suppresses levels of trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4 and
acethylated H3 at the K-RAS promoter. We also found that silibinin
downregulates long non-coding RNAs: HOTAIR and ZFAS1, which are known to
play roles as oncogenic lncRNAs in various cancers. This study shows that
silibinin exerts anti-cancer effects through down-regulation of the actin
cytoskeleton and PI3K/Akt pathways and thus suppresses the development
and progression of bladder cancer.


