Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abraxane eliminates cancer stem cells in triple-negative breast
cancers.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) represents about 20 percent of all
breast cancers, with a poorer survival rate and being associated with
high-grade tumors and the least favorable prognosis. Due to the absence
of hormone receptors and Her2 receptor, no targeted therapy is available
and chemotherapy is the standard treatment for TNBC patient. Paclitaxel
is a widely used chemotherapy drug for various cancers with severe side
effects due to its solvent. Abraxane is an albumin-bound nanoparticle of
paclitaxel with less severe side effects.

Here we investigated whether cancer stem cells (CSCs) in TNBC response
differentially to abraxane and paclitaxel both in cell culture and
xenograft mouse models.

Using a series of human TNBC cell lines, we showed that there is no
difference between solvent-based paclitaxel and abraxane in vitro in term
of efficacy and eliminating cancer stem cells using MTS assay,
mammosphere formation assay, and flow analysis of cancer stem cells.
Interestingly, we demonstrated that abraxane shows superior efficacy than
solvent-based paclitaxel in human SUM149 xenograft NOD SCID mouse model
in adjuvant treatment. More important, we demonstrated that abraxane
eliminates cancer stem cells in xenograft NOD SCID mouse model in
advanced treatment, while solvent-based paclitaxel increases cancer stem
cells. Cell uptake assay indicated that TNBC cells take more abraxane
than solvent-based paclitaxel, which partially attributes to its superior
efficacy in xenograft mouse models. Taken together, our data confirmed
that abraxane is superior to solvent-based paclitaxel and may be a better
option for TNBC patients in adjuvant or metastatic treatment.


