Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alpha-tubulin acetyltransferase, MEC-17, regulates cancer cell
morphology and migration through epithelial-mesenchymal transition
suppression and cell polarity disruption.


Acetylation of α-tubulin has characterized as a key process for
microtubule stabilization, and it can regulate cell spreading and
modulate the dynamics of focal adhesion. MEC-17, a newly identified
alpha-tubulin-N-acetyltransferase 1, serves as the major α-tubulin
acetyltransferase to promote α-tubulin acetylation in vitro and in vivo.
However, the physiological function of MEC-17 in cancer cells and its
effect on MT acetylation during cell morphogenesis and migration has
remained elusive. In the present study, our results showed that
overexpression of MEC-17 induced increment of cell focal adhesion area,
suppressed pseudopods formation in three-dimension collagen-embedded
cultured environment and inhibited cancer cell migratory and invasive
abilities. These changes were further proved to be caused by
epithelial-mensenchymal transition (EMT) repression, cell polarity
disruption caused by alteration of Golgi orientation and cdc42 activity
and the decrease in the phosphorylation of extracellular signal
regulatedkinase1/2 (Erk1/2). On the contrary, silencing of endogenous
MEC-17 by specific shRNA accelerated the pseudopods formation and EMT
process, which lead to facilitating the cell migration. Taken together,
these results demonstrated that the important role of MEC-17 in the
modulation of intrinsic cellular morphogenesis and migratory and invasive
functions through regulation of EMT and polarization. (The study was
supported by the following grants: MOST 103-2320-B-006-036-MY3 and MOST
105-2325-B-400-001 from the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan,
ROC)


