Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic characterization of kinase inhibitors reveals
heterogeneity in responses by class and cell line.


Several publications have addressed concerns surrounding drug response
screens by pointing out sources of variability and by presenting
recommendations for better experimental methods and more robust
analytical approaches. In the presented profiling effort, we integrated
the latest advances in drug response measurement and focused on data
diversity and quality rather than on breadth. We selected 32 breast
cancer cell lines with a strong bias towards triple negative lines as
well as 4 cell lines established from relevant patient-derived
xenografts. We evaluated a panel of clinically relevant kinase inhibitors
using a microscopy-based drug response assay to measure drug potency, and
to quantify drug efficacy in terms of growth inhibition (GR metrics) and
cell death. The use of the GR metrics to quantify drug sensitivity
enabled us to identify and study differences between cytostatic and
cytotoxic responses. This systematic dose response dataset is
complemented by measurements of baseline mRNA expression levels by RNAseq
and endogenous protein levels by shotgun mass spectrometry across all
cell lines. The completeness and controlled conditions under which these
data sets were collected provide confidence in their integration. The
baseline RNA and protein expression levels were used to build predictors
of the measured drug responses with the goal of identifying the
biological processes responsible for the differences in sensitivity
across drugs and cell lines. Differences in the phenotypic responses of
cell lines to kinase inhibitors with the same nominal targets have been
investigated, and associated with variable inhibitor polypharmacology.


