Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trends in colorectal cancer survival in Arab World, 1990-2009.


Introduction: Cancer survival is a key measure of the effectiveness of
health-care systems. Globally, colon and rectum cancer ranked third for
cancer incidence and fourth for cancer death in 2013. For developed
countries it ranked second for incidence and mortality, and in developing
countries it ranked fourth for both incidence and mortality. An
increasing trend in incidence is reported from various registries of Arab
world, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia present the highest incidences worldwide.

Objective: To describe the trends of the survival of colorectal cancer
patients diagnosed in Arab countries.

Material and Methods: This report is a summary of the two survival
figures of CONCORD study 1 (1990-1994) and CONCORD study 2 (1995-2009).
Individual colon and rectum tumour records were submitted by 06
population-based cancer registries in Arab countries (Jordan, Saoudi
Arabia, Qatar, Algeria, Lybia and Tunisia) for 9050 patients (15-99
years) diagnosed during 1990-2009 and followed up to 31 December 2009 .
Estimated five-year net survival, adjusted for background mortality by
single year of age, sex, calendar year in each country.

Results : For patients diagnosed during the period 2005-2009, the
age-standardized five-years net survivals were respectively higher 68,2%
for colon cancer and 77,8% for rectum cancer in Qatar and the lowest rate
for rectal cancer 21% in Jordan, between 1995-1999 and 2005-2009,
Survival increased in Algeria, but this trend is less reliable

Conclusions: Comparison of population-based cancer survival CONCORD study
showed very wide variations in survival from colorectal cancer in Arab
world. Cancer survival research is being used to formulate cancer control
and the need to implement effective strategies of primary prevention.


