Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined effect of multiple gene polymorphisms on cancer risk
stratification.


Cyclin D1 (CCND1) G870A polymorphism has been known to be a risk factor
in multiple cancers. Cyclin D1 is a cell cycle regulator frequently
mutated, amplified and overexpressed in a variety of tumors. Activation
and over expression of CCND1 have been found in variety of tumors and
alterations in CCND1 are thought to be involved in carcinogensis. CCND1
polymorphism A870G interferes with splicing and studies showed DNA damage
in cells from subjects with ‘A’ allele to bypass G1/S check point of
the cell cycle control mechanism more easily than damage in cells with G
allele (wild type). A single base pair polymorphism (exon 4, G870A) in
the CCND1 gene affects gene splicing. This identification and validation
of contributing genetic factors such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) represents a critical step in the advance toward personalized
medicine. Several gene expression correlation studies have been done but
to our knowledge studies have not been reported on SNP’s of ERBB2 gene,
ESR gene and CCND1 combined effect correlating with high risk. In this
study, we examined the relationship between ERBB2 (codon 655), Estrogen
receptor (ER Intron1 TCyclin D1 (CCND1) G870A polymorphism has been known
to be a risk factor in multiple cancers. Cyclin D1 is a cell cycle
regulator frequently mutated, amplified and overexpressed in a variety of
tumors. Activation and over expression of CCND1 have been found in
variety of tumors and alterations in CCND1 are thought to be involved in
carcinogensis. CCND1 polymorphism A870G interferes with splicing and
studies showed DNA damage in cells from subjects with ‘A’ allele to
bypass G1/S check point of the cell cycle control mechanism more easily
than damage in cells with G allele (wild type). A single base pair
polymorphism (exon 4, G870A) in the CCND1 gene affects gene splicing.
This identification and validation of contributing genetic factors such
as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) represents a critical step in
the advance toward personalized medicine. Several gene expression
correlation studies have been done but to our knowledge studies have not
been reported on SNP’s of ERBB2 gene, ESR gene and CCND1 combined
effect correlating with high risk. In this study, we examined the
relationship between ERBB2 (codon 655), Estrogen receptor (ER Intron1
T<C) and cyclin D1 (Exon 4) polymorphic additive effect in cancers more
specific to breast cancer. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood
samples collected on study. The SNPs were tested by the PCR-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Our results show
individuals carrying CCND1 ‘A allele in combination with variant
ERBB2/BsmAI uncut allele are significantly high (PCyclin D1 (CCND1) G870A
polymorphism has been known to be a risk factor in multiple cancers.
Cyclin D1 is a cell cycle regulator frequently mutated, amplified and
overexpressed in a variety of tumors. Activation and over expression of
CCND1 have been found in variety of tumors and alterations in CCND1 are
thought to be involved in carcinogensis. CCND1 polymorphism A870G
interferes with splicing and studies showed DNA damage in cells from
subjects with ‘A’ allele to bypass G1/S check point of the cell cycle
control mechanism more easily than damage in cells with G allele (wild
type). A single base pair polymorphism (exon 4, G870A) in the CCND1 gene
affects gene splicing. This identification and validation of contributing
genetic factors such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) represents
a critical step in the advance toward personalized medicine. Several gene
expression correlation studies have been done but to our knowledge
studies have not been reported on SNP’s of ERBB2 gene, ESR gene and
CCND1 combined effect correlating with high risk. In this study, we
examined the relationship between ERBB2 (codon 655), Estrogen receptor
(ER Intron1 T<C) and cyclin D1 (Exon 4) polymorphic additive effect in
cancers more specific to breast cancer. Genomic DNA was extracted from
whole blood samples collected on study. The SNPs were tested by the
PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Our
results show individuals carrying CCND1 ‘A allele in combination with
variant ERBB2/BsmAI uncut allele are significantly high (P<0.004) in
cancer patients (N=232) as compared to controls. (N=222). Similarly
individuals carrying CCND1 Variant ‘A ‘ allele in combination with
ESR ‘C’ Allele showed high frequency with pCyclin D1 (CCND1) G870A
polymorphism has been known to be a risk factor in multiple cancers.
Cyclin D1 is a cell cycle regulator frequently mutated, amplified and
overexpressed in a variety of tumors. Activation and over expression of
CCND1 have been found in variety of tumors and alterations in CCND1 are
thought to be involved in carcinogensis. CCND1 polymorphism A870G
interferes with splicing and studies showed DNA damage in cells from
subjects with ‘A’ allele to bypass G1/S check point of the cell cycle
control mechanism more easily than damage in cells with G allele (wild
type). A single base pair polymorphism (exon 4, G870A) in the CCND1 gene
affects gene splicing. This identification and validation of contributing
genetic factors such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) represents
a critical step in the advance toward personalized medicine. Several gene
expression correlation studies have been done but to our knowledge
studies have not been reported on SNP’s of ERBB2 gene, ESR gene and
CCND1 combined effect correlating with high risk. In this study, we
examined the relationship between ERBB2 (codon 655), Estrogen receptor
(ER Intron1 T<C) and cyclin D1 (Exon 4) polymorphic additive effect in
cancers more specific to breast cancer. Genomic DNA was extracted from
whole blood samples collected on study. The SNPs were tested by the
PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Our
results show individuals carrying CCND1 ‘A allele in combination with
variant ERBB2/BsmAI uncut allele are significantly high (P<0.004) in
cancer patients (N=232) as compared to controls. (N=222). Similarly
individuals carrying CCND1 Variant ‘A ‘ allele in combination with
ESR ‘C’ Allele showed high frequency with p<0.009. Both these
combinations showed a strong and significant association with cancer but
individually, ERBB2 variant did not show any significant association, ESR
gene showed a borderline association and CCND1 showed strong association
independent of these two gene polymorphisms. Earlier few studies have
shown no association of ERBB2 mutation in agreement with the previous
reports. In conclusion our data suggests that in complex diseases a
single gene may not contribute to show its effect but in combination may
show a profound effect in evaluating the risk.


