Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The p53/p21 complex is a functional unit that regulates cancer
cell invasion and apoptosis by targeting Bcl-2 family proteins.


Although well known as a transcription factor, the p53 tumor suppressor
also exists in the cytoplasm (including the mitochondria) of normal and
cancer cells. Moreover, nuclear p53 is translocated to the mitochondria
upon apoptotic stimulation of cells. The cytoplasmic/mitochondrial p53
can bind pro-survival Bcl-2 family proteins (e.g., Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, and
Bcl-w), liberating Bax therefrom. Bax then exerts its pro-apoptotic or
anti-invasive function depending on experimental conditions. Given the
ability of p53 to interact with p21, we investigated the possible
involvement of p21 in these functions. Here, we show that whereas p53 can
bind to Bcl-w alone, it requires p21 to liberate Bax from Bcl-w and
suppress/promote cell invasion/death, respectively. p21 consistently
binds Bcl-w, forming a p53/p21/Bcl-w complex. Only this trifold complex,
but not any of the pairings, facilitates the release of Bax from Bcl-w.
Accordingly, a p53 derivative incapable of binding p21 fails to mediate
radiotherapy-induced tumor retardation and cell death in mice. We further
show that Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL also serves as a target of p53/p21 cooperative
action. Overall, our findings indicate that the p53/p21 complex rather
than p53 itself regulates cell invasion and death by targeting Bcl-2
proteins. We propose that the p53/p21 complex is a functional unit that
acts on multiple types of cellular components, providing a new foundation
for understanding the tumor-suppressing functions of p53 and p21.


