Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyisoprenylated cysteinyl amide inhibitors disrupt actin
cytoskeleton organization, induce cell rounding, and block invasion of
NSCLC.


Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) malignancy is dependent on cellular
processes that promote metastasis. F-actin organization is central to
cell migration, invasion, adhesion and angiogenesis which are all
processes involved in metastasis. F-actin remodeling is enhanced by the
overexpression and/or hyper-activation of some members of the Rho family
of small GTPases. Therefore agents that mitigate hyperactive Rho proteins
may be clinically relevant for controlling metastasis. We previously
reported the synthesis and characterization of polyisoprenylated
cysteinyl amide inhibitors (PCAIs) as potential inhibitors of the cancer
phenotype. In this report, we investigate the potential role of PCAIs
against NSCLC malignancy and show that as low as 0.5 µM PCAIs
significantly inhibit 2D and 3D NCI-H1299 cell migration by 48% and 45%,
respectively. PCAIs at 1 µM inhibited 2D and 3D NCI-H1299 cell invasion
through Matrigel by 50% and 85%, respectively. Additionally, exposure to
5 µM of the PCAIs, NSL-BA-040 caused a 38% drop in F-actin intensity at
the cell membrane 24 h post treatment. Importantly, this drop in F-actin
was accompanied by a 73% reduction in the number of filopodia per cell.
Interestingly, the polyisoprenyl group of the PCAIs is essential for
these effects, as NSL-100, an analog that lacks the farnesyl moiety, does
not elicit similar effects on F-actin assembly and organization. Put
together, our findings indicate that PCAIs disrupt F-actin assembly and
organization to suppress cell motility and invasion and point towards a
potential role of PCAIs as effective therapies for NSCLC metastasis and
invasion.


