Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem cell proliferation in human prostate cancer cells
utilizing a new defined 3D spheroid culture system.


Solid tumors grow in a three-dimensional (3D) spatial conformation,
resulting in a heterogeneous exposure to oxygen and nutrients as well as
to other physical and chemical stresses. To mimic the 3D spatial
conformation, 3D in vitro culture models have been used in cancer
research since the diffusion-limited distribution of oxygen (hypoxia),
nutrients, metabolites, and signaling molecules is not mimicked in
conventional two-dimensional (2D) monolayer cultures. One of the 3D in
vitro culture models, the tumorsphere culture is an emerging model for
studying and expanding the cancer stem cell (CSC) population. E006AA cell
line is a spontaneously immortalized cell line derived from a Gleason 6
localized prostate cancer in a hormone-naive prostate cancer patient of
African American descent. This cell line expresses androgen receptor and
was repeatedly reported to be non-tumorigenic in nude mice. However this
cell line forms continuously growing tumor in NOG-SCID triple-deficient
mice (i.e., NOG-SCID mice not having NK, B, and T-cells) and an
establishment of highly tumorgenic subline E006AA-hT was reported
suggesting this cell line has a potential for CSC proliferation by 3D
sphere cultures. Here we report tumorsphere cultures of E006AA cells by a
new 3D spheroid culture media system. The cells showed continuous
proliferation supported during serial passage of 3D tumorsphere cultures.
In addition to the stable proliferation, increases of Aldehyde
Dehydrogenase (ALDH) expressing CSC population were observed with the
increase of passages of 3D tumorsphere cultures.


