Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P53 pathway restoring compound P306 inhibits colorectal cancer
growth.


We recently reported that P01 is a potent p53 pathway-restoring small
molecule that acts through increasing levels of TAp73. Further, it also
interferes with the p73-mutant p53 protein-protein interaction and by
downregulation of ∆Np73 (Tian, Zhang and El-Deiry, abstract# 3830, AACR
2016). P01 is a member of the natural products that have been shown to
have potent anti-cancer activity against tumors with mutated p53. Based
on the structure of the pharmacophore of compound P01, we designed and
synthesized new analogs based on published structure-activity
relationship and organic synthesis papers. The newly synthesized analogs
were potent in reducing both short-term and long-term proliferation in a
broad panel of mutant p53 cell lines such as HT29, SW480, DLD-1,
MDA-MB-231and H1975 with EC50s in the range of 0.16 μM to 0.26 μM. We
are currently evaluating the anti-cancer effects of three analogs P301,
P304 and P306, of which only two of these analogs induce TAp73 as assayed
by western blot. We are currently characterizing the analog P306, which
is the most potent compound among them. P306 engages the apoptosis
pathway by upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins like PUMA, DR5, and BIM
and downregulation of anti-apoptotic markers such as Mcl-1 in a time-and
dose-dependent manner in colorectal cancer cell lines. P306 treatment
also downregulates both mRNA and protein level of MET and EGFR in HT29
cells that overexpress MET and EGFR receptors. We are currently
investigating the mechanisms of induction of both PUMA and DR5 in mutant
p53 cells and determining whether either gene is necessary for the
apoptotic effects of P306 in colorectal cancer cells. Our preliminary
data indicates that upregulation of DR5 is through the ATF4/CHOP pathway
post-P306 treatment. It has been reported that Puma is a target gene of
ATF4, CHOP and p73, however, we found that none of them is responsible
for P306-induced upregulation of PUMA in p53 mutated DLD1, SW480 or
HCT116 p53-null cell lines. Thus, our ongoing in vitro studies are
focused on further understanding the mechanism of action of P306 in
mutant p53 cells and potentially exploring combinations with FDA-approved
therapies. We are also in the process of conducting, first-in animal
studies of P306 as single agent or in combination with chemotherapy or
targeted therapy.


