Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brain metastatic microenvironment reshapes cancer cell metabolism
through epigenetic up-regulation of glutamate decarboxylase 1.


Cancer metabolism has been well documented to influence primary tumor
development. Yet, the role of deregulated metabolism in metastasis
progression is not well understood. Based on a distinct metabolic
transcriptome profile in brain metastases compared to their primary tumor
counterparts, we hypothesized that metabolic transcriptome shifting
during metastatic evolution is crucial for metastatic success to the
brain. Here we show that, despite a global down-regulation of multiple
metabolic pathways in the brain metastatic tumors, the expression of the
GABA metabolic pathway mediator glutamate decarboxylase 1 (GAD1) is
significantly up-regulated. Using cell based co-culture models for
different primary and brain metastatic microenvironments and in vivo
brain metastasis models, we demonstrate that down-regulation of DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) induced by the brain microenvironment results
in decreased GAD1 promoter methylation and subsequent up-regulation of
GAD1 expression in tumor cells. To dynamically visualize the cellular
metabolic responses mediated by GAD1, we utilized the Peredox biosensor
to monitor the cytosolic NADH:NAD+ equilibrium in tumor cells using
time-lapse imaging. By knocking down of GAD1 induced by primary glia cell
co-culture, we abolished the capability of tumor cells to utilize
extracellular glutamine, leading to an NADH accumulation in the cytosol
and a more oxidative cellular status. Lastly, either loss of GAD1
genetically or targeting GABA metabolic pathway by the repurposing of a
neurological drug, vigabatrin, results in a significant decrease in brain
metastasis incidence. Taken together, our results demonstrated that brain
microenvironment-specific metabolic shifting through GAD1 promoter
de-methylation drives brain metastasis outgrowth.


