Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delivering selective and cell-active inhibitors of V804M mutant
RET kinase through structure-guided drug discovery.


Activating gene fusions in the RET receptor tyrosine kinase have been
found to drive 1-2% of lung adenocarcinomas and therefore offer an
attractive target for targeted therapy. Whilst non-selective tyrosine
kinase inhibitors with RET activity are efficacious in this setting,
their use is generally limited by dose limiting toxicity associated with
their more potent activity versus other targets, specifically KDR
(VEGFR2) in the case of cabozantinib and vandetanib. Given this
limitation, there is considerable interest in developing more selective
inhibitors of RET kinase. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are prone to early
clinical failure due to mutations in the kinase ATPase binding domain,
which render the kinase catalytically active but no longer sensitive to
drug treatment. Such mutations often occur in the so-called
“gatekeeper” region and in this specific case, resistance is
predicted to arise from a Val-Met or Val-Leu mutation at residue 804.
Through a combination of computational methods, structural biology and
drug design, we have identified and further optimized a series of
inhibitors of the V804M mutant RET kinase which show sub-micromolar
cellular activity in cells driven by V804M RET. Moreover, these agents
show excellent selectivity against the wtRET kinase and KDR. As such,
these agents may offer valuable start-points for second-generation RET
inhibitors for use in patents who relapse after treatment with first
generation selective RET inhibitors.


