Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic reprograming of immune cells through selective
inhibition of HDAC6 reduces suppressive phenotypes and augments
anti-tumor properties of T-cells.


Alteration of the epigenetic landscape of immune cells can modify the
pattern of gene expression, thus resulting in phenotypic and functional
changes. Small molecule inhibitors targeting epigenetic modifiers, such
as histone deacetylases (HDACs), have been shown to reduce tumor growth.
Besides promoting direct anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target
immune cells and alter their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that
the HDAC6 selective inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat)
decrease the function of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T
regulatory (Treg) cells, maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells,
and do not reduce viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells derived from melanoma patients were treated with
ACY-241, and the phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the
suppressive molecules ARG1 (pAlteration of the epigenetic landscape of
immune cells can modify the pattern of gene expression, thus resulting in
phenotypic and functional changes. Small molecule inhibitors targeting
epigenetic modifiers, such as histone deacetylases (HDACs), have been
shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides promoting direct anti-tumor
effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune cells and alter their gene
regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the HDAC6 selective inhibitors
ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease the function of myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory (Treg) cells, maintain
an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not reduce viability of
immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from
melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the phenotype of MDSCs
was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules ARG1 (p<0.01) and
NOS2 (pAlteration of the epigenetic landscape of immune cells can modify
the pattern of gene expression, thus resulting in phenotypic and
functional changes. Small molecule inhibitors targeting epigenetic
modifiers, such as histone deacetylases (HDACs), have been shown to
reduce tumor growth. Besides promoting direct anti-tumor effects, HDAC
inhibitors also target immune cells and alter their gene regulation.
Here, we demonstrate that the HDAC6 selective inhibitors ACY-241 and
ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease the function of myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory (Treg) cells, maintain an
effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not reduce viability of immune
cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from melanoma
patients were treated with ACY-241, and the phenotype of MDSCs was
assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2
(p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+ and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+
MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs. To gain insight into
other suppressive populations, we evaluated the phenotype and function of
Treg cells derived from melanoma patients. Cultures of CD3+ T-cells
treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in decreased expression of
FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs (CD4+CD25+CD127-; pAlteration of the
epigenetic landscape of immune cells can modify the pattern of gene
expression, thus resulting in phenotypic and functional changes. Small
molecule inhibitors targeting epigenetic modifiers, such as histone
deacetylases (HDACs), have been shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides
promoting direct anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune
cells and alter their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the
HDAC6 selective inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease
the function of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory
(Treg) cells, maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not
reduce viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear
cells derived from melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the
phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules
ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+
and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+ MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs.
To gain insight into other suppressive populations, we evaluated the
phenotype and function of Treg cells derived from melanoma patients.
Cultures of CD3+ T-cells treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in
decreased expression of FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs
(CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001). ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs exhibited less
suppressive activity against responding conventional T-cells in standard
assays, compared to Tregs pre-treated with DMSO control (pAlteration of
the epigenetic landscape of immune cells can modify the pattern of gene
expression, thus resulting in phenotypic and functional changes. Small
molecule inhibitors targeting epigenetic modifiers, such as histone
deacetylases (HDACs), have been shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides
promoting direct anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune
cells and alter their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the
HDAC6 selective inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease
the function of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory
(Treg) cells, maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not
reduce viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear
cells derived from melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the
phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules
ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+
and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+ MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs.
To gain insight into other suppressive populations, we evaluated the
phenotype and function of Treg cells derived from melanoma patients.
Cultures of CD3+ T-cells treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in
decreased expression of FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs
(CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001). ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs exhibited less
suppressive activity against responding conventional T-cells in standard
assays, compared to Tregs pre-treated with DMSO control (p<0.01). CD3+
T-cells exposed to ACY-241 or ACY-1215 were activated via CD3/CD28
co-stimulation to assess effects on cytokine production. Selective HDAC6
inhibition shifted T-cell differentiation towards Th1-type (Tbet+) over
Th2-type (GATA3+), compared to DMSO (pAlteration of the epigenetic
landscape of immune cells can modify the pattern of gene expression, thus
resulting in phenotypic and functional changes. Small molecule inhibitors
targeting epigenetic modifiers, such as histone deacetylases (HDACs),
have been shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides promoting direct
anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune cells and alter
their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the HDAC6 selective
inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease the function of
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory (Treg) cells,
maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not reduce
viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear cells
derived from melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the
phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules
ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+
and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+ MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs.
To gain insight into other suppressive populations, we evaluated the
phenotype and function of Treg cells derived from melanoma patients.
Cultures of CD3+ T-cells treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in
decreased expression of FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs
(CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001). ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs exhibited less
suppressive activity against responding conventional T-cells in standard
assays, compared to Tregs pre-treated with DMSO control (p<0.01). CD3+
T-cells exposed to ACY-241 or ACY-1215 were activated via CD3/CD28
co-stimulation to assess effects on cytokine production. Selective HDAC6
inhibition shifted T-cell differentiation towards Th1-type (Tbet+) over
Th2-type (GATA3+), compared to DMSO (p<0.05). Additionally, Th2 cytokines
(e.g. IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13) were significantly decreased
(pAlteration of the epigenetic landscape of immune cells can modify the
pattern of gene expression, thus resulting in phenotypic and functional
changes. Small molecule inhibitors targeting epigenetic modifiers, such
as histone deacetylases (HDACs), have been shown to reduce tumor growth.
Besides promoting direct anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target
immune cells and alter their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that
the HDAC6 selective inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat)
decrease the function of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T
regulatory (Treg) cells, maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells,
and do not reduce viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells derived from melanoma patients were treated with
ACY-241, and the phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the
suppressive molecules ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in
CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+ and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+ MDSC populations,
suggesting less potent MDSCs. To gain insight into other suppressive
populations, we evaluated the phenotype and function of Treg cells
derived from melanoma patients. Cultures of CD3+ T-cells treated with
ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in decreased expression of FOXP3 and reduced
frequency of Tregs (CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001). ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs
exhibited less suppressive activity against responding conventional
T-cells in standard assays, compared to Tregs pre-treated with DMSO
control (p<0.01). CD3+ T-cells exposed to ACY-241 or ACY-1215 were
activated via CD3/CD28 co-stimulation to assess effects on cytokine
production. Selective HDAC6 inhibition shifted T-cell differentiation
towards Th1-type (Tbet+) over Th2-type (GATA3+), compared to DMSO
(p<0.05). Additionally, Th2 cytokines (e.g. IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10,
IL-13) were significantly decreased (p<0.05). In accordance with
decreased Th2 differentiation, mTORC signal transduction, including
phosphor-SGK1, was similarly reduced (pAlteration of the epigenetic
landscape of immune cells can modify the pattern of gene expression, thus
resulting in phenotypic and functional changes. Small molecule inhibitors
targeting epigenetic modifiers, such as histone deacetylases (HDACs),
have been shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides promoting direct
anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune cells and alter
their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the HDAC6 selective
inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease the function of
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory (Treg) cells,
maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not reduce
viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear cells
derived from melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the
phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules
ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+
and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+ MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs.
To gain insight into other suppressive populations, we evaluated the
phenotype and function of Treg cells derived from melanoma patients.
Cultures of CD3+ T-cells treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in
decreased expression of FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs
(CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001). ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs exhibited less
suppressive activity against responding conventional T-cells in standard
assays, compared to Tregs pre-treated with DMSO control (p<0.01). CD3+
T-cells exposed to ACY-241 or ACY-1215 were activated via CD3/CD28
co-stimulation to assess effects on cytokine production. Selective HDAC6
inhibition shifted T-cell differentiation towards Th1-type (Tbet+) over
Th2-type (GATA3+), compared to DMSO (p<0.05). Additionally, Th2 cytokines
(e.g. IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13) were significantly decreased
(p<0.05). In accordance with decreased Th2 differentiation, mTORC signal
transduction, including phosphor-SGK1, was similarly reduced (p<0.05).
Targeted inhibition of mTORC signaling (i.e. SGK1 inhibitor)
recapitulated decreased Th2 cytokine production (pAlteration of the
epigenetic landscape of immune cells can modify the pattern of gene
expression, thus resulting in phenotypic and functional changes. Small
molecule inhibitors targeting epigenetic modifiers, such as histone
deacetylases (HDACs), have been shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides
promoting direct anti-tumor effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune
cells and alter their gene regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the
HDAC6 selective inhibitors ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease
the function of myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory
(Treg) cells, maintain an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not
reduce viability of immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear
cells derived from melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the
phenotype of MDSCs was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules
ARG1 (p<0.01) and NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+
and CD14+HLA DR lo CD33+ MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs.
To gain insight into other suppressive populations, we evaluated the
phenotype and function of Treg cells derived from melanoma patients.
Cultures of CD3+ T-cells treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in
decreased expression of FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs
(CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001). ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs exhibited less
suppressive activity against responding conventional T-cells in standard
assays, compared to Tregs pre-treated with DMSO control (p<0.01). CD3+
T-cells exposed to ACY-241 or ACY-1215 were activated via CD3/CD28
co-stimulation to assess effects on cytokine production. Selective HDAC6
inhibition shifted T-cell differentiation towards Th1-type (Tbet+) over
Th2-type (GATA3+), compared to DMSO (p<0.05). Additionally, Th2 cytokines
(e.g. IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13) were significantly decreased
(p<0.05). In accordance with decreased Th2 differentiation, mTORC signal
transduction, including phosphor-SGK1, was similarly reduced (p<0.05).
Targeted inhibition of mTORC signaling (i.e. SGK1 inhibitor)
recapitulated decreased Th2 cytokine production (p<0.05). In order to
address effector immune function, tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
were harvested from melanoma biopsies and expanded in vitro in the
presence of ACY-1215 or ACY-241, and IL-2. Measuring CD45RA, CD45RO,
CD62L and/or CCR7, an accumulation of central memory CD4+ and CD8+
T-cells was observed (pAlteration of the epigenetic landscape of immune
cells can modify the pattern of gene expression, thus resulting in
phenotypic and functional changes. Small molecule inhibitors targeting
epigenetic modifiers, such as histone deacetylases (HDACs), have been
shown to reduce tumor growth. Besides promoting direct anti-tumor
effects, HDAC inhibitors also target immune cells and alter their gene
regulation. Here, we demonstrate that the HDAC6 selective inhibitors
ACY-241 and ACY-1215 (ricolinostat) decrease the function of myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSC) and T regulatory (Treg) cells, maintain
an effector phenotype by CD8+ T cells, and do not reduce viability of
immune cells. First, peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from
melanoma patients were treated with ACY-241, and the phenotype of MDSCs
was assessed. Expression of the suppressive molecules ARG1 (p<0.01) and
NOS2 (p<0.05) was decreased in CD14+HLA DR lo CD11b+ and CD14+HLA DR lo
CD33+ MDSC populations, suggesting less potent MDSCs. To gain insight
into other suppressive populations, we evaluated the phenotype and
function of Treg cells derived from melanoma patients. Cultures of CD3+
T-cells treated with ACY-1215 or ACY-241 resulted in decreased expression
of FOXP3 and reduced frequency of Tregs (CD4+CD25+CD127-; p<0.001).
ACY-1215 pre-treated Tregs exhibited less suppressive activity against
responding conventional T-cells in standard assays, compared to Tregs
pre-treated with DMSO control (p<0.01). CD3+ T-cells exposed to ACY-241
or ACY-1215 were activated via CD3/CD28 co-stimulation to assess effects
on cytokine production. Selective HDAC6 inhibition shifted T-cell
differentiation towards Th1-type (Tbet+) over Th2-type (GATA3+), compared
to DMSO (p<0.05). Additionally, Th2 cytokines (e.g. IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-10, IL-13) were significantly decreased (p<0.05). In accordance with
decreased Th2 differentiation, mTORC signal transduction, including
phosphor-SGK1, was similarly reduced (p<0.05). Targeted inhibition of
mTORC signaling (i.e. SGK1 inhibitor) recapitulated decreased Th2
cytokine production (p<0.05). In order to address effector immune
function, tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were harvested from
melanoma biopsies and expanded in vitro in the presence of ACY-1215 or
ACY-241, and IL-2. Measuring CD45RA, CD45RO, CD62L and/or CCR7, an
accumulation of central memory CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells was observed
(p<0.05). Activated TILs treated with ACY-241 or ACY-1215 displayed
higher expression of IFN-gamma and CD107a. Collectively, these data
indicate that epigenetic reprograming of immune cells by HDAC6 selective
inhibitors may decrease the function of suppressive subsets (e.g. Tregs,
MDSCs), while enhancing the accumulation of anti-tumor memory and
effector T-cell subsets.


