Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of mutant KRAS cell and tumor growth by
PHT-7.3, an inhibitor of the KRas signaling nanocluster protein Cnk1.


Activating mutations of KRas is the most common proto-oncogenic event in
human cancer but there remains no effective therapy for patients
harboring mutated KRas (mut-KRas). Despite intense efforts, tight
nucleotide binding, few defined pockets, and redundant localization
signals have impeded the development of compounds that bind or inhibit
KRas. We have identified connector enhancer of kinase suppressor of Ras 1
(Cnk1) as a critical mediator for growth driven by mut-KRas in human
cancer cells. Cnk1 co-localizes with mutant KRas at the membrane and
deletion of Cnk1 abrogates KRas activation and the activation of the Ras
effectors Ral and Rho. Cnk1 deletion caused cells with mutant KRas to
accumulate at the G1 checkpoint similar to selective deletion of mutant
KRas itself. Following a screen and initial structural optimization a
small molecule probe compound PHT-7.3 was identified and shown to bind
selectively to the pleckstrin homology PH domain of Cnk1 preventing Cnk1
and mut-KRas co-localization. PHT-7.3 inhibited mut-KRas but not wt-KRas
non small cell lung cancer (nsclc) cell growth, and selectively blocks
mut-KRas downstream signaling in cells. PHT-7.3 exhibited cytostatic
antitumor activity in the mut-KRas(G12S) A549 and mut-KRas(G12V) H441
nsclc xenografts, but not in the wt-KRas H1975 nsclc xenograft. Mut-KRas
downstream signaling was inhibited by PHT-7.3 in the xenografts with
downregulation of activated Rho and Ral signaling. PHT-7.3 showed further
increased antitumor activity in A549 xenografts in combination with
erlotinib or trametinib. Thus, the work identifies the PH domain of Cnk1
as a druggable target whose inhibition selectively blocks mutant-KRas
activation, and PHT-7.3 as a lead agent in the development of therapies
for KRas tumors.


