Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a first in class APRIL fully blocking antibody
BION-1301 for the treatment of multiple myeloma.


APRIL, or tumor necrosis factor super family member 13 (TNFSF13), is a
ligand for the receptors B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA) and
transmembrane activator calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand (CAML)
interactor (TACI). APRIL serum levels are enhanced in patients diagnosed
with multiple myeloma (MM), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and
colorectal carcinoma and are correlated with poor prognosis.

As a paracrine factor produced by osteoclasts, macrophages and other
cells in the bone marrow niche, APRIL binds to BCMA to drive
proliferation and survival of human Multiple Myeloma (MM) cells and
induces resistance to several standard of care agents. Using a mouse
anti-human APRIL blocking antibody 01A1 originally discovered using
Aduroâ€™s B-Select platform, we demonstrated that osteoclast-induced MM
cell in vitro proliferation and survival is dependent on APRIL. In these
co-cultures, cytolytic activity of lenalidomide and bortezomib is
significantly enhanced by 01A in a dose-dependent fashion2. Importantly,
APRIL drives and 01A inhibits expression of an immunosuppressive gene set
including the immune checkpoint programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1),
interleukin-10, vascular endothelial growth factor, and transforming
growth factor beta.

The human APRIL antagonist antibody 01A was humanized and designated
BION-1301. The antibody binds an epitope overlapping the BCMA and TACI
binding sites potently and fully blocks BCMA and TACI binding (IC50 The
human APRIL antagonist antibody 01A was humanized and designated
BION-1301. The antibody binds an epitope overlapping the BCMA and TACI
binding sites potently and fully blocks BCMA and TACI binding (IC50 <1
nM). Biophysical and functional experiments indicated that BION-1301
recapitulated all characteristics of 01A. In vivo, BION-1301 was shown to
suppress T cell-independent B cell responses to NP-Ficoll. Furthermore,
APRIL blockade demonstrated single agent anti-multiple myeloma activity
in a humanized SCID model2 confirming its activity in vivo, and
potentially indicating that BION-1301 is active targeting multiple
myeloma cells in a tumor-protective bone marrow microenvironment.

To our knowledge, BION-1301 is a first-in-class humanized APRIL
antagonist demonstrated in to inhibit multiple myeloma survival, drug
resistance and an immune suppressive phenotype preclinical. These data
suggest a rationale to develop BION-1301 as a single agent, and in
combination with lenalidomide, bortezomib, or possibly checkpoint
inhibitors such as anti-PD-1. BION-1301 is expected to enter Phase 1 in
2017.

1) Guadagnoli at al. Blood. 2011 Jun 23;117(25):6856-65

2) Yu-Tzu et al. Blood. 2016 Jun 23;127(25):3225-36


