Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenotypic human tumor cell line profiling and predictive
biomarker analysis for epigenetic inhibitors.


In recent years, epigenetic target inhibitors have emerged as viable
therapeutics for treating various types of cancers. Testing of the
epigenetic inhibitors in cell proliferation assays revealed that
inhibition of many epigenetic targets resulted in a significantly delayed
drug response that is not revealed by conventional, 72-hour cell growth
assays. OncoPanel LT™ from Eurofins Pharma Discovery Services is
developed specifically for evaluation of compounds with a protracted
mechanism of action, and consists of a large collection of cell lines
with broad cancer type and subtype representation, and extensive genomic
characterization. We have tested decitabine, a DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor, panobinostat, a histone deacteylase inhibitor, GSK-343, an
EZH2 inhibitor, GSK-J4, a JMJD3/UTX inhibitor, and JQ1, a BRD2/3/4
inhibitor in OncoPanel LT™. These epigenetic inhibitors were incubated
for 10 days with more than 200 human tumor cell lines and the inhibition
data were analyzed to determine IC50, EC50, and GI50 values. These
inhibition data, as well as the genomic features of the cell lines, were
utilized to perform univariate genomic analysis to identify predictive
biomarkers of response. We will discuss the activity of compounds against
this cell line panel, as well as statistically significant biomarkers of
response, based on the univariate genomic analysis.


