Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor TUSC2 immunogene therapy is synergistic with
anti-PD1 in lung cancer syngeneic mouse models.


TUSC2, a pro-apoptotic tumor suppressor gene whose expression is lost or
decreased in most lung cancers, activates the innate immune system
through initiation of broad spectrum cytokine secretion and natural
killer (NK) cell activation. TUSC2 delivered systemically by nanovesicles
has mediated tumor regression in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer
clinical trials. We studied the effect of TUSC2 on immune cell
populations and the anti-tumor activity of TUSC2 in combination with
anti-PD1 checkpoint blockade in two syngeneic mouse models: C57BL/6 mice
subcutaneously injected with murine lung adenocarcinoma cell line
CMT/167-luc cells (KrasG12V mutation) and 344SQ (KrasG12D allele and a
knock-in Trp53R172HÎ”G allele) adenocarcinomas which metastasize to the
lung in 129S2 mice. Tumor growth was monitored by scoring ex-vivo
luminescence using the IVIS Imaging System 200. Multi-color flow
cytometry was used for immune profiling of circulating immune cells after
nanovesicle mediated TUSC2 intravenous injection. Cytokine gene
expression in response to TUSC2 in sorted immune subpopulations was
determined by real-time PCR. Tumor growth was significantly reduced with
TUSC2 treatment compared with no treatment in both subcutaneous and
metastatic mouse models. Synergistic anti-tumor activity was observed
when TUSC2 was combined with anti-PD1 verified in five independent
experiments. In the lung metastasis model, mice treated with TUSC2 +
anti-PD1 lived significantly longer than with single agent treatment.
Circulating NK cells increased three fold following TUSC2 nanovesicle
intravenous injection both in tumor free and tumor bearing mice which
correlated with tumor regression and survival. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
responses were increased whereas Tregs and MDSCs decreased with TUSC2
alone and TUSC2+anti-PD1 treatment. The levels of T cell checkpoint
markers PD1, CTLA-4, LAG-3, and TIM-3 evaluated by flow cytometry were
decreased after TUSC2 treatment. TUSC2 anti-tumor response was abolished
when NK cells were depleted indicating NK cells are important mediators
of the TUSC2 treatment effect. Single cell suspension analysis by flow
cytometry showed high numbers of NK cells infiltrating lung tumor
metastases after TUSC2 treatment. The number of tumor nodules in the lung
was significantly less following treatment with TUSC2 nanovesicles
compared with control. IL-15 gene expression which mediates NK cell
proliferation, was increased by TUSC2. In conclusion, systemic TUSC2
nanovesicle immunogene therapy combined with checkpoint blockade showed
synergistic anti-tumor efficacy and activated the immune system through
upregulation of NK cells and CTL and downregulation of regulatory cells.


