Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Residential airborne heavy metal concentrations and breast cancer
characteristics.


Background: Ambient air metal concentrations have recently been
implicated in the etiology of breast cancer. Previous studies have shown
airborne concentrations of arsenic and cadmium are associated with the
development of estrogen receptor-negative tumors. This study aims to
replicate these findings and examine the role of other toxic and
essential heavy metals.

Methods: Participants were women who were diagnosed with breast cancer in
Chicago between 2005 and 2008. We examined estrogen and progesterone
receptor-negative (ER-/PR-) and high-grade tumors as markers of
aggressive breast cancer, and estimated 15-year markers of exposure of 11
heavy metals. Exposures were calculated using census tract-level airborne
concentrations from the National-scale Air Toxics Assessment and
participantsâ€™ residential histories. We adjusted all models for
socioeconomic status and reproductive factors.

Results: We found that prevalent ER-/PR- tumors were associated with
increased residential exposure to airborne concentrations of antimony (Q4
vs Q1: OR= 1.81; 95% CI: 0.95, 3.44; Ptrend= 0.04), cobalt (Q4 vs Q1: OR=
2.37; 95% CI: 1.26, 4.45; Ptrend Results: We found that prevalent ER-/PR-
tumors were associated with increased residential exposure to airborne
concentrations of antimony (Q4 vs Q1: OR= 1.81; 95% CI: 0.95, 3.44;
Ptrend= 0.04), cobalt (Q4 vs Q1: OR= 2.37; 95% CI: 1.26, 4.45; Ptrend <
0.01), manganese (Q4 vs Q1: OR= 2.55; 95% CI: 1.24, 5.24; Ptrend= 0.04),
and selenium (Q4 vs Q1: OR= 1.85; 95% CI: 1.03, 3.29; Ptrend= 0.05), and
also identified marginally significant trends for arsenic (Ptrend= 0.06),
chromium (Ptrend= 0.08), lead (Ptrend= 0.08), and mercury (Ptrend= 0.07).
We did not identify any overall associations with high-grade tumors,
however when stratifying by menopausal status we found that antimony (Q4
vs Q1: OR= 6.97, 95% CI: 1.61-30.19) and arsenic (Q4 vs Q1: OR= 6.97, 95%
CI: 1.61-30.19) were associated with prevalent high-grade tumors in
premenopausal women only.

Discussion: This study found further support for a role of airborne
arsenic concentrations, and novel evidence implicating other airborne
estrogen-pathway disrupting metal concentrations, in the development of
aggressive breast cancer subtypes. Additionally, this is the first study
to implicate heavy metal exposure in the etiology of high-grade tumors.
These results suggest that long-term, low-dose exposures to certain heavy
metals play a role in the etiology of aggressive breast cancer
characteristics. Airborne exposures have the ability to affect large
populations and findings from this and similar studies have large public
health implications.


