Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mapping the molecular communication within the tumor
microenvironment of pancreatic cancer as well as between tumor and
peritumoral tissue.


We are analyzing in detail the molecular communication between the
different cell types in the microenvironment of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDAC). Also, its regulation is being investigated,
looking at aspects such as the kind and mixture of molecules needed for
triggering a particular regulative function, and unraveling the inter-
and intracellular processes utilized to transmit a molecular message.

Although a rare tumor entity, adding up to only about 3% of all cancer
cases in the Western world, PDAC is the fourth most frequent cause of
cancer-related death; mortality is nearly identical to incidence. There
is no real remedy apart from surgery, which can be applied to only 10 to
20% of patients. Even then, basically all patients will experience tumor
recurrence.

Our study is based on a large basic set of data at the levels of DNA, RNA
and protein that was generated from some 1000 pancreatic tumor samples
[1], supplemented with information from studies that aim at an
elucidation of functional molecules and comparative analyses in other
tumors. This has already led to the creation of basic functional
knowledge about metastasis [e.g., 2], the establishment of means for
diagnosis [3, 4], an accurate disease prognosis [1], the characterization
of communication processes [5] and the identification of new therapeutic
avenues [6].

At the conference, we will report about the status of mapping
particularly the protein-mediated communication between the different
cell types in the tumor microenvironment. Also, we will show results
about the effect that PDAC tissue has on the wider peritumoral
environment and vice versa. The peritumoral tissue is exhibiting a field
defect that does not seem to be dependent on DNA-methylation. A
comparison of PDAC and cystic pancreatic tumors revealed that differences
in communicating with the peritumoral tissue could actually be more
important to the known pathological difference between the two cancer
entities than the molecular variations in the tumor cells.

1. Bauer et al. (2017), work submitted for publication

2. Botla et al. (2016) Cancer Res. 76, 4149-4159

3. Keller et al. (2014) BMC Med. 12, 224

4. Moskalev et al. (2015) Oncotarget 6, 4418-4427

5. Dror et al. (2016) Nature Cell Biol. 18, 1006-1017

6. Jandaghi et al. (2016) Gastroenterology, in press (doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2016.08.040)

www.dkfz.de/funct_genome/


