Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the EZH2 inhibitor tazemetostat as a monotherapy and
in combination with multiple myeloma therapies in preclinical models.


The EZH2 inhibitor tazemetostat (EPZ-6438) is currently being evaluated
in phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of non-Hodgkinâ€™s Lymphoma
(NHL). EZH2 inhibitors have shown anti-proliferative effects in multiple
preclinical models of NHL and objective clinical responses have been
reported in patients with B-cell lymphomas in phase 1 and phase 2 studies
of tazemetostat. Mounting evidence suggests that EZH2 is an important
regulator of B cell differentiation, both in normal B-cells and in B-cell
lymphoma, and may be an important mediator of cell fate in B-cell
malignancies in the clinic. Consistent with its essential role in
regulating B cell differentiation, recent studies have also shown a
dependence on EZH2 activity in multiple myeloma (MM), a disease arising
from terminally-differentiated B-cell lymphocyte plasmablasts. Frequent
genetic alterations of epigenetic modulators are observed in MM, pointing
towards an important role in the initiation and maintenance of this
disease. Dysregulation of the H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2, its
corresponding histone demethylase UTX and the H3K36 methyltransferase
WHSC1 in MM suggest that disruption of the balance of histone methylation
may be fundamental to MM pathogenesis in a subset of cases. Indeed,
inhibition of EZH2 alone has shown potent anti-proliferative effects both
in in vitro and in vivo preclinical models of MM. Here, we describe the
effects of small molecule EZH2 inhibitors as monotherapy and in
combination with standard of care agents in preclinical models of MM.
Tazemetostat selectively inhibits intracellular H3K27 methylation in MM
cell lines and elicits a robust anti-proliferative effect in 14-day
assays. Following demonstration of single agent activity, we then
investigated potential for combinatorial activity of tazemetostat with
first and second line therapies for multiple myeloma as well as other
non-approved but emerging therapies. Synergistic anti-proliferative
activity was observed when tazemetostat was combined with glucocorticoid
receptor agonists (dexamethasone, prednisolone), small molecule immune
system modulators (lenalidomide, pomalidomide) and proteasome inhibitors
(bortezomib, ixazomib) when cells were primed with tazemetostat for seven
days prior to the addition of the standard of care drugs. Combination
activity was also observed with an alternate treatment schedule where
cells were co-treated with tazemetostat along with the combination
partner for seven days. Studies with selected therapeutic modalities were
expanded into in vivo xenograft models to further evaluate monotherapy
and combination activity of EZH2 inhibitors in MM.


