Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor signaling in FTE of BRCA mutation carriers.


Genetic and reproductive factors predicate epidemiological risk factors
underlying epithelial ovarian cancer. The fallopian tube epithelia (FTE),
the presumptive etiological site of high-grade serous ovarian cancer
(HGSC), is a hormonal responsive tissue. Estrogen is known to promote
cell proliferation and its metabolism produces reactive oxygen species
that damage DNA and promote tumorigenesis. Estrogen receptor (ER) is
rarely mutated, amplified or deleted in HGSC, yet only 10% of patients
respond to anti-estrogen treatment, suggesting that intrinsic variables
to the ER pathway contribute to this clinical outcome. TP53 mutations
occur in almost 100% of HGSCs, indicating that mutated p53 supports a
model as an early event in the pathogenesis of HGSC. We hypothesized that
in the presence of dysfunctional p53, subsequent promiscuous binding of
ER will yield aberrant signaling, ultimately significantly contributing
to cellular transformation. Mutant p53 and ER co-localize in FTE cells,
suggesting potential synergy. We established cell lines with p53
mutations and treated them with estradiol, an estrogen analog, to observe
any changes in response. The genome binding sites of ER-regulated
transcription factors were then identified and mapped by whole genome
chromatin immunoprecipitation-deep sequencing (ChIP-Seq). The data
generated will facilitate the development of gene signatures that will
predict response to anti-estrogen therapy in serous ovarian cancer
patients, and contribute to the discovery of biomarkers to more
accurately identify patients who will benefit from hormonal therapies.


