Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cdk4/6 kinase inhibitor resistance in prostate cancer.


Non-organ confined prostate cancer (PCa) is often effectively, but only
transiently treated by targeting the androgen receptor (AR) signaling
axis through androgen depletion strategies, often coupled with AR
antagonists. Unfortunately, disease recurs within a median of 3-4 years,
presenting as castration resistant PCa (CRPC), for which there are
limited therapeutic options. This emphasizes the need for more
efficacious drugs and a patient-tailored approach towards cancer therapy
to improve disease outcome. One class of drugs currently tested
clinically, Cdk4/6 kinase inhibitors, blocks phosphorylation of the
retinoblastoma (RB) tumor suppressor, thereby boosting its function, and
likely preventing castration resistance. As Cdk4/6 inhibitor resistance
has already been reported in other cancers, some PCa patients are
anticipated to develop drug resistance. Here, we created
palbociclib-resistant PCa cell models by continuously culturing them in
presence of the drug to unravel mechanisms of acquired resistance, and
assessed them for cross-resistance to ribociclib and response to other
therapeutics. While the parental PCa cell models, Cdk4/6 inhibitors
efficiently induce a G1 cell cycle arrest, the resistant cell lines
bypass this cell cycle checkpoint. Although loss of RB is a known
mechanism for Cdk4/6i resistance, none of the models lost RB expression.
Strikingly, these originally hormone-sensitive cell lines, upon
developing Cdk4/6 inhibitor resistance display altered response to
selected therapeutic regimens. Mechanisms of resistance, as informed by
Whole Exome Sequencing and RNASeq, will be discussed.


