Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosome instability mechanisms in breast cancer among African
Americans and Caucasians.


Significant disparities exist in breast cancer among African Americans
(AAs) women compared to Caucasians. Even though AAs are less likely to
undergo regular mammograms due to access barriers, it is unlikely that
differences in screen based detection accounts entirely for outcome
disparities. While the current guidelines recommend women begin
mammography at age 40 or 50, AA women may be at increased risk for
delayed diagnosis since >10% of breast cancer cases in AAs are diagnosed
in women younger Significant disparities exist in breast cancer among
African Americans (AAs) women compared to Caucasians. Even though AAs are
less likely to undergo regular mammograms due to access barriers, it is
unlikely that differences in screen based detection accounts entirely for
outcome disparities. While the current guidelines recommend women begin
mammography at age 40 or 50, AA women may be at increased risk for
delayed diagnosis since >10% of breast cancer cases in AAs are diagnosed
in women younger <40 years compared with 5% of Caucasians. This
highlights the importance of defining optimal ethnically appropriate age
of screening especially given the disproportionate mortality among
younger black women patients. Therefore, an alternative approach using
biomarkers should be considered in order to develop ethnically
appropriate measures for detecting the disease in the earliest stages.
Genomic instability has long been recognized as a major driver of
carcinogenesis occurring early on and increasing in complexity with
disease progression. However, to date little is known about the
underlying mechanisms associated with such instability among the
different ethnic groups. In this study we hypothesized that alterations
in telomere length and dysfunctional centrosome apparatus are underlying
mechanisms associated with ethnic-based genomic instability. We
investigated alterations in centrosome apparatus, misaligned chromosomes
and spindle angle orientation in AA [HCC 70] and Caucasian [HCC1395] cell
lines using confocal microscopy. Our results demonstrated significant
differences in structural (30%) and numerical alterations (60%) in
centrosome apparatus between AA and Caucasian cell lines (pSignificant
disparities exist in breast cancer among African Americans (AAs) women
compared to Caucasians. Even though AAs are less likely to undergo
regular mammograms due to access barriers, it is unlikely that
differences in screen based detection accounts entirely for outcome
disparities. While the current guidelines recommend women begin
mammography at age 40 or 50, AA women may be at increased risk for
delayed diagnosis since >10% of breast cancer cases in AAs are diagnosed
in women younger <40 years compared with 5% of Caucasians. This
highlights the importance of defining optimal ethnically appropriate age
of screening especially given the disproportionate mortality among
younger black women patients. Therefore, an alternative approach using
biomarkers should be considered in order to develop ethnically
appropriate measures for detecting the disease in the earliest stages.
Genomic instability has long been recognized as a major driver of
carcinogenesis occurring early on and increasing in complexity with
disease progression. However, to date little is known about the
underlying mechanisms associated with such instability among the
different ethnic groups. In this study we hypothesized that alterations
in telomere length and dysfunctional centrosome apparatus are underlying
mechanisms associated with ethnic-based genomic instability. We
investigated alterations in centrosome apparatus, misaligned chromosomes
and spindle angle orientation in AA [HCC 70] and Caucasian [HCC1395] cell
lines using confocal microscopy. Our results demonstrated significant
differences in structural (30%) and numerical alterations (60%) in
centrosome apparatus between AA and Caucasian cell lines (p<0.001). We
also noticed a significant increase of misaligned chromosomes (35%) and
(68 %) in the metaphase of Caucasians and AA’s respectively
(pSignificant disparities exist in breast cancer among African Americans
(AAs) women compared to Caucasians. Even though AAs are less likely to
undergo regular mammograms due to access barriers, it is unlikely that
differences in screen based detection accounts entirely for outcome
disparities. While the current guidelines recommend women begin
mammography at age 40 or 50, AA women may be at increased risk for
delayed diagnosis since >10% of breast cancer cases in AAs are diagnosed
in women younger <40 years compared with 5% of Caucasians. This
highlights the importance of defining optimal ethnically appropriate age
of screening especially given the disproportionate mortality among
younger black women patients. Therefore, an alternative approach using
biomarkers should be considered in order to develop ethnically
appropriate measures for detecting the disease in the earliest stages.
Genomic instability has long been recognized as a major driver of
carcinogenesis occurring early on and increasing in complexity with
disease progression. However, to date little is known about the
underlying mechanisms associated with such instability among the
different ethnic groups. In this study we hypothesized that alterations
in telomere length and dysfunctional centrosome apparatus are underlying
mechanisms associated with ethnic-based genomic instability. We
investigated alterations in centrosome apparatus, misaligned chromosomes
and spindle angle orientation in AA [HCC 70] and Caucasian [HCC1395] cell
lines using confocal microscopy. Our results demonstrated significant
differences in structural (30%) and numerical alterations (60%) in
centrosome apparatus between AA and Caucasian cell lines (p<0.001). We
also noticed a significant increase of misaligned chromosomes (35%) and
(68 %) in the metaphase of Caucasians and AA’s respectively (p<0.002).
In addition, a significant difference in spindle orientation was observed
among AAs and Caucasians suggesting that mitotic phase abnormalities may
be, in part, responsible for the underlying genetic instabilities
associated with breast cancer. Using ingenuity pathway analysis, we
compared gene expressions in both AAs and Caucasian cell lines and
observed a significant change in telomerase signaling expression between
the cell lines, suggesting a role for telomere lengths in the generation
of genetic instability. Together, identifying the specific mechanisms
that drive tumorigenesis may provide opportunities for future targeted
prevention efforts among high risk cohorts. (This work is supported in
part by CA189240)


