Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pan-HER inhibitor, varlitinib, disrupts HER/ERK signaling and
causes apoptosis in triple-negative breast cancer cells.


Background:

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), characterized by aggressive
behavior and poor prognosis, represents an important clinical challenge
because there is no well-established target therapy. Therefore, the
identification and validation of a targeted therapy for TNBC is an urgent
need. Molecular profiling studies have shown some TNBC tumors harboring
aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) or human epidermal
growth factor receptor (HER) signaling, suggesting therapeutic potential
with EGFR inhibitors. Varlitinib (ASLAN001) is a small molecule
reversible pan-HER inhibitor of EGFR (HER1), HER2 and HER4. To-date,
varlitinib has been extensively investigated in several tumor types,
including HER2 positive metastatic breast cancer. TNBC is known to
demonstrate expression of EGFR. Since varlitinib also targets EGFR
signaling, we hypothesized that it may also have antitumor efficacy in
TNBC.

Methods:

MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC cell lines were used for in vitro studies.
Cell viability was examined by MTT assay. Apoptotic effects were examined
by flow cytometry and Western blot. Signal transduction pathways in cells
were assessed by Western blot.

Results:

We first examined the protein expression of EGFR in a panel of TNBC cell
lines. We identified MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 as EGFR-expressing cell
lines. We found that varlitinib significantly inhibited cell viability
and induced cell apoptosis in MDA-MB-468 cells but not in MDA-MB-231
cells. MDA-MB-231 cells carry the KRAS G13D mutation that drives
downstream ERK signaling. We therefore examined the downstream signaling
proteins of EGFR, including PI3K/Akt and MAPK/ERK signaling. Results
showed that the protein levels of p-MEK and p-ERK were decreased in
varlitinib-sensitive MDA-MB-468 cell lines, but there was no significant
change in these phospho-proteins in varlitinib-resistant MDA-MB-231
cells. Furthermore, we found that ERK inhibition resensitized
varlitinib-resistant cells to varlitinib-induced cell death. In addition,
ectopic expression of ERK reduced the varlitinib-induced apoptosis on
varlitinib-sensitive MDA-MB-468 cells. In addition, MDA-MB-468 cells are
known to harbor p53-R273H gain-of-function mutation that may activate
EGFR-signaling, whether the mutation is associated with varlitinib
sensitivity needs further investigation.

Conclusions:

In this study, we identified TNBC as another tumor type that may be
sensitive to varlitinibâ€™s antitumor activity through the inhibition of
HER/MAPK signaling and subsequent increase in apoptotic activity.


