Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Challenges to breast cancer early detection in the developing,
high income country of Trinidad and Tobago.


Trinidad and Tobago (T&T) has one of the highest breast cancer (BC)
mortality rates in the Americas. For the period 1995-2007, 5-year BC
survival rates in T&T were approximately 30%. One possible explanation
for T&Tâ€™s low BC survival rates could be late presentation and
detection. Currently, opportunistic BC screening programs exist in the
public and private sectors and some advocate for an organized national BC
screening program. However, the World Health Organization (WHO) only
recommends the implementation of organized BC screening in high resource
settings. Thus, the purpose of this study was to conduct a situational
analysis of breast cancer early detection services in the public and
private sector to identify gaps in service and determine if a national
organized screening program is warranted. The quality, availability,
affordability and accessibility of BC screening services in the public
and private sector was assessed with an online survey using the Cancer
Control WHO Guide for Effective Programs framework. The inter-rater
reliability and validity was assessed during a pilot phase at two public
institutions. All public and private facilities and NGOs with BC early
detection services were invited to participate in the survey. A focus
group with key radiologists in T&T was held to review the results of the
study, identify unaddressed challenges and make recommendations for
improvement. Significant challenges exist in service availability and
access, physical and human resources, program monitoring and evaluation,
quality control mechanisms, follow-up diagnostics and care. Specifically,
services are largely monopolized by the private sector at a cost to
nationals. Public services which are free, are restricted to major
hospitals where wait times extend to 3-6 months, thus contributing to a
disparity in access. Both sectors cite a lack of trained staff such as
specialist breast radiographers and radiologists. There is also a lack of
preventative maintenance and investment in new machinery. No quality
control guidelines or manuals for machinery use exist in the public
sector. Across both sectors, 70% of institutions have no program
evaluation. Other systemic problems such as long wait times for pathology
reports also undermine the efficacy of current BC early detection
efforts. An organized national breast cancer screening program is not
recommended for T&T at this time. More pressing concerns across the
cancer care continuum need to be first addressed particularly in
strengthening human and physical resource capacity and service quality
for detection, diagnosis, and follow-up care. Also, research into factors
such as time-to-treat, frequency of late stage presentation and
misdiagnosis warrant further attention if T&T is to improve its BC
survival rate.


