Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: First demonstration that hypoxia targeting with radiation improves
tumor control in a mammal tumor model.


For over a century, resistance of radiation to living tissues has been
associated with hypoxia, a local lack of molecular oxygen, or low pO2.
The focus of this research has been to validate the hypothesis that has
been assumed, but not proven over the past century, that radiation
treatment focused specifically on hypoxic regions of tumors would improve
tumor curability. This research used Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
(EPR) imaging to provide absolute pO2 images in volume elements or voxels
of murine tumors with 1 torr pO2 resolution and 0.7 mm spatial resolution
in FSa fibrosarcomas in the legs of C3H mice. We define hypoxic regions
of tumors as those whose image subvolumes or voxels have low pO2, voxels
less than 10 torr. We have established EPR pO2 imaging as a reliable
locator of relevant radiobiologically relevant hypoxia. To determine if
pO2 based dose painting improves tumor cure, we implemented the XRAD225Cx
system to deliver gantry based x-ray treatments to mouse tumors
accurately registered with EPR pO2 images. All tumors were pretreated
with a dose of radiation that had been determined in separate experiments
to cure 30% of tumors, a TCD30. Conclusive failure to demonstrate a
difference between treating crude spherical volumes including ~ 85% of
hypoxic voxels with an additional curative dose compared with treatment
with shells of radiation avoiding hypoxia (anti-boosts) proved tenets of
radiation biology: a few surviving hypoxic clonogens cause radiation
treatment failure. In response, we implemented rapid 3D printing Tungsten
loaded, highly conformal plastic blocks to compare treating ~100% of
hypoxic tumor voxels with hypoxia avoidance, treating similar volumes of
well oxygenated tumor. Only then did we observe significant (pFor over a
century, resistance of radiation to living tissues has been associated
with hypoxia, a local lack of molecular oxygen, or low pO2. The focus of
this research has been to validate the hypothesis that has been assumed,
but not proven over the past century, that radiation treatment focused
specifically on hypoxic regions of tumors would improve tumor curability.
This research used Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) imaging to
provide absolute pO2 images in volume elements or voxels of murine tumors
with 1 torr pO2 resolution and 0.7 mm spatial resolution in FSa
fibrosarcomas in the legs of C3H mice. We define hypoxic regions of
tumors as those whose image subvolumes or voxels have low pO2, voxels
less than 10 torr. We have established EPR pO2 imaging as a reliable
locator of relevant radiobiologically relevant hypoxia. To determine if
pO2 based dose painting improves tumor cure, we implemented the XRAD225Cx
system to deliver gantry based x-ray treatments to mouse tumors
accurately registered with EPR pO2 images. All tumors were pretreated
with a dose of radiation that had been determined in separate experiments
to cure 30% of tumors, a TCD30. Conclusive failure to demonstrate a
difference between treating crude spherical volumes including ~ 85% of
hypoxic voxels with an additional curative dose compared with treatment
with shells of radiation avoiding hypoxia (anti-boosts) proved tenets of
radiation biology: a few surviving hypoxic clonogens cause radiation
treatment failure. In response, we implemented rapid 3D printing Tungsten
loaded, highly conformal plastic blocks to compare treating ~100% of
hypoxic tumor voxels with hypoxia avoidance, treating similar volumes of
well oxygenated tumor. Only then did we observe significant (p<0.01)
tumor control differences between hypoxic boosts and anti-boosts. This is
the first validation of the curative effectiveness of focusing hypoxia
based dose painting in mammalian tumors.


