Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated levels of circulating miR-34a-5p and miR-181c-3p during
cancer initiation by aflatoxin B1.


MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that affect gene expression. They are
essential in normal physiological processes and have been implicated in
carcinogenesis. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second leading
cause of cancer death globally, with the risk factor aflatoxin (AFB1)
estimated to play a causal role in up to 28% of all HCC cases. In this
study, we analyzed circulating miRNAs in a quantitative rat cancer model
that were previously found to be associated with AFB1 exposure in liver.
Sera were examined from 3 groups of animals: rats dosed with AFB1 (200
µg) for 28 consecutive days receiving vehicle only or AFB1 plus the
chemopreventive agent CDDO-Im (30 µmol), and controls (Johnson et al.,
CaPR, 2014). Small RNAs were isolated from these serum samples at the end
of the dosing period and analyzed by RT-qPCR. Quantitative PCR results at
the end of the carcinogenic 28-day dosing regimen revealed notable
increased expression of miR-34a-5p and miR-181c-3p (13 fold and 170 fold,
respectively) in the AFB1 treated samples compared to controls. This
expression was reduced in animals that received complete protection from
developing HCC by concurrent intervention with CDDO-Im. Additionally,
miR-122-5p displayed increased expression (5 fold) and miR-541-5p was
downregulated (0.08 fold) in the sera of AFB1-treated animals. Overall,
the data suggest that serum expression of miR-34a-5p and 181c-3p during
liver cancer initiation could give insight into increased risk of
developing HCC. Supported by T32ES007141-31A1 and CA197222.


