Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of the potent and selective BET
inhibitor INCB057643 in models of hematologic malignancies.


Inhibitors of the Bromodomain and Extra-Terminal (BET) family of
bromodomain containing proteins regulate expression of key cell fate,
cell cycle, and survival genes including c-myc. In preclinical models,
BET inhibitors have demonstrated significant efficacy in a variety of
different oncology indications, including hematological malignancies.
Here we describe the preclinical profile of the novel, orally
bioavailable BET inhibitor INCB057643 in preclinical models of
hematologic malignancies. INCB057643 inhibited binding of BRD2/BRD3/BRD4
to an acetylated histone H4 peptide in the low nM range, and was
selective against other bromodomain containing proteins. In vitro
analyses showed that INCB057643 inhibited proliferation of human AML,
DLBCL, and multiple myeloma cell lines, with a corresponding decrease in
MYC protein levels. Cell cycle analyses indicated that G1 arrest and a
concentration-dependent increase in apoptosis were seen within 48 hours
of treatment with INCB057643. BRD proteins also regulate the expression
of many pro-inflammatory genes. Production of several cytokines,
including IL-6, IL-10 and MIP-1α, was repressed by INCB057643 in human
and mouse whole blood stimulated ex vivo with LPS. Consistent with these
effects, analyses of gene expression in cells treated with INCB057643
revealed that pathways involved in cell cycle progression, apoptosis, and
IL-6 were among the most significantly altered in vitro. Oral
administration of INCB057643 resulted in significant anti-tumor efficacy
in xenograft models of AML, myeloma, and DLBCL. Additionally, combining
INCB057643 with standard of care agents used for the treatment of DLBCL
including rituximab and bendamustine resulted in enhanced anti-tumor
efficacy relative to that achieved with single agent therapies at doses
that were well tolerated. In addition, many B cell malignancies are
reliant on the PI3Kδ pathway for proliferation and survival, suggesting
that the combination of INCB057643 with the clinical stage PI3Kδ
specific inhibitor INCB050465 may be a rational therapeutic strategy for
DLBCL. Compared with single agent BETi or PI3Kδi therapy, the
combination significantly potentiated tumor growth inhibition in DLBCL
models representative of the ABC subtype (HBL-1), and the double hit GCB
subtype (WILL2). These data suggest that clinical exploration of
INCB057643 as a monotherapy or in combination in hematologic malignancies
is warranted.


