Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long noncoding RNA HOXA11 antisense promotes tumor progression via
the Notch pathway in serous ovarian cancer.


The biological function of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is only
partially understood. We investigated the expression of the novel HOXA11
antisense (HOXA11as) lncRNA and its oncogenic role in serous ovarian
cancer (SOC). HOXA11as expression was examined in 129 serous ovarian
cancer tissue samples by real time RT-PCR. Clinicopathologic factors and
patient survival were compared between high (N = 27) and low HOXA11as
expression group (N = 102). To investigate the role of HOXA11as in cell
proliferation, invasion, and migration, HOXA11as expression in ovarian
cancer cells was knocked down using RNA interference. HOXA11as expression
in cancer tissue was 77-fold higher than that of noncancerous tissue (P
The biological function of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is only
partially understood. We investigated the expression of the novel HOXA11
antisense (HOXA11as) lncRNA and its oncogenic role in serous ovarian
cancer (SOC). HOXA11as expression was examined in 129 serous ovarian
cancer tissue samples by real time RT-PCR. Clinicopathologic factors and
patient survival were compared between high (N = 27) and low HOXA11as
expression group (N = 102). To investigate the role of HOXA11as in cell
proliferation, invasion, and migration, HOXA11as expression in ovarian
cancer cells was knocked down using RNA interference. HOXA11as expression
in cancer tissue was 77-fold higher than that of noncancerous tissue (P <
0.05). Higher HOXA11as expression significantly correlated with
histologic grade (P = 0.017) and preoperative CA125 (P = 0.048). HOXA11as
overexpression in SOC cells led to increased cell proliferation,
invasion, and migration. In addition, HOXA11as was associated with the
expression of genes that involve in cell proliferation, invasion, and
migration. Moreover, Knockdown of HOXA11as decreased the expression of
vascular endothelial growth factor, matrix metalloproteinase-9 and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which are important for cell
motility and metastasis. Mechanistic investigation revealed that Notch1,
Hes1 and p300 proteins could be inhibited by HOXA11as depletion. In
multivariate analysis, HOXA11as was a prognostic factor of progressive
disease and mortality (HR = 1.730, 2.170 and P = 0.043, 0.033,
respectively). Progression-free and overall survival were significantly
shorter in patients with high HOXA11as expression. These findings
highlight the clinical significance of HOXA11as in predicting the
prognosis of SOC patients and suggest its potential in promoting tumor
aggressiveness by regulation of the Notch signaling pathway and
EMT-related mechanisms.


