Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilizing zebrafish to study the effect strigolactone on breast
cancer cells.


Strigolactones (SLs) are a novel class of phytohormones that regulates
shoot branching patterns and above-ground plant architecture by
inhibiting the outgrowth of axillary lateral buds or meristems. The SL
analogues (SLAs) inhibit the growth and survival of a wide array of
cancer-derived cell lines including: prostate, colon, lung, melanoma,
osteosarcoma and leukemic cell lines, while minimally affecting normal
cultured cells. Interestingly, cancer cells with high metastatic
potential are more sensitive to the inhibitory effect of SLAs than less
aggressive cells. Treatment of cancer cells with SLAs leads to the
activation of stress-related signaling including p38MAPKs and JNK1/2, and
disrupt the microtubule network. Furthermore, a reduction in
acetylated-alpha-tubulin was observed in SLA-treated MDA-MB-231 cells.
Microtubules dynamics has been proposed as one of the mechanisms that
regulate cell migration by acting on lamellipodia formation. The ECIS
invasion assay data suggests that even at low concentration of SLA and as
soon as 6 hours, SLAs suppress MDA-MB-231 cellsâ€™ ability to invade the
HUVEC monolayer. To further examine the effect of SLAs on the invasive
and metastatic behaviors of cancer cells in vivo, fluorescently labeled
MDA-MB-231 cells were used as xenograft models in zebrafish. Embryos
injected with MDA-MB-231 cells showed 66.6% metastasis in vehicle treated
control fishes, as compared to 22.85% in SLAs treated fishes. This
suggests that SLAs are potent inhibitors of cancer dissemination and
metastasis.


