Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pokemon functions as a metabolic oncoprotein integrating glucose &
lipid metabolism in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Pokemon (also known as FBI-1 or LRF) is a proto-oncogene encoded by
ZBTB7A gene. It functions as a transcription factor, playing important
roles in embryonic development, cell differentiation and neoplasia.
Pokemon is abnormally expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and may
contribute to the metabolic homeostasis of HCC cells, but the mechanism
of action remains to be fully understood. This study demonstrated that
Pokemon may integrate glycolysis and lipid metabolism in hepatocellular
carcinogenesis. Our data showed that Pokemon was upregulated in HCC cell
lines and clinical samples. Ectopic expression of Pokemon stimulated HCC
cell growth and proliferation in culture and tumorigenesis in nude mice.
Lipid metabolomic analysis by LC/MS exhibited that in HCC cells
lipogenesis was positively correlated with Pokemon expression levels, and
targeted expression of Pokemon in HCC cells promoted the flux of
radiolabeled glucose to lipids, including membrane phospholipids, through
the aerobic glycolysis-acetyl-CoA metabolic stream. Mechanistic studies
revealed that Pokemon stimulated glycolysis through activation of PKA and
its mediated Raf/c-Myc pathway. In the tested HCC cells, Pokemon
activated fatty acid synthase (FASN) and suppressed AMPK, an inhibitor of
acetyl-CoA carboxylase α (ACC-α), stimulating fatty acid and lipid
synthesis. Together our results suggest that Pokemon correlates
glycolysis and lipid synthesis and thus promotes lipogenesis and
hepatocellular tumorigenesis.


