Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: O-GlcNAc transferase inhibition in breast cancer cells.


O-linked-N-acetylglucosamination (O-GlcNAcylation) is a
post-translational modification that occurs on serine and threonine amino
acid residues of the intracellular proteins. O-GlcNAcylation of numerous
targets is catalyzed by a single enzyme - O-GlcNAc-transferase (OGT).
O-GlcNAcylation impacts protein activation and stability thereby
regulating several key biological functions, and is heavily involved in
cancer development and progression. OGT expression and total protein
O-GlcNAcylation are elevated in many cancers compared to non-malignant
adjacent tissues. In breast cancer, this increase also has a positive
correlation with the tumor grade suggesting a possible link to metastasis
and disease progression. Here we investigated the effects of OGT
inhibition in two triple-negative (TNBC) and two receptor-positive
luminal breast cancer cell lines. Treatment of cells with an OGT
inhibitor as well as OGT knockdown led to a strong decrease in viability
and proliferation of the TNBC cells, but significantly less so in the
luminal receptor-positive cell lines. This differential response was
evaluated using analysis of apoptosis, cell cycle, gene expression and a
reverse-phase antibody-based protein array (RPPA). We found that cell
cycle progression was affected by OGT inhibition. In addition, proteomics
data pointed towards the transcription factor hairy and enhancer of
split-1 (HES1) as a possible mediator of the cytotoxicity observed in the
TNBC cell lines. We currently work to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
of HES1 regulation by OGT and its effect on TNBC cell survival and
apoptosis. In conclusion, OGT inhibition has a pronounced cytotoxic
effect on the TNBC cells and may have some potential for therapeutic use
in the future.


