Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Axl–hi DTCs in the bone marrow of a genetically engineered mouse
model of prostate cancer exhibit decreased proliferation.


The majority of prostate cancer (PCa) deaths are attributed to bone
metastases, which may not arise until years after the primary tumor has
been removed. Disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) have been shown to already
be present in the bone marrow of patients at the time of prostatectomy,
and it is thought that they undergo a period of dormancy, allowing them
to remain undetected for years before manifesting into clinically
detectable metastases. It is not known what allows PCa DTCs to undergo
and persist in this dormant state, but it is likely that factors in the
bone marrow niche play an essential role. Previously our group has shown
that one of these niche factors, Gas6, can regulate growth of PCa cells.
The growth restraining effects of Gas6 on PCa cells is likely mediated
through the tyrosine kinase receptor Axl, whose expression was found to
be increased on dormant DTCs compared to proliferating metastases in a
xenograft mouse model. Here, we utilized the TRAMP model, a genetically
engineered mouse model of spontaneous PCa progression, to compare the
frequency of Axl-hi and Axl-low bone marrow DTCs that are proliferating
versus non-proliferating. Further, we also compared Axl expression and
proliferation in matched primary tumors. To investigate the functional
significance of Gas6/Axl signaling in mediating PCa dormancy, we have
generated Axl knockout PCa cells to test the requirement of Axl in
maintaining dormancy, and Axl overexpressing PCa cells to test the
sufficiency of Axl in mediating dormancy. Determining the role of Axl and
any other regulatory mechanisms of PCa DTC dormancy will be crucial in
efforts to prevent lethal and incurable metastasis.


