Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative high throughput screening as a tool to identify novel
therapies in bladder cancer.


Introduction: Bladder cancer (CaB) is the 4th most common cancer among
men in the US. It is the most expensive malignancies to treat from
diagnosis to death. No new pharmacological agents have been approved for
treatment of bladder cancer since the approval of BCG in 1990. Thus,
there is an urgent need for development of new treatment therapies.
Quantitative high throughput screening (qHTS) of representative cancer
lines with oncology drugs may identify new treatments or re-purpose
already existing therapies for different disease. We utilized this
technique to identify new therapies in two primary bladder lines (T24 and
UMUC3) and their metastatic lines (T24T, SLT3 and FL3 of T24 and LUL-2
for UMUC3).

Methods: We screened 7 bladder cancer cell lines against 1,912 oncology
drugs using a 48 hour cell proliferation assay with an ATPâˆ’based
readout (CellTiterGlo) to determine activity and potency of compounds in
a dose response manner. One of the candidate drugs inhibitory in all cell
lines tested is flavopiridol, a pan CDK inhibitor. We further
characterized the mechanism of action and in vivo effects of flavopiridol
using various cell based assays and mouse xenograft studies.

Results: The initial screen identified 95 compounds active in 7 cell
lines. The top 50 compounds were further analyzed for molecular size of
>200 g/mol and TPSAResults: The initial screen identified 95 compounds
active in 7 cell lines. The top 50 compounds were further analyzed for
molecular size of >200 g/mol and TPSA<90. This identified mitomycin C and
8 novel compounds. Further testing revealed Flavopiridol to be most
consistent with qHTS data having IC50 of 100-300nM in all the cell lines
tested. Flavopiridol induces G2/M arrest; however, very little apoptosis
was seen suggesting cytostatic rather than cytotoxic mechanism of
flavopiridol action. Flavopiridol showed dose dependent inhibition of
migration, invasion and colony formation in CaB cell lines tested.
Xenograft studies in rapidly growing UMUC-3 cells showed slowing of tumor
growth but not complete reduction indicating cytostatic mechanism of
flavopiridol. However, in slow growing cells, 5637, 5/8 treated mice
showed complete tumor reduction.

Conclusions: qHTS can identify novel compounds. Flavopiridol seems to be
a very effective inhibitor both in vitro and in vivo. Physical properties
of Flavopiridol are most suited for intravesical use which may lead to it
being an effective inhibitor of CaB in the bladder at higher doses
without any/few systemic toxicities. Studies are underway to elucidate
the use of flavopiridol as a single intravesical agent.


