Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel metastatic lung cancer associated
lncRNA.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide with the majority of
patients presenting with metastasis and moreover, developing resistance
to current treatments. One promising therapeutic area is the novel class
of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). While emerging evidence implicates them
in cancer, lncRNA biology is still largely unexplored in tumor
metastasis. To elucidate the function of lncRNAs in lung cancer, our lab
used transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) to discover 120 long non-coding
RNAs (lncRNAs) that are enriched in metastatic tumors compared to their
corresponding primary lung tumors, which we have named Metastasis
Associated Lung cancer LncRNAs (MALLs). Notably, metastatic tumors were
enriched for differentially expressed protein-coding genes targeted by
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). In lung cancer studies show that
the catalytic subunit of PRC2, EZH2 (an H3K27 methylase), is
overexpressed, associates with poor prognosis, promotes tumor
progression, and epigenetically represses genes to promote metastasis.
Specifically, we have found MALL-1 to be (i) highly up-regulated in lung
cancer; (ii) promotes proliferation and migration/invasion, hallmarks of
oncogenic phenotypes; (iii) binds to EZH2; and (iv) cooperatively
represses well-known PRC2 target genes associated with metastasis in
patients. Further, we found MALL-1 to be altered in multiple solid tumors
thus suggesting a critical conserved oncogenic role of MALL-1 in solid
tumor progression. We believe MALL-1 promotes aggressive disease through
its interactions with, and recruitment of the PRC2 complex to chromatin,
to epigenetically modify genes associated with metastasis.


