Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioenergetic signature from cocultures of pancreatic tumor cell
lines and fibroblasts.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the tumors with greater
invasiveness and metastasis. PDAC is associated with a large desmoplastic
reaction, characterized by fibroblastic proliferation and extracellular
matrix secretion. Besides, cellular bioenergetics has become a central
issue of investigation in cancer biology, because the altered energy
metabolism of cancer cells has been proposed as a potential target for
cancer treatment. We have established co-cultures between PDAC cell lines
(Capan-1 or PL-45) and fibroblasts (LC5). A reverse phase protein
microarray (RPMA) approach has been applied to quantify proteins of
energy metabolism in theses co-cultures, with the aim of identifying
potential biomarkers in PDACs. The fifteen proteins of energy metabolism
studied included members of the mitochondrial oxidation of pyruvate, the
tricarboxylic acid cycle, Î²-oxidation of fatty acids, electron transport
and oxidative phosphorylation, glycogen metabolism, glycolysis and
oxidative stress using highly specific antibodies. Co-cultures modified
proteins expression of energy metabolism, respect to monocultures.
Capan-1 in co-culture increased several proteins belonging to OXPHOS
(NDUFS3, SDHB, CORE2 and COXII), the antioxidant SOD2, the mitochondrial
HSP60, and G6PDH. The expression of the glycolitic PKM2 decreased. Their
fibroblasts partners increased the expression of SDHB and also decreased
PKM2. PL-45 in co-culture, experimented an increase in HADHA. Their
fibroblasts partners showed a decrease in PKM2, LDHA, IF1, PDHe and
HSP60.Capann-1 and PL-45 in co-culture with fibroblast, differ en their
energy metabolism phenotype. Overall, the results indicate that the
quantification of bioenergetic signature offers potential biomarkers that
could be implemented to refine the understanding of the biological
principles of PDAC and, eventually, the management of patients with these
tumors.


