Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ovarian-dependent SSM2ucd mouse mammary carcinoma cells depend on
Cyp3a11 epoxygenase activity for proliferation.


Introduction: Silencing of the human cytochrome P450 (CYP) monooxygenase
enzyme CYP3A4 in the ER+ MCF-7 tumor cell line inhibits tumor growth in
the mammary fat pad, but the relative roles of tumor cell intrinsic CYPs
vs. vascular/microenvironment CYPs remain to be determined and a
syngeneic animal model is needed to answer this question. The SSM2ucd
ovarian dependent mouse mammary carcinoma cell line forms a
transplantable estrogen-receptor positive (ER+) mouse mammary tumor in
which growth dependence on cell intrinsic CYPs may be tested in vitro and
in vivo. The SSM2ucd cell line is derived from 129SvJ: homozygous
Stat1-null female mice, which develop ER+ mammary tumors (1,2).
Expression profiling of spontaneously arising mouse mammary carcinomas in
a TP53 KO model revealed that the CYP3A4 ortholog Cyp3a11 is up-regulated
in these tumors.

Methods: Cyp3a11 bactosomes were used to assay for NADPH dependent
biosynthesis of EETs from arachidonic acid using an LC-MS/MS method.
siRNA silencing and CRISPR/Cas9 knock out of the Cyp3a11 exons 2 and 3
was performed and the cell lines were characterized for EET dependence
using an MTT assay. The highly potent inhibitor and chemical probe of CYP
epoxygenase activity, hexyl-benzyl-biguanide (HBB), was used to test
dependence of SSM2ucd cells on CYP epoxygenase activity. Total cellular
EETs in SSM2ucd cells exposed to HBB at the IC50were measured by the
LC-MS/MS method.

Results: Cyp3a11 was shown to have robust NADPH dependent epoxygenase
activity, while SSM2ucd cells were EET dependent for growth. Silencing of
Cyp3a11 was demonstrated to inhibit proliferation of the SSM2ucd cell
line, which was partly abrogated by EETs. CRISPR/Cas9 knock out of the
Cyp3a11 in the SSM2ucd cell line was performed and exon 2 and exon 3
deleted cell lines were derived. SSM2ucd Cyp3a11 knock out cell lines
were more sensitive to EET-induced proliferation under serum free
condition than control lines. HBB potently inhibits the SSM2ucd cell line
in vitro (IC50=25 uM) and reduces total cellular EET levels in this cell
line at IC50. These results suggest that we may see inhibitory activity
of HBB in a syngeneic 129/SvJ tumor transplantation model.

Conclusions: The Cyp3a11 gene can be silenced in the SSM2ucd cell line,
without disrupting cell viability, allowing further study of the roles of
EETs in mouse mammary carcinoma proliferation, survival and
clonogenicity. The Cyp3a11 gene has been knocked out in the SSM2 ucd cell
line, allowing in vitro and in vivo studies of the roles of Cyp3a11 in
the growth of ovarian dependent mouse mammary carcinoma.

1. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 20;14(1):R16

2. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129895]


