Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting treatment resistance in patients with ovarian cancer
and PDX-models using single-cell RNA-sequencing.


Background: Ovarian cancer (OvCa) is frequently associated with malignant
effusions, which are complex ecosystems with heterogeneous populations of
malignant cells and non-malignant cells. Bulk RNA-seq or whole-exome
sequencing (WES) only reflect average cellular behavior and thereby mask
intrinsic cell diversity with potential relevance for treatment
resistance.

Approach: To overcome some of these barriers, we applied single-cell
RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) to malignant and non-malignant cells isolated
from patients with platinum treatment resistant disease. Furthermore, we
used patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cohorts, in which we isolated cells
for scRNA-seq from vehicle tumors (VEH), treated the other models with
carboplatin, and harvested cells at the time of minimal residual disease
(MRD) or disease progression (PROG).

Results: To date, we have profiled ~12000 single cells from 12 patients
with treatment na√Øve (n=3) or platinum-resistant disease (n=9),
including sequential sampling in 3 patients with resistant disease. We
observed significant inter- and intra-individual transcriptional
heterogeneity in malignant cells. A recurrent pattern across resistant
patients was the differential expression of inflammatory pathways in a
subset of cells. In a patient with three consecutive specimens, we
observed increasing accumulation of cells expressing a cell state
characterized by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) signaling,
Importantly, these cells were genetically identical to the entire
population, supporting the hypothesis that non-encoded mechanisms
conferred treatment resistance. In a BRCA-mutant patient, unbiased
analysis identified a stemness program in a subpopulation of cells, which
was genetically identical to other cells, indicating phenotypic
conversion. To systemically interrogate mechanisms of resistance to
platinum therapy, sequenced single cells isolated from PDX models at
three time points (VEH, MRD and PROG). In a BRCA-WT PDX model, resistant
cells isolated at MRD and PROG shared a transcriptional program that was
dominated by expression of a STAT3 program. Ex vivo cultures from
platinum-resistant patients were exquisitely sensitivity to
JAK/STAT3-inhibitor. Live cell imaging revealed that STAT3-inhibition
prevented spheroid formation, attachment and clearance through a
mesothelial monolayer in vitro.

Conclusion: Our results indicate that non-encoded mechanisms play an
important role in the development of treatment resistance in ovarian
cancer. Our initial studies indicate an important role of inflammatory
pathways in treatment resistance, in particular STAT3 signaling, which
can be overcome with specific inhibitors at nanomolar concentrations.
These data suggests that single-cell profiling can be performed on
clinical ovarian cancer specimens and may yield novel therapeutic avenues
for patients with treatment-resistant ovarian cancer.


