Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consistency of standing orders for primary prophylactic CSF within
a national network of community oncology practices: SWOG intergroup trial
S1415CD.


BACKGROUND

Among the 400,000 individuals undergoing chemotherapy for breast,
colorectal and lung cancer in the US, many are at risk of febrile
neutropenia (FN). Prophylactic colony stimulating factor (CSF) use
reduces the risk of FN, yet studies show that 55%-95% of CSF prescribing
is inconsistent with clinical practice guidelines. There is lack of
evidence and ambiguous guidelines for CSF use in regimens with an
intermediate risk of FN. To address these issues, we are conducting a
pragmatic trial to assess CSF prescribing and to generate evidence about
CSF efficacy with intermediate risk regimens. To inform the design and
sample size needs, we conducted a survey of current CSF order system use
within a large network of community oncology practices.

METHODS

The study setting are sites within the NCI Community Oncology Research
Program (NCORP), a national network across the U.S. and Puerto Rico that
conducts multi-site cancer clinical trials. Between January-September
2016, 58 NCORP practices were surveyed on their existing systems for
prescribing CSF prophylaxis.

RESULTS

8 clinics (14%) reported that their sites do not use any standing orders
for CSF prophylaxis prescribing. Standing order set characteristics for
the remaining 50 practices are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 Summary of CSF standing order implementation in 50 surveyed NCORP
clinics





Breast Cancer Regimens

Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Regimens

Colorectal Cancer Regimens



Order Set Characteristic

Dose Dense

N (%)

High Risk

N (%)

Intermediate Risk

N (%)

Low Risk

N (%)

Intermediate Risk

N (%)

Low Risk

N (%)

Intermediate Risk

N (%)

Low Risk

N (%)



Automatically Included in Order Set (Standing Orders)

46 (82%)

31

(62%)

7

(14%)

0

8

(16%)

0

7

(14%)

0



Automatically Excluded in Order Set

0

0

6

(12%)

19 (38%)

5

(10%)

19

(38%)

8

(16%)

19 (38%)



No automatic ordering- up to physician discretion to add or exclude orders

4

(8%)

19

(38%)

37

(74%)

31

(62%)

37

(74%)

31 (62%)

35

(670%)

31 (62%)





CONCLUSIONS

We observed wide variation in the current application of standing orders.
Intermediate risk regimens had the most inconsistent practices, with a
near equal number of clinics choosing either actively including or
excluding CSF order sets. The majority of clinics using standing orders
included CSF for dose dense and high risk regimens but only 19 (38%)
actively excluded CSF for low risk regimens. These results support the
need for more evidence to inform clearer guidelines on CSF use in
intermediate risk regimens and studies that evaluate the effects of
existing CSF standing orders on guideline adherence and patient outcomes.

Funding:PCORI (PCS-1402-09988) and NCORP grant (5UG1CA189974)


