Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-modulating effect of bevacizumab in EGFR mutated lung
adenocarcinoma.


Background: Host immunity affect treatment effect of lung cancer.
Peripheral blood S100A9+ monocytic myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) is a predictive factor for treatment response of chemotherapy and
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) of
lung adenocarcinoma patients. Bevacizumab have immune-modulating effect,
including decreasing MDSCs, and improve treatment effect in combination
with immunotherapy. However, the effect of immune modulation in
combination of bevacizumab and EGFR-TKI in EGFR mutated lung
adenocarcinoma patients is not clear.

Methods: Stage IV lung adenocarcinoma harboring sensitive EGFR mutation
patients receiving first line EGFR-TKI or combination EGFR-TKI and
bevacizumab were enrolled. The peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMCs)
were collected, and S100A9+ MDSCs percentage was calculated by flow
cytometry from CD14+S100A9+ in PBMC. Clinical data was collected.

Results: Eight patients receiving EGFR-TKI and bevacizumab, as
combination group, and twenty patients received EGFR-TKI alone, as
control group, were enrolled. PBMC S100A9+ MDSC decreased in combination
group (decrease 39Â±18% from baseline), but not in control group.
Combination group had longer progress free survival (PFS) comparing with
control group. (Median PFS combination vs control group: 15.2 vs 9.9
months, Log Rank test, p=0.05) Increased of peripheral blood cytotoxic T
cells also had trend in combination group but not in control group.

Conclusion: Besides the anti-angiogenesis effect, bevacizumab had immune
modulated effect, especially in decreasing circulating S100A9+ MDSC in
EGFR mutated lung adenocarcinoma patients. This might partially explain
the longer PFS in combination of EGFR-TKI of anti-angiogenesis agent
treatment.


