Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype-specific expression of small non-coding RNAs in breast
cancer.


We have performed a small RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) experiment to find
candidate small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in breast cancer (BC) for the
identification of signatures that aid in the prediction of therapy
responsiveness, prognosis or patient outcome. We used 195 invasive BC
tumor and 20 benign breast tissue samples from the Kuopio Breast Cancer
Project (KBCP) study material. KBCP material is collected from a
genetically homogeneous population of Eastern Finland, and includes
fresh-frozen and FFPE breast tissue samples, EDTA blood samples and
serum, as well as comprehensive background/lifestyle information,
clinical, treatment and follow-up data extending over 20 years. This
well-defined material enables the identification of factors associating
with BC risk, different stages of disease progression and outcome. Total
RNA was extracted from the fresh-frozen BC and benign breast tissue using
the Ambion mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit. Small RNA-Seq was performed using
the Illumina TruSeq Small RNA Library Prep kit and the Illumina MiSeq
next-generation sequencing instrument. Analyses were concentrated in
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and other non-miRNA small ncRNAs
(sncRNAs). Bioinformatic analysis commenced with quality control and
preprocessing steps including read quality assessment (FastQC), adapter
trimming (TRIMMOMATIC), and removal of e.g. ribosomal RNA reads (Bowtie).
Preprocessed reads were aligned (Tophat) to human reference
transcriptomes (piRNABank and GENCODE non-miRNA sncRNAs), followed by
data conversions e.g. for visualization (samtools, IGVtools). Gene-wise
read counts were collected using summarizeOverlaps R package, and
statistically differentially expressed (DE) genes were identified using
DESeq2 R package. We first compared the small RNA expression in the
benign breast tissue with invasive BC and observed in total 635 sncRNAs
and 94 piRNAs with differential expression (PAdjWe have performed a small
RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) experiment to find candidate small non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs) in breast cancer (BC) for the identification of signatures
that aid in the prediction of therapy responsiveness, prognosis or
patient outcome. We used 195 invasive BC tumor and 20 benign breast
tissue samples from the Kuopio Breast Cancer Project (KBCP) study
material. KBCP material is collected from a genetically homogeneous
population of Eastern Finland, and includes fresh-frozen and FFPE breast
tissue samples, EDTA blood samples and serum, as well as comprehensive
background/lifestyle information, clinical, treatment and follow-up data
extending over 20 years. This well-defined material enables the
identification of factors associating with BC risk, different stages of
disease progression and outcome. Total RNA was extracted from the
fresh-frozen BC and benign breast tissue using the Ambion mirVana miRNA
Isolation Kit. Small RNA-Seq was performed using the Illumina TruSeq
Small RNA Library Prep kit and the Illumina MiSeq next-generation
sequencing instrument. Analyses were concentrated in PIWI-interacting
RNAs (piRNAs) and other non-miRNA small ncRNAs (sncRNAs). Bioinformatic
analysis commenced with quality control and preprocessing steps including
read quality assessment (FastQC), adapter trimming (TRIMMOMATIC), and
removal of e.g. ribosomal RNA reads (Bowtie). Preprocessed reads were
aligned (Tophat) to human reference transcriptomes (piRNABank and GENCODE
non-miRNA sncRNAs), followed by data conversions e.g. for visualization
(samtools, IGVtools). Gene-wise read counts were collected using
summarizeOverlaps R package, and statistically differentially expressed
(DE) genes were identified using DESeq2 R package. We first compared the
small RNA expression in the benign breast tissue with invasive BC and
observed in total 635 sncRNAs and 94 piRNAs with differential expression
(PAdj<0.05). Of these 520 sncRNAs and 73 piRNAs were upregulated, and 115
sncRNAs and 21 piRNAs downregulated in the invasive tumors compared to
benign breast tissue. When comparing the luminal BC subtype with
triple-negative BC (TNBC) we observed 204 DE (PAdjWe have performed a
small RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) experiment to find candidate small
non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in breast cancer (BC) for the identification of
signatures that aid in the prediction of therapy responsiveness,
prognosis or patient outcome. We used 195 invasive BC tumor and 20 benign
breast tissue samples from the Kuopio Breast Cancer Project (KBCP) study
material. KBCP material is collected from a genetically homogeneous
population of Eastern Finland, and includes fresh-frozen and FFPE breast
tissue samples, EDTA blood samples and serum, as well as comprehensive
background/lifestyle information, clinical, treatment and follow-up data
extending over 20 years. This well-defined material enables the
identification of factors associating with BC risk, different stages of
disease progression and outcome. Total RNA was extracted from the
fresh-frozen BC and benign breast tissue using the Ambion mirVana miRNA
Isolation Kit. Small RNA-Seq was performed using the Illumina TruSeq
Small RNA Library Prep kit and the Illumina MiSeq next-generation
sequencing instrument. Analyses were concentrated in PIWI-interacting
RNAs (piRNAs) and other non-miRNA small ncRNAs (sncRNAs). Bioinformatic
analysis commenced with quality control and preprocessing steps including
read quality assessment (FastQC), adapter trimming (TRIMMOMATIC), and
removal of e.g. ribosomal RNA reads (Bowtie). Preprocessed reads were
aligned (Tophat) to human reference transcriptomes (piRNABank and GENCODE
non-miRNA sncRNAs), followed by data conversions e.g. for visualization
(samtools, IGVtools). Gene-wise read counts were collected using
summarizeOverlaps R package, and statistically differentially expressed
(DE) genes were identified using DESeq2 R package. We first compared the
small RNA expression in the benign breast tissue with invasive BC and
observed in total 635 sncRNAs and 94 piRNAs with differential expression
(PAdj<0.05). Of these 520 sncRNAs and 73 piRNAs were upregulated, and 115
sncRNAs and 21 piRNAs downregulated in the invasive tumors compared to
benign breast tissue. When comparing the luminal BC subtype with
triple-negative BC (TNBC) we observed 204 DE (PAdj<0.05) sncRNAs and 32
piRNAs. Of these, 103 sncRNAs and 18 piRNAs were upregulated, and 101
sncRNAs and 14 piRNAs downregulated in TNBC compared to luminal tumors.
Differential expression was also observed between ER (estrogen receptor)
negative and ER positive invasive tumors. Of the 242 DE sncRNAs and 32
piRNAs, 105 sncRNAs and 12 piRNAs were upregulated, and 137 sncRNAs and
20 piRNAs downregulated in ER positive BC compared to ER negative.
Preliminary results of hierarchical clustering and principal component
analysis of normalized log2 piRNA and sncRNA expression levels revealed
the potential for finding differences between BC subtypes. The subsequent
statistical analysis enabled us to identify individual piRNAs and other
sncRNAs as candidate druggable biomarkers for e.g. TNBC patients.


