Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential clinical significance of downregulation of MAPK pathway
components mRNA expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC).


We previously showed the MAPK pathway can be mutationally activated, and
may implicate drug sensitivity in HNSCC [1]. Here, we report that RNA
expression of several MAPK pathway components may be associated with
HNSCC patients' outcome based on the US-TCGA Provisional data. We found
that loss of DUSP4, a negative regulator of MAPK pathway, was correlated
with poor overall survival (OS; P=0.0286) and disease free survival (DFS)
in HNSCC (0.00150; median progression time = 38.11 vs. 71.22 months in
DUSP4-unaltered patients) which can potentially be explained by
activation of oncogenic MAPK pathway upon DUSP4 underexpression.
Interestingly, we identified a group of HNSCC patients with homozygous
loss and mRNA downregulation of MAPK pathway scaffold protein components
(GRB2, SHC2 and SHC3) with significantly poorer DFS (P=0.000871). RPPA
analysis showed a trend of decreased protein expression level of
phospho-RAFs, downstream of scaffold proteins, decreased MEKs and MAPKs,
supportive of an overall decreased MAPK pathway signaling in this subset
of patients.

Unexpectedly, downregulation (homozygous deletion/ RNA expression less
than 2 SD) of multiple MAPK pathway components which normally support
activation of the pathway: RAF1 (9%), MAPK1 (3%) and RPS6KA1 (1.9%) was
found to be significantly associated with poorer DFS (P=6.643x10^-5) with
median time to progression of 18.17 months vs. 71.22 months in the
unaltered group. Subsequent proteomic analysis of the respective patient
tumors from the TCGA cohort (N=357 with RPPA data) showed that these
patient tumors had elevated levels of E2F1 protein expression (P=0.0146),
along with increase FOXM1 expression (P=8.499x10^-4), which is known to
drive cell cycle progression [2]. As E2F1 is involved in cell survival
upon DNA damage [3], it is likely that upregulation of E2F1 protein
expression may enable cancer cells to survive after DNA insults by
radiotherapy or chemotherapy, and contributes to disease relapse.

Acknowledgements:

VWYL is funded by the Research Grant Council, Hong Kong (#17114814,
General Research Fund), Theme-based Research Scheme (T12-401/13-R), and
the Start-up Fund from the School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Reference:

1.

Van Allen, E.M., et al., Genomic Correlate of Exceptional Erlotinib
Response in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma. JAMA Oncol, 2015.
1(2): p. 238-44.

2.

Barger, C.J., et al., Genetic determinants of FOXM1 overexpression in
epithelial ovarian cancer and functional contribution to cell cycle
progression. Oncotarget, 2015. 6(29): p. 27613-27.

3.

Berton, T.R., et al., Regulation of epidermal apoptosis and DNA repair by
E2F1 in response to ultraviolet B radiation. Oncogene, 2005. 24(15): p.
2449-60.


