Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of RP6530, a dual PI3Kδ/γ inhibitor, accentuates
Romidepsin activity in NHL cells in vitro.


Background: Relapsed or refractory Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL)
represents a significant unmet medical need. Novel treatment options
currently being explored include Romidepsin, a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, which has demonstrated significant preclinical and clinical
activity. Because the PI3K pathway is often activated in NHL, combining
Romidepsin with a PI3K δ/γ inhibitor may be a viable alternative to
chemotherapy. RP6530 is a novel, potent, and selective PI3K δ/γ
inhibitor that demonstrated high potency against PI3Kδ (IC50=25 nM) and
γ (IC50=33 nM) enzymes with selectivity over α (>300-fold) and β
(>100-fold) isoforms. Dose-escalation trials to evaluate the safety and
efficacy of RP6530 in patients with hematological malignancies are
currently underway at several sites in US and Europe. The objective of
this study was to evaluate the effect of a combination of Romidepsin and
RP6530 in NHL cells.

Methods: Combination of Romidepsin and RPRP6530 was evaluated in the
following NHL cell lines: OCI-LY-1, OCI-LY-10, RAJI, DAUDI, TOLEDO, JEKO,
MAVER, and SU-DHL-1. Synergism or additivity between Romidepsin and
RP6530 was determined using different concentrations of the compounds in
a 5 x 5 grid and calculated based on the BLISS score. Effect on apoptosis
and cell cycle were estimated by flow cytometry. Phosphorylated AKT and
PARP were determined by Western Blotting.

Results: Synergism or additivity between Romidepsin and RP6530 for
anti-proliferative activity was noticed in all the cell lines tested with
effect being most pronounced in OCI-LY-1, OCI-LY-10, JEKO, and SU-DHL-1.
Incubating cells with 3-5 nM Romidepsin and 3 or 5 μM RP6530 resulted in
a 2 to 5-fold increase in the total apoptotic population. Cell cycle
analysis indicated that the combination of Romidepsin (1-5 nM) and RP6530
(1-5 μM) caused a G0/G1 arrest (2 to 3-fold) with a corresponding
increase in percent of apoptotic cells. While Romidepsin had minimal
effect of pAKT, treatment with RP6530 reduced expression by 40-90% across
cell lines. Further, Romidepsin + RP6530 enhanced expression of cleaved
PARP (8 to 60-fold) compared to either agent alone

Conclusions: Addition of RP6530, a potent and selective dual PI3Kδ/γ
inhibitor, potentiated Romidepsin activity in NHL cells. Findings provide
a rationale for use of the combination in future clinical trials
involving naïve or relapsed NHL patients thereby providing a safer
alternative to currently available therapy.


