Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of mild oxidative stress as a strategy for reactivation
of mutant p53 proteins: KSS72, a small molecule derived from ethacrynic
acid restores the biological functions of R248W/Q mutant.


p53 gene mutations in 50% of human cancers drive the emergence of
oncogenic genomes and confer resistance to anticancer drugs & apoptosis.
Therefore, a pharmacological reactivation of p53 mutant proteins to their
wild-type forms has emerged as an intense research area. We have shown
that induction of oxidative protein modifications primarily underlie the
mechanistic conversion of mutant to wt or wt-like p53 forms (Eur J
Medchem 107:233, 2016; Int J Oncol 48:1426, 2016). R248W/Q DNA contact
mutations in the p53 core are highly frequent and cause functional
inactivation. No small molecules reactivating this p53 mutation are
available. Here, we describe the design and synthesis of a small molecule
KSS72 using a cell-based screening and its potency in reactivating the
R248 p53 mutants. KSS72 is a non-diuretic hydrophobic analog
[1-(2,3-dichloro-4-methoxyphenyl)-2-methylenebutan-1-one] of ethacrynic
acid (Edecrin) obtained by removing the carboxylate side chain. KSS-72
retained the ability to bind with GSH, inhibit GSTs and induce marked
redox-imbalance in tumor cells. KSS72 displayed preferential cytotoxicity
(3-4 fold more cell killing) against cancer cells expressing the allele
specific R248W mutation (MiaPaca-2) in comparison with the wt p53 or
p53-null cancer cell lines. Further, we developed isogenic cell lines
expressing the R248W and R248Q mutants in the p53-null H1299 lung cancer
cells and evaluated their sensitivity towards KSS72; these models again
verified the greater drug efficacy. To prove the hypothesis the higher
efficacy of KSS72 stems from the reactivation of mutant p53, the
conformation-specific antibodies (Pab1620 for wt and Pab420 for mutant)
were employed. Immunoprecipitation and immunostaining using confocal
microscopy showed that KSS72 treatment of R248W or R248Q p53-cells
results in a marked reciprocal loss of mutant protein and gradual
increase of wt-like protein. EMSA revealed a time-dependent restoration
of DNA-binding of the mutant p53, which was accompanied by a distinct
upregulation of pro-apoptotic signaling pathways mediated by PUMA, Bax,
p21cip1 and MDM2 proteins. A strong G2/M arrest and significant apoptosis
were observed. Other data showed that KSS72 restores the wt structure and
function by covalently binding the p53R248 protein. Pharmacokinetics
showed that KSS72 has excellent oral bioavailability with a half-life of
3.5 h. In MiaPaca-2 xenografts developed in nude mice, there was a marked
tumor growth suppression with KSS72 as a single drug. In conclusion,
KSS72 is an attractive lead compound for further development because p53
reactivation occurred without discernible organ toxicities after oral
doses and a wide therapeutic window. The redox-sensitive cysteines
involved in the p53 reactivation are being identified by mass
spectrometry (supported by CPRIT grants RP130266 & RP170207 to KSS).


