Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of histone modifying enzymes associated with
tamoxifen resistance in MCF7 breast cancer cells.


Tamoxifen is widely used to treat estrogen receptor-alpha positive breast
cancer. However, resistance to tamoxifen often prevent the success of
endocrine therapy. Epigenetic change in tumors are associated with cancer
development and progression. Although altered histone modification has
been implicated in tumorigenesis, their role in endocrine resistance was
little known. To identified tamoxifen-resistance associated histone
methylation modifying enzyme, we examined the global histone H3
methylation patterns in tamoxifen-resistance MCF7 breast cancer cells.
Our results show that, the levels of methylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4) and histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) was upregulated in tamoxifen
resistance MCF7 breast cancer cells. Next, we analysis expression levels
of H3K4 and H3K9 methylation modifying enzyme in tamoxifen resistance
breast cancer cells. qRT-PCR results show that H3K4 methyltransferases
(KMT2A and KMT2C) is upregulated in tamoxifen resistance breast cancer
cells. Moreover, we observed that si-RNA mediated knockdown of KMT2C was
more susceptible to tamoxifen-induced growth inhibition. Finally,
Analyses of publicly available patient data sets indicated that KMT2A and
KMT2C levels are higher in patients after endocrine therapy failure
(recurrence), compared to those of responders (non-recurrence). Our study
indicates that elevated levels of KMT2A and KMT2C in the
tamoxifen-resistance breast cancers may contributed tamoxifen resistance.


