Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between automethylation and phosphorylation tightly
regulates G9a and GLP coactivator function with steroid hormone receptors.


Hormone-activated steroid receptors (SR) bind to specific regulatory
elements on DNA and recruit coregulators which remodel chromatin,
regulate assembly of the transcription complex, and regulate
transcription of their target genes. As for many coregulators, the lysine
methyltransferases G9a and GLP function in both activation and repression
of transcription depending on the target gene. Indeed, G9a and GLP
catalyze methylation of H3K9, a well-known repressive mark, but can also
act as coactivators of SR (e.g. estrogen receptor Î± and glucocorticoid
receptor or GR). G9a and GLP can form homo- and heterodimers via
interactions between their C-terminal domains. At the molecular level, we
established that GLP, as well as G9a, is methylated on the N terminal
domain of the protein, which is the region implicated in coactivator
function. This event is required for the recruitment of HP1g, while HP1g
binding to G9a and GLP is inhibited by aurora B-mediated phosphorylation
of G9a or GLP adjacent to the methylation site. In transient reporter
gene assays, mutations of G9a and GLP methylation sites significantly
decreased their coactivator activity with GR. Inversely, inhibition of
Aurora kinase B activity increased the reporter gene activation. In
addition, inhibition of the kinase activity of Aurora B increased the
expression of endogenous GR target genes positively regulated by G9a and
GLP, while depletion of HP1g inhibited their expression. Moreover
methylated G9a or GLP can form a ternary complex with HP1g and GR in cell
lines, and HP1g was recruited to the GR binding sites of the target genes
positively regulated by G9a and GLP (but not on GR target genes that do
not require G9a or GLP). Interestingly, the subset of GR target genes
positively regulated by G9a and GLP contains some genes involved in
cellular movement. At the physiological level, we established that G9a
and GLP act as coactivators of GR target genes that mediate
glucocorticoid repression of cell migration, which accompanies
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition associated with cancer progression.

In this study we demonstrated that G9a and GLP methylation is required
for their coactivator function with GR, because it facilitates
recruitment of HP1g which functions selectively as a coactivator for
genes positively regulated by G9a, GLP and GR. Inversely, G9a and GLP
phosphorylation antagonizes these effects. This competition could be
involved in the switch to determine whether G9a and GLP function as
coactivator or corepressor on specific target genes. Defining the
specific molecular functions of SR coregulators and how their recruitment
and actions are coordinated is key to understanding how transcription is
regulated and will suggest new targets in steroid hormone regulated
cancer and in other steroid hormone-related diseases.


