Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of the IRAK4 inhibitor CA-4948 in patient-derived
xenograft models of diffuse large B cell lymphoma.


IRAK4 kinase activity is required for toll-like receptor (TLR) and
interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R) signaling in a variety of myeloid and
lymphoid cell types. Recruitment of IRAK4 to these receptors and its
subsequent activation is facilitated by the MYD88 adaptor protein, which
is mutated in ~22% of DLBCL cases. The MYD88 L265P activating mutation is
found in ~30% of the activated B-cell (ABC) and ~6% of germinal center
B-cell (GCB) subtypes of DLBCL and leads to constitutive activation of
NF-ÎºB signaling that is associated with worse prognosis. Thus, the
development of small molecule inhibitors targeting IRAK4 is an attractive
anticancer strategy for MYD88 mutation-containing cancers such as DLBCL.

We are developing an IRAK4 inhibitor, CA-4948, as a therapeutic agent for
hematological cancers with dysregulated TLR/MYD88/IRAK4 signaling.
CA-4948 (previously AU-4948) is a selective and potent IRAK4 kinase
inhibitor with in vivo activity in a TLR4-induced cytokine release model.
CA-4948 exhibits favorable DMPK properties, oral bioavailability, and is
well tolerated in mice. Furthermore, CA-4948 was previously shown to
exhibit dose-dependent efficacy in ABC-DLBCL MYD88-L265P xenograft tumor
models using cell lines OCI-LY3 and OCI-LY10.

Here, we report the efficacy results from testing CA-4948 in a panel of
well characterized, patient-derived DLBCL tumor xenograft (PDX) mouse
models. CA-4948 exhibited the greatest efficacy in four of the five
ABC-DLBCL PDX models tested as compared to GBC-DLBCL and ABC/GCB DLBCL
PDX models. Furthermore, CA-4948 was efficacious in ABC-DLBCL PDX tumors
containing activating mutations in both TLR/IL-1R and BCR signaling
pathways (MYD88 and CD79B double mutants). Interestingly, the one
ABC-DLBCL PDX model that failed to respond to CA-4948 treatment contained
a MYD88 L265P mutation as well as a BCL6 translocation. While this
particular PDX model was resistant to CA-4948, and showed a weak
anti-tumor response to single-agent ibrutinib, the combination treatment
of ibrutinib and CA-4948 exhibited a synergistic tumor growth inhibition
effect. In summary, CA-4948 exhibited anti-tumor activity in ABC-type
DLCBL PDX tumor models including those containing combinations of
activating mutations in the TLR/IL-1R and BCR signaling pathways. These
results underscore the therapeutic potential of IRAK4 kinase inhibition
by CA-4948, as a single-agent or in combination with BCR inhibitors, for
the treatment of DLBCL.


