Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anthracycline-based antibody drug conjugates with potent
immune-stimulatory functions.


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) are highly potent and selective
anti-tumor drugs, combining the specific targeting of monoclonal
antibodies with the potency of small molecule toxic payloads. Here, we
employed enzymatic, site-specific conjugation to generate homogenous ADCs
based on a derivative of the highly potent anthracycline toxin PNU-159682
and a non-cleavable peptide linker, using the anti-HER-2 antibody
trastuzumab (part of trastuzumab emtansine) and the anti-CD30 antibody
cAC10 (part of brentuximab vedotin). Characterization of the resulting
ADCs in vitro and in vivo showed that they were highly stable and
exhibited potencies exceeding those of ADCs based on conventional
tubulin-targeting payloads, such as trastuzumab emtansine and brentuximab
vedotin. Anti-tumor activity in an immune-competent host involved
activation of the immune system, as shown by evaluation of a
trastuzumab-PNU ADC in a Kadcyla-resistant HER2-positive orthotopic
breast cancer model. Depletion of CD8 T cells severely reduced the
anti-tumor activity of the ADC, demonstrating an important role for T
cells in driving tumor regression. Furthermore, when tumor free animals
were re-challenged with the same tumor, tumor growth was entirely
inhibited in the absence of any further ADC administration, indicating
the development of an immunological memory. In summary, we present a
novel ADC format endowed not only with highly potent cytotoxicity, but
also effective immune-stimulatory functions.


