Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FATE1 promotes mitochondrial hyperfusion and supports maintenance
of mitochondrial networks following apoptosis stimulation.


FATE1 (fetal and adult testis expressed 1), also known as the
cancer-testis antigen BJ-HCC-2, is expressed in testis and tumor tissues.
FATE1 was recently described as a major survival factor in tumor cells of
various origins, by mediating the degradation of the pro-apoptotic
BH3-only protein Bik (Maxfield et al., in Nat Commun 2015 Nov 16;6:8840)
and through ER-mitochondrial uncoupling (Doghman-Bouguerra et al., in
EMBO Rep 2016 Sep;17(9):1264-80). Interestingly, FATE1 shares high
sequence homology with the mitochondrial Drp1 receptor MFF (mitochondrial
fission factor). We thus investigated a possible role of FATE1 impact on
mitochondrial morphology following the stimulation of apoptosis in cancer
cells. We found that, similar to MFF, FATE1 is localized to outer
mitochondrial membranes and, unlike MFF, additionally localized to the
endoplasmic reticulum. Importantly, in contrast to MFF, FATE1
overexpression does not recruit Drp1 to mitochondria, and instead
promotes hyperfusion of mitochondrial networks. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments and reconstitution of Mfn2 or Mfn1 in double knockout mouse
embryonic fibroblasts indicate a role for the mitochondrial fusion
protein Mfn2, but not Mfn1. As FATE1 overexpressing cancer cells were
more resistant to mitochondrial fragmentation in response to TNF and
valinomycin treatments, we propose FATE1 as a novel regulator of
mitochondrial morphology changes occurring during apoptosis, with
possible implications in FATE1-mediated resistance of cancer cells to
chemotherapy.


