Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of inhibition of cell cycle versus transcription
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) in ovarian cancer cells.


Background. Cell cycle is regulated by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs)
activity, whose deregulation can lead to uncontrolled proliferation and
cancer. Other CDKs are engaged in the regulation of transcription and
post-transcriptional mRNA processing through the phosphorylation of the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, such as CDK9 and CDK12.
Inhibitors of cell cycle CDKs have been developed as anticancer agents
and some of them are under clinical validation (e.g. palbociclib). While
recent data would suggest that inhibition of CDK9 is feasible and has
antitumor effect, the data on the therapeutic role of CDK12 inhibition
are very scanty.

Methods. Ovarian cancer cell lines were maintained in RPMI medium
supplemented with 5% glutamine and 10% FBS. Cells were treated with
different drug concentrations and after 72 hours cell survival was
evaluated by MTS assay (Promega). IC50 values were calculated by
interpolation method. Cell cycle analysis and apoptosis were performed
with standard flow cytometric methods. A2780 and SKOV3 ovarian cancer
cell lines knocked out for CDK12 were generated with CRISPR/CAS9 genome
editing tool.

Results. The cytotoxicity of palbociclib (a CDK4/6 inhibitor) and
LDC000067 (a CDK9 inhibitor) was tested in a panel of ovarian cancer cell
lines (A2780, SKOV3, OVCAR3, OVCAR5, OVCAR8, OVCA432, OVCA433, IGROV1,
EFO27). Sensitivity of cells was similar for palbociclib and LDC000067,
ranging from 10 to 33 and from 8 to 60 μM, respectively. A preferential
G1 block was observed with palbociclib, while LDC000067 caused a S-G2
block. A higher induction of apoptosis was observed after LDC000067 than
after palbociclib treatment in both A2780 and SKOV3. The
palbociclib-induced G1 block was associated with decreased Rb
phosphorylation, while no modulation of the Ser2 in the carboxyterminal
domain of RNA polymerase II was observed after LDC000067 treatment. We
generated CDK12 knocked out cells transfecting CRISPR/CAS9 engineered
plasmid in both A2780 and SKOV3 ovarian cancer lines. The biological and
pharmacological characterization of these clones is under study.

Conclusions. Palbociclib and LDC000067 showed a dose dependent cytotoxic
effect in the panel of ovarian cancer cell lines tested and were active
in the μM range. Preliminary data of treatment induced cell cycle
perturbation and apoptosis suggest that the two drugs behave in a
different manner and have distinct molecular effects on cells.


