Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel human telomerase associated protein by
mass spectrometry.


Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures at the ends of eukaryotic
chromosomes that prevent them from degradation, recombination, and
end-to-end fusion. Telomere consists of DNA repeats, which in human is of
the sequence TTAGGG, and it is bound by a group of proteins called
shelterin complex. Telomere is synthesized by telomerase. Telomerase is
absent in most human somatic cells while it is up-regulated in 90% of
cancer cells, in which telomerase plays an essential role in cancer
cellsâ€™ replicative immortality. However, telomerase is only present at
approximately 250 molecules per cancer cell. To exert its function of
elongating telomere, telomerase has to find the end of telomeres which
needed to be elongated. However, how telomerase is precisely recruited to
telomere ends is not clearly understood. To better understand the
recruitment process of telomerase, we initially screened and subsequently
identified novel binding proteins of hTERT, the catalytic subunit of
telomerase, through a pull-down assay using cancer cell lines with
endogenously Flag-tagged hTERT. Using mass spectrometry (MS), we were
able to identify a promising interesting protein. Further, direct
interaction between TERT and this protein was validated. Then, we found
that this protein can also interact with the shelterin component, TRF1
(Telomeric repeat-binding factor 1), which binds to double stranded
telomeric DNA. Furthermore, from previous published reports, this protein
was shown to interact with single-stranded telomeric DNA binding protein
POT1 (Protection of Telomeres 1) in the shelterin complex. Functionally,
overexpression of this protein in cancer cell lines can result in the
elongation of telomeres, while knock-down or knock-out of the protein
results in the shortening of telomere. In conclusion, we identified an
hTERT-binding protein that affects telomere maintenance which may be
involved in telomerase recruitment process. In the long run, it could
serve as a potential therapeutic target for cancers.


