Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improving prognosis or promoting progression? Double sword of
S100A8 in colorectal cancer.


Tumor tissues are heterogeneous, including cancer cells, cancer stem
cells and immune cells. The immune states are involved in malignancy and
prognosis in colorectal carcinomas (CRC). S100A8, which represented
granulocytes and monocytes, was identified as a favorable indicator for
survival by previous work. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) play critical roles on tumor cell
malignancy and metastasis. The immune states, CSC and EMT should be
regarded as integrity, which is important for clinical efforts and the
mechanism investigation. For better understanding the associations among
immune cells, CSC and EMT in CRC, S100A8 as along with CSC (Lgr5, Nanog,
ALDH1 and CD44v6) and EMT (E-cadherin and Snail) markers were detected in
the tumor invasive front (TF) and tumor center (TC) respectively by
immunohistochemistry in 419 CRCs and survival analysis was done.
Furthermore, functions of S100A8 in EMT were verified in vitro.

S100A8+TF count was positively correlated with Lgr5TC (r=0.162, p=0.004)
and cytoplasmic SnailTF expression (r=0.116, p=0.043), while it was not
correlated with other stem cell markers wherever they were located, and
not associated with E-cadherinTC or E-cadherinTF, or cytoplasmic snailTC
or nucleic SnailTC and SnailTF expression (p>0.005). After combining
S100A8+TF and Lgr5TC, three groups were got. It showed S100A8+TFhigh
Lgr5TChigh had the best 5-year survival, while S100A8+TFlow

Lgr5TClow had the worst 5-year survival. After joining with cytoplasmic
snailTF into S100A8+TF and Lgr5TC, six groups were got. Finally, three
groups with similar outcome were merged as A, B, and C, called SLS
(S100A8, Lgr5 and snail). Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis showed
group C, with S100A8lowLgr5lowsnailhigh had the worst 5-year survival.
SLS was also an independent predictor for 5-year survival.

S100A8 was not only stained in granulocytes and monocytes but also in
tumor cells. Then S100A8 was overexpressed by lentiviral vector in DLD1
and sw620 CRC cell lines to further investigate its intracellular
functions. On the contrary, overexpression of S100A8 in tumor cells not
only facilitated tumor cell proliferation, migration and invasion but
also converted cells to EMT phenotype. Western blot showed E-cadherin was
down-regulated and Vimentin, MMP9 and snail were up-regulated in S100A8
overexpressed cells. The transcription factor USF2 was verified to
interact with S100A8 by luciferase reporter gene. Western blot showed
overexpression of USF2 increased S100A8 expression, while overexpression
of S100A8 had no effect on USF2.

In conclusion, S100A8 from immune cells or tumor cells has opposing
effects on cancer progression. S100A8 in immune cells predicts good
prognosis. However, S100A8 in tumor cells, which could be regulated by
USF2, promotes proliferation, migration and invasion, along with EMT
transformation.


