Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective assessment for telomere length in relation to risk
of cancer in the Singapore Chinese Health Study.


Background: Telomeres are crucial in the maintenance of chromosome
integrity and genomic stability. A critically short telomere length can
trigger cell to enter replicative senescence with a result of cell death;
alternatively, cells continue to divide if death does not occur, which
results in genomic instability and chromosomal abnormality. A series of
epidemiological studies have examined the association between telomere
length and the risk of cancers, but the findings remain conflicting.

Methods: Among 63,257 participants of the Singapore Chinese Health Study,
a population-based prospective cohort of Chinese men and women aged 45-74
years recruited from 1993 through 1998, 28,219 provided baseline blood
samples. We used quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method to
quantify relative telomere length determined by the ratio of telomere
repeat copy number (T) to single-copy gene for albumin (S) (i.e., TSR) on
all subjects. The present analysis included 24,847 subjects with valid
TSR values after excluding samples with insufficient DNA (n = 1,908)
and/or patients with prevalent cancer at baseline blood draw (n =1,464).
As of December 31, 2015, 3,778 participants developed cancer, including
722 colorectal cancer, 599 lung cancer, and 412 breast cancer. Cox models
were used to estimate hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI)
of developing any cancer and these selected specific cancer types for
different quintiles of TSR.

Results: Women had a 5.7% higher TSR value than men (PResults: Women had
a 5.7% higher TSR value than men (P<0.0001). Age, level of education,
number of cigarettes/day, years of smoking, and pack-years of smoking
were all inversely associated with TSR (PResults: Women had a 5.7% higher
TSR value than men (P<0.0001). Age, level of education, number of
cigarettes/day, years of smoking, and pack-years of smoking were all
inversely associated with TSR (P<0.0001). High TSR was associated, in a
dose-dependent manner, with significantly increased risk of total cancer
and breast, colorectal and lung cancer. Compared with the lowest
quintile, the HRs (95% CIs) of total cancer for the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th,
and 5th quintile of TSR were 1.03 (0.89, 1.20), 1.08 (0.93-1.26), 1.15
(0.98-1.34), and 1.36 (1.16-1.58), respectively, after adjustment for
age, sex, education and smoking (Ptrend=0.001). The corresponding HRs
(95% CIs) were 1.21 (0.72-2.03), 1.59 (0.97-2.60), 1.59 (1.04-2.75) and
1.62 (0.99-2.66) for breast cancer (Ptrend=0.023); 1.44 (1.03-2.00), 1.10
(0.76-1.59), 1.32 (0.92-1.90) and 1.88 (1.32-2.66) for colorectal cancer
(Ptrend=0.004); and 1.41 (0.98-2.05), 1.37 (0.93-2.02), 1.31 (0.86-1.99)
and 1.88 (1.26-2.81) for lung cancer (Ptrend=0.010).

Conclusions: This prospective cohort study demonstrates that longer
telomere length is associated with significantly increased risk of total
and major cancers in a general population. These results suggest a
complex role of telomere in the development of cancer.


