Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-200c-driven mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition as a
therapeutic target in uterine carcinosarcomas.


Introduction and purpose of study: Uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS) is an
aggressive and rare malignancy with poor prognosis and limited treatment
options. These biphasic tumors, consisting of epithelial and mesenchymal
components, are hypothesized to evolve from less aggressive endometrial
adenocarcinomas (EACs) through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
EMT is a reversible process, and mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET)
has been shown to decrease tumor aggressiveness. Inducing MET has been
suggested for treatment of cancers with a mesenchymal phenotype. In our
studies, we investigated the importance of EMT in the evolution of UCS by
depleting miR-200, a family of microRNAs critical for EMT, in EAC cell
lines. We also explored the role of miR-200 overexpression as a driving
force for MET in UCS with a focus on finding novel therapeutic approaches
to the treatment of this aggressive disease.

Experimental procedures: To test whether UCSs evolve from EACs, we
depleted miR-200b/c in EAC cell lines, Ishikawa and MFE-280. For the MET
studies, we stably overexpressed miR-200c in UCS cell lines, SNU685 and
JHUCS1. Gene expression was measured using TaqMan and whole transcriptome
sequencing (RNA-seq) assays. Immunoblotting was performed on the
EMT-relevant proteins. Cell adhesion and in vitro cell proliferation were
measured using commercially available assays. In vivo tumor growth of
JHUCS1 miR-200c-overexpressed cells was measured in xenografted mice.

Summary of the data: Compared to EAC cells, UCS cells had undetectable
miR-200c expression. Depletion of miR-200b/c in EAC cells resulted in
expected increased ZEB1 and decreased E-cadherin expression. The lack of
increased N-cadherin, vimentin and morphologic changes, even in the
presence of exogenous TGF-Î² suggests partial EMT induction.
Overexpression of miR-200c in UCS cells resulted in full MET, with a
decrease in ZEB1, ZEB2, N-cadherin and vimentin and an increase in
E-cadherin. Increased cellular adhesion was observed along with typical
MET morphologic changes. miR-200c overexpression led to inhibited UCS
cell proliferation and metabolic activity. Overexpression of miR-200c in
vivo resulted in substantially smaller tumors compared to mice bearing
control UCS cells.

Conclusions: Our data suggest that mechanisms additional to, or other
than EMT, are necessary for the evolution of UCS from EAC. UCS cell
lines, however, readily undergo robust MET in the setting of increased
miR-200c expression rendering them less aggressive. These findings
suggest that miR200 overexpression through advanced microRNA therapeutics
may lead to new options for the treatment of uterine carcinosarcomas.


