Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-196b as a potential biomarker for human esophageal cancer.


Esophageal cancer is the sixth most common cause of cancer related death.
Although multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations have been detected
in esophageal cancer, molecular markers for early diagnosis and
prediction of prognosis or treatment responses are quite limited.
microRNA (miRNA) is a class of small-regulatory non-coding RNA, acting as
either a tumor suppressor or oncogene by regulating gene expression
through pairing with complementary seed of the targeted messenger RNAs
(mRNA). A number of miRNA expression profiling studies have been
conducted in esophageal. In our current study, we analyzed the most
recent studies on miRNAs expression profiles in esophageal cancer.
Consistently dysregulated miRNAs have been identified in esophageal
cancer, including upregulation of miR-196b, miR-135a, and downregulation
of miR-141, miR-200a-5p, miR-200b-3p, miR-27b, miR-210. We first assessed
expression of miRNAs in esophageal cancer cell lines and primary
esophageal cancer tissues by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Significantly overexpressed miR-196b was
observed in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma KYSE-70 and KYSE-180
compared with normal esophageal squamous cell line, HET-1A. Furthermore,
overexpression of miR-196b was detected in 12 out of 14 (86%) cancer
tissues compared to the matched normal tissues. Forced expression of
miR-196b promotes the proliferation and invasion in esophageal cancer
cell lines. TargetScanS and miRanda were used to identify the target
genes of miR-196b. A list of targets genes were predicted, including
GATA6, ARHGAP28, EPS15 and EPHA7. Forced expression of miR-196b resulted
in significant downregulated EPS15 and EPHA7 expression in esophageal
cancer cell lines. Our present work suggested that miR-196b acts as an
oncomiR by regulating EPS15 and EPHA7. Therefore, miR-196b could be used
as a biomarker for esophageal cancer.


