Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low frequency variant detection and tissue-of-origin exploration
using liquid biopsies.


The promise of liquid biopsy assays lies in the non-invasive monitoring
of diseases, such as cancer, through circulating, cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
or circulating tumor cell DNA. This may assist in advancing early-stage
diagnosis while simultaneously monitoring treatment response over time.
Since these materials are often limited, most liquid biopsy assays
incorporate targeted sequencing to enable cost-effective deep coverage of
target loci for detection of low frequency pathogenic variants. Yet a
critical aspect in attaining the necessary sensitivity is an assay that
produces uniform, comprehensive coverage from low DNA input quantities.
We have developed a liquid biopsy workflow to enable low frequency
variant detection from a 10 mL blood draw using the Promega Maxwell RSC
combined with Swift Biosciences Accel-NGS 2SÂ® library preparation
methodologies. In addition, we explore whether methylation patterns of
the extracted cfDNA possess information of the tissue-of-origin.

Whole blood samples were collected in Streck cell-free DNA BCT vials from
patients with late stage cancer and cfDNA was extracted with the Promega
Maxwell RSC. This instrument yielded DNA outputs ranging from 8-32 ng,
with a size profile defined by a predominant peak of ~170bp and a mean
Alu repeat qPCR integrity score of 0.22, characteristic of high quality
cfDNA lacking cellular DNA content. A total of 20 ng cfDNA was used to
make an Accel-NGS 2S Hyb library followed by hybridization capture using
Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon probes. The Accel-NGS 2S Hyb Kit
exhibits a 90% library conversion rate with cfDNA and provides high
complexity libraries with uniform target coverage. In addition, molecular
barcodes were incorporated to label each library molecule uniquely prior
to PCR amplification. These molecular barcodes were utilized for accurate
removal of PCR duplicates while simultaneously preserving naturally
occurring fragmentation and strand duplicates to maximize data recovery.
Secondly, these barcoded molecules were grouped to generate consensus
sequences after removal of false positives originating from PCR and
sequencing errors. Variant calling was performed using Vardict and Lofreq
enabling highly sensitive and precise detection of variants down to a
0.5% allele frequency.

In parallel, we have developed a workflow to determine if the epigenetic
status of cfDNA can identify tissue-of-origin. This workflow utilizes the
Accel-NGS Methyl-Seq DNA Library Kit to enable unbiased characterization
from low (5 ng) cfDNA inputs. Through whole genome bisulfite sequencing,
using a priori knowledge of differentially methylated regions
characteristic of different human tissues, we can identify the
predominant tissue source of cfDNA in blood.


