Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic potential of combination therapy using a next
generation antisense oligonucleotide targeting the androgen receptor and
AKT inhibition with AZD5363 in genetically engineered mouse models of
prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer is highly dependent on androgen receptor (AR) and
PI3K/AKT signaling pathways for survival and disease progression.
Preclinical evidence suggests that combinatorial approaches targeting
both AR and PI3K/AKT activity improves treatment efficacy. However,
sustained responses from traditional and next-generation anti-androgen
therapies targeting AR remain elusive in clinical practice due to
inherent/acquired resistance resulting in lethal castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). Mechanisms for continued AR transcriptional
activity may be ligand dependent or independent but still require AR gene
expression. Persistent AR gene expression is a key feature of CRPC. Thus,
blocking AR gene expression by antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) is a
logical approach to CRPC. We previously showed that monotherapy with
ISIS581088, a generation 2.5 ASO targeting mouse AR, demonstrated strong
antitumor activity in a transgenic mouse model of PTEN-deficient prostate
cancer. In this study we show the antitumor effects of combined therapy
of ISIS581088 and AZD5363, a potent AKT inhibitor and demonstrate the
therapeutic benefit of combination therapy in a clinically relevant mouse
model of CRPC. Sixteen-week-old mice with PTEN-/- castration-naïve
prostate tumors were treated with ISIS581088 and AZD5363 alone or in
combination for four weeks. Tumor growth inhibition rates were 41.2%,
20.2% and 54.4% for ISIS581088, AZD5363 and ISIS581088/AZD5363 treatment
groups, respectively, PProstate cancer is highly dependent on androgen
receptor (AR) and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways for survival and disease
progression. Preclinical evidence suggests that combinatorial approaches
targeting both AR and PI3K/AKT activity improves treatment efficacy.
However, sustained responses from traditional and next-generation
anti-androgen therapies targeting AR remain elusive in clinical practice
due to inherent/acquired resistance resulting in lethal
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Mechanisms for continued AR
transcriptional activity may be ligand dependent or independent but still
require AR gene expression. Persistent AR gene expression is a key
feature of CRPC. Thus, blocking AR gene expression by antisense
oligonucleotides (ASO) is a logical approach to CRPC. We previously
showed that monotherapy with ISIS581088, a generation 2.5 ASO targeting
mouse AR, demonstrated strong antitumor activity in a transgenic mouse
model of PTEN-deficient prostate cancer. In this study we show the
antitumor effects of combined therapy of ISIS581088 and AZD5363, a potent
AKT inhibitor and demonstrate the therapeutic benefit of combination
therapy in a clinically relevant mouse model of CRPC. Sixteen-week-old
mice with PTEN-/- castration-naïve prostate tumors were treated with
ISIS581088 and AZD5363 alone or in combination for four weeks. Tumor
growth inhibition rates were 41.2%, 20.2% and 54.4% for ISIS581088,
AZD5363 and ISIS581088/AZD5363 treatment groups, respectively, P<0.001.
In a model of mouse CRPC, 16-week-old mice with PTEN-/-
castration-resistant prostate tumors (eight weeks post castration)
experienced reduced tumor burden with all treatments but no enhancement
was observed when the compounds were administered in combination compared
with monotherapy drug treatments. In a randomized trial of advanced CRPC
in PTEN/P53 double knockout mice, combination therapy significantly
increased overall survival. Median survival were 18, 17 21, 22, and 38
days for control vehicle, control ASO, ISIS581088, AZD5363 and
ISIS581088/AZD5363 treatment groups, respectively, P=0.041. In
conclusion, our data shows that combination therapy significantly reduced
tumor burden in mice with castration-naïve tumors compared to those
treated with monotherapy. Notably, combination therapy did not produce an
additive effect in an early stage CRPC intervention model. Still,
combination therapy demonstrated a clear advantage in prolonging overall
survival in a long-term randomized mouse trial of PTEN/P53-deficient
CRPC. Thus, our data provides preclinical evidence to support that next
generation ASOs targeting AR in combination with AKT inhibition is a
potentially effective treatment approach for CRPC.


