Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The key role of Abi1 loss in dysregulating cell-cell adhesion
during prostate cancer tumorigenesis.


Prostate cancer accounts for 20-25% of cancer cases every year and is
predicted at over 180,000 new cases in 2016. However, the mechanisms of
prostate cancer initiation and castration resistance still remains poorly
understood. Our previous research shows mutations and deletions in
Abelson interactor 1 (Abi1), an integral part of WAVE complex, in
prostate tumor samples. Moreover, WAVE complex levels are inversely
correlated to prostate cancer recurrence and castration resistance,
outlining their clinical significance. A common phenomenon found early on
in most cancers, including prostate cancer, is dysregulated cell-cell
adhesion. This points towards a possible tumor suppressor mechanism,
since Abi1 and the WAVE complex are in fact the primary regulators of
branched actin polymerization via the Arp2/3 complex, and are critical
for the formation and maintenance of cell-cell adhesion complexes. Hence,
to study Abi1 in prostate cancer, we generated a prostate-specific
conditional Abi1 knock-out (KO) mouse. In these mice, we observed
evidence of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), a precursor of
invasive carcinoma, with changes in proliferation and cell-cell adhesion
markers. The goal of this study is to elucidate the mechanism by which
the loss of Abi1 leads to the development of PIN in these mice. We are
leading this analysis by primary 3D cultures with cells from our Abi1 KO
prostates, and 2D cultures with mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Loss
of Abi1 leads to increase in size of the cultured spheroids, which
indicates increased proliferation and dysregulated cell-cell adhesion.
Also, adherens junction (AJ) markers E-cadherin and Î²-catenin levels are
lower in western blots and immunostaining, suggesting defects in
cell-cell adhesion. In MEFs, we observe loss of membrane localization of
AJ proteins in Abi1 KO cells. Loss of Abi1 is often associated with
upregulation of Abi2, which may be a contributing factor to the
phenotype. To validate our findings in a human system, we have recently
developed a CRISPR-mediated KO of Abi1 in the RWPE-1 non-tumor prostate
cell line. We will use this KO cell line to determine cell-cell adhesion
formation and maintenance in 2D and 3D cultures. In conclusion, loss of
Abi1 leads to dysregulation of cell-cell adhesion in prostate epithelial
cells, which may be a key mechanism for tumor development and progression
in prostate cancer. Supported by NCI R01 CA161018 (LK).


