Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling the tumor invasion front using 3D fluidic tumoroid
culture of cancer cells.


To realize the promise of precision medicine, it is important to
integrate phenotypic assessment of cell populations to genomic data. The
analysis of invading leader cells at the tumor invasion front is of
interest as they may be guided by a targetable molecular phenotype.
However, there is a lack of suitable platforms on which to analyze the
tumor invasion front. In this study, we have designed and constructed a
fluidic device for long-term (several days to weeks) 3-dimensional
tumoroid culture of diverse cancer cells. Using this device, we can
recapitulate the tumor invasion front and at the same time quantify the
invasive potential of different breast cancer cell line models. Analyses
of the tumor invasion front indicated a region of higher proliferation
and suggest that the leader cells possess a different molecular phenotype
from the tumoroid mass. Interestingly, significant heterogeneity among
invading cells was still observed, suggesting that there could be: 1) the
presence of multiple subpopulations of invasive cells, each with a
different clonal genetic signature; and/or 2) reversible phenotypic
switching occurring among invading cells due to phenotypic plasticity.
These results obtained using this innovative device highlight and present
a promising solution to the challenges developing adequate therapeutics
accounting for tumor phenotypic heterogeneity. There is potential for the
device for use in personalized medicine at diagnosis, allowing for both
the quantification of disease progression risk as well as the molecular
characterization of the invasive subpopulations from patient samples and
their response to tailored therapies.


