Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cationic polymer inhibits pancreatic cancer invasion in vitro and
metastasis in vivo.


Pancreatic cancer has the poorest prognosis of all major cancers with a
5-year survival of less than 5%. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has been
well-validated as a biomarker that correlates with tumor burden. More
recently, a role for cfDNA in facilitating tumor progression has also
been identified. The latter occurs through activation of nucleic acid
sensing receptors such as toll-like receptors (TLRs) in both tumor cells
and the host environment, which can upregulate pro-metastatic signaling
pathways. In addition, tumor-derived extracellular vesicles such as
microparticles and exosomes have also been implicated in promoting
metastasis by activating pro-invasive pathways in tumor cells and
pre-conditioning secondary sites for metastatic establishment. Our
laboratory has previously shown that cationic polymers can scavenge
negatively charged nucleic acids like cfDNA and abrogate aberrant
inflammation in disease models of autoimmunity and infection. Herein, we
investigated the ability of the cationic polymer, PAMAM-G3, to bind and
inhibit cfDNA as well as anionic tumor-derived extracellular vesicles
using in vitro models of pancreatic cancer cell line invasion. We also
evaluated the effect of PAMAM-G3 treatment in a bioluminescent syngeneic
murine model of pancreatic cancer metastasis. PAMAM-G3 significantly
inhibited in vitro invasion of pancreatic cancer cell lines in response
to both cfDNA and tumor-derived extracellular vesicles. Moreover,
biweekly intraperitoneal treatment with PAMAM-G3 (20 mg/kg) starting 48
hours after pancreatic tumor cell implantation led to a significant
reduction in liver metastasis without affecting primary tumor growth.
Thus, cationic polymers such as PAMAM-G3 may represent a novel class of
therapeutics to combat pancreatic cancer metastasis.


