Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efatutazone reduces mammosphere formation in
Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- and Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice.


Introduction: Efatutazone, a PPAR gamma agonist, may affect tumor growth
through the induction of terminal cell differentiation. Thus, we
hypothesize that efatutazone could affect progenitor cell number. Here,
we evaluate progenitor cell number by measuring mammospheres, which is
considered one way to measure potential progenitor cells.

Methods: Two month old Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- (n= 14) and
Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- (n= 10) C57Bl/6 mice were randomly placed on
either control or treated with efatutazone through the diet (30-mg/kg
concentration, F3028, rodent diet, grain-based, 1/2-in pellets; Bio-Serv,
Frenchtown, NJ) with necropsy at four months and isolation of primary
mammary epithelial cells from thoracic glands for studies of mammosphere
formation using SCIVAX 96-well low adhesion nanoculture plates
(Organogenix, Inc., Japan) using EpiCult-B Mouse Media (Stem Cell
Technology, Inc., Vancouver, Canada) with 0,1,5, and 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) added. Thoracic mammary gland tissue was frozen at -20°C
followed by isolation of RNA and evaluation of PPAR gamma pathway gene
expression by real-time RT-PCR using TaqMan® Array Mouse Lipid Regulated
Genes (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham MA). One inguinal gland
was fixed for mammary gland whole mount and the other inguinal gland was
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded for histology.

Results: SCIVAX nanoculture plates showed reproducible increases in
mammosphere numbers with increasing FBS concentrations (p Results: SCIVAX
nanoculture plates showed reproducible increases in mammosphere numbers
with increasing FBS concentrations (p <0.05 one-way, Kruskal-Wallis). A
significant increase in sphere number was seen in
Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- compared to Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice
(pResults: SCIVAX nanoculture plates showed reproducible increases in
mammosphere numbers with increasing FBS concentrations (p <0.05 one-way,
Kruskal-Wallis). A significant increase in sphere number was seen in
Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- compared to Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice
(p<0.05 one-way, Kruskall Wallis). Efatutazone treatment significantly
decreased sphere numbers in Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- and in
Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice (pResults: SCIVAX nanoculture plates
showed reproducible increases in mammosphere numbers with increasing FBS
concentrations (p <0.05 one-way, Kruskal-Wallis). A significant increase
in sphere number was seen in Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- compared to
Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice (p<0.05 one-way, Kruskall Wallis).
Efatutazone treatment significantly decreased sphere numbers in
Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- and in Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice (p<0.05
one-way, Kruskall Wallis). Expression of PPAR gamma pathway genes were
increased at the RNA level with statistically significant increases in
Acadvl, Tnf, Alox5 (pResults: SCIVAX nanoculture plates showed
reproducible increases in mammosphere numbers with increasing FBS
concentrations (p <0.05 one-way, Kruskal-Wallis). A significant increase
in sphere number was seen in Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- compared to
Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice (p<0.05 one-way, Kruskall Wallis).
Efatutazone treatment significantly decreased sphere numbers in
Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- and in Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice (p<0.05
one-way, Kruskall Wallis). Expression of PPAR gamma pathway genes were
increased at the RNA level with statistically significant increases in
Acadvl, Tnf, Alox5 (p<0.05) and Il1B, Srebf2, Hmgcs1, Hmgcr (pResults:
SCIVAX nanoculture plates showed reproducible increases in mammosphere
numbers with increasing FBS concentrations (p <0.05 one-way,
Kruskal-Wallis). A significant increase in sphere number was seen in
Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- compared to Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice
(p<0.05 one-way, Kruskall Wallis). Efatutazone treatment significantly
decreased sphere numbers in Brca1WT/fl11/Cre/p53+/- and in
Brca1fl11/fl11/Cre/p53+/- mice (p<0.05 one-way, Kruskall Wallis).
Expression of PPAR gamma pathway genes were increased at the RNA level
with statistically significant increases in Acadvl, Tnf, Alox5 (p<0.05)
and Il1B, Srebf2, Hmgcs1, Hmgcr (p<0.01) genes (BootsRatio,
http://rht.iconcologia.net/stats/br/several.html) in mice on efatutazone
as compared to control diet.

Discussion: SCIVAX nanoculture plates can be used to quantitatively
evaluate and compare mammosphere numbers between different genotypes and
treatment groups. The higher numbers of mammospheres found with loss of
both Brca1 copies as compared to one copy is consistent with previously
published literature. The decrease in mammosphere numbers with
efatutazone treatment could be secondary to its differentiating impact on
mammary epithelial cells.

Conclusion: While efatutazone statistically significantly reduced
mammosphere numbers, the absolute reduction was less the 25%.


