Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Untargeted and targeted multiplatform metabolomic and lipidomic
approaches for monitoring biological effects in serum from total body
irradiated humans.


Investigation of responses to radiation therapy or exposure to radiation
in an intentional or accidental manner have identified significant
biomarkers for biodosimetry and monitoring of individuals in urine
through metabolomics (1). We extend the investigation in serum by
combining targeted and untargeted methodologies with a multiplatform
approach. Serum was collected from patients exposed to total body
irradiation (TBI) prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation at
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. The underlying diseases (chronic
myelogenous leukemia, acute lymphocytic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia,
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, or myelodysplastic syndrome) were in remission and
the cohort included both males and females. Serum was collected prior to
irradiation, at 3-8 h after a single dose of 1.25 Gy, and at 24h after
three fractions of 1.25 Gy each. Untargeted metabolomic and lipidomic
approaches with liquid chromatography (LC) mass spectrometry (MS) and gas
chromatography (GC) MS demonstrated significant perturbations at the
later time point and higher total dose. Alterations in circulating levels
were observed in lipids from monoacylglycerol, triacylglycerol,
phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylserine, and
phosphatidic acid lipid classes. Fatty acids were some of the most
dysregulated lipids, with increased levels linked to pro-inflammatory
processes. To further investigate the presence of low abundance
pro-inflammatory metabolites, we utilized a targeted and highly
quantitative approach measuring downstream molecules from fatty acids,
such as thromboxanes, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes that can act as
signaling molecules and mediators of systemic inflammation. Results
identified a rapid response within the first 3-8 hours primarily mediated
through the enzymatic action of lipoxygenase (LOX) and cytochrome P450
(CYP450), although some dissipated at the later time point. Less
significant alterations were observed in the anti-inflammatory pathway,
although the fatty acid precursor Î±-linolenic acid remained elevated in
both time points. Finally, as observed in our previous published study of
a similar cohort (1), sex-dependent differences were analyzed and unlike
the urinary results, females appeared to be more responsive to radiation
effects as measured in serum with lipidomics and metabolomics. No sex
differences were observed with the targeted approach. The ability to
identify and quantify small molecules in blood following radiation
exposure can therefore be utilized to not only monitor systemic effects
of radiotherapy but also to generate signatures that can be utilized to
identify accidentally exposed individuals that may require medical
intervention. 1. Laiakis EC et al. Radiat Res 2014; 181: 350-361.


