Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-treating fields decrease proliferation and clonogenicity of
patient-derived WHO grade IV glioma cell lines.


Despite decades of research, efficacious treatments for malignant glioma
tumors are limited. Tumor-treating fields (TTFields) are FDA-approved for
the treatment of newly-diagnosed and recurrent glioblastoma. In this
study, in vitro experiments comparing TTFields to untreated controls were
performed on patient-derived grade IV glioma cell lines to determine the
effects of TTFields on cell proliferation and clonogenicity. Methods:
Studies utilizing patient tumor specimens were approved by the Wayne
State University Institutional Review Board and written informed consent
was obtained from participants. Patient tumor specimens (glioblastoma and
gliosarcoma) were collected immediately following microsurgical
resection. Single-cell suspensions from the tumor tissues were prepared
by enzymatic and mechanical disruption. Equal numbers of cells were
plated on plastic coverslips in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum. TTFields were applied at 200 kHz to half of the
coverslips. Culture media was replaced every day. At the conclusion of
the 2 week treatment, cell proliferation was assessed with the XTT assay
and cells were harvested and replated for clonogenic assays (10,000
cells/well). The resulting colonies were fixed and stained with crystal
violet and counted with an automated colony counter. Control vs. TTFields
treated groups were compared by two-tailed t-tests. Results: The two-week
TTFields treatment significantly reduced cell proliferation in both the
glioblastoma (41.6 ± 11.1 % control; n=4; pDespite decades of research,
efficacious treatments for malignant glioma tumors are limited.
Tumor-treating fields (TTFields) are FDA-approved for the treatment of
newly-diagnosed and recurrent glioblastoma. In this study, in vitro
experiments comparing TTFields to untreated controls were performed on
patient-derived grade IV glioma cell lines to determine the effects of
TTFields on cell proliferation and clonogenicity. Methods: Studies
utilizing patient tumor specimens were approved by the Wayne State
University Institutional Review Board and written informed consent was
obtained from participants. Patient tumor specimens (glioblastoma and
gliosarcoma) were collected immediately following microsurgical
resection. Single-cell suspensions from the tumor tissues were prepared
by enzymatic and mechanical disruption. Equal numbers of cells were
plated on plastic coverslips in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum. TTFields were applied at 200 kHz to half of the
coverslips. Culture media was replaced every day. At the conclusion of
the 2 week treatment, cell proliferation was assessed with the XTT assay
and cells were harvested and replated for clonogenic assays (10,000
cells/well). The resulting colonies were fixed and stained with crystal
violet and counted with an automated colony counter. Control vs. TTFields
treated groups were compared by two-tailed t-tests. Results: The two-week
TTFields treatment significantly reduced cell proliferation in both the
glioblastoma (41.6 ± 11.1 % control; n=4; p<0.001) and in the
gliosarcoma (41.6 ± 16.6 % control; n=4; pDespite decades of research,
efficacious treatments for malignant glioma tumors are limited.
Tumor-treating fields (TTFields) are FDA-approved for the treatment of
newly-diagnosed and recurrent glioblastoma. In this study, in vitro
experiments comparing TTFields to untreated controls were performed on
patient-derived grade IV glioma cell lines to determine the effects of
TTFields on cell proliferation and clonogenicity. Methods: Studies
utilizing patient tumor specimens were approved by the Wayne State
University Institutional Review Board and written informed consent was
obtained from participants. Patient tumor specimens (glioblastoma and
gliosarcoma) were collected immediately following microsurgical
resection. Single-cell suspensions from the tumor tissues were prepared
by enzymatic and mechanical disruption. Equal numbers of cells were
plated on plastic coverslips in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum. TTFields were applied at 200 kHz to half of the
coverslips. Culture media was replaced every day. At the conclusion of
the 2 week treatment, cell proliferation was assessed with the XTT assay
and cells were harvested and replated for clonogenic assays (10,000
cells/well). The resulting colonies were fixed and stained with crystal
violet and counted with an automated colony counter. Control vs. TTFields
treated groups were compared by two-tailed t-tests. Results: The two-week
TTFields treatment significantly reduced cell proliferation in both the
glioblastoma (41.6 ± 11.1 % control; n=4; p<0.001) and in the
gliosarcoma (41.6 ± 16.6 % control; n=4; p<0.002) as measured by XTT
assay. The clonogenic assay revealed that the number of colonies
generated from both cell lines was reduced by TTFields treatment. For the
glioblastoma cell line, control cells yielded 847 colonies with an
average diameter of 462.8 ± 5.6 µM while TTFields-treated cells yielded
561 colonies with an average diameter of 435.1 ± 7.3 µM, which was a
statistically significant decrease (p=0.0022). For the gliosarcoma cell
line, control cells yielded 809 colonies vs. 144 colonies from the
TTFields treated cells, although the average diameter of the colonies was
unchanged between groups (control 375.1 ± 176.1 µM; TTFields 362.9 ±
196.0 µM). Conclusions: In vitro application of TTFields markedly
reduced cell proliferation and clonogenicity in both patient-derived WHO
grade IV glioblastoma and gliosarcoma cell lines. This is the first
report on the in vitro effects of TTFields on gliosarcoma.


