Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained MAPK activation as a mechanism of resistance to
osimertinib plus selumetinib in models of EGFR-mutant cancer.


INTRODUCTION: Osimertinib is a third-generation, mutant-selective
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)
recently approved for the treatment of T790M-positive EGFR-mutant lung
cancer. The mutant-selective nature of osimertinib improves its
tolerability by limiting its inhibition of wild-type EGFR compared to
first- and second-generation EGFR inhibitors, making it a good candidate
for rationally-designed combination therapies. One such combination,
osimertinib plus the MEK inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244; ARRY-142886), is
currently being studied as part of the phase 1b TATTON trial
(NCT02143466). Previous work by our group demonstrated that selumetinib
may delay or reverse resistance to osimertinib in some cases; however, we
anticipate that resistance to this combination will ultimately develop in
patients. Here, we investigate acquired resistance to osimertinib and
selumetinib combination therapy in vitro and in vivo.

DESIGN: In cells sensitive to osimertinib plus selumetinib (hereafter
referred to as combination-sensitive cells), ERK phosphorylation was
monitored via Western blot over the course of a 7-day treatment with 200
nM osimertinib plus 1 ÂµM selumetinib. To detect RAS-GTP, an active RAS
precipitation was performed in combination-sensitive and
combination-resistant cell lines following treatment with osimertinib. In
combination-resistant cells, pharmacologic inhibitors of various MAPK
pathway components were used to assess whether they could restore
potency. Western blot analysis was used to confirm on-target effects.
Lastly, an analysis of differences in gene expression between four
isogenic sets of combination-sensitive and combination-resistant cell
lines is currently ongoing.

RESULTS: In cell lines that are sensitive to growth inhibition by the
combination of osimertinib plus selumetinib, we observed complete
re-activation of the MAPK pathway after 5 days of continuous exposure to
both inhibitors. Additionally, RAS activity was elevated in
combination-resistant cell lines, and these cells remained sensitive to
the ERK inhibitor SCH772984. Likewise, the addition of a pan-RAF
inhibitor restored the growth inhibitory effects of osimertinib plus
selumetinib in combination-resistant cells, suggesting that incomplete
inhibition of MAPK is responsible for resistance in these cells.
Furthermore, an alternative MEK inhibitor, trametinib, was efficacious in
combination with osimertinib in cell lines that were resistant to
osimertinib plus selumetinib.

CONCLUSION: These data identify a potential mechanism of resistance to a
combination therapy that is currently being tested in the clinic.
Specifically, these data demonstrate that re-activation of the MAPK
pathway is a mechanism of resistance to osimertinib plus selumetinib and
that this pathway is still targetable in combination-resistant cells.


