Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survivin negatively-regulates autophagy through interference with
the formation of Atg5-Atg12-Atg16L complex in breast cancer cells.


Survivin, a member of the inhibitors-of-apoptosis proteins family, is
highly expressed in different cancers and its expression is correlated
with tumorigenesis and tumor metastasis. At the cellular and molecular
levels, Survivin is a dual functions protein that promotes mitosis and
also inhibits apoptosis. In this study, we found that Survivin is a novel
negative-regulator of autophagy. Molecular analysis and computational
modeling revealed that Survivin negatively regulates the formation of
Atg5-Atg12 conjugates, which plays important roles in the process of
autophagosome elongation, in breast cancer cells. It also negatively
regulates the expression and activity of cathepsin L in cells.
Interestingly, we found that Survivin binds to p62/SQSTM1 and LC3B and is
also an autophagic substrate protein, in which its expression is in part
directly regulated by autophagy at the protein level. Finally,
mechanistic study revealed YM155, a Survivin inhibitor that was
originally developed to inhibit Survivin gene transcription,
downregulates Survivin expression in part through autophagic protein
degradation. Taken together, findings of this study provide new
mechanistic insights into both molecular functions and regulations of
Survivin and the molecular mechanism of actions of YM155, a drug
currently undergoing clinical trials for cancer treatment.


