Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disrupting immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment via stealthy
nanobombs to enhance T-cell anticancer efficacy.


Despite the fact that the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment
(ISTME) has long been recognized as a major hurdle that significantly
limits the anticancer efficacy of various therapeutic strategies,
including T-cell-based immunotherapy, there is currently no effective way
to address this challenge. In this work, we prove that sequential
photothermal therapy (PTT), mediated with stealthy laser-triggerable
nanobombs composed of iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) following systemic
delivery, can remove both pre-resident and also newly triggered
immunosuppressor cells in established tumors to enhance the efficacy of
T-cell anticancer therapy. Using flow cytometry to study various T-cell
populations in tumor tissues 48 h post PTT in a 4T1 mouse model, our data
suggest that IONP-mediated PTT could significantly reduce the CD4+FoxP3+
regulatory T-cell population. Our data also suggest that CD8+ cytotoxic
T-cell populations in PTT-treated tumor tissues return to those of
non-treated tumors, and are believed to be newly activated at the tumor
site or recruited from periphery blood following PTT. Our data further
suggest that PTT twice spaced by a 24 h interval has the best anticancer
efficacy, compared to PTT once or three times at 24 h increments. This
enhanced anticancer effect from the sequential IONP-mediated PTT (twice)
is believed to be due to an enhanced ability to eliminate triggered
immunosuppressor cells that respond faster than cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells.
Furthermore, our Luminex analysis of chemokine serum concentrations
indicates that IONP-mediated PTT can decrease suppressor-cell-attractive
protein secretion, such as G-CSF. In addition, our immunohistochemistry
data from tumor tissue staining indicate that IONP-mediated PTT
down-regulates tumor cell PD-L1 expression to disrupt tumor-cell-mediated
immunosuppression. The capability of IONP-mediated PTT to disrupt ISTME
can significantly enhance T-cell anticancer efficacy toward both treated
established tumors and distal tumor cells. When combining IONP-mediated
PTT with anti-CTLA-4 therapy to block CD8+ T-cell inhibition, our data
suggest that combination treatment significantly inhibits tumor growth (p
Despite the fact that the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment
(ISTME) has long been recognized as a major hurdle that significantly
limits the anticancer efficacy of various therapeutic strategies,
including T-cell-based immunotherapy, there is currently no effective way
to address this challenge. In this work, we prove that sequential
photothermal therapy (PTT), mediated with stealthy laser-triggerable
nanobombs composed of iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) following systemic
delivery, can remove both pre-resident and also newly triggered
immunosuppressor cells in established tumors to enhance the efficacy of
T-cell anticancer therapy. Using flow cytometry to study various T-cell
populations in tumor tissues 48 h post PTT in a 4T1 mouse model, our data
suggest that IONP-mediated PTT could significantly reduce the CD4+FoxP3+
regulatory T-cell population. Our data also suggest that CD8+ cytotoxic
T-cell populations in PTT-treated tumor tissues return to those of
non-treated tumors, and are believed to be newly activated at the tumor
site or recruited from periphery blood following PTT. Our data further
suggest that PTT twice spaced by a 24 h interval has the best anticancer
efficacy, compared to PTT once or three times at 24 h increments. This
enhanced anticancer effect from the sequential IONP-mediated PTT (twice)
is believed to be due to an enhanced ability to eliminate triggered
immunosuppressor cells that respond faster than cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells.
Furthermore, our Luminex analysis of chemokine serum concentrations
indicates that IONP-mediated PTT can decrease suppressor-cell-attractive
protein secretion, such as G-CSF. In addition, our immunohistochemistry
data from tumor tissue staining indicate that IONP-mediated PTT
down-regulates tumor cell PD-L1 expression to disrupt tumor-cell-mediated
immunosuppression. The capability of IONP-mediated PTT to disrupt ISTME
can significantly enhance T-cell anticancer efficacy toward both treated
established tumors and distal tumor cells. When combining IONP-mediated
PTT with anti-CTLA-4 therapy to block CD8+ T-cell inhibition, our data
suggest that combination treatment significantly inhibits tumor growth (p
< 0.01), while control treatments, including the antibody alone,
IONP-mediated PTT alone, and mock treatment, fail to do so. Our data
further show that in a metastasis-mimic model, mice (6/6) that had
primary tumors treated with PTT/anti-CTLA-4 reject pre-inoculated cancer
cells at a distal site. Our data also show that the majority of the
PTT/anti-CTLA-4 treatment-cured mice can reject subcutaneously (8/12) or
tail-vein injected 4T1 cancer cells (9/9), indicating memory T-cell
immune surveillance. In conclusion, this study provides a
nanotechnology-based novel strategy to effectively disrupt not only
pre-existing but also treatment-induced ISTME to boost T-cell-based
cancer immunotherapy.


