Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of ABCB1 single nucleotide polymorphisms on the outcome
in lenalidomide treated multiple myeloma patients.


Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell
malignancy with high mortality rate. Treatment outcomes have improved
since the introduction of new drugs such as the IMiD lenalidomide, but
relapse rates and resistance is still a problem. The gene ABCB1 encodes
the drug transporter p-glycoprotein (p-gp) which confers resistance
through extrusion of drugs over the cell membrane. Lenalidomide is
subject to limited metabolism and excreted mainly via the kidneys. In
vitro studies have shown lenalidomide to be an ABCB1 substrate, and
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) affecting gene expression,
transporter function and/or activity may affect drug distribution and the
subsequent outcome and risk of adverse events. However, in vivo studies
of the effect of ABCB1 on lenalidomide pharmacokinetics are
contradictory. Our aim was to investigate the influence of ABCB1 SNPs on
lenalidomide treatment outcome and adverse events (AE).

Materials & Methods: In the observational part of two connected studies,
133 Lenalidomide naÃ¯ve patients at 1st relapse/refractory MM were
treated with lenalidomide and dexamethasone for up to 9 cycles of 4
weeks. In the prospective 2nd part, 62 patients that had achieved at
least partial response according to IMWG-criteria followed by at least
two additional treatment cycles were randomized to either
lenalidomide/dexamethasone or lenalidomide as a single drug. 90 patients
(of which 47 was further randomized to the 2nd part) had samples
available for genotyping of the ABCB1 SNPs 1199G>A (Ser400Asn,
rs2229109), 1236C>T (rs1128503), 2677G>T/A (Ala893Ser, rs2032582) and
3435C>T (rs1045642) using Pyrosequencing. Correlations to overall
survival, time to progression (TTP), response parameters and AE were
investigated, and a p-value of 0.05 was considered significant.

Results: No significant correlations to hematological AE or response
rates were found, and no impact on survival for 1236C>T, 2677G>T/A or
3435C>T, neither in the whole population nor in patients randomized to
the 2nd part. The results were similar also when risk (according to FISH)
was considered. There was a trend towards improved TTP for patients
carrying the 1199A variant; mean TTP 3.2 years (95%CI 2.3-4.1) vs 2.2
years (95%CI 1.8-2.6) for G/A and G/G, respectively (p=0.076). This trend
was confirmed in the multivariable cox regression analysis; HR=0.280
(95%CI 0.74-1.054), p=0.06. The difference in TTP was significant in the
non-high risk subgroup; mean TTP 4.3 years (95%CI 3.7-4.9) vs 2.3 years
(95%CI 1.8-2.8), p=0.034, for G/A and G/G, respectively.

Conclusion: No evidence was found for a large impact of 1236C>T,
2677G>T/A or 3435C>T on lenalidomide treatment outcome or risk of
hematological AE. 1199G>A may be a potential marker of TTP in non-high
risk MM but further studies in a larger cohort is needed to clarify the
relationship and whether this is due to altered drug transport or efflux
independent mechanisms.


