Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Recreational physical activity, body mass index, and waist
circumference in relation to lung cancer incidence in a large US
prospective cohort.


Background: Physical activity has been associated with lower lung cancer
risk in numerous studies with estimates ranging from 20-50% lower risk in
the most versus the least active study participants. Underweight and
obesity have also been associated with lower lung cancer risk, with a
nonlinear, inverted U-shaped relationship. The associations between
physical activity and obesity with lung cancer are likely significantly
confounded by smoking since individuals who smoke are generally less
active and leaner than non-smokers. However, few studies have been able
to examine these associations stratified by smoking status.

Objective: To examine in detail whether an association between physical
activity, BMI, and lung cancer exists in the absence of residual
confounding by smoking.

Methods: Using data 118,225 men and women who were cancer-free at
enrollment (1992) in the American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention
Study-II Nutrition Cohort, we examined associations between recreational
physical activity (MET-hours per week; none, 0.1-Methods: Using data
118,225 men and women who were cancer-free at enrollment (1992) in the
American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition Cohort, we
examined associations between recreational physical activity (MET-hours
per week; none, 0.1-<8.75 (reference), 8.75-17.4, 17.5+ MET-hours/week),
body mass index (BMI, weight (kg)/height (meters)2; Methods: Using data
118,225 men and women who were cancer-free at enrollment (1992) in the
American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition Cohort, we
examined associations between recreational physical activity (MET-hours
per week; none, 0.1-<8.75 (reference), 8.75-17.4, 17.5+ MET-hours/week),
body mass index (BMI, weight (kg)/height (meters)2; <18.5, 18.5-22.0
(reference), 22.1-24.9, 25.0-29.9, 30.0+ kg/m2), and waist circumference
(measured in 1997; sex-specific quartiles) in relation to lung cancer
risk stratified by smoking status and years since quitting among former
smokers (never, current, former Methods: Using data 118,225 men and women
who were cancer-free at enrollment (1992) in the American Cancer Society
Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition Cohort, we examined associations
between recreational physical activity (MET-hours per week; none,
0.1-<8.75 (reference), 8.75-17.4, 17.5+ MET-hours/week), body mass index
(BMI, weight (kg)/height (meters)2; <18.5, 18.5-22.0 (reference),
22.1-24.9, 25.0-29.9, 30.0+ kg/m2), and waist circumference (measured in
1997; sex-specific quartiles) in relation to lung cancer risk stratified
by smoking status and years since quitting among former smokers (never,
current, former <10 years, former, 10-19 years, former 20+ years). Cox
proportional hazards modeling was used to compute hazard rate ratios (RR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) while adjusting for potential
confounders.

Results: Follow-up included 2,384,545person-years during which 4,669 men
and women were diagnosed with lung cancer (453 among never smokers; 1,452
among current smokers; 1,194 among former smokers Results: Follow-up
included 2,384,545person-years during which 4,669 men and women were
diagnosed with lung cancer (453 among never smokers; 1,452 among current
smokers; 1,194 among former smokers <10 years since quitting; 725 among
former 10-19 years; and 845 among former 20+ years). Physically activity
was not associated with lung cancer risk for any of the smoking strata
except in former smokers less than 10 years since quitting (RR=0.78; 95%
CI 0.68-0.91 for 17.5+ MET-hours/week). Similarly, BMI was inversely
associated with lung cancer only in former smokers less than 10 years
since quitting (RR=0.74; 95% CI 0.60-0.92 for 30+ kg/m2). Waist
circumference was not associated with lung cancer risk in any smoking
category.

Conclusion: While being physically active and maintaining a healthy body
weight are important for prevention of various types of cancer, our
results suggest that neither physical activity, body mass index, or waist
circumference are associated with lung cancer risk, regardless of smoking
status. Whether the associations between physical activity, BMI and lung
cancer in ex-smokers who have recently quit are due to chance,
confounding or reverse causality warrants further investigation.


