Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival analysis for the elderly esophageal cancer patients
(≥80 years) with surgery and non-surgery treatments.


With the aging of population, the elderly esophageal cancer patients are
increasing. However, the optimal treatment methods have not been well
characterized for the elderly esophageal cancer patients because of that
most randomized studies have excluded the elderly. The aim of this study
was thus to analyze the outcomes of surgery and non-surgery therapy on
the elderly patients aged 80 years or older with esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) to provide more evidences for optimal treatment design
on the elderly patient. The enrolled 1,143 ESCC cases in this study were
from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer
Research. Of the 1,143 patients, there were 614 males with a mean age of
82.45±2.64 and 529 females with a mean age of 82.44±2.61. The age
ranged from 80 to 96 years old at diagnosed. All the patients were
confirmed as ESCC by histopathology. The patients were classified into
four groups based on treatment methods, i.e., radical esophagectomy
(group I), esophagectomy plus radiochemotherapy (group II),
radiochemotherapy only (group III), and symptomatic treatment (group IV).
Radical esophagectomy was performed on 304 patients (26.6%), including
134 males and 97 females. In addition, of the 304 patients with radical
esophagectomy, there were 73 patients who were received radichemotherapy
after surgery. 518 patients received only radiochemotherapy (45.3%).
Radiochemotherapy included 50-60 Gy of radiation concurrent with or
without 5-fluorouracil alone or combined with cisplatin. Moreover, there
were 321 patients (28.1%) who did not receive either surgery or
radiochemotherapy, but only with symptomatic treatment. The Kaplan-Meier
analysis indicated that there was no significant difference in gender,
age or histology between patients in the different groups. The overall
1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were 56%, 31% and 19%, respectively,
with a median survival time of 2.5 years. In group I, the overall 1-, 3-
and 5-year survival rates were 68%, 48% and 30%, respectively, with a
median survival time of 3.8 years. In group II, the overall 1-, 3- and
5-year survival rates were 48%, 32% and 14%, respectively, with a median
survival time of 1.9 years. In group III, the overall 1-, 3- and 5-year
survival rates were 58%, 28% and 18%, respectively, with a median
survival time of 2.5 years. In group IV, the overall 1-, 3- and 5-year
survival rates were 39%, 18% and 0.08%, respectively, with a median
survival time of 1.6 years. The log rank survival analysis showed that
the surgery group had better prognosis than surgery plus
radiochemotherapy or radiochemotherapy alone group (PWith the aging of
population, the elderly esophageal cancer patients are increasing.
However, the optimal treatment methods have not been well characterized
for the elderly esophageal cancer patients because of that most
randomized studies have excluded the elderly. The aim of this study was
thus to analyze the outcomes of surgery and non-surgery therapy on the
elderly patients aged 80 years or older with esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) to provide more evidences for optimal treatment design
on the elderly patient. The enrolled 1,143 ESCC cases in this study were
from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer
Research. Of the 1,143 patients, there were 614 males with a mean age of
82.45±2.64 and 529 females with a mean age of 82.44±2.61. The age
ranged from 80 to 96 years old at diagnosed. All the patients were
confirmed as ESCC by histopathology. The patients were classified into
four groups based on treatment methods, i.e., radical esophagectomy
(group I), esophagectomy plus radiochemotherapy (group II),
radiochemotherapy only (group III), and symptomatic treatment (group IV).
Radical esophagectomy was performed on 304 patients (26.6%), including
134 males and 97 females. In addition, of the 304 patients with radical
esophagectomy, there were 73 patients who were received radichemotherapy
after surgery. 518 patients received only radiochemotherapy (45.3%).
Radiochemotherapy included 50-60 Gy of radiation concurrent with or
without 5-fluorouracil alone or combined with cisplatin. Moreover, there
were 321 patients (28.1%) who did not receive either surgery or
radiochemotherapy, but only with symptomatic treatment. The Kaplan-Meier
analysis indicated that there was no significant difference in gender,
age or histology between patients in the different groups. The overall
1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were 56%, 31% and 19%, respectively,
with a median survival time of 2.5 years. In group I, the overall 1-, 3-
and 5-year survival rates were 68%, 48% and 30%, respectively, with a
median survival time of 3.8 years. In group II, the overall 1-, 3- and
5-year survival rates were 48%, 32% and 14%, respectively, with a median
survival time of 1.9 years. In group III, the overall 1-, 3- and 5-year
survival rates were 58%, 28% and 18%, respectively, with a median
survival time of 2.5 years. In group IV, the overall 1-, 3- and 5-year
survival rates were 39%, 18% and 0.08%, respectively, with a median
survival time of 1.6 years. The log rank survival analysis showed that
the surgery group had better prognosis than surgery plus
radiochemotherapy or radiochemotherapy alone group (P<0.002) and the
symptomatic treatment group (PWith the aging of population, the elderly
esophageal cancer patients are increasing. However, the optimal treatment
methods have not been well characterized for the elderly esophageal
cancer patients because of that most randomized studies have excluded the
elderly. The aim of this study was thus to analyze the outcomes of
surgery and non-surgery therapy on the elderly patients aged 80 years or
older with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) to provide more
evidences for optimal treatment design on the elderly patient. The
enrolled 1,143 ESCC cases in this study were from the ESCC database in
Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer Research. Of the 1,143
patients, there were 614 males with a mean age of 82.45±2.64 and 529
females with a mean age of 82.44±2.61. The age ranged from 80 to 96
years old at diagnosed. All the patients were confirmed as ESCC by
histopathology. The patients were classified into four groups based on
treatment methods, i.e., radical esophagectomy (group I), esophagectomy
plus radiochemotherapy (group II), radiochemotherapy only (group III),
and symptomatic treatment (group IV). Radical esophagectomy was performed
on 304 patients (26.6%), including 134 males and 97 females. In addition,
of the 304 patients with radical esophagectomy, there were 73 patients
who were received radichemotherapy after surgery. 518 patients received
only radiochemotherapy (45.3%). Radiochemotherapy included 50-60 Gy of
radiation concurrent with or without 5-fluorouracil alone or combined
with cisplatin. Moreover, there were 321 patients (28.1%) who did not
receive either surgery or radiochemotherapy, but only with symptomatic
treatment. The Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that there was no
significant difference in gender, age or histology between patients in
the different groups. The overall 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were
56%, 31% and 19%, respectively, with a median survival time of 2.5 years.
In group I, the overall 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were 68%, 48%
and 30%, respectively, with a median survival time of 3.8 years. In group
II, the overall 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were 48%, 32% and 14%,
respectively, with a median survival time of 1.9 years. In group III, the
overall 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were 58%, 28% and 18%,
respectively, with a median survival time of 2.5 years. In group IV, the
overall 1-, 3- and 5-year survival rates were 39%, 18% and 0.08%,
respectively, with a median survival time of 1.6 years. The log rank
survival analysis showed that the surgery group had better prognosis than
surgery plus radiochemotherapy or radiochemotherapy alone group (P<0.002)
and the symptomatic treatment group (P<0.000). The present results
demonstrate the benefit of esophagectomy on the elderly ESCC patients in
terms of survival. [Supported by the Joint Funds of NSFC (U1301227),
Natural Science Foundation of Henan Province (20161110) and
Correspondence to: Li Dong Wang, Email: ldwang2007@126.com]


