Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated macrophages infiltration highly associated with
PD-L1 expression in gastric cancer.


Objectives: programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is key protein for tumor to
acquire the evacuation form T cell immune response and PD-L1 inhibitors
are useful for an immune checkpoint blockade therapy. Tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM) facilitate not only tumor cell progression, but also
immunosuppression, which prevent tumor cell attack by T cell. Therefore,
TAM is considered to be associated with PD-L1 expression, however it
remain unclear in gastric cancer (GC).

Methods: We performed immunohistochemical staining of PD-L1, CD68
(pan-macrophage) and CD163 (M2 macrophage) in 217 GC sample tissue
microarray. The area of CD68 and CD163 positive cells were evaluated by
using by the Cytoplasmic V2.0 algorithm on the Aperio ImageScope software.

Results: 31 samples (14.3%) were positive for PD-L1 expression. The mean
of rate for CD68 and CD163 positive area were 6.8±0.38% and 6.2±0.30%,
respectively. CD163 positive macrophage infiltration is significantly
more in diffuse type tumor than in intestinal type tumor (diffuse
(n=111): 6.9%, intestinal (n=91): 5.3%, p=0.0056), but CD68 positive
macrophage infiltration is similar in both type (p=0.38). Interestingly,
PD-L1 expression tumor have significantly more CD68 and CD163 positive
macrophage infiltration (CD68: PD-L1 negative 6.3%, positive 10.4%,
p=0.0002, CD163: PD-L1 negative 5.7%, positive 9.2%, pResults: 31 samples
(14.3%) were positive for PD-L1 expression. The mean of rate for CD68 and
CD163 positive area were 6.8±0.38% and 6.2±0.30%, respectively. CD163
positive macrophage infiltration is significantly more in diffuse type
tumor than in intestinal type tumor (diffuse (n=111): 6.9%, intestinal
(n=91): 5.3%, p=0.0056), but CD68 positive macrophage infiltration is
similar in both type (p=0.38). Interestingly, PD-L1 expression tumor have
significantly more CD68 and CD163 positive macrophage infiltration (CD68:
PD-L1 negative 6.3%, positive 10.4%, p=0.0002, CD163: PD-L1 negative
5.7%, positive 9.2%, p<0.0001). PD-L1 expression and CD68 and CD163
positive area had no relationship between any clinicopathological
features.

Conclusions: Macrophages infiltration in GC is highly associated with
PD-L1 expression of tumor cells. M2 macrophage infiltration is
significantly associated with diffused type of GAC. This result suggests
that TAM

infiltration is associated with the immunosuppression through
upregulating PD-L1 expression in GC cells. Thus, macrophages infiltration
can serve as a potential therapeutic target.

.


