Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Redox regulation of the biosynthesis of mitronic tsmiR miR6855 in
the basal like breast cancer cells.


Radiation and chemotherapeutic agents eradicate tumors by inducing
irreparable DNA damage. However, cancer cells often develop resistance to
therapy by manipulating the DNA repair machinery. Conversely, a dividing
cell constantly exposed to environmental and endogenous DNA damaging
agents can transform into a tumor due to incorrect repair. Therefore the
expression level of DNA repair proteins is critical both for cancer
therapy and tumorigenesis. Our preliminary studies implied a unique
mechanism involving an miRNA miR-6855-3p that promotes the biosynthesis
of the transcriptional regulator protein SPRDX5 which enhances the
expression of the tumor suppressor protein BRCA2 leading to the genotoxin
and radiation-resistance of aggressive SLUG-high basal-like breast cancer
(BLBC) cells. The miRNA miR-6855-3p thus acts as a tumor suppressor miRNA
(tsmiR). Interestingly, the gene for the miRNA miR-6855-3p is mitronic
and is nested within the intron#13 of the USP20 gene which is a
deubiquitinase. Thus, the transcription of miR-6855-3p gene is regulated
through the USP20 gene promoter. We present evidence here that USP20 and
miR-6855 gene transcriptions are up regulated by oxidative stress.
Tert-butylhydroperoxide was used for oxidative stress. Under the
oxidative stress conditions tested, NRF2 level and the levels of several
NRF2-regulated proteins are increased, indicating activation of NRF2 in
the stressed BLBC cells. Under the stress conditions the levels of USP20
and miR-6855-3p are increased significantly. Knockdown of NRF2 prevented
stress-induced elevation of USP20 and miR-6855-3p RNA level in the BLBC
cells indicating the involvement of NRF2 in this process. The binding of
NRF2 to the USP20 gene promoter and its function were characterized by
ChIP analysis, site-directed mutagenesis and using the
promoter-luciferase reporter constructs. We conclude that the
biosynthesis of the tsmiR miR-6855-3p in the BLBC cells is regulated by
oxidative stress and involves NRF2. Since oxidative stress is a hallmark
in the etiology and progression of metastatic breast cancer,
understanding the redox regulation of a tsmiR that positively influences
BRCA2 gene expression in the BLBC cells could be clinically significant.
Supported in part by DOD-CDMRP IDEA Expansion Grant# BC103645 and NIH/NCI
grant 1R21CA181920-01 to GC and 1U54RR026140 to SM.


