Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear lemur tyrosine kinase-2 regulates RNA polymerase II
dependent transcription in prostate cancer.


The Androgen Receptor (AR), a DNA-binding transcription factor plays a
key role in the development and maintenance of prostate epithelia by
modulating expression of growth-promoting genes. AR has been proposed to
regulate gene expression by enhancing the efficiency of RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) dependent transcription elongation. Dysregulation of this
AR-dependent transcriptional activity has been implicated not only in
prostate cancer but also androgen-independent prostate cancer. Recently,
we showed that protein expression of Lemur Tyrosine Kianse-2 (LMTK2), a
serine-threonine kinase is downregulated in prostate cancer. Importantly,
our study ascribed a novel role for LMTK2, as a negative regulator of
AR-dependent transcriptional activity in prostate epithelial cells.
However, the mechanism through which LMTK2 is able to regulate AR remains
to be determined. Here, we show that LMTK2 is not only present in
cytoplasmic fraction but also, within the nucleus of mammalian cells
where it co-localizes with AR, newly transcribed mRNA and with RNA
polymerase II (RNAPII). Interestingly, our data reveals that LMTK2
colocalizes with elongating RNAPII, phosphorylated on serine 2 of the
carboxyl-terminal domain. This presents an interesting possibility that
LMTK2 might be able to regulate transcription of AR-dependent genes by
interacting with the elongating RNAPII and transcription & epigenetic
factors. As such, our study potentially identifies LMTK2 as an important
player regulating the AR-RNAPII mediated transcription machinery in
mammalian cells.


