Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV16 was the preponderant type of HPV infection in cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma.


Purpose: Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been well established as a
causative factor in mucosal oropharyngeal cancer and anogenital surface
malignancies. However, its etiological role in cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma (cSCC) is still debated. The aim of this study is to identify
the presence of HPV types in cSCC and identify their associations with
cSCC.

Methods: 77 cSCC blocks from 54 patients underwent DNA isolation and a
broad spectrum of HPV PCR tests to detect the presence of HPV genotypes
by the use of a universal primer pair GP5+/GP6+. The resultant PCR
products were cloned to T Vectors and subsequently underwent DNA
sequencing and Nucleotide BLAST search to identify the HPV types in cSCC.
To ensure the accuracy of the HPV PCR test, 16 blocks from 10 head and
neck SCC (oropharyngeal) patients were also included in the HPV presence
and type analyses. Cutaneous SCC patients’ demographics, pathology and
clinical parameters were compared and analyzed statistically in
conjunction with the HPV test results.

Results: HPV DNA was found in 37 of 77 (48.1%) blocks representing 32 of
54 (59.3%) cSCC patients. HPV16 was the preponderant type of HPV
Infection, accounting for 28 of 32 (87.5%) and 30 of 37 (81.08%) HPV
positive patients and blocks. Other HPV genotypes found included HPV18,
57, 10, 2, accounting for 4 of 32 (12.5%), 2 of 32 (6.25%), 2 of 32
(6.25%), 2 of 32 (6.25%) of the HPV positive patients and 4 of 37
(10.81%), 2 of 37 (5.41%), 2 of 37 (5.41%), 2 of 37 (5.41%) of the HPV
positive blocks, respectively. HPV infection was significantly associated
with the cSCC tumor size in this cohort of patients. Tumors with a size
of ≤20mm were more frequently associated with HPV. Moreover, the
average tumor size of the HPV positive group was also significantly
smaller than that of the HPV negative group.

Conclusions: HPV infection is very commonly found in cSCC patients and
HPV16 is the major type of HPV involved in cSCC oncogenesis, accounting
for >80% of HPV infections. HPV is a contributing factor, which appears
to be contributing to a smaller size of cSCC, which may improve the
prognostic classification of patients to provide a new insight into
tumorigenesis.


