Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-drug conjugates containing glucuronide-tubulysin payloads
display activity in MDR+ and heterogeneous tumor models.


While antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) find increasing application in
cancer treatment regimens, de novo or treatment-emergent resistance
mechanisms could impair clinical benefit. Two resistance mechanisms that
emerge under continuous ADC exposure in vitro include upregulation of
transporters that confer multidrug resistance (MDR+) and loss of cognate
antigen expression. New technologies that circumvent these resistance
mechanisms may serve to extend the utility of next generation ADCs.
Recently, we developed the quaternary ammonium linker system to expand
the scope of conjugatable payloads to include tertiary amine-containing
compounds and applied the linker to tubulysins, a highly potent class of
microtubule disrupting agents that maintain activity in MDR+ cell lines.
Quaternary ammonium-linked glucuronide-tubulysin drug-linkers were
synthesized and evaluated as ADCs. The resulting conjugates were potent
and immunologically specific across a panel of cancer cell lines,
including those displaying the MDR phenotype. The ADCs also demonstrate
potent bystander activity in a co-culture model containing a mixture of
antigen-positive and -negative cell lines. Incorporation of a PEG12 side
chain in the linker enabled loading at 8-drugs/Ab for increased in vivo
potency while maintaining suitable ADC pharmacokinetic properties. In
vivo, the glucuronide-tubulysin conjugates displayed activity in MDR+
xenograft models and bystander activity in an admixed Ag+/Ag-
heterogeneous tumor model. Thus, the glucuronide-tubulysin drug-linkers
represent a promising new payload for ADCs, combining conjugate potency
in the presence of the MDR phenotype with robust activity in models of
tumor antigen heterogeneity.


