Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic therapy of doxorrubicin and molecular iodine in canine
mammary cancer.


Introduction: Conventional chemotherapy is administered at the maximal
tolerated dose (MTD), usually every 21 days, and the drug-free period
allows the patient to recover from the adverse effects secondary to the
treatment. However, this period also enables tumor cells to reinitiate
growth through induced tumoral revascularization. In recent years, a new
strategy known as metronomic chemotherapy explored the scheme of
long-lasting low-dose administration of antineoplastic drugs, which
results in the attenuation or interruption of tumor growth by inhibition
of angiogenesis and/or reactivation of anti-tumoral immune system.
Moreover, the use of combination therapies including cell
re-differentiation messengers are currently being tested to provide a
better quality of life. In this sense, it has been demonstrated that the
supplement of molecular iodine (I2) induces apoptotic and cellular
re-differentiation effects, and its combination with doxorubicin (DOX)
promotes a cytotoxic effect and generates cardioprotection. In this
study, canine mammary cancer is used as a model of spontaneous
carcinogenesis.

Objective: Determine the efficacy of metronomic therapy of DOX in
combination with I2 analyzing the clinical, pathological, and molecular
effects involved in proliferation, invasion, and chemoresistance.

Methods: 27 female dogs with mammary cancer were given daily I2 (10 mg)
supplements or placebo (colored water) in conjunction with four cycles of
DOX (30mg/m2, intravenous). Two protocols were carried out: the standard
protocol with a 21-day interval and 20-minute infusions, and the
metronomic protocol with a 15-day interval and 60-minute infusions
(DOX-M).

Results: The metronomic scheme (DOX-M) attenuated the severity of side
effects, but it showed no difference in tumor response (size, gene
expression). The I2 supplement significantly improved the quality of life
in both schemes, and it exerted synergistic effects on the tumor response
in DOX-M, decreasing the epithelial component as well as markers of
chemoresistance (MDR1 and Survivin) and invasion (uPA). The antitumor
immune response (lymphocytic infiltration) in this scheme was
significantly activated, and all these responses were accompanied by a
major increase in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor type gamma
(PPARy) expression. Endocrine evaluation showed that I2 supplements do
not alter thyroid function or estrogen response.

Conclusions: Combination of DOX + I2 in a metronomic scheme exerts
synergistic effects that prevent drug resistance and invasion and greatly
improve the patient's quality of life. Studies are underway to decrease
the dose of DOX. Key words: Molecular Iodine, Doxorubicin, Canine Mammary
Cancer, Metronomic Therapy. The authors appreciate the technical support
of Alexander Bontempo, Evangelina Delgado and Mar√≠a Juana Cardenas.
Investigation supported by PAPIIT-UNAM IN200813 and 201516; CONACYT
245255.


