Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A subset of poorly prognostic pediatric posterior fossa
ependymomas exhibit lowered H3K27me3 and DNA hypomethylation and show
epigenetic similarities with H3K27M mutant diffuse intrinsic pontine
gliomas.


Pediatric posterior fossa ependymomas are poorly understood childhood
brain tumors and have no effective treatments. The biology of these
tumors is obscure as recent sequencing efforts suggest that they lack
recurrent genetic alterations. A subset of these tumors termed PF-A
ependymomas exhibits CpG-island hypermethylation implicating epigenetic
alterations in their pathogenesis. Through comprehensive analyses of
histone modification, we discovered global H3K27me3 reduction in a subset
of these tumors. Tumors with lowered H3K27me3 showed many clinical and
biologic similarities with PFA-ependymomas. Global reduction in H3K27me3
is likewise observed in pediatric gliomas that bear histone H3K27M
mutations termed diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPG) that also arise
in the posterior fossa of young children. Analyses of ependymomas with
reduced H3K27me3 and H3K27M mutant DIPGs showed many similarities in DNA
methylation and enrichment of H3K27me3 in many genomic loci important for
neuroglial specification. Combined integrative analysis of both tumor
types uncovered common epigenetic deregulation of select factors that
control radial glial biology and radial glia in the developing posterior
fossa showed reduced H3K27me3. Finally, PF ependymomas with lowered
H3K27me3 were more invasive radiologically and exhibited poor prognosis
in three independent cohorts (P300). These data have clinical
implications for biomarker development and to inform epigenetic
approaches to treat PF ependymomas.


