Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyamines are rich and induces epigenetic change by inhibition of
LSD1 in cancer stem-like cells.


Cancer stem cells (CSC) are highly tumorigenic and resistant to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. We have previously reported that a small
fraction of cancer cells with low proteasome activity had CSC-like
properties. Ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) is an enzyme which converts
ornithine to polyamines including putrescine, spermidine, and spermine.
Proteasomal degradation of ODC is known to be ubiquitin-independent. The
aim of this study was to explain how low proteasome activity gave
CSC-like properties. Western blot showed high ODC protein level in
CSC-like cells in cervical cancer and osteosarcoma cell lines, although
ODC mRNA level is not high. These findings suggest that ODC protein level
is high in CSC-like cells because ODC protein degradation is inactive. To
investigate polyamine metabolism in CSC-like cells, we performed GC-MS
analysis and found that putrescine, spermidine, and spermine were
enriched in CSC-like cells. Furthermore, flux analysis showed conversion
from ornithine to polyamines was more rapid in CSC-like cells. We
performed a computational structure analysis and found that polyamines
bind and inhibit demethylase site of LSD1 which is known to be a
demethylase of histone H3K4 and a nuclear homolog of amine oxidases.
Spermine was the strongest binding energy. An enzyme assay showed that
LSD1 activity was dose-dependently inhibited by polyamines and spermine
was the strong inhibitor. Finally, we analyzed performed ChIP sequencing
analysis by using HeLa CSC-like cells and found that more global
enrichment of H3K4me3 and less global enrichment of H3K4me1 than
non-CSC-like cells. In conclusion, polyamines are rich in CSC, and be
able to inhibit LSD1 activty and induce epigenetic alterations especially
in H3K4 methylation in CSC.


