Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictors of plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations among
breast cancer survivors.


Background: A review of recent evidences suggests that circulating
25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) concentrations are associated with better
prognosis among breast cancer survivors. However, little is known about
modifiable factors for vitamin D status among breast cancer survivors. We
aimed to explore demographic, lifestyle, and clinical factors associated
with vitamin D status among breast cancer survivors.

Methods: We included a total of 207 breast cancer survivors aged 21-79
years who were enrolled between 2015 and 2016 at three large hospitals.
Participants had been diagnosed with stage I to III primary breast cancer
and had breast cancer surgery at least 6 months before enrollment. We
asked participants about demographic, socioeconomic, and lifestyle
factors. Clinical data were extracted from medical records. Dietary
intake was assessed using 3-day dietary records. Plasma 25-OHD
concentrations were measured by the electrochemiluminescence immunoassay.
We fit a multivariable linear regression model to predict plasma plasma
25(OH)D with all candidate predictors with p ≤ 0.1 in the univariate
analysis.

Result: Mean value (SD) of plasma 25(OH)D concentrations were 23.75±
12.15ng/ml among users of supplement containing vitamin D, and 13.35±
8.62ng/ml among non-user. In the univariate linear regression models, we
identified the following independent predictors associated with plasma
25-OHD concentrations: vitamin D intake from supplement, calcium intake
from supplement, vitamin D from food, use of any supplement, body mass
index (BMI), months after diagnosis, season of blood draw, daily sun
exposure during the last 2 years, smoking habit, skin change after
sunburn, suncap use, parity, and ER status. When we included all of these
predictors in the multivariate linear regression models, we found that
use of any supplement (β = 1.19 for use vs. nonuse, pResult: Mean value
(SD) of plasma 25(OH)D concentrations were 23.75± 12.15ng/ml among users
of supplement containing vitamin D, and 13.35± 8.62ng/ml among non-user.
In the univariate linear regression models, we identified the following
independent predictors associated with plasma 25-OHD concentrations:
vitamin D intake from supplement, calcium intake from supplement, vitamin
D from food, use of any supplement, body mass index (BMI), months after
diagnosis, season of blood draw, daily sun exposure during the last 2
years, smoking habit, skin change after sunburn, suncap use, parity, and
ER status. When we included all of these predictors in the multivariate
linear regression models, we found that use of any supplement (β = 1.19
for use vs. nonuse, p<0.001), BMI at diagnosis (β = -0.08 for 1 kg/m2
increment, p=0.02), season of blood draw (β = 0.83 summer vs. spring,
p=0.008; and β = 0.75 fall vs. spring, p=0.01), and daily sun exposure
during the last 2 years (β = - 0.0005 for 1 minute increment, p=0.02).
Predicted models explained 23.95% of the total variability in plasma
25-OHD concentrations.

Conclusions: We found that supplemental use, BMI at diagnosis, season of
blood draw, and daily sun exposure during the last 2 years were
associated with plasma 25-OHD concentrations among Korean breast cancer
survivors. Future studies are needed to investigate the role of vitamin D
in the progression of breast cancer among Korean breast cancer survivors.
Funding information: This research was supported by the Basic Science
Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning
(NRF-2014R1A2A2A01007794).


