Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of program death ligand 1 expression after a single
cycle of chemotherapy is associated with inferior survival in patients
with local advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma treated with
preoperative chemoradiotherapy.


Introduction

Previous studies have demonstrated that the expression of program
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), a ligand of an immune checkpoint, on cancer cells
or on immune cells may have prognostic significance in multiple cancer
types including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We evaluated
the expression of PD-L1 and its dynamic changes following one cycle of
chemotherapy before standard preoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT) in a
cohort of locally advanced ESCC patients.

Patients and Methods

A cohort of 66 patients of locally advanced ESCC have been enrolled to a
phase II clinical trial of a single-cycle chemotherapy (a combination of
weekly paclitaxel, cisplatin and 24 hour infusional 5-fluorouracil, 2
week on plus one week off, followed by paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based
preoperative CRT and radical surgery. Paired tumor tissues from
endoscopic biopsy before and after the single-cycle chemotherapy were
available in 21 patients. Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression
was performed using the Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience,
Pleasanton, CA, USA). The expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously
reported. Tumor cells were scored according to percentage of
positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%, TC2≥5% and A cohort of 66 patients
of locally advanced ESCC have been enrolled to a phase II clinical trial
of a single-cycle chemotherapy (a combination of weekly paclitaxel,
cisplatin and 24 hour infusional 5-fluorouracil, 2 week on plus one week
off, followed by paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based preoperative CRT and
radical surgery. Paired tumor tissues from endoscopic biopsy before and
after the single-cycle chemotherapy were available in 21 patients.
Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression was performed using the
Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The
expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously reported. Tumor cells were
scored according to percentage of positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%,
TC2≥5% and <50%, TC1≥1% and A cohort of 66 patients of locally
advanced ESCC have been enrolled to a phase II clinical trial of a
single-cycle chemotherapy (a combination of weekly paclitaxel, cisplatin
and 24 hour infusional 5-fluorouracil, 2 week on plus one week off,
followed by paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based preoperative CRT and radical
surgery. Paired tumor tissues from endoscopic biopsy before and after the
single-cycle chemotherapy were available in 21 patients.
Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression was performed using the
Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The
expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously reported. Tumor cells were
scored according to percentage of positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%,
TC2≥5% and <50%, TC1≥1% and <5%, and TC0A cohort of 66 patients of
locally advanced ESCC have been enrolled to a phase II clinical trial of
a single-cycle chemotherapy (a combination of weekly paclitaxel,
cisplatin and 24 hour infusional 5-fluorouracil, 2 week on plus one week
off, followed by paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based preoperative CRT and
radical surgery. Paired tumor tissues from endoscopic biopsy before and
after the single-cycle chemotherapy were available in 21 patients.
Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression was performed using the
Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The
expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously reported. Tumor cells were
scored according to percentage of positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%,
TC2≥5% and <50%, TC1≥1% and <5%, and TC0<1%; Immune cells: IC3≥10%,
IC2≥5% and A cohort of 66 patients of locally advanced ESCC have been
enrolled to a phase II clinical trial of a single-cycle chemotherapy (a
combination of weekly paclitaxel, cisplatin and 24 hour infusional
5-fluorouracil, 2 week on plus one week off, followed by
paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based preoperative CRT and radical surgery.
Paired tumor tissues from endoscopic biopsy before and after the
single-cycle chemotherapy were available in 21 patients.
Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression was performed using the
Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The
expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously reported. Tumor cells were
scored according to percentage of positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%,
TC2≥5% and <50%, TC1≥1% and <5%, and TC0<1%; Immune cells: IC3≥10%,
IC2≥5% and <10%, IC1≥1% and A cohort of 66 patients of locally
advanced ESCC have been enrolled to a phase II clinical trial of a
single-cycle chemotherapy (a combination of weekly paclitaxel, cisplatin
and 24 hour infusional 5-fluorouracil, 2 week on plus one week off,
followed by paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based preoperative CRT and radical
surgery. Paired tumor tissues from endoscopic biopsy before and after the
single-cycle chemotherapy were available in 21 patients.
Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression was performed using the
Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The
expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously reported. Tumor cells were
scored according to percentage of positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%,
TC2≥5% and <50%, TC1≥1% and <5%, and TC0<1%; Immune cells: IC3≥10%,
IC2≥5% and <10%, IC1≥1% and <5%, and IC0A cohort of 66 patients of
locally advanced ESCC have been enrolled to a phase II clinical trial of
a single-cycle chemotherapy (a combination of weekly paclitaxel,
cisplatin and 24 hour infusional 5-fluorouracil, 2 week on plus one week
off, followed by paclitaxel/cisplatin (TP) -based preoperative CRT and
radical surgery. Paired tumor tissues from endoscopic biopsy before and
after the single-cycle chemotherapy were available in 21 patients.
Immunohistochemical stain for PD-L1 expression was performed using the
Clone SP142 antibody (Spring Bioscience, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The
expression of PD-L1 was scored as previously reported. Tumor cells were
scored according to percentage of positively-stained cells: TC3≥50%,
TC2≥5% and <50%, TC1≥1% and <5%, and TC0<1%; Immune cells: IC3≥10%,
IC2≥5% and <10%, IC1≥1% and <5%, and IC0<1%.

Results

In 21 baseline ESCC tissues, 7 of 19 (37%) exhibited positive PD-L1
expression on tumor cells, and 10 of 21 (48%) exhibited positive
expression on immune cells. In 21 ESCC tissues obtained a median of 18
days after initiating chemotherapy, 9 of 18 (50%) and 15 of 21 (71%)
demonstrated positive PD-L1 expression on tumor cells and immune cells,
respectively. The expression of PD-L1 was significantly increased in
post-chemotherapy ESCC tissues compared with baseline tissues (p=0.010);
and the increased PD-L1 expression between paired tissues was significant
on immune cells (p=0.0056) but did not reach statistical significance on
tumor cells (p=0.11). The positive PD-L1 expression in baseline ESCC
tissues was correlated with better survival (HR: 0.37, p=0.023). Besides,
patients with more increase of PD-L1 expression after chemotherapy had
significantly worse survival than those with less (median survival: 19.4
vs 71.20 months, HR: 4.07, p=0.0089).

Conclusion

PD-L1 expression of ESCC can be up-regulated by chemotherapy. The

up-regulation of PD-L1 is associated with poor outcome for locally
advanced ESCC patients. (The study was supported by the grant NTUH
104-M2891 and the grant MOST 105-2314-B-002-186-MY3)


