Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Massively parallel sequencing analysis of breast
adenomyoepitheliomas reveals the heterogeneity of the disease and
identifies a subset driven by HRAS hotspot mutations.


Adenomyoepithelioma (AME) is a rare biphasic proliferative breast lesion,
which may resemble salivary gland epithelial-myoepithelial carcinomas
(EMCs). Most AMEs have an indolent clinical course, but malignant
transformation and local and distant recurrences have been reported. We
sought to define the mutational landscape of AMEs and investigate the
functional impact of recurrent likely pathogenic mutations identified in
these tumors. Nineteen AMEs were subjected to whole-exome massively
parallel sequencing (MPS, n=7) or targeted capture MPS using MSK-IMPACT
assay (n=12). Somatic genetic alterations and the cancer cell fraction of
mutations were defined using state-of-the-art bioinformatics algorithms.
Selected genes (i.e. HRAS and PIK3CA) were subjected to Sanger sequencing
in a series of 17 additional AMEs (total n=36). Non-tumorigenic mammary
epithelial cells (i.e. MCF10A, MCF10A with the PIK3CAH1047R mutation and
MCF12A), which are estrogen receptor (ER)-negative, were utilized for 2D
and 3D functional studies. Of 36 cases, 22 were ER-positive and 14 were
ER-negative. MPS analysis revealed a low mutation burden and HRASQ61 and
PIK3CA hotspot mutations in 6/19 (32%) and 11/19 (58%) AMEs,
respectively. All HRASQ61 and all but one PIK3CA mutations were clonal.
ER-positive and ER-negative AMEs were fundamentally histologically and
genetically distinct. Whilst ER-positive AMEs displayed recurrent PIK3CA
mutations (50%, 11/22) but lacked HRAS mutations, ER-negative AMEs
displayed, in addition to PIK3CA mutations (57%, 8/14), recurrent HRASQ61
mutations (57%, 8/14). HRASQ61 mutations co-occurred with PIK3CA
mutations (50%, 4/8), PIK3R1 deletions (12.5%, 1/8) and/or CDKN2A
homozygous deletions (25%, 2/8). HRASQ61 mutations, but not PIK3CA
mutations, were significantly associated with ER-negativity (100% vs
21%), concurrent carcinoma (50% vs 7%), axillary metastases (38% vs 0%),
high proliferation (63% vs 4%), necrosis (63% vs 11%) and nuclear
pleomorphism (75% vs 29%). In vitro forced HRASQ61R expression in MCF10A
and MCF12A cells resulted in increased proliferation and transformation.
In 3D organotypic cell cultures, forced HRASQ61R resulted in a highly
disorganized growth pattern, a partial loss of epithelial phenotype and
acquisition of aberrant myoepithelial differentiation, which was more
overt in PIK3CA-mutant MCF10A cells. In conclusion, AMEs are
phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous. Whilst PIK3CA hotspot
mutations occur across the spectrum of lesions, HRASQ61 hotspot mutations
are restricted to ER-negative AMEs, which should arguably be classified
as breast EMCs. Our genomic and functional analyses are consistent with
the notion that HRASQ61 mutations are driver events in the pathogenesis
of ER-negative AMEs and may be sufficient for the acquisition of
myoepithelial differentiation in breast cells.


