Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive and integrated approach to genomic and proteomic
analysis of FFPE NSCLC tumor specimens.


This poster describes a novel fully integrated method for the multiplexed
DNA, RNA and Protein analysis of formalin fixed paraffin embedded tumor
specimens. Cancer progression is typically a result of aberrations in the
molecular pathways that regulate cell growth. Identifying and
understanding these changes is necessary for the detection of drug
targets as well as the identification of novel biomarkers that can
predict response to such drugs. Deep molecular profiling of clinical
tumor samples is challenged by limited material and the compromised
quality resulting from variable handling and the fixation processes that
are commonly employed in the clinical laboratories. While multiplexed
gene expression and mutational analysis of such samples has become well
established, we describe a new method that enables multiplexed DNA, RNA
and protein analysis from a single formalin fixed paraffin embedded
(FFPE) tumor specimen on the NanoString nCounter system. We have adapted
the sample preparation methods to enable the multi-analyte analysis of
FFPE samples and have demonstrated concordance with the clinical gold
standard immunohistochemistry (IHC) methodology. As a proof-of-concept,
five FFPE non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) specimens were
simultaneously stained with a panel of antibodies specific to a variety
of cancer-relevant proteins, five of which were validated on serial
sections by IHC using antibodies from Cell Signaling Technology. In
addition to the protein analysis, from the same specimen, expression of
770 cancer-related genes and >100 single nucleotide variants (SNVs) were
also analyzed on the nCounter platform. By integrating the analysis of
DNA SNVâ€™s, as well as RNA and protein expression from single FFPE
specimens, it is now possible to reveal the molecular mechanisms of tumor
progression, uncover novel drug targets and identify biomarkers from
precious specimens.


