Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New chk1 inhibitor development & the feasibility of use of chk1
inhibitor with antimetabolite for NSCLC.


DNA damaging anticancer agents activate checkpoints that stop the cell
cycle to prevent additional DNA replication & mitosis until damaged
region has been repaired. One of the important regulatory proteins
activated in DNA damage response pathway is Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1).
Therefore, Chk1 inhibitors have emerged as promising new therapeutics for
cancer. In order to find novel Chk1 inhibitor, we have conducted a
structure based virtual screening. Several small molecules have shown 75
- 100 % inhibition of Chk1 in the binding affinity assay. Combined with
the results of kinase assay with ATP & mechanism based cell assay, hit
candidates has been led. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer
related deaths in Korea. About 85 % of lung cancer is non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC) worldwide. Chemotherapy for NSCLC is often regarded
ineffective. To test the feasibility of Chk1 inhibitor to sensitize
antimetabolite in NSCLC, growth inhibition induced by gemcitabine plus
MK8776 was assessed in A549 & H1129 cells. These cells are insensitive to
the MK8776 when treated as a single agent (IC50 >10 Î¼M). In contrast,
MK8776 reduced the concentration of gemcitabine required to inhibit H1299
or A540 cell growth by almost 3-30 fold or 6-15 fold, respectively,
depending on the concentration used. These results would imply the
potential clinical utility of Chk1 inhibitor as an adjuvant for
antimetabolite such as gemcitabine for NSCLC. Further studies to evaluate
the effectiveness of Chk1 inhibitor including new molecules would be
warranted in additional preclinical and clinical settings. [The chemical
library used in this study was kindly provided by Korea Chemical Bank &
KIST. This study was supported by a grant (2015R1D1A1A01057014) from the
National Research Foundation of Korea.]


