Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A simple yet powerful method to purify NGS compatible RNA from
formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissues using FormaPure DNA.


Extensive archives of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cancer
tissues and next generation sequencing (NGS) capabilities provide rich
resources for identifying and validating new cancer biomarkers. However,
the ability to conduct FFPE-NGS studies has been limited by poor nucleic
acid purification methods that are generally difficult and cumbersome to
perform, particularly with RNA. FormaPure DNA was recently launched to
provide a simplified workflow to extract DNA from FFPE curls. Its nucleic
acid binding chemistry employs Beckman Coulter's proprietary SPRI (solid
phase reversible immobilization) technology, which purifies nucleic acids
without centrifugation or vacuum manifold. The SPRI technology ensures
stronger binding and higher quality purification than other silica-coated
bead methods that typically lead to lower quality results due to
instances of nucleic acid shearing. Here, we present a modified FormaPure
DNA workflow to purify RNA from FFPE samples, offering the flexibility to
examine both genomic and transcriptomic roles in cancer biomarkers
studies. We show that our extractions yield significantly more RNA (up to
2.5 µg per FFPE curl) and take a fraction of the time to perform
compared to other benchmarks. Furthermore, we demonstrate that purified
RNA can be used to generate high quality NGS data. Lastly, our extraction
method can be automated on a variety of Beckman Coulter’s Biomek liquid
handling workstations to offer an integrated solution for high-throughput
FFPE-RNA-NGS experiments: RNA from 96 FFPE samples can be purified for
NGS in less than 5 hours with minimal hands-on time.


