Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acid oxidation mediated autophagy regulation in triple
negative breast cancer.


Compared to hormone regulated/responsive (ER+) breast cancer (BC), triple
negative BC (TNBC) patients have a worse overall survival, a
significantly shorter disease-free survival, and a shorter
post-recurrence survival. Using transmitochondrial cybrid (cybrid)
(compares different mitochondria under a common defined nuclear
background)-based discovery and validation in cell lines, patient derived
xenografts (PDXs) and BC clinical tissues/data, we recently published
that fatty acid oxidation (FAO) is a major energy pathway in TNBC. We
also showed that FAO is a major regulator of Src activation by
autophosphorylation at Src Y419 in metastatic TNBC. Our data suggest that
inhibition of FAO induce cell growth inhibition. Short-term treatment of
FAO inhibitors induces both cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. We observed
cell cycle arrest in G1-S phase in FAO inhibitor treated TNBC cells.
Apoptotic markers like cleaved Caspase-3 and cleaved PARP induced in FAO
inhibited cells. Short-term treatment of FAO inhibitor also showed
induction of AKT pathway. Further analysis on the role of FAO in TNBC
suggests that FAO is a critical player in autophagy signaling in TNBC.
Long-term treatment with FAO inhibitors or knockdown of FAO rate-limiting
proteins carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT1) induce autophagic cell
death with beclin-1 and LC3-II induction in TNBC. However, no such
phenomenon observed in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer
cell lines. Treatment with autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine (3-MA)
abolished the FAO-induced cell growth inhibition and reduced beclin-1 and
LC3-II induction. Ongoing studies using knock-down and over expression
approaches focus on the role of specific pathways that are responsible
for mitochondrial energy reprogramming regulated autophagy signaling in
metastatic TNBC.


