Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of CB-839 and everolimus is effective in inhibiting
growth of endocrine resistant breast cancer in vivo.


About 70% of all breast cancers are estrogen receptor alpha positive
(ER+). Anti-hormone therapy such as antiestrogens are often used to treat
ER+ breast cancer but breast cancer cells can develop resistance to these
drugs (endocrine resistance). Unfortunately, ~50% percent of all
antiestrogen treated tumors eventually develop endocrine resistance, and
therefore, there is an urgent need to find ways to treat this incurable
disease. We have shown that endocrine resistant breast cancer cells show
an increased dependence on the amino acid glutamine and this process is
regulated by MYC activation via the unfolded protein response (UPR).
Metabolites of glutamine such as glutamate and proline are significantly
elevated in endocrine resistant cells. Cellular changes in glutamine are
sensed by the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex, mTORC1, which
is known to be deregulated in endocrine resistant breast cancer. In this
study, we used human antiestrogen (Fulvestrant/Faslodex or Tamoxifen)
sensitive and resistant ER+ breast cancer cells and xenografts to test
the efficacy of CB-839, an anti-glutaminase, and everolimus (Afinitor), a
mTORC1 inhibitor. Combination of CB-839 and everolimus, but not each drug
alone, inhibited growth of antiestrogen resistant tumors compared to
vehicle alone at 4 weeks post-treatment. The combination treatment did
not significantly inhibit growth of antiestrogen sensitive tumors
compared with its respective vehicle alone treatment. Thus, a combination
strategy that targets glutamine dependence and increased mTOR activation
may be a novel strategy in treating endocrine resistant breast cancer.


