Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-based inhibition of CSF-1R as a component of combination
immunotherapy in preclinical models.


The colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R) signaling pathway
promotes tumor progression via the recruitment, differentiation, and
survival of immuno-suppressive tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs).
FivePrime has developed cabiralizumab (FPA008), an IgG4 antibody against
CSF-1R that blocks the ability of both CSF-1 and IL-34 to bind and
activate this receptor, thereby modulating the immune response to
tumorigenesis. In order to investigate the impact of CSF-1R signaling
inhibition in preclinical models, we generated a surrogate antibody,
cmFPA008, which targets mouse CSF-1R and demonstrates equivalent affinity
and ligand-blocking ability as FPA008. Utilizing a combination of flow
cytometry and immunofluorescence analyses, we have identified alterations
in the tumor microenvironment that occur upon CSF-1R inhibition,
including significant reduction of immunosuppressive TAMs and an increase
in tumor PD-L1 expression. Interestingly, we observe a transient increase
in CD8+ T cell number and activation upon TAM depletion, followed by a
subsequent increase in MDSC populations that corresponds with reduction
of the CD8+ T cell numbers. Moreover, we have used murine syngeneic tumor
models to examine the anti-tumor impact of CSF-1R inhibition in
combination with other immuno-oncology agents. Our results show that,
when added to PD-1/PD-L1 blockade, cmFPA008 can significantly enhance
anti-tumor efficacy. We are currently exploring the effects of combining
cmFPA008-induced TAM depletion with additional immuno-oncology agents,
including T cell agonists. Our preclinical results demonstrate that
inhibition of the CSF-1R pathway can combine with various immuno-oncology
agents with distinct mechanisms of action. FivePrime has initiated a
clinical trial in collaboration with Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) to
investigate the use of cabiralizumab in combination with nivolumab
(anti-PD-1, OPDIVOÂ®) in six different tumor types.


