Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of the selective CYP17-lyase and androgen receptor (AR)
inhibitor, seviteronel, and the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4/6
inhibitor, G1T38, on tumor growth in an AR-V7+ castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC) xenograft model.


Background: Castration-resistant prostate cancers that express the
constitutively active androgen receptor (AR) variant AR-V7 exhibit
significantly reduced progression-free and overall survival in response
to the AR targeting agents, enzalutamide (ENZ) and abiraterone.
Inhibition of Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase (PIK3CA) or CDK4/6 has been
proposed as alternative therapies that directly target the cell cycle
pathway in these tumors. However, the combined role of AR plus cell cycle
inhibition in this treatment setting has not been established. G1T38 is a
potent, selective clinical stage CDK 4/6 inhibitor. Seviteronel (SEVI) is
a selective CYP17-lyase and AR inhibitor that blocks the growth of CRPC
tumors with clinically relevant AR mutations, including T878A and
AR-F876L. The activity of SEVI, ENZ and G1T38, alone or in combination,
was evaluated using the 22Rv1 (AR-V7+) CRPC model in vitro and in vivo.

Methods: Cellular proliferation (7 days) of 22Rv1 prostate cancer cells
treated with SEVI, ENZ, and G1T38 alone or in combination with SEVI or
ENZA was assessed by measuring DNA content. Orchiectomized male nu/nu
mice bearing 22Rv1 were randomized to receive vehicle, SEVI (150mg/kg/day
p.o.), ENZ (30 mg/kg/day p.o.), G1T38 (25-100 mg/kg/day p.o.), or SEVI or
ENZ in combination with G1T38. A docetaxel (20 mg/kg weekly i.p.) group
was included as a standard of care comparison. Time to progression
(X-fold increase in tumor volume) and tumor volume changes were assessed
over a 3-7-week dosing period. Blood and tissues were collected for
analysis of exposure and pharmacodynamics markers of response.

Results: SEVI and G1T38 alone or in combination, significantly reduced
the proliferation of 22Rv1 cells in vitro (pResults: SEVI and G1T38 alone
or in combination, significantly reduced the proliferation of 22Rv1 cells
in vitro (p<0.05). Compared to vehicle, SEVI and G1T38 monotherapy
significantly inhibited tumor growth and time to progression by 1.5 and
2.5 fold, respectively (pResults: SEVI and G1T38 alone or in combination,
significantly reduced the proliferation of 22Rv1 cells in vitro (p<0.05).
Compared to vehicle, SEVI and G1T38 monotherapy significantly inhibited
tumor growth and time to progression by 1.5 and 2.5 fold, respectively
(p<0.05); the combination of SEVI and G1T38 further decreased tumor
growth and resulted in a 4-fold delay in progression (pResults: SEVI and
G1T38 alone or in combination, significantly reduced the proliferation of
22Rv1 cells in vitro (p<0.05). Compared to vehicle, SEVI and G1T38
monotherapy significantly inhibited tumor growth and time to progression
by 1.5 and 2.5 fold, respectively (p<0.05); the combination of SEVI and
G1T38 further decreased tumor growth and resulted in a 4-fold delay in
progression (p<0.001). In contrast, ENZ alone was without effect on tumor
growth and did not increase response to G1T38 as compared to G1T38 alone.

Conclusions: SEVI and G1T38 mono- or combination therapy significantly
decreased the growth of the AR-V7+ 22Rv1 CPRC model in vitro and in vivo,
an activity that distinguishes SEVI from ENZ. Therefore, combining SEVI
with a CDK4/6 inhibitor such as G1T38 may be an effective therapy for the
treatment of CRPC that is resistant to current standards of care.


