Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tanshinone IIA can decrease growth factor receptors expression and
dural-block both Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways to
inhibit human breast cancer BT-20 cells.


Background : Tanshinone IIA (Tan-IIA, C19H18O3) with anti-inflammatory
activities and antioxidant properties, is one of the diterpine quinones
extracted from Salviae miltiorrhizae radix (Danshen). Tan-IIA can inhibit
many human cancer cell lines through different molecular mechanisms. The
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/ mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) and RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathways are two of the most frequently
dysregulated kinase cascades in human cancer. Transmembrane tyrosine
kinase has been strongly implicated in the proliferation, survival, and
metastasis of human tumors. Both pathways represent important signal
transduction mechanisms that facilitate the proliferation and survival of
cancers driven by growth factor receptors, such as vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor (VEGFR), insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
(IGF-IR), or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Targeting both the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR Pathways for suppressing inhibitor
resistant cells is necessary because the individual downstream components
of these signaling cascades either through epigenetic modification or
somatic mutation are also known to be frequently altered in cancer, thus
contributing to resistance to anticancer therapies and tumorigenesis.

Material and methods: In the present study, the human breast cancer BT-20
cells were treated with Tan-IIA in vitro. The cytotoxicity of Tan-IIA was
evaluated by MTT assay. The effects of Tan-IIA on the protein expressions
of EGFR, IGF-IR, VEGFR, PI3K, AKT, mTOR, Ras, Raf, MEK and ERK and
Î²-actin in the BT-20 cells were examined by western blot analysis.

Results: The results showed that Tan-IIA can induce the proliferation
inhibition with time and dose dependent and inhibit the activity of the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways. In addition, it was
showed that Tan-IIA treatment inhibited the protein expression levels of
EGFR, VEGFR and IGF-IR significantly.

Conclusions: These findings indicated that one of the molecular
mechanisms for Tan-IIA to inhibit BT-20 cells maybe through inhibiting
the protein expression levels of EGFR, VEGFR, IGF-IR and both
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and Ras/PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways. The use of Tan-IIA for
breast cancer may become a feasible novel therapy option. Further studies
are warranted to elucidate its mechanisms fully.


