Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of prostate tumor growth by an extract from the
muscadine grape.


Despite decades of advancements, cancer remains the second leading cause
of mortality in the United States with an estimated 1.7 million new cases
and over 600,000 deaths predicted for 2016, indicating a clear need for
more effective chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive agents. While natural
products derived from plants have served as an abundant source of
anticancer agents, it is predicted that less than 2 percent of the plant
species with medicinal value have been investigated. Muscadine grape
(Vitis rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a popular
nutraceutical supplement due to the high anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-proliferative effects of a distinct phytochemical composition of
polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The current study examines the effects
of a proprietary muscadine grape extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont
Research & Development Corp.) on the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer
cells, in both a time- and dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an
IncuCyte Zoom Imaging system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a
5-day treatment with 20 µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p
Despite decades of advancements, cancer remains the second leading cause
of mortality in the United States with an estimated 1.7 million new cases
and over 600,000 deaths predicted for 2016, indicating a clear need for
more effective chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive agents. While natural
products derived from plants have served as an abundant source of
anticancer agents, it is predicted that less than 2 percent of the plant
species with medicinal value have been investigated. Muscadine grape
(Vitis rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a popular
nutraceutical supplement due to the high anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-proliferative effects of a distinct phytochemical composition of
polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The current study examines the effects
of a proprietary muscadine grape extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont
Research & Development Corp.) on the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer
cells, in both a time- and dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an
IncuCyte Zoom Imaging system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a
5-day treatment with 20 µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p
< 0.001). Athymic mice (male, 15-20 g, 5-6 weeks of age) were injected
subcutaneously on the lower flank with 1.6 x 106 LNCaP cells, to assess
the effect of the MGE in vivo. When the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice
were randomized and MGE was added to the drinking water at a
concentration of 0.2 µg phenolics/mL (1.0 mg phenolics/mouse/day for a
25 g mouse); control mice drank untreated water. After 5 weeks, the mice
were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed. The volume of prostate
tumors growing in the flank of nude mice drinking water with MGE was
markedly reduced compared to the size of the tumors from control mice
[252.6 ± 61.73 mm3 (MGE) versus 765.2 ± 101.8 mm3 (control); n=6,
pDespite decades of advancements, cancer remains the second leading cause
of mortality in the United States with an estimated 1.7 million new cases
and over 600,000 deaths predicted for 2016, indicating a clear need for
more effective chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive agents. While natural
products derived from plants have served as an abundant source of
anticancer agents, it is predicted that less than 2 percent of the plant
species with medicinal value have been investigated. Muscadine grape
(Vitis rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a popular
nutraceutical supplement due to the high anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-proliferative effects of a distinct phytochemical composition of
polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The current study examines the effects
of a proprietary muscadine grape extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont
Research & Development Corp.) on the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer
cells, in both a time- and dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an
IncuCyte Zoom Imaging system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a
5-day treatment with 20 µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p
< 0.001). Athymic mice (male, 15-20 g, 5-6 weeks of age) were injected
subcutaneously on the lower flank with 1.6 x 106 LNCaP cells, to assess
the effect of the MGE in vivo. When the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice
were randomized and MGE was added to the drinking water at a
concentration of 0.2 µg phenolics/mL (1.0 mg phenolics/mouse/day for a
25 g mouse); control mice drank untreated water. After 5 weeks, the mice
were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed. The volume of prostate
tumors growing in the flank of nude mice drinking water with MGE was
markedly reduced compared to the size of the tumors from control mice
[252.6 ± 61.73 mm3 (MGE) versus 765.2 ± 101.8 mm3 (control); n=6,
p<0.001). Further, the weight of prostate tumors from mice drinking MGE
was also significantly decreased [0.96 ± 0.14 g (control) as compared to
0.41 ± 0.11 g (MGE)], a reduction of 57% (p Despite decades of
advancements, cancer remains the second leading cause of mortality in the
United States with an estimated 1.7 million new cases and over 600,000
deaths predicted for 2016, indicating a clear need for more effective
chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive agents. While natural products
derived from plants have served as an abundant source of anticancer
agents, it is predicted that less than 2 percent of the plant species
with medicinal value have been investigated. Muscadine grape (Vitis
rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a popular nutraceutical
supplement due to the high anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, and
anti-proliferative effects of a distinct phytochemical composition of
polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The current study examines the effects
of a proprietary muscadine grape extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont
Research & Development Corp.) on the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer
cells, in both a time- and dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an
IncuCyte Zoom Imaging system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a
5-day treatment with 20 µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p
< 0.001). Athymic mice (male, 15-20 g, 5-6 weeks of age) were injected
subcutaneously on the lower flank with 1.6 x 106 LNCaP cells, to assess
the effect of the MGE in vivo. When the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice
were randomized and MGE was added to the drinking water at a
concentration of 0.2 µg phenolics/mL (1.0 mg phenolics/mouse/day for a
25 g mouse); control mice drank untreated water. After 5 weeks, the mice
were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed. The volume of prostate
tumors growing in the flank of nude mice drinking water with MGE was
markedly reduced compared to the size of the tumors from control mice
[252.6 ± 61.73 mm3 (MGE) versus 765.2 ± 101.8 mm3 (control); n=6,
p<0.001). Further, the weight of prostate tumors from mice drinking MGE
was also significantly decreased [0.96 ± 0.14 g (control) as compared to
0.41 ± 0.11 g (MGE)], a reduction of 57% (p < 0.05). Five microns tumor
sections were incubated with an antibody to CD34 and tumor vessels were
identified by positive immunoreactivity and morphology. MGE reduced the
number of blood vessels/field from 10.25 ± 0.9 to 7.10 ± 0.6 (p Despite
decades of advancements, cancer remains the second leading cause of
mortality in the United States with an estimated 1.7 million new cases
and over 600,000 deaths predicted for 2016, indicating a clear need for
more effective chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive agents. While natural
products derived from plants have served as an abundant source of
anticancer agents, it is predicted that less than 2 percent of the plant
species with medicinal value have been investigated. Muscadine grape
(Vitis rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a popular
nutraceutical supplement due to the high anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-proliferative effects of a distinct phytochemical composition of
polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The current study examines the effects
of a proprietary muscadine grape extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont
Research & Development Corp.) on the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer
cells, in both a time- and dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an
IncuCyte Zoom Imaging system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a
5-day treatment with 20 µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p
< 0.001). Athymic mice (male, 15-20 g, 5-6 weeks of age) were injected
subcutaneously on the lower flank with 1.6 x 106 LNCaP cells, to assess
the effect of the MGE in vivo. When the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice
were randomized and MGE was added to the drinking water at a
concentration of 0.2 µg phenolics/mL (1.0 mg phenolics/mouse/day for a
25 g mouse); control mice drank untreated water. After 5 weeks, the mice
were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed. The volume of prostate
tumors growing in the flank of nude mice drinking water with MGE was
markedly reduced compared to the size of the tumors from control mice
[252.6 ± 61.73 mm3 (MGE) versus 765.2 ± 101.8 mm3 (control); n=6,
p<0.001). Further, the weight of prostate tumors from mice drinking MGE
was also significantly decreased [0.96 ± 0.14 g (control) as compared to
0.41 ± 0.11 g (MGE)], a reduction of 57% (p < 0.05). Five microns tumor
sections were incubated with an antibody to CD34 and tumor vessels were
identified by positive immunoreactivity and morphology. MGE reduced the
number of blood vessels/field from 10.25 ± 0.9 to 7.10 ± 0.6 (p <
0.05), suggesting that the extract inhibits angiogenesis. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and placental growth factor (PLGF) were
measured by qPCR, to determine the effect of the extract on angiogenic
factors. MGE reduced VEGF mRNA from 1.02 ± 0.06 to 0.72 ± 0.07 relative
units (p Despite decades of advancements, cancer remains the second
leading cause of mortality in the United States with an estimated 1.7
million new cases and over 600,000 deaths predicted for 2016, indicating
a clear need for more effective chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive
agents. While natural products derived from plants have served as an
abundant source of anticancer agents, it is predicted that less than 2
percent of the plant species with medicinal value have been investigated.
Muscadine grape (Vitis rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a
popular nutraceutical supplement due to the high anti-oxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-proliferative effects of a distinct
phytochemical composition of polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The
current study examines the effects of a proprietary muscadine grape
extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont Research & Development Corp.) on the
proliferation of prostate cancer cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the
growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer cells, in both a time- and
dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an IncuCyte Zoom Imaging
system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a 5-day treatment with 20
µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p < 0.001). Athymic mice
(male, 15-20 g, 5-6 weeks of age) were injected subcutaneously on the
lower flank with 1.6 x 106 LNCaP cells, to assess the effect of the MGE
in vivo. When the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice were randomized and
MGE was added to the drinking water at a concentration of 0.2 µg
phenolics/mL (1.0 mg phenolics/mouse/day for a 25 g mouse); control mice
drank untreated water. After 5 weeks, the mice were sacrificed and the
tumors were weighed. The volume of prostate tumors growing in the flank
of nude mice drinking water with MGE was markedly reduced compared to the
size of the tumors from control mice [252.6 ± 61.73 mm3 (MGE) versus
765.2 ± 101.8 mm3 (control); n=6, p<0.001). Further, the weight of
prostate tumors from mice drinking MGE was also significantly decreased
[0.96 ± 0.14 g (control) as compared to 0.41 ± 0.11 g (MGE)], a
reduction of 57% (p < 0.05). Five microns tumor sections were incubated
with an antibody to CD34 and tumor vessels were identified by positive
immunoreactivity and morphology. MGE reduced the number of blood
vessels/field from 10.25 ± 0.9 to 7.10 ± 0.6 (p < 0.05), suggesting
that the extract inhibits angiogenesis. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and placental growth factor (PLGF) were measured by qPCR,
to determine the effect of the extract on angiogenic factors. MGE reduced
VEGF mRNA from 1.02 ± 0.06 to 0.72 ± 0.07 relative units (p < 0.05) and
PLGF mRNA from 1.03 ± 0.11 to 0.63 ± 0.07 relative units (p Despite
decades of advancements, cancer remains the second leading cause of
mortality in the United States with an estimated 1.7 million new cases
and over 600,000 deaths predicted for 2016, indicating a clear need for
more effective chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive agents. While natural
products derived from plants have served as an abundant source of
anticancer agents, it is predicted that less than 2 percent of the plant
species with medicinal value have been investigated. Muscadine grape
(Vitis rotundifolia) skin and/or seed extracts are a popular
nutraceutical supplement due to the high anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory,
and anti-proliferative effects of a distinct phytochemical composition of
polyphenols and proanthocyanidins. The current study examines the effects
of a proprietary muscadine grape extract formulation (MGE; Piedmont
Research & Development Corp.) on the proliferation of prostate cancer
cells and tumors. MGE inhibited the growth of human LnCaP prostate cancer
cells, in both a time- and dose-dependent manner, as quantified using an
IncuCyte Zoom Imaging system. Cell growth was reduced by 36.8% after a
5-day treatment with 20 µg/mL MGE compared to untreated cells (n = 6, p
< 0.001). Athymic mice (male, 15-20 g, 5-6 weeks of age) were injected
subcutaneously on the lower flank with 1.6 x 106 LNCaP cells, to assess
the effect of the MGE in vivo. When the tumors reached 100 mm3, the mice
were randomized and MGE was added to the drinking water at a
concentration of 0.2 µg phenolics/mL (1.0 mg phenolics/mouse/day for a
25 g mouse); control mice drank untreated water. After 5 weeks, the mice
were sacrificed and the tumors were weighed. The volume of prostate
tumors growing in the flank of nude mice drinking water with MGE was
markedly reduced compared to the size of the tumors from control mice
[252.6 ± 61.73 mm3 (MGE) versus 765.2 ± 101.8 mm3 (control); n=6,
p<0.001). Further, the weight of prostate tumors from mice drinking MGE
was also significantly decreased [0.96 ± 0.14 g (control) as compared to
0.41 ± 0.11 g (MGE)], a reduction of 57% (p < 0.05). Five microns tumor
sections were incubated with an antibody to CD34 and tumor vessels were
identified by positive immunoreactivity and morphology. MGE reduced the
number of blood vessels/field from 10.25 ± 0.9 to 7.10 ± 0.6 (p <
0.05), suggesting that the extract inhibits angiogenesis. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and placental growth factor (PLGF) were
measured by qPCR, to determine the effect of the extract on angiogenic
factors. MGE reduced VEGF mRNA from 1.02 ± 0.06 to 0.72 ± 0.07 relative
units (p < 0.05) and PLGF mRNA from 1.03 ± 0.11 to 0.63 ± 0.07 relative
units (p < 0.05), providing additional evidence of an anti-angiogenic
effect of the extract. Collectively, these results are the first to
demonstrate that a novel MGE formulation reduces prostate tumor growth in
a mouse model, by inhibiting angiogenesis, suggesting that MGE may be an
effective treatment for prostate cancer.


