Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIF-induced stat3 activation promotes resistance to MEK blockade
in KRAS mutant colorectal cancer cells.


Although MEK blockade has been highlighted as a promising anti-tumor
drug, it has poor clinical efficacy in KRAS mutant colorectal cancer.
Several feedback systems have been described in which inhibition of one
intracellular pathway leads to activation of a parallel signaling
pathway, thereby decreasing the effectiveness of single-MEK targeted
therapies. In this study, we describe a feedback mechanism in which MEK
inhibition leads to activation of macrophage migration inhibitory factor
(MIF)-induced stat3 signaling pathway in KRAS mutant colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells. We found that KRAS mutant CRC cells with refametinib, MEK
inhibitor, induced MIF secretion and resulted in activation of Stat3. MIF
knockdown by siRNA partially restored sensitivity to refametinib in KRAS
mutant cells. In addition, combination with refametinib and 4IPP, a MIF
inhibitor, effectively reduced the activity of stat3 and MAPK, more than
single agent treatment. As a result, combined therapy was found to
exhibit a synergistic growth inhibitory effect against
refametinib-resistant cells by downregulating MIF expression. These
results reveal that MIF-induced stat3 activation evoked an intrinsic
resistance to refametinib. Our results provide the basis for a rational
combination strategy against KRAS mutant colorectal cancers, predicated
on the understanding of cross-talk between the MEK and MIF pathways.


