Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyclonal secondary FGFR2 mutations drive acquired resistance to
FGFR inhibition in FGFR2 fusion-positive cholangiocarcinoma patients.


Genetic alterations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
pathway are promising therapeutic targets in a broad range of cancers and
occur in ~20% of ICCs. As seen with other targeted therapies, however,
acquired resistance has limited the efficacy of selective FGFR kinase
inhibitors such as BGJ398. In a phase II trial of patients with advanced
refractory cholangiocarcinoma harboring an FGFR gene alteration, BGJ398
displayed an overall response rate of 22%, but the durability of response
was short in some patients. We report the molecular basis of acquired
resistance in 4 patients with advanced FGFR2-fusion positive ICC via
integrative genomic characterization of cell-free circulating tumor DNA
(cfDNA), the primary tumor, and metastases. Each patient enjoyed an
initial response, but all subsequently progressed within 10 months.
Serial analysis of cfDNA revealed multiple point mutations in the FGFR2
kinase domain at progression (Table 1). The gatekeeper mutation, p.
V564F, sterically hinders drug binding and was identified in 3 of 4
patients. In patient #1, five different FGFR2 mutations were detected in
the post-progression cfDNA but only one, p. K641R, was identified in the
post-progression biopsy. A rapid autopsy was performed, and genomic
characterization of 12 metastatic lesions revealed marked inter- and
intra-lesional heterogeneity, with different FGFR2 mutations in
individual resistant clones. Molecular modeling and in vitro studies
indicated that each mutation lead to BGJ398 resistance that was
surmountable by structurally distinct FGFR inhibitors. Thus, our report
provides the first genetic evidence of clinical acquired resistance to
FGFR inhibitor therapy in patients and informs future strategies for
detecting mechanisms of resistance and promoting more durable remissions.

Clinical and Molecular Data on Patients with Advanced Refractory CCA
treated with BGJ398



Patient ID

Sex

Age at Diagnosis (years)

FGFR2 Fusion partner

Maximum Response

Progression Free Survival on BGJ398 (months)

Overall Survival since Diagnosis (months)

FGFR2 Mutations on cfDNA at progression



1

F

47

OPTN

28%

3.6

32

V564F, N549H, K641R, E565A, L617V



2

F

59

ZMYMY4

50%

5.6

31

V564F, N549H/K, E565A, K659M



3

F

69

SORBS1

68%

12.6

50

K659M, K714R



4

M

43

BICC1

37%

7.4

18

V564F


