Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Geographic disparities in prevalence of baseline prostate
inflammation and prostate cancer risk: Results from a multinational trial.


Introduction: Prostate cancer incidence rates vary 25-fold worldwide. The
distribution of lifestyle factors also varies by geographic region and
these factors may impact prostate inflammation, which is inversely
associated with prostate cancer risk in the REduction by DUtasteride of
prostate Cancer Events (REDUCE) trial. Herein, we examined geographic
differences in the prevalence of histological prostate inflammation and
geographic differences in prostate cancer risk using REDUCE, a
multinational trial of men with a negative baseline prostate biopsy.

Methods: We conducted a retrospective analysis of data from 7,213 men
with a negative baseline prostate biopsy in REDUCE from Europe (n=4,802),
North America (n=1,796), South America (n=467), and Australia/New Zealand
(n=148). Histological inflammation was classified as chronic
(lymphocytes, macrophages) or acute (neutrophils) by central review of
negative baseline prostate biopsies. Logistic regression was used to
calculate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for
associations between geographic region and prostate inflammation, and
between geographic region and prostate cancer risk at trial-mandated
repeat biopsy, adjusting for potential confounders. To avoid confounding
by race, analyses were restricted to white men.

Results: Chronic and acute prostate inflammation was detected in 77% and
15% of men, respectively. Relative to Europeans, North Americans and
Australians/New Zealanders were more likely to have acute prostate
inflammation in the negative biopsy (OR 1.74; 95% CI 1.48-2.05 and OR
2.04; 95% CI 1.38-3.02, respectively), while South Americans were less
likely to have acute inflammation (OR 0.42; 95% CI 0.28-0.61). Among
North Americans, Canadians were more likely to have acute prostate
inflammation than men from the United States (OR 1.40; 95% CI 1.07-1.83).
Among Europeans, the prevalence of acute inflammation was lower in
Northern, Southern and Eastern Europe, relative to Western Europe (OR
0.79; 95% CI 0.65-0.97, OR 0.84; 95% CI 0.66-1.07 and OR 0.62; 95% CI
0.45-0.87, respectively), with similar results for chronic inflammation.
Regions with higher prevalence of prostate inflammation had lower
prostate cancer risk at 2-year biopsy, including North America (OR 0.87;
95% CI 0.71-1.07) and Australia/New Zealand (OR 0.48; 95% CI 0.24-0.95),
relative to Europe. Conversely, regions with lower prevalence of prostate
inflammation had higher prostate cancer risk at 2-year biopsy, including
Northern and Eastern Europe (OR 1.30; 95% CI 1.05-1.62 and OR 1.74; 95%
CI 1.29-2.35, respectively), relative to Western Europe.

Conclusions: Geographic disparities in the prevalence of prostate
inflammation is a potential biologic mechanism contributing to global
differences in prostate cancer incidence rates.


