Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HABP2 p.G534E variant in patients with family history of thyroid
and breast cancer.


Background. Familial Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC) has been recently
associated with the HABP2 p.G534E mutation. In this study we evaluated
the putative association of the HABP2 p.G534E mutation and familial
history of PTC and Breast Carcinoma (BC) in the Brazilian population.

Methods. Germline mutations of twenty unrelated individuals with personal
and/or family history of PTC and/or BC were identified by whole exome
sequencing (WES), using Nextera Exome Enrichment kit and HiSeq200
platform (Illumina). Two cases were positive for p.G534E. Family members
from both positive cases (seven from Family 1 and three from Family 2)
were recruited for segregation analysis. An additional patient and three
relatives (Family 3) with history of PTC and BC were included for
validation. Fifty frozen PTC tumor samples and 170 healthy Brazilian
individuals were also screened for the HABP2 variant. Confirmation and
validation were performed by Sanger sequencing.

Results. Interestingly, Family 1 reported a consanguineous history,
reflected in two homozygous cases: the proband (PTC) and his unaffected
sister. Also, only one (BC) out of eight tested members was negative for
p.G534E. In the Family 2, the only patient diagnosed with PTC was
negative for the mutation, while three relatives were positive for the
same loci. The index case (PTC) from Family 3, was wild type for HABP2
and three relatives tested were positive carriers. In PTC tumor samples
the Allele Frequency (AF) was 0.04: two heterozygous and one homozygous
for p.G534E. Among 170 healthy individuals, five were heterozygous for
the variant, representing an AF of 0.0147. The two index patients
evaluated by WES also presented interesting pathogenic variants in genes
potentially associated with deregulation of the extracellular matrix
organization pathway (CTSB, TNXB, COL4A3, COL16A1, COL24A1, COL5A2, NID1,
LOXL2, MMP11, TRIM24 and MUSK) and DNA repair function (NBN and MSH2).

Conclusion. Our findings suggest that HABP2 is not a predisposition gene
involved in familial PTC and BC.

Financial Support: FAPESP (2013/01867-8 and 2014/03983-8) and CNPq
(481132/2012-0)


