Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modeling of gastric cancer with lymphovascular invasion and H.
pylori: a systems approach.


Background:

Modeling behaviors of gastric cancer system with an H.Pylori co-morbidity
allows clinician- educators to describe cancer metastasis through the
lens of a system approach. Lymphovascular invasion in gastric cancer has
shown to have low survival rate within a five year period. The unresolved
presence of H. Pylori in the gastric chamber allows for pervasive
inflammation of the mucosal lining. Lymphovascular invasion supported
with extracellular membrane (ECM) detachment and anoikis suppression
exhibit elements of a systems approach such as inputs, processes, output
and a feedback loop.

Methods:

Insightmaker.com is a simulation and modeling program used to create the
stock and flow models. This system based approach allows a user to create
primitives such as stock and variables and add connections using link and
flow elements. A simulation run provides a visualization of the defined
stock against a timeline on a dynamic graph.

Results:

A generalized metastasis model was first generated in insightmaker.com.
An organ specific model was used to model how cancer cells interact with
the gastric mucosal lining and its spread to the lymphovascular system.
This organ specific model will help a clinician- educator represent
chemical pathways and relationships to explain the secondary growth of
tumors from its original site.

Conclusion:

The initial instructional activity was designed with an easy to follow
demo of an actual working systems model in systems biology or population
ecology. This allows for the content to be familiar to the student. A
team of 4 students constructed a systems model of a portion of the
gastric tumor metastasis cycle such as ECM detachment or suppression of
the anoikis process. An evaluation rubric was used to guide the
development of the group created student model with evaluation categories
such as narrative of the system model, attributes of the system, data
flow and values used and a personal reflection of their experience.

The successful implementation of a system approach is packaging the
instructional activity and its supporting content in bite size pieces, an
incremental approach and explicit description of the activityâ€™s
deliverables. The drag and drop interface and intuitive icon driven menu
of insightmaker.com is ideal for lowering the learning curve for a
systems thinking instructional activity and can fit in the time
constraints of an oncology course block as part of a case based
instruction session in an undergraduate medical curriculum.


