Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting microRNA-143 in glioblastoma in vivo increases tumor
growth.


The purpose of this study is to assess the biological role of the
microRNA-143 (miR-143) in Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). GBM is the most
common and lethal of all brain tumors. In the United States, the
incidence of GBM is about 17% of all primary brain tumors and about
60-75% of all Astrocytomas (American Brain Tumor Association, 2014). The
standard therapy is surgical tumor removal followed by chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. However, many patients recur after treatment and the median
survival rate for GBM has remained 15 months for the past 20 years. Thus,
novel therapies for GBM treatment are urgently necessary. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs (18-22 nucleotides in
length) that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level.
MiRNAs bind to the 3â€™-untranslate region (UTR) of messenger RNAs
(mRNAs) and regulate protein synthesis. Several deregulated miRNAs have
been identified in all cancer types including GBM. In this study we aim
to thoroughly uncover the role of miR-143 by using GBM cell lines, mouse
models and patient samples. Total RNA was isolated from FFPE samples from
brain tumor patients. TaqMan-based Real-time PCR showed that the relative
expression of miR-143 was higher in GBM patients compared to control
individuals, and with paired surrounding non-cancerous tissue.
Furthermore, GBM cells transiently transfected with a miR-143
oligonucleotide inhibitor showed reduced cell proliferation (68.5%)
(clonogenicity assay), increased apoptosis and cell cycle arrest of GBM
cells in the S phase (Flow cytometry and Western blots). In vivo studies
using primary GBM cells injected in the flank of nude mice showed that
repeated doses of miR-143-inhibitor liposomal formulation increased the
tumor size compared with control mice. These contradictory results could
be due to effects of the microenvironment where the tumor is growing.
Further studies will be made using intracranial injections in an
orthotopic xenograft mouse model to confirm this hypothesis. Western blot
analysis and luciferase reporter assays are also underway to identify
novel miR-143 target genes in GBM cells. This research project is being
supported by: PRCTRC: NCRR (U54 RR 026139-01A1), NIMHD (8U54 MD
007587-03), and RCMI: MBRS-RISE, NCRR (2G12-RR003051) and NIMHD
(8G12-MD007600) from the NIH.


