Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of eribulin and AURKA inhibitor prevents metastatic
colonization and eradicates established metastases in breast cancer.


The majority of cancer-related deaths (90%) are happened due to
metastasis from the primary tumor site to distant organs. MLN8237 is a
small, highly selective molecule inhibitor of Aurora A kinase (AURKA),
which results in disruption of the mitotic spindle, chromosome
segregation collapse, and inhibition of cell proliferation. Numerous
studies have showed that levels of AURKA are elevated in many types of
cancer, including breast cancer. Our previous studies indicated that
MLN8237 is extremely potent against pulmonary metastasis, but not the
primary tumor in orthotropic xenograft model. To further enhance MLN8237
based regiment, its combination with other therapeutic compounds can be
used. As a potential partner we chose eribulin - fully synthetic
macrocyclic analogue of the marine natural product halichondrin B.
Eribulin belong to the class of non-taxane microtubule destabilizing
molecules, currently used in clinic to treat taxol resistant metastatic
breast cancer. In present study we have investigated the effect of
MLN8237 and eribulin against breast cancer in vivo and in vitro. The
results showed that combination of drugs possess a synergistic effect on
both primary tumor and metastases, through inducing cytotoxic autophagy
and apoptosis. This data clearly indicate great potential behind the
MLN8237 based therapies and introduce a new hope for the eradication of
metastatic breast cancer.


