Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cryptotanshinone activate Nrf2 expression through microRNA
regulations.


Cryptotanshinone is a diterpene quinone derived from the roots of Salvia
miltiorrhiza Bunge. An increasing number of studies have demonstrated
that cryptotanshinone has the pharmacological activities such as
anti-oxidative stress, anti-bacteria, anti-inflammation, and anti-cancer.
Cryptotanshinone has been found to increase the ARE expression level
induced by the Nrf2 and decrease Keap1 expression. This study
investigated Nrf2 and Keap1-related microRNA to understand the mechanisms
of cryptotanshinone in antioxidant activities. HepG2 cells were treated
with cryptotanshinone 2.5 Î¼M in DMEM medium with 1% FBS for 5 days.
Total RNA was obtained for small RNA sequencing and real-time PCR
analyses. The analyses revealed that Cryptotanshinone had the potential
to inhibit miR-27a-5p, miR-142-5p, miR-28 and miR-93-5p levels, which
subsequently increased the Nrf2 mRNA level. On the other hand, the Keap1
mRNA level was suppressed through up-regulation of miR-23a and
down-regulation of miR-7-5p. Moreover, Nrf2 and its related downstream
anti-oxidant enzymes such as NQO1 and UGT were increased and the Keap1
protein level was decreased. These findings suggest that cryptotanshinone
possesses the cancer chemoprevention activity in up-regulation of Nrf2
mRNA and protein levels through the suppression of inhibitory microRNA.
Future investigations that extend the current study can focus on
pharmacological mechanism of cryptotanshinone as a cancer chemoprevention
agent, and the safety of long-term uptake of cryptotanshinone for cancer
prevention.


