Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the nuclear import receptor, KpnB1 synergizes with
cisplatin toxicity in cervical cancer cells.


Elevated expression of members of the nuclear transport protein family
has been reported in multiple cancers and presents as novel anticancer
therapeutic targets. Using a cervical cancer model system, we have
previously shown that inhibition of the nuclear import receptor, KpnB1 by
siRNA and a novel small molecule, Inhibitor of Nuclear Import (INI-43)
resulted in cancer cell death via apoptosis. In this study, we
investigated the cancer cell killing effects of KpnB1 inhibition in
combination with Cisplatin (CDDP), a first-line chemotherapeutic agent
used in the treatment of many cancers. KpnB1 siRNA and INI-43 treatment
at sub-lethal concentrations enhanced cancer cells' sensitivity to CDDP.
Our data shows that the combination treatment of INI-43 and CDDP
significantly decreases CDDP IC50 compared to CDDP treatment alone.
Increased PARP-cleavage was observed in combination treated cells and
this correlated with increased γH2A.X, indicating increased apoptosis
and DNA damage. Furthermore, INI-43 treatment reduced the nuclear import
of NFκB, a stress-regulated response transcription factor known to be a
KpnB1 cargo protein that promotes cancer cell survival. Decreased levels
of downstream pro-survival and DNA-repair targets of NFκB were observed,
including cyclinD1, c-Myc and XIAP, which correlated with increased DNA
damage and apoptosis. Taken together, results suggest increased Cisplatin
sensitivity of cervical cancer cells when nuclear import via KpnB1 is
inhibited.


