Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T-cell receptor immunosequencing reveals novel insights into the
immune response to human pancreatic cancer.


Introduction Despite advancements in therapy, pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) remains an aggressive cancer with high mortality. It
is characterized by dense inflammation, including many T cells; however,
it is unclear whether these T cells signify a true antitumor response. In
the setting of disappointing early results of immunotherapy in PDA, we
sought to gain a deeper understanding of the tumor-associated T-cell
response.

Methods With IRB approval, we obtained archival resected PDA tumors in
paraffin-embedded blocks from 54 patients. We performed histopathology to
identify blocks containing lymph nodes (LN) and performed T-cell receptor
(TCR) immunosequencing on DNA extracted from immediately adjacent tissue.
To address possible intratumoral heterogeneity, we analyzed duplicate
samples from separate blocks for 10 patients. Productive clonality was
defined as 1-Pielouâ€™s evenness for TCR rearrangements encoding a
functional protein; TCR fraction was calculated from number of observed
templates and the amount of input DNA. Two-tailed t-tests were used to
compare subgroups. TCR sequence overlap between each of the 10 pairs of
duplicate samples were calculated at the amino acid level.

Results Among samples that did not contain LN, mean TCR fraction was
0.27, and mean clonality was 0.15 (typical peripheral blood mononuclear
cell clonality is 0.08). TCR fraction was positively correlated with
clonality (R2=0.23, p=0.007), though this correlation was only
significant in patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (R2=0.19,
p=0.03). TCR fraction was higher in patients with positive nodal status
(0.32 vs. 0.23, p=0.02), but lower in patients who received neoadjuvant
therapy (0.22 vs. 0.33, p=0.02). There was no survival difference between
high or low TCR fraction or clonality. Samples containing LN (not
included in previous analyses) had higher TCR fraction (0.49 vs. 0.27,
pResults Among samples that did not contain LN, mean TCR fraction was
0.27, and mean clonality was 0.15 (typical peripheral blood mononuclear
cell clonality is 0.08). TCR fraction was positively correlated with
clonality (R2=0.23, p=0.007), though this correlation was only
significant in patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (R2=0.19,
p=0.03). TCR fraction was higher in patients with positive nodal status
(0.32 vs. 0.23, p=0.02), but lower in patients who received neoadjuvant
therapy (0.22 vs. 0.33, p=0.02). There was no survival difference between
high or low TCR fraction or clonality. Samples containing LN (not
included in previous analyses) had higher TCR fraction (0.49 vs. 0.27,
p<0.0001) but lower clonality (0.09 vs. 0.15, p=0.0002); this
relationship was maintained regardless of nodal status. Among 10 pairs of
duplicate samples, there was 53% mean overlap of TCR amino acid
sequences, compared to 0.1% for pairs of unmatched samples (pResults
Among samples that did not contain LN, mean TCR fraction was 0.27, and
mean clonality was 0.15 (typical peripheral blood mononuclear cell
clonality is 0.08). TCR fraction was positively correlated with clonality
(R2=0.23, p=0.007), though this correlation was only significant in
patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (R2=0.19, p=0.03). TCR
fraction was higher in patients with positive nodal status (0.32 vs.
0.23, p=0.02), but lower in patients who received neoadjuvant therapy
(0.22 vs. 0.33, p=0.02). There was no survival difference between high or
low TCR fraction or clonality. Samples containing LN (not included in
previous analyses) had higher TCR fraction (0.49 vs. 0.27, p<0.0001) but
lower clonality (0.09 vs. 0.15, p=0.0002); this relationship was
maintained regardless of nodal status. Among 10 pairs of duplicate
samples, there was 53% mean overlap of TCR amino acid sequences, compared
to 0.1% for pairs of unmatched samples (p<0.0001).

Conclusion Here we demonstrate evidence of clonal expansion of T cells in
the human PDA microenvironment. Extensive overlap of TCR sequences
between two distinct samples for each of 10 pairs analyzed further
suggests that the clonal expansion may be specific to tumor antigens.
Neoadjuvant therapy may also influence clonal expansion, as only treated
patients had a positive correlation between TCR fraction and clonality.
Finally, the presence of a lymph node appears to skew TCR sequencing data
toward a less clonal but more numerous population. This suggests that the
most rigorous analysis of TCRs in a solid tumor microenvironment needs to
exclude blocks that contain lymph nodes in order to characterize the true
intratumoral population of T cells.


