Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of kif14 overexpression on tumor formation in mice in a
lifespan study.


KIF14 is a mitotic kinesin and microtubule-associated molecular motor
that plays an essential role in the last stages of cytokinesis. In
multiple cancer types, KIF14, overexpression in tumors correlates with
stage, aggressiveness, and poor patient outcomes. There is considerable
interest in KIF14 as a possible oncogene, since the KIF14 locus is in a
common region of genomic gain in multiple cancers.

In this study, wild type BDF-1 mice and a strain constitutively
overexpressing Kif14, known as Kif14-Tg mice, were evaluated at the end
of their natural lifespan, specifically for the occurrence of tumors.
There were approximately fifty mice per genotype, and eighty of these
mice have died. These mice were necropsied and the following tissues were
collected: kidney, liver, lung, spleen, seminal vesicles, ovary, mammary
gland, bone marrow, pituitary gland, eye, and brain. Any gross nodules
were also collected. These tissues were then fixed in 10% neutral
buffered formalin, processed, sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and
eosin.

Although there was no significant difference in mouse weights through the
lifespan or in the survival curve between the Kif14-Tg and their wild
type littermates, a significant increase in follicular lymphoma and
diffuse large B cell lymphoma was seen in Kif14-Tg mice compared to the
wild type mice. Thirty-three mice developed either a follicular lymphoma
or a diffuse large B cell lymphoma, and twenty-four of those mice were
Kif14-Tg mice. These were the two most common tumors in Kif14-Tg mice.
Other lesions and tumors that were seen in both strains included thymic
lymphoma, sarcomas, myeloid dysplasia, and other carcinomas. Nontumorous
lesions were seen in both strains of mice including hydronephrosis and
telangiectasia in multiple organs. Ballooning degeneration of the lens of
the eyes was observed in five mice from the strain Kif14-Tg.

Our finding of increased follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B cell
lymphoma proves the first evidence that Kif14 can promote tumor formation
in a wild-type background. This is the first evidence that Kif14 may have
a role in lymphoma, but complements our earlier finding that Kif14
overexpression can accelerate tumor formation in a mouse model of
retinoblastoma. Together, these outcomes further support Kif14â€™s
potential as an oncogene.


