Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Improved resection and prolonged overall survival with
PD-1-IRDye800CW fluorescent probe-guided surgery and PD-1 adjuvant
immunotherapy.


Purpose: An intraoperative technique to accurately identify microscopic
tumor residuals could be applied to decrease the risk of positive
surgical margins. Several lines of evidence support the expression and
immunotherapeutic effect of PD-1 in breast cancer. Here, we sought to
develop a fluorescence labeled PD-1 probe for in vivo breast tumor
imaging and image-guided surgery. The efficacy of PD-1 monoclonal
antibody (mAb) as adjuvant immunotherapy after surgery was also assessed.

Experimental Design: A near-infrared dye labeled PD-1-IRDye800CW probe
was developed and examined for its application in tumor imaging and
image-guided tumor resection in an immunocompetent 4T1 mammary mouse
tumor model that recapitulates clinical metastatic cancer. Fluorescence
molecular imaging (FMI) was performed to monitor probe biodistribution
and intraoperative imaging. Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) was carried out
concurrently to monitor tumor growth and evaluate post-surgical tumor
residuals, recurrences, and metastases.

Results: The PD-1-IRDye800CW probe exhibited a specific and stable signal
at the tumor region compared to the IgG control, and exhibited the
highest tumor-to-background ratio (TBR) 8 h post-injection (11.62 ±
0.79), approximately 5 fold higher than the IgG control (2.13 ± 0.30).
Furthermore, PD-1-IRDye800CW guided surgery combined with PD-1 adjuvant
immunotherapy inhibited tumor regrowth and microtumor metastases, as
determined by BLI imaging, and thus improved survival rate with no
obvious side effects.

Conclusions: Our study demonstrated the feasibility of using
PD-1-IRDye800CW for breast tumor imaging and image-guided tumor
resection. Moreover, we found that PD-1 mAb adjuvant immunotherapy
reduces cancer recurrences and metastases emanating from minimal tumor
residuals.


