Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced efficacy of selumetinib by pretreatment of 5-FU in
preclinical Ras/Raf-mutant colorectal cancer models.


Optimal strategy for the application of MEK inhibitor as combination
therapy has not been established in Ras/Raf-mutant colorectal cancer
(CRC). As we preliminary observed that 5-FU-induced pharmacodynamic
changes were restored by ERK inhibition, we hypothesized that
post-treatment of MEK inhibitor would enhance antitumor activity of 5-FU.
Treatment of 5-FU for 2 days followed by selumetinib for another 2 days
(FS schedule) exhibited synergism for cell viability, whereas reverse or
concomitant combination showed antagonism or inconsistent response,
respectively, in 8 kinds of CRC cell lines including BRAFV600E colo205,
BRAFV600E RKO, or KRASG13D HCT8 cells. Combination as FS schedule
persistently down-regulated the phosphorylation of ERK and pS6 throughout
treatment period, whereas selumininib alone or reverse combination
transiently decreased within 24 hr. The cells treated as FS schedule
exhibited higher apoptosis and lower capacity of anchorage-independent
cell growth than the cells under single or reverse combination.
Microarray analysis revealed the distinct groups of genes underlying
different efficacy by schedule-dependent treatment. Tumor growth in mice
administered 5-FU at 10 mg/kg/day for colo205 and at 30 mg/kg/day for
HCT8 for 7 days followed by selumetinib at 10 mg/kg/day for colo205 and
25 mg/kg/day for HCT8 for another 7 days was significantly retarded than
that in mice treated with single agents. But the combination in reverse
sequence induced comparable tumor growth to single agents. Decreased
expression of Ki67 was observed in tumors from mice treated as FS
scheduling. Our results suggest that the schedule-dependent combination
of 5-FU and selumetinib may be benefit in patients having CRC with
hyper-activation of Ras/RAF pathway.


