Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional profiling of germline EPAS1 variants associated with
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.


Background: Endothelial PAS domain-containing protein 1 (EPAS1), encoding
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 2-alpha (HIF2α), is involved in
regulation of cellular hypoxia responses and has been shown to play a
role in several cancers including renal cell cancer and
pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma (PPGL). HIF2 levels are tightly regulated,
being low in normoxia but increased in hypoxia. Studying heritable PPGL
syndromes has uncovered diverse genetic events that lead to
oxygen-independent HIF stabilization. Using massively parallel
sequencing, we noted several germline EPAS1 variants that occurred in
subjects also carrying pathogenic mutations in either VHL or SDHB. In
addition, two distinct EPAS1 variants were identified in separate
individuals who did not harbor germline mutation in other known
susceptibility genes. We therefore investigated whether these variants
affected EPAS1 function.

Method: Six different EPAS1 variants were identified in the germline of
patients with PPGL; p.His194Arg, p.Arg247Ser, p.Phe374Tyr, p.Thr766Pro,
p.Pro785Thr and p.Ile789Val. GFP-tagged HIF2α expressing constructs -
expressing either empty vector, wildtype or mutant HIF2α- were generated
(including positive control p.Pro531Thr) and transfected into HEK293
cells. HEK293 cells transfected with wildtype HIF2α were also subjected
to hypoxic conditions for use as a positive control.
Co-immunoprecipitation followed by Western blotting analyses were
performed to determine whether: a) HIF2α mutants are still able to
interact with VHL and ARNT; and b) HIF2α mutants are stabilized under
normoxia. Candidate target gene expression (CCND1 and SLC2A) was measured
by RT-qPCR.

Results: Western blot analyses showed that p.Arg247Ser, p.Phe374Tyr,
p.Pro531Thr and p.Pro785Thr amino acid changes in HIF2α were all more
stable than wild-type HIF2α under normoxia. Co-IP of HIF2α with VHL
showed significantly reduced interaction with p.Arg247Ser and p.Pro531Thr
(pResults: Western blot analyses showed that p.Arg247Ser, p.Phe374Tyr,
p.Pro531Thr and p.Pro785Thr amino acid changes in HIF2α were all more
stable than wild-type HIF2α under normoxia. Co-IP of HIF2α with VHL
showed significantly reduced interaction with p.Arg247Ser and p.Pro531Thr
(p<0.05). Co-IP of HIF2α with ARNT failed to show any effect on
interaction occurring as a result of the HIF2α variants. Interestingly
only p.Pro531Thr was able to induce CCND1 and SLC2A gene expression
(pResults: Western blot analyses showed that p.Arg247Ser, p.Phe374Tyr,
p.Pro531Thr and p.Pro785Thr amino acid changes in HIF2α were all more
stable than wild-type HIF2α under normoxia. Co-IP of HIF2α with VHL
showed significantly reduced interaction with p.Arg247Ser and p.Pro531Thr
(p<0.05). Co-IP of HIF2α with ARNT failed to show any effect on
interaction occurring as a result of the HIF2α variants. Interestingly
only p.Pro531Thr was able to induce CCND1 and SLC2A gene expression
(p<0.05).

Conclusion: Germline EPAS1 variants p.Arg247Ser and p.Phe374Tyr share
some functional features in common with the known oncogenic somatic
variant p.Pro531Thr. These variants may therefore be functionally
relevant to developing cancers that are dependent upon pseudo-hypoxia.
Whether any of these EPAS1 variants will affect response to HIF2α
antagonist therapies is yet unknown and may be of importance.


