Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug resistant B-cell tumors eliminated by novel therapeutic
antibodies in vivo.


B-cell malignancies have been successfully targeted in the clinic by
therapies such as anti-CD20 antibody rituximab or Brutonâ€™s tyrosine
kinase inhibitor ibrutinib. However, leukemias and lymphomas remain
incurable due to primary or acquired resistance, ultimately leaving
patients without an effective treatment option. We sought to circumvent
this drug resistance by pursuing an alternative target known as B cell
activating factor receptor (BAFF-R). Despite past limited success, BAFF-R
remains a prime target for B-cell lymphoma and leukemia therapeutic
antibody development due to its key role in B-cell proliferation and
development.

We report the development of two novel monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
against human (h) BAFF-R. The mAbs were generated by immunizing mice with
(h)BAFF-R-expressing mouse fibroblast cells presenting a natively folded,
cell-surface immunogen. The two mAbs presented unique complementarity
determining regions that specifically bound (h)BAFF-R-expressing mouse
fibroblast cells but not the parental counterpart. Furthermore, the
antibodies were specific to B-cell containing organs such as tonsil and
spleen, by immunohistochemical staining and without detectable reactivity
in heart, lung, brain, liver, and kidney tissues. To tailor the
antibodies for clinical application, a human IgG1 Fc capable of eliciting
an immune response was substituted, creating chimeric versions. We showed
that both chimeric mAbs bound with high affinity to human B-cell lymphoma
cell lines including JeKo-1 (mantle cell lymphoma; MCL), SU-DHL-6
(diffuse large B cell lymphoma; DLBCL), Raji (Burkitt lymphoma), and RL
(follicular lymphoma). The chimeric antibodies also elicited
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) with primary human
natural killer (NK) cells in vitro against these tumor lines as well as
primary lymphoma samples (n=5) from patients who progressed after
rituximab exposure. Most notably, the antibodies demonstrated efficacy in
two in vivo drug resistant lymphoma models we developed, a
rituximab-resistant CD20 genomic knockout variant of JeKo-1 and the
naturally ibrutinib-resistant Z-138. Using these lymphomas lines for
xenogeneic tumor models in NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice, we found our
antibodies significantly inhibited tumor growth, conferring long-term and
tumor free survival on the mice.

Our in vitro and in vivo results robustly demonstrate the high
specificity and significant anti-tumor effects of our anti-BAFF-R
antibodies against a broad variety of B-cell malignancies, especially
against cases of rituximab and ibrutinib resistance. This successful
development of novel anti-BAFF-R therapeutic antibodies warrants support
for further translational development for clinical use in light of
current resistance cases.


