Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide location analysis of DNA adducts in vivo.


DNA adducts are the biochemical consequences of exposure to UV light,
carcinogens or DNA-reactive drugs. They play a central role in malignant
transformation and the selective killing of cancer cells by
chemotherapeutic agents. The functional consequences of DNA adducts is
likely to depend on their exact location in the genome with respect to
histones and sites where histones and DNA are modified. However, tools
that permit precise genome-wide mapping of adduct locations have poor
resolution or are too specific to the type of DNA-adduct. Here we present
the development of a molecular assay (Ad-Seq) capable of identifying the
genomic location of damaged DNA bases in whole cells. Using naked DNA
treated with cisplatin (cDDP) or ultra-violet (UV) light as the damaging
agents, the strategy relies on differential exonuclease digestion to
enrich genome-wide libraries for fragments containing DNA adducts,
followed by high-throughput sequencing. Consistent with the expected
adduct chemistry, the 5â€™ end of the reads were enriched in TT, TC or CT
di-nucleotides in the UV treated DNA (>4x) and in AG or GG in the cDDP
treated DNA (1.5x), suggesting a positive predictive value of 76% and 44%
and UV (TT) and cDDP (GG) adduct detection, respectively. Applied in vivo
to IMR90 cells, Ad-Seq revealed that the fraction of AG/GG loci was
higher in DNA from the cDDP-treated cells at all coverage depths,
reaching 1.5x enrichment for the highest depth quartile. This indicates
that the method is selective and that even low covered loci show
enrichment of AG/GG sequences. The enrichment in purines was limited to 3
nucleotides downstream of the read start site, confirming the high
resolution of the exonuclease digestion. A total of 11 x 103 AG/GG loci
were identified in replicate in cDDP-treated samples and were absent from
untreated controls. With about 60 x103 expected adducts per genome, the
current assay therefore captured up to 18% of cDDP adducts. The most
covered adduct sites were significantly enriched in the quiescent
chromatin domains (depleted of histone modifications, p=6.7x10-31), and
depleted in the transcription start sites (p=4.9x10-12), as defined by
the ENCODE consortium. This may be reflective of the differences in DNA
accessibility or the mechanisms of repair in these distinct regions of
the genome. The analysis was performed using the PipeDuct computational
package, which was developed to align the sequencing reads and provide
general statistics and quality control information of Ad-Seq data. Ad-Seq
is therefore a novel, unbiased method to map DNA-adducts and study in
vivo the genome-wide specificity of their formation and repair.


