Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 inhibition with Galiellalactone effectively targets the
prostate cancer stem-like cell population.


Introduction and objectives Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) represent a
small subpopulation of largely quiescent cells that reside within tumors.
Several studies have demonstrated that this small population is more
resistant to current therapies and is therefore directly responsible for
tumor recurrence. The transcription factor STAT3 has been recently
related to the regulation of the stem cell niche in prostate cancer
(PCa), and inhibition of activated STAT3 (pSTAT3) seems to be a valid
strategy to selectively target PCa CSCs. We have previously shown that
pSTAT3 blockade by Galielallactone (GL) not only reduces proliferation
and induces apoptosis of prostate cancer cells in vitro, but also
inhibits the growth of prostate tumors and the metastatic spread to
regional and distal lymph nodes in vivo. Here we performed experiments
aimed at studying the effect of the inhibitor GL on PCa CSCs, in order to
increase our understanding on this compound as a promising therapeutic
approach for prostate cancer patients.

Materials and methods The expression of stem, basal and luminal cell
surface markers (CD133/CD44/CD24) was analyzed by FACS on DU145 and PC3
cells treated with GL. DU145 cells were sorted based on expression of the
above markers and then plated for further analysis, including expression
of pSTAT3 by IHC and cell proliferation by the WST1 assay. The effect of
GL on clonogenic recovery of PCa CSCs was studied by colony formation
with sorted cells.

Results Our results show that the CSC populations (CD133+/CD44+) express
high levels of activated pSTAT3 compared to the CD44+/CD24+ cell
population. Treatment with GL decreased the number of CSCs in DU145 cells
after 48h, whilst the number of CD44+/CD24+ cells was less affected.
Importantly, treatment with GL had no effect on CD133+/CD44+ or
CD44+/CD24+ populations in PC3 cells, which donâ€™t express pSTAT3. Of
note, both CD133+/CD44+ and CD44+/CD24+ cells responded to treatment with
GL, as proliferation decreased in a dose-dependent manner. Treatment with
GL significantly reduced the ability of CSCs to form colonies in a
concentration-dependent manner.

Conclusion This study demonstrates that the STAT3 inhibitor
Galiellalactone can specifically target the prostate cancer stem-like
cell population in vitro, implying that pSTAT3 inhibition by GL could
represent a valid therapeutic strategy to antagonize CSCs in human
prostate cancer. Future experiments will be aimed at validating these
data and relating the clonogenic inhibition to the effects of pSTAT3
blockade by GL on tumor initiation by prostate cancer stem-like cells in
vivo.


