Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD47 promotes ovarian cancer progression by inhibiting macrophage
phagocytosis.


CD47 is highly expressed in many malignant diseases including ovarian
cancer, and renders malignant cells resistant to phagocytosis by
macrophages. Anti-CD47 mAbs have shown anti-cancer effects in several
types of cancers. However, it remains controversial whether anti-CD47
mAbs promote phagocytosis by the inhibition of CD47 function or by
CD47-SIRPα independent opsonization. We tried to provide more evidence
in our study by knocking down CD47. CD47 expression of 93 patients was
tested by flow-cytometry. We confirmed a positive correlation between
high CD47 levels and poor clinical characteristics, such as poorly
differentiated and advanced FIGO stages. A cohort of 29 FIGO stage III-IV
patients with poorly differentiated serous adenocarcinoma were followed
up for 50 months. Median survival for CD47 high patients was 19 months,
while for CD47 low patients was 43months, p=0.0435. To further evaluate
the mechanism of CD47 in phagocytosis, CD47 expression on SK-OV-3 cell
was knocked down using shRNA. No change in tumor cell viability,
proliferation, and migration was observed. Macrophage phagocytosis index
increased from 10.2% to 43.9% in vitro. In xenograph experiments, average
tumor number decreased from 75.6 to 50.4 and the animals also experienced
significantly longer survival (p=0.0017). Similar sets of experiments
were done using an anti-CD47 mAb B6H12 clone while adopting both control
IgG and anti-HLA ABC as control antibodies. Consistent with the results
from the knockdown experiments, anti-CD47 mAb treatment led to an
increase in macrophage phagocytosis index in vitro of both SK-OV-3 cells
(from 8% and 9.4% to 37.1%) and primary cancer cells (from 5.6% and 7.4%
to 35.1%). In vivo xenograft experiments also showed increased macrophage
infiltration (6.5% compared to 1.5% in control group). In five different
ovarian cancer cell lines, we found that CD113+ tumor initiating cells
(TICs) expressed higher levels of CD47 compared to CD133- cancer cells.
Tumorigenic capabilities of TICs were confirmed by colony-forming assay
and ALDEFLUOR assay. Upon anti-CD47 mAb treatment, macrophage
phagocytosis of TICs was enhanced significantly in vitro (phagocytosis
index increased from 10% and 12.7% to 47.3%). In conclusion, CD47
inhibits macrophage phagocytosis of both ovarian cancer cells and TICs.
Downregulation of CD47 or inhibition by mAb was able to reverse this
effect, and it may involve Fc independent mechanism. Thus, CD47 antibody
therapy may be a promising strategy for not only eliminating tumor cells
but also preventing cancer relapse triggered by TICs, benefiting the
patients’ short-term and long-term prognoses.


