Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SWI/SNF aberrations sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to DNA
crosslinking agents.


While gemcitabine has been the mainstay therapy for advanced pancreatic
cancer, newer combination regimens (e.g. FOLFIRINOX) have extended
patient survival, though carry greater toxicity. Biomarkers are needed to
better stratify patients for appropriate therapy. Previously, we reported
that one-third of pancreatic cancers harbor deletions or deleterious
mutations in key subunits of the SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable (SWI/SNF)
chromatin remodeling complex. The SWI/SNF complex mobilizes nucleosomes
on DNA, and plays a key role in modulating DNA transcription and repair.
Thus, we hypothesized that pancreatic cancers with SWI/SNF aberrations
might exhibit compromised DNA repair, and show increased sensitivity to
DNA damaging agents. Here, we studied pancreatic cancer cell lines with
deficient (or else exogenously reconstituted) SWI/SNF subunits, as well
as normal pancreatic epithelial cells (HPDE) following SWI/SNF subunit
knockdown. Cells were challenged with DNA damaging agents, including
those used in current combination regimens, and then cell viability
assayed. We found that pancreatic cells with SWI/SNF dysfunction showed
markedly increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, and in particular
DNA crosslinking agents (cisplatin and oxaliplatin). Assaying clearance
of Î³H2AX foci confirmed that SWI/SNF dysfunction impaired DNA damage
response/repair. Finally, by analyzing pancreatic cancer patient data
(TCGA), we found that pancreatic cancers with SWI/SNF deficiency (subunit
mutation and/or decreased expression) showed a strong trend towards
extended survival with platinum containing chemo regimens. Thus, SWI/SNF
dysfunction sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to DNA crosslinking
agents, and SWI/SNF mutation status may provide a useful biomarker to
predict which patients are likely to benefit from platinum-containing
chemotherapy regimens.


