Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of six human colorectal cancer cell lines:
identification of genes that have metastatic potential.


A number of genes have been studied in accordance with their metastatic
potential. Nevertheless, widely used metastatic colorectal cancer cell
lines such as SW-620 or IS3 only show the influence of metastatic genes
within limited mutational landscape. Here, three pairs of primary CRC
(SNU-2335A, SNU-2335D, SNU-2404A, SNU-2404B, SNU-2414A, and SNU-2414B)
and corresponding metastasis cell lines were established and analyzed by
whole exome sequencing and microarray.

Three pairs of primary CRC (SNU-2335A, SNU-2404A, and SNU-2414A) and
corresponding matched metastasis cell lines (SNU-2335D, SNU-2404B, and
SNU-2414B) were analyzed for gene expression by microarray and whole
exome sequencing. Selected target genes from microarray were analyzed
again by real-time PCR in order to confirm the mRNA expression level in
the paired CRC cell lines.

The genes selected for examination were calponin 3, acidic (CNN3); sorbin
and SH3 domain containing 1(SORBS1); epithelial stromal interaction 1
(EPSTI1); bone marrow stromal cell antigen 2(BST2); kelch-like 5 (KLHL5);
trypsinogen C (TRY6); and synaptotagmin-like 5 (SYTL5). We calculated the
intersection of all three metastatic CRC cell lines. Five genes (BST2,
SORBS1, CNN3, EPSTI1, and KLHL5) were up-regulated in metastatic cell
lines compared to primary cell lines. Two genes (TRY6 and SYTL5) were
down-regulated in metastatic cell lines compared to primary cell lines.
Then, we ranked 15 genes that were up-regulated and 15 genes that were
down-regulated in omental metastasis regardless of the 2-folds threshold.
Of the 30 genes that were differently expressed, we selected three genes
(CNN3, SORBS1, and TRY6) that showed the highest fold changes and are
found in 2-fold change analysis.

We identified 7 genes that were differently expressed in metastatic CRC
cell lines compared to primary CRC cell lines. These genes may serve as
diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for patients with metastatic
CRC.


