Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel antibody-drug conjugates targeting ADAM9-expressing solid
tumors demonstrate potent preclinical activity.


ADAM9, also known as MDC9 or meltrin-Î³, is a member of the ADAM (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family of proteases, which have been
implicated in cytokine and growth factor shedding, and cell migration.
Dysregulation of ADAM9 has been implicated in tumor progression and
metastasis, as well as pathological neovascularization. ADAM9
overexpression has been shown to correlate with poor prognosis in
prostate, renal, and pancreatic cancers. Using an immunization approach
in which antibodies were raised to fetal progenitor and stem-like cancer
cell lines followed by screening on tumor and normal tissues, we
identified ADAM9 as a promising cell surface tumor target. FFPE-IHC
expression analysis revealed that ADAM9 is overexpressed in multiple
solid tumor indications relative to corresponding normal tissues. The
overexpression of ADAM9 in tumors coupled with its restricted expression
in normal tissues make ADAM9 an attractive target for antibody-drug
conjugate (ADC) therapy.

Here, we describe two ADCs both of which are based on a high affinity
anti-ADAM9 antibody to selectively target ADAM9-expressing tumors. The
first ADC utilizes the maytansine-derived microtubule disruptor, DM4,
linked via a hindered disulfide hydrophilic linker (sulfo-SPDB). The
second ADC exploits an ultra-potent DNA alkylating payload, DGN549, which
is conjugated to two engineered cysteines via a peptide linker. Both
conjugates bound with similar subnanomolar affinity to ADAM9-expressing
cells. In vitro cytotoxicity studies showed that anti-ADAM9 ADCs can kill
a broad panel of ADAM9-positve tumor cell lines, including lung,
pancreatic, renal, prostate, and colon tumor cell lines. In particular,
the anti-ADAM9-DGN549 conjugate was extremely potent with IC50 values
ranging from 0.1 to 65 pM and was at least 2 logs more active than a
non-targeting conjugate. Surprisingly, efficient in vitro cytotoxicity
was observed at ADAM9 expression levels as low as a few thousand cell
surface receptors per cell.

Consistent with their in vitro activity, both anti-ADAM9 ADCs displayed
compelling anti-tumor activity in xenograft models. In a CaLu3 non-small
cell lung cancer xenograft model, anti-ADAM9-DM4 induced tumor growth
delay at a single 1.25 mg Ab/kg dose. In the same model, a single
intravenous dose of 0.25 mg Ab/kg of the anti-ADAM9-DGN549 produced
durable complete remissions in 8/8 mice. A non-targeting DGN549 ADC was
inactive even when dosed at 10 times that of the anti-ADAM9 ADC,
demonstrating that targeted delivery of DGN549 through ADAM9 binding is
required for activity.

These data demonstrate that anti-ADAM9 ADCs exhibit antitumor activity
against a broad panel of ADAM9-positive malignancies and cause durable
remissions in preclinical models at doses expected to be clinically
achievable. Anti-ADAM9 ADCs represent a promising therapeutic strategy to
target a wide range of ADAM9-expressing tumors.


