Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ablation of caspase-7 promotes solar-simulated light-induced mouse
skin carcinogenesis through upregulation of keratin-17.


Solar UV irradiation is an environmental carcinogen that causes skin
cancer. Caspase-7 is expressed at reduced levels in many cancers. The
present study was designed to examine the role of caspase-7 in
solar-simulated light (SSL)-induced skin cancerr and to elucidate its
underlying molecular mechanisms. Our study revealed that mice with
genetic ablation of caspase-7 are significantly susceptible to
SSL-induced skin carcinogenesis. Epidermal hyperplasia, tumor volume and
tumor numbers were increased in caspase-7 knockout (KO) mice compared
with SKH1 wild-type mice irradiated with SSL. The expression of cell
proliferation biomarkers, such as survivin and Ki-67, was elevated in
SSL-irradiated skin of caspase-7 KO mice compared with those observed in
SSL-exposed wild-type SKH1 mouse skin. Moreover, SSL-induced apoptosis
was abolished in skin from caspase-7 KO mice. 2-DE gel electrophoresis,
followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight
analysis of skin tissue lysates from SSL-irradiated SKH1 wild-type and
caspase-7 KO mice revealed an aberrant induction of keratin-17 in
caspase-7 KO mice. Immunohistochemical analysis of skin tumors also
showed an increase of keratin-17 expression in caspase-7 KO mice compared
with SKH1 wild-type mice. Furthermore the expression of keratin-17 was
also elevated in SSL-irradiated caspase-7 KO keratinocytes as well as in
human basal cell carcinomas. The in vitro caspase activity assay showed
keratin-17 as a substrate of caspase-7, but not caspase-3. Overall, our
study suggests that genetic loss of caspase-7 promotes SSL-induced skin
carcinogenesis by blocking caspase-7-mediated cleavage of keratin-17.


