Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The breast cancer gene CCDC170 regulates the Golgi-associated
microtubule network and directional cell migration.


Background: Breast cancer (BCa) is a genetically heterogeneous disease
and many genes contributing to BCa risk remain to be identified.
Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) and subsequent fine-mapping
studies (>50) have strongly implicated genetic alterations at the
CCDC170/C6ORF97-ESR1 locus (6q25.1) as being associated with the risk of
BCa. ESR1, encoding the estrogen receptor, might be a more obvious
candidate for influencing risk. Surprisingly, our analysis using
genome-wide differential allele-specific expression (DASE), an indicator
for BCa susceptibility, suggested that the genetic alterations of
CCDC170, but not ESR1, accounts for GWAS-associated BCa risk at this
locus. CCDC170 is a coiled-coiled domain-containing protein of poorly
understood function. BCa-specific truncation and missense mutations in
CCDC170 also have been detected, with the truncations being implicated in
driving Luminal B subtype BCa. Together these findings demonstrate that
the CCDC170 gene is involved in BCa, but the underlying molecular
mechanisms for its role in tumorigenesis are unknown.

Experimental designs and results: By using the approaches of confocal
microscopy and cell imaging analysis, here we report for the first time
that CCDC170 is associated with the Golgi apparatus and perinuclear
microtubules (MTs), and support a role for CCDC170 in the
Golgi-associated microtubule network. We have shown that overexpression
of CCDC170 triggers Golgi reorganization and stabilizes Golgi-associated
MTs, accompanied by dramatically increased acetylation of Î±-tubulin that
is driven by the acetyltransferase ATAT1. The Golgi-associated MT network
has been proposed to regulate cell polarity and migration. In support of
this concept, we have shown that CRISPR knockout increases, and
overexpression of CCDC170 decreases, BCa directional cell migration in
vitro. We also found that the BCa-specific truncations result in
mislocalization of CCDC170 and/or diminished stability of
Golgi-associated MTs. Lastly, we identified candidate CCDC170 functional
binding partners (e.g. MAP4) that are consistent with its localization
and proposed function. These partners may serve to mediate the
acetylation and stabilization of MTs.

Conclusions: Taken together, our findings demonstrate that CCDC170 plays
an essential role in Golgi-associated MT organization and stabilization,
and provide a mechanism for how perturbations in CCDC170 could alter
Golgi-mediated cell polarity, and thereby drive BCa and other
abnormalities. This work was partially supported by the Susan G. Komen
for the Cure (KG100274), NCI (CA186853), and Eileen Stein Jacoby Fund.


