Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of microRNA-137 enhances ASCT2 expression and
tumor glutamine metabolism.


Cancer cells amplify the expression of ASC amino acid transporter 2
(ASCT2, also called SLC1A5), a high-affinity glutamine carrier protein,
to coordinate metabolic reprogramming and malignant transformation. Yet
genetic and/or epigenetic mechanisms underlying the control of
ASCT2-mediated glutamine metabolism remain to be clarified. Combined
in-silico algorithms with systemic experimental screening, we herein
identify the tumor suppressor miR-137 as an essential regulator that
targets ASCT2 mRNA and cancer cell glutamine metabolism. Metabolic
analysis shows that miR-137 derepression, similar to ASCT2 inactivation,
significantly inhibits glutamine consumption and TCA cycle anaplerosis.
Mechanistically, methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) and DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) cooperate to promote active methylation of the
miR-137 promoter and its decreased transcription, which conversely
enhances ASCT2 expression and glutamine metabolism. As such, expression
between miR-137 and ASCT2 is inversely correlated in multiple human
cancer types, including colorectal carcinomas, glioblastomas, prostate
and pancreatic cancers. These findings thus elucidate a universal
mechanism responsible for ASCT2 deregulation in human cancers, revealing
a molecular link between miR-137, ASCT2 and tumor metabolism.


