Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-450a suppresses adhesion but promotes invasion through
targeting of TMEM182 in oral squamous cell carcinoma.


Our microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures of oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) revealed that miR-450a was significantly increased in
cancer tissues compared with normal epithelium. In this study, we focused
on the functional significance of miR-450a in cancer cells and
identification of miR-450a-regulated novel targets in OSCC.
Overexpression of miR-450a in DOK and SAS cells showed significant
inhibition of cell adhesion and induction of cell invasiveness,
suggesting that miR-450a functions as an onco-miRNA. We performed
genome-wide gene expression analysis to search for miR-450a-regulated
molecular targets. Gene expression data and luciferase reporter assays
revealed that TMEM182 was directly targeted by miR-450a. The
miR-450a-reduced cellular adhesion was blocked by TMEM182 restoration,
suggesting that miR-450a exhibits its oncogenic activity through
negatively regulating TMEM182 level. Furthermore, miR-450a expression
could be induced by the cytokine TNF-α primarily through activating
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway. ERK
inhibitor prevented the TNF-α-induced miR-450a expression and enhanced
adhesion ability. Taken together, these data indicate that
TNF-α/ERK-dependent expression of miR-450a plays an important role in
mediating cellular adhesion and invasiveness, and scavenging miR-450a
function using antagomir may have therapeutic potential for the treatment
of OSCC. (The study was supported by the following grants: MOST
103-2320-B-006-036-MY3 and MOST 105-2325-B-400-001 from the Ministry of
Science and Technology of Taiwan, ROC)


