Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ISG15 knockdown inhibits growth of pancreatic cancer.


Background: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease
driven by mutated KRAS with an average survival of only 3-6 months from
the time of diagnosis. Interferon-Stimulated Gene 15 (ISG15) is a 15 kDa
protein induced by Type I interferons (IFN-α and IFN-β) and is a member
of the ubiquitin-like superfamily of proteins. The ISG15 pathway is
highly elevated in various malignancies where it has been shown to
stabilize KRAS protein expression. However, very little is known about
the role of the ISG15 pathway in PDAC. The purpose of this project is to
investigate the expression and proliferative effects of the ISG15 pathway
in PDAC.

Methods: The ISG15 knockdown cells were created using the CRISPR
(Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) gene editing
system. ISG15 was stably knocked-down in murine Panc02 pancreatic cancer
cells by transfection with an ISG15 CRISPR construct from Genscript
(pSpCas9 BB-2A-Puro (PX459)) and treated with media containing puromycin
(2 μg/ml) for selection. Knockdown was confirmed by RT-PCR. The effect
of ISG15 knockdown on PDAC cell growth in vitro was determined by
comparing viable cell counts on wild-type and ISG15 knockdown Panc02
cells 48 hours after plating. The effect of ISG15 knockdown on pancreatic
tumorigenesis was determined by subcutaneous inoculation of syngeneic
immune competent C57BL/6 mice with 1x106 Panc02 wild-type or ISG15
knockdown cells. Tumor volumes were measured weekly and after 3 weeks the
mice were euthanized, tumors dissected and weighed.

Results: ISG15 CRISPR treated cells had a 50% reduction in ISG15 mRNA
expression as compared to wild-type cells. ISG15 knockdown in Panc02 PDAC
cells significantly reduced cell growth as compared to wild-type cells
(p=0.030). Tumors formed from ISG15 knockdown Panc02 cells significantly
had a 74% reduction in tumor volume (p=0.031) and 78% reduction in tumor
weight (p=0.029) as compared to wild-type cells.

Conclusion: The ISG15 pathway contributes to PDAC by increasing cell
growth and the tumorigenic potential of pancreatic cancer cells.
Ultimately, strategies to target the ISG15 pathway may lead to improved
survival for patients diagnosed with PDAC.

Supported by: NIH T32CA00968 grant


