Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering adoptive T cell therapy for efficacy in ovarian cancer.


Over 20,000 women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer annually - more than
half will die within 5 years and this rate has changed very little in the
last 20 years, highlighting the need for innovative therapies. One
promising new treatment strategy has the potential to control tumor
growth without toxicity to healthy tissues, by employing immune T cells
engineered to target proteins uniquely overexpressed in tumors. Recent
technological advances have helped identify and validate Wilmsâ€™ Tumor
Antigen 1 (WT1) and mesothelin (MSLN) as valid antigen targets for
ovarian cancer, as these proteins contribute to malignant and invasive
phenotypes and have limited expression in healthy cells. In preclinical
studies using either patient-derived cell lines or the mouse ID8 ovarian
tumor model, we found that T cells engineered to express either a WT1- or
MSLN- specific high-affinity T cell receptor (TCR) can kill human and
murine ovarian tumor cells in vitro. Moreover, in a disseminated in vivo
murine model, adoptively transferred TCR-engineered T cells
preferentially accumulated within established ID8 tumors, delayed ovarian
tumor growth and prolonged mouse survival. However, our data also
revealed that the tumor microenvironment (TME) can limit engineered T
cell persistence and killing capacity. Cellular and molecular analyses
showed human therapy will face similar TME-mediated obstacles. The
ovarian cancer TME is a nutrient- and oxygen-deprived milieu, and
adaptive metabolic responses by infiltrating T cells have protean effects
on T cell function. Thus, strategies that modulate T cell metabolic
pathways, and thereby influence activity in the TME, might enhance T cell
function and improve anti-tumor efficacy by overcoming a critical
component of immune evasion by solid tumors. Ongoing studies will be
discussed that are exploring strategies to overcome elements common to
the human and murine TME, including direct modulation of the environment
and T cell engineering to promote T cell survival and function.


