Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel function of HGF in the activation of Chk1 phosphorylation
in colon cancer cells.


ATR/Chk1 pathway plays an essential role in modulation of DNA damage
response (DDR) and homologous recombination (HR). Particularly, Chk1
phosphorylation is involved in cancer prognosis and therapeutic
resistance. Although some receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) participate in
the regulation of Chk1 phosphorylation, the effect of hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) on Chk1 phosphorylation is unknown. In the present study,
Western blotting and subcellular fractionation were performed to identify
the expression and the location of Chk1 phosphorylation in the presence
of HGF. With small interfering RNA transfections, co-immunoprecipitations
were performed to detect the interaction between TopBP1 and ATR complex.
Our results demonstrated that HGF moderately activated Chk1
phosphorylation in colon cancer cells via upregulation of TopBP1, RAD51,
and complex formation of TopBP1 and ATR. Furthermore, AKT activation
promoted by HGF served as an important intermediator linking HGF/MET
signaling and Chk1 phosphorylation. Depletion of AKT activity attenuated
expression of basal line p-Chk1 and induced Chk1 activation due to HGF
stimulation. Meantime, activation of AKT directly regulated expression of
TopBP1 and RAD51. Suppression of AKT restored HGF-induced upregulation of
TopBP1, RAD51, and enhancement of TopBP1/ATR complex as well. Our studies
showed that HGF was implicated in regulating Chk1 phosphorylation and
further demonstrated that AKT activity was responsible for HGF-induced
Chk1 phosphorylation, which might potentially result in management of
prognosis and therapeutic sensitivity in cancer therapy.


