Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of new rexinoids for lung cancer.


Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer deaths around the world.
It is estimated that there will be over 150,000 deaths in the United
States alone from this disease every year. With no significant
improvement in 5 year survival rates over the past 30 years, effective
prevention or early intervention is a promising approach to reduce the
high mortality of lung cancer. Rexinoids are selective ligands for
retinoid X receptors (RXR), which regulate the expression of a wide
variety of genes. As transcription factors, rexinoids play important
roles in proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, which are highly
relevant in cancer. Bexarotene is the only synthetic rexinoid that has
been approved by the FDA and is used for the treatment of refractory
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. It has also been tested in various clinical
trials for lung cancer and breast cancer. However, Bexarotene is not
potent or selective enough for RXRs, causing limited efficacy and
unacceptable toxicities. Therefore, we synthesized a series of new
rexinoids and screened them for their ability to inhibit nitric oxide
(NO) production in RAW264.7 macrophage-like cells stimulated with LPS.
Several of these compounds inhibited NO production at nanomolar
concentrations. Based on this screening and other in vitro assays, two
new rexinoids were chosen for in vivo testing. Female A/J mice were
injected i.p. with vinyl carbamate (16 mg/kg). One week later, the mice
were fed control diet or rexinoids in diet (40-80 mg/kg diet) for 16
weeks. Tumor number, size and histopathology were then evaluated. All of
the rexinoids reduced the number and size of the lung tumors. However,
Bexarotene only reduced the average number of tumors by 8-17%, while a
new pyrimidine-analog of Bexarotene—henceforth,
pyrimidine-Bexarotene—reduced the number of tumors by 24-28%. The
average tumor burden on lung sections was also reduced by
pyrimidine-Bexarotene by 59% compared to the controls (from 0.47 ± 0.19
mm3 in the control group to 0.19 ± 0.05 mm3 in the treated group). In
contrast, average tumor burden was 0.35 ± 0.08 mm3 in the group treated
with Bexarotene, a reduction of 26%. Notably, the percentage of high
grade tumors (both histological and nuclear characteristics) were
significantly (pLung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer deaths
around the world. It is estimated that there will be over 150,000 deaths
in the United States alone from this disease every year. With no
significant improvement in 5 year survival rates over the past 30 years,
effective prevention or early intervention is a promising approach to
reduce the high mortality of lung cancer. Rexinoids are selective ligands
for retinoid X receptors (RXR), which regulate the expression of a wide
variety of genes. As transcription factors, rexinoids play important
roles in proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, which are highly
relevant in cancer. Bexarotene is the only synthetic rexinoid that has
been approved by the FDA and is used for the treatment of refractory
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. It has also been tested in various clinical
trials for lung cancer and breast cancer. However, Bexarotene is not
potent or selective enough for RXRs, causing limited efficacy and
unacceptable toxicities. Therefore, we synthesized a series of new
rexinoids and screened them for their ability to inhibit nitric oxide
(NO) production in RAW264.7 macrophage-like cells stimulated with LPS.
Several of these compounds inhibited NO production at nanomolar
concentrations. Based on this screening and other in vitro assays, two
new rexinoids were chosen for in vivo testing. Female A/J mice were
injected i.p. with vinyl carbamate (16 mg/kg). One week later, the mice
were fed control diet or rexinoids in diet (40-80 mg/kg diet) for 16
weeks. Tumor number, size and histopathology were then evaluated. All of
the rexinoids reduced the number and size of the lung tumors. However,
Bexarotene only reduced the average number of tumors by 8-17%, while a
new pyrimidine-analog of Bexarotene—henceforth,
pyrimidine-Bexarotene—reduced the number of tumors by 24-28%. The
average tumor burden on lung sections was also reduced by
pyrimidine-Bexarotene by 59% compared to the controls (from 0.47 ± 0.19
mm3 in the control group to 0.19 ± 0.05 mm3 in the treated group). In
contrast, average tumor burden was 0.35 ± 0.08 mm3 in the group treated
with Bexarotene, a reduction of 26%. Notably, the percentage of high
grade tumors (both histological and nuclear characteristics) were
significantly (p<0.05) higher in the mice fed Bexarotene (63%) than in
the control group (38%), while the percentage of high grade tumors was
only 34% in the pyrimidine-Bexarotene group. Since a major side effect of
rexinoids is an elevation in triglyceride levels, we measured total
triclycerides in both liver and plasma. Pyrimidine-Bexarotene reduced
triclyceride levels in the liver (7.17 ug/kg tissue) compared to
Bexarotene (8.23 ug/kg tissue) and plasma (3.6mg/ml vs. 4.8mg/ml,
respectively; pLung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer deaths
around the world. It is estimated that there will be over 150,000 deaths
in the United States alone from this disease every year. With no
significant improvement in 5 year survival rates over the past 30 years,
effective prevention or early intervention is a promising approach to
reduce the high mortality of lung cancer. Rexinoids are selective ligands
for retinoid X receptors (RXR), which regulate the expression of a wide
variety of genes. As transcription factors, rexinoids play important
roles in proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, which are highly
relevant in cancer. Bexarotene is the only synthetic rexinoid that has
been approved by the FDA and is used for the treatment of refractory
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. It has also been tested in various clinical
trials for lung cancer and breast cancer. However, Bexarotene is not
potent or selective enough for RXRs, causing limited efficacy and
unacceptable toxicities. Therefore, we synthesized a series of new
rexinoids and screened them for their ability to inhibit nitric oxide
(NO) production in RAW264.7 macrophage-like cells stimulated with LPS.
Several of these compounds inhibited NO production at nanomolar
concentrations. Based on this screening and other in vitro assays, two
new rexinoids were chosen for in vivo testing. Female A/J mice were
injected i.p. with vinyl carbamate (16 mg/kg). One week later, the mice
were fed control diet or rexinoids in diet (40-80 mg/kg diet) for 16
weeks. Tumor number, size and histopathology were then evaluated. All of
the rexinoids reduced the number and size of the lung tumors. However,
Bexarotene only reduced the average number of tumors by 8-17%, while a
new pyrimidine-analog of Bexarotene—henceforth,
pyrimidine-Bexarotene—reduced the number of tumors by 24-28%. The
average tumor burden on lung sections was also reduced by
pyrimidine-Bexarotene by 59% compared to the controls (from 0.47 ± 0.19
mm3 in the control group to 0.19 ± 0.05 mm3 in the treated group). In
contrast, average tumor burden was 0.35 ± 0.08 mm3 in the group treated
with Bexarotene, a reduction of 26%. Notably, the percentage of high
grade tumors (both histological and nuclear characteristics) were
significantly (p<0.05) higher in the mice fed Bexarotene (63%) than in
the control group (38%), while the percentage of high grade tumors was
only 34% in the pyrimidine-Bexarotene group. Since a major side effect of
rexinoids is an elevation in triglyceride levels, we measured total
triclycerides in both liver and plasma. Pyrimidine-Bexarotene reduced
triclyceride levels in the liver (7.17 ug/kg tissue) compared to
Bexarotene (8.23 ug/kg tissue) and plasma (3.6mg/ml vs. 4.8mg/ml,
respectively; p<0.05). These studies suggest that new rexinoids can be
synthesized that are superior to Bexarotene for prevention of lung
cancer. Additional synthesis and testing of new rexinoids will be
performed to further enhance the potency and selectivity of this
promising class of drugs.


