Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of early lung cancer miRNA biomarkers using qRT-PCR
and novel label-free nanoarray technology.


Whereas over 75% of lung cancer patients are diagnosed at an advanced or
metastatic stage and their 5-year survival rate is Whereas over 75% of
lung cancer patients are diagnosed at an advanced or metastatic stage and
their 5-year survival rate is <5%, patients diagnosed at an early stage,
Stage I, have ~70% 5-year survival rate. In the present study, Stage I
lung cancer miRNA biomarkers were identified using qRT-PCR and novel
label-free facile nanoarray technology for early lung cancer detection.
Total RNA from human A549 lung and ACHN kidney cancer cell lysates and
media were isolated and qRT-PCR/Taqman® analyses (two-step RT-PCR) were
carried out for 8 miRNA lung cancer biomarker candidates. The 8 miRNA
levels were normalized by the miR16 level (no change reported in lung
cancer). Ratios of miR486/miR16 and miR29c/miR16 increased ~10-fold in
A549 lung cancer cell lysates and media compared with those in ACHN
kidney cells. Total RNA fractions were isolated from 11 healthy subjects,
21 Stage I and 19 Stage II/III adenocarcinoma and 5 squamous lung cancer
patients and levels of the 8 miRNAs were measured by qRT-PCR/Taqman®
analysis (in total, 1,026 analyses) and normalized by the miR16 level.
miR486 levels were up-regulated (p=0.02) and miR203 (p=0.0005) and miR205
(p=0.041) levels were down-regulated in Stages I and II/III
adenocarcinoma. Whereas miR122 and miR29c were not detected in serum
samples from the majority of healthy subjects, the miRNAs were expressed
in 82% and 71%, respectively, of Stage I and 90% and 100%, respectively,
of Stages II/III lung cancer patients. A novel label-free facile 90 nm
(diameter) miRNA nanowell technology was developed. Electrochemical
analyses of the early lung cancer biomarker candidates, miR486 and
miR29c, and, an internal control, miR16, were carried out using various
concentrations of miRNA standards (0 to 100 fM) with biotinylated cDNA
captured by streptavidin coated on the nanogold surface. The Nyquist
plots showed a dose-dependent increase in impedance (-Z” kohm) and
sensitivity of the miRNA nanowell electrochemical technology was ≤1 fM.
The impedance level obtained with miR29c in A549 lung cancer cell media
was ~2.8-fold higher (mean value ± SD, 163.9 ± 32.8 kohm) compared with
ACHN kidney cancer cell media (60.8 ± 33.1 kohm) by 90 nm nanowell
analysis (p=0.000019). Electrochemical analyses of a serum sample
obtained from a lung cancer patient revealed that miR486 and miR29c
levels were ~2-fold (p=0.0031) and 9-fold (p=0.0006) higher,
respectively, compared to the pooled human control sera. This result
agreed with the result obtained by qRT-PCR/Taqman® analysis of human
serum samples. Our results suggest that miR486 and miR203 levels up- and
down-regulated, respectively, in lung cancer serum samples are biomarkers
for early (Stage I) lung cancer diagnosis. Supported by NCI SBIR Phase I
contract, N261201500040C (Topic 337).


