Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GPC2 is an oncogene and immunotherapeutic target in high-risk
neuroblastoma.


Background: GD2-directed immunotherapeutic strategies have improved
outcomes in neuroblastoma; however, the majority of patients treated
suffer relapse and GD2 expression on pain fibers causes dose-limiting
toxicities.

Methods: To identify alternative cell surface immunotherapeutic targets,
we compared high-risk neuroblastoma (n=126 tumors) and normal tissue RNA
sequencing data (GTEx; n=7859 samples from 31 normal tissues) and
prioritized genes by differential and absolute expression and cell
surface prediction. Genes were further surveyed for somatic copy number
gain and correlative expression with MYCN amplification. Differential
protein expression and localization were confirmed in neuroblastoma
primary tumors (n=98), patient-derived xenografts (n=32; PDXs), cell
lines (n=23), and normal pediatric tissues (n=36). Cell lines were
subjected to candidate gene gain and loss of function studies (n=11).
Additional pediatric tumor RNA sequencing data was surveyed followed by
confirmatory immunohistochemistry (IHC). Finally, candidate specific
antibodies were isolated from a human Fab phage library and utilized for
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) engineering followed by cytotoxicity
studies.

Results: We identified 33 differentially expressed cell surface molecules
from which we prioritized glypican-2 (GPC2) for validation given GPC2’s
robust differential expression (log-fold change tumor vs. normal tissue =
1.71-9.22; p=1.99 x 10-9-1.88 x10-300), high-level absolute RNA
expression (median FPKM=60), and frequent DNA copy number gain associated
with higher GPC2 expression (35%, n=182 tumors; pResults: We identified
33 differentially expressed cell surface molecules from which we
prioritized glypican-2 (GPC2) for validation given GPC2’s robust
differential expression (log-fold change tumor vs. normal tissue =
1.71-9.22; p=1.99 x 10-9-1.88 x10-300), high-level absolute RNA
expression (median FPKM=60), and frequent DNA copy number gain associated
with higher GPC2 expression (35%, n=182 tumors; p<0.005). GPC2 expression
was also higher in MYCN amplified neuroblastomas (pResults: We identified
33 differentially expressed cell surface molecules from which we
prioritized glypican-2 (GPC2) for validation given GPC2’s robust
differential expression (log-fold change tumor vs. normal tissue =
1.71-9.22; p=1.99 x 10-9-1.88 x10-300), high-level absolute RNA
expression (median FPKM=60), and frequent DNA copy number gain associated
with higher GPC2 expression (35%, n=182 tumors; p<0.005). GPC2 expression
was also higher in MYCN amplified neuroblastomas (p<0.05), MYCN binds the
GPC2 promoter shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing
and reporter assays, and MYCN depletion resulted in decreased GPC2
expression. Immunoblot, flow cytometry, immunofluorescence, and IHC
analysis of primary tumors, PDXs, and cell lines confirmed dense cell
surface GPC2 expression. Medulloblastomas (n=62) were also found to have
high GPC2 expression that positively correlated with MYC, MYCN, and GPC2
loci gain (pResults: We identified 33 differentially expressed cell
surface molecules from which we prioritized glypican-2 (GPC2) for
validation given GPC2’s robust differential expression (log-fold change
tumor vs. normal tissue = 1.71-9.22; p=1.99 x 10-9-1.88 x10-300),
high-level absolute RNA expression (median FPKM=60), and frequent DNA
copy number gain associated with higher GPC2 expression (35%, n=182
tumors; p<0.005). GPC2 expression was also higher in MYCN amplified
neuroblastomas (p<0.05), MYCN binds the GPC2 promoter shown by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing and reporter assays, and MYCN
depletion resulted in decreased GPC2 expression. Immunoblot, flow
cytometry, immunofluorescence, and IHC analysis of primary tumors, PDXs,
and cell lines confirmed dense cell surface GPC2 expression.
Medulloblastomas (n=62) were also found to have high GPC2 expression that
positively correlated with MYC, MYCN, and GPC2 loci gain (p<0.0001).
Pediatric normal tissues had very restricted cell surface GPC2
expression, with only low levels found in the esophagus and skin. GPC2
depletion in neuroblastoma cell lines resulted in apoptosis and growth
inhibition and GPC2 forced over-expression increased neuroblastoma cell
proliferation (pResults: We identified 33 differentially expressed cell
surface molecules from which we prioritized glypican-2 (GPC2) for
validation given GPC2’s robust differential expression (log-fold change
tumor vs. normal tissue = 1.71-9.22; p=1.99 x 10-9-1.88 x10-300),
high-level absolute RNA expression (median FPKM=60), and frequent DNA
copy number gain associated with higher GPC2 expression (35%, n=182
tumors; p<0.005). GPC2 expression was also higher in MYCN amplified
neuroblastomas (p<0.05), MYCN binds the GPC2 promoter shown by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing and reporter assays, and MYCN
depletion resulted in decreased GPC2 expression. Immunoblot, flow
cytometry, immunofluorescence, and IHC analysis of primary tumors, PDXs,
and cell lines confirmed dense cell surface GPC2 expression.
Medulloblastomas (n=62) were also found to have high GPC2 expression that
positively correlated with MYC, MYCN, and GPC2 loci gain (p<0.0001).
Pediatric normal tissues had very restricted cell surface GPC2
expression, with only low levels found in the esophagus and skin. GPC2
depletion in neuroblastoma cell lines resulted in apoptosis and growth
inhibition and GPC2 forced over-expression increased neuroblastoma cell
proliferation (p<0.001 for all assays). Finally, a human GPC2 antibody,
D3-GPC2-Fab, was developed and shown to bind GPC2 with high affinity and
specificity. D3-GPC2-IgG1 induced internalization of GPC2 and was
conjugated to pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimers to form an ADC which
induced potent and specific cytotoxicity to GPC2 expressing neuroblastoma
cells (IC50 = 1.7-11 pM).

Conclusions: GPC2 is an oncogene and immunotherapeutic target in
neuroblastoma and potentially other cancers.


