Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel and a shared H3.3K27M mutation derived
neoantigen epitope and H3.3K27M specific TCR engineered T cell therapy
for glioma.


Brain cancers are the leading cause of cancer related mortality in
children and young adults with median overall survival of 9-10 months and
hence represents a significant unmet medical need. Genome-wide sequencing
efforts of pediatric gliomas have identified a recurrent and shared
missense mutation in the gene encoding the replication-independent
variant of histone 3, H3.3. Approximately 70% of diffuse intrinsic
pontine gliomas (DIPG) and 50% of thalamic and other midline gliomas
harbor the amino acid substitution from lysine (K) to methionine (M) at
the position 27 of H3.3 gene. Tumor specific missense mutations are not
subjected to self-tolerance and can be suitable targets (neoantigens) for
cancer immunotherapy. Herein, we evaluated whether the H3.3K27M mutation
can induce specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response in HLA-A2+ T
cells. In vitro stimulation of HLA-A2+ donor derived CD8+ T cells with a
synthetic peptide encompassing the H3.3K27M mutation (H3.3K27M epitope)
induced CTL lines which recognized not only T2 cells loaded with the
synthetic H3.3K27M epitope peptide but also lysed the HLA-A2+ DIPG cells
which endogenously harbor the H3.3K27M mutation. On the other hand, the
CTL lines did not react to either HLA-A2+ but H3.3K27M- negative DIPG
cell lines or H3.3K27M positive but HLA-A2 negative DIPG cells. The
H3.3K27M epitope peptide but not the non-mutant counterpart indicated an
excellent binding affinity (Kd 151nM) to HLA-A2 based on competitive
binding inhibition assay. From CTL clones with high and specific
affinities to HLA-A2-H3.3K27M-tetramer, cDNAs for T cell receptor (TCR)
alpha and beta chains were cloned into a retroviral vector. Human HLA-A2+
T cells transduced with the TCR demonstrated antigen specific reactivity
as well as anti-glioma responses in vitro. Peptide titration assays
suggested that the H3.3K27M specific TCR had the half-maximal reactivity
for peptide recognition of around 100nM. Furthermore, critically
important for safety of clinical application, alanine scanning
demonstrated that the key amino acid sequence motif in the epitope of the
TCR reactivity is not shared by any known human protein. Finally,
intravenous administration of T cells transduced with H3.3K27M specific
TCR significantly inhibited the growth of intracranial HLA-A2+ H3.3K27M
positive glioma xenografts in immune deficient NSG mice. These data
provide us with a strong basis for developing peptide based vaccines as
well as adoptive transfer therapy using autologous T cells transduced
with the H3.3K27M specific TCR.

Acknowledgements: This study is supported by the NIH/NINDS
(1RO1NS096954), V Foundation and Parker Institution for Cancer
Immunotherapy.


