Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-proliferative effects of cinnamon extract in colon cancer.


Colon cancer is the third most lethal cancer worldwide, and is estimated
to cause 49,190 cancer-related deaths in the U.S. in 2016 alone. Current
treatments for colon cancer are limited in their capacity to target tumor
cells employing adaptive mechanisms necessary for survival and
proliferation, often resulting in poor prognosis. Therefore, it is
critical to develop novel target-specific therapeutic approaches with
minimal cytotoxicity to normal cells, in order to mitigate potential side
effects. Proanthocyanidins represent a subclass of flavonoids, which have
been widely investigated for their chemopreventive and therapeutic
potential. Cinnamtannin B-1 (CTB-1) is a proanthocyanidin shown to have
anti-cancer effects in several cancers, but its anti-cancer potential in
colon cancer has not been tested. Hence, the focus of this study was to
determine the anticancer effects of CTB-1 in colon cancer. Our results
show that CTB-1 treatment significantly decreases the cell viability and
proliferation of DLD-1 and COLO 201 human colon cancer cells in a time
and dose-dependent manner. In addition, CTB-1 treatment modulated the
cell cycle progression of colon cancer cells via G2/M arrest, coupled
with a reduction of cells in the S phase. The expression and/or
phosphorylation of key molecules involved in apoptosis and cell cycle
progression were also modulated in response to CTB-1 treatment.
Collectively, these findings, for the first time, shed light on the
anti-proliferative effects of CTB-1 in colon cancer, and further
demonstrate its potential as a novel therapeutic/preventive agent.


