Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM 31510, a clinical stage candidate demonstrates potent
anti-tumor effect in an immune-competent syngeneic pancreatic cancer
model.


BPM 31510, a clinical stage nanodispersion of ubidecarenone, demonstrates
anti-tumor effects by eliciting an anti-Warburg metabolic switch in
cancer. Previous studies in an immune compromised PaCa2 xenograft model
has unequivocally demonstrated significant efficacy of BPM 31510 on tumor
volume and survival. The fundamental property of BPM 31510 to influence
mitochondrial bioenergetics and the recognized interplay between T cell
metabolism and maturation prompted investigation into the effects of BPM
31510 on T lymphocyte functions in eliciting anti-cancer effects. In this
study BPM 31510 selectively influenced activation and maturation of T
cells in murine peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Moreover, in
addition to determining changes in the CD3+ population, changes in
surface expression of PD-1 and CTLA4 along with the IFN-Î³ secretion were
examined. Murine cancer cell lines exposed to BPM 31510 were associated
with variable sensitivity with highly metabolic tumor types being most
sensitive. Next, the anti-cancer activity of BPM 31510 in an in vivo
immunocompetent syngeneic Pan02 rodent model was investigated. Murine
Pan02 pancreatic cancer cells were implanted subcutaneously into C57BL/6
mice. Tumors with mean volume of 80 mm3 were treated twice a day with
vehicle control or BPM 31510 at 25, 50, 100 mg/kg, administered
intraperitoneal. Tumor volumes were measured every 4 days. At day 21 post
treatment, tumors were harvested and analyzed for the level of
infiltrating immune cells by immunofluorescent staining with CD8+ for T
cells and F4/80 for tumor macrophages. These results demonstrate a
dose-dependent reduction in tumor volume following 21 days of BPM 31510
treatment. In summary, BPM 31510 exerts potent anti-tumor effects through
its dual function of modulating tumor cell metabolism and potentially
influencing immune check-point to improve overall survival outcomes.


