Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LncRNA as potential target in drug-resistant melanomas.


Melanoma is the most common lethal form of skin cancer. Activating
mutations in BRAF and RAS oncogenes account for over 80% of all melanomas
and hyper-activate the MAPK cascade. Despite major advances in targeted
melanoma therapies over the past decade, drug resistance limits their
efficacy.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a new class of genes that do not encode
proteins, which have been characterized as epigenetic regulatory
molecules. LncRNAs have emerged as important players in cancer, potential
predictors of therapeutic responses and targets for new treatments;
however, their functions and precise molecular mechanisms remains largely
unexplored.

Our study aims to find novel potential targets involved in the
acquisition of resistance to MAPK inhibitors.

We identified an intergenic lncRNA (lincRNA) highly differentially
expressed in drug-resistant melanoma samples, called MAPK Inhibitor
Resistance Associated Transcript (MIRAT). We determined that MIRAT is
localized mainly in the cytoplasm and plays a role in modulating the
signal transduction pathways without regulating the genomic neighborhood.
We discovered that MIRAT is upregulated in early drug tolerance to MAPK
inhibition. Mechanistically, the gene overexpression and silencing of
MIRAT, as well as preliminary RNA-protein interaction results, showed
that it modulates the MAPK signal transduction pathway by binding to a
downstream target of MEK.

Collectively, these results highlight the relevance of cytoplasmic
lincRNAâ€™s and their role in oncogenic signaling pathways, and further
suggest that lncRNAs and their protein-binding partners may serve as
novel potential targets for overcoming drug resistance in melanoma.


