Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precise somatic mutation prediction in the absence of matching
normal DNA.


Accurate identification of somatic mutations is an essential first step
for many cancer studies. It is usually done by comparing the genome of
the tumour to the reference genome sequence derived from a normal tissue
taken from the same donor. However, there are a number of possible
scenarios in which matched normal tissues might be not available for
comparisons. It is most commonly encountered when performing analysis on
retrospective studies with human tissues from clinical trials or
pathology archives when normal samples were not collected in the first
place or patient consent precludes examination of normal tissue or
germline variants. Another common scenario is the use of a cancer cell
line as an experimental model, many of which have no information on the
donorâ€™s normal genome. In this work, we describe an algorithm to
identify somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS) data in the absence of normal samples using a machine
learning approach. Our algorithm was evaluated using a family of
supervised learning classifications across six different cancer types and
~1,600 samples, including cell lines, fresh frozen tissues, and
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. In addition, our
algorithm was tested with both deep targeted sequencing and whole exome
sequencing strategies. The algorithm correctly classified between 95% and
98% of somatic mutations with F1-measure ranges from 75.9% to 98.6%
depending on the tumour type. We have released the algorithm as a
software package called ISOWN (Identification of SOmatic mutations
Without matching Normal tissues), which is available as Open Source under
Apache License 2.0 from https://github.com/ikalatskaya/ISOWN.


