Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gate keeping role for endometrial cancer about Lynch syndrome by
surgeon.


Background: It is well known that Lynch syndrome increases risk of
endometrial and colorectal cancer. There is not much study about
detecting Lynch syndrome patient fast among Korean population by
gynecologic oncology surgeon. We undertook this study to investigate this.

Methods: A review of endometrial cancer patients who was counseled about
Lynch syndrome in Department of Obstetrics and gynecology, Samsung
Changwon Hospital by single surgeon was done. Clinical information was
extracted from the medical record including age, family and personal
history of cancer, immunohistochemistry(IHC), microsatellite instability
test(MSI), and gene sequencing results. Risk management and posttest
education after result were offered about risk reducing options and
cascade testing for affected individual

Results: App patient was 16.There were two germline mutations (both MSH2)
(c.23C>T (p.Thr8Met), c.187delG (p.Val63*).Both were negative for MSH2
IHC, But no patient matched criteria of Amsterdam. Four variation of
unknown significance (VUS) was found (Three MSH2 and One MLH1).Among
those all were abnormal in IHC and there was only one Amsterdam criteria
matched patient. There were two unstable MSI patients, one was MSH2
germline mutation and the other was MSH2 VUS. Median age was
57(41~76).Most cases were endometrioid type (11/16, 69 %).Seventy five
percent were stage I(12/16).

Conclusion: Two MSH2 germline mutation patients among this population was
found. Gynecologic oncology surgeon can be adapted to develop the ability
to assess and evaluate genetic risk among endometrial cancer.


