Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin inhibits TGFβ-induced stromal ECM remodeling to impede
invasion in ovarian cancer.


Recently, our group has elucidated that metformin, the commonly used
medication for type 2 diabetes, has anti-ovarian cancer (OvCa) effects in
preclinical models and use of the drug is associated with improved OvCa
survival in retrospective epidemiological studies. While the cytotoxic
effects of metformin in ovarian cancer cell lines is well demonstrated,
the impact of metformin on tumor-stromal interactions in the tumor
microenvironment is not well defined. Currently, our work has focused on
the impact of metformin on the tumor microenvironment and cancer cell
behavior in physiologic models of tumor metastasis. Using a 3D
organotypic model, we demonstrate that OvCa cell invasion is inhibited by
metformin. In evaluating the molecular mechanism mediating this effect we
show that OvCa cells co-cultured with stromal cells or stimulated with
TGFβ1 upregulate the production of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
proteins fibronectin and collagen 1 and that this effect is attenuated by
metformin. Interestingly, metformin’s inhibition of ECM production was
not dependent on AMP-activated kinase (AMPK), a common metformin target.
To expand on this finding we performed label-free shotgun proteomics and
identified collagens, fibronectin and TGFBR2 to be among the proteins
most highly repressed in response to metformin exposure in OvCa cells.
Finally, we identified that this repression of ECM remodeling by
metformin was associated with an overall reduction in TGFBR2 expression
and consequent SMAD/STAT3 activity. Taken together, our data indicate
that metformin may have novel targets in the tumor microenvironment where
it targets pro-tumorigenic effects of the stromal compartment by
repressing TGFβ-dependent stromal cell ECM secretion, thereby inhibiting
ovarian cancer invasion and metastasis.


