Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acid synthase-mediated palmitate production impacts
epidermal growth factor receptor signaling to regulate specificity
protein 1 in breast cancer cells.


Fatty acid synthase (FASN), the sole cytosolic enzyme responsible for de
novo palmitate synthesis, is critical for cancer cell survival and is a
marker of poor prognosis. FASN overexpression has been shown to confer
resistance to both drug and radiation resistance by inhibiting
drug-induced ceramide production and by increasing DNA repair activities.
Recently, it was found that FASN upregulation of non-homologous end
joining (NHEJ) repair of double strand DNA breaks was due to FASN
up-regulation of Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) by increasing
expression of specificity protein 1 (SP1). However, how FASN regulates
the expression of SP1 remains unknown. In this study, we tested the
hypothesis that, palmitate, the end product of FASN catalysis, plays an
important role in regulating SP1 expression by posttranslationally
modifying epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and affecting its
activity. Using paired isogenic cell lines with FASN overexpression and
FASN knockdown as well as exogenous supplementation of palmitate, we
found that depleting palmitate in culture reduced SP1 expression while
supplementing palmitate rescues this effect. Furthermore, FASN
overexpression and knockdown increased and decreased, respectively,
phosphorylation and activation of EGFR. Treatment with EGFR inhibitor,
Erlotinib, reduced SP1 expression. These findings suggest that FASN
regulation of SP1 and NHEJ repair may be via regulating EGFR activity. We
are in the process of determining the potential effect of palmitoylation
of EGFR on its activation and regulation of SP1 expression.


