Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMEM33 induces apoptosis via UPR signaling and autophagy in breast
cancer cells.


TMEM33 is a novel transmembrane protein that resides in the endoplasmic
reticulum (EnR). It has been shown to activate the PERK and IRE1α
branches of the unfolded protein response (UPR). However, the underlying
mechanism of action of this EnR resident protein TMEM33 and the cellular
functions that it regulates remain largely unknown. In this study, we
show that overexpression of TMEM33 induces robust cell death in breast
cancer cells. Inhibition of the PERK/eIF2alpha pathway with eIF2alpha
inhibitor ISRIB blocks the TMEM33 induced cell death. TMEM33
overexpression strongly activates UPR associated pro-death JNK-p53
signaling. We also observed a significant inhibition of the downstream
survivin, which blocks cell death activation by binding to caspases and
inhibiting their activation. We further show that the blockage of JNK
activation with either an inhibitor or overexpression of survivin,
protects cells against TMEM33 induced apoptosis. In addition, we show
that TMEM33 overexpression induces autophagy in breast cancer cells.
Inhibition of autophagy with using either the inhibitor chloroquine or
knockdown of the Atg5 gene, further sensitizes breast cancer cells to the
effects of TMEM33 overexpression. Cell death induced by TMEM33 is also
decreased by overexpression of the autophagy gene Beclin 1. The findings
in this study demonstrate that the novel EnR resident protein TMEM33
induces cell death by activating IRE1α-JNK-p53-survivin signaling in
breast cancer cells. Concurrently, autophagy is also activated by TMEM33,
and functions as a pro-survival mechanism. Cell fate reflects the balance
between the pro-death and pro-survival activities as regulated by TMEM33.


