Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OGT restrains the NRF2 antioxidant pathway via O-GlcNAcylation of
KEAP1.


O-GlcNAcylation is a reversible post-translational modification that adds
an O-linked Î²-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) moiety onto
serine/threonine residues of target proteins. This modification is
regulated by only two enzymes: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT, the writer) and
O-GlcNAcase (OGA, the eraser) in mammals. Recent studies have revealed
that OGT expression and O-GlcNAc modifications are elevated in several
cancers, but specific O-GlcNAc targets are not well defined. We conducted
a global transcriptome profiling in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells to
search for signaling events that respond to O-GlcNAc fluctuation. We
found significant up-regulation of genes involved in the NRF2-dependent
stress response when OGT activity is inhibited in different tumor types.
We also discovered a strong positive correlation of gene signatures
between low OGT activity and NRF2 activation in multiple human tumor gene
expression datasets. NRF2, the primary regulator of redox balance, is
usually activated by oxidative stress and repressed under basal
conditions by the KEAP1-CUL3 ubiquitin ligase complex. However, we found
that OGT inhibition increases NRF2 protein level through reducing
poly-ubiquitination of NRF2 in the absence of oxidative stress. By
chemical sugar labeling and mass spectrometry assays, we identified that
KEAP1 is directly O-GlcNAcylated by OGT especially within the BTB and
Kelch motifs. Of all 11 putative O-GlcNAc sites on KEAP1, we found serine
104 is responsible for regulating NRF2 activity through affecting
KEAP1-CUL3 interaction. Interestingly, we found the amount of
intracellular glucose co-vary with KEAP1 O-GlcNAcylation and NRF2
protein, suggesting that glucose metabolites may utilize the nutrient
sensing O-GlcNAcylation to fine-tune the antioxidant response. We propose
that cancer cells could utilize O-GlcNAcylation, specifically on KEAP1,
to regulate NRF2-mediated stress responses in response to the dynamics of
intracellular glucose level. Since the NRF2 pathway is inappropriately
activated in certain tumor types due to dysregulated function of KEAP1,
such as non-small cell lung cancer, where it provides stress resistance
and a growth advantage. Our study could provide new insight into redox
cancer biology and provide novel strategy to modulate NRF2 activity
during tumor development.


