Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ornithine decarboxylase as a therapeutic target in endometrial
cancer.


Endometrial cancer is the 4th most common cancer and the 6th deadliest
cancer in US women. The American Cancer Society estimates there will be
60,050 new endometrial cancers in 2016, an increase of more than 10% from
the previous year highlighting the need for more effective treatments and
prevention. Ornithine Decarboxylase (ODC) a key enzyme in polyamine
synthesis is often overexpressed in cancers and contributes to cell
proliferation and tumor growth. Therefore, ODC and the polyamine pathway
are considered rational targets for cancer treatment or prevention. We
noted ubiquitous expression of ODC1 in our previously published
endometrial cancer gene array data and confirmed this in the cancer
genome atlas (TCGA), finding expression in all four molecular sub-types
with highest expression in copy number high cancers which have the worst
clinical outcomes. Therefore, we explored the association of ODC1 gene
expression with clinical outcomes of overall survival (OS) and recurrence
in the TCGA cohort and noted that elevated ODC1 was significantly related
to OS (Wald test p=0.001) and recurrence (p=0.01). Importantly, we
confirmed these observations using QRT-PCR in a validation cohort of 60
endometrial cancers and found that endometrial cancers with elevated ODC1
had significantly shorter recurrence-free intervals (p=5.59x10-5) and
elevated hazard ratio=3.72. Similar to TCGA data we also noted a strong
trend to worse OS ( p=0.00014) with elevated hazard ratio 3.81. Numerous
studies including clinical trials have examined the chemopreventive and
anti-tumor effects of difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a specific
inhibitor of ODC. We found that DFMO treatment significantly reduced cell
proliferation, cell viability, and colony formation in human cell line
models derived from undifferentiated, endometrioid, serous, MMT and clear
cell endometrial cancers. In contrast, immortalized uterine endometrial
epithelial cells (EM E6/E7 TERT1) were less sensitive to DFMO. To confirm
the significant effects of DFMO in vitro we performed an in vivo study
with human endometrial cancer (ACI-98) tumor-bearing athymic nude mice.
Xenografted mice were either treated with 2% (w/v) DFMO supplied in
drinking water or water only (n=10/group). DFMO significantly reduced the
tumor burden in mice compared to controls (p=0.0023). ODC-regulated
polyamines (putrescine [Put] and spermidine [Spd]) known activators of
cell proliferation were strongly decreased in response to DFMO, in both
tumor tissue ([Put] (p=0.0006), [Spd] (pEndometrial cancer is the 4th
most common cancer and the 6th deadliest cancer in US women. The American
Cancer Society estimates there will be 60,050 new endometrial cancers in
2016, an increase of more than 10% from the previous year highlighting
the need for more effective treatments and prevention. Ornithine
Decarboxylase (ODC) a key enzyme in polyamine synthesis is often
overexpressed in cancers and contributes to cell proliferation and tumor
growth. Therefore, ODC and the polyamine pathway are considered rational
targets for cancer treatment or prevention. We noted ubiquitous
expression of ODC1 in our previously published endometrial cancer gene
array data and confirmed this in the cancer genome atlas (TCGA), finding
expression in all four molecular sub-types with highest expression in
copy number high cancers which have the worst clinical outcomes.
Therefore, we explored the association of ODC1 gene expression with
clinical outcomes of overall survival (OS) and recurrence in the TCGA
cohort and noted that elevated ODC1 was significantly related to OS (Wald
test p=0.001) and recurrence (p=0.01). Importantly, we confirmed these
observations using QRT-PCR in a validation cohort of 60 endometrial
cancers and found that endometrial cancers with elevated ODC1 had
significantly shorter recurrence-free intervals (p=5.59x10-5) and
elevated hazard ratio=3.72. Similar to TCGA data we also noted a strong
trend to worse OS ( p=0.00014) with elevated hazard ratio 3.81. Numerous
studies including clinical trials have examined the chemopreventive and
anti-tumor effects of difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a specific
inhibitor of ODC. We found that DFMO treatment significantly reduced cell
proliferation, cell viability, and colony formation in human cell line
models derived from undifferentiated, endometrioid, serous, MMT and clear
cell endometrial cancers. In contrast, immortalized uterine endometrial
epithelial cells (EM E6/E7 TERT1) were less sensitive to DFMO. To confirm
the significant effects of DFMO in vitro we performed an in vivo study
with human endometrial cancer (ACI-98) tumor-bearing athymic nude mice.
Xenografted mice were either treated with 2% (w/v) DFMO supplied in
drinking water or water only (n=10/group). DFMO significantly reduced the
tumor burden in mice compared to controls (p=0.0023). ODC-regulated
polyamines (putrescine [Put] and spermidine [Spd]) known activators of
cell proliferation were strongly decreased in response to DFMO, in both
tumor tissue ([Put] (p=0.0006), [Spd] (p<0.0001)) and blood plasma ([Put]
(pEndometrial cancer is the 4th most common cancer and the 6th deadliest
cancer in US women. The American Cancer Society estimates there will be
60,050 new endometrial cancers in 2016, an increase of more than 10% from
the previous year highlighting the need for more effective treatments and
prevention. Ornithine Decarboxylase (ODC) a key enzyme in polyamine
synthesis is often overexpressed in cancers and contributes to cell
proliferation and tumor growth. Therefore, ODC and the polyamine pathway
are considered rational targets for cancer treatment or prevention. We
noted ubiquitous expression of ODC1 in our previously published
endometrial cancer gene array data and confirmed this in the cancer
genome atlas (TCGA), finding expression in all four molecular sub-types
with highest expression in copy number high cancers which have the worst
clinical outcomes. Therefore, we explored the association of ODC1 gene
expression with clinical outcomes of overall survival (OS) and recurrence
in the TCGA cohort and noted that elevated ODC1 was significantly related
to OS (Wald test p=0.001) and recurrence (p=0.01). Importantly, we
confirmed these observations using QRT-PCR in a validation cohort of 60
endometrial cancers and found that endometrial cancers with elevated ODC1
had significantly shorter recurrence-free intervals (p=5.59x10-5) and
elevated hazard ratio=3.72. Similar to TCGA data we also noted a strong
trend to worse OS ( p=0.00014) with elevated hazard ratio 3.81. Numerous
studies including clinical trials have examined the chemopreventive and
anti-tumor effects of difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), a specific
inhibitor of ODC. We found that DFMO treatment significantly reduced cell
proliferation, cell viability, and colony formation in human cell line
models derived from undifferentiated, endometrioid, serous, MMT and clear
cell endometrial cancers. In contrast, immortalized uterine endometrial
epithelial cells (EM E6/E7 TERT1) were less sensitive to DFMO. To confirm
the significant effects of DFMO in vitro we performed an in vivo study
with human endometrial cancer (ACI-98) tumor-bearing athymic nude mice.
Xenografted mice were either treated with 2% (w/v) DFMO supplied in
drinking water or water only (n=10/group). DFMO significantly reduced the
tumor burden in mice compared to controls (p=0.0023). ODC-regulated
polyamines (putrescine [Put] and spermidine [Spd]) known activators of
cell proliferation were strongly decreased in response to DFMO, in both
tumor tissue ([Put] (p=0.0006), [Spd] (p<0.0001)) and blood plasma ([Put]
(p<0.0001), [Spd] (p=0.0049)) of treated mice. Results of these studies
indicate that some endometrial cancers appear particularly sensitive to
DFMO. Our findings indicate that the polyamine pathway in endometrial
cancers in general and specifically those most clinically relevant
endometrial cancers could be targeted for effective treatment,
chemoprevention or chemoprevention of recurrence.


