Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel CXCR3 allosteric modulators inhibit breast cancer stem cells
and metastasis.


There is an urgent need to identify molecular targets that are relevant
to metastatic and/or stem-like cancer cells (CSC). Theoretically,
surface-expressed G-protein coupled receptors on CSC are attractive
therapeutic targets. There is considerable evidence that the inflammatory
milieu of the tumor microenvironment drives CSC and we now show that two
isoforms of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 play important but distinct
roles in cancer behavior. In the bulk tumor cell population, CXCR3,
isoform A is highly expressed relative to CXCR3B. CXCR3A is critical to
metastatic success. CXCR3, isoform B, is highly upregulated in breast
cancer CSC. When CXCR3B is gene-silenced in a model of basal-type,
metastatic breast cancer, tumorsphere-forming capacity is reduced and the
aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive (ALDH1+) population is correspondingly
decreased. Conversely, overexpression of CXCR3B enhances these CSC
properties. Thus, CXCR3B is critical to maintenance of the phenotype and
function of breast CSC. CXCR3 ligands CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL11 all bind
with high affinity to CXCR3, however, each ligand is coupled to different
intracellular signaling pathways. For example, others have reported that,
in HEK cells, CXCL10 strongly induces ERK activation, but CXCL11 does
not. In our hands, CXCL11 more potently induces an ALDH1+ population in
MDA-MB-231 cells compared to CXCL10. We have developed novel allosteric
modulators of CXCR3 that demonstrate probe (ligand)-dependence. BD64
preferentially inhibits CXCL11-mediated Î²-arrestin 2 recruitment
relative to inhibition of GPCR signaling; BD103 is significantly more
effective at blocking CXCL11 versus CXCL10-mediated GPCR signaling.
Neither BD64 nor BD103 affects the proliferation of non-CSC, however both
compounds inhibit the ability of CSC to form tumorspheres. Furthermore,
both CXCR3 antagonists reverse ligand-mediated induction of the ALDH1+
fraction. Most interesting is that both BD64 and BD103 effectively
inhibit tumor cell colonization of the lung. These data suggest that
optimal tumor control will be achieved when both metastatic, CXCR3Ahigh
as well as CXCR3Bhigh CSC populations are inhibited by highly specific
CXCR3 modulators.


