Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adh1blow/Cyp26b1high activity of CD90+ (myo)fibroblasts supports
tumor-promoting inflammation in colorectal cancer.


Introduction. Retinol (RO) and its active metabolite, all-trans retinoic
acid (atRA), have been widely studied as cancer chemotherapeutic agents.
atRA is a critical immunoregulatory molecule reported to decrease cancer
cell proliferation and inhibit tumor-promoting inflammation. However,
recent studies report a loss of efficacy of atRA treatment to counteract
colorectal cancer (CRC) progress, and the mechanisms underlying this
failure are not fully understood. Alcohol dehydrogenase 1B (ADH1B), a
major isoform of alcohol dehydrogenase expressed in normal colon, is
responsible for the conversion of RO to atRA. We recently reported that
stromal (myo)fibroblasts are major ADH1B expressers in normal colonic
mucosa and that this expression is lost during the neoplastic
transformation process of CRC. Thus, we hypothesized that aberrant
retinoid signaling in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) is among key
processes supporting tumor-promoting inflammation in CRC.

Methods. Real-time PCR, confocal microscopy and cytokine luminex arrays
were used to evaluate alterations in retinoid pathway gene expression and
activity to define its relevance to the tumor-associated inflammation in
human normal and CRC colonic tissues, and in normal primary
(myo)fibroblasts (N-CMFs) and CAFs.

Results. We observed a strong downregulation of ADH1B expression in CAFs
in situ and in culture along with an increased expression of the tumor
growth promoting inflammatory cytokine IL-6. Addition of the ADH1B
substrate, RO, or its metabolite, atRA, to N-CMF cultures decreased the
LPS-inducible IL-6 expression by N-CMFs. No downregulation of
LPS-inducible IL-6 expression by RO was observed in CAFs, while atRA
treatment partially inhibits IL-6 expression. Silencing of adh1b gene in
N-CMFs led to the increased production of the LPS-inducible IL-6. This
suggests that lack of ADH1B expression in CAFs prevents conversion of RO
into atRA, resulting in the disruption of the negative regulation of
IL-6. A decrease in downstream enzyme ALDH1A expression, which converts
ADH1Bâ€™s byproduct retinaldehyde, to atRA, was also observed in CAFs.
Finally, only a partial inhibition of IL-6 production by exogenous atRA
was observed in CAFs. When compared to N-CMFs, CAFs expressed higher
levels of CYP26B1, a cytochrome that is responsible for atRA degradation.
Treatment of CAFs with atRA resulted in an eight fold higher upregulation
of CYP26B1 expression than in N-CMFs.

Conclusions. Taken together, our data suggests that CYP26B1
overexpression in CAFs along with ADH1B downregulation support aberrant
retinoic acid metabolism in CRC. Adh1blow/Cyp26b1high activity of CAFs
leads to a decrease of atRA availability in the tumor microenvironment,
supporting IL-6-driven tumor growth promoting inflammation and resistance
to exogenous atRA as a chemotherapeutic agent in CRC.


