Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-metastatic platinum through glycan targeting in breast cancer.


The high affinity of polynuclear platinum compounds (PPCs) for heparan
sulfate (HS) is mediated through a “sulfate clamp” and PPC
interactions can be conceptualized as “polyarginine” mimics. Strong
HS-PPC binding protects the oligosaccharide against sulfate loss through
metalloshielding.1 Metalloshielding will in principle affect HS
interactions with relevant enzymes and proteins such as heparanase and
growth factors, similar in concept to inhibition of DNA-protein binding
through modification of DNA structure and conformation.2 PPCs inhibit
cleavage of a model pentasaccharide by heparanase and further modulate
bFGF binding to HS, and bFGF-induced migration and signaling in colon
cancer cells.3 The end-point of functional modulation of HS interactions
is inhibition of angiogenesis and metastasis.3 Following
proof-of-principle of strong in vivo anti-metastatic activity of PPCs in
clinically relevant breast cancer models,4 this contribution examines the
underlying mechanism of platinums as anti-metastatic agents. We report on
the cellular effects of PPC-HS metalloshielding on multiple growth factor
signaling pathways (bFGF, HB-EGF) and specific syndecan (Sdc)-dependent
signaling in breast cancer. Coupled with previously demonstrated DNA
binding, PPCs represent intrinsically dual- function agents combining
platinum cytotoxicity with anti-angiogenic effects derived from first
principles through glycan targeting.

[1] Mangrum, J.B., Engelmann, B.J., Peterson, E.J., Ryan, J.J.,
Berners-Price, S.J., Farrell, N.P. Chemical Communications 2014, 50,
4056-4058.

[2] Chiodelli, P., Bugatti, A., Urbinati, C., Rusnati, M. Molecules 2015,
20, 6342-6388.

[3] Peterson, E.J., Daniel, A.G., Katner, S.J., Bohlmann, L., Chang,C.,
Bezos, A., Parish, C.R., von Itzstein, M., Berners-Price, S.J., Farrell,
N.P. Chem. Sci. 2016, DOI: 10.1039/C6SC02515C.

[4] E. Katsuta, S. Demasi, S. Katner, H. Aoki, E. Peterson, E., N.P.
Farrell and K. Takabe. (2016). Proc. AACR New Orleans, LA. Abstract #3064.

DC 1-5 April 2017


