Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 and BRCA 2 mutation predictions using BRACAPRO and MYRIAD
models in patients with Korean ethnicity.


Introduction: This study is aimed to compare the predictive efficacy of
BRCAPRO and MYRIAD BRCA risk calculator in patients tested in Korean
ethnicity.

Methods: Individuals, who received gene test on BRCA mutation from
November 2010 to August 2016, were recruited from database of department
of obstetrics and gynecology at a single institute in Korea. Observed
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status was compared with predicted carrier
probabilities under the BRCAPRO, and MYRIAD BRCA risk calculator. Risk
assessment for all patients was calculated using the CancerGene
assessment software.

Results: Total of 279 patients was recruited, and 99.3% (277 out of 279)
had Korean ethnicity. The mean age at presentation was 52 years. Out of
the 279 individuals, 206 had ovarian cancer, 36 had breast cancer, 26 had
double primary ovarian/breast cancer, and 11 had no cancer. Fifty five
individuals had family history of ovarian/breast cancer in first degree
relatives. Sixty three patients (22.6%) tested positive for a BRCA
mutation (45 BRCA1, 18 BRCA2). The mean BRCAPRO and MYRIAD score for all
patients was 6.4% and 7.7%, respectively. The BRCAPRO and MYRIAD scores
were significantly higher for patients who tested positive for a BRCA
mutation (30.4% vs. 6.3%, P Results: Total of 279 patients was recruited,
and 99.3% (277 out of 279) had Korean ethnicity. The mean age at
presentation was 52 years. Out of the 279 individuals, 206 had ovarian
cancer, 36 had breast cancer, 26 had double primary ovarian/breast
cancer, and 11 had no cancer. Fifty five individuals had family history
of ovarian/breast cancer in first degree relatives. Sixty three patients
(22.6%) tested positive for a BRCA mutation (45 BRCA1, 18 BRCA2). The
mean BRCAPRO and MYRIAD score for all patients was 6.4% and 7.7%,
respectively. The BRCAPRO and MYRIAD scores were significantly higher for
patients who tested positive for a BRCA mutation (30.4% vs. 6.3%, P <
0.001, 12.1% vs. 7.7%, P Results: Total of 279 patients was recruited,
and 99.3% (277 out of 279) had Korean ethnicity. The mean age at
presentation was 52 years. Out of the 279 individuals, 206 had ovarian
cancer, 36 had breast cancer, 26 had double primary ovarian/breast
cancer, and 11 had no cancer. Fifty five individuals had family history
of ovarian/breast cancer in first degree relatives. Sixty three patients
(22.6%) tested positive for a BRCA mutation (45 BRCA1, 18 BRCA2). The
mean BRCAPRO and MYRIAD score for all patients was 6.4% and 7.7%,
respectively. The BRCAPRO and MYRIAD scores were significantly higher for
patients who tested positive for a BRCA mutation (30.4% vs. 6.3%, P <
0.001, 12.1% vs. 7.7%, P < 0.001, respectively). The area under the
receiver operating characteristics curves were 0.762, and 0.751 for all
patients for the BRCAPRO and MYRIAD score to predict the risk of carrying
a BRCA mutation.

Conclusion: BRCAPRO and MYRIAD appear to be valid risk assessment tools
for determining the risk of carrying a BRCA mutation in Korean ethnicity.


