Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FT-1518, a new generation selective and potent mTORC1 and mTORC2
inhibitor: an in vitro and in vivo profile.


Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a clinically validated target in
the treatment of cancer. mTOR forms two distinct multiprotein complexes,
mTORC1 and mTORC2 which regulate cell growth, metabolism, proliferation,
and survival. Rapamycin analogues target only the mTORC1 complex but do
not affect the mTORC2 complex, which is an important driver for cancer
cell growth and survival. The new generation of “Selective” mTOR
inhibitors, blocking both mTORC1 and mTORC2 signaling might increase the
efficacy and safety while expanding the therapeutic potential of these
anticancer agents. Herein we describe FT-1518, a low nanomolar potent,
kinase and PI3K sub family selective mTOR inhibitor. FT-1518 not only
exhibited high oral bioavailability in preclinical species but has
demonstrated excellent microsomal stability with no inhibitory activity
towards undesired CYPs. FT-1518 showed high sustained tumor exposure and
target Inhibition in a single oral dose xenograft model. FT-1518 depicted
very good growth inhibitory activity across a large panel of hematologic
and solid tumor cell lines with most activities falling into low
nanomolar range. mTOR kinase inhibition in cells, by FT-1518, resulted in
more potent inhibition of the mTOR pathway biomarkers (mTORC 1 & 2
biomarkers [pAkt(S473) and pS6(S240/244) or p70 S6K), no inhibition of
PI3K biomarker [pAkt(T308)], and improved anti-proliferative activity as
compared with rapamycin. FT-1518 exhibited dose-dependent and higher
tumor growth inhibition (TGI) in multiple solid tumor xenografts compared
with rapalogs and is poised to enter the clinic with a favorable
toxicology profile.


