Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mass spectrometric characterization of peptides associated with
molecules of the major histocompatibility complex.


The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a region of highly
polymorphic genes encoding for glycoproteins (MHC molecules) that form
part of the cell-mediated branch of the acquired immune system. In the
cytosol, cellular self and foreign (non-self) proteins are constantly
being degraded; it is the peptides generated that are presented,
non-covalently bound to MHC molecules, on the surface of cells for
inspection by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs). Non recognition of the
presented peptide ultimately leads to cell destruction.

Characterizing the factors associated with Non recognition is an
attractive proposition for anyone interested in generating tools for
targeted cell destruction. In the field of oncology the obvious
application then is the targeted destruction of cancerous cells. To
enable the molecular level characterization of peptides associated with
molecules of the major histocompatibility complex requires a targeted
protein complex enrichment, an unbiased peptide elution and finally a
peptide analysis method. Most frequently an immunoprecipitation is used
to isolate the target complex. The peptide elution is performed under
conditions minimizing protein contamination and finally peptide analysis
is accomplished by mass spectrometry.

Here we present a case study of our recent work optimizing and performing
a workflow for the analysis of peptides associated with Class I MHC
molecules. The goal of the assay optimization was to minimize the amount
of antibody required for the assay, to minimize the amount of biological
material needed from which the complex is isolated and to achieve the
optimum sensitivity towards the hitherto unknown target peptides.


