Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic impact of OPN and DKK1 in patient of hepatocellular
carcinoma after hepatectomy.


The new biomarkers are essential for improving the survival and prognosis
of hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) patients. Alpha-fetoprotein(AFP) is the
most widely used biomarker. But the low sensitivity and specificity
limits its clinical application. Recent study validated the diagnostic
capability of osteopontin(OPN) and dickkopf-1(DKK1) and assessed the
combination of AFP, DKK1, and OPN as a panel for the diagnosis of HCC.
Based on these previous studies, we hypothesized that combination of OPN
and DKK1 can be used to as a marker for prognosis to patient of HCC after
hepatectomy. From January 2006 to December 2008, patients undergoing
hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma were screened serum that has
been stored in the Bank of tumor. To target the selected patient, it was
confirmed that the remaining tissue specimen is stored after diagnosis.
Serum of the patients was used to investigate the OPN and DKK1 by ELISA.
In the paraffin block were prepared unstained slide and OPN and DKK1
level checked by IHC. It examined the correlation between prognosis and
biomarkers through statistical analysis. AFP, OPN(serum level) and
DKK1(serum level) are an independent prognostic factor for overall
survival(OS) in HCC after hepatectomy(n=60, P=0.0204, 0.0167 and 0.0455
respectively). New biomarkers combinations based on the AFP existing
biomarker are showed a falling curve of the overall survival(OS) and
disease-free survival(DFS) in Kaplan Meier curve. In conclusion,
combination of OPN, DKK1 and AFP as a biomarker could support the correct
diagnosis for HCC after hepatectomy.


