Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of ovarian cancer stem cell population by DDB2.


Cancer stem cells (CSCs), representing the root of many solid tumors
including ovarian cancer, have been implicated in disease recurrence,
metastasis, and therapeutic resistance. Our previous study has
demonstrated that DNA damage-binding protein 2 (DDB2) is able to reduce
the abundance of CSCs in the bulk ovarian cancer cells, providing a novel
mechanism to explain the DDB2-mediated suppression of tumorigenicity and
metastasis, and also suggesting that low expression of DDB2 is required
for the maintenance of CSCs. However, the underlying mechanisms still
remain unclear. By using the Tet-On DDB2 modulation system, we have
confirmed our previous finding that downregulation of DDB2 expands the
CSC population in the 2008 ovarian cancer cell line. We also found that
DDB2 is able to suppress non-CSC-to-CSC conversions in this cancer cell
line. DDB2 has been recognized as a transcriptional regulator. Our
microarray analysis has identified ALDH1A1 to be targeted and regulated
by DDB2. The downregulation of ALDH1A1 expression by DDB2 at both mRNA
and protein levels has been validated in various ovarian cancer cell
lines. The mechanistic investigation demonstrated that DDB2 can bind to
the promoter region of the ALDH1A1 gene, facilitating the enrichment of
histone H3K27me3 by recruiting EZH2 to the promoter region, eventually
inhibiting the promoter activity of the ALDH1A1 gene. In addition, we
also found that DDB2 competes with transcription factor C/EBPÎ² for
binding to the ALDH1A1 promoter, indirectly inhibiting the ALDH1A1
promoter activity. Finally, we knocked down the expression of DDB2 and
ALDH1A1 individually or simultaneously in the 2008 ovarian cancer cell
line, and analyzed their tumorigenicity. We found that downregulation of
ALDH1A1 is able to block DDB2 silencing-induced expansion of the CSC
population, indicating that ALDH1A1 plays a critical role in
DDB2-mediated suppression of the CSC population in ovarian cancer cells.
In summary, our data demonstrated that DDB2, functioning as a
transcription repressor, is able to abrogate ovarian CSC properties by
downregulating ALDH1A1 expression. This study provides a novel mechanism
underlying the regulation of the CSC population, and would facilitate the
development of efficient strategies for eliminating CSCs to prevent tumor
relapse and metastasis in ovarian cancers. (Supported by NIH R01CA151248)


