Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular profiling of protein methyltransferases in prostate
cancer and their clinical significance.


Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers among men
worldwide. Most deaths of prostate cancer patients occur after the
disease has progressed to castration-resistant prostate cancer,
accompanied by metastatic dissemination and resistance to
androgen-deprivation therapy. Therefore, an urgent need exists to
identify druggable targets that will improve the treatment of this deadly
and devastating disease. Epigenetic alteration has been identified as one
the major causes of prostate cancer. Protein methyltransferases (PMTs), a
large class of epigenetic enzymes that add one or more methyl groups to
lysine (K) and arginine (R) residues on histones and non-histone
proteins, play critical roles in chromatin function, transcriptional
regulation, genomic stability, DNA repair and RNA metabolism. Although
dysregulation of several PMTs has been reported in prostate cancers,
there has been no systematic analysis of genomic anomalies and expression
of PMTs in prostate cancer. In addition, the clinical relevance of
alterations of each PMT in prostate cancer has yet to be fully explored.
Here, we performed an integrated genomic and transcriptomic analysis of
68 PMT genes in prostate cancer (TCGA dataset) and identified
associations among recurrent copy number alterations, gene expressions,
clinicopathological features, and survival of patients. In addition to
well-known EZH2 and WHSC1, we identified several additional PTMs,
including SETDB1, SETD5 and PRDM12, which were significantly
overexpressed in high-grade and high-stage prostate cancer. We also found
that SETDB1 overexpression was significantly associated with biochemical
recurrence of prostate cancer patients. To assess the contribution of
endogenous SETDB1 overexpression to prostate cancer growth and
progression, we examined the effects of knocking down SETDB1 in two
prostate cancer cell lines CWR22Rv1 and DU-145. SETDB1 knockdown
dramatically reduced CWR22Rv1 and DU-145 cell growth compared with the
non-silencing control. We also identified all SETDB1 binding sites across
the human genome in DU-145 prostate cancer cells by using an unbiased
ChIP-seq approach. In summary, our integrated genomic and transcriptomic
analysis identified a broad spectrum of genetic alterations in PMT genes
involved in prostate cancer progression. Our findings suggest a promising
avenue for future researchâ€”to focus on a subset of PMTs to better
understand the molecular mechanisms and to identify therapeutic targets
in prostate cancer.


