Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic serum signatures as potential prognostic biomarkers for
neuroblastoma patients.


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric malignancy with phenotypes varying from
spontaneously regressing to metastatic tumors. Thus, disease
stratification and the subsequent treatment decision is of utmost
importance for NB patients. The methods, which are currently available
for prognosis, require complex genetic analyses and access to the tumor
tissue. Thus, there is a need for new prognostic and predictive markers
that reflect the NB biology and rely on simple tests and easily
accessible material. Serum metabolite profiles reflect a combination of
factors released by the tumors and the general metabolic state of the
patients. Thus, identifying the differences in metabolites between
patients with various tumor phenotypes and responses to treatment may
lead to discovery of biologically relevant prognostic biomarkers. The
goal of our study was to determine blood-based metabolic signatures
characteristic for patients with low and high-risk NB and identify
potential biomarkers of high-risk disease. Plasma samples from NB
patients at different stages of the disease were obtained from the
Children’s Oncology Group. Initially, 50 samples were analyzed by Ultra
Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) in conjunction with
electrospray-quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometry (ESI-Q-TOF). A
set of 26 independent plasma samples was then used for validation study.
Statistically significant differences in metabolic profiles were observed
between serum from patients with low and high risk disease, various
stages of the disease (stage 1-2 vs stage 3 and/or stage 4), as well as
undifferentiated vs. differentiating tumors. For all comparisons, the
metabolic signatures consisting of metabolites significantly different
between the groups exhibited high test sensitivity and specificity (the
area under the ROC curves 0.92-1). Metabolites that were dysregulated in
high risk NBs included those involved in energy and choline metabolism,
as well as amino acid and lipid biosynthesis. Of particular interest was
a significant increase in serum levels of oxoglutaric acid observed in
patients with high-risk disease (pNeuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric
malignancy with phenotypes varying from spontaneously regressing to
metastatic tumors. Thus, disease stratification and the subsequent
treatment decision is of utmost importance for NB patients. The methods,
which are currently available for prognosis, require complex genetic
analyses and access to the tumor tissue. Thus, there is a need for new
prognostic and predictive markers that reflect the NB biology and rely on
simple tests and easily accessible material. Serum metabolite profiles
reflect a combination of factors released by the tumors and the general
metabolic state of the patients. Thus, identifying the differences in
metabolites between patients with various tumor phenotypes and responses
to treatment may lead to discovery of biologically relevant prognostic
biomarkers. The goal of our study was to determine blood-based metabolic
signatures characteristic for patients with low and high-risk NB and
identify potential biomarkers of high-risk disease. Plasma samples from
NB patients at different stages of the disease were obtained from the
Children’s Oncology Group. Initially, 50 samples were analyzed by Ultra
Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) in conjunction with
electrospray-quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometry (ESI-Q-TOF). A
set of 26 independent plasma samples was then used for validation study.
Statistically significant differences in metabolic profiles were observed
between serum from patients with low and high risk disease, various
stages of the disease (stage 1-2 vs stage 3 and/or stage 4), as well as
undifferentiated vs. differentiating tumors. For all comparisons, the
metabolic signatures consisting of metabolites significantly different
between the groups exhibited high test sensitivity and specificity (the
area under the ROC curves 0.92-1). Metabolites that were dysregulated in
high risk NBs included those involved in energy and choline metabolism,
as well as amino acid and lipid biosynthesis. Of particular interest was
a significant increase in serum levels of oxoglutaric acid observed in
patients with high-risk disease (p<0.01) and metastatic tumors
(pNeuroblastoma (NB) is a pediatric malignancy with phenotypes varying
from spontaneously regressing to metastatic tumors. Thus, disease
stratification and the subsequent treatment decision is of utmost
importance for NB patients. The methods, which are currently available
for prognosis, require complex genetic analyses and access to the tumor
tissue. Thus, there is a need for new prognostic and predictive markers
that reflect the NB biology and rely on simple tests and easily
accessible material. Serum metabolite profiles reflect a combination of
factors released by the tumors and the general metabolic state of the
patients. Thus, identifying the differences in metabolites between
patients with various tumor phenotypes and responses to treatment may
lead to discovery of biologically relevant prognostic biomarkers. The
goal of our study was to determine blood-based metabolic signatures
characteristic for patients with low and high-risk NB and identify
potential biomarkers of high-risk disease. Plasma samples from NB
patients at different stages of the disease were obtained from the
Children’s Oncology Group. Initially, 50 samples were analyzed by Ultra
Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) in conjunction with
electrospray-quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometry (ESI-Q-TOF). A
set of 26 independent plasma samples was then used for validation study.
Statistically significant differences in metabolic profiles were observed
between serum from patients with low and high risk disease, various
stages of the disease (stage 1-2 vs stage 3 and/or stage 4), as well as
undifferentiated vs. differentiating tumors. For all comparisons, the
metabolic signatures consisting of metabolites significantly different
between the groups exhibited high test sensitivity and specificity (the
area under the ROC curves 0.92-1). Metabolites that were dysregulated in
high risk NBs included those involved in energy and choline metabolism,
as well as amino acid and lipid biosynthesis. Of particular interest was
a significant increase in serum levels of oxoglutaric acid observed in
patients with high-risk disease (p<0.01) and metastatic tumors (p<0.001).
As oxoglutaric acid is a key metabolite of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA)
cycle that is involved in regulation of the balance between glutamine and
glucose metabolism, as well as lipid synthesis and hypoxia response,
these data warrant further investigations into the biological role of
these pathways in biology of high risk NB. In summary, using a
metabolomics approach we were able to delineate blood based biomarkers
that could potentially be used for patient stratification following large
scale validation studies.


