Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resolving cellular complexity in renal cell carcinoma with
droplet-based single cell transcriptomics.


Purpose: The development, growth, invasion and metastasis of cancer is
supported and sustained by complex tissue microenvironments. Interactions
between the stromal cells, cancer cells and immune cells through
autocrine and paracrine signaling, influences many stages of cancer
progression. Furthermore, understanding the identity of the tumor
infiltrated immune cell populations is known to predict survival
outcomes. Kidney cancer is the 12th most prevalent cancer in the world
and is predicted to affect 62,700 new cases in 2016 in the United States
alone (American Cancer Society). Existing studies on renal cell carcinoma
utilizing bulk profiling methods have been unable to deconvolute the role
of the various cell types in promoting the progression this cancer type.

Method: Single cell transcriptomics of primary tumors is a powerful
approach to study not only the cancer cells but also the cells of the
microenvironment. We profiled the various cell types that comprise
primary renal cell carcinoma using the Chromium Single Cell 3â€™ system
(10X Genomics).

Results: With this single cell approach, we have generated thousands of
single cell transcriptomes leading to the identification of numerous cell
types and cell states in renal cell carcinoma and matched normal kidney.
The microenvironment of renal cell carcinoma tumors contains a
heterogeneous mix of stromal, immune and kidney cell types. Compared with
the matched normal, the tumors are heavily infiltrated with lymphocytes,
mast cells and cells of the myeloid lineage. We identified pathways
enriched in specific cell types that illuminate potential mechanisms
underlying the cell-cell interactions between cancer cells, stromal
cells, and the infiltrating immune cells thus highlighting potentially
new targeting strategies for the treatment of this disease. In addition,
the single cell data described here will be used to deconvolute existing
and new bulk analyses of renal cell carcinoma patients and to establish
targeted antibody panels for use in flow and imaging mass cytometry. We
anticipate both will lead to better patient stratification to inform
patient-specific treatment regimes.

Conclusion: Droplet-based single cell transcriptomics can successfully
identify the numerous cell types that comprise a tumor, providing a
foundation of knowledge to inform biomarker selection and provide insight
into novel treatment strategies. This approach reflects a more
comprehensive view of renal tumors that is often masked by bulk profiling
analyses.


