Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative multiplex analysis of immune checkpoint protein
expression in circulation and in the tumor microenvironment.


Immune checkpoint inhibitors have been proven to be an effective method
in improving antitumor immune response. Many immune checkpoint proteins
are expressed as soluble forms in circulation and in the tumor and tumor
microenvironment. Here we report the development of bead-based Luminex
multiplex assays for the quantitative profiling of co-inhibitory and
co-stimulating immune checkpoint proteins CTLA-4, PD-1, TIM-3, LAG-3,
HVEM. GITRL, BTLA, CD27, CD28, CD40, GITR, PD-L1, B7-1/CD80, B7-2/CD86,
and ICOS. In order to explore the use of soluble immune checkpoint
proteins as putative cancer biomarkers, we used these multiplex assays to
measure checkpoint protein levels in serum samples from breast cancer
patients, colon cancer patients, and a corresponding set of normal serum
samples. Analysis of the soluble checkpoint protein signatures generated
from this multiplex approach revealed a significantly elevated level of
soluble TIM-3 protein in the breast cancer serum samples and in the colon
cancer serum samples compared to the healthy serum controls (pImmune
checkpoint inhibitors have been proven to be an effective method in
improving antitumor immune response. Many immune checkpoint proteins are
expressed as soluble forms in circulation and in the tumor and tumor
microenvironment. Here we report the development of bead-based Luminex
multiplex assays for the quantitative profiling of co-inhibitory and
co-stimulating immune checkpoint proteins CTLA-4, PD-1, TIM-3, LAG-3,
HVEM. GITRL, BTLA, CD27, CD28, CD40, GITR, PD-L1, B7-1/CD80, B7-2/CD86,
and ICOS. In order to explore the use of soluble immune checkpoint
proteins as putative cancer biomarkers, we used these multiplex assays to
measure checkpoint protein levels in serum samples from breast cancer
patients, colon cancer patients, and a corresponding set of normal serum
samples. Analysis of the soluble checkpoint protein signatures generated
from this multiplex approach revealed a significantly elevated level of
soluble TIM-3 protein in the breast cancer serum samples and in the colon
cancer serum samples compared to the healthy serum controls (p<0.001). In
addition, we analyzed the immune checkpoint protein expression profiles
in lysates of tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 3 patients with
metastatic breast cancer and 2 patients with colorectal cancer.
Differential expression of multiple checkpoint proteins, including BTLA,
CD27, TIM-3, HVEM, CD40, GITR, LAG3, CTLA-4, B7-1, PD-L1, or ICOS, were
detected in these matched lysates, indicating the roles and complexity of
checkpoint proteins in tumor microenvironment. In summary, our results
demonstrate that the multiplex assays we developed are useful research
tools for the simultaneously quantitation of immune checkpoint proteins,
as well as its potential application in cancer biomarker discovery and
translational research in cancer immunotherapy.


