Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Sister Study: Morbid conditions at enrollment in a breast
cancer cohort.


The Sister Study is a prospective cohort of 50,884 unaffected sisters of
women diagnosed with breast cancer; given that participants were at
increased risk of developing breast cancer, we wanted to investigate the
prevalence of other conditions at enrollment. We compared demographic,
lifestyle, and selected self-reported morbid conditions between Sister
Study participants and women in NHANES, a representative sample of the US
population, using age-adjusted prevalence, overall and by race/ethnicity.
Demographically, women in the Sister Study are more likely than women in
NHANES to be non-Hispanic white, well-educated and to have had higher
household incomes. They were also somewhat more likely to have been
post-menopausal at enrollment and have ever used hormonal birth control
or hormone replacement therapy. The Sister Study has a lower prevalence
of current smokers and a higher prevalence of alcohol consumption than
among women in NHANES. BMI was lower in the Sister Study. Sister Study
participants generally had a lower age-adjusted prevalence of
self-reported chronic morbid conditions at baseline than did women in
NHANES. For cardio- and cerebrovascular conditions, for example, heart
attack and stroke were lower in the Sister Study (0.9% vs. 2.4%; 0.6% vs.
3.1%, respectively) as were self-reported hypertension and high
cholesterol (22.8% vs. 34.5%; 28.6% vs. 40.7%). This pattern was similar
across all race/ethnicity groups with the exception of angina, which was
similar to NHANES overall (2.1% vs. 2.2%). Prevalence of diabetes was
lower in the Sister Study (4.9% vs. 9.5%) as were cancers other than
breast or non-melanoma skin (4.4% vs. 8.1%) and rheumatoid arthritis
(3.3% vs. 6.2%). Again, this was similar across race/ethnicity groups. A
few conditions had a higher prevalence in the Sister Study: uterine
fibroids, endometriosis, osteoporosis, and allergies (22.0% vs. 13.7%;
12.2% vs. 7.7%; 17.0% vs. 8.6%; and 54.1% vs. 44.2%). Thyroid disease
(excluding cancer), asthma, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis
were similar in the Sister Study and NHANES (19.4% vs. 18.5%; 14.6% vs.
15.0%; 0.5% vs. 0.4%; and 1.4% vs. 1.3%). Two or more morbid conditions
were reported by just over one third of Sister Study participants. After
restriction to college graduates, differences between the Sister study
and NHANES were no longer apparent. The few exceptions were differences
that would be expected, given Sister Study participants’ ability to
participate in a long-term study, healthy behaviors and access to care:
lower prevalence of hypertension and high cholesterol; higher prevalence
of self-reported fibroids, osteoporosis, and allergies. Although Sister
Study participants do differ in a few respects from the NHANES
population, the cohort is a unique and well characterized resource,
well-suited for research on the incidence of number of chronic
conditions, in addition to breast cancer.


