Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential predictive biomarkers of clinical responses for a novel
CDC7-selective inhibitor TAK-931.


Cell division cycle 7 (CDC7) is a serine/threonine kinase, which plays
important roles in initiation of DNA replication by phosphorylating MCM2.
Kinase activity of CDC7 is controlled by its binding protein DBF4 in a
cell-cycle dependent manner. Here we developed a potent CDC7 inhibitor
TAK-931 (IC50120-fold selectivity of TAK-931 for CDC7 kinase inhibition
compared to other kinase inhibitions. Treatment with TAK-931 suppressed
the cellular MCM2 phosphorylation at Ser40, resulting in a delayed S
phase progression, checkpoint activation, apoptosis, and potent growth
suppression in various cancer cell lines. Furthermore, oral
administration of TAK-931 as a single agent caused a significant
antitumor activity in multiple xenograft models which include both cell
line-based xenografts and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models. These
results demonstrate that TAK-931 is a highly potent and selective
inhibitor of CDC7 kinase, and causes a potent antiproliferation both in
vitro and in vivo studies using various cancer cells. Next, to identify
potential predictive biomarkers to guide patient-selection strategies, in
vitro cell panel screening of TAK-931 using was tested for its ability to
antiproliferation in 246 cell lines, which includes both solid and
hematological cancer cells. TAK-931 inhibited proliferation of multiple
cancer cell lines, with mean concentration producing a half-maximal
response (EC50) values ranging from 29.1 nM to > 30 Î¼M (median = 554.5
nM). While the wide range of TAK-931 antiproliferative spectrum was
observed, neither doubling speed nor CDC7 expression profile did predict
tTAK-931 sensitivity in cancer cell lines. A correlative study of the
tumor genetic mutations in relation to antiproliferative activity that
KRAS mutant cancer cells were more sensitive to TAK-931 compared to KRAS
non-mutant cell lines (p60% TGI. Our findings suggest that the
KRAS-mutant pancreatic tumors could be the potential candidate for the
TAK-931 target indication.


