Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CK2 for overcoming paclitaxel resistance in gastric
cancer.


Despite advances in cancer treatment, gastric cancer is still one of the
most fatal cancers. This is because paclitaxel, the most widely used
treatment for gastric cancer, has limited clinical utility by the
development of resistance. Casein kinase 2 (CK2) activation has been
reported to be involved in proliferation in various tumors and resistance
form chemotherapy. Therefore, we investigated the association between
paclitaxel resistance and CK2 activation. CK2 expression was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors
from 59 AGC patients who were treated with paclitaxel as second line
therapy. Patients with high expression of CK2 (29/59, 39%) showed lower
disease control rate (DCR) (47.7 % vs. 72.3 %, p=0.017) and shorter
progression free survival (PFS) (2.8 months vs. 4.8 months, p=0.009)
compared to those who with low expression. Cell proliferation assay were
carried out by MTT assay after drug treatment with paclitaxel, CX-4945
(CK2 inhibitor) in 49 gastric cancer cell lines. CK2 protein expression
was shown to be associated with paclitaxel sensitivity. Of the gastric
cancer cell lines, SNU-1 was selected for paclitaxel resistance, high
expression of CK2, and high sensitivity to CX-4945. Combination therapy
CX-4945 and paclitaxel showed synergistic antitumor effect in SNU-1 by
MTT assay and showed inhibition of down signaling of PI3K/AKT pathway on
western blot. In conclusion, CK2 activation was shown to be related to
paclitaxel resistance. CX-4945 in combination with paclitaxel could be
treatment of choice in gastric cancer with paclitaxel resistance.


