Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of immunogenic cell death and tumor regression in murine
animal models by a novel cytolytic compound, LTX-401.


LTX-401 is a de novo designed cytolytic compound that shares many
chemical features with anticancer peptides, such as amphipathicity,
hydrophobicity and overall net charge. In vitro cytotoxicity studies
revealed that LTX-401 was highly active against a panel of malignant
cells including murine and human cancer cell lines while displaying
selectivity towards human red blood cells. Furthermore, LTX-401 was found
to induce immunogenic cell death as demonstrated by the release of
Damage-Associated Molecular Pattern molecules, or ‘danger signals’,
such as High-Mobility Group Box-1 protein, ATP and cytochrome c. Flow
cytometric and confocal microscopy studies also demonstrated reduced
signal from lysosomal dye Lysotracker-DND-26, hence indicating loss of
lysosomal integrity upon induction of cell death. The latter was
supported using transmission electron microscopy, showing distinct
morphological characteristics of necrosis. Moreover, at low
concentrations, LTX-401 selectively enriched in the Golgi apparatus and
initiated a lethal signaling event that in part could be inhibited by
Brefeldin A. Complete tumor regression has been obtained in several
rodent models, including the B16 mouse melanoma model and the JM1 rat
hepatocellular carcinoma model by intratumoral injection with LTX-401.
Additionally, previously cured animals showed protection against
rechallenge with live tumor cells, indicating the induction of
tumor-specific immune memory. The increased survival benefit of
LTX-401-treated animals provides a rationale for further evaluation of
the compound as an immunotherapeutic agent against solid malignancies.


