Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OncoVEXmGM-CSF (HSV-1 modified similarly to Talimogene
Laherparepvec) in combination with CTLA-4 blockade leads to both local
and systemic efficacy in a murine syngeneic model of metastatic melanoma.


Talimogene laherparepvec is an oncolytic immunotherapy based on a
modified herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) designed to kill cancer
cells through two mechanisms: a) direct viral-mediated lysis and b)
stimulation of a tumor antigen-specific adaptive immune response. We
developed a mouse model of metastatic melanoma using the B16F10 cell line
to study local and systemic responses following treatment with talimogene
laherparepvec alone or in combination with CTLA-4 blockade.
OncoVEXmGM-CSF, an HSV-1 modified similarly to talimogene laherparepvec
(murine GM-CSF is expressed instead of human GM-CSF) was used in these
studies.

B16F10 cells have been reported to be resistant to HSV-1 infection due to
a lack of requisite entry receptors. To overcome resistance, we
transduced B16F10 cells with a lentiviral vector expressing mouse nectin1
(mNectin1) or eGFP as a control. Expression was confirmed by ddPCR and
sensitivity to OncoVEXmGM-CSF evaluated in an in vitro viability assay.
B16F10-mNectin1 cells were highly sensitive to OncoVEXmGM-CSF with a
multiplicity of infection (MOI) IC50 of 0.001 (B16F10-eGFP were
insensitive at MOI of 100). In vivo, B16F10-mNectin1 and B16F10-eGFP
cells showed similar growth when injected subcutaneously. OncoVEXmGM-CSF
treatment of B16F10-mNectin1 tumors (intratumoral, 5x106 PFU/dose, 3X)
caused a significant (pB16F10 cells have been reported to be resistant to
HSV-1 infection due to a lack of requisite entry receptors. To overcome
resistance, we transduced B16F10 cells with a lentiviral vector
expressing mouse nectin1 (mNectin1) or eGFP as a control. Expression was
confirmed by ddPCR and sensitivity to OncoVEXmGM-CSF evaluated in an in
vitro viability assay. B16F10-mNectin1 cells were highly sensitive to
OncoVEXmGM-CSF with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) IC50 of 0.001
(B16F10-eGFP were insensitive at MOI of 100). In vivo, B16F10-mNectin1
and B16F10-eGFP cells showed similar growth when injected subcutaneously.
OncoVEXmGM-CSF treatment of B16F10-mNectin1 tumors (intratumoral, 5x106
PFU/dose, 3X) caused a significant (p<0.0001) inhibition of tumor growth
and prolonged median overall survival compared to control animals. To
assess the local and systemic effect of OncoVEXmGM-CSF in combination
with CTLA-4 blockade, we developed a model of experimental metastatic
melanoma by delivering the B16F10-eGFP cells intravenously (systemic,
non-injectable tumors) on day 0 and implanting the B16F10-mNectin1 cells
SC (local, injectable tumors) on day 2. Mice were dosed with
OncoVEXmGM-CSF and anti-CTLA-4 antibody 9D9 (100ug/dose) every 3 days
between days 12 and 19. Subcutaneous tumor growth inhibition was assessed
and lung metastasis were quantified on day 28. Both OncoVEXmGM-CSF and
CTLA-4 treatment significantly inhibited subcutaneous tumor growth and
lung metastasis. The combination of both therapeutics resulted in
significantly greater local and systemic efficacy than either agent
alone. The strong local and systemic anti-tumor activity of the
combination resulted in a significant increase in median overall survival
(pB16F10 cells have been reported to be resistant to HSV-1 infection due
to a lack of requisite entry receptors. To overcome resistance, we
transduced B16F10 cells with a lentiviral vector expressing mouse nectin1
(mNectin1) or eGFP as a control. Expression was confirmed by ddPCR and
sensitivity to OncoVEXmGM-CSF evaluated in an in vitro viability assay.
B16F10-mNectin1 cells were highly sensitive to OncoVEXmGM-CSF with a
multiplicity of infection (MOI) IC50 of 0.001 (B16F10-eGFP were
insensitive at MOI of 100). In vivo, B16F10-mNectin1 and B16F10-eGFP
cells showed similar growth when injected subcutaneously. OncoVEXmGM-CSF
treatment of B16F10-mNectin1 tumors (intratumoral, 5x106 PFU/dose, 3X)
caused a significant (p<0.0001) inhibition of tumor growth and prolonged
median overall survival compared to control animals. To assess the local
and systemic effect of OncoVEXmGM-CSF in combination with CTLA-4
blockade, we developed a model of experimental metastatic melanoma by
delivering the B16F10-eGFP cells intravenously (systemic, non-injectable
tumors) on day 0 and implanting the B16F10-mNectin1 cells SC (local,
injectable tumors) on day 2. Mice were dosed with OncoVEXmGM-CSF and
anti-CTLA-4 antibody 9D9 (100ug/dose) every 3 days between days 12 and
19. Subcutaneous tumor growth inhibition was assessed and lung metastasis
were quantified on day 28. Both OncoVEXmGM-CSF and CTLA-4 treatment
significantly inhibited subcutaneous tumor growth and lung metastasis.
The combination of both therapeutics resulted in significantly greater
local and systemic efficacy than either agent alone. The strong local and
systemic anti-tumor activity of the combination resulted in a significant
increase in median overall survival (p<0.0001) compared to control mice
that received intravenous B16F10-eGFP cells only.

In conclusion, OncoVEXmGM-CSF in combination with CTLA-4 blockade
significantly reduced systemic tumor burden and prolonged median overall
survival in a B16F10 mouse model of metastatic melanoma. These data
support the proposed MOA by which OncoVEXmGM-CSF treatment can cause
direct tumor lysis along with potentiation of an adaptive, systemic
anti-tumor immune response.


