Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of stromal fibrosis accelerates tumorigenesis in NeuT
mice.


Background: One of the central challenges in cancer prevention is the
identification of factors in the tumor microenvironment (TME) that
increase breast cancer susceptibility. The stromal composition of the
breast is largely adipose and fibroblast tissue, and thus it is important
to understand how alterations in these constituents affect in the onset
of stromal fibrosis (SF) and cancer progression. To address these
questions, MMTV-NeuT mice were crossed into the FAT-ATTAC (fat apoptosis
through targeted activation of caspase 8) background (NeuT/ATTAC),
wherein conditional dimerization of the FKBP-caspase 8 fusion transgene
in female mice results in mammary fat ablation and its replacement with
fibrotic tissue.

Results: Induction of mammary fat ablation in NeuT/ATTAC mice over 4
weeks resulted in increased ductal proliferation and SF as denoted by
increased collagen deposition and expression of Fibroblast Activation
Protein and Î±-smooth muscle actin. Maintaining SF over 3-5 months
resulted in a 40% reduction in tumor onset and a 2.5-fold increase in
tumor multiplicity, which was associated with increased infiltration by
myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Gene expression profiling of tumors
from mice with and without SF identified increased expression of the
immune-related genes Cxcl1, Ly6d and CD14, as well as acute phase
proteins Saa1 and S100a6 in NeuT/ATTAC mice with SF.

Conclusion: Induction of SF in an erbB2-dependent breast cancer model
resulted in a tumor microenvironment more conducive to tumor progression
and immune tolerance. These results suggest alternative therapeutic
approaches that could be taken, eg. chemokine receptor antagonists, to
increase the effectiveness of immunotherapy and chemotherapy.

Supported by a grant from the Avon Foundation for Women and Award
1P30CA051008 from the National Cancer Institute, NIH, to the Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center.


