Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alterations in phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) pathway and
cAMP pathway confirm poor prognosis and reduced overall survival (OS) in
a series of 209 acute myeloid leukemia patients.


Introduction PI3P is a molecule that regulate cell growth and mediates
cell proliferation via PI3K/AKT/mTOR in response to various growth
signals. Abnormal activation of genes in its pathway is associated to
oncogenic activity and poor Overall Survival (OS). AMPK plays a role as a
regulator of cellular energy homeostasis. Aims The aim of the this study
is to define the role of PI3P pathways and AMPK pathway in AML.

Methods In this work we analyzed 208 consecutive newly diagnosed non M3
AML patients, screened for TP53, FLT3, NMP1, IDH1, IDH2, and DNMT3A
mutations. Remission status was assessed with bone marrow biopsy. We
performed Microarray-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization with
Affymetrix SNP array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD in all the patients; we performed
Whole Exome Sequencing (WES)in 80/208 patients. Survival data were
collected prospectively, with a median follow-up of 18 months. Survival
analysis was performed with Kaplan Meyer method using log rank test.
Univariate and multivariable regression and Cox Hazard Ratio(HR) model
was performed. Correlation between variables was assessed with Fisher’s
exact test.

Results We selected genes in pathways basing on literature and GO data.
Alterations in these pathways involved 103/209 patients (48%). We
analyzed the gene in two different pathways. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
includes the following genes: pik3ca, cdkn1a, akt1, akt3, mtor and pten,
pdk1,pik3r1 and irs1. The second one is AMPK pathway and it include:
sesn, prkaa1, prkab1, prkag1, prkag3. Alterations in PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway confer worst OS (p = .035) when compared with unaltered patient,
but events in these pathways did not affect therapy response. Alterations
in AMPK pathway confer worst OS (pResults We selected genes in pathways
basing on literature and GO data. Alterations in these pathways involved
103/209 patients (48%). We analyzed the gene in two different pathways.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway includes the following genes: pik3ca, cdkn1a, akt1,
akt3, mtor and pten, pdk1,pik3r1 and irs1. The second one is AMPK pathway
and it include: sesn, prkaa1, prkab1, prkag1, prkag3. Alterations in
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway confer worst OS (p = .035) when compared with
unaltered patient, but events in these pathways did not affect therapy
response. Alterations in AMPK pathway confer worst OS (p<.001);
Alteration of regulators in cAMP were related to lower CR% after
induction in univariate (pResults We selected genes in pathways basing on
literature and GO data. Alterations in these pathways involved 103/209
patients (48%). We analyzed the gene in two different pathways.
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway includes the following genes: pik3ca, cdkn1a, akt1,
akt3, mtor and pten, pdk1,pik3r1 and irs1. The second one is AMPK pathway
and it include: sesn, prkaa1, prkab1, prkag1, prkag3. Alterations in
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway confer worst OS (p = .035) when compared with
unaltered patient, but events in these pathways did not affect therapy
response. Alterations in AMPK pathway confer worst OS (p<.001);
Alteration of regulators in cAMP were related to lower CR% after
induction in univariate (p<.001) and multivariable analysis with age,
karyotype, secondary AML, TP53 mutation (p=0.009). AMPc pathway
alteration was significantly associated with complex karyotype and TP53
mutation (pResults We selected genes in pathways basing on literature and
GO data. Alterations in these pathways involved 103/209 patients (48%).
We analyzed the gene in two different pathways. PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
includes the following genes: pik3ca, cdkn1a, akt1, akt3, mtor and pten,
pdk1,pik3r1 and irs1. The second one is AMPK pathway and it include:
sesn, prkaa1, prkab1, prkag1, prkag3. Alterations in PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway confer worst OS (p = .035) when compared with unaltered patient,
but events in these pathways did not affect therapy response. Alterations
in AMPK pathway confer worst OS (p<.001); Alteration of regulators in
cAMP were related to lower CR% after induction in univariate (p<.001) and
multivariable analysis with age, karyotype, secondary AML, TP53 mutation
(p=0.009). AMPc pathway alteration was significantly associated with
complex karyotype and TP53 mutation (p<.001). WES in a sub-cohort of
patients did not found any significant mutation in genes we analyzed,
according to literature.

Conclusions Our work investigates the role of PI3P and cAMP pathways in
AML. Surprisingly, it showed that alterations in these pathways are
associated with poor prognosis. Significantly, alterations in cAMP
pathways were associated with therapy resistance. Acknowledgement: ELN,
AIL, AIRC, PRIN, Progetto Regione-Università 2010-12, FP7 NGS-PTL
project, HARMONY


