Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The LSD1 Specific Inhibitor INCB059872 enhances the activity of
immune checkpoint blockade by reshaping the myeloid compartment in the
syngeneic 4T1 mouse mammary tumor model.


Immune checkpoint blockade has shown considerable therapeutic promise in
the clinic. However, single agent activity is compromised by the presence
of suppressive myeloid cells, including myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSC), tumor associated macrophages (TAM) and polymorphonuclear (PMN)
cells, in the tumor microenvironment. Epigenetic alterations can
significantly contribute to the development of the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment and recent data have suggested that combining
epigenetic-based therapies with immunotherapeutic agents can lead to
improved efficacy in preclinical models. Since Lysine Specific
Demethylase 1 (LSD1) has been shown to play a critical role in
hematopoiesis, we hypothesized that inhibition of LSD1 could have a
direct effect on myeloid cell differentiation and potentially restore
normal myelopoiesis in cancer patients. To test this hypothesis, we
evaluated INCB059872, a potent, selective and orally available
FAD-directed covalent inhibitor of LSD1 in several experimental models.
In an in vitro differentiation assay, the majority of CD34+ progenitor
cells were driven to a monocytic phenotype in the presence of INCB059872,
while control treated cells differentiated toward granulocytic PMN cells.
Similar results were observed in vivo. Using the orthotopic 4T1 mammary
cancer model, the myeloid compartment was characterized in tumor tissues
following treatment with INCB059872. Notably, the population of PMN-MDSC
was significantly decreased in tumor tissues following oral
administration of INCB059872, whereas the macrophage population was
increased. These data suggest that INCB059872 can redirect myeloid
differentiation toward monocyte/macrophages and inhibit the
differentiation of PMN-MDSC in this syngeneic tumor microenvironment.
Consistently, intratumoral T lymphocyte infiltration was increased
following INCB059872 treatment. The combination of INCB059872 and
Î±-PD-L1 antibody enhanced anti-tumor efficacy in the 4T1 orthotopic
tumor model. Collectively, these data suggest that inhibition of LSD1
with INCB059872 can directly affect myeloid differentiation to reduce the
accumulation of myeloid suppressive cells, restoring the tumor
microenvironment to be more responsive to PD-1/PD-L1 axis blockade. This
study supports the therapeutic potential for the combination of an LSD1
inhibitor with immuno-therapeutic agents to improve overall clinical
response in cancer patients.


