Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Otx2 and c-Myc association drives tumor progression in
medulloblastoma molecular subtypes 3/4.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is a pediatric brain tumor comprising of four
molecular subgroups, with Group 3 and 4 tumors characterized by
particularly poor prognosis. While research has advanced our
understanding of MB, there is still a pressing need for new knowledge of
the functional processes underlying its progression due to a scarcity of
therapeutics. Recent studies have identified Orthodenticle homeobox 2
(Otx2), a cerebellar transcription factor, to be highly expressed in MB
Group 3/4 subtypes. Datamining studies from Northcott and Robinson
datasets revealed co-expression of Otx2 and c-Myc in Group 3/4 tumors.
DAB staining conducted in human MB specimens showed increased expression
of Otx2 and c-Myc. Colocalization studies confirmed datamining results.
Next, we used a clinical Otx2 inhibitor, all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA),
in a PDX cell line, P9, and in UW228 cells. Western blot analysis
demonstrated reduced levels of c-Myc along with Otx2. In another
experiment, we used the c-Myc/Max inhibitor 10058-F4 and observed
comparable results to Otx2 inhibition. Real time PCR and
immunocytochemistry experiments confirmed the aforementioned results.
Further, treatment with ATRA and 10058-F4 showed reduced proliferation
and migratory abilities in p9 and UW228 when compared to their respective
controls. Mass spectrometry conducted on immune-precipitated Otx2 in P9
cells revealed a plethora of novel interaction partners that drive tumor
growth and progression. In addition, western blot analysis in ATRA
treated cells showed reduced expression of Max, suggestive of the
existence of a feedback loop that link with Otx2 and c-Myc. Collectively
our studies highlight Otx2 as a potential contributor to the malignant
phenotype and describe its role in mediating the aggressiveness of Group
3/4 medulloblastoma.


