Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decreased Fanconi anemia gene expression contributes to efficacy
of PARP and DNMT inhibitor combination therapy in triple negative breast
cancer.


Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) have efficacy in a
sub-set of triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) with inherited
mutations in DNA double strand break repair (DSBR) genes, such as the
BRCA1/2 genes in homologous recombination (HR), through synthetic
lethality. However, PARP inhibitors have failed for the majority of
sporadic TNBCs with intact BRCA1 genes. Therefore, novel targeted
therapies must be explored. We have recently reported that PARPi
Talazoparib in combination with DNA methyl transferase inhibitors
(DNMTi)s azacytidine (AZA) or decitabine (DAC) have efficacy in sporadic
TNBCs in vitro and in vivo. PARPi act not only to catalytically inhibit
PARP but also to trap PARP at DNA single strand breaks (SSB), leading to
suicidal DNA-protein crosslinks (DPC). We also showed that Talazoparib in
combination with AZA/DAC increases PARP trapping in DNA, leading to
increased and persistent levels of lethal DSBs, suggesting that DSBR may
also be impaired with this treatment. HR plays an important role in
resolving DPC in mammalian cells and Fanconi anemia (FA)-dependent HR has
been previously shown to resolve AZA-induced replication lesions. Herein,
we determined whether HR is impaired with combination drug treatment
using a chromosomally integrated GFP-based reporter in the TNBC cell
line, MDA-MB-231. HR activity was significantly (pPoly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) have efficacy in a sub-set of triple
negative breast cancers (TNBCs) with inherited mutations in DNA double
strand break repair (DSBR) genes, such as the BRCA1/2 genes in homologous
recombination (HR), through synthetic lethality. However, PARP inhibitors
have failed for the majority of sporadic TNBCs with intact BRCA1 genes.
Therefore, novel targeted therapies must be explored. We have recently
reported that PARPi Talazoparib in combination with DNA methyl
transferase inhibitors (DNMTi)s azacytidine (AZA) or decitabine (DAC)
have efficacy in sporadic TNBCs in vitro and in vivo. PARPi act not only
to catalytically inhibit PARP but also to trap PARP at DNA single strand
breaks (SSB), leading to suicidal DNA-protein crosslinks (DPC). We also
showed that Talazoparib in combination with AZA/DAC increases PARP
trapping in DNA, leading to increased and persistent levels of lethal
DSBs, suggesting that DSBR may also be impaired with this treatment. HR
plays an important role in resolving DPC in mammalian cells and Fanconi
anemia (FA)-dependent HR has been previously shown to resolve AZA-induced
replication lesions. Herein, we determined whether HR is impaired with
combination drug treatment using a chromosomally integrated GFP-based
reporter in the TNBC cell line, MDA-MB-231. HR activity was significantly
(p<0.05) decreased with AZA or AZA/Talazoparib combination treatment,
suggesting that AZA mediates decreased HR activity. We next questioned
whether subsets of HR genes are indirectly down-regulated by the
epigenetic reprogramming effects of DNMTis, thereby contributing to the
efficacy of DNMTi and PARPi combination therapy. Microarray analysis was
performed in multiple TNBC cell lines (including MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468,
and SUM159PT) post DNMTi treatment and showed significant (pPoly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) have efficacy in a
sub-set of triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs) with inherited
mutations in DNA double strand break repair (DSBR) genes, such as the
BRCA1/2 genes in homologous recombination (HR), through synthetic
lethality. However, PARP inhibitors have failed for the majority of
sporadic TNBCs with intact BRCA1 genes. Therefore, novel targeted
therapies must be explored. We have recently reported that PARPi
Talazoparib in combination with DNA methyl transferase inhibitors
(DNMTi)s azacytidine (AZA) or decitabine (DAC) have efficacy in sporadic
TNBCs in vitro and in vivo. PARPi act not only to catalytically inhibit
PARP but also to trap PARP at DNA single strand breaks (SSB), leading to
suicidal DNA-protein crosslinks (DPC). We also showed that Talazoparib in
combination with AZA/DAC increases PARP trapping in DNA, leading to
increased and persistent levels of lethal DSBs, suggesting that DSBR may
also be impaired with this treatment. HR plays an important role in
resolving DPC in mammalian cells and Fanconi anemia (FA)-dependent HR has
been previously shown to resolve AZA-induced replication lesions. Herein,
we determined whether HR is impaired with combination drug treatment
using a chromosomally integrated GFP-based reporter in the TNBC cell
line, MDA-MB-231. HR activity was significantly (p<0.05) decreased with
AZA or AZA/Talazoparib combination treatment, suggesting that AZA
mediates decreased HR activity. We next questioned whether subsets of HR
genes are indirectly down-regulated by the epigenetic reprogramming
effects of DNMTis, thereby contributing to the efficacy of DNMTi and
PARPi combination therapy. Microarray analysis was performed in multiple
TNBC cell lines (including MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, and SUM159PT) post
DNMTi treatment and showed significant (p<0.05) decreases in expression
of FANCD2, FANCC, and FANCE that could potentially generate a synthetic
lethality when combined with PARPi, as has recently been reported.
Decreased FA gene expression was validated by qPCR of mRNA and western
analysis of proteins. Moreover, treatment of TNBC with DNA crosslinking
agents, which require FA-dependent repair, have increased sensitivity
post DNMTi treatment. These data suggest that decreased FA gene
expression contributes to the efficacy of PARPi/DNMTi treatment in TNBC.
Work is now underway to determine whether depletion of FA proteins can
increase PARP trapping in PARPis treated TNBCs, leading to increased
levels of cytotoxic DSBs.


