Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the adenosine immunosuppressive pathway for cancer
immunotherapy with small molecule agents.


Standard Immune Checkpoint Therapies, such as anti-CTLA-4 or
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 mAb, demonstrate long progression-free-survival for
responding patients but with a low response rate. This can be due to
additional immunosuppressive mechanisms developed by resistant tumors.
The adenosine pathway is one of the main drivers of tumor progression by
acting on two key features of the TME (Tumor Micro-Environment); immunity
and angiogenesis. Expression of CD73 on tumor cells and on
immunosuppressive cell subsets leads to the generation of adenosine from
AMP. Adenosine inhibits the biological functions of T lymphocytes
infiltrating the tumor by binding to the A2AR (receptor). Evotec and
Exscientia are collaborating to accelerate small molecule drug discovery
in the field of Immuno-Oncology by integrating a unique biophysical
screening approach to the adenosine receptors and CD73 to drive automated
medicinal chemistry design with a translational-focused screening
cascade, to discover novel agents that target the adenosinergic pathway
in immuno-oncology. We have firstly sought to generate novel A2AR
antagonists and secondly to create A2AR/CD73 bi-specific inhibitory
molecules with a dual pharmacological profile, from fragment screening
and de novo design approaches. In vivo combination study demonstrate the
advantages of targeting CD73 and A2AR. We have obtained active molecules
illustrated by in vitro data on primary human T lymphocytes. These
results, have paved the way to an optimized process to identify
adenosinergic pathway inhibitors with properties optimized for
immuno-oncology.


