Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating adipose stromal cells (CASCs) as a potential biomarker
of response to weight loss interventions in obese women at high risk for
breast cancer.


Background Obesity is a modifiable risk factor for breast cancer in the
United States. White adipose tissue is increased in obese (BMI â‰¥ 30
kg/m2) women, releasing estrogens and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Adipose
stromal cells play a key role in releasing estrogens, while circulating
adipose stromal cells (CASCs, characterized as CD34+CD31-CD45-) home to
tumor sites and promote angiogenesis and vascularization. CASCs have been
correlated with BMI in both cancer and non-cancer patients. However, BMI
alone as a marker of adiposity has its limitations. We examined whether
CASCs correlate with additional measures of adiposity in women who are at
high risk for development of breast cancer.

Methods Women at high risk for development of breast cancer but without
prior breast cancer were recruited for random periareolar fine needle
aspiration (RPFNA), DEXA body composition, anthropomorphic assessment,
and non-fasting venous blood collection. Mononuclear cells were isolated
and the frequency of CD34brightCD31-CD45- cells was assessed by flow
cytometry.

Results CASC frequency ranged from 0 to 0.018% (median 0.001%) for 13
non-obese and 20 obese women. There was no association between CASC
frequency and BMI (range 19 - 46 kg/m2), either as a linear correlation
or when dichotomized at a BMI of 30 kg/m2. However, there were tendencies
for greater CASC frequencies in pre-menopausal women, women with greater
waist circumference (pResults CASC frequency ranged from 0 to 0.018%
(median 0.001%) for 13 non-obese and 20 obese women. There was no
association between CASC frequency and BMI (range 19 - 46 kg/m2), either
as a linear correlation or when dichotomized at a BMI of 30 kg/m2.
However, there were tendencies for greater CASC frequencies in
pre-menopausal women, women with greater waist circumference (p<0.050),
and women with visceral fat mass greater than 50%. With limited numbers,
there was no apparent association of CASC frequency with cytology or
proliferation (Ki-67) of benign breast epithelial cells acquired by RPFNA.

Conclusions This is the first study to investigate CASC frequency in a
cohort of women at high-risk for development of breast cancer. Our
results to date do not show an association between CASC frequency and
obesity (BMI). However, associations with other indices of visceral fat
suggest that evaluation of circulating adipose stromal cells could have
value as a biomarker of response in clinical trials of obese breast
cancer survivors and high risk women undergoing weight loss (especially
fat mass) interventions.


