Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and safety profiling
of CB-103: A novel first-in-class small molecule inhibitor of the NOTCH
pathway.


NOTCH signaling is a developmental pathway known to play critical roles
during embryonic development as well as for the regulation of
self-renewing tissues. Aberrant activation of NOTCH signaling leads to
deregulation of the self-renewal process resulting in sustained
proliferation, evasion of cell death, loss of differentiation capacity,
invasion and metastasis, all of which are hallmarks of cancer. Over
activation of NOTCH in human cancers can be a consequence of over
expression of NOTCH ligands/receptors, GOF mutations in NOTCH receptors
as well as chromosomal translocations leading to constitutive activation
of the pathway by producing truncated version of NOTCH1 or NOTCH2. Over
activation of NOTCH and its oncogenic role in various cancers is
prognostically relevant with shorter survival seen in patients harbouring
these genetic alterations. Given the importance of Notch signaling in
human cancers, several therapeutic approaches have been utilized to block
NOTCH signaling. Two of these strategies are; a) the use of monoclonal
blocking antibodies (mAbs) against NOTCH ligands and receptors and b) the
use of small molecule Î³-secretase inhibitors (GSIs). However, these
approaches can only be effective if tumor cells express full-length
ligand or receptor molecules. On the contrary, in human cancers
harbouring NOTCH gene fusion due to chromosomal translocations, the use
of mAbs and GSIs will have very limited clinical benefits. A third, yet
not fully explored approach would be the blockage of NOTCH signalling by
targeting the most downstream complex in the NOTCH signal transduction
cascade, the NOTCH transcriptional activation complex, using small
molecule inhibitors.

Previously we have reported the discovery and characterization of CB-103,
a novel first-in-class orally-active small molecule inhibitor of the
NOTCH pathway. CB-103 inhibits NOTCH signaling by targeting the NOTCH
transcriptional activation complex in the nucleus. CB-103 has shown the
ability to block NOTCH signalling in various human cancer cell lines with
active NOTCH pathway. CB-103 has also been tested in in vivo models. In a
GSI/mAb resistant model of human triple negative breast cancer, CB-103
has demonstrated excellent anti-tumor efficacy. In this study we present
additional pharmacology, pharmacokinetics data and provide an overview of
the good safety and tolerability seen with CB-103 in the non-clinical
studies. Based on these findings CB-103 has been selected as clinical
candidate to be investigated in a FIM, phase I/IIA clinical study in
advanced cancer patients.


