Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study of unselected prostate cancer cases
in Finnish population.


Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the second most prevalent cancer in men
worldwide, representing the most common cancer in males in Finland with
5043 new cases and with over 850 annual deaths (2013). PrCa has a
significant heritable component, with genetic factors accounting for 58%
of the risk. Accordingly, genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
identified 104 low penetrance PrCa susceptibility loci to date,
predominantly in populations of mixed European ancestry. However, effect
allele frequencies (EAF) and strength of association (Odds ratio, OR) are
often variable across populations. Our aim is to identify common PrCa
susceptibility alleles specific for Finnish population. Therefore, we
conducted a meta-analyses of >200.000 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 2764 PrCa cases and 2401 controls of Finnish origin. Germline
DNA samples were genotyped within the Collaborative Oncological
Gene-Environment Study (COGS) using Illumina iSelect custom SNP
genotyping platform. Statistical analyses of unconditional case-control
logistic regression model was performed by using PLINK software. After
FDR adjustment altogether 160 variants remain significant on GWAS level
(pProstate cancer (PrCa) is the second most prevalent cancer in men
worldwide, representing the most common cancer in males in Finland with
5043 new cases and with over 850 annual deaths (2013). PrCa has a
significant heritable component, with genetic factors accounting for 58%
of the risk. Accordingly, genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
identified 104 low penetrance PrCa susceptibility loci to date,
predominantly in populations of mixed European ancestry. However, effect
allele frequencies (EAF) and strength of association (Odds ratio, OR) are
often variable across populations. Our aim is to identify common PrCa
susceptibility alleles specific for Finnish population. Therefore, we
conducted a meta-analyses of >200.000 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 2764 PrCa cases and 2401 controls of Finnish origin. Germline
DNA samples were genotyped within the Collaborative Oncological
Gene-Environment Study (COGS) using Illumina iSelect custom SNP
genotyping platform. Statistical analyses of unconditional case-control
logistic regression model was performed by using PLINK software. After
FDR adjustment altogether 160 variants remain significant on GWAS level
(p<5x10-8). The Finnish population specific PrCa associated signals are
concentrated on chromosomes (chr) 7, 8, 11, 17, 19, and in close
proximity to one another on the same chr. The strength of association
varies between 0.59-1.86. In our study we identified 101 risk variants on
chr 8, 11, 17 (OR 1.24-1.86) and 59 protective variants on chr 7, 8, 17,
19 (OR 0.59-0.80) with non-overlapping confidence intervals (CIs). The OR
1.86 is the highest by now found in GWAS studies examining common SNPs in
non-familiar cases. Our data suggests that chromosome 11 seem to be risk
conferring, whereas chromosomes 7 and 19 possess protective variants. The
results facilitate population risk stratification for screening, clinical
studies, treatment choices and functional research of prostate cancer in
Finnish population


