Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic sex hormone levels and breast cancer survival in
the Nurses' Health Study.


Background The role of estrogens has been well established in the
development and progression of breast cancers, while an independent
function of androgens remains to be fully elucidated. There is consistent
evidence that increased levels of circulating sex steroid hormones
predict subsequent breast cancer risk. However, few studies to date have
evaluated circulating sex hormone levels in relation to breast cancer
prognosis and the limited available evidence suggests that higher
estrogen and androgen levels are associated with worse prognosis.
Identifying the distinct roles of estrogens and androgens and their
hormone receptor signaling pathways in breast cancers may inform novel
approaches to breast cancer prevention and treatment.

Methods We evaluated the association between pre-diagnostic circulating
sex hormones and breast cancer survival among 683 breast cancer cases
from the Nursesâ€™ Health Study (NHS) cohort. The NHS began in 1976 with
the enrollment of U.S. registered nurses between the ages of 30 and 55.
The women in this analysis provided a blood sample in 1989-1990, were
postmenopausal and not using menopausal hormone therapy at the time of
blood draw, and were diagnosed with invasive breast cancer between 1990
and 2010. Levels of estradiol, estrone, estrone sulfate, testosterone,
androstenedione, DHEA, DHEAS, and SHBG were measured in plasma. The
association between hormone levels and survival was assessed through
construction of Kaplan-Meier survival curves and through use of Cox
proportional hazards models to estimate hazard ratios and 95% confidence
intervals adjusted for patient, tumor, and treatment covariates.

Results Over follow-up through 2014, a total of 219 deaths occurred,
including 57 breast cancer deaths. For each hormone, we found no
association with breast cancer survival by the log-rank test. Upon
adjustment for patient, tumor, and treatment covariates, we observed
non-significant 47% increases in breast cancer mortality per unit
increase in log estradiol (HR=1.47, 95% CI 0.94-2.31) and estrone sulfate
(HR=1.47, 95% CI 0.97-2.24). Log testosterone was not associated with
breast cancer survival (HR=0.84, 95% CI 0.46-1.53) and the findings were
null for the other hormones. These findings were robust when evaluating
overall survival and when stratifying by tumor estrogen receptor
expression.

Conclusions We observed no significant associations between
pre-diagnostic sex hormone levels and breast cancer survival among
postmenopausal women. This is the first analysis to evaluate
pre-diagnostic hormone levels in relation to survival. Though limited by
sample size, it improves upon past analyses of post-diagnostic hormone
levels by reducing the possibility of the tumor affecting hormone levels
and by better accounting for tumor and treatment characteristics. The
findings should be replicated in a larger population to further assess
the prognostic value of circulating sex hormones in breast cancer
survival.


