Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell division rate heterogeneity explains in vitro clonal
dominance.


The cells that make up a tumor exhibit large phenotypic and genotypic
variation, which strongly influences the effectiveness of cancer therapy.
A typical manifestation of intratumor heterogeneity is the presence of a
few clones that represent most of the tumor population, i.e. clonal
dominance. Such heterogeneity could potentially be caused by the
occurrence of different ratios of cancer stem cells and differentiated
cells per clone, or, alternatively, clonal dominance may be caused by
heterogeneity of division rates between clones. Previously published
work, applying lineage tracing with genetic barcodes to in vitro iterated
growth and passage experiments demonstrated that clonal dominance was
accompanied by clone loss and partial overlap in dominant clones between
biological replicates [1]. To identify the source of these observations,
we build a computational model that simulates the iterated growth and
passage experiments. By varying the 'division rules' in the model, we can
quantitatively predict the evolution of the clone distribution for the
aforementioned hypotheses. In this manner, we show that clonal dominance
does not appear in simulations where all cells divide at a uniform rate,
even when the population is subdivided in cancer stem cells and
differentiated cells. However, when the division rates vary between
clones and are inherited from parent cells, dominant clones appear. These
simulations also closely match the in vitro evolution of clone loss and
clonal overlap between biological replicates. Altogether, our findings
suggest that tumor cells exhibit a heritable variability in the division
rates of individual cells.

References

[1] Porter, S. et al. (2014). Lentiviral and targeted cellular barcoding
reveals ongoing clonal dynamics of cell lines in vitro and in vivo.
Genome Biology, 15(5), R75.


