Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention by tolfenamic acid and characterization of the
molecular targets in Pirc and FAP colorectal adenomas.


A critical need exists in sporadic and high-risk colorectal cancer
patients for endoscopic screening combined with safe and effective
preventive agents. To prioritize molecular targets for prevention studies
in vivo, RNA-seq analyses were conducted on colorectal adenomas from
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) patients, and from the Apc-mutant
polyposis in rat colon (Pirc) model. Using a new murine endoscopic
polypectomy methodology (F.U. Ertem et al., Gastrointest Endosc
2016;83:1272-6), we evaluated agents that might substitute for the
current standard of care, Sulindac, and identified tolfenamic acid (TA)
as a promising candidate for further investigation. At
clinically-relevant doses in the Pirc model, TA suppressed tumorigenesis
significantly both in the small intestine and in the colon. Inhibition by
TA of colonic crypt cell proliferation, and the concomitant activation of
apoptosis, coincided with reduced expression in target tissues of
β-catenin, cyclin D1, Survivin and matrix metalloproteinase 7. Based on
the oncogene candidates defined by RNA-seq analysis, endoscopic tracking
revealed the time-course of tumor suppression by TA, and the temporal
changes in S100a9, Nppb, Aldh1a3 and Mmp7, highlighting their value as
potential early biomarkers for prevention in the clinical setting. As an
“old drug” repurposed from migraine, TA appears to offer an exciting
new therapeutic avenue in FAP and other high-risk colorectal cancer
patient populations. This work was supported in part by NIH grants
CA090890, CA122959, ES00210, ES023512, the John S. Dunn Foundation, and a
Chancellor’s Research Initiative.

1


