Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplatform metabolomics analysis of growth arrest in pancreatic
tumor xenografts.


R,S-4-Methoxy-1-naphthylfenoterol, MNF, inhibits the G protein-coupled
receptor GPR55. In this study, we determine the effect of MNF on human
PANC-1 pancreatic tumor growth in mice and apply multiplatform
metabolomics analysis to identify pathways associated with growth arrest.

Methods: Female Balb/c nude mice, 6-8 weeks old, 18-20g, were inoculated
subcutaneously with 5 x 106 PANC-1 cells. On Day 8, mice were placed in
groups of 10 using random block design based upon tumor volume. Mice
received daily ip injections of vehicle or 40mgxkg-1 MNF 5 days/week for
3 treatment cycles. Mice were monitored daily and tumor volumes measured
at beginning and end of each dosing cycle. On Day 33, mice were
euthanized, and plasma samples and tumors collected. Tumor tissue was
homogenized, extracted and analyzed using liquid chromatography-QTOF-MS,
capillary electrophoresis-TOF-MS and gas chromatography-EI-Q-MS.
Differences between groups were evaluated by unpaired t-test or
Mann−Whitney test with post hoc Benjamini-Hochberg correction.
Statistical significance was set at P≤0.05. Compound identification was
accomplished using online databases and in-house standards

Results Tumor volume increased in vehicle-treated mice by ~700%, 142 ± 8
mm3 to 957 ± 79 mm3 and only ~250% in MNF-treated mice, 143 ± 8 mm3 to
259 ± 27 mm3. On Day 33, MNF was not detected in plasma but accumulated
in tumor tissues, 43.9 ± 32.7 ng/g. Plasma L-lactate levels were reduced
from 3.29 ± 0.66 mmol/L το 2.81 ± 0.60 mmol/L, P≤0.001. Differences
in tumor tissue metabolome were observed with MNF compared to vehicle,
which was reflected by significant, P≤0.05, changes in relative
metabolite signals. MNF treatment was accompanied by the disruption of
pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis at uridine 5'-monophosphate, UMP, and
increased UMP degradation. Moreover, the +237% increase in ophthalmic
acid and +95% increase in its precursor 2-aminobutyrate indicate higher
oxidative stress and the +51% increase in 2-hydroxyproline suggest
greater HFI-1α proteolysis upon MNF treatment.

Conclusions These results are consistent with our previous observations
in PANC-1 cells showing that GPR55 inhibition attenuates activation of
the EGFR-MEK-ERK, Wnt-β-catenin and PI3K/AKT pathways resulting in lower
cyclin D1 expression and halting the cell cycle in G1. The reduction in
HIF-1α expression and glycolytic flux in MNF-treated PANC-1 cells is in
line with the decline in L-lactate plasma levels in MNF-treated mice. The
data from this study indicate that MNF may be useful in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer.


