Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatase Mg2+ and Mn2+ dependent 1F promotes
smoking-induced breast cancer by inactivating phosphorylated p53-induced
signals.


Previously we demonstrated that the activation of α9-nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (α9-nAchR) signaling by smoking promotes breast
cancer formation. To investigate the downstream signaling molecules
involved in α9-nAChR-induced breast tumorigenesis, we used real-time
polymerase chain reactions and Western blotting to assess expression of
protein phosphatase Mg2+/Mn2+ dependent 1F (PPM1F), a Ser/Thr protein
phosphatase, in human breast cancer samples (n=167). Additionally, stable
PPM1F-knockdown and overexpressing cell lines were established to
evaluate the function of PPM1F. The phosphatase activity of PPM1F in
nicotine-treated cells was assessed through Western blotting, confocal
microscopy, and fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Higher levels of
PPM1F were detected in the breast cancer tissues of heavy smokers (n=7,
12.8-fold) greater than of non-smokers (n= 28, 6.3-fold) (**p=0.01). In
vitro, nicotine induced PPM1F expression, whereas α9-nAChR knockdown
reduced the protein expression of PPM1F. A series of biochemical
experiments using nicotine-treated cells suggested that the
dephosphorylation of p53 (Ser-20) and BAX (Ser-184) by PPM1F is a
critical posttranslational modification, as observed in breast cancer
patients who were heavy smokers. These observations indicate that PPM1F
may be a mediator downstream of α9-nAChR that activates smoking-induced
carcinogenic signals. Thus, PPM1F expression could be used for prognostic
diagnosis or inhibited

for cancer prevention and therapy.


