Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical nevi and risk of incident skin cancer in US men: a
prospective study.


Background and Aims: Atypical nevi (AN) are a strong risk factor as well
as a precursor of melanoma. However, most previous studies on the
associations between atypical nevi (AN) and the risk of melanoma have
been conducted in retrospective case-control settings and the few
available prospective studies have been based on small sample sizes.
Further, few studies have examined the associations between AN and risk
of keratinocyte carcinomas (formerly called non-melanoma skin cancer). We
prospectively examined the risk of incident melanoma, squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) associated with AN.

Methods: In the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, information on AN
was collected by self-report. Only those confirmed cases of AN by a
supplementary questionnaire, the Atypical Nevus Screening Questionnaire
(ANQ), were included in the analyses. Diagnosis of skin cancers was
reported biennially and information on melanoma and SCC was
pathologically confirmed. A total of 50193 men were included in our
study, with 1239 confirmed cases of AN with information on diagnosis
year. Cases of AN that were not confirmed or did not respond to the ANQ
were excluded from the analyses. Time-dependent Cox-regression analyses
were conducted for the associations between AN and risk of incident
melanoma, SCC, and BCC respectively.

Results: We identified 545 melanoma cases, 1721 SCC cases, and 13498 BCC
cases during the follow-up (1986-2012). A history of AN was significantly
associated with increased risk of incident melanoma (hazard ratio
[HR]=3.50, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 2.13-5.76) overall and at
different body sites (head and neck, trunk, or limbs). The risk of
melanoma was particularly augmented with the increasing number of AN that
were surgically removed (HR=1.26, 95% CI: 1.16-1.37 per AN) and for cases
of AN with tissue re-excision from the nevus removal sites (HR=4.59, 95%
CI: 1.70-12.41). A history of AN was also significantly associated with
increased risk of BCC (HR=1.84, 95% CI: 1.60-2.10) and was only
associated with risk of SCC at the trunk sites (HR=3.09, 95% CI:
1.24-7.72).

Conclusions: A history of AN significantly increased the risk of
subsequent melanoma in a prospective study of men. A history of AN may
also be associated with increased risk of BCC overall and trunk SCC,
which requires further studies to replicate.


