Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of comorbidities among Hispanic and non-Hispanic white breast
cancer survivors compared to breast cancer free women.


Hispanic women are projected to account for an increasing proportion of
the U.S. breast cancer (BC) survivor population which is reaching 3.1
million. The number of BC survivors at risk of developing age-related
comorbid conditions is increasing. Limited studies have examined the
relationship between being a BC survivor and risk of comorbidities
compared to BC free women of similar age. Few studies have included
Hispanic women, in which the prevalence of chronic conditions, such as
diabetes and hypertension are high. In this study we examined the
associations between BC survivor status, ethnicity, and risk of
comorbidities among long-term BC survivors and BC free women/controls
that participated in the New Mexico Womenâ€™s Health Study (NMWHS) - a
population-based case-control study from 1992-1994. The Long-Term Quality
of Life Follow-up Study (2007-2011) was conducted approximately 15 years
(median) from BC diagnosis for cases or selection date for controls that
participated in the NMWHS. Data for comorbid conditions, lifestyle and
reproductive factors were collected at follow-up interview. Baseline data
from the NMWHS interviews were also available. A total of 449 BC
survivors (68 Hispanic, 131 NHW) and controls (78 Hispanic, 172 NHW) were
included in this analysis. Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were calculated using logistic regression models for the
associations between survivor status, risk of disease-specific conditions
and comorbidities based on Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) level
(low-high vs none) at follow-up. The mean age at follow-up of BC
survivors (64.3 years) and controls (64.0 years) was not significantly
different. A total of 128 survivors and 139 controls experienced low-high
levels of CCI (chi-sq. p=0.06). The two most commonly reported CCI
conditions among survivors and controls were connective tissue disease
(43% of survivors; 33% of controls) and chronic pulmonary disease (25% of
survivors; 18% of controls). Overall, BC survivors had increased risk of
CCI (OR, 1.66; 95% CI 1.10-2.51), compared to controls. While Hispanic
ethnicity was not a significant predictor of CCI, the following factors
were significantly associated with CCI and were mutually adjusted for
with survivor status: smoked for > 6 months at baseline (OR, 1.59; 95% CI
1.06-2.38); hypertension at follow-up (OR, 1.84; 95% CI 1.19-2.85); and
history of hysterectomy (OR, 1.97; 95% CI 1.28-3.03). BC survivor status
significantly predicted risk of connective tissue (OR, 1.76; 95% CI
1.17-2.64) and chronic pulmonary diseases (OR, 1.68; 95% CI 1.04-2.70);
while no significant associations were observed for risk of diabetes,
hypertension, or heart disease. Our findings suggest that smoking history
and hysterectomy are contextual factors when considering BC survivorship
care, and comorbidities such as connective tissue and pulmonary diseases
should also be considered.


