Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intestinal estrogen receptor beta attenuates colon cancer
signaling pathways in vivo.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common form of cancer and the
second leading cause for cancer deaths. Several epidemiological, in vitro
and in vivo studies suggest that Estrogen receptor β (ERβ) could be a
possible target for CRC prevention and treatment, but the potential
mechanism is not demonstrated. ERβ is expressed in intestinal epithelial
cells, as well as in some intestinal immune cells and other tissues.
Previous studies have seen increased CRC after full ERβ knockout, but it
is not clear if this is mediated by intestinal ERβ. The specific aim of
our study is to determine the role of intestinal ERβ during colon cancer
development in vivo. We deleted ERβ specifically in the intestine
epithelia of mice (iERβKO), and induced CRC using Azoxymethane (AOM) and
Dextran Sulfate Sodium (DSS) treatment. After 9 weeks treatment, all mice
presented colitis and two iERβKO mice but none of the wild-type (WT)
mice had developed tumors. qPCR showed that the expression of
pro-inflammatory markers was higher in iERβKO treated mice than in
untreated or WT mice, Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of proliferative markers
showed that iERβKO exhibited higher cell proliferation in the top of the
crypts compared to controls. After 16 weeks treatment, all mice developed
tumors. qPCR showed that the expression of mesenchymal markers was higher
in treated iERβKO mice compared to treated WT mice. Our results
demonstrate that intestinal ERβ attenuates colon cancer-related pathways.


