Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radioresistance is linked with stem-like properties via activation
of aryl hydrocarbon receptor.


Most cancer patients receive radiotherapy in the course of their disease
and the occurrence of radioresistance is associated with a poor prognosis
for cancer patients. The molecular pathways that drive the enhanced
tumorigenic potential during the development of radioresistance are
poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) plays a vital and previously unrecognized role in the
maintenance of stem-like cells that are isolated from radioresistant
epithelial lung cancer and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. AhR promotes the
stem-like phenotype and drives metastasis by directly targeting the
promoters of ‘stemness’ genes, such as the ATP-binding cassette
sub-family G member 2 (ABCG2) gene. Cancer cell populations enriched for
ABCG2 expression (CD338+) show an elevated ‘stemness’ signature and
are more prone to cancer progression in vitro and in vivo. Ubiquitin
C-terminal hydrolase-L3 (UCHL3), a deubiquitinating enzyme, may
counteract AhR, while IKKα, a bone fide chromatin modifier, may directly
activate stemness related genes. The radioresistant cancer cell sublines
are associated with a hybrid state in epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET), and elevated tumor
associated macrophages and proinflammatory factors. Moreover, the
radioresistant sublines display high levels of oncometabolites, including
α-ketoglutarate, and treatment of cancer cells with α-ketoglutarate
enhances their stem-like properties through activation of the AhR. Thus
AhR is functionally linked with radioresistance in lung cancer and
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and it drives tumorigenesis by an epithelial
and mesenchymal composition, tumor associated macrophages and
oncometabolites.


