Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MerTK promotes resistance to irreversible EGFR TKIs by activation
of the PI3K-AKT pathway in NSCLCs expressing wild-type EGFR.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death with poor
survival rates worldwide. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for
85% of all lung cancers and 60% of these have overexpression of wild-type
EGFR (wtEGFR), which portends a poor prognosis. In addition, in a recent
clinical trial 6 of 12 lung cancer patients whose tumors acquired a
resistance-conferring T790M EGFR mutation during treatment with an EGFR
TKI reverted to wtEGFR after treatment with Rociletinib/CO-1686, an
irreversible EGFR TKI that is selective for the T790M mutant. These data
suggest that targeting wtEGFR may improve treatment outcomes; however, to
date single agents that target wtEGFR have not been effective in large
scale clinical trials and new ways to target wtEGFR in this context are
needed. Our laboratory previously identified the MerTK receptor tyrosine
kinase as a potential therapeutic target in NSCLC and developed MRX-2843
as a novel MerTK-selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor with
favorable properties for clinical translation. Irrespective of driver
oncogene status, treatment with a MerTK inhibitor yields potent
anti-tumor effects in NSCLC cell culture models and blocks tumor growth
in xenografts of the MerTK-dependent wtEGFR-expressing A549 cell line. In
an attempt to more potently block A549 lung cancer cell proliferation, we
screened a library of 378 kinase inhibitors that are in various stages of
development and identified synergy between MRX-2843 and multiple
irreversible EGFR TKIs, including CO-1686 and Osimertinib/AZD-9291.
Further, we found that wtEGFR and MerTK were frequently co-expressed and
co-immunoprecipitated with each other in NSCLC cancer cell lysates.
Synergistic inhibition of cell expansion was observed in a spectrum of
NSCLC cell lines with wtEGFR expression treated with the combination
therapy, including H1299 (NRAS mutation), H157 (KRAS mutation), H3122
(ALK fusion), and Colo699 (FGFR1 overexpression). On a mechanistic level,
combined treatment with 1Î¼M CO-1686 and 100 nM MRX-2843 dramatically
inhibited phosphorylation of both MerTK and EGFR and downstream signaling
through the PI3K-AKT and MAPK-ERK pathways, while treatment with
equivalent doses of either single agent did not efficiently inhibit
MerTK, EGFR or downstream signaling. Additionally, CO-1686 mediated
synergistic inhibition of A549 expansion in combination with a PI3K or
AKT inhibitor, suggesting a role for PI3K-AKT activation downstream of
MerTK contributing to the resistance of wtEGFR NSCLCs to irreversible
EGFR TKIs. Taken together, our data provide rationale for a novel
strategy for treatment of NSCLC with wtEGFR overexpression by combining
MRX-2843 and an irreversible EGFR inhibitor.


