Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autoregulation of protein kinase D1 (PRKD1) expression in prostate
cancer.


Protein kinase D1 (PRKD1) is down regulated in gastric, breast and
prostate cancer. Several regulatory mechanisms modulate PRKD1 activity in
cancers. In colon cancer, it has been shown that PRKD1 is down regulated
by nuclear beta-catenin. We explored whether beta-catenin is involved in
regulation of PRKD1 expression in prostate cancer as well. A CHIP assay
performed using prostate cancer LNCaP cell lysate and pull down with beta
-catenin antibody, which demonstrated recruitment of beta -catenin to
promoter of PRKD1 gene as well as at downstream regions in the gene
suggesting that beta -catenin could be involved in PRKD1 regulation. To
identify the exact binding site of beta-catenin to PRKD1 gene, we carried
out CHIP sequencing. The beta -catenin protein complex was bound to a 166
bp sequence near exon 2 (chr14:29899631-29899796). Because beta -catenin
is a coactivator and not a known transcription factor, we performed a
transcription factor promoter array, which showed that the MYC/MAX
transcription factor complex may be the mediator of the regulatory effect
of beta -catenin on PRKD1 expression. We validated the results by
performing CHIP assay using MYC and MAX antibodies which showed
recruitment of both MYC and MAX to the same beta -catenin binding site to
PRKD1. In order to assess the functional impact of beta -catenin
regulation of PRKD1 in prostate cancer, beta-catenin mutated at threonine

120 residue (we have previously shown that PRKD1 is the only known kinase
to phosphorylate the site) demonstrated increased nuclear translocation
of beta-catenin and increase down regulation of PRKD1 and increased
androgen receptor (AR) activity (increased AR activity is well
established to be associated with PC progression). Our data has
identified a novel auto-regulatory mechanism of PRKD1 expression through
beta-catenin phosphorylation.


