Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RET rearrangements as promising therapeutic targets in breast
cancer.


Background: Receptor tyrosine kinase alterations have played a
significant role in therapeutic decisions for cancer due to their
oncogenic nature and response to targeted small molecule kinase
inhibitors. Increased genomic profiling of tumors using hybrid-capture
based next-generation sequencing approaches now reveal the presence of
previously unknown fusions and alterations involving kinases in a diverse
set of cancers. Here we report the presence and therapeutic significance
of recurrent and novel fusions involving RET, a known oncogenic tyrosine
kinase receptor, in breast cancer.

Methods: Comprehensive genomic profiling on formalin-fixed, paraffin
embedded patient tumor tissues was performed using FoundationOne platform
that covers the entire coding region for 315 cancer-related genes and
introns of 28 genes involved in rearrangements at a depth of 500-1000X
(Foundation Medicine, MA). Out of 23 rearrangements, two representative
RET fusion expression vectors were synthesized and expressed in
non-tumorigenic cell lines (breast MCF10A and mouse 3T3 fibroblasts) and
were evaluated for RET kinase signaling, drug response, and
tumorigenicity.

Results: RET gene fusions, the canonical NCOA4-RET and a novel,
noncanonical RASGEF1A-RET fusion, were identified in two separate breast
cancers and both include exons required to retain the intact kinase
domain of Ret. The novel RASGEF1A-RET fusion includes the non-coding
region of RASGEF1A potentially resulting in a truncated RET protein using
an alternate internal start site in exon 11 of RET. In vitro
characterization of both fusions expressed in mouse 3T3 and human MCF10a
cell lines revealed constitutive kinase activation and subsequent
downstream signaling as evidenced by phosphorylation of Ret, Erk and Akt.
This is the first reported noncanonical RET rearrangement resulting in a
5â€™ truncated but functional RET kinase. Non-tumorigenic cell lines with
stable expression of either rearrangement showed transformed phenotypes
assessed by changes in morphology, enhanced growth rate, colony forming
ability, and tumor formation in mice. RET fusion-transformed cells were
exquisitely sensitive to treatment with RET inhibitors when evaluated in
both short-term and long-term functional assays. NCOA4-RET was found by
CGP in an index case of metastatic ER+/HER2+ breast cancer that had
radiographic evidence of disease progression while on trastuzumab,
pertuzumab, and anastrazole. Subsequent treatment with cabozantinib plus
anastrazole led to a rapid clinical and radiographic response.

Conclusion: CGP techniques involving hybrid-capture based approaches can
identify previously unreported but recurrent RET gene fusions in breast
cancer. Here, we show that RET fusions including both canonical and
non-canonical complex rearrangements are functional and may represent
promising therapeutic targets in selected breast cancer patients.


