Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pro-nanodrug with intratumoral reconstitution and intracellular
delivery beyond therapy-resistance molecular pumps.


Tumor metastases to distant organs pose a serious challenge to cancer
treatment. The metastatic tumor lesions are less accessible to cancer
drugs and the malignant cells often quickly develop therapy resistance.
To address both biological and drug transport concerns in cancer
treatment, we have developed a novel composite pro-nanodrug to provide
sustained intra-tumoral assembly of nanotherapeutics, and tested its
anti-cancer efficacy in murine models of breast cancer metastases to the
lung and liver. Specifically, large payloads of polymeric doxorubicin
(pDox) pro-drug were packaged as single molecules into a porous silicon
microparticles that can be enriched in tumor tissue in the forms of
vascular and cellular depots. Once inside the tumor, the pDox molecules
self-assemble into nanoparticles that are released into the tissue where
they are effectively internalized by tumor cells. The nanoparticulate
prodrug is transported through the vesicular system, and doxorubicin is
cleaved from the polymer and released in the immediate proximity of the
nucleus beyond the reach of the drug efflux pumps. In vivo efficacy
studies demonstrated that the pro-nanodrug was effective in treating
metastatic tumors with or without expression of the multi-drug resistant
genes.


