Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human epidermal growth receptor-2 immunohistochemistry in gastric
cancer.


Introduction: Gastric cancer is the second most common GI cancers and
third leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. In Ghana, gastric
cancer contributes significantly to cancer morbidity and mortality. The
recent development on the benefit of targeted therapy in the management
of gastric cancer using HER-2 monoclonal antibody in combination with
chemotherapy has greatly improved the overall survival of patients. This
study therefore aims at determining the frequency of Her-2
over-expression in gastric carcinomas in Kumasi, Ghana and comparing with
other prognostic factors.

Methodology: Demographic data and histological diagnosis were retrieved
from the surgical day book of the Department of Pathology, Komfo Anokye
Teaching Hospital, Kumasi. The slides were retrieved and reviewed to
confirm diagnosis, grading and classification of gastric cancer.
Immunohistochemistry was done with anti-HER-2 antibody to confirm HER-2
over-expression. The data was analysed with SPSS version 17. Results: Of
the 99 cases of gastric cancer seen over the 8 year period, there were 57
males and 42 females, adenocarcinoma (91), GIST (5) and Non Hodgskin
Lymphoma (3). The age range of the study population was 8-90 years with
modal age group in the 6th decade. There were more biopsies (63) than
resections (36). Of the adenocarcinomas, 45 were poorly differentiated,
38 moderately differentiated and 8 well differentiated. Diffuse type is
most common with 47 cases followed by intestinal 41cases and mixed type 3
cases. Three of the 4 patients under the age of 30 years had lymphoma.
HER-2 over-expression was seen in 14 out of the 47 tested and all were
intestinal type.

Conclusion: HER -2 over-expression was seen a small cohort of our
patients with gastric cancer especially those with intestinal type.


