Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence linking aquaporin-3 loss to increased invasiveness in
bladder cancer.


Bladder cancer (BCa) is the most common type of urothelial cancer (UC).
According to American Cancer Society, in 2016, diagnoses of 76,960 new
cases of bladder cancer (BCa) and 16,390 BCa associated deaths have been
estimated. More than 90% of bladder cancer starts in the innermost
transitional epithelium (urothelium) of the bladder. Aquaporin 3 (AQP3),
one of 13 members of a transmembrane channel forming protein family
(AQP0-12), has an N-terminal basolateral sorting signal and localizes to
the basolateral membrane in epithelial tissues. Recent studies have shown
that AQP3 expression is decreased in UC thus supporting a new hypothesis
that alteration of the expression of AQP3 plays a role in the
pathogenesis of UC. However, it remains to be determined whether AQP3 is
involved in the invasion and metastasis of UC cells. In the present
study, human bladder cancer cell lines of different grades, SW780 (G1)
and TCCSUP (G4) were studied. Transcript and protein levels of AQP3
expression were significantly higher in low grade, SW780 cells when
compared to the higher-grade TCCSUP cells. Inhibition of AQP3 by CuSO4 or
siRNA specific knockdown of AQP3 resulted in increased migration in the
wound-healing scratch assay. Over-expression of AQP3 plasmid resulted in
reduced migration. It is known that epithelial cell polarity contributes
to tumor suppression and that loss of E-cadherin is a crucial step in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our results indicate that
AQP3 overexpression induced expression of E-cadherin, consistent with a
role for AQP3 as a tumor suppressor by maintaining epithelial cell
polarity and inhibiting EMT in BCa. Conversely, reduced AQP3 levels
leading to reduced E-cadherin levels in high-grade BCa cells may result
in loss of cell polarity, increased invasiveness and increased EMT.


