Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineered microfluidic 3D human microvasculature identifies
Talin-1-dependent adhesion and FAK activation as the key promoter of
cancer cell trans-endothelial migration.


In extravasation cancer cells and vascular niche are involved in a tight
cross-talk which has been defined as the rate-regulating event for
metastases establishment [1]. Recent, animal studies support the
hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in focal adhesion complex
alterations, however, it still needs to be elucidated which are the
specific regulators of each event composing extravasation. Focal adhesion
proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated
in breast cancer. Both targets due to their structural and functional
role, dramatically influence cancer mechanotransduction leading to
endothelial junction disruption, critical in extravasation process [2].
Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models for each extravasation step
allowing single cell behavior analyses through high resolution real time
imaging in a reliable and quantitative way in a physiological
environment. Through this novel approach we analyzed the effect of TLN-1
and FAK and their genetic and chemical inhibition in breast cancer
extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic vasculature displayed maturation
markers and physiological permeability (1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed
cancer cell injection through the hollow vessels. Western blot confirmed
TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly
affected morphology and proliferation (pIn extravasation cancer cells and
vascular niche are involved in a tight cross-talk which has been defined
as the rate-regulating event for metastases establishment [1]. Recent,
animal studies support the hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in
focal adhesion complex alterations, however, it still needs to be
elucidated which are the specific regulators of each event composing
extravasation. Focal adhesion proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion
Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated in breast cancer. Both targets due to their
structural and functional role, dramatically influence cancer
mechanotransduction leading to endothelial junction disruption, critical
in extravasation process [2]. Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models
for each extravasation step allowing single cell behavior analyses
through high resolution real time imaging in a reliable and quantitative
way in a physiological environment. Through this novel approach we
analyzed the effect of TLN-1 and FAK and their genetic and chemical
inhibition in breast cancer extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic
vasculature displayed maturation markers and physiological permeability
(1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed cancer cell injection through the hollow
vessels. Western blot confirmed TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in
MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly affected morphology and
proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the involvement of both targets
in adhesion to the endothelium (pIn extravasation cancer cells and
vascular niche are involved in a tight cross-talk which has been defined
as the rate-regulating event for metastases establishment [1]. Recent,
animal studies support the hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in
focal adhesion complex alterations, however, it still needs to be
elucidated which are the specific regulators of each event composing
extravasation. Focal adhesion proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion
Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated in breast cancer. Both targets due to their
structural and functional role, dramatically influence cancer
mechanotransduction leading to endothelial junction disruption, critical
in extravasation process [2]. Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models
for each extravasation step allowing single cell behavior analyses
through high resolution real time imaging in a reliable and quantitative
way in a physiological environment. Through this novel approach we
analyzed the effect of TLN-1 and FAK and their genetic and chemical
inhibition in breast cancer extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic
vasculature displayed maturation markers and physiological permeability
(1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed cancer cell injection through the hollow
vessels. Western blot confirmed TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in
MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly affected morphology and
proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the involvement of both targets
in adhesion to the endothelium (p<0.001). Trans endothelial migration
(TEM) was decreased in TLN-1 KD (pIn extravasation cancer cells and
vascular niche are involved in a tight cross-talk which has been defined
as the rate-regulating event for metastases establishment [1]. Recent,
animal studies support the hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in
focal adhesion complex alterations, however, it still needs to be
elucidated which are the specific regulators of each event composing
extravasation. Focal adhesion proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion
Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated in breast cancer. Both targets due to their
structural and functional role, dramatically influence cancer
mechanotransduction leading to endothelial junction disruption, critical
in extravasation process [2]. Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models
for each extravasation step allowing single cell behavior analyses
through high resolution real time imaging in a reliable and quantitative
way in a physiological environment. Through this novel approach we
analyzed the effect of TLN-1 and FAK and their genetic and chemical
inhibition in breast cancer extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic
vasculature displayed maturation markers and physiological permeability
(1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed cancer cell injection through the hollow
vessels. Western blot confirmed TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in
MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly affected morphology and
proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the involvement of both targets
in adhesion to the endothelium (p<0.001). Trans endothelial migration
(TEM) was decreased in TLN-1 KD (p<0.05) and in FAK KD (PIn extravasation
cancer cells and vascular niche are involved in a tight cross-talk which
has been defined as the rate-regulating event for metastases
establishment [1]. Recent, animal studies support the hypothesis that
metastatic deficiency lies in focal adhesion complex alterations,
however, it still needs to be elucidated which are the specific
regulators of each event composing extravasation. Focal adhesion proteins
Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated in
breast cancer. Both targets due to their structural and functional role,
dramatically influence cancer mechanotransduction leading to endothelial
junction disruption, critical in extravasation process [2]. Here, we
generated ad hoc engineered models for each extravasation step allowing
single cell behavior analyses through high resolution real time imaging
in a reliable and quantitative way in a physiological environment.
Through this novel approach we analyzed the effect of TLN-1 and FAK and
their genetic and chemical inhibition in breast cancer extravasation. The
3D-microfluidic vasculature displayed maturation markers and
physiological permeability (1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed cancer cell
injection through the hollow vessels. Western blot confirmed TLN-1 and
FAK knock down (KD) in MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly affected
morphology and proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the involvement
of both targets in adhesion to the endothelium (p<0.001). Trans
endothelial migration (TEM) was decreased in TLN-1 KD (p<0.05) and in FAK
KD (P<0.01). Both TLN-1 and FAK KD cells were trapped into the vessels
and were not able to extend pseudopodia. Cancer migration tracking in 3D
matrix was statistically lower in both KD (pIn extravasation cancer cells
and vascular niche are involved in a tight cross-talk which has been
defined as the rate-regulating event for metastases establishment [1].
Recent, animal studies support the hypothesis that metastatic deficiency
lies in focal adhesion complex alterations, however, it still needs to be
elucidated which are the specific regulators of each event composing
extravasation. Focal adhesion proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion
Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated in breast cancer. Both targets due to their
structural and functional role, dramatically influence cancer
mechanotransduction leading to endothelial junction disruption, critical
in extravasation process [2]. Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models
for each extravasation step allowing single cell behavior analyses
through high resolution real time imaging in a reliable and quantitative
way in a physiological environment. Through this novel approach we
analyzed the effect of TLN-1 and FAK and their genetic and chemical
inhibition in breast cancer extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic
vasculature displayed maturation markers and physiological permeability
(1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed cancer cell injection through the hollow
vessels. Western blot confirmed TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in
MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly affected morphology and
proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the involvement of both targets
in adhesion to the endothelium (p<0.001). Trans endothelial migration
(TEM) was decreased in TLN-1 KD (p<0.05) and in FAK KD (P<0.01). Both
TLN-1 and FAK KD cells were trapped into the vessels and were not able to
extend pseudopodia. Cancer migration tracking in 3D matrix was
statistically lower in both KD (p<0.001). The calculated ratios of
adhesion/TEM and invasion/TEM were lower in TLN-1 compared to FAK KD,
demonstrating that TLN-1 plays a major role in adhesion to endothelium
and early invasion while FAK was identified as the main driver in TEM.
Additive (TLN-1 and FAK) KD did not show significant difference respect
to the target that mostly affected adhesion and invasion demonstrating
TLN-1 role in these events. Additive KD was statistically lower compared
to TLN-1 KD (PIn extravasation cancer cells and vascular niche are
involved in a tight cross-talk which has been defined as the
rate-regulating event for metastases establishment [1]. Recent, animal
studies support the hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in focal
adhesion complex alterations, however, it still needs to be elucidated
which are the specific regulators of each event composing extravasation.
Focal adhesion proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK)
are up-regulated in breast cancer. Both targets due to their structural
and functional role, dramatically influence cancer mechanotransduction
leading to endothelial junction disruption, critical in extravasation
process [2]. Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models for each
extravasation step allowing single cell behavior analyses through high
resolution real time imaging in a reliable and quantitative way in a
physiological environment. Through this novel approach we analyzed the
effect of TLN-1 and FAK and their genetic and chemical inhibition in
breast cancer extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic vasculature displayed
maturation markers and physiological permeability (1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s)
and allowed cancer cell injection through the hollow vessels. Western
blot confirmed TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in MDA-MB231. Both targets
significantly affected morphology and proliferation (p<0.001). We
demonstrated the involvement of both targets in adhesion to the
endothelium (p<0.001). Trans endothelial migration (TEM) was decreased in
TLN-1 KD (p<0.05) and in FAK KD (P<0.01). Both TLN-1 and FAK KD cells
were trapped into the vessels and were not able to extend pseudopodia.
Cancer migration tracking in 3D matrix was statistically lower in both KD
(p<0.001). The calculated ratios of adhesion/TEM and invasion/TEM were
lower in TLN-1 compared to FAK KD, demonstrating that TLN-1 plays a major
role in adhesion to endothelium and early invasion while FAK was
identified as the main driver in TEM. Additive (TLN-1 and FAK) KD did not
show significant difference respect to the target that mostly affected
adhesion and invasion demonstrating TLN-1 role in these events. Additive
KD was statistically lower compared to TLN-1 KD (P<0.05), supporting FAK
crucial role in TEM. Inhibition of TLN-1 and FAK phosphorylation revealed
that actin polymerization and pseudopodia formation (required for
extravasation) were dependent by their structural role and were
independent by their phosphorylation. However, the inhibition of FAK
activity showed FAK phosphorylation as the key driver of TEM mechanism
(pIn extravasation cancer cells and vascular niche are involved in a
tight cross-talk which has been defined as the rate-regulating event for
metastases establishment [1]. Recent, animal studies support the
hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in focal adhesion complex
alterations, however, it still needs to be elucidated which are the
specific regulators of each event composing extravasation. Focal adhesion
proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated
in breast cancer. Both targets due to their structural and functional
role, dramatically influence cancer mechanotransduction leading to
endothelial junction disruption, critical in extravasation process [2].
Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models for each extravasation step
allowing single cell behavior analyses through high resolution real time
imaging in a reliable and quantitative way in a physiological
environment. Through this novel approach we analyzed the effect of TLN-1
and FAK and their genetic and chemical inhibition in breast cancer
extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic vasculature displayed maturation
markers and physiological permeability (1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed
cancer cell injection through the hollow vessels. Western blot confirmed
TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly
affected morphology and proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the
involvement of both targets in adhesion to the endothelium (p<0.001).
Trans endothelial migration (TEM) was decreased in TLN-1 KD (p<0.05) and
in FAK KD (P<0.01). Both TLN-1 and FAK KD cells were trapped into the
vessels and were not able to extend pseudopodia. Cancer migration
tracking in 3D matrix was statistically lower in both KD (p<0.001). The
calculated ratios of adhesion/TEM and invasion/TEM were lower in TLN-1
compared to FAK KD, demonstrating that TLN-1 plays a major role in
adhesion to endothelium and early invasion while FAK was identified as
the main driver in TEM. Additive (TLN-1 and FAK) KD did not show
significant difference respect to the target that mostly affected
adhesion and invasion demonstrating TLN-1 role in these events. Additive
KD was statistically lower compared to TLN-1 KD (P<0.05), supporting FAK
crucial role in TEM. Inhibition of TLN-1 and FAK phosphorylation revealed
that actin polymerization and pseudopodia formation (required for
extravasation) were dependent by their structural role and were
independent by their phosphorylation. However, the inhibition of FAK
activity showed FAK phosphorylation as the key driver of TEM mechanism
(p<0.01). Concluding, our results supported by in vivo data (pIn
extravasation cancer cells and vascular niche are involved in a tight
cross-talk which has been defined as the rate-regulating event for
metastases establishment [1]. Recent, animal studies support the
hypothesis that metastatic deficiency lies in focal adhesion complex
alterations, however, it still needs to be elucidated which are the
specific regulators of each event composing extravasation. Focal adhesion
proteins Talin-1 (TLN-1) and Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) are up-regulated
in breast cancer. Both targets due to their structural and functional
role, dramatically influence cancer mechanotransduction leading to
endothelial junction disruption, critical in extravasation process [2].
Here, we generated ad hoc engineered models for each extravasation step
allowing single cell behavior analyses through high resolution real time
imaging in a reliable and quantitative way in a physiological
environment. Through this novel approach we analyzed the effect of TLN-1
and FAK and their genetic and chemical inhibition in breast cancer
extravasation. The 3D-microfluidic vasculature displayed maturation
markers and physiological permeability (1.5±0.76*10-6cm/s) and allowed
cancer cell injection through the hollow vessels. Western blot confirmed
TLN-1 and FAK knock down (KD) in MDA-MB231. Both targets significantly
affected morphology and proliferation (p<0.001). We demonstrated the
involvement of both targets in adhesion to the endothelium (p<0.001).
Trans endothelial migration (TEM) was decreased in TLN-1 KD (p<0.05) and
in FAK KD (P<0.01). Both TLN-1 and FAK KD cells were trapped into the
vessels and were not able to extend pseudopodia. Cancer migration
tracking in 3D matrix was statistically lower in both KD (p<0.001). The
calculated ratios of adhesion/TEM and invasion/TEM were lower in TLN-1
compared to FAK KD, demonstrating that TLN-1 plays a major role in
adhesion to endothelium and early invasion while FAK was identified as
the main driver in TEM. Additive (TLN-1 and FAK) KD did not show
significant difference respect to the target that mostly affected
adhesion and invasion demonstrating TLN-1 role in these events. Additive
KD was statistically lower compared to TLN-1 KD (P<0.05), supporting FAK
crucial role in TEM. Inhibition of TLN-1 and FAK phosphorylation revealed
that actin polymerization and pseudopodia formation (required for
extravasation) were dependent by their structural role and were
independent by their phosphorylation. However, the inhibition of FAK
activity showed FAK phosphorylation as the key driver of TEM mechanism
(p<0.01). Concluding, our results supported by in vivo data (p<0.05)
showed that TLN-1 and FAK inhibition may represent novel strategies
challenging mechanisms leading to metastatic establishment. 1.
Cell,2011.147(2):p.275-92; 2. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,2015.112(1):p.214-9


