Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Focal radiation enhances paclitaxel therapy in a mouse model of
triple negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for 15-20% of all breast
cancers in the US. In general, patients have poorer prognosis and
therapeutic intervention is more challenging due to insensitivity to
hormonal and anti-HER2 therapies. Therapeutic options include
chemotherapy and/or radiation (RT) treatment. In this work we utilized
HCC70, a human TNBC cell line, grown subcutaneously in NSG mice. We
investigated whether the combination of focal RT and paclitaxel would
improve anti-tumor activity over paclitaxel alone. RT therapy has
typically been delivered in low doses over long periods of time. More
recently higher fractions of RT are being given in shorter time
intervals. Utilizing the Small Animal Radiation Research Platform (SARRP;
Xstrahl, Suwanee, GA) we compared a low dose (2.5Gy) fractionated regimen
to a higher dose but less frequent regimen (8Gy, QDx3) either as
monotherapy or in combination with paclitaxel (15mg/kg weekly). The total
cumulative dose of radiation was 24-25Gy in both radiation regimens.
Paclitaxel alone produced moderate activity with a 10 day tumor growth
delay and no tumor regressions. Treatment with low dose RT resulted in
tumor stasis for â‰¥68 days, but there were no tumor regressions or tumor
free survivors (TFS). Treatment with 8Gy, produced a 75% incidence of
confirmed partial regressions (PR) and a 25% incidence of complete
regressions (CR) with no TFS. In this group we observed slightly more
body weight loss (BWL), more frequent clinical signs, and more frequent
need for food and water supplementation than with the fractionated RT
regimen. Mean BWL was ~10% with a nadir around 8-10 days post first RT
dose. BWL was recovered over the next 1-2 week period. The combination of
low dose focal RT with paclitaxel produced activity similar to that with
high dose radiation (50% PR, 40% CR, and 1 TFS). Treatment with
paclitaxel plus 8Gy RT was highly efficacious, producing an 80% incidence
of CRs, all of which remained tumor free at study day 108. The remaining
mouse experienced tumor stasis in excess of 63 days. Thus, a higher dose
of focal RT given in shorter intervals in combination with systemic
paclitaxel resulted in the most efficacious therapeutic strategy but at
the cost of increased BWL and clinical signs.


