Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The metabolic secretome of cachexia inducing pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.


Cachexia is an underexplored and yet devastating consequence of cancer
that is the cause of 20% of all cancer related deaths1. Cachexia inducing
tumors cause a ‘wasting away’ of the body. The condition is
associated with poor treatment outcome2, fatigue, and extremely poor
quality of life2,3. Because of the multi-factorial characteristics of
this condition, it has been difficult to understand the mechanisms
driving the impact of the tumor on body organs and the sequence of events
that leads to this lethal condition. Here we have used 1H MRS to
characterize the metabolic profile of tumor interstitial fluid (TIF)
obtained from noncachexia (Panc1) and cachexia inducing (Pa04C) tumors to
further understand the impact of the deranged metabolism of
cachexia-inducing tumors on the tumor metabolic secretome.

The human pancreatic cancer cell line, Panc1, was obtained from ATCC. The
human pancreatic cancer cell line, Pa04C, was provided by Dr. Maitra4.
Six to 8 week old male SCID mice were inoculated in both the right and
left flank with cancer cells (5×106, Panc1 N=2, Pa04C N=2). We created a
collection chamber to collect TIF. The chamber was implanted together
with small tumor pieces harvested from the subcutaneous flank tumors,
into the subcutaneous flank space of SCID mice (Panc1 N=8 and Pa04C N=6)
until the tumor encompassed the chamber (4-5 weeks). The tumor was then
removed and the tumor tissue and TIF were collected. To obtain control
TIF, an empty chamber was implanted in the subcutaneous flank space of
healthy mice. Dual phase solvent extraction was performed on tumor
tissue. The water phase was separated, freeze dried, reconstituted in D2O
PBS for spectral acquisition. All 1H MR spectra were acquired on an
Avance III 750 MHz (17.6T) Bruker NMR spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm
broad band inverse (BBI) probe. Spectral acquisition, processing and
quantification were performed using TOPSPIN 2.1 software.

Notable differences between Pa04C compared to Panc1 TIF or normal
interstitial fluid were a significant decrease of polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA) and lipids, and formate, pyruvate, glutamine, and glucose.
Lactate, glutamate, succinate, glycine and acetone significantly
increased in Pa04C TIF compared to Panc1 TIF or normal interstitial
fluid. These differences in TIF cannot be explained solely by the
differences in the tumor metabolic profile. Our data provide new insights
into changes in the metabolic secretome with induction of cachexia that
may shed new light on the cachexia cascade, and identify metabolic
strategies to reverse the syndrome.

References:

(1) Argiles, J. M., et al. Nature reviews. Cancer 2014, 14, 754-762.

(2) Ozola Zalite, I., et al. Pancreatology 2015, 15, 19-24.

(3) Fearon, K. C., et al. HPB (Oxford) 2010, 12, 323-324.

(4) Penet, M. F., et al. Clinical Cancer Research 2015, 21, 386-395.

Acknowledgment: This work was supported by NIH R01 CA193365, NIH
P50CA013175 and NIH P30CA06973.


