Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New device for radiation delivery in breast cancer patients -
double balloon applicator for optimal dose distribution.


Currently available applicators for delivery of accelerated partial
breast irradiation using a high dose afterloader, have treatment
catheters close to the center of the balloon in fixed positions,
restricting oneâ€™s ability to modify the dose to critical organs.
Recently we developed a novel, dual balloon brachytherapy applicator
using which one could optimize radiation dose by shaping the resection
cavity with an outer balloon and allowing an inner balloon to selectively
position the treatment catheters away from the central axis of the
balloon based on cavity size.

The Double Balloon Breast Brachytherapy applicator offers a unique design
with adjustable treatment catheters, allowing for both optimized dose
delivery and conformal avoidance of critical structures. This applicator
is a single entry (1 cm incision), multi-channel high dose rate
afterloader (HDR) accessory device. The treatment catheters can be
expanded to an optimal location greater than or equal to 50% of the outer
balloon diameter(> 1 cm diameter) - thereby optimizing dose delivery to
the patient. The Conformal Double Balloon Breast Brachytherapy Device has
the ability to optimize either conformality or homogeneity by allowing
expansion of an inner polyurethane balloon to selectively position
multiple treatment catheters significantly away from the central axis of
an expanded outer polyurethane balloon.

A model study of the Double Balloon Breast Brachytherapy Device was
performed with a wide range of volumes of the lumpectomy cavity. Each
case is scanned in a CT scanner and the data transported to a treatment
planning system. Dosimetric parameters such as dose delivered to
treatment site, different organs such as skin, ribs, etc are evaluated
and compared against existing breast brachytherapy applicator devices.

Both ultrasound and CT images clearly indicate that the quality of the
Double Balloon Device images are comparable to other commercial devices.
All catheters are distinguishable and can be reconstructed for treatment
planning, and the balloon volume can be clearly delineated. Planning
Treatment Volume (PTV) based on balloon volume can be easily generated
and optimized dosimetry performed. Initial patient studies also indicate
that using the double balloon applicator optimized dosimetry can be
obtained thereby reducing the dose to critical structures such as skin
and rib while maintaining the dose to the target.


