Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair status in a patient derived ovarian cancer xenobank.


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal gynecological
malignancy with a 5-year relative survival rate of 45%. The high
mortality rate is in part due to the development of platinum
chemoresistance occurring in more than 70% of patients after the
first-line therapy. DNA repair capacity has been reported to be a key
determinant for the cellular response to platinum agents. Since half of
the high grade serous EOCs lacks Homologous Recombination repair, we
aimed to profile the DNA repair status in a panel of well characterized
42 ovarian patient derived xenografts (PDXs) recently established in our
laboratory and to correlate it with the in vivo response to a platinum
based therapy. We evaluated by real time PCR (ABI-7900, Applied
Biosystems) the mRNA levels of genes with a key role in Base Excision
Repair (OGG1, POLB and PARP1), Homologous Recombination (BRCA1, PALB2,
TP53BP1 and RAD51), Nucleotide Excision Repair (ERCC1, XPA, XPF, XPD and
XPG), Fanconi Anemia pathway (FANCA, FANCC, FANCD2 and FANCF),
Translesion Repair (POLEta), Mismatch Repair (MLH1), Microhomology End
Joining (POLQ), Non Homologous End Joining (XRCC4, XRCC5, XRCC6 and
XRCC7) and CDK12, a kinase regulating the transcription of some DNA
repair genes. The methylation status of BRCA1, ERCC1, MLH1, XPA, XPG and
FANCF was investigated by standard techniques. Our results show that the
DNA repair genes considered were variably expressed in all the 42 PDXs
analyzed, with no specific histotype-specific cluster of expression. The
expression of PALB2, FANCC, FANCD2, OGG1, POLQ and RAD51 was found to
correlate with the expression of at least six other genes. In high grade
serous/endometrioid PDXs, the CDK12 mRNA expression levels positively
correlated with the expression of TP53BP1, PALB2, XPF and POLB. BRCA1 was
found to be hypermethylated in 51% of the xenografts. TP53 mutated PDXs
showed statistically significant higher levels of POLQ, FANCD2, RAD51,
and POLB genes. The expression of CDK12 [p=0.017], PALB2 [p=0.019] and
XPF [p= 0.016] was negatively associated with the in vivo response to
DDP, with resistant PDXs showing higher mRNA levels than responsive ones.
We looked for association with overall survival in the TCGA data set and
we found that high levels of CDK12 were associated with a worse overall
survival in patients with a residual tumor after surgery minus than 2cm.
These data suggest that some DNA repair genes can have a role in EOC
patientsâ€™ response to DDP therapy. Particularly, CDK12 was
significantly able to predict worse survival in patients undergoing
optimal debulking surgery. Our xenobank will be a valid instrument to set
up functional DNA repair assays, as suggested by preliminary data on
primary cultures.


