Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stability and stemness of the hybrid epithelial-mesenchymal
phenotype.


Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes – EMT and MET
– are hallmarks of cellular plasticity during embryonic development and
cancer metastasis. During these transitions, cells can also adopt a
hybrid epithelial/mesenchymal (hybrid E/M) phenotype enabling them to
migrate collectively as observed during gastrulation, wound healing, and
clusters of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs). The hybrid E/M phenotype has
largely been tacitly assumed to be 'metastable', i.e. transient state.
Here, we integrate mathematical modeling with in vitro experiments to
identify certain 'phenotypic stability factors' (PSFs) - GRHL2, OVOL2 and
ΔNP63α that can stabilize a hybrid E/M phenotype. We show that H1975
(NSCLC cell line) cells can display a hybrid E/M phenotype stably and
migrate collectively, a behavior that is impaired by knockdown of GRHL2
or OVOL2. Further, our computational model predicts that these PSFs can
also associate hybrid E/M phenotype with high tumor-initiating potential,
a prediction strengthened by the observation that the higher levels of
one or more of these PSFs may predict poor patient outcome. Overall, our
results suggest that a hybrid E/M phenotype need not be 'metastable', and
bolster the notion that a hybrid E/M phenotype, but not necessarily full
EMT, associates with aggressive tumor progression.


