Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel miR-129 mimic with enhanced therapeutic
potential for treatment of resistant colorectal cancer.


Treatment of advanced stage colorectal cancer remains a clinical
challenge associated with resistance to fluoropyrimidine based
chemotherapy. There is an urgent need to discover and develop new
strategies to enhance treatment efficacy in order to improve outcomes for
these patients. Non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) have important functions as
oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes in the regulation of cancer
development and progression. Recently, miRNAs have emerged as potential
therapeutic options. We have previously identified miR-129 as a tumor
suppressor miRNA and potential therapeutic candidate in colorectal
cancer. The expression of miR-129 is progressively lost in colorectal
cancer patients and is an important regulator of apoptosis through the
targeting of genes such as BCL-2. miR-129 was also found to enhance
5-flurouracil (5-FU) cytotoxicity in vitro and in vivo. To further
developing miR-129 based novel therapeutics in colorectal cancer, we have
designed a modified version of miR-129 to enhance stability and efficacy.
The miR-129 mimic is significantly more potent in inhibiting
proliferation of a panel of colon cancer cell lines than the native
miR-129 precursor, with 79% reduction by miR-129 mimic compared to 38%
for native precursor. The miR-129 mimic induces profound cell cycle
arrest at the G1/S checkpoint. The G1/S ratio increased 3.8 fold compared
to control when cells were transfected with miR-129 mimic. We also
demonstrated that the miR-129 mimic retains its target specificity to
BCL-2, TS and E2F3. The therapeutic potential of miR-129 mimic was
demonstrated in vivo mouse colon tumor models as a potent inhibitor of
tumor growth and metastasis. As a result, miR-129 mimic has a great
potential to be further developed as a novel therapeutic drug for
treatment of advanced colorectal cancer.


