Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA fusion detection in thyroid nodules with a targeted RNA
sequencing panel.


Thyroid nodules are quite common and detected in as high as 67% of the
population. Only a small portion of thyroid nodules are malignant thyroid
cancers. Advances in understanding the molecular pathology of thyroid
cancer are leading to the development of better biomarkers and novel
targeted therapies. The tumorigenic role of RNA fusions has been reported
in many forms of cancer. Fusions can result from structural
rearrangements like translocations and deletions, transcription
read-through of neighboring genes, or the trans- and cis-splicing of
pre-mRNAs. Many fusions act as key drivers for cancer development.
Detection of fusion RNA is a challenge with traditional technologies like
FISH and qPCR, as they are laborious, low throughput, and do not provide
detailed information about the fusion. Here we explored the possible use
of a tumor fusion-targeted RNA-based panel (QIAseq targeted RNAscan
panel, which is targeting 223 fusion gene pairs, 576 unique fusions) as a
tool to study fusions in thyroid nodules. The presence of these fusions
were surveyed in RNA samples from 10 thyroid cancer (PTC and FVPTC)
samples and 19 non-cancer control samples (NH and FA) using this oncology
targeted panel and sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq. PAX8-PPARG, a
fusion gene with a well-established link to thyroid cancer, was found in
the cancer group. In addition, we observed a universal expression of a
recurrent read-through transcript, HALC1-COQL, in all thyroid nodules.
Our results suggest that a targeted RNA-based panel provided a useful
tool for fusion gene study in thyroid cancer. The role of the expected
rearrangement and the unexpected read-through fusion in thyroid nodules
needs to be further evaluated, as it could provide useful information for
thyroid nodule differentiation.


