Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide nanofibers: targeted therapies for glioblastoma multiforme.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a malignant brain tumor with poor
prognosis due to tumor heterogeneity, poor drug blood-brain barrier (BBB)
permeability and targeting. GBM biopsies indicated the overexpression of
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) that when activated by neuropeptide
agonists result in an antiproliferative effect. However, translation of
these neuropeptides into novel therapies for GBM is frustrated by their
short half-life (1.8 mg) ensuring that the resulting nanomedicine can be
clinically translatable. Both unloaded- and paclitaxel loaded-nanofibers
showed superior stability compared to the parent neuropeptide in the
presence of plasma, brain, liver and cell homogenates (>6-fold).
Nanofibers elicited a strong antiproliferative effect (IC50: 5.06 μM)
resulting in a cell cycle arrest at G2/M in a GPCR positive GBM cell line
(U-87 MG). Loading paclitaxel (1nM) within the nanofibers resulted in a
synergistic effect evidenced by a decrease in cell survival by 32%.
Nanofibers counteracted the forskolin-induced increase of intracellular
cAMP levels indicating that the GPCR is linked to the GαI protein known
to mediate the antiproliferative effect on GBM. Confocal studies
confirmed the internalization of the peptide while SMFS studies supported
specific binding of the nanofibers to GPCR on U-87MG cell surface with
equivalent binding probability to peptide agonists and increased
residence time. Texas Red labelled nanofibers permeate across an in vitro
BBB model enabling the permeation of paclitaxel (Papp: 8.45 x10-6 cm/s).
Thus, described peptide nanofibers are a novel targeted nanomedicine for
GBM therapy able to be clinically translated. In vivo proof of concept
studies and pharmacokinetics are under way.


