Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of estrogen receptor alpha and nuclear
transport pathways remodel metabolic pathways to induce apoptosis and
overcome tamoxifen resistance.


There is a critical need for novel therapeutic approaches to re-sensitize
recurrent ERα (+) tumors to endocrine therapies. The objective of this
study was to elucidate mechanisms of improved effectiveness of combined
targeting of ERα and XPO1, a nuclear transport protein in overcoming
endocrine resistance. Using Cignal Finder pathway analysis, Seahorse
metabolic profiling and GC/MS whole metabolite profiling, we found that
combination of 4-OH-Tam and Selinexor (SXR), being evaluated in multiple
later stage clinical trials in patients with relapsed and /or refractory
hematological and solid tumor malignancies, inhibited Akt phosphorylation
by changing the localization of the kinase. Since we observed dramatic
changes in Akt activity we hypothesized that glucose utilization pathways
and metabolic profile of breast cancer cells would change in the presence
of 4-OH-Tam and SXR. These cells were more dependent on mitochondria for
energy production. Their glucose and fatty acid dependency decreased in
the presence of SXR and cells were more dependent on glutamine as the
mitochondrial fuel source. We showed that combined targeting of XPO1 and
ERα rewires metabolic pathways, increase demand on mitochondria and
causes increased production of ROS that would eventually lead to
apoptosis. Re-modelling metabolic pathways to regenerate new
vulnerabilities in endocrine-resistant tumors is novel, and given the
need for better strategies for improving therapy response of relapsed
ERα (+) tumors, our findings show great promise for uncovering the role
ERα-XPO1 crosstalk plays in reducing cancer recurrences.


