Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DLL3 analysis of circulating tumor cells predict treatment outcome
in phase 1 rova-T study in small cell lung cancer.


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive neuroendocrine tumor with
early dissemination and poor prognosis that accounts for 15-20% of all
lung cancer cases worldwide. Most cases are inoperable and biopsies to
investigate SCLC biology are rarely obtainable. Circulating tumor cells
(CTCs), which are prevalent in SCLC, present a readily accessible liquid
biopsy. Here we present CTC data from aggressive, late stage SCLC
patients who were enrolled on a Phase 1 trial studying Rova-T (anti-DLL3
antibody drug conjugate). CTCs were captured using a microfluidic
platform (IsoFlux) that uses flow control and immunomagnetic capturing of
epithelial cell surface marker (EpCAM)-positive cells. CTCs were isolated
before dosing (baseline) of Rova-T and at successive time points post
treatment. CTCs from each time point were distinguished and enumerated
using DAPI, EpCAM and the cytoplasmic marker (pan-CK), in addition to the
absence of CD45. Enriched CTCs were also collected for RT-PCR for
expression analysis of genes confirmed to be absent in blood cells. The
number of CTCs varied among the 58 baseline samples collected, ranging
from 5-1000 CTCs per 7.5ml of blood. When the CTCs were assessed for DLL3
target expression, 37/58 baseline samples expressed DLL3 by RT-PCR.
Interestingly, the expression of DLL3 on the baseline CTCs correlated
with treatment outcome. When additional time points after treatment were
enumerated for CTCs, patients that presented with DLL3 expression on CTC
at baseline showed a significant decrease in CTCs after treatment. This
suggests that Rova-T might kill DLL3-expressing CTCs. These data support
continued investigation of DLL3 expression on CTC in SCLC patients with
the goal of facilitating a liquid biopsy able to assess DLL3 status as a
prospective companion diagnostic for Rova-T.


