Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR-mediated Spred1 phosphorylation inhibits NF1 to sustain
constitutive Ras/MAPK signaling.


Spred proteins negatively regulate Ras/MAPK signaling following growth
factor stimulation. Inhibition of Ras primary occurs through Spreds
ability to bind and localize NF1, a RasGAP and major tumor suppressor, to
the plasma membrane. Spred1 and NF1 loss-of-function mutations occur
across multiple cancer types including non-small cell lung carcinoma,
glioblastoma, melanoma, stomach carcinoma, and uterine carcinosarcoma.
Here we demonstrate that EGFR signaling disrupts Spred1-NF1 binding. Mass
spectrometry was performed on cells overexpressing EGFRL858R to identify
potential phosphorylation sites on Spred1 and NF1 that could disrupt
Spred1-NF1 binding by steric hindrance. A serine phosphorylation site on
Spred1 was identified in which a phosphomimetic and phosphodeficient
mutant decreased or increased Spred1-NF1 binding, respectively.
Phosphomimetic Spred1 is unable to suppress Ras-GTP following EGF
stimulation. Therefore, phosphorylation of Spred1 at this site by a
serine kinase downstream of EGFR may disrupt Spred1-NF1 binding. To
identify the Spred1 kinase we are performing an in vitro kinase assay and
an unbiased CRISPRa screen. Our findings provide one potential mechanism
by which EGFR signaling disrupts negative feedback to sustain
constitutive Ras signaling. Furthermore, this work may elucidate a novel
therapeutic target for restoring NF1-mediated inhibition of Ras.


