Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dissociation constant rate of ADC would be an important factor
for antitumor activity in vivo.


Introduction: Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs), consisting of a monoclonal
antibody, a potent cytotoxic agent and a linker, are currently considered
as promising potent agents for cancer therapy. However, especially in
solid tumors, the tumor stroma would hinder ADCs from accessing to cancer
cells, leading to decline the efficacy of ADCs in clinical study. In
order to overcome these difficulties and to maximize the ADC potential,
the optimization of ADC components is needed. And itâ€™s well-known that
antitumor activity of ADCs depends on PK properties, binding affinity,
internalization efficiency and other functions. In present study,
therefore, we focused on the characteristics of antibody for ADC design,
and investigated what characteristics could affect anti-tumor effects in
vivo.

Materials and Method: First, we prepared 4 types of monoclonal antibodies
against tissue factor (TF) which is known as a 47-kDa transmembrane
glycoprotein and an initiation factor of the extrinsic blood coagulation.
And then, anti-TF antibodies were conjugated with
maleimidocaproyl-valine-citrulline-p-amino-benzoyloxycarbonyl linker and
monomethyl auristatin E. Both of them were well-known liker system and
drug for current ADC design. After conjugation, we investigated the
characteristics, including binding parameters, internalization
efficiencies, drug release rates, cytotoxicity against human pancreatic
cancer cell lines in vitro, half-life in vivo, anti-tumor effects using
xenograft model, and distribution in tumor tissues.

Results: In SPR analysis, anti-TF ADCs showed the significant differences
of binding kinetics parameters. However, in other assays, anti-TF ADCs
showed almost same internalization efficiencies, drug release rates,
cytotoxicity against cancer cell lines in vitro, half-life in vivo. The
efficacy of anti-TF ADCs was examined in BxPC3 xenograft model when the
average tumor size reached 200 mm3. Although anti-TF ADCs significantly
inhibited BxPC3 tumor growth compared with control groups, there was no
difference of anti-tumor effects among anti-TF ADCs. We further examined
the anti-tumor effects when the average tumor size reached 600 mm3.
Interestingly, the antitumor effect of ADC using the clone with high
dissociation constant was superior to that with low dissociation constant
against large size tumor, especially in the early phase. Furthermore, the
distribution of ADC in BxPC3 tumor demonstrated that the former clone
showed higher penetration ability than the latter clone.

Conclusion: We concluded that binding kinetics parameters, in particular,
the dissociation constant rate contributed to the tumor penetration
ability of anti-TF ADCs and the different distribution in BxPC3 tumor.
The distribution changes would affect the differences of anti-tumor
effects in large size BxPC3 tumor. Therefore we suggested that the
dissociation constant rate would be an important factor for ADCs design.


