Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sequential treatment with the Wee1 inhibitor, AZD1775, enhances
the effect of trabectedin in the L-sarcomas.


Soft tissue sarcomas are heterogeneous mesenchymal neoplasms and account
for 1% of all cancers in adults. Over 50 sarcomas subtypes have been
classified and many have very limited treatment options. Chemotherapies
such as doxorubicin, dacarbazine and gemcitabine have had very low
response rates. Two of the most common subtypes of sarcomas are
liposarcoma and leiomyosarcoma, also referred to as the L-sarcomas.
Trabectedin, a marine derived compound from the sea sponge, Ecteinascidia
turbinate, has recently been approved for the treatment of L-sarcomas
which has shown a modest effect over common therapies. As a DNA damaging
agent, we hypothesized that trabectedin would induce a G2 cell cycle
arrest and subsequent inhibition of Wee1 would abrogate this cell cycle
checkpoint and induce apoptosis. We therefore examined the effects of
trabectedin followed by AZD1775, a Wee1 inhibitor, in a panel of 6
sarcoma cell lines including liposarcoma (LS141, DDLS) and leiomyosarcoma
(SK-LMS, SK-UT1, SK-UT1b). IC50s concentrations of trabectedin were
determined to be between 0.5 to 2nM, while IC50s for AZD1775 were in the
range of 100-200 nM. In vitro results have shown an enhanced inhibition
of cell viability with combination treatment in all cell lines at
concentrations of 1nM trabectedin for 24hrs followed by 100nM AZD1775 for
48hrs. We also examined biochemical effects with sequential drug
treatment (24hrs trabectedin followed by 24hrs AZD1775) which presented
an increase of cyclin A1 and cyclin B1 indicative of G2 cell cycle arrest
along with increase of phospho-H2AX, indicative of DNA damage by
trabectedin, while subsequent treatment with the Wee1 inhibitor showed
decrease of phosphorylation of CDC2 (Tyr15). Flow cytometric analysis
indicated G2/M cell cycle arrest with trabectedin and abrogation of G2/M
with AZD1775. These observations correlated with enhanced apoptosis as
measured by biochemical PARP cleavage and DNA content (sub-G1
population). Taken together these results provide a foundation for the
development of the sequential treatment of trabectedin followed by the
Wee1 inhibitor, AZD775, in the L-sarcomas.


