Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of smoking on breast tumor pathology.


Background Although smoking is not a well-established breast cancer risk
factor, proximity of lungs to the breasts and findings that tobacco smoke
constituents serve as mammary carcinogens in animal models suggests that
smoking may alter the breast microenvironment and affect breast
tumorigenesis. To determine how smoking influences tumor pathogenesis,
the relationships between smoking and pathological characteristics and
outcome were evaluated in 1,707 women with invasive breast cancer.

Methods Patients enrolled in the Clinical Breast Care Project 2001-2013
filled out a questionnaire that included answers to current smoking
status, current and previous pack use/day, number of years smoked, and
length since last smoked. Patients were classified as never, former or
current smokers. Pack years was calculated as years smoked x pack
use/day. Logistic regression was performed to determine whether smoking
was associated with any characteristics. Significance was defined as
PMethods Patients enrolled in the Clinical Breast Care Project 2001-2013
filled out a questionnaire that included answers to current smoking
status, current and previous pack use/day, number of years smoked, and
length since last smoked. Patients were classified as never, former or
current smokers. Pack years was calculated as years smoked x pack
use/day. Logistic regression was performed to determine whether smoking
was associated with any characteristics. Significance was defined as
P<0.05

Results 55.7% of women never smoked, 31.5% were former smokers and 12.8%
were current smokers. The average number or pack years was 14.5 in former
smokers and 25.5 in current smokers. Current smoking status was
associated with lymph node metastasis (OR 1.44; 95% CI 1.03-2.01),
positive HER2 status (OR 1.54, 95% CI 1.04-2.25), larger tumor size (OR
1.55; 95% CI 1.14-2.11) and higher tumor stage (OR 1.54, 95% CI
1.16-2.04) when compared to never smokers. Former smokers were less
likely to be diagnosed with later stage tumors (OR 0.77, 95% CI
0.62-0.96) compared to never smokers. No significant associations were
detected when pack years were considered as a continuous variable; when
categorized as 0, 35 pack years, >35 pack years was associated with
positive HER2 status (OR 1.80, 95% CI 1.06-3.03) and tumors of the
ER+HER2+ subtype (OR 1.99, 95% CI 1.07-3.7). Overall survival was
significantly lower for former and current smokers compared to never
smokers (P=0.014); however, breast cancer specific survival did not
differ significantly between groups (P=0.226).

Conclusions Current smokers are at increased risk for having larger and
later stage tumors with positive lymph node and HER2 status. Tumor size,
stage and lymph node status are temporal factors, thus suggest that
current smokers may have delayed diagnosis compared to never and former
smokers. In contrast, HER2 status reflects a biological phenomenon and
the risk of HER2 positivity increases with pack years, suggesting that
carcinogens found in tobacco smoke may promote overexpression of HER2.


