Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetoelectric nanoparticles for high-specificity treatment of
cancer.


Introduction: Delivering a drug specifically into the tumor cell past its
membrane and then releasing the drug into the tumor cells without
affecting the normal cells remains a formidable challenge. Unlike any
other nanoparticles, magnetoelectric nanoparticles (MENs) display a
non-zero magnetoelectric (ME) effect and thus present a unique capability
to use external magnetic fields to control intrinsic electric fields
associated with cell membranes and the interaction between MENs and
therapeutic loads. Because cancer and normal cells of the same type have
different electric properties, MENs is used for high-specificity targeted
delivery. An a.c. magnetic field is used to trigger drug release off the
nanoparticles.

Brief Methods: 30-nm CoFe2O4-BaTiO3 core shell MENs, with a magnetization
of 1 emu/g, a coercivity of 300 Oe, and a ME coefficient of 10-100 mV
cm-1 Oe-1 were prepared with a coprecipitation process. MENs were coated
with fluorescein isothiocyanate to monitor their intra-cellular transport
through a high-contrast confocal microscopy. Three cancer cell lines
including Skov-3 (Ovarian adenocarcinoma), U87-MG (Glioblastoma), and
MCF-7A (Breast adenocarcinoma), and two normal cell lines including brain
endothelial cells (Brain EC) and ovarian cells HOMEC were cultured at
37Â°C. The transport of MENs loaded with drugs, peptides, and RNAs
through the cell membranes and the consequent release of the load under
different d.c. and a.c. magnetic fields were studied through confocal
microscopy and photoabsorption spectroscopy, respectively. Trypan-blue
viability count was used to assess cell growth inhibition under different
study conditions. Atomic force microscopy of the cell membranes was
conducted to understand the interaction between the nanoparticles and the
cells.

Summary of new data: Comparison of MENs with purely magnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles showed that the penetration through the cancer cell
membrane could be achieved only with MENs. It took d.c. fields of 100 Oe
and over 1000 Oe to nanoelectroporate the membranes of SKOV-3 and HOMEC
cell lines, respectively. An a.c. magnetic field with a strength of 50 Oe
and a near-d.c. frequency of 100 Hz was sufficient to enable release of a
therapeutic load off MENs. All the cancer cell lines under study showed
membrane penetration threshold d.c. fields at least a factor of ten
smaller compared to their normal counterparts.

Conclusion: MENs displayed unique capabilities for externally controlled
high-specificity targeted anticancer drug delivery and release on demand
via application of d.c. and a.c. magnetic fields, respectively. Because
MENs rely on a physical mechanism rather than antibody-mediated delivery,
they can be used for high specificity delivery and high-efficacy
controlled release of a broad range of therapeutic loads including drugs,
peptides, and RNAs to treat many different cancers.


