Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model that mimics human MEN1 tumor is effective in
preclinical neuroendocrine tumor therapeutics.


Conditional knockout of Men1 in β cells leads to development of
pituitary adenomas and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) by the
age of eight to twelve months. This suggests that other events, like loss
of additional mutations, may be required for development of tumors in the
absence of MEN1. Since it was reported that mutations in genes of
PI3K/mTOR pathway are found in human neuroendocrine tumors, we
hypothesized that double deletion of PTEN and MEN1 may accelerate
neuroendocrine tumorigenesis. Mice with double deletion of PTEN and MEN1
in β cells were produced by crosses among mice with Cre gene under the
control of Rat Insulin promoter (Rip-Cre), floxed allele Men1
(Men1fl/fl), and Pten (Ptenfl/fl). Then mice with the genotype of
Men1fl/fl Ptenfl/fl Rip-Cre were monitored for development of tumors.
Consistent with our hypothesis, mice with conditional deletion of PTEN
and MEN1 leads to fully developed PanNETs and pituitary adenomas by three
to four months old, much earlier than that with Men1 deletion alone.
These tumors resemble human MEN1 tumors at a histological and molecular
level. Activation of phospho-AKT was observed in these tumors and
Rapamycin treatments lead to delayed PanNETs and pituitary adenomas for
at least two months. This mouse model (Men1fl/fl Ptenfl/fl Rip-Cre)
directly supports that PI3K/mTOR pathway plays a critical role in
neuroendocrine tumorigenesis, and also provides a platform to study new
therapeutic opportunities for PanNETs and neuroendocrine tumors of the
pituitary through the targeting of PI3K/mTOR pathway and MEN1 pathway.
This model represents an important tool for studying the biology and
preclinical therapeutics of human neuroendocrine tumors.


