Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery via Elastin Like Polypeptide: Biodistribution of
a doxorubicin derivative in MDA-MB231 human breast cancer xenografts in
mice.


The anticancer agent doxorubicin has been widely used in the treatment of
a variety of hematological malignancies and solid tumors. Despite
doxorubicinâ€™s efficiency in eradicating tumor cells, severe damage to
healthy tissues, along with cardiotoxicity, limits its use in clinics. To
overcome adverse side effects, improve patient safety, and enhance
therapeutic efficacy, we have designed a thermally responsive biopolymer
doxorubicin carrier that can be specifically targeted to tumor tissue by
locally applying mild hyperthermia (41 degrees C).

The developed drug vehicle is composed of: a cell penetrating peptide
(SynB1) to promote tumor and cellular uptake; thermally responsive
Elastin like polypeptide (ELP); and the (6-maleimidocaproyl) hydrazone
derivative of doxorubicin (DOXO-EMCH) containing a pH-sensitive hydrazine
linker that releases dox in the acidic tumor environment. We used the in
vivo imaging system, IVIS, to determine the biodistribution of
doxorubicin-delivered ELP in MDA-MB231 triple negative human breast
cancer cell line xenografts in nude mice. Tumor bearing mice were treated
with a single IV injection of 10 mg/kg doxorubicin equivalent dose with
free doxorubicin, thermally responsive SynB1 ELP 1-DOXO, and a thermally
nonresponsive control biopolymer, SynB1 ELP 2-DOXO. Following a 2 hour
treatment with hyperthermia, tumors showed a 2-fold higher uptake when
treated with SynB1 ELP 1-DOXO compared to free doxorubicin. Accumulation
of the thermally non-responsive control SynB1 ELP2 -DOXO was comparable
to free doxorubicin, indicating that an increase in dox accumulation with
ELP is due to aggregation in response to thermal targeting. Higher levels
of SynB1 ELP1 -DOXO and SynB1 ELP2 -DOXO with respect to free doxorubicin
were observed in kidneys. Fluorescence intensity from hearts of animals
treated with SynB1 ELP1 - DOXO show a 5-fold lower accumulation of
doxorubicin than the same dose of free doxorubicin. SynB1-ELP1-DOXO
biopolymers demonstrated a 6-fold increase in tumor/heart ratio in
comparison to free doxorubicin, indicating preferential accumulation of
the drug carrier in tumors.

Overall, thermally targeted polymers are a promising therapy to enhance
tumor targeting and uptake of anticancer drugs and to minimize free drug
toxicity in healthy tissues, representing a great potential for clinical
application.


