Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of whole genome amplification for whole exome
sequencing in detecting genetic mutation.


Whole exome sequencing (WES) has been widely used for studying genetic
mutations in DNA coding regions to elucidate cancer etiology and for
identifying biomarkers to optimize chemotherapy. However, these studies
can be limited when only small amount of DNA is available. Whole genome
amplification (WGA) technology can be combined with WES to make these
studies technically possible. Here, we evaluated WGA using a phi 29
polymerase prior to library preparation for WES in samples with various
DNA concentrations. WES was performed by targeted exon amplification
followed by massively parallel sequencing. We compared the base calls of
single nucleotide variants for individual same samples with or without
WGA prior to library construction to determine the concordance rate of
variant calls. We also assessed genetic variant call rate in the same
samples with or without WGA. The number of variants obtained ranged from
159,851,999 to 390,784 in the non-amplified samples and from 353,215 to
384,118 in the same amplified samples. The average concordance rate of
identical variants in the samples with or without WGA was 96.5%. Our
results indicate that WGA in prior to WES can increase detection
efficiency of single nucleotide variants in samples with relatively small
amount of DNA and/or low DNA concentration.


