Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune consequences of penfluridol treatment associated with
inhibition of glioblastoma tumor growth.


Glioblastoma is the most common and lethal brain tumor associated with
only 12% median survival rate of patients. Despite the development of
advanced surgical, radiation or use of combinations of anti-cancer drugs,
treatment for glioblastoma patients is still a challenge. The major
contributing factor in glioblastoma progression and resistive nature is
its ability to evade the immune surveillance. Hence, modulating the
immune system in glioblastoma tumors could be an important strategy for
anticancer therapeutics. Penfluridol, an antipsychotic drug has been
shown to have anti-cancer properties in our recently published studies.
The present study evaluates the immune response of penfluridol in
glioblastoma tumors. Our results demonstrated that penfluridol treatment
significantly suppressed glioblastoma tumor growth. Our current results
demonstrated about 72% suppression of myeloid derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) with penfluridol treatment in mouse bearing U87MG glioblastoma
tumors. MDSCs are known to increase regulatory T cells (Treg), which are
immunosuppressive in nature and suppresses M1 macrophages that are tumor
suppressive in nature. Our results also showed suppression of regulatory
T cells as well as elevation of M1 macrophages with penfluridol treatment
by 58% and 57% respectively. Decrease in CCL4 as well as IFNÎ³ with
penfluridol treatment was also observed indicating decrease in overall
tumor inflammation. This is the first report demonstrating immune
modulations by penfluridol treatment associated with glioblastoma tumor
growth suppression prompting further investigation to establish
penfluridol as a treatment option for glioblastoma patients. [Studies
supported in part by R01 grant CA129038, awarded by National Cancer
Institute, NIH]


