Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A guide to filtering TARGET Complete Genomics germline variants.


With the public release of TARGETâ€™s pediatric cancer data, researchers
are eager to investigate and integrate variants from both tumor and
germline sequencing data, but caution should be used when interpreting
TARGET variant calls from Complete Genomics data, as they unlike the
Illumina based calls for which most of our databases and tools are
customized. Here, we use germline samples from 55 neuroblastoma cases
with both whole genome Complete Genomics variants and whole exome
Illumina variants from GATK, Pindel, Platypus, and bam2mpg to investigate
differences between germline variant calls from Complete Genomics and
Illumina platforms. Our study of ~160,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPS) and ~19,000 insertions or deletions (indels) reveals that while
SNP sets largely agree between Complete Genomics and Illumina, Complete
Genomics data have many indels not present in Illumina calls, making it
difficult to screen Complete Genomics indels against popular Illumina
based variant databases like those provided by the Exome Aggregation
Consortium and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome
Sequencing Project. Further probing of Complete Genomics indels uncovered
inconsistent indel formatting resulting a loss of recurrent variants, and
miscalculated read depths in earlier versions of the Complete Genomics
platform. To solve these issues and make Complete Genomics variant calls
comparable to Illumina calls, we introduce a Snakemake pipeline that
reformats Complete Genomics variant files and creates variant features
for use in decision tree or random forest classifiers trained to
recognize Complete Genomics variants that will be present in Illumina
variant call sets. We determine that the most important features for
locating Complete Genomics variants likely to be found in Illumina
germline variant call sets are the presence of reads from both
directions, average variant allele fraction across the cohort, a variant
call in the matched tumor, the variant fraction of reads, and read depth.
Using ten fold cross validation with our decision tree, we obtain >95%
recall and >98% precision for SNPs, and >90% recall and >85% precision
for indels. We advocate the use of our pipeline and filtering scheme for
making Complete Genomics variant calls comparable to Illumina based calls.


