Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-6 dynamics regulate neuroendocrine transformation in gefitinib
acquired resistance EGFR mutant lung cancer cells.


Transformation to small-cell lung cancer (SCLC, one of aggressive
neuroendocrine [NE] tumor) is reported when activating epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutant non-small-cell lung cancer acquired
resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI, such as gefitinib). IL-6
activation confers to acquire TKI resistance and associates with p53 and
RB inactivation those are SCLC hallmark changes. Whether NE
transformation could phenocopy in isogenic acquired resistance cell line
and the role of IL-6 in this process remain unknown. We established
827GRs (including 827GR, 827GR+ and 827GR.M6) acquired resistance to
gefitinib from HCC827 cells by long term stepwise treated with gefitinib
and they still had EGFR exon 19 deletion without acquired T790M. 827GR
was parental resistance line with unstable gefitinib resistance in
drug-free medium by passage. We maintained 827GR in medium with or
without 1μM gefitinib over 6 months to generate stable clones: 827GR+
and 827GR.M6. 827GRs had SCLC hallmark changes, i.e., inactivation of
p53, RB and Notch by western blot and gene set enrichment analysis.
Compared to HCC827, 827GRs were more sensitive to cisplatin and etoposide
but not paclitaxel. IL-6 level was positive correlated with gefitinib
resistance among 827GRs by cytokine array and ELISA. Interestingly, among
827GRs, 827GR.M6 harbored low IL-6 secretion had obviously
NOTCH-ASCL1-DLL3 alteration, high NE marker expression and significant
inter-rater agreement with selected Byers’ SCLC gene signature than
high IL-6 secretion 827GR+, suggesting IL-6 dynamics might regulate NE
marker expression. IL-6 genetic manipulation in HCC827 and 827GR+ also
demonstrated this phenomenon. Moreover, IL-6 dynamics correlate with NE
expression also showed in patient derived lung cancer cell line in
published microarray dataset (GSE64322). In conclusion, our work
demonstrated activating EGFR mutant lung cancer acquired resistance to
TKI with NE transformation could phenocopy in isogenic cell line model
and IL-6 dynamics might regulate this process.


