Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA demethylase alkbh5 supports breast cancer growth and
progression.


N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is one of the most prevalent internal
modifications in eukaryotic messenger RNA. This dynamic and reversible
modification is installed by methyltransferase complex consisting of
three subunits: Methyltransferase-like protein 3 (METTL3),
Methyltransferase-like protein 14 (METTL14) and Wilms tumor 1-associating
protein (WTAP), and erased by two independent demethylases, Fat mass and
obesity associated protein (FTO) and AlkB homolog 5 (ALKBH5). RNA
demthylase ALKBH5 has been reported to play vital roles in several
biological processes. However, very little is known about the role of
ALKBH5 in cancer in general and breast tumorigenesis in particular. In
this study, we report that ALKBH5 promotes breast cancer growth and
progression. Using in vitro and in vivo models, we show that silencing of
ALKBH5 inhibits breast cancer growth and invasion. Importantly, our
studies reveal that ALKBH5 mediates its pro-tumorigenic function by
regulating several microtubule associated genes including KIF2C, PLK1,
MAPRE1 and RCC2 that are critical for spindle formation or assembly
during mitotic progression. Interestingly, ALKBH5 target genes KIF2C and
MAPRE1 are highly expressed in breast cancer patients and their higher
expression is strongly correlated with lower survival of breast cancer
patients. We believe that an optimal level of RNA methylation of key
target genes is critical for normal cell cycle progression and any
alteration in the levels of RNA methylation may alter activity or
expression of these genes resulting in unabated cell proliferation.


