Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Nek2 in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Cancer is a disease of aging. Among different types of cancer, liver
cancer is one of the most prevalent cancers over the world and
particularly affects people in some East Asia countries such as Korea,
Japan and China. The NIMA-related kinase 2 (Nek2), which regulates
centrosome cohesion, is a potential player in carcinogenesis. Our
evidence showed Nek2 mRNA and protein levels are overexpressed in liver
cancer cells and promotes HCC cell growth. Since Nek2 is pertinent to
centrosome, we speculated that it might take part in centrosome
regulation. To study the effect of Nek2 in chromosomal instability,
centrosome splitting and cell cycle, a stable isoform Nek2A
overexpression inducible system was generated in different Hepatocellular
Carcinoma cell lines for investigations through immunofluorescent
staining and cell-cytometry. For the study of centrosome, we observed
that higher proportion of cells with centrosome splitting occurred in the
Nek2A overexpressing cells in both HepG2 and SMMC-7721 inducible cell
lines. Moreover, cell cycle analysis showed an increased content of DNA
when Nek2A is overexpressed, suggesting that Nek2A induces more
aneuploidy cells. To conclude, overexpression of Nek2 exacerbates
chromosomal instability. Dysregulation of centrosome may be the key for
understanding of regulatory mechanism of chromosomal instability by Nek2.


