Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic and biological effects of 5-azacytidine and RRX-001 on
DLD-1 colorectal cancer cell lines.


Introduction. Extramural vascular invasion (EMVI) in rectal tumours is an
important risk factor for disease recurrence and death. Recent studies
have demonstrated CpG island hypermethylation phenotype (CIMP) to be an
independent risk factor for developing EMVI. This study investigates the
cellular processes linking hypermethylation with EMVI by an in vitro
model of rectal cancer, and assess the biological and epigenetic effects
of known and putative demethylating agents.

Methods. Hypermethylated DLD-1 human colorectal cancer cells were
cultured for three days and treated daily with demethylating agents
5-azacytidine (AZA) or RRx-001 across a dose range (0.5µM to 5µM).
Standard tests of population doubling (RPD) and cytotoxicity (trypan
blue) were performed across the dose range for each compound. Treated
cells were subjected to a 500µm gel-insert scratch migration assay and
video microscopy was used to record time-to-convergence (TC). Methylation
specific PCR was performed on harvested cells across the dose range and
compared to controls for eight genes associated with CIMP (SOCS1, MINT-1,
hMLH, NEUROG1, THBD, HAND1, ADAMTS1, IGFBP3).

Results. 5-azacytidine and RRx-001 both demonstrated >50% reduction in
RPD at a dose of 2µM, with a linear dose-dependent retardation of
population growth from 0.1µM to 1.0µM. Trypan blue test also
demonstrated linear increase in cytotoxicity for both agents up to 1µM.
Mean TC was 38.6hrs +/- 2.4hrs (1SD) for control, solvent control (DMSO),
and 0.5µM AZA & RRx-001. Mean TC for 1.0µM and 2.0µM AZA was 52.0hrs
+/- 3.0hrs and 91.0hrs +/- 3.75hrs, respectively (p=Results.
5-azacytidine and RRx-001 both demonstrated >50% reduction in RPD at a
dose of 2µM, with a linear dose-dependent retardation of population
growth from 0.1µM to 1.0µM. Trypan blue test also demonstrated linear
increase in cytotoxicity for both agents up to 1µM. Mean TC was 38.6hrs
+/- 2.4hrs (1SD) for control, solvent control (DMSO), and 0.5µM AZA &
RRx-001. Mean TC for 1.0µM and 2.0µM AZA was 52.0hrs +/- 3.0hrs and
91.0hrs +/- 3.75hrs, respectively (p=<0.001). Mean TC for 1.0µM and
2.0µM RRx-001 was 57.0hrs +/- 2.0hrs and 96.0hrs +/- 6.0hrs,
respectively (p=Results. 5-azacytidine and RRx-001 both demonstrated >50%
reduction in RPD at a dose of 2µM, with a linear dose-dependent
retardation of population growth from 0.1µM to 1.0µM. Trypan blue test
also demonstrated linear increase in cytotoxicity for both agents up to
1µM. Mean TC was 38.6hrs +/- 2.4hrs (1SD) for control, solvent control
(DMSO), and 0.5µM AZA & RRx-001. Mean TC for 1.0µM and 2.0µM AZA was
52.0hrs +/- 3.0hrs and 91.0hrs +/- 3.75hrs, respectively (p=<0.001). Mean
TC for 1.0µM and 2.0µM RRx-001 was 57.0hrs +/- 2.0hrs and 96.0hrs +/-
6.0hrs, respectively (p=<0.005).

Both AZA and RRx-001 demethylate 5 out of 8 CpG islands across the dose
spectrum. hMLH, SOCS, and IGFBP3 were resistant to demethylation for both
compounds at all doses. MINT, HAND, and THBD were partially demethylated
by both agents, but ADAMTS1 was demethylated by AZA only. In each of the
genes that demonstrated CpG island demethylation the demethylation was
incomplete, with strong methylated bands present despite an additional
demethylated band also being demonstrated. RRx-001 demonstrated a
dose-dependent demethylation of NEUROG1 and THBD as integrated density of
demethylated bands decreased against increasing dose of drug.

Conclusions. This study demonstrates the demethylating ability of both
agents against the methylome of 5 out of 8 genes associated with CIMP,
which is a known to be associated with EMVI; an independent risk factor
for poor prognosis in rectal cancers. The biological and demethylating
effects occur at doses below those that may be considered cytotoxic,
suggesting that demethylation its self is reducing the rate of cell
division and migration of cancer cells. Further work is required to
quantify the effects of both agents on the methylome of DLD-1 cells, and
to explore the mechanisms of action of both compounds.


