Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perception of barriers and facilitators to hepatitis B virus
screening, vaccination, and treatment care among Asian American
physicians.


Objective: To examine practices and factors affecting Hepatitis B Virus
(HBV) screening, vaccination, and treatment among Asian-American
physicians in New York City.

Methods: Members of the Chinese American Independent Practice Association
(CAIPA) will be recruited to participate in a comprehensive survey,
developed based on prior research, to assess physiciansâ€™ practice in
HBV screening, vaccination and treatment. This study will also
examinebarriers/facilitators toward HBV prevention and treatment in
knowledge, familiarity or awareness of guidelines, perception,
attitude/behaviors, self-efficacy, motivation, patient factors, cultural,
and environmental factors. A bivariate analysis and multivariate
regressions will be conducted to evaluate factors that predict study
outcomes.

Results: We hypothesize that Asian American physicians are more likely to
screen for HBV, but are experiencing many barriers unique to the Asian
American physicians that are leading them improperly perceive certain
patients not at risk for HBV infection. Furthermore, we anticipate
finding significant key barriers and facilitators among Asian American
physicians for HBV screening and vaccination and treatment towards Asian
patients. Preliminary findings will be presented at the conference.

Conclusions & Implications: Asian/Pacific Islanders (APIs) are
disproportionally affected by chronic hepatitis B. Therefore, identifying
chronically infected persons and linking them to care is crucial. As a
result of the reverence of the doctors, a cultural norm prevalence within
the Asian community, physicians are uniquely positioned to improve HBV
screening and vaccination rates and if necessary, recommend linkage to
care. This study will fill in an important gap in creating a
culturally-relevant, physician-focused intervention to improve HBV care
and reduce the burden of HBV infection within the Asian community.


