Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative analysis of molecular and drug response data from
clinical samples and PDTXs to identify pharmacogenomic associations in
breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women showing high clinical
and molecular heterogeneity. Current clinical management causes patients
overtreatment with implications on both patientsâ€™ quality of life and
healthcare costs. Moreover, intrinsic or acquired tumor resistance to
treatment leads to incurable metastatic progression in a significant
proportion of patients. Consequently, there is an urgent need for better
predictive biomarkers and a better understanding of the mechanisms
driving response to treatment. As part of the METABRIC initiative, we
fully molecularly characterized 2000 breast primary tumors, measuring
gene expression, copy number aberration, somatic mutations and
methylation. In addition, a biobank of breast cancer patient-derived
tumor xenograft (PDTX) models (n=92) has been generated in our lab and a
comprehensive molecular characterization was also obtained. We recently
demonstrated that breast cancer PDTXs maintain originating cancers
intra-tumor heterogeneity, hence representing a more relevant preclinical
model than cell lines. An ex-vivo drug screening was performed in these
models generating response data (IC50 and AUC) for 100 different drugs,
including "best in class" PI3K, PARP and CDK4/6 inhibitors, novel
biological and chemical inhibitors of HER2, ER, IGF1R and HER3, as well
as standard of care agents. Here we derived signatures of pathway
activation/disruption by integrating different data types in the METABRIC
cohort. Their association with previous breast cancer classifications, as
well as their prognostic significance was studied. The predictive power
of these signatures was investigated in the PDTX cohort to identify novel
pharmacogenomics associations. They were tested independently as well as
in combination, to derive molecular predictors of response to treatment.
We found known and novel associations between genomic/transcriptomic
features and drug response. For example, our results confirmed the known
association between estrogen receptor-related genes and response to
tamoxifen treatment. We also identified markers of response to inhibitors
of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Selected findings were validated in
clinical cohorts as well as in independent PDTX models. In conclusion, by
integrating molecular data from large cohorts of clinical samples and
PDTX we have generated a computational framework for the systematic
identification of pharmacogenomics associations in breast cancer and to
generate hypothesis for rational drug-drug combinations.


