Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of CDCA1 protein as a novel prognostic biomarker
and therapeutic target for oral cancer.


Oral cavity carcinoma (OCC) is one of the most common causes of
cancer-related death worldwide. Current therapies for OCC still show poor
clinical outcome with five-year survival rate of less than 63%.
Therefore, next generation biomarkers and therapeutic strategies for OCC
are eagerly awaited. We selected genes that were specifically
overexpressed in the majority of OCC using our gene expression profile
database, and identified cell division cycle associated 1 (CDCA1) that
appeared to encode nuclear protein as a candidate. Immunohistochemical
analysis using tissue microarray covering 99 OCC tissues detected that
CDCA1 protein was expressed in 67 cases of 99 OCC tissues (68%), but not
in normal oral epithelia. In addition, high levels of CDCA1 protein
expression was significantly associated with poor prognosis for OCC
patients (P = 0.0244 by log-rank test). Furthermore, knockdown of CDCA1
expression by siRNAs significantly inhibited the growth of tumor cells.
Moreover, flow cytometric analysis, multiple apoptosis assays, and live
cell imaging experiment revealed that CDCA1 could be important for the
growth and survival of OCC cells, probably through the regulation of
mitotic prophase and/or apoptosis. Our findings suggest that CDCA1 is
likely to be a novel prognostic biomarker and a therapeutic target for
OCC patients.


