Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the biochemical interaction of hnRNP A18 to
thioredoxin transcript.


Introduction: The RNA-binding protein heterogenous ribonucleoprotein A18
(hnRNP A18) is a protein translation regulator found to be elevated in
many cancers. Previous work from our lab has shown that under stress
conditions, hnRNP A18 is able to bind and regulate the translation of a
group of mRNAs, including thioredoxin (TRX), a redox-regulating protein
implicated in promoting tumor progression. Additionally, the formation of
functional hnRNP A18:TRX complexes increases de novo protein synthesis of
TRX through the stabilization of its mRNA transcript. It has been
reported that like most RNA-binding proteins, hnRNP A18 is a modular
protein and is uniquely composed of a single N-terminal RNA binding
domain (RBD) and a C-terminal arginine-glycine rich (RGG) domain. The RBD
is able to dictate specificity and affinity of substrate binding, while
methylation of the arginine residues in the RGG domain contributes to its
RNA binding capability. The observed translational regulation of TRX by
hnRNP A18 merits further studies into understanding the physical
interaction between the two molecules.

Methods/Results: To determine the region which hnRNP A18 interacts with
thioredoxin, stable cell lines overexpressing the RBD, RGG or full length
(FL) domains of hnRNP A18 were generated in human melanoma cells.
Ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation assays were performed using
specific antibodies to either the RBD or RGG domain epitope. Reverse
transcription PCR data reveals the presence of TRX mRNA in the resultant
immunoprecipitated materials, indicating that both the RBD and RGG domain
of hnRNP A18 protein is able to independently bind TRX mRNA. Maximum
binding was observed when both RBD and RGG regions were present.
Furthermore, hnRNP A18-GST recombinant proteins were engineered to
determine the exact region which hnRNP A18 binds to on its target mRNAs.
TRX mRNA was systematically deleted and increasing amounts of hnRNP
A18-GST protein was added to determine binding capability. Northwestern
analysis reveals that hnRNP A18 binds to its consensus motif in the TRX
3â€™UTR and to a new 19 nucleotide motif downstream of the consensus site.

Conclusion: Heterogenous ribonucleoprotein A18 is a stress-activated
RNA-binding protein that functions in the translational regulation of
TRX. Although the RBD and RGG domains are each independently able to
physically interact with TRX, both regions are necessary for maximal
binding. Furthermore, a new 19 nucleotide motif located downstream of the
hnRNP A18 consensus motif was also found to be sufficient for binding.
The binding interface between RNA-binding proteins and their target mRNAs
hold significant importance in understanding how the two molecules
interact and will offer new insights into developing novel drug
therapeutics that disrupt ribonucleoprotein formation.


