Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical impact of multiplex ctDNA gene analysis in lung
cancer.


Background: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of cell-free circulating
tumor DNA (ctDNA) enables a non-invasive option for comprehensive genomic
analysis of lung cancer patients. Currently there is insufficient data in
regard to the impact of ctDNA analysis on clinical decision making. In
this study, we evaluated the clinical utility of ctDNA sequencing on
treatment strategy and progression-free survival.

Methods: In this retrospective study, data was collected from files of 92
NSCLC patients monitored between the years 2014-2016 at the Thoracic
Center Unit at Davidoff Cancer Center, Rabin Medical Center, Israel.
Plasma samples from stage IIIb/IV non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients were analyzed by a commercial test (Guardant 360), using hybrid
capture, single molecule barcoding and massively parallel paired-end
synthesis to sequence a targeted gene panel. This test allows the
detection of somatic alterations such as point mutations, indels, fusions
and copy number amplifications.

Results: 92 consecutive NSCLC patients were included in this study.
Median age at diagnosis was 63 years, male:female ratio was 1:1.6. 40%
(37/92) were never-smokers, 84% (77/92) had adenocarcinoma. 38% (35/92)
performed ctDNA analysis before 1st line therapy and 62% (57/92) on
progression. ctDNA analysis yielded lung cancer related actionable
mutations in total 39% (36/92) of the patients; 31% (11/35) among upfront
testing and 44% (25/57) among patients at progression on matched therapy.
Treatment decision was taken toward targeted therapy subsequent to NGS
analysis in 23% (8/35) and 26% (15/57) respectively (total 25%; 23/92).
53 individual actionable genomic alterations were found. The most common
genes were sensitizing EGFR mutations (47.2%; 25/53), MET amplifications
and/or exon 14 skipping mutations (17%; 9/53) and resistance EGFR
mutations (13.2%; 7/53). Response assessment (RECIST) for 18 patients
with evaluable response to targeted therapy showed complete response in
6% (1/18), partial response in 39% (7/18), stable disease in 22% (4/18)
and progressive disease in 33% (6/18). Total objective response rate
(ORR) was 45% and disease control rate was 67%.

Conclusions: Comprehensive ctDNA testing revealed possible treatment
options for two-thirds of patients analyzed. ctDNA analysis impacted
clinical decision making in a quarter of the patients. Although this
topic needs to be further assessed in large randomized controlled trials,
these positive results emphasize the utility of liquid biopsy analysis to
guide clinicians to select the right therapy for the right patient.


