Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BET inhibitors INCB054329 and INCB057643 display significant
activity in androgen-independent prostate cancer models.


Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Deregulated
transcriptional factors and epigenetic effectors contribute to prostate
cancer progression and castration resistance providing ideal targets for
developing new therapeutic strategies. Bromodomain and extra-terminal
(BET) proteins act transcriptional co-activators interacting with
multiple co-regulatory molecules at gene promoters and enhancers. BET
inhibitors (BETi) disrupt transcriptional regulatory complexes and have
broad anticancer activity. INCB054329 and INCB057643 are BETi with proven
pre-clinical activity in hematological and solid tumors. Both compounds
are currently in clinical trials (NCT02431260 and NCT02711137) in
advanced cancer patients. In this study we explored for the first time
the activity of these two BETi in prostate cancer, comparing their
effects in androgen-dependent and independent models in vitro and in
vivo. We assessed the effect of INCB054329 and INCB057643 on cell
proliferation, colony formation and tumor-sphere assays in
androgen-dependent (LNCaP and VCaP) and androgen-independent (DU145, PC3,
22Rv1) cells. The in vivo antitumor activity was evaluated in mice with
22Rv1 derived subcutaneous xenografts with drugs administered orally
(BID, daily for 3 weeks). INCB054329 and INCB057643 inhibited
proliferation of prostate cancer cell lines. In short-term cell
proliferation assays the BETi appeared more effective against
androgen-dependent (VCaP and LNCaP) than androgen-independent (DU145 and
PC3) cells (GI50 of ≤100 nM and ≥500 nM, respectively). 22Rv1 cells,
which express androgen-independent AR splice variants, exhibited an
intermediate level of sensitivity to both compounds (GI50: 150-250 nM).
Interestingly, in colony and tumor-sphere forming assays all the cell
lines showed substantially greater sensitivity to the BETi than in
short-term assays. Notably, androgen-independent 22Rv1 cells were highly
responsive with GI50 values ≤100 nM similar to those seen in
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells. Treatment of mice bearing 22Rv1 tumor
xenografts with INCB054329 (50 mg/kg) and INCB057643 (3 mg/kg) led to
significant inhibition of tumor growth (T/C%: 42 and 45%, respectively)
and consistent reduction of tumor weight relative to vehicle-treated
mice. These results provide evidence of activity of INCB054329 and
INCB057643 in prostate cancer cell lines. Although short term assays
suggest a preferential anti-proliferative effect in androgen sensitive
prostate cancer cells, both compounds also exhibit significant activity
in an androgen-independent model both in vitro and in vivo suggesting
that they might represent a valid therapeutic option for treatment of
castration-resistant prostate cancer.


