Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing tumor killing abilities of NK cells by targeting CD16
shedding, and ADAM17.


CD16 consists of two isoforms (CD16a and CD16b) encoded by two highly
homologous genes that differ by only 6 amino acids in their extracellular
regions. CD16b is expressed by human neutrophils and CD16a by human
natural killer (NK) cells. The ectodomain regions of both CD16 isoforms
are cleaved proximal to the cell membrane by a proteolytic process
referred to as ectodomain shedding. We demonstrate that the membrane
metalloprotease ADAM17 cleaves CD16 in isolated leukocytes and in human
patients. By mass spectrometry analysis, we determined 3 adjacent
cleavage sites in neutrophil CD16b and one cleavage site in NK cell CD16a
that occurred at the same location as the predominant cleavage site in
CD16b, which is interesting considering CD16b is linked to the plasma
membrane via a GPI anchor and CD16a is a transmembrane protein.
Antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC) by NK cells is a key
mechanism in the anti-cancer effects of therapeutic antibodies, and CD16a
exclusively recognizes tumor-bound antibodies. Surface levels of CD16a
are rapidly down-regulated upon NK cell activation by cytokines, target
cell interaction, and tumor infiltration, which is associated with
impaired ADCC. Thus blocking this process has important clinical
significance. We contend that maintaining high surface levels of CD16a
during NK cell-based immunotherapy will enhance their killing of
antibody-bound tumor cells. In ongoing studies, we are examining
pharmaceutical and gene-targeting means of preventing CD16a cleavage as a
novel therapeutic strategy to enhance the anti-cancer effects of NK cells.


