Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PI3K inhibitor, taselisib, has a unique mechanism of action
that leads to enhanced potency in PIK3CA mutant models.


Activating mutations in PIK3CA are commonly found in a wide variety of
human cancers, and the dysregulation of the phosphoinositide-3 kinase
(PI3K) signaling pathway has been implicated in tumor cell growth and
survival. Taselisib (GDC-0032), a novel, oral, selective inhibitor of
p110alpha, sparing inhibition of p110beta, is more potent in cancer cells
bearing PIK3CA mutants than those with wildtype PIK3CA. Preclinical
studies demonstrate that taselisib induces more apoptotic cell death in
PIK3CA mutant cancer cells than other PI3K inhibitors.

We have discovered that taselisib has a dual mechanism of action, both
blocking PI3K signaling, and inducing a decrease in p110a protein levels.
Mass spec analysis reveals that taselisib treatment leads to the specific
depletion of mutant p110alpha without significant change in wildtype
p110alpha protein levels. This drug-induced p110a protein depletion is
rescued by E1 inhibitors and by proteasome inhibitors. Other clinical
PI3K inhibitors, including p110alpha selective and pan-PI3K inhibitors,
are unable to induce the depletion of mutant p110 alpha protein.
Furthermore, we have discovered that taselisib more effectively maintains
pathway suppression in PIK3CA mutant cells at 24 hrs in response to
feedback. In comparison to other clinical-stage PI3K inhibitors
administered at a maximum tolerated dose, taselisib has superior efficacy
with increased tumor regressions in PIK3CA mutant xenograft models. In
summary, these preclinical studies indicate that PI3K inhibitors, which
have the ability to trigger degradation of mutant p110a protein, can more
effectively suppress the signaling pathway, which may result in greater
anti-tumor activity and improved therapeutic index in PIK3CA mutant
tumors.


