Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of the retinoblastoma protein in induction
and maintenance of oncogene-induced cellular senescence in tumor
suppression.


Oncogene-induced cellular senescence is a tumor suppressor response
resulting in irreversible cell cycle exit, and is dependent on the p53
and RB pathways. Loss of p53 has recently been shown to allow re-entry of
senescent cells into the cell cycle. The role of the RB1 protein in
maintenance of the senescent state is less well studied. We investigated
whether RB1 is necessary for the induction as well as the maintenance of
oncogene-induced senescence, and we also evaluated whether RB1 activation
is sufficient to induce and/or maintain senesce in the absence of a
functional p53 pathway. Inactivation of RB1 prior to onset of senescence
led to failure of senescence induction, with impaired cell cycle exit and
failure to induce senescence markers. On the other hand, loss of RB1
after cells had already entered oncogene-induced senescence was able to
reverse some features of the senescence phenotype, but did not result in
successful cell division and accumulation. Interestingly, in the absence
of p53, constitutively active RB1 was sufficient for cells to undergo
oncogene-induced senescence, and effectively prevented colony formation.
Finally, while p53 inactivation was sufficient for senescent cells to
re-enter the cell cycle, constitutive activation of RB1 prevented cell
cycle re-entry, even in the absence of p53. Our findings show that RB1 is
necessary for both the induction and maintenance of oncogene-induced
senescence, and that active RB is sufficient for senescence induction as
well as its maintenance, both in the presence and absence of p53. These
results have direct implications on targeting RB activation as a
senescence-inducing approach in both p53 wild type and p53-defective
premalignant and malignant tumors.


