Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Primary tumor cell lines derived from gastric PDX tumors displays
differences in chemosensitivity.


Gastric cancer is a multifactorial and fatal disease with limited
effective therapeutic options. Its overall mortality ranked third among
cancer-related deaths worldwide. Patient-derived-xenograft (PDX) models
have been widely used in the biomedical research. They recapitulate the
genomic diversity/heterogeneity of patient tumors, maintain a lot of the
characteristics of the original tumors and showed much better correlation
with clinical outcome comparing to traditional cell line derived
xenograft models. However, the relatively low throughput and
time-consuming nature of PDX studies prevent them from being used in
large scale screening or mechanistic studies. To facilitate drug
development in gastric cancer, different cancer cell lines have been
developed in our laboratory from gastric PDX tumors. We performed STR
analyses to validate their identity and RNAseq data also showed high
similarities to their parental PDX tumors. These primary gastric tumor
cell lines displayed differences from each other in their
chemo-sensitivities in vitro and in vivo. They also differ in their
protein expression such as the HER-2 expression level. Pharmacology
studies using different compounds showed similar drug responses of these
cell lines in tissue culture, xenografts using these cell lines and the
original PDX models. Our data demonstrated the high fidelity of these
cell lines to their parental PDX tumors and serve as a bridge between the
high-throughput drug screening and highly clinical relevant PDX models
and will greatly facilitate the drug development in gastric cancer.


