Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-4 receptor-targeted cytotoxic T cells enhances the
therapeutic efficacy of adoptive T cell therapy against melanoma.


Melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer, has long been a major focus
of immunotherapy. Adoptive T cell therapy-based cancer immunotherapy has
been used to enhance the specificity and potential of host immune system
to treat melanoma. However, the infiltration and antitumor function of
cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) are blocked or down-regulated by various signals
derived from tumor cells and cells in tumor microenvironment. A novel
approach to specify and enhance the homing ability of CTLs to tumor is of
high demand. Interleukin-4 receptor (IL-4R) is over-expressed on many
types of cancer cells, including melanoma, and has been widely employed
for targeted drug delivery. In this work, we examined whether the tumor
homing efficiency and anti-tumor therapeutic efficacy of CTLs could be
heighten by labeling CTLs with IL4RPep-1, a targeting peptide that binds
to IL-4R. The labeling was empowered by conjugating IL4RPep-1 with
Dioleylphosphatidylethanolamine-biological anchor for membrane
(DOPE-BAM), an oleyl acid-derived membrane anchor that incorporates into
lipid membrane of cells. Tumor-specific CTLs isolated from the mice
immunized by irradiated B16F10 melanoma cells were highly populated with
CD62L+CD44+ activated T cells. After labeling with IL4RPep-1 via
DOPE-BAM, CTLs were still functionally active, as determined by
intracellular interferon-Î³ and granzyme release assays. Moreover, such
labeling did not affect the proliferation of T cells. Adoptive transfer
of IL4RPep-1-labeled, IL-4R-targeted CD45.1+CTLs into CD45.2 mice bearing
B16F10 melanoma enhanced their accumulation at tumor compared to that of
unlabeled T cells. Tumor homing of IL4RPep-1-labeled T cells was further
validated by in vivo fluorescence imaging of mice bearing 4T1 tumor at
mammary gland. Adoptive transfer of IL-4R-targeted CTLs showed remarkable
anti-tumor growth activity in mice bearing B16F10 tumor compared to
untargeted CTLs. After the transfer, flow cytometric study of immune
cells showed significant increase of CD8+ T cells and
F4/80+CD86+M1-polarized macrophages with noticeable decrease in
tumor-promoting immune cells, such as F4/80+CD206+M2-polarized
macrophages, Gr1+CD11b+ myeloid derived suppressor cells, and CD3+CD4+ T
cells. The CTLs accumulated at tumor were mostly exogenous CD45.1+ T
cells. These results implicate that IL-4R-targeted CTLs, which is enabled
by labeling of with IL4RPep-1, can be a promising strategy in the field
of adoptive T cell therapy against IL-4R-overexpressing tumor.


