Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating exosomal microRNA-203 and microRNA-373 as non-invasive
biomarkers for predicting prognosis and metastasis in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background and Aim Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most
common cancer and the most leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Although considerable progress has been made in treatment of
HCC, early detection is still highly considered the key to improved
survival. Thus, for the earlier diagnosis and accurate prediction of HCC,
identification of non-invasive molecular biomarkers for HCC patients is
an imperative need. Recently, cancer cell-derived extracellular vesicles
(EVs) have been known to contain various intracellular biomolecules
including microRNAs (miRNAs). The aim of this study was to evaluate
whether exosomal miRNAs can serve as a serum-based biomarker in HCC.

Materials and Methods We isolated exosome from serum samples from HCC
patients as well as normal healthy controls using ultracentrifugation,
and it was confirmed by expression of exosome markers (CD9, CD63, ALIX,
and TSG101) based on immunoblotting. Next, the expression of 6 miRNAs
(miRNA-24, -130a, -182, -203, -373, and -423) was analyzed in the exosome
samples. We also investigated expression status of the 6 miRNAs in
matched HCC tissues and corresponding normal liver tissues. MiRNAs
expression was determined by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), and
miRNAs expression was normalized relative to cel-miR-39 and RNU6B
expression for serum and tissue samples, respectively.

Results We successfully purified exosome from serum clinical samples and
detected miRNAs in the exosome. We observed that a subset of miRNAs from
serum exosome, including miRNA-24, -130a, -182, -203, and -373 were
enhanced in HCC patients than normal healthy controls. In further
comparison between early stage and advanced stage of HCC patients, serum
exosomal miRNA-203 (PResults We successfully purified exosome from serum
clinical samples and detected miRNAs in the exosome. We observed that a
subset of miRNAs from serum exosome, including miRNA-24, -130a, -182,
-203, and -373 were enhanced in HCC patients than normal healthy
controls. In further comparison between early stage and advanced stage of
HCC patients, serum exosomal miRNA-203 (P<0.05) and miRNA-373 (PResults
We successfully purified exosome from serum clinical samples and detected
miRNAs in the exosome. We observed that a subset of miRNAs from serum
exosome, including miRNA-24, -130a, -182, -203, and -373 were enhanced in
HCC patients than normal healthy controls. In further comparison between
early stage and advanced stage of HCC patients, serum exosomal miRNA-203
(P<0.05) and miRNA-373 (P<0.05) were significantly up-regulated in
advanced HCC patients. While no significant changes in the expression of
other serum exosomal miRNAs (miRNA-24, -130a, -182, and -423) according
to HCC progression. More interestingly, high serum exosomal miRNA-203 and
miRNA-373 was associated with HCC progression (PResults We successfully
purified exosome from serum clinical samples and detected miRNAs in the
exosome. We observed that a subset of miRNAs from serum exosome,
including miRNA-24, -130a, -182, -203, and -373 were enhanced in HCC
patients than normal healthy controls. In further comparison between
early stage and advanced stage of HCC patients, serum exosomal miRNA-203
(P<0.05) and miRNA-373 (P<0.05) were significantly up-regulated in
advanced HCC patients. While no significant changes in the expression of
other serum exosomal miRNAs (miRNA-24, -130a, -182, and -423) according
to HCC progression. More interestingly, high serum exosomal miRNA-203 and
miRNA-373 was associated with HCC progression (P<0.01) as well as
prognosis (PResults We successfully purified exosome from serum clinical
samples and detected miRNAs in the exosome. We observed that a subset of
miRNAs from serum exosome, including miRNA-24, -130a, -182, -203, and
-373 were enhanced in HCC patients than normal healthy controls. In
further comparison between early stage and advanced stage of HCC
patients, serum exosomal miRNA-203 (P<0.05) and miRNA-373 (P<0.05) were
significantly up-regulated in advanced HCC patients. While no significant
changes in the expression of other serum exosomal miRNAs (miRNA-24,
-130a, -182, and -423) according to HCC progression. More interestingly,
high serum exosomal miRNA-203 and miRNA-373 was associated with HCC
progression (P<0.01) as well as prognosis (P<0.05) of HCC patients.

Conclusions We provided the novel evidence for usefulness of serum
circulating exosomal miR-203 and miR-373 expressions as strong potential
biomarkers for predicting prognosis and metastasis of HCC patients.


