Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of missense variants in BRCA1 BRCT domains.


Currently, only ~¼ (133/600) of documented single nucleotide variation
leading to missense changes in the BRCA1 gene have been characterized as
pathogenic or non-pathogenic (IARC Classes 4 & 5 and 1 & 2, respectively)
posing a challenge for carriers of these variants. A detailed
understanding of structure-function relationships is critical for the
assessment of these variants in the interpretation of data from
functional assay and for the development of functional impact predictors.
Thus, we have systematically probed the C-terminus of BRCA1 including the
N-terminal border of the BRCT domains (M1650, S1651), the BRCT linker
region (G1738, D1739, V1740, G1743, H1746, G1748, P1749, R1753, and
D1757), and the alpha 1 and alpha’1 helices in BRCT[N] and [C],
respectively. We assessed the functional impact of 47 missense variants
using a validated transcriptional assay by a protein fusion of the GAL4
DNA-binding domain to BRCA1 C-terminus (aa 1,396-1,863) in HEK 293FT
cells. Analysis of functional data redefined the BRCT border (previously
thought to be at S1651) at residue M1650. Overall, mutations in the BRCT
linker had severe impact on the function. Mutations in the alpha1 and
alpha’1 helices also tended to display impaired function despite the
lack of functional impact of 16 out of the 17 variants previously
analyzed. In summary, our study provides increased granularity in our
understanding of BRCA1 regions less tolerant to changes and therefore
more likely to contain pathogenic variants. This knowledge will be
critical for the assignment of different prior probabilities of
pathogenicity given the variant location, improving risk assessment and
clinical management of carriers of BRCA1 missense alleles


