Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis by a novel
phytobiological mixture against breast cancer cell lines.


Breast cancer remains a leading cause of women’s death worldwide with
progressive emergence of resistance towards approved chemotherapies. For
this reason, new complementarytreatments have been sought. One of those
includethe use of a phytobiological mixture against different types of
malignancies, including but not limited to breast cancer. Herein, we
investigated the anti-proliferative effects of a novel phytobiological
mixture (PB)against two breast cancer cell lines :MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7.The PB mixture is composed of the following: quercetin,
resveratrol, cruciferex, epigallocatechin-3-gallate and curcumin at
different proportions. Theanti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of
PB were evaluated at non-cytotoxic concentrations as determined usingthe
Sulfa-Rhodamine B assay (SRB).The effects of PB on the induction of
apoptosis were valuated using Annexin-V and flow cytometry to measure the
resultingDNA fragments. The results showed that at 72hrs, PB had
cytotoxic effects against MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells with an IC50’s of
25.8±5.4 µg/ml and 56.9±4.2 µg/ml, respectively. Exposure of
MDA-MB-231 to PB for 72hrs resulted in the induction of apoptosis in a
dose-dependent manner. PB concentrations of 10 µg/ml and 30 µg/ml,
resulted in early programmed cell death of 9.1±1.5% and 22.1±1.8%
respectively. Exposure to PB (10 µg/ml for 24 hrs) resulted in mild cell
cycle arrest at the G2/M phase20.3±0.3% ;while higher dosesshowed a
significant cell cyclearrest at theS-phaseas compared to the control
untreated cells (pBreast cancer remains a leading cause of women’s
death worldwide with progressive emergence of resistance towards approved
chemotherapies. For this reason, new complementarytreatments have been
sought. One of those includethe use of a phytobiological mixture against
different types of malignancies, including but not limited to breast
cancer. Herein, we investigated the anti-proliferative effects of a novel
phytobiological mixture (PB)against two breast cancer cell lines
:MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7.The PB mixture is composed of the following:
quercetin, resveratrol, cruciferex, epigallocatechin-3-gallate and
curcumin at different proportions. Theanti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects of PB were evaluated at non-cytotoxic
concentrations as determined usingthe Sulfa-Rhodamine B assay (SRB).The
effects of PB on the induction of apoptosis were valuated using Annexin-V
and flow cytometry to measure the resultingDNA fragments. The results
showed that at 72hrs, PB had cytotoxic effects against MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 cells with an IC50’s of 25.8±5.4 µg/ml and 56.9±4.2 µg/ml,
respectively. Exposure of MDA-MB-231 to PB for 72hrs resulted in the
induction of apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. PB concentrations of
10 µg/ml and 30 µg/ml, resulted in early programmed cell death of
9.1±1.5% and 22.1±1.8% respectively. Exposure to PB (10 µg/ml for 24
hrs) resulted in mild cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase20.3±0.3%
;while higher dosesshowed a significant cell cyclearrest at theS-phaseas
compared to the control untreated cells (p<0.001). However, exposure to
PB for 48 hrs at both doses,10 µg/ml and30 µg/ml,resulted in a
significant cell cycle arrest at the S-phase 25.3±1.6% and 20.5±
0.4%respectivelyas compared to the control untreated cells 12.4±1.5%
(pBreast cancer remains a leading cause of women’s death worldwide with
progressive emergence of resistance towards approved chemotherapies. For
this reason, new complementarytreatments have been sought. One of those
includethe use of a phytobiological mixture against different types of
malignancies, including but not limited to breast cancer. Herein, we
investigated the anti-proliferative effects of a novel phytobiological
mixture (PB)against two breast cancer cell lines :MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7.The PB mixture is composed of the following: quercetin,
resveratrol, cruciferex, epigallocatechin-3-gallate and curcumin at
different proportions. Theanti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of
PB were evaluated at non-cytotoxic concentrations as determined usingthe
Sulfa-Rhodamine B assay (SRB).The effects of PB on the induction of
apoptosis were valuated using Annexin-V and flow cytometry to measure the
resultingDNA fragments. The results showed that at 72hrs, PB had
cytotoxic effects against MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells with an IC50’s of
25.8±5.4 µg/ml and 56.9±4.2 µg/ml, respectively. Exposure of
MDA-MB-231 to PB for 72hrs resulted in the induction of apoptosis in a
dose-dependent manner. PB concentrations of 10 µg/ml and 30 µg/ml,
resulted in early programmed cell death of 9.1±1.5% and 22.1±1.8%
respectively. Exposure to PB (10 µg/ml for 24 hrs) resulted in mild cell
cycle arrest at the G2/M phase20.3±0.3% ;while higher dosesshowed a
significant cell cyclearrest at theS-phaseas compared to the control
untreated cells (p<0.001). However, exposure to PB for 48 hrs at both
doses,10 µg/ml and30 µg/ml,resulted in a significant cell cycle arrest
at the S-phase 25.3±1.6% and 20.5± 0.4%respectivelyas compared to the
control untreated cells 12.4±1.5% (p<0.001). In conclusion, PB was found
to have a promising anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effect in breast
cancer cell lines. Further studies are needed to address the underlying
mechanism of action of PB against breast cancer cell lines.


