Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological targeting of the Aurora A and Histone 3 lysine 9
methyltransferase pathways in pancreatic cancer induces mitotic
catastrophe.


By regulating gene expression networks that mediate neoplastic behavior,
epigenetic protein complexes are the ultimate effectors of oncogenic
pathways. This hierarchical position of epigenetic pathways within the
mechanisms that regulate cancer makes them ideal candidates for
therapeutic targets. The current work was designed to characterize the
role of the K9H3 Histone Methyltransferase (HMT) pathway in mediating
oncogenic signals downstream of Aurora Kinase A (AurkA), with the goal of
designing efficient combinatorial therapies against PDAC. Affinity
protein purification, combined with mass spectrometry, demonstrates that
HP1Î³ isolated from mitotic cells interacts with AurkA and the HMTs, G9a
and GLP. We also find that this complex is critical for mitotic
progression and cell proliferation. Congruently, treatment of PDAC cells
with individual drugs against AurkA or HP1-HMT inhibits cell growth by
inducing senescence, a cytostatic response. However, the combination of
these agents has a synergistic effect of reducing cell growth in both,
monolayer and spheroid cultures to result in a cytotoxic effect. Confocal
and electron microscopy, along with cell cycle analysis, demonstrate that
the cytotoxic effect of this combination is due to induction of mitotic
catastrophe, a distinct form of cell death that occurs during mitosis.
Molecularly, the combination of AurkA and HP1-HMT inhibition bypasses
G2/M arrest with downregulation of the Chk1-Cdc25c pathway. In vivo
treatment of PDAC orthotopic xenografts with the HP1-HMT inhibitor alone
demonstrated reduced PDAC growth, and increased efficacy in PDAC growth
reduction was observed in combination with the AurkA inhibitor over
either individual treatment. Thus, our data demonstrate a novel
AurkA-HP1-HMT mitotic pathway that holds promise for potential
pharmacological targeting in combinatorial therapy for this malignancy.


