Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel class of potent and selective inhibitors efface MTH1 as
broad-spectrum cancer target.


Malignant transformation is accompanied by increased reactive oxygen
species (ROS) known to promote carcinogenesis and damage free nucleotides
and DNA. During replication, damaged nucleotides are incorporated into
DNA resulting in DNA breaks and mutations, which can ultimately lead to
cell death. Cancer cells may evade this process via overexpression of
MTH1 (also known as NUDT1), a member of nudix phosphohydrolase protein
family, which converts the oxidized nucleotides 8-oxo-dGTP and 2-OH-dATP
into the corresponding monophosphates thus preventing their incorporation
into DNA and avoiding cell death. Initial RNAi-mediated knockdown of MTH1
and tool compounds (TH588, (S)-crizotinib) inhibiting MTH1 supported this
model. As MTH1 is not essential for non-transformed cell survival, MTH1
was hypothesized to be a non-oncogenic cancer addiction and a potential
broad-spectrum cancer target. Attractive target rationale combined with
previous success in identifying potent and cellularly active MTH1
inhibitors prompted us to develop new cancer therapeutics inhibiting
MTH1. By using fragment-based screening and structure-based drug design,
a series of 4-amino-2-carboxamide-7-azaindoles was identified. We
developed biochemically potent and selective MTH1 inhibitors with good
cell permeability and metabolic stability. These MTH1 inhibitors
demonstrated target engagement in cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA),
and a strong positive correlation between cellular and biochemical
potency was observed. One promising MTH1 inhibitor from this structural
class was BAY-707. Unexpectedly however, these properties did not
translate into accumulation of oxidized nucleotides within DNA and
consequent induction of Î³H2AX and DNA damage response. Moreover, while
tool compounds (TH588, (S)-crizotinib) were confirmed to be biochemically
potent MTH1 inhibitors which stunted the proliferation of a range of
cancer cell lines, our more potent and cellularly active MTH1 inhibitors,
including BAY-707, demonstrated no significant effect on cancer cell
survival. Furthermore, we were unable to demonstrate in vivo efficacy
using xenograft models of human cancers or syngeneic mouse tumor models.
Finally, our in vitro and in vivo combination studies with pro-oxidants,
standard-of-care drugs or radiation also failed to result in significant
additive or synergistic growth inhibitory effects on cancer cells. Thus,
our findings support the recently published observations made with other
potent and selective MTH1 chemical probes (AZ compound 15, IACS-4759,
NPD7155) and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated MTH1 knockout. Based on these
observations and our additional target validation experiments, we
concluded that MTH1 is not essential for cancer cell survival or for the
sanitization of damaged nucleotides within cells and thus not a viable
target for development of novel anticancer agents.


