Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of lung cancer by assay of novel methylated DNA markers
in plasma.


Purpose: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide.
Most present symptomatically at late stage with high lethality. Early
detection reduces mortality but accurate and readily accessible tools for
population screening are limited. By whole methylome sequencing, we have
identified novel methylated DNA markers (MDMs) for lung cancer in tissue
(Giakoumopoulos et al. ASCO 2016). Using top candidate MDMs in the
present study, we now explore their clinical accuracy for lung cancer
detection when assayed from plasma.

Experimental Procedures: Archival plasmas from two independent study
groups were tested in blinded fashion. Lung cancer cases and controls
(apparently healthy smokers) for each group were balanced on age and sex
(Group 1: 64 cases, 231 controls; Group 2: 23 cases, 80 controls). Using
multiplex PCR followed by QuARTS (Quantitative Allele-Specific Real-time
Target and Signal amplification) assay, a post-bisulfite quantification
of MDMs on DNA extracted from plasma was performed. We selected 31 MDM
candidates for initial evaluation in Group 1 (1 ml plasma/patient); top
individual MDMs were subsequently tested in Group 2 to identify optimal
MDM panels for lung cancer detection (2 ml/patient).

Results: From Group 1 analyses, 13 high performance MDMs were selected
for further testing (CYP26C1, SOBP, SUCLG2, SHOX2, ZDHHC1, NFIX,
FLJ45983, HOXA9, B3GALT6, ZNF781, SP9, BARX1, EMX1) with individual areas
under the receiver operator curve (AUCs) ranging from 0.593 to 0.939.
Discrimination by individual MDMs was corroborated in Group 2 in which
data was analyzed using two methods: a logistic regression fit and a
regression partition tree approach. The logistic fit model identified a
4-marker panel (ZNF781, BARX1, EMX1, and SOBP) with an AUC of 0.96 and an
overall sensitivity of 91% and 90% specificity. Analysis of the data
using a regression partition tree approach identified 4 markers (ZNF781,
BARX1, EMX1, and HOXA9) with AUC of 0.93 and an overall sensitivity of
96% and specificity of 94%. For both approaches, B3GALT6 was used as a
standardizing marker of total DNA input.

Conclusion: A panel of MDMs assayed in plasma achieved high sensitivity
and specificity for all types of lung cancer. Further clinical evaluation
and validation of this promising panel in larger patient groups are
clearly indicated.


