Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen induced NRF1 signaling is a molecular mechanism
underlying the generation of different breast cancer stem cell
subpopulations leading to intratumoral heterogeneity.


Life time exposure to elevated levels of estrogen (E2) is a major risk
factor for breast cancer. Among women with ER/PR positive tumors, only 50
to 60% of women respond to endocrine therapy. Intra-tumoral heterogeneity
of breast cancer cells may be one of the reason for unresponsiveness to
endocrine therapy in more than 40% of ER-positive breast cancer cases. In
this study we examined that heterogeneous breast cancer stem cells
(BCSCs) are produced by exposure to E2 and/or ectopic expression of
molecular risk factor - nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1). To elucidate
this, we used single cell confocal imaging, flow sorting, ChIP and
qRT-PCR approaches. We also measured the key regulators of pluripotency,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), stemness, cell apoptosis and
cell cycle regulation. The functional assay for cancer stem cells
enrichment employed were selection of cells in B27 medium as spheroids,
anchorage-independent growth and mammosphere formation assays.
Carcinogenic treatments of E2 to MCF10 A CD24- cells induced formation of
~1.46% CD44+/CD24+ and 26.02% of CD44+/CD24- subpopulations, which are a
typical phenotypes associated with human breast tumor-initiating cells
(BTICs) or BCSCs. These subpopulations are capable of forming
self-renewing mammospheres. In contrast, CD24+ or CD24-/CD44- cells did
not form mammospheres. Stable NRF1 overexpression induced formation of
2.36% CD44+/CD24+ and of 64% CD44+/CD24- subpopulations. Carcinogenic
treatments of E2 to stable NRF1 overexpressing MCF10 A cells, induced to
acquire 21.54% CD44+/CD24+ and 44.54% CD44+/CD24- subpopulations. E2
treatment to NRF1 overexpressing BSCSs markers significantly increased
mammosphere forming capability, compared to NRF1 alone. The dominant
negative form of NRF1 diminished the effects of E2 and/or NRF1 induced
acquiring of BCSCs antigen markers and their capability of forming
mammospheres. E2 induced BTICs/BCSCs were heterogeneous. Each
subpopulation was characterized by a different transcriptional and
biomarker profiles of CD24, CD44, CD49f, CD133, ALDH1A1, CXCR4, and NRF1.
The expression of different markers for pluripotency (OCT4, SOX2 and
Nanog), EMT (E-cadherin, N-cadherin and Vimentin), stemness (CD24, CD44,
CD39f, CD133, ALDH1A1), cell cycle (p16,CDC2,CDC25C, cyclinB1) and
metastasis (CXCR4), were associated with BTICs produced by E2 and/or
NRF1. In summary, we observed new roles of NRF1 in contributing to
acquire breast tumor initiating stem-like cells and in regulating EMT and
invasiveness of BCSCs, thus opens a new direction of NRF1â€™s role in
breast cancer research. A better understanding of how E2 dependent breast
neoplasm heterogeneity depends on NRF1 network may open new avenues for
therapeutic strategy against breast cancer. This work was supported
partly by VA MERIT Review (VA BX001463) grant to DR.


