Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A culturally competent, community driven, collaborative approach
to health care education conferences addressing the health disparities of
African Americans.


The ability to effectively deliver health care education that meets the
social, cultural, and linguistic needs of people with diverse cultures is
an important consideration, and is referred to as culturally or community
competent approaches. Community and culturally competent health care
education approaches are especially important in educational conferences
designed to engage residents in health care issues such as health
screenings, lifestyle, and preventative approaches toward improved
health, as well as examining the impact of these and other factors on
health disparities related to ethnicity. In this report, we evaluated 15
ActNOW cancer education conferences over a 5-year period, using a
community driven, culturally competent conference model designed to
educate African Americans participants, with an emphasis on reducing
health disparities through understanding cancer, the importance of
clinical trials participation, screening, and preventative and healthy
lifestyle choices. Qualitative data on an aggregate of 380 participants
were obtained through an anonymous evaluation and feedback survey
questionnaire distributed to participants at the end of the conference.
Participants’ pre- and post-conference perceived cancer knowledge and
intent to change lifestyle were evaluated. Conference attendees
voluntarily completed the self-administered questionnaire comprised of 8
questions. Each question had 4 possible responses: 1. non-existent; 2.
minimal; 3. moderate or 4. considerable. For statistical analysis,
responses were separated into two groups; low and high. Responses
designated 1 or 2 were considered to reflect minimal understanding of the
subject material; and frequency counts for responses 1 or 2 were
aggregated and designated as "Low" understanding responses. Responses 3
or 4 reflected a higher understanding of the subject material; and
frequency counts for responses 3 or 4 were aggregated and designated as
"High" understanding responses. The groups were then analyzed
statistically using Fisher's exact test, where a two-sided p≤0.05 is
considered significant. The results demonstrated a significant number
(27%) of respondents indicating a low understanding of the topics before
the event. After the event, a significantly lesser number (2%) of low
respondents reported a low understanding of the topics, with a
concomitant increase in high respondents reporting a greater
understanding (from 73% pre- to 98% post-conference); pThe ability to
effectively deliver health care education that meets the social,
cultural, and linguistic needs of people with diverse cultures is an
important consideration, and is referred to as culturally or community
competent approaches. Community and culturally competent health care
education approaches are especially important in educational conferences
designed to engage residents in health care issues such as health
screenings, lifestyle, and preventative approaches toward improved
health, as well as examining the impact of these and other factors on
health disparities related to ethnicity. In this report, we evaluated 15
ActNOW cancer education conferences over a 5-year period, using a
community driven, culturally competent conference model designed to
educate African Americans participants, with an emphasis on reducing
health disparities through understanding cancer, the importance of
clinical trials participation, screening, and preventative and healthy
lifestyle choices. Qualitative data on an aggregate of 380 participants
were obtained through an anonymous evaluation and feedback survey
questionnaire distributed to participants at the end of the conference.
Participants’ pre- and post-conference perceived cancer knowledge and
intent to change lifestyle were evaluated. Conference attendees
voluntarily completed the self-administered questionnaire comprised of 8
questions. Each question had 4 possible responses: 1. non-existent; 2.
minimal; 3. moderate or 4. considerable. For statistical analysis,
responses were separated into two groups; low and high. Responses
designated 1 or 2 were considered to reflect minimal understanding of the
subject material; and frequency counts for responses 1 or 2 were
aggregated and designated as "Low" understanding responses. Responses 3
or 4 reflected a higher understanding of the subject material; and
frequency counts for responses 3 or 4 were aggregated and designated as
"High" understanding responses. The groups were then analyzed
statistically using Fisher's exact test, where a two-sided p≤0.05 is
considered significant. The results demonstrated a significant number
(27%) of respondents indicating a low understanding of the topics before
the event. After the event, a significantly lesser number (2%) of low
respondents reported a low understanding of the topics, with a
concomitant increase in high respondents reporting a greater
understanding (from 73% pre- to 98% post-conference); p<0.0001. Similar
significant shifts in practice knowledge profiles were also seen (pThe
ability to effectively deliver health care education that meets the
social, cultural, and linguistic needs of people with diverse cultures is
an important consideration, and is referred to as culturally or community
competent approaches. Community and culturally competent health care
education approaches are especially important in educational conferences
designed to engage residents in health care issues such as health
screenings, lifestyle, and preventative approaches toward improved
health, as well as examining the impact of these and other factors on
health disparities related to ethnicity. In this report, we evaluated 15
ActNOW cancer education conferences over a 5-year period, using a
community driven, culturally competent conference model designed to
educate African Americans participants, with an emphasis on reducing
health disparities through understanding cancer, the importance of
clinical trials participation, screening, and preventative and healthy
lifestyle choices. Qualitative data on an aggregate of 380 participants
were obtained through an anonymous evaluation and feedback survey
questionnaire distributed to participants at the end of the conference.
Participants’ pre- and post-conference perceived cancer knowledge and
intent to change lifestyle were evaluated. Conference attendees
voluntarily completed the self-administered questionnaire comprised of 8
questions. Each question had 4 possible responses: 1. non-existent; 2.
minimal; 3. moderate or 4. considerable. For statistical analysis,
responses were separated into two groups; low and high. Responses
designated 1 or 2 were considered to reflect minimal understanding of the
subject material; and frequency counts for responses 1 or 2 were
aggregated and designated as "Low" understanding responses. Responses 3
or 4 reflected a higher understanding of the subject material; and
frequency counts for responses 3 or 4 were aggregated and designated as
"High" understanding responses. The groups were then analyzed
statistically using Fisher's exact test, where a two-sided p≤0.05 is
considered significant. The results demonstrated a significant number
(27%) of respondents indicating a low understanding of the topics before
the event. After the event, a significantly lesser number (2%) of low
respondents reported a low understanding of the topics, with a
concomitant increase in high respondents reporting a greater
understanding (from 73% pre- to 98% post-conference); p<0.0001. Similar
significant shifts in practice knowledge profiles were also seen
(p<0.0001). Cultural and/or community competent approaches for health
care education are a needed consideration


