Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (Fak) leads to sensitization
of p53 mutant head and neck cancer to genotoxic stress.


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is most commonly treated
with DNA-damaging therapies such as cisplatin and/or radiation. However,
a significant proportion of HNSCCs are resistant to this therapy.
Recently, we have identified focal adhesion kinase (Fak) as a targetable
biomarker of therapeutic resistance in this disease. Additionally,
utilizing in vivo shRNA screening of druggable targets in a panel of
HNSCC cell lines, Fak was one of the most significant genes related to
radiosensitization. Additional investigations utilizing a combination of
in vivo and in vitro assays have shown that inhibition of Fak either
chemically or via shRNA leads to dramatically increased sensitivity to
DNA damage. This effect is primarily found in p53-mutant tumors and cell
lines, which are known to be resistant to DNA-damaging therapies. DNA
damage due to radiation appears to be potentiated in p53 mutant HNSCC
cell lines following Fak inhibition, but less so in matched p53 wild type
HNSCC. Moreover, basal Fak activity is higher in HNSCC cell lines
engineered to express missense p53 mutations compared to either wild type
or p53 null cells. We also found that several forms of mutant p53 bind to
Fak and may alter its activity directly. Taken together, our data suggest
a targetable nexus of mutant p53 and Fak that can be directly modulated
to improve the efficacy of DNA-damaging therapy.


