Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of human mammary tumor virus (HMTV) in human breast cancer
by NanoString nCounter and FISH analysis.


Human Mammary Tumor Virus (HMTV), a retrovirus 90-98% homologous to Mouse
Mammary tumor Virus (MMTV), the etiological agent of murine mammary
cancer, has been detected by PCR in 40% of American womenâ€™s breast
cancers, but not in healthy tissues of the same breast (Cancer Research
1995, 55:5173-79; Clin. Cancer Research 2001, 7-283-4). A complete 9.9 kb
HMTV proviral sequence has been detected in breast cancer genomic DNA
(Cancer Res 2001,61:1754-9). HMTV viral particles with betaretrovirus
characteristics have been isolated from metastatic breast cancer cells in
effusions (MSSM cells). Expression of HMTV proteins has been detected in
MSSM cells by western blot, fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis,
and immunofluorescence assays but not in normal mammary epithelial cells
(J Virol Methods 2010, 163(1): 157-61). PCR is a sensitive technique
susceptible of contamination, which due to amplification, could result in
false positive detection. Although murine DNA was not found by PCR, the
possibility still exists that HMTV in human DNA could be a result of
laboratory contamination. Despite the substantial evidence supporting the
presence of HMTV in breast cancer the controversy continues because the
chance of contamination has led to doubt that murine-like viruses are
human pathogens. We now report additional analyses of breast cancer
specimens employing other methods for HMTV detection that reinforce
previous findings. NanoString nCounter, a new technology using specific
100 mer oligonucleotides as probes bound to reporter molecules that can
detect HMTV gag, env and LTR sequences as well as two murine specific
probes in a single reaction without amplification. Flourescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) assays with a HMTV probe is a technology that
permits visualization of HMTV proviral DNA in the nuclei of surgical
samples of breast cancer as well as in MSSM cells. Results from
Nanostring nCounter, and FISH analysis show the presence of HMTV DNA in
surgical cancer specimens and in MSSM cells. The data exclude
contamination and confirm the authenticity of HMTV in human breast
cancer. Next-generation sequencing and other studies are in progress to
determine the role of HMTV in the pathogenesis of breast carcinoma.


