Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: psiTPTE22-HERV functions as a tumor suppressor in gastric cancer
and is associated with disease outcome.


Background and aim: The novel gene psiTPTE22-HERV identified by us
previously is a human endogenous retrovirus (HERV)-related gene located
adjacent to the gene psiTPTE22. With a high GC content around the
promoter region, expression of psiTPTE22-HERV can be regulated
epigentically by DNA methylation. We aimed to elucidate the clinical
significance of epigenetic alteration and biological function of
psiTPTE22-HERV in gastric cancer.

Methods and results: psiTPTE22-HERV was ubiquitously expressed in normal
adult tissues including stomach, but was frequently
silenced/down-reguated in gastric tumors and cancer cell lines as
evidenced by RT-PCR. Bisulfite genomic sequencing results indicated that
psiTPTE22-HERV was silenced by promoter DNA methylation, and its
expression could be restored by demethylation treatments in gastric
cancer cell lines. Ectopic expression of psiTPTE22-HERV significantly
suppressed cell viability, clonogenicity and cell cycle progression,
induced apoptosis, and inhibited migration and invasion of SGC7901 and
MKN45 gastric cancer cells. In contrast, knock-down of psiTPTE22-HERV in
the gastric cancer MKN1 cells significantly increased cell growth and
migration ability, promoted cell cycle progress and inhibited cell
apoptosis. psiTPTE22-HERV significantly suppressed subcutaneous
tumorigenicity of SGC7901 cells in nude mice and metastasis (liver
implantation) in tail vein injection models. Promoter methylation level
of psiTPTE22-HERV was significantly higher in gastric tumors than in
adjacent non-tumor tissues as revealed by bisulfite genomic sequencing
(PMethods and results: psiTPTE22-HERV was ubiquitously expressed in
normal adult tissues including stomach, but was frequently
silenced/down-reguated in gastric tumors and cancer cell lines as
evidenced by RT-PCR. Bisulfite genomic sequencing results indicated that
psiTPTE22-HERV was silenced by promoter DNA methylation, and its
expression could be restored by demethylation treatments in gastric
cancer cell lines. Ectopic expression of psiTPTE22-HERV significantly
suppressed cell viability, clonogenicity and cell cycle progression,
induced apoptosis, and inhibited migration and invasion of SGC7901 and
MKN45 gastric cancer cells. In contrast, knock-down of psiTPTE22-HERV in
the gastric cancer MKN1 cells significantly increased cell growth and
migration ability, promoted cell cycle progress and inhibited cell
apoptosis. psiTPTE22-HERV significantly suppressed subcutaneous
tumorigenicity of SGC7901 cells in nude mice and metastasis (liver
implantation) in tail vein injection models. Promoter methylation level
of psiTPTE22-HERV was significantly higher in gastric tumors than in
adjacent non-tumor tissues as revealed by bisulfite genomic sequencing
(P<0.05); methylation levels in both tumors and adjacent non-tumor
tissues of gastric cancer patients were significantly higher than in
normal stomach tissues (both PMethods and results: psiTPTE22-HERV was
ubiquitously expressed in normal adult tissues including stomach, but was
frequently silenced/down-reguated in gastric tumors and cancer cell lines
as evidenced by RT-PCR. Bisulfite genomic sequencing results indicated
that psiTPTE22-HERV was silenced by promoter DNA methylation, and its
expression could be restored by demethylation treatments in gastric
cancer cell lines. Ectopic expression of psiTPTE22-HERV significantly
suppressed cell viability, clonogenicity and cell cycle progression,
induced apoptosis, and inhibited migration and invasion of SGC7901 and
MKN45 gastric cancer cells. In contrast, knock-down of psiTPTE22-HERV in
the gastric cancer MKN1 cells significantly increased cell growth and
migration ability, promoted cell cycle progress and inhibited cell
apoptosis. psiTPTE22-HERV significantly suppressed subcutaneous
tumorigenicity of SGC7901 cells in nude mice and metastasis (liver
implantation) in tail vein injection models. Promoter methylation level
of psiTPTE22-HERV was significantly higher in gastric tumors than in
adjacent non-tumor tissues as revealed by bisulfite genomic sequencing
(P<0.05); methylation levels in both tumors and adjacent non-tumor
tissues of gastric cancer patients were significantly higher than in
normal stomach tissues (both P<0.001). Multivariate Cox regression
analysis demonstrated that promoter methylation of psiTPTE22-HERV in
primary gastric tumors was an independent risk factor for poor survival.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that high-methylation of
psiTPTE22-HERV promoter was significantly associated with shortened
survival in gastric cancer patients from two independent cohorts (both
PMethods and results: psiTPTE22-HERV was ubiquitously expressed in normal
adult tissues including stomach, but was frequently
silenced/down-reguated in gastric tumors and cancer cell lines as
evidenced by RT-PCR. Bisulfite genomic sequencing results indicated that
psiTPTE22-HERV was silenced by promoter DNA methylation, and its
expression could be restored by demethylation treatments in gastric
cancer cell lines. Ectopic expression of psiTPTE22-HERV significantly
suppressed cell viability, clonogenicity and cell cycle progression,
induced apoptosis, and inhibited migration and invasion of SGC7901 and
MKN45 gastric cancer cells. In contrast, knock-down of psiTPTE22-HERV in
the gastric cancer MKN1 cells significantly increased cell growth and
migration ability, promoted cell cycle progress and inhibited cell
apoptosis. psiTPTE22-HERV significantly suppressed subcutaneous
tumorigenicity of SGC7901 cells in nude mice and metastasis (liver
implantation) in tail vein injection models. Promoter methylation level
of psiTPTE22-HERV was significantly higher in gastric tumors than in
adjacent non-tumor tissues as revealed by bisulfite genomic sequencing
(P<0.05); methylation levels in both tumors and adjacent non-tumor
tissues of gastric cancer patients were significantly higher than in
normal stomach tissues (both P<0.001). Multivariate Cox regression
analysis demonstrated that promoter methylation of psiTPTE22-HERV in
primary gastric tumors was an independent risk factor for poor survival.
Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that high-methylation of
psiTPTE22-HERV promoter was significantly associated with shortened
survival in gastric cancer patients from two independent cohorts (both
P<0.05).

Conclusion: psiTPTE22-HERV functions as a tumor suppressor that is
commonly down-regulated by promoter methylation in gastric cancer, which
may serve as a prognostic biomarker for gastirc cancer patients.


