Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidemiology of primary lung cancer and its trend northeast of
Iran during 1985-2012.


Introduction: In this study we investigated epidemiology and trends of
primary lung cancers in northeast of Iran during 1985-2012.

Methods: In this cross-sectional study records of primary lung cancers
from 1985 to 2012 in Mashhad, northeast of Iran, were investigated. Data
were obtained from the referral oncologic hospital and private radiation
oncology clinic. To study trends, the duration of study was categorized
into three periods: 1985-1995, 1995-2005 and 2005-2012. Statistically
significant level was considered Methods: In this cross-sectional study
records of primary lung cancers from 1985 to 2012 in Mashhad, northeast
of Iran, were investigated. Data were obtained from the referral
oncologic hospital and private radiation oncology clinic. To study
trends, the duration of study was categorized into three periods:
1985-1995, 1995-2005 and 2005-2012. Statistically significant level was
considered <0.05.

Results: Of 939 cases with mean age of 60.57 (±12.31) years, 660(70.3%)
were male. Male to female ratio was 2.36. Mean age was 61.47±12.01 years
for males and 58.45±12.75 for females (p=0.001). Mean age at diagnosis
and rate of smokers was unchanged in three intervals (table 1).





Time period

1985-1995

1995-2005

2005-20012

P value



Age(years)

60.67±11.74

60.57±12.24

60.49±12.94

0.98



Gender:

Male

female

167(78.4)

46(21.6)

330(68.6)

151(31.4)

163(66.5)

82(33.5

0.01



Male to female ratio

3.63

2.18

1.99





Smoking history:

Yes

no

69(76.7)

21(23.3)

211(67.8)

100(32.2)

100(65)

54(35)

0.15



Smokers:

Male

Female

59(85.5)

10(14.5)

159(75.4)

52(24.6)

74(74)

26(26)

0.16



Male-to-female ratio of smokers

5.9

3.06

2.84





Squamous cell carcinoma with relative frequency of 44.2% was the most
frequent pathologic subtype in total population followed by
adenocarcinoma (18.2%), Small Cell Lung cancer (16.8%), large Cell
carcinoma (1.3%) and other subtypes (19.5%). Relative frequency of
pathologic subtypes had significant changes in three intervals (p
Squamous cell carcinoma with relative frequency of 44.2% was the most
frequent pathologic subtype in total population followed by
adenocarcinoma (18.2%), Small Cell Lung cancer (16.8%), large Cell
carcinoma (1.3%) and other subtypes (19.5%). Relative frequency of
pathologic subtypes had significant changes in three intervals (p
<0.001). Relative frequency of adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma
were increasing while it was decreasing for SCC and SCLCs during three
recent decades. There was statistically significant difference in mean
age at diagnosis (pSquamous cell carcinoma with relative frequency of
44.2% was the most frequent pathologic subtype in total population
followed by adenocarcinoma (18.2%), Small Cell Lung cancer (16.8%), large
Cell carcinoma (1.3%) and other subtypes (19.5%). Relative frequency of
pathologic subtypes had significant changes in three intervals (p
<0.001). Relative frequency of adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma
were increasing while it was decreasing for SCC and SCLCs during three
recent decades. There was statistically significant difference in mean
age at diagnosis (p<0.001), rate of smokers (pSquamous cell carcinoma
with relative frequency of 44.2% was the most frequent pathologic subtype
in total population followed by adenocarcinoma (18.2%), Small Cell Lung
cancer (16.8%), large Cell carcinoma (1.3%) and other subtypes (19.5%).
Relative frequency of pathologic subtypes had significant changes in
three intervals (p <0.001). Relative frequency of adenocarcinoma and
large cell carcinoma were increasing while it was decreasing for SCC and
SCLCs during three recent decades. There was statistically significant
difference in mean age at diagnosis (p<0.001), rate of smokers (p<0.001)
and male to female ratio (p=0.01) between four leading pathologic
subtypes. Mean age at diagnosis (55.92±12.90 years), male to female
ratio (1.69), and rate of smokers (46.8%) were lowest in adenocarcinomas.

Conclusion: Similar to universal picture, adenocarcinoma showed
increasing rates during recent three decades with higher prevalence among
younger aged patients, women and nonsmokers. These trends are indicative
of changes in exposures and smoking habits and reveal the need for
regional studies in this context.


