Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The inhibitory role of Kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside induced AMPK
activation on the growth of human breast cancer cell lines.


Solidago virga-aurea, herbaceous perennial plant of the family
Asteraceae, has astringent, diuretic, and antiseptic assets. In our
current study, we found that kaempferol-3- O -rutinoside (KR) from
Solidago virga-aurea extract prompted cellular apoptosis in breast cancer
cells. The present study was conducted to investigate its effects on
MCF-7 cells with respect to the induction of inhibitory effect on cell
viability against MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines. In
addition, apoptotic protein, especially Bim, was also increased in KR
treated MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cell line. However, an anti-apoptotic
protein, Bcl-xL, was not changed by KR. To find out positive regulator of
Bim

expression, FOXO (forkhead-box transcription factor, group O) 3a and AMPK
(5' AMP-activated protein kinase) protein expressions were examined in KR
treated cells. Immunoblot analysis showed dramatically increased
expressions of FOXO3a and AMPK in KR treated MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells.
In addition, cell cycle analysis indicated that G0/G1 arrest was
intensely increased in KR treated MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Moreover,
phospho-AMPK (pT172) and phospho-FOXO3a (S472) expression were also
increased in KR treated MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. Our results suggest
that KR induces apoptosis by AMPK-FOXO3a mediated Bim expression. The
mechanisms of KR

mediated AMPK and FOXO3a regulation is not fully elucidated yet, but
further studies about these molecular mechanisms between two proteins
will give some ideas for cancer therapies for certain breast cancer
patients.


