Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of transcriptional controls responsible for
differential gene expression of the proton-coupled folate transporter in
human solid tumors.


The majority of folate uptake into tissues and tumors involves
facilitated carriers, the reduced folate carrier (RFC) and proton-coupled
folate transporter (PCFT). PCFT is highly expressed in a wide range of
human tumor cell lines and primary tumor specimens from a variety of
lineages, with modest expression in most normal tissues. PCFT transports
optimally at pHs characterizing the tumor microenvironment. We discovered
novel 6-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine folate analogs with
substantial selectivity for PCFT over RFC, resulting in potent antitumor
efficacy in vitro and in vivo. However, in some cases PCFT levels varied
substantially. Studies were performed to characterize the basis for these
dramatic differences in PCFT gene expression between HepG2 (elevated) and
HT1080 (negligible) tumor cells. Low levels of PCFT gene expression in
HT1080 cells were not likely due to methylation of CpG islands in the
PCFT promoter since 5-aza-2â€™-deoxycytidine treatment did not restore
PCFT gene expression. A PCFT promoter reporter construct -2005/+96 in
pGL3 (transcription starts at +1) was generated and showed high levels of
activity in HeLa cells by luciferase reporter assays. For HepG2 and
HT1080 cells, wide variations in PCFT transcript levels by real-time
RT-PCR were paralleled by reporter gene activities with the -2005/+96
construct, suggesting that these were primarily due to PCFT
transcriptional regulation. Progressive deletion analysis of the
-2005/+96 construct and reporter assays in HepG2 and HT1080 cells
localized the minimal promoter region to between -50 and +96. Additional
deletion constructs (-35/+96, -20/+96, -15/+96 and -10/+96) were
generated and studied. Whereas the -35/+96, -20/+96, -15/+96 promoter
constructs retained ~50% activity for HepG2 cells and ~10-15% activity
for HT1080 cells relative to the -50/+96 construct, in both cases the
-10/+96 construct was essentially inactive. Two critical cis elements
were identified in the PCFT minimal promoter by deletion analysis located
between positions -50 and -35, and -15 and -10. Bioinformatics analysis
localized putative cis elements for KLF-15 (-50 to -35) and NRF1 (-15 to
-10) binding. The functional importance of these elements was confirmed
by mutations of core consensus sequences in the -50/+96 construct and
reporter gene assays. Binding of NRF1 and KLF15 to the endogenous PCFT
promoter in HepG2 and HT1080 cells was confirmed by ChIP assays which
paralleled patterns of differential PCFT gene expression. Collectively,
our results suggest that NRF1 and KLF15 contribute to dramatic variations
in PCFT gene expression between tumor cells. Better understanding the key
determinants of PCFT transcriptional control may lead to strategies for
modulating PCFT levels in combination with PCFT-targeted
6-pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine folate analogs for treating solid tumors.


