Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a human pancreatic tumor microenvironment system
(TMeS) for evaluation of novel therapeutics.


The development of drugs to treat cancer is severely hampered by the
inefficiency of translating pre-clinical in vitro and mouse studies into
clinical benefit. Over 90% of drugs that progress through pre-clinical
studies fail in human trials. Therefore, there is a critical need to
improve the accuracy of evaluating pre-clinical drug efficacy through the
development of more physiologically relevant human models. This is
especially the case for pancreatic cancer, the 4th leading cause of
cancer deaths with a 5-year survival rate of The development of drugs to
treat cancer is severely hampered by the inefficiency of translating
pre-clinical in vitro and mouse studies into clinical benefit. Over 90%
of drugs that progress through pre-clinical studies fail in human trials.
Therefore, there is a critical need to improve the accuracy of evaluating
pre-clinical drug efficacy through the development of more
physiologically relevant human models. This is especially the case for
pancreatic cancer, the 4th leading cause of cancer deaths with a 5-year
survival rate of <6%, where new therapies are desperately needed. The
tumor microenvironment (TME) of PDAC contains numerous cell types
including vascular endothelial cells, stellate cells and fibroblasts, as
well as a complex extracellular matrix (ECM), all of which contribute to
the growth and survival of cancer cells, as well as posing potential
targets for therapeutic intervention. Thus, a more complete and nuanced
understanding of the PDAC TME is required for the rational development of
effective therapies. To address this problem, an in vitro tumor
microenvironment system (TMeS) was engineered to incorporate tumor
capillary hemodynamics and biological transport with co-cultured human
microvascular endothelial cells, along with pancreatic tumor and stellate
cells. We demonstrate that significant tumor cell transcriptomic changes
occur in the TMeS that correlate with the in vivo xenograft
transcriptome, including alterations in cell cycle regulation, oncogene
signaling, and metabolism. PDAC tumor cells from two patients were
inhibited by the human Cmax dose of gemcitabine to levels paralleling the
patientsâ€™ clinical responses. Previous work demonstrated that the FAK
inhibitor, PF-562,271, worked only on in vivo xenografts and not on 2D in
vitro PDAC cultures and here we show that PF-562,271 effectively
inhibited PDAC growth in the TMeS indicating in vivo-like drug responses.
In sum, the TMeS recapitulates the in vivo xenograft transcriptional
program and responds to both established and experimental small molecule
inhibitor chemotherapeutics at concentrations that correspond to human
therapeutic plasma levels. Therefore, this model provides a unique
platform to rigorously test the contributions of the cellular and
molecular components of the TME through manipulating individual
constituents in a controlled fashion that is not possible in vivo.
Moreover, the TMeS can be used for the rapid evaluation of novel
precision therapies. Finally, this system is amenable to using patient
tumor material directly, enabling the potential use of the TMeS for
patient avatars.


