Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activities of EGFR/HER2/HER4 kinase inhibitor S-222611
in the experimental brain metastases of HER2-positive breast cancer.


S-222611 is an oral, reversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), human EGFR2 (HER2) and human EGFR4 (HER4)
with antitumor activities in animal models expressing these proteins. In
phase I trials, S-222611 have shown to be well-tolerated with efficacy
against HER2-positive tumors, including breast cancer metastatic to
brain. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the mode of action for
S-222611 treatment in brain metastasis using experimental mice models. At
first, we examined the effect of S-222611 on HER2-positive breast cancer
cell “MDA-MB-361” intracranial implantation model (ICM). Once daily
oral administration of S-222611 significantly reduced the tumor volume at
doses ranging from 25 to 100 mg/kg and the ED50 value was 21.2 mg/kg.
Furthermore, S-222611 showed the survival prolonging activity in the ICM
and the activity was significantly superior to that of lapatinib. It is
known that patients with breast cancers having brain metastases display
heterogeneous blood-tumor barrier (BTB) permeability that affects drug
delivery and efficacy, also BTB integrities were reported to be disrupted
in the ICM. To understand the mode of action for S-222611 in patient
whose BTB was intact, we have developed the experimental brain metastases
model by serial in vivo passage (MDA-MB-361 intraventricular injection
model; IVM). BTB integrities in IVM were confirmed to be largely
remaining intact by fluorescently labeled dextran incorporation study,
and we examined the distribution of S-222611 on this model after single
oral administration at the clinical relevant dose (50 mg/kg). By imaging
mass spectrometry analysis, S-222611 concentration in the brain
metastases of the IVM was significantly higher than that of lapatinib.
The concentrations of S-222611 in the brain metastases of the IVM showed
5.2 µmol/L, which was remarkably higher than the in vitro IC50 value
(26.5 nmol/L) of S-222611 for growth inhibition of MDA-MB-361, indicating
that S-222611 could have potent antitumor activity in the brain
metastases even though the intact BTB was remained. In fact, once daily
oral administration of S-222611 significantly reduced the tumor volume in
the brain at 50 mg/kg on the IVM. Taken together, in vitro/in vivo
antitumor studies for MDA-MB-361 supported that S-222611 could be
effective against brain metastases which have both intact and permeable
BTB. In conclusion, S-222611 is expected to be useful for the treatment
of patients with HER2-positive breast cancers, including those with brain
metastases.


