Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined cetuximab and pemetrexed therapy enhances cytotoxicity
against crizotinib-resistant non-small cell lung cancer cells by
downregulating thymidylate synthase.


Although non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells with anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK)-rearranged initially show a dramatic response to
crizotinib, these cells eventually develop resistance to crizotinib. This
resistance is caused by secondary mutations and copy number gain in the
ALK gene. However, other resistance mechanisms through activation of the
bypass tracts have yet to be clearly elucidated. To investigate the
mechanisms of acquired resistance to ALK fusion-directed treatment in
NSCLC, we generated crizotinib-resistant NSCLC cell lines in vitro
through chronic exposure of an ALK fusion NSCLC line (SNU2292) to
crizotinib. Interestingly, the resultant SNU2292-CR cells maintained
activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and expressed
increased levels of transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-Î±), an EGFR
ligand. Additionally, we found that thymidylate synthase (TS) was
overexpressed in SNU2292-CR cells compared with the parental cells. We
showed reduction of TS enhanced synergistic inhibition of cell
proliferation when cetuximab, an EGFR inhibitor, was combined with
pemetrexed, a TS inhibitor. As a result, combined therapy was found to
exhibit a synergistic growth inhibitory effect against
crizotinib-resistant cells by downregulating TS expression. Taken
together, these results support a potential role of activation of the
bypass tracts in acquired resistance to ALK-directed treatment in
ALK-rearranged NSCLC, and provide insights into strategies for preventing
and/or overcoming this resistance in patients


