Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRC1-driven network of transcription factors mediates hormone
treatment resistance.


Despite the clinical benefit in treating ER positive breast cancer,
hormone therapy resistance occurs in 40% patients leading to disease
progression. Steroid receptor co-activator 1 (SRC1) enhances target gene
transcription and has a critical role in breast cancer cell
tumorigenicity. There is now key evidence that SRC1 is vital to the
capacity of hormone-dependent tumors to adapt and overcome targeted
therapy.

Utilizing a genome wide multi omics sequencing of breast cancer patients
and models, this study aimed to define the programs of SRC1 controlled
transcriptional networks, identifying both interacting partners and
downstream transcription factor (TF) targets that mediate the treatment
resistant phenotype.

RIME uncovered novel SRC1 interacting partners (including STAT1, PRMT1,
and HDAC2) and associated TF partner networks in the hormone treatment
resistant LY2 cells. In parallel, RNA-seq of LY2s with SRC1 stable
knockdown revealed SRC1 regulated transcriptome networks identifying 1731
up regulated genes, including 153 TFs. SRC1 cistrome, characterized by
ChIP-seq analyses was combined with motif binding analysis, to further
validate 40 TFs directly regulated by SRC-1 and its interaction network.
Dependence on SRC1 was confirmed through SRC-1 siRNA and CRISPR
validation.

Upon this discovery, validation and functional interrogation studies we
identified a cadre of 4 TFs including E2F7, DEK, TRPS1 and SMARCA1 that
execute SRC1 role in hormone treatment resistance. Functional analysis of
this 4 gene TF network found it to be co-operating as a driver of hormone
resistant cell by coupling activation of motility with stemness. TFs can
reprogram resistant cells by reversing differentiation as demonstrated in
the mammosphere, 3D acinar assays and CD24/44 flow cytometry analysis.

This TF gene set is a significant predictor of poor recurrence free
survival in hormone treated patients, supporting its role in increased
metastatic risk in breast cancer and the clinical relevance of our
findings. Furthermore, in an ER+ve PDX, established from resistant and
treatment na√Øve patient, protein expression of the TF network members
co-expressed with SRC1 and were only found in the hormone treatment
resistant PDX models.

This study highlights SRC1 regulated disease progression program in
hormone treatment-resistant disease. Identified SRC1 interactome and its
regulated transcriptome are active independent of its ER co-activator
role. The SRC1 mediated TF network is involved in reprogramming of
resistant cells, whose concerted activity is responsible for driving
dedifferentiation of cells and enhancing their stem like and highly
migratory tumor initiation population. This work provides key evidence on
the mechanism of resistance in ER+ve hormone resistant cancer and has
substantial implications both for the treatment of hormone dependent
breast cancer and for identifying the mediators of metastatic potential.


