Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alcohol consumption and hepatitis B-associated microRNAs in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) affects more than 500,000 new patients
each year and is characterized by fast growing, heterogeneous tumors and
low five-year survival rates. Despite the identification of HCC risk
factors, including alcohol consumption and chronic hepatitis B (HBV)
infection, early diagnosis of HCC and molecular understanding of how
these risk factors promote HCC both individually and in combination
remain elusive. microRNAs (miRNAs), non-coding transcripts ~22 nt in
length, have emerged as central mediators of post-transcriptional and
translational gene regulation, and have been increasingly implicated in
the initiation and progression of many cancers, including HCC. However,
the dysregulation profile of miRNAs in HCCs of varying etiologies remains
largely unexplored. To identify dysregulated miRNAs specifically
associated with alcohol use or with HBV in HCC patients, we analyzed
next-generation RNA-sequencing data from 234 HCCs in The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). Through differential expression analyses on cohorts
stratified by alcohol consumption and HBV status, we discovered 10 miRNAs
specifically dysregulated in alcohol-associated HCCs and 251 miRNAs
specifically dysregulated in HBV-associated HCCs (FDR Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) affects more than 500,000 new patients each year and is
characterized by fast growing, heterogeneous tumors and low five-year
survival rates. Despite the identification of HCC risk factors, including
alcohol consumption and chronic hepatitis B (HBV) infection, early
diagnosis of HCC and molecular understanding of how these risk factors
promote HCC both individually and in combination remain elusive.
microRNAs (miRNAs), non-coding transcripts ~22 nt in length, have emerged
as central mediators of post-transcriptional and translational gene
regulation, and have been increasingly implicated in the initiation and
progression of many cancers, including HCC. However, the dysregulation
profile of miRNAs in HCCs of varying etiologies remains largely
unexplored. To identify dysregulated miRNAs specifically associated with
alcohol use or with HBV in HCC patients, we analyzed next-generation
RNA-sequencing data from 234 HCCs in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
Through differential expression analyses on cohorts stratified by alcohol
consumption and HBV status, we discovered 10 miRNAs specifically
dysregulated in alcohol-associated HCCs and 251 miRNAs specifically
dysregulated in HBV-associated HCCs (FDR < 0.05). Among these, two
miRNAs, miR-944 and miR-223-3p, significantly overexpressed in HCC
alcohol consumers, exhibited additional correlations with patient
survival, tumor stage, and mutations in CTNNB1, MUC16 and TNN (p
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) affects more than 500,000 new patients
each year and is characterized by fast growing, heterogeneous tumors and
low five-year survival rates. Despite the identification of HCC risk
factors, including alcohol consumption and chronic hepatitis B (HBV)
infection, early diagnosis of HCC and molecular understanding of how
these risk factors promote HCC both individually and in combination
remain elusive. microRNAs (miRNAs), non-coding transcripts ~22 nt in
length, have emerged as central mediators of post-transcriptional and
translational gene regulation, and have been increasingly implicated in
the initiation and progression of many cancers, including HCC. However,
the dysregulation profile of miRNAs in HCCs of varying etiologies remains
largely unexplored. To identify dysregulated miRNAs specifically
associated with alcohol use or with HBV in HCC patients, we analyzed
next-generation RNA-sequencing data from 234 HCCs in The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). Through differential expression analyses on cohorts
stratified by alcohol consumption and HBV status, we discovered 10 miRNAs
specifically dysregulated in alcohol-associated HCCs and 251 miRNAs
specifically dysregulated in HBV-associated HCCs (FDR < 0.05). Among
these, two miRNAs, miR-944 and miR-223-3p, significantly overexpressed in
HCC alcohol consumers, exhibited additional correlations with patient
survival, tumor stage, and mutations in CTNNB1, MUC16 and TNN (p < 0.05).
We subsequently validated the upregulation of miR-944 and miR-223-3p in
vitro following treatment of both normal liver and HCC cell lines with
biologically relevant doses of alcohol and acetaldehyde, the first
breakdown metabolite of ethanol. Knockdown of miR-944 and miR-223-3p
significantly reduced cellular proliferation in both acetaldehyde-treated
and untreated normal and HCC cell lines, and resulted in increased
sensitivity to cisplatin. Inhibition of both miRNAs in HCC cell lines
also restored the expression of several tumor suppressor genes targeted
by miR-944 and miR-223-3p. Taken together, our findings enhance knowledge
of the respective roles of miRNAs in alcohol- and HBV-mediated HCC, and
highlight the increased transcriptomic resolution afforded by
etiology-specific studies of cancer pathogenesis and progression.


