Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum retinol and risk of overall and site-specific cancer in the
Alpha Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study.


Retinol, one of the most biologically active forms of vitamin A,
influences many biologic pathways potentially related to cancer. However,
results of observational studies of serum retinol and cancer risk have
been mixed. We prospectively examined serum retinol and risk of overall
and site-specific cancer in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study, a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled
trial of α-tocopherol (AT) and β-carotene (BC) supplementation
conducted in male smokers in southwestern Finland. At enrollment,
overnight fasting blood samples were collected and stored at -70°C
protected from light. Serum retinol concentration was measured for all
29,133 participants using reverse-phase high performance liquid
chromatography. 10,798 cancer cases occurred through 12/31/2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate the prospective
association between quintiles of baseline serum retinol and overall and
site-specific cancer incidence. Known or hypothesized risk factors for
cancer were included in the multivariable model (AT and BC
supplementation group, cigarettes smoked/day, years smoked, age, BMI,
alcohol intake, and serum AT, BC, and cholesterol). Stratified analyses
for all subgroups of the covariates (by category or by medians for
continuous variables) and follow-up time to diagnosis (Retinol, one of
the most biologically active forms of vitamin A, influences many biologic
pathways potentially related to cancer. However, results of observational
studies of serum retinol and cancer risk have been mixed. We
prospectively examined serum retinol and risk of overall and
site-specific cancer in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study, a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled
trial of α-tocopherol (AT) and β-carotene (BC) supplementation
conducted in male smokers in southwestern Finland. At enrollment,
overnight fasting blood samples were collected and stored at -70°C
protected from light. Serum retinol concentration was measured for all
29,133 participants using reverse-phase high performance liquid
chromatography. 10,798 cancer cases occurred through 12/31/2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate the prospective
association between quintiles of baseline serum retinol and overall and
site-specific cancer incidence. Known or hypothesized risk factors for
cancer were included in the multivariable model (AT and BC
supplementation group, cigarettes smoked/day, years smoked, age, BMI,
alcohol intake, and serum AT, BC, and cholesterol). Stratified analyses
for all subgroups of the covariates (by category or by medians for
continuous variables) and follow-up time to diagnosis (<10 vs. ≥10 y)
were also performed for overall cancer and for the cancers for which an
association with serum retinol was observed. After adjustment for age,
higher serum retinol was associated with a lower risk of overall cancer
(Q5 vs. Q1: HR=0.93, 95%CI=0.88-0.99, p-trend = 0.04). This finding was
attenuated and no longer statistically significant after multivariable
adjustment (MV-adj) (Q5 vs. Q1: MV-adj HR= 0.97, 95% CI = 0.91-1.03,
p-trend = 0.43). Higher retinol concentrations were associated with
increased risk of prostate cancer (Q5 vs. Q1: MV-adj HR=1.28, 95%CI =
1.13-1.45, p-trend Retinol, one of the most biologically active forms of
vitamin A, influences many biologic pathways potentially related to
cancer. However, results of observational studies of serum retinol and
cancer risk have been mixed. We prospectively examined serum retinol and
risk of overall and site-specific cancer in the Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study, a randomized, double-blind,
placebo controlled trial of α-tocopherol (AT) and β-carotene (BC)
supplementation conducted in male smokers in southwestern Finland. At
enrollment, overnight fasting blood samples were collected and stored at
-70°C protected from light. Serum retinol concentration was measured for
all 29,133 participants using reverse-phase high performance liquid
chromatography. 10,798 cancer cases occurred through 12/31/2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate the prospective
association between quintiles of baseline serum retinol and overall and
site-specific cancer incidence. Known or hypothesized risk factors for
cancer were included in the multivariable model (AT and BC
supplementation group, cigarettes smoked/day, years smoked, age, BMI,
alcohol intake, and serum AT, BC, and cholesterol). Stratified analyses
for all subgroups of the covariates (by category or by medians for
continuous variables) and follow-up time to diagnosis (<10 vs. ≥10 y)
were also performed for overall cancer and for the cancers for which an
association with serum retinol was observed. After adjustment for age,
higher serum retinol was associated with a lower risk of overall cancer
(Q5 vs. Q1: HR=0.93, 95%CI=0.88-0.99, p-trend = 0.04). This finding was
attenuated and no longer statistically significant after multivariable
adjustment (MV-adj) (Q5 vs. Q1: MV-adj HR= 0.97, 95% CI = 0.91-1.03,
p-trend = 0.43). Higher retinol concentrations were associated with
increased risk of prostate cancer (Q5 vs. Q1: MV-adj HR=1.28, 95%CI =
1.13-1.45, p-trend < 0.0001) and lower risk of both lung and liver
cancers (Q5 vs. Q1: liver MV-adj HR = 0.70, 95%CI = 0.50-0.99,p-trend =
0.03; lung MV-adj HR = 0.80, 95%CI = 0.72-0.88, p-trend Retinol, one of
the most biologically active forms of vitamin A, influences many biologic
pathways potentially related to cancer. However, results of observational
studies of serum retinol and cancer risk have been mixed. We
prospectively examined serum retinol and risk of overall and
site-specific cancer in the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study, a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled
trial of α-tocopherol (AT) and β-carotene (BC) supplementation
conducted in male smokers in southwestern Finland. At enrollment,
overnight fasting blood samples were collected and stored at -70°C
protected from light. Serum retinol concentration was measured for all
29,133 participants using reverse-phase high performance liquid
chromatography. 10,798 cancer cases occurred through 12/31/2012. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate the prospective
association between quintiles of baseline serum retinol and overall and
site-specific cancer incidence. Known or hypothesized risk factors for
cancer were included in the multivariable model (AT and BC
supplementation group, cigarettes smoked/day, years smoked, age, BMI,
alcohol intake, and serum AT, BC, and cholesterol). Stratified analyses
for all subgroups of the covariates (by category or by medians for
continuous variables) and follow-up time to diagnosis (<10 vs. ≥10 y)
were also performed for overall cancer and for the cancers for which an
association with serum retinol was observed. After adjustment for age,
higher serum retinol was associated with a lower risk of overall cancer
(Q5 vs. Q1: HR=0.93, 95%CI=0.88-0.99, p-trend = 0.04). This finding was
attenuated and no longer statistically significant after multivariable
adjustment (MV-adj) (Q5 vs. Q1: MV-adj HR= 0.97, 95% CI = 0.91-1.03,
p-trend = 0.43). Higher retinol concentrations were associated with
increased risk of prostate cancer (Q5 vs. Q1: MV-adj HR=1.28, 95%CI =
1.13-1.45, p-trend < 0.0001) and lower risk of both lung and liver
cancers (Q5 vs. Q1: liver MV-adj HR = 0.70, 95%CI = 0.50-0.99,p-trend =
0.03; lung MV-adj HR = 0.80, 95%CI = 0.72-0.88, p-trend < 0.0001). No
associations with other cancers were observed. The inverse association
between retinol and lung cancer was significantly modified by serum BC
with a stronger association among men with higher serum BC (p for
interaction = 0.018). No other statistically significant interactions
were observed. In this large prospective study, higher serum retinol was
associated with increased risk of prostate cancer and lower risk of lung
and liver cancers. Understanding the biological mechanisms that underlie
these associations may provide insight into retinol’s role in cancer
prevention.


