Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mouse-human co-clinical trials demonstrate superior efficacy with
combinational approach of BKM120 and erbitux over BKM120 monotherapy in
patients with recurrent and/or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of head
and neck (R/M-SCCHN).


Background: To investigate clinical activity, safety and biomarkers of a
pan-PI3K inhibitor BKM120 in R/M-SCCHN and identify optimal combinational
strategies by conducting mouse co-clinical trials mirroring the ongoing
clinical study.

Methods: Patients with R/M-SCCHN were eligible if they had progressed on
platinum-based chemotherapy, and were treated with BKM120 100mg/day. The
primary endpoint was disease control rate (DCR) at 8 weeks. Secondary
endpoints included response rate (RR), progression-free survival rate
(PFS), overall survival (OS) and safety. Patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs) with genomic annotations were established directly from patients
for evaluation of novel drug combinations and biomarkers. Based on the
integrated clinical and preclinical data, study protocol had been revised
to combine BKM120 and erbitux to explore whether erbitux increases the
efficacy of BKM120 in R/M-SCCHN.

Results: A total of 52 patients were enrolled. Patient characteristics
included median age (55 years; range, 31-82); male (84.6%); ECOG
performance status 0/1/2 (13.5%/73%/13.5%); locoregional/metastatic/both
(30.8%/30.8%/38.4%); oral cavity/oropharynx/larynx primary
(36.5%/30.8%/13.5%); prior chemotherapy regimens 1/≥2 (40%/60%). Seven
patients were not evaluable due to rapid progression or withdrawal. DCR
at 8 weeks was 60% (27/45) and RR was 2.2% (1/45) in BKM120 monotherapy.
Median PFS and OS were 8.0 (95% CI, 5.3-9.5) and 30.7 weeks (95% CI,
11.8-26.6). After protocol revision, 11 patients were treated with BKM120
and erbitux after progression to BKM120. In combination phase, PR was
observed in 18.1% (2/11) and SD was 45.5% (5/11) in patients who failed
to BKM120. Toxicities were not increased in combination phase. In seven
established PDXs, we tested BKM120 alone or in combination with erbitux.
All PDXs showed strong resistance to single-agent BKM120, whereas three
PDXs (3/7, 42.8%) demonstrated strong synergistic inhibition of tumor
growth to combined BKM120 and erbitux, compared with single agent (vs.
BKM120, PResults: A total of 52 patients were enrolled. Patient
characteristics included median age (55 years; range, 31-82); male
(84.6%); ECOG performance status 0/1/2 (13.5%/73%/13.5%);
locoregional/metastatic/both (30.8%/30.8%/38.4%); oral
cavity/oropharynx/larynx primary (36.5%/30.8%/13.5%); prior chemotherapy
regimens 1/≥2 (40%/60%). Seven patients were not evaluable due to rapid
progression or withdrawal. DCR at 8 weeks was 60% (27/45) and RR was 2.2%
(1/45) in BKM120 monotherapy. Median PFS and OS were 8.0 (95% CI,
5.3-9.5) and 30.7 weeks (95% CI, 11.8-26.6). After protocol revision, 11
patients were treated with BKM120 and erbitux after progression to
BKM120. In combination phase, PR was observed in 18.1% (2/11) and SD was
45.5% (5/11) in patients who failed to BKM120. Toxicities were not
increased in combination phase. In seven established PDXs, we tested
BKM120 alone or in combination with erbitux. All PDXs showed strong
resistance to single-agent BKM120, whereas three PDXs (3/7, 42.8%)
demonstrated strong synergistic inhibition of tumor growth to combined
BKM120 and erbitux, compared with single agent (vs. BKM120, P<0.01; vs.
Erbitux, PResults: A total of 52 patients were enrolled. Patient
characteristics included median age (55 years; range, 31-82); male
(84.6%); ECOG performance status 0/1/2 (13.5%/73%/13.5%);
locoregional/metastatic/both (30.8%/30.8%/38.4%); oral
cavity/oropharynx/larynx primary (36.5%/30.8%/13.5%); prior chemotherapy
regimens 1/≥2 (40%/60%). Seven patients were not evaluable due to rapid
progression or withdrawal. DCR at 8 weeks was 60% (27/45) and RR was 2.2%
(1/45) in BKM120 monotherapy. Median PFS and OS were 8.0 (95% CI,
5.3-9.5) and 30.7 weeks (95% CI, 11.8-26.6). After protocol revision, 11
patients were treated with BKM120 and erbitux after progression to
BKM120. In combination phase, PR was observed in 18.1% (2/11) and SD was
45.5% (5/11) in patients who failed to BKM120. Toxicities were not
increased in combination phase. In seven established PDXs, we tested
BKM120 alone or in combination with erbitux. All PDXs showed strong
resistance to single-agent BKM120, whereas three PDXs (3/7, 42.8%)
demonstrated strong synergistic inhibition of tumor growth to combined
BKM120 and erbitux, compared with single agent (vs. BKM120, P<0.01; vs.
Erbitux, P<0.01), which resembled the responses of corresponding
patients. We found several genetic alterations in F2 tumors including
EGFR fusion, HRAS mutation (G12D), MYC amplification, KRAS mutation
(G13D), and EGFR amplification. Interestingly, two PDXs with RAS
mutations demonstrated synergistic effect of BKM120 and erbitux.

Conclusions: Combining BKM120 and Erbitux would be effective treatment
strategies with manageable toxicity in R/M-SCCHN based on strong
rationale of co-clinical trial with PDXs (NCT01527877).


