Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered skeletal muscle mitochondrial function and redox biology
with chemotherapy and exercise in a colorectal cancer mouse model.


Background: Chemotherapy improves outcomes for patients with
gastrointestinal cancer, but carries associated morbidity. Platinum-based
chemotherapy adversely impacts fitness, invivo mitochondrial function,
and cellular redox status in humans, however the mechanisms are poorly
understood. Exercise interventions mitigate against this, but
interactions between the effect of the cancer, chemotherapy, and exercise
intervention are poorly understood. Using a colorectal cancer (CRC) mouse
model we investigated changes in skeletal muscle oxidative
phosphorylation (OxPhos) capacity and redox biology with chemotherapy and
exercise.

Method: SCID mice (n=48) were randomized to laparotomy with (Ca) or
without (NCa) orthotopic caecal injection of DLD-1 CRC cells. CRC
established over 8 weeks then mice were randomized to 1) 3 cycles of
intra-peritoneal (IP) chemotherapy (Chemo; 5FU 5mg/kg, Oxaliplatin
10mg/kg and Leucovorin 90mg/kg) followed by interval exercise-training 2)
Chemo and no exercise 3) IP saline sham (Sal) with exercise or 4) Sal
with no exercise. Blood was collected pre and post-Chemo and at death
(post-exercise), and markers of oxidative stress measured. Soleus muscle
mitochondrial function was analyzed using high-resolution respirometry.
Measurements included maximum OxPhos capacity (PI+II+Î²), Complex I and
II capacities and the ratio of octanoyl-carnitine to pyruvate-supported
respiration (FAO). Histopathological caecal examination was undertaken to
determine cancer response.

Results: Chemotherapy alone resulted in 37% lower OxPhos capacities in
sham mice (p=0.011), whilst FAO was 40% lower (p=0.004). Cancer alone
resulted in 38% lower OxPhos capacities (p=0.012). In combination with
cancer, chemotherapy resulted in OxPhos capacities that were 42% lower
than in mice with cancer but no chemotherapy (p=0.007), along with 51%
lower Complex I (pResults: Chemotherapy alone resulted in 37% lower
OxPhos capacities in sham mice (p=0.011), whilst FAO was 40% lower
(p=0.004). Cancer alone resulted in 38% lower OxPhos capacities
(p=0.012). In combination with cancer, chemotherapy resulted in OxPhos
capacities that were 42% lower than in mice with cancer but no
chemotherapy (p=0.007), along with 51% lower Complex I (p<0.001) and 42%
lower Complex II (p=0.007) capacities. In sham mice (NCaSal), exercise
resulted in 33% greater Complex II activities (p=0.042), but exercise did
not alter mitochondrial function in any other group. Total plasma protein
content (TPPC) increased with time in the CaSal (+32%) and the NCaSal
mice (+23%), whilst it decreased with chemotherapy (CaChemo -20%,
NCaChemo -10%). Oxidative stress increased with chemotherapy and
exercise, however exploratory interaction analyses are ongoing. Complete
histopathological response was seen in 2 of 6 CaChemoEx animals. No other
complete response was seen.

Conclusion: Chemotherapy and cancer alone were associated with a loss of
oxidative capacity, with a greater reduction when combined. Chemotherapy
alone and with cancer caused a shift away from FAO and reduction in TPPC.
Though we demonstrated an exercise effect in sham mice, exercise did not
increase OxPhos capacity, nor did it ameliorate the effects of cancer and
chemotherapy. A more intense exercise intervention may be required.


