Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GTP cyclohydrolase in brain tumor stem cells is implicated in
glioblastoma growth.


Glioblastomas (GBMs) are the most common primary brain tumors in adults
and one of the most aggressive cancers with high rates of recurrence and
therapeutic resistance. In GBMs, subpopulations of highly tumorigenic
cells called brain tumor initiating cells (BTICs) have been characterized
by their unique capacity to promote tumor maintenance, therapeutic
resistance, and angiogenesis. BTIC maintenance is known to be regulated
by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. GTP cyclohydrolase, or GCH1, is
a critical molecule regulating reactive species levels. We found that
expression of GCH1 RNA and protein were upregulated in BTICs in
comparison to non-BTICs. Overexpression of GCH1 in glioma cells increased
cell growth in vitro and increased tumor formation and decreased survival
in an intracranial GBM mouse model. In contrast, GCH1 depletion with
short hairpin RNA in GBM cells led to growth inhibition in vitro as well
as increased survival in animal orthotopic models. Furthermore, genetic
modulation of GCH1 led to altered ROS levels in GBM xenolines. In silico
analyses demonstrate that higher GCH1 levels in glioma patients correlate
with higher glioma grade, recurrence and worse survival. Together, our
data suggest that upregulation of GCH1 in BTICs promotes tumor
maintenance and is a key regulator of reactive oxygen species in
glioblastoma.


