Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying the genetic basis of stage 4S neuroblastoma.


Introduction: The 5 year mortality rate for stage 4 metastatic
neuroblastoma (NBL) is ~50%; however, the stage 4S subset of NBL is
typically classified as low-risk with tumors exhibiting spontaneous
regression. To date, the underlying genetic mechanisms influencing this
distinct phenotype remain unknown.

Method: To identify genetic determinants specific to the 4S phenotype, we
performed genome-wide association study (GWAS) analyses. Blood DNA
samples from 6,195 NBL patients and 11,384 non-NBL controls were
genotyped using Illumina SNP arrays. European ancestry subjects were
selected for inclusion in a discovery [stage 4S (n=148), stage 4 (n=996),
non-NBL controls (n=9,923)] or replication cohort [stage 4S (n=76), stage
4 (n=608), non-NBL controls (n=1,461)]. Following imputation using 1KG
Phase 3, we conducted case:case comparisons including stage 4S vs. 4 and
stage 4S vs. 1, followed by comparisons of NBL cases in each group to
matched non-NBL controls. Variants uniquely associated with 4S NBL were
defined as those meeting the following criteria: (1) stage 4S vs. 4 meta
P Method: To identify genetic determinants specific to the 4S phenotype,
we performed genome-wide association study (GWAS) analyses. Blood DNA
samples from 6,195 NBL patients and 11,384 non-NBL controls were
genotyped using Illumina SNP arrays. European ancestry subjects were
selected for inclusion in a discovery [stage 4S (n=148), stage 4 (n=996),
non-NBL controls (n=9,923)] or replication cohort [stage 4S (n=76), stage
4 (n=608), non-NBL controls (n=1,461)]. Following imputation using 1KG
Phase 3, we conducted case:case comparisons including stage 4S vs. 4 and
stage 4S vs. 1, followed by comparisons of NBL cases in each group to
matched non-NBL controls. Variants uniquely associated with 4S NBL were
defined as those meeting the following criteria: (1) stage 4S vs. 4 meta
P < 5.0 x 10-5 and P Method: To identify genetic determinants specific to
the 4S phenotype, we performed genome-wide association study (GWAS)
analyses. Blood DNA samples from 6,195 NBL patients and 11,384 non-NBL
controls were genotyped using Illumina SNP arrays. European ancestry
subjects were selected for inclusion in a discovery [stage 4S (n=148),
stage 4 (n=996), non-NBL controls (n=9,923)] or replication cohort [stage
4S (n=76), stage 4 (n=608), non-NBL controls (n=1,461)]. Following
imputation using 1KG Phase 3, we conducted case:case comparisons
including stage 4S vs. 4 and stage 4S vs. 1, followed by comparisons of
NBL cases in each group to matched non-NBL controls. Variants uniquely
associated with 4S NBL were defined as those meeting the following
criteria: (1) stage 4S vs. 4 meta P < 5.0 x 10-5 and P < 0.005 in the
discovery cohort (2) 4S vs. non-NBL control P 0.05) or odds ratio in the
opposite direction in 4 vs. non-NBL controls.

Results: 4S-specific variants that met our criteria spanned multiple
regions with several harboring genes important to neuronal function
including 9q34 (SARDH/DBH; rs2502746), 1p32.2 (KCNH1; rs12122529), 1p34
(KCNQ4; chr 1:41317634), 7q34 (CNTNAP2; rs79403134) and 2q24.1 (KCNJ3;
rs78829625). At the 9q34 locus, rs2502746 showed further evidence as an
expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) for Dopamine Beta-Hydroxylase
Antisense RNA1( DBH-AS1 P = 1.9 x 10-5 sun-exposed skin) and Sarcosine
Dehydrogenase SARDH expression (P = 2.5 x 10-6 whole blood). Other
4S-specific loci observed include 3q27.3 (rs113207181), 8p21.3
(rs12548388), and 15q12 (rs62189512). Notably, none of the previously
identified NBL susceptibility loci were found to be associated with 4S
NBL in the 4S vs. non-NBL control comparison, suggesting a unique genetic
basis for this enigmatic subset.

Discussion: Although a unifying mechanism underlying 4S NBL has yet to be
identified, our results suggest a potential role for ion-channel and
neuronal function genes. Ongoing efforts include investigating the role
these genes and associated pathways play in NBL, including an integrative
genomic, epigenomic and transcriptome analysis of stage 4 and 4S NBL.


