Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR expression and phosphorylation in HNSCC predict response to
EGFR inhibition but cell lines are not representative for the clinical
situation.


Introduction Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth
most common cancer. Survival rates have not been improved for decades and
conventional therapy is effective in only 50% of the patients. Based on
broad expression in up to 80-90% of the HNSCC cases, epidermal growth
factor receptor emerged as drug target but clinical efficacy of EGFR
inhibitors in HNSCC is very limited. We therefore reinvestigated the EGFR
expression levels necessary for response in cell lines and clinical
samples.

Methods Standard procedures were used for IHC. The antibody clone D38B1
was used in 1:900 dilution for 2h at RT. Stainings were performed using
the DAKO Envision system. EGFR expression and phosphorylation of
Tyrosine-1173 were analysed by MSD (Mesoscale Discovery) in lysates from
fresh frozen tumor or exponentially growing cells. For proliferation
assays, 2000 cells per well were grown for 24 h before addition of
inhibitors. Cell culture was continued for 72 h before testing viability
using the CellTiter-GloÂ® Assay.

Results The majority (11/13) of HNSCC cell lines responded to the EGFR
inhibitor Erlotinib. EGFR was highly expressed and phosphorylated in the
Erlotinib responsive cell lines. Resistant cell lines displayed low level
EGFR expression and phosphorylation. However, EGFR expression and
phosphorylation in treatment naive clinical samples were significantly
below the levels found in responding cell lines. In clinical samples EGFR
was not overexpressed on the cellular level. Based on these findings, a
clinical response to Erlotinib in HNSCC would not be expected.

Conclusion The prognostic value of EGFR expression has been used to argue
for EGFR as a relevant target in HNSCC. Although most reviews claim that
EGFR is overexpressed in HNSCC, clear data supporting this position are
missing. Early studies tested the RNA levels and found the EGFR
expression in tumors higher compared to control tissues. Studies using
IHC assessed the association of EGFR expression with disease progression,
but no comparison to expression in normal mucosa was described.
Overexpression was based on percentage of positive cells not on the
intensity of expression. We show similar levels of EGFR expression in
growing keratinocytes and tumor cells. The often described overexpression
only originated from a larger number of EGFR positive cells, not on
overexpression on the cellular level. The high expression and functional
relevance of EGFR in cell lines proves that EGFR activity is required for
survival in cell culture. Our findings lead to the conclusion that this
is not representative of the clinical situation. Definition of a response
threshold for EGFR expression and clinical verification of this
expression level is mandatory for the successful use of a predictive
biomarker.


