Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of DEC1 and DEC2 in cancer metabolism.


Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor DEC1
(bHLHE40/Stra13/Sharp2) and DEC2 (bHLHE41/Sharp1) are clock genes that
show a circadian rhythm in various tissues. However, the function of DEC1
and DEC2 in metabolism has not been poorly understood. AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) activity plays important roles in the metabolic
process and circadian rhythm. However, how circadian rhythm of
phosphorylation of AMPK (pAMPK) is regulated has been yet understood. The
aim of this study is to investigate whether there is a direct correlation
between DEC1 and DEC2 expression and AMPK activity in normal and cancer
cells. There was an inverse relationship between DEC1 expression and AMPK
activity. DEC1 protein and pAMPK showed a circadian rhythm in the mouse
liver with different peak levels. Knocking down DEC1 expression increased
pAMPK, whereas overexpression of DEC1 decreased it. DEC1 bound to the
E-box of the LKB1 promoter, decreased LKB1 activity and total protein
levels. In addition, pAMPK immunoreactivity was strongly detected in the
liver and lung of DEC2 knockout mice compared with that of wild-type
mice. Interestingly, medium change induced the circadian rhythm of DEC2,
but not DEC1 in cancer cells. We conclude that DEC1 and DEC2 negatively
regulates AMPK activity via LKB1, and play important roles in cancer cell
metabolism.


