Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Delineating the role of ZEB1 loss in the chemo and radioresistance
of glioma stem cells.


The most prevalent brain cancer, Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) has an
average survival of less than 2 years. Despite advances in therapy there
is still an overall poor response to treatment which has been attributed
to glioma stem cells (GSC’s), a subset of tumor cells that are able to
self-renew, inhibit differentiation and are often chemo and
radioresistant. The genetics and mechanisms underlying how glioma stem
cells are able to repopulate tumors and affect patient survival
desperately need to be defined. We are interested in delineating the role
that ZEB1 (zinc finger e-box binding homeobox-1) loss has on GSC’s and
what role this loss plays in the chemo and radioresistance of GSC’s.
Most insights into ZEB1 regard it as tumorigenic and an initiator of EMT
(epithelial mesenchymal transition). Surprisingly, in this study, we have
shown that in TCGA datasets ZEB1 deletion frequently occurs and this loss
actually results in poorer glioma patient survival. Copy number analysis
as well as immunohistochemistry on patient samples shows that ZEB1 loss
occurs both at the gene and protein level. Stable ZEB1 knockdown in our
patient derived glioma stem cell lines results in increased proliferation
and a resistance to differentiation. Following chemotherapy as well as
radiotherapy, knockdown cell lines show increased cell viability as well
as higher levels of secondary neurosphere formation. Decreased apoptosis
and changes in cell cycle as well as the DNA damage response pathway were
also observed in the knockdown lines following chemo and radiotherapy.
Overall, this data indicates that loss of ZEB1 in GSC’s results in
enhanced resistance to standard therapy. With these results, we have
reason to believe that ZEB1 may be used as a novel therapeutic target to
combat the chemo and radioresistance of glioma stem cells.


