Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro properties and pre-clinical activity of PF-06801591, a
high-affinity engineered anti-human PD-1.


Monoclonal-antibody-based therapies targeting the immune checkpoint
receptors have become the new standard of care in many cancers.
Antibodies that specifically target programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) or
its cognate ligand, programmed death receptor ligand-1 (PD-L1), alone or
in combination, have yielded clinical benefits and durable responses in
patient subsets with various cancers (including metastatic melanoma,
NSCLC, RCC, urothelial cancer, cHL and others). Here we report on the
biophysical characteristics and non-clinical antagonistic activities of
PF-06801591. PF-06801591 is a humanized anti-PD-1 antibody of human IgG4
isotype, that binds selectively and with similar potency to human and
cynomolgus monkey PD-1 receptor (EC50 ~50 pM) and blocks its interaction
with its cognate ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2 (IC50 Monoclonal-antibody-based
therapies targeting the immune checkpoint receptors have become the new
standard of care in many cancers. Antibodies that specifically target
programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) or its cognate ligand, programmed
death receptor ligand-1 (PD-L1), alone or in combination, have yielded
clinical benefits and durable responses in patient subsets with various
cancers (including metastatic melanoma, NSCLC, RCC, urothelial cancer,
cHL and others). Here we report on the biophysical characteristics and
non-clinical antagonistic activities of PF-06801591. PF-06801591 is a
humanized anti-PD-1 antibody of human IgG4 isotype, that binds
selectively and with similar potency to human and cynomolgus monkey PD-1
receptor (EC50 ~50 pM) and blocks its interaction with its cognate
ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2 (IC50 < 1 nM) with no detectable Fc effector
function. The interaction of PF-06801591 to PD-1 rescues T cell
suppression and exhaustion that translates into NFAT activation, IL-2 and
IFN-gamma secretion and T cell proliferation both in vitro cultures and
in vivo using an acute xeno GvHD model with human PBMC transfer. Binding
of PF-068001591 to human and cynomolgus PD-1 is characterized by the
formation of a very stable complex (T1/2 = 2 h) as measured by SPR at 37
C, resulting in high affinity (KD ~20 pM) as measured in solution by
KinExA at 23 C. In addition, we explored therapeutic potential of
anti-PD-1 in combination with other immunotherapy agents using surrogate
antibodies in non-clinical tumor models. The data presented here support
future development of PF-06801591 as a single agent or in combination
with other immunotherapies.


