Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells measured in the pulmonary vein and the
radial artery during surgery of non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: The number of circulating tumor cells (CTC) detected by the
CellSearch system is low or absent in 7.5 mL of venous peripheral blood
of metastatic and non-metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. Our hypothesis is that CTC can be detected in the pulmonary
vein draining the lobe containing the primary tumor before its removal
and would be influenced by manipulation of the lobe during surgery.

Methods: Patients with early stage NSCLC undergoing open lobectomy were
included. During surgery, blood was drawn centrally (pulmonary vein
draining the lobe containing the tumor) and peripherally (radial artery)
at two time points: directly after thoracotomy and identification of the
draining pulmonary vein (T1) and just before closure of the draining
pulmonary vein after manipulation, dissection and closure of the
pulmonary artery (T2). EpCAM+ CTC were detected by CellSearch. The EpCAM+
CTC depleted sample was subsequently filtered through 5Âµm micosieves and
fluorescently labeled for identification of EpCAM- CTC (DAPI+,
Cytokeratin+ and CD45-).

Results: So far, three patients have been included. Remarkably, cell
clumps were detected among EpCAM+ CTC at T1 in the pulmonary vein in all
patients, and as well at T2 in patient #3. CTC in the pulmonary vein at
T1 were morphologically different than those detected at T2 and in the
arteries. Experiments to confirm malignancy of both subtypes of CTC are
pending, using chromosome aneuploidy status and copy number variation
analysis to compare them with the resected tumor.

Conclusion: In early stage NSCLC high amounts single and clumps of CTC
are observed in the draining pulmonary vein during surgery. The amount
measured in the radial artery is lower, indicating loss of CTC in the
circulatory system before peripheral measurement. If the cells found
really are CTC that are shed from the primary tumor during surgery, it
will have clinical consequences for the surgery techniques used.

EpCAM+ and EpCAM- Circulating tumor cells found during surgery in
non-small cell lung cancer





Patient #1



Patient #2



Patient $3





#CTC/7.5 mL

EpCAM+

EpCAM-

EpCAM+

EpCAM-

EpCAM+

EpCAM-



Baseline (T0)

NA

NA

NA

NA

3

2



Draining vein T1

*85

35

*10

4

*50

130



Draining Vein T2

1

5

19

11

*101

10



Radial artery T1

1

2

0

5

0

0



Radial artery T2

2

1

0

1

0

12



Radial Artery T1+3

NA

NA

NA

NA

0

2



Radial artery T1+5

NA

NA

NA

NA

0

5



Radial artery T2+5

NA

NA

NA

NA

2

1



*Presence of CTC clusters


