Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An anti-CD4 depleting antibody reverses regulatory T-cell-induced
suppression of dendritic cells while preventing nonspecific CD4+ T cell
responses in tumor-bearing mice.


Administration of an anti-CD4 depleting antibody induces tumor-specific
CD8+ T cell responses in tumor-bearing mice, although the mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon remain unclear. CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells
(Treg) impair antigen presentation by DCs through CTLA4-mediated
down-regulation of CD80/CD86. In the present study, we investigated the
effects of an anti-CD4 depleting monoclonal antibody (mAb) on DC
responses in the B16F10 and LLC subcutaneous tumor models, and compared
these effects with those of Treg targeting therapy. Administration of
anti-CD4 mAb up-regulated CD80/CD86 in tumor-infiltrating DCs, and in
migrating-type but not resident-type DC subsets in the tumor-draining
lymph node. The upregulation of CD80/CD86 on these DC populations was
correlated with increased proliferation of tumor-specific CD8+ T cells in
the tumor-draining lymph node. Anti-CD4 mAb-induced CD80/CD86
up-regulation and tumor-specific CD8+ T cell responses were remarkably
higher than that induced by an anti-CD25 depleting mAb or an anti-CTLA4
blocking mAb, and were equivalent to that induced by
diphtheria-toxin-induced selective depletion of Tregs in Foxp3-DTR mice.
Importantly, the activation of CD4+ conventional T cells and B cells in
the peripheral lymph nodes that was observed following Treg depletion was
not observed following anti-CD4 mAb administration. In conclusion,
anti-CD4 depleting antibody therapy is an effective way to evoke
anti-tumor CD8+ T cell responses by reversing regulatory T cell-induced
suppression of dendritic cells, and to reduce the risk of severe
autoimmunity in cancer patients.


