Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nano-tetraiodothyroacetic acid (NDAT) potentiates
gefitinib-induced antiproliferation in colorectal cancer cells by
inhibiting EGFR sialylation and PI3K activation.


The resistance of gefitinib has been revealed to complicate cancer
therapy. Tetraiodothyroacetic acid (tetrac) and its nanoparticulate
derivative (NDAT, nano-tetrac) have been proved in vitro and in vivo
xenograft demonstrating anti-proliferative and anti-angiogenetic
activities. It also indicates that they potentiate anti-cancer
agent-induced anti-proliferation in cancer cells. In this study, we
investigated the effects of NDAT on gefitinib-induced anti-cancer
activities in human colorectal cancer cells. Gefitinib inhibited cell
proliferation at concentration 1 μM in K-ras wild type HT29 cell and
NDAT enhanced the anti-proliferation-induced gefitinib significantly.
Meanwhile, both inhibited proliferative and metastatic genes expression
in HT29 cells. On the other hand, 10 μM gefitinib inhibited cell
proliferation in K-ras mutant HCT116 cell which was further enhanced by
NDAT. Different from results in HT-29 cells, only NDAT inhibited
proliferative and metastatic genes expression significantly and enhanced
the effect of gefitinib in HCT116 cells. ST6Gal-1 catalyzes sialylation
of EGFR and induces gefitinib-resistant in colorectal cancers. In
addition, NDAT did reduced not only ST6Gal-1 gene expression, but also
its protein production. However, the inhibition of ST6Gal-1 expression
may not be sufficient to induced anti-proliferation in colorectal cancer
cells. PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, was able to potentiate the
gefitinib-induced anti-proliferation in

HCT116 cells suggesting that constitutive activation of PI3K may play a
key role on gefitinib-resistance in HCT116 cells. In summary, NDAT
potentiated gefitinib-induced anti-proliferation via inhibiting the
activity of ST6Gal-1 and PI3K activation in gefitinib-resistant
colorectal cancer cells.


