Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NCI's CPTAC Phase III, proteogenomic analysis of additonal cancer
types.


The Clinical Proteomics Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) is a National
Cancer Institute initiative that seeks to uncover the molecular basis of
cancer using a proteogenomic approach to study prospective cancer
specimens. Leidos Biomed provides an infrastructure for supporting the
collection of high quality biospecimens and data, in addition to project
and subcontract management for the program. CPTAC applies the
understanding of the molecular basis of cancer to identify biomarker
candidates. Phase II of CPTAC, completed in 2016, collected over 500
cases from breast, colon and ovarian patients. In early 2016, CPTAC Phase
III began to collect and analyze 200 cases of each of ten additional
cancers. The goal is to collect 200 qualified cases of five to six tumor
types over a five-year period, although the program is currently accruing
from ten. The study entails collection and pathology evaluation of
biospecimens, high-quality clinical data and images from clinical sites
around the world. A biorepository evaluates and processes the
biospecimens, sending nucleic acids to a sequencing center and tissues to
proteomics groups. Data are combined and analyzed by translational
centers. Genomic data are made available to the research community
through the NCI Genomic Data Commons. Proteomic data are made available
through the Data Coordinating Center. We report here on progress in
collection of tissues and clinical data, and use of biorepository,
proteomics and genomics and analysis centers.


