Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cross talk between tumor cell derived HMGB1 and adaptive B cells
in the tumor microenvironment of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the most aggressive type of
cancer among gastrointestinal cancers. The lack of effective anti-tumor
immunity strategy for ESCC patients imposes urgent demand for new
treatment paradigm. Tumor microenvironment (TME) is characterized by
diverse cell populations (cancerous, immune cells, and pleiotropic nature
of cytokines and inhibitory receptors) whose alternations are closely
related with tumor progression. High mobility group box chromosomal
protein 1 (HMGB1) has been recognized to be expressed in various tumor
cells, and importantly it has also been identified as one of the key
factors regulating inflammatory reactions.

By comparing differentially expressed genes between ESCC tumors (T) and
their corresponding non-tumorous (NT) tissues high-throughput
transcriptome sequencing system (RNA-Seq, Illumina HiSeq 2500), we found
that the ligands of TIM-3 (an inhibitory receptor), HMGB1 and galectin-9,
but not, cell-surface phosphatidylserine, were overexpressed in all ESCC
samples when compared to their NT counterparts. We further characterized
HMGB1 and galectin-9 gene expression changes in 37 matched primary ESCC T
and NT control samples by qRT-PCR. We found that HMGB-1 and galectin-9
mRNA is constitutively expressed in all samples, while ESCC T tissue
significantly expressed ~2fold higher of HMGB-1, but not galectin-9, mRNA
as compared to paired NT tissue. Histopathological characterization of
ESCC tissue by sequential single staining for B-cells (CD20) and plasma
cells (CD138), demonstrating that B cell infiltrate was dominated by
CD20+ B cells lacking of terminal differentiation into plasma cells.
Additionally, CD20+ B cells infiltrates were negative for CD27 (marker
for memory B cells) and IgD (marker for na√Øve B cells). Additionally, we
isolated CD20+ B cells from healthy peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC), and stimulated with/without HMGB-1/IgM. Conditional medium (CM)
were collected for foci formation and we found that ESCC cell lines
KYSE30 and KYSE180 have better capacity for proliferation when culture
with activated B cells CM as compared to unstimulated B cells.
Collectively, we believe that the suboptimal clinical outcomes relies on
CD20+HMGB1 receptor+ B cells that are exposed to high HMGB1
concentrations in the ESCC microenvironment may eventually become
pro-tumor B cells subset.


