Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP-1287, an oral prodrug of the cyclin-dependent kinase-9
inhibitor alvocidib.


Alvocidib is a potent inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) and
induces apoptosis in cancer cells by reducing the expression of
short-lived, anti-apoptotic proteins such as MCL-1. Alvocidib, as a part
of a sequential combination regimen with cytarabine and mitoxantrone
(ACM), is currently in a Phase II clinical trial in relapsed/refractory
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Patients with AML that have a high
dependence on MCL-1 are considered more likely to benefit from the
alvocidib-containing regimen. MCL-1 has emerged as a key protein in drug
resistance of multiple solid tumor types including breast, prostate and
lung cancers. The use of alvocidib in clinical settings beyond the ACM
regimen is somewhat limited by the current intravenous route of
administration. An orally administered form of alvocidib would allow
prolonged repression of MCL-1 through chronic dosing and scheduling.
Alvocidib itself is highly permeable in CACO-2 monolayers and is soluble
at acidic pHs but solubility is strikingly reduced at neutral or basic
conditions, which could hamper the development of an oral formulation. We
hypothesized that a phosphate prodrug of alvocidib would improve
solubility under neutral or basic conditions and enable the efficient
systemic delivery of alvocidib via oral administration. We synthesized a
phosphate prodrug of alvocidib, TP-1287, in three steps from the parent
compound. The solubility of TP-1287, was determined at various pH levels.
It was found to be highly soluble under acidic, neutral, and basic
conditions (1.5 mg/mL at pH 2.2; 1.8 mg/mL at pH 4.5; 9.5 mg/mL at pH 6.8
and 9.3 mg/mL at pH 8.7) compared to alvocidib (4.4 mg/mL at pH 2.2; 1.3
mg/mL at pH 4.5; 0.02 mg/mL at pH 6.8 and 0.02 mg/mL at pH 8.7).
Pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in mice in which TP-1287 was
efficiently converted to the parent alvocidib (Cmax = 1922.7 ng/ml, t1/2
= 4.4 hr) with high oral bioavailability (%F = 182.3, compared to
intravenous alvocidib). Efficacy and pharmacodynamic studies (measuring
MCL-1 expression levels), were evaluated in tumor xenograft models.
TP-1287 demonstrated significant anti-tumor efficacy in the MV4-11 AML
mouse xenograft model and produced as much as a 61.7% inhibition of the
pharmacodynamic biomarker MCL-1 in xenografted tumors, demonstrating a
wide, 75-fold therapeutic dosing window. In addition, TP-1287 strongly
inhibited tumor growth, achieving 109.1% tumor growth inhibition (%TGI)
at the 7.5 mg/kg dose level. TP-1287 is highly soluble over a broader pH
range than alvocidib and is efficiently metabolized to the parent
compound in vivo, following oral administration. Tumor xenograft models
and pharmacodynamic studies indicate that oral delivery of TP-1287 is
efficacious in mice. Based on these results, we anticipate moving
TP-1287, as an orally delivered CDK9 inhibitor, into a forthcoming
clinical trial directed towards solid tumors vulnerable to the
suppression of MCL-1.


