Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beyond malaria: Second career of artesunate as cancer drug.


More than a decade ago, we initiated a research program on the molecular
pharmacology of phytochemicals derived from Chinese medicinal herbs.
Bioactive plant extracts have been fractionated by chromatographic
techniques. We isolated bioactive compounds and elucidated their chemical
structures by nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry. A
promising compounds was artemisinin from Artemisia annua L. and its
semisynthetic compound artesunate. Artemisinin and artesunate are
anti-malarial drugs. Our data indicated profound activity against cancer
cells, but also against various viruses, Schistosoma, Trypanosoma, and
even plant crown gall tumors. To elucidate the molecular mode of actions
against cancer, we applied molecular biological and pharmacogenomic
approaches in vitro and in vivo. Different signaling pathways were
identified not only in cancer cells but also in cells infected with
viruses, e.g. HCMV, HSV1 and others. To translate the experimental
results in cell lines and animals to the bedside, we report on the
compassionate use of artesunate in single cancer patients as well as on
our efforts to initiate several clinical phase I/II trials in veterinary
tumors as well as in human cervix or colorectal carcinoma. These pilot
studies indeed indicate that artesunate is not only useful as
antimalarial drug, but also exerts activity against cancer and viral
diseases. Clinical results will also be presented that not only
artesunate as semisynthetic chemical derivative of artemisinin, but also
herbal extracts from Artemisia annua are active in veterinary and human
tumor patients. Artesunate represents an illustrative example for the
therapeutic potential of medicinal herbs and drugs derived from
traditional Chinese medicine.References 1. Efferth et al.: Journal of
Molecular Medicine 2002;80:233-42. 2. Efferth: Drug Resistance Updates
2005;8:85-97. 3. Efferth et al.: Molecular Cancer Therapeutics
2008;7:152-61. 4. Li et al.: Cancer Research 2008;68:4347-51. 5. Shapira
et al.: Clinical Infectious Diseases 2008;46:1455-7. 6. Efferth et al.:
Clinical Infectious Diseases 2008;47:804-11. 7. Krishna et al.:
Ebiomedicine 2014;2:82-90. 8. Saeed et al.: Pharmacological Research
2016;110:216-226.


