Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and immunological characterization of non-small cell
lung cancer harboring cMET alterations.


Purpose: To explore the correlation between the expression of
immunological biomarkers in a subset of NSCLC tumors presenting cMET
activation.

Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 200 tumor samples from a cohort of
patients diagnosed with NSCLC in 3 different hospitals, from Spain and
France. cMET activation was defined by the presence of one or more of the
following criteria: 1- cMET mutations inducing exon 14 skipping
(METex14), 2- cMET amplification, assessed by FISH 3- cMET
overexpression, assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). METex14 mutations
were determined by genomic sequencing and RT-PCR. FISH was interpreted
according to Capuzzo scoring system, considering 5 or more gene copies as
the mean value for positive amplification. Concurrent genetic alterations
in EGFR and ERBB2 tyrosine kinase receptors were also determined. PD-L1
expression and density of tumoral infiltrating CD8+ lymphocytes were
assessed by IHC. Statistical correlation analysis was performed by
Chi-square and Fisherâ€™s exact test.

Results: METex14, cMET amplification and cMET overexpression were
detected in 2%, 7.8% and 31% of tumors, respectively. Histological
subtypes included: 70% adenocarcinoma, 20% squamous cell carcinoma, 8%
large cell, 2% pulmonary sarcomatoid. Curiously, one of the METex14
adenocarcinoma was concurrent with ERBB2 amplification. Those tumors
harbouring METex14 or cMET amplification were correlated with positivity
for PD-L1 expression (p = 0.02). However, this association was not
observed in cMET overexpressed tumors.

Conclusions: We observed a direct correlation between PD-L1 positivity
and METex14 or cMET amplification. Functional analysis and a large cohort
of tumors are required to better characterize the potential role of cMET
pathway in the regulation of PD-L1 expression.


