Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Critical variables for automated protein immunodetection using
western blot.


Reliable immunodetection of proteins is a critical step in the discovery
of novel biomarkers. It is often performed manually. The immunodetection
protocol consists of multiple steps including blocking of nonspecific
binding sites, incubation using primary and secondary antibodies and
extensive washing between steps that easily introduce bias and errors.
The quality of results depends on multiple subjective and objective
factors such as the qualification and technical skills of the personnel
performing the assay and the accuracy of temporal and temperature
control, especially during the immunodetection step. BlotCycler™,
automated western blot processor, use fluidic control system that allows
to eliminate the variability associated with immunodetection and to
achieve higher sensitivity by optimized washing procedure. We used
BlotCycler to analyze critical variables for immunodetection including
temperature, incubation time and reagent mixing. Relatively small changes
in duration and temperature of incubation significantly affect not only
the intensity of signal but also the specificity of antibody interaction
with antigen. Automated immunodetection at 4ºC significantly improve the
specificity of detection and sensitivity that allows reproducible
detection of low expressing proteins. Automated processing using
BlotCycler allows optimization and control of critical variables leading
to improved reproducibility and specificity of immunodetection and should
be routinely used for biomarker candidate discovery and confirmation,
reliable protein quantification, primary antibody specificity testing,
and optimization of primary and secondary antibodies concentrations.


