Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging tumor metabolism to guide treatment of breast cancer with
drugs targeted at PI3K alpha.


PI3KCA (which encodes the phosphoinositide-3 kinase alpha isoform) is the
most frequently mutated oncogene in breast cancer. Recently, several
alpha isoform-specific PI3K inhibitors have been developed and have
entered into early-phase clinical trials. However, intrinsic and acquired
resistance limits their utility. Non‚Äêinvasive imaging methods could be
used to guide treatment by not only allowing selection of the most
effective drug in individual patients, but also by detecting intrinsic
and acquired resistance.

We have been evaluating the effectiveness of a selective PI3K alpha
inhibitor, Taselisib (GDC-0032 Genentech S.A.), by monitoring the rate of
[1-13C]lactate production after injection of hyperpolarized
[1-13C]pyruvate in cell lines and patient-derived xenografts (PDX) models
of breast cancer using 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging.
Hyperpolarization of the 13C nucleus increases its sensitivity to
detection in the MR experiment by 104 - 105x, thus allowing real time
imaging of tumor metabolism. Preliminary data suggest that labeled
lactate production can distinguish sensitive and resistant breast cancer
models to Taselisib a few days after treatment. We are currently
broadening the panel of PDXs analyzed and also including genetically
engineered mechanistic-models of drug resistance.

The present study highlights the effectiveness of hyperpolarized 13C
spectroscopy/spectroscopic imaging for detecting early response or
resistance to next generation PI3K inhibitors. This clinically applicable
technique can provide insights into in vivo response in real-time and
identify new strategies to increase the efficacy of therapy in individual
patients.


