Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-S6 levels correlate with response to Copanlisib (BAY
80-6946) in multiple myeloma.


Background: Copanlisib (BAY 80-6946) is a reversible, pan-class I PI3K
inhibitor with preferential activity for the alpha isoform, which may be
of particular importance in multiple myeloma. Here we demonstrated the in
vitro efficacy of copanlisib in a panel of 20 multiple myeloma cell
lines. Baseline levels of phospho-S6 (P-S6) correlated with sensitivity
to copanlisib, resulting in a potential biomarker of response. In
addition, the change of P-S6 post-treatment could be used as a
pharmacodynamic biomarker for copanlisib treatment.

Methods: We screened a panel of 20 multiple myeloma cell lines and
selected 3 sensitive: NCI-H929, MM.1S, L-363, and 3 resistant: AMO-1,
JJN3, COLO-677 for further analysis. We performed apoptosis and cell
senescence assays following 72 hours of 50nM and 100nM copanlisib
exposure. Cell cycle analysis and induction of apoptosis were performed
by FACS after propidium iodide or PI/ANX-V FITC staining, respectively.
Cellular senescence was determined by measuring Î²-galactosidase activity
in cells treated for 96 hours. Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was
performed at baseline and post treatment for proteomic analysis with
confirmatory western blots. Flow cytometry was also performed to monitor
the post-treatment P-S6 level changes.

Results: Copanlisib treatment induced apoptosis in the sensitive cell
lines (50-80% AN-V+ cells) but not in resistant cell lines (1-5% AN-V+
cells). An increased cell cycle arrest in G1 was also observed in the
sensitive cell lines but not in the resistant lines. The cell senescence
assays confirmed apoptosis rather than cell senescence as the mechanism
of inhibition of proliferation. RPPA analysis demonstrated lower baseline
p-S6 (S235/236, S240/244) protein levels in sensitive compared to
resistant cell lines and this was confirmed with western blot analysis.
Treatment with copanlisib resulted in a greater decrease in p-S6 in the
sensitive cell lines NCI-H929 and L363 (53-83%, 73-93% respectively) than
in the resistant cell lines COLO-677 and JJN3 (5-27%, and 38-67%,
respectively), which was validated by western blot and phospho-flow. We
also showed by RPPA and WB that copanlisib down-regulates pro-survival
and proliferation molecules including p-S6K1, p-S6 and p-4EBP1, and
upregulates pro-apoptotic PDCD4 in all cell lines, but to a greater
extent in sensitive cell lines. Finally, pharmacodynamic p-S6 response
remained at different post-treatment time points.

Discussion: A differential response to copanlisib is seen in the myeloma
cell line panel. A subgroup of multiple myeloma cell lines demonstrated
median IC50 values in the low nanomolar range (5-100nM), and responses
correlated with low baseline P-S6. This p-S6 stratified response was only
observed with PI3K-alpha inhibitors, but not with inhibitors targeting
other PI3K isoforms or pan-PI3K inhibitors. Further studies may allow
development of a new patient screening method or companion diagnostic.


