Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential pro-proliferative role of SIRT6 in melanoma.


Melanoma is one of the deadliest form of skin cancer that can rapidly
metastasize to become lethal, if not diagnosed early or left untreated.
In 2016, approximately 76,380 new melanoma cases and 10,130
melanoma-related deaths are predicted in the United States. Current
preventive and therapeutic strategies have not been sufficiently
effective in the management of melanoma. Therefore, novel molecular
targets and treatments are required for an effective management of this
neoplasm. In our laboratory, we are assessing the role and functional and
therapeutic significance of sirtuin family of proteins in melanoma.
Sirtuins (SIRTs) have been conserved through evolution from prokaryotic
to eukaryotic cells. SIRTs are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+)
dependent protein deacetylases and belong to class III of the histone
deacetylase (HDAC) family. Seven members of the mammalian SIRT family are
known to date, and despite structural similarities, each SIRT has their
own biological niche, performing unique functions via regulating critical
mechanisms in the cell. The role of SIRTs in cancer is somewhat
controversial, as they have exhibited conflicting functions (tumor
promoter vs. tumor suppressor) depending on cell and tissue contexts. The
sirtuin SIRT6, a predominantly nuclear protein, has been shown to conduct
ADP-ribosyl transferase and histone deacetylase activities. SIRT6 plays
key roles in DNA repair, inflammation and metabolic diseases such as
cancer. Currently, the role of SIRT6 in melanoma is not known. The
objective of this study was to determine the role of SIRT6 in melanoma.
Using a panel of human melanoma cell lines (A375, Hs 294T, G361,
SK-MEL-2, SK-MEL-28, SK-MEL-31, WM115 and WM35) differing in genetic
complexity and disease progression stage, and normal human epidermal
melanocytes (NHEMs), we determined the endogenous expression levels of
SIRT6. We found that compared to NHEMs, SIRT6 is significantly
upregulated in melanoma cell lines, at mRNA as well as protein levels, as
shown by quantitative Real-Time PCR and western blot analyses. Further,
employing a human tissue microarray (TMA) coupled with quantitative
Vectraâ„¢ analysis, we determined the expression profile of SIRT6 protein
in human melanoma and melanocytic nevus tissues. Our data demonstrated
that SIRT6 is significantly overexpressed in human melanoma tissues when
compared to nevi. Furthermore, lentiviral short hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown of SIRT6 in human melanoma cells was found to result in a
marked anti-proliferative response in melanoma cells. Taken together, our
data suggest that SIRT6 overexpression could potentially be a
contributing factor in melanoma progression. Further detailed studies are
underway to understand the functional significance of SIRT6 in melanoma
development and progression.


