Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic function of miR-23b-3p in hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: miR-23b has been identified as various cancer-related
biomarkers. Interestingly, it works as an oncogenic miRNA in lymphoma,
renal cancer and glioma, while it works as a tumor suppressor miRNA in
pancreatic cancer, bladder cancer and prostate cancer (Donadeli M et al,
Cancer Lett, 2014). We have previously reported miR-23b-3p as a oncomiR
in NSCLCs (Begum S, Hayashi M et al, Sci Rep, 2015). To find the
correlation to other carcinogenesis, we focused on miR-23b function in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

Methods: miR-23b-3p expression was examined in 9 HCC cell lines (SK-Hep1,
HuH2, HLE, PLC/PRF/5, HuH1, HuH7, HLF, Hep3B, HepG2). The downstream of
miR-23b-3p overexpression was examined by Cancer Pathway Finder (Qiagen).
Results were applied to 125 clinical HCC samples (2002-2011 surgically
resected).

Results: Transfection experiments were performed for HepG2 (miR-23b-3p
highly expressed) by siRNA and for SK-Hep1 (lowly expressed) by miRNA
mimic. Cancer cell proliferation was activated by miR-23b-3p
overexpression, and diminished by its inhibition. In order to find the
associated genes, miR-23b-3p overexpressed SK-Hep1 cells were compared
with parental SK-Hep1 cells by global gene expression analysis. ANGP1,
ERCC5 and G6PD genes were upregulated, while KDR, WEE1, OCLN genes were
downregulated. We also detected additional two genes (AUH and MICU3) by
TargetScan Release 5.2. Clinical HCC samples were divided into miR-23b-3p
upregulated 48 cases (38%) and downregulated 77 cases (62%). Upregulated
cases were correlated with aged patients (P=0.015), capsule invasion
positive (P=0.039) and serosal invasion positive (P=0.049). Also, they
showed significantly poor recurrence free survival (HR=1.64, P=0.037,
95%CI:1.03-2.59) and overall survival (HR=3.10, P=0.001, 95%:1.57-6.29)
in multivariable analysis.

Conclusion: miR-23b-3p increased the HCC cell proliferation, and
indicated the invasive type of HCCs. It functions as a oncogenic
biomarker in HCCs and might be a therapeutic target.


