Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cell correlates oral leukoplakia malignant
transformation through regulate T cell response.


Introduction

Leukoplakia is one of the most common clinically presented oral potential
malignant disorders (OPMD). Detailed understanding of
leukoplakia-associated molecular or cellular changes would help us better
undertand about the progress of leukoplakia malignant transformation. In
this study, we examined the potential involvement of MSC in this very
progress, and demonstrated lesion resident MSCs may favour leukoplakia
malignant transformation through its strong immunoregulation on T cell.

Methods

Eighteen six-week-old female Sprague-Dawley rats (180-220g) were given
0.05g/L 4NQO in drinking water for 22 weeks for development of lesions.
Lesions classfied by histological HE stainnig. MSCs were obtained from
single cell suspesion of lesions, and cultured with splenocyte to study
its immunoregulate ability.

Results

1. MSC-like cells are enriched in carcinogen induced leukoplakia and
cancers. Representative results showing the lesions on tongue of rats.
And relative proportion of MSC phenotype marker (CD29+, CD31-, CD45-,
CD90+) in oral lesions (OMSC) were counted by flow cytometry.

2. Leukoplakia-derived MSC (L-OMSC), cancer-derived MSC (C-OMSC), and the
normal mucosa-derived MSC (N-OMSC) share the similar stemness properties.

3. Cancer lesion have less infiltrating T cells (quantified by IHC and
FCM of CD3 ). Cancer-derived MSCs suppress T cell proliferation, but not
promote T cell apoptosis and inhibit T cell migration to the lesions.

4. Higher number of lesion derived MSCs associates with higher celluar
proliferation in the lesions.

Summary

Our study demonstrated MSCs could migrate to pre-malignant leukoplakia
lesions prior to tumor establishment. Further, MSCs play an important
role in leukoplakia malignant transformation induced by chemicals, which
via its strong immunomodulatory activities.


