Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Broad reduction in cancer incidence in patients treated with
warfarin: a prospective cohort study.


BACKGROUND

Evidence shows that the vitamin K-antagonist warfarin, a popular
anti-coagulant in clinical use for decades, has anti-tumor activity. This
is recently attributed to disruption of post-translational modification
of Gas6, the common ligand of the Axl receptor tyrosine kinase family.
Gas6-Axl signaling is associated with malignancy and is required for
tumoriogenesis and progression in several preclinical cancer models.
Warfarin is shown to inhibit Axl signaling-dependent malignant traits and
enhance anti-tumor immune responses at doses that do not achieve
anticoagulation. The objective of this study is to investigate the
association between warfarin use and cancer incidence in a large
unselected Norwegian cohort. Our results reveal a remarkable reduction in
cancer incidence associated with warfarin use across a wide range of
tumor types.

METHODS

A cohort selected from the Norwegian population registry included all
persons born between 1924-1954, living in Norway 2006-2012 (n=1 256 725).
We cross-referenced this cohort using the unique Norwegian National ID
Number to: 1) the Cancer Registry of Norway and retrieved information on
all cancer cases 2006-2012; 2) information on filled warfarin
prescriptions (ATC: B01AA03) from the Norwegian Prescriptions Database
(2004-2012). Warfarin-use was defined > 6 months and minimum 2 years
between first warfarin prescription and cancer diagnosis. We also
performed a subgroup analysis on persons prescribed warfarin for atrial
fibrillation/flutter (n=33 313) compared to non-users. Mantel-Haenzel
method was used to calculate the incidence rate ratio (IRR), adjusting
for sex and age.

RESULTS

In this cohort, 92 942 persons were classified as warfarin users, and we
observed 132 687 cancer cases in the 7-year study period. We observed a
significantly lower sex and age-adjusted risk for cancer development
across all malignancy types in the warfarin user group compared to the
non-user group (IRR: 0.842, 95% CI, 0.824-0.861). The association was
similar among many cancers including major types (prostate IRR: 0.687,95%
CI 0.653-0.722; lung IRR: 0.801, 95% CI 0.749-0.856; breast IRR: 0.903,
95% CI 0.817-0.998). Given the expected confounding effect of thrombotic
disease on cancer incidence, we conducted a subgroup analysis among
patients prescribed warfarin for atrial fibrillation/flutter (AF-group),
a subgroup with reduced comorbidity. Warfarin users in the AF-group
showed a stronger overall cancer risk reduction (IRR: 0.619, 95%CI
0.592-0.646), including all major cancer types, particular lung cancer.
(Prostate, IRR: 0.604, 95%CI 0.552-0.662; Lung IRR: 0.391, 95%CI
0.332-0.460; Breast IRR: 0.720, 95%CI 0.594-0.871)

CONCLUSION

We show that warfarin use is associated with a broad cancer protective
effect in a large unselected patient cohort. Subgroup analysis of
arrhythmia patients to reduce confounders reinforced the notion that
warfarin exerts important anti-tumor effects.


