Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine promotes stemness-related properties and cell
migration/metastasis through IGF-1R regulation in triple negative breast
cancer.


Purpose: To determine the role of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I
receptor (IGF-IR) in alpha 9 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(α9-nAChR)-induced stemness-related properties and to assess the
therapeutic potential for preventing early tumor relapse and metastasis
of TNBCs.

Experimental Design: Expression levels of stemness-related genes,
α9-nAChR and IGF-IR in tissues (n = 67) were analyzed by real-time Q-PCR
and the correlation of different gene levels were calculated by the
Pearson correlation analysis. The effects of either α9-nAChR activation
or IGF-1R transactivation on stemness expression in TNBC were examined
using ALDEFLUOR assay with flow cytometry, RNA interference, wound
closure/migration/invasion assay, and animal models. The α9-nAChR, OCT4
and IGF-1R protein, p-IGF-1R in tissues were detected by
immunohistochemical staining.

Results: A high positive correlation between the gene expression levels
of OCT4/NANOG/CD24/CD44 and α9-nAChR/IGF-IR in human breast cancer
tissues was observed. Nicotine induced α9-nAChR activation
trans-activates an IGF-IR expression and a phosphorylation of STAT3,
which stimulated stemness-related properties in both the cell lines and
the xenografted mouse tumors. The inhibition of either α9-nAChR or
IGF-IR activation by RNA interference significantly suppressed the
nicotine-induced stemness-related properties and cell metastasis both in
vitro and in vivo.

Conclusions: IGF-1R signal regulates the nicotine/α9-nAChR-induced
stemness properties and cell metastasis therefore convene poor prognosis
in TNBCs.


