Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel BRCA1 mimetic 35446HCl inhibits growth of anti estrogen
resistant breast cancer cells through the NF–?B pathway.


Nearly a third of breast cancer patients develop resistance to
antiestrogen treatments although the estrogen receptor ER-Î± continues to
affect cell survival and proliferation. Thus there is a need for new
interventions to inhibit ER-Î± function. Based on high-resolution
mapping, we proposed interaction sites on both BRCA1 and ER-Î± in a
three-dimensional model of BRCA1. Utilizing this model, we identified a
class of compounds that fits into a predicted BRCA1-binding cavity within
ER-Î±, mimics the ability of BRCA1 to repress ER-Î± activity, and
functions differently than other antiestrogens. Previous publication has
shown that the 1st generation BRCA1 mimetic compound (A7) reduced
proliferation and inhibited ER-Î± activity in antiestrogen-sensitive and
resistant breast cancer cells with negligible non-specific toxicity. More
importantly we have shown that the 2nd generation compounds (35446, 4631)
partially restored sensitivity to Tam/ICI-resistant cells (LCC9), caused
dissociation of ER-Î± from a model estrogen response element (ERE) in
MCF-7 cells, and inhibited growth of LCC9 tumor xenografts at nontoxic
concentrations utilizing compound 35446-HCl (35446 prepared as a
hydrochloride salt). The focus of this study is the mechanism of action
of 35446-HCl compoundâ€™s inhibition of ER-Î±, which includes inhibition
of a major signaling pathway and mode of cell death. Eight genes
identified from RNA-seq in LCC9 cells treated with BRCA1 mimetic A7 were
verified by qPCR using 35446-HCl. One verified gene is the NF-ÎºB
activator IKKB, which is linked to therapy resistance. Treatment with
35446-HCl inhibited IKKB expression and proliferation in LCC9 cells
compared to untreated Control at 48 and 72 hrs (pNearly a third of breast
cancer patients develop resistance to antiestrogen treatments although
the estrogen receptor ER-Î± continues to affect cell survival and
proliferation. Thus there is a need for new interventions to inhibit
ER-Î± function. Based on high-resolution mapping, we proposed interaction
sites on both BRCA1 and ER-Î± in a three-dimensional model of BRCA1.
Utilizing this model, we identified a class of compounds that fits into a
predicted BRCA1-binding cavity within ER-Î±, mimics the ability of BRCA1
to repress ER-Î± activity, and functions differently than other
antiestrogens. Previous publication has shown that the 1st generation
BRCA1 mimetic compound (A7) reduced proliferation and inhibited ER-Î±
activity in antiestrogen-sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells with
negligible non-specific toxicity. More importantly we have shown that the
2nd generation compounds (35446, 4631) partially restored sensitivity to
Tam/ICI-resistant cells (LCC9), caused dissociation of ER-Î± from a model
estrogen response element (ERE) in MCF-7 cells, and inhibited growth of
LCC9 tumor xenografts at nontoxic concentrations utilizing compound
35446-HCl (35446 prepared as a hydrochloride salt). The focus of this
study is the mechanism of action of 35446-HCl compoundâ€™s inhibition of
ER-Î±, which includes inhibition of a major signaling pathway and mode of
cell death. Eight genes identified from RNA-seq in LCC9 cells treated
with BRCA1 mimetic A7 were verified by qPCR using 35446-HCl. One verified
gene is the NF-ÎºB activator IKKB, which is linked to therapy resistance.
Treatment with 35446-HCl inhibited IKKB expression and proliferation in
LCC9 cells compared to untreated Control at 48 and 72 hrs (p<0.0001).
Transcriptional activity from the p65 promoter as measured with a
luciferase assay was decreased in the presence of BRCA1 mimetic treatment
(pNearly a third of breast cancer patients develop resistance to
antiestrogen treatments although the estrogen receptor ER-Î± continues to
affect cell survival and proliferation. Thus there is a need for new
interventions to inhibit ER-Î± function. Based on high-resolution
mapping, we proposed interaction sites on both BRCA1 and ER-Î± in a
three-dimensional model of BRCA1. Utilizing this model, we identified a
class of compounds that fits into a predicted BRCA1-binding cavity within
ER-Î±, mimics the ability of BRCA1 to repress ER-Î± activity, and
functions differently than other antiestrogens. Previous publication has
shown that the 1st generation BRCA1 mimetic compound (A7) reduced
proliferation and inhibited ER-Î± activity in antiestrogen-sensitive and
resistant breast cancer cells with negligible non-specific toxicity. More
importantly we have shown that the 2nd generation compounds (35446, 4631)
partially restored sensitivity to Tam/ICI-resistant cells (LCC9), caused
dissociation of ER-Î± from a model estrogen response element (ERE) in
MCF-7 cells, and inhibited growth of LCC9 tumor xenografts at nontoxic
concentrations utilizing compound 35446-HCl (35446 prepared as a
hydrochloride salt). The focus of this study is the mechanism of action
of 35446-HCl compoundâ€™s inhibition of ER-Î±, which includes inhibition
of a major signaling pathway and mode of cell death. Eight genes
identified from RNA-seq in LCC9 cells treated with BRCA1 mimetic A7 were
verified by qPCR using 35446-HCl. One verified gene is the NF-ÎºB
activator IKKB, which is linked to therapy resistance. Treatment with
35446-HCl inhibited IKKB expression and proliferation in LCC9 cells
compared to untreated Control at 48 and 72 hrs (p<0.0001).
Transcriptional activity from the p65 promoter as measured with a
luciferase assay was decreased in the presence of BRCA1 mimetic treatment
(p<0.0001). Expression of downstream targets of NF-ÎºB, including genes
known to inhibit apoptosis, was reduced (p value ranging from Nearly a
third of breast cancer patients develop resistance to antiestrogen
treatments although the estrogen receptor ER-Î± continues to affect cell
survival and proliferation. Thus there is a need for new interventions to
inhibit ER-Î± function. Based on high-resolution mapping, we proposed
interaction sites on both BRCA1 and ER-Î± in a three-dimensional model of
BRCA1. Utilizing this model, we identified a class of compounds that fits
into a predicted BRCA1-binding cavity within ER-Î±, mimics the ability of
BRCA1 to repress ER-Î± activity, and functions differently than other
antiestrogens. Previous publication has shown that the 1st generation
BRCA1 mimetic compound (A7) reduced proliferation and inhibited ER-Î±
activity in antiestrogen-sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells with
negligible non-specific toxicity. More importantly we have shown that the
2nd generation compounds (35446, 4631) partially restored sensitivity to
Tam/ICI-resistant cells (LCC9), caused dissociation of ER-Î± from a model
estrogen response element (ERE) in MCF-7 cells, and inhibited growth of
LCC9 tumor xenografts at nontoxic concentrations utilizing compound
35446-HCl (35446 prepared as a hydrochloride salt). The focus of this
study is the mechanism of action of 35446-HCl compoundâ€™s inhibition of
ER-Î±, which includes inhibition of a major signaling pathway and mode of
cell death. Eight genes identified from RNA-seq in LCC9 cells treated
with BRCA1 mimetic A7 were verified by qPCR using 35446-HCl. One verified
gene is the NF-ÎºB activator IKKB, which is linked to therapy resistance.
Treatment with 35446-HCl inhibited IKKB expression and proliferation in
LCC9 cells compared to untreated Control at 48 and 72 hrs (p<0.0001).
Transcriptional activity from the p65 promoter as measured with a
luciferase assay was decreased in the presence of BRCA1 mimetic treatment
(p<0.0001). Expression of downstream targets of NF-ÎºB, including genes
known to inhibit apoptosis, was reduced (p value ranging from < 0.05-
0.001). Apoptosis due to 35446-HCl treatment was verified by caspase-7
cleavage and increased TUNEL staining at both 48 and 72 hrs. In silico
analysis of the IKBKB promoter within 10kb upstream of the transcription
start site identified one putative full ERE and five putative half ERE
sites. Of these, 35446-HCl inhibited the interaction of ER-Î± with the
full ERE (pNearly a third of breast cancer patients develop resistance to
antiestrogen treatments although the estrogen receptor ER-Î± continues to
affect cell survival and proliferation. Thus there is a need for new
interventions to inhibit ER-Î± function. Based on high-resolution
mapping, we proposed interaction sites on both BRCA1 and ER-Î± in a
three-dimensional model of BRCA1. Utilizing this model, we identified a
class of compounds that fits into a predicted BRCA1-binding cavity within
ER-Î±, mimics the ability of BRCA1 to repress ER-Î± activity, and
functions differently than other antiestrogens. Previous publication has
shown that the 1st generation BRCA1 mimetic compound (A7) reduced
proliferation and inhibited ER-Î± activity in antiestrogen-sensitive and
resistant breast cancer cells with negligible non-specific toxicity. More
importantly we have shown that the 2nd generation compounds (35446, 4631)
partially restored sensitivity to Tam/ICI-resistant cells (LCC9), caused
dissociation of ER-Î± from a model estrogen response element (ERE) in
MCF-7 cells, and inhibited growth of LCC9 tumor xenografts at nontoxic
concentrations utilizing compound 35446-HCl (35446 prepared as a
hydrochloride salt). The focus of this study is the mechanism of action
of 35446-HCl compoundâ€™s inhibition of ER-Î±, which includes inhibition
of a major signaling pathway and mode of cell death. Eight genes
identified from RNA-seq in LCC9 cells treated with BRCA1 mimetic A7 were
verified by qPCR using 35446-HCl. One verified gene is the NF-ÎºB
activator IKKB, which is linked to therapy resistance. Treatment with
35446-HCl inhibited IKKB expression and proliferation in LCC9 cells
compared to untreated Control at 48 and 72 hrs (p<0.0001).
Transcriptional activity from the p65 promoter as measured with a
luciferase assay was decreased in the presence of BRCA1 mimetic treatment
(p<0.0001). Expression of downstream targets of NF-ÎºB, including genes
known to inhibit apoptosis, was reduced (p value ranging from < 0.05-
0.001). Apoptosis due to 35446-HCl treatment was verified by caspase-7
cleavage and increased TUNEL staining at both 48 and 72 hrs. In silico
analysis of the IKBKB promoter within 10kb upstream of the transcription
start site identified one putative full ERE and five putative half ERE
sites. Of these, 35446-HCl inhibited the interaction of ER-Î± with the
full ERE (p<0.0001) and five half ERE (p value ranging from Nearly a
third of breast cancer patients develop resistance to antiestrogen
treatments although the estrogen receptor ER-Î± continues to affect cell
survival and proliferation. Thus there is a need for new interventions to
inhibit ER-Î± function. Based on high-resolution mapping, we proposed
interaction sites on both BRCA1 and ER-Î± in a three-dimensional model of
BRCA1. Utilizing this model, we identified a class of compounds that fits
into a predicted BRCA1-binding cavity within ER-Î±, mimics the ability of
BRCA1 to repress ER-Î± activity, and functions differently than other
antiestrogens. Previous publication has shown that the 1st generation
BRCA1 mimetic compound (A7) reduced proliferation and inhibited ER-Î±
activity in antiestrogen-sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells with
negligible non-specific toxicity. More importantly we have shown that the
2nd generation compounds (35446, 4631) partially restored sensitivity to
Tam/ICI-resistant cells (LCC9), caused dissociation of ER-Î± from a model
estrogen response element (ERE) in MCF-7 cells, and inhibited growth of
LCC9 tumor xenografts at nontoxic concentrations utilizing compound
35446-HCl (35446 prepared as a hydrochloride salt). The focus of this
study is the mechanism of action of 35446-HCl compoundâ€™s inhibition of
ER-Î±, which includes inhibition of a major signaling pathway and mode of
cell death. Eight genes identified from RNA-seq in LCC9 cells treated
with BRCA1 mimetic A7 were verified by qPCR using 35446-HCl. One verified
gene is the NF-ÎºB activator IKKB, which is linked to therapy resistance.
Treatment with 35446-HCl inhibited IKKB expression and proliferation in
LCC9 cells compared to untreated Control at 48 and 72 hrs (p<0.0001).
Transcriptional activity from the p65 promoter as measured with a
luciferase assay was decreased in the presence of BRCA1 mimetic treatment
(p<0.0001). Expression of downstream targets of NF-ÎºB, including genes
known to inhibit apoptosis, was reduced (p value ranging from < 0.05-
0.001). Apoptosis due to 35446-HCl treatment was verified by caspase-7
cleavage and increased TUNEL staining at both 48 and 72 hrs. In silico
analysis of the IKBKB promoter within 10kb upstream of the transcription
start site identified one putative full ERE and five putative half ERE
sites. Of these, 35446-HCl inhibited the interaction of ER-Î± with the
full ERE (p<0.0001) and five half ERE (p value ranging from < 0.05-
0.001) sites upstream of the IKKB start site in LCC9 cells as well as Tam
resistant/ER-Î± mutated T47Dco cells. These results identify a mechanism
of a novel compound that can overcome antiestrogen resistance.


