Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GNS561 is a new quinoline derivative with high efficacy on cancer
stem cells from colorectal liver metastasis and hepatocellular carcinoma.


Background: In spite of wide application of sorafenib for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treatment, and systemic chemotherapy
cocktails (5-fluorouracil, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin) for metastatic
colorectal cancer, the prognostic for both cancers remains poor. In
recent years, highly tumorigenic sub-populations of cancer cells named
Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs) have been claimed as responsible of some tumor
recurrences. Indeed, CSCs are resistant to chemotherapy, and they have
the ability to regenerate all the tumor bulk with its heterogeneous cell
type populations. For this reason, new drugs with original mechanism of
action which target CSC properties would likely improve cancer treatment

Material and methods: Antitumor activity of GNS561 was tested on a panel
of cancer cell lines and primary tumors. GNS561 impact on CSCs
subpopulation in patient derived cells from colorectal hepatic metastatic
tumors was assessed by flow cytometry (ALDH activity). In HCC, the effect
of this drug was evaluated by sphere formation assay as readout to
estimate CSC survival. Tolerance and plasma and liver pharmacokinetic
were evaluated after single and repeated dosing in mice and rats. In vivo
GNS561 activity was tested in orthotopic mouse model

Results: GNS561 demonstrated multiple cellular effects such as inhibition
of autophagy, induction of apoptosis and cell cycle modulation. It showed
antitumor activity against several human cancer cell lines. Furthermore,
GNS561 was effective against a panel of HCC tumors even from patients
harboring sorafenib resistance. GNS561 showed nonetheless an original
dose-response cytotoxic activity against the whole tumor populations but
also against a subpopulation displaying high ALDH activity in three CRC
patient-derived cell lines established from fresh liver metastasis
biopsies. Consequently, on the same model this compound induced a
striking decrease of sphere formation. In HCC cell lines GNS561 was
active on both whole populations (mean EC50 2ÂµM) and subpopulations
displaying CSC features (Epcam high). In addition, in the opposite of
sorafenib, GNS561 decreases the HCC cell capacity to form spheroids. In
mouse, GNS561 was found well tolerated and highly selectively trapped in
the liver (exposure ratio liver/plasma about 170 animals). In HCC PDX
mouse model, tumor growth was significantly reduced by GNS561 with a
dose-response manner, this tumor regression was associated with AFP level
decreases by 72% with GNS561 (p=0.002) and 54% with sorafenib (p=0.046)
compared to control

Conclusions: GNS561 is a liver selective drug which offers great promise
for HCC and liver metastatic tumors treatment. By simultaneously
targeting the cancer stem cell subpopulation and tumor bulk, both cell
heterogeneity, plasticity and recurrences could be overcome at least in
colorectal cancer and HCC. GNS 561 is now aimed to further reach clinical
development in patients in 2017


