Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: B7-H1/PD-L1 soluble expression in multiple cancer subtypes: High
sensitivity measurement by immunoassay.


Aberrant expression of the B7-H1/PD-L1 immunomodulatory molecule is
evident in many forms of cancer. The evidence for increased protein
levels of B7-H1/PD-L1 comes largely from immunohistochemistry analysis of
surgical and biopsy specimens. While several studies attempt to correlate
B7-H1/PD-L1 expression with poor prognosis, there are studies that
conclude no correlation based on technical difficulties associated with
detecting B7-H1/PD-L1 protein expression on the cell surface. We were
able to quantifiably measure soluble B7-H1/PD-L1 in conditioned medium
from tumor cell cultures using two new immunoassays, a Quantikine® ELISA
and a Simple Plex™ Assay. We show that breast, prostate, glioma, and
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells express various levels of B7-H1/PD-L1
which correlate to their PTEN or proliferation status. This is in
agreement with previous findings showing that increases in B7-H1/PD-L1
expression levels are frequently coincident with loss of the PTEN tumor
suppressor or increased activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI
3-K) pathway. The androgen-responsive LNCaP prostate cancer cell line
does not exhibit measurable B7-H1/PD-L1 in any instance, while the
androgen-independent prostate cancer cell line PC-3 expresses measurable
B7-H1/PD-L1 that is further inducible with PMA treatment. In all cell
lines included in our study, incubation with PMA increases the level of
B7-H1/PD-L1 released into the culture media, while pretreatment with the
PI 3-K inhibitor, LY294002, abrogates this increase. Importantly, the
Simple Plex platform is able to quantify very low levels of B7-H1/PD-L1
that are below detection by ELISA. Our data suggest that combining the
Quantikine ELISA and Simple Plex platforms is a powerful strategy for
reliably and quantitatively assessing soluble B7-H1/PD-L1 levels.


