Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect and VEGF/HSP70-hom haplotype analysis:
Relationship to prostate cancer risk and clinical outcome.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a complex disorder resulting from the combined
effects of multiple environmental and genetic factors. Our previous
single-locus analysis showed that VEGF and HSP70-hom polymorphisms were
significantly associated with PCa susceptibility and prognosis. Both
genes encoding these proteins were located on chromosome 6p21, and
combining the neighboring single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) into
haplotypes may increase the association with the disease. Three tagging
polymorphisms, the HSP70-hom 2437 T/C, the VEGF-1154 G/A, and the
VEGF-634 G/C SNPs were genotyped in 101 cases and 80 controls. For the
combined analysis of VEGF and HSP70-hom, we found a positive gradient in
the odds ratios (ORs) related to the number of high-risk genotypes with a
3.53-fold increase of prostate carcinoma risk (OR= 3.53; p= 0.015).
Furthermore, the TAG and CAG haplotypes at positions HSP70-hom, VEGF-1154
and VEGF -634 exhibited a two-fold (OR= 0.46; p= 0.014) and a seven-fold
(OR= 0.14; p= 0.00005) reduction in PCa risk, respectively. Regarding PCa
prognosis, the TAG haplotype had a negative association with the
aggressive phenotype as defined by the histopathological grade (OR= 0.28;
p= 0.006). Our findings confirm the role of at-risk haplotype across the
HSP70-hom/VEGF gene cluster in determining susceptibility to PCa.


