Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic assessment of spliceosome components as drivers of
breast cancer progression.


Accumulating evidence indicates that RNA splicing is involved in
different steps of carcinogenesis. Although the critical role of a
limited number of splicing factors has been demonstrated in several
cancer studies, the function of many spliceosome components is still
unknown. In breast cancer samples higher expression levels of a subset of
spliceosome components consistently correlated with more aggressive tumor
types in patient microarray as well as RNA sequencing data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We further systematically evaluated the
effect of siRNA-mediated knockdown of 244 individual splicing factors on
both cell migration and proliferation in two aggressive breast cancer
cell lines MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T using high throughput microscopy.
Primary candidates were validated with four single siRNAs and classified
based on their effects on migration and proliferation. Knockdown of
validated spliceosome factors such as SNRPG and SNRPA1 affected the
levels of small nuclear RNAs, the main catalyzers of the spliceosome.
Moreover, high expression of these key candidate hits is associated with
poor breast cancer metastasis free survival. To investigate the
downstream mechanisms and splicing patterns controlled by our candidate
genes we performed RNA sequencing on both control and siRNA mediated
knockdown cells. Interestingly, knockdown of our hits affect
extracellular matrix pathways that are essential in tumor cell migration
and invasion. Altogether our data indicate a key role for spliceosome
factors in the control of breast cancer progression which provide new
leads for future therapeutic intervention.


