Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory role of miRNA-661 in triple-negative breast cancer of
African American women.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) disproportionately afflicts young
African American (AA) women when compared to Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW),
being usually diagnosed in advanced stage, likely to experience
metastasis and often unresponsive to treatment. An increased number of
studies have characterized the differences in the tumor biology between
AA and NHW patients and have shown that breast tumors from AA patients
present increased cell proliferation, elevated expression of angiogenesis
markers and higher migration and invasive properties, the fundamental
hallmarks of cancer. MiRNAs are short sequences of non-coding RNAs that
act on gene expression regulation. In this study, our main objective was
to determine the expression levels of miRNA-661 in the TNBC of AA when
compared to the NHWs and to verify it is directly role in affecting the
aggressive TNBC phenotype. MiRNA-661 expression analysis was conducted by
RT-qPCR in the tumor tissue of 31 AA-TNBC patients and 17 NHW-TNBC
patients. AA and NHW samples of 40 and 20 non-TNBC subtype, respectively,
and 49 adjacent normal tissue (ANTs) were used as control for the subtype
and tumor specificity, respectively. Our results showed a significant
down-regulation of miR-661 expression in TNBC of AA in relation to the
NWH (PTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) disproportionately afflicts
young African American (AA) women when compared to Non-Hispanic Whites
(NHW), being usually diagnosed in advanced stage, likely to experience
metastasis and often unresponsive to treatment. An increased number of
studies have characterized the differences in the tumor biology between
AA and NHW patients and have shown that breast tumors from AA patients
present increased cell proliferation, elevated expression of angiogenesis
markers and higher migration and invasive properties, the fundamental
hallmarks of cancer. MiRNAs are short sequences of non-coding RNAs that
act on gene expression regulation. In this study, our main objective was
to determine the expression levels of miRNA-661 in the TNBC of AA when
compared to the NHWs and to verify it is directly role in affecting the
aggressive TNBC phenotype. MiRNA-661 expression analysis was conducted by
RT-qPCR in the tumor tissue of 31 AA-TNBC patients and 17 NHW-TNBC
patients. AA and NHW samples of 40 and 20 non-TNBC subtype, respectively,
and 49 adjacent normal tissue (ANTs) were used as control for the subtype
and tumor specificity, respectively. Our results showed a significant
down-regulation of miR-661 expression in TNBC of AA in relation to the
NWH (P<0.0001) and between the AA-TNBC and non-TNBC subtypes (PTriple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) disproportionately afflicts young African
American (AA) women when compared to Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW), being
usually diagnosed in advanced stage, likely to experience metastasis and
often unresponsive to treatment. An increased number of studies have
characterized the differences in the tumor biology between AA and NHW
patients and have shown that breast tumors from AA patients present
increased cell proliferation, elevated expression of angiogenesis markers
and higher migration and invasive properties, the fundamental hallmarks
of cancer. MiRNAs are short sequences of non-coding RNAs that act on gene
expression regulation. In this study, our main objective was to determine
the expression levels of miRNA-661 in the TNBC of AA when compared to the
NHWs and to verify it is directly role in affecting the aggressive TNBC
phenotype. MiRNA-661 expression analysis was conducted by RT-qPCR in the
tumor tissue of 31 AA-TNBC patients and 17 NHW-TNBC patients. AA and NHW
samples of 40 and 20 non-TNBC subtype, respectively, and 49 adjacent
normal tissue (ANTs) were used as control for the subtype and tumor
specificity, respectively. Our results showed a significant
down-regulation of miR-661 expression in TNBC of AA in relation to the
NWH (P<0.0001) and between the AA-TNBC and non-TNBC subtypes (P<0.001).
MiR-661 was also significantly differentially expressed in the ANT when
compared to the tumor tissue (PTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC)
disproportionately afflicts young African American (AA) women when
compared to Non-Hispanic Whites (NHW), being usually diagnosed in
advanced stage, likely to experience metastasis and often unresponsive to
treatment. An increased number of studies have characterized the
differences in the tumor biology between AA and NHW patients and have
shown that breast tumors from AA patients present increased cell
proliferation, elevated expression of angiogenesis markers and higher
migration and invasive properties, the fundamental hallmarks of cancer.
MiRNAs are short sequences of non-coding RNAs that act on gene expression
regulation. In this study, our main objective was to determine the
expression levels of miRNA-661 in the TNBC of AA when compared to the
NHWs and to verify it is directly role in affecting the aggressive TNBC
phenotype. MiRNA-661 expression analysis was conducted by RT-qPCR in the
tumor tissue of 31 AA-TNBC patients and 17 NHW-TNBC patients. AA and NHW
samples of 40 and 20 non-TNBC subtype, respectively, and 49 adjacent
normal tissue (ANTs) were used as control for the subtype and tumor
specificity, respectively. Our results showed a significant
down-regulation of miR-661 expression in TNBC of AA in relation to the
NWH (P<0.0001) and between the AA-TNBC and non-TNBC subtypes (P<0.001).
MiR-661 was also significantly differentially expressed in the ANT when
compared to the tumor tissue (P<0.001). In addition, ROC analysis showed
a high power of this miRNA in discriminating the TNBC genome of AA and
NHW women (AUC= 0.79 (0.65-0.92), 95%CI). Modulation of the expression of
this miRNA in the HCC1806 and BT549 TNBC cell lines, derived from an AA
and NHW patient respectively, using inducers/repressors systems, showed
its direct effect in cell proliferation, migration and cytotoxicity.
Interestingly these effects presented a higher impact in the HCC1806 cell
line model. Altogether, our findings indicate that miRNA-661
dysregulation is associated with TNBC of AA women, and directly impacts
their tumor phenotype. The uncovering of the molecular mechanisms that
dictates these effects, specially the ones that modulate drug response,
is critical for patient selection and stratification into novel and
efficient target therapies. This much needed knowledge would lead to
profound clinical benefits, particularly to young AA patients, that are
commonly affected by the TNBC aggressive phenotype. Funding: This project
was supported by the Georgetown University Center of Excellence in
Regulatory Science and Innovation (CERSI U01FD004319), a collaborative
effort between the university and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
to promote regulatory science through innovative research and education.
This research does not necessarily reflect the views of the FDA. The
authors thank the CNPq - Brazil for scholarship (ASF).


