Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-1 antibody treatment induces gut microbiota changes in CT-26
colon cancer syngeneic model.


The gut microbiota plays an important role in shaping systemic immune
response. One novel frontier in cancer research is investigating how the
gut microbiota change immune response and influence the efficacy of
anticancer immunotherapy drugs; this has been reported in CTLA4 and PD-L1
antibody treatment, both in laboratory and clinical settings. One recent
study reported that composition of patient`s gut microbes appears to be a
determining factor for immunotherapy, at least in melanoma patients.
These findings shed light on the potential use of gut microbial as a
biomarker for responders in cancer immunotherapy and even as a novel
treatment.

Here, we evaluated the gut microbiota profiling upon PD-1 antibody
(RMP1-14) treatment in CT-26 colon cancer syngeneic mouse model. Fresh
feces were collected at different time points before and after treatment,
snap frozen and sent for 16s RNA sequencing for microbiome profiling. Our
results identified top 25 abundant taxa in genus level in CT-26 feces.
Significant abundance changes were observed in several genera after PD-1
antibody treatment, especially in Akkermansia. These findings indicate
that immunotherapy like PD-1 antibody can induce the profile changes of
gut microbiota in CT-26 model.

Furthermore, we also investigated the correlation of gut microbiome with
immune- microenvironment and the efficacy upon IO therapy, as well as the
possibility to utilize microbiota profiling as a quality control step
that may help to explain the variability observed in many syngeneic
studies.


