Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL14 and CXCR7 expression are upregulated in human squamous lung
cancers.


Purposes

Lung squamous cell carcinoma (SQCC) is the second-largest histological
subtype of non-small cell lung cancer, but relatively few biomarkers are
available compared to adenocarcinoma. Recently, chemokines and their
receptors have been suggested to play important roles in the initiation
or progression of cancers. In this study we examined the expression of
chemokines and their receptors in human lung SQCC.

Methods

For mRNA expression of chemokines their receptors study, tumors and their
matched normal lung specimens were collected from fresh frozen samples of
10 patients. For immunohistochemistry (IHC) study, formalin-fixed
paraffine-embedded samples of 35 patients with primary lung SQCC were
collected. All samples were from patients who were subjected to curative
surgical resection at Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences.

The mRNA was extracted by Quiagen RNeasy kit and the human RT2ProfilerPCR
arrays for Chemokines/Receptors (SA Biosciences) was employed to
determine the mRNA expression. Also, IHC was used to demonstrate their
protein expression.

Results

The expression profiles of 84 chemokines and their related genes were
compared across the tumors and their matched normal lung tissues. Among
them, mRNA expression levels of CXCL14 (p=0.000) and CXCR7 (p=0.025) were
significantly upregulated in tumor. CXCL14 and CXCR7 protein expression
by IHC were detected in 25 (71%, p=0.000) and 21 (60%, p=0.000) of 35
cases for tumor, respectively. However, normal lung tissues showed no
protein expression for CXCL14 and CXCR7. We also analyzed the correlation
between clinicopathologic features (age, stage, tumor size, lymph node
involvement, lymphovascular and perineural invasion and differentiation
of tumor) and protein expression of CXCL14 and CXCR7. Although not
significant, CXCL14 protein expression was more detected in the advanced
stage (stage I/II, 60% vs III/IV, 90%) (p=0.120), lymphatic invasion
(Yes, 82% vs No, 41%) (p=0.146) and perineural invasion (Yes, 100% vs No,
57%) (p=0.067). CXCR7 protein expression was significantly higher in
advanced stage (stage I/II, 11/24, 46% vs III/IV, 10/10, 100%) (p=0.005)
and lymphatic invasion (Yes, 13/16, 81% vs No, 8/18, 44%) (p=0.039).

Conclusions

This study demonstrated that mRNA expression level of CXCL14 and CXCR7
were significantly higher in SQCC compared to those in normal tissue.
CXCR7 protein expression was detected significantly higher in advanced
stage and lymphatic invasion. Our results indicated that CXCL14 and CXCR7
might play important roles in carcinogenesis and further study to
elucidate their role in SQCC is required.


