Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational drug repositioning and biochemical validation of
piperlongumine as a potent therapeutic agent for neuroendocrine prostate
cancer.


Introduction and Objectives: Neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) is a
highly lethal and drug-resistant variant of prostate cancer (PCa). We
have used a genomics-based drug-repositioning approach and identified
compounds with therapeutic activity against NEPC. One of the compounds-
piperlongumine (PL) is a natural product constituent of the fruit of the
Long pepper (Piper longum). The efficacy of this drug was tested in the
NEPC cell line model NCI-H660 and compared to several other PCa cell
lines in a modified WST-1 assay. Pre-clinical testing in mouse xenograft
models of NEPC was also undertaken. Finally, the ability of
piperlongumine to inhibit p-STAT3 signaling and promote apoptosis was
measured by western blot analyses.

Methods: PCa cell lines (LNCaP, 22Rv1, Du145, PC3, H660 and RWPE) were
grown in complete media (RPM1 10%FBS, Advanced DMEM 5%FBS or
Keratinocyte-SFM) and treated with piperlongumine for 3 or 7 days. IC50
values were generated from WST assay data using Prism6. Nude mice (n=5)
were injected with 1.5x106 H660 cells on each flank, and
intraperitoneally administered with either 2.5mg/kg PL (n=3) or DMSO
(n=2) daily for 3 weeks after tumors formed 200mm3 in volume. Tumor
volume was measured daily with calipers. Western blot analyses were
performed on protein lysates extracted from tumors and PCa cells treated
with 0-10 μM of drug.

Results: PL was highly effective in inhibiting the growth of H660 cells
(IC50 = 0.4 μM) compared to LNCaP, 22Rv1, Du145, PC3, and RWPE cells.
This was consistent with an increased level of cPARP1 in H660 cells when
compared to other prostate cancer cell lines. On average, the growth rate
of untreated tumors was 2.7 times greater than those treated with PL.
Similar to previous reports suggesting PL to inhibit STAT3 activity,
treated H660 cells exhibited inhibition of STAT3 phosphorylation.

Conclusions: Using computational drug repositioning approaches we have
identified several lead compounds for NEPC. One of the compound
piperlongumine, a water-soluble plant product with no known side effects
inhibits the growth of the highly drug-resistant NEPC cell line H660.

Source of Funding: Deane Prostate Health, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai. Both Shalini S Yadav and Kamlesh K Yadav are supported by
the Prostate Cancer Foundation Young Investigator Awards. Research in
Dudley's lab is supported by grants from National Institutes of Health
R01 DK098242 and U54 CA189201.


