Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new SOX2/OCT4 stem cell biosensor reveals the mechanism of
cancer stem cell dissemination in human breast cancer.


There is increasing consensus that cancer stem cells (CSC) play an
important role during metastatic progression of breast cancer. Previous
studies have shown that stem cells display a pro-invasive phenotype in
breast cancer. However, the phenotypes specific to breast cancer stem
cells have not been evaluated at single cell resolution in vivo. Here, we
employ high-resolution intravital two-photon microscopy in both
orthotopic xenograft tumors, and their metastases, formed from human
breast cancer cell lines expressing a previously characterized SOX2/OCT4
transcription-based fluorescent stem cell biosensor (SORE6). Using this
high resolution imaging technology we found that SORE6+ stem cells: (a)
constitute a minority population of the primary mammary tumors, (b) move
approximately ten times slower than non-stem breast cancer cells (0.1 vs
1.1 Âµm/min, respectively), (c) are migratory toward blood vessels and,
(d) compared to non-stem cells, they are enriched for invasive cellular
protrusions called invadopodia. This is important because we have shown
that these phenotypes are specifically associated with the disseminating
population of tumor cells in the primary tumor site and, in addition,
invadopodia are required for transendothelial migration during
intravasation. Stem cells also have a three-fold higher incidence of
direct contact with macrophages compared to non-stem cells. In fact, stem
cells were frequently seen to be part of the tripartite macrophage-tumor
cell- endothelial cell complex called TMEM, which was previously shown to
be the doorway for intravasation of tumor cells in primary mammary tumors
and is validated as a prognostic of metastasis in human breast cancer
patients. Furthermore, we followed breast cancer stem cell dissemination
to the lung by using a novel lung window for high resolution imaging of
the lung (WHRIL), which allows visualization of the same lung tissue in a
single mouse, serially, over days to weeks. Using WHRIL, in combination
with intravital multiphoton microscopy and the above biosensor, we
visualized the arrival, extravasation and outgrowth of spontaneously
arriving breast tumor cells in the lung. We report here for the first
time, the kinetics and stemness state of the spontaneously metastasizing
tumor cells and, the record at single cell resolution, of their fate and
metastatic outgrowth in the lung over time.


