Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating cancer hallmark context from glioma MR imaging and RNA
expression data .


Radiogenomics or radiomics is an emerging field where tumor genomic data
is correlated with radiology image features, thereby potentially
providing more biological information about the tumor phenotype. A
central challenge is the potential for model over-fitting due to analysis
of many thousands of genomic data-points with hundreds of corresponding
patient image features. Biological interpretation of the imaging feature
correlations is also challenged by overlapping pathways and common gene
effects. Our goals were: i) to explore correlations between gene
expression and corresponding Magnetic Resonance (MR) Apparent Diffusion
Coefficient (ADC) derived imaging features in low grade glioma (LGG); ii)
to classify significant gene and imaging correlates by cancer hallmark1.
RNA expression data from 32 LGG patients were extracted from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) and matched with corresponding MR image data from The
Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). Among 32 patients, 18 were males (56%),
and ages ranged from 21 to 74 years (mean age 44). Tumor and normal
regions in the MR images were annotated by an expert radiologist using
ITK-Snap. The normal reference region was used normalize image
intensities in corresponding tumor regions. Tumor texture features were
computed on ADC Maps at each voxel location within the disease region
(including first and second order statistics, Run Length and
co-occurrence matrix derived measures features. The voxel features were
finally aggregated within the tumor region using statistical measures of
mean, variance, median, kurtosis, and skewness. ADC imaging features
(n=310) were correlated with each single gene expression value (11614
genes after MAD>0.4 filtering). Only image features and genes with
pairwise correlations higher than 0.68 (0.68 is the 3-standard deviation
above average correlation) and FDR (False Discovery Rate) Radiogenomics
or radiomics is an emerging field where tumor genomic data is correlated
with radiology image features, thereby potentially providing more
biological information about the tumor phenotype. A central challenge is
the potential for model over-fitting due to analysis of many thousands of
genomic data-points with hundreds of corresponding patient image
features. Biological interpretation of the imaging feature correlations
is also challenged by overlapping pathways and common gene effects. Our
goals were: i) to explore correlations between gene expression and
corresponding Magnetic Resonance (MR) Apparent Diffusion Coefficient
(ADC) derived imaging features in low grade glioma (LGG); ii) to classify
significant gene and imaging correlates by cancer hallmark1. RNA
expression data from 32 LGG patients were extracted from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) and matched with corresponding MR image data from The
Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). Among 32 patients, 18 were males (56%),
and ages ranged from 21 to 74 years (mean age 44). Tumor and normal
regions in the MR images were annotated by an expert radiologist using
ITK-Snap. The normal reference region was used normalize image
intensities in corresponding tumor regions. Tumor texture features were
computed on ADC Maps at each voxel location within the disease region
(including first and second order statistics, Run Length and
co-occurrence matrix derived measures features. The voxel features were
finally aggregated within the tumor region using statistical measures of
mean, variance, median, kurtosis, and skewness. ADC imaging features
(n=310) were correlated with each single gene expression value (11614
genes after MAD>0.4 filtering). Only image features and genes with
pairwise correlations higher than 0.68 (0.68 is the 3-standard deviation
above average correlation) and FDR (False Discovery Rate) <0.1 were used
for follow-up analyses. Significant genes and MR image features were
aggregated into 3 groups based on gene expression and correlated with
cancer hallmarks. Seven Haralick image features (reflecting the average
level of image intensity heterogeneity) were independently, significantly
correlated with the Angiogenesis Hallmark (FDR all Radiogenomics or
radiomics is an emerging field where tumor genomic data is correlated
with radiology image features, thereby potentially providing more
biological information about the tumor phenotype. A central challenge is
the potential for model over-fitting due to analysis of many thousands of
genomic data-points with hundreds of corresponding patient image
features. Biological interpretation of the imaging feature correlations
is also challenged by overlapping pathways and common gene effects. Our
goals were: i) to explore correlations between gene expression and
corresponding Magnetic Resonance (MR) Apparent Diffusion Coefficient
(ADC) derived imaging features in low grade glioma (LGG); ii) to classify
significant gene and imaging correlates by cancer hallmark1. RNA
expression data from 32 LGG patients were extracted from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) and matched with corresponding MR image data from The
Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). Among 32 patients, 18 were males (56%),
and ages ranged from 21 to 74 years (mean age 44). Tumor and normal
regions in the MR images were annotated by an expert radiologist using
ITK-Snap. The normal reference region was used normalize image
intensities in corresponding tumor regions. Tumor texture features were
computed on ADC Maps at each voxel location within the disease region
(including first and second order statistics, Run Length and
co-occurrence matrix derived measures features. The voxel features were
finally aggregated within the tumor region using statistical measures of
mean, variance, median, kurtosis, and skewness. ADC imaging features
(n=310) were correlated with each single gene expression value (11614
genes after MAD>0.4 filtering). Only image features and genes with
pairwise correlations higher than 0.68 (0.68 is the 3-standard deviation
above average correlation) and FDR (False Discovery Rate) <0.1 were used
for follow-up analyses. Significant genes and MR image features were
aggregated into 3 groups based on gene expression and correlated with
cancer hallmarks. Seven Haralick image features (reflecting the average
level of image intensity heterogeneity) were independently, significantly
correlated with the Angiogenesis Hallmark (FDR all < 0.001). Three
Haralick image features (reflecting asymmetric distribution of intensity)
were significantly correlated with the Activating Invasion and Metastasis
Hallmark (FDR all Radiogenomics or radiomics is an emerging field where
tumor genomic data is correlated with radiology image features, thereby
potentially providing more biological information about the tumor
phenotype. A central challenge is the potential for model over-fitting
due to analysis of many thousands of genomic data-points with hundreds of
corresponding patient image features. Biological interpretation of the
imaging feature correlations is also challenged by overlapping pathways
and common gene effects. Our goals were: i) to explore correlations
between gene expression and corresponding Magnetic Resonance (MR)
Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) derived imaging features in low
grade glioma (LGG); ii) to classify significant gene and imaging
correlates by cancer hallmark1. RNA expression data from 32 LGG patients
were extracted from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and matched with
corresponding MR image data from The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA). Among
32 patients, 18 were males (56%), and ages ranged from 21 to 74 years
(mean age 44). Tumor and normal regions in the MR images were annotated
by an expert radiologist using ITK-Snap. The normal reference region was
used normalize image intensities in corresponding tumor regions. Tumor
texture features were computed on ADC Maps at each voxel location within
the disease region (including first and second order statistics, Run
Length and co-occurrence matrix derived measures features. The voxel
features were finally aggregated within the tumor region using
statistical measures of mean, variance, median, kurtosis, and skewness.
ADC imaging features (n=310) were correlated with each single gene
expression value (11614 genes after MAD>0.4 filtering). Only image
features and genes with pairwise correlations higher than 0.68 (0.68 is
the 3-standard deviation above average correlation) and FDR (False
Discovery Rate) <0.1 were used for follow-up analyses. Significant genes
and MR image features were aggregated into 3 groups based on gene
expression and correlated with cancer hallmarks. Seven Haralick image
features (reflecting the average level of image intensity heterogeneity)
were independently, significantly correlated with the Angiogenesis
Hallmark (FDR all < 0.001). Three Haralick image features (reflecting
asymmetric distribution of intensity) were significantly correlated with
the Activating Invasion and Metastasis Hallmark (FDR all < 0.001).
Validation of these findings in additional LGG cases with additional
imaging protocols and features is ongoing. Radiogenomics informed by
genomic profiling may usher in processes to infer cancer hallmarks to aid
treatment planning and prognosis of glioma patients.1 Hanahan D and
Weinberg RA (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell
144(5):646-74.


