Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dichotomous roles of Dicer1 in rhabdomyosarcoma and angiosarcoma.


Pediatric and adult angiosarcomas are rare and highly aggressive soft
tissue sarcomas with an extremely poor prognosis. Due to the rarity of
this disease especially in children, the molecular drivers and optimized
treatment strategies for patients are lacking, highlighting the need for
genetic and in vivo animal models. MicroRNAs are a class of small RNAs
that regulate gene expression and are often dysregulated in cancers
including sarcomas. DICER1 is required for microRNA biogenesis and
germline DICER1 mutations result in a cancer predisposition syndrome
associated with increased risk of benign and malignant tumors including
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a pediatric soft tissue sarcoma resembling
developmentally arrested skeletal muscle. Here we show Dicer1 expression
is required for tumorigenesis in a mouse model of RMS driven by
activation of oncogenic Smoothened by Cre recombinase expressed from the
adipose protein 2 (aP2) promoter (aP2-Cre). Unexpectedly, in studying the
role of Dicer1 in RMS, we found that Dicer1 deletion with aP2-Cre leads
to aggressive angiosarcoma. Angiosarcoma development was independent of
the Smoothened oncogene and other genetically engineered oncogenes or
tumor suppressor loss, providing the first in vivo mouse model of
biallelic Dicer1 loss alone driving tumorigenesis. Angiosarcomas in
aP2-Cre;Dicer1Flox/- mice histologically and genetically resemble human
angiosarcoma and were enriched for microRNA-23 target genes including the
oncogene Ccnd1 as well as Adam19, Plau, and Wsb1 that promote
invasiveness and metastasis. The aP2-Cre;Dicer1Flox/- model provides a
simple in vivo animal model to study angiosarcoma for novel therapeutics
and the molecular mechanisms of cancer initiation, progression, and
metastasis. In addition, our results demonstrate DICER1 and microRNAs
play major and opposing roles in sarcomagenesis.


