Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic impact of abnormal DNA damage response protein
expression in breast cancer.


Purpose Defects of DNA damage repair are known to be associated with the
efficacy of anthracycline or platinum-based chemotherapy as well as
poly[ADP-ribose] polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) and PD-1/PD-L1
checkpoint inhibitors. Since multiple proteins are involved in DNA-damage
response (DDR) and operate collectively, our main aim was to better
understand the expression of proteins in DDR machinery and their
integrated prognostic value in the different subtypes of breast cancer.

Methods A total of 419 consecutive breast cancer patients who underwent
curative resection in 2008 were enrolled in the study. Tissue microarray
has been constructed, and NBS1, BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and p53 expression were
determined by immunohistochemistry.

Results All patients were female, with a median age of 47 years; 280
(67%) had luminal A, 36 (9%) had luminal B, 37 (9%) had HER2-enriched,
and 56 (13%) had triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Loss of NBS1,
BRCA1, BRCA2, and ATM expression was observed in 6.7%, 33.7%, 89.9%, and
30.8% of breast cancer patients, respectively, and abnormal p53
expression was observed in 39.3% of patients. Loss of NBS1, BRCA1, ATM
and abnormal p53 expression was associated with significantly lower
disease-free survival (DFS) rates, respectively. “Abnormal DDR protein
expression”, defined as loss of any one of NBS1, BRCA1, ATM and/or
abnormal p53 expression, was observed in 258 of 399 evaluable cases
(64.7%) and was significantly associated with higher tumor grade, larger
tumor size, and ER- and/or PR-negative status. Majority of patients with
luminal B (31/36, 86.1%), HER2-enriched (34/35, 94.4%), and TNBC (46/53,
86.8%) subtype showed abnormal DDR protein expression. In comparison,
136/264 patients (53.8%) with luminal A subtype had abnormal DDR protein
expression. Abnormal DDR protein expression was associated with
significantly lower 5-year DFS rate than those in patients with normal
DDR protein expression in all patients (95.6% vs. 84.8%, p = 0.001), as
well as in luminal A subgroup (97.4% vs. 89.0%, p = 0.011). In
multivariate analysis, abnormal DDR protein expression remained as an
independent predictor of shorter DFS for luminal A subtype tumors (hazard
ratio 3.14; 95% confidence interval, 1.16 – 8.47, p = 0.024).

Conclusion We demonstrated differential expression of proteins in DDR
machinery according to breast cancer subtypes and its prognostic
implication. Most of luminal B and HER2-enriched tumors has abnormal DDR
expression as frequently as triple negative tumors. Less but significant
proportion of luminal A tumors also shows abnormal DDR protein
expression, which is an independent poor prognostic factor.


