Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatidylserine-targeting antibodies enhance anti-tumor
activity of a tumor vaccine in a HPV-induced tumor model.


Antibodies targeting phosphatidylserine (PS) have been shown to induce
anti-tumor responses by induction of tumor-specific T cells. Based on
this observation, we evaluated the responses of PS and PD-1 targeting
antibody therapy to enhance anti-tumor responses of a HPV16 peptide
vaccine formulated in DepoVaxâ„¢ (DPX) in mice bearing HPV-transformed C3
mouse tumors. The addition of PS-targeting antibody (mch1N11) to
DPX/metronomic cyclophosphamide (mCPA) immunotherapy prolonged survival
in comparison to mice receiving an isotype control in combination with
DPX/mCPA. When anti-PD-1 was added to mch1N11 + mCPA, there was no
increase in survival. The addition of mch1N11 to DPX/mCPA immunotherapy
had no effect on tumor growth or survival in the aggressive B16-F10
model. TIL analysis revealed an increase in CD8+ T cells, antigen
specific CD8+ T cells and PD-1+ T cells in the tumor with mch1N11
treatment. The expression of surface markers for macrophages (CD68high,
F4/80) and dendritic cells (CD11c) were also increased in the tumors of
mice treated with mch1N11. RT-qPCR analysis of the tumor confirmed higher
mRNA expression of T cells markers (CD8, Granzyme B, PD-1) and antigen
presenting cell markers (F4/80, CD74). In the spleen, expression of cell
surface markers for monocytes (CD11b) and PD-1+ T cells (CD8) were
elevated in groups treated with mch1N11 in combination with anti-PD-1.
Combined, these findings indicate that in this model, PS-targeting
antibodies can enhance the activity of phagocytic cells involved in
antigen presentation. We have found that PD-1 expression increases as
anti-tumor activity increases, therefore these results also provide an
indication that antibodies targeting PS enhance the anti-tumor immune
response induced by DPX/mCPA therapy. The observations suggest that
PS-targeting antibodies may enhance therapeutic vaccines for the
treatment of cancer.


