Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: G9a methyltransferase plays a role in ATM-dependent DNA damage
response.


Induction of DNA damage leads to a choreographed set of local chromatin
changes that ensures an efficient recruitment of DNA repair factors. One
principal regulator of the DNA Damage Response (DDR) signaling pathway is
ATM kinase, which phosphorylates key factors at early stages of the
response. G9a protein methyltransferase has been identified as a novel
substrate for ATM. We have found that G9a localizes to sites of DNA
damage in an ATM-dependent fashion and that inhibition of its activity
affects recruitment of multiple DNA repair factors. Moreover G9a
catalytic inhibition using UNC0638 leads to hyperactivation of ATM
induced by DNA breaks. This was associated with an increased
ATM-dependent “spreading” of pH2AX and MDC1 signals seen at regions
of localized DNA breaks induced by UV-laser scissors. These data suggest
that G9a activity is required for regulating the extent of ATM activation
as well as for efficient recruitment of downstream DNA repair factors.
Biochemical data will be presented that explore potential mechanisms for
these findings. Overall our data suggests that G9a plays a critical role
in the regulation of ATM-dependent signaling during the DNA damage
response, and raises the possibility of using G9a inhibitors to target
cancers with certain DNA repair defects.


