Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodeling histone chaperone FACT complex modulates AP
site damage repair in chromatin and sensitizes cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic drugs.


Recognition and repair of DNA lesions in the genome are critical for
maintaining genomic stability and reducing the generation of mutations
that lead to cancer development. The most frequently formed DNA lesion in
the genome is the apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site which is mutagenic and
blocks transcription and replication. The primary enzyme to repair AP
sites in mammalian cells is the AP endonuclease (APE1), which often
overexpresses in diverse cancer types and its overexpression is
associated with patientsâ€™ resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. The
repair of AP sites by APE1 through the Base Excision Repair (BER) pathway
is extensively investigated in vitro. However, how AP site is recognized
by APE1 in the context of highly complex nucleosome structure in
chromatin is unknown. Because DNA is packaged tightly in nucleosome, the
ability of repair proteins to access sites of DNA damage and facilitates
repair of the damage requires chromatin remodeling activities. Here, we
show that APE1 interacts with chromatin remodeling histone chaperone
complex, FACT (facilitates of chromatin transcription) via its N-terminal
domain in cells. By immunoprecipitation of endogenous APE1 from chromatin
fraction and separation of protein bands in SDS-PAGE followed by
MALDI-TOF-TOF analysis, we have identified both subunits (SPT16 & SSRP1)
of FACT as the prominent APE1 interacting partners. Subsequently, we
confirmed the interaction of APE1 with FACT complex by Co-IP and
immunofluorescence analysis and found that both SPT16 and SSRP1 interact
with APE1 in the nucleus and in chromatin. Interestingly, we found rapid
eviction of histones with concomitant degradation of FACT complex upon
induction of DNA damages. Downregulation of FACT complex abrogates the
nucleosome eviction, the recruitment of repair protein APE1 in chromatin
and the repair of AP sites, demonstrating the functional importance of
nucleosomes disruption in BER pathway and identifying chromatin
remodeling protein required for the process. Notably, knock-down of FACT
showed increased sensitivity of cancer cells to many chemotherapeutic
drugs. We also found that FACT down-regulated cells have much higher
accumulation of AP site damages in the genome compared to control cells.
Our study revealed a key role of nucleosome remodeling complex FACT in
DNA damage repair in BER pathway. This study also suggests that histone
chaperone complex could be a potential target for enhancing sensitivity
of tumor cells to chemotherapy.


