Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM31510, a clinical stage metabolic modulator demonstrates
therapeutic efficacy in an in vivo C6 rat glioma model and synergizes
with temozolomide.


BPM31510, a parenteral nanodispersion of ubidecarenone that is in
clinical testing for solid tumors, effectuates an anti-cancer effect in
highly metabolic cancers by eliciting an anti-Warburg effect.
Intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of BPM31510 reverses paraplegia in
a rat CNS leukemia model demonstrating the bioavailability of the drug to
the central nervous system. The study describes data demonstrating the
therapeutic utility of BPM31510 in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
BPM31510 decreased cell proliferation rates in patient derived GBM cell
lines compared to temozolamide (TMZ), pretreatment with BPM31510 followed
by TMZ challenge was associated with significant synergy in reducing cell
proliferation compared to monotherapy. In a C6 glioma allograft rat model
treatment with BPM31510 alone (n=30/group) (i.p., 50mg/kg, b.i.d)
increased overall survival compared to untreated control group. BPM31510
in combination with procarbazine (oral, 60mg/kg; d 8, 21) and vincristine
(IV, 1.4mg/kg; d 8, 29) significantly improved overall survival compared
to BPM31510 alone or chemotherapy. Furthermore, long term survival was
achieved in four of twenty rats with C6 gliomas receiving BPM31510 doses
between 10 and 50 mg/kg compared with none treated with either vehicle or
irradiation (P BPM31510, a parenteral nanodispersion of ubidecarenone
that is in clinical testing for solid tumors, effectuates an anti-cancer
effect in highly metabolic cancers by eliciting an anti-Warburg effect.
Intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of BPM31510 reverses paraplegia in
a rat CNS leukemia model demonstrating the bioavailability of the drug to
the central nervous system. The study describes data demonstrating the
therapeutic utility of BPM31510 in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
BPM31510 decreased cell proliferation rates in patient derived GBM cell
lines compared to temozolamide (TMZ), pretreatment with BPM31510 followed
by TMZ challenge was associated with significant synergy in reducing cell
proliferation compared to monotherapy. In a C6 glioma allograft rat model
treatment with BPM31510 alone (n=30/group) (i.p., 50mg/kg, b.i.d)
increased overall survival compared to untreated control group. BPM31510
in combination with procarbazine (oral, 60mg/kg; d 8, 21) and vincristine
(IV, 1.4mg/kg; d 8, 29) significantly improved overall survival compared
to BPM31510 alone or chemotherapy. Furthermore, long term survival was
achieved in four of twenty rats with C6 gliomas receiving BPM31510 doses
between 10 and 50 mg/kg compared with none treated with either vehicle or
irradiation (P < 0.02, Fisher exact test). Interestingly, the long term
survival persisted for over two months after all treatment was
discontinued; MR imaging confirmed the presence of static masses in these
long term survivors. Collectively, the data demonstrate that BPM31510 has
a robust effect in a preclinical model of GBM. Intravenous BPM31510 is
currently in Phase 1/2 clinical trial for TMZ+BEV refractory GBM patients.


