Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMI and esophageal adenocarcinoma survival.


Purpose: Though BMI is a known risk factor for esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EA), the effect of BMI on EA overall survival remains unclear.

Procedures: The source population is the Esophageal Cancer Study, an
ongoing case-control and survivorship study of esophageal cancer patients
recruited from Massachusets General Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute. In September of 2004, the study introduced a new patient
questionnaire that included questions on weight throughout adulthood. For
this study, we restricted our analysis to Caucasian, male patients with
histologically confirmed EA who received their initial diagnosis between
9/1/2004 and 12/31/2014, and who were older than age 40 at time of
diagnosis (281 patients). Our exposures of interests were BMI categories
(30) and ΔBMI (the average BMI past the age of 40 minus BMI at time of
diagnosis), categorized the differences into 2 (people who lost
substantial weight). We used an extended Cox proportional hazards model
to obtain hazard ratios (HR) of BMI at diagnosis and ΔBMI, stratifying
baseline hazard by cancer stage, having surgery as a time dependent
covariate, and adjusting for radiation and chemotherapy treatment, age,
sustained inability to eat solid foods after diagnosis, and smoking
status.

Results: Of the 282 patients that met our eligibility criteria, 211 men
with complete information available were included in the analyses, and
there were 131 recorded events during follow-up. In this study
population, mean age at diagnosis was 63.7 years (SD±9.8), median
survival was 2.6 years, mean average BMI after 40 years of age was 29.0
kg/m2(SD±4.5), and mean BMI at diagnosis was 27.4 kg/m2(SD±4.4).
Compared to obese subjects at diagnosis, underweight, healthy weight, and
overweight at diagnosis respectively had an adjusted hazard ratios of
death (HR) of 2.72(95% CI: 0.59-12.45), 1.79 (95%, CI: 1.06-3.02) and
1.08 (95% CI: 0.65-1.74) (BMI category p=0.04), likely demonstrating
reverse causation. Adjusting for confounders, the ΔBMI model shows that
patients who lost substantial weight by diagnosis had the highest hazard
of death, compared to patients who gained weight in late life prior to
diagnosis (HR=0.70, 95% CI: 0.45-1.1) and patients who lost some weight
(HR=0.55, 95% CI: 0.35-0.9)( ΔBMI category p=0.05). The strong effect of
ΔBMI even after adjusting for patients’ inability or lack of desire to
eat (anorexia), implicates cachexia as a possible independent mechanism
of this association. In addition, age at dx, stage at diagnosis, and
surgical resection were significant predictors of overall survival.

Conclusion: Substantial change in BMI prior to diagnosis indicates poor
overall survival in middle-aged and elderly Caucasian men with esophageal
adenocarcinoma.


