Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating cytokines as biomarkers of BEP toxicity in TGCTs
patients.


Background: Cytokines are key components in process of inflammation and
immune response, what are important processes in many toxicities.
Bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatinum (BEP) is a standard treatment in
patients with testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs). Grade 3/4 toxicity can
be dose limiting and can highly influence patientâ€™s quality of life.
Our aim was to investigate correlation between circulating cytokines and
BEP toxicity in TGCTs patients.

Methods: The study population consisted of chemonaive TGCTs patients
treated by BEP chemotherapy. Grade 3 and 4 toxicities were assessed
according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE)
version 4.0 after first cycle of chemotherapy. G-CSF was administered to
all patients after chemotherapy. Circulating 51 plasma cytokines were
analyzed at baseline before chemotherapy administration (94 patients) and
on cycle 1 day 22 (57 patients) using multiplex bead arrays. Toxicities
were correlated to pretreatment and also postreatment levels of
circulating cytokines. Spearman's correlation test was used to analyze
the association between cytokines and toxicity.

Results: Significant correlations between grade 3/4 toxicity and
cytokines were observed. Neutropenia was associated with elevated
pretreatment levels of TGF-beta 2, IL-2R alpha, HGF, MIG, NGF-beta, SDF-1
alpha, IL-1beta, IL-4, IL-5, IL-17, FGF-basic, G-CSF, MIP-1 alpha and
postreatment elevated levels of GRO-alpha, TNF-beta. Thrombocytopenia
related with higher pretreatment levels of IL-2R alpha, IL-18, M-CSF and
higher postreatment IL-3, IL-12p40, GRO-alpha, MCP-3, M-CSF, MIF, NGF
-beta. Anemia correlated with elevated pretreatment IL-16, GRO-alpha,
HGF, MIF, NGF-beta, SCF, SCGF-beta, MCP-1-MCAF and elevated postreatment
levels of IL-16, HGF, M-CSF, SCGF-beta. There were many positive
associations between pyelonephritis and pretreatment IL-2R alpha, IL-18,
M-CSF, NGF-beta and postreatment IL-2R alpha, IL-3, IL12p40, CTACK, HGF,
MCP-3, M-CSF, NGF-beta, SCGF-beta, IL-6. Diarrhea related with higher
pretreatment levels of IL-15 and also higher postreatment IL-15, GM-CSF
and lower postreatment levels of IFN-alpha, CTACK. Several other
associations were detected between elevated postreatment levels of
cytokines and toxicities: nausea and SCGF-beta, febrile neutropenia and
GRO-alpha, TNF-beta, SIRS and GRO-alpha, PDGF-BB. All correlations were
significant P Results: Significant correlations between grade 3/4
toxicity and cytokines were observed. Neutropenia was associated with
elevated pretreatment levels of TGF-beta 2, IL-2R alpha, HGF, MIG,
NGF-beta, SDF-1 alpha, IL-1beta, IL-4, IL-5, IL-17, FGF-basic, G-CSF,
MIP-1 alpha and postreatment elevated levels of GRO-alpha, TNF-beta.
Thrombocytopenia related with higher pretreatment levels of IL-2R alpha,
IL-18, M-CSF and higher postreatment IL-3, IL-12p40, GRO-alpha, MCP-3,
M-CSF, MIF, NGF -beta. Anemia correlated with elevated pretreatment
IL-16, GRO-alpha, HGF, MIF, NGF-beta, SCF, SCGF-beta, MCP-1-MCAF and
elevated postreatment levels of IL-16, HGF, M-CSF, SCGF-beta. There were
many positive associations between pyelonephritis and pretreatment IL-2R
alpha, IL-18, M-CSF, NGF-beta and postreatment IL-2R alpha, IL-3,
IL12p40, CTACK, HGF, MCP-3, M-CSF, NGF-beta, SCGF-beta, IL-6. Diarrhea
related with higher pretreatment levels of IL-15 and also higher
postreatment IL-15, GM-CSF and lower postreatment levels of IFN-alpha,
CTACK. Several other associations were detected between elevated
postreatment levels of cytokines and toxicities: nausea and SCGF-beta,
febrile neutropenia and GRO-alpha, TNF-beta, SIRS and GRO-alpha, PDGF-BB.
All correlations were significant P <0.05.

Conclusions: Circulating cytokines are promising and easily detectable
biomarker for predicting BEP toxicity in TGCTs patients. This work was
supported by the Slovak Research and Development Agency under the
contracts No. APVV-0016-11 and APVV-15-0086.


