Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hereditary risks of male breast cancer in a multi-gene panel
testing cohort.


While the population-based risk for breast cancer in males remains
relatively low (1:1000), inherited predisposition can significantly raise
this to as high as 10%, in men who carry a mutation in the BRCA2 gene.
Lifetime breast cancer risks of 1-2% have also been reported in men who
carry a mutation in BRCA1. These risks, as well as elevated risks of
prostate, pancreatic, and melanoma cancers, are important to discuss in
families diagnosed with Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome,
which is often viewed as being clinically relevant only to the women in
an affected family. However, beyond the BRCA1/2 genes, limited data is
available on hereditary predisposition to male breast cancer. We analyzed
clinical histories and molecular results from multi-gene panel testing
for hereditary cancer predisposition in a cohort of 715 men affected by
breast cancer. A total of 708 male breast cancer patients were eligible
for inclusion in the final analysis. Molecular testing included analysis
of 5 to 59 genes for DNA coding sequence and copy number variants by
next-generation sequencing and microarray. Genetic variants identified
were classified according to a 5-tier system using previously validated
algorithms1,2. Only those variants classified as pathogenic or likely
pathogenic were included in the analyses as positive for a mutation.
Overall, a mutation was detected in 18% of these men. Four subjects
carried a mutation in two different breast cancer predisposition genes.
BRCA2 and CHEK2 were the most frequently mutated genes. The risk of
breast cancer was significantly elevated compared to public controls in
individuals with a mutation in BRCA2 (odds ratio (OR)=13.9;
p=1.92x10-16), CHEK2 (OR=3.8; p=6.24x10-24) and PALB2 (OR=6.6, p=0.01).
Average age was similar amongst men with (63.5±2.7 years) and without
(62.3±1.2 years) mutations, as were clinical and family histories of
additional cancers. The high overall diagnostic yield suggests the
utility of testing all male breast cancer patient regardless of age or
family history by multigene panel testing, and provides data to support
risk-based counseling and medical recommendations for screening and/or
prevention in male mutation carriers.

1. 1. LaDuca et al. Genet Med. 2014 Nov;16(11):830-7 2. 2. Richards et
al. Genet Med. 2015 May;17(5):405-24


