Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pyrrole-Imidazole polyamide conjugate targeting KRAS oncogenic
mutations is a promising approach against KRAS mutated colorectal and
pancreatic cancers.


Although a tremendous amount of studies has been made to directly target
oncogenic drivers, such as RAS and MYC, no drug is clinically available
because of difficulties to develop RAS- or Myc-targeted anti-cancer
therapeutics due to the smooth 3D surface topology. One of major
limitations of targeting the RAS pathway may be intrinsic or acquired
resistance as seen in the other molecular target therapy. A new approach
that directly target driver genes may provide a more direct route to help
address unmet medical needs for refractory cancer conquest. We therefore
synthesized the Pyrrole-Imidazole polyamide conjugate, KR12, specifically
alkylated KRAS codon 12 mutant DNA (G12D or G12V). KR12 reduced
expression of the mutated oncogenic-protein by RNA transcription
inhibition and induced cancer cell death at low dose (1 to 50 nM). We
also applied a novel enrichment-based sequencing and computational
pipeline, which first identifies a PIPâ€™s genomic binding sites through
next-generation sequencing followed by gene expression microarray
studies. The computational analysis suggested non-KRAS binding overall
had little contribution to changes at the phenotypic level in colorectal
cancer cell lines. We also the anti-cancer event is not only for
colorectal but also pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Significant
tumor reduction was observed in a mouse model of spontaneous PDAC
(LSL-KrasG12D/+,Ptf1aCre/+,Tgfbr2flox/flox). In animal studies we also
observed KR12 intakes and retentions in tumor but not any other organs 24
hours after I.V. administration. We will summarize the sequence-dependent
alkylating approach using antibiotic mimics of alkylating PI-polyamide
conjugates, may open a new strategy targeting the driver oncogene mutated
DNA sequence. This approach should be used for medicine against variety
of unfavorable KRAS mutated cancers.


