Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlative analysis of systemic markers from a randomized trial
assessing local consolidative therapy for non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients with oligometastatic disease.


Introduction: We present serum correlative analysis from a phase II
randomized trial to identify markers associated with progression free
survival (PFS) in NSCLC.

Methods: NSCLC patients presenting with oligometastatic disease (≤3
metastases) were enrolled on a multi-institution phase II randomized
trial (NCT01725165). Patients who did not progress after ≥3 months of
first-line systemic therapy were randomized to upfront local
consolidative therapy (LCT arm) to all sites of disease or at later
progression (no-LCT arm). For correlative analyses, peripheral blood was
collected from consenting patients after completion of initial systemic
therapy but prior to randomization (baseline) and at each follow up.
Serum cytokine and angiogenesis factors (CAFs) were analyzed via magnetic
bead-based multiplex assay (Merck Millipore). Peripheral blood T cell
receptor (TCR) repertoire was profiled by immunoSEQ (Adaptive
Biotechnologies). Peripheral cell-free DNA (cfDNA) was subjected to next
generation sequencing of a panel of cancer genes. Comparisons of PFS, the
primary endpoint of this study, were conducted via log-rank test.

Results: After enrollment of 74 patients with a median follow up of 19
months, this study was closed early after the Data Safety Monitoring
Committee review determined efficacy in the LCT arm. Of 49 randomized
patients, correlative blood draws were conducted on 33 patients.
Considering all patients, high baseline EGF (cutpoint 50 pg/ml; median
PFS: 5.7 vs 19.8 mo), Eotaxin (cutpoint 110 pg/ml; median PFS: 5.7 vs 21
mo), TNF alpha (cutpoint 8 pg/ml; median PFS: 3.6 vs 17.9 mo), or low
baseline GRO (cutpoint 600 pg/ml; median PFS: 17.9 vs 3.6 mo) were
associated with longer PFS (all PResults: After enrollment of 74 patients
with a median follow up of 19 months, this study was closed early after
the Data Safety Monitoring Committee review determined efficacy in the
LCT arm. Of 49 randomized patients, correlative blood draws were
conducted on 33 patients. Considering all patients, high baseline EGF
(cutpoint 50 pg/ml; median PFS: 5.7 vs 19.8 mo), Eotaxin (cutpoint 110
pg/ml; median PFS: 5.7 vs 21 mo), TNF alpha (cutpoint 8 pg/ml; median
PFS: 3.6 vs 17.9 mo), or low baseline GRO (cutpoint 600 pg/ml; median
PFS: 17.9 vs 3.6 mo) were associated with longer PFS (all P<0.05). When
considering individual treatment arms, LCT arm patients exhibiting low
baseline MMP-2 (cutpoint 90 ug/ml; median PFS: 17.9 vs 5.3 mo) and no-LCT
arm patients exhibiting low baseline GRO (cutpoint 600 pg/ml; median PFS:
21.0 vs 1.8 mo) or high baseline FGF-2 (cutpoint 58 pg/ml; median PFS:
2.2 vs 21.0 mo) exhibited longer PFS (all PResults: After enrollment of
74 patients with a median follow up of 19 months, this study was closed
early after the Data Safety Monitoring Committee review determined
efficacy in the LCT arm. Of 49 randomized patients, correlative blood
draws were conducted on 33 patients. Considering all patients, high
baseline EGF (cutpoint 50 pg/ml; median PFS: 5.7 vs 19.8 mo), Eotaxin
(cutpoint 110 pg/ml; median PFS: 5.7 vs 21 mo), TNF alpha (cutpoint 8
pg/ml; median PFS: 3.6 vs 17.9 mo), or low baseline GRO (cutpoint 600
pg/ml; median PFS: 17.9 vs 3.6 mo) were associated with longer PFS (all
P<0.05). When considering individual treatment arms, LCT arm patients
exhibiting low baseline MMP-2 (cutpoint 90 ug/ml; median PFS: 17.9 vs 5.3
mo) and no-LCT arm patients exhibiting low baseline GRO (cutpoint 600
pg/ml; median PFS: 21.0 vs 1.8 mo) or high baseline FGF-2 (cutpoint 58
pg/ml; median PFS: 2.2 vs 21.0 mo) exhibited longer PFS (all P<0.05). TCR
repertoire and cfDNA profile analyses are underway.

Conclusions: In this exploratory analysis, we identified baseline CAFs
associated with PFS. These finding are being validated in a larger cohort
of patients. If validated, CAFs could be a biomarker to select patients
with oligometastatic NSCLC for aggressive local treatment.


