Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of coffee consumption and caffeine intake with
mammographic breast density.


Purpose: Previous studies suggest that coffee consumption and caffeine
intake may be associated with reduced breast cancer risk which may result
from stimulating effect of coffee on estrogen metabolism enzymes and
subsequent changes in bioavailable estrogen. We investigated the
association of coffee consumption and caffeine intake with mammographic
density by woman’s menopausal status and, in postmenopausal women, by
hormone therapy (HT).

Methods: This study included 4,130 cancer-free women within the Nurses’
Health Study and Nurses’ Health Study II cohorts. Percent breast
density (PD), absolute dense and non-dense areas were measured from
digitized film mammograms using a computer-assisted thresholding
technique; all measures were square-root transformed for the analysis to
improve normality. Diet was assessed with a food frequency questionnaire;
average cumulative coffee/caffeine consumption was calculated using data
available from all the questionnaires preceding the mammogram date.
Information regarding breast cancer risk factors was obtained from
baseline or biennial questionnaires closest to the mammogram date. We
used generalized linear regression to quantify associations between
exposures and breast density measures, adjusted for potential
confounders. Associations were examined separately for regular coffee,
decaffeinated coffee, total coffee, and energy-adjusted caffeine intake.

Results: In multivariable analyses, decaffeinated coffee was positively
associated with PD in premenopausal women (2+ cups/day: β=0.23,
p-trend=0.03). In postmenopausal women, decaffeinated and total coffee
were inversely associated with PD (decaffeinated coffee 2+ cups/day:
β=-0.24, p-trend=0.04; total coffee 4+ cups/day: β=-0.17). These
associations appeared to be driven by the inverse associations of these
exposures with absolute dense area. Among current HT users (n=980),
regular coffee and caffeine intake were inversely associated with PD
(regular coffee 4+ cups/day: β=-0.29, p-trendResults: In multivariable
analyses, decaffeinated coffee was positively associated with PD in
premenopausal women (2+ cups/day: β=0.23, p-trend=0.03). In
postmenopausal women, decaffeinated and total coffee were inversely
associated with PD (decaffeinated coffee 2+ cups/day: β=-0.24,
p-trend=0.04; total coffee 4+ cups/day: β=-0.17). These associations
appeared to be driven by the inverse associations of these exposures with
absolute dense area. Among current HT users (n=980), regular coffee and
caffeine intake were inversely associated with PD (regular coffee 4+
cups/day: β=-0.29, p-trend<0.01; caffeine 4th vs. 1st quartile:
β=-0.32, p-trendResults: In multivariable analyses, decaffeinated coffee
was positively associated with PD in premenopausal women (2+ cups/day:
β=0.23, p-trend=0.03). In postmenopausal women, decaffeinated and total
coffee were inversely associated with PD (decaffeinated coffee 2+
cups/day: β=-0.24, p-trend=0.04; total coffee 4+ cups/day: β=-0.17).
These associations appeared to be driven by the inverse associations of
these exposures with absolute dense area. Among current HT users (n=980),
regular coffee and caffeine intake were inversely associated with PD
(regular coffee 4+ cups/day: β=-0.29, p-trend<0.01; caffeine 4th vs. 1st
quartile: β=-0.32, p-trend<0.01). Among past users (n=430),
decaffeinated coffee was inversely associated with PD (2+ cups/day
β=-0.70, p-trend=0.02).

Conclusions: Our findings suggest that among current HT users, regular
coffee and caffeine are inversely associated with mammographic percent
breast density.


