Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia response signaling is linked to TACE resistance in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers
worldwide, and outcome is dismal, due to tumor heterogeneity and lack of
effective treatment options for patients with later stage disease.
Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) is the gold standard of
therapy for patients with intermediate to locally advanced tumors. TACE
delivers a high dose of chemotherapy directly to the tumor via the
hepatic artery, followed by an embolizing agent to restrict tumor blood
supply. However, tumor hypoxia is linked to alterations in metabolism,
such as increased glycolysis (the Warburg effect), and can lead to
enhanced cell survival. Several randomized control trials (RCTs) showed a
survival benefit with TACE, but only with strict patient selection
criteria. In Asia, TACE is also commonly used as adjuvant therapy after
surgical resection, yet RCTs evaluating adjuvant TACE have shown
conflicting results, likely due to patient selection and stratification.
We hypothesize that tumor gene expression is predictive of response
following TACE, and that differential cellular metabolism resembling a
hypoxic phenotype prior to treatment is responsible for TACE resistance.
We retrospectively analyzed gene expression data in treatment-naive tumor
tissue from a cohort of Chinese patients who received TACE. Using
hierarchical clustering, followed by class comparison and survival risk
prediction, we identified a 14-gene signature that is predictive of
response vs. non-response to TACE, as measured by overall survival,
independent of other clinical variables. We found that hypoxia- and
glycolysis-related genes are enriched among differentially expressed
genes in TACE Responders vs. Non-Responders, and that hypoxia master
regulator HIF-1Î± and hypoxia target gene VEGF are significantly
up-regulated in Non-Responders. We determined that a key glycolysis gene
is up-regulated in Non-Responders, and conversely, two rate-limiting
genes involved in gluconeogenesis, the pathway opposing glycolysis, are
up-regulated in Responders. We also examined metabolomic data from the
TACE cohort, and found an enrichment of glycolysis-related metabolites in
Non-Responders, and gluconeogenesis-related metabolites in Responders.
Further investigation will be required to connect altered glucose
metabolism to TACE resistance and to determine driver genes linking
hypoxia and metabolism, which, together with our 14-gene signature, may
serve as a stratification tool to guide personalized treatment modalities
for HCC patients.


