Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) promotes growth of EGFR-mutant lung
tumors in airway regions but not in alveolar regions in a transgenic
mouse model.


Although an exogenous EGF is dispensable for EGFRL858R-mediated NIH3T3
cell transformation in vitro (Greulich et al., PLoS Med 2005), an
exogenous EGF promotes growth of H1650 and H1975 lung adenocarcinoma
cells that carry EGFR mutations in vitro (Sordella et al., Science 2004).
However, it is unknown whether an exogenous EGFR ligand plays a role in
growth of EGFR-mutant lung tumors in vivo. Here, using conditional
transgenic mice expressing EGFRL858R or KRASG12D along with an exogenous
TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) in lung epithelium, we sought to determine the
role of an EGFR ligand in EGFRL858R-lung tumors or wild type EGFR-lung
tumors (KRASG12D-lung tumors) in vivo. As previously reported,
conditional expression of TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) in lung epithelium
caused pulmonary fibrosis but not lung tumors (Korfhagen et al., J Clin
Invest 1994; Hardie et al., AJP-LCMP 2004), indicating that the
expression of an exogenous EGFR ligand is not sufficient to induce lung
tumors. Conditional expression of EGFRL858R or KRASG12D in lung
epithelium caused lung tumors as previously reported (Fisher et al.,
Genes Dev 2001; Politi et al., Gene Dev 2006). In our study using a new
rtTA driver, Scgb1a1-rtTA line 2 (Perl et al., AJRCMB 2006), the majority
of EGFRL858R-lung tumors occurred in alveolar regions while KRASG12D-lung
tumors occurred in both alveolar and airway regions. Importantly,
co-expression of EGFRL858R along with TGFalpha in lung epithelium induced
the growth of lung tumors in airway regions but not in alveolar regions
while the expression of EGFRL858R alone did not induce lung tumors in
airway regions. Co-expression of EGFRL858R along with TGFalpha also
shortened survival of the mice compared to the expression of either
EGFRL858R or TGFalpha alone (median 32 days for EGFRL858R/TGFalpha vs 118
days for EGFRL858R alone or 248 days for TGFalpha alone). Co-expression
of KRASG12D with TGFalpha did not influence tumor location or survival of
the mice compared to the expression of either KRASG12D or TGFalpha alone.
Consistent with the mouse study, TGFalpha expression in human EGFR-mutant
lung cancer but not wild-type EGFR lung cancer was associated with worse
overall survival (median 44 months for TGFalpha high vs 75 months for
TGFalpha low; pAlthough an exogenous EGF is dispensable for
EGFRL858R-mediated NIH3T3 cell transformation in vitro (Greulich et al.,
PLoS Med 2005), an exogenous EGF promotes growth of H1650 and H1975 lung
adenocarcinoma cells that carry EGFR mutations in vitro (Sordella et al.,
Science 2004). However, it is unknown whether an exogenous EGFR ligand
plays a role in growth of EGFR-mutant lung tumors in vivo. Here, using
conditional transgenic mice expressing EGFRL858R or KRASG12D along with
an exogenous TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) in lung epithelium, we sought to
determine the role of an EGFR ligand in EGFRL858R-lung tumors or wild
type EGFR-lung tumors (KRASG12D-lung tumors) in vivo. As previously
reported, conditional expression of TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) in lung
epithelium caused pulmonary fibrosis but not lung tumors (Korfhagen et
al., J Clin Invest 1994; Hardie et al., AJP-LCMP 2004), indicating that
the expression of an exogenous EGFR ligand is not sufficient to induce
lung tumors. Conditional expression of EGFRL858R or KRASG12D in lung
epithelium caused lung tumors as previously reported (Fisher et al.,
Genes Dev 2001; Politi et al., Gene Dev 2006). In our study using a new
rtTA driver, Scgb1a1-rtTA line 2 (Perl et al., AJRCMB 2006), the majority
of EGFRL858R-lung tumors occurred in alveolar regions while KRASG12D-lung
tumors occurred in both alveolar and airway regions. Importantly,
co-expression of EGFRL858R along with TGFalpha in lung epithelium induced
the growth of lung tumors in airway regions but not in alveolar regions
while the expression of EGFRL858R alone did not induce lung tumors in
airway regions. Co-expression of EGFRL858R along with TGFalpha also
shortened survival of the mice compared to the expression of either
EGFRL858R or TGFalpha alone (median 32 days for EGFRL858R/TGFalpha vs 118
days for EGFRL858R alone or 248 days for TGFalpha alone). Co-expression
of KRASG12D with TGFalpha did not influence tumor location or survival of
the mice compared to the expression of either KRASG12D or TGFalpha alone.
Consistent with the mouse study, TGFalpha expression in human EGFR-mutant
lung cancer but not wild-type EGFR lung cancer was associated with worse
overall survival (median 44 months for TGFalpha high vs 75 months for
TGFalpha low; p<0.05) and recurrence free survival (median 21 months for
TGFalpha high vs 61 months for TGFalpha low; pAlthough an exogenous EGF
is dispensable for EGFRL858R-mediated NIH3T3 cell transformation in vitro
(Greulich et al., PLoS Med 2005), an exogenous EGF promotes growth of
H1650 and H1975 lung adenocarcinoma cells that carry EGFR mutations in
vitro (Sordella et al., Science 2004). However, it is unknown whether an
exogenous EGFR ligand plays a role in growth of EGFR-mutant lung tumors
in vivo. Here, using conditional transgenic mice expressing EGFRL858R or
KRASG12D along with an exogenous TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) in lung
epithelium, we sought to determine the role of an EGFR ligand in
EGFRL858R-lung tumors or wild type EGFR-lung tumors (KRASG12D-lung
tumors) in vivo. As previously reported, conditional expression of
TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) in lung epithelium caused pulmonary fibrosis
but not lung tumors (Korfhagen et al., J Clin Invest 1994; Hardie et al.,
AJP-LCMP 2004), indicating that the expression of an exogenous EGFR
ligand is not sufficient to induce lung tumors. Conditional expression of
EGFRL858R or KRASG12D in lung epithelium caused lung tumors as previously
reported (Fisher et al., Genes Dev 2001; Politi et al., Gene Dev 2006).
In our study using a new rtTA driver, Scgb1a1-rtTA line 2 (Perl et al.,
AJRCMB 2006), the majority of EGFRL858R-lung tumors occurred in alveolar
regions while KRASG12D-lung tumors occurred in both alveolar and airway
regions. Importantly, co-expression of EGFRL858R along with TGFalpha in
lung epithelium induced the growth of lung tumors in airway regions but
not in alveolar regions while the expression of EGFRL858R alone did not
induce lung tumors in airway regions. Co-expression of EGFRL858R along
with TGFalpha also shortened survival of the mice compared to the
expression of either EGFRL858R or TGFalpha alone (median 32 days for
EGFRL858R/TGFalpha vs 118 days for EGFRL858R alone or 248 days for
TGFalpha alone). Co-expression of KRASG12D with TGFalpha did not
influence tumor location or survival of the mice compared to the
expression of either KRASG12D or TGFalpha alone. Consistent with the
mouse study, TGFalpha expression in human EGFR-mutant lung cancer but not
wild-type EGFR lung cancer was associated with worse overall survival
(median 44 months for TGFalpha high vs 75 months for TGFalpha low;
p<0.05) and recurrence free survival (median 21 months for TGFalpha high
vs 61 months for TGFalpha low; p<0.05). Collectively, our results
demonstrate that TGFalpha (an EGFR ligand) promotes not only the growth
of EGFRL858R-lung tumors but also influences the regions where the
EGFRL858R-lung tumors form.


