Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of causes of death in patients with esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma in China.


In China, more than 80% of the esophageal cancer occurs in farmer
village, and most of the esophageal cancer patients die at village home.
Therefore, the cause of death for esophageal cancer patients has not been
well characterized. The present study was thus undertaken to determine
the causes of death in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) to provide more information for further prevention and accurate
treatment after ESCC diagnosed. All the 8,838 ESCC patients with a
detailed cause of death in this study were derived from the ESCC database
(1973-2015) in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer Research of the
First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University, China. All the patients
were categorized by age (0.05) and the cause of death by ESCC recurrence
and metastasis, cardiovascular disease, different infections, second
cancer, accident, suicide and uncertain cause was 96% (5485) 1.5% (84),
0.8% (44), 0.6% (34), 0.3% (18), 0.2% (16), 0.6% (32), respectively in
males and 96.5% (3015), 1.1% (37), 0.8% (24) 0.6% (18), 0.2% (7), 0.2%
(6) and 0.6% (18), respectively in females. The present results
demonstrate that recurrence and metastasis are the major cause of death
both in male and female for ESCC (96%). It is noteworthy that there are
0.2 percent of the ESCC patients have suicide which call for more
attention of psychotherapy on cancer patients. [Supported by the Science
and Technology Major Projects of Henan Province of China (161100311300),
and Correspondence to: Li Dong Wang, the National Key Research and
Development Program of China and Correspondence to: Li Dong Wang. Email:
ldwang2007@126.com]


