Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of drug resistance mechanisms and strategies for
overcoming resistance in cancer therapy using a curated clinical
knowledgebase.


Emergence of resistance to targeted therapies is a critical problem in
cancer therapy, and understanding both the mechanisms of resistance and
strategies for overcoming resistance are crucial to effective treatment
of cancer patients. The JAX Clinical Knowledgebase (JAX-CKB), which
incorporates data on therapeutic efficacy in the context of molecular
alterations, enables rapid analysis of known therapy resistance
mechanisms and current data surrounding strategies for overcoming
resistance, both in the preclinical and clinical setting. Using the
JAX-CKB, we have identified over 1250 lines of evidence corresponding to
therapy resistance across tumor types. Of those lines, 147 correspond to
therapy resistance in lung cancer. The JAX-CKB contains 22 variants in
ALK associated with ALK therapy resistance. Within ALK fusion-positive
lung cancer, evidence lines corresponding to ALK inhibitor resistance are
associated primarily with complex molecular profiles containing secondary
ALK mutations, and mechanisms for overcoming resistance in this setting
were associated with use of novel agents. Within EGFR mutation positive
lung cancer, lines associated with resistance to EGFR inhibitor therapy
included copy number alterations, primary resistance mutations, secondary
resistance mutations, and expression level changes. Strategies for
overcoming resistance in these settings include novel agents and/or
various combination therapies. The JAX-CKB provides a unique global view
into current data on resistance to targeted therapies in oncology, which
may enable more rapid assessment of effective therapy options and expose
opportunities for additional research into strategies for overcoming
resistance.


