Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer effect of ulipristal acetate in uterine leiomyosarcoma.


Objectives Uterine leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is a rare uterine malignancy that
arises from the smooth muscle of the uterine wall. Although LMS is an
aggressive tumor associated with a high risk of recurrence, current
radiotherapy and chemotherapy is limited role in the treatment.
Therefore, the introduction of a new therapy for LMS of the uterus is
urgently needed. Ulipristal acetate (UPA, selective progesterone receptor
modulator) is used for pre-operative treatment of moderate to severe
symptoms of uterine fibroids because UPA-treated fibroids shown about
inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis and remodeling of
the extracellular matrix. However, anti-cancer effect of LMS has not yet
been reported. This study was designed to investigate preclinical
efficacy of UPA as anti-cancer agent in LMS cells.

Methods We treated UPA in human LMS cells including SK-UT-1 and MESSA to
evaluate the effect on cell proliferation using MTT assay. To check the
apoptosis according to UPA treatment, we performed ELISA in LMS cells. In
addition, in vivo therapy experiments of UPA were done using xenografts
using SK-UT-1 and MESSA in nude mice. SK-UT-1 or MESSA cells were
injected s.c, into mice (n = 10 per group) and these were randomly
assigned to two groups: PBS (control), oral UPA 2mg/kg once daily. All
specimens were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and paraffin-enclosed for
examination. Sections 4 Î¼m thick were stained with TUNEL and
immunohistochemistry.

Result UPA significantly inhibited the cell survival the growth and
increased the apoptosis in SK-UT-1 and MESSA cells. In in vivo
experiments, UPA significantly decreased the tumor growth in both mice
with SK-UT-1 and MESSA cells compared with control (both pResult UPA
significantly inhibited the cell survival the growth and increased the
apoptosis in SK-UT-1 and MESSA cells. In in vivo experiments, UPA
significantly decreased the tumor growth in both mice with SK-UT-1 and
MESSA cells compared with control (both p<0.001). Moreover, the
immunohistochemical analysis using in vivo tumor samples showed that UPA
treated group decreased Ki-67 expression and increased apoptosis revealed
by TUNEL assay compared with control.

Conclusions. We found that UPA have anti-cancer-effects in LMS cells via
the action to cell proliferation and apoptosis through in vivo and in
vivo tests. Further studies using patient-derived tumor xenograft model
(Avatar mice) and detailed mechanisms of anti-cancer effects for UPA will
be needed.


