Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CGP identifies largely non-overlapping high tumor mutational
burden and HRD genomic alterations in 721 clinically advanced prostate
acinar adenocarcinoma cases.


Background: Effective therapies for the management of castrate resistant
prostate cancer are lacking. We performed comprehensive genomic profiling
(CGP) on advanced prostate carcinomas (PC) in the course of clinical care
to identify genomic alterations that could suggest benefit from targeted,
immune- and PARP inhibitor therapeutic strategies.

Methods: DNA was extracted from 40 microns of FFPE specimen from 721
clinically advanced PC cases. CGP was performed using a hybrid-capture,
adaptor ligation based next generation sequencing assay to a mean
coverage depth of over 500X. All four classes of genomic alterations (GA)
- base substitutions, insertions and deletions, gene fusions, and copy
number alterations (amplifications and losses) - were identified.

Results: Of the 721 PC patients - men with median age of 65 (range 34 -
88) - CGP was performed on 335 (46.5%) prostate specimens and 386 (53.5%)
specimens from metastatic sites. The most common genes altered were TP53
(N=336, 46.6%), PTEN (N=254, 35.2%), TMPRSS2-ERG (N=214, all fusions,
29.7%), AR (N=173, 24%), and MYC (N=105, 14.6%). Median tumor mutational
burden (TMB) for this series was 3.6 mut/Mb (range 0 - 305). AR and MYC
amplifications were enriched in metastatic tumors compared to primary
tumors (p 15% of cases, including homozygous deletions and truncating
mutations in BRCA2 in 79 (11%) samples, as well as truncating mutations
in ATM in 41 (5.7%) samples, with only 3 samples possessing alterations
in both genes. Cases with these HRD-relevant alterations possessed
overall higher genomic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) content than did
those without (p = 0.02). HRD and non-HRD cases had median TMB of 4.8
versus 2.7 mut/Mb, respectively, and mean TMB of 10.4 versus 4.0 mut/Mb
(p 15% of cases, including homozygous deletions and truncating mutations
in BRCA2 in 79 (11%) samples, as well as truncating mutations in ATM in
41 (5.7%) samples, with only 3 samples possessing alterations in both
genes. Cases with these HRD-relevant alterations possessed overall higher
genomic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) content than did those without (p =
0.02). HRD and non-HRD cases had median TMB of 4.8 versus 2.7 mut/Mb,
respectively, and mean TMB of 10.4 versus 4.0 mut/Mb (p < 0.01). Only
2.6% of non-HRD cases were TMB-high (20 mut/Mb or more), versus 8.4% of
HRD cases, a small but significant enrichment in the latter.

Conclusions: CGP for advanced PC cases identifies largely non-overlapping
TMB-high and HRD positive cases, suggesting benefit from
immunotherapeutics and PARP inhibitors respectively. Further
investigation will assess whether HRD pathway alterations result in
genomic LOH in the context of a hypermutated tumor, and enrichment or
exclusivity with other GA in prostate carcinoma.


