Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome- and whole genome sequencing for clinical evaluation and
precision medicine in neuroblastoma.


Background. Despite major progress in treatment of pediatric cancer,
aggressive neuroblastoma (NB) still constitutes a major clinical problem.
Currently, the event free survival of high-risk NB is about 40%
implicating that 60% either donâ€™t go into full remission or falls into
relapse. Most relapses have an acquired drug resistance meaning that
conventional treatment options may not work. Therefore, further studies
of this group are of great importance. Massive parallel sequencing has
now become a valuable tool in both cancer research and in clinical
evaluation as it provides valuable information regarding patient specific
alterations that might be used in targeted therapy.

Material and Methods. DNA from 54 patients in total have been subjects
for massive parallel sequencing; 16 tumor/normal pairs and 27 single
tumors have been analyzed using exome sequencing, 8 tumor/normal pairs
with whole genome sequencing and three using both exome and whole genome
sequencing. Exome sequences were mapped using BWA with GATK realignment
followed by variant calling through SNPeff and copy number analysis
trough ControlFreec. Whole genome data were analyzed using the CLC
Genomic Workbench with annotation and filtering done in Ingenuity variant
analysis software.

Results. On average, 14 somatic protein changing single nucleotide
variants were detected per patient (range 2-71) with recurrent
alterations mainly detected mainly in ALK. Predicted deleterious germ
line alterations in well-established cancer genes were detected in three
patients. Structural variants included genes such as ATRX and TERT, as
described by others previously, but also novel homozygous focal deletions
at chromosome 19. Shortest regions of overlapping deletions of this chr19
region include seven gens whereof CIC (Capicua) might be the most
interesting in a cancer context. Copy number analysis of both exome- and
whole genome sequencing gives genomic profiles that are comparable to the
genome profiles generated from the SNP-microarrays that current are in
clinical use. Specific breakpoints for structural variants could be
detected in all sample subjects for whole genome sequencing as well as
for all for all MYCN amplified neuroblastomas that subjects for exome
sequencing.

Conclusions. Exome- and whole genome sequencing can be used for clinical
evaluation of NB providing information regarding both constitutional and
tumor specific alterations. The information can be used for clinical
decision of patient specific therapeutic options such as ALK- or CDK4/6
inhibitors, but can also in rare cases give information regarding which
treatments not to use. Furthermore, whole genome sequencing also gives
the possibility to identify tumor specific structural alterations such as
translocation breakpoints that can be used to monitor tumor burden in
liquid biopsies.


