Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deubiquitinase OTUD6B isoforms are important regulators of growth
and proliferation.


Deubiquitinases (DUBs) are increasingly linked to the regulation of
fundamental processes in normal and cancer cells, including DNA
replication and repair, programmed cell death, and oncogenes and tumor
suppressors signaling. Here evidence is presented that the deubiquitinase
OTUD6B regulates protein synthesis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells, operating downstream from mTORC1. OTUD6B associates with the
protein synthesis initiation complex and modifies components of the 48S
preinitiation complex. The two main OTUD6B splicing isoforms seem to
regulate protein synthesis in opposing fashions: the long OTUD6B-1
isoform is inhibitory, while the short OTUD6B-2 isoform stimulates
protein synthesis. These properties affect NSCLC cell proliferation,
since OTUD6B-1 represses DNA synthesis while OTUD6B-2 promotes it.
Mutational analysis and downstream mediators suggest that the two OTUD6B
isoforms modify different cellular targets. OTUD6B-2 influences the
expression of cyclin D1 by promoting its translation while regulating
(directly or indirectly) c-Myc protein stability. This phenomenon appears
to have clinical relevance as NSCLC cells and human tumor specimens have
a reduced OTUD6B-1/OTUD6B-2 mRNA ratio compared to normal samples. The
global OTUD6B expression level does not change significantly between
non-neoplastic and malignant tissues, suggesting that modifications of
splicing factors during the process of transformation are responsible for
this isoform switch. Because protein synthesis inhibition is a viable
treatment strategy for NSCLC, these data indicate that OTUD6B isoform 2,
being specifically linked to NSCLC growth, represents an attractive,
novel therapeutic target and potential biomarker for early diagnosis of
malignant NSCLC.


