Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of new therapeutic monoclonal antibodies to challenging
GPCRs, ion channels and transporters.


The objective of this work was to evaluate the ability to generate panels
of monoclonal antibodies against a set of highly challenging targets
including GPCRs (CB1, C5AR, CXCR5 and CGRPR), transporters (GLUT4), and
ion channels (P2X3). Integral membrane proteins are important drug
targets and monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) directed against them are highly
sought for therapeutic purposes. However, the complex structure of
multispan membrane protein targets makes the discovery of these MAbs
especially challenging. To address this need, Integral Molecular has
developed the MPS Discovery Engine® to enable the isolation,
characterization, and engineering of monoclonal antibodies for GPCRs, ion
channels, and transporters. MPS utilizes a collection of technologies to
address each of the barriers to monoclonal antibody development against
the native extracellular epitopes of multispan membrane proteins. These
include, antigen engineering to attain high levels of surface expression,
DNA and Lipoparticle immunization to present native epitopes to the
immune system, diverse immunization host species to deal with highly
conserved proteins, Lipoparticles (high concentration native membrane
proteins) to enable phage display and microfludic B-cell isolation, and
shotgun mutagenesis (comprehensive Alanine scanning) for epitope mapping.
Using the MPS Discovery Engine® we were able to successfully generate
large panels of antibodies to the targets that were able to bind to the
native extracellular epitopes on cells by flow cytometry. A subset of the
antibodies had antagonist activity. With this technology we have the
ability to target intact, conformation specific, and functional
antibodies to complex membrane proteins.


