Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying early genetic steps in malignant transformation of
neurofibromatosis type 1- associated plexiform neurofibromas.


BACKGROUND: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a genetic tumor
predisposition disorder caused by germline mutations in tumor suppressor
NF1. Plexiform neurofibromas (PN) are benign tumors that arise prenatally
or early in childhood and affect 30-50% of NF1 population. Somatic
inactivation of second copy of NF1 is believed to be primary genetic
event leading to PN initiation. NF1 patients have 8-12% lifetime risk of
developing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), a highly
aggressive soft tissue sarcoma, often arising from pre-existing PN and
atypical NF (ANF). ANF are pre-malignant tumors that often arise within
PN and can transform into MPNST. They are distinct from both PN and MPNST
clinically and histologically, thus representing an intermediate step in
malignant transformation. Several studies identified deletion of the
CDKN2A/2B locus as the most frequent genetic event in ANF, however it is
not clear whether other genes or pathways play role in PN transformation
into ANF and further into MPNST. In this study, we performed genomic
analysis of 16 ANF and 4 MPNST matched with normal DNA obtained from 14
and 4 patients, respectively.

METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing and whole transcriptome
RNASeq analyses on Illumina Hi-Seq 2500 platform and copy-number variant
(CNV) analysis on Illumina HumanOmniExpressExome-8 SNP-arrays. In
addition, we performed deep sequencing of NF1 and validation of select
mutations on IonTorrent platform. For select tumors we estimated growth
rate and metabolic activity by using volumetric MRI and FDG-PET.

RESULTS: We identified inactivation of NF1 in the majority of ANF and all
MPNST. We also detected CDKN2A/B locus deletion in the majority of ANF
and MPNST (heterozygous in ANF and mostly homozygous in MPNST). We
determined that PRC2 genes (EED and SUZ12) were mutated in multiple MPNST
but never in ANF. We identified a low number of point mutations and small
indels in the genomes of ANF (median 1, range 0-4) and somewhat elevated
mutation burden in MPNST (median 23, range 18-31), however none of these
mutations were recurrent and none of the mutant genes (other than NF1 and
CDKN2A) were present in multiple samples. We found 93 CNV per tumor
(median) in ANF that constituted ~2% of their genomes. In comparison, we
observed 2,249 CNV (median) in MPNST that comprised ~75% of their
genomes. We didnâ€™t detect significant correlation between growth rate
or metabolic activity and the degree of genomic instability or mutation
burden in the tumors, however the size of the sample set was modest.
RNAseq data analysis is pending.

CONCLUSIONS: It appears that PN-ANF transition is predominantly if not
exclusively driven by heterozygous deletion of the CDKN2A/2B locus.
Further progression to MPNST likely involves homozygous loss of CDKN2A/B
and complete inactivation of the PRC2 complex. Widespread LOH in MPNST
may accelerate inactivation of key gatekeepers.


