Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Designer peptides targeting epidermal growth factor as novel
anti-breast cancer agents.


Triple negative breast cancer (TBNC) is the only major type of breast
cancer for which no specific FDA approved target therapy is available to
improve patient outcomes. TNBC lacks the usual breast cancer targets
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2/neu receptor.
Studies have shown that TBNC does express the epidermal growth factor
receptor and has recently emerged as one of the potential targets in
TBNC. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) mediates several cellular functions
and processes such as survival, motility, differentiation, proliferation
and death. When it is released by epidermal tissues, EGF binds to cell
surface receptors such as the Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
causing a conformational change which facilitates its dimerization. This
receptor dimerization triggers its tyrosine kinase-mediated signal
transduction activity. Apart from EGF, EGFR is reported to bind to
Transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-α), Argos and Potato
Carboxypeptidase inhibitor (PCI). All of these proteins have unique
structural motifs which targets EGFR. PCI’s structure consisting of
three disulfide bridges presents a unique knot like binding motif
resembling EGF and is able to compete with EGF for its binding site on
EGFR preventing receptor dimerization thereby antagonizing its action. We
have used an integrated computational drug discovery approach to generate
several PCI derived peptidic ligands targeting EGFR protein-protein
interactions. PCI- peptides bind to EGFR in silico and block
EGFR-mediated cell growth, proliferation and migration in vitro. We
believe these designer peptidic inhibitors will provide structural and
mechanistic clues towards novel therapeutics to combat TNBC.


