Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patterns of racial disparities in health-related quality of life
among colorectal cancer patients and relationship with survival.


Distinct racial disparities are evident in CRC prognosis with Black
patients experiencing worse outcomes than Hispanics and Whites. In a
prior study of Health Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL) in a cohort of CRC
patients, we observed that racial minority patients experienced lower
HR-QoL scores compared to White CRC patients. Therefore, in this study,
we focused on the identification of patterns of racial disparities in
HR-QoL scores and relationship to differences in prognosis. White
(N=450), Hispanic (N=366), and Black (N=316) CRC patients within 1 year
of diagnosis at MD Anderson Cancer Center completed the SF-12 quality of
life questionnaire to determine Mental Composite Summary (MCS) and
Physical Composite Summary (PCS) scores. Participants also completed a
questionnaire to collect epidemiology and sociodemographic variables.
Vital status and histology information was obtained from the
institutional tumor registry. Racial disparities were reported in HR-QoL
with both Black and Hispanic patients reporting lower mean PCS and MCS
scores compared to White patients, suggesting poorer HR-QoL in these
populations. We observed differences in patterns of association between
epidemiology and sociodemographic variables and poor HR-QoL by race.
Hispanics who never married were at higher risk of poor physical HR-QoL
(OR: 2.55(1.15-5.67), P=0.021) compared to married patients, which was
not observed for White or Black CRC patients. Similarly, CRC patients
with some college education was associated with a decreased risk of poor
PCS, but only in Hispanics (OR: 0.26(0.13-0.52), PDistinct racial
disparities are evident in CRC prognosis with Black patients experiencing
worse outcomes than Hispanics and Whites. In a prior study of Health
Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL) in a cohort of CRC patients, we observed
that racial minority patients experienced lower HR-QoL scores compared to
White CRC patients. Therefore, in this study, we focused on the
identification of patterns of racial disparities in HR-QoL scores and
relationship to differences in prognosis. White (N=450), Hispanic
(N=366), and Black (N=316) CRC patients within 1 year of diagnosis at MD
Anderson Cancer Center completed the SF-12 quality of life questionnaire
to determine Mental Composite Summary (MCS) and Physical Composite
Summary (PCS) scores. Participants also completed a questionnaire to
collect epidemiology and sociodemographic variables. Vital status and
histology information was obtained from the institutional tumor registry.
Racial disparities were reported in HR-QoL with both Black and Hispanic
patients reporting lower mean PCS and MCS scores compared to White
patients, suggesting poorer HR-QoL in these populations. We observed
differences in patterns of association between epidemiology and
sociodemographic variables and poor HR-QoL by race. Hispanics who never
married were at higher risk of poor physical HR-QoL (OR: 2.55(1.15-5.67),
P=0.021) compared to married patients, which was not observed for White
or Black CRC patients. Similarly, CRC patients with some college
education was associated with a decreased risk of poor PCS, but only in
Hispanics (OR: 0.26(0.13-0.52), P<0.0001). White females have about
two-fold risk of poor PCS (P=2.00 x 10-4) and MCS (P=2.21 x 10-4) scores
compared to White males. This relationship was also observed for Black
females OR: 2.28(1.35-3.84), but not Hispanic females. Among CRC patients
reporting poor PCS (Distinct racial disparities are evident in CRC
prognosis with Black patients experiencing worse outcomes than Hispanics
and Whites. In a prior study of Health Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL)
in a cohort of CRC patients, we observed that racial minority patients
experienced lower HR-QoL scores compared to White CRC patients.
Therefore, in this study, we focused on the identification of patterns of
racial disparities in HR-QoL scores and relationship to differences in
prognosis. White (N=450), Hispanic (N=366), and Black (N=316) CRC
patients within 1 year of diagnosis at MD Anderson Cancer Center
completed the SF-12 quality of life questionnaire to determine Mental
Composite Summary (MCS) and Physical Composite Summary (PCS) scores.
Participants also completed a questionnaire to collect epidemiology and
sociodemographic variables. Vital status and histology information was
obtained from the institutional tumor registry. Racial disparities were
reported in HR-QoL with both Black and Hispanic patients reporting lower
mean PCS and MCS scores compared to White patients, suggesting poorer
HR-QoL in these populations. We observed differences in patterns of
association between epidemiology and sociodemographic variables and poor
HR-QoL by race. Hispanics who never married were at higher risk of poor
physical HR-QoL (OR: 2.55(1.15-5.67), P=0.021) compared to married
patients, which was not observed for White or Black CRC patients.
Similarly, CRC patients with some college education was associated with a
decreased risk of poor PCS, but only in Hispanics (OR: 0.26(0.13-0.52),
P<0.0001). White females have about two-fold risk of poor PCS (P=2.00 x
10-4) and MCS (P=2.21 x 10-4) scores compared to White males. This
relationship was also observed for Black females OR: 2.28(1.35-3.84), but
not Hispanic females. Among CRC patients reporting poor PCS (<50),
significant differences in median survival times (MSTs) were observed by
race. Hispanic patients had the highest MST at 85.4 months followed by
Blacks (47.8 months) and Whites (43.2 months). A similar relationship was
observed for poor MCS (Distinct racial disparities are evident in CRC
prognosis with Black patients experiencing worse outcomes than Hispanics
and Whites. In a prior study of Health Related Quality of Life (HR-QoL)
in a cohort of CRC patients, we observed that racial minority patients
experienced lower HR-QoL scores compared to White CRC patients.
Therefore, in this study, we focused on the identification of patterns of
racial disparities in HR-QoL scores and relationship to differences in
prognosis. White (N=450), Hispanic (N=366), and Black (N=316) CRC
patients within 1 year of diagnosis at MD Anderson Cancer Center
completed the SF-12 quality of life questionnaire to determine Mental
Composite Summary (MCS) and Physical Composite Summary (PCS) scores.
Participants also completed a questionnaire to collect epidemiology and
sociodemographic variables. Vital status and histology information was
obtained from the institutional tumor registry. Racial disparities were
reported in HR-QoL with both Black and Hispanic patients reporting lower
mean PCS and MCS scores compared to White patients, suggesting poorer
HR-QoL in these populations. We observed differences in patterns of
association between epidemiology and sociodemographic variables and poor
HR-QoL by race. Hispanics who never married were at higher risk of poor
physical HR-QoL (OR: 2.55(1.15-5.67), P=0.021) compared to married
patients, which was not observed for White or Black CRC patients.
Similarly, CRC patients with some college education was associated with a
decreased risk of poor PCS, but only in Hispanics (OR: 0.26(0.13-0.52),
P<0.0001). White females have about two-fold risk of poor PCS (P=2.00 x
10-4) and MCS (P=2.21 x 10-4) scores compared to White males. This
relationship was also observed for Black females OR: 2.28(1.35-3.84), but
not Hispanic females. Among CRC patients reporting poor PCS (<50),
significant differences in median survival times (MSTs) were observed by
race. Hispanic patients had the highest MST at 85.4 months followed by
Blacks (47.8 months) and Whites (43.2 months). A similar relationship was
observed for poor MCS (<50) stratified by race with MST times of 81.9
months for Hispanics, 40.8 months for Blacks, and 54.1 months for Whites.
In conclusion, we identified patterns of racial disparities in
epidemiology and sociodemographic factors that correspond to poor
baseline HR-QoL in CRC patients. We also demonstrated that a prognostic
correlation exists between baseline HR-QoL and patient overall survival,
and that this relationship is influenced by race. The patterns of racial
disparity identified in this study can be an important tool for assessing
the underlying mediators of HR-QoL in CRC patients and to further
identify those who are particularly at risk for poor prognosis.


