Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pre-clinical model for lung cancer interception: gene expression
similarities between human and mouse bronchial premalignant lesions.


The molecular events that drive the development of the premalignant
lesions (PMLs) that precede lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are poorly
understood. A major limitation to understanding PMLs and developing
interventions is the lack of preclinical models to test candidates
derived from human studies. Previous work by our group and others
suggests that the N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model of
lung SCC may be a candidate for modeling human PMLs based on histologic
similarities, but its molecular relationship to human disease is limited.
In this study, we investigate the transcriptomic similarities between
PMLs from the NTCU treated mice and humans. RNA from 40 whole lung
sections (curls) and laser capture microdissected (LCM) of PMLs of
varying histology from SWR/J and A/J mice treated with NTCU were profiled
by RNA-Seq. RNA from 131 human endobronchial biopsies representing
analogous histological grades were also profiled by RNA-Seq as part of
the Pre-Cancer Genome Atlas (PCGA). Linear modeling was used to identify
gene expression differences associated with increasing histological
severity, mouse strain and sample type. Concordance of gene expression
associated with histology between species was investigated using GSEA and
GSVA. Biological pathways were inferred using EnrichR and GSEA. A gene
expression signature associated with increasing histological severity
across all mouse samples was identified (1195 genes, FDRThe molecular
events that drive the development of the premalignant lesions (PMLs) that
precede lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are poorly understood. A major
limitation to understanding PMLs and developing interventions is the lack
of preclinical models to test candidates derived from human studies.
Previous work by our group and others suggests that the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model of lung SCC may be a
candidate for modeling human PMLs based on histologic similarities, but
its molecular relationship to human disease is limited. In this study, we
investigate the transcriptomic similarities between PMLs from the NTCU
treated mice and humans. RNA from 40 whole lung sections (curls) and
laser capture microdissected (LCM) of PMLs of varying histology from
SWR/J and A/J mice treated with NTCU were profiled by RNA-Seq. RNA from
131 human endobronchial biopsies representing analogous histological
grades were also profiled by RNA-Seq as part of the Pre-Cancer Genome
Atlas (PCGA). Linear modeling was used to identify gene expression
differences associated with increasing histological severity, mouse
strain and sample type. Concordance of gene expression associated with
histology between species was investigated using GSEA and GSVA.
Biological pathways were inferred using EnrichR and GSEA. A gene
expression signature associated with increasing histological severity
across all mouse samples was identified (1195 genes, FDR<0.05), which was
concordant with gene expression differences associated with increasing
histological severity of human PMLs (FDRThe molecular events that drive
the development of the premalignant lesions (PMLs) that precede lung
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are poorly understood. A major limitation
to understanding PMLs and developing interventions is the lack of
preclinical models to test candidates derived from human studies.
Previous work by our group and others suggests that the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model of lung SCC may be a
candidate for modeling human PMLs based on histologic similarities, but
its molecular relationship to human disease is limited. In this study, we
investigate the transcriptomic similarities between PMLs from the NTCU
treated mice and humans. RNA from 40 whole lung sections (curls) and
laser capture microdissected (LCM) of PMLs of varying histology from
SWR/J and A/J mice treated with NTCU were profiled by RNA-Seq. RNA from
131 human endobronchial biopsies representing analogous histological
grades were also profiled by RNA-Seq as part of the Pre-Cancer Genome
Atlas (PCGA). Linear modeling was used to identify gene expression
differences associated with increasing histological severity, mouse
strain and sample type. Concordance of gene expression associated with
histology between species was investigated using GSEA and GSVA.
Biological pathways were inferred using EnrichR and GSEA. A gene
expression signature associated with increasing histological severity
across all mouse samples was identified (1195 genes, FDR<0.05), which was
concordant with gene expression differences associated with increasing
histological severity of human PMLs (FDR<0.05). We identified a 51-gene
(pThe molecular events that drive the development of the premalignant
lesions (PMLs) that precede lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are poorly
understood. A major limitation to understanding PMLs and developing
interventions is the lack of preclinical models to test candidates
derived from human studies. Previous work by our group and others
suggests that the N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model of
lung SCC may be a candidate for modeling human PMLs based on histologic
similarities, but its molecular relationship to human disease is limited.
In this study, we investigate the transcriptomic similarities between
PMLs from the NTCU treated mice and humans. RNA from 40 whole lung
sections (curls) and laser capture microdissected (LCM) of PMLs of
varying histology from SWR/J and A/J mice treated with NTCU were profiled
by RNA-Seq. RNA from 131 human endobronchial biopsies representing
analogous histological grades were also profiled by RNA-Seq as part of
the Pre-Cancer Genome Atlas (PCGA). Linear modeling was used to identify
gene expression differences associated with increasing histological
severity, mouse strain and sample type. Concordance of gene expression
associated with histology between species was investigated using GSEA and
GSVA. Biological pathways were inferred using EnrichR and GSEA. A gene
expression signature associated with increasing histological severity
across all mouse samples was identified (1195 genes, FDR<0.05), which was
concordant with gene expression differences associated with increasing
histological severity of human PMLs (FDR<0.05). We identified a 51-gene
(p<0.001) and a 178-gene (pThe molecular events that drive the
development of the premalignant lesions (PMLs) that precede lung squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) are poorly understood. A major limitation to
understanding PMLs and developing interventions is the lack of
preclinical models to test candidates derived from human studies.
Previous work by our group and others suggests that the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model of lung SCC may be a
candidate for modeling human PMLs based on histologic similarities, but
its molecular relationship to human disease is limited. In this study, we
investigate the transcriptomic similarities between PMLs from the NTCU
treated mice and humans. RNA from 40 whole lung sections (curls) and
laser capture microdissected (LCM) of PMLs of varying histology from
SWR/J and A/J mice treated with NTCU were profiled by RNA-Seq. RNA from
131 human endobronchial biopsies representing analogous histological
grades were also profiled by RNA-Seq as part of the Pre-Cancer Genome
Atlas (PCGA). Linear modeling was used to identify gene expression
differences associated with increasing histological severity, mouse
strain and sample type. Concordance of gene expression associated with
histology between species was investigated using GSEA and GSVA.
Biological pathways were inferred using EnrichR and GSEA. A gene
expression signature associated with increasing histological severity
across all mouse samples was identified (1195 genes, FDR<0.05), which was
concordant with gene expression differences associated with increasing
histological severity of human PMLs (FDR<0.05). We identified a 51-gene
(p<0.001) and a 178-gene (p<0.001) signatures associated with increasing
histology in the all SWR/J and A/J samples respectively. These gene
expression signatures are enriched for biological pathways involved in
immune modulation, occurring with progressing lesions. Conversely, genes
whose expression changed with increasing histology in a model that
included only LCM samples (153 genes at pThe molecular events that drive
the development of the premalignant lesions (PMLs) that precede lung
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) are poorly understood. A major limitation
to understanding PMLs and developing interventions is the lack of
preclinical models to test candidates derived from human studies.
Previous work by our group and others suggests that the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) mouse model of lung SCC may be a
candidate for modeling human PMLs based on histologic similarities, but
its molecular relationship to human disease is limited. In this study, we
investigate the transcriptomic similarities between PMLs from the NTCU
treated mice and humans. RNA from 40 whole lung sections (curls) and
laser capture microdissected (LCM) of PMLs of varying histology from
SWR/J and A/J mice treated with NTCU were profiled by RNA-Seq. RNA from
131 human endobronchial biopsies representing analogous histological
grades were also profiled by RNA-Seq as part of the Pre-Cancer Genome
Atlas (PCGA). Linear modeling was used to identify gene expression
differences associated with increasing histological severity, mouse
strain and sample type. Concordance of gene expression associated with
histology between species was investigated using GSEA and GSVA.
Biological pathways were inferred using EnrichR and GSEA. A gene
expression signature associated with increasing histological severity
across all mouse samples was identified (1195 genes, FDR<0.05), which was
concordant with gene expression differences associated with increasing
histological severity of human PMLs (FDR<0.05). We identified a 51-gene
(p<0.001) and a 178-gene (p<0.001) signatures associated with increasing
histology in the all SWR/J and A/J samples respectively. These gene
expression signatures are enriched for biological pathways involved in
immune modulation, occurring with progressing lesions. Conversely, genes
whose expression changed with increasing histology in a model that
included only LCM samples (153 genes at p<0.001) revealed
epithelial-specific processes including the up-regulation of KRT5 and p63
and loss of TTF1. Additionally, in the LCM samples, we identified
up-regulation of genes involved in proliferation including a number of
genes involved in cell structure, metabolism, transcription and
translation, anti-apoptosis as well as several immunosuppressive genes.
The major finding of these studies is that there are molecular
similarities between PMLs from human and NTCU treated mice, which suggest
that this mouse model may be useful to investigate targeted early
intervention to halt or reverse PML progression towards lung cancer.


