Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment of XL019, a selective Jak2 inhibitor, highly
sensitizes drug-resistant cancer cells by increasing P-gp inhibition.


1

Co-treatment of XL019, a selective Jak2 inhibitor, highly sensitizes
drug-resistant cancer cells by increasing P-gp inhibition

Ji Hyun Cheon1, Yu Jin Park, Ji Yeon Son, Sung Pil Yoon, and Hyung Sik Kim

Lab of molecular of toxicology, School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, South Korea

A high expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is consistently observed in
multidrug resistance (MDR) cancer cells. The purpose of our study was to
identify conditions that would increase the sensitivity of
P-gp-overexpressing drug-resistant KBV20C cancer cell line. We used
commercially available epigenetic library, which includes 128 compounds.
Using cellular viability test, we identified that XL019 highly sensitized
KBV20C-resistant cells to vincristine treatment. However, XL019-induced
sensitization was not observed in vincristine-treated sensitive KB parent
cells, suggesting that these effects are specific to resistant cancer
cells. Using FACS analysis, western-blot, and annexin V staining, we
identified that XL109 sensitized vincristine-treated KBV20C cells via
apoptosis and G2 arrest. Furthermore, sensitization potency of XL109 in
combination with vincristine was measured in KBV20C cells when comparing
with P-gp inhibitor verapamil or another Jak2 inhibitor CEP-33779. We
further investigated the mechanisms of XL109 against sensitization of
vincristine-treated KBV20C cells. The sensitization mechanism of XL109
was mainly depends on the inhibition of P-gp. In addition, ATPase
activity was also conducted to identify as potential role of XL019 in
P-gp inhibition. In the docking modeling, XL019 and CEP-33779 showed high
binding affinity docking score against ABCB1 receptor protein by -10.590
and -9.104, respectively. Collectively, inhibition of P-gp by XL109 can
increase the vincristine-sensitivity in MDR cancer cells through
increased apoptosis and G2 arrest. Our findings indicate that Jak2
inhibitor may be a promising target in the treatment of patients
resistant to anti-mitotic drug.


