Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tracking the genetic relationship between first and late-onset
second urothelial cancers by mutational signature analysis.


Exposure to aristolochic acid (AA, IARC Group 1 carcinogen) present in
some traditional herbal medicines leads to aristolochic acid nephropathy
(AAN), often complicated by development of multiple urothelial carcinomas
of sequential onset. We used genome-scale mutational signature analysis
of multiple urinary tract tumors of AAN cases from a unique patient group
to determine the relationships of the patientsâ€™ late-onset second
cancers to the AA exposure as well as to the first cancers.

Aristolactam-DNA adduct-positive AAN patients (n=4) who developed cancer
within 8 years following the initial exposure to AA were chosen for
analysis of their first cancers (upper tract urothelial carcinomas, UTUC)
and second cancers of delayed onset (1-9 years after first-cancer
diagnosis, involving the bladder or ureteral meatus). All patients had
received a kidney transplant before developing the second cancers and had
a functional renal graft prior to prophylactic nephroureterectomy.
Genomic DNAs were isolated from FFPE sections of the renal cortex and
from the upper and lower tract tumors of each patient using laser capture
micro-dissection or macro-dissection of the tumor areas. Low-coverage
(~15x) exome 100-bp paired-end sequencing was performed using Illumina
HiSeq2500. Customized variant calling identified somatic variants absent
in non-tumor tissues. Non-negative matrix factorization was applied to
extract mutational signatures in the tumor tissues.

In all cases, we established the mutational signature of AA (the COSMIC
signature 22) in the first UTUC as well as second cancers involving the
bladder or lower ureter (meatus). Additionally, the first and second
cancers harbored considerable overlaps in exposure-specific (A>T) somatic
mutations. This finding provides evidence that the delayed onset of
bladder urothelial carcinomas in AAN patients is likely due to distal
seeding of cancer cells originating from the primary UTUC tumors.

Our first-of-its-kind study addresses the risk as well as mechanistic
factors leading to the second, late-onset bladder urothelial carcinomas
following kidney transplantation and primary UTUC development. Our
results underline the importance of long-term bladder follow-up in
high-risk populations with established or suspected AA exposure.

Funding: IARC; NYU Genome Technology Center is partially supported by the
NIH/NCI (P30CA016087) grant.


