Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microsatellite genotyping enables precision lung cancer risk
classification.


There remains a large discrepancy between the known genetic contributions
to cancer and that which can be explained by genomic variants, both
inherited and somatic. Recently, understudied repetitive DNA regions
called microsatellites have been identified as genetic risk markers for a
number of diseases including various cancers (breast, ovarian and brain).
In this study we demonstrate an integrated process for identifying and
validating microsatellite based risk markers for lung cancer using data
from the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) and the 1000 genomes project.
Comparing whole exome germline sequencing data from 488 TCGA lung cancer
samples to germline exome data from 390 control samples from the 1000
genomes project, we identified 119 potentially informative microsatellite
loci. These loci (risk markers) were found to be able to distinguish
between cancer and control samples with sensitivity and specificity
ratios over 0.8. Then these loci, supplemented with additional loci from
other cancers and controls, were evaluated using a custom target
enrichment kit and sample-multiplexed nextgen sequencing. Thirteen of the
119 risk markers were validated using high-depth (579xÂ±315) nextgen
sequencing of 30 lung cancer and 89 control samples, resulting in
sensitivity and specificity ratios were 0.90 and 0.94, respectively. When
8 loci harvested from the bioinformatic analysis of other cancers are
added to the classifier, then the sensitivity and specificity rise to
0.93 and 0.97, respectively. Analysis of the genes harboring these loci
revealed two genes (ARID1B and REL) and two significantly enriched
pathways (chromatin organization and cellular response to stress) which
suggest that the process of lung carcinogenesis is linked to chromatin
remodeling, inflammation, and tumor microenvironment restructuring. We
illustrate that high-depth nextgen sequencing enables a high precision
microsatellite-based risk classifier.


