Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of MTDH in estrogen-regulated gene expression.


Disruption of estrogen signaling is widely associated with the
development of breast, endometrial, and ovarian cancers. As a
multifunctional mediator of carcinogenesis, metadherin (MTDH)/AEG-1
overexpression has been associated with numerous types of cancers, with
reported roles in tumor initiation, proliferation, invasion, metastasis
and chemoresistance. At the molecular level, MTDH has been shown to
interact with proteins that drive tumorigenesis, including NF-κB, PLZF,
BCCIPα and SND1. Through analysis of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
datasets for ER-positive endometrial and breast cancers, we found that
over 25% of all gene expression correlated with MTDH. Using Affymetrix
microarrays, we characterized the differences in gene expression between
estrogen-treated parental and MTDH-deficient endometrial and breast
cancer cells. We also explored a possible interaction between MTDH and ER
by immunoprecipitation and found that MTDH and ER associated in both
breast and endometrial cancer cells in response to estrogen. Reciprocal
co-immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that acute estrogen
stimulation promoted the interaction of MTDH with ER in the nucleus.
These data suggest that MTDH and ERα interact in the nucleus with
estrogen treatment, and MTDH/ER co-regulated genes may have functions in
drug resistance, metastasis and tumor progression.


