Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive evaluation of Illumina’s TruSight® Tumor 170
Panel to estimate tumor mutational burden.


Tumor mutational burden (TMB), or the density of variants in a tumor, is
typically assessed by whole exome sequencing (WES) and has been shown to
correlate with efficacy of immunotherapy treatment. Targeted cancer gene
panels are broadly used to assess mutational status in cancer related
genes but have not historically been used to estimate TMB. Recently, two
studies have demonstrated that TMB can be accurately estimated using
these cancer gene panelsi,ii. Illumina’s TruSight® Tumor 170 (TST170,
research use only, RUO) panel is a comprehensive next-generation
sequencing (NGS) assay that covers the coding regions of 170 genes
associated with solid tumors. TST170 targets DNA and RNA variants from
the same FFPE tumor sample in a single sequencing run. Here we evaluate
the performance of TMB estimation with TST170.

TST170 is an enrichment-based targeted panel designed to capture
mutational changes, including single nucleotide variant, indels,
amplifications, splice variants and fusions. The TST170 analysis pipeline
is able to call variants with frequencies down to 5%. In the current
study, TMB was calculated as the number of reported variants per megabase
after germline polymorphism filtering. First, we evaluated the
performance of TST170 for TMB estimation using 6,000 TCGA samples that
had been analyzed by WES. TMB estimated from the TST170 targeted regions
showed a high correlation to TMB estimated from WES (R2=0.91). Next, we
evaluated the prognostic value of TMB estimated from TST170 by
overlapping the TST170 targeted regions with WES data for 202 subjects
treated with CTLA-4 or PD-1 from three clinical studies. Higher TMB
estimated from the TST170 targeted regions was observed in subjects who
responded to checkpoint inhibitors. Finally, we assessed the correlation
of TMB estimation using matched samples profiled with both WES and TST170
and again saw high correlation between the two methods. In summary, our
analysis indicates that the panel content of TST170 can be used to
accurately estimate TMB from tumor samples.

i Garofalo A, Sholl L, Reardon B, et al. The impact of tumor profiling
approaches and genomic data strategies for cancer precision medicine.
Genome Med. 2016;8(1):79. doi:10.1186/s13073-016-0333-9.

ii Campesato, L., Barroso-Sousa, R., Jimenez, L., et al. Comprehensive
cancer-gene panels can be used to estimate mutational load and predict
clinical benefit to PD-1 blockade in clinical practice. Oncotarget,
2015;6(33), 34221-34227.


