Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive diagnosis of early-stage lung cancer via targeted
high-throughput DNA methylation sequencing of circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA).


Current state-of-the-art lung cancer early screening involves using
low-dose CT scan to identify lung nodules smaller than 3cm in diameter.
However, itâ€™s still a clinical dilemma to differentiate between
malignant and benign nodules.

We took the approach of methylation profiling by high-throughput
bisulfite DNA sequencing in tissue samples to identify specific
methylation signatures. We learned methylation patterns that
differentiate malignant vs. benign lesions from tissue samples by
in-depth data mining, and then used pattern matching to classify plasma
samples. Given the usual low amount of ctDNA in plasma, we also developed
an ultra-sensitive library preparation method to perform targeted
bisulfite DNA sequencing from as low as 1ng of cfDNA or 1mL of plasma.

From a training set of 88 tissue samples, which includes 60 malignant
specimens with different subtypes (invasive adenomas, IA; minimally
invasive adenomas, MIA; atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, AAH;
adenocarcinoma in situ, AIS; carcinoid; lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma
of the lung, LELC; squamous carcinoma, SC; as well as 28 benign specimens
in different categories including hematomas, granuloma, tuberculosis,
inflammatory pseudotumor (IPT), sclerosing hemangiomas (SHL) and
infections, we were able to achieve a sensitivity of 95% for
identification of malignant lesions, with a specificity of 78.6%. From an
independent validation set of 45 plasma samples, we achieved a
sensitivity of 94.7% and a specificity of 85.7% for differentiating
patients with malignant tumor from patients with benign lesions.
Specifically, our assay is demonstrated to be highly sensitive towards
early-stage lung cancer detection, with a sensitivity of 93.3% in a total
of 15 patients with stage IA/B lung cancer.

In summary, we have developed a highly sensitive blood-based non-invasive
diagnostic assay for identification of early stage lung cancer, which can
aid clinical decisions for patients with a CT scan positive for lung
nodules. This approach can also be extended to non-invasive early
screening for various cancer types.


