Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) inhibitor,
OT-82, exhibits in vitro and in vivo efficacy against patient-derived
xenograft models of high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Cancer cells are highly dependent on nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) for the biosynthesis of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD). Besides its role in energy metabolism, NAMPT
influences the activity of NAD-dependent enzymes, including poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) and sirtuins, and thereby regulates
cellular survival and stress response. Disruption of NAD synthesis
through NAMPT inhibition represents a potential therapeutic strategy for
treating cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of
the novel NAMPT inhibitor OT-82, initially isolated for its selective
toxicity against a panel of adult leukemia cell lines, in a diverse panel
of leukemia cell lines in vitro and pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) in vivo, and to identify
potential biomarkers predictive of OT-82 response. OT-82 demonstrated low
nanomolar IC50 values (0.9 – 3.4 nM) in 3 ALL and 3 acute myeloid
leukemia cell lines as determined by resazurin reduction assays. In vivo
efficacy of OT-82 (40 mg/kg x 3 days x 3 weeks, p.o.) was evaluated as a
single agent against pediatric ALL PDXs, including B-cell precursor ALL
(n = 3), Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) positive ALL (n = 2), Ph-like ALL
(n = 2), T-cell ALL (n = 3), and early T-cell precursor ALL (n = 3) in
immune deficient (NSG) mice. Response to treatment was assessed by time
to event or stringent objective response criteria modeled after the
clinical setting. OT-82 was well tolerated, significantly increased
event-free survival (EFS) relative to control mice in 11/13 ALL PDXs, and
elicited objective responses in 11/13 (85%) PDXs [3 Partial Responses, 4
Complete Responses (CRs) and 4 Maintained CRs (MCRs)]. Analysis of basal
protein expression revealed elevated levels of poly (ADP-ribosyl)ated
(PARylated) PARP-1 in 4/5 responders versus 0/2 non-responders. In vitro
studies examining various chemotherapeutic agents used for childhood
leukemia showed synergy between cytarabine (AraC) and OT-82 in an ALL
cell line. In an OT-82 sensitive Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) PDX,
treatment with AraC (25 mg/kg x 5 days x 2 weeks, i.p.) and OT-82 (40
mg/kg x 3 days x 2 weeks, p.o.) significantly increased EFS compared to
OT-82 (PCancer cells are highly dependent on nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) for the biosynthesis of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD). Besides its role in energy metabolism, NAMPT
influences the activity of NAD-dependent enzymes, including poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) and sirtuins, and thereby regulates
cellular survival and stress response. Disruption of NAD synthesis
through NAMPT inhibition represents a potential therapeutic strategy for
treating cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of
the novel NAMPT inhibitor OT-82, initially isolated for its selective
toxicity against a panel of adult leukemia cell lines, in a diverse panel
of leukemia cell lines in vitro and pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) in vivo, and to identify
potential biomarkers predictive of OT-82 response. OT-82 demonstrated low
nanomolar IC50 values (0.9 – 3.4 nM) in 3 ALL and 3 acute myeloid
leukemia cell lines as determined by resazurin reduction assays. In vivo
efficacy of OT-82 (40 mg/kg x 3 days x 3 weeks, p.o.) was evaluated as a
single agent against pediatric ALL PDXs, including B-cell precursor ALL
(n = 3), Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) positive ALL (n = 2), Ph-like ALL
(n = 2), T-cell ALL (n = 3), and early T-cell precursor ALL (n = 3) in
immune deficient (NSG) mice. Response to treatment was assessed by time
to event or stringent objective response criteria modeled after the
clinical setting. OT-82 was well tolerated, significantly increased
event-free survival (EFS) relative to control mice in 11/13 ALL PDXs, and
elicited objective responses in 11/13 (85%) PDXs [3 Partial Responses, 4
Complete Responses (CRs) and 4 Maintained CRs (MCRs)]. Analysis of basal
protein expression revealed elevated levels of poly (ADP-ribosyl)ated
(PARylated) PARP-1 in 4/5 responders versus 0/2 non-responders. In vitro
studies examining various chemotherapeutic agents used for childhood
leukemia showed synergy between cytarabine (AraC) and OT-82 in an ALL
cell line. In an OT-82 sensitive Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) PDX,
treatment with AraC (25 mg/kg x 5 days x 2 weeks, i.p.) and OT-82 (40
mg/kg x 3 days x 2 weeks, p.o.) significantly increased EFS compared to
OT-82 (P<0.0001) or AraC (PCancer cells are highly dependent on
nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) for the biosynthesis of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). Besides its role in energy
metabolism, NAMPT influences the activity of NAD-dependent enzymes,
including poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) and sirtuins, and
thereby regulates cellular survival and stress response. Disruption of
NAD synthesis through NAMPT inhibition represents a potential therapeutic
strategy for treating cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
efficacy of the novel NAMPT inhibitor OT-82, initially isolated for its
selective toxicity against a panel of adult leukemia cell lines, in a
diverse panel of leukemia cell lines in vitro and pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) in vivo,
and to identify potential biomarkers predictive of OT-82 response. OT-82
demonstrated low nanomolar IC50 values (0.9 – 3.4 nM) in 3 ALL and 3
acute myeloid leukemia cell lines as determined by resazurin reduction
assays. In vivo efficacy of OT-82 (40 mg/kg x 3 days x 3 weeks, p.o.) was
evaluated as a single agent against pediatric ALL PDXs, including B-cell
precursor ALL (n = 3), Philadelphia chromosome (Ph) positive ALL (n = 2),
Ph-like ALL (n = 2), T-cell ALL (n = 3), and early T-cell precursor ALL
(n = 3) in immune deficient (NSG) mice. Response to treatment was
assessed by time to event or stringent objective response criteria
modeled after the clinical setting. OT-82 was well tolerated,
significantly increased event-free survival (EFS) relative to control
mice in 11/13 ALL PDXs, and elicited objective responses in 11/13 (85%)
PDXs [3 Partial Responses, 4 Complete Responses (CRs) and 4 Maintained
CRs (MCRs)]. Analysis of basal protein expression revealed elevated
levels of poly (ADP-ribosyl)ated (PARylated) PARP-1 in 4/5 responders
versus 0/2 non-responders. In vitro studies examining various
chemotherapeutic agents used for childhood leukemia showed synergy
between cytarabine (AraC) and OT-82 in an ALL cell line. In an OT-82
sensitive Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) PDX, treatment with AraC (25 mg/kg
x 5 days x 2 weeks, i.p.) and OT-82 (40 mg/kg x 3 days x 2 weeks, p.o.)
significantly increased EFS compared to OT-82 (P<0.0001) or AraC
(P<0.0001) alone. Moreover, the OT-82/AraC combination elicited an MCR
compared to OT-82 (CR) and AraC (Progressive Disease) alone. The results
herein demonstrate significant activity of OT-82 against leukemia cell
lines and a range of pediatric ALL subtypes in vivo, and the potential
for PARylated PARP-1 expression as a biomarker for predicting OT-82
response. Moreover, the enhanced activity of OT-82 in combination with
AraC over single agent therapy further suggests NAMPT inhibition as an
attractive strategy for treating high-risk pediatric ALL. Supported by
U01CA199000 from the NCI.


