Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of a lectin as a drug carrier for glycan-targeting
cancer therapy.


Various cancers such as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remain
intractable despite recent advances in tumour-targeting antibody drugs.
Although the outermost coating of every cell type is predominantly
composed of cell-specific glycans, antibody strategies have hit walls of
technical difficulties in intentional glycan targeting, and
medico-economic burden. Lectins, proteins with glycan-binding potential,
could be used as an alternative scaffold; however, the prejudice that all
lectins mediate harmful haemagglutination limited its use only in
experimental and diagnostic applications. Here, we show the successful in
vivo application of a lectin as a drug carrier for cancer therapy. We
have employed rBC2LC-N lectin since this has already shown a specific
affinity between PDAC cell-surface glycans. When a lectin-drug conjugate
(LecD) was developed by fusion with a bacterial exotoxin, the 50%
inhibitory concentration (1.04 pg/ml=0.0195 pM) was 1000 times lower than
that of conventional immunotoxins (on the order of ng/ml). In addition,
we have revealed that rBC2LC-N lectin was safely administrable to mice
without haemagglutination. Administration of this LecD in a PDAC mouse
model of subcutaneous nodules and peritoneal dissemination, generated
prominent therapeutic effects. The utilization of lectins as an in vivo
drug-carrier targeting cancer glycan shows realistic potential when
paired with advanced lectin engineering technologies, and their
applications could be expanded by coupling with small molecule and/or
nanoparticle drugs.


