Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liquid biopsy testing allows highly-sensitive detection of plasma
cfDNA mutations in 87 breast cancer-related genes.


Liquid biopsies have the potential to revolutionize the way physicians
select personalized anti-cancer therapies, monitor patient responses to
treatment, and characterize acquired resistance to cancer drugs. New
tests that use a simple peripheral blood draw offer snapshots of a
patientâ€˜s total tumor DNA mutation profile and are attractive because
of their minimally-invasive modality and because they integrate
information from both primary and metastatic disease. Currently, most
plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) mutation detection tests used in clinical
research detect known hotspot mutations in a limited number of genes.
Technologies that interrogate multi-gene panels in cfDNA are advancing,
but commercially-available options suitable for clinical use are limited,
come at a high cost, and are not customizable. We designed and developed
a customized, next generation sequencing-based, liquid biopsy assay
capable of detecting somatic mutations in 87 breast cancer genes involved
in cell cycle and estrogen receptor signaling. Targeted regions (147 Kb)
were enriched using hybrid capture resulting in an average capture
specificity and uniformity of 65.93% and 96.38%, respectively. When
tested on cfDNA from healthy donors (n=14), we demonstrated a level of
specificity >99.99%. Analytical sensitivity of 0.1% was established on
HapMap and reference mutant cell line DNA. Using a pool of HapMap genomic
DNA (n=10), 96% (48/50) of SNPs with expected allele frequency of 0.1%
were detected. In reference mutant cell line DNA with 1% or 0.1% mutant
allele frequencies, we were able to reliably detect all mutations present
at 1% and mutations at 0.1% in 50% of the cases. Assay validation on
plasma cfDNA with matching tumor from ER+, HER2- breast cancer patients
will be presented. In conclusion, we developed a highly sensitive and
specific liquid biopsy assay to interrogate 87 breast cancer-related
genes. The high level of specificity and sensitivity makes the test ideal
not only for detecting known cancer gene hotspot mutations but also for
detection of novel gene mutations that may arise during treatment as a
result of acquired drug resistance.


