Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversion of epithelial to mesenchymal transition under androgen
deprived conditions promotes chemoresistance in prostate cancer.


Introduction:

Metastatic prostate cancer (PC) is one of the leading causes of cancer
related male deaths in Australia. Radical prostatectomy followed by
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) upon recurrence of disease is the
conventional form of treatment. Upon relapse, administration of androgen
targeted therapy (ATT) and subsequent chemotherapy improves quality of
life and overall survival of patients. However, it is not curative and
the disease ultimately progresses. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is a process that can facilitate tumour growth and progression to
metastasis and has also been associated with chemoresistance. We
therefore aim to determine how EMT and resultant reversal of this state
(MET) influences the chemoresistance profile of PC cells and further
determine if and how specific genetic regulators are involved in this
process.

Methods:

Doxycycline hyclate (Dox) inducible Snai1 and Zeb1, LNCaP EMT models were
used to determine the effect of the EMT status in response to a
clinically relevant panel of drugs using cellular and molecular assays.
All assays were performed in both fetal bovine serum (FBS) and charcoal
stripped serum (CSS) supplemented culture media. CSS media was used to
mimic an ADT-like environment. Using 2D monolayer and 3D spheroid [Happy
CellÂ©] formats. Cells were induced for 5 days of EMT in the presence of
Dox and were allowed to revert for 14 days of MET (absence of Dox) before
the drug assays were carried out over a period of 72 hours. Live/dead
cell staining was used to determine viability percentage in both models.
Flow cytometry was used for 2D assays and 3D assays were analysed using
either a GE IN Cell Analyzer live cell imaging system or confocal
microscopy.

Results:

Induction of Snai1 and Zeb1 induced an elongated cell shape and increased
mRNA and protein expression of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin
during EMT. This was associated with a decrease in expression of
epithelial markers E-cadherin and EpCam,. An eventual drop in the
expression levels of vimentin at around 14 days of dox removal along with
an increase in epithelial markers was observed. These changes were also
associated with a gradual reversal in the phenotype of these cells.
However, this reversal in phenotype and expression of EMT markers was not
as striking in cells grown in CSS compared to cells in FBS media (both 2D
and 3D). Mitoxantrone concentration-response assays in a 2D format showed
that cells that undergo a subsequent MET are more chemoresistant than
uninduced or EMT cells when grown in CSS media. This was however, not
observed in cells undergoing similar transitions in the FBS media.

Conclusions:

The chemoresistance profile of prostate cancer cells is altered by their
EMT status. This effect is enhanced in the context of ADT. Cells that
revert back to a more epithelial phenotype after undergoing an EMT
exhibit higher resistance towards chemotherapy drugs.


