Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of TRAIL signaling through the development of
carcinogen-induced colorectal cancer.


TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL/APO-2L) is a death ligand
that can induce apoptosis by its cognate death receptors (DRs). Due to
its unique ability to selectively induce DR-mediated apoptosis in cancer
cells while showing no apparent toxicity to normal cells, the rhTRAIL has
been actively studied for cancer therapy. Clinical studies of TRAIL
revealed a broad tolerability in humans but failed to demonstrate a
robust therapeutic benefit in oncology. The main factors responsible for
the disappointing results of TRAIL used in cancer patients are 1) its
short half-life (less than 30 min in humans) and 2) heterogeneous primary
cancers are generally TRAIL-resistant. To overcome the short half and low
potency of TRAIL in vivo, we have developed an engineered PEGylated TRAIL
(TRAILPEG). PEGylation is a gold standard to extend the half-life of
protein drugs and a highly efficient commercial strategy. While
investigating the improved therapeutic potential of TRAILPEG in
colitis-associated cancer (CAC), we validated that TRAILPEG can
ameliorate an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), the high risk for CRC.
Therapeutic efficacy of systemically administered long-acting TRAIL was
validated in vivo in IBD and CAC animal models showing an
anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer effects. Dimethylhydrazine metabolite
azoxymethane (AOM) used to induce CAC in A/J mice, while a chronic
inflammation model of colitis/IBD was induced with DSS without the AOM.
Most of the mice administered with AOM/DSS developed adenocarcinoma on
the distal part of the colon, but the number of adenocarcinomas per colon
was significantly lower in the TRAILPEG treated mice than in the
vehicle-treated groups. The shortening of the colon length, a measurable
characteristic of colitis severity was more recovered in mice treated
with TRAILPEG compared to disease control. The TRAILPEG treatment
significantly decreased the number of large neoplasms in total tumor and
led to an over 30~40% reduction in the total tumors. In addition, the
symptoms of rectal bleeding in the AOM/DSS mice was rare to detect. The
elevated MPO activity was significantly suppressed by TRAILPEG treatment.
In parallel, we found that TRAILPEG treatment resulted in the activation
of Caspase-8 and decrease of phosph-STAT3 suggesting the dual roles of
TRAIL signaling for apoptosis and anti-inflammation by western blotting.
The mRNA levels of inflammatory cytokines including of IL-6, IL-17,
MCP-1, ICAM-1, and TNF-Î² were recovered by TRAILPEG in the AOM/DSS
model. Our studies demonstrated that TRAILPEG could effectively treat IBD
and CAC in AOM/DSS mice model. The mechanisms involved in this effect of
TRAILPEG on IBD and CAC were associated with an increase of cell death,
as well as, intervention inflammatory responses.


