Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A baseline IFNG gene expression signature correlates with clinical
outcomes in durvalumab-treated advanced NSCLC cancer patients.


Durvalumab (D) is a human IgG1 monoclonal antibody which inhibits PDL1
binding to PD-1 and CD80, restoring antitumor immunity. In D-treated (tx)
NSCLC patients (pts), we previously reported high baseline levels of
tumoral PD-L1 protein and IFNγ mRNA expression associated with improved
ORRs, PFS and OS. Here, a gene expression signature of baseline tumors
associates with improved outcomes on D. CP1108/NCT01693562 was a
nonrandomized phase 1/2 trial evaluating D in advanced previously tx
NSCLC or other solid tumors. By 29APR2016, 304 NSCLC pts received 10
mg/kg Q2W of D ≤12 months with median 18.8 months follow up. RNA
sequencing of frozen biopsies was conducted on 97 NSCLC tumors of
sufficient quality with matched IHC for tumoral PD-L1 on 92 fresh or
archival biopsies. Among 21 pre-identified immune-related genes, mRNAs
for IFNG, LAG3, CXCL9, and PDL1 individually correlated best with
outcomes in NSCLC after adjustment for sex, age, prior therapy,
histology, ECOG and smoking. A signature was developed as mean mRNA
levels of the four genes; signatures >upper tertile were IFNG signature
positive (IFNGS+). Analysis was performed on NSCLC, then applied to 30
available urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) biopsies. NSCLC with ≥25%
tumor cells stained for PD-L1 at any intensity were PD-L1+. 29 NSCLC had
pre/post-treatment tumors for mRNA analysis. KM and Cox PH models were
used. IFNGS+ D-tx NSCLC pts had higher ORR, median PFS and OS compared to
PDL1+, PDL1-, and IFNGS- pts (Table 1); IFNGS+ UBC D-tx pts also
correlated with these outcomes. Following D treatment, IFNGS was induced
in NSCLC pts (FC=2; p=0.0046) regardless of clinical response. High
levels of pre-treatment IFNGS in NSCLC pts associated with greater
benefit from D. D induces IFNGS within the tumor microenvironment.
Observations from other tumor types will be presented. Table 1. Clinical
outcomes by IFNGS or PD-L1 status



# Pts (# events [OS;PFS])

ORR % (95% CI)

Median OS months (95% CI)

OS adjusted HRa; p

Median PFS months (95% CI)

PFS adjusted HRa; p



NSCLC





IFNGS+

32 (16;21)

37.5 (21.7,56.3)

24.6 (10.3,NA)

0.42; 0.0082

7.5 (3.6,NA)

0.32; 0.00028



IFNGS-

65 (40;51)

6.2 (2.0,15.8)

6.5 (4.8,15.7)



1.4 (1.4,2.6)





PDL1 TPS>=25%

38 (18;25)

28.9 (16.0,46.1)

20.5 (6.6,NA)

0.53; 0.0788

3.6 (1.7,14.6)

0.60; 0.0823



PDL1 TPSPDL1 TPS<25%

54 (35;43)

7.4 (5.8,25.5)

9.1 (5.4,21.1)



1.5 (1.4,3.9)





NR=Not Reached; NA=Not Applicable; aAdjusted for covariates. TPS= tumor
proportion score Ventana SP263 assay


