Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair protein expression and response of homologous
recombination deficient ovarian cancer to the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitor rucaparib in the ARIEL2 Part 1 study.


Background: PARP inhibitors (PARPis) are active in cancers with
homologous recombination (HR) defects. Preclinical studies have shown
that secondary mutations or alterations in gene expression (e.g.,
downregulation of 53BP1, Ku70, Ku80 or DNA-PKcs) restore HR and confer
PARPi resistance. In addition, low PARP1 expression can diminish PARP
trapping and cause PARPi resistance.

ARIEL2 Part 1 is a phase 2 study of the PARPi rucaparib in platinum
sensitive, relapsed high grade serous or endometrioid ovarian cancer
(OC). Pretreatment OC biopsies were previously assayed for HR gene
mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH), a genomic scar that reflects
HR deficiency. Two tumor groups (BRCA wildtype [wt]/LOH high and BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutant) have objective response rates of 29.3% and 80%,
respectively, as well as progression free survival (PFS) of 5.7 and 12.8
months, respectively, on rucaparib (E. Swisher et al., Lancet Oncol., in
press). Common AEs included nausea (80%), asthenia/fatigue (78%),
constipation (46%), and vomiting (44%). The present studies tested the
hypotheses that i) lower PARP1 expression and/or ii) lower expression of
NHEJ components 53BP1, DNA-PKcs, Ku80, Ku70, or LIG4, may correlate with
diminished response rate as well as PFS in pts treated with rucaparib on
ARIEL2.

Methods: Immunohistochemical assays were developed for 53BP1, DNA-PKcs,
Ku80, Ku70, LIG4, and PARP1 and validated in formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded cell lines differing in analyte expression. Available
pretreatment OC biopsies from ARIEL2 Part 1 were stained and scored for %
of tumor nuclei that were negative (0), weak (1+), moderate (2+) or
strong (3+). Modified H-scores were correlated with clinical
characteristics and outcome measures.

Results: Pretreatment biopsies from 62-68 pts were successfully stained
for each repair protein. Across the samples, PARP1 H-scores varied from 0
to 300 (median 160). Focusing on the BRCA wt/LOH high group (n = 38),
there was no significant difference in PFS of pts with low (200) PARP1
H-score (p = 0.57). Expression of DNA-PKcs, Ku70, Ku80, and LIG4 was
generally lower (median H-scores 20-60) and did not individually
correlate with response or PFS. In contrast, there was a trend toward
improved PFS in BRCA wt/LOH high OC pts expressing intermediate or high
53BP1 (H-score ≥ 100, n = 10) compared to pts with low 53BP1 (H-score
200) PARP1 H-score (p = 0.57). Expression of DNA-PKcs, Ku70, Ku80, and
LIG4 was generally lower (median H-scores 20-60) and did not individually
correlate with response or PFS. In contrast, there was a trend toward
improved PFS in BRCA wt/LOH high OC pts expressing intermediate or high
53BP1 (H-score ≥ 100, n = 10) compared to pts with low 53BP1 (H-score
<100, n = 25), with median PFS 20.7 vs. 5.5 months (p = 0.073),
respectively. Staining of additional pretreatment biopsies is planned.

Conclusions: In the BRCA wt/LOH high group, pretreatment PARP1 expression
does not correlate with rucaparib response. In contrast, BRCA wt/LOH high
OC pts with low 53BP1 have a trend toward shorter PFS with rucaparib,
suggesting that 53BP1 downregulation might correlate with clinical PARPi
resistance in BRCA wt/LOH high OC.


