Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study of thyroid nodule in Korean
population.


Thyroid nodule is very common. Several autopsy surveys reported that 30%
or more of patients had thyroid nodule. However, inherited genetic risk
factors for thyroid nodule remain unknown. Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) are widely used in human genetics to identify genes
associated with various diseases. We aimed to find genetic factors for
thyroid nodule and conducted case-control GWAS.

Objective: To identify genetic variants associated with susceptibility to
thyroid nodules

Methods: We performed a two-stage GWAS for thyroid nodule. The discovery
stage involved a genome-wide scan of 713 subjects with thyroid nodule and
591 subjects with normal thyroid from a population-based cohort.
replication testing was conducted in an additional 600 cases and 600
controls from the participants of a health check-up.

Results In discovery stage, 21 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) in 20 loci including NKX2-1, ITGB1 and ZBTB25 were selected for
replication. The strongest signal located in NKX2-1 (P = 9x10-7), which
is known susceptibility locus for differentiated thyroid cancer. However,
no SNP showed significant association in replication test. In joint
analysis, no association signals reaching genome-wide significance (P
Results In discovery stage, 21 candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) in 20 loci including NKX2-1, ITGB1 and ZBTB25 were selected for
replication. The strongest signal located in NKX2-1 (P = 9x10-7), which
is known susceptibility locus for differentiated thyroid cancer. However,
no SNP showed significant association in replication test. In joint
analysis, no association signals reaching genome-wide significance (P
<5x10-8) were detected.

Conclusion GWAS for thyroid nodule have failed to identify susceptibility
locus. Therefore, genetic effect for development of thyroid nodule could
be negligible.


