Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXA4 and HOXB3 gene expression signature as a biomarker of tumor
recurrence in patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC)
following primary cytoreductive surgery and first-line adjuvant
chemotherapy.


Background: Aberrant HOX gene expression has been observed in various
malignancies; however, their role as a biomarker for recurrence in
patients with HGSOC is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that a HOX gene
signature is a biomarker for disease-free survival (DFS) in HGSOC
patients following primary cytoreductive surgery and adjuvant
platinum-based chemotherapy. Methods: A panel of HOX genes associated
with DFS in a discovery cohort of 19 HGSOC patients with available
RNA-Seq data, and/or previously reported as associated with survival
endpoints in the literature, were selected for testing by qPCR using the
Fluidigm platform in an independent training cohort of primary tumors
from 73 HGSOC patients. Cox proportional hazards model was used to
identify HOX genes significantly associated with DFS. A prognostic gene
signature was developed based on the combined linear predictor from the
final multivariable Cox model. Patients were stratified into risk groups
using the optimal cutoff of the linear predictor risk score, whereby the
optimal cutoff was defined as the value that maximized the log-rank test
statistic. Risk group stratification was further tested for association
with DFS in a larger HGSOC dataset (N=414) with similar clinical
characteristics from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The role of the
identified HOX genes in influencing drug sensitivity was examined by
overexpressing these genes in a HGSOC cell line, PEO1. Results: Of 23 HOX
genes selected for testing in the training cohort, overexpression of
HOXA4 (HR=1.21, 95% CI=1.08-1.35, P=0.001) and HOXB3 (HR=1.09, 95%
CI=1.02-1.17, P=0.016) were significantly associated with decreased DFS
in multivariate analysis. The median DFS in patients with a HOXA4/HOXB3
risk score ≤ the optimal cutoff was > 80 months (not yet reached),
whereas the median DFS in patients with a HOXA4/HOXB3 risk score > the
optimal cutoff was 16.9 months (HR=7.85, 95% CI=4.19-14.69, PBackground:
Aberrant HOX gene expression has been observed in various malignancies;
however, their role as a biomarker for recurrence in patients with HGSOC
is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that a HOX gene signature is a
biomarker for disease-free survival (DFS) in HGSOC patients following
primary cytoreductive surgery and adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy.
Methods: A panel of HOX genes associated with DFS in a discovery cohort
of 19 HGSOC patients with available RNA-Seq data, and/or previously
reported as associated with survival endpoints in the literature, were
selected for testing by qPCR using the Fluidigm platform in an
independent training cohort of primary tumors from 73 HGSOC patients. Cox
proportional hazards model was used to identify HOX genes significantly
associated with DFS. A prognostic gene signature was developed based on
the combined linear predictor from the final multivariable Cox model.
Patients were stratified into risk groups using the optimal cutoff of the
linear predictor risk score, whereby the optimal cutoff was defined as
the value that maximized the log-rank test statistic. Risk group
stratification was further tested for association with DFS in a larger
HGSOC dataset (N=414) with similar clinical characteristics from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The role of the identified HOX genes in
influencing drug sensitivity was examined by overexpressing these genes
in a HGSOC cell line, PEO1. Results: Of 23 HOX genes selected for testing
in the training cohort, overexpression of HOXA4 (HR=1.21, 95%
CI=1.08-1.35, P=0.001) and HOXB3 (HR=1.09, 95% CI=1.02-1.17, P=0.016)
were significantly associated with decreased DFS in multivariate
analysis. The median DFS in patients with a HOXA4/HOXB3 risk score ≤
the optimal cutoff was > 80 months (not yet reached), whereas the median
DFS in patients with a HOXA4/HOXB3 risk score > the optimal cutoff was
16.9 months (HR=7.85, 95% CI=4.19-14.69, P<0.001). The HOXA4/HOXB3 risk
score remained significantly associated with DFS in the HGSOC dataset
from the TCGA (P=0.02). In vitro studies demonstrated that PEO1 cells
overexpressing either HOXA4 or HOXB3 were significantly (PBackground:
Aberrant HOX gene expression has been observed in various malignancies;
however, their role as a biomarker for recurrence in patients with HGSOC
is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that a HOX gene signature is a
biomarker for disease-free survival (DFS) in HGSOC patients following
primary cytoreductive surgery and adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy.
Methods: A panel of HOX genes associated with DFS in a discovery cohort
of 19 HGSOC patients with available RNA-Seq data, and/or previously
reported as associated with survival endpoints in the literature, were
selected for testing by qPCR using the Fluidigm platform in an
independent training cohort of primary tumors from 73 HGSOC patients. Cox
proportional hazards model was used to identify HOX genes significantly
associated with DFS. A prognostic gene signature was developed based on
the combined linear predictor from the final multivariable Cox model.
Patients were stratified into risk groups using the optimal cutoff of the
linear predictor risk score, whereby the optimal cutoff was defined as
the value that maximized the log-rank test statistic. Risk group
stratification was further tested for association with DFS in a larger
HGSOC dataset (N=414) with similar clinical characteristics from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The role of the identified HOX genes in
influencing drug sensitivity was examined by overexpressing these genes
in a HGSOC cell line, PEO1. Results: Of 23 HOX genes selected for testing
in the training cohort, overexpression of HOXA4 (HR=1.21, 95%
CI=1.08-1.35, P=0.001) and HOXB3 (HR=1.09, 95% CI=1.02-1.17, P=0.016)
were significantly associated with decreased DFS in multivariate
analysis. The median DFS in patients with a HOXA4/HOXB3 risk score ≤
the optimal cutoff was > 80 months (not yet reached), whereas the median
DFS in patients with a HOXA4/HOXB3 risk score > the optimal cutoff was
16.9 months (HR=7.85, 95% CI=4.19-14.69, P<0.001). The HOXA4/HOXB3 risk
score remained significantly associated with DFS in the HGSOC dataset
from the TCGA (P=0.02). In vitro studies demonstrated that PEO1 cells
overexpressing either HOXA4 or HOXB3 were significantly (P<0.05) more
resistant to cisplatin and carboplatin, but not to paclitaxel, as
compared to empty vector transfected cells. Conclusion: The HOXA4/HOXB3
risk score was significantly associated with DFS in a training cohort of
HGSOC patients, and remained significantly associated in a larger
independent HGSOC dataset from the TCGA. Further, in vitro studies
suggest that HOXA4 and HOXB3 overexpression is associated with platinum
resistance. Thus, overexpression of HOXA4 and HOXB3 in primary HGSOC may
serve as a potential biomarker for recurrence and the risk score model
developed warrants prospective validation in HGSOC patients.


