Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LINE-1 tumor hypomethylation is associated with shorter
recurrence-free survival in localized clear-cell renal cell carcinoma.


Background: Cancer cells are characterized by alterations of DNA
methylation patterns involving global DNA hypomethylation and
site-specific CpG island promoter hypermethylation. Global DNA
hypomethylation is thought to play a role in genetic instability and
tumor aggressiveness. Long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (L1/LINE-1)
repetitive elements represent 40% of the genome and their methylation is
a good indicator of the global DNA methylation level. Although LINE-1
methylation has been previously shown to be associated with prognosis of
patients with cancer, the value of LINE-1 methylation in predicting
recurrence of patients with localized clear-cell renal cell carcinomas
remains unknown.

Material and Methods: We quantified the LINE-1 methylation using
bisulfite pyrosequencing in cohort of 200 patients with resected
clear-cell renal cell carcinomas (AJCC stage I-III). LINE-1 methylation
of adjacent normal kidney was also assessed in 128 cases. Threshold of
tumor LINE-1 hypomethylation was defined as LINE-1 methylation in normal
samples minus three standard deviation.

Results: Median methylation of tumor samples was 59.01% versus 61.61% for
normal adjacent kidney samples (pResults: Median methylation of tumor
samples was 59.01% versus 61.61% for normal adjacent kidney samples
(p<10-5). LINE-1 methylation level of normal adjacent kidney was
associated with tumor size (Spearman R=0.21, P=0.02) but not with age
(p=0.24) or Leibovitch score (p=0.05). Tumor LINE-1 hypomethylation was
observed in 20 samples (n=10%). Strikingly, those were enriched for
tumors occurring in female (60% versus 27.7%) (p=0.005); of note, no
association was found between LINE-1 tumor hypomethylation and tumor
grade (p=0.31), stage (p=1), age (p=0.24) and Leibovitch score (p=0.82).
In multivariate analysis, only Leibovitch score and LINE-1
hypomethylation were independently associated with poor recurrence-free
survival.

Conclusion: LINE-1 hypomethylation is associated with shorter
recurrence-free survival in patients with resected clear-cell renal cell
carcinomas, suggesting the possibility of using it as predictive
biomarker of recurrence.


