Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell drug resistance induced by the programmed death ligand
1 (PD-L1) immune checkpoint is associated with autophagy.


The interaction between the Programmed Death Ligand 1 (PD-L1) immune
checkpoint on the tumor cell surface with the Programmed Death-1 (PD-1)
receptor on cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) leads to CTL inactivation,
thereby promoting tumor cell escape from adaptive immunity. We previously
demonstrated that signaling by PD-L1/PD-1 is bidirectional and leads to
activation of oncogenic pathways as well as drug resistance in tumor
cells. We also have preliminary evidence that Immunity Related GTPase M,
an important mediator of autophagy, is up-regulated by PD-1/PD-L1 reverse
signaling. Autophagy is a well-established mechanism of drug resistance
in cancer cells. This led us to hypothesize that PD-1/PD-L1 signaling
induces drug resistance in tumor cells by up-regulating autophagy. The
MEK/ERK and the PI3K/Akt signaling pathways are known to increase and
decrease autophagy, respectively. Breast cancer cells exposed to rPD-1
showed a time dependent increase in extracellular signalâ€“regulated
kinase (ERK) activation and a decrease in protein kinase B (Akt)
activation. Conversion of microtubule-associated protein light chain 3
(LC3)-I to LC3-II is a requirement for autophagosome formation and is a
robust marker of autophagy. Exposure of human breast cancer cells to
recombinant PD-1 (rPD-1) showed a time-dependent increase in LC-3 II. We
are currently conducting additional studies to confirm that the
activation of PD-L1 signaling in tumor cells up-regulates autophagy.
These results provide evidence that PD-1/PD-L1 reverse signaling
activates autophagy as a potential mechanism of cancer cell
chemoresistance. (Supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.)


