Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does molecular staging trump clinical staging: a pan-cancer,
big-data analysis of TCGA data.


True integration of clinical staging and molecular prognostic biomarkers
has been hampered by a lack of comprehensive data sets with adequate
power. In the last two years, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) has
generated and made available a repository of rich, high volume -omics
datasets including molecular profiling together with matched clinical
data.

Methods: Clinical and transcriptomics data were downloaded for TCGA
datasets (38 projects) representing a total of 14,043 patients. Matched
expression and clinical data was available for 34 cohorts, covering 10554
patients (median n=270, range 15-1091) and survival data was available
for 24 cohorts (7854 patients, median 294 per cohort), with a median
follow-up of 10.7 months (range 1.9 to 61 months). Prediction models were
constructed based on the latest AJCC staging guide, a novel five gene
molecular prognostic signature specifically derived for each cancer type,
and a combined model utilising both. Accuracy of survival prediction was
calculated as the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve
(AUC), based on 2-year overall survival prediction.

Results: Pan-cancer analyses demonstrate accuracy of clinical staging
from 0.55-0.91 (median 0.72), while molecular prognostication varies from
0.7-0.99 (median 0.84). The combined model is consistently more accurate,
0.71-0.99 (median 0.89, pResults: Pan-cancer analyses demonstrate
accuracy of clinical staging from 0.55-0.91 (median 0.72), while
molecular prognostication varies from 0.7-0.99 (median 0.84). The
combined model is consistently more accurate, 0.71-0.99 (median 0.89,
p<0.01), where the benefit of adding molecular data improved accuracy
(median +0.13, +0.03-0.36). The absolute benefit of adding molecular data
to clinical staging correlated more closely with strength of clinical
prediction (R2=0.35) than strength of molecular prediction (R2=0.08).
When clinical staging was more less accurate (clinical prediction
Results: Pan-cancer analyses demonstrate accuracy of clinical staging
from 0.55-0.91 (median 0.72), while molecular prognostication varies from
0.7-0.99 (median 0.84). The combined model is consistently more accurate,
0.71-0.99 (median 0.89, p<0.01), where the benefit of adding molecular
data improved accuracy (median +0.13, +0.03-0.36). The absolute benefit
of adding molecular data to clinical staging correlated more closely with
strength of clinical prediction (R2=0.35) than strength of molecular
prediction (R2=0.08). When clinical staging was more less accurate
(clinical prediction < 0.7), there was a greater contribution of
molecular data, compared to cancers with more accurate clinical staging
(mean +0.15 vs +0.07, respectively; p=0.015). Interestingly, of the six
tumours with poor clinical prediction (AUC 0.7) suggests an important
need for more accurate prognostic models in this subtype.

Conclusion: The potential role for molecular staging as an adjunct to
clinical staging remains undefined. In this study, we demonstrate for the
first time the importance of molecular prognostication across a range of
cancer sub-types, but especially where conventional staging performs
poorly. The latter sub-group is further enriched for squamous cell
cancers, where molecular information offers dramatic improvement in
accuracy (+0.15 to AUC), and hence, should be prioritized for assessment
of molecular signatures. The lack of integrating molecular data could
also reflect limitations in our understanding of tumour biology, which in
turn needs to be translated into potential actionable targets and
therapeutic benefit.


