Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor and anti-angiogenic effects of Apatinib
combined with chemotherapy in a zebrafish model of non-small cell lung
cancer.


Background: Apatinib is a highly selective VEGFR2 inhibitor, but its
effects on non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been widely
reported and whether there is synergistic effect of Apatinib and
conventional chemotherapeutic drugs is also unclear.

Methods: In vitro, MTT assay was used to evaluate the combination effects
of Apatinib and chemotherapy agents (Gemcitabine, Paclitaxel and
Pemetrexed) against A549 (EGFR negative mutation cell line) lung cancer
cells. In vivo, we firstly assessed the safety of Apatinib and
chemotherapy agent in zebrafish model by observing organ developmental
malformation and zebrafish embryos mortality induced by drug toxicity.
The inhibition effect on the development of blood vessel in zebrafish was
used to assess antiangiogenic property of Apatinib. By means of
microinjection, A549 cells stained with red fluorescent cell tracer
CM-Dil fluorescence were grafted into the yolk sac of zebrafish embryo.
Then, zebrafish were incubated with Apatinib, chemotherapy agents or
Apatinib combined chemotherapy agents, respectively. The tumor xenografts
volume was measured by estimating the relative fluorescence intensity.
Q-RTPCR was used to detect the expression of some genes associated with
angiogenesis in order to identify molecular mechanism of the combination
effects of Apatinib and chemotherapy agent.

Results: Apatinib had a direct inhibitory effect on A549 cells with the
IC50 values ranging from 2.693 to 5.384Î¼mol. Apatinib combined with
Pemetrexed gave the most optimal anti-tumor effect compared with
Gemcitabine or Paclitaxel in vitro. In zebrafish model, the LC50 value of
Apatinib to zebrafish embryos was only half it of Pemetrexed to zebrafish
embryos, suggesting that Apatinib is a low toxicity agent. In addition,
Apatinib strongly inhibits the process of angiogenesis but not the
developed and mature vasculature, suggesting that Apatinib can
effectively inhibit tumor angiogenesis in lung cancer patient, which is
aided in suppressing tumor growth. As for antitumor effects, Apatinib or
Pemetrexed, whatever alone or combination all significantly inhibited
tumor growth and the co-treatment of Apatinib and Pemetrexed gave the
most optimal anti-tumor effect, suggesting that the combination of
apatinib and Pemetrexed may be a promising alternative therapy for lung
cancer patients. Finally, the qRT-PCR showed that in addition to
synergistically inhibiting VEGFR2 gene expression, co-treatment of
Apatinib and Pemetrexed also synergistically inhibit Efnb2a, Robo4 and
FGFR4 gene expression.

Conclusions: Apatinib combined with chemotherapies, especially
Pemetrexed, synergistically enhanced anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic
effects in zebrafish model of NSCLC mainly through inhibiting VEGFR2,
Efnb2a, Robo4 and FGFR4 pathways.


