Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RHBDF2 in stromal fibroblasts mediates TGF-β signaling and
enhances gastric cancer cell invasion via intercellular crosstalk.


Background: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have been reported to
promote various types of tumor through secretion of soluble factors.
However, there have been no systematic studies of CAFs in diffuse-type
gastric cancers (DGCs). We investigated the characteristics and
functional roles of CAFs in DGCs using comprehensive genomic approach.

Methods: We established primary fibroblasts, normal fibroblasts (NFs) and
CAFs from more than 100 tissue samples from GC patients. NFs/CAFs were
subjected to Exome and RNA sequencing, and the possible candidates for
functional assay were selected from among the acquired comprehensive
data. The candidate molecules were examined the functional roles for GC
tumor progression by in vitro assays.

Results: CAFs exhibited an invasive molecular pattern and acquired
motility in extracellular matrix (ECM). We identified RHBDF2 as a
mediator of TGF-β signaling and an enhancer of CAF motility. RHBDF2
silencing in CAFs significantly decreased their motility stimulated by
TGF-β1 in ECM, whereas NFs transfected with the RHBDF2 expression vector
displayed a greater motility in ECM than did control NFs. RHBDF2
silencing also decreased type I TGF-β receptor (TβRI) cleavage through
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α converting enzyme (TACE) activity and
attenuated the invasive molecular pattern of CAFs. Consequently,
high-motility CAFs confer on DGC cells the ability to invade the ECM.
Furthermore, simultaneous treatment with interleukin (IL)-1α, IL-1β and
TNF-α resulted in a strong induction of RHBDF2 expression in NFs. The
expression of these cytokines in GC tissues was associated with poor
prognosis in GC patients.

Conclusion: These findings highlight the underlying mechanism whereby DGC
cells take advantage of CAFs to acquire invasiveness.


