Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetically engineered mouse models of proliferative C5 high grade
serous ovarian cancer.


Introduction: High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) can be divided
into four subgroups based on molecular characteristics1,2. The
proliferative/C5 subgroup is defined by MYCN-pathway activation and may
be associated with stem cell-like behavior3. The majority of HGSOC
originate from the secretory cells of the fallopian tube (FT), with both
tumours and secretory cells characterised by PAX8 expression4. We have
developed pre-malignant C5 sub-type Genetically Engineered Mouse Models
(GEMM) to characterise key molecular events in the initiation of this
sub-type and to provide an immune-competent model for testing
therapeutics.

Methods: We have generated independent GEMM with p53 dysfunction
(p53lsl-R172H knock-in5) and over-expression of the MYCN-pathway, using
either lsl-MYCN or lsl-lin28b transgenes6 directed by the
doxycycline-inducible PAX8 promoter. Murine FT were harvested following
two-weeks of transgene activation. One FT was harvested en bloc and
paraffin embedded for analysis by H&E and immunohistochemistry for the
presence of pre-malignant tubal lesions. The contralateral FT was
macro-dissected into distal/mid-FT, which were snap frozen for analysis
of gene expression by qRT-PCR and RNAseq. As mice with PAX8-directed
expression of oncogenes (Â±MYCN/lin28b overexpression) developed enlarged
kidneys due to renal tubular adenomata, for alternate mice, the
mid/distal FT tissue was implanted into the bursae of wild-type CBA/nu
mice for observation and later analysis.

Results: FT were harvested from twelve p53lsl-R172H/lsl-lin28b mice and
from ten p53lsl-R172H/lsl-MYCN mice (including relevant control mice).
Dysplastic lesions were observed in a subset of p53lsl-R172H/lsl-MYCN or
lsl-lin28b FT and not in controls. MYCN pathway activation was
demonstrated by qRT-PCR analysis.

Conclusion: Over-expression of the MYCN-pathway can drive FT epithelial
dysplasia in the presence of p53 dysfunction. RNASeq analysis is being
performed to elucidate early genetic events in dysplastic FT. Mice are
now being harvested after eight-weeks of doxycycline activation to
determine whether more advanced pre-malignant change occurs. CRISPR
guides deleting relevant genes including p53, PTEN, Nf1 or Rb1 were
generated to delete additional genes in MYCN pathway-transgenic FT,
followed by implantation for observation of tumourigenesis.


