Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic inhibition of Notch1 in metastatic prostate cancer.


Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is the primary
cause of prostate cancer specific mortality, and is currently incurable.
Defining new mechanisms that can predict progression and drive lethal
CRPC is critical. Notch1 receptor, a cell surface-signaling molecule
dysregulated in many cancers, is highly expressed in CRPC. Chronic
activation of Notch1 synergizes with multiple oncogenic pathways altered
in early disease to promote the development of poorly differentiated
prostate carcinoma. Consistent with its activation in clinical CRPC,
tumors driven by NICD1 in combination with alternative pathways altered
in prostate cancer are metastatic and resistant to androgen deprivation.

Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of Notch1 activity decreases cell
proliferation and colony formation of 22RV1 prostate cancer cells in
vitro. 22RV1 subcutaneous xenograft growth was significantly impaired by
treatment with pharmacological inhibitors of Notch1 activation over the
course of 20-day treatment. Further, Notch1 inhibition in combination
with other standard prostate cancer treatments compounded efficacy of
individual treatments to attenuate colony formation potential of prostate
cancer cells in vitro.

The Notch1 signaling axis, confirmed to synergize with multiple pathways
to promote metastatic CRPC already provides a novel pathway for
diagnostic stratification of prostate cancer patients. Our studies
additionally implicate Notch1 as a therapeutically relevant target for
aggressive prostate cancer.


