Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prevalence of endometrial cancer in women with postmenopausal
bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis.


Background: Endometrial cancer is highly curable when detected early, but
clinical symptoms are often missed. Most cancers arise in women with
abnormal postmenopausal bleeding (PMB). However, PMB is not specific for
endometrial cancers. In previous reports, the prevalence of endometrial
cancer in women with PMB was reported to range from 3-25%. Because of the
importance for guiding clinical management and endometrial cancer risk
prediction, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to obtain
precise prevalence estimates of endometrial cancer in women with PMB.

Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis summarized all
peer-reviewed studies reporting endometrial cancer prevalence in women
with PMB, published before Sept. 1, 2016. We calculated a pooled
prevalence estimate and 95% confidence interval (CI) using a
random-effects model, and quantified heterogeneity across studies using
the I2 statistic. Subgroup meta-analyses were performed to investigate
sources of variability according to selection criteria for endometrial
thickness (ET) and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). We also stratified
by study location to determine whether prevalence estimates varied by
country or region if ≤5 studies included per country.

Results: 105 studies were included, contributing data for 37,000 women
with PMB and 3,028 with cancer from 34 countries. Overall, the pooled
prevalence of endometrial cancer in women with PMB was 11% (95% CI
10-12%), with I2 =94.3%. Among studies that selected women with a minimum
ET (≥ 4mm; n=14), the pooled prevalence of endometrial cancer was 17%
(95% CI 14-20%) compared with studies that did not select for ET (10%,
95% CI 9-11%). In studies that excluded women using HRT (n=34), the
pooled prevalence of endometrial cancer was 15% (95% CI 12-17%) compared
with studies that did not exclude women using HRT (9%, 95% CI 8-10%).
Stratification by study location revealed variation in prevalence
estimates. For example, in the United States (n=9) and the United Kingdom
(n=16), prevalence of endometrial cancer was 4% (95% CI 2-7%) and 5% (95%
CI 4-6%), respectively, whereas in Italy (n=14), the prevalence was 11%
(95% 8-14%). Regional differences were also observed, ranging from 8%
(95% CI 3-14%) in South Central Asia (n=5) to 18% (95% CI 12-23%) in
Southern Europe (n=11).

Conclusions: The overall prevalence of endometrial cancer among
unselected women with PMB is approximately 10% with substantial
heterogeneity across studies. Marked geographic differences in the
prevalence endometrial cancer were observed. Factors related to selection
for ET and/or HRT use may partially contribute to this variability. Risk
prediction models depend on precise prevalence estimates for accurate
prediction and utility in clinical management. More research is needed to
test the applicability of endometrial cancer risk prediction models in
high-risk subgroups and in study populations from diverse geographic
regions.


