Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and phenotypic characterization of breast and colorectal
cancer cells selected for resistance to antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC).


Monoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by clinical resistance. For
example, alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK signaling, over
activation/expression of alternate receptor kinases (c-Met/ IGF-1R), or
proteolysis of extracellular domains harboring target epitopes are
postulated mechanisms of clinical resistance to trastuzumab. ADCC is a
major mechanism of action for mAbs. Most studies have focused on cell
models of resistance through in vitro selection, in presence of mAbs, in
the absence of immune effector cells. We developed a unique model of
immune selection, where target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer cells SKBR3,
BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were subjected to ADCC
(>90% cell death) with saturating concentrations of trastuzumab or
cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively, and human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in triplicate) was continued for 10
consecutive passages and surviving cells were allowed to grow to
confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1
isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only were utilized as controls.
Compared to parent controls, immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells
demonstrated statistically significant increase in proliferation (WST
viability assays, PMonoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by
clinical resistance. For example, alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK
signaling, over activation/expression of alternate receptor kinases
(c-Met/ IGF-1R), or proteolysis of extracellular domains harboring target
epitopes are postulated mechanisms of clinical resistance to trastuzumab.
ADCC is a major mechanism of action for mAbs. Most studies have focused
on cell models of resistance through in vitro selection, in presence of
mAbs, in the absence of immune effector cells. We developed a unique
model of immune selection, where target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer
cells SKBR3, BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were
subjected to ADCC (>90% cell death) with saturating concentrations of
trastuzumab or cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively, and human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in triplicate) was continued
for 10 consecutive passages and surviving cells were allowed to grow to
confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1
isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only were utilized as controls.
Compared to parent controls, immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells
demonstrated statistically significant increase in proliferation (WST
viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher colony forming
efficiency (soft agar assays, PMonoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is
limited by clinical resistance. For example, alterations in PI3K/Akt
/Ras-MAPK signaling, over activation/expression of alternate receptor
kinases (c-Met/ IGF-1R), or proteolysis of extracellular domains
harboring target epitopes are postulated mechanisms of clinical
resistance to trastuzumab. ADCC is a major mechanism of action for mAbs.
Most studies have focused on cell models of resistance through in vitro
selection, in presence of mAbs, in the absence of immune effector cells.
We developed a unique model of immune selection, where target cells (HER2
+ve breast cancer cells SKBR3, BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells
HT29, DLD1) were subjected to ADCC (>90% cell death) with saturating
concentrations of trastuzumab or cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively,
and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in
triplicate) was continued for 10 consecutive passages and surviving cells
were allowed to grow to confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks.
Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1 isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only
were utilized as controls. Compared to parent controls, immune-selected
DLD1 and SKBR3 cells demonstrated statistically significant increase in
proliferation (WST viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher
colony forming efficiency (soft agar assays, P<0.001); immune-selected
HT29 and SKBR3 cells showed significantly higher motility (trans-well
migration assays, PMonoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by
clinical resistance. For example, alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK
signaling, over activation/expression of alternate receptor kinases
(c-Met/ IGF-1R), or proteolysis of extracellular domains harboring target
epitopes are postulated mechanisms of clinical resistance to trastuzumab.
ADCC is a major mechanism of action for mAbs. Most studies have focused
on cell models of resistance through in vitro selection, in presence of
mAbs, in the absence of immune effector cells. We developed a unique
model of immune selection, where target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer
cells SKBR3, BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were
subjected to ADCC (>90% cell death) with saturating concentrations of
trastuzumab or cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively, and human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in triplicate) was continued
for 10 consecutive passages and surviving cells were allowed to grow to
confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1
isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only were utilized as controls.
Compared to parent controls, immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells
demonstrated statistically significant increase in proliferation (WST
viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher colony forming
efficiency (soft agar assays, P<0.001); immune-selected HT29 and SKBR3
cells showed significantly higher motility (trans-well migration assays,
P<0.05, and PMonoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by clinical
resistance. For example, alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK signaling,
over activation/expression of alternate receptor kinases (c-Met/ IGF-1R),
or proteolysis of extracellular domains harboring target epitopes are
postulated mechanisms of clinical resistance to trastuzumab. ADCC is a
major mechanism of action for mAbs. Most studies have focused on cell
models of resistance through in vitro selection, in presence of mAbs, in
the absence of immune effector cells. We developed a unique model of
immune selection, where target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer cells SKBR3,
BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were subjected to ADCC
(>90% cell death) with saturating concentrations of trastuzumab or
cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively, and human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in triplicate) was continued for 10
consecutive passages and surviving cells were allowed to grow to
confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1
isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only were utilized as controls.
Compared to parent controls, immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells
demonstrated statistically significant increase in proliferation (WST
viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher colony forming
efficiency (soft agar assays, P<0.001); immune-selected HT29 and SKBR3
cells showed significantly higher motility (trans-well migration assays,
P<0.05, and P<0.001 respectively). In vitro ADCC assays (calcein
labeling) suggested significant reduction (max 20%, pMonoclonal antibody
(mAb) therapy is limited by clinical resistance. For example, alterations
in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK signaling, over activation/expression of alternate
receptor kinases (c-Met/ IGF-1R), or proteolysis of extracellular domains
harboring target epitopes are postulated mechanisms of clinical
resistance to trastuzumab. ADCC is a major mechanism of action for mAbs.
Most studies have focused on cell models of resistance through in vitro
selection, in presence of mAbs, in the absence of immune effector cells.
We developed a unique model of immune selection, where target cells (HER2
+ve breast cancer cells SKBR3, BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells
HT29, DLD1) were subjected to ADCC (>90% cell death) with saturating
concentrations of trastuzumab or cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively,
and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in
triplicate) was continued for 10 consecutive passages and surviving cells
were allowed to grow to confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks.
Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1 isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only
were utilized as controls. Compared to parent controls, immune-selected
DLD1 and SKBR3 cells demonstrated statistically significant increase in
proliferation (WST viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher
colony forming efficiency (soft agar assays, P<0.001); immune-selected
HT29 and SKBR3 cells showed significantly higher motility (trans-well
migration assays, P<0.05, and P<0.001 respectively). In vitro ADCC assays
(calcein labeling) suggested significant reduction (max 20%, p<0.005) in
cell lysis in all the immune-selected cell lines compared to parent.
Immune-selected HT29 cells demonstrated a 5-fold reduction in gene copy
number of EGFR by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH, pMonoclonal
antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by clinical resistance. For example,
alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK signaling, over activation/expression
of alternate receptor kinases (c-Met/ IGF-1R), or proteolysis of
extracellular domains harboring target epitopes are postulated mechanisms
of clinical resistance to trastuzumab. ADCC is a major mechanism of
action for mAbs. Most studies have focused on cell models of resistance
through in vitro selection, in presence of mAbs, in the absence of immune
effector cells. We developed a unique model of immune selection, where
target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer cells SKBR3, BT474; and EGFR +ve
colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were subjected to ADCC (>90% cell death)
with saturating concentrations of trastuzumab or cetuximab (100 µg/ml),
respectively, and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
Selection (in triplicate) was continued for 10 consecutive passages and
surviving cells were allowed to grow to confluence over a period of 8-10
weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1 isotype control, mAb-alone and
PBMCs only were utilized as controls. Compared to parent controls,
immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells demonstrated statistically
significant increase in proliferation (WST viability assays, P<0.01), and
significantly higher colony forming efficiency (soft agar assays,
P<0.001); immune-selected HT29 and SKBR3 cells showed significantly
higher motility (trans-well migration assays, P<0.05, and P<0.001
respectively). In vitro ADCC assays (calcein labeling) suggested
significant reduction (max 20%, p<0.005) in cell lysis in all the
immune-selected cell lines compared to parent. Immune-selected HT29 cells
demonstrated a 5-fold reduction in gene copy number of EGFR by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH, p<0.0001), 2-fold reduction in
mRNA levels (qPCR, pMonoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by
clinical resistance. For example, alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK
signaling, over activation/expression of alternate receptor kinases
(c-Met/ IGF-1R), or proteolysis of extracellular domains harboring target
epitopes are postulated mechanisms of clinical resistance to trastuzumab.
ADCC is a major mechanism of action for mAbs. Most studies have focused
on cell models of resistance through in vitro selection, in presence of
mAbs, in the absence of immune effector cells. We developed a unique
model of immune selection, where target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer
cells SKBR3, BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were
subjected to ADCC (>90% cell death) with saturating concentrations of
trastuzumab or cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively, and human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in triplicate) was continued
for 10 consecutive passages and surviving cells were allowed to grow to
confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1
isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only were utilized as controls.
Compared to parent controls, immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells
demonstrated statistically significant increase in proliferation (WST
viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher colony forming
efficiency (soft agar assays, P<0.001); immune-selected HT29 and SKBR3
cells showed significantly higher motility (trans-well migration assays,
P<0.05, and P<0.001 respectively). In vitro ADCC assays (calcein
labeling) suggested significant reduction (max 20%, p<0.005) in cell
lysis in all the immune-selected cell lines compared to parent.
Immune-selected HT29 cells demonstrated a 5-fold reduction in gene copy
number of EGFR by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH, p<0.0001),
2-fold reduction in mRNA levels (qPCR, p< 0.01) and 1.8-fold reduction in
protein levels of EGFR (densitometry scans, western blot analyses,
pMonoclonal antibody (mAb) therapy is limited by clinical resistance. For
example, alterations in PI3K/Akt /Ras-MAPK signaling, over
activation/expression of alternate receptor kinases (c-Met/ IGF-1R), or
proteolysis of extracellular domains harboring target epitopes are
postulated mechanisms of clinical resistance to trastuzumab. ADCC is a
major mechanism of action for mAbs. Most studies have focused on cell
models of resistance through in vitro selection, in presence of mAbs, in
the absence of immune effector cells. We developed a unique model of
immune selection, where target cells (HER2 +ve breast cancer cells SKBR3,
BT474; and EGFR +ve colon cancer cells HT29, DLD1) were subjected to ADCC
(>90% cell death) with saturating concentrations of trastuzumab or
cetuximab (100 µg/ml), respectively, and human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Selection (in triplicate) was continued for 10
consecutive passages and surviving cells were allowed to grow to
confluence over a period of 8-10 weeks. Mock-treated parent cells, IgG1
isotype control, mAb-alone and PBMCs only were utilized as controls.
Compared to parent controls, immune-selected DLD1 and SKBR3 cells
demonstrated statistically significant increase in proliferation (WST
viability assays, P<0.01), and significantly higher colony forming
efficiency (soft agar assays, P<0.001); immune-selected HT29 and SKBR3
cells showed significantly higher motility (trans-well migration assays,
P<0.05, and P<0.001 respectively). In vitro ADCC assays (calcein
labeling) suggested significant reduction (max 20%, p<0.005) in cell
lysis in all the immune-selected cell lines compared to parent.
Immune-selected HT29 cells demonstrated a 5-fold reduction in gene copy
number of EGFR by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH, p<0.0001),
2-fold reduction in mRNA levels (qPCR, p< 0.01) and 1.8-fold reduction in
protein levels of EGFR (densitometry scans, western blot analyses,
p<0.01). Transcriptome-wide next-generation RNA sequencing (Illumina
NextSeq 500, 2 x 75 bp paired-end, with over 100 million paired-end
reads/sample), coupled with bioinformatic analyses (Reactome pathway
database) revealed gene expression changes in ADCC-selected cells. These
involve changes in key immune signaling pathways such as class I/II MHC
antigen processing, cell chemotaxis, inflammatory and immune regulatory
pathways among others. Our data indicate immune-selection by effector
cells contributes to ADCC resistance in vitro. Further investigation will
determine whether mAb combination with an agonist antibody against CD137
(co-stimulatory NK cell receptor) or Fc-engineered MAbs (e.g.
afucosylated) will sensitize the resistant cells. It is hoped that this
investigation will better inform mAb therapy by elucidating potentially
targetable pathways/ markers that emerge from immune-selection with
therapeutic mAbs.


