Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel lncRNA involved in Bcr-Abl mediated
cellular transformation.


Aberrant expression of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is associated with
various human cancers. However, little information is available about
functional involvement of lncRNAs in tumorigenesis of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) induced by Bcr-Abl oncogene. In this study, we performed a
comprehensive analysis of lncRNAs in human CML cells using an lncRNA cDNA
microarray combined with drug treatment. We identified an lncRNA termed
lncRNA-up38 that was critically involved in Bcr-Abl-mediated cellular
transformation. We found that expression of lncRNA-up38 was greatly
upregulated by inhibiting Bcr-Abl kinase activity in K562 cells and
leukemic cells derived from CML patients. Furthermore, our experiments
demonstrated that lncRNA-up38 acted as a key regulator of 4EBP1
functioning during Bcr-Abl-mediated cellular transformation. Moreover,
silencing lncRNA-up38 promoted leukemic cells survival and enhanced
Bcr-Abl-mediated tumorigenesis, whereas forced expression of lncRNA-up38
sensitized leukemic cells to undergo apoptosis and inhibited
Bcr-Abl-induced tumorigenesis. Additionally, our experiments have begun
to address the mechanism of how lncRNA-up38 is regulated in the leukemic
cells and showed that Bcr-Abl repressed lncRNA-up38 expression through
c-Myc-dependent signaling. Taken together, these results reveal that
Bcr-Abl-mediated cellular transformation is associated with
downregulation of tumor-suppressor lncRNA-up38 and suggest a potential
strategy for the treatment of Bcr-Abl-positive leukemia.


