Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Longitudinal monitoring of cell-free DNA in patients with small
cell lung cancer reveals dynamic insights into treatment efficacy and
disease relapse.


Introduction: Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly lethal
neuroendocrine malignancy that accounts for approximately 10-15% of all
lung cancers and is responsible for approximately 30,000 deaths annually
in the United States and 200,000 deaths worldwide every year1. There is
an urgent need to develop novel treatment strategies for patients with
this disease. We sought to improve the quality of patient care by
establishing a liquid biopsy assay for rapid, noninvasive monitoring of
disease burden.

Design: The SCLC assay relies on targeted next-generation DNA sequencing
of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) collected from patient plasma. The assay targets
a panel of 14 genes that are frequently mutated in SCLC2. We examined a
total of 141 plasma samples from a cohort of 27 patients. 11 patients had
limited stage SCLC and 16 patients had extensive stage SCLC. The analyzed
plasma samples were collected during the course of patient treatment and
included time points before and after chemotherapy or immunotherapy.

Results: We detected somatic, disease-associated mutations in the cfDNA
of 78% of patient samples (21/27). The allele frequency of cfDNA ranged
from ≤0.5% to ≥85%. The most commonly mutated genes were TP53 and
RB1, which were found in 17/27 and 10/27 samples, respectively. We also
detected single nucleotide variants in PIK3CA (3/27) and PTEN (1/27) as
well as copy number variants in MYC and MYCL1 (2/27). The observed mutant
allele frequencies in longitudinal samples tracked closely with treatment
responses. Strikingly, we found instances where the assay detected the
reappearance of tumor-associated markers several weeks before clinical
evidence of relapse was detected.

Conclusions: cfDNA sequencing allows for improved monitoring of disease
burden, depth of responses to treatment, and timely warning of disease
relapse in patients with SCLC.

References:

1. Society, A.C., Cancer Facts and Figures 2015. American Cancer Society,
Atlanta, Ga, 2015.

2. George, J. et al., Comprehensive genomic profiles of small cell lung
cancer, Nature 524:47


