Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of serum metabolites and glioma risk.


Malignant glioma is one of the most devastating adult malignancies.
Although there exists an urgent need for actionable leads regarding its
prevention and early detection, the etiology of glioma remains largely
unknown. We conducted a prospective serum metabolomic analysis of glioma
based on 64 cases and individually matched controls selected from
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median
time from collection of baseline fasting serum to diagnosis of glioma was
nine years (interdecile range 3-20 years). We used ultra-high performance
LC/MS which identified 730 known metabolites for analysis. Conditional
logistic regression models examined odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals for one-standard deviation differences in metabolite signals on
a log-scale. Forty-three serum metabolites were associated with glioma at
PMalignant glioma is one of the most devastating adult malignancies.
Although there exists an urgent need for actionable leads regarding its
prevention and early detection, the etiology of glioma remains largely
unknown. We conducted a prospective serum metabolomic analysis of glioma
based on 64 cases and individually matched controls selected from
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median
time from collection of baseline fasting serum to diagnosis of glioma was
nine years (interdecile range 3-20 years). We used ultra-high performance
LC/MS which identified 730 known metabolites for analysis. Conditional
logistic regression models examined odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals for one-standard deviation differences in metabolite signals on
a log-scale. Forty-three serum metabolites were associated with glioma at
P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine, cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate
and argininate yielded the strongest metabolite signals and were
inversely associated overall risk of glioma (0.0065≤PMalignant glioma
is one of the most devastating adult malignancies. Although there exists
an urgent need for actionable leads regarding its prevention and early
detection, the etiology of glioma remains largely unknown. We conducted a
prospective serum metabolomic analysis of glioma based on 64 cases and
individually matched controls selected from Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median time from collection
of baseline fasting serum to diagnosis of glioma was nine years
(interdecile range 3-20 years). We used ultra-high performance LC/MS
which identified 730 known metabolites for analysis. Conditional logistic
regression models examined odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
for one-standard deviation differences in metabolite signals on a
log-scale. Forty-three serum metabolites were associated with glioma at
P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine, cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate
and argininate yielded the strongest metabolite signals and were
inversely associated overall risk of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three
serum acylcarnitines (0.016≤PMalignant glioma is one of the most
devastating adult malignancies. Although there exists an urgent need for
actionable leads regarding its prevention and early detection, the
etiology of glioma remains largely unknown. We conducted a prospective
serum metabolomic analysis of glioma based on 64 cases and individually
matched controls selected from Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median time from collection of baseline fasting
serum to diagnosis of glioma was nine years (interdecile range 3-20
years). We used ultra-high performance LC/MS which identified 730 known
metabolites for analysis. Conditional logistic regression models examined
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals for one-standard deviation
differences in metabolite signals on a log-scale. Forty-three serum
metabolites were associated with glioma at P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine,
cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate and argininate yielded
the strongest metabolite signals and were inversely associated overall
risk of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three serum acylcarnitines
(0.016≤P<0.046), and seven xanthine (i.e., caffeine) metabolites
(0.017≤PMalignant glioma is one of the most devastating adult
malignancies. Although there exists an urgent need for actionable leads
regarding its prevention and early detection, the etiology of glioma
remains largely unknown. We conducted a prospective serum metabolomic
analysis of glioma based on 64 cases and individually matched controls
selected from Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC)
Study. Median time from collection of baseline fasting serum to diagnosis
of glioma was nine years (interdecile range 3-20 years). We used
ultra-high performance LC/MS which identified 730 known metabolites for
analysis. Conditional logistic regression models examined odds ratios
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals for one-standard deviation differences
in metabolite signals on a log-scale. Forty-three serum metabolites were
associated with glioma at P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine, cysteine,
alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate and argininate yielded the
strongest metabolite signals and were inversely associated overall risk
of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three serum acylcarnitines
(0.016≤P<0.046), and seven xanthine (i.e., caffeine) metabolites
(0.017≤P<0.042) were higher in cases than controls. Findings were
mostly similar in high-grade glioma cases, although proportionally more
metabolites showed positive risk associations such as N-acetylglutamate,
ribonate, and 5-methyluridine (0.04≤PMalignant glioma is one of the
most devastating adult malignancies. Although there exists an urgent need
for actionable leads regarding its prevention and early detection, the
etiology of glioma remains largely unknown. We conducted a prospective
serum metabolomic analysis of glioma based on 64 cases and individually
matched controls selected from Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median time from collection of baseline fasting
serum to diagnosis of glioma was nine years (interdecile range 3-20
years). We used ultra-high performance LC/MS which identified 730 known
metabolites for analysis. Conditional logistic regression models examined
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals for one-standard deviation
differences in metabolite signals on a log-scale. Forty-three serum
metabolites were associated with glioma at P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine,
cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate and argininate yielded
the strongest metabolite signals and were inversely associated overall
risk of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three serum acylcarnitines
(0.016≤P<0.046), and seven xanthine (i.e., caffeine) metabolites
(0.017≤P<0.042) were higher in cases than controls. Findings were
mostly similar in high-grade glioma cases, although proportionally more
metabolites showed positive risk associations such as N-acetylglutamate,
ribonate, and 5-methyluridine (0.04≤P<0.02). Notably, xanthine
compounds appeared unrelated to high-grade glioma. Prominent metabolite
signals for inverse associations were the bile acids glycocholenate
sulfate and 3β-hydroxy-5-cholenoic acid, xenobiotic
methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate sulfate, sex steroid
5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20beta-diol monosulfate, and cofactor/vitamin
oxalate. We found weaker risk associations for lower-grade glioma, of
which none achieved significance at PMalignant glioma is one of the most
devastating adult malignancies. Although there exists an urgent need for
actionable leads regarding its prevention and early detection, the
etiology of glioma remains largely unknown. We conducted a prospective
serum metabolomic analysis of glioma based on 64 cases and individually
matched controls selected from Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median time from collection of baseline fasting
serum to diagnosis of glioma was nine years (interdecile range 3-20
years). We used ultra-high performance LC/MS which identified 730 known
metabolites for analysis. Conditional logistic regression models examined
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals for one-standard deviation
differences in metabolite signals on a log-scale. Forty-three serum
metabolites were associated with glioma at P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine,
cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate and argininate yielded
the strongest metabolite signals and were inversely associated overall
risk of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three serum acylcarnitines
(0.016≤P<0.046), and seven xanthine (i.e., caffeine) metabolites
(0.017≤P<0.042) were higher in cases than controls. Findings were
mostly similar in high-grade glioma cases, although proportionally more
metabolites showed positive risk associations such as N-acetylglutamate,
ribonate, and 5-methyluridine (0.04≤P<0.02). Notably, xanthine
compounds appeared unrelated to high-grade glioma. Prominent metabolite
signals for inverse associations were the bile acids glycocholenate
sulfate and 3β-hydroxy-5-cholenoic acid, xenobiotic
methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate sulfate, sex steroid
5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20beta-diol monosulfate, and cofactor/vitamin
oxalate. We found weaker risk associations for lower-grade glioma, of
which none achieved significance at P<0.05. The metabolic sub-pathway
analysis revealed associations for primary bile acid, urea cycle/arginine
and proline, tocopherol, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis/pyruvate metabolites
with overall glioma risk (0.005≤PMalignant glioma is one of the most
devastating adult malignancies. Although there exists an urgent need for
actionable leads regarding its prevention and early detection, the
etiology of glioma remains largely unknown. We conducted a prospective
serum metabolomic analysis of glioma based on 64 cases and individually
matched controls selected from Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer
Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median time from collection of baseline fasting
serum to diagnosis of glioma was nine years (interdecile range 3-20
years). We used ultra-high performance LC/MS which identified 730 known
metabolites for analysis. Conditional logistic regression models examined
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals for one-standard deviation
differences in metabolite signals on a log-scale. Forty-three serum
metabolites were associated with glioma at P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine,
cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate and argininate yielded
the strongest metabolite signals and were inversely associated overall
risk of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three serum acylcarnitines
(0.016≤P<0.046), and seven xanthine (i.e., caffeine) metabolites
(0.017≤P<0.042) were higher in cases than controls. Findings were
mostly similar in high-grade glioma cases, although proportionally more
metabolites showed positive risk associations such as N-acetylglutamate,
ribonate, and 5-methyluridine (0.04≤P<0.02). Notably, xanthine
compounds appeared unrelated to high-grade glioma. Prominent metabolite
signals for inverse associations were the bile acids glycocholenate
sulfate and 3β-hydroxy-5-cholenoic acid, xenobiotic
methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate sulfate, sex steroid
5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20beta-diol monosulfate, and cofactor/vitamin
oxalate. We found weaker risk associations for lower-grade glioma, of
which none achieved significance at P<0.05. The metabolic sub-pathway
analysis revealed associations for primary bile acid, urea cycle/arginine
and proline, tocopherol, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis/pyruvate metabolites
with overall glioma risk (0.005≤P<0.048); ascorbate and aldarate
pathways were associated with high-grade glioma (P=0.02), whereas
glycolysis/gluconeogenesis/pyruvate, eicosanoid and glutamate pathways
were found to be associated with lower-grade disease (0.01≤PMalignant
glioma is one of the most devastating adult malignancies. Although there
exists an urgent need for actionable leads regarding its prevention and
early detection, the etiology of glioma remains largely unknown. We
conducted a prospective serum metabolomic analysis of glioma based on 64
cases and individually matched controls selected from Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study. Median time from collection
of baseline fasting serum to diagnosis of glioma was nine years
(interdecile range 3-20 years). We used ultra-high performance LC/MS
which identified 730 known metabolites for analysis. Conditional logistic
regression models examined odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
for one-standard deviation differences in metabolite signals on a
log-scale. Forty-three serum metabolites were associated with glioma at
P<0.05. 2-Oxoarginine, cysteine, alpha-ketoglutarate, chenodeoxycholate
and argininate yielded the strongest metabolite signals and were
inversely associated overall risk of glioma (0.0065≤P<0.0083). Three
serum acylcarnitines (0.016≤P<0.046), and seven xanthine (i.e.,
caffeine) metabolites (0.017≤P<0.042) were higher in cases than
controls. Findings were mostly similar in high-grade glioma cases,
although proportionally more metabolites showed positive risk
associations such as N-acetylglutamate, ribonate, and 5-methyluridine
(0.04≤P<0.02). Notably, xanthine compounds appeared unrelated to
high-grade glioma. Prominent metabolite signals for inverse associations
were the bile acids glycocholenate sulfate and 3β-hydroxy-5-cholenoic
acid, xenobiotic methyl-4-hydroxybenzoate sulfate, sex steroid
5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20beta-diol monosulfate, and cofactor/vitamin
oxalate. We found weaker risk associations for lower-grade glioma, of
which none achieved significance at P<0.05. The metabolic sub-pathway
analysis revealed associations for primary bile acid, urea cycle/arginine
and proline, tocopherol, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis/pyruvate metabolites
with overall glioma risk (0.005≤P<0.048); ascorbate and aldarate
pathways were associated with high-grade glioma (P=0.02), whereas
glycolysis/gluconeogenesis/pyruvate, eicosanoid and glutamate pathways
were found to be associated with lower-grade disease (0.01≤P<0.04).
These associations did not, however, reach the stringent Bonferroni
significance threshold for correction of multiple comparisons. In
conclusion, we identified a serum metabolomic profile of glioma, years in
advance of clinical diagnoses, characterized by altered molecular signals
in the arginine/proline, antioxidant, bile acid, and glycolytic pathways.
The observed patterns provide potential new leads regarding the molecular
basis relevant to etiologic or sub-clinical biomarkers for glioma. The
findings require reexamination in larger and more diverse populations,
including through glioma consortia.


