Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate identification and prioritization of candidate
neoantigens from integrated cancer exome and transcriptome sequencing of
FFPE samples.


Precise identification and characterization of candidate neoantigens is
important for the development of effective cancer vaccines, adoptive
T-cell transfer, and prediction of response to checkpoint inhibitors. The
candidate tumor neoantigens are actionable only when expressed, however,
current prediction methods lack the capacity to evaluate neoantigen
expression. Sequencing both DNA and RNA from a patientâ€™s tumor tissue
enables identification of mutations and evaluation of their expression
leading to accurate identification of putative neoantigens. The purpose
of this study was to develop and validate a methodology for co-extraction
and sequencing of DNA and RNA from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) samples to enable a robust neoantigen prediction protocol that
integrates whole exome and transcriptome data to identify and prioritize
tumor neoantigens for application in immuno-oncology research and
clinical trials. In order to prepare high-quality sequencing libraries
from FFPE specimens, the tissue was macrodissected to enrich for
tumor-specific material, and improve the overall accuracy of
next-generation sequencing for detection of somatic alterations. Total
DNA and RNA was co-extracted and purified. The DNA was used to prepare
whole exome sequencing (WES) libraries, while the co-extracted RNA was
ribosome-depleted, and reverse-transcribed to prepare RNA sequencing
(RNAseq) libraries. The WES and RNAseq data was then analyzed using a
multi-algorithm HLA typing and neoantigen prediction protocol
(ImmunoSelect-RTM). ImmunoSelect-R evaluates somatic genomic alterations
identified from WES of tumor and matched normal tissue to ensure
appropriate prediction of candidate neoantigens. The process of
neoantigen prediction was then refined by integration of patient
tumor-matched RNAseq data, which allowed for removal of non-expressed
putative neoantigens. To further validate the approach, we applied the
methodology to a set of experimentally validated neoantigens. In this
setting, ImmunoSelect-R correctly classified 18 out of 19 as strong
neoantigen candidates, suggesting a sensitivity of greater than 90%.
Moreover, in a set of 10 patients, ImmunoSelect-R consistently ranked
experimentally validated neoantigens within the top 20% of all neoantigen
candidates derived from whole exome sequencing. In summary, our combined
tissue processing, macrodissection, co-extraction, and neoantigen
prediction methodology is able to identify and prioritize candidate
neoantigens. Our approach is unique in combining high-fidelity sequencing
(WES) and expression (RNAseq) data to accurately inform the selection of
actionable tumor neoantigens for immuno-oncology applications.


