Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell surface vimentin is a novel marker for CTC detection in
neuroblastoma.


Among children in the United States, brain cancers now account for most
number of cancer-related deaths. Neuroblastomas (NB) and sarcomas account
for 13% of all childhood cancers in the United States. Despite
significant progress yielding increased 5-year survival, 1250 deaths are
expected this year from childhood cancers and cancer incidence has been
steadily increasing. One of the key contributors to cancer mortality is
tumor metastasis. It is generally believed that CTCs are shed into the
circulation from primary tumors and contain unique driver mutations
enabling their aggressive phenotype. However, detection of CTCs from NB
is difficult as there is no direct method. Our lab has developed a
monoclonal antibody targeting vimentin on the cells’ surface. Cell
surface vimentin (CSV) is only observed in tumor cells; it remains
intracellular in normal cells. We have published data demonstrating the
superior specificity and sensitivity of our approach in breast, colon,
and prostate cancer. Here, we report direct CTC detection in NB using our
CSV mAb. As part of our collaborative effort analyzing NB blood samples
from a multicenter Phase II trial, we present novel discoveries regarding
treatment of NB with difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) and its effects on
CTC release into the circulation in patients under remission. Among our
observations, approximately ~1/3 patients have low or no CTCs while ~1/4
with high numbers of CTC are responding to DFMO treatment. Remaining
patients show oscillating CTC numbers. Further, treatment with DFMO
showed a statistically significant decline in CTCs after the beginning of
therapy. Ongoing work including whole genome analysis can possibly reveal
new insight into CTCs’ entering the circulation. These data demonstrate
that our CTC capture using CSV is a novel and unique approach for
detection in NB.


