Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Muscadine grape extract inhibits breast cancer brain metastatic
cells by multiple mechanisms.


Tumor metastasis to the brain is a common complication of cancer,
affecting 500,000 patients each year. Due to poor penetration of most
chemotherapeutics into the brain, brain metastasis may occur even while
systemic disease in under control. Despite aggressive treatments
including radiation therapy, survival at 12 months following diagnosis is
only 20%, underscoring the need for better means to prevent and/or treat
brain metastases.

Natural products have historically been a very successful source of new
drugs. We are investigating the anti-cancer potential of a proprietary
muscadine grape extract (MGE; from Piedmont Research & Development Corp.)
on breast cancer cell lines that are metastatic to the brain. In a colony
formation assay, MGE (10 μg/mL) decreased clonogenic survival of
4T1.luc2.Br5 cells by 50% (n=3, pNatural products have historically been
a very successful source of new drugs. We are investigating the
anti-cancer potential of a proprietary muscadine grape extract (MGE; from
Piedmont Research & Development Corp.) on breast cancer cell lines that
are metastatic to the brain. In a colony formation assay, MGE (10 μg/mL)
decreased clonogenic survival of 4T1.luc2.Br5 cells by 50% (n=3,
p<0.0001). The Eo771.luc.Br5 cells were more sensitive to MGE, showing
33% inhibition at 5 μg/mL (n=3, pNatural products have historically been
a very successful source of new drugs. We are investigating the
anti-cancer potential of a proprietary muscadine grape extract (MGE; from
Piedmont Research & Development Corp.) on breast cancer cell lines that
are metastatic to the brain. In a colony formation assay, MGE (10 μg/mL)
decreased clonogenic survival of 4T1.luc2.Br5 cells by 50% (n=3,
p<0.0001). The Eo771.luc.Br5 cells were more sensitive to MGE, showing
33% inhibition at 5 μg/mL (n=3, p<0.001) and 91% inhibition at 7.5
μg/mL (n=3, pNatural products have historically been a very successful
source of new drugs. We are investigating the anti-cancer potential of a
proprietary muscadine grape extract (MGE; from Piedmont Research &
Development Corp.) on breast cancer cell lines that are metastatic to the
brain. In a colony formation assay, MGE (10 μg/mL) decreased clonogenic
survival of 4T1.luc2.Br5 cells by 50% (n=3, p<0.0001). The Eo771.luc.Br5
cells were more sensitive to MGE, showing 33% inhibition at 5 μg/mL
(n=3, p<0.001) and 91% inhibition at 7.5 μg/mL (n=3, p<0.0001). We also
assessed response to the combined treatment of MGE and ionizing radiation
(IR). While MGE did not sensitize cells to IR, combined administration of
MGE and IR resulted in decreased clonogenic survival compared to either
modality alone for both cell lines (n=3-4 experiments, pNatural products
have historically been a very successful source of new drugs. We are
investigating the anti-cancer potential of a proprietary muscadine grape
extract (MGE; from Piedmont Research & Development Corp.) on breast
cancer cell lines that are metastatic to the brain. In a colony formation
assay, MGE (10 μg/mL) decreased clonogenic survival of 4T1.luc2.Br5
cells by 50% (n=3, p<0.0001). The Eo771.luc.Br5 cells were more sensitive
to MGE, showing 33% inhibition at 5 μg/mL (n=3, p<0.001) and 91%
inhibition at 7.5 μg/mL (n=3, p<0.0001). We also assessed response to
the combined treatment of MGE and ionizing radiation (IR). While MGE did
not sensitize cells to IR, combined administration of MGE and IR resulted
in decreased clonogenic survival compared to either modality alone for
both cell lines (n=3-4 experiments, p<0.01), suggesting an additive
effect.

Mechanistically, acute exposure (24 h) to 10 μg/mL MGE induced apoptosis
in 4T1.luc2.Br5 cells as evidenced by PARP cleavage and detection of
activated cleaved caspase 3. Further, ERK1/2 activation was decreased 68%
at this time point (n=3, p80% decrease following MGE treatment (24 h, 10
μg/mL) in both cell lines. Together these data suggest that MGE inhibits
breast cancer brain metastatic cell proliferation by multiple mechanisms,
including inhibition of clonogenic growth through induction of apoptosis
and/or decreased cell cycle progression, suggesting that MGE may have
utility in the treatment of breast cancer brain metastasis.


