Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of extrinsic and intrinsic solid stress on tumor spheroid
growth.


Growth-induced intrinsic solid stress and adaptive response to extrinsic
mechanical cues have been recognized as major hurdles to overcome in
cancer treatment and any approach that could significantly modulate these
parameters would have an impact in improving therapies. An attracting in
vitro model to explore this issue is the Multicellular Tumor Spheroid, a
3D culture model reproducing the non-vascularized microtumor environment,
proliferation gradient and cellular interactions. To explore and assess
spheroid growth-induced solid stress, we couple biological approach to
the application of mechanics and modeling. We adapted a method, which
consist in partial sectioning of the microtumor and measuring tissue
relaxation parameters. Using this strategy, we showed that cell
proliferation induced the accumulation of intrinsic mechanical
constraint. To investigate the consequence of the accumulation of solid
stress at the cell scale, we analyzed 3D cellular organization within
spheroids. Using 3D light sheet microscopy (LSM) visualization on
optically cleared spheroids combined with 3D reconstruction and automatic
algorithms, we were able to determine cell density, nuclear orientation
and nuclear shape in whole 3D spheroids. We found that stress
accumulation is associated with an increase in cell density and a
regionalization of nuclei organization. We also explored the impact of
extrinsic stress in 3D culture condition under constraint. We found that
mechanical constraint and cytoskeleton control nuclei orientation and
using live 3D LSM microscopy we show that mechanical constraint induces
an actin cytoskeleton-dependent prometaphase delay. We anticipate that
this work will provide key information and parameters to improve our
knowledge of the crosstalk between mechanical parameters and tumor growth.


