Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of the KIF22 in human prostate cancer cells.


In the previous study, we identified genes that were differentially
expressed between monolayers and spheroids in prostate cancer cell lines.
The KIF22 gene was extracted as one of candidate genes related with
spheroid formation and multicellular resistance. KIF22 is one of the
kinesin superfamily proteins that are microtubule-dependent molecular
motor proteins with DNA-binding capacity. KIF22 plays an important role
in eukaryotic cell mitosis and macromolecule transportation. Alteration
of KIF22 expression and function may lead to cancer development and
progression. In this study, we explored the function of the KIF22 in
prostate cancer cell lines, DU145 and LNCaP using the KIF22 siRNA. The
KIF22 mRNA levels in LNCaP and DU-145 monolayers were detected, and
time-dependently increased in both spheroids. The inhibition of KIF22
mRNA using siRNA affected cell proliferation in DU145 and LNCaP spheroids
as well as monolayers. In addition, this suppression caused G2/M arrest
and apoptosis in both cell lines. In clinical samples, its mRNA
expression was significantly higher in tumor portions than in
non-cancerous portions. However, the inhibition of KIF22 mRNA did not
affect cell migration and invasion in DU145 and LNCaP cells. These
findings suggest that KIF22 may play an important role in prostate cancer
proliferation, especially spheroid formation, and have the potential to
be targeted for prostate cancer treatments such as combination therapy
with docetaxel.


