Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Personalization of dexamethasone in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Synthetic glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone (Dex), are pivotal in
the treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) but are
associated with significant variability, both in terms of toxicity and
efficacy. We aimed to investigate three key variables to better
understand how Dex personalization may be achieved: pharmacokinetics
(PK), intracellular Dex accumulation, and cellular response, following
Dex binding to the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in ALL cells.

For Dex PK studies, blood samples were collected post oral administration
on one of the first three days of induction chemotherapy in 99 patients
on the UKALL 2011 trial receiving either 6mg/m2 for28 days (standard arm)
or 10mg/m2 for 14 days (short arm). Plasma Dex levels were analysed using
a validated LC/MS method, and a non-compartmental pharmacokinetic
analysis. To assess intracellular Dex levels, cell lines, primagraft
(n=9) and primary patient samples (n=6) were studied. The plasma Dex
LC/MS method was optimized to quantify Dex in ALL cell lysates. Dex
accumulation was also assessed using flow cytometric analysis of Dex
conjugated to FITC. Cellular Dex sensitivity was assessed using Alamar
Blue assays.

There was a wide Dex PK variability, with AUC0-12h, and Cmax
significantly higher on the short compared to the standard arm; 564
(202-1606) versus 408 (142-1009), median (range), p=0.0003 and 0.0006,
respectively. However there was substantial overlap between the two arms,
with a number of patients on the standard arm exhibiting higher exposures
than those on short therapy.

Dex GI50 values ranged from 37 - > 1000 nM and 2 - > 1000 nM in cell
lines and patient samples respectively. Western blotting indicated
wildtype GR in all samples, with R3D11 and REH cell lines serving as
hemizygous deleted and GR negative controls. Dex accumulation in cell
lines was 2.1 and 1.8 (range 1.2 - 2.1) pmol/106 cells in PreB697 and Dex
resistant sub-lines, respectively. While patient samples exhibited
greater variability, Dex accumulation was not significantly different
between sensitive and resistant cells; mean of 1.0 versus 1.4 (range
0.1-2.3, 0.4-4.4 pmol/ 106 cells, p=0.17). Flow cytometry Dex FITC
accumulation confirmed these data, with a mean fluorescence intensity of
4.2 versus 4.1 (range 1.5-5.9, 2.0 - 9.1, respectively; p=0.97).

These data suggest that while PK and cellular response are hugely
variable, variations in drug accumulation do not appear to play a key
role in Dex response in ALL cells. Importantly, 62% of patient cell
samples had Dex GI50 values greater than plasma concentrations observed
in any patient, on both arms on the UKALL 2011 trial. A combined approach
incorporating PK assessments and cellular response in ALL cells should be
further investigated, to allow a comprehensive understanding of Dex
pharmacology with a view to optimizing its clinical utility.


