Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-specific antibody labeling of pancreatic cancer in a
patient-derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) mouse model using a
fluorescent humanized anti-CEA antibody.


Introduction: Delineation of tumor margins is critical in oncologic
surgery, particularly in resection of pancreatic cancer. Surgeons are
limited in visualization with bright light surgery. Fluorescence guided
surgery (FGS) can help surgeons better visualize all potential cancer
cells during the operation. In the present study, we show that the use of
an anti-CEA antibody conjugated to an 800nm NIR fluorescent dye can
selectively label pancreatic cancer in both pancreatic cancer cell lines
and patient derived xenograft mouse models (PDOX).

Materials/Methods: BxPC3-GFP cells or pancreatic cancer tissue specimens
were grafted into flanks of nude mice. Both types of tumors were allowed
to grow until 1 cm. Fragments tumors (2 mm3) were grafted onto the
pancreatic tail of recipient mice to create PDOX models. After tumors
reached 7-10mm in size, 75 ug of Anti-CEA-800 dye was injected into the
tail-vein (LI-COR 800 CW IRDyeÂ®, Lincoln, NE). Mice were imaged via the
Maestro CRI imaging system (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA) 24 hours after
injection.

Results: Images obtained after fluorescent antibody injection showed that
anti-CEA-800 specifically labeled both the cell-line-derived tumors and
patient-derived tumors with an adequate tumor to background contrast at
24 hours. The dye co-localized with GFP in tagged tumor cells lines. GFP
fluorescence had poor penetration if covered by overlying tissue, which
was not an issue with the anti-CEA-800 dye. The dye allowed clear
identification of the tumor and tumor margin. In the BxPC-3 based tumor,
the dye allowed identification of a small 1mm satellite lesion in the
spleen that would otherwise have been missed.

Conclusions: Fluorescent humanized anti-CEA-800 antibody specifically
labeled orthotopically implanted pancreatic cancer xenografts from cell
lines and patient derived tissue. Tumor-specific fluorescence imaging
clearly identified the primary tumor and satellite lesion. The 800nm
wavelength allowed deeper tissue penetration, particularly in areas of
tumor covered by normal pancreatic parenchyma. Humanized anti-CEA
antibodies conjugated to a radio-labeling agent and LI-COR 800 dye is
already in Phase I/II trials. Humanized anti-CEA conjugated with the
IR-800 dye is a promising agent for future clinical FGS applications.


