Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploration of tissue morphologies in breast cancer samples using
unsupervised machine learning.


We applied a machine learning approach for exploration of tissue
morphology in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained breast cancer tissue
microarray (TMA) samples. We then investigated whether the morphological
categories produced were associated with clinically relevant molecular
biomarkers and 10-year overall survival.

The data set comprises digitized (0.22 Âµm/pixel) and H&E stained TMA
spots from tumor samples of 490 women who were diagnosed with primary
breast cancer within a Finnish breast cancer database (FinProg) collected
in 1991 and 1992. In order to quantitatively describe the tissue
morphologies of the TMA spots, we divided the tissue images into
rectangular sub-images (224x224 pixels), and extracted features with a
pre-trained convolutional neural network. We then clustered the
sub-images (n=147,266) with a non-linear data embedding algorithm that
creates a two-dimensional mapping of the tissue morphologies. Lastly, we
defined a quantitative profile for each tumor, describing the
morphologies within the tissue spot image by dividing the two-dimensional
map of morphologies into 128 separate clusters with k-nearest neighbor
clustering.

Visual inspection of the two-dimensional embedding of tissue spot images
verified that the morphologies clustered coherently, i.e. similar looking
sub-images formed distinct clusters in the map. Interestingly, some
morphological patterns were strongly associated with tumor estrogen
receptor content, progesterone receptor content, human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 status, and the proliferation marker Ki-67 status
(pVisual inspection of the two-dimensional embedding of tissue spot
images verified that the morphologies clustered coherently, i.e. similar
looking sub-images formed distinct clusters in the map. Interestingly,
some morphological patterns were strongly associated with tumor estrogen
receptor content, progesterone receptor content, human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 status, and the proliferation marker Ki-67 status
(p<0.0001 for each comparison). In exploratory analyses we identified one
morphological category that was associated with a favorable 10-year
overall survival with a risk ratio of 0.68 (CI95% 0.53-0.89, p=0.002,
power = 0.87).

Our work demonstrates that unsupervised machine learning can be applied
to explore and better understand the role of morphological patterns in
breast cancer. Methods that quantitatively assess the morphology of
cancer tissue may complement molecular biomarkers and potentially reveal
novel prognostic and predictive factors.


