Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms underlying primary ibrutinib sensitivity in CLL.


The Brutonâ€™s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor ibrutinib is efficacious
in B cell malignancies including chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Although the majority of CLL patients respond to ibrutinib, CLL clones
with unmutated IGHV gene (U-CLL) are significantly more sensitive to
ibrutinib than clones with mutated IGHV (M-CLL). About 77% of U-CLL but
only 33% M-CLL patients experience a partial or complete response. Since
ibrutinib resistance occurs, understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying this difference will improve clinical practice. Here we
hypothesized that the difference in ibrutinib sensitivity between U-CLL
and M-CLL was due to a greater vulnerability of U-CLL B cells to the loss
of environmental prosurvival signals.

We first evaluated 28 treatment naive CLL cases receiving ibrutinib. We
defined not only the characteristic CLL B cell but also T cell
lymphocytosis and the latter resolved faster in patients with good
prognosis. After 1 treatment cycle, CLL T cells failed to proliferate
upon mitogenic stimulation and to home to solid tissues after transfer
into NSG mice. Without BCR signaling and T cell support, the CLL B cell
proliferative fraction was diminished and the remaining B cells had
elevated but dysfunctional surface membrane (sm) CXCR4 based on impaired
recycling, internalization and signaling. Ibrutinib also inhibited CXCR4
phosphorylation at ser324/325/339 at a greater level in U-CLL.

We then investigated ibrutinib mediated changes in microenvironment in a
xenograft mouse model using primary cells from 3 U-CLL and 3 M-CLL cases.
Ibrutinib significantly inhibited CLL cell growth in spleen; the treated
CLL cells developed elevated but dysfunctional smCXCR4. The inhibition on
tumor growth and impaired CXCR4 occurred to much greater extent in U-CLL.
Notably, ibrutinib also significantly inhibited T cell growth only in
U-CLL cases. Thus, ibrutinib inhibited CXCR4 signaling and CLL B-T cell
crosstalk essential for tumor growth in tissue niches, especially in
U-CLL cases that has limited B-lymphocytosis.

Finally, molecules controlling the vulnerability of U-CLL B cells to
death in the absence of environmental prosurvival signals were examined
in 15 patients. Ibrutinib reduced BCL2 protein levels in U-CLL but not
M-CLL; levels of BCL-XL and MCL-1 were unchanged. Consistent with these
results, U-CLL but not M-CLL cell survival in vitro was promoted by T
cell stimulation that led to upregulation of prosurvival BCL2. These
findings suggest enhanced CLL B cell death by inhibiting BCL2 in U-CLL
after the loss of environmental prosurvival signals.

Altogether, ibrutinib inhibits CLL-microenvironment crosstalk by blocking
CXCR4 signaling and T cell support. U-CLL cells had a greater
vulnerability to the loss of environmental prosurvival signals after
ibrutinib inhibition. Our data demonstrate mechanisms underlying the
differences in primary ibrutinib sensitivity between U- and M- CLL
patients, supporting the use of inhibitors of BTK and BCL2 in CLL.


