Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential biomarker related to EGFR mutation by
functional proteome profiling in primary non-small cell lung cancer.


Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately 85% of lung
cancers which the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.
Recently, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activating mutations
have been proved relevant to NSCLC and let treatment of EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) become an alternative therapy for NSCLC
patients. Despite excellent clinical response to EGFR-TKIs, the intrinsic
and acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI created challenges in clinical
practice. Although several mechanisms may contribute to solve EGFR‚ÄêTKIs
resistance, there still have 20% to 30% of these patients that how the
resistance developed remain unclear. Studies indicated that the increment
of membrane efflux may be associated with drug resistance. In this study,
we use differential membrane proteomic analysis to identify potential
biomarkers for therapeutics of EGFR-TIKs resistance in NSCLC
patients.Several primary NSCLC cell lines with different EGFR status were
be isolated by our laboratory. Identification of modulators on membrane
of primary cancer cells with different EGFR status was analyzed by
membrane proteomic assay using LC-MS/ MS. The expression patterns of EGFR
mutation cells would compare with that of wild type groups and the
potential candidates would be selected by cross the results of
interactome profiles of EGFR mutation cell lines. The expression patterns
and functional role of these candidates were be examined in NSCLC cells
by several molecular, cellular and biochemical analysis; and demonstrated
the clinical relevance of these specific targets with EGFR mutation. The
expressions of 100 modulators up-regulated in EGFR mutation cells
compared with that of wild type group. After cross reacted with the 474
interaction proteins of mutated EGFR, 8 proteins were selected as
potential candidates that related to EGFR-TKI resistance, especially the
expression of a protein we called SHX in EGFR mutation cells. We
demonstrated the real expression levels of SHX in different lung cancer
cells, and performed network analysis of SHX and EGFR in translational
level.The analysis of differential membrane proteomic found several
novelbiomarkers and potential regulation mechanisms that related to the
development of EGFR-TKIs resistance in NSCLC. These identification may
provide us new direction for exploiting therapeutic strategy for NSCLC
treatment in the future.


