Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CC-90002 (anti-CD47 antibody) in vivo anti-tumor activity is
associated with an increase in M1-polarized macrophages.


CD47, also known as integrin-associated protein, is over-expressed in
several tumor types, including AML, NHL, breast cancer and multiple
myeloma. Elevated expression of CD47 on the cell surface protects tumors
from phagocytosis by macrophages through binding to signal regulatory
protein alpha (SIRPα) on the surface of macrophages. The CD47-SIRPα
interaction triggers events that culminate in the inhibition of the
phagocytic process. Macrophages are one of the immune cell types
frequently found in the tumor microenvironment and exist as a
heterogeneous population that includes both M1 and M2 macrophages. While
the spectrum of macrophage subpopulations are likely quite diverse,
traditionally, it is thought that M1 macrophages are pro-inflammatory,
enhancing immune responses against tumor cells, while M2 macrophages are
pro-tumor, since they express a wide array of anti-inflammatory
molecules, cytokines and growth factors that promote tumor growth,
angiogenesis and an immunosuppressive microenvironment. We evaluated
CC-90002 efficacy in the RPMI-8226 multiple myeloma and MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer xenograft models and enumerated mouse M1/M2-like macrophage
populations within in the tumor before and after C-90002 treatment. In
both RPMI-8226 and MDA-MB-231 models, M2 macrophages were the primary
resident macrophage. Our studies show that when mice bearing RPMI-8226
multiple myeloma xenografts were treated with CC-90002 (a humanized
anti-CD47 antibody), tumor regression was preceded by infiltration of
macrophages into the xenograft. In the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer model,
resident macrophages appeared to mediate the CC-90002 anti-tumor efficacy
in vivo without additional macrophage trafficking. Interestingly, in both
models, M1 macrophages appear to mediate CC-90002 efficacy regardless of
whether macrophages infiltrate the tumor or are tumor-resident. In the
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer model where CC-90002 did not induce
infiltration, it is possible that resident tumor macrophages were
re-educated to an M1 phenotype. In in vitro experiments using human
monocyte-derived macrophages, both M1 and M2 macrophages are able to
promote phagocytosis and additionally, we observed that CC-90002
selectively inhibited migration of M2 macrophages toward tumor cell
conditioned media. This would presumably shift the overall balance of
tumor-associated macrophages toward the M1 phenotype and suggests that
inhibiting CD47 can both promote tumor phagocytosis and skew tumor
macrophage subpopulations toward an anti-tumor phenotype. CC-90002 is
currently being tested in two ongoing Phase I clinical studies in
subjects with advanced solid and hematologic cancers (NCT02367196,
NCT02641002).


