Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low dose ionizing radiation induces persistent activation of NADPH
oxidase pathway in mouse colon.


Exposure to ionizing radiation has been linked to persistent oxidative
stress. The purpose of the current study was to characterize the role of
NADPH oxidase pathway in radiation-induced increased oxidant production
in colon epithelial cells. Mice (C57BL/6J; 6-8 weeks, male) were exposed
to either sham or 0.5 Gy γ radiation, and NADPH oxidase pathway and
oxidative stress markers were assessed in colon samples 60 d after
exposure. Radiation exposure led to higher elevation of 4-HNE and
8-oxo-dG staining relative to unirradiated control. We also observed
increased staining for the proliferative marker phospho-histone H3 in
colon sections of irradiated mice. PCR analysis showed increased
expression of two NADPH oxidase isoforms, Nox1 and Nox3, in irradiated
samples. Additionally, expression of NoxA1 and Noxo1 along with Hif1α
were also increased after radiation. Immunoblot analysis confirmed the
PCR results, and ChIP assay revealed greater binding of stress response
factor GATA6 and Hif1α to Nox1 and Nox3, and Nox3 promoters respectively
after radiation exposure relative to control. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments show enhanced binding of Rac1, an activator of NADPH oxidase,
to Nox1 and Nox3. In summary, we demonstrated that exposure to a low dose
of γ radiation caused long-term upregulation of NADPH oxidase isoforms
as well as its regulators and activators such as NoxA1, Noxo1, Hif1α,
TLR4, GATA6, Doux1, and Doux2. When considered along with our results on
oxidative stress and proliferative markers, our observations on NADPH
oxidase pathway provides new insight into molecular events contributing
to radiation-induced persistent oxidative stress and cell proliferation
in colon, and have implications for colorectal carcinogenesis.


