Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of NKTR-214 in combination with pmel-1 ACT in
an aggressive murine melanoma model.


The adoptive cell transfer (ACT) of genetically engineered T cells
expressing cancer-specific T-cell receptors (TCR) has been shown to
induce effective anti-tumor response. However, tumors frequently relapse
after an initial response. Another strategy towards stimulating the
immune system is the use of high-dose interleukin-2 (IL-2) to target the
IL-2 receptor (IL2R), leading to immune cell expansion. However,
clinically approved IL-2 expands both tumor-killing CD8+ effector T cells
(CD8T) as well as regulatory T cells (Tregs) through binding the
IL-2Rβγ and IL-2Rαβγ complexes, respectively. Tregs in the tumor
lead to immune suppression, which hampers the antitumoral response.
NKTR-214 is a CD122-biased cytokine agonist conjugated with multiple
releasable chains of polyethylene glycol and designed to provide
sustained signaling through the heterodimeric IL-2 receptor pathway
(IL-2Rβγ) to preferentially activate and expand effector CD8+ T and NK
cells over Tregs. We used the pmel-1 ACT/B16 melanoma tumor model to test
the anti-tumor activity of NKTR-214 and evaluate its effects on
tumor-specific TCR transgenic T cells. On Day 0 (D0) C57BL/6 mice were
implanted with B16-F10 mouse melanoma cells and lymphodepleted with 500
cGy on D6. On D7, mice were treated with either the combination of ACT (T
lymphocytes activated in vitro with 1 μg/ml gp100) plus NKTR-214 (0.8
mg/kg, q9dx3, i.v.) or with C57/B6 T cells plus PBS (vehicle control).
The tumors of the vehicle control mice (n=12) rapidly grew to the 1500mm3
endpoint in 12 days post-treatment, versus 35 days for the NKTR-214 group
(n=12) with only 1 out of 12 mice reaching endpoint. Bioluminescence
imaging was used to visualize the in vivo distribution and tumor-homing
of antigen-specific T cells. Interestingly, the reporter T cells were
retained in the spleen until D7 and could be seen migrating to the tumor
at D9 reaching peak of bioluminescence at day 12, a delayed time point
compared to the 5 days usually observed in mice treated with standard
IL-2. The signal persisted in the NKTR-214 + ACT group until D20 versus
D7 in the vehicle-control animals. These data suggest that NKTR-214 + ACT
is well tolerated and provides a robust anti-tumor response in the
aggressive B16F10 model. Treatment with NKTR-214 + ACT robustly mobilizes
T cells into the tumor where they durably persist. The robust and
long-lasting effect of NKTR214 supports its potential use in combination
with cell-based therapeutics.


