Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival predictors of Burkitt's lymphoma in children, adults and
elderly in the United States during 2000-2013.


Background. Burkittâ€™s Lymphoma (BL) has three peaks of occurrence, in
children, adults and elderly, at 10, 40 and 70 years respectively. To the
best of our knowledge, no study has been conducted to assess predictors
of survival in the three age groups. We hypothesized that the predictors
of survival may differ by age group. We, therefore, sought to determine
the predictors of survival for BL in these three groups: children (70
years of age).

Methods. Using the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
database covering the years 2000-2013, we identified 797 children, 1,994
adults and 757 elderly patients newly diagnosed with BL. We used Cox
proportional hazards regression models to determine prognostic factors
for survival for each age group.

Results. Five-year relative survival in BL for children, adults and
elderly were 90.4%, 47.8%, and 28.9%, respectively. Having at least stage
II disease and multiple primaries were associated with higher mortality
in the elderly group. In adults, multiple primaries, stage III or IV
disease, African American race and bone marrow primary were associated
with increased mortality whereas stage IV disease and multiple primaries
were associated with worse outcome in children.

Conclusion. These findings demonstrate commonalities and differences in
predictors of survival that may have implications for management of BL
patients.

Financial Support: This work was supported by the US National Institutes
of Health/National Cancer Institute 1P20CA210300-01 (PI: Shu XO, Tran
T/Sub-contract-PI: Luu HN) and the University of South Florida start-up
grant (PI: Luu HN).


