Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic interaction between gemcitabine and PD-0325901 in
C-33A cervical carcinoma cell line.


Cervical cancer affects over half a million women worldwide, and is one
of the most common causes of death in women. Treatment of cervical
cancers consists of surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, or combination of
therapies. However, about half of patients with advance cancer will show
recurrent tumors. Signaling cascades are often dysregulated in human
cancer cells making them attractive targets for combination drug
therapies. PD-0325901, an inhibitor of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase, is a promising target for metastatic cancer. Another drug used to
treat cervical carcinoma is gemcitabine, a nucleoside analog inhibitor of
the ribonucleotide reductase and DNA damage inducible protein 45a
(Gadd45a). This drug is generally used in combination with other drugs,
after reoccurrence of the disease state. We decided to evaluate the
efficacy of gemcitabine in combination with PD-0325901 in C-33A, a
metastatic cervical cancer-derived cell line. We evaluated the potency of
gemcitabine and PD-0325901 alone and in combination. Cell viability after
incubation with the drugs was determined at 72 hours and at 7 days by
measuring ATP content. Synergy was determined assessed utilizing
BIOENSISâ€™s suite of drug combination analysis tools including:
isobologram, combination index (CI) and Bliss analysis. Isobologram
analysis at 72 hours of incubation revealed that the mean values of the
observed data were significantly smaller than those of the predicted
maximum additive values, indicating synergy. Bliss and combination index
analysis confirmed the observation, showing a synergistic effect at
concentrations between 2 - 200 nM PD-0325901 and 0.3 - 3 nM gemcitabine.
Similar patterns of synergy were observed with 7 day incubations of C-33A
with gemcitabine and PD-0325901. These results indicate that gemcitabine
and PD-0325901 showed significantly more growth inhibition than either
drug alone in the C-33A tumor cell line, suggesting that the combination
of gemcitabine - PD-0325901 could be used in cervical cancer therapy.


