Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAK is required for the survival of tumor cells in MMTV-Wnt1
driven basal-like mammary tumors.


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease. Stratification of patients
based on the subtype of breast cancer is a key to successful treatment of
breast cancer. Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK), a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase
is over expressed and activated in several cancers including breast
cancer. Our earlier studies have shown inhibition of FAK in MMTV-PyMT
mouse mammary tumors that are classified as Luminal B subtype, delays
tumor onset and reduces tumor growth. To address whether inhibition of
FAK would be beneficial in basal-like mammary tumors, we generated a
conditional deletion of FAK and a knock in mutation of FAK lacking its
kinase activity, in MMTV-WNT1 mouse model, which classifies as
basal-like. Similar to PyMT mammary tumors we found that loss of FAK or
its kinase function delays tumor onset and tumor growth of basal like
WNT1 mammary tumors. However unlike the PyMT tumors, the reduced tumor
growth in WNT1 model is not due to decreased proliferation. Interestingly
loss of FAK activity in WNT1 tumors results in accumulation of cleaved
caspase 3, suggesting that loss of FAK activity results in compromised
tumor cell survival. When we investigated the pathways through which FAK
could affect survival, we found that loss of FAK activity reduces
activation of AKT. Reduced AKT activation induces the expression of
pro-apoptotic genes. In summary our studies show that in a basal-like
tumor model, FAK is required for survival of the tumor cells. Hence
inhibition of FAK could be beneficial for elimination of basal-like tumor
cells.


