Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility and evaluation of exosomal RNAs as novel diagnostic
biomarkers for high grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer.


Introduction: High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) survival has been
essentially unchanged over the last ten years despite new therapeutic
strategies. In order to make a large-scale impact on overall survival,
early detection strategies are imperative. Exosomes are cell-derived
vesicles derived from multivesicular bodies or the plasma membrane that
carry a variety of biomolecules, including protein, DNA, and RNA.
Exosomal contents represent a novel and underexplored source of tumor
biomarkers, in particular for HGSOC. This study aimed to first evaluate
approaches to exosomal RNA purification and to then compare the exosomal
RNA profiles from serum of patients with benign ovarian disease and HGSOC
to determine if unique profiles exist, and to identify biomarkers useful
for early detection.

Methods: Cell free serum was obtained from patients in each of the
following categories: HGSOC with early (n=24) or late stage (n=24)
disease, benign ovarian masses (n=24) and healthy age-matched controls
(n=24). We compared ultracentrifugation and a commercial precipitation
solution to enrich and isolate exosomes. Exosomal enrichment was
confirmed by both transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and western blot
using anti-CD63 antibodies. RNA was extracted for each and deep
sequencing analysis was performed for 12 candidates within each group. A
second cohort of 48 samples will be used for validation of the best
performing candidate biomarkers from the discovery cohort via RT-qPCR.

Results: Enrichment of exosomes was confirmed via qualitative assessment
using TEM and Western blot analysis. RNA quality was superior when RNA
isolations were performed using the QIAgen RNeasy kit compared to the
AllPrep kit. Mean RNA yield for each group ranged from 10.3-28.6ng/Âµl
and RNA yield and quality was independent of sample age. RNAseq analyses
are ongoing to identify biomarkers specific to HGSOC that can be detected
at the earliest stages. The top differentially RNAs for the ovarian
cancer groups will be validated in an independent cohort of specimens. A
panel will then be generated in combination with CA125 to determine the
clinical utility of an integrated -omics approach in early stage
detection of HGSOC.

Conclusions: Efficient isolation of exosomes and RNA can be achieved from
archived specimens >10 years old. Evaluation of exosomal RNA in HGSOC
provides a novel method for biomarker discovery.


