Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 as a therapeutic target in glioblastoma: a cellular and
molecular study.


Glioblastoma is the most common and deadliest malignant brain tumor in
adults. It is currently treated with a combination of surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ). Resistance to TMZ
is a challenge in the treatment of this type of brain cancer. Epigenetic
modulation is a new possibility to be tested against glioblastoma.
Inhibition of EZH2, a histone methyltransferase (H3K27met3) which is
overexpressed in cancer cells, leading to angiogenesis and metastasis,
might be a new strategy to treat this tumor. In this work, the EZH2
inhibitor DZNeP was tested in A172 glioblastoma cells and in
A172-TMZ-resistant glioblastoma cells. Inhibition of cell proliferation,
cell adhesion, colony formation, and cell migration was noted in A172 and
A172-TMZ-resistant glioblastoma cells after DZNeP treatment. DZNeP also
decreased EZH2 expression, and increased the expression of its target
genes (E-cadherin and TIMP3), which might probably contribute to
inhibiting the development of a cancer metastatic phenotype. Finally,
DZNeP negatively regulated the TGFβ pathway: the expression of receptors
involved in this pathway (TGFβR1 and TGFβR2) was decreased, and the
expression of inhibitors of this pathway (BAMBI, SMAD6 and SMAD7) was
increased. In order to support the results obtained by qRT-PCR about the
TGFβ1 pathway, protein expression of SMAD2 and PSMAD2 was analyzed by
Western blot. The ratio between PSMAD2/SMAD2 decreased in cells treated
with DZNeP, which supports the possible therapeutic effect of this drug
against the TGFβ pathway, as PSMAD2 is a negative prognostic marker in
glioblastoma. In conclusion, we propose that inhibition of EZH2 might be
considered as a therapeutic strategy against glioblastoma.


