Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alterations in the chromatin accessibility in nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. Accumulated evidence in the past decade
has stablished that NASH, in addition to other well-identified risk
factors, is becoming a major cause of HCC in United States. In the
present study, we investigated cancer-associated chromatin alterations in
the Stelic Animal Model (STAM) of NASH-related HCC. Using Assay for
Transposase-Accessible Chromatin with high throughput sequencing
(ATAC-seq), we identified 1666 differentially opened chromatin regions in
HCC tumor tissue as compared to normal livers. Annotation of these
regions showed that they were associated with 1773 differentially
expressed genes, which were enriched in lipid and steroid metabolism,
obesity, and cancer. Among the differentially opened chromatin regions,
10% resided within 5 kb from the transcription start site (TSS), while
the remaining 90% were located distal to the TSS (> 5 kb). By combining
ATAC-seq and transcriptomic profiles, we demonstrated that 182 of the
up-regulated genes were associated with open chromatin regions in tumor
tissue. Furthermore, 24 of these up-regulated genes, including Apoa4,
Nupr1, Anxa2, and Igfbp1, had accessible chromatin regions located
proximal to the TSS. Importantly, analysis of histone modifications at
the open chromatin regions of the over-expressed cancer-related Apoa4 and
Anxa2 genes demonstrated enrichment by H3K4 mono-methylation (H3H4me1)
and H3K27 acetylation (H3K27ac), histone marks that associated with the
active gene promoters (H3K27ac) and enhancers (H3Kme1 and H3K27ac). In
conclusion, these data provide evidence for alterations in the chromatin
accessibility in tumor tissue and potential role of open chromatin
regions in the over-expression of critical cancer-related genes in HCC.


