Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential of hyperpolarized 13-C magnetic resonance
spectroscopy to monitor the effect of combretastatin based vascular
disrupting agents.


Purpose: Targeting tumor vasculature using vascular disrupting agents
(VDAs) is an attractive therapy. These agents induce rapid physiological
changes long before any growth inhibitory effects become apparent.
Detecting these early changes should allow us to predict anti-tumor
effects. Hyperpolarized ¹³C magnetic resonance spectroscopy (HPMRS)
allows dynamic measurements of the metabolism of 13C-labeled substrates
and may be a new approach for reliably monitoring early effects of VDAs.
The aim of this study was to investigate the potential of HPMRS to
achieve this in a pre-clinical model.

Methods: Mice bearing 200 cubic mm foot implanted C3H mammary carcinomas
were intraperitoneally injected with combretastatin-A4-phosphate (CA4P)
or the A1 analogue OXi4503. Tumor response was assessed by determining
necrosis development, measured histologically 24-hours after treatment,
and tumor growth time (TGT; time to reach 5 times treatment volume).
Estimates of tumor perfusion and metabolism were performed 3h (CA4P) and
6h (OXi4503) after treatment. Perfusion was measured from Hoechst 33342
uptake in histological sections and by dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) at 7-Tesla. Metabolic changes were assessed
following intravenous injection of hyperpolarized [1-¹³C]pyruvate and
observing the conversion to lactate with HPMRS in a 9.4-Tesla scanner.
Additional mice were positron emission tomography (PET) scanned using a
Mediso nanoScan PET/MRI scanner following administration of
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Statistical comparisons were made using a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with significance level of
pMethods: Mice bearing 200 cubic mm foot implanted C3H mammary carcinomas
were intraperitoneally injected with combretastatin-A4-phosphate (CA4P)
or the A1 analogue OXi4503. Tumor response was assessed by determining
necrosis development, measured histologically 24-hours after treatment,
and tumor growth time (TGT; time to reach 5 times treatment volume).
Estimates of tumor perfusion and metabolism were performed 3h (CA4P) and
6h (OXi4503) after treatment. Perfusion was measured from Hoechst 33342
uptake in histological sections and by dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) at 7-Tesla. Metabolic changes were assessed
following intravenous injection of hyperpolarized [1-¹³C]pyruvate and
observing the conversion to lactate with HPMRS in a 9.4-Tesla scanner.
Additional mice were positron emission tomography (PET) scanned using a
Mediso nanoScan PET/MRI scanner following administration of
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Statistical comparisons were made using a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with significance level of p<0.05.

Results: A dose response relationship was found between injected drug
doses and both tumor necrosis induction and TGT, with OXi4503 having a
larger effect than CA4P. Two equally effective doses were selected for
further analysis (250 mg/kg for CA4P and 50 mg/kg for OXi4503). Both
drugs significantly decreased perfusion relative to controls; the
respective mean (with 1 SE) values for CA4P and OXi4503 were decreased to
57% (50-64) and 38% (28-48) using Hoechst 33342, and 61% (57-65) and 61%
(54-68) using DCE-MRI. FDG uptake (mean tumor-to-brain ratio) also
significantly reduced to 43% (33-53) and 33% (25-41) for CA4P and
OXi4503, respectively. However, an unaltered pyruvate to lactate ratio
was found; the values being 98% (89-107) for CA4P and 113% (102-124) for
OXi4503.

Conclusion: No change in the HPMRS values was observed, despite changes
in all other parameters, indicating that the metabolic fate of pyruvate
remains unaltered despite reduced delivery of oxygen and nutrients. This
could be because our data provides measures of whole-tumor mean responses
that include a viable metabolically unaltered tumor rim and a tumor core
with no blood flow (i.e., no pyruvate delivery) following VDA treatment.


