Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and validation of Predi-HRD liquid biopsy test for
PARP inhibitor clinical trials.


Response to DNA-damaging agents, such as platinum and recently emerged
PARP inhibitors, is associated with homologous recombination deficiency
(HRD) pathway. In fact, as reported by multiple clinical trials, patients
with advanced breast, prostate, and ovarian cancers who have harmful
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 have demonstrated a great benefit from
treatment of PARP inhibitors including olaparib, niraparib, and
talazoparib. Current companion diagnostic assays that mainly examine
germline defects from blood or somatic alterations from tumor tissues
have shown several practical challenges: germline test does not capture
somatic alterations of a tumor, initial biopsies from a tumor may not
reflect the current status of the tumorâ€™s genetic profile over time,
and tissue biopsy may be of insufficient quantity or
unavailable/unobtainable for downstream molecular profiling.

Here we introduce the Predi-HRD blood test, a non-invasive,
next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based multiplex assay that enables
real-time monitoring of temporal change of tumor heterogeneity and highly
sensitive detection of defects in HR genes including BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM,
CHEK2, among others. Technical validation was performed to evaluate assay
sensitivity, specificity and accuracy using reference samples with known
genetic profiling and further validated on a variety of orthogonal
platforms such as digital PCR, allele-specific PCR and Sanger sequencing.
Mutation prevalence of HR genes was examined in clinical plasma samples
from patients with advanced ovarian cancer after systemic chemotherapy.
The successful development of Predi-HRD liquid biopsy test offers an
efficient solution to stratify and monitor cancer patients who may
benefit from HRD-targeted therapeutics such as PARP inhibitors.


