Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA polymerase beta participates in DNA end-joining.


DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) are one of the most deleterious lesions.
If left unrepaired, DSBs lead to genomic instability and carcinogenesis.
The cells combat DSBs by two classical pathways that include homologous
recombination (HR) which requires the sister chromatid for sequence
homology, and non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), wherein the two DNA ends
are re-joined. Recently a back-up NHEJ pathway has been reported and is
referred non-canonical NHEJ which has been given many names, such as
alternative NHEJ or microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ). The
enzymatic mechanisms of non-canonical NHEJ are not well defined. NHEJ
requires processing enzymes including nucleases and polymerases, although
the roles of these enzymes in the pathway are poorly understood. Recent
studies have implicated a role for DNA polymerase theta (Pol θ), an
A-family polymerase is essential for non-canonical NHEJ pathway. Emerging
evidence indicates X-family polymerases, mammalian DNA polymerases lambda
(λ) and mu (μ) and yeast Pol 4 promote DNA end-joining. Our laboratory
has recently provided evidence for a role for DNA polymerase beta (Pol
β), another X-family polymerase, in V(D)J recombination, a process that
requires end-joining. Here, using a recently developed fluorescence based
assay that monitors non-canonical NHEJ and HR, we provide evidence that
Pol β plays a role in the non-canonical NHEJ process. DNA sequencing at
the break point junctions revealed Pol β-depleted cells have fewer small
deletions than control cells, but significantly greater numbers of
insertions and large deletions. We further demonstrate that Pol
β-depleted cells have increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents that
induce double-strand breaks and that there is persistent accumulation of
DSBs in these cells. In combination, our results suggest that Pol β is
critical for double-strand break repair.


