Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BTK inhibitor BGB-3111 demonstrates anti-tumor activity in solid
tumor models.


Background BGB-3111 is a novel, irreversible, second generation BTK
inhibitor with better selectivity profile and DMPK property compared to
ibrutinib. It has demonstrated promising anti-tumor activities in
patients with advanced B cell malignancies. Given BTK is expressed in all
hematopoietic lineages except for T lymphocytes, it is reasonable to
explore the immune modulatory effect of BGB-3111. In this study, we
sought to investigate the anti-tumor activity of BGB-3111 in solid tumor
models.

Methods Cell viability was assessed with Cell Titer GloÂ® assay and half
maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) were estimated. In vivo activity
was assessed in subcutaneous mouse xenograft models. Treatments were
administered by oral gavage and individual body weight and tumor volume
was recorded twice weekly.

Results In vitro studies showed that MDA-MB-436 cells are insensitive to
BGB-3111, which do not expresse BTK. In both human breast cancer
MDA-MB-436 and human A431 epidermoid carcinoma subcutaneous xenograft
models, the tumor cells were co-injected with peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of healthy donors. In MDA-MB-436 model,
BGB-3111 (15 mg/kg, BID) single agent significantly induced tumor growth
inhibition (TGI) of 55%, whereas showed no anti-tumor effect if no PBMCs
co-injected. Furthermore, co-treatment of BGB-3111 (15 mg/kg, BID) and
anti-PD-1 antibody BGB-A317 (10 mg/kg, QW) demonstrated enhanced
therapeutic effect in A431 allogeneic model. Interestingly, in BCLU200
and BCLU054 NSCLC primary tumor xenograft models (without PBMC
co-injection), BGB-3111 (15 mg/kg, BID) also demonstrated significant
anti-tumor activity.

Conclusions In summary, BGB-3111 showed interesting activity in solid
tumor models, suggesting BTK inhibitor might have potential to be used
beyond hematology malignancies. .


