Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi screen identified novel long non-coding RNAs involved in cell
growth control, migration, and invasion.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly aggressive form of
breast cancer often associated with poor prognosis. Owing to the lack of
therapeutic targets, patients with TNBC tend to rely on standard
chemotherapy; however, chemo-resistance often develops in TNBC as a
result of deregulated cell death control like in many other tumors. Long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are transcripts longer than 200bp and have
little or no protein-coding capacity. Although once considered as
transcriptional noise, significant numbers of lncRNAs are now known as
modulators of protein expression and functions and are implicated in a
range of developmental processes and diseases. As many of them influence
oncogenes and tumor suppressors in cancer, they represent excellent
biomarkers as well as potential targets for therapy. In order to gain
more insight on cell death regulation and to seek potential targets for
TNBC, we employed an RNAi screen targeting 2231 lncRNAs in MDA-MB-231
TNBC cells. By using changes in cell metabolic activity (MTT assay) as
readouts for primary screen and changes in cell number as confirmation,
our unbiased screen identified two novel lncRNAs that drastically reduced
cell proliferation when depleted. In addition to cell growth, the two
lncRNAs also contribute to cancer cell migration and invasion.
Interestingly, our gene profiling analyses and RNA immunoprecipitation
studies show the two lncRNAs are involved in signaling cascades known to
promote mammary tumorigenesis including EGF and Î²-catenin. We are now
trying to delineate the detailed molecular mechanism(s) by which the two
lncRNAs contribute to TNBC tumorigenesis. Together, our current results
suggest a possibility for the two novel lncRNAs as drug targets in
triple-negative breast cancer.


