Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor-induced ANGPTL4 enhances anoikis
resistance and tumor metastasis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.


Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is important for cancer cell proliferation,
angiogenesis and metastasis in many types of cancer. However, the
mechanisms involved in EGF-induced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) metastasis remain largely unknown. In this study, we reveal that
angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) plays an important role in the regulation
of EGF-induced cancer metastasis. We showed that EGF-induced ANGPTL4
expression promoted anoikis resistance and cancer cell migration and
invasion in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). In addition,
depletion of ANGPTL4 inhibited EGF-induced cancer cell invasion.
Autocrine production of EGF-induced ANGPTL4 regulated the expression of
MMPs. The induction of MMP-1 gene expression by ANGPTL4-activated
integrin Î²1 signaling occurred through the AP-1 binding site in the
MMP-1 gene promoter. Furthermore, down-regulation of MMP-1 impeded EGF-
and recombinant ANGPTL4-enhanced HNSCC cell migration and invasion.
Depletion of ANGPTL4 significantly blocked EGF-primed anoikis resistance
and extravasation. Moreover, depletion of ANGPTL4 significantly blocked
EGF-primed metastatic seeding of tumor cells and MMP-1 expression in
lungs. However, no effect of ANGPTL4 on tumor growth was observed. These
results suggest that EGF-induced expression and autocrine production of
ANGPTL4 enhances HNSCC metastasis via the up-regulation of MMP-1
expression. Inhibition of ANGPTL4 expression may be a potential strategy
for the treatment of EGFR-mediated HNSCC metastasis.


