Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 positive and sorafenib resistant hepatocellular carcinomas
respond to the ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor INK128.


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is activated in about 50% of patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Allosteric mTOR inhibitors, also known as
rapalogs, fail to show any significant clinical utility. In an effort to
identify new pathways and compounds to treat advanced HCC, we considered
the ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor INK128. ATP-competitive mTOR
inhibitors attenuate both mTORC1 and mTORC2. We evaluated INK128 in
sorafenib sensitive and insensitive HCC cell lines, CD44low and CD44high
HCC and those cell lines with acquired sorafenib resistance. CD44 was
significantly increased in Huh7 cells made resistant to sorafenib. Forced
expression of CD44 enhanced cellular proliferation and migration, and
rendered the cells more sensitive to the anti-proliferative effects of
INK128. INK128 suppressed CD44 expression by blocking phosphorylation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4EBP1 in HCC cells while
allosteric mTOR inhibitors do not. Moreover, INK128 exhibited potent
anti-proliferative and anti-migration effects on the mesenchymal-like HCC
cells, CD44high and sorafenib resistant HCC cells compared to the
allosteric mTOR inhibitor everolimus. Combination studies of INK128 and
sorafenib showed an additive to synergistic anti-proliferative effect in
CD44high HCC cells. Our findings suggest that ATP-competitive mTOR
inhibitors are effective in treating advanced HCC patients who express
CD44, and are insensitive or resistant to sorafenib. It also highlights
the potential use of CD44 as a biomarker of response in these patients.


