Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Verification of prostate cancer genomics biomarker candidates at
protein level using PRISM-SRM.


Mass spectrometry (MS) based targeted proteomics such as selected
reaction monitoring (SRM) provides an antibody-independent strategy for
sensitive, specific and multiplexed verification of genomics biomarker
candidates at the protein level. In order to identify a panel of proteins
with the potential to discriminate between aggressive and indolent forms
of prostate cancer and predict prostate cancer progression, we have
selected 52 protein candidates from existing prostate cancer genomics
data sets and validated cancer drivers, and performed quantitative
proteomics analysis in tumor and control tissue samples using the highly
sensitive PRISM (high-pressure, high-resolution separations coupled with
intelligent selection and multiplexing)-SRM approach. PRISM-SRM assays
have been developed for the 52 prostate cancer biomarker candidates
including: prostate cancer prognosis associated genes, prostate cancer
associated genes that were up-regulated in transcriptomics studies, and
other cancer-related genes (including the ERG or ETV1 isoforms). Two sets
of tissue samples were analyzed using PRISM-SRM with heavy
isotope-labeled synthetic peptides as internal standards: 1) 10 high
Gleason-score (7-9) primary prostate tumors and 10 benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH) tissues (OCT-embedded specimens); and 2) 10 primary
tumors from patients showing metastatic progression, 10 primary tumors
from patients who showed biochemical recurrence (BCR), and 10 primary
tumors from patients with no BCR or metastatic progression after more
than ten years of follow-up after radical prostatectomy (FFPE whole mount
prostate specimens). Overall, PRISM-SRM analyses of all the patient
tissue samples enabled the detection of 48 out of 52 biomarker
candidates, suggesting extremely low level of expression of the remaining
6 genes (HXC6, OSTP, TWST1, and ERG8); in comparison regular LC-SRM can
only detect 21 of these candidates at the protein level. In the 10 high
Gleason-score tumors and 10 BPH controls, 13 proteins were found
differentially abundant with PMass spectrometry (MS) based targeted
proteomics such as selected reaction monitoring (SRM) provides an
antibody-independent strategy for sensitive, specific and multiplexed
verification of genomics biomarker candidates at the protein level. In
order to identify a panel of proteins with the potential to discriminate
between aggressive and indolent forms of prostate cancer and predict
prostate cancer progression, we have selected 52 protein candidates from
existing prostate cancer genomics data sets and validated cancer drivers,
and performed quantitative proteomics analysis in tumor and control
tissue samples using the highly sensitive PRISM (high-pressure,
high-resolution separations coupled with intelligent selection and
multiplexing)-SRM approach. PRISM-SRM assays have been developed for the
52 prostate cancer biomarker candidates including: prostate cancer
prognosis associated genes, prostate cancer associated genes that were
up-regulated in transcriptomics studies, and other cancer-related genes
(including the ERG or ETV1 isoforms). Two sets of tissue samples were
analyzed using PRISM-SRM with heavy isotope-labeled synthetic peptides as
internal standards: 1) 10 high Gleason-score (7-9) primary prostate
tumors and 10 benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) tissues (OCT-embedded
specimens); and 2) 10 primary tumors from patients showing metastatic
progression, 10 primary tumors from patients who showed biochemical
recurrence (BCR), and 10 primary tumors from patients with no BCR or
metastatic progression after more than ten years of follow-up after
radical prostatectomy (FFPE whole mount prostate specimens). Overall,
PRISM-SRM analyses of all the patient tissue samples enabled the
detection of 48 out of 52 biomarker candidates, suggesting extremely low
level of expression of the remaining 6 genes (HXC6, OSTP, TWST1, and
ERG8); in comparison regular LC-SRM can only detect 21 of these
candidates at the protein level. In the 10 high Gleason-score tumors and
10 BPH controls, 13 proteins were found differentially abundant with
P<0.05. In the 10X10X10 FFPE sample analysis, there were three proteins
discriminating between “metastatic progression” and “no
progression” tumors, one protein discriminated between BCR and “no
progression” tumors, and four proteins discriminated between metastatic
progression and BCR tumors (PMass spectrometry (MS) based targeted
proteomics such as selected reaction monitoring (SRM) provides an
antibody-independent strategy for sensitive, specific and multiplexed
verification of genomics biomarker candidates at the protein level. In
order to identify a panel of proteins with the potential to discriminate
between aggressive and indolent forms of prostate cancer and predict
prostate cancer progression, we have selected 52 protein candidates from
existing prostate cancer genomics data sets and validated cancer drivers,
and performed quantitative proteomics analysis in tumor and control
tissue samples using the highly sensitive PRISM (high-pressure,
high-resolution separations coupled with intelligent selection and
multiplexing)-SRM approach. PRISM-SRM assays have been developed for the
52 prostate cancer biomarker candidates including: prostate cancer
prognosis associated genes, prostate cancer associated genes that were
up-regulated in transcriptomics studies, and other cancer-related genes
(including the ERG or ETV1 isoforms). Two sets of tissue samples were
analyzed using PRISM-SRM with heavy isotope-labeled synthetic peptides as
internal standards: 1) 10 high Gleason-score (7-9) primary prostate
tumors and 10 benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) tissues (OCT-embedded
specimens); and 2) 10 primary tumors from patients showing metastatic
progression, 10 primary tumors from patients who showed biochemical
recurrence (BCR), and 10 primary tumors from patients with no BCR or
metastatic progression after more than ten years of follow-up after
radical prostatectomy (FFPE whole mount prostate specimens). Overall,
PRISM-SRM analyses of all the patient tissue samples enabled the
detection of 48 out of 52 biomarker candidates, suggesting extremely low
level of expression of the remaining 6 genes (HXC6, OSTP, TWST1, and
ERG8); in comparison regular LC-SRM can only detect 21 of these
candidates at the protein level. In the 10 high Gleason-score tumors and
10 BPH controls, 13 proteins were found differentially abundant with
P<0.05. In the 10X10X10 FFPE sample analysis, there were three proteins
discriminating between “metastatic progression” and “no
progression” tumors, one protein discriminated between BCR and “no
progression” tumors, and four proteins discriminated between metastatic
progression and BCR tumors (P<0.05). These promising biomarker candidates
will be further evaluated, individually and in panels, in independent,
larger cohort for their potential prognostic applications. In summary,
PRISM-SRM provides a highly sensitive method for quantification and rapid
screening of multiple potential biomarker candidates at the protein
level. This approach holds great potential for rapidly translating
genomics-based discovery candidates into protein-based biomarkers.


