Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Highly-sensitive detection of EGFR mutation in non-small cell lung
cancer using mutant-enrichment method.


Detection of mutations in EGFR in non-small cell lung cancer is important
for the clinical decision-making process of molecularly targeted
therapies, including Iressa®, Tarceva®, and Tagrisso®. In this study
we developed an assay allowing the detection of EGFR gene mutations being
conducted in the routine diagnostic procedure and its analytic and
clinical performance were evaluated using different types of specimens.
The EGFR mutation assay in this study allows for detecting EGFR exon 19
deletion (Del), exon 20 insertion (Ins), and mutation in T790M, L858R,
S768I and L861Q of rare amounts in a normal genetic background.
Enhancement of detection sensitivity was achieved with the developed
mutant enrichment method which combines mutation-specific primers and
3'-phosphorylation oligonucleotides as blockers for inhibiting wild-type
gene from DNA amplification. Analytic performance for each mutant was
assessed using the control plasmids containing the mutant genes of known
amounts as well as the genomic DNA extracted from mutant cell lines and
Horizon FFPE samples. The assay performance were also evaluated using
clinical samples in parallel with the FDA-approval companion diagnostic
product therascreen® EGFR RGQ PCR Kit . The sensitivity of the assay
evaluated using control plasmids for Del, T790M , L858R, S768I, L861Q
mutation and Ins was 5%, 0.5%, 1%, 0.5%, 0.1% and 0.5% respectively, and
was 1%, 0.5%, 0.5%, 0.5%, 0.1% and 0.5% respectively when applying on HDx
reference standards. Diagnostic results for the 116 clinical samples for
identifying mutations of del, T790M, L858R, S768I, L861Q and Ins was
92.2%, 100%, 99.1%, 100%, 97.4% and 100% respectively concordance with
the therascreen® EGFR RGQ PCR Kit, including 17 cases of multiple
mutations. The overall diagnostic results for all mutations evaluated
with PPA (positive percent agreement), NPA (negative percentage
agreement) and OPA (overall percentage agreement) were 83.3%, 98.2% and
90.5%, respectively. The three samples firstly diagnostic as false
positive were retested and confirmed to be Exon 19 del by DNA sequencing.
The assay demonstrated good sensitivity when compared with commercial
product. More clinical studies are being performed to establish
relationship between drug efficacy and different mutation combinations.


