Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 expression in primary lesions vs metastatic sites and by
demographics in advanced urothelial carcinoma samples.


Background: Determination of programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
expression levels in tumors may help physicians understand which patients
(pts) are most likely to respond to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies in
urothelial carcinoma (UC). Understanding the impact of different sample
types and demographics on PD-L1 expression is important to determine
suitability of tumor biopsies for testing.

Methods: As of July 24, 2016, 363 pts screened in the UC cohort of Study
CD-ON-MEDI4736-1108 (NCT01693562) had tissue available for analysis and
47 pts had provided paired primary and metastatic samples. FFPE samples
were tested in a central laboratory with the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay
using a BenchMark ULTRA instrument. Pts were classified as having either
PD-L1 high (PD-L1 expression ≥25% either on tumour cells [TC] or immune
cells [IC]) or PD-L1 low/negative (Methods: As of July 24, 2016, 363 pts
screened in the UC cohort of Study CD-ON-MEDI4736-1108 (NCT01693562) had
tissue available for analysis and 47 pts had provided paired primary and
metastatic samples. FFPE samples were tested in a central laboratory with
the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay using a BenchMark ULTRA instrument. Pts
were classified as having either PD-L1 high (PD-L1 expression ≥25%
either on tumour cells [TC] or immune cells [IC]) or PD-L1 low/negative
(<25% on TC and IC) tumors. PD-L1 high prevalence was reported in primary
vs metastatic sites, and by age, sex and race.

Results: PD-L1 status was evaluable for 332/363 (91.5%) pts (175/332
[52.7%] PD-L1 high and 157/332 [47.3%] PD-L1 low/negative) whose UC
specimens were tested (intent to diagnose [ITD] population). Overall
percentage agreement between paired primary and metastatic samples, based
on combined TC/IC scoring ≥25%, was 74.5% (95% CI 59.7 - 86.1%). In the
ITD population, using only the samples from which patient PD-L1
expression status was determined, PD-L1 high prevalence in primary and
metastatic samples was 57.1% and 50.9% respectively (p=0.343, not
significant). The proportion of pts with PD-L1 high status was not
enriched in any demographic group (Table).

Conclusions: Initial data from UC pts in Study 1108 showed similar PD-L1
high prevalence in primary and metastatic lesions and good concordance
between paired primary and metastatic samples. These results build
optimism that samples obtained from either location could be used to
determine PD-L1 status. Further data are needed to confirm these findings.

Patients screened for UC cohort with evaluable PD-L1 result - ITD
population (n = 332)



Parameter

PD-L1 high, n (%)

P value



Age, years

<65 (n=131)

73 (55.7%)

0.438



≥65 (n=201)

102 (50.8%)



Sex

Male (n=236)

127 (53.8%)

0.610



Female (n=96)

48 (50.0%)



Race

Asian (n=52)

23 (44.2%)

Asian vs White: 0.406



Black or African American (n=10)

6 (60.0%)



White (n=218)

113 (51.8%)



Other (n=9)

4 (44.4%)


