Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting tankyrases as a therapeutic strategy for triple-negative
breast cancer.


Tankyrases (TNKS1 and TNKS2) are members of the human poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) family and catalyze PARsylation by using NAD+ as a
substrate to modify various proteins in order to regulate various
cellular processes including Wnt/β-catenin signaling. TNKS1 has been
shown to be overexpressed and to be correlated with highly aggressive
disease and prognosis in various types of human cancers. A small molecule
inhibitor of TNKS1, XAV-939 has been proven to be a potent inhibitor of
Wnt/β-catenin signaling by stabilizing Axin. However, the effect of
tankyrase inhibitors as potential breast cancer therapy is still under
investigation. In this study, we found that TNKS1 is highly expressed in
breast cancer cell lines, particularly in triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) cells and that the expression of TNKS1 correlates with
anti-proliferative efficacy of tankyrase inhibitors, XAV-939 and JW55.
Also, XAV-939 treatment suppressed cell migration and invasion
capabilities and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) signaling in
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines. Moreover, XAV-939 reduced
expression of stemness markers. It was shown that polo-like kinase 1
(PLK1) functions as a positive regulator of TNKS1 protein stability.
Interestingly, we found that combination treatment of XAV-939 with PLK
inhibitor GW843682X significantly suppressed cell growth, clonogenic
potential, migratory and invasive capabilities of breast cancer cells.
The combination of XAV-939 with ionizing radiation (IR) also showed an
additional therapeutic effect. Therefore, our findings highlight the
important value of TNKS1 as a therapeutic target and suggest the
potential for improving the clinical efficacies of tankyrase inhibitors
in combination with either PLK inhibitors or radiotherapy for patients
with triple-negative breast cancer.


