Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High EGFR somatic mutation frequency targeting the TK domain in
colorectal cancer patients with microsatellite instability (MSI).


CRCs arise through genetic changes that impact various driver genes and
in some tumors increased mutation rate in microsatellite unstable tumors.
The hypermutable phenotype associated with microsatellite instability
(MSI) results from loss of the mismatch repair system (MMR) activity. MSI
is detected in 15% of all CRCs, and such tumors have a better prognosis
and different chemotherapeutic outcome patterns, including high clinical
benefit from immune checkpoint therapy or relative resistance to 5-FU as
compared to microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors. The epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway plays an essential role in
carcinogenesis of CRCs and is known to be overexpressed in MSI CRCs while
highly mutated in Lung cancer. We analyzed the mutation frequency of
deregulated pathways including EGFR and its downstream genes KRAS and
BRAF in CRCs. We found a significantly elevated EGFR mutation frequency
in CRC MSI-H subtype (45.5% vs. 6.5% in MSS CRCs, pCRCs arise through
genetic changes that impact various driver genes and in some tumors
increased mutation rate in microsatellite unstable tumors. The
hypermutable phenotype associated with microsatellite instability (MSI)
results from loss of the mismatch repair system (MMR) activity. MSI is
detected in 15% of all CRCs, and such tumors have a better prognosis and
different chemotherapeutic outcome patterns, including high clinical
benefit from immune checkpoint therapy or relative resistance to 5-FU as
compared to microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors. The epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway plays an essential role in
carcinogenesis of CRCs and is known to be overexpressed in MSI CRCs while
highly mutated in Lung cancer. We analyzed the mutation frequency of
deregulated pathways including EGFR and its downstream genes KRAS and
BRAF in CRCs. We found a significantly elevated EGFR mutation frequency
in CRC MSI-H subtype (45.5% vs. 6.5% in MSS CRCs, p<0.0000001). Although
KRAS and NRAS are mutated with high frequency in both MSI-H and MSS
groups, BRAF corresponding to RTK-RAS pathways is more altered in MSI-H
than MSS CRCs (32.67% vs 13.10%; p=0.001), consistent with the known
association between MSI-H CRCs and BRAF mutations. We hypothesized that
there might be a mutation pattern in EGFR in CRC subtypes that provide a
rationale for EGFR-targeted therapy for a subtype of CRC. Of 1104
profiled CRCs in the COSMIC v73 database, somatic EGFR mutations were
mapped for 101 MSI-High versus 916 MSS CRCs. EGFR mutations mapped on the
protein structure revealed that mutations are mainly targeting tyrosine
kinase (TK) domain while the extracellular domain remained mostly
wild-type with potential for targeting by anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibodies. It is known that downstream genes such as KRAS as well as
expression levels of EGFR ligands can affect the sensitivity of CRCs to
anti-EGFR therapy. We didnâ€™t detect any difference in mRNA expression
level between MSI-H and MSS group but our analysis is indicative of the
presence of G12D mutations in a high proportion of KRAS-mutated MSS CRCs,
therefore resistance to anti-EGFR antibodies such as cetuximab would be
expected. However, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib and
gefitinib could be considered for further testing in patients with MSI-H
tumors that have a lower frequency of G12D KRAS mutations and may have
mutant EGFR.


