Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular function of PARP inhibition in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary malignant brain tumor,
whose major biomarkers are the DNA methylation status of the promoter for
O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) and the loss/mutation of
the tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). Despite
treatment combining surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy with the
alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ), patient survival remains poor and
recurrence is virtually inevitable, due to TMZ resistance.
Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is a nuclear protein involved in
multiple facets of DNA repair and transcriptional regulation. This enzyme
catalyses the transfer and polymerization of ADP ribose units from NAD+
to form branched polymers of ADP-ribose, called poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR),
covalently attached to heterologous acceptor proteins or PARP-1 itself.
There is a growing interest in PARP inhibitors (PARPi) for their clinical
potential in cancer treatment. Because of the importance of PARP-1
activity in the maintenance of genomic integrity and DNA repair,
treatment with PARPi as adjuvant to TMZ chemotherapy can be beneficial in
GBM. PARPi are currently in clinical trials for patients with GBM
(NCT02152982, NCT01390571, NCT01514201), and one of them is a phase
II/III study of the PARPi veliparib for patients with newly-diagnosed GBM
(NCT02152982). However, the molecular role of PARP-1 and its activity in
GBM remains elusive. Using cellular and molecular approach, we are
assessing the effectiveness of the PARPi veliparib compared to standard
treatment with TMZ in PTEN-mutated GBM and TMZ-resistant GBM cell lines.
By understanding the biology of PARP inhibition in GBM, we will establish
a specific molecular signature that predicts the efficacy of PARPi
treatment in patients diagnosed with GBM.


