Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR as a marker for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma-derived
small extracellular vesicles.


Head and neck cancer will account for an estimated 61,760 new cancer
cases and 13,190 cancer-related deaths in the United States in 2016, the
majority of which (> 90%) will be squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The
prognosis for HNSCC is relatively poor, with an overall 5-year survival
around 60%, and the outlook worsens with increasing stage at diagnosis,
which is problematic since about two-thirds of patients present with
advanced stage disease. This underscores the urgent need for discovery,
development and translation of novel biomarkers to facilitate early
detection of HNSCC and bolster the chance for positive patient outcomes.
Exosomes are nano-sized (40-150 nm) membrane-encapsulated vesicles that
may offer a new avenue for discovery and development of novel HNSCC
biomarkers. However, they are released by essentially all cells, both
normal and malignant, into the extracellular space, resulting in a noisy
environment in biofluids from the perspective of biomarker measurement.
As such, a membrane-bound surface marker that allows for enrichment for
cancer-derived exosomes in patient samples would provide a clear benefit.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which belongs to the ErbB/HER
family of receptor tyrosine kinases, localizes to the plasma membrane and
is over-expressed in as much as 90% of HNSCC tumors. Therefore, we
hypothesized that EGFR will be over-represented on membranes of
HNSCC-derived exosomes and thus may offer utility as a surface marker for
detection and/or enrichment. To test this, we cultured an HNSCC cell line
that over-expresses EGFR (FaDu), EGFR-deficient SW620 colorectal
adenocarcinoma cells, and primary human oral epithelial cells pooled from
3 healthy donors. Cells were cultivated in supplier-recommended media
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) that was super-depleted of exosomes via
18 hour ultracentrifugation at 100,000g and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at
37Â°C with 5% CO2 in 150 cm2 flasks with 25mL media. After reaching
80-90% confluence, media was harvested, and exosomes were isolated and
purified via differential ultracentrifugation. Exosome isolates were
whole-mounted on carbon grids, Immuno-Gold labeled with anti-EGFR, and
imaged on a JEOL JEM-1230 transmission electron microscope (Immuno-EM);
anti-nucleoporin 153 (NUP-153), which localizes to the nucleus, was used
as a negative control. Immuno-EM images indicate abundant EGFR expression
on exosomes secreted by FaDu HNSCC cells, but EGFR is not detectable on
the exosomes secreted by the oral epithelial cells from healthy donors.
These results indicate that EGFR may offer utility for enrichment for
HNSCC-derived exosomes in human biofluid isolates using magnetic beads or
flow cytometry.


