Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of novel IRAK4 inhibitor CA4948 in AML and MDS.


Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) & Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) are
hematologic malignancies that arise from a population of aberrant
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Overactivated innate immune signaling
pathways such as IRAK1, TRAF6, IL1RAP, S100A9 and IL8 have been
demonstrated in MDS/AML and play important roles in propagation of
disease. IRAK4 (interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4), is a protein
kinase involved in signaling innate immune responses and forms a critical
signaling complex with IRAK1. To determine its role in disease
pathobiology, we analyzed transcriptomic data from CD34+ stem and
progenitor cells from 183 MDS patients and found significantly increased
expression of IRAK4 in MDS samples belonging to the high risk RAEB
category (Refractory anemia with excess of blasts, N=80, P Value
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) & Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) are
hematologic malignancies that arise from a population of aberrant
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Overactivated innate immune signaling
pathways such as IRAK1, TRAF6, IL1RAP, S100A9 and IL8 have been
demonstrated in MDS/AML and play important roles in propagation of
disease. IRAK4 (interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4), is a protein
kinase involved in signaling innate immune responses and forms a critical
signaling complex with IRAK1. To determine its role in disease
pathobiology, we analyzed transcriptomic data from CD34+ stem and
progenitor cells from 183 MDS patients and found significantly increased
expression of IRAK4 in MDS samples belonging to the high risk RAEB
category (Refractory anemia with excess of blasts, N=80, P Value <0.05
when compared to healthy controls). Furthermore, increased IRAK4
expression was predictive of significantly adverse prognosis (P value
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) & Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) are
hematologic malignancies that arise from a population of aberrant
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Overactivated innate immune signaling
pathways such as IRAK1, TRAF6, IL1RAP, S100A9 and IL8 have been
demonstrated in MDS/AML and play important roles in propagation of
disease. IRAK4 (interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4), is a protein
kinase involved in signaling innate immune responses and forms a critical
signaling complex with IRAK1. To determine its role in disease
pathobiology, we analyzed transcriptomic data from CD34+ stem and
progenitor cells from 183 MDS patients and found significantly increased
expression of IRAK4 in MDS samples belonging to the high risk RAEB
category (Refractory anemia with excess of blasts, N=80, P Value <0.05
when compared to healthy controls). Furthermore, increased IRAK4
expression was predictive of significantly adverse prognosis (P value <
0.05, median survival of 2.6 years compared to 5.2 years for group with
lower IRAK4). Clinical correlations revealed that MDS patients with
higher IRAK4 expression in stem/progenitor cells had significantly higher
transfusion dependence and had higher leukemic blast counts (Mean Blast
Count 9.3% vs 3.9%, PMyelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) & Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (AML) are hematologic malignancies that arise from a population
of aberrant hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Overactivated innate immune
signaling pathways such as IRAK1, TRAF6, IL1RAP, S100A9 and IL8 have been
demonstrated in MDS/AML and play important roles in propagation of
disease. IRAK4 (interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4), is a protein
kinase involved in signaling innate immune responses and forms a critical
signaling complex with IRAK1. To determine its role in disease
pathobiology, we analyzed transcriptomic data from CD34+ stem and
progenitor cells from 183 MDS patients and found significantly increased
expression of IRAK4 in MDS samples belonging to the high risk RAEB
category (Refractory anemia with excess of blasts, N=80, P Value <0.05
when compared to healthy controls). Furthermore, increased IRAK4
expression was predictive of significantly adverse prognosis (P value <
0.05, median survival of 2.6 years compared to 5.2 years for group with
lower IRAK4). Clinical correlations revealed that MDS patients with
higher IRAK4 expression in stem/progenitor cells had significantly higher
transfusion dependence and had higher leukemic blast counts (Mean Blast
Count 9.3% vs 3.9%, P<0.05), further demonstrating IRAK4 to be an adverse
prognostic marker in MDS. IRAK4 was also overexpressed in highly purified
FACS sorted disease initiating stem cell populations (Long Term-HSC,
CD34+/CD38-/CD90+/Lin –ve) from AML patients with complex cytogenetics
when compared to healthy controls.

To functionally determine the role of IRAK4 in MDS/AML pathogenesis, we
utilized CA-4948, a potent, oral, small-molecule inhibitor of IRAK4, to
assess the effect of inhibiting IRAK4 catalytic activity. In vitro,
CA-4948 blocked downstream NF-κB pathway signaling, including secretion
of proinflammatory cytokines, in Toll-like receptor stimulated THP1
leukemic cells. CA-4948 was tested in clonogenic assays from primary MDS
and AML samples. MDS and AML are associated with block in differentiation
that leads to cytopenias that are the cause of morbidity in these
patients. Treatment with CA-4948 led to increased erythroid and myeloid
differentiation in a majority of samples. Furthermore, drug treatment led
to decreased viability of MDS/AML stem cells (CD34+/CD38-/Lin-ve) In vivo
studies using a THP1 leukemia xenograft model in NSG mice demonstrated
that CA-4948 was well tolerated and led to significantly decreased
disease burden after 6 weeks of treatment.

In conclusion, we demonstrate that IRAK4 is upregulated in stem and
progenitor cells in MDS and AML and is an adverse prognostic marker.
Importantly, a novel, specific, inhibitor of IRAK4 shows preclinical in
vitro and in vivo efficacy in MDS and AML models.


