Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel multidimensional cfDNA assay for real time analysis of
chemotherapy response.


Due to its non-invasive nature and transient lifespan (~30 mins),
circulating cell free DNA (cfDNA) may provide novel insights into cancer
evolution and response to therapy. Here, we have developed a
multidimensional cfDNA assay to measure patients’ responses to
chemotherapy on a time scale that would be impossible using traditional
biopsy methodologies.

We extracted cfDNA from plasma collected immediately before and after
infusion of cytotoxic chemotherapy, and 24 hours after treatment. We
developed assays to (1) quantify cfDNA via qPCR of a 288 base pair
amplicon of Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements (LINE1), (2) determine the
DNA Integrity Index based on additional analysis of 115bp and 516bp LINE1
amplicons, and (3) analyze androgen receptor exon 8 via targeted deep
sequencing.

We analyzed cfDNA extracted from 17 patients with metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer through sequential application of
these 3 assays. Median PSA levels were 69 (0-2223) ng/dl, Hgb 12 (8.2-15)
g/L, Alk Phos 117 (35-879) IU/mL. Deep sequencing of AR exon 8 revealed 6
of the 17 patients presented with 1-2 SNVs (H874Y, T877A, D890H or D879Y)
at ≥1% frequency. Considering LINE1 quantification alone, the average
change pre/post chemotherapy was 38.78 pg/mL (0.5-292.0 pg/mL). A variety
of responses was noted including: 8 of the patients expressed elevated
LINE1 levels post-treatment when compared to baseline, and 5 expressed
depressed levels. Importantly, therapy did not affect tumor subclones
equally, as demonstrated by sequencing and quantitation of mutant AR exon
8 species. Additional data on changes in DNA Integrity Index will be
presented.

We conclude that cytotoxic chemotherapy produces immediately observable
effects on cfDNA. The effect of docetaxel chemotherapy on distinct clones
within the tumor can be measured within hours. Now that a short-time
dynamics response has been demonstrated, follow up studies will be
performed involving more patients to determine the prognostic value.


