Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRT16 germline mutation associated with familial syndrome of
tylosis with esophageal cancer (TOC).


Tylosis (palmoplantar keratoderma) with esophageal cancer (TOC) also
known as Howel-Evans syndrome has been associated with pathogenic
mutations in RHBDF2. A potential TOC family was referred for clinical
evaluation at the Family Cancer Assessment Clinic (FCAC) at Huntsman
Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, Utah. Multiple relatives of the proband
had hyperkeratosis on the areas of skin associated with pressure and
friction, especially the feet, as well as oral leukoplakia. The
probandâ€™s father, paternal aunt, paternal grandfather, and paternal
great grandfather had been diagnosed with esophageal cancer. Clinical
testing was unable to identify a germline mutation in RHBDFR2 that
explained the observed phenotype and inheritance pattern. As part of
Heritage 1K Project (University of Utah), Pediatric & Adult Cancer
Section, we performed whole genome sequencing (WGS) on 5 family members,
4 that were affected with the hyperkeratosis, and 1 unaffected family
member, to identify other potential genetic causes for the observed TOC
phenotype. We prioritized variants via VAAST (Variant Annotation,
Analysis and Search Tool). Reducing our genes of interest to those
involved in palmoplantar keratoderma with PHEVOR (Phenotype Driven
Variant Ontological Re-ranking Tool), we identified a pathogenic
mutation: KRT16 c.379C>T p.Arg127Cys. This mutation is reported in a
large palmoplantar keratoderma family (without esophageal cancer) and is
listed as pathogenic in Clinvar (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar). KRT16
c.379C>T p.Arg127Cys was present in each of the affected family members,
but not in the unaffected relative. Our analysis is the first of its kind
to suggest carriers of pathogenic variants in KRT16 are at-risk for
esophageal cancer, and may benefit from esophageal surveillance.
Additionally, patients presenting with a family history of esophageal
cancer should be considered for germline testing for KRT16 mutations
along with RHBDF2 mutations.


