Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: β-Tubulin inhibitors reduce GLUT1 membrane trafficking to
attenuate tumorigenesis in glioblastoma subtypes.


Glioblastoma is an aggressive, high-grade tumor with poor prognosis due
to lack of sound therapeutic options. Mesenchymal subtype GBMs are
particularly difficult to treat because they tend to proliferate in the
sub ventricular zone, an area that breeds stem-like neural cells and
proves nearly impossible to access for surgical resection. They also
contribute to creating a hypoxic microenvironment and switch to
glycolytic metabolism in what is known as the Warburg Effect. Here, we
hypothesize that strategically inhibiting the glucose transporter, GLUT1,
through cytoskeletal components that traffic it to the cell membrane may
reverse the Warburg Effect, attenuating further tumorigenesis and
decreasing the stemness of such cells. Datamining studies and immunoblot
analysis conducted on human glioblastoma patient specimens (hGBM)
demonstrated that GLUT1 is highly upregulated. Limiting dilution assay
conducted using GLUT1 inhibitors- fasentin and 2-Deoxy-D-glucose reduced
the proliferation in mesenchymal cancer stem cell (CSC) subtype in in
vitro culture. Simultaneously, mass spectrometric analysis revealed
significant association between GLUT1 and β-tubulin 4 (TUBB4) in
mesenchymal subtyped cells. This association was further confirmed by
large-sample datamining and in immunoprecipitation studies from hGBM
specimens, suggesting that TUBB4 may be a viable target in deterring the
trafficking of upregulated GLUT1 to the membrane. Collectively, these
studies confirm that GLUT1 is associated with TUBB4, and that targeting
TUBB4 via siRNA or colchicine derivatives could prove effective in
reversing the Warburg Effect in GBM cells and ultimately improve patient
outcomes.


