Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trends in age distribution of breast cancer, in north east of
Iran: Report of six thousand patients over 30 years.


Aim: This study was aimed to evaluate the age at the time of diagnosis of
breast cancer and it’s probably changes in distribution among patients
during 30 years.

Methods: This cross- sectional study was conducted in Mashhad, Iran from
1981 until 2011. The data of patients were obtained from case records.
The duration of study was categorized into three periods: 1981-1990,
1991-2000 and 2001-2011. SPSS software was used for analyses. The
difference was considered significant if PMethods: This cross- sectional
study was conducted in Mashhad, Iran from 1981 until 2011. The data of
patients were obtained from case records. The duration of study was
categorized into three periods: 1981-1990, 1991-2000 and 2001-2011. SPSS
software was used for analyses. The difference was considered significant
if P<0.05.

Result: From 6274 breast cancer cases, 174 patients were male (2.5%) and
the others 6100 were female (97.5%).Mean age at the time of diagnosis was
49.07 ± 12.07 years (male: 56.48 ± 14.14, female: 48.8 ±12.01). There
was significant difference in age by sex (p Result: From 6274 breast
cancer cases, 174 patients were male (2.5%) and the others 6100 were
female (97.5%).Mean age at the time of diagnosis was 49.07 ± 12.07 years
(male: 56.48 ± 14.14, female: 48.8 ±12.01). There was significant
difference in age by sex (p <0.001). Table 1 presents the mean age of
studied patients in each 10 years of study. ANOVA test showed that there
was not statistical significant difference (P value= 0.1).





Decades

Frequency

Mean age

SD

Youngest

Oldest



1981-1990

467

47.97

12.043

18

88



2000-1991

1771

49.03

12.338

20

99



2001-2011

3949

49.22

11.954

20

98





The most histologic type of breast cancer was ductal carcinoma 65.6%
others percent in order were: NOS 19.6%, lobular 3.7%, medullary 2.8%,
adenocarcinoma 2.8%, tubular and papillary 0.2% and 5.1% of other types.
Relative frequency of histologic types had significant differences among
3 intervals (p The most histologic type of breast cancer was ductal
carcinoma 65.6% others percent in order were: NOS 19.6%, lobular 3.7%,
medullary 2.8%, adenocarcinoma 2.8%, tubular and papillary 0.2% and 5.1%
of other types. Relative frequency of histologic types had significant
differences among 3 intervals (p <0.001), the frequency of adenocarcinoma
was decreasing but ductal carcinoma was increasing during 3 decades. Mean
age of ductal carcinoma, lobular, medullary and adenocarcinoma was
48.9±11.8, 50.6±12.4, 46.4±11.4, 50.2±11.9, respectively. Mean age
had significant differences among these main histologic types (p
=0.002).98% of patients were urban and 2% were rural. Mean age of these 2
groups has statistical significant difference (P = 0.001) and is 10 years
older in rural patients. Frequency of people who live in urban area was
increased significantly (pThe most histologic type of breast cancer was
ductal carcinoma 65.6% others percent in order were: NOS 19.6%, lobular
3.7%, medullary 2.8%, adenocarcinoma 2.8%, tubular and papillary 0.2% and
5.1% of other types. Relative frequency of histologic types had
significant differences among 3 intervals (p <0.001), the frequency of
adenocarcinoma was decreasing but ductal carcinoma was increasing during
3 decades. Mean age of ductal carcinoma, lobular, medullary and
adenocarcinoma was 48.9±11.8, 50.6±12.4, 46.4±11.4, 50.2±11.9,
respectively. Mean age had significant differences among these main
histologic types (p =0.002).98% of patients were urban and 2% were rural.
Mean age of these 2 groups has statistical significant difference (P =
0.001) and is 10 years older in rural patients. Frequency of people who
live in urban area was increased significantly (p<00.1) during these 30
years compare with rural area.

Conclusion: breast cancer occurs in Iranian women at least one decade
younger than women in developed countries we found no change in mean age
of diagnosis of breast cancer during these 30 years from 1981 to 2011.

.


