Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of YAP/TAZ-dependent transforming properties in LATS1/2
deleted RPE1 cells by MAPKAPK5 targeting.


Purpose: Recent evidence suggests the Hippo pathway effectors YAP/TAZ
play important roles in tumor pathogenesis, including tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and drug resistance. Loss of LATS1/2, the negative regulators
of YAP/TAZ, has been reported in various human tumors, and suggested to
activate YAP/TAZ in tumorigenic process. However, the molecular
consequence of LATS1/2 genetic loss in benign human cells has not been
addressed, and therapeutic targets for tumors with LATS1/2 loss have not
been explored. We aimed to investigate the transforming potential of
LATS1/2 loss in human RPE1 cells, and to find targetable kinases that
support YAP/TAZ activation in tumors with LATS1/2 loss

Method: To examine the effect of LATS1/2 loss, both LATS1 and LATS2
alleles were deleted by CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing in RPE1-hTERT cells.
YAP/TAZ activity of LATS1/2-null RPE1 cells was measured by
immunofluorescence (IF) staining and qRT-PCR. Transforming properties of
LATS1/2 loss were monitored on both 2-dimensional (2D) and 3D culture,
and the centrosome number and DNA contents of cells were determined by IF
and propidium iodide staining. LATS1/2-null RPE1 cells were subjected to
an image-based kinome-wide siRNA library screening for identifying
YAP/TAZ downregulating hits.

Results: The LATS1/2-null RPE1 cells showed persistent nuclear
localization and transcriptional activation of YAP/TAZ. In contrast to
wild-type RPE1 cells, the LATS1/2-null RPE1 cells showed high
proliferation rate, loss of contact inhibition, and sphere formation
capacity in matrigel 3D culture, demonstrating transforming activity of
LATS1/2 loss. Moreover, LATS1/2 knockout caused genomic instability and
centrosome overduplication in RPE1 cells that might be related to defects
in mitotic checkpoint regulation. Next, we performed an image-based siRNA
library screening to find potential therapeutic targets for tumors with
LATS1/2 loss. We found that the inhibition of a p38 MAPK pathway
component, MAPKAPK5, suppresses YAP/TAZ nuclear localization and
activation in LATS1/2-null RPE1 cells. MAPKAPK5 physically interacted
with YAP, and RNAi-mediated MAPKAPK5 inhibition decreased YAP/TAZ protein
level and transcriptional activity. MAPKAPK5 depletion resulted in
suppression of LATS1/2-null RPE1 cell proliferation on 2D culture as well
as sphere formation capacity on 3D culture. Conversely, constitutively
active MAPKAPK5 mutant expression in RPE1 cells induced YAP/TAZ nuclear
enrichment.

Conclusion: These results suggest that LATS1/2 genetic loss drives
transforming properties in human RPE1 cells, and MAPKAPK5 inhibition
suppresses YAP/TAZ activation induced by LATS1/2 loss. We suggest that
MAPKAPK5 is a novel positive regulator of YAP/TAZ and may serve as a
therapeutic target for YAP/TAZ-driven tumors.


