Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transferrin receptor 1 (TfR) as marker for circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) identification in NSCLC.


CTCs are used as a surrogate source of tumor material in solid tumors.
Clinical applications of CTCs as liquid biopsy comprise the monitoring of
molecular alterations during tumor progression and dynamic evaluation of
molecular markers of treatment response. The FDA-cleared method to
isolate CTCs in cancer patients (Cell Search) is based on positive
selection of EpCAM expressing cells. However, this approach performs
poorly in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as it identifies CTCs in
only 7% of the subjects, failing to show any prognostic relevance.

Down-regulation/loss of epithelial markers to isolate (EpCAM) and
identify (cytokeratin, CK) CTCs could in part explain the low CTC yield
obtained in NSCLC with approaches based on epithelial markers expression.
To overcome this challenge we used size-based CTC enrichment (ISET
filters) from NSCLC patientsâ€™ peripheral blood. As a positive
identifier of CTCs we used transferrin receptor 1 (TfR) which is a cell
membrane-associated protein, that mediates intracellular iron uptake, and
which is expressed at low levels in many normal tissues but
over-expressed in cancer cells.

We first analyzed TfR protein expression by immunofluorescence in a panel
of NSCLC cell lines and in healthy donor leukocytes. While all NSCLC
cells lines analyzed were positive for TfR expression, none of the
leukocyte expressed the receptor. Moreover, TfR expression was detected
also in EpCAM negative NSCLC cell lines. To determine the clinical
applicability of this novel CTC identifier, we determined TfR expression
in CTCs isolated from peripheral blood of 35 metastatic NSCLC patients
using the ISET filter technology. The isolated CTCs were stained for TfR,
CK, CD45 and DAPI. For each patient, one additional ISET filter was
stained with Giemsa for morphologic analysis by a pathologist. By using
the classic panel of CTC identifiers markers (CK+/CD45-/DAPI+), CTCs were
identified in 4/34 (11%) patients, while by using TfR as positive
identifier (TfR+/CD45-/DAPI+) CTCs were identified in 31/35 (88%)
subjects. The morphologic review of Giemsa stained filters confirmed the
presence of tumor cells in 28/34 (82%) samples [0-217 CTCs/sample].
Interestingly, patients with > 6 TfR+ CTCs had a worse overall survival
(OS) than patients with We first analyzed TfR protein expression by
immunofluorescence in a panel of NSCLC cell lines and in healthy donor
leukocytes. While all NSCLC cells lines analyzed were positive for TfR
expression, none of the leukocyte expressed the receptor. Moreover, TfR
expression was detected also in EpCAM negative NSCLC cell lines. To
determine the clinical applicability of this novel CTC identifier, we
determined TfR expression in CTCs isolated from peripheral blood of 35
metastatic NSCLC patients using the ISET filter technology. The isolated
CTCs were stained for TfR, CK, CD45 and DAPI. For each patient, one
additional ISET filter was stained with Giemsa for morphologic analysis
by a pathologist. By using the classic panel of CTC identifiers markers
(CK+/CD45-/DAPI+), CTCs were identified in 4/34 (11%) patients, while by
using TfR as positive identifier (TfR+/CD45-/DAPI+) CTCs were identified
in 31/35 (88%) subjects. The morphologic review of Giemsa stained filters
confirmed the presence of tumor cells in 28/34 (82%) samples [0-217
CTCs/sample]. Interestingly, patients with > 6 TfR+ CTCs had a worse
overall survival (OS) than patients with < 6 TfR+ CTCs [p=0.048 Log Rank
(Mantel-Cox)]. OS did not significantly differ using the same cutoff with
CTCs defined based on CK or Giemsa staining.

Overall, our data indicate that TfR is a promising biomarker for the
detection of CTCs in NSCLC CTCs, superior to CK or EpCAM. Our data also
suggest that TfR may potentially identify CTCs subpopulations with a
significant prognostic role in NSCLC. We are currently isolating TfR+
CTCs from early stage and metastatic NSCLC patients for further molecular
characterization and determination of clinical significance.


