Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt antagonist, secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (SFRP4) and
peptides from its associated domains, increases chemotherapeutic response
of cancer stem cells of malignant mesothelioma cell lines.


Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a highly aggressive cancer associated with
past asbestos exposure that is characterized by rapid progression, late
metastases and poor prognosis. There is a need for much improved and
novel therapies for this cancer through improved biological understanding
of the disease.Previous studies have shown that SFRPs in general and
SFRP4 in particular are down regulated in mesothelioma tissue and cell
lines 1-4. Based on our own study and previously demonstrated a role for
sFRP4 in making chemoresistant tumours amenable to chemotherapeutics
5-16. We have now progressed our work into the effects of peptides
derived from the cysteine-rich domain and the netrin-like domain of sFRP4
on tumour initiating cells derived from MM cell lines.We examined the
effect of secreted frizzled-related protein 4 (sFRP4), a Wnt signaling
antagonist and its associated peptides, in chemosensitizing the MM cell
line ONE 58 and JU77 and MM cancer stem cells (CSCs) enriched from these
two cell lines to chemotherapeutics.We found tumorspheres exposed to
sFRP4 and peptides alone and in combination with cisplatin induced cell
death and decreased CD133 and ALDH1 expression.We thus identified for the
first time that sFRP4 and associated peptides could help to sensitise to
chemotherapeutics and destroy cancer stem cells of MM cell line, which
would lead to effective treatment regimen to combat malignant
mesothelioma. Our initial in vitro data exemplify the ability of these
peptides in diminishing the numbers of therapy-resistant Tumor initiating
cells (TICs).

References:

1.

Lee et al, 2004, Oncogene, 23(39), 6672-6676.

2.

He et al, 2005 Cancer research, 65(3), 743-748.

3.

Kohnoe et al 2010; Oncology reports, 24(2), 423

4.

S.A. Fox et al., 2013 Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 11;440(1):82-7

5.

Perumal V et al., 2015 Int J Biochem Cell Biol, Mar 21;64:91-96

6.

Wolf V et al., FEBS Lett 1997. 385-9

7.

Hsieh M, et al., Endocrinology 2003, 144:4597-4606

8.

Drake JM, et al., Apoptosis 2003, 8:389-397

9.

Constantinou T, et al., J Mol Signal 2008, 3:10

10.

White L, et al., Reprod Biomed Online 2009, 18:104-110

11.

Muley A et al., Am J Pathol 2010, 176: 1505-1516

12.

Longman D,et al., Oncology Research 2012, 20: 1-6

13.

Uttara S, et al., BMC Cell Biology 2012,13: 25

14.

Warrier A, et al., Cancer Gene Therapy 2014, 21: 381-388

15.

Warrier S, et al., Oncology Research 2014 21: 9

16.

Perumal V, et al, Exp Cell Res. 2016 Feb 15;341(2):218-24.


