Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A potent and selective CSF-1R inhibitor, DCR-0064, inhibits colony
stimulating factor 1 signaling in vitro and in vivo.


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are major components of leukocytic
infiltrate of tumors. It has been reported that high TAMs density is
associated with poor clinical prognosis. Within the tumor
microenvironment, TAMs rely on signaling through CSF-1/CSF-1 Receptor
kinase axis to promote tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis.
Therefore, decrease of TAMs density in tumors through inhibition of
CSF-1R kinase is considered a potential target for drug development. In
this study, we report that a novel small molecule DCR-0064 inhibits
CSF-1R kinase with IC50 value below 10 nM and possesses specificity for
CSF-1R over other tyrosine or serine/threonine kinases. DCR-0064
selectively inhibits CSF-1 induced growth of M-NFS-60 myeloid cells and
effectively suppresses intracellular CSF-1R activation with IC50 value
less than 100 nM. The potency and selectivity of DCR-0064 is superior to
the current lead CSF-1R inhibitor, PLX3397, which is in phase III
clinical development for treating tenosynovial giant cell tumor. The
selectively growth inhibitory activity of DCR-0064 is consistent with
inhibition of CSF-1R signaling. Oral administration of DCR-0064 reduces
TAMs density in vivo in mice. DCR-0064 is being developed as a candidate
for preclinical development.


