Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SMAD4 loss is associated with poor prognosis in Middle Eastern
colorectal cancer.


Background: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is major cause of morbidity and
mortality in cancer patients worldwide and it ranks as the most common
cancer in males and the third most common among females in Saudi Arabia.
Alteration in TGF-β pathway has been reported in many cancers. So In
search for new molecular targets we analyzed the role of SMAD4, critical
TGF-β pathway mediator, in Saudi colorectal cancers

Methods: 426 CRC cases were analyzed for SMAD4 mutations by targeted
capture sequencing and protein expression status by immunohistochemistry
in a tissue microarray format. Results were analyzed for association with
any clinico-pathological parameters and for prognostic significance.

Results: SMAD4 mutations were detected in 11.9 %( 50/418) cases of Saudi
colorectal cancers. CRC with SMAD4 mutations were significantly
associated with NRAS mutations (p=0.0481). SMAD4 complete loss of
expression by immunohistochemistry was seen in 12.8% (52/404) cases and
this loss was associated with young age (p=0.0236) and inversely with
MSI-high tumors (p=0.0005). SMAD4 expression loss by immunohistochemistry
and mutation were significantly associated with each other

(p=0.0028). In the multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional
hazard model SMAD4 expression loss was an independent marker of poor
prognosis (p=0.0119)

Conclusion: SMAD4 alteration was found to be associated with a poor
overall survival in the Saudi colorectal cancer patients. With the advent
of targeted anticancer therapy, this study confirms the findings of other
investigators and highlights a potential target which can be exploited to
improve the survival of CRC patients in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia


