Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascularity and vascular maturity in breast cancer: a comparative
analysis of the different molecular subtypes.


Currently, angiogenesis inhibitors lack considerable activity and did not
result in survival

advantage in breast cancer. The goal of this study is to evaluate
vasculature in terms of

vascularity and vascular maturity among breast cancer subtypes. Archived
tumor

samples for breast cancer patients were retrieved from Pathology
Department at Royal

Medical Services in Jordan. Tissue sections were stained for the
expression of

basement membrane laminin using immunohistochemical analysis. Endothelial
cell and

pericyte were identified and counted based on the shape of the nuclei as
visualized with

DAPI stain. Demographic, clinical, and pathological data were retrieved
from patient

medical records at time of diagnosis. Vascularity was obtained by
counting the number

of blood vessels and maturity of blood vessels is represented by the
ratio of the average

number of endothelial cell to average number of pericytes. A total of 60
patients were

enrolled in this study in which 34 patients (56.7%) have
hormone-dependent disease, 14

patients (23.3%) determined to have HER2-positive disease, and 12 cases
(20.0%) were

classified as triple-negative. Results showed a significant difference
for the mean

number of blood vessels (p=0.008) and endothelial cell to pericyte ratio
(p=0.000)

among the different molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Post hoc
analysis indicated

statistically significant difference in mean number of blood vessels
between hormone-

dependent and HER2-positive tumors (p=0.015). In addition, ratio of
endothelial cells to

pericytes was significantly different between hormone-dependent cases and
each of

HER2-positive and triple-negative cases (p=0.000 and 0.014,
respectively). Size of

tumor was significantly correlated to endothelial cell to pericyte ratio
for the population

examined (r=0.345, p=0.007). A significant correlation was found between
the number of

blood vessels and number of involved lymph nodes among all patients
(r=0.271,

p=0.038). Independent samples tâ€“test analysis comparing mean number of
blood

vessels and endothelial to pericyte ratio according to hormone receptor
status showed

significant difference between hormone receptor negative and positive
cases for both

estrogen and progesterone receptors (pestrogen and progesterone receptors
(p<0.05). No significant difference was found for

the vascular parameters tested according to tumor stage, grade, and
lymphovascular

invasion (p>0.05). Collectively, these findings showed that the degree of
tumor

vascularity and vascular maturity are not uniform among breast cancer
subtypes.

Vascular maturity was remarkably higher for hormone-dependent breast
tumors

compared to both HER2-positive and triple-negative cases. It is critical
that a careful

assessment of tumor vasculature is being considered in breast cancer
patients in order

to determine responsiveness to chemotherapy and anti-angiogenic treatment
among the

different molecular subtypes.


