Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of HDP-101, an anti-BCMA antibody-drug
conjugate.


Background:

ATACs (antibody-targeted Amanitin conjugates) comprise a new class of
antibody-drug conjugates using amanitin as toxic payload. Amanitin binds
to the eukaryotic RNA pol II and thereby inhibits the cellular
transcription process at very low concentrations. In the current study,
in vitro and in vivo data of new ATACs targeting BCMA (B Cell Maturation
Antigen, also known as CD269) are presented. BCMA is selectively
expressed on malignant plasma cells like in multiple myeloma (MM) and
hence considered an ideal target for Amanitin based ADCs.

Material and methods:

MM cell lines: NCI-H929, MM.1S Luc (stable luciferase transfected) and
CCRF-CEM (BCMA negative).

Antibody: anti-BCMA Thiomab (Max Delbr√ºck Centrum, Berlin;
derivatization and production at Heidelberg Pharma).

Synthesis of HDP-101: Maleimide amanitin compounds were conjugated to
substituted cysteine residues of the anti-BCMA Thiomab.

Cell proliferation assay: Quantitative determination of cytotoxicity was
performed by CellTiter Glo 2.0 assay (Promega) or WST.1 assay (Roche).

Animal models: Subcutaneous and metastatic mouse xenograft tumor models
with MM cell lines NCI-H929 and MM.1S Luc were performed in single-dose
and multiple-dosing experiments. Tolerability was assessed in mice and
nonhuman primates (NHP).

Results:

HDP-101 showed in vitro cytotoxicity on BCMA+ cell lines in picomolar
range, whereas no cytotoxic activity on BCMA- cells was observed.

In mouse xenograft models, HDP-101 caused dose-dependent tumor regression
and complete remission after a single i.v. dose of 2.0 mg/kg and 4.0
mg/kg in s.c. xenografts and after single i.v. doses from 0.1 mg/kg to
2.0 mg/kg in disseminating xenografts.

Safety profiling in Cynomolgus monkeys revealed a good tolerability and
therapeutic index after sequentially applied doses of 0.3, 1.0, and
multiple dose application of 4 x 3.0 mg/kg. Hematology and clinical
chemistry parameters were unaffected except liver enzymes and LDH: A mild
to moderate and transient increase was observed. The half-life of the ADC
in serum was 7-9 days; the free toxin was detectable at levels close to
the lower limit of quantification only (LLOQ = 1.2nM).

Conclusions:

Targeted cytotoxic drug delivery to BCMA positive MM cell lines was
achieved by using HDP-101, an anti-BCMA-ATAC. The mode of action of the
payload Amanitin led to an efficient anti-tumor potential in vitro and in
vivo with good tolerability in NHP studies. Using ADCs in the therapy of
multiple myeloma is a promising approach, especially by using a cytotoxic
agent whose mode of action differs from other commonly used toxins, like
ATACs. First-in-human trial is expected to start in 2018.


