Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of therapeutic combinations in glioblastoma using
personalized gene expression networks.


The goal of our study was to identify patient-specific gene expression
networks from Glioblastoma Patient-Derived Xenografts (PDXs) and
determine novel therapeutic compound combinations using those networks.

Glioblastoma is the most common malignant primary adult brain tumor with
a standard of care consisting of maximal surgical resection followed by
radiotherapy and adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy. However,
despite medical advances in the field, recurrence is almost universal,
suggesting the need for more personalized and targeted therapeutic
approaches.

For this, we obtained, transcriptional data from Glioblastoma PDXs and
used them to identify their respective differentially expressed genes.
Patient-specific gene expression networks were then created and their
biological relevance was supplemented by integrating them with TCGA
Glioblastoma transcriptional data. In order to identify compound
combinations specific for those networks, we used the extensive chemical
perturbation signatures from the Library of Network-based Cellular
Signatures (LINCS). From the large number of L1000 transcriptional data
we extracted gene expression signatures that were indicative of specific
LINCS compounds. We then compared those signatures to the
patient-specific networks in order to prioritize compound combinations
that were inducing discordant transcriptional changes in distinct
sub-networks of the PDXs transcriptome. The most orthogonal compound
combinations were then chosen and used in in-vitro cell viability assays
of Glioblastoma PDXs in order to evaluate their effectiveness. The above
process can be used to prioritize compound combinations with potential
therapeutic effect in a patient-specific manner.


