Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semaphorin signal via MICAL3 induces symmetrical cell division of
cancer stem-like cells to confer aggressiveness in breast cancer.


Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) are thought to be maintained in
cancerous tissues by increased frequency of symmetric cell division at
the expense of asymmetric cell divisionin the cancer tissues, although
how this occurs it remain largely unknown. Here, we discovered that
molecules interactinging with CasL 3 (MICAL3) contributed to tumor sphere
formation in patient-derived breast cancer cells and tumor initiating
activity in a patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model. Semaphorin
(Sema)-stimulation induced complex formation involving MICAL3 and
collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2), leading to stabilization
of Numb in breast cancer cells. Neuropillin-1 (NP1), a receptor for Sema,
and Numb were specifically expressed and colocalized at high levels in a
BCSC-enriched population that induce tumor sphere formation. MICAL3
knockdown decreased symmetric cell division and increased asymmetric
division of in NP1-high cancer stem-like cells that express high level of
Numb at high levels. Thus, MICAL3/CRMP2/Numb pathway appears to play a
critical role in the symmetric division of NP1-high cancer stem-like
cells to expand the pool of BCSCs. Finally, we showed that breast cancer
patients with higher expression levels of NP1 and Numb in cancer tissues
show poor prognosis compared with those with lower expression levels of
NP1 and Numb by using tissue microarray of breast cancer tissues. We
provide a rationale for eradicating BCSC by blocking the symmetric
division of BCSC by targeting molecules in Sema/NP1/MICAL3 pathway.


