Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and functional analysis of signal peptidase complex 18
in bladder cancer.


Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a common malignancy that causes
approximately 150,000 deaths per year worldwide. So far, no molecularly
targeted agents have been approved for treatment of the disease. In the
present study, we built an in-house oligonucleotide array, on which 394
genes were selected based on our SAGE data and previously reported array
data, in order to identify the genes of most relevance to gastric
carcinogenesis. Among these genes, we focused on SEC11A, because it is
frequently overexpressed in gastric cancer (GC). SEC11A encodes the SPC18
protein, which is one of the subunits of the signal peptidase complex
(SPC). Most secretory proteins contain amino terminal- or internal signal
peptides that direct their sorting to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
From the ER, proteins are transported to either the extracellular space
or the plasma membrane through the ER-Golgi secretory pathway. The ER
signal peptides are then cleaved by the SPC. In GC, SPC18 contributes to
progression via EGFR pathway associated with TGF-a secretion. However,
the expression and function of SPC18 have not been investigated in
bladder cancer (BC). In this study, we analyzed the expression and
distribution of SPC18 in human BC. Expression of SPC18 was observed in 44
(54.3%) out of 81 BC cases that was associated with T category
(p=0.0002), Grade (p=0.0425), vascular invasion (p=0.0112) and CK5/6
positive/ CK20 negative basal type BC (p=0.0004). The univariate analysis
indicated that expression of SPC18 (HR, 3.14; 95% CI, 1.47-7.47;
P=0.0027) was associated with overall survival. In the multivariate
model, SPC18 expression was an independent prognostic indicator (HR,
3.46; 95% CI, 1.35-10.00; P=0.0087). BC cells KMBC2 transfected with
SPC18 expression vector significantly induced the cell growth
(pUrothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a common malignancy that causes
approximately 150,000 deaths per year worldwide. So far, no molecularly
targeted agents have been approved for treatment of the disease. In the
present study, we built an in-house oligonucleotide array, on which 394
genes were selected based on our SAGE data and previously reported array
data, in order to identify the genes of most relevance to gastric
carcinogenesis. Among these genes, we focused on SEC11A, because it is
frequently overexpressed in gastric cancer (GC). SEC11A encodes the SPC18
protein, which is one of the subunits of the signal peptidase complex
(SPC). Most secretory proteins contain amino terminal- or internal signal
peptides that direct their sorting to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
From the ER, proteins are transported to either the extracellular space
or the plasma membrane through the ER-Golgi secretory pathway. The ER
signal peptides are then cleaved by the SPC. In GC, SPC18 contributes to
progression via EGFR pathway associated with TGF-a secretion. However,
the expression and function of SPC18 have not been investigated in
bladder cancer (BC). In this study, we analyzed the expression and
distribution of SPC18 in human BC. Expression of SPC18 was observed in 44
(54.3%) out of 81 BC cases that was associated with T category
(p=0.0002), Grade (p=0.0425), vascular invasion (p=0.0112) and CK5/6
positive/ CK20 negative basal type BC (p=0.0004). The univariate analysis
indicated that expression of SPC18 (HR, 3.14; 95% CI, 1.47-7.47;
P=0.0027) was associated with overall survival. In the multivariate
model, SPC18 expression was an independent prognostic indicator (HR,
3.46; 95% CI, 1.35-10.00; P=0.0087). BC cells KMBC2 transfected with
SPC18 expression vector significantly induced the cell growth (p<0.01)
and invasion (pUrothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a common malignancy
that causes approximately 150,000 deaths per year worldwide. So far, no
molecularly targeted agents have been approved for treatment of the
disease. In the present study, we built an in-house oligonucleotide
array, on which 394 genes were selected based on our SAGE data and
previously reported array data, in order to identify the genes of most
relevance to gastric carcinogenesis. Among these genes, we focused on
SEC11A, because it is frequently overexpressed in gastric cancer (GC).
SEC11A encodes the SPC18 protein, which is one of the subunits of the
signal peptidase complex (SPC). Most secretory proteins contain amino
terminal- or internal signal peptides that direct their sorting to the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). From the ER, proteins are transported to
either the extracellular space or the plasma membrane through the
ER-Golgi secretory pathway. The ER signal peptides are then cleaved by
the SPC. In GC, SPC18 contributes to progression via EGFR pathway
associated with TGF-a secretion. However, the expression and function of
SPC18 have not been investigated in bladder cancer (BC). In this study,
we analyzed the expression and distribution of SPC18 in human BC.
Expression of SPC18 was observed in 44 (54.3%) out of 81 BC cases that
was associated with T category (p=0.0002), Grade (p=0.0425), vascular
invasion (p=0.0112) and CK5/6 positive/ CK20 negative basal type BC
(p=0.0004). The univariate analysis indicated that expression of SPC18
(HR, 3.14; 95% CI, 1.47-7.47; P=0.0027) was associated with overall
survival. In the multivariate model, SPC18 expression was an independent
prognostic indicator (HR, 3.46; 95% CI, 1.35-10.00; P=0.0087). BC cells
KMBC2 transfected with SPC18 expression vector significantly induced the
cell growth (p<0.01) and invasion (p<0.01) activity. Western blot showed
the overexpression of SPC18 induced the phosphorylation of EGFR, Akt and
Erk. Real-time reverse transcription PCR analysis revealed the SPC18
forced expression cells induced mesenchymal character. These results
suggest that SPC18 might contribute to the progression of BC.


