Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deep immunophenotyping using flow cytometry of dissociated cells
from Barrett's esophagus and matched adjacent squamous epithelium defines
distinct phenotypic clusters.


Barrett's esophagus (BE) is defined as metaplasia of the squamous
epithelium to a specialized columnar epithelium with risk factors of
gastroesophageal reflux and obesity and a predilection for middle-age and
older white males. BE progresses through stages of dysplasia (low-grade
and high-grade) before developing into esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Challenges remain in early detection and predicting which patients may
progress to dysplasia. Here we describe a method by which we compare
human clinical IRB-approved BE biopsies and adjacent normal squamous
epithelium using tissue dissociation and deep immunophenotyping by flow
cytometric collection and analysis. A cassette of canonical epithelial or
tumor stem cell-associated targets (EpCAM, CD24, CD44, CD49f, Her2/neu,
CD133, CD90, CD166, and CD29), immune cell markers (CD3, CD45, CD127,
HLA-DR, CD16, CD56, CD4, CD8, CD25, and CD19), as well as targets
associated with myeloid derived suppressor cells (CD14, CD15, CD33,
CD11b, HLA-DR, CD31 and CD86) were used to discern differences across
subjects and between cellular compartments in normal and BE tissue. The
Barrettâ€™s samples show a majority population with a characteristic
phenotype (EpCAM+CD133lowCD49fhigh) when compared with normal squamous
tissue samples (EpCAM-CD133-CD49flow). The samples separate into two
discrete groups using hierarchical clustering based on differential
surface marker expression of combined epithelial and immune cell markers,
but also reveal unexpected, shared phenotypes for some normal and BE
samples. Principal component analysis supports this grouping and was used
to identify more compelling targets for categorization, such as CD133 and
CD49f. The resulting expression and distribution of targets offer a
phenotypic fingerprint characterizing both the epithelial cell and immune
cell compartment. Besides providing the potential for revealing
clinically relevant differences between BE and normal tissue, as well as
across subjects, the discovered surface immunophenotypes can be used to
target specific subpopulations from dysplastic tissue for further
molecular investigation. A deeper understanding of the role of such
specific subpopulations should increase the prospects for more complete
understanding of BE and its progression.


