Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of EWS-FLI1 binding partners
in Ewing sarcoma cell lines.


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is characterized by a reciprocal translocation
t(11;22) that results in a fusion of the EWSR1 and FLI1 genes (EWS-FLI).
The objective of this study is to identify protein binding partners of
the purportedly undruggable chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1 to
serve as alternative pharmacological targets for potential ES-selective
drug therapies. The literature identifies the orphan nuclear receptor
DAX1 (encoded by NR0B1) as a binding partner of EWS-FLI1 the expression
of which is restricted outside ES, thereby providing a target for a
potential ES selective drug. Yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screening using
EWS-FLI1 as the bait was employed to identify other potential targets.
The importance of the binding partners identified by the Y2H screen was
initially assessed by a series of proliferation assays involving the ES
cell lines EW8, ES7 and ES6 as well as rhabdomyosarcoma cell line Rh30
(Non-Ewing control). Prior to measuring proliferation, cells were
transfected a siRNA designed to target the putative binding partner of
EWS-FLI1. These cells were then grown alongside cells transfected with a
control siRNA over a period of 96 hr. The change in cell confluence in
the wells was measured by a live-cell real-time measurement (Incucyte).
Gene knockdown was confirmed by RT-PCR and western blot analysis. The
proliferation assays showed that the knockdown of DAX1 produces a notable
reduction in cell proliferation compared to siRNA control proliferation
in all three of the Ewing cell lines (10% to 25%). No significant DAX1
siRNA based inhibition of cell proliferation was detected in the Rh30
non-Ewing control cell line. Three of the proteins identified by the Y2H
screen showed significant reductions in ES cell proliferation.
Methyl-CpG-Binding Domain Protein 1 (MBD1) knockdown caused the
proliferation of the ES cell lines to level off at 60% to 80% within 2 to
4 days. Proliferation of MBD1 siRNA and control siRNA transfected Rh30
cells was similar for the full 4 days of the assay. Mannosidase-Î±-class
2B-member 2 (MAN2B2) knockdown caused the proliferation of the ES and
Rh30 cell lines to level off at 25% to 65% within 1 to 2 days.
Mixed-Lineage Leukemia Protein 3 (MLL3) knockdown caused the
proliferation of the EW8 and ES7 cell lines to level off at 52% and 70%
respectively. MLL3 knockdown did not inhibit the proliferation of Rh30
cells when compared to siRNA control cells. In contrast, ES6 cell
proliferation was also not inhibited by MLL3 knockdown when compared to
their siRNA control cells. The knockdowns of DAX1, MLL3 and MBD1 suggest
that these EWS-FLI1 binding partners would likely provide potential
targets for ES drug development. The effect of knocking down
Y2H-identified EWS-FLI interactors on colony formation, migration and
tumorigenicity is ongoing.


