Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Panel of urinary cell-free microRNAs in detection of urinary
bladder cancer.


Bladder cancer is the most common cancer of the urinary tract. More than
90% of bladder cancers are urothelial carcinoma, which are divided into
non-muscle-invasive and muscle-invasive forms. Non-muscle-invasive tumors
frequently recur (50-70%) and can also progress to invasion form
(10-15%). These patients are monitored by cystoscopy and may have
multiple resections over many years. Improved monitoring method is
needed, ideally via urine analysis, which could reduce the morbidity and
costs associated with long follow up. Currently there are no molecular
biomarkers which could diagnose or accurately predict disease
progression. We aimed to develop a clinically applicable, specific and
sensitive panel of urine microRNAs enabling detect bladder cancer and
predict risk of progression to muscle-invasive form.Within the
exploratory phase of study we have analyzed expression profiles of 1733
miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 bladder cancer patients (6 muscle
invasive, 5 high-grade muscle non-invasive, 5 low-grade muscle
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. Diagnostic and
prognostic potential of selected microRNAs was further validated on
independent samples in training phase (50 bladder cancer patients, 15
controls) and validation phase (100 bladder cancer patients, 55 controls,
45 renal cancer patients) using specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR
method.Global expression profiling identified set of 76 miRNAs able
distinguish bladder cancer patients from healthy controls (P Bladder
cancer is the most common cancer of the urinary tract. More than 90% of
bladder cancers are urothelial carcinoma, which are divided into
non-muscle-invasive and muscle-invasive forms. Non-muscle-invasive tumors
frequently recur (50-70%) and can also progress to invasion form
(10-15%). These patients are monitored by cystoscopy and may have
multiple resections over many years. Improved monitoring method is
needed, ideally via urine analysis, which could reduce the morbidity and
costs associated with long follow up. Currently there are no molecular
biomarkers which could diagnose or accurately predict disease
progression. We aimed to develop a clinically applicable, specific and
sensitive panel of urine microRNAs enabling detect bladder cancer and
predict risk of progression to muscle-invasive form.Within the
exploratory phase of study we have analyzed expression profiles of 1733
miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 bladder cancer patients (6 muscle
invasive, 5 high-grade muscle non-invasive, 5 low-grade muscle
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. Diagnostic and
prognostic potential of selected microRNAs was further validated on
independent samples in training phase (50 bladder cancer patients, 15
controls) and validation phase (100 bladder cancer patients, 55 controls,
45 renal cancer patients) using specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR
method.Global expression profiling identified set of 76 miRNAs able
distinguish bladder cancer patients from healthy controls (P < 0,01),
thereof 64 highly up-regulated and 12 down-regulated. Moreover 23 miRNAs
were able distinguish invasive and non-invasive forms of UCUB (P Bladder
cancer is the most common cancer of the urinary tract. More than 90% of
bladder cancers are urothelial carcinoma, which are divided into
non-muscle-invasive and muscle-invasive forms. Non-muscle-invasive tumors
frequently recur (50-70%) and can also progress to invasion form
(10-15%). These patients are monitored by cystoscopy and may have
multiple resections over many years. Improved monitoring method is
needed, ideally via urine analysis, which could reduce the morbidity and
costs associated with long follow up. Currently there are no molecular
biomarkers which could diagnose or accurately predict disease
progression. We aimed to develop a clinically applicable, specific and
sensitive panel of urine microRNAs enabling detect bladder cancer and
predict risk of progression to muscle-invasive form.Within the
exploratory phase of study we have analyzed expression profiles of 1733
miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 bladder cancer patients (6 muscle
invasive, 5 high-grade muscle non-invasive, 5 low-grade muscle
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. Diagnostic and
prognostic potential of selected microRNAs was further validated on
independent samples in training phase (50 bladder cancer patients, 15
controls) and validation phase (100 bladder cancer patients, 55 controls,
45 renal cancer patients) using specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR
method.Global expression profiling identified set of 76 miRNAs able
distinguish bladder cancer patients from healthy controls (P < 0,01),
thereof 64 highly up-regulated and 12 down-regulated. Moreover 23 miRNAs
were able distinguish invasive and non-invasive forms of UCUB (P < 0,01)
and 18 miRNAs high-grade and low-grad non-invasive (p Bladder cancer is
the most common cancer of the urinary tract. More than 90% of bladder
cancers are urothelial carcinoma, which are divided into
non-muscle-invasive and muscle-invasive forms. Non-muscle-invasive tumors
frequently recur (50-70%) and can also progress to invasion form
(10-15%). These patients are monitored by cystoscopy and may have
multiple resections over many years. Improved monitoring method is
needed, ideally via urine analysis, which could reduce the morbidity and
costs associated with long follow up. Currently there are no molecular
biomarkers which could diagnose or accurately predict disease
progression. We aimed to develop a clinically applicable, specific and
sensitive panel of urine microRNAs enabling detect bladder cancer and
predict risk of progression to muscle-invasive form.Within the
exploratory phase of study we have analyzed expression profiles of 1733
miRNAs in urine supernatant of 16 bladder cancer patients (6 muscle
invasive, 5 high-grade muscle non-invasive, 5 low-grade muscle
non-invasive), 17 controls, 10 RCC patients and 4 urinary tract
infections (UTI) using Affymetrix miRNA microarrays. Diagnostic and
prognostic potential of selected microRNAs was further validated on
independent samples in training phase (50 bladder cancer patients, 15
controls) and validation phase (100 bladder cancer patients, 55 controls,
45 renal cancer patients) using specific TaqMan assays and qRT-PCR
method.Global expression profiling identified set of 76 miRNAs able
distinguish bladder cancer patients from healthy controls (P < 0,01),
thereof 64 highly up-regulated and 12 down-regulated. Moreover 23 miRNAs
were able distinguish invasive and non-invasive forms of UCUB (P < 0,01)
and 18 miRNAs high-grade and low-grad non-invasive (p < 0,01). Set of 12
miRNAs with highest expression level and statistical significance was
validated in training phase of study. Based on the results the panel of
three miRNAs (miR-31, miR-93, miR-191) was profiled. In validation phase
we confirmed diagnostic potential and ability of this urine miRNA-based
panel to diagnose patients with bladder cancer with high sensitivity and
specificity (AUC = 0,8794, sensitivity = 82%, specificity = 80%).Our data
have shown that urinary microRNAs could serve as sensitive and specific
biomarkers of urinary bladder cancer and could be useful tool to increase
sensitivity of standard cytological examination and reduce costs
associated with long-term follow-up of bladder cancer patients. This work
was supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr.
15-33158A, 15-34553A, 15-31627A, 15-34678A, 16-31314A, 16-31765A and by
grant of Czech Grant Agency nr. 16-18257S.. All rights reserved.


