Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel hypoxia-inducible factor-1 inhibitor IDF-11774 regulates
cancer metabolism, thereby suppressing tumor growth.


HIF-1 is associated with poor patient prognosis and therapeutic
resistance of cancer. We have developed a novel hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1 inhibitor, IDF-11774, as a clinical candidate for cancer therapy.
Under hypoxic condition, IDF-11774 inhibited the accumulation of HIF-1α
in vitro and in vivo in colorectal carcinoma HCT116 cells. IDF-11774
suppressed the angiogenesis of cancer cells by reducing the expression of
HIF-1 target genes. Moreover, IDF-11774 reduced glucose uptake, leading
sensitizing cell growth on low glucose condition. IDF-11774 also
decreased the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) and oxygen
consumption rate (OCR). Metabolic profile of IDF-11774-treated cells
revealed low levels of NAD+, lactate, and intermediates in glycolysis and
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. More importantly, we observed elevated
AMP and diminished ATP level, leading high AMP/ATP ratio. Apparently,
phosphorylation of AMPK increased, leading inhibition of mTOR signaling
in cells. In vivo xenograft assays demonstrated that IDF11774 has
significant anti-cancer efficacy by targeting cancer metabolism in mouse
models containing the KRAS, PTEN or VHL mutation, which often occurs in
many malignant cancers. Collectively, IDF-11774 suppresses the
hypoxia-induced HIF-1α accumulation, thereby repressing tumor growth by
regulating cancer metabolism.


