Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neoadjuvant everolimus as a targeted therapy for early stage
breast cancer.


Introduction: Everolimus is an oral mTOR inhibitor. It is used for its
antitumor effect in breast cancer. This study summarizes the clinical
outcomes and noted adverse events from sequencing-derived combination
treatments that include everolimus in the neoadjuvant setting.

Material and Methods: To date, 57 breast cancer patients have been
enrolled to clinical trial NCT02470715 and treated in the neoadjuvant
setting. The data presented here focus specifically on 17 patients that
have long enough follow up and that have been treated with
everolimus-based combinations. FoundationOne© test and Theralink© assay
was used for genomic profiling and proteomic analysis respectively.
Clinical outcomes were assessed at the time of surgery. A pathological
complete response was defined as the absence of residual disease.

Results: Everolimus was prescribed for the patients in this study based
on the findings from their genomic or proteomic testing, targeting
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. The evidence for using everolimus in ER+ patients
(n=13) includes alterations in PIK3CA (n=9), PTEN (n=3), FGFs (n=2), and
phospho-S6 ribosomal protein (Ser235/236). 4E-BP1 (phospho-S65) was
targeted in the Her2+ (n=1) patient. PIK3CA (n=2) and PIK3C2B (n=1)
presented in the 3 triple negative (TN) patients.

Everolimus and paclitaxel was used in all patients as the backbone
combination while trastuzumab was added for Her2+ patients and hormonal
therapy was added for ER+ patients. Aromatase inhibitors were used in
most of the cases as hormonal therapy in ER+ patients while goserelin was
used in 3 cases for premenopausal patients. Pazopanib and trametinib were
added to two of the TN patients and palbociclib was added for one ER+
/Her2- patient targeting other alterations.

From the 17 patients (clinical stage I to III) treated with everolimus in
the neoadjuvant setting, pathological complete response was achieved in 4
(23%) patients (2 ER+, 1 Her2+ and 1 TN). 65% (n=11) patients had partial
response (10 ER+, 1 TN). Only one TN patient did not response to the
neoadjuvant treatment.

Over half of the patients (59%) tolerated the treatment well while 6
patients (35%) developed adverse events which resulted in a change of
regimen. Grade 3 and above adverse events including mucositis, cough and
fever were observed in ER+/Her2- patients who were treated with
everolimus + paclitaxel + hormonal therapy. The symptoms were managed by
a dose reduction or a period of treatment hold. One ER+/Her2+ patient
treated with everolimus + paclitaxel + anastazole + trastuzumab developed
a UTI, diarrhea, mucositis and edema after 7 weeks of treatment.
Treatment was stopped in this case.

Conclusion: Based upon our findings, everolimus is an effective drug in
the neoadjuvant treatment of early stage breast cancer. Even though the
numbers are small, our outcomes show significant promise. Adverse events
related to the treatment were manageable and did not negatively impact
our ability to give the treatment in most cases.


