Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The receptor tyrosine kinase AXL mediates nuclear translocation of
the epidermal growth factor receptor.


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is an important therapeutic
target in patients with various cancers. Unfortunately, resistance to
anti-EGFR therapeutics is common. Previous studies in our laboratory
identified two mechanisms of resistance to the EGFR monoclonal antibody
cetuximab: First, the nuclear translocation of EGFR bypasses the
inhibitory effects of cetuximab; and second, the receptor tyrosine kinase
AXL mediates cetuximab resistance by maintaining EGFR activation and
downstream signaling. On the basis of these findings, we hypothesized
that AXL could mediate the nuclear translocation of EGFR in the setting
of cetuximab resistance. We found that NSCLC cetuximab-resistant clones
and patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) had increased abundance of nuclear
EGFR (nEGFR) and AXL. Cellular fractionation techniques, super resolution
microscopy, and electron microcopy revealed that genetic loss of AXL
diminished the nuclear translocation and accumulation of EGFR. Building
on previous studies indicating that SRC family kinases (SFKs) and HER
family ligands mediate the nuclear translocation of EGFR, we found that
AXL knockdown down-regulated the expression of the SFKs YES and LYN, and
the ligand neuregulin-1 (NRG1). Furthermore, AXL knockdown decreased the
interaction between EGFR and HER3 and the nuclear abundance of HER3.
Nuclear localization of EGFR could be rescued only upon simultaneous
overexpression of Lyn and NRG1 in cells depleted of AXL. Collectively,
these data uncover a previously unrecognized role for AXL in regulating
the nuclear translocation of EGFR and suggest that AXL-mediated SFK
activation and NRG1 expression are necessary and sufficient to regulate
this process.


