Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer incidence trends and recent patterns overall and
by histologic type among US men and women by racial/ethnic group:
evidence from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
program.


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer incidence has been rising. We examined
incidence patterns by sex, race, age, and histologic subtype.

Methods: We used data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results
(SEER) registries (9, 13 and 18) to calculate counts, age-adjusted rates
(2000 US Standard Population), annual percent changes (APCs) and
incidence rate ratios (IRRs) for all pancreatic cancers and main
histologic subgroups.

Results: Pancreatic cancer incidence rates declined among males between
1974 and 1991, and increased in the 1992-2013 period among white
Hispanics and non-Hispanics (APC= 0.73 and 0.84, respectively). Among
females, incidence rates also rose significantly during 1992-2013 among
white non-Hispanics, white Hispanics, and Asians (APC= 0.81, 0.56, and
1.23, respectively). In contrast, rates among black males and females
changed little. Within age groups, rates significantly increased among
males who were white non-Hispanic age ≥55 years and white Hispanics in
the 55-74 age group. Among black males, rates declined in the 45-54 age
group at a statistically significant pace. Pancreatic cancer incidence
rates for females rose among white non-Hispanics in all age groups
Results: Pancreatic cancer incidence rates declined among males between
1974 and 1991, and increased in the 1992-2013 period among white
Hispanics and non-Hispanics (APC= 0.73 and 0.84, respectively). Among
females, incidence rates also rose significantly during 1992-2013 among
white non-Hispanics, white Hispanics, and Asians (APC= 0.81, 0.56, and
1.23, respectively). In contrast, rates among black males and females
changed little. Within age groups, rates significantly increased among
males who were white non-Hispanic age ≥55 years and white Hispanics in
the 55-74 age group. Among black males, rates declined in the 45-54 age
group at a statistically significant pace. Pancreatic cancer incidence
rates for females rose among white non-Hispanics in all age groups <85
years (range: 0.47-4.01), among Asians of ages 55-84, and white Hispanics
in the 55-64 age-group.

Most pancreatic cancers were specified as adenocarcinoma, not otherwise
specified (NOS) or ductal adenocarcinoma. Rates increased among all
racial/ethnic groups for adenocarcinoma, NOS and ductal adenocarcinoma
while those for cystic mucinous ductal adenocarcinoma and poorly
specified type decreased. The incidence rates of non-secretory pancreatic
endocrine cancer rose >6% per year among white non-Hispanics and
Asian/Pacific Islanders.

Overall incidence rates were significantly higher among males than
females (M/F IRR=1.28). The IRR was >1.00 at all ages >35, but rates
among females were significantly higher at younger ages (IRR Overall
incidence rates were significantly higher among males than females (M/F
IRR=1.28). The IRR was >1.00 at all ages >35, but rates among females
were significantly higher at younger ages (IRR <0.81). The M/F IRRs were
elevated for acinar cell adenocarcinoma (2.85), non-secretory endocrine
cancers (1.47) and ductal cystic or mucinous adenocarcinomas (1.11),
while for solid pseudopapillary adenocarcinoma there was a significant
female excess (0.22).

Conclusion: Pancreatic cancer incidence rates vary within demographic
groups and histologic subtypes.


