Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs induce ER stress and have an
immunomodulatory role in the suppression of colorectal tumorigenesis.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second-leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the United States. A number of epidemiological studies,
clinical trials, and animal studies have demonstrated the chemopreventive
effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on CRC. However,
the exact mechanism by which NSAIDs suppress colorectal tumorigenesis has
remained unclear. Our previous study showed that NSAID-induced death
receptor signaling, along with loss of the gatekeeper APC tumor
suppressor, triggers a synthetic lethal interaction and apoptotic death
in an otherwise normal cell. In this study, we determined how NSAIDs
induce death receptor signaling, and found a critical role of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. Treating CRC cells with the
NSAIDs sulindac or indomethacin upregulated C/EBP homologous
transcription factor (CHOP), a key mediator of the ER stress response
that is required for the induction of death receptor 5 (DR5) by NSAIDs.
Blocking ER stress abolished the apoptotic effect of NSAIDs in CRC cells
and in normal colonic epithelial cells with knockdown of APC, and also
suppressed the chemopreventive activity of NSAIDs in APCMin/+ mice.
Furthermore, we identified plasma membrane translocation of calreticulin
in cells undergoing NSAID-induced apoptosis, suggesting the involvement
of immunomodulation in this tumor suppression. Our results provide novel
insight into the chemopreventive mechanism of NSAIDs, which may help
design more effective chemopreventive strategies and agents.


