Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BNip3 suppresses hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) growth by limiting
lipogenesis.


BNip3 is a mitochondrial protein that promotes the turnover of
mitochondria at the autophagolysosome when nutrient supplies are low.
BNip3-null livers exhibit lipid accumulation and develop a phenotype
mimicking non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, a known precursor for
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Additionally, BNip3 is
silenced in human HCC and other malignancies and this loss often
correlates with more aggressive tumors and worse outcomes. However, the
functional significance of BNIP3 loss for growth and progression of HCC
has not been determined. We utilized the diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced
mouse model of HCC to determine how loss of BNip3 affected HCC
development in the mouse. Wild type and BNip3-null mice were treated with
DEN, and tumor burden (size and number) was assessed at 6, 8, and 10
months of age. We also generated primary HCC cell lines from the tumors
arising in BNip3-null mice for in vitro analysis of tumor cell growth and
metabolism. We observed that BNip3-null mice had reduced tumor latency
and enhanced tumor growth rate in the liver following DEN treatment
compared to wild type mice consistent with BNip3 functioning as a tumor
suppressor of HCC. Interestingly, tumors arising in BNip3-null mice
accumulated increased lipid and qPCR analysis of primary tumors and cell
lines revealed increased expression of lipogenesis genes compared to wild
type. Treatment with a novel fatty acid synthase inhibitor or
re-expression of BNip3 in the BNip3-null HCC cell lines reduced tumor
cell growth and lipogenesis, and promoted oxidative metabolism. These
results indicate that BNip3 acts as a tumor suppressor in HCC by limiting
de novo lipogenesis and suggest that fatty acid synthase inhibitors could
be effective therapeutically against BNIP3 deficient HCC in patients.


