Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lysophosphatidic acid receptor signaling and pancreatic
adenocarcinoma tumor microenvironment.


Introduction: Changes in lipid biosynthesis has attracted significant
attention in the study of cancer. Its value in our understanding of
pancreatic cancer has not yet been realized. This study examined
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) variant biosynthesis in patients with stage
II-III pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), evaluating serum, bile,
and tissue levels of LPA, its receptors, and downstream metabolites. LPA,
a product of phospholipase D activity of the enzyme autotaxin (ATX) is a
potent mitogenic agent. Data suggests that changes in lipid biosynthesis
contribute to the tumor microenvironment in PDAC.

Methods: PDAC, matched adjacent non-malignant tissues, gall bladder bile
and serum samples were collected from patients with Stage II-III
pancreatic cancer at the time of surgery. Control bile and serum were
collected from patients undergoing cholecystectomy for benign disease and
living renal donors respectively.

Results: Serum and biliary LPA levels were increased in patients with
PDAC when compared to controls. ATX activity, and LPA receptors, LPAR1,
LPAR2, and LPAR5 were greater in PDAC adjacent pancreatic tissue when
compared to PDAC tissue. In contrast, TNFα receptors TNFα1 and TNFα2
and LPA receptor LPAR3 receptor expression was greater in PDAC lesions
when compared to adjacent tissue.

Conclusion: PDAC patients display a modified LPA biosynthesis profile,
when compared to non-PDAC patients, potentially providing a
paracrine-signaling cascade to promote pancreatic tumorigenesis through
increased expression of mitogenic cytokines and growth factors.


