Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CLEC4D in inflammation-driven liver carcinogenesis.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for approximately 90% of all
primary liver tumors and is the second most deadly cancer in the world.
HCC commonly arises in a chronically damaged liver that contains large
amounts of inflammation and fibrosis. Indeed, interactions among
hepatocytes, stromal, and inflammatory cells create a complex
microenvironment permissive to tumor development. Myeloid cells are
crucial players in cancer-related inflammation. From transcriptional
profiling of liver myeloid cells, we identified the gene encoding for the
C-type lectin receptor CLEC4D as one of the genes upregulated during the
inflammatory response that precedes cancer development in a spontaneous
model of murine HCC. We hypothesized that CLEC4D may be involved in the
molecular mechanisms that drive HCC pathogenesis. We used the murine
model of diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced liver carcinogenesis and
evaluated tumor growth in genetically modified mice lacking CLEC4D
(CLEC4D KO mice), as compared to C57BL/6 wild type (WT) mice. We observed
that tumor burden (number of tumors per mouse and tumor dimensions) was
reduced in CLEC4D KO mice compared to WT mice. Gene expression analysis
of tumor lesions showed that the tumor microenvironment of CLEC4D KO mice
was less inflammatory. CLEC4D expression was then evaluated in surgical
specimens and tissue microarrays from HCV+ HCC patients. CLEC4D-positive
inflammatory cells (macrophages and granulocytes) were present both in
the peritumor and in the tumor areas. The percentage of intratumor
CLEC4D-positive cells inversely correlated with the degree of the lesion:
CLEC4D expression was higher in dysplastic nodules compared to high grade
HCCs. Our results indicate that the CLEC4D-dependent pathway contributes
to the initiation and the progression of HCC. By targeting CLEC4D, we
could modulate immune responses and provide an environment less favorable
to tumor growth. An intervention at this level could represent a
chemopreventive strategy to arrest the development of HCC in a cirrhotic
liver.This work has been supported by Fondazione Cariplo, grant nÂ°
2014-0962.


