Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: [18F]HX4 shows potential as a predictive biomarker for the
radiosensitizing capacities of metformin in a NSCLC xenograft model.


Introduction

Metformin (MET) may improve tumor oxygenation and thus radiotherapy (RT)
response. However, appropriate imaging biomarkers for patient
stratification, critically needed to be able to advance to clinical
trials with MET as a radiosensitizer, are still lacking. In this
proof-of-concept (POC) study, we first assessed the effect of acute MET
administration on NSCLC xenograft tumor hypoxia with PET using the novel
hypoxia PET tracer [18F]HX4. Second, we verified the influence of a
single dose of MET prior to RT on treatment outcome.

Experimental procedures

A549 tumor-bearing mice (n=9; animals were inoculated in both hind legs)
underwent a [18F]HX4 PET/CT scan to determine baseline tumor hypoxia. The
next day, mice were administered 100 mg/kg MET IV. [18F]HX4 was
administered IV 30 min. later, whereupon a second PET/CT scan was
performed to assess changes in tumor hypoxia. Two days after this second
scan, mice were randomized into three groups (n=3/group): a control group
(1), a RT group (2), and a MET+RT group (3) with comparable tumor volumes
(259±103; 218±81 and 247±121 mm3, resp.). Animals were administered
0.9% saline (groups 1-2) or 100 mg/kg MET (group 3) IV, followed by a
single dose of 10 Gy 30 min. after administration (groups 2-3). Control
animals of group 1 underwent sham RT. During the entire study, tumor
growth was monitored triweekly by caliper measurements. Calculation of
the relative tumor volumes (RTV) was initiated when tumors reached a mean
baseline volume of 100 mm3 with the formula RTV=Vtime x/Vbaseline. Tumor
growth inhibition (TGI) was calculated for each tumor in both treatment
groups with the formula TGI=1-(RTVtreated/RTVcontrol).

Results

MET significantly altered A549 tumor hypoxia, as the mean [18F]HX4
tumor-to-blood ratio (TBR) was reduced from 3.03±0.27 to 2.82±0.25
(p=0.040) after MET administration. The tempering influence of MET on
tumor hypoxia improved RT response, as fifteen days after irradiation TGI
was 63±7% in the MET+RT group as compared to only 36±9% in the RT
group, however significance was not reached. To date, tumors are still
being measured triweekly and this will be continued until a volume of
1500 mm3 is reached. Then, animals will be sacrificed for histological
validations on tumor tissue to assess differences in a.o. proliferation
and hypoxia.

Conclusions

Using non-invasive imaging, we showed in A549 xenograft tumors that MET
acts as a radiosensitizer possibly by decreasing tumor hypoxia. Our
results imply that [18F]HX4 PET imaging holds potential as a predictive
biomarker for the beneficial effect of MET in the treatment of NSCLC;
however, the small group sizes in this POC study did not allow us to draw
sound conclusions. These promising findings will be validated in a larger
follow-up study in order to validate [18F]HX4 PET as a predictive
biomarker for MET and RT response.


