Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro screening of individual human neuroendocrine tumors for
their angiogenic response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors.


Background: Human neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are highly vascular in
nature and reliant on multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (TKs) for their
neovascularization, growth, and, metastasis. These tumors most commonly
originate in the small bowel (SB) and frequently metastasize to the lymph
nodes and other organs. Current treatment of metastatic NETs involves a
variety of approaches including antiangiogenesis therapies. In this study
we tested effectiveness of six TK inhibitors (TKIs) [Dovitinib lactate,
Regorafenib, Erlotinib, Imatinib, Vatalanib, and Sunitinib] on individual
NETs angiogenic response in vitro.

Methods: Specimens were obtained from NET patients who underwent removal
of their primary tumor (small bowel/pancreas/stomach), nodal, and organ
(i.e. liver/ovary/omentum/mesentery) metastasis. Fresh tumors were
minced, embedded in a fibrin-thrombin clot and supplemented with nutrient
culture media per the in vitro human tumor angiogenesis model protocol.
Neovessels were visually scored and evaluated for angiogenic parameters:
percent initiation (%I), angiogenic growth (AI), and overall angiogenic
response (OAR). All TKIs were prepared consistent with manufacturer’s
instructions and their effective concentration was determined by dose
response experiments. The selected TKI dose reflected the clinically
achievable plasma level. A large group of NETs was tested for their
antiangiogenic response to six TKIs [Dovitinib lactate (D): n=164,
Regorafenib (R): n=163, Erlotinib (E): n=35, Imatinib (I): n=51,
Vatalanib (V): n=163, Sutent (S): n=164)]. Paired samples t-test was used
to compare TKI to control results for each angiogenic parameter, and
independent samples t-test to compare TKI-response of primary and
metastatic sites (MedCalc).

Results: Each selected dose [D: 82nM, R: 1100nM, E: 100µM, I: 2.5µM, V:
20µM, S: 188nM] achieved statistically significant inhibition of OAR
(D:94.23%, R:35.58%, E:52.07%, I:59.77%, V:76.65%, S:64.79%) in all NETs
(pResults: Each selected dose [D: 82nM, R: 1100nM, E: 100µM, I: 2.5µM,
V: 20µM, S: 188nM] achieved statistically significant inhibition of OAR
(D:94.23%, R:35.58%, E:52.07%, I:59.77%, V:76.65%, S:64.79%) in all NETs
(p<0.0001). This is accomplished by the simultaneous statistically
significant decrease of %I by at least 3.47% (p=0.0164) and AI by at
least 34.03% (p0.2119). In all NETs, TKIs inhibited both mechanisms of
angiogenesis, but preferentially targeted growth (all TKIs: p0.2119). In
all NETs, TKIs inhibited both mechanisms of angiogenesis, but
preferentially targeted growth (all TKIs: p<0.0001) over %I (D, I, V, S:
p0.2119). In all NETs, TKIs inhibited both mechanisms of angiogenesis,
but preferentially targeted growth (all TKIs: p<0.0001) over %I (D, I, V,
S: p<0.0001; E: p=0.0072; R: p=0.0164).

Conclusions: In vitro screening of individual tumors revealed that TKIs
effectively inhibited all parameters of angiogenesis in all NETs, primary
and metastatic tumors. Selected TKIs preferentially inhibited angiogenic
growth rather than initiation in all NETs. Our preclinical results show
that Dovitinib inhibits angiogenesis most effectively in human NETs
compared to other TKIs in vitro.


