Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PEA-15 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasive
behavior through its phosphorylation in triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype with no
proven active targeted therapies available. Patients with TNBC have a
very poor prognosis because the disease often metastasizes. Newer
approaches to preventing metastasis and inhibiting tumor growth, are
crucial to improving prognosis for these patients. Previously it has been
shown that PEA-15 binds to ERK, preventing ERK from being translocated to
the nucleus and hence blocking its activity. Our previous studies showed
that overexpression of wild type PEA-15 inhibited ERK activity and
reduced tumor volume in a TNBC xenograft model. We also showed that
PEA-15 being unphosphorylated at both Ser104 and Ser116 inhibited ovarian
cancer cell tumorigenicity. However, the function and impact of PEA-15
phosphorylation on TNBC is not well understood. From these observations,
we hypothesized that unphosphorylated PEA-15 will prevent metastasis in
TNBC through the inhibition of EMT. To study the effect of the
phosphorylation status of PEA-15 on metastasis in TNBC, we established
stable cell lines overexpressing nonphosphorylatable (PEA-15-AA) and
phosphomimetic (PEA-15-DD) mutants in MDA-MB-468 cells. The clonogenic
growth of PEA-15-AA was significantly reduced by 80% compared with vector
control, PEA-15-V. Anchorage-independent growth of PEA-15-AA was
inhibited by 60% compared with PEA-15-V (PTriple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) is an aggressive subtype with no proven active targeted therapies
available. Patients with TNBC have a very poor prognosis because the
disease often metastasizes. Newer approaches to preventing metastasis and
inhibiting tumor growth, are crucial to improving prognosis for these
patients. Previously it has been shown that PEA-15 binds to ERK,
preventing ERK from being translocated to the nucleus and hence blocking
its activity. Our previous studies showed that overexpression of wild
type PEA-15 inhibited ERK activity and reduced tumor volume in a TNBC
xenograft model. We also showed that PEA-15 being unphosphorylated at
both Ser104 and Ser116 inhibited ovarian cancer cell tumorigenicity.
However, the function and impact of PEA-15 phosphorylation on TNBC is not
well understood. From these observations, we hypothesized that
unphosphorylated PEA-15 will prevent metastasis in TNBC through the
inhibition of EMT. To study the effect of the phosphorylation status of
PEA-15 on metastasis in TNBC, we established stable cell lines
overexpressing nonphosphorylatable (PEA-15-AA) and phosphomimetic
(PEA-15-DD) mutants in MDA-MB-468 cells. The clonogenic growth of
PEA-15-AA was significantly reduced by 80% compared with vector control,
PEA-15-V. Anchorage-independent growth of PEA-15-AA was inhibited by 60%
compared with PEA-15-V (P<0.05). PEA15-AA upregulated the expression of
E-cadherin, a key epithelial molecular marker and decreased expression of
vimentin suggesting that PEA-15-AA reverses EMT. Moreover, compared with
PEA-15-V, migration and invasion of PEA-15-AA were significantly reduced.
To determine the mechanism of how PEA-15 regulates EMT and metastasis, we
performed RT-PCR immune and metastasis arrays. We found that expression
levels of IL-6, IL-8 and PDGF-BB were greatly decreased in PEA-15-AA.
Upon stimulation of the PEA-15-AA with these cytokines, mesenchymal
characteristics were partially rescued indicating that PEA-15-AA may
inhibit the expression of these cytokines, thereby reversing EMT.
Further, to determine the in vivo effect of PEA-15-AA, we injected stable
transfectants of MDA-MB-468 cells into the mammary fat pad of NOD/SCID
mice. The PEA-15-DD-injected group showed an increase (PTriple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype with no proven active
targeted therapies available. Patients with TNBC have a very poor
prognosis because the disease often metastasizes. Newer approaches to
preventing metastasis and inhibiting tumor growth, are crucial to
improving prognosis for these patients. Previously it has been shown that
PEA-15 binds to ERK, preventing ERK from being translocated to the
nucleus and hence blocking its activity. Our previous studies showed that
overexpression of wild type PEA-15 inhibited ERK activity and reduced
tumor volume in a TNBC xenograft model. We also showed that PEA-15 being
unphosphorylated at both Ser104 and Ser116 inhibited ovarian cancer cell
tumorigenicity. However, the function and impact of PEA-15
phosphorylation on TNBC is not well understood. From these observations,
we hypothesized that unphosphorylated PEA-15 will prevent metastasis in
TNBC through the inhibition of EMT. To study the effect of the
phosphorylation status of PEA-15 on metastasis in TNBC, we established
stable cell lines overexpressing nonphosphorylatable (PEA-15-AA) and
phosphomimetic (PEA-15-DD) mutants in MDA-MB-468 cells. The clonogenic
growth of PEA-15-AA was significantly reduced by 80% compared with vector
control, PEA-15-V. Anchorage-independent growth of PEA-15-AA was
inhibited by 60% compared with PEA-15-V (P<0.05). PEA15-AA upregulated
the expression of E-cadherin, a key epithelial molecular marker and
decreased expression of vimentin suggesting that PEA-15-AA reverses EMT.
Moreover, compared with PEA-15-V, migration and invasion of PEA-15-AA
were significantly reduced. To determine the mechanism of how PEA-15
regulates EMT and metastasis, we performed RT-PCR immune and metastasis
arrays. We found that expression levels of IL-6, IL-8 and PDGF-BB were
greatly decreased in PEA-15-AA. Upon stimulation of the PEA-15-AA with
these cytokines, mesenchymal characteristics were partially rescued
indicating that PEA-15-AA may inhibit the expression of these cytokines,
thereby reversing EMT. Further, to determine the in vivo effect of
PEA-15-AA, we injected stable transfectants of MDA-MB-468 cells into the
mammary fat pad of NOD/SCID mice. The PEA-15-DD-injected group showed an
increase (P<0.05) in tumor volume compared with PEA-15-V and PEA-15-AA
groups. Additionally, immunohistochemical data revealed that vimentin and
p-Î²-catenin (Ser675) expression was greatly decreased in PEA-15-AA
tissues, suggesting that PEA-15-AA has antitumor effects. Further studies
are warranted to evaluate the impact of PEA-15 phosphorylation on
metastasis in vivo using mice bearing highly metastatic human breast
tumor and determine the mechanism underlying decreased cytokine
expression in PEA-15-AA. Together, this study highlights the potential
for overexpression of unphosphorylated PEA-15 as an approach for
TNBC-targeted therapy.


