Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CPTAC phase II final report.


National Cancer Institute’s Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis
Consortium (CPTAC) is a comprehensive and coordinated effort to
accelerate the understanding of the molecular basis of cancer through the
application of robust, quantitative, proteomic technologies and
workflows. The primary goal for this program is to systematically
identify proteins that derive from alterations in cancer genomes and
related biological processes, integrate the genomic and proteomic data
from analysis of common cancer biospecimen and provide this data with
accompanying assays and protocols to the community. The phase II effort
managed by the Leidos Biomedical Research Inc. had a goal to procure and
qualify a minimum of 100 cases from 3 cancer types (Breast, Ovarian and
Colon). Tissues and analytes from the 100 cases were sent to proteomic
and genomic characterization centers for analysis. The proteomic data
were made available through the Data Coordinating Center (DCC) and the
genomic data were made available through NCI’s Genomic Data Commons
(GDC). The success from the phase II effort has set precedence for a much
larger phase III effort that will focus on additional cancer types and
cases. Preliminary analysis results confirm the need for the combination
of the genomic and proteomic approaches to produce a more comprehensive
inventory of the detectable proteins in a tumor and advance our
understanding of cancer biology.


