Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT3B mediated DNA methylation and epigenetic reprogramming of
metastatic cancer cells.


Approximately 90% of cancer patients die from metastasis. In many cases,
current therapies are designed based on the primary tumor
characterization and are ineffective against metastatic disease. It is
not clear whether metastatic cancer cells acquire additional genetic and
epigenetic alterations, if so, what are the underlying mechanisms. Using
several tumor models, we demonstrated that DNMT3B, de nova DNA
methyltransferase, was increased in metastatic nodules in comparison to
that from the primary tumors. DNMT3B knockdown or overexpression
significantly inhibited or increased metastatic colonization of cancer
cells. To understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of DNMT3B
regulation, we performed DNMT3B ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, and DNA
methylation-seq comparing lung metastases with primary tumors and 4T1
cells. We identified genes that are differentially methylated and
expressed. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed DNMT3B targeting multiple
oncogenic signaling pathways. Bioinformatics analysis of human databases
demonstrated significantly higher expression levels of DNMT3B in
metastases than primary tumors in breast, prostate and melanoma cancer
patients. In summary, our study demonstrated that DNMT3B as a key
epigenetic regulator which plays critical roles for tumor metastasis. Our
work suggests DNMT3B as potential therapeutic targets for breast cancer
patients with metastatic disease.


