Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted sequencing reveals distinct and rare pathogenic variants
in Caucasians with colorectal cancer.


PURPOSE: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is currently used to establish
mutational profiles in many multigene diseases such as colorectal cancer
(CRC) which is on the rise in many parts of the developing World
including in the Middle East. Little is known about its genetic hallmarks
in these populations. AIM: To identify variants in 15 CRC-associated
genes in patients of Iranian descent.

METHODS: CRC specimens from 63 patients were used to establish the
variants’ profile on an Ion Torrent platform by targeted exome
sequencing. To rule out technical artifacts, the variants were validated
in 13 of these samples using an Illumina NGS platform. Validated variants
were annotated and compared to variants from publically available
databases. An in-silico functional analysis was performed. MSI status of
the analyzed samples was established. RESULTS: There were 51 validated
variants distributed on 12 genes: 22% MSH3 (n=11/51), 10% MSH6 (n=5/51),
8% AMER1 (n=4/51), 20% APC (n=10/51), 2% BRAF (n=1/51), 2% KRAS (n=1/51),
12% PIK3CA (n=6/51), 8% TGFβR2A (n=4/51), 2% SMAD4 (n=1/51), 4% SOX9
(n=2/51), 6% TCF7L2 (n=3/51), and 6% TP53 (n=3/51). Most known and
distinct variants were in mismatch repair genes (MMR, 32%) and APC (20%).
Among oncogenes, PIK3CA was the top target (12%). MSH3 variants were more
frequent and predominantly homozygous in the analyzed population.

CONCLUSION: These results illustrate for the first time CRC mutational
profile in Iranian patients. MSH3, MSH6, APC and PIK3CA genes seem to
play a bigger role in the path to cancer in this population. This is
especially true for MSH3 variants that were very frequent and
predominantly homozygous as these will associate with the EMAST phenotype
that has prognostic implications. These findings will potentially lead to
informed genetic diagnosis protocol and targeted therapeutic strategies.


