Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanistic and benchmarking studies of ADCT-502, a
pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimer-containing antibody-drug conjugate
(ADC) targeting HER2-expressing solid tumors.


ADCT-502 is an ADC composed of an engineered version of humanized IgG1
trastuzumab, directed against human HER2, site-specifically conjugated to
the highly cytotoxic PBD-based linker-drug tesirine (drug-antibody ratio
of 1.7). In vitro, ADCT-502 has highly potent and targeted cytotoxicity
against various solid cancer cell lines. In vivo, ADCT-502 demonstrates
strong and durable antitumor activity in mouse xenografts with various
levels of HER2, but is inactive in a HER2-negative xenograft. ADCT-502 is
stable, well tolerated and has a favorable PK profile both in rat and
cynomolgus monkey. The current study aimed to define further the
mechanism of action of ADCT-502 and to benchmark its activity in
xenograft models against ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1), the ADC
currently approved for the treatment of HER2+ metastatic breast cancers.
ADCT-502 bound and internalized efficiently in JIMT-1 cells (HER2+) and
co-localized with lysosomes within 2 hours. PBD dimers bind in the DNA
minor groove and exert cytotoxicity via the formation of DNA interstrand
cross-links. Following a 2-hour exposure to ADCT-502, DNA interstrand
cross-linking peaked between 12 and 24 hours, after which cross-links
persisted at least 36 hours. In contrast, cross-link formation by an
equimolar concentration of warhead alone, peaked immediately following
drug exposure and a non-targeted ADC did not produce DNA crosslinks in
these cells. Moreover, ADCT-502 showed indirect bystander killing
activity in HER2-negative MDA-MB-468 cells incubated with conditioned
medium from ADCT-502-treated HER2+ SK-BR-3 cells. In vivo, antitumor
activity of ADCT-502 was compared to T-DM1 in both cell line- and
patient-derived-xenograft (PDX) models. For example, in a HER2 1+, FISH-
breast cancer PDX, ADCT-502 showed dose-dependent antitumor activity
resulting in 1/8 and 8/8 TFS after a single dose at 0.1 and 0.2 mg/kg,
respectively. Conversely, a single dose of T-DM1 at 30 mg/kg showed only
marginal activity compared to the control. Similarly, in a HER2 1+, FISH-
esophageal cancer PDX, while a single dose of ADCT-502 at 0.44 mg/kg
resulted in strong and durable antitumor activity, single doses of T-DM1
at either 10 or 30 mg/kg showed no activity compared to the control.
These data confirm that the mechanism of cell killing of ADCT-502 is via
target-specific internalization and subsequent cross-linking of DNA. They
also show superior in vivo antitumor activity of ADCT-502 compared to
T-DM1 in various tumor xenografts, including those with low HER2 levels.
Taken together, these results support the development of ADCT-502 not
only in patients that have become resistant/refractory to T-DM1, but also
in patients whose tumors express low levels of HER2, and are not eligible
for treatment with T-DM1.


