Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Automation and miniaturization of 3D tumor models for compound
screens.


Three-dimensional (3D) systems of cell culture can provide a more
representative model of solid tumors and more physiologically relevant
outputs from drug screens than two-dimensional cell cultures. A diverse
array of 3D models have been used to investigate tumor physiology and
susceptibility to chemotherapeutics but all of these models present
challenges to establish and manipulate at the high throughputs required
for screens. Cancer spheroids are large clusters of cells formed in
suspension to replicate the gradients of gases, nutrients, and drugs seen
by solid tumors. In contrast, MatrigelÂ® or other hydrogel cultures are
often used to replicate native cell morphology and polarity or to enable
studies of 3D structure formation or cell migration. To overcome manual
challenges and improve reliability, we automated the plating, drug
treatment, and analysis of these 3D models. We were able to form
consistent cancer spheroids in both hanging drop and low attachment
plates and used imaging and flow cytometry to gain a more complete
understanding of the cytotoxic drug response in this model. Cells were
also plated on top of and embedded within Matrigel and cell growth and
apoptosis induction was measured with standard and confocal imaging
approaches. Both 3D models were miniaturized to 384-well format, thereby
enabling the throughput required for large-scale screens to identify
novel cancer treatments.


