Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-mediated
pulmonary carcinogenesis in mice by omega-3-fatty acids.


3-Methylcholanthrene (MC) and benzo[a]pyrene (BP) are potent polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) carcinogens. PAHs are present in cigarette
smoke, diesel exhausts, and charcoal broiled meats, etc. Cytochrome P450
(CYP) 1A/1B1 enzymes play key roles in the activation of PAHs to
carcinogenic metabolites, which initiate carcinogenesis by binding
covalently to DNA, and the adducts, if not repaired, could lead to
tumorigenesis. In this study we tested the hypothesis that pre-treatment
of mice with omega-3-fatty acids, i.e. [eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) will lead to attenuation of PAH-mediated
pulmonary DNA adduct formation and pulmonary tumorigenesis. Twelve week
old male and female A/J mice received EPA (60 mg/kg) and DHA (40 mg/kg)
from day 1 to day 24. Control mice were treated with vehicle corn oil. On
day 3, mice were treated with BP (40 µmol/kg) or 3-methylcholanthrene
(MC, 40 µmol/kg) by i.p. In the short-term experiment (DNA adduct
studies), 3-5 mice from each group were terminated at day 10 (7 days
after BP or MC treatment). EPA/DHA significantly suppressed formation of
BP-DNA and MC-DNA adducts in lung and liver of both male and female mice.
In the long-term experiment (tumor studies), 8 mice for each group
continued to receive EPA/DHA twice per week till end of experiment (16
weeks). Pulmonary tumor incidence and multiplicity was significantly
suppressed in mice given EPA+DHA, compared to those given the PAHs, BP or
MC alone. These studies suggest that the omega 3-fatty acids could be
developed as novel candidates for the prevention of PAH-mediated lung
cancers in humans.


