Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo CRISPR screening identifies Ptpn2 as a target for cancer
immunotherapy.


Despite the dramatic clinical success of cancer immunotherapy with PD-1
checkpoint blockade, most patients donâ€™t experience sustained clinical
benefit, suggesting that additional therapeutic strategies are needed.
Functional genomic screens in cancer cells to discover new therapeutic
targets are usually carried out in vitro where interaction with the
immune system is absent. Here we report a pooled, loss-of-function
genetic screening approach using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing that is
conducted in vivo in mouse transplantable tumors treated with vaccination
and PD-1 checkpoint blockade. We tested 2,400 genes expressed by melanoma
cells for those that synergize with or cause resistance to checkpoint
blockade, and recovered the known immune evasion molecules, PD-L1 and
CD47. Loss of function of multiple genes required to sense interferon-y
caused resistance to immunotherapy. Deletion of Ptpn2, a pleotropic
protein tyrosine phosphatase improved response to immunotherapy. In vivo,
Ptpn2 deficient tumors showed increased infiltration of activated CD8+T
cells. In vitro, Ptpn2 loss by tumor cells increased antigen presentation
to T cells. Biochemical, transcriptional and genetic epistasis
experiments demonstrated that loss of function of Ptpn2 sensitizes tumors
to immunotherapy by enhancing interferon-y-mediated effects on the tumor
cell. Thus, augmenting interferon-y signaling in tumor cells could
increase the efficacy of immunotherapy. More generally, in vivo genetic
screens in tumor models can identify new immunotherapy targets and
rationally prioritize combination therapies.


