Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting CDK1 and MEK/ERK overcome mutant BRAF-mediated apoptosis
resistance in human colorectal cancer cells.


BRAFV600E mutation occurs in ~10% of human colorectal cancers (CRC) where
it is associated with treatment resistance and poor prognosis. Data from
TCGA and a clinical trial cohort identified a distinct subset of BRAF
mutant colon cancers with deregulation of the cell cycle and
overexpression of CDK1 (Barras D, et al, Clin Cancer Res. 2016). We
tested the hypothesis that CDK1 inhibition can enhance apoptosis in
BRAFV600E CRC cells. Since BRAF mutant cells show p-ERK activation,
combined inhibition of CDK1 and MEK/ERK was evaluated. Using isogenic
colon cancer cells, BRAF mutant alleles were shown to confer resistance
to the CDK1 inhibitor, R0-3306, in a gene dose-dependent manner that was
associated with reduced cleavage of caspase-3 and downstream PARP, and
decreased pH2AX (DNA fragmentation marker). Ectopic BRAFV600E or
constitutively active MEK mutant also conferred resistance to R0-3306.
CDK1 siRNA was shown to increase cobimetinib-induced apoptosis, including
annexin V labeling, and increased pH2AX. Furthermore, ERK siRNA or
cobimetinib treatment attenuated CDK1 protein expression and increased
R0-3306-induced pH2Ax. Moreover, treatment with R0-3306 plus cobimetinib
significantly enhanced a caspase-dependent apoptosis and markedly reduced
colony formation vs either drug alone in two CRC cell lines. Caspase-3
cleavage by R0-3306 + cobimetinib was dependent upon caspase-8.
Mechanistically, CDK1 inhibition by R0-3306 suppressed the
phosphorylation of procaspase-8 at Ser-387 shown by R0-3306 withdrawal
which restored p-C8-S387 coincident with expression of the mitotic
marker, pH3S10. In conclusion, inhibition of CDK1 can significantly
augment apoptosis induction by MEK/ERK inhibition in BRAFV600E CRC cells,
suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy to overcome mutant BRAF-mediated
resistance.

Apoptosis induction by CDK1 inhibitor (R0-3306) ± MEK/ERK inhibitor
cobimetinib





Treatment

Treatment

Treatement

Treatment





CRC cell lines

DMSO

R0-3306 (5 µM)

cobimetinib (5 µM)

combination



Annexin V+ (%)

RKO

13.43 ± 1.41

32.55 ± 2.93

15.04 ± 0.26

52.72 ± 3.16



Annexin V+ (%)

HT-29

11.22 ± 1.84

42.44 ± 2.70

25.29 ± 0.16

65.62 ± 4.11


