Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single agent NKTR-214, a biased IL2 pathway agonist, increases
immune cell infiltrates in brain tumors and prolongs survival in rodent
(rattus) glioblastoma (GBM).


Background: Immunotherapy is an attractive option for brain tumor therapy
if a robust infiltrative T cell response can be elicited in the tumor.
NKTR-214 is a CD122-biased cytokine agonist conjugated with multiple
releasable chains of polyethylene glycol and designed to provide
sustained signaling through the heterodimeric IL-2 receptor pathway
(IL-2Rβγ) to preferentially activate and expand effector CD8+ T and NK
cells over Tregs. To assess the potential activity of single agent
NKTR-214 in GBM, we used an orthotopic rat glioblastoma survival model.

Methods:NKTR-214 was administered at 0.1 or 0.3 mg/kg q2w iv to
Sprague-Dawley rats starting 2 or 7 days (D2, D7) post (p)-implantation
of 106 C6 glioma cells into the right striatum. The model requires
euthanasia by ~D14 due to tumor burden. Brain tumors were characterized
by magnetic resonance (MR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and for retention of PEG polymer in
brain tumor.

Results: Compared to rats receiving vehicle (n = 15), survival was
significantly prolonged after NKTR-214 treatment (n = 43, mean 17.2 vs.
10.0 days (P Results: Compared to rats receiving vehicle (n = 15),
survival was significantly prolonged after NKTR-214 treatment (n = 43,
mean 17.2 vs. 10.0 days (P < 0.001) with 15% of rats across all groups
alive and tumor-free at Day 50 when the study was terminated. Both doses
were equally effective and well tolerated. Surprisingly, treated rats
bearing large MR-detectable D7 tumors survived significantly longer
compared to rats bearing microscopic D2 tumors (6/21 or ~30% versus 0/21
or 0% respectively at D50, mean 23.1 vs. 12 days, P Results: Compared to
rats receiving vehicle (n = 15), survival was significantly prolonged
after NKTR-214 treatment (n = 43, mean 17.2 vs. 10.0 days (P < 0.001)
with 15% of rats across all groups alive and tumor-free at Day 50 when
the study was terminated. Both doses were equally effective and well
tolerated. Surprisingly, treated rats bearing large MR-detectable D7
tumors survived significantly longer compared to rats bearing microscopic
D2 tumors (6/21 or ~30% versus 0/21 or 0% respectively at D50, mean 23.1
vs. 12 days, P < 0.004). Concordantly, CD8+ T cells in D7 tumors were
significantly increased after NKTR-214 therapy compared to vehicle and D2
tumors, while CD4+ remained low with no significant difference between
groups. PEG polymer was detected in the tumor at least 72 hours
p-injection.

Conclusions: NKTR-214 is well tolerated, prolongs survival and induces
immunological activity in the brain when administered to rats harboring
orthotopic GBM. While there was no significant dose dependence, a marked
increase in survival was observed when larger D7 tumors were treated with
NKTR-214 compared to microscopic D2 tumors, associated with increased
intratumoral CD8+ T cells. Levels of CD4+ were unchanged, consistent with
the mechanism of CD-122 biased activation of the IL2 pathway. While
requiring further study, it is intriguing that the increased sensitivity
of larger tumors also corresponds to onset of angiogenesis and rapid
tumor growth in this model. NKTR-214 is currently being evaluated in an
outpatient Phase 1 / 2 clinical trial for the treatment of solid tumors.
The results presented suggest a potential role for NKTR-214 in the
treatment of patients afflicted with GBM.


