Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastrointestinal stromal tumor: Retrospective analysis of 44 cases
of center of reference in eastern Algeria.


Aim: To analyze the clinicopathologic characteristics, prognostic
factors, and treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs).

Methods: We conducted a retrospective analysis of all cases of GISTs
treated in the Medical Oncology Unit from 2010 through 2015.

Results: We analyzed 44 patients with a median age of 49.43 years (17-76
years) with sex ratio 1:1. The main symptom was abdominal pain. Thirty
patients had limited-stage disease and 14 patients had metastatic
disease. We observed 90% of the immunohistochemistry exams were positive
for CD117 (c-Kit+). The most frequent location was in the stomach (45%),
the high-risk group was predominant (50%) and the average tumor size is
12.84 cm. Surgery was considered R0 (extensive) in 75% of the cases and
the main sites of metastases were liver and peritoneum.25 patients
received imatinib 400 mg qDay in adjuvant setting,5 patients in
neoadjuvant, 13 patients in palliative and 1 patient had best supportive
care. A total of 44 patients were followed up for 1 to 78 months.6
patients (13 %) developed recurrence or metastasis during or after
adjuvant treatment. Two patients had surgery after neoadjuvant
treatment(40%). 4 patients treated in second line with imatinib 800 mg
qDay, 5 patients with sunitinib and 2 patients rechallenged in third line
with imatinib 800 mg qDay.

Conclusion: Our patients presented mainly in the form of high-risk
disease, Surgery is the mainstay treatment when GISTs are localized,
Adjuvant therapy is used depending their risk of relapse. In the advanced
disease, tyrosine kinase inhibitors have substantially improved the
prognosis of GISTs.


