Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ligand-conjugated superparamagnetic biosynthesized magnetite
nanoparticles for specific targeting via in vivo imaging of triple
negative breast cancer.


This paper presents ligand-conjugated biosynthesized magnetite
nanoparticles (BMNPs) that serve as molecular magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) contrast agents for specific targeting of cell-surface receptors on
triple negative breast cancer cells. Superparamagnetic BMNPs were
functionalized with Luteinizing Hormone Releasing Hormone (LHRH), a
molecular recognition units (MRUs) that have been shown to have receptors
that are overexpressed on MDA MB 231 cells. Early and metastatic tumors
from triple negative breast cancer xenografts were targeted in vivo in a
nude mouse model in the presence of both ligand-conjugated and
unconjugated superparamagnetic BMNPs. A combination of transmission
electron microscopy (TEM), Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and
spectrophotometric analysis was used to investigate the specific
accumulation of the functionalized superparamagnetic BMNPs tumor specific
sites. The results obtained compliment the in vitro experiment that
showed enhancement of MRI contrast by ligand-conjugated BMNPs. At a
concentration of ~ 20mg/kg of both nanoparticles, the ligand-conjugated
BMNPs reveal specific attachment to tumor tissue as well as metastases in
the lungs. However, most of the unconjugated BMNPs were found to
accumulate in the liver, spleen and kidney which showed their
non-specificity. The implications of the results obtained is for the
specific targeting and early detection of triple negative breast cancer.


