Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Advantage of dendritic cells for the therapeutic cancer vaccine.


Background: To develop effective cancer vaccine, we examined CTLs induced
by peptide vaccination (CTLpep) and DC vaccination (CTLDC) in terms of
their antitumor effects.

Methods: For preparation of peptide vaccine, 50 µg hgp100 peptide
(KVPRNQDWL) and 20 µg CpG were emulsified with 50 µl CFA or IFA. Bone
marrow-derived DCs were matured with LPS and pulsed with hgp100 peptide
at 1 µg/ml and used as DC vaccine. To induce CTLpep and CTLDC, C57BL/6
mice were first injected with 1 x 107 naive spleen cells from Pmel-1 TCR
transgenic mice to increase hgp100-specific CTL precursors. Then mice
were vaccinated twice with 2 weeks interval. The induction of CTLs were
evaluated 2 weeks after the second vaccination. To evaluate their
antitumor activity, 1 x 106 B16F10 were inoculated into vaccinated mice
(prophylactic model). For therapeutic model, 1 x 106 B16F10 were
inoculated into mice on day 0. Five days later 1 x 107 Pmel-1 splenocytes
were transferred. Then, mice were vaccinated on days 5 and 12, followed
by the measurement of tumor growth.

Results: DC vaccine induced 5-times more CTLs than peptide vaccine. The
numbers of CTLpep and CTLDC obtained in the spleen were 2.4±0.2x105 and
1.2±0.4x106, respectively. CTLpep expressed PD-1 and Tim-3 at higher
level than CTLDC. Most of CTLpep showed effector memory phenotype
(CD44hiCD62L-), while CTLDC contained a considerable fraction of central
memory cells (CD44hiCD62L+). Although both CTLpep and CTLDC produce
IFN-γ and TNF-α at similar level, more CD107a were detected on CTLDC
than CTLpep upon re-stimulation. CTLDC displayed better proliferation
potential than CTLpep. These phenotypic differences were confirmed by the
comprehensive gene expression analysis. Transcriptome analysis revealed
that considerable portion of CTLpep and CTLDC were comparable and
different from that of naïve CTLs. However, several genes were expressed
differentially. CTLpep expressed higher amount of inhibitory receptors,
such as Pdcd1, Lag3, Ctla4 and Tigit than CTLDC. CTLDC expressed Fbp1,
which inhibits glycolysis, and Cpt1a, which is the rate-limiting enzyme
of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation, suggesting that their metabolic
statuses were shifted from glycolysis to fatty acid oxidation. DC vaccine
completely inhibited the tumor growth in prophylactic vaccine setting,
while peptide vaccine delayed tumor growth compared to control mice. In
therapeutic protocol, peptide vaccine showed no antitumor effect, while
DC vaccine significantly suppressed tumor growth. The numbers of
intratumoral CTLpep and CTLDC on day 19 were 5.2±2.8 x 104/g and
5.0±1.4 x 105/g, respectively. Intratumoral CTLDC expressed lower levels
of PD-1, Tim-3 and LAG-3 and more Ki67 than CTLpep. Furthermore,
Intratumoral CTLDC produce more IFN-γ and TNF-α than CTLpep.

Conclusion: DC vaccine induced intratumoral CTLs with multi-functionality
and high proliferation potential. Therefore, DC vaccine is our choice for
the therapeutic cancer vaccine.


