Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ARID1A and ARID1B dependent proteomics.


Protein sub-units of the SWI/SNF nucleosome and chromatin remodeling
complexes are frequently mutated in cancer. The ARID1A and ARID1B DNA
interacting component are among these mutated proteins. Alterations in
ARID1A have been reported in breast, colon, lung, kidney, pancreatic,
bladder, cervical, ovarian and uterine cancers whereas ARID1B mutation is
less common. Additional data suggests ARID1A mutant cancers are dependent
on functional ARID1B and that targeting ARID1B may be a therapeutic
strategy. However, ARID1A and 1B are often co-inactivated in aggressive
un/dedifferentiated carcinomas of the ovary and endometrium suggesting
tumor suppressive functions might exist not only in ARID1A but also in
1B. In this study, we examined the effects of restoring ARID1A or 1B in
an undifferentiated endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line harboring
inactivating mutations in both genes. ACI-98 cells derived from a stage
IV undifferentiated endometrial cancer were found to lack expression of
ARID1A and 1B protein. We subsequently identified two individual
truncating mutations in ARID1A and 1B by genomic DNA and cDNA sequencing
indicating no wild-type message was expressed. Restoration of ARID1A in
ACI-98 cells using a Tet-on system revealed remarkable growth inhibition,
however, ARID1B restoration showed only a moderate cell growth inhibition
with cells taking on a flattened phenotype. Clones of ARID1A/1B restored
cells were treated w/wo doxycycline (Dox) for 48h a time point prior to
cell death or morphologic changes and protein changes catalogued using LC
MS/MS. We identified 771 and 1168 differentially expressed proteins
(z-score Protein sub-units of the SWI/SNF nucleosome and chromatin
remodeling complexes are frequently mutated in cancer. The ARID1A and
ARID1B DNA interacting component are among these mutated proteins.
Alterations in ARID1A have been reported in breast, colon, lung, kidney,
pancreatic, bladder, cervical, ovarian and uterine cancers whereas ARID1B
mutation is less common. Additional data suggests ARID1A mutant cancers
are dependent on functional ARID1B and that targeting ARID1B may be a
therapeutic strategy. However, ARID1A and 1B are often co-inactivated in
aggressive un/dedifferentiated carcinomas of the ovary and endometrium
suggesting tumor suppressive functions might exist not only in ARID1A but
also in 1B. In this study, we examined the effects of restoring ARID1A or
1B in an undifferentiated endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line harboring
inactivating mutations in both genes. ACI-98 cells derived from a stage
IV undifferentiated endometrial cancer were found to lack expression of
ARID1A and 1B protein. We subsequently identified two individual
truncating mutations in ARID1A and 1B by genomic DNA and cDNA sequencing
indicating no wild-type message was expressed. Restoration of ARID1A in
ACI-98 cells using a Tet-on system revealed remarkable growth inhibition,
however, ARID1B restoration showed only a moderate cell growth inhibition
with cells taking on a flattened phenotype. Clones of ARID1A/1B restored
cells were treated w/wo doxycycline (Dox) for 48h a time point prior to
cell death or morphologic changes and protein changes catalogued using LC
MS/MS. We identified 771 and 1168 differentially expressed proteins
(z-score <0.05) from ARID1A or 1B restored clones compared to dox free
control and 138 proteins were common in these two groups (up-regulated:
57, down-regulated: 37, reverse regulation between ARID1A and 1B: 44). We
performed pathway analysis of the ARID1A and 1B proteome by Advaita
Pathway Guide software and this analysis identified 10 significantly
impacted pathways in ARID1A and 17 pathways in ARID1B. However, there was
no common pathway between the two. Wnt signaling pathway (KEGG: 04310)
was among ARID1A distinguished pathways with 9 of 46 proteins being
differentially expressed. Among these NKD1 a negative regulator of the
Wnt-Î²-catenin-Tcf signaling pathway was increased in ARID1A restored
cells more than 10 fold. We confirmed the differential expression of NKD1
using qRT-PCR following ARID1A expression. The p53 signaling pathway
(KEGG: 04916) was significantly (11 of 34 proteins) affected following
ARID1B complementation. We confirmed the differential expression of FAS
was up-regulated 6 fold in proteomics and 3.4 fold in qPCR. These results
suggest that restoration of ARID1A or 1B both effect cell proliferation
to varying degree. The lack of overlap between the proteomes of ARID1A/1B
restored cells indicates distinct pathways underlying these induced
phenotypes and different function of SWI/SNFARID1A or SWI/SNFARID1B.


