Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S-PLEXSM Troponin I assay with fg/mL sensitivity.


Cardiovascular toxicity is a potential complication of multiple
anticancer therapies. Some drugs, such as anthracyclines, have been
implicated in irreversible cardiac dysfunction. Cardiac troponin is a
specific and sensitive marker of myocardial injury. Serum and plasma
concentrations of troponin are often below the limits of detection in
apparently healthy individuals. Sensitivity of troponin assays has
improved by two orders of magnitude over the last several years, but few
assays can detect basal levels of serum troponin in more than 50% of
apparently healthy individuals, limiting the utility of the assay for
early detection of low levels of cardiac damage.

S-PLEX is a novel ultrasensitive immunoassay platform based on MSD’s
MULTI-ARRAY® electrochemiluminescence technology. An S-PLEX cardiac
troponin I assay was developed and analytically characterized for
research use. Serum and plasma samples from 24 apparently healthy
individuals, 90 individuals with cardiovascular complications, and 25
individuals receiving anthracycline chemotherapy were measured. The assay
required 25 μL of sample per measurement and was run on the MESO®
SECTOR S 600 and MESO QuickPlex® SQ 120 instruments. The lower limit of
detection was determined to be 10 fg/mL and the limits of quantitation
ranged from 31 fg/mL to 160,000 fg/mL. The assay was anchored to the NIST
reference material SRM 2921. Control samples run at 3 levels (n=8 per
plate, 8 plates, 2 days, 2 operators) had total CVs of 7% to 8% (n=64).
Spike recovery and dilution linearity had recoveries between 80% and
120%. Specificity of the assay was demonstrated by analyte depletion
using several commercially available anti-troponin specific antibodies.
There was no detectable cross-reactivity to skeletal troponin. As
expected, troponin I serum or plasma concentrations were high (~10,000
fg/mL to >160,000 fg/mL) for 90 individuals with cardiovascular
complications. Troponin I serum concentrations in 25 samples from
individuals receiving anthracycline chemotherapy had a median
concentration of 306 fg/mL and a range of S-PLEX is a novel
ultrasensitive immunoassay platform based on MSD’s MULTI-ARRAY®
electrochemiluminescence technology. An S-PLEX cardiac troponin I assay
was developed and analytically characterized for research use. Serum and
plasma samples from 24 apparently healthy individuals, 90 individuals
with cardiovascular complications, and 25 individuals receiving
anthracycline chemotherapy were measured. The assay required 25 μL of
sample per measurement and was run on the MESO® SECTOR S 600 and MESO
QuickPlex® SQ 120 instruments. The lower limit of detection was
determined to be 10 fg/mL and the limits of quantitation ranged from 31
fg/mL to 160,000 fg/mL. The assay was anchored to the NIST reference
material SRM 2921. Control samples run at 3 levels (n=8 per plate, 8
plates, 2 days, 2 operators) had total CVs of 7% to 8% (n=64). Spike
recovery and dilution linearity had recoveries between 80% and 120%.
Specificity of the assay was demonstrated by analyte depletion using
several commercially available anti-troponin specific antibodies. There
was no detectable cross-reactivity to skeletal troponin. As expected,
troponin I serum or plasma concentrations were high (~10,000 fg/mL to
>160,000 fg/mL) for 90 individuals with cardiovascular complications.
Troponin I serum concentrations in 25 samples from individuals receiving
anthracycline chemotherapy had a median concentration of 306 fg/mL and a
range of <10 to 5,820 fg/mL, comparable to a set of apparently healthy
specimens (n=24) with a median concentration of 226 fg/mL and a range of
S-PLEX is a novel ultrasensitive immunoassay platform based on MSD’s
MULTI-ARRAY® electrochemiluminescence technology. An S-PLEX cardiac
troponin I assay was developed and analytically characterized for
research use. Serum and plasma samples from 24 apparently healthy
individuals, 90 individuals with cardiovascular complications, and 25
individuals receiving anthracycline chemotherapy were measured. The assay
required 25 μL of sample per measurement and was run on the MESO®
SECTOR S 600 and MESO QuickPlex® SQ 120 instruments. The lower limit of
detection was determined to be 10 fg/mL and the limits of quantitation
ranged from 31 fg/mL to 160,000 fg/mL. The assay was anchored to the NIST
reference material SRM 2921. Control samples run at 3 levels (n=8 per
plate, 8 plates, 2 days, 2 operators) had total CVs of 7% to 8% (n=64).
Spike recovery and dilution linearity had recoveries between 80% and
120%. Specificity of the assay was demonstrated by analyte depletion
using several commercially available anti-troponin specific antibodies.
There was no detectable cross-reactivity to skeletal troponin. As
expected, troponin I serum or plasma concentrations were high (~10,000
fg/mL to >160,000 fg/mL) for 90 individuals with cardiovascular
complications. Troponin I serum concentrations in 25 samples from
individuals receiving anthracycline chemotherapy had a median
concentration of 306 fg/mL and a range of <10 to 5,820 fg/mL, comparable
to a set of apparently healthy specimens (n=24) with a median
concentration of 226 fg/mL and a range of <10 to 4,330 fg/mL. The S-PLEX
troponin I assay was capable of detecting troponin in 44 of the 49
samples from individuals with no known cardiovascular disease.

In conclusion, we have developed a highly specific and sensitive cardiac
troponin I assay that is capable of accurately measuring the cardiac
troponin I protein concentration in samples from individuals with known
cardiovascular disease, as well as 90% of the apparently healthy
individuals tested. This assay can be used to study low levels of cardiac
troponin I in serum and plasma samples and may provide a useful research
tool for the detection of cardiac troponin I, a biomarker linked to
cardiac damage.


