Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Avoiding chemotherapy resistance in squamous cell carcinomas:
anticancer activities of terpenoids and their impact on the regulation of
microRNAs.


MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that play important roles in cellular
biology. They have been implicated in pharmacogenomics by down-regulating
genes that are essential for drug function. In this work we verified the
potential anticancer activity of the quinone methide triterpenes maytenin
and 22-Î²-hydroxymaytenin, as well as of a quinone methide
triterpene-rich extract obtained from cultivated Maytenus ilicifolia root
cells, and evaluated the associated microRNA expression following half
maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) treatment. Standard selectivity
index (SI) for the isolated compounds and the root cell extract was
determined by the logarithmic shift in effective concentration (IC50)
between cancer cell lines and oral keratinocytes. Both isolated molecules
as well as the root cell extract presented pronounced antiproliferative
and pro-apoptotic activities in four cell lines derived from head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas, including a metastasis-derived cell line.
A positive SI, with an average 2-fold increase in potency, was detected
for single agents and for the extract. MicroRNA expression profiles were
assessed at 24h, 48h and 72h following treatment and an average of 100
molecules presented consistent marked variation in expression levels.
Considering associations of microRNAs, genes they regulate, and the drugs
effects dependent on these genes, the down-regulation of miR-193a-3p and
miR-21 in treated cells is of particular interest. Both microRNAs have
been involved in 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin resistance, current agents
of standard chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced head and neck cancer.
Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck is one of the most common
cancer types worldwide whereas treatment options based on conventional
therapies or targeted therapies under development have limited efficacy.
Plant-derived products are valuable sources for the development of new
therapeutic options for cancer treatment or as synergistic agents in
existing regular care.


