Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution and drug resistance of primary and relapse tumors in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Our integrated multi-omics analysis of paired primary and relapse DLBCL
tumors provides comprehensive view to tumor evolution, drug resistance
and disease heterogeneity. DLBCL is an aggressive systemic disease in
which tumors can arise in virtually any part of the body. Activated
B-cell (ABC) and germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like subtypes differ
molecularly and clinically. Three-year progression-free survival (PFS) in
ABC is around 40% vs over 80% in GCB. Whole genome (WGS, 7 patients),
transcriptome (total RNA, 7 patients) and methylome sequencing data
produced using the Illumina HiSeq platform was complemented with Illumina
TruSeq amplicon sequencing covering 102,571 bp of the genome on 788
custom selected targets. Altogether 23 fresh frozen and 28 paraffin
embedded tumor samples from 24 patients with an advanced disease and at
least one relapse event were included in the study. To investigate the
clonal hierarchy of the primary and relapsed tumors we employed dirichlet
process clustering using cancer cell fraction (CCF) estimates or variant
allele frequencies from somatic point mutations. Divergent evolution was
prominent in the GCB subtype whereas in ABC subtype subclonal mutations
are rare and only few genomic differences were detected between primary
and relapse tumors (p-value=0.047, Pearson's Chi-squared test on 7
patients with WGS data) suggesting pre-treatment drug resistance which is
probably triggered by global hypo- or hypermethylation at relapse stage.
In the GCB subtype primary and relapse branches have diverged much before
diagnosis and subsequently developed independently. Number of emerging
primary or relapse specific clonal and subclonal mutations correlate with
PSF and overall survival (OS). Mutational signatures were concordant with
the inferred evolutionary models in four out of five GCB cases.
Contribution of the somatic hypermutation signature was higher in
resistant tumors and correlated with time to progression of the disease.
We identified 72 relapse tumor related genes including many known B-cell
lymphoma genes such as CD79B, IGLL5, PIM1, SGK1. These were used in
survival analysis in the CGCI RNA data set derived from 92 diagnostic
DLBCL tumors. Patients with subclonal mutations in these genes had
shorter PSF and OS (Kaplan-Meier p-values 0.0122 and 0.0071,
respectively). To validate and further define our hypothesis we are
simulating DLBCL evolution as a discrete time branching process model
(Galton-Watson branching processes). The goal is to reconstruct
phylogenetic trees from a simulated tumor and explain different types of
evolutionary models inferred from the patient data. Despite of remarkable
heterogeneity in DLBCL we observed two main evolutionary models which are
concordant with disease subtype, patientâ€™s survival, treatment response
at diagnosis and relapse, and molecular features of a tumor.


