Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The significance of calreticulin in pancreatic cancer: a molecule
highly expressed in pancreatic cancer stem-like cells.


Cancer stem-like cells (CSLCs) in solid tumors are thought to be
resistant to conventional chemotherapy or molecular targeting therapy and
to contribute to cancer recurrence and metastasis. In this study, we
aimed to identify a biomarker of pancreatic CSLCs (P-CSLCs).
P-CSLC-enriched population was generated from pancreatic cancer cell
lines using our previously reported method and its protein expression
profile was compared with that of parental cells by two-dimensional
electrophoresis and tandem mass spectrometry. The results indicated that
a chaperone protein calreticulin (CRT) was significantly upregulated in
P-CSLCs compared to parental cells. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated
that CRT was mostly localized to the surface of P-CSLCs and did not
correlate with the levels of CD44v9, another P-CSLC biomarker.
Furthermore, the side population in CRThigh/CD44v9low population is much
higher than that in CRTlow/CD44v9high population. CRT expression was also
assessed by immunohistochemistry in pancreatic cancer tissues (n = 80)
obtained after radical resection and was found to be associated with
patients’ clinicopathological features and disease outcomes in the
Cox’s proportional hazard regression model. Multivariate analysis
identified CRT as an independent prognostic factor for pancreatic cancer
patients, along with age and post-operative therapy. Our results suggest
that CRT can serve as a biomarker of P-CSLCs and a prognostic factor
associated with poorer survival of pancreatic cancer patients. This novel
biomarker can be useful for detecting P-CSLCs independently, which had
been detectable by multiple surface markers like CD24, CD44 and ESA. We
will present CSLCs properties of CRThigh population in P-CSLCs.


