Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A PEAK1/GATA2 signaling axis controls VEGFR2 expression to mediate
angiogenesis.


Formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis) is crucial for proper
development, but can also contribute to many diseases including cancer.
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) is a receptor
tyrosine kinase that mediates angiogenesis in developing vertebrates and
is frequently upregulated in many human cancers. However, the underlying
mechanisms that regulate VEGFR2 expression in normal and diseased cells
are poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that pseudopodium-enriched
atypical kinase 1 (PEAK1) mediates developmental and tumor-induced
angiogenesis by modulating VEGFR2 expression and downstream signaling.
Knockout of peak1 in zebrafish using TALEN technology (Transcription
Activator-Like Effector Nucleases) or knockdown by specific peak1
morpholinos (MO) induced severe pericardial edema, blood-pooling defects,
and inhibited formation of intersegmental (ISV) and subintestinal vessels
(SIV). In Peak1 knockout mice, neonatal retinal vessel development was
severely delayed, and the ex vivo angiogenic ability of adult thoracic
aorta was greatly reduced. Intravital time-lapse imaging of ISV formation
in peak1 knockout zebrafish revealed major defects in endothelial cell
migration and proliferation. Similarly, PEAK1 knockdown or overexpression
in HUVECs modulated endothelial cell migration, proliferation, and vessel
sprouting in vitro. Biochemical studies and quantitative proteomic
profiling of PEAK1 knockdown HUVECs revealed a dramatic loss of VEGFR2
mRNA and protein expression, which attenuated downstream signaling to Akt
and ERK, leading to loss of VEGF-mediated vessel formation. PEAK1
specifically regulated VEGFR2 levels and did not alter VEGFR1 expression,
and reconstitution of PEAK1 knockdown cells with PEAK1 restored VEGFR2
mRNA and protein expression. Mechanistic studies revealed that PEAK1
specifically regulates VEGFR2 mRNA transcription by modulating expression
of the transcription factor GATA2. Re-expression of GATA2 in PEAK1
depleted cells restored VEGFR2 mRNA and protein expression as well as
downstream signaling, indicating that GATA2 is a necessary downstream
component in this response. Also, introduction of gata2 mRNA into PEAK1
knockdown zebrafish restored normal ISV formation and vegfr2 mRNA
expression in these animals. Finally, bioinformatics and interrogation of
the TCGA RNAseq database revealed significant Pearsonâ€™s correlations
between PEAK1 and VEGFR2 expression in 17 of 32 different human cancers.
Collectively, our findings indicate that PEAK1 regulates developmental
and tumor-induced angiogenesis by regulating GATA2-dependent VEGFR2
expression and its downstream signals.


