Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADCT-401/MEDI3726, a novel pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD)-based
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) targeting PSMA-expressing prostate cancers.


Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is an attractive target for an
ADC approach as it is over-expressed by virtually all prostate cancers
and its expression is highest in poorly-differentiated, metastatic and
castration-resistant cases. PSMA has limited expression in non-prostatic
tissues, it is not secreted or cleaved by PSMA-expressing cells, and it
is constitutively internalized, a process that may be accelerated by
specific antibody binding. ADCT-401/MEDI3726 is an ADC composed of a
monoclonal antibody (J591), directed against human PSMA,
site-specifically conjugated (drug-to-antibody ratio of 1.8) to a highly
cytotoxic DNA cross-linking PBD dimer with a valine-alanine dipeptide
linker. In vitro, ADCT-401/MEDI3726 demonstrated potent and specific
cytotoxicity in a panel of PSMA-expressing prostate cancer cell lines,
whereas its activity was greatly reduced in PSMA-negative cell lines. In
vivo, ADCT-401/MEDI3726 showed strong antitumor activity against CWR22Rv1
and LNCaP human-derived prostate cancer xenograft models. In the CWR22Rv1
model, a tumor with low, heterogeneous PSMA expression, ADCT-401/MEDI3726
achieved dose-dependent antitumor activity when administered as single
dose at either 0.33 or 1 mg/kg, which resulted in significant increase in
survival compared to the vehicle-treated animals. Moreover, a single dose
of ADCT-401/MEDI3726 showed remarkable superior antitumor activity
compared to multiple doses of another PSMA-targeted ADC stochastically
conjugated to the auristatin payload vcMMAE with a DAR of ~4. In the
LNCaP model, ADCT-401/MEDI3726 resulted in dose-dependent antitumor
activity when dosed once at 0.11, 0.33 or 1 mg/kg. In the PSMA-negative
prostate cancer-derived PC3 xenograft model, ADCT-401/MEDI3726 and an
isotope-control ADC showed limited tumor growth inhibition highlighting
target-mediated antitumor activity. ADCT-401/MEDI3726 demonstrated potent
and specific in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity in prostate
cancer-derived models of differing levels of PSMA and this warrants
further development of this ADC into the clinic.


