Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective killing of SMARCA2- and SMARCA4-deficient tumors by
inhibition of EZH2: In vitro and in vivo preclinical models.


The histone methyltransferase EZH2 is the enzymatic subunit of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that catalyzes the methylation of
H3K27 thereby repressing target gene transcription. EZH2 is amplified,
overexpressed, or mutated in multiple cancer types, most notably
Follicular Lymphoma (FL) and germinal center Diffuse Large B-cell
Lymphoma (GCB-DLBCL). We previously reported that preclinical models of
malignant rhabdoid tumors, which are deficient in the SWI/SNF core
component INI1 (SNF5, SMARCB1), are selectively killed by potent and
selective inhibitors of EZH2. Here we report another class of
SWI/SNF-altered cancers named small cell carcinoma of the ovary
hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) that is dependent on EZH2 activity. SCCOHT is
a very aggressive form of cancer that responds poorly to conventional
therapy with a one-year overall survival rate of only 50%. Very few novel
agents have been approved for this indication; thus there is a need for
targeted therapeutics in SCCOHT. SMARCA4 and SMARCA2 are co-inactivated
in this tumor type that has many rhabdoid features. We demonstrate that
tazemetostat, an EZH2 inhibitor currently in phase 2 clinical trials,
induces potent and selective killing in SMARCA2 and SMARCA4-deficient
ovarian cell lines. In addition to small molecule inhibitor data, we
conducted functional genomics studies with CRISPR pooled screening, and
confirmed that SCCOHT is also sensitive to CRISPR-mediated EZH2 gene
ablation. Dose-dependent anti-tumor effects were observed upon
tazemetostat treatment in SCCOHT xenografts deficient in both SMARCA2 and
SMARCA4. We also report on additional non-ovarian tumor types with dual
SMARCA2/SMARCA4 loss including NSCLC that exhibit EZH2 dependence
representing additional potential therapeutic indications for
tazemetostat treatment.


