Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative stress and selective protein carbonylation in human
breast cancer tissue.


Protein carbonylation is an irreversible modification to the side chain
of amino acid residues induced by severe oxidative stress. Reactive
oxygen species (ROS) are constantly produced under normal as well as
stress-induced conditions, and play a role in both cancer progression and
cancer suppression. Tumor tissue are known to have higher ROS levels
compared to surrounding healthy tissue but ROS-induced specific protein
carbonylation and its unique role in cancer progression/suppression are
poorly understood. In this study we compared the relative total and
specific protein carbonylation in flash frozen human breast cancer and
matched adjacent normal tissue using ELISA, two-color western blot, mass
spectrometry, and immunoprecipitation approaches. To understand
antioxidant capacity in tumor tissue, we analyzed superoxide dismutase
(SOD) for its antioxidant activity and protein level. Our results
indicate that tumor tissue has greater total protein carbonylation, lower
SOD activity, lower SOD protein levels, and elevated levels of autophagy
compared to matched adjacent healthy tissue. We also identified three
specific proteins that showed higher level of carbonylation selectively
in tumor tissue compared to adjacent normal tissue. Our findings were
further confirmed using the immortalized MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line and MCF-12A noncancerous normal human epithelial breast cell.
Identification of selectively carbonylated proteins in cancer tissue, and
understanding their specific role in cancer progression may promote the
development of targeted therapeutic approaches to mitigate or enhance
oxidative damage of such proteins selectively in tumor tissue.


