Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing kinase inhibitors with polypharmacological profiles for
the treatment of resistant cancers.


Small molecule kinase inhibitors targeting a specific oncoprotein driving
cancer cells have shown great clinical success in the past (e.g. imatinib
against leukemia). However, resistance to targeted therapies quickly
arises due to plasticity associated with cancer cell signaling and tumor
heterogeneity. One way to overcome this problem is to rationally design
drugs with polypharmacology that can target multiple signaling pathways
engaging in cancer cell proliferation and survival. To this end, we have
developed a strategy based on combining phenotypic screens of small
molecule inhibitors and affinity-based mass spectrometry to identify
drugs with multi-targeted properties and piloted this approach using the
highly resistant KRAS mutant non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. We
began this study by screening kinase inhibitors targeting MEK, ERK, PI3K,
Akt and mTOR and found that the lung cancer cells were largely resistant
to single drugs but showed enhanced sensitivity towards triple inhibition
of MEK, ERK and PI3K. These cell lines were then screened with a library
of covalent and non-covalent kinase inhibitors in an attempt to identify
a small molecule inhibitor that could mimic the activity of the triple
drug combination. This led to the discovery of SM1-71 that not only
recapitulated the growth inhibitory activity of MEK+ERK+PI3K inhibition,
but also blocked phosphorylation of ERK, Akt, mTOR and S6K in cells.
Target profiling of the drug was carried out using chemoproteomics, which
revealed that SM1-71 inhibited 55 kinases at a 1Î¼M concentration.
Dose-dependent evaluation further determined the IC50 of inhibition
across the 55 kinases and rank ordered them based on binding affinity.
Top hits including MEK1, MEK2, ERK1, ERK2, AURKA, SRC and RPS6KA3 were
confirmed using alternate kinase screens and cellular assays. Growth
factor receptors such as IGF1R, MET and EGFR were also identified and
further validated using cell-based assays. Taken together, these results
elucidated the polypharmacology associated with SM1-71 and uncovered key
targets responsible for inducing strong cytotoxicity in KRAS mutant lung
cancer cells. Through the combination of phenotypic screens and mass
spectrometry-based target identification, we have demonstrated the proof
of principle for developing kinase inhibitors with polypharmacology
targeting resistant cancers.


