Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large established B16 tumors in mice are eradicated by ZVexÂ®
(dendritic cell-targeting lentiviral vector) and G100 (TLR4 agonist)
combination immunotherapy through increasing tumor-infiltrating effector
T cells and inducing antigen spreading.


INTRODUCTION: Effective immunotherapy requires the presence of effector T
cells penetrating the tumor. ZVex is a hybrid lentiviral vector platform
that targets dendritic cells in vivo to express genes of tumor-associated
antigen (TAA)-of-interest and activate TAA-specific CD8 T cells. G100 is
the intratumoral (IT) injection of formulated glucopyranosyl lipid A (a
synthetic TLR4 agonist) and has been shown to induce T cell homing
chemokines, CXCL9 and CXCL10. We report here that G100 promoted an
inflamed tumor microenvironment (TME) and improved infiltration of
ZVex-induced TAA-specific CD8 T cells to the TME, thereby eradicating
large established B16 tumors. This was previously achieved only with a
complex vaccine/anti-tumor antibody/checkpoint inhibitor/IL-2 regimen
(Moynihan, Nature, 2016).

RESULTS: B16-OVA tumor-bearing mice were randomized into 4 treatment
cohorts: 1) untreated; 2) ZVex expressing ovalbumin (ZVex/OVA),
subcutaneously (SC); 3) G100 (IT); 4) ZVex/OVA (SC) and G100 (IT)
combination. While mice in Cohorts 2 and 3 exhibited delayed tumor
growth, nearly all mice (16/18) from Cohort 4 had completely regressed
tumors and survived tumor-free until end of study (109 days). CD8 T cell
depletion abrogated this anti-tumor response. Cohort 4 mice with
regressed tumors were then randomized and re-challenged with either a)
B16-OVA or b) parental B16 (lacking expression of the ZVex-targeted
antigen, OVA): a) B16-OVA re-challenge was rejected by 100% of recipient
mice - consistent with induction of T cell memory; and b) B16
re-challenge was rejected by 30%-50% of recipient mice - demonstrating
functional antigen spreading. T cell receptor deep sequencing showed that
ZVex/OVA alone increased tumor-infiltrating T cell clones specific for
OVA, validated by pMHC-multimer staining. ZVex/OVA and G100 combination
expanded additional T cell clones, further evident of antigen spreading.
Lastly, the TME of Cohort 4 mice showed the most profound
pro-inflammatory changes, as assessed by RNA transcriptional profiling.

CONCLUSIONS: These data collectively demonstrate that anti-tumor efficacy
observed in Cohort 4 mice was mediated largely by ZVex/OVA-induced
effector T cells and that TME modulation with G100 drastically shifted
the TME to a more inflamed milieu, promoting T cell proliferation,
antigen spreading, and generation of immunological memory. To our
knowledge, this is the first time that large established B16 tumors have
been completely eradicated using a combination of systemic and in situ
immunizations, a potentially effective strategy to convert non-inflamed
tumors to inflamed tumors. Both ZVex and G100 are in multiple clinical
trials, and their combination is currently being investigated in a phase
I trial in soft tissue sarcoma patients with injectable tumors.


