Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing in clear renal cell carcinoma: KEAP1 promoter
hypermethylation.


The Keap1/Nrf2 pathway is a master regulator of the cellular redox state
through the induction of several antioxidant defense genes implicated in
chemotherapeutic drugs resistance of tumor cells. An increasing body of
evidence supports a key role for Keap1/Nrf2 pathway in kidney diseases
and renal cell carcinoma, but data concerning the molecular basis and the
clinical effect of its deregulation remain incomplete.

Here we performed a comprehensive genetic and epigenetic analysis of the
KEAP1 gene in 37 tumor/normal paired tissues of clear cell Renal
Carcinoma (ccRCCs). Promoter methylation analysis was performed by using
a quantitative methylation specific PCR assay in real time, whereas
mutation scanning was performed on FFPE tissues by direct sanger
sequencing of the exons 4-7 codifying for the DGR domain of the Keap1
protein.

A tumor-specific DNA methylation of the KEAP1 gene promoter region was
found in 18 out of 37 ccRCCs (48,6%) and a direct effects on the
modulation of Keap1 mRNA levels was confirmed by in vitro 5-azacytidine
treatment on three different ccRCCs cell lines. Analysis of an
independent TGCA data set corroborate the epigenetic findings and reveals
a significant correlation in multivariate analysis of epigenetic KEAP1
silencing with Overall Survival in ccRCCs.

Our results further suggest that epigenetic deregulation of the
Nrf2/Keap1 system could play a pivotal role in the cancerogenesis of
ccRCCs. In addition identifying patients with KEAP1 epigenetic
abnormalities may contribute to disease progression prediction and
response to therapy in ccRCC affected patients.


