Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtype 3 regulates gastric stem
cell expansion and gastric cancer progression by controlling YAP
activation.


Within the gastrointestine, nerves help to regulate both normal and
neoplastic stem cell dynamics. Several previous studies suggested that
cholinergic nerve signaling plays an important role in gastrointestinal
cancer development, but the exact underlying mechanism has not been
clarified. In this study, we examined the role of muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor subtype 3 (M3R) in gastric homeostasis and cancer
development by using mouse models and human cancer cell lines. In situ
hybridization revealed M3R expression in gastric stem cell zone, and its
expression was markedly upregulated in gastric cancer cells. We knocked
out M3R in Lgr5+ gastric stem cells in Lgr5-CreERT; M3Rflox/flox mice,
and found that deletion of M3R inhibited clonal expansion of Lgr5+ cells
in regenerative states. In a gastric tumor model of Mist1-CreERT;
Apcflox/flox mice, knockout of M3R dramatically suppressed tumor growth.
RNA sequencing analysis of these tumors revealed that several important
pathways were significantly inhibited in M3R knockout samples, including
YAP/TAZ pathway. We established M3R-expressing gastric cancer cell lines,
and western blotting, luciferase assay, and RT-PCR analysis confirmed
that acetylcholine (ACh) agonist activates YAP pathway through M3R. YAP
is upregulated in approximately half of gastric cancer patients, and its
expression is significantly associated with disease stage and
histological form. This M3R-YAP axis activates the gastric stem cell
niche and offers a compelling target for tumor treatment and prevention.


