Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VCAN promotes clear cell renal cell carcinoma tumor progression
and metastasis, and predicts poor prognosis.


Introduction and Objectives: Although versican (VCAN) is known to promote
tumor progression and enhance metastasis of several types of cancers, its
role in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) remains unknown.
Interestingly, a recent report showed that VCAN is an important target of
chromosomal 5q gain, one of the most prevalent genetic abnormalities in
ccRCC cases. In the present study, we investigated whether VCAN
expression is associated with the pathogenesis of ccRCC.

Methods: VCAN expression was analyzed in 3 RCC and normal kidney cell
lines, as well as 84 matched ccRCC and normal renal tissues. We also
performed various functional analyses of growth and progression
properties using VCAN-depleted ccRCC cells. Microarray analysis was then
employed to investigate the target genes of the pathway involved in ccRCC
tumorigenesis and development.

Results: There are 4 isoforms of VCAN containing the N-terminal globular
(G1 domain) and C-terminal globular (G3 domain) domains, each of which
was found to be over-expressed in the ccRCC samples as compared to the
controls. Higher VCAN expression was significantly correlated with
metastasis (pResults: There are 4 isoforms of VCAN containing the
N-terminal globular (G1 domain) and C-terminal globular (G3 domain)
domains, each of which was found to be over-expressed in the ccRCC
samples as compared to the controls. Higher VCAN expression was
significantly correlated with metastasis (p<0.001) and worse 5-year
overall survival after a radical nephrectomy (p=0.014). In vitro, VCAN
knockdown by siRNA in Caki-2 and 786-O cells significantly decreased cell
proliferation and increased apoptosis, and was also found to be
associated with alteration of several TNF signaling-related genes, such
as TNF-Î±, BID, and BAK. Furthermore, VCAN depletion markedly decreased
cell migration and invasion associated with reduced MMP7 and CXCR4 levels.

Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that VCAN promotes ccRCC
tumorigenesis and metastasis, showing it to be an attractive novel target
for diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies for affected
patients.


