Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of circulating and tissue biomarkers in patients with
metastatic colorectal cancer treated with first-line FOLFOX-aflibercept
therapy. Results of the GERCOR VELVET Phase II Study.


Background: The combination of aflibercept to OPTIMOX (VELVET study) was
evaluated in patients with previously untreated advanced colorectal
cancer. A biomarker program was set-up to explore the expression of
several tissue biomarkers at baseline and circulating biomarkers upon
treatment cycles to identify the best monitoring biomarkers of the
treatment strategy.

Methods: VELVET was a prospective, single arm phase II trial. Patientâ€™s
plasma samples were collected at baseline, and during induction therapy
at day 1 of the first 6 cycles. Circulating biomarkers were analyzed
using multiplexing immunoassays (31 biomarkers, 3 panels). Assays were
conducted on a Biorad Bioplex platform, expect for PlGF, VEGF-A and
Neuropillin-1 which were assessed using ELISA assays. Tissue biomarker
were analyzed at baseline by IHC, using a BOND-Max autostainer (Leica
biosystems). EGFR mutation status were analyzed using next generation
sequencing.

Results: Among 49 patients included in the VELVET study from May 2013 to
May 2014, 44 (90%) patients were evaluable for circulating biomarkers
expression. The proportion of patients with tumor response (CR or PR) was
higher in patients with high baseline levels of sVEGFR2, sEGFR, G-CSF,
Prolactin and low baseline levels of VEGFA and MIF. Progression-free
survival (PFS) was higher in patients with low baseline levels of
Osteopontin (HR: 0.53; P=0.045) and in patients with high baseline levels
of VEGF-C (HR: 0.45; P=0.014) and sVEGFR3 (HR: 0.50; P=0.045). Overall
survival was higher in patients with high sVEGFR3 (HR: 0.36; P=0.030)
levels. In both responders and non-responders, sVEGFR-1 and PlGF
dramatically increased upon exposure to aflibercept and remained
overexpressed for the all course of induction therapy. Circulation
biomarkers modulations will be analyzed upon the 6 cycles. Tumor tissue
biomarker assessment at baseline using IHC and theEGFR pathway mutations
status will be added.

Conclusions: Exposure to aflibercept is associated with an increase of
sVEGFR-1 and PlGF at cycle 1. Elevated baseline expression levels of
on-target sVEGFR3 predict favorable outcome in patients treated with
aflibercept.


