Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of metastasis by KP54 and non-KP54 kisspeptins.


KISS1 is a secreted neuropeptide which can act as a metastasis suppressor
protein. Expression of KISS1 inhibits metastatic colonization at
secondary sites, rendering disseminated cells dormant. In order for KISS1
to suppress metastasis, it must be secreted outside of the cell, where
furin cleaves KISS1 into kisspeptins. This cleavage liberates an internal
kisspeptin, Kisspeptin-54 (KP54, K67 to F121), which is amidated and has
the ability to bind a Gq/11-coupled protein receptor KISS1R. The
mechanism of action for KISS1 metastasis suppression has long been
assumed to be KP54 interacting with KISS1R. However, expression of KISS1R
is not necessary for KISS1 metastasis suppression, and the extracellular
processing of KISS1 hints at an alternative hypothesis: a different
kisspeptin may be responsible for suppressing metastasis. To test this
hypothesis, all possible kisspeptins were generated based on known
dibasic cleavage sites (M1-Q145; M1-R56; M1-R67; M1-R124; R56-R66;
R67-F121; R56-F121; R56-Q145; R67-Q145; R124-Q145) and were cloned to
include the same secretion sequence as nascent KISS1. These kisspeptins
(KISS1 Manufactured Peptides, or KMP) were independently expressed in
B16-F10 murine melanoma cells. To test for experimental metastasis,
B16-F10 cells expressing KMP were injected intravenously into the lateral
tail vein of syngeneic mice and the lungs were examined for metastatic
load. While KP54 suppressed metastasis, additional KMP lacking the KISS1R
binding site (LRF-NH2) were able to completely suppress metastasis
(pKISS1 is a secreted neuropeptide which can act as a metastasis
suppressor protein. Expression of KISS1 inhibits metastatic colonization
at secondary sites, rendering disseminated cells dormant. In order for
KISS1 to suppress metastasis, it must be secreted outside of the cell,
where furin cleaves KISS1 into kisspeptins. This cleavage liberates an
internal kisspeptin, Kisspeptin-54 (KP54, K67 to F121), which is amidated
and has the ability to bind a Gq/11-coupled protein receptor KISS1R. The
mechanism of action for KISS1 metastasis suppression has long been
assumed to be KP54 interacting with KISS1R. However, expression of KISS1R
is not necessary for KISS1 metastasis suppression, and the extracellular
processing of KISS1 hints at an alternative hypothesis: a different
kisspeptin may be responsible for suppressing metastasis. To test this
hypothesis, all possible kisspeptins were generated based on known
dibasic cleavage sites (M1-Q145; M1-R56; M1-R67; M1-R124; R56-R66;
R67-F121; R56-F121; R56-Q145; R67-Q145; R124-Q145) and were cloned to
include the same secretion sequence as nascent KISS1. These kisspeptins
(KISS1 Manufactured Peptides, or KMP) were independently expressed in
B16-F10 murine melanoma cells. To test for experimental metastasis,
B16-F10 cells expressing KMP were injected intravenously into the lateral
tail vein of syngeneic mice and the lungs were examined for metastatic
load. While KP54 suppressed metastasis, additional KMP lacking the KISS1R
binding site (LRF-NH2) were able to completely suppress metastasis
(p<0.05). When assessing metastasis-associated traits in vitro,
suppressor KMP suppressed motility, increased mitochondrial biomass, and
increased oxidative phosphorylation (phenotypes previously reported with
KISS1 expression). In particular, one kisspeptin (KMP2, M1 - R56)
suppressed metastatic traits in vitro as well as completely suppressing
metastasis in vivo. As a whole, these data suggest that metastasis
suppression by KISS1 is not necessarily contingent on KISS1R activation,
and also supports investigation into additional receptors.


