Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interlaboratory concordance of genetic variant classifications in
BRCA1 and BRCA2.


Background: Clinical laboratories use publicly available literature,
databases, and expertise to determine the pathogenicity of genetic
variants in test reports. Recently, discordances between public databases
have been raised as a concern, most prominently by those who use
proprietary data in their classification processes. However, the clinical
impact of these discordances is unclear. In prior work, we observed 99.8%
concordance of clinically significant variant classifications between two
labs across 975 prospectively accrued patients (Lincoln et al., J Mol
Diag 2015). Here we evaluated BRCA1/12 variant classification concordance
among multiple labs in a much larger patient population.

Methods: Over 5000 ClinVar submissions of classified BRCA1/2 variants
from 7 established laboratories (Ambry, the Children's Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Counsyl, Emory, GeneDx, Invitae, and Myriad) were
available for comparison. Myriad data were submitted by the Sharing
Clinical Reports Project. Clinically significant differences were those
that could substantially change clinical management: i.e. between
pathogenic (including likely pathogenic), versus VUS (variant of
uncertain significance), benign or likely benign; otherwise results were
considered concordant. Approximately 22,000 patients were represented in
this comparison.

Results: Counting each variant separately, concordance between labs was
high: 98.5% overall. However this calculation greatly underestimates the
much higher concordance calculated on a per-patient basis. All discordant
classifications were in rare variants that, by definition, are present in
very few patients. Moreover, classifications of most rare variants are
concordant (sometimes, concordantly VUS). Based on clinical and
population prevalence, we calculate that 99.8% of patients would receive
net concordant BRCA1/2 reports, similar to our previous studyâ€™s
results. The dominant sources of discordance were (a) date, where
classifications that postdate a critical piece of evidence disagree with
those that predate it; and (b) expert judgment differences evaluating the
strength of certain evidence, usually functional assays.

Discussion: Classification concordance needs to be measured carefully to
avoid over-counting differences. While substantial differences are seen
in few patients, it is important to resolve these collaboratively, not
competitively, as is done in other areas of oncology. Thorough and
ongoing peer review of classifications is enabled by public databases
like ClinVar which both enable laboratory quality control efforts and
help improve personalized medical care practices.


