Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response of C4.4A-positive patient-derived xenograft models of
ESCC, HNSCC and bladder cancer to BAY1129980, a C4.4A-targeted antibody
drug conjugate.


C4.4A (LYPD3) is a cancer- and metastasis-associated transmembrane cell
surface protein which is expressed at high frequency and density in
multiple tumor types including squamous and non-squamous non-small cell
lung carcinoma ((NSCLC), head & neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC),
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and bladder cancer. C4.4A
expression is restricted to a limited number of tissues (e.g. suprabasal
layer of skin) making C4.4A an attractive target for the treatment of
cancer with a C4.4A-targeted antibody-drug conjugate (ADC). BAY 1129980
(C4.4A-ADC), is an ADC consisting of a fully human C4.4A-targeting
monoclonal antibody (technology licensed from BioInvent) conjugated via a
novel, non-cleavable alkyl hydrazide linker to a novel, highly potent
auristatin W, an antimitotic agent (technology licensed from Seattle
Genetics, Inc.). This C4.4A-ADC has been previously shown to be
efficacious in C4.4A positive cell line-derived and PDX models of NSCLC.
Here we present new preclinical efficacy data of C4.4A-ADC in
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of ESCC, HNSCC and bladder cancer.
Models were selected based on tumor C4.4A levels as determined by mRNA
levels and immunohistochemistry (IHC), the latter of which allowed
ranking of models according to H-score, percentage of C4.4A positivity,
and staining intensity (0 to 3+) in the cell membrane. Representative
C4.4A-positive models were selected for in vivo efficacy studies (n=7
each): 4 HNSCC, 4 ESCC and 2 bladder cancers. C4.4A-ADC was administered
as one cycle (Q4Dx3) at doses of 7.5 and 15 mg/kg, and efficacy was
assessed up to 4 weeks post treatment for optimum tumor growth inhibition
(TGI). In ESCC models a response to C4.4A ADC was seen in ES0190 (TGI of
77%; 15mg/kg) and in ES0195 (59%). In HNSCC models an ADC effect on tumor
growth was observed in HN10847 (46%), HN9619 (34%), and HN10321 (22%).
Finally, both bladder models tested were sensitive to treatment, with a
transient response seen in BL0597 (41%) and a strong and complete tumor
growth control in BL5001 (93%,) which was superior to cisplatin. The data
show that C4.4A-positive PDX models of ESCC, HNSCC and bladder cancer can
respond to C4.4A-ADC. C4.4A expression served as a marker for
preselection of the models. Nevertheless, other factors may affect
response and sensitivity of these tumor models, such as sensitivity to
tubulin inhibition, ADC uptake and intracellular processing. In summary,
these data support further exploration of the potential of BAY 1129980 in
HNSCC, ESCC and bladder cancer in addition to NSCLC. A Phase 1 clinical
trial of BAY 1129980 is ongoing (NCT02134197).


