Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using droplet digital PCR to analyze MYCN copy number in plasma
from patients with high-risk neuroblastoma.


The invasive nature of surgical biopsies most often prevents their
sequential application to monitor disease in patients with high-risk
neuroblastoma. Even when available, single biopsies often fail to reflect
neuroblastoma dynamics, intratumor heterogeneity and drug sensitivities
likely to change during neuroblastoma evolution and treatment.
Implementing molecular characterization of cell-free
neuroblastoma-derived DNA (cfDNA) isolated from blood plasma would
improve outcome prediction, patient monitoring and treatment selection
for high-risk neuroblastoma patients, by providing a method to follow
clonal evolution in tumor subpopulations and treatment response as well
as capture the molecular landscape of all tumor clones. As a first step,
we established a digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) protocol to analyze the MYCN
copy number status. Analyzing the dilution series of a synthetic MYCN
template consisting of 70 nucleotides demonstrated a strong correlation
between theoretically calculated MYCN copy number and the MYCN copy
number measured using our ddPCR protocol. We compared MYCN copy number
status in a large panel of neuroblastoma cell lines with MYCN copy number
determined from cfDNAs isolated from cell culture media from the
corresponding cell lines. Our ddPCR protocol reliably detected MYCN
status in the cell line using cfDNA analysis. Next, we turned to a
subcutaneous MYCN-driven neuroblastoma xenograft model to compare MYCN
copy number in the xenografted tumor to MYCN copy number determined from
cfDNA isolated from the mouse blood plasma. MYCN copy numbers also
positively correlated using this model. We then analyzed MYCN copy number
status in primary neuroblastoma samples from 10 patients and compared
these values to the MYCN copy number determined from cfDNA isolated from
200 Âµl of blood plasma collected from the corresponding patients. These
final validation steps demonstrated that our ddPCR protocol for cfDNA
from patient blood plasma reliably detects MYCN copy number status in the
tumor. Our data justify the further development of molecular
neuroblastoma characterization from cfDNA in patient blood plasma. An
expanded molecular diagnostic monitoring palette will improve monitoring
of disease progression including relapse and metastatic events as well as
therapy success or failure in high-risk neuroblastoma patients.


