Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor action in prostate cancer partitions into
distinct transcriptional codes that differ in clinical relevance.


With few exceptions the 30,000 prostate cancer (CaP) deaths annually in
the US are due to failure of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). ADT
prevents ligand-activation of androgen receptor (AR). Despite remission,
CaP progresses while continuing to rely on AR. ARâ€™s transcriptional
output that controls CaP behavior is an alternative therapeutic target,
but its molecular regulation is poorly understood. Here, we determined
the androgen dependence of hundreds of direct AR target genes on 18
coregulators that are relevant to CaP progression, and uncovered that the
AR-dependent transcriptome breaks down in coregulator-dependent gene
sets. Pairwise comparison and unsupervised clustering showed limited
overlap between the gene subsignatures. Neither ChIP nor qRT-PCR studies
revealed differences in the kinetics of coregulator recruitment to
Androgen Response Elements (AREs) or of androgen regulation of different
gene sets. Rather, Cistrome analyses of AR binding sites demonstrated
preferential enrichment in binding motifs for distinct transcription
factors (TFs) between coregulator-dependent gene sets. Pathway and GSEA
analyses of these signatures indicated associations with select
biological processes and differential enrichments between normal prostate
and CaP, CaPs of different stages, and CaP and bone marrow
microenvironment. These results suggested that coregulators may unite the
action of DNA-bound AR and TF(s) to control select aspects of
androgen-dependent CaP cell biology. The presence and functionality of
such novel predicted AR transcriptional codes, namely AR-WDR77-p53 and
AR-STAT3-IRF1 with projected roles in CaP cell proliferation and stemness
respectively, was confirmed in Co-IP and gene expression profiling. As AR
and p53 are the major drivers of lethal CaP, the AR-WDR77-p53 code was
explored further. Mass spectrometry after WDR77 and p53 IP independently
identified PGAM5, a recently isolated serine/threonine protein
phosphatase that regulates cell death and unknown to be relevant to AR
signaling or CaP biology, as part of the AR-WDR77-p53 complex. Co-IP
assays verified IP-mass spectrometry results and ChIP studies confirmed
recruitment of PGAM5 to WDR77-dependent AREs. Expression profiling
demonstrated significant overlap in genes for which androgen regulation
was altered after silencing of WDR77, PGAM5 or p53. Co-IP and ChIP
studies showed that androgen-dependent recruitment of p53 to ARE-bound AR
requires WDR77 and PGAM5. Western blotting and flow cytometry analyses
indicated that WDR77 and PGAM5 and their dependent AR target genes
control G1/S cell cycle progression, which was maintained in presence of
clinically relevant gain-of-function p53 mutants. These novel insights
indicate that disrupting select protein-protein and protein-DNA
interactions may be a viable strategy to inhibit AR action that drives
CaP lethal progression.


