Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of oral selective estrogen receptor degrader RAD1901 in
preclinical models of endocrine sensitive/resistant breast cancer.


Aromatase inhibitors (AI) are the mainstay for treatment of
postmenopausal estrogen receptor positive (ER+) primary breast cancer
(BC). However, many patients relapse whilst retaining a functional ER.
The selective ER degrader (SERD) fulvestrant has been evaluated as a
potential 2nd or 3rd line therapy for patients who relapse on AI
treatment. Although exhibiting promising potential, its low
bioavailability has limited its use to combination therapy in metastatic
patients. Here, we assessed the efficacy of the orally available SERD,
RAD1901, in a panel of BC cells with varying genetic backgrounds
modelling patients both sensitive and resistant to AI therapy (LTED).
Fulvestrant was used in parallel to allow relative responses to be
compared. Cell proliferation assays in 2D and spheroids the presence of
0.01nM 17Î²-estradiol showed a concentration-dependent decrease in
proliferation in response to RAD1901 and fulvestrant. GI50 values for
RAD1901 in general were 10-fold higher than fulvestrant but equated to
doses that are clinically achievable for RAD1901. Most importantly,
RAD1901 effectively suppressed proliferation of two LTED models
harbouring naturally occurring ESR1 mutations, MCF7 LTEDY537C (GI50 5nM)
and SUM44-LTEDY537S (GI50 100nM). GI50 values of RAD1901 and fulvestrant
showed similar reduction of ER, progesterone receptor (PGR) and cyclin D1
together with decreased phosphorylation of retinoblastoma (RB),
concordant with cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) for ER in response to RAD1901 or fulvestrant
showed a 70% reduction in recruitment of ER to TFF1, GREB1 and PGR
promoters and concomitant reduction in mRNA expression of these genes. In
MCF7-Arom cells, combination of letrozole with RAD1901 or fulvestrant
showed enhanced antiproliferative effect compared to letrozole alone. The
addition of RAD1901 to CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib or abemaciclib
demonstrated additivity compared with monotherapy. In addition, RAD1901
effectively inhibited growth of palbociclib-resistant MCF7 LTED
cells.These preclinical findings highlight the potential utility of
RAD1901 as a potent drug in the treatment of ER+ BC. Combined with its
bioavailability profile, RAD1901 warrants clinical testing versus
fulvestrant after relapse on an AI, either alone or in combination with a
CDK4/6 inhibitor.


