Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagic ovarian cancer cells exhibit substantially enhanced
sensitivity to Crizotinib.


One of the major factors contributing to poor outcomes for patients with
ovarian cancer is the persistence of dormant, drug resistant cancer cells
after primary surgery and chemotherapy. Recurrent, progressively growing
ovarian cancer metastases are generally well vascularized and may only
have a small fraction of cancer cells undergoing autophagy. By contrast,
the persistent, drug resistant, dormant cancer cells that remain on the
peritoneal cavity after conventional treatment tend to be poorly
vascularized. In this nutrient-poor, avascular microenvironment autophagy
is widespread and can be found in more than 80% of cases. Drugs that
regulate survival in autophagic cancer cells may be much more active when
administered as maintenance therapy than when used to treat gross primary
or recurrent disease. Using unbiased siRNA screens, we have identified
target genes that regulate the survival of ovarian cancer cells that are
undergoing autophagy that has been induced by the re-expression of DIRAS3
or by amino acid starvation. Knockdown of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK) significantly reduced survival of ovarian cancer cells that were
undergoing autophagy. Importantly, the FDA-approved ALK inhibitor,
Crizotinib, exhibited significantly greater toxicity after induction of
autophagy by upregulation of DIRAS3 (ARHI) in OVCAR8, CAOV3, and SKOv3
ovarian cancer cells. Induction of autophagy by upregulation of DIRAS3 in
SKOv3 ovarian cancer cells reduced the IC50 of Crizotinib from 7.44µM ±
0.04708 to 2.129µM ± 0.06152 (POne of the major factors contributing to
poor outcomes for patients with ovarian cancer is the persistence of
dormant, drug resistant cancer cells after primary surgery and
chemotherapy. Recurrent, progressively growing ovarian cancer metastases
are generally well vascularized and may only have a small fraction of
cancer cells undergoing autophagy. By contrast, the persistent, drug
resistant, dormant cancer cells that remain on the peritoneal cavity
after conventional treatment tend to be poorly vascularized. In this
nutrient-poor, avascular microenvironment autophagy is widespread and can
be found in more than 80% of cases. Drugs that regulate survival in
autophagic cancer cells may be much more active when administered as
maintenance therapy than when used to treat gross primary or recurrent
disease. Using unbiased siRNA screens, we have identified target genes
that regulate the survival of ovarian cancer cells that are undergoing
autophagy that has been induced by the re-expression of DIRAS3 or by
amino acid starvation. Knockdown of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
significantly reduced survival of ovarian cancer cells that were
undergoing autophagy. Importantly, the FDA-approved ALK inhibitor,
Crizotinib, exhibited significantly greater toxicity after induction of
autophagy by upregulation of DIRAS3 (ARHI) in OVCAR8, CAOV3, and SKOv3
ovarian cancer cells. Induction of autophagy by upregulation of DIRAS3 in
SKOv3 ovarian cancer cells reduced the IC50 of Crizotinib from 7.44µM ±
0.04708 to 2.129µM ± 0.06152 (P<0.05). Conversely, siRNA knockdown of
DIRAS3 in CAOV3 cells with endogenously high DIRAS3 expression and
baseline autophagy increased the IC50 of Crizotinib from 204 nM ±
0.01265 to 267 nM ± 0.01715 (POne of the major factors contributing to
poor outcomes for patients with ovarian cancer is the persistence of
dormant, drug resistant cancer cells after primary surgery and
chemotherapy. Recurrent, progressively growing ovarian cancer metastases
are generally well vascularized and may only have a small fraction of
cancer cells undergoing autophagy. By contrast, the persistent, drug
resistant, dormant cancer cells that remain on the peritoneal cavity
after conventional treatment tend to be poorly vascularized. In this
nutrient-poor, avascular microenvironment autophagy is widespread and can
be found in more than 80% of cases. Drugs that regulate survival in
autophagic cancer cells may be much more active when administered as
maintenance therapy than when used to treat gross primary or recurrent
disease. Using unbiased siRNA screens, we have identified target genes
that regulate the survival of ovarian cancer cells that are undergoing
autophagy that has been induced by the re-expression of DIRAS3 or by
amino acid starvation. Knockdown of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
significantly reduced survival of ovarian cancer cells that were
undergoing autophagy. Importantly, the FDA-approved ALK inhibitor,
Crizotinib, exhibited significantly greater toxicity after induction of
autophagy by upregulation of DIRAS3 (ARHI) in OVCAR8, CAOV3, and SKOv3
ovarian cancer cells. Induction of autophagy by upregulation of DIRAS3 in
SKOv3 ovarian cancer cells reduced the IC50 of Crizotinib from 7.44µM ±
0.04708 to 2.129µM ± 0.06152 (P<0.05). Conversely, siRNA knockdown of
DIRAS3 in CAOV3 cells with endogenously high DIRAS3 expression and
baseline autophagy increased the IC50 of Crizotinib from 204 nM ±
0.01265 to 267 nM ± 0.01715 (P<0.05). Our studies in cell culture
suggest that Crizotinib might provide an effective agent to eliminate
autophagic, dormant drug resistant ovarian cancer cells that remain after
conventional cytoreductive surgery and combination chemotherapy.
Subsequent studies will evaluate the effect of Crizotinib in xenograft
models of DIRAS3-induced ovarian cancer dormancy.


