Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) in Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcoma is a highly aggressive bone and soft tissue cancer that is
caused by the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. The EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein
functions, in part, as an aberrant transcription factor and is required
for tumor growth and survival. In order to identify downstream targets of
EWS-FLI1, we used human embryonic stem cells that express inducible
EWS-FLI1 to model the initiation and development of Ewing sarcoma in a
genetically defined system. We then used this model system and a gene
expression based approach to identify that Ewing sarcoma cells are
uniquely vulnerable to inhibitors of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR),
which impair DNA replication by blocking the synthesis of
deoxyribonucleotides. Here we report that the treatment of Ewing sarcoma
cells with gemcitabine, an irreversible inhibitor of the RRM1 subunit of
RNR, results in impaired DNA replication, cell cycle arrest, and
apoptosis in Ewing sarcoma cells. Additionally, we have found that the
effect of gemcitabine on the viability of Ewing sarcoma cells is
sustained even after removal of the drug from the cell culture medium.
Moreover, ataxia telangiectasia and rad3-related protein (ATR) and
checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) inhibitors increase the toxicity of
gemcitabine in Ewing sarcoma cells by blocking the adaptive response to
impaired DNA replication. Currently, ongoing work is focused on the in
vivo testing of gemcitabine, alone and in combination with CHK1 and ATR
inhibitors, as a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of Ewing
sarcoma.


