Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGFBR1*6A mouse model mimics human breast cancer development and
progression.


Transforming Growth Factor-ß (TGF-β) is one of the most commonly
altered cellular signaling pathways in human cancer. Our group was the
first to discover TGFBR1*6A (*6A), a common hypomorphic variant of the
type I TGF-ß receptor (TGFBR1), which has been associated with increased
risk for breast cancer in multiple epidemiological studies. Functional
analysis also suggests that *6A is associated with decreased tumor
suppressive TGF-β signaling in early tumor development and is involved
with promoting tumorigenesis in advanced carcinomas. To better understand
the functional impact of *6A and constitutively reduced TGF-ß signaling
on breast cancer development and progression, we have recently developed
a series of transgenic knock-in mouse model variants by replacing exon 1
of the mouse Tgfbr1 sequence with human exon 1 sequences harboring both
*6A and wild-type (*9A) TGFBR1 variants and crossed them with MMTVneu
mice.

We generated a total of 5 FVB double and/or triple transgenic mouse
strains: MMTVneu;9A/9A, MMTVneu;6A/6A, MMTVneu;9A/6A, MMTVneu;*9A/-, and
MMTVneu;6A/-. Following tumor development, measurements were performed
three times per week to determine tumor volume. All mice were allowed to
live up to 18 months (548 days) or until they died of natural causes.
Specimens were collected for later analysis of blood, tumors, normal
mammary tissue, and were evaluated for lung metastases. Statistical
comparisons performed using Student’s t-test.

Only 34.4% of MMTVneu;9A/9A mice (11/32) developed mammary tumors, while
80% of MMTVneu;6A/6A mice (24/30; p=0.0002) and 62.5% of MMTVneu;6A/-
mice (19/32, p=0.046) developed tumors. The percentage of MMTVneu;9A/6A
and MMTVneu;*9A/- mice that developed tumors was higher than
MMTVneu;9A/9A mice (48.3% and 50%, respectively) but was not
statistically significant. Additionally, 66.7% of MMTVneu;6A/6A mice
(20/30) developed 2 or more tumors, while only 25% of MMTVneu;9A/9A mice
(8/32) developed multiple tumors (p=0.0007).

Our data suggests that we have developed transgenic mouse strains that
accurately mimic human breast cancer susceptibility associated with *6A
and constitutively decreased TGFBR1 expression in humans, as evidenced by
other studies. These mouse models may be a tool to provide invaluable
insight to better understand the role of TGFBR1 variants in the
development and progression of breast cancer.


