Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of Bax and mTOR for cancer therapeutics.


Pharmacologic manipulation of the serine (S)184 phosphorylation site of
Bax protein to functionally regulate its proapoptotic activity is an
attractive anticancer strategy. We recently identified three small
molecule Bax agonists. SMBA1 was selected as the lead compound based on
its chemical structure and its drug-like properties, from which a more
effective analog, CYD-2-11, was generated. CYD-2-11 targets the
structural pocket around S184 in the C-terminal tail of Bax, directly
activating its proapoptotic activity via 6A7 conformational change and
formation of Bax homo-oligomers in mitochondrial membranes. CYD-2-11
suppresses tumor growth in SCLC, NSCLC and patient-derived lung cancer
xenografts as well as the genetically engineered mutant KRAS-driven lung
cancer model with no significant normal tissue toxicity. Inhibition of
mTOR by RAD001 enhances S184 Bax phosphorylation in lung cancer cell
lines and tumor tissues from lung cancer patients treated with RAD001,
which inactivates the propaoptotic function of Bax, contributing to
rapalog-resistance. Combined CYD-2-11 and RAD001 treatment not only
displays strong synergistic activity against lung cancer but also
overcomes rapalog-resistance in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, a
mechanism-driven combination of Bax agonist and mTOR inhibitor represents
a highly attractive therapeutic strategy to improve lung cancer patient
outcomes.


