Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of chromosomal allelic imbalances through RNA-seq.


Transcriptome sequencing (mRNA-seq) is becoming a very versatile
technique for profiling tumors, extending beyond its original intent of
transcript quantification, identification of alternative transcripts, and
detection of gene fusions. For instance, through recent advancements in
RNA-seq data analyses, one can now computationally assess allele-specific
gene expression and generate profiles of expressed somatic mutations.
Here, we demonstrate the ability to identify chromosomal allelic
imbalances (AI) through detection of haplotype-specific patterns in gene
transcripts. This class of RNA-based observations may potentially reveal
DNA-level chromosomal allelic imbalances or uncover large regions of
transcription deregulation. From the TCGA Uterine Carcinosarcoma project,
we downloaded exome and RNA sequencing data for 48 patientsâ€™
tumor/normal sample pairs in addition to their clinical annotations. We
also downloaded Affymetrix SNP6-based DNA copy number event calls made by
the TCGA for use as a gold standard when evaluating the AI calls in the
exome and RNA-seq. AI calls were made in both the exome and RNA-seq data
by: (1) calling 1000 Genomes genotypes in the sequencing data, (2)
phasing haplotypes and then (3) characterizing haplotype imbalances using
a tool that we developed called hapLOHseq. hapLOHseq applied to the exome
and RNA-seq data both resulted in a 72% specificity for identifying the
gold standard AI events. In RNA-seq data we detected 43% of the
chromosomal AI events identified in the exome sequencing data. When
considering AI events specifically detected in the RNA-seq and not the
gold standard (RNA-specific AI), the data suggest that higher
RNA-specific AI loads could be negatively associated with survival (p-val
= 0.076), with higher RNA-specific AI load patients having a median
survival of 771 days compared to 1526 days for those patients with lower
loads of RNA-specific AI. In conclusion, our results suggest that
analysis of chromosomal AI in RNA-seq has equal specificity for detecting
DNA-level AI when compared to exome sequencing, although at lower
sensitivities. Clinically, our analyses suggest that patients with higher
RNA-specific AI load may have a worse overall survival prognosis. The AI
we are identifying in the RNA-seq samples may reflect large-scale
transcription defects, resulting in a negative impact on the survival of
patients. One possible cause of RNA-specific allelic imbalance could be
the presence of cis mutations that impact a large-region of the
transcription of one of the two haplotypes. Currently, we are identifying
areas for improvement in our analytical methods, while interrogating and
characterizing exome and RNA-seq AI in additional data sets.


