Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Premature polyadenylation causes oncogenic truncations of the
tumor suppressor genes BRCA1, LATS1 and MAGI3 in breast cancer.


Cleavage and polyadenylation is a fundamental process in the control of
gene expression, yet how cancer cells deregulate this process to generate
cancer-causing alterations is only beginning to be appreciated. We
previously showed that in human breast cancer, premature polyadenylation
of the tumor suppressor gene MAGI3 causes the expression of a truncated
protein that dominantly promotes malignant growth via the Hippo pathway.
This established a precedent for premature polyadenylation as an aberrant
process causing transformation in vitro and in vivo. However, little is
known about the molecular mechanism that causes premature
polyadenylation, or what types of genes it affects in cancer.

Despite the absence of cis-acting mutations, premature polyadenylation of
MAGI3 occurs specifically following the geneâ€™s large internal exon. We
therefore asked whether an epigenetic mechanism might underlie the
phenomenon of premature polyadenylation in cancer. Here, we report that
genes with large internal exons are susceptible to truncation by
premature polyadenylation. In addition to MAGI3, premature
polyadenylation truncates the gene products of two tumor suppressor genes
with large internal exons, BRCA1 and LATS1. These truncated proteins are
upregulated in breast cancer cells compared to non-transformed mammary
epithelial cells and enable downstream oncogenic events instead of
providing tumor suppressive functions.

Large internal exons are infrequently found in the genome as the
mechanics of efficient splice site recognition favor small exons.
Interestingly in transcripts, large internal exons are conspicuously
enriched in N6-methyladenosine (m6A), though the functional significance
of these epitranscriptomic marks remains unknown. Molecularly, we find
that methylated levels of N6-adenosine in the large internal exons of
BRCA1, LATS1 and MAGI3 transcripts are significantly reduced in breast
cancer cells that upregulate the truncated gene products compared to
non-transformed mammary epithelial cells. These results raise the
intriguing possibility that m6A marks in large internal exons are
mechanistically involved in repressing premature polyadenylation. We are
currently investigating this hypothesis by perturbing N6-adenosine
methylation in cells and examining the functional consequences.

In summary, our study suggests that premature polyadenylation may be a
more pervasive alteration mechanism than previously appreciated in cancer
and begins to illuminate a gene region-specific mechanism responsible for
repressing premature polyadenylation.


