Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-6734 induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis via up-regulation
of p21 expression in colon cancer cells.


Recently, microRNAs have been implicated in the regulation of gene
expression in terms of both gene silencing and gene activation. Here, we
investigated the effects of miR-6734, which has a sequence homology with
a specific region of p21WAF1/CIP1 (p21) promoter, on cancer cell growth
and the mechanisms involved in this effect. miR-6734 up-regulated p21
expression at both mRNA and protein levels and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis using biotin-labeled miR-6734 confirmed the
association of miR-6734 with p21 promoter. Moreover, miR-6734 inhibited
cancer cell growth and induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in HCT-116
cells, which was abolished by knockdown of p21. The phosphorylation of Rb
and the cleavage of caspase 3 and PARP were suppressed by miR-6734
transfection in HCT-116 cells and these effects were also reversed by p21
knockdown. In addition, miR-6734 transfection caused prolonged induction
of p21 gene and modification of histones in p21 promoter, which are
typical aspects of a phenomenon referred to as RNA activation (RNAa).
Collectively, our results demonstrated that miR-6734 inhibits the growth
of colon cancer cells by up-regulating p21 gene expression and subsequent
induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, suggesting its role as an
important endogenous regulator of cancer cell proliferation and survival.


