Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRIB3 regulates cell cycle progression and programmed cell death
in non-small cell lung cancer.


Introduction: The pseudokinase Tribbles pseudokinase 3 (TRIB3) is known
as a regulator in cellular responses to a variety of stresses such as
glucose insufficiency and (ER) stress. TRIB3 has been described in some
studies as a tumor suppressor due to its effect on inactivating PI3K/Akt
pathway, but other studies suggest TRIB3 as a stimulator of tumor
progression. In this study, we aimed to define the functions of TRIB3 in
in non-small cell lung cancer.

Methods: TRIB3 expression was altered using a lentiviral vector to
overexpress TRIB3 in non-small cell lung cancer. A CRISPR-CAS9 construct
with guiding sequence matching to TRIB3 gene was used to knock out its
expression. Cell proliferation was evaluated using MTS and trypan blue
assays. Boyden chamber assay was used to assess the cell migration while
cell cycle phases were determined using flow cytometry. Heatmap analysis
was performed to assess the changes in the expressions of genes in cell
cycle progression and apoptosis.

Results: TRIB3 overexpression led to reduced cell proliferation and
migration. Moreover, it contributed to the increased of cell cycle arrest
at G0/G1 phase. QPCR analyses of cell cycle related genes showed an
upregulation of CDK inhibitors in (NCI-H358) TRIB3 overexpression cells,
while depletion of TRIB3 led to the down-regulation of CDK inhibitors.
TRIB3 overexpression led to downregulation of LC3B and other autophagy
markers while increasing the expression of apoptotic genes.

Conclusion: Increased TRIB3 expression in non-small cell lung cancer
cells inhibited proliferation by blocking cell cycle progression through
the upregulation of CDK inhibitors, led to activation of cell death
through apoptosis. Our study reveals a significant role of TRIB3 in
regulating cell cycle progression, apoptosis and autophagy.


