Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosome instability drives phenotypic switching to metastasis.


Chromosome instability (CIN) is the most striking feature of human
cancers. However, how CIN drives tumor progression to metastasis remains
elusive. Here we studied the role of chromosome content changes in
generating the phenotypic dynamics that is required for metastasis. We
isolated epithelial (E) and mesenchymal (M) clones from human carcinoma
cell lines and showed that the E clones were able to generate mesenchymal
variants, which had the potential to further produce epithelial
revertants autonomously. The successive acquisition of invasive
mesenchymal and then epithelial phenotypes recapitulated the steps in
tumor progression to metastasis. Importantly, the generation of
mesenchymal variants from clonal epithelial populations was associated
with subtle changes in chromosome content, which altered the chromosome
transcriptome and influenced the expression of genes encoding
intercellular junction (IJ) proteins, while the loss of chromosome 10p,
which harbors the ZEB1 gene, was frequently detected in epithelial
variants generated from M clones. Knocking down these IJ genes in E cells
induced a mesenchymal phenotype, while knocking down the ZEB1 gene in M
cells induced an epithelial phenotype, demonstrating a causal role of
chromosome content changes in phenotypic determination. Thus, our studies
suggest a novel paradigm of tumor metastasis: primary epithelial
carcinoma cells that lose chromosomes harboring IJ genes acquire an
invasive mesenchymal phenotype, and subsequent chromosome content changes
such as loss of 10p in disseminated mesenchymal cells generate epithelial
variants, which can be selected for to generate epithelial tumors during
metastatic colonization.


