Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of extracellular cystine and cysteine by a mutagenized
human enzyme causes ROS mediated cytotoxicity in pancreatic cancer cells .


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a dismal 5-year survival rate
at 7%. The oncogene KRAS that is mutationally activated in over 90% of
PDACs, has been shown to be involved in regulating redox homeostasis.
Hence, perturbation of oxidative balance might provide a therapeutic
window to effectively treat pancreatic cancer. One strategy to achieve
this is to target the tripeptide glutathione (GSH) â€“ a major
intracellular antioxidant. Cysteine (Cys), which has the functional
moiety of GSH, can either be synthesized de novo or imported,
predominantly as cystine (CSSC) that is then reduced intracellularly to
Cys. In cancer, intracellular Cys synthesis has to be supplemented with
extracellular import in order to fulfil the excessive metabolic demand of
proliferation, which includes maintenance of oxidative balance through
GSH synthesis. We hypothesize that this increased requirement for
Cys/CSSC import in tumor cells will make them selectively sensitive to
prolonged depletion of these amino acids in the serum by a genetically
engineered human enzyme called Cyst(e)inase. In addition, we believe that
combining Cyst(e)inase with other redox balance perturbing agents will
produce a synergistic therapeutic effect.

In our study, Cyst(e)inase treatment of cultured pancreatic cancer cell
lines (Panc1, MIA-PaCa2, BxPC3) decreased intracellular Cys and GSH, and
inhibited cell growth. Sensitivity to Cyst(e)inase was correlated with
ROS accumulation (Panc1>MIA-PaCa2>BxPC3). Panc1 cells exhibited G2-arrest
and apoptotic cell death following 24 hours of treatment whereas BxPC3
cells underwent only a G1-arrest and no cell death even after 72 hours of
treatment. Further mechanistic investigation showed activation of AMP
kinase and other stress related kinases (p38, ERK and JNK), and DNA
damage signaling (ATM) only in the more sensitive cell lines. Inhibition
of the mTORC1-p70S6K-S6 ribosomal protein signaling pathway was observed
in all 3 cell lines. Cyst(e)inase displayed synergistic cytotoxicity when
combined with buthionine sulfoximine (GSH synthesis inhibitor), auranofin
(thioredoxin reductase inhibitor), sulfasalazine (inhibitor of cystine
import) and the natural compound curcumin known to increase intracellular
ROS, indicating that concurrently inhibiting alternative cellular
antioxidant pathways or directly increasing intracellular ROS might
improve the anti-tumor efficacy of Cyst(e)inase. The effect of biweekly
intraperitoneal Cyst(e)inase treatment on growth of pancreatic cancer
cell xenografts in nude mice will also be reported. Collectively, the
current data suggest that depletion of extracellular Cys/CSSC using
Cyst(e)inase may have utility either as a monotherapy or a combination
therapy for pancreatic cancer.


