Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear expression of insulin receptor (InsR) adds prognostic
information in primary breast cancer patients with high BMI.


Aim and introduction The aim of this study was to elucidate the
prognostic importance of nuclear expression of the insulin receptor
(nucInsR) in primary breast cancer. The InsR is important for the
metabolism, for the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling network
and is implicated in breast cancer. Insulin and InsR are interlinked with
obesity and body mass index (BMI), which are also associated with breast
cancer. The InsR is present both in the membrane and cytoplasm and can
additionally translocate to the nucleus. The role of nucInsR is not well
understood and the prognostic importance is unclear.

Methods The tumor-specific expression of nucInsR was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry on invasive breast cancer tissue microarrays from
984 primary breast cancer patients included in a population-based cohort
in Sweden. Patients were followed for up to 11 years, the median
follow-up for patients still at risk was five years. nucInsR in relation
to prognosis was analyzed using Cox regression, adjusted for age,
invasive tumor size, axillary lymph node involvement, histological grade,
estrogen receptor (ER) status, BMI, tumor storage time, and treatment.

Results Status for nucInsR was available for 900 patients (91.5%).
nucInsRpos staining was present in 214 patients (23.8%) and was
associated with lower age (P=0.004), and lower waist-to-hip ratio
(P=0.006), but not with BMI, ER or PR status. During follow-up, 107
patients had a first breast cancer event. nucInsR had no prognostic
significant impact among all patients. However, there was a significant
effect modification of BMI on nucInsR regarding event-free survival
(Pinteraction=0.006). Patients with nucInsRpos-expressing tumors and
higher BMI (≥25 kg/m2) had lower risk for any breast cancer event,
adjusted HR (0.49; 95% CI 0.26-0.93), while patients with
nucInsRpos-expressing tumors and normal BMI (Results Status for nucInsR
was available for 900 patients (91.5%). nucInsRpos staining was present
in 214 patients (23.8%) and was associated with lower age (P=0.004), and
lower waist-to-hip ratio (P=0.006), but not with BMI, ER or PR status.
During follow-up, 107 patients had a first breast cancer event. nucInsR
had no prognostic significant impact among all patients. However, there
was a significant effect modification of BMI on nucInsR regarding
event-free survival (Pinteraction=0.006). Patients with
nucInsRpos-expressing tumors and higher BMI (≥25 kg/m2) had lower risk
for any breast cancer event, adjusted HR (0.49; 95% CI 0.26-0.93), while
patients with nucInsRpos-expressing tumors and normal BMI (<25 kg/m2)
were associated with a non-significant higher risk of events, adjusted HR
(1.72; 95% CI 0.93-3.17).

Conclusions These results indicate that nucInsR status may add prognostic
information in primary breast cancer depending on BMI.


