Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A unique 3D tissue-engineered human melanoma model combining
lymphatic and blood microvasculature to study cancer cell dissemination.


INTRODUCTION: Melanoma is amongst malignancies with constantly increasing
incidence in developed countries. One of the underlying causes of death
for patients diagnosed with melanoma is metastasis, which can spread
through lymphatic or blood vessels. Mechanisms controlling the
dissemination paths are poorly understood and relevant models for
studying metastasis physiopathology are often inadequate. To address
this, we hypothesized that the human tumor microenvironment can be
mimicked in vitro by combining tissue-engineered microvascularized skin
and melanoma microtissues.

METHODS: Tissue-engineered skin was produced using primary dermal,
epidermal and microvascular endothelial cells by the self-assembly
technique without any exogenous biomaterial. Tumor microtissues were
produced using the hanging drop method. Six melanoma cell lines were used
originating from primary tumor sites (A375, SK-MEL 28 and WM983a) and
from metastatic sites (RPMI 7951, Malme 3M and WM983b). Tumor development
and growth were assessed by histology, immunofluorescence and confocal
microscopy, while cytokine secretion profiles were determined by ELISA.
WM983a and WM983b models were treated for 11 days with vemurafenib.
Response to treatment was assessed by counting the ratio of tumor cells
positive for Ki67, representative of the tumor proliferation.

RESULTS: We obtained a tissue-engineered skin displaying two distinct
microvascular networks: a VE-cadherin+ CD31+ blood network, and a PDPN+
LYVE-1+ CD31+ lymphatic network. Blood capillaries were thin and highly
connected whereas lymphatic capillaries were larger and presented a
distinct morphology. Histological analyses revealed tumor microtissue
integration at the dermoepidermal junction within the reconstructed skin.
The pro-lymphangiogenic factor and tumor-secreted VEGF-C was detected in
conditioned media from the melanoma microtissues (662 pg/ml).
Furthermore, CCL21, a chemoattractant known to be secreted by lymphatic
endothelial cells, displayed secretion levels that were 10-fold higher in
microvascularized tissues compared to the non-microvascularized skin (P
â‰¤ 0.001). Both of these cytokines are involved in the cross-talk
between tumor cells and capillaries, and thus in tumor dissemination. The
3D melanoma model responded to vemurafenib with up to a 5-fold decrease
of tumor cell proliferation and a partial pigmentation of the tumor.

CONCLUSION: This unique 3D in vitro melanoma model mimics tumor
microenvironment by combining blood and lymphatic capillaries with
melanoma microtissues in a reconstructed skin. Being responsive to
treatment such as vemurafenib, it represents a valuable tool for studying
mechanisms of metastasis and drug response in a fully human cell and
matrix microenvironment, and thus testing anti-metastatic compounds could
better predict their safety and efficacy.


