Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulated expression of pentraxin-3 in glioblastoma (GBM) stem
cells: Implications for GBM invasion and progression.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is highly invasive and resistant to current
therapies. The aggressiveness of brain tumor is attributed to GBM stem
cells (GSC) that release inflammatory cytokines, and exacerbate
inflammation in tumor microenvironment, critically affecting GBM survival
and invasiveness. The glycoprotein pentraxin-3 (PTX3), a modulator of
tumor-associated inflammation, is known to be correlated with tumor grade
and severity of malignancies of some cancers. However, little is known
about the role of PTX3 in GBM growth and invasion. In this study, we
examined the role of PTX3 in GSCs exhibiting various degree of
invasiveness. From patient brain tumors, our team has isolated the small
subsets of glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) and are validated for their
self-renewal and multi-lineage potential. Our studies have shown that
these GSCs efficiently form orthotopic brain tumors in immune-deficient
mice. Our results show that conditioned media from GSCs promote
pro-angiogenic tube formation from endothelial cells. GSCs that are grown
in the absence of growth factors EGF and bFGF, formed efficient
xenografts in immune-deficient mice and showed increased dispersal in the
mice brain. Interestingly, polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
immunofluorescence staining showed upregulated expression of PTX3 in
these GSCs, and correlated with the degree of invasiveness.
Differentiation of GSC into astrocytes in vitro, lead to decreased
expression of PTX3. In support of this, recent histochemical study has
shown that PTX3 levels correlate with GBM grade and is a candidate
biomarker for cancer progression. Thus, PTX3 may represent a new target
and marker of inflammation for glioma malignancy.


