Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrospective analysis of epidemiological variants of malignancies
in Sokoto, Northwestern Nigeria.


Background: The burden of cancer in Nigeria is increasing. Information on
incidence, prevalence, pattern, and high risk factors are essential for
evaluation and cancer control. This report is a follow up from earlier
previous report published in 2005 on cancers seen in Usmanu Danfodiyo
University Teaching Hospital (UDUTH) Sokoto.

Objectives: The aim of this study is to determine epidemiological
variants of all malignancies seen from 1 January 2006 to 31 December 2015.

Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective review of all malignancies
seen at the Usmanu Danfodiyo University Teaching Hospital in Sokoto
during the period 2006 to 2016. There was no restriction on gender or age
groups. Mean, frequencies, percentages, and independent sample t-test
were performed using SPSS version 21.0 for Windows. Significant level set
at p Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective review of all
malignancies seen at the Usmanu Danfodiyo University Teaching Hospital in
Sokoto during the period 2006 to 2016. There was no restriction on gender
or age groups. Mean, frequencies, percentages, and independent sample
t-test were performed using SPSS version 21.0 for Windows. Significant
level set at p < 0.05.

Results: A total of 3933 cancer patients were seen during the ten-year
period. There were more female malignancies (n=2260, 57.5%) compared to
male malignancies (n=1673, 42.5%). The overall mean age (years) was
44.28, median age was 45.0, modal age was 50, and SD was 18.69; the age
range was 1 to 99 years. Males (mean age 45.77, median age in male 50.0,
modal age 60, and SD 21.03) were significantly older than females (mean
age 43.18, median age 45.0, modal age 50, and SD 16.67). The adult
malignancies account for 90.9% (n=3575) and childhood malignancies
account for 9.1% (n=358). Overall, the ten most common malignancies were:
breast 763 (19.4%), cervix 312 (7.9%), prostate 267 (6.8%), lymph node
248 (6.3%), skin 225 (5.7%), bladder 191 (4.9%), rectum 114 (2.9%), ovary
110 (2.8%), eye 97 (2.5%), soft tissue 95 (2.4%). In males, the ten most
frequent malignancies were: prostate 267 (16.00%), bladder 160 (9.60%),
skin 138 (8.20%), nasophraynx 87 (5.2%), lymph node 85 (5.10%), rectum 61
(3.60%), eye 55 (3.30%), salivary gland 38 (2.3%), larynx 37 (2.20%), and
anal 37 (2.20%). In females, the ten most common malignancies were breast
731 (731%), cervix 302 (13.40%), lymph node 163 (7.20%), ovary 110
(4.90%), skin 87 (3.80%) endometrial 61 (2.70%), rectum 53 (2.30%),
nasophraynx 45 (2.0%), soft tissue 43 (1.90%), and eye 42 (1.90%).

Conclusion: Our study concludes that malignancies of the breast, cervix,
and prostate are the three most common in our environment. These
malignancies tend to present at younger age (less than 50 years of age)
compared to other developing countries. Therefore, public education and
well developed screening programs are urgently needed to overcome this
burden.


