Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in risk factor-colorectal adenoma associations
according to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use.


Multiple observational studies and large, randomized controlled trials
indicate that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) strongly
reduce risk for colorectal neoplasms. The strengths of these findings
suggest that NSAIDs may so mask various risk factor-colorectal neoplasm
associations, that they may be undetectable among NSAID users. Temporal
changes and between-population differences in regular NSAID use
prevalence may account for some of the inconsistencies in reported
findings for risk factor-colorectal neoplasm associations. We
investigated whether associations of known colorectal cancer risk factors
with colorectal adenoma differed by non-aspirin NSAID use using pooled
data from 3 colonoscopy-based case-control studies of incident, sporadic
colorectal adenoma conducted in Minnesota, North Carolina, and South
Carolina between 1991 and 2002. Participants (n=789 cases, 2,035
polyp-free controls) provided risk factor data prior to colonoscopy. The
multivariable-adjusted odds ratios (OR) (95% confidence intervals [CI])
for those in the highest relative to the lowest quartiles of exposure, by
regular non-aspirin NSAID non-use/use, respectively, were 1.57 (CI 0.96,
2.55) vs. 1.22 (CI 0.40, 3.70) for total fat, 1.37 (CI 0.86, 2.18) vs.
0.78 (CI 0.26, 2.35) for saturated fat, 0.92 (CI 0.67, 1.26) vs. 1.31 (CI
0.62, 2.76) for total calcium, 0.88 (CI 0.64, 1.22) vs. 1.38 (CI 0.65,
2.93) for total fruits and vegetables, 1.05 (CI 0.73, 1.50) vs. 0.73 (CI
0.33, 1.62) for red and processed meats, and 0.84 (CI 0.65, 1.10) vs.
0.97 (CI 0.54,1.75) for physical activity. For current smokers relative
to never smokers, the ORs (CIs) among regular non-NSAID users/non-users
were 2.88 (CI 2.20, 3.77) vs. 1.64 (CI 0.85, 3.17), respectively, and for
those who were obese relative to those who were normal weight, they were
1.65 (CI 1.27, 2.16) vs. 1.20 (CI 0.70, 2.04). The associations of age,
height, and intakes of alcohol, dietary fiber, and total folate with
adenoma did not substantially differ according to NSAID use.

These findings suggest that regular non-aspirin NSAID use may mask,
beyond simple confounding, associations of various risk factors with
colorectal adenoma, suggesting that differential proportions of regular
NSAID users between study populations may explain some inconsistencies in
reported risk factor-colorectal neoplasm associations, and support
routinely assessing such associations stratified by regular non-aspirin
NSAID use.


