Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of ADI-PEG20 on PDL1 expression in ASS1 deficient uveal
melanoma.


Uveal melanoma (UM), involving the iris, choroid and ciliary body, is the
commonest intraocular tumor in adults. Half of patients develop
metastasis with a high mortality despite currently available systemic
therapies including immune checkpoint blockade. Studies show that while
CTLA4 antagonism has a modest effect in UM, PD1/PDL1 blockade is largely
ineffective whereas trials of combination checkpoint blockade are yet to
report. We confirmed previously that deficiency of argininosuccinate
synthetase 1 (ASS1), a key enzyme involved in arginine synthesis,
sensitizes UM cells to arginine deprivation using pegylated arginine
deiminase or ADI-PEG20. Early trials of ADI-PEG20 in UM have shown safety
and efficacy in the clinic and thus we tested the potential for a
combined immunometabolic strategy. ASS1-deficient UM cell lines (OMM1,
OMM2.5, MEL270) were analyzed for the immune checkpoint protein PDL1
along with their sensitivity to arginine depletion. We also tested
metastatic UM for ASS1 and PDL1 expression, and the impact of ADI-PEG20
treatment using samples from a current clinical trial (NCT02029690). We
showed that ASS1 and PDL1 protein expression were absent in the 3 UM cell
lines and in a majority of primary tumors (75/102 for ASS1 and 83/102 for
PDL1; 5% threshold of expression) and all metastatic tumor biopises
(n=16/16 for both). Transfection of ASS1 in OMM1, OMM2.5, MEL270 led to
an increase in PDL1 expression by qPCR, western blotting and FACS, which
was reversible following knockdown of ASS1. Induction of PDL1 expression
by ASS1 was accompanied by interferon (IFN)-alpha and beta (but not
IFN-gamma) release into the cell supernatant, and was abrogated using the
pan-STAT inhibitor ruxolitinib. Next, PDL1 expression was significantly
increased in the 3 ASS1-negative UM cell lines with ADI-PEG20 treatment
by 24hrs and was associated with Type I IFN signaling which waned along
with PDL1 expression by 48hrs. The ADI-PEG 20 induction of PDL1 was
abolished using ruxolitinib, indicating that the upregulation of Type I
IFNs is critical for regulation of the PDL1 checkpoint protein. While
analysis of UM biopsies of patients progressing on ADI-PEG20 revealed
upregulation of ASS1 (n=2/2; and thus resistance to ADI-PEG20) a
concomitant increase in PDL1 was not observed (n=0/2). Collectively, our
data show that ASS1 is absent in a majority of patient biopsies of
primary and metastatic UM tumors and is tightly correlated with PDL1
expression. UM cells lines displayed sensitivity to ADI-PEG20, which
upregulated levels of PDL1 expression via Type 1 interferon signaling
that may enhance the currently limited efficacy of checkpoint blockade in
UM. Further studies are ongoing of the IFN-mediated signaling between
ASS1 and PDL1 in UM in response to arginine deprivation with ADI-PEG20.


