Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bispecific anti-CD123 x anti-CD3 ADAPTIRâ„¢ molecules for
redirected T-cell cytotoxicity in hematological malignancies.


Introduction: CD123 is a component of the IL-3 receptor expressed in
several hematological malignancies including AML, ALL, HCL, and MDS.
CD123 is a compelling target in AML due to its overexpression on AML
blasts as well as leukemic stem cells, which are thought to be resistant
to chemotherapy and may be responsible for relapse of disease following
treatment. While CD123 is expressed by some normal leukocyte populations
in circulation and hematopoietic progenitor cells in the bone marrow, the
low frequency of expression on normal cell types provides a therapeutic
window for targeting CD123 in tumor settings with the potential for
durable response and reversible side effects. We have developed
bispecific anti-CD123 x anti-CD3 ADAPTIR molecules APVO436 and APVO437
for redirecting T-cell cytotoxicity to CD123-expressing tumor cells.
Results are presented that examine the in vitro and in vivo activity of
these molecules in preclinical models of AML.

Methods: APVO436 and APVO437 proteins were expressed in CHO cells.
Affinity SPR studies were performed using recombinant CD123-ectodomain.
In vitro functional studies were conducted with CD123+ AML tumor cell
lines and primary human and cynomolgus macaque T-cell populations.
Cytotoxic activity was determined using chromium release assays. On-cell
binding, T-cell activation and proliferation were assessed using
multi-color flow cytometry. Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined in
BALB/c mice using a single IV dose of approximately 10 mg/kg. In vivo
studies to examine tumor growth inhibition activity were performed with
NOD/SCID mice co-implanted subcutaneously with AML tumor cells and human
T-cells followed by treatment with APVO436 or APVO437. Tumor growth was
assessed by measuring tumor volume and Bioluminescent Imaging.

Results: APVO436 and APVO437 bound human CD123 protein with high affinity
and binding to CD123 and CD3 expressing cell lines was confirmed by flow
cytometry. Both APVO436 and APVO437 induced concentration-dependent lysis
of CD123+ AML cell lines with primary human effector T-cells, accompanied
by T-cell activation and proliferation. Comparable redirected T-cell
cytotoxicity function was observed using primary cynomolgus macaque T
cells. These activities were dependent on the expression of CD123 by the
tumor target cells. APVO436 and APVO437 demonstrated an extended
elimination half-life in mouse serum, typical of molecules capable of
binding the neo-natal Fc receptor. In vivo, growth of AML tumor cells was
inhibited by treatment with low doses of APVO436 and APVO437,
significantly improving host survival.

Conclusion: Taken together these data demonstrate potent in vitro and in
vivo activity of APVO436 and APVO437 against CD123 expressing tumor cells
and are supportive of further investigation of this approach as a
potential treatment option for AML and other hematological malignancies.


