Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-7 suppresses RB1 expression leading to chromosomal
instability in leukemia cells harboring c-Kit mutation.


C-Kit mutation D816V is a well-known indicator of poor prognosis in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring t(8;21) chromosomal translocations.
However, the mechanism the D816V mutation promotes therapeutic resistance
is still under investigation. C-Kit V814 mutation is a murine counterpart
of the human D816V. We utilized a murine IL-3 dependent cell line Ba/F3
with or without the c-Kit V814 mutation to investigate its downstream
signaling pathway and the effect on the expression of bcl-2 family
members and critical granulocytic transcription factors. The c-Kit V814
and wild type (WT) c-Kit were retrovirally transduced into Ba/F3 cells.
Unexpectedly, Gata1 mRNA was significantly downregulated to one-tenth in
V814+Ba/F3 cells (p 2-fold) in cells treated with PD325901 compared with
controls. We focused our further analysis on miR-7 as it is highly
conserved in vertebrates. The differences in miR-7 expression were
confirmed using qRT-PCR (10.5-fold change, p 2-fold) in cells treated
with PD325901 compared with controls. We focused our further analysis on
miR-7 as it is highly conserved in vertebrates. The differences in miR-7
expression were confirmed using qRT-PCR (10.5-fold change, p < 0.01). In
silico analysis implicated Rb1 as a candidate miR-7 target that may
regulate Gata1 transcription. Luciferase reporter constructs containing
murine and human Rb1 miR-7 target sequence exhibited 0.51 and 0.49 times
lower luciferase activity than the controls, respectively (p 2-fold) in
cells treated with PD325901 compared with controls. We focused our
further analysis on miR-7 as it is highly conserved in vertebrates. The
differences in miR-7 expression were confirmed using qRT-PCR (10.5-fold
change, p < 0.01). In silico analysis implicated Rb1 as a candidate miR-7
target that may regulate Gata1 transcription. Luciferase reporter
constructs containing murine and human Rb1 miR-7 target sequence
exhibited 0.51 and 0.49 times lower luciferase activity than the
controls, respectively (p < 0.01). To further determine the biological
significance of the c-Kit mutation that would transform the cells to more
aggressive phenotype, we focused on DNA and chromosomal instability
caused by RB1 deterioration. We exposed WT c-Kit Ba/F3 and V814+Ba/F3
cells to 4 Gy irradiation and then used immunohistochemistry to analyze
the frequency of γH2AX foci in the cells. The percentage of cells with
more than 10 γH2AX foci was significantly higher in V814+Ba/F3 cells
than WT Ba/F3 cells (27% vs. 14%, p 2-fold) in cells treated with
PD325901 compared with controls. We focused our further analysis on miR-7
as it is highly conserved in vertebrates. The differences in miR-7
expression were confirmed using qRT-PCR (10.5-fold change, p < 0.01). In
silico analysis implicated Rb1 as a candidate miR-7 target that may
regulate Gata1 transcription. Luciferase reporter constructs containing
murine and human Rb1 miR-7 target sequence exhibited 0.51 and 0.49 times
lower luciferase activity than the controls, respectively (p < 0.01). To
further determine the biological significance of the c-Kit mutation that
would transform the cells to more aggressive phenotype, we focused on DNA
and chromosomal instability caused by RB1 deterioration. We exposed WT
c-Kit Ba/F3 and V814+Ba/F3 cells to 4 Gy irradiation and then used
immunohistochemistry to analyze the frequency of γH2AX foci in the
cells. The percentage of cells with more than 10 γH2AX foci was
significantly higher in V814+Ba/F3 cells than WT Ba/F3 cells (27% vs.
14%, p < 0.05), Here, we clearly show that a single mutation of c-Kit is
sufficient to regulate miR-7 expression leading to RB1 translational
suppression. Since c-Kit mutation requires only a single step to inhibit
RB1, this mechanism is more likely to facilitate oncogenesis than
bi-allelic RB1 chromosomal and/or gene alterations in leukemia cells.
Taken together, we identified miR-7 as a suppressor of RB1 in V814
mutation-positive cells, which might reflect the responsibility of D816V
to refractory feature in AML.


