Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PVT1 exons 4A, 4B, and 9 are overexpressed in aggressive prostate
cancer, and PVT1 exon 4B may distinguish between indolent and aggressive
prostate cancer.


Aggressive prostate cancer (PCa) disproportionately affects males of
African ancestry (MoAA). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are
unclear. Chromosome 8q24 is a PCa susceptibility locus that harbors the
PVT1 non-coding gene. We previously demonstrated that PVT1 exon 9 may be
involved in aggressive PCa. Moreover, using the most recent full-genome
variability panel from the 1000 Genomes project, we recently identified a
string of 75 SNPs in a 26-kb region spanning PVT1 exons 4A and 4B as
consistently showing the highest level of genetic differentiation between
African and non-African populations. However, the expression of PVT1
exons 4A, 4B, and 9 in prostate tissues of MoAA has never been
investigated. Our aim was to determine the expression of PVT1 exons 4A,
4B, and 9 in histologically confirmed normal prostate (n=7), benign
prostate (n=11) and malignant prostate tissue (n=11) from prostatectomy
or transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsies in Nigeria, a sub-Saharan Black
African population. Nine patients had tumor tissues with Gleason score
≥ 8. Tissues were collected in compliance with Institutional Ethics
Board approved protocols. RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and
quantitative-PCR were performed to analyze mRNA expression of PVT1 exons
4A, 4B, and 9. There was a statistically significant difference in the
relative expression of PVT1 exons 4A (F(2,82)=9.031, p = 0.000), 4B
(F(2,82)=5.294, p = 0.007) and 9 (F(2,82)=4.788, p = 0.011) between
groups as determined by one-way ANOVA. Tukey posthoc test showed
statistically significant differences between relative mean expression of
PVT1 exons 4A, 4B and 9 in prostate tumor tissues versus normal prostate
tissues: PVT1 exon 4A (prostate tumor: 3.15±0.497, 95% CI [2.13, 4.17]),
(benign prostate: 1.74±0.163, 95% CI [1.41,2.07]), and (normal prostate:
1.28±0.141, 95% CI [0.989, 1.57]); PVT1 exon 4B (prostate tumor:
2.217±0.360, 95% CI[1.47, 2.95]), (benign prostate: 1.17±0.176, 95% CI
[0.821,1.53]), and (normal prostate: 1.25±0.169, 95% CI [0.900, 1.60]);
PVT1 exon 9 (prostate tumor: 1.71±0.190, 95% CI [1.32, 2.10]), (benign
prostate: 1.26±0.148, 95% CI [.967,1.57]), and (normal prostate:
0.944±0.151, 95% CI[0.630, 1.25]). Paired t-test showed a significant
difference in the expression profile for PVT1 exon 4B in prostate tumors
with Gleason score ≥8 (2.98±0.539, 95% CI [1.90,4.06]) as compared to
those with Gleason score ≤7 (1.32±0.340, 95% CI [0.645,2.07]) with p
=0.009. These results show that overexpression of PVT1 exons 4A, 4B and 9
is characteristic of PCa in MoAA. Further, PVT1 exons 4B and 9
overexpression are specific for PCa, and PVT1 exon 4B may distinguish
between indolent and aggressive PCa in MoAA.


