Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analytical validation of Ki67/CD8 duplex IHC assay using
computational tissue analysis (cTATM).


Chromogenic multiplex immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays enable
investigation of the spatial relationships between tumor and immune
cells, which is thought to be important for understanding and predicting
therapeutic response. Development and analytical validation of multiplex
IHC assays enables the use of such assays to simultaneously investigate
multiple biomarkers as predictors of clinical response. In this study, we
analytically validated a chromogenic duplex IHC assay that quantifies
Ki67 and CD8 in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded non-small cell lung
cancer tissues. Five performance criteria were selected and evaluated
based on Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines: reportable
range, analytical sensitivity, analytical specificity, accuracy, and
precision. Similar to analytical validation studies for monoplex IHC
assays, this study utilized a reference method and multiple days of
staining. The percentage of cells positive for Ki67 nuclear staining
and/or CD8 membrane staining were quantified using our computational
Tissue Analysis (cTATM) platform. Performance of the Ki67/CD8 chromogenic
duplex IHC assay was considered acceptable for the five criteria
evaluated. Once the performance of the assay was established, additional
exploratory cTA-based endpoints were examined, including the
quantification of each biomarker in the tumor compartment and the tumor
microenvironment, and analysis of the spatial arrangement of immune cells
relative to tumor cells. In conclusion, Flagshipâ€™s cTA platform allows
for more consistent quantification of individual analytes on dual-stained
tissue sections, enabling investigation of complex biological questions
that cannot be achieved with traditional tissue-based manual endpoints.


