Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systemic map of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)-regulated
phosphotargets and drug responses in cancer cells.


Despite the pivotal role of phosphatases in cancer cell signalling,
systemic understanding of phosphatase targets is still at infancy.
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a human tumor suppressor complex. PP2A
inhibition is a requirement for human cell transformation and PP2A
regulates many cancer critical signalling pathways. Importantly, emerging
data indicates that reactivation of PP2A tumor suppressor activity could
provide entirely novel approach for cancer therapy. Here, we present
first systemic analysis of phosphoprotein targets (dephosphorylome)
regulated by PP2A in cancer cells. Based on data, PP2A regulates cancer
critical signalling pathways, including entire EGFR-RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK
cascade, and functions as a master regulator of MYC function. At network
level, PP2A targets critical cellular processes such as chromosome
organization, RNA splicing, and nuclear envelope assembly. Surprisingly,
soft clustering of PP2A dephosphorylome revealed that most phospho-target
residues are subject to only unidirectional regulation in cancer cells.
Moreover, targets show intracellular gradient where phosphatase
inhibition dominates nuclear phosphorylation balance. Since
phosphoregulation is critical for cancer drug responses, dephosphorylome
was correlated with cancer cell responses to over 300 drugs. Importantly,
cancer therapies could be broadly classified based on their
dephosphorylome, both at quantitative and qualitative manner. Finally, we
demonstrate the utility of this large dataset by validating the role of
PP2A in MEK inhibitor resistance in KRAS mutant cancer cells via
regulation of RAF, mTor and MYC. The study presents first systemic
resource to understand potential of PP2A manipulation in cancer cell
signalling and drug responses. The study also uncovers generally
important insights to phosphoregulation.


