Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deficiency of protease-activated receptor 2 signaling sensitizes
EGFR-TKI-induced apoptosis in colorectal cancer.


Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) patients show resistance to EGFR-TKI
(epidermal growth factor receptor -tyrosine kinase inhibitor) treatment.
Protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR2) has been shown to transactivate
EGFR. We aim to investigate whether PAR2 sensitizes EGFR-TKI-induced
apoptosis in CRC. Firstly, inhibition of PAR2 with shRNA or ENMD-1068 (a
selective antagonist of PAR2) significantly sensitized EGFR-TKI
(gefitinib or AG1478)-induced apoptosis, which was measured with Annexin
V/ PI staining and activation of caspase-3 in different CRC cell lines.
In xenograft tumor model, gefitinib treatment dramatically reduced the
tumor volume in HT-29-shPAR2 compared with HT-29-vector. Mechanism study
showed that PAR2 knockdown significantly reduced bcl-xL expression at
both mRNA and protein level. Consistently, activation of PAR2 upregulated
bcl-xL. Furthermore, inhibition of protein phosphatase (PP) with okadaic
acid significantly downregulated bcl-xL. Moreover, knockdown of PP1 with
siRNA blocked PAR2-induced accumulation of bcl-xL. In summary, our
findings suggest that inhibition of PAR2 sensitizes EGFR-TKI-induced
apoptosis via downregulation of bcl-xL in colorectal cancer. Considering
the extensive expression of PAR2 and PAR2-activating proteases in colon,
it strongly indicates that inhibition of PAR2 may be a potential avenue
to overcome EGFR-TKI resistance in patients with CRC.


