Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microbiome-TP53 gene interaction in human lung cancer.


Lung cancer is the leading cancer diagnosis worldwide and the number one
cause of cancer deaths. Exposure to cigarette smoke, the primary risk
factor in lung cancer, reduces epithelial barrier function and increases
susceptibility to infections. Herein, we hypothesized that somatic
mutations together with cigarette smoke create a dysbiotic microbiota
that is associated with lung carcinogenesis. Using lung tissue from
controls (n=33) or cancer cases (n=143), we conducted 16S rRNA gene
sequencing (MiSeq), with RNA-seq data from lung cancer cases in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (n=1112) serving as the validation cohort. We
demonstrate a lower alpha diversity in normal lung as compared to
non-tumor adjacent or tumor tissue, indicating a shift in the overall
microbial community in lung cancer patients as compared to those without
cancer. Lung cancer cases were classified by the relative abundance of
two taxa, Variovorax and Streptococcus, with an increase in Variovorax
abundance in tumors as compared to non-tumor adjacent paired lung tissue
(FDR corrected P=0.013). The species of Variovorax was identified
histologically, and also by two additional 16S rRNA strategies (Resphera
Insight analysis and PacBio sequencing). A group of taxa were associated
with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), of which Acidovorax were enriched in
smokers (P =0.0013). Further, these taxa, including Acidovorax, exhibited
higher abundance among the subset of SCC cases with TP53 mutations, an
association not seen in adenocarcinomas (AD). Therefore, we observed a
microbiome-gene and a microbiome-exposure interaction in SCC lung cancer
tissue. Together, these results open the door for future biomarker
research that could be used to improve screening and direct mechanistic
studies of lung cancer therapy.


