Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo modeling of high grade glioma for oncology drug
development.


In a multi-disciplinary project, patient derived glioblastoma stem-cell
cultures (GSCs) have been established and characterized extensively with
the goal of applying computational efforts to integrate results from
high-throughput screens of drugs and RNAi with genomic and
transcriptional profiling to predict the most successful therapy for
individual glioma patients. The main goal of this study was to develop a
platform for testing the tumor-initiating capacity of GSCs in mouse brain
and to label the cells with GFP-luciferase to enable non-invasive
quantification of tumor growth by in vivo bioluminescence imaging.
Adherently grown GFP-luciferase labeled glioblastoma stem-cell cultures
were dissociated and injected stereotactically into immunodeficient mice.
Tumor growth was monitored by IVIS imaging for up to 40 weeks and brains
were collected for histopathological and immunohistochemical stainings.
Automatic quantification and growth pattern analysis of tumor cells in
brain sections was set up based on human cell specific staining and a
CellProfiler Analystâ€™s machine learning classifier with a manual
observer correlation of 0.86. GSC xenograft tumors with a wide range of
histopathological features and biological behaviors recapitulating high
grade astrocytoma was confirmed in mice injected with 14 of the 29
glioblastoma cell cultures (48%). Glial lineage markers, such as Sox2,
GFAP, and Olig2, were expressed both in patient tumors and patient
derived xenografts. Individual glioblastoma cell cultures were either
characterized by formation of condensed tumors (8/14, 57%) or diffuse
infiltrative growth through the brain parenchyma (6/14, 43%). In summary,
we present a valuable mouse model for preclinical studies of glioma.
Integrative analysis of molecular profiles with growth pattern data has
the potential to unravel genes that distinguish tumors with more
infiltrative growth. Our biobank of luciferase labeled GSCs may be useful
for longitudinal monitoring of tumor growth dynamics in the setting of
therapies and provides a foundation for testing the effect of predicted
drug vulnerabilites in orthotopic xenografts mouse models.


