Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p16INH4a status helps predict clinical outcome of dysplasia in the
oral cavity irrespective of HPV status.


Objectives: p16INK4a is a key gatekeeper for multiple biological
processes that are associated with protection from cancer, including cell
cycle control and senescence. Elevated expression of this gene is
strongly correlated with biological activity of HPV infection and cancer
development in uterine cervix and tonsil. Although HPV DNA has been found
in a small portion of oral cavity cancers and dysplasia, the relevance of
its presence to cancer development at this site is unclear, as is the
significance of an expression change in p16INK4a as a predictor of HPV
status, tissue behavior and outcome.

Methods: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded biopsies from 164 patients
with mild, moderate and severe oral dysplasia in the “Oral Cancer
Prediction Longitudinal study” (OCPL), British Columbia, Canada, were
analyzed for HPV DNA using a semi-quantitative viral load Luminex
technology. Expression of p16INK4a was assessed and categorized into 3
staining patterns (diffuse, focal, and negative).

Results: HPV DNA was found in 13 (8%) lesions, 7 had HPV-16 infection and
1 HPV-18. Of the 164 samples, diffuse p16INK4a expression was present in
18%, focal in 56% and no p16 staining in 23% of samples. There was no
significant correlation between HPV DNA-positivity and p16INK4a staining.
Different p16 staining patterns showed significantly different
progression rates (P Results: HPV DNA was found in 13 (8%) lesions, 7 had
HPV-16 infection and 1 HPV-18. Of the 164 samples, diffuse p16INK4a
expression was present in 18%, focal in 56% and no p16 staining in 23% of
samples. There was no significant correlation between HPV DNA-positivity
and p16INK4a staining. Different p16 staining patterns showed
significantly different progression rates (P < 0.0001): progression
occurred in 1/92 (1.1%) focally stained, 1/29 (3.5%) diffusely stained
and 10/43 (23.3%) with no staining.

Conclusion: HPV DNA-positivity occurs in a small proportion of oral
dysplasia but is poorly associated with p16INK4a expression. Future
assessment of these samples for HR-HPV oncogene transcripts will provide
information on its biological activity. The low likelihood of progression
of p16INK4a focally stained lesions suggests a value of this marker in
identification of low-risk cases.

Acknowledgements: Supported by Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung
Foundation, Germany


