Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic events associated with metastasis of colorectal cancer by
whole-genome sequencing.


Background: The diversity of the genomic landscape in colorectal cancer
(CRC) is under active investigation. Concordance in molecular events
between primary CRC and metastatic tumors is a subject of debate.
Understanding the genetic background of metastatic CRC facilitates
personalized therapies that target specific molecular events associated
with the tumor.

Methods: We performed whole genome sequencing in matched primary,
metastasis and normal tissues from 3 patients with RAS/NRAS/BRAF wild
types and microsatellite stable CRC. We implemented an analysis pipeline
that integrated the genetic lesions to characterize somatic single
nucleotide variations (SNVs), short insertions and deletions (indels),
structural variations including fusions and copy number alterations.

Results: Both primary and metastatic tumors showed a predominant
mutational signature of C: G â†’T: A transition. A total of 282
non-silent mutations were identified in 3 pairs of CRC (median 63 per
tumor, range 42 to 98). There were 148 (52.5%) variants shared in matched
primary and metastatic tumors, 63 (22.3%) were found unique to primary
and 71 (25.2%) were unique to the metastases. Only common well known
genes (APC and TP53) and TTN mutations were found to be recurrent in the
3 patients. A total of 609 (range 33-171 per tumor) structural variants
were discovered with 44.1% concordance between primary and metastasis
pairs. We also identified 6 novel candidate fusions shared in primary and
metastases and 2 private to the primary tumors. Consistent with the
result of previous studies, copy loss at chromosome 17p and 18, and gain
at chromosome 5, 8 and 13 were the common events both in the primary and
metastatic tumor.

Discussion and conclusions: Our data demonstrated a considerable
difference in mutational landscape between primary CRCs and their
matching metastatic tumors. The result suggested that the metastasis
might originate from a distinct subclone from a heterogeneous primary
tumor, or additional gain or loss of function via mutation to permit
tumor invasion and spreading is necessary to facilitate metastasis. Each
of the two models is complicated by the possibility of tumor
heterogeneity within the primary tumor. In conclusion, comprehensive
analysis and assessment for the genomic events is a powerful approach to
delve deeper into the internal relations and contradictions between
primary and paired metastases, helping to identify novel genomic events
associated with metastasis of CRC.


