Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal identity of breast cancer promotes brain metastases
and therapeutic resistance through MLK4/NFkB signaling Pathway.


Patients with breast cancer brain metastases (BCBM) suffer from a
devastating outcome despite recent progress in a variety of therapeutic
modality. Among the four major molecular subtypes, breast cancers that
are either human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) 2- positive or
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients have a higher risk of BCBM
compared with the luminal cancer patients. The mechanisms by which the
disseminated cancer cells overcome the multistep defense mechanism in the
brain, adapt the microenvironment, and subsequently initiate metastasis
remain elusive. Recently, we identified a set of genes that contribute to
initiate Glioblastoma (GBM) and at least some of them are functionally
essential for GBM establishment and the therapy resistance. Mixed lineage
kinase 4 (MLK4) is a relatively poorly characterized serine/threonine
kinase, which is largely expressed in various cancers including GBM. We
recently found a critical role of MLK4 in controlling the mesenchymal
identity in GBM stem cells and plays a role in GBM initiation through
direct activation of NF-kB signaling. Our preliminary data indicates MLK4
is also highly expressed in patient-derived hormone receptor
(HR)-negative breast cancer cells in comparison with the other
HR-positive counterparts. For therapeutic development purpose, we
performed the structure-based drug design, which has led to identify two
small molecule MLK4 inhibitor candidates to test efficacy on a set of
patient-derived breast cancer cells in vitro and their xenografted tumors
in vivo. Results will be presented in the conference.


