Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aurora-A kinase: a nuclear driver of metastasis.


Aurora-A Kinase (AURKA) is a serine/threonine kinase that is critical for
mitosis. AURKA is overexpressed in 96% of human cancers, including breast
cancer. It has been previously shown that AURKA localizes to the nucleus
in breast cancer metastases and especially in metastases of Triple
Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC). Our objective is to define the role of
nuclear AURKA in breast cancer metastasis in TNBC. Here we report that
TNBC cells vary in amount of nuclear AURKA and this potentially
correlates with their metastatic capabilities. Based on our preliminary
findings we hypothesized that nuclear AURKA promotes cell survival and
resistance to apoptosis in the metastatic niche. To test this hypothesis
we created TNBC cell lines with CRISPR/Cas9 based deletion of endogenous
AURKA. We also constructed exogenous AURKA specifically targeted to the
nucleus by addition of a nuclear localization signal (NLS) or cytoplasm
via addition of a nuclear exclusion signal (NES), respectively. To allow
for in vitro and in vivo rescue experiments with exogenous NES or NLS
AURKA in sgAURKA expressing TNBC cells, we introduced several silent
mutations to avoid sgAURKA targeting. In our pilot orthotopic xenograft
study with MDA-MB-231-luc2-Cas9 (TNBC) cells expressing sgAURKA with WT
AURKA, NLS-AURKA or AURKA-NES shows a trend of increased metastatic
colonization in the AURKA-NLS group. Overall, our results indicate that
the amount of nuclear AURKA is increased in metastatic breast cancer cell
lines and metastases of TNBC, but the mechanism of this translocation is
currently unknown. Elucidation of this mechanism is critical for
development of new therapeutical strategies for control and eradication
of metastatic disease.


