Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory gene expression differences among prostate cancer
patients exposed to the World Trade Center aftermath.


Background: World Trade Center (WTC) rescue and recovery workers were
exposed to a complex mixture of dust and debris after the collapse of the
WTC towers. An excess incidence of prostate cancer was observed in the
WTC workers and, more advanced prostate cancer cases have been associated
with higher levels of WTC exposure. As inflammation is known to promote
tumor development and progression and the prostate cancer etiology
remains uncertain, we compared RNA expression of inflammatory markers in
prostate cancer tumors from WTC patients with matched prostate cancer
patients not related to WTC.

Methods: RNA was prepared from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumors of
15 WTC prostate cancer and 14 non-WTC prostate cancers, age, race, and
Gleason-score matched. Gene expression was quantified using Nanostring
nCounter® PanCancer Immune Profiling Panel, which combines markers for
24 immune cell types and populations, 30 common cancer antigens and genes
representing all immune response categories including key checkpoint
blockade genes. Data analysis was performed using the NanoString nSolver
2.6 analysis software. Genes shown to be characteristic of innate and
adaptive immune cell populations were used to derive cell-type scores
indicating population abundance of each immune cell type. Comparisons of
cell type scores were performed using Student’s t test.

Results: WTC prostate cancers expressed high levels of genes associated
with chronic inflammation: NFATC2 (Fold change=3.0, PResults: WTC
prostate cancers expressed high levels of genes associated with chronic
inflammation: NFATC2 (Fold change=3.0, P<0.001), MRC1 (Fold change=2.0,
P=0.001), CT8L (Fold change=1.5, P=0.01), CSF1 (Fold change=1.5,
P=0.001), NFKB1 (Fold change=1.3, P=0.005), CXCL13 (Fold change=3.7,
P=0.04), IL6 (Fold change=2.5, P=0.04) and ITCH (Fold change= 0.3,
P=0.001) compared with non-WTC prostate cancers. Conversely, non-WTC
prostate cancers expressed higher levels of genes associated with innate
immunity: TIRAP (Fold Change=0.05, PResults: WTC prostate cancers
expressed high levels of genes associated with chronic inflammation:
NFATC2 (Fold change=3.0, P<0.001), MRC1 (Fold change=2.0, P=0.001), CT8L
(Fold change=1.5, P=0.01), CSF1 (Fold change=1.5, P=0.001), NFKB1 (Fold
change=1.3, P=0.005), CXCL13 (Fold change=3.7, P=0.04), IL6 (Fold
change=2.5, P=0.04) and ITCH (Fold change= 0.3, P=0.001) compared with
non-WTC prostate cancers. Conversely, non-WTC prostate cancers expressed
higher levels of genes associated with innate immunity: TIRAP (Fold
Change=0.05, P<0.001), IRF3 (Fold change=1, PResults: WTC prostate
cancers expressed high levels of genes associated with chronic
inflammation: NFATC2 (Fold change=3.0, P<0.001), MRC1 (Fold change=2.0,
P=0.001), CT8L (Fold change=1.5, P=0.01), CSF1 (Fold change=1.5,
P=0.001), NFKB1 (Fold change=1.3, P=0.005), CXCL13 (Fold change=3.7,
P=0.04), IL6 (Fold change=2.5, P=0.04) and ITCH (Fold change= 0.3,
P=0.001) compared with non-WTC prostate cancers. Conversely, non-WTC
prostate cancers expressed higher levels of genes associated with innate
immunity: TIRAP (Fold Change=0.05, P<0.001), IRF3 (Fold change=1,
P<0.001), and FADD (Fold change=0.5, P=0.005), compared with WTC prostate
cancer. In cell type enrichment analysis, macrophage and CD45+ cells
scored higher in non-WTC (8.83±0.75 SD and 9.09±0.78 SD) than WTC
(7.81±0.73 SD and 8.53±0.53 SD) prostate cancer samples (t=3.70,
PResults: WTC prostate cancers expressed high levels of genes associated
with chronic inflammation: NFATC2 (Fold change=3.0, P<0.001), MRC1 (Fold
change=2.0, P=0.001), CT8L (Fold change=1.5, P=0.01), CSF1 (Fold
change=1.5, P=0.001), NFKB1 (Fold change=1.3, P=0.005), CXCL13 (Fold
change=3.7, P=0.04), IL6 (Fold change=2.5, P=0.04) and ITCH (Fold change=
0.3, P=0.001) compared with non-WTC prostate cancers. Conversely, non-WTC
prostate cancers expressed higher levels of genes associated with innate
immunity: TIRAP (Fold Change=0.05, P<0.001), IRF3 (Fold change=1,
P<0.001), and FADD (Fold change=0.5, P=0.005), compared with WTC prostate
cancer. In cell type enrichment analysis, macrophage and CD45+ cells
scored higher in non-WTC (8.83±0.75 SD and 9.09±0.78 SD) than WTC
(7.81±0.73 SD and 8.53±0.53 SD) prostate cancer samples (t=3.70,
P<0.001 and t=2.29, P=0.02); regulatory T cells scored higher in WTC
(5.90±0.52 SD) than non-WTC (5.42±0.67 SD) prostate cancer samples
(t=2.15, P=0.04).

Conclusions: Compared to non-WTC prostate cancers, tumors from
WTC-exposed patients show overall lower expressions of genes involved in
local innate immune-system response and a higher expression of adaptive
immune-system response genes. Environmental factors, such as exposure
during the 9/11 aftermath, may have played a role in the development of
advanced prostate cancer in these patients via high immune-tolerance. The
results have implications for a role of environmental factors in prostate
carcinogenesis.


