Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET suppresses protein translation, differentially effects
polysome loading of cell cycle regulatory proteins and inhibits cell
growth and proliferation of prostate cancer cells.


Introduction: Translational control is a critical component in
development and progression of cancer and could be explored to develop
antineoplastic therapies. Results from our laboratory have shown that TET
(a derivative of Tetrandrine) inhibits cell growth and promotes apoptosis
of prostate cancer (PCa) cells. However, the underlying molecular
mechanisms are not clearly understood. We observed that TET inhibited
4EBP phosphorylation, suggesting that it might inhibit translational
initiation. In the present study we evaluated the effects of TET on
Translation in general and cell cycle related proteins in particular.

Methods: Androgen dependent PCa cells LNCaP and Enz resistant CRPCa cells
22Rv1 were maintained in supplemented RPMI as recommended. Where
indicated cells were treated with TET (0 or 20ÂµM) for various time
points (2h, 8h, 18h and 24h). At the end of the experimental periods
cells were pulsed with cycloheximide for 10 minutes in RPMI media.
Cytoplasmic RNA was collected by lysing cells in polysome lysis buffer.
Cell lysates were centrifuged and the resulting cytosolic supernatant was
separated by density (a 10% to 50% sucrose) gradient and centrifugation.
Fractions were collected using a TELEDYNE ISCO Density Gradient
Fractionation System with continuous monitoring of untranslated mRNAs.
Polysome (P)/Monosome (M) ratio were measured. The total RNA in each
fraction was extracted using TRIzol LS (Invitrogen) and qRT PCR was done
for p21, p27, Cyclin D1 and c-Myc gene for each fraction. Cell viability
was measured by MTT assay at various time points.

Results: TET treatment resulted in decreased protein synthesis. TET
treatment resulted in decrease of RNA associated with Polysomes. There
were a significant shift in P/M ratio from 0.82 (control) to 0.48 (24 h.
TET) [TET 2hrs (0.75), 8h (0.69) and 18hrs (0.52)] in LNCaP and P/M ratio
form 0.91 (control) to 0.32 (8 h TET) [TET 2h (0.78) and 4h (0.53)] in
22Rv1 cells. The decrease of the P/M ratio suggests that TET inhibits
translation initiation in prostate cancer cells independent of the
androgen dependence. While there was generalized decrease in translation
and specific decrease in mRNA for Cyclin D1, c-Myc associated with
polysomes following TET treatment. In quite contrast to these findings,
we observed an increase in mRNA for p21 and p27 in polysomal fractions of
TET treated cells as compare to control at 24 h in LNCaP cells. These
data suggest differential effects of TET treatment on polysome loading of
cell cycle regulatory proteins. Moreover, TET inhibited growth and
proliferation of LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells in dose as well as in time
dependent fashion.

Conclusions: TET targets translational machinery and differentially
effects translation of cell cycle regulatory genes by effecting their
polysome loading and effects cell growth and proliferation of androgen
dependent and castrate resistant PCa cells.


