Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of lung cancer organoid lines as a new preclinical
model for lung cancer.


Human cancers are composed of genetically and phenotypically
heterogeneous subpopulations organized into a hierarchy of tumor
initiating stem cells and various differentiated tumor cell. Cancer
organoids seem to be more suitable in vitro models for targeting tumor
heterogeneity than cell lines. We established cancer organoid lines from
lung cancer patient tissues, recapitulating histology of human cancers in
three dimensional culture conditions. Thirteen organoid lines from
various lung cancer subtypes including adenocarcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma and small cell carcinoma were compared with their original
human tumors in histologic features and genetic profiles. In the IHC
staining, it revealed that organoids of adenocarcinomas have typical
glandulo-papillary structures or mucin-containing tumor cells. Organoids
of squamous cell carcinomas showed keratinization and intercellular
bridges. Organoids of small cell carcinoma displayed typical
neuroendocrine morphology. Using NGS cancer panel sequencing, the
organoid lines maintained genetic characteristics of the original human
tumors in major driver genes including EGFR, TP53, and RB mutation. In
xenograft experiments, the organoid lines revealed stronger
tumorigenesity than direct graft of human tumor tissues. Cancer organoids
showed resistance to various anticancer drug treatments. In conclusion,
our lung cancer organoid lines are alternative cancer model for
preclinical researches recapitulating genotypic and phenotypic
heterogeneity of original human tumors.


