Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GATK CNV: copy-number variation discovery from coverage data.


We propose and evaluate a novel algorithm for inferring germline and
somatic copy number variation from whole exome sequencing (WES) and whole
genome sequencing (WGS) data. Starting with the depth of aligned short
reads from a cohort of samples, we use a Bayesian model for learning
sequencing bias and simultaneously detecting CNV events using a hidden
Markov model for change-point detection. A unified framework is used to
call both germline and somatic CNVs. Denoising and event discovery are
performed self-consistently to achieve maximum accuracy. In contrast to
previous methods, our model naturally accounts for mixed sex cohorts and
can detect events on sex chromosomes. Furthermore, we can detect
excessively noisy samples and extract useful information within a
probabilistic framework. Our implementation can also utilize Spark
clusters, enabling the processing of larger cohorts and allowing for
improved runtime performance.

We benchmark the new method for precision, recall, and reproducibility of
both germline and somatic variants. Evaluations are performed on a cohort
of WES samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas with matching WGS data. For
germline variants, we use blood normal samples and compare our calls on
WES data against Genome STRiP calls on WGS data. We find that GATK CNV
yields remarkably higher precision and recall compared to XHMM and CODEX
software packages. For somatic variants, we compare our calls against
TITAN and find a remarkably high concordance.


