Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel ALK specific mRNA in situ hybridization assay for non-small
cell lung carcinoma.


A recent technical advance in the mRNA in situ hybridization (mRNA-ISH)
assay provides simultaneous signal amplification and background
suppression with a unique probe design to achieve single molecule
visualization. We assessed the utility of the mRNA-ISH assay as a
diagnostic tool to detect anaplastic lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase
(ALK) mRNA in non-small cell lung carcinoma. We compared the mRNA-ISH
assay with immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). The study included 279 surgically resected lung
adenocarcinomas and 44 transbronchial biopsied (TBB) adenocarcinomas.
mRNA-ISH was conducted using the RNAscope 2.0 system which includes
pre-designed detection probes for the tyrosine kinase domain of ALK mRNA.
IHC was conducted on all of the 323 samples using ALK-specific
antibodies. mRNA-ISH was performed on 279 surgical samples and 6 TBB
samples. Break-apart FISH was used to assess cases that were mRNA-ISH or
IHC positive. ALK protein expression was detected in 11/279 (3.9%)
specimens. ALK mRNA was also detected by mRNA-ISH in these cases, and 9
of the 11 specimens (81%), were also positive by ALK FISH. Using the IHC
results as a reference, the sensitivity and specificity of mRNA-ISH was
100%. In the TBB cohort, ALK protein expression was observed in 3/44
(6.8%) of specimens, in which ALK mRNA expression was also detected. ALK
mRNA-ISH data were highly correlated with the IHC data, and ALK mRNA-ISH
was able to identify every FISH-positive sample. We conclude that
mRNA-ISH could play an alternative or complementary role in ALK genetic
diagnosis in NSCLC.


