Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated analysis package of miRNA and mRNA expression dataAn
integrated analysis package of miRNA and mRNA expression data.


MicroRNAs(miRNAs) are small and non-coding RNAs that can regulate gene
expression by binding on the 3â€™UTR of target mRNAs and inhibiting mRNAs
to translate protein, or even promoting mRNAs degradation. In various
complex disease and pathological conditions, we can identify dysregulated
which are the causative factors. Therefore, it is an essential approach
to explore the interactions between miRNA and gene in certain diseases,
such as cancers. However, challenge arises when we are trying to validate
the interactions by doing bench experiments. The numbers of miRNA-gene
interactions are too large to be validated. Currently, most prediction
algorithms only provide its own result and low consistency rates across
independent methods have been reported. Therefore, it is necessary to
develop a systematic method to perform a comprehensive analysis by using
the expression profiles from genes and miRNAs concurrently. To address
these issues, we developed an R package named as anamiR. AnamiR is able
to perform an integrated analysis of mRNA and miRNA with the phenotype
information. The analysis procedures are briefly summarized as the
follows. Initially, differential expression analysis would be applied to
the raw data. Subsequently, the anamiR package can identify significant
pairs of miRNAs and genes if their Pearson correlation coefficients are
lower than the pre-defined threshold. Next, the significant pairs were
compared to the embedded database in anamiR, which included two validated
and several predicting miRNA-gene databases. Lastly, functional analysis
is also available in this package to characterize the biological
functions and signaling pathways of dysregulated miRNAs and genes. A
breast cancer dataset was analyzed by using anamiR, which identified nine
miRNA-gene interactions for deeper studying. Among these interactions,
there are two miRNAs and nine genes included. miR-497-5p and miR-204-5p
which both were mentioned in breast cancer frequently, are found by
anamiR. The anamiR package is freely available at Bioconductor.


