Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of enhancer elements at kidney cancer
susceptibility loci using MPRA.


GWAS is an important tool for discovering regions in the genome
associated with cancer susceptibility. For renal cell carcinoma (RCC),
only two loci have had their functional basis explained (11q13 and
12p12). Here, we used a massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA) to
investigate enhancer activity in 20 GWAS regions that had an RCC
association p-value of at least 10-7. We selected 784 SNPs with an r2>0.4
or D’>0.5 and MAFGWAS is an important tool for discovering regions in
the genome associated with cancer susceptibility. For renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), only two loci have had their functional basis explained
(11q13 and 12p12). Here, we used a massively parallel reporter assay
(MPRA) to investigate enhancer activity in 20 GWAS regions that had an
RCC association p-value of at least 10-7. We selected 784 SNPs with an
r2>0.4 or D’>0.5 and MAF<0.05 that had evidence for enhancer activity
based on available ENCODE transcription factor or histone ChIP-seq,
FAIRE, and DNase I hypersensitive data. The MPRA library was composed of
47461 oligonucleotides 201 bp in length, compelled of 145 bps contained
the SNP in the forward or reverse orientation followed by 10 bp of
barcode sequence to allow for identification. Each of the 784 SNPs tested
were tagged 10 separate times for both orientations. Controls were
constructed by randomizing the 10 nucleotides centered on the SNP. The
MPRA library was the cloned into a luciferase reporter vector that was
transfected into HEK293T and ACHN cell lines. NGS was performed on 5
replicates using the the Illumina HiSeq 2500. After correcting for
multiple comparisons, 50 SNPs from 16 regions showed significant
p-values. From these 50 SNPs, 29 showed enhancer activity that was
independent of the forward/reverse orientation and had the same effect in
both cell lines. This analysis has identified possible functional
variants at RCC risk loci and opens opportunities to discover new
molecular mechanisms of genetic susceptibility of RCC.


