Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and quantification of isoforms of eukaryotic
initiation factor 4E as biomarker in Mnk inhibitor-treated mouse model by
capillary-based immunoassay platform.


Elevated levels of the phosphorylated m7G cap binding protein, eukaryotic
initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) are associated with neoplasia. An observed
oncogenic signaling effect upon activation of Erk1/2 or p38 MAPKs in
cells is the phosphorylation of eIF4E specifically at Serine 209 by
downstream kinase MAP kinase-interacting kinase 1 and 2 (Mnks).
Therefore, inhibiting Mnks could be a potential therapeutic approach that
selectively targets cancer cells without introducing toxicity to normal
cells. To measure the target engagement and efficacy of Mnk inhibitors,
we have established a sensitive method to quantitatively detect
phospho-eIF4E and non-phospho-eIF4E. Here, we report using NanoPro 100
system, an automated capillary-based immunoassay platform that could
separate the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated eIF4E isoforms based
on different isoelectric points. Primary antibodies against both
non-phospho eIF4E and Serine 209 phosphorylated eIF4E were used for
identification and verification of eIF4E isoforms in protein samples
obtained from cell lysate, blood samples and tumor samples. Two major
isoforms of eIF4E with isoelectric point at 5.38 for phospho-eIF4E and
5.88 for non-phospho-eIF4E were identified in eIF4E-overexpressing K562
cells. siRNA knockdown of eIF4E expression reduced both isoforms, while
treatment with Mnk inhibitor only reduced phospho-eIF4E level. The
measurement and quantification of the relative changes of phosphorylated
eIF4E by this method can potentially be used in monitoring the efficacy
of Mnk inhibitors in xenograft and future clinical trials.


