Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of ERKs-RSK2 signaling in human cancers.


RSK2 is a member of p90RSK superfamily consisted with RSK1-4 and MSK1-2,
and has suggested involving in many cellular processes including cell
proliferation, differentiation, transformation and cancer development.
Accumulating data obtained by our 16-year researches strongly
demonstrated that RSK2 is a key player in cell transformation and cancer
metastasis. We found that ectopic expression of RSK2 induced
anchorage-independent cell transformation. Notably, knockdown of RSK2
strongly suppressed constitutive active-Ras (CA-Ras)-induced
foci-formation, EGF-induced cell transformation and cancer cell growth in
anchorage-independent condition. The results obtained from human skin
cancer tissue array demonstrated that total protein levels and RSK2
activity were higher in cancer tissues than that of normal tissues.
Molecular targeting of RSK2 or ERK1 and 2 with natural compounds
demonstrated that ERKs-RSK2 signaling pathway plays a key role in cell
transformation and cancer development. Moreover, inhibition of ERKs-RSK2
signaling suppressed NF-κB activity in JB6Cl41 cells. The EGF-induced
NF-κB activity was abrogated up-regulation of COX-2 mRNA expression and
COX-2 protein levels by inhibition of ERKs-RSK2 signaling pathway.
Interestingly, magnolin, a specific inhibitor of ERK1 and ERK2,
suppressed ERK-mediated MMP-2 and NF-κB-mediated MMP-9 expression. In
addition, we found that the protein expression of N-cadherin involved in
metastasis was markedly attenuated by inhibition of ERKs-RSK2 signaling
pathway. Notably, magnolin suppressed the migration and invasion of lung
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. Taken together, these results
demonstrated that targeting of ERKs-RSK2 signaling is beneficial for the
chemoprevention, and anti-invasion and -migration in cancer metastasis.

Key words: MAPK pathway, Transformation, Metastasis, Molecular targets


