Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Driver pathway blockage synergizes with PLK1 inhibition in
anaplastic thyroid cancer.


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is one of the most lethal malignancies,
with a median survival of less than 6 months from the time of diagnosis.
Molecular changes that characterize ATC have been recently well defined
and involve most often p53 mutations, and activation of PI3K, RAS and
BRAF. PLK1, an essential mitotic regulator, has been found overexpressed
in ATC.

Previous data from our lab have shown that PLK1 inhibitors are effective
in ATC cell lines. However PLK1 inhibition often results in escape from
growth arrest through mitotic slippage. This leads to the generation of
polyploid, genetically unstable, cell populations.

We have tested the effect of combining PLK1 and PI3K inhibitors in ATC
cell lines. Combined treatment with the PLK1 inhibitor BI6727 and the
PI3K inhibitor BKM120 resulted in a significant synergistic effect in ATC
cell lines with high levels of AKT activity, but not in those with
undetectable pAKT. Combination of the two drugs enhanced the G2/M arrest
at doses in which the single drugs showed no effect. In addition, it led
to a massive reduction of the tetraploid cells population. Furthermore,
combined treatment with BI6727 and BKM120 in PI3Khigh cell lines showed a
significant induction of apoptosis in a time- and dose-dependent manner.

Combined inhibition of PI3K and PLK1 was extremely effective in
inhibiting tumor growth in vivo, in an immunocompetent allograft model of
ATC.

Our results show that combination of PLK1 and PI3K inhibitors is an
effective treatment for ATC cells with high levels of PI3K signaling.
This combination results in cell cycle arrest, inhibition of of
tetraploid cell generation, and induction of apoptosis, suggesting a
clear therapeutic potential.


