Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasticity in heterogenous cancer stem cells promotes glioblastoma
radioresistance.


Some cancers including Glioblastoma (GBM) have hierarchical cellular
architecture with cancer stem cells (CSCs) as a minor tumorigenic
subpopulation. While CSCs have been touted to contribute to initiate
recurrence, post-surgical therapy-induced phenotypic changes in CSCs
remain elusive. Here we report that treatment of GBM cells with ionizing
radiation (IR) promotes a wound-healing mesenchymal signature,
accompanied by conversion of na√Øve CSCs expressing CD133 to
post-treatment more radioresistant CSCs expressing the GPI-anchored,
TGFb-inhibitory protein CD109 in an ATM, NF-kB, CEBP-b dependent manner.
In post-IR GBM, these therapy-escaped CD133-/CD109+ GBM cells, but not
the rest of the tumor, uniquely retain clonogenic, tumorigenic, and
multi-potent capacities both in vitro and in vivo. CD109 silencing
unexpectedly eliminates cancer stemness via controlling YAP/TAZ as the
downstream target and this CD109-YAP/TAZ signaling axis is evolutionally
conserved between drosophila and human brain tumors. Clinically, both
CD133 and CD109 are independently associated with poorer prognosis of GBM
patients, while the poorest prognosis group of GBM expressed both CD133
and CD109 at higher rates. These data indicate a possibility of the
post-IR CSC plasticity and subsequent heterogeneity, and the activation
of the CD109-YAP/TAZ signaling axis as previously unidentified
therapeutic targets for post-IR recurrent GBM.


