Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplex IHC detection of immune checkpoint receptors in the
tumor microenvironment.


As immune checkpoint blockade has been shown to partially reverse the
exhausted T cell phenotype and consequently lead to a decrease in tumor
burden, there is a need for an understanding of this T cell type. Using
recently developed, highly validated antibodies, we have developed a
fluorescent multiplex, TSA-based assay in order to examine the
interaction of PD-L1 with PD-1-expressing exhausted T cells in various
tumor types. Here, we construct a seven-color multiplex panel in order to
simultaneously visualize cytokeratin (the tumor mask), DAPI (nuclear
counterstain), CD8 (cytotoxic T cell marker), the exhausted T cell
markers PD-1, Tim-3 and Lag-3, and the ligand for PD-1, PD-L1. This
technique not only enabled the concurrent detection of these markers, but
also provided high-resolution visualization of interactions between
PD-1-expressing CD8+ T cells and PD-L1-expressing CD68+ macrophages in
the tumor microenvironment. The seven-plex panel was applied to FFPE
tumor microarrays (TMAs) consisting of breast, lung and ovarian tumor
tissue and each core was subsequently analyzed for the distribution,
co-localization, frequency and proximity of these targets in relation to
one another. While we often visualized co-expression of Lag-3 and PD-1 on
T cells, Tim-3 was frequently observed on PD-L1+ macrophages in several
tumor types. This data provides valuable insight into the co-expression
profiles of these markers in multiple tumor types and has implications
for the use of combination therapies that aim to target both the innate
and adaptive immune systems.


