Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNFAIP8 promotes prostate cancer cell survival by modulating
autophagy.


TNF-α inducible protein (TNFAIP8) is an antiapoptotic protein with roles
in tumor cell growth and survival. Mechanisms of cell survival by TNFAIP8
remains elusive. In the current study, we investigated the role and
molecular mechanism related to TNFAIP8 in the modulation of cell/cycle,
autophagy and drug resistance/cell survival in prostate cancer cells.
Microarray data from PC3 prostate cancer cells ectopically expressing
TNFAIP8 demonstrated modulation of cell cycle related genes such as CDKs,
CDCs and PCNA. Immunoblotting data from overexpression of TNFAIP8 in PC3
cells shows upregulation of cell cycle proteins cyclin A, cyclin B1, Myt1
and Chk1. However, no change in cell cycle was found. Phosphorylation of
Histone-S10, CDC2-Tyr15 and Wee1-S642] was also observed. Autophagy plays
an important role in tumor cell survival. We evaluated the effects of
TNFAIP8 in modulating autophagy. Overexpression of TNFAIP8 leads to
induction of autophagy. TNFAIP8 positively modulates the
expression/stabilization of autophagy markers and effectors such as LC3β
I/II, Beclin1, 4EBP1, oncogene p62 and SIRT1. Knockdown of TNFAIP8
inhibits autophagy induced by nutrient starvation in PC3 prostate and
MCF7 breast cancer cells. We also evaluated cell growth and survival in
PC3 cells. We demonstrate that TNFAIP8 promotes cell growth and
proliferation in PC3, LNCaP and C4-2 prostate cancer cells. Furthermore,
we have found that TNFAIP8 increase resistance against anticancer drugs
docetaxel and doxorubicin. These data collectively suggest that by the
creation of cellular autophagy events TNFAIP8 promotes cell survival and
drug resistance in prostate cancer cells.


