Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-associated fibroblast driven drug resistance in colorectal
cancer.


Drug resistance remains a major problem in the treatment of most cancers.
For example, KRAS wild-type colorectal cancers (CRCs) are typically
treated with the anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) therapy
cetuximab in combination with standard chemotherapy; however, of the 40%
of patients that do respond, virtually all relapse within 3-12 months.
Additionally, around 25% of nonresponders have no identifiable resistance
mechanisms. This suggests that it is not just cell-intrinsic mechanisms
that result in resistance, but that extrinsic factors play a role. The
purpose of this study was to investigate how the dynamics of the tumor
microenvironment, specifically cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and
hypoxia, modify the response of CRC cells to cetuximab. We used a novel
high-content imaging platform to generate quantitative phenotypic data
(i.e. morphology, birth/death rates) of cellular co-cultures perturbed by
multiple, co-occurring microenvironmental conditions. Preliminary data
demonstrated reduced sensitivity of tumor cells to cetuximab in the
presence of CAFs, which was dependent on patient specifics and time scale
of co-culture. Additionally, we found that low oxygen conditions altered
the effect of CAFs on tumor cell phenotypes, which highlights the
importance of studying co-occurring microenvironmental factors. This work
underlies the importance of considering not just the genetic makeup of
patient tumors, but also the heterogeneity of the surrounding
microenvironment when designing personalized treatment strategies.


