Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cohesin subunit STAG1 is a hardwired genetic dependency of
STAG2 mutant cancer cells.


Recent genome analyses have identified recurrent mutations in subunits of
the cohesin complex in human cancer. Cohesin is a chromosomal factor that
is essential for sister chromatid cohesion and cell division and that
contributes to gene regulation and DNA repair. Deleterious mutations in
the cohesin subunit STAG2 have been detected in about 20% of bladder
cancer, 15% of Ewing sarcoma and 6% of AML/MDS patients. The mechanistic
involvement of cohesin mutations in the pathogenesis of human
malignancies is currently under active investigation. We hypothesized
that the loss of STAG2 could alter the properties and functionalities of
the cohesin complex leading to unique vulnerabilities of STAG2 mutant
cells. Using CRISPR/Cas9 and RNAi in isogenic solid cancer and leukemic
models we identified STAG1, a STAG2 paralog, as a strong and clean
genetic vulnerability of STAG2 mutant cells. Mechanistically, STAG1 loss
abrogates sister chromatid cohesion specifically in STAG2 mutant but not
wild-type cells leading to mitotic catastrophe, defective cell division
and apoptosis. STAG1 inactivation inhibits the proliferation of disease
relevant STAG2 mutant but not wild-type bladder cancer and Ewing sarcoma
cell lines. Restoration of STAG2 expression in a mutant bladder cancer
model alleviates the dependence on STAG1. Our results demonstrate that
the cohesin subunits STAG1 and STAG2 act redundantly to support sister
chromatid cohesion and cell viability in human cells. We have identified
STAG1 as a hardwired, context independent vulnerability of STAG2 mutant
cancers. Specific synthetic lethalities elicited by recurrent cohesin
mutations in human tumors hold the promise for the development of
selective therapeutics.


