Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo antiangiogenic activity of
desacetylvinblastine monohydrazide through inhibition of VEGFR2 and Axl
pathways.


Background and Objective: Tumor angiogenesis process is regulated by
multiple proangiogenic pathways, such as VEGFR2 and Axl. Inhibition of
VEGF/VEGFR2 signaling alone fails to block tumor neovascularization, and
anti-VEGF resistance is often associated with Axl. Hence, discovery of
novel agents that target multiple angiogenesis pathways is in demand.
Here, we describe desacetylvinblastine monohydrazide (DAVLBH), a
derivative of vinblastine (VLB) that exerts a more potent antiangiogenic
effect than VLB in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting VEGFR2 and Axl
pathways.

Methods: The antiangiogenic effects of DAVLBH were studied in vitro
(proliferation, migration, and tube formation assays) and ex vivo (aortic
ring assay). In vitro pericyte migration to endothelial tubes was
assessed using a three-dimensional co-culture assay. In vivo assay was
performed in HeLa xenograft model. Western blotting, immunohistochemical
and immunofluorescence assays were conducted to evaluate the key proteins
of the VEGF/VEGFR2 and Gas6/Axl pathways.

Results: DAVLBH (1 nM) inhibited VEGF- and Gas6-induced angiogenesis in
vitro. At 0.75 Î¼mol/kg, DAVLBH significantly delayed tumor growth and
reduced vascular density in vivo, which was associated with the
inactivation of VEGF/VEGFR2 and Gas6/Axl signalling pathways. DAVLBH
blocked the compensatory upregulation of Axl in response to bevacizumab
treatment in HUVECs. DAVLBH also suppressed the recruitment of pericytes
to well-established endothelial tubes and reduced pericyte coverage in
vivo, which was accompanied by inhibition of Axl.

Conclusions: DAVLBH potently inhibited angiogenesis-mediated tumor growth
by blocking the activation of VEGF/VEGFR2 and Gas6/Axl pathways. DAVLBH
might serve as a promising antiangiogenic agent for cancer therapy.


