Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of antitumor properties of metformin over human
multidrug-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia cells.


Besides the progress in the knowledge of cancer biology, the rates of
mortality due to this disease are still considerably elevated. Therefore,
application of new drugs in antitumor therapies has been constantly
studied. However, any of them have achieved a considerable success so
far. In this work we evaluated the ability of metformin, a traditional
hypoglycemic prescribed to treatment of type II diabetes along decades,
over programmed cell death and modulation of metastatic potential in
multidrug resistant (MDR) human myeloid chronic leukemia cells (Lucena),
through MTT reduction test, flow cytometry, western blotting and gelatin
zymography. Metformin was able to reduce the cell viability in a
concentration and time-dependent manner, but was not able to induce
Lucena cells to apoptosis or necrosis, though activation of the apoptotic
machinery. Indeed, it was not observed activation of caspase 3, in
contrast to an expressive activation of PARP. Interestingly, proteins
associated to autophagy were overexpressed by Lucena cells, and an arrest
of cell cycle was observed after exposition to the drug. Finally, it was
verified that metformin was able to modulate activity of MMP2 and MMP9,
enzymes associated to the metastatic process. Taken together these
results suggest that the hypoglycemic is able to acts over the first
steps of cancers in more aggressive stages. Finally, inhibition of MMPs
indicates a promissory action of metformin for the treatment of
metastatic disease.


