Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fisetin, a dietary flavonoid for the prevention and treatment of
PIK3CA-mutant colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most frequent and deadliest cancers
worldwide with patients often diagnosed in advanced stages of the
disease. Approximately 15-20% of advanced colorectal cancers harbor
activating mutations in PIK3CA, which has been identified as an important
oncogene in multiple cancers. Therefore, modeling the effects of this
type of mutation in the mammalian colon is significant. Fisetin is a
naturally occurring flavonoid in strawberry, apple, persimmon, grape,
onion and cucumber. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is the most used
chemotherapeutic agent in CRC; however, it has serious side-effects.
Therefore, augmentation of the 5-FU therapeutic effect could lead to
lower effective doses and subsequently fewer side effects. We conducted
in-vitro and in-vivo studies to determine the effect of fisetin, 5-FU and
their combination on PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling in PIK3CA-mutant colon
cancer cells (HCT116 and HT-29), PIK3CA wild-type colon cancer cells
(SW480), and newly developed mouse models. We found that there was more
pronounced decrease in cell-viability and number of colonies in
PIK3CA-mutant colon cancer cells than PIK3CA wild-type colon cancer
cells. Apoptotic genes and proteins are promising targets for cancer
treatment as they provide several theoretical basis to influence pathways
causing greater tumor cell death. We observed an increase in the protein
expression of Bax and decrease in Bcl2 on treatment with combination of
fisetin and 5-FU than either agent alone. The full size PARP (116 KD)
protein was also cleaved to yield an 85 KD fragment after treatment of
cells with fisetin, 5-FU and their combination. Apoptotic effects of
fisetin and 5-FU combination were also confirmed by flow cytometry in
PIK3CA-mutant colon cancer cells. The PI3K/AKT pathway is frequently
activated in CRC leading to tumorigenesis and the resistance to
chemotherapy. Treatment of PIK3CA-mutant colon cancer cells with fisetin
and 5-FU caused decrease in the expression of (i) PI3K (p85 and p110),
(ii) phosphorylation of Akt (Ser473 and Thr308), (iii), phosphorylation
of mTOR, its target proteins, and constituents of mTOR signaling complex.
Treatment with fisetin and 5-FU also led to an increase in the
phosphorylation of AMPKÎ±. Next, we performed studies to investigate the
effect of the treatment of combination of fisetin and 5-FU on colorectal
tumorigenesis in FC13K1ApcMin/+ mice. These animals form tumors in the
distal small intestine and colon that have lost APC activity and express
constitutively active PI3K as often occurs in humans. Interestingly, the
effect of fisetin was much stronger than that of 5-FU and comparable to
the fisetin and 5-FU combination. Both fisetin only and combination
treatment groups had significantly lower incidence relative to the
control group. We suggest that fisetin could be used as a preventive
agent as well as an adjuvant with 5-FU for the treatment of PIK3CA-mutant
CRC.


