Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early events in metastatic spread: new approaches using targeted
therapeutics to disrupt formation of the pre-metastatic niche and
development of lung metastases.


Solid tumors release soluble factors causing migration of a subset of
normal bone marrow derived cells (BMDCs) - primarily VEGFR-1+
hematopoietic progenitor cells and VEGFR-2+ circulating endothelial
progenitor cells - from the bone marrow to organ sites. These normal
BMDCs self-assemble into a pre-metastatic niche- a micro-environment
eventually hosting migratory tumor cells from the primary site.
Disruption of this niche or selective targeting the migratory tumor cells
may inhibit metastatic spread. The significance and specific
characteristics of the BMDCs is still unclear. We have previously
observed migration of VEGFR-1+ BMDCs to the lung and lymph nodes, and
VEGFR-2+ BMDCs to liver, lung and lymph nodes. Using GFP+ BMDCâ€™s from
genetically engineered mice, we characterized the role that recruitment
of BMDCs may play in breast cancer metastasis. We assessed the BMDC
recruitment profile in lethally irradiated female nu/nu mice transplanted
with GFP+ BMDCs from donor mice, followed by orthotopic placement of
MDA-MB-231/luc cells or injected with MDA-MB-231/luc conditioned media
for 30 days. Flow cytometry results show a gradual increase in the
recruitment of CD11b+VEGFR-1+ cells in all the tissues examined from
tumor-bearing mice. Recruitment of these cells to the liver in mice
treated only with MDA-MB-231/Luc conditioned media was also apparent, but
the increase was not as high as in livers of mice with the
orthotopically-placed tumors. Recruitment of CD11b+VEGFR-2+ BMDCs was
also observed but only in liver and lung. Interestingly, conditioned
media seemed to recruit this subset of cells more strongly to these two
tissues than signaling from orthotopic tumors. Spleen and lymph node
showed minimal recruitment of CD11b+VEGFR-2+ BMDCs. We have previously
developed the GrB/VEGF fusion construct- a novel pro-apoptotic fusion
protein which specifically targets cells harboring VEGFR2 and have
utilized this agent to specifically target BMDCs which are VEGFR2 +. Our
preliminary data indicate that treatment with GrB/VEGF does not
significantly alter the recruitment of VEGFR-1+ or VEFGR-2+ cells to
lungs, when assessed two weeks after the final treatment. We observed
increased recruitment of F4/80+ macrophages to the lung. On the other
hand, CD11b+Gr-1- BMDCs were significantly reduced following GrB/VEGF
treatment, although the F4/80+ subpopulation carrying this signature
increased. Studies are ongoing to determine whether systemic
administration of this agent can disrupt the formation of the niche and
the eventual establishment of metastatic tumors. Understanding the role
of BMDCs in metastatic spread and the formation of the pre-metastatic
niche and their role in the early development of metastasis will be
critical in designing targeted therapeutic approaches to inhibit the
metastatic process. Research sponsored, in part, by the Clayton
Foundation for Research.


