Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histopathologic patterns of nasopharyngeal malignancy in Lagos,
Nigeria and its association with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV): A 10-year
retrospective study.


Background: Nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) is a rare cancer worldwide. It is
now found to be increasing in incidence in Nigeria, though the incidence
is lower when compared to countries in the Mediterranean basin, North
Africa and Southeast Asia. NPC is frequently associated with Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), but no previous study has been done in Lagos to document the
association.

Objective: To determine the prevalence, histologic types and age
distribution of nasopharyngeal malignancy in Lagos University Teaching
Hospital (LUTH) and its association with EBV over a period of 10 years,
between January 2003 to December 2012.

Materials and Methods: Slides and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissue blocks, hospital request forms, referral cards, patientsâ€™ case
notes and duplicate copies of histopathology reports of cases of
histologically diagnosed nasopharyngeal malignancy in the Anatomic and
Molecular Pathology department of LUTH within the study period were
retrieved. The cases were reclassified into epithelial and non-epithelial
malignancies. The epithelial malignancies were reclassified according to
WHO classification. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for EBV latent membrane
protein-1 (LMP-1) was carried out on cases with viable FFPE to evaluate
the prevalence of the virus in Nasopharngeal malignancy.

Results: A total of 75 histologically confirmed cases of nasopharyngeal
malignancy were seen during the study period, which constituted 1.1% of
the total cancer recorded in this center. There were 47 males (63%) and
28 females (37%) with a male to female ratio of 1.7:1. The age ranged
from 3 to 75 years, mean age was 44.1 years, the peak age group was 40
-49 years for males and 50 - 59 years for females. On histological
classification, undifferentiated carcinoma (WHO type III) was the
commonest (49.3%), differentiated non-keratinizing squamous cell
carcinoma, SCC (WHO type II) and keratinizing SCC (WHO type I) accounted
for 24% and 9.3% respectively. Thus, NPC accounted for 82.6% of the total
cases of nasopharyngeal malignancy seen. Other histological types seen
were non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) 13.3%, well differentiated adenocarcinoma
2.7% and low grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma 1.3%. EBV LMP-1 IHC was
positive in 30 (86%) out of the 35 cases studied. These consisted of 14
undifferentiated carcinoma, 5 NHL, 2 adenocarcinoma, 7differentiated
non-keratinizing SCC (WHO type II) and the 2 cases of keratinizing SCC
(WHO type 1).

Conclusion: Nasopharyngeal malignancy is not uncommon in this
environment. It occurred more frequently in males than females with the
peak age of incidence at 5th decade of life, undifferentiated carcinoma
(WHO type III) is the commonest histologic type and it is highly
associated with EBV.


