Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COSMIC Cancer Gene Census: expert descriptions across genes in
oncogenesis.


The Cancer Gene Census is an ongoing effort to catalogue genes for which
somatic mutations have been causally implicated in cancer. The Census
comprises manually curated summaries of the most relevant information for
cancer-driving genes and their somatic mutations and brings together the
expertise of a dedicated curation team, cancer scientists and the
comprehensive resources of the COSMIC database. Current research focuses
on characterising the participation of 609 census genes in hallmarks of
cancer and identification of additional genes involved in these
biological traits primarily via altered expression, CNA or epigenetic
changes. New overviews of cancer gene function focused on hallmarks of
cancer pull together manually curated information on the function of
proteins coded by cancer genes and summarises the data in simple
graphical form. It presents a condensed overview of most relevant facts
with quick access to the literature source, aiming to provide summary
characteristics of a cancer gene, rather than a full monography, to avoid
information overload. This functional characterisation enables the
creation of lists of genes of interest focused on the particular role
they play in the development of cancer, as well as aiming to identify the
cellular functions affected by mutations in particular tumours, and help
to choose right targets for targeted therapy or synthetic lethality
experiments. The Census is available from the COSMIC website for online
use or download at: http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census.


