Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAS pathway activation and sensitivity to therapeutic agents is
correlated with NF1 residual activity in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors.


Background: Malignant Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumor (MPNST) is a
malignant sarcoma that derives from a peripheral nerve or plexiform
neurofibroma. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) patients are particularly
susceptible, with a higher risk, earlier onset, and worse prognosis. The
major factor associated with MPNST and NF-1 is Neurofibromin 1, coded by
the NF1 gene. NF1 mutation results in RAS hyperactivation. Chemotherapy
for MPNST is currently limited, with poor prognosis for metastatic or
unresectable tumors. Thus, the development of promising treatment
solutions for MPNST to translate to clinical trials is required.

Methods: Here, we seek to identify efficacious chemotherapeutic
treatments for MPNST with a combination of drug screening and biological
pathway analysis. We used our previously established preclinical system
to test FDA approved or promising developmental agents against five cell
line models for MPNST. We screened sixty agents with diverse mechanisms
of action below published maximum plasma concentrations, and measured
effects with a CellTiter-Glo viability assay. Promising agents were then
tested in two-drug combinations, allowing for determination of synergism.
We then examined the molecular effects of the top candidates with use of
antibody arrays that permit detection of a series of phosphorylated
proteins.

Results: The group of most efficacious drugs was enriched with agents
that target factors downstream of RAS, including MEK, mTOR, and PI3K
inhibitors, with microtubule inhibitors, genotoxics, and HDAC inhibitors
also demonstrating good results. Strong synergism was observed across our
cell line models particularly in combinations containing the dual
mTORC1/2 inhibitor INK128. Interestingly, drug sensitivity varied greatly
between cell lines, correlating with relative NF1 protein and RAS-GTP
levels. We analyzed the activation of the RAS pathway in response to drug
treatment with antibody arrays and found that, following treatment,
relative phosphorylation signal was more decreased compared to controls
in cell lines with lower relative NF1 protein levels. Doxorubicin was
able to reduce phosphorylation signal compared to controls to a level
near comparable to targeted inhibitors, which could contribute to
doxorubicinâ€™s current usefulness against MPNSTs. Importantly, we
identified combination treatments that were able to greatly reduce the
relative phosphorylation signal of RAS pathway members versus control.
Combinations containing INK128 resulted in the most pathway shutdown.
These findings suggest that MPNSTs may be susceptible to combination
treatments targeting RAS pathway members. Moreover, it may be possible to
use pathway analysis as a diagnostic tool to predict drug tolerance.


