Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatory treatment for pediatric low grade glioma with the dual
mTORC1/2 inhibitor TAK228 and MEK inhibitor Trametinib.


Pediatric low grade glioma (PLGG) is one of the most common childhood
tumors. If the tumor is located in a region of the brain that is not
accessible for surgical resection or if the tumor recurs after surgery,
additional therapies are needed. Recent studies highlighted the important
role of mTORC and MEK-activation in PLGG. The dual mTORC1/2-inhibitor,
TAK-228, and the FDA approved MEK-inhibitor, Trametinib, have good brain
penetration and are promising candidates for targeted therapy PLGG. We
hypothesized that TAK-228 and Trametinib would show synergistic effects
both in vitro and in vivo in PLGG models. We treated the PLGG derived
cell lines Res186 and Res259 with TAK-228, Trametinib, and vehicle. Cell
growth was investigated using MTT-assay over different days and compared
to the treatment with the vehicle. DNA replication was measured through
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assay and apoptosis was evaluated
through cleaved caspase 3 (CC-3) staining. Cells were analyzed and
counted with ImageJ. Activation of MAPK pathway was detected via Western
Blot by phosphorylated pERK compared to total pERK, and β-actin.
Treatment of Res186 and Res259 with TAK-288 or Trametinib reduces cell
growth and proliferation in a dose and time depended manner. Res186 have
a significant reduction in cell growth after 4 days treatment (TAK-288:
20nM, **pPediatric low grade glioma (PLGG) is one of the most common
childhood tumors. If the tumor is located in a region of the brain that
is not accessible for surgical resection or if the tumor recurs after
surgery, additional therapies are needed. Recent studies highlighted the
important role of mTORC and MEK-activation in PLGG. The dual
mTORC1/2-inhibitor, TAK-228, and the FDA approved MEK-inhibitor,
Trametinib, have good brain penetration and are promising candidates for
targeted therapy PLGG. We hypothesized that TAK-228 and Trametinib would
show synergistic effects both in vitro and in vivo in PLGG models. We
treated the PLGG derived cell lines Res186 and Res259 with TAK-228,
Trametinib, and vehicle. Cell growth was investigated using MTT-assay
over different days and compared to the treatment with the vehicle. DNA
replication was measured through bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation
assay and apoptosis was evaluated through cleaved caspase 3 (CC-3)
staining. Cells were analyzed and counted with ImageJ. Activation of MAPK
pathway was detected via Western Blot by phosphorylated pERK compared to
total pERK, and β-actin. Treatment of Res186 and Res259 with TAK-288 or
Trametinib reduces cell growth and proliferation in a dose and time
depended manner. Res186 have a significant reduction in cell growth after
4 days treatment (TAK-288: 20nM, **p<0.01; Trametinib: 20nM, **pPediatric
low grade glioma (PLGG) is one of the most common childhood tumors. If
the tumor is located in a region of the brain that is not accessible for
surgical resection or if the tumor recurs after surgery, additional
therapies are needed. Recent studies highlighted the important role of
mTORC and MEK-activation in PLGG. The dual mTORC1/2-inhibitor, TAK-228,
and the FDA approved MEK-inhibitor, Trametinib, have good brain
penetration and are promising candidates for targeted therapy PLGG. We
hypothesized that TAK-228 and Trametinib would show synergistic effects
both in vitro and in vivo in PLGG models. We treated the PLGG derived
cell lines Res186 and Res259 with TAK-228, Trametinib, and vehicle. Cell
growth was investigated using MTT-assay over different days and compared
to the treatment with the vehicle. DNA replication was measured through
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assay and apoptosis was evaluated
through cleaved caspase 3 (CC-3) staining. Cells were analyzed and
counted with ImageJ. Activation of MAPK pathway was detected via Western
Blot by phosphorylated pERK compared to total pERK, and β-actin.
Treatment of Res186 and Res259 with TAK-288 or Trametinib reduces cell
growth and proliferation in a dose and time depended manner. Res186 have
a significant reduction in cell growth after 4 days treatment (TAK-288:
20nM, **p<0.01; Trametinib: 20nM, **p<0.01). Res259 showed a significant
cell reduction at the same time point, but with a higher drug dose
(TAK-288: 50nM, *pPediatric low grade glioma (PLGG) is one of the most
common childhood tumors. If the tumor is located in a region of the brain
that is not accessible for surgical resection or if the tumor recurs
after surgery, additional therapies are needed. Recent studies
highlighted the important role of mTORC and MEK-activation in PLGG. The
dual mTORC1/2-inhibitor, TAK-228, and the FDA approved MEK-inhibitor,
Trametinib, have good brain penetration and are promising candidates for
targeted therapy PLGG. We hypothesized that TAK-228 and Trametinib would
show synergistic effects both in vitro and in vivo in PLGG models. We
treated the PLGG derived cell lines Res186 and Res259 with TAK-228,
Trametinib, and vehicle. Cell growth was investigated using MTT-assay
over different days and compared to the treatment with the vehicle. DNA
replication was measured through bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation
assay and apoptosis was evaluated through cleaved caspase 3 (CC-3)
staining. Cells were analyzed and counted with ImageJ. Activation of MAPK
pathway was detected via Western Blot by phosphorylated pERK compared to
total pERK, and β-actin. Treatment of Res186 and Res259 with TAK-288 or
Trametinib reduces cell growth and proliferation in a dose and time
depended manner. Res186 have a significant reduction in cell growth after
4 days treatment (TAK-288: 20nM, **p<0.01; Trametinib: 20nM, **p<0.01).
Res259 showed a significant cell reduction at the same time point, but
with a higher drug dose (TAK-288: 50nM, *p<0.05; Trametinib: 50nM,
**pPediatric low grade glioma (PLGG) is one of the most common childhood
tumors. If the tumor is located in a region of the brain that is not
accessible for surgical resection or if the tumor recurs after surgery,
additional therapies are needed. Recent studies highlighted the important
role of mTORC and MEK-activation in PLGG. The dual mTORC1/2-inhibitor,
TAK-228, and the FDA approved MEK-inhibitor, Trametinib, have good brain
penetration and are promising candidates for targeted therapy PLGG. We
hypothesized that TAK-228 and Trametinib would show synergistic effects
both in vitro and in vivo in PLGG models. We treated the PLGG derived
cell lines Res186 and Res259 with TAK-228, Trametinib, and vehicle. Cell
growth was investigated using MTT-assay over different days and compared
to the treatment with the vehicle. DNA replication was measured through
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assay and apoptosis was evaluated
through cleaved caspase 3 (CC-3) staining. Cells were analyzed and
counted with ImageJ. Activation of MAPK pathway was detected via Western
Blot by phosphorylated pERK compared to total pERK, and β-actin.
Treatment of Res186 and Res259 with TAK-288 or Trametinib reduces cell
growth and proliferation in a dose and time depended manner. Res186 have
a significant reduction in cell growth after 4 days treatment (TAK-288:
20nM, **p<0.01; Trametinib: 20nM, **p<0.01). Res259 showed a significant
cell reduction at the same time point, but with a higher drug dose
(TAK-288: 50nM, *p<0.05; Trametinib: 50nM, **p<0.01). IC50 values for
TAK-288 was 15nM for Res186 and 20nM for Res259 cells on day 4. IC50
values for Trametinib was 50nM for Res186 and 100nM for Res259 cells.
Staining for CC-3 showed a significant increase for apoptosis in Res259
cells after treatment with TAK-288 or Trametinib (**p Pediatric low grade
glioma (PLGG) is one of the most common childhood tumors. If the tumor is
located in a region of the brain that is not accessible for surgical
resection or if the tumor recurs after surgery, additional therapies are
needed. Recent studies highlighted the important role of mTORC and
MEK-activation in PLGG. The dual mTORC1/2-inhibitor, TAK-228, and the FDA
approved MEK-inhibitor, Trametinib, have good brain penetration and are
promising candidates for targeted therapy PLGG. We hypothesized that
TAK-228 and Trametinib would show synergistic effects both in vitro and
in vivo in PLGG models. We treated the PLGG derived cell lines Res186 and
Res259 with TAK-228, Trametinib, and vehicle. Cell growth was
investigated using MTT-assay over different days and compared to the
treatment with the vehicle. DNA replication was measured through
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation assay and apoptosis was evaluated
through cleaved caspase 3 (CC-3) staining. Cells were analyzed and
counted with ImageJ. Activation of MAPK pathway was detected via Western
Blot by phosphorylated pERK compared to total pERK, and β-actin.
Treatment of Res186 and Res259 with TAK-288 or Trametinib reduces cell
growth and proliferation in a dose and time depended manner. Res186 have
a significant reduction in cell growth after 4 days treatment (TAK-288:
20nM, **p<0.01; Trametinib: 20nM, **p<0.01). Res259 showed a significant
cell reduction at the same time point, but with a higher drug dose
(TAK-288: 50nM, *p<0.05; Trametinib: 50nM, **p<0.01). IC50 values for
TAK-288 was 15nM for Res186 and 20nM for Res259 cells on day 4. IC50
values for Trametinib was 50nM for Res186 and 100nM for Res259 cells.
Staining for CC-3 showed a significant increase for apoptosis in Res259
cells after treatment with TAK-288 or Trametinib (**p < 0.01). No
positive CC-3 staining was detected in Res186 cells after drug treatment.
MAPK pathway was activated in a dose-dependent manner as determined by
phosphorylated pERK Western Blot after TAK-288 and inactivated after
Trametinib treatment. No change in total ERK concentration was detected,
suggesting that cells attempt to compensate for loss of mTOR signaling by
upregulating MAP kinase signaling. Our preliminary results show that the
PLGG-derived cell lines are sensitive to TAK-228 and Trametinib
treatment. All cell lines showed decreased proliferation at various doses
of either inhibitor. The increased MAP kinase activity we identified
after TAK-228 treatment suggests a compensatory mechanism that may render
these cells especially sensitive to treatment with both TORC1/2 and MEK
inhibitors. We will now investigate both drugs in vivo. Evidence of
activity in murine models will be necessary to provide a pre-clinical
rationale for combination therapy of these agents in aggressive PLGG.


