Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue factor targeted radionuclide therapy with 177Lu-FVIIai
inhibits tumor growth of human pancreatic cancer xenografts.


Introduction: Tissue factor (TF) is involved in cancer processes
responsible for aggressiveness and invasiveness and there is a
correlation between tumor TF expression, metastatic potential, and
patient outcome. The aim of the study was to develop a novel compound for
localized TF targeted radionuclide therapy based on Factor VII (FVII),
the natural ligand to TF. In the current study, we investigated the
biodistribution and therapeutic potential of 177Lu labeled active site
inhibited FVIIa (177Lu-FVIIai) for radionuclide therapy targeting TF in
an experimental mouse model of pancreatic cancer.

Methods: p-SCN-Bn-CHX-A’’-DTPA was conjugated to FVIIai followed by
radiolabeling with 177Lu (177Lu-CHX-A’’-DTPA-FVIIai). A pancreas
xenograft mouse model (BxPC3) was used to assess the therapeutic
potential of 177Lu-FVIIai. NMRI nude mice were injected subcutaneously
with BxPC3 cells. When tumors reached 50 mm3, the mice were randomized
into groups receiving 177Lu-FVIIai, FVIIai, or vehicle. 177Lu-FVIIai was
administered in doses of 15 MBq, 7.5 MBq or 2 x 7.5 MBq (n=8 mice/group).
Tumor growth was monitored by 3 weekly measurements. Ex vivo
biodistribution of 177Lu-FVIIai was studied in several organs at 1, 4,
24, 72 and 168 hours after injection. The in vivo biodistribution was
evaluated by SPECT/CT imaging. Furthermore, competition and dose
escalation experiments (1-30 MBq) were performed. Toxicity effects of the
treatment with 177Lu-FVIIai were evaluated by hematology.

Results: FVIIai was successfully radiolabeled with 177Lu with a high
specific activity of 10-25 GBq/µmol after EDTA scavenging and PD-10
purification. No difference in tumor growth was observed between the
FVIIai and vehicle groups. Mice receiving 15 MBq 177Lu-FVIIai had a
significantly reduced tumor growth from day 0 to day 19 compared with
mice from the control groups (425.5±44.8% versus 614.2±49.1%; p=0.02).
No significant difference in tumor growth was observed in the groups
receiving 7.5 MBq or 2 x 7.5 MBq compared with controls on day 19. There
was a significant increase in the survival of mice treated with 7.5 MBq
177Lu-FVIIai compared with the controls (p=0.007). Treatment with 15 and
2 x 7.5 MBq 177Lu-FVIIai did not influence survival. Ex vivo tumor uptake
of 177Lu-FVIIai was 1.16±0.04, 1.97±0.18, 1.95±0.07, 1.01±0.06,
0.31±0.02 percent injected dose per gram (%ID/g) at 1, 4, 24, 72 and 168
hours post-injection, respectively. Competition with unlabeled FVIIai 10
minutes before 177Lu-FVIIai injection significantly reduced tumor uptake
of 177Lu-FVIIai (from 2.5±0.16 %ID/g to 1.7±0.05 %ID/g; pResults:
FVIIai was successfully radiolabeled with 177Lu with a high specific
activity of 10-25 GBq/µmol after EDTA scavenging and PD-10 purification.
No difference in tumor growth was observed between the FVIIai and vehicle
groups. Mice receiving 15 MBq 177Lu-FVIIai had a significantly reduced
tumor growth from day 0 to day 19 compared with mice from the control
groups (425.5±44.8% versus 614.2±49.1%; p=0.02). No significant
difference in tumor growth was observed in the groups receiving 7.5 MBq
or 2 x 7.5 MBq compared with controls on day 19. There was a significant
increase in the survival of mice treated with 7.5 MBq 177Lu-FVIIai
compared with the controls (p=0.007). Treatment with 15 and 2 x 7.5 MBq
177Lu-FVIIai did not influence survival. Ex vivo tumor uptake of
177Lu-FVIIai was 1.16±0.04, 1.97±0.18, 1.95±0.07, 1.01±0.06,
0.31±0.02 percent injected dose per gram (%ID/g) at 1, 4, 24, 72 and 168
hours post-injection, respectively. Competition with unlabeled FVIIai 10
minutes before 177Lu-FVIIai injection significantly reduced tumor uptake
of 177Lu-FVIIai (from 2.5±0.16 %ID/g to 1.7±0.05 %ID/g; p<0.05). Tumor
uptake (%ID/g) of 177Lu-FVIIai was unchanged when varying the dose from
1-30 MBq. A transient decrease in leucocyte counts was observed for the
mice receiving 15 and 7.5 MBq 177Lu-FVIIai.

Conclusion: FVIIai was successfully radiolabeled with 177Lu. 177Lu-FVIIai
showed therapeutic potential in a mouse model of human pancreatic cancer.


