Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Variation in Merlin expression and its prognostic significance in
malignant pleural mesothelioma.


Introduction:

Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM) is an aggressive cancer with overall
survival (OS) of about 8 months. Prognostic biomarkers allowing for
biology-driven individualized therapies are lacking in MPM. Alterations
in a tumor suppressor gene NF-2 are seen in 20-40% of MPM. NF-2 encodes
for Merlin, which suppresses tumorigenesis by regulating pathways like
mTOR and Hippo. Merlin status had been proposed as a predictive biomarker
for treatment with the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibitor. The purpose
of our study is to examine differences in Merlin expression among
histologic subtypes of MPM and its prognostic impact on clinical outcome.

Materials and Method:

48 cases of MPM from 1993-2013 with available archival tissues were
identified. H/E stained sections were reviewed by a pathologist and
categorized into 3 histologic subtypes, namely epithelioid (E),
sarcomatoid (S) and biphasic (B). Immunohisochemistry-based Merlin
expression score from 0 to 3 were given to the samples, accounting for
both intensity and frequency of staining. Chart review was performed to
obtain clinical data. Kruskal-Wallis Test was used to compare mean Merlin
scores, and Logrank test was used to compare OS between low Merlin (LM,
48 cases of MPM from 1993-2013 with available archival tissues were
identified. H/E stained sections were reviewed by a pathologist and
categorized into 3 histologic subtypes, namely epithelioid (E),
sarcomatoid (S) and biphasic (B). Immunohisochemistry-based Merlin
expression score from 0 to 3 were given to the samples, accounting for
both intensity and frequency of staining. Chart review was performed to
obtain clinical data. Kruskal-Wallis Test was used to compare mean Merlin
scores, and Logrank test was used to compare OS between low Merlin (LM,
<3) and high Merlin (HM, 3) groups.

Results:

Mean age of patients was 66.75 years (HM 64.58, LM 68.92). Other
demographic profile (HM%, LM%) included male sex 89.5% (51, 49), current
or past smokers 66.6% (47, 53), current or past Asbestos exposure 71%
(35, 65), resectable disease 89% (51, 49), stages 3 or 4 disease 64% (56,
44), and 85% (56, 44) received surgery. Mean Merlin scores among 3
histologic types were different (Mean, Std. Dev: B 2.25, 0.48; E 2.74,
0.54; S 2.56, 0.53; p= 0.0037). Mean Merlin score of E component was
significantly higher than that of S component within B MPM (E 2.75, 0.45;
S 1.75, 0.68; pMean age of patients was 66.75 years (HM 64.58, LM 68.92).
Other demographic profile (HM%, LM%) included male sex 89.5% (51, 49),
current or past smokers 66.6% (47, 53), current or past Asbestos exposure
71% (35, 65), resectable disease 89% (51, 49), stages 3 or 4 disease 64%
(56, 44), and 85% (56, 44) received surgery. Mean Merlin scores among 3
histologic types were different (Mean, Std. Dev: B 2.25, 0.48; E 2.74,
0.54; S 2.56, 0.53; p= 0.0037). Mean Merlin score of E component was
significantly higher than that of S component within B MPM (E 2.75, 0.45;
S 1.75, 0.68; p<0.0001). Interestingly, mean Merlin score of S was
significantly higher than that of S component of B MPM (S 2.56, 0.53; B
1.75, 0.68; p=0.005) making S component of B MPM least Merlin expresser.
There was no significant difference in response rate to platinum and in
progression-free survival between LM and HM. Median OS (months) for LM
was 8.8 compared to 12.9 for HM (p=0.0262). Among different variables
analyzed (age, sex, smoking history, histology, and upfront treatment
modalities), age was associated with OS. After controlling for age, there
was no statistically significant difference in OS between LM and HM
(p=0.11).

Conclusion:

Merlin expression level is different among E, S and B MPMs. Moreover, it
is significantly lower in S component of B MPM than S. Its prognostic
ability appears to be confounded by the association with age in our
cohort. A larger study is needed to further explore the prognostic impact
of this biomarker.


