Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Semaphorin 3C has a possibility of a new prognostic marker in
colorectal cancer.


Background: Generally, Semaphorins are secretary or transmembrane-bound
molecules that act as axon guidance cues in the nervous system. Recent
research showed increased expression of semaphorin 3C correlates with
cancers that possess higher invasive and metastatic characteristics. For
example, in breast cancer, inhibition of semaphorin 3C reduces adhesion
and invasion. The aim of this study was to evaluate a possibility that
semaphorin 3C might be a new prognostic marker in colorectal cancer.

Material and methods: We used two cohorts. Cohort 1 was the 192 patients
with colorectal cancer resected surgically between 2009 and 2010. We used
GSE 14333 dataset as Cohort 2 which included 226 patients with the
colorectal cancer. In each cohorts, we divided the patients in to the two
groups i.e., high or low semaphorin 3C expression group using receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve based on the information of the
recurrence of colorectal cancer. Disease-free-survival (DFS) rates were
calculated using Kaplan-Meier methods. Differences between curves were
evaluated with the log-rank test.

Results: In the cohort 1, the DFS in the patients with higher expression
was worse than that in the patients with lower expression (P = 0.0467).
Semaphorin 3C has two probes (203788_s_at and 203789_s_at) in GSE14333.
In the cohort 2, using each two probe of semaphorin 3C, the DFS in the
patients with higher expression was worse than that of those patients
with lower expression (P = 0.0015 and P = 0.0003).

Conclusions: This study suggested that Semaphorin 3C might be a new
prognostic marker in colorectal cancer.


