Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of compound isolated from Beilschmiedia tsangii as
a liver cancer specific NRF2 inhibitor.


Drug resistance is the main cause of cancer recurrence and a major
obstacle to the success of anticancer therapy. NRF2, a pivotal
transcription factor regulates antioxidant response and detoxification,
has been shown to participate in the development of cancer drug
resistance. Functional suppression of NRF2 rendered cancer cell more
susceptible to anticancer treatments. Beilschmiedia tsangii Merr.
(Lauraceae) is a medium-sized evergreen tree. It has been reported that
Beilschmiedia extract showed a strong antioxidant activity. In
continuation of our bioactivity studies on this species, we tested the
effects of 23 compounds isolated from the B. tsangii on NRF2 activity. We
identified
rel-(7R,8R,7′R,8′R)-3,4,3′,4′-dimethylene-dioxy-5,5′-dimethoxy-7,
7′-epoxylignan (BT04) significantly inhibited NRF2 activity in liver
cancer cell (Huh7) with an IC50 value of 17 μM, but not in keratinocyte
(HacaT cell). By contrast, luteolin, a known NRF2 inhibitor, suppressed
NRF2 activity in both Huh7 cell and HacaT cell. Moreover, the mRNA level
of NRF2 target genes, NQO1 and HO1, were significantly decreased in Huh7
upon BT04 treatment, while those NRF2 target genes remained unchanged in
BT04-treated HacaT cell. A moderate cytotoxic effect of BT04 on Huh7 cell
was also observed. Accordingly, our result suggested that BT04 can
specifically inhibit NRF2 activity in liver cancer, which in turn
indicated that BT04 could be a potential adjuvant to improve
chemoresistance.


