Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PCNA-dependent cleavage and degradation of SDE2 regulates response
to replication stress.


Maintaining genomic integrity during DNA replication is essential for
cellular survival and for preventing tumorigenesis. Proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) functions as a processivity factor for DNA
replication, and posttranslational modification of PCNA plays a key role
in coordinating DNA repair against replication-blocking lesions by
providing a platform to recruit factors required for DNA repair and cell
cycle control. Here, we identify human SDE2 as a new genome surveillance
factor regulated by PCNA interaction. SDE2 contains an N-terminal
ubiquitin-like (UBL) fold, which is cleaved at a diglycine motif via a
PCNA-interacting peptide (PIP) box and deubiquitinating enzyme activity.
The cleaved SDE2 is required for negatively regulating ultraviolet
damage-inducible PCNA monoubiquitination and counteracting replication
stress. The cleaved SDE2 products need to be degraded by the CRL4CDT2
ubiquitin E3 ligase in a cell cycle- and DNA damage-dependent manner, and
failure to degrade SDE2 impairs S phase progression and cellular
survival. Collectively, this study uncovers a new role for CRL4CDT2 in
protecting genomic integrity against replication stress via regulated
proteolysis of PCNA-associated SDE2 and provides insights into how an
integrated UBL domain within linear polypeptide sequence controls protein
stability and function. Knowledge on such mechanism will be useful to
identify novel cancer therapeutic interventions exploiting deregulated
ubiquitin signaling and SDE2 activities in cancer.


