Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A microenvironment gene signature predicts poor outcome in
patients with luminal breast cancers subjected to local-regional
treatment.


Gene expression studies, mainly addressed at the tumor cell compartment
of breast cancers (BC) contributed to unravel the molecular heterogeneity
providing clinicians with new and reliable tools for therapeutic
planning. Despite many investigations have focused on genetic
abnormalities initiating and driving tumorigenesis, there is now evidence
that the cancer cell behavior depends not only on intrinsic features, but
also on the interactions with the microenvironment. However,
notwithstanding the interest in investigating tumor-stroma cross-talks,
the clinical relevance of subtype-specific molecular imprint of such
interactions is largely unexplored. As such, we attempted to clinically
and biologically validate the subtype-specific gene signatures derived
from an in vitro model recapitulating the interaction between BCs and
activated stromal cells. Gene expression signatures derived from luminal
(T47D, MCF7, ZR75.1), HER2+ (SkBr3+, BT474, MDA-MB-361) and basal-like
(MDA-MD-468, MDA-MB-231, BT20) cell lines treated by conditioned media
from normal or cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) showed common- and
subtype-specific pathways according to GSEA. In fact, interferon, IL-6,
IL-12 and IL-23 signaling, Toll Like Receptor pathway, pathways related
to inflammation and metabolism of carbohydrates were positively enriched
in HER2+ and luminal subtypes. Complement cascade and Tumor Necrosis
Factor pathways were positively enriched in basal and luminal tumors; no
common pathway was observed in HER2+ and basal subtypes. The association
between microenvironment signatures specific for luminal, HER2+ and basal
BC cell lines and disease-free survival was evaluated in silico on
published gene expression profiles (GEPs) from 2048 patients
homogeneously treated. BCs were classified as microenvironment-positive
(µENV+ve, with GEP suggesting stroma activation), or negative (µENV-ve)
by correlating tumor’s GEP with the respective subtype-specific
signature. Patients with luminal µENV+ve tumors had 2.5-fold higher risk
of developing distant metastases (HR=2.546; 95% Confidence Interval, Cl:
1.751-3.701, P=9.84E-07), while µENV status did not affect or was only
suggestive of metastases in women with HER2-enriched (HR=1.541; 95% Cl:
0.788-3.012, P=0.206) or basal tumors (HR=1.894; 95% Cl: 0.938-3.824;
P=0.0747), respectively. In luminal tumors, the µENV status maintained
its prognostic role (HR=2.098; CI: 1.214-3.624; P=0.00791) in
multivariable analysis including size, age and genomic grade index.
Validity of our in vitro model was also supported by biological endpoints
such as proliferation (MTT-assay) and migration/invasion
(Transwell-assay). In vitro-derived gene signatures trace a
subtype-specific interaction with CAFs and add independent information to
classical prognostic variables in women with luminal “microenvironment
sensitive” tumors.


