Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCL6 modulates the TP53 and STAT pathways in glioma.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) remains the most aggressive brain
malignancy with little improvement in prognosis or therapy for decades.
Recently, we identified BCL6, also known as ZBTB27, to be a novel
oncogene in GBM. In this study, we performed IHC analysis of 153 primary
human glioma specimens and 8 normal brain samples. BCL6 expression is
robustly elevated in tumor samples and positively correlated with glioma
pathological grade. High BCL6 expression strongly predicts a worse
prognosis of GBM patients. Depletion of BCL6 in human GBM cells reduced
the incorporation of BrdU, promoted the cellular senescence and inhibited
the growth of human GBM cells in vivo. Next, genome-wide occupancy of
BCL6 in GBM cells was characterized by ChIP-seq assay. Genomic regions
centered on BCL6 peaks are co-enriched with RNA-Pol II and flanked with
strong H3K27ac and H3K4me3 modifications. MYC and two long non-coding
RNAs MALAT1 and NEAT1 were identified as novel BCL6 targets in GBM.
Moreover, pathway enrichment analysis of BCL6 peak-associated genes
reveals a significant enrichment of JAK-STAT, TP53, ERBB and MAPK
pathways. We demostrated further that BCL6 represses the TP53 pathway and
promotes the JAK-STAT pathway activation in GBM cells. Together, our
findings uncover potential downstream targets and provide a better
understanding of BCL6 function in GBM.


