Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of high-fructose and standard diets in
methylnitrosourea (MNU)-induced ER+ mammary cancers: Altered
carcinogenesis, differential effects of metformin, and metabolomic
differences.


The MNU-induced model of ER+ mammary cancers in Sprague-Dawley rats has
routinely been employed in screening for chemopreventive agents. We
recently reported that metformin was ineffective in preventing mammary
cancers in rats on a standard diet (Thompson, et al, Cancer Prev. Res, 8,
231-9, 2015). In this study, we evaluated the carcinogenic response in
Vehicle-treated rats and rats receiving Metformin (150 mg/Kg BW/day) on
standard Teklad or isocaloric High-Fructose diets. In the first study,
rats were placed on Teklad or High-Fructose diet at 43 days of age. At
100 days of age, animals were administered a single dose of MNU. Animals
were administered Metformin or tamoxifen beginning 5 days later. Rats
were palpated weekly for mammary tumors and sacrificed at 300 days of
age. Body weights between groups were not different. Tumor multiplicity
and tumor weights were: Vehicle-Teklad,1.15 and 1.44g; Vehicle-
High-Fructose, 2.10 and 2.94g; Metformin-Teklad, 1.25 and 1.91g;
Metformin -High-Fructose, 1.00 and1.99g. Tamoxifen resulted in the
prevention of all tumors. High-Fructose alone resulted in a 2X increase
in tumor multiplicity (PThe MNU-induced model of ER+ mammary cancers in
Sprague-Dawley rats has routinely been employed in screening for
chemopreventive agents. We recently reported that metformin was
ineffective in preventing mammary cancers in rats on a standard diet
(Thompson, et al, Cancer Prev. Res, 8, 231-9, 2015). In this study, we
evaluated the carcinogenic response in Vehicle-treated rats and rats
receiving Metformin (150 mg/Kg BW/day) on standard Teklad or isocaloric
High-Fructose diets. In the first study, rats were placed on Teklad or
High-Fructose diet at 43 days of age. At 100 days of age, animals were
administered a single dose of MNU. Animals were administered Metformin or
tamoxifen beginning 5 days later. Rats were palpated weekly for mammary
tumors and sacrificed at 300 days of age. Body weights between groups
were not different. Tumor multiplicity and tumor weights were:
Vehicle-Teklad,1.15 and 1.44g; Vehicle- High-Fructose, 2.10 and 2.94g;
Metformin-Teklad, 1.25 and 1.91g; Metformin -High-Fructose, 1.00
and1.99g. Tamoxifen resulted in the prevention of all tumors.
High-Fructose alone resulted in a 2X increase in tumor multiplicity
(P<0.05) and tumor weights (PP0.05). In the second study, which parallels
the standard MNU model, rats were also placed on Teklad or High-Fructose
diet at 43 days of age. At 50 days of age, rats were administered a
single dose of MNU. Rats on High-Fructose diet were administered either
Vehicle or Metformin, while rats on Teklad diet were given only Vehicle;
beginning 5 days later. Rats were palpated weekly and sacrificed at 170
days of age. Body weights between groups were not different. Tumor
multiplicity and tumor weights were: Vehicle-High-Fructose, 6.00 and
7.74g; Metformin High-Fructose, 5.00 and 6.17g; and Vehicle-Teklad, 2.70
and 5.75g. As indicated, Vehicle-treated rats on High-Fructose diet had
twice the number of cancers as Vehicle-Teklad diet (P0.05). In the second
study, which parallels the standard MNU model, rats were also placed on
Teklad or High-Fructose diet at 43 days of age. At 50 days of age, rats
were administered a single dose of MNU. Rats on High-Fructose diet were
administered either Vehicle or Metformin, while rats on Teklad diet were
given only Vehicle; beginning 5 days later. Rats were palpated weekly and
sacrificed at 170 days of age. Body weights between groups were not
different. Tumor multiplicity and tumor weights were:
Vehicle-High-Fructose, 6.00 and 7.74g; Metformin High-Fructose, 5.00 and
6.17g; and Vehicle-Teklad, 2.70 and 5.75g. As indicated, Vehicle-treated
rats on High-Fructose diet had twice the number of cancers as
Vehicle-Teklad diet (P<0.05). Metformin had a minimal effect in rats on a
High-Fructose diet; unlike our previous results in rats ( receiving MNU
at 50 days of age) on Teklad or High-Fat diet where metformin increased
cancer multiplicity and cancer weights. Furthermore, we performed
metabolomic studies on both serum and cancers from animals on Teklad and
High-Fructose diets. It was observed (based on principal component
analysis) that serum from rats on High-Fructose and standard Teklad diet
were profoundly different. Furthermore, there appeared to be a metabolic
signature in rats bearing cancers. These and other metabolomic changes
will be presented. Supported by NCI contract number HHSN261201200021I,
Task Order HHSN26100005.


