Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Objective measurement and significance of VISTA (PD-1H) expression
in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


Introduction: VISTA (PD-1H) is a member of the B7 family of immune
co-regulatory molecules and has been proposed as a novel anti-cancer
immunotherapy target. The intra- and extracellular domains of VISTA show
homology to PD-1 and PD-L1, respectively, suggesting a role in anti-tumor
immune evasion. The expression of VISTA, its association with PD-1 axis
components and biological role in human NSCLC are unknown.

Methods: Using multiplex quantitative immunofluorescence (QIF), we
simultaneously measured the levels of VISTA (clone D1L2G, CST), PD-L1
(clone 405.9A11, CST) and PD-1 (clone EH33, CST) protein in 732 stage
I-IV NSCLCs from 3 retrospective collections represented in tissue
microarray format (cohort #1 [n=297, Yale], cohort #2 [n=329, Greece];
and cohort #3 [n=106, Yale]). To evaluate the tumor tissue distribution,
VISTA was also selectively measured in cytokeratin+ tumor cells, CD3+
T-cells, CD4+ T-helper cells, CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells and CD20+
B-lymphocytes. Associations between the marker levels,
clinico-pathological-molecular variables and survival were studied.

Results: VISTA protein was detected in all NSCLCs, showed a membranous
staining pattern and was localized predominantly in the tumor cells in
27.4% of cases; and in the stromal compartment in 98.5%. Although VISTA
was detected in all major tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) subsets,
the signal was higher in CD20+ B-cells than in CD3+ T-lymphocytes
(PResults: VISTA protein was detected in all NSCLCs, showed a membranous
staining pattern and was localized predominantly in the tumor cells in
27.4% of cases; and in the stromal compartment in 98.5%. Although VISTA
was detected in all major tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) subsets,
the signal was higher in CD20+ B-cells than in CD3+ T-lymphocytes
(P<0.05); and in CD4+ helper than in CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells (PResults:
VISTA protein was detected in all NSCLCs, showed a membranous staining
pattern and was localized predominantly in the tumor cells in 27.4% of
cases; and in the stromal compartment in 98.5%. Although VISTA was
detected in all major tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) subsets, the
signal was higher in CD20+ B-cells than in CD3+ T-lymphocytes (P<0.05);
and in CD4+ helper than in CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells (P<0.001). Using the
median score as cut point, elevated VISTA in tumor and/or stromal cells
was significantly associated with high PD-L1, PD-1 protein expression and
increased CD8+TILs in the cohorts (PResults: VISTA protein was detected
in all NSCLCs, showed a membranous staining pattern and was localized
predominantly in the tumor cells in 27.4% of cases; and in the stromal
compartment in 98.5%. Although VISTA was detected in all major tumor
infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) subsets, the signal was higher in CD20+
B-cells than in CD3+ T-lymphocytes (P<0.05); and in CD4+ helper than in
CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells (P<0.001). Using the median score as cut point,
elevated VISTA in tumor and/or stromal cells was significantly associated
with high PD-L1, PD-1 protein expression and increased CD8+TILs in the
cohorts (P<0.001 - PResults: VISTA protein was detected in all NSCLCs,
showed a membranous staining pattern and was localized predominantly in
the tumor cells in 27.4% of cases; and in the stromal compartment in
98.5%. Although VISTA was detected in all major tumor infiltrating
lymphocyte (TIL) subsets, the signal was higher in CD20+ B-cells than in
CD3+ T-lymphocytes (P<0.05); and in CD4+ helper than in CD8+ cytotoxic
T-cells (P<0.001). Using the median score as cut point, elevated VISTA in
tumor and/or stromal cells was significantly associated with high PD-L1,
PD-1 protein expression and increased CD8+TILs in the cohorts (P<0.001 -
P<0.05). No consistent association between VISTA levels and age, gender,
smoking status, specific NSCLC histology, stage, EGFR/KRAS mutations and
overall survival was found.

Conclusion: VISTA is expressed in the majority of NSCLCs and shows
differential distribution in tumor/stromal cells and TIL subsets,
suggesting a complex function as a ligand and receptor. Elevated
expression of VISTA in NSCLC is associated with increased PD-1 axis
targets and cytotoxic T-cell density, indicating its possible modulation
by pro-inflammatory signals. Our results support VISTA as a candidate
target for anti-cancer immunotherapy in NSCLC alone or in combination
with PD-1 axis blockers.


