Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cell monitoring, isolation, and culture from a
patient with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer for drug screening
and creation of a patient-derived xenograft model.


Background. Enumeration, phenotyping and single cell genomics of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) provide three types of information to
guide cancer therapy. In some instances, a fourth type is possible:
functional analysis in vitro, or in in vivo patient-derived xenografts
(PDXs). We used a density-based rare cell separation and analysis system
to collect CTCs from the blood of a patient with metastatic
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) for in vitro culture and
high-throughput drug screening and to generate a PDX model.

Methods: The patient was enrolled in the ITOMIC-001 study (University of
Washington) and after informed consent, CTCs were evaluated prior to
initial cisplatin treatment and tracked longitudinally using the AccuCyte
â€“ CyteFinder system (RareCyte). Samples containing high numbers of CTCs
were placed into 3 different culture media. Cells grown in culture were
tested against a panel of anti-cancer drugs and injected into mice to
form a PDX model.

Results: Nine CTC evaluations were performed over 9.5 months. CTCs were
verified by expression of epithelial (cytokeratin and/or EpCAM) and
nuclear stains without CD45 expression. After initial treatment with
cisplatin, the CTC count per 7.5 mL rose from 4 to 19 cells at 3 months,
consistent with the lack of a clinical response, and decreased after LE
011 (CDK4/6 inhibitor) and then glembatumumab vedotin (anti-gpNMB) to 8
and 4 cells at 5 and 7 months respectively. At 9 months the CTC count
rose to > 13,000 and 5 days later to > 80,000 shortly before her death.
At autopsy there was massive infiltration of the liver and pulmonary
vasculature by tumor cells. Cultures in all media showed initial growth,
but only one (RPMI + 10% serum) was sustained, forming semi-adherent 3D
tumor clusters. 6 million cells were harvested and a drug screen using
160 anti-cancer agents was performed. The CTC line showed sensitivity to
several agents. Cells were also injected into the mammary fat pad of
immunodeficient mice. In at least one mouse, macroscopic tumors were
observed. The CTC cell line has grown continually in culture for over a
year. Aliquots of this cell line have been frozen and thawed with no
noticeable effect on cell growth.

Conclusions: Using a density-based rare cell collection system, we have
established a CTC cell line from a TNBC patient with extremely high CTC
counts. The line was used to perform a screen for agents active against
the tumor cells and to create a PDX model. As in vitro techniques
advance, smaller number of CTCs may be effectively cultured and thus
allow this approach to be used in real time to find effective drug
regiments for individualized cancer therapy.


