Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lurbinectedin reverses platinum dependent IRF1 overexpression and
nuclear localization, partially responsible for resistance to platinum
drugs in ovarian cancer.


Lurbinectedin (PM1183) is a new synthetic compound from the
tetrahydroisoquinoline family, which has demonstrated a strong
antiproliferative activity against a panel of human tumor models in
preclinical assays and is currently being evaluated in phase III clinical
trials in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer and small cell lung cancer.
Lurbinectedin binds to DNA, inhibits trans-activated transcription,
induces the degradation of elongating RNA Pol II and fools nucleotide
excision repair to produce dsDNA breaks that need to be repaired mainly
by homologous recombination (HR)1,2. Nearly 70% of patients diagnosed
with ovarian cancer are in advanced stage, and the vast majority of them
will eventually relapse after a primary cytoreductive surgery and several
cycles of standard adjuvant chemotherapy including a platinum drug and a
taxane. After a period of treatment with platinum drugs, patients will
finally develop resistance, usually mediated by mechanisms such as drug
detoxification or efflux and enhanced DNA repair. IRF-1 transcription
factor expression has been shown to be up-regulated by cisplatin (CDDP)
in ovarian cancer cells and might be limiting the response to the drug,
likely by inhibiting cell proliferation3. Here we took advantage of the
A2780/A2780cis human ovarian cancer cell lines, the second being a
cisplatin resistant derivative, to investigate the role of IRF1 in the
response of human ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin and lurbinectedin.
A2780cis cells are, indeed, more resistant to cisplatin that their
parental cell line but they do not differ in their resistance to
lurbinectedin. Basal IRF-1 protein levels were actually higher in
A2780cis cells than in their parental cell line, contributing to their
resistance to cisplatin. Furthermore, cisplatin treatment induced the
overexpression and nuclear localization of IRF-1 both, in A2780 and
A2780cis cell lines. Contrarily, lurbinectedin did not induce the
overexpression of IRF-1 neither in A2780 nor in A2780cis, explaining why
this latter cell line is not resistant to the compound. Furthermore,
lurbinectedin co-treatment with cisplatin reduced the expression of IRF-1
in A2780 and, more importantly, in A2780cis cells, explaining the
synergism the combination has on these tumor cell lines. Thus,
lurbinectedin not only did not activate the same mechanisms of resistance
as cisplatin in ovarian cancer cells, but even reversed the resistance of
these resistant cells to platinum drugs. 1 Santamaría Nuñez et al,
2016. Mol Cancer Ther 15(10):2399-2412 2 Romano et al, 2013. Int J
Cancer. 2013 Nov;133(9):2024-33 3 Pavan et al, 2013. Eur J Cancer
49(4):964-973


