Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiVax: an innovative cancer neoantigen prediction system.


T cell epitopes bearing tumor-specific mutations discovered using next
generation sequencing stimulate T cell-mediated processes that lead to
tumor regression. Although neoantigen prediction using computational
methods rapidly identifies epitope candidates in the mutanome, a large
proportion prove to be non-immunogenic. Innovative computational tools
validated for infectious disease can be applied to enhance design of
personalized cancer immunotherapies by classification of predicted
epitopes according to potential for mounting a tumor-specific response.
We developed the JanusMatrix algorithm that parses query sequences into
MHC-facing and T cell receptor (TCR)-facing sequences and screens
sequence databases to identify MHC ligands that share TCR faces with
host-related proteins. A database of human protein sequences is available
to identify tumor-specific epitopes that may reduce anti-tumor activity
by sequences that activate regulatory T cells (Tregs) trained in the
thymus on self-antigens. Similarly, tumor-specific epitope candidates are
screened using databases composed of human commensal- or pathogen-derived
sequences to identify epitopes that, respectively, may detrimentally or
beneficially cross-react with T cells raised over the course of an
individualâ€™s immune history. We conducted retrospective analyses of
cancer vaccine efficacy studies performed in mice [Kreiter et al. 2015
Nature 520, 692-696] showing that mutanome-directed vaccines effective at
preventing tumor growth contained higher numbers of class I and II MHC
neo-epitopes and had lower potential to cross-react with other murine
proteins, as identified by the MiVax platform. Likewise, an evaluation of
mutanomes derived from non-small cell lung cancer patients [Rizvi et al.
2014 Science 348, 124-128] revealed that improved clinical outcomes were
observed in patients with mutanomes enriched in class I MHC neo-epitopes
with TCR faces distinct from other self-epitopes. While retrospective in
nature, the suite of tools used for these analyses have been extensively
validated in prospective vaccine studies for infectious disease. Removal
of Treg epitopes identified by JanusMatrix has led to the development of
a novel H7N9 influenza vaccine scheduled for Phase I clinical trial.
These results highlight the benefits of using in silico tools for the
selection of high-value neoantigen candidates and how they can improve
the design and efficacy of cancer vaccines. Neoantigens with low Treg
activation potential may then be used to support development of
personalized therapies including vaccination and in vitro expansion of
tumor infiltrating lymphocytes for adoptive cell transfer.


