Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Measuring gene expression at the tumor microenvironment: A
comparison between nCounter PanCancer Immune Profiling Panel and Oncomine
Immune Response Research Assay.


The tumor microenvironment, especially infiltrating T lymphocytes and
inflammatory molecules, is believed to be highly relevant to the
tumorâ€™s sensitivity to cancer checkpoint blockade therapy. At the same
time, the exact markers that are predictive of response for each
therapeutic agent are still the subject of active investigations. To
address the need for better understanding of the effect of different T
cell subsets, antigen presentation, and tumor killing, gene expression
profiling presents an attractive means to simultaneously evaluate the
tumor microenvironment and cancer cells. In this study we compare the
results and performance of the nCounter PanCancer Immune Profiling Panel
and the Oncomine Immune Response Research Assay, both of which are
designed to measure the expression of genes indicative of an immune
response and potential immune-editing activities by tumor cells. The
nCounter panel detects gene expression by counting unique probes that
hybridize target mRNA, while the Oncomine panel employs NGS to sequence
and count reads derived from the targets. While both panels are designed
to work with FFPE samples, The nCounter panel expects 100 ng of
unamplified RNA, while the Oncomine panel requires only 10 ng total RNA
with its AmpliSeq technology. The two panels share 254 common genes,
which constitute the basis for this comparison. Across 12 cancer samples
(breast, H&N, melanoma, NSCLC, and RCC), results show that the Oncomine
panel offers 20% higher dynamic range, thereby providing more robust
readouts about the differences among samples. More importantly, with
virtually no background noise, the underlying NGS technology provides an
absolute zero readout for non-expressing genes which significantly
improves the sensitivity for detecting low expressing genes, as their
presence can be confirmed by as few as two reads. The two technologies
show moderate correlation (R ~ 0.7), with the Oncomine panel more
strongly correlating with qPCR (R ~ 0.9). Finally, when clustered using
all genes on the panel, only the Oncomine panel provides clear
stratification of cancer types, thus allowing the panel to be used for
tissue type confirmation in addition to evaluating the immune response.


