Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Notch1 and Numb in small cell lung cancer.


Background: Notch signaling plays an important role in tumorigenesis.
Numb represses intracellular Notch signaling. Previous studies have
demonstrated that Notch signaling suppresses the proliferation of small
cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines. However, in SCLC, the association
between Notch1 and Numb expression and clinicopathological factors or
prognosis has remained unclear. In this study, we evaluated the
expression of Notch1 and Numb in SCLC.

Methods: We immunohistochemically assessed 125 SCLCs that were surgically
resected at 16 institutions participating in either the Hokkaido Lung
Cancer Clinical Study Group Trial (HOT) or the Fukushima Investigative
Group for Healing Thoracic Malignancy (FIGHT) between 2003 and 2013.
Correlations between Notch1 or Numb expression and various
clinicopathological features were evaluated.

Results: Notch1 expression was associated with ECOG performance status.
Numb expression was associated with age, sex, and pathological histology
(SCLC or Combined SCLC). Analysis of cellular biological expression did
not demonstrate a significant correlation between the expression of
Notch1 and of Numb. Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that high
Notch1 expression was an independent favorable prognostic factor for SCLC
(hazard ratio = 0.503, P = 0.023).

Conclusions: We demonstrate that Notch1 expression, but not Numb, is
associated with prognosis in SCLC and may provide a novel prognostic
marker of SCLC.


