Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SerRS is a key inhibitor of VEGFA through both transcriptional and
translational controls.


Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) is the most important
mediator of angiogenesis and a major target for cancer therapy. Recent
studies from our lab revealed that seryl-tRNA synthetase (SerRS), by
counteracting transcription factor c-Myc in the nucleus, is the crucial
transcriptional repressor of VEGFA and a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis
(1,2). Here we report that SerRS controls the expression of VEGFA not
only in the nucleus but also in the cytoplasm through mediating its
translational readthrough. Translational read-through of the VEGFA mRNA
generates a novel isoform called VEGF-Ax that, compared with the
non-readthrough isoform VEGF165, has a 22-amino acid C-terminal extension
and much weakened angiogenic activity (3,4). Interestingly, serine was
identified as the amino acid inserted in the place of the UGA stop codon
during the read-through (3). In unpublished work, wWe findound that SerRS
can bind to the 3â€™UTR region of the VEGFA mRNA. The binding anchors
SerRS to charge serine onto tRNASec (the tRNA for the 21st amino acid
selenocysteine that decodes the UGA stop codon), while preventing the
charged serine from being modified into selenocysteine. SerRS binding
also blocks the release factors (eRFs) from terminating translation at
the stop codon. Therefore, SerRS is the key mediator of the translational
readthrough that generates VEGF-Ax. Collectively, we have established
that a member of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase family plays a critical
role in regulating VEGF and angiogenesis through both transcriptional and
translational controls.

References

1. Xu X, Shi Y, Zhang HM, Swindell EC, Marshall AG, Guo M, Kishi S, Yang
XL*. Unique domain appended to vertebrate tRNA synthetase is essential
for vascular development. Nat Commun. 2012 Feb 21;3:681.

2. Shi Y, Xu X, Zhang Q, Fu G, Mo Z, Wang GS, Kishi S, Yang XL*. tRNA
synthetase counteracts c-Myc to develop functional vasculature. Elife.
2014 Jun 17;3:e02349.

3. Eswarappa SM, Potdar AA, Koch WJ, Fan Y, Vasu K, Lindner D, Willard B,
Graham LM, DiCorleto PE, Fox PL. Programmed translational readthrough
generates antiangiogenic VEGF-Ax. Cell. 2014 Jun 19;157(7):1605-18.

4. Xin H, Zhong C, Nudleman E, Ferrara N. Evidence for Pro-angiogenic
Functions of VEGF-Ax. Cell. 2016 Sep 22;167(1):275-284.


