Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation enhances the intracellular delivery of anti-MGMT
morpholino oligonucleotides (AMONs) to enhance the cytotoxicity of
chemo-radiation in cancer cells.


Background: This study evaluates the use of a sub-lethal dose of ionizing
radiation to guide and enhance the intracellular delivery of morpholino
antisense nucleotides designed to block O6-methylguanine DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) to enhance the cytotoxicity of chemo-radiation
therapy (CRT). MGMT is a DNA repair enzyme and its expression is a
well-known mechanism for resistance to CRT in glioblastoma. Epigenetic
silencing of this enzyme by promotor methylation is associated with
better response and clinically relevant survival benefits after CRT. We
designed anti-MGMT morpholino oligonucleotides (AMON) using the stable
vivo-morphalinos backbone. Intracellular delivery of morpholinos,
particularly in a manner that could be clinically feasible, continues to
be a major challenge. We use sublethal ionizing radiation to enhance the
delivery of AMON to transiently reduced MGMT protein expression. We
previously demonstrated that sublethal ionizing radiation enhances the
delivery of AMONs to reduce MGMT expression in human cancer cells (T98G
glioma and H460 and A549 non-small cell lung cancer cell lines) in vitro
as well as the targeted knockdown of MGMT with systemically administered
AMONsin pre-irradiated tumors. We now test whether blocking MGMT will
enhance the cytotoxicity of CRT, and investigate the mechanism by which
radiation permits cellular uptake of AMONs.

Methods: MGMT expressing, human T98G glioblastoma cells were used for all
in-vitro studies. AMONs and non-specific fluorescent tagged control
morpholinos were synthesized and purchased from Gene Tools, LLC
(Philomath, OR, USA). High-resolution widefield microscopy with image
deconvolution was performed to confirm the intracellular delivery. Cells
were exposed to 1 Gy radiation; 24 hrs post radiation cells were treated
with AMONs. Cells were then exposed to temozolomide (75 or 150 Î¼g/mL) on
day 3. Lysates were obtained on days 4 and 7. Expression of cellular MGMT
protein, apoptosis markers, and key endocytosis proteins were
characterized using immunoblotting.

Results: Our results demonstrate that MGMT silencing using a single dose
of AMONs delivered with sublethal dose of radiation increased apoptosis
by 50% and reduces cell viability by 50% at one and two days after
therapy. Further, we demonstrate an increase in caveolin 1, clathrin and
dynamin expression after radiation exposure.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that blocking AMONs can enhance the
cytotoxicity of CRT. Dynamin mediated endocytosis appears to play a key
role in this enhanced cellular update of antisense nucleotides after a
sublethal dose of radiation. Since radiation is already part of standard
of care cancer therapy, the use of radiation to guide the delivery of
systemically administered anti-sense nucleotides is a novel strategy to
target key tumor associated proteins for therapeutic benefit key.


