Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the tri-snRNP complex for triple-negative breast cancer
therapy.


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) account for ~15% of all breast
cancers and the majority of breast cancers in women carrying a BRCA1
germline mutation. Due to the inadequacy of existing treatment, here we
sought to identify shared genetic dependencies across different TNBC cell
lines with the ultimate goal of uncovering novel therapeutic targets. To
this end, we performed a targeted siRNA lethality screen across 11 human
breast cell lines focusing on 154 genes, which we previously identified
as selectively essential to a genetically-defined TNBC progenitor cell
line (BPLER) relative to a myoepithelial-like isogenic cell line (HMLER).
Thirty genes scored as recurrently and selectively required for survival
of progenitor-like (or basal-A) TNBC lines compared to differentiated
cell lines. Genes for proteins involved in RNA splicing were prominent
shared dependencies among basal-A TNBC cell lines. Of particular note
were those associated with the U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP complex, including
PRPF8 and PRPF38A. Transcriptome-wide RNA-seq analysis of the knockdown
of either led to widespread intronic retention, expression of immune
system genes and aberrant splicing of transcripts involved in protein
translation, proteasome function, mitosis and apoptosis, including the
TNBC dependency gene MCL1. As the proteasome and mitosis are also
established TNBC vulnerabilities, we have identified specific classes of
transcripts that are both particularly susceptible to perturbation of
tri-snRNP activity and selectively essential for TNBC, making the
tri-snRNP complex an attractive target for downstream drug development.


