Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel hydrocarbon stapled peptide inhibitors suppresses β-catenin
dependent cancer growth and immunomodulates colorectal tumors.


Mutations in several components of the canonical Wnt pathway function as
drivers in a range of common solid tumor cancers, including about 90% of
sporadic colorectal cancers (CRCs), the third most common cancer in the
US. In particular, activation of β-catenin (β-cat), a key Wnt signaling
component, can initiate tumorigenesis in the intestine and promote cancer
stem cell metastasis6,7. As such, targeting the Wnt pathway is an
attractive approach to the development of cancer therapeutics. However,
Wnt inhibitors tested to date, including those that disrupt β-cat
activity, have either had limited efficacy or unacceptable side effect
profiles1. Here, we developed a potent and robust, selective lead
compound targeting oncogenic Wnt activity by disrupting the highly
specific interaction of β-cat with its co-activators BCL9/B9L, which has
been shown to abrogate transactivation. By using hydrocarbon stapled
peptide technology and an acutely sensitive high throughput biochemical
screening assay, we have identified several promising peptides that
possess a strong pharmacokinetic profile. These peptides (i) exhibit
robust activity in mouse models; (ii) inhibit cancer cell proliferation,
metastasis, and stem cell progression; and (iii) modulate the immune
microenvironment, demonstrating the feasibility of such peptide
development and selection. Synergy is demonstrated between the stapled
peptides and anti-PD1 antibodies, which has significant implications for
combination therapy with commercial immune checkpoint blockers that have
become standard of care for second-line melanoma treatment. These
peptides represent a promising new potential therapeutic class for
patients with CRC, for which traditional chemotherapy and targeted
inhibitors have had limited therapeutic success.


