Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the RON kinase in the regulation of the antitumor immune
response in pancreatic cancer.


RON is a cell-surface receptor for the macrophage-stimulating protein
expressed in tissue-resident macrophages and overexpressed in multiple
epithelial neoplasms including pancreatic cancer. Our laboratory recently
found that RON serves to mediate pancreatic duct carcinogenesis initiated
by KRAS. We demonstrated that RON overexpression in the pancreas results
in more rapid local and metastatic progression ultimately associated with
decreased survival. We also discovered profound changes in the
immunophenotype within the tumor microenvironment associated with RON
expression. We notably established that RON expression drives the
polarization of tumor-associated macrophages into an alternative,
pro-tumorigenic state. We hypothesize that these unique activities help
to shape the immunosuppressive milieu of the pancreatic cancer
microenvironment and that RON directed therapy has the potential to serve
as a novel immunomodulatory strategy in this disease. The aim of this
work is to define how RON signaling contributes to shaping the pancreatic
cancer microenvironment. In order to further interrogate the role of RON
during pancreatic carcinogenesis, we bred kinase-dead RON mice (KD) to
Pdx1-cre/LSL-KRASG12D mice. We observed a significant delay in the onset
of pancreatic neoplasia and a significant decrease in tumor weight. The
absence of functional RON kinase markedly reduced trafficking of CD11b+
cells to the pancreas and immunophenotyping in tumors showed a clear
reduction of alternatively polarized macrophages when compared to RON
overexpression or KRAS mutation alone. Because RON is expressed in both
epithelial and stromal cell populations, we further sought to dissect the
relevance of RON function to tumor growth within these cellular
compartments. We performed orthotopic injections of organo√Ød-3D cells
derived from tumors of KPC mice (LSL-KrasG12D/+; LSL-Trp53R172H/+;
Pdx-1-Cre). These cells were injected in wild type (WT) or RON KD mice.
Preliminary results show that tumor growth is impaired in KD mice,
suggesting that RON activity in the host microenvironment influence tumor
growth. In order to identify all immune populations regulated by RON, we
will conduct an exhaustive immunophenotyping of murine pancreatic tumors.
A transcriptomic analysis will then be conducted on selected cell
populations to better define the molecular mechanisms associated with the
RON regulation. Finally, given the effect of RON signaling on macrophage
polarization, we will also dissect the effects of RON signaling from bone
marrow derived myeloid cells versus resident tissue macrophages.
Preliminary results and future experiments will significantly narrow the
gap in our understanding of how RON signaling contributes to shaping the
pancreatic cancer chimera and therefore how RON-directed therapies could
be most successfully utilized to the benefit of those afflicted with this
most deadly disease


