Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the breast cancer resistance protein BCRP in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


Introduction: The breast cancer resistance protein BCRP, encoded by
ABCG2, is a member of the ABC transporter family and is well-known for
its contribution to multi-drug resistance in cancer. Although BCRP
expression is altered in various cancer types, its role and function in
cancer, independent from drug efflux, remains largely elusive. In this
study, we aimed to elucidate regulatory mechanisms of ABCG2 expression
and its biological relevance in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC)
as well as associations with response to sunitinib treatment in patients
with metastatic ccRCC.

Experimental Procedures: Data from the ccRCC cohort of The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) was used to assess ABCG2 mRNA expression (n=463), DNA
methylation (n=288) and genetic variants present in tumor tissue (n=326)
within the ABCG2 gene region. An independent ccRCC cohort of 64 patients
was used for the analysis of ABCG2 mRNA and protein expression by TaqMan
quantitative real time PCR or immunohistochemical staining of TMAs,
respectively, and for genotyping of 34 variants in the ABCG2 gene by
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. The influence of miRNAs on ABCG2 expression
was investigated in the second cohort and validated in in vitro cell
culture experiments performed in the renal cancer cell line A498 to
confirm the interaction of selected miRNAs with the ABCG2 3’UTR. ABCG2
mRNA data and treatment information of a third ccRCC cohort was used to
elucidate potential links of ABCG2 with sunitinib response.

Results: In the TCGA cohort low ABCG2 mRNA expression was significantly
associated with clinicopathological features (T: P=4.79e-11, N:
P=9.76e-04, M: P=1.28e-06, G: P=6.61e-15 and tumor necrosis: P=9.76e-04)
and with inferior patient survival (HR=0.22; 95%CI: 0.15-0.32;
P[logrank]Results: In the TCGA cohort low ABCG2 mRNA expression was
significantly associated with clinicopathological features (T:
P=4.79e-11, N: P=9.76e-04, M: P=1.28e-06, G: P=6.61e-15 and tumor
necrosis: P=9.76e-04) and with inferior patient survival (HR=0.22; 95%CI:
0.15-0.32; P[logrank]<10e-14). DNA methylation levels within the ABCG2
gene were low and hardly variable in ccRCC patients. Somatic variants
were only found in a minority of patients and together with genetic
variants had only a moderate influence on ABCG2 expression and patient
survival. The link between ABCG2 expression with survival could be
confirmed in the second ccRCC cohort. The investigated variants did not
significantly affect ABCG2 expression on mRNA or protein level.
miR-212-3p and miR-132-3p were identified to be linked to ABCG2 protein
expression in ccRCC patients of the second cohort. The interaction of
these miRNAs with the ABCG2 3’UTR was confirmed in in vitro cell
culture experiments by reporter gene assays. Analysis of a potential
association of ABCG2 expression with sunitinib response revealed a better
outcome for patients with high ABCG2 levels.

Conclusion: In this study, we found that higher ABCG2 expression
contributes to longer survival in ccRCC patients and better response to
sunitinib treatment. Whereas genetic variants had only a minor impact on
ABCG2 variability in ccRCC, epigenetic regulation by miRNAs, in
particular miR-212-3p and miR-132-3p, contributed to aberrant ABCG2
expression.


