Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The influence of cancer on working poor and working non-poor
cancer survivorsâ€™ work productivity, employment and quality of life.


Employment issues are cited as one of the most common unmet psychosocial
needs of cancer survivors; specifically, patients indicate they want more
information on how to navigate working during their illness, the return
to work process and how to manage the immediate and long-term effects on
job productivity. Yet, most oncology care providers feel limited in their
ability to address this topic with patients, citing minimal guidance,
limited access to resources they feel clients need to achieve
work-related goals, and concerns regarding their knowledge of how cancer
may impact work. Likewise, supervisors of employees diagnosed with cancer
are ill-prepared to manage the needs of cancer survivors beyond the
standard referral to human resources. One limitation of the existing
research on cancer and employment is that most studies have only examined
these issues among higher income and more educated cancer survivors. The
employment experiences of low-wage and less educated cancer survivors
have been understudied. This is a significant gap in the research on
cancer survivorship and work given the massive growth of low-wage jobs in
the US since the 2008 Great Recession. The employment circumstances are
significantly different for workers in low-wage jobs than they are for
other workers. Thus, the effects of cancer on the work productivity of
working poor and working non-poor may vary and consequently may have
different effects on long-term employment and quality of life for cancer
survivors.

This study addresses this gap in the cancer survivorship literature by
examining whether there is variation in the effects of cancer on the work
productivity of working poor and working non-poor cancer survivors and
its radiating effects on employment and the quality of life of cancer
survivors. Using data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)
and the MEPS Cancer Survivorship Supplement, this secondary data analysis
will study cancer survivors who were employed at the time of their cancer
diagnosis, comparing the effects of cancer on work productivity among
working poor and working non-poor respondents and determining whether
differences in work productivity influence long-term employment and
quality of life. Preliminary results indicate that a higher percentage of
working poor cancer survivors were less productive at work due to cancer
and reported lower current employment rates and quality of life
indicators in comparison to working non-poor survivors. Study results
could help oncology medical teams, supervisors, and human resources
professionals assist working cancer survivors during this transition
period in their lives.


