Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-symptomatic detection and early treatment of mammary cancer
with anti-PD-L1 in a mouse mode.


Cancer kills ~8M people/year and the WHO predicts an epidemic of cancer
in the developing world over the next 20 years due to increased
longevity. Development of a simple method to detect and treat cancer
early could be a solution to this challenge. Here we test this approach
in principle in a transgenic mouse mammary tumor model by immunosignature
(IMS) diagnostics. IMSs are profiles of antibodies in the blood displayed
on a high density peptide array. As previous published data showed, the
IMS can distinguish different diseases based on the disease specific
antibody profile in the patient, including different cancers and
infectious diseases. According to the immune surveillance theory, the
immune system, including the humoral immune response, starts to interact
with cancer cells as soon as they are transformed. First, we tested if
the IMS is sensitive enough to detect the antibody profile change caused
by the early tumor development in the FVB-NeuN (MMTVneu/202Mul/J) mammary
cancer model. In the FVB-NeuN model, the MMTV promoter activates the wild
type rat ERBB2 gene in mammary cells, and every mammary cell potentially
can convert into a cancer cell. The transition from normal mammary glands
to hyperplasia of FVB-NeuN in mouse starts at 8.6 to 15 weeks after
birth. The mice develop the first palpable tumor in one of the ten
mammary glands by 19-45 weeks of age with an average age of 32Â±1.2 weeks
in our hands. We collected serum every 4 weeks from the FVB-NeuN mice and
the wild type FVB mice for the IMS analysis. The IMS can distinguish the
FVB-NeuN mouse from the age matched wild type FVB mouse as early as 12
weeks (Stage-1) before the onset of the first palpable tumor. We also
analyzed the IMSs from the Stage-2 (8 weeks before the palpable tumor and
so on) to Stage 4. Different IMS of each stage has only partial overlap
with the other stages. The cross-stage prediction analysis showed the
accuracy of the cancer detection by using different IMS is from 75% to
93%. Second, we determined if early treatment at the time of diagnosis
with the checkpoint blockade, anti-PD-L1, would inhibit the tumor growth.
A course of 3 injections at the time of diagnosis significantly retarded
tumor growth relative to untreated controls. The early treatment elicited
long-term protection which could restrict the tumor growth even four
months after the treatment. The treated mice presented a specific IMS at
28 days post treatment and 35 days post the first palpable tumor,
compared to the untreated mice. This indicates that the early treatment
elicited an anti-tumor immune response that could inhibit tumor growth.
This preliminary experiment suggests that early diagnosis combined with
systemic treatment might be a method to control or eliminate cancer.


