Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a selective MKLP2/KIF20A inhibitor with high
in-vivo antitumor activity.


Mitotic kinesins are essential regulators of cancer cell replication and
migration. The mitotic kinesin MKLP2/KIF20A, a member of the kinesin-6
family, plays an essential role during cytokinesis and was identified as
a potential new target for cancer chemotherapy1. We have previously
identified Paprotrain, a new synthetic compound, as the first selective
MKLP2 inhibitor2. Recently, we obtained Paprotrain analogues with higher
potency on MKLP23. Herein we describe the identification and
characterization of BKS0349, a new potent analogue of Paprotrain.

BKS0349 compound is 10 times more potent than paprotain on MKLP2
inhibition and has shown an even more restricted specificity profile when
tested on a large set of kinases. In-vitro this compound is highly
cytotoxic on a wide panel of human cancer cell lines (IC50 ranged 10-70
nM, which corresponds to 1000 fold improvement of paprotrain potency)
while no toxicity is observed on human normal cells such as peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and primary hepatocytes (IC50 >50µM).
BKS0349 compound is well tolerated in mice using repeated intravenous
administrations (200 mg/kg, twice a week for 4 weeks). In xenografted
nude mice, in-vivo treatment with BKS0349 compound demonstrates a high
antitumor activity against various human cancer cell models, either
sensitive or resistant to some standard-of-care treatments. In addition,
human cancer cells treated in-vitro as well as in-vivo with BSK0349
compound display Golgi scattering and a mitotic arrest leading to cell
death, as hallmarks of BKS0349’ mode of action.

These findings show that MKLP2 is a potential new target for cancer
chemotherapy and BKS0349 a good candidate to be developed for cancer
treatment.

1Paclitaxel targets FOXM1 to regulate KIF20A in mitotic catastrophe and
breast cancer paclitaxel resistance. P. Khongkow et al. Oncogene, 2015,
1-13.

2Relocation of Aurora B and Survivin from centromeres to the central
spindle impaired by a kinesin-specific MKLP-2 inhibitor. S. Tcherniuk et
al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010, 49:8228-8231.

3New MKLP-2 inhibitors in the paprotrain series: design, synthesis and
biological evaluations. C. Labrière et al. Bioorg and Med Chem, 2016,
24:731-734.


