Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular dynamics simulation of permeation pathway of cytochrome
C through Bax pore.


How cytochrome C is released from the mitochondria to the cytosol via Bax
oligomeric pores, a process which is required for apoptosis, is still a
mystery. Based on the residue-residue distances detected experimentally
for Bax and its homologous protein (Bak), we recently computationally
solve the first atomic model for Bax oligomeric pores at the membranes.
Next, we investigate the mechanism at the microsecond time- and nanometer
space- scale using coarse-grained replica exchange and all-atom MD
simulations. Our free energy landscape depicts a low barrier for the
permeation of cytochrome C into the Bax C-terminal mouth, with the
pathway proceeding to the inner cavity and exiting via the N-terminal
mouth. Release is guided by organized charged/hydrophilic surfaces. The
hydrophilicity and negative charge of the pore surface gradually increase
along the release pathway from the pore entry to the exit opening. Rather
than inert passing of cytochrome C through a rigid pore, the flexible
pore may selectively aid the cytochrome C passage. The energy barrier is
under 4 kcal/mol. Thus, once the Bax pore is formed in the membrane, the
release of cytochrome C may be readily achieved through energy
fluctuations. Collectively, our work provides mechanistic insight and
atomic detail into the release of cytochrome C through Bax oligomeric
pores.


