Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin suppresses triple-negative breast cancer stem cells by
targeting KLF5 for degradation.


Out of the breast cancer subtypes, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
has the poorest prognosis without effective targeted therapies. A stem
cell transcription factor KLF5 is over-expressed in basal type TNBC and
promoting cell proliferation, survival and stemness. Previously, we
demonstrated that Mifepristone suppresses basal TNBC stem cells by
down-regulating KLF5 expression through inducing the expression of
miR-153. In this study, Metformin, a first-line drug for type 2 diabetes
mellitus, was demonstrated to target breast cancer stem cells
selectively. However, the efficiency and the mechanism of action of
metformin in TNBC are unclear. We demonstrated that metformin decreased
the percentage of TNBC stem cells partially through the downregulation of
the expression of KLF5 and its downstream target genes, such as Nanog and
FGF-BP1, in TNBC cell lines. Metformin induced GSK3β-mediated KLF5
protein phosphorylation and degradation through the inhibition of PKA
activity in TNBC cells. Consistently, PKA activators increased the
expression levels of KLF5. We observed a positive correlation between
p-CREB and KLF5 protein levels in human TNBC samples. These findings
suggest that metformin suppresses TNBC stem cells partially through the
PKA-GSK3β-KLF5 signaling pathway.


