Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic tumors can be sensitized to radiation therapy by
repurposing papaverine as an inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration.


Tumor hypoxia is a characteristic feature of solid tumors. Low oxygen
tension represents a barrier to effective radiation therapy because
oxygen is required to fix the DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation.
Many strategies have been proposed as a means to increase the
radiosensitivity of hypoxic tumors but the clinical benefits have been
disappointing. Finding an effective way to radiosensitize hypoxic tumors
thus represents a major challenge for improving the current protocols for
clinical radiation therapy.

Decreasing the demand for oxygen within the tumor has been proposed as a
way to reduce hypoxia, as reduced demand could lead to increased tumor
oxygenation prior to delivery of radiation. Although several compounds
have been proposed based on this approach, the toxicity and/or required
dose have proven to be a limitation of their potential clinical benefit.
Papaverine is an opiate alkaloid that has been used in clinical practice
for over 70 years as a smooth muscle relaxant. The drug has a long
established safety profile, short biological half-life and most
importantly, high potency in its off-target effect limiting mitochondrial
oxygen consumption. We therefore hypothesized that papaverine could
effectively radiosensitize hypoxic tumors by decreasing tumor hypoxia.

At clinically achievable concentrations in the low micromolar range,
papaverine efficiently reduced the rate of oxygen consumption (OCR) in
all tested cell lines in vitro. Within the first 30 minutes, 10 uM of the
drug reduced the OCR by 30-40%. We identified the mechanism of OCR
reduction as direct binding and inhibition of mitochondrial complex I,
independent of the drugâ€™s activity as a phosphodiesterase inhibitor.
More importantly, a single dose of 2 mg/kg papaverine injected I.V.
significantly increased tumor oxygenation in vivo by 1.2-1.3 fold in nude
mice harboring EO771 and A549 xenografts. Because normal tissue is fully
oxygenated, we found muscle oxygenation remained unchanged after drug
delivery. Finally, 2 mg/kg papaverine injected 35 minutes prior to a
single dose of irradiation resulted in a 2.0 fold relative growth delay
in E0771 tumors compared to irradiation alone. In addition, in the more
hypoxic A549 xenografts, the benefit provided by papaverine was a 3.0
fold relative growth delay. In conclusion, according to our data a
single, clinically relevant dose of papaverine administered shortly
before irradiation reduces tumor hypoxia and thus provides significant
benefit over irradiation alone, strongly highlighting its potential to
improve current strategies to enhance response to radiation therapy.


