Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative molecular analysis of gene expression and methylation
reveals 116 putative key regulator genes of human hepatocarcinogenesis.


Introduction: Liver cancer is the second cause of cancer-related
mortality worldwide. Currently, there are only two systemic agents able
to increase survival in patients at advanced stages (i.e. sorafenib and
regorafenib). Median survival of these patients is still poor, which
highlights the need for new therapies. Our aim is to identify key
regulatory gene networks with oncogenic properties amenable for
therapeutic intervention through 1) integration of gene expression and
DNA methylation data from human HCC samples followed by 2) functional
validation in mice using shRNA screens.

Methods: DNA methylation (Illumina HM450) and mRNA expression (Affymetrix
human genome U219) data of 215 human HCC samples (Villanueva, Hepatology
2015) were analyzed to identify key gene regulatory networks. A causality
test interrogated the impact of cis and trans regulation of promoter
methylation on gene expression (Yoo, PLoS Genet 2015). A key regulator
gene was defined when it regulated a substantial number of downstream
genes (more than 2 standard deviations from the mean predicted
trans-regulated downstream genes). Data analysis includes differential
gene expression, topological overlap clustering (hierarchical,
non-negative factorization [NMF]), and gene annotation. The tumorigenic
potential of candidate tumor suppressors was experimentally validated
through a positive selection shRNA (short-hairpin RNA) screen in mice (6
shRNAs/gene, 48 shRNAs/pool, 5 mice/library).

Results: We identified 116 potential HCC key regulator genes, predicted
to regulate expression of between 1,484 and 3,511 downstream genes for
each one. Among the key regulators, 60 were classified as potential tumor
maintenance genes and 56 as potential tumor suppressors genes based on
differential expression with non-tumoral tissue (FDRResults: We
identified 116 potential HCC key regulator genes, predicted to regulate
expression of between 1,484 and 3,511 downstream genes for each one.
Among the key regulators, 60 were classified as potential tumor
maintenance genes and 56 as potential tumor suppressors genes based on
differential expression with non-tumoral tissue (FDR<0.05). Hierarchical
clustering of downstream genes showed significant overlap among multiple
key regulators, suggesting their function in co-regulatory networks. Gene
annotation showed a majority of key regulators associated (FDRResults: We
identified 116 potential HCC key regulator genes, predicted to regulate
expression of between 1,484 and 3,511 downstream genes for each one.
Among the key regulators, 60 were classified as potential tumor
maintenance genes and 56 as potential tumor suppressors genes based on
differential expression with non-tumoral tissue (FDR<0.05). Hierarchical
clustering of downstream genes showed significant overlap among multiple
key regulators, suggesting their function in co-regulatory networks. Gene
annotation showed a majority of key regulators associated (FDR<0.05) with
focal adhesion and matrix reorganization. Three clusters of patients
emerged upon NMF clustering of the key regulator’s gene expression, one
of which showed (n=69/215, 32% of patients) significant overlap with the
previously described CTNNB1 subclass of HCC (Chiang, Cancer Res 2008). In
mice, 2/6 shRNA libraries showed significant accelerated tumor growth
when compared to control [median time to 400 cc of tumor volume were 29
(library #2) and 30 (library #3) versus 39 days in control, PResults: We
identified 116 potential HCC key regulator genes, predicted to regulate
expression of between 1,484 and 3,511 downstream genes for each one.
Among the key regulators, 60 were classified as potential tumor
maintenance genes and 56 as potential tumor suppressors genes based on
differential expression with non-tumoral tissue (FDR<0.05). Hierarchical
clustering of downstream genes showed significant overlap among multiple
key regulators, suggesting their function in co-regulatory networks. Gene
annotation showed a majority of key regulators associated (FDR<0.05) with
focal adhesion and matrix reorganization. Three clusters of patients
emerged upon NMF clustering of the key regulator’s gene expression, one
of which showed (n=69/215, 32% of patients) significant overlap with the
previously described CTNNB1 subclass of HCC (Chiang, Cancer Res 2008). In
mice, 2/6 shRNA libraries showed significant accelerated tumor growth
when compared to control [median time to 400 cc of tumor volume were 29
(library #2) and 30 (library #3) versus 39 days in control, P<0.05],
suggesting enrichment of bona fide tumor suppressors. Planned sequencing
analysis will confirm the identity of these candidates.

Conclusions: We have identified 116 putative key regulators of
hepatocarcinogenesis by integrative analysis of gene expression and DNA
methylation. Functional validation indicates enrichment of bona fide
tumor suppressors.


