Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MCAM modulates small cell lung cancer chemoresistance via
PI3k/Akt/Sox2 signaling pathway.


Despite favorable responses to initial therapy SCLC relapse occurs within
a year exhibiting a multidrug resistant phenotype. Due to limited
accessibility of patient tissues for research purpose, SCLC patient
derived xenografts (PDXs) have provided the best opportunity to address
this limitation. We sought to identify novel mechanisms involved in SCLC
chemoresistance. Through in-depth proteomic profiling, we identified MCAM
as a markedly upregulated surface receptor in chemoresistant SCLC cell
lines that exhibited a mesenchymal phenotype and in chemoresistant PDXs
compared to matched treatment-na√Øve tumors. MCAM is a cell membrane
protein whose expression has been implicated in multiple human cancers.
MCAM expression is also detected in lung adenocarcinoma; however, its
expression and role in SCLC is still not been explored. MCAM knockdown in
chemoresistant cells reduced cell proliferation and decreased the IC50
inhibitory concentration of chemotherapeutic drugs. MCAM was found to
modulate sensitivity of SCLC cells to chemotherapeutic drugs through
up-regulation of MRP1/ABCC1 expression and of the PI3K/AKT pathway in a
SOX2 dependent manner. Metabolomic profiling revealed that MCAM can
modulate glutamic acid and lactate production in chemoresistant cells
with a distinct metabolic phenotype sustaining low oxidative
phosphorylation. MCAM may serve as a novel therapeutic target to overcome
chemoresistance in SCLC.


