Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High complexity molecular indexing reveals that time-dependent
cell plasticity underpins response to EGFR targeted therapy.


Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)-mutant tumors often receive erlotinib, a 1st
generation EGFR inhibitor, as a frontline therapy. Although many patients
initially experience positive response with erlotinib treatment,
resistance invariably occurs in the majority of cases - however, it
remains unclear the full extent by which resistance is pre-determined by
genomic aberration, stochastic by potentially epigenetic mechanisms, or a
combination thereof. Using a lentiviral DNA barcode library to
molecularly index PC-9, an EGFR mutant (exon 19 del. E746-A750) cell line
model, we used next-generation DNA sequencing to trace the fate of over
1.6 million individual cells following erlotinib treatment. Similar to
previous reports, we show that multiple subpopulations are present in
PC-9 cells - those that are exquisitely sensitive to erlotinib, and those
that are inherently resistant, representing ~2% of the population.
Surprisingly, in the absence of erlotinib treatment, we show that cells
cultured over time transitioned between these two states while
maintaining population equilibrium. Using mathematical modeling, we
identified several parameters of state switching or flux that were
required to maintain this dynamic equilibrium. Understanding the
molecular basis by which cells maintain cell state plasticity may enable
new strategies to limit intra-tumor heterogeneity and may ultimately
improve recurrence-free survival in NSCLC following erlotinib therapy.


