Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of scores reflective of biological processes
underlying human disease states from mass spectrometry of serum.


A method was developed that allows the evaluation of complex biological
processes from mass spectrometry of human serum samples. Applying gene
set enrichment analysis ideas to matched protein expression data from a
panel of 1129 proteins and deep MALDIÂ® mass spectral data from a set of
49 human serum samples with lung cancer (n=45) or non-cancer (n=4),
subsets of mass spectral features associated with selected biological
functions were identified. Biological functions included acute response,
complement system, and wound healing and the protein members of each
function were assigned using the intersection of gene ontologies and the
protein panel. Using mass spectral data collected from an independent
NSCLC sample cohort (n=85) from patients treated with targeted therapy,
principal component analysis was used to derive scoring functions
(combinations of the feature subsets) for each biological class. These
scoring functions were validated in an additional NSCLC sample set
(n=123) treated with chemotherapy. The scoring functions can be applied
to mass spectra obtained from any human serum sample to generate scores
associated with individual biological processes. We have developed
scoring functions for several biological processes. Acute response score
was associated with outcome in Cox proportional hazard analysis in
several independent patient cohorts across multiple therapies and
indications, including lung cancer, as mentioned, and ovarian cancer
(n=165) treated with platinum doublets following surgery. Choice of a
single cutoff allowed stratification of patients into groups with
significantly better or worse outcome. In a cohort of nivolumab treated
NSCLC patients (n=67) with available longitudinal samples, outcome was
also found to depend on changes in scores during therapy. Interestingly,
while the distributions of acute phase scores were quite similar across
multiple tumor types, scores for other biological functions, such as
wound healing, varied considerably. This may reflect differences in
relative importance of individual biological functions between tumor
types. A scoring system based on biological functional categories has a
wide range of uses that could be tested and applied in a clinical
setting. Currently, tests that measure a single biomarker for monitoring
a particular disease have questionable utility and limit the usefulness
to the clinician and patient treatment decision making. A tool that
measures the activity of a complex biological process could be useful in
deciding when an intervention is needed (screening), or for monitoring
the effects during therapy.


