Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer associated fibroblasts promote tumor metastasis coexisting
with cancer cells in blood circulation.


Background: Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are activated
fibroblasts and an important player in the tumor microenvironment. Their
activity promotes cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, and
metastasis. The most prognostic factor in tumor progression is
metastasis. Cancer metastasis is a multi-step process that tumor cells
detach from primary site, survive in the bloodstream, and seed in target
organ. Although previous studies have focused on the interaction between
CAFs and cancer cells in primary tumor site, the roles of CAFs in blood
circulation remain largely unknown. We investigated the effect of CAFs
coexisting with cancer cells in bloodstream on tumor metastasis in vivo
mouse model, and also examined the effect of CAFs in subcutaneous tumor.

Methods: We used female BALB/c-nu/nu mice and BALB/c mice in the
experiments. Cancer cells were mouse mammary carcinoma cell lines 4T1
transfected with luciferase, colon cancer cell lines Colon 26 transfected
with luciferase. Fibroblast cell lines were mouse embryonic fibroblast
MEF and NIH-3T3. In venous injection mouse model, we injected 1 Ã— 106
cancer cells alone or the same number of cancer and fibroblast
co-cultured together. When we injected cancer cells transfected with
luciferase, the mice were subjected to in vivo imaging system (IVIS) and
measured luminescence intensity of metastatic sites. We have also
harvested lung and compared its weight and metastatic nodule under
microscopy. Furthermore, in subcutaneous tumor metastatic mouse model,
cancer cells alone or mixed with cancer cells and CAFs were
subcutaneously inoculated into the mice.

Results: In the group of mice injected with cancer cells and fibroblasts,
luminescent intensity of each lungs were higher than cancer cell alone.
Harvested lung weight and the number of metastatic nodules were also
higher in the group with cancer cells and fibroblasts.In subcutaneous
model, mice inoculated with cancer cells and fibroblast had much more
metastatic sites than cancer cells alone.

Conclusions: Our data indicate that CAFs promote tumor metastasis by
stimulating cancer cells in blood circulation, as well as in primary
tumor site.These findings suggest that CAFs in both bloodstream and
primary site could be a promising therapeutic target. CAF-targeted
therapy could reduce tumor metastasis and improve the prognosis of cancer
patients.


