Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS2-ERG predictive value for taxanes resistance according to
prior second-line hormonal manipulations in metastatic castration
resistant prostate cancer.


Background: TMPRSS2-ERG is a genetic alteration specific of prostate
cancer, present in primary tumors and maintained under castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression. It results in
androgen-driven overexpression of ERG, which is involved in resistance to
taxanes in preclinical models. In prior work, we found that TMPRSS2-ERG
expression in blood correlated with docetaxel resistance in metastatic
CPRC. Here, we investigated if TMPRSS2-ERG expression in primary tumors
predicts taxanes resistance in CPRC and the potential impact of prior
second-line hormonal manipulations with abiraterone (A) or enzalutamide
(E).

Methods: Patients with metastatic CRPC treated with taxanes were
included. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumors and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) fraction were tested for TMPRSS2-ERG by
RT-qPCR. FFPE from hormone-sensitive disease (primary diagnosis) were
retrospectively obtained. PBMCs were prospectively collected prior taxane
initiation. TMPRSS2-ERG expression was tested by RT-qPCR. TMPRSS2-ERG
detection was correlated with taxane response and clinical outcome.

Results: A total of 84 tumor samples from 74 patients were included: 65
(87.3%) treated with docetaxel, 19 (25.7%) with cabazitaxel and 10
(13.5%) with both. Forty-six tumor samples (54.7%) were TMPRSS2-ERG+ and
38 (45.2%) TMPRSS2-ERG-. Overall, no correlation between tumor
TMPRSS2-ERG expression and taxanes response or clinical outcome was
observed. In 42 (50%) samples matched tumor and PBMC samples were
available at the time of this analysis: 23 (54.7%) had detectable
TMPRSS2-ERG on tissue and 11 (26.2%) on PBMCs fraction. In 27 patients,
taxanes were administered as a first-line therapy and in 15 after A or E
progression. TMPRSS2-ERG was detected in PBMC from 8 (29.6%) and 3 (20%)
patients without or with prior A or E. In patients without prior A or E,
TMPRSS2-ERG expression in primary tumors predicted a lower median PSA-PFS
(5.5 vs 10.1 months for TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs -, respectively; pResults: A
total of 84 tumor samples from 74 patients were included: 65 (87.3%)
treated with docetaxel, 19 (25.7%) with cabazitaxel and 10 (13.5%) with
both. Forty-six tumor samples (54.7%) were TMPRSS2-ERG+ and 38 (45.2%)
TMPRSS2-ERG-. Overall, no correlation between tumor TMPRSS2-ERG
expression and taxanes response or clinical outcome was observed. In 42
(50%) samples matched tumor and PBMC samples were available at the time
of this analysis: 23 (54.7%) had detectable TMPRSS2-ERG on tissue and 11
(26.2%) on PBMCs fraction. In 27 patients, taxanes were administered as a
first-line therapy and in 15 after A or E progression. TMPRSS2-ERG was
detected in PBMC from 8 (29.6%) and 3 (20%) patients without or with
prior A or E. In patients without prior A or E, TMPRSS2-ERG expression in
primary tumors predicted a lower median PSA-PFS (5.5 vs 10.1 months for
TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs -, respectively; p<0.05). Similarly, when analyzing PBMCs
samples from patients without prior A or E, PSA response was observed in
0% of TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs 55.6% of TMPRSS2-ERG- patients (p = 0.009). Median
PSA-PFS, Rx-PFS were 2.9 vs 8.1 months (p Results: A total of 84 tumor
samples from 74 patients were included: 65 (87.3%) treated with
docetaxel, 19 (25.7%) with cabazitaxel and 10 (13.5%) with both.
Forty-six tumor samples (54.7%) were TMPRSS2-ERG+ and 38 (45.2%)
TMPRSS2-ERG-. Overall, no correlation between tumor TMPRSS2-ERG
expression and taxanes response or clinical outcome was observed. In 42
(50%) samples matched tumor and PBMC samples were available at the time
of this analysis: 23 (54.7%) had detectable TMPRSS2-ERG on tissue and 11
(26.2%) on PBMCs fraction. In 27 patients, taxanes were administered as a
first-line therapy and in 15 after A or E progression. TMPRSS2-ERG was
detected in PBMC from 8 (29.6%) and 3 (20%) patients without or with
prior A or E. In patients without prior A or E, TMPRSS2-ERG expression in
primary tumors predicted a lower median PSA-PFS (5.5 vs 10.1 months for
TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs -, respectively; p<0.05). Similarly, when analyzing PBMCs
samples from patients without prior A or E, PSA response was observed in
0% of TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs 55.6% of TMPRSS2-ERG- patients (p = 0.009). Median
PSA-PFS, Rx-PFS were 2.9 vs 8.1 months (p < 0.01) and 3.2 vs 7.3 (p
Results: A total of 84 tumor samples from 74 patients were included: 65
(87.3%) treated with docetaxel, 19 (25.7%) with cabazitaxel and 10
(13.5%) with both. Forty-six tumor samples (54.7%) were TMPRSS2-ERG+ and
38 (45.2%) TMPRSS2-ERG-. Overall, no correlation between tumor
TMPRSS2-ERG expression and taxanes response or clinical outcome was
observed. In 42 (50%) samples matched tumor and PBMC samples were
available at the time of this analysis: 23 (54.7%) had detectable
TMPRSS2-ERG on tissue and 11 (26.2%) on PBMCs fraction. In 27 patients,
taxanes were administered as a first-line therapy and in 15 after A or E
progression. TMPRSS2-ERG was detected in PBMC from 8 (29.6%) and 3 (20%)
patients without or with prior A or E. In patients without prior A or E,
TMPRSS2-ERG expression in primary tumors predicted a lower median PSA-PFS
(5.5 vs 10.1 months for TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs -, respectively; p<0.05).
Similarly, when analyzing PBMCs samples from patients without prior A or
E, PSA response was observed in 0% of TMPRSS2-ERG+ vs 55.6% of
TMPRSS2-ERG- patients (p = 0.009). Median PSA-PFS, Rx-PFS were 2.9 vs 8.1
months (p < 0.01) and 3.2 vs 7.3 (p < 0.05), for TMPRSS2-ERG+ and
TMPRSS2-ERG- patients. However, no significant differences were found
either in PBMCs or FFPE samples in patients that received A or E prior to
taxanes, regarding to PSA response, PSA-PFS, Rx-PFS and OS parameters
between TMPRSS2-ERG+ and TMPRSS2-ERG- samples.

Conclusions: The role of TMPRSS2-ERG in taxane resistance may be
different according to prior exposure to second-line hormone-therapy in
CRPC. Prior androgen receptor inhibition may result in TMPRSS2-ERG
downregulation and/or activation of alternative mechanisms of resistance.
Further data according to this hypothesis will be presented.


