Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting PTP4A3 phosphatase in ovarian cancer with the potent
noncompetitive inhibitor JMS-631-053.


PTP4A3 is a highly attractive molecular target for ovarian cancer (OvCa).
Elevated levels of PTP4A3 mRNA and protein in human ovarian tumors
correlate with disease progression, poor prognosis and poor survival.
Genetic depletion of PTP4A3 in OvCa cell lines diminishes their ability
to migrate and reduces their in vivo tumorigenicity while PTP4A3
overexpression increases tumor cell migration, invasion, and
dissemination. Together, these data suggest PTP4A3 is a novel molecular
target for OvCa; however, the lack of potent and selective PTP4A3 small
molecule inhibitors has hindered PTP4A3â€™s definitive validation in OvCa
and in other cancers. To drive the pharmacological validation of PTP4A3,
we developed JMS-631-053
(7-imino-2-phenylthieno[3,2-c]pyridine-4,6(5H,7H)-dione), a potent (Ki=3
nM in vitro), specific, noncompetitive, PTP4A3 inhibitor. JMS-631-053
inhibited cellular migration, invasion, and colony formation in soft
agar. Potent OvCa cell-based effects were observed by profiling
JMS-631-053 against a panel of 8 OvCa cell lines using a 2D drug
susceptibility assay, with EC50 values as low as 600 nM. Likewise,
JMS-631-053 killed OvCa 3D spheroids, including those derived from high
grade serous OvCa cell lines, with EC50 values as low as 300 nM. The OvCa
drug resistant cell lines (i.e., A2780CP20 and HeyA8MDR) retained
responsiveness to JMS-631-053 (using 2D and 3D culturing conditions)
suggesting that inhibition of PTP4A3 may be a viable therapeutic strategy
for chemoresistant OvCa. Preliminary data also suggests that JMS-631-053
synergizes with cisplatin when used in combination studies. Hence,
JMS-631-053 will be a valuable chemical tool for further validation of
PTP4A3 as an OvCa target as well as provide potential leads for future
drug discovery.


