Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting SHP-1/p-Lyn signaling shows therapeutic potential in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Background:

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is one aggressive form of
non-Hodgkinâ€™s lymphoma. Genetic analyses revealed molecular
heterogeneity of DLBCL tumors, classifying the cell-of-origin into two
distinct molecular subtypes: germinal center B-cell (GCB) and activated
B-cell (ABC). ABC-type DLBCL has a worse survival after upfront
chemotherapy compared to GCB-type DLBCL, thus ABC-type DLBCL patients
have an unmet medical need that warrants additional research efforts and
new therapeutic options. In current study we explored the biological role
and potential therapeutic implication of a protein phosphatase SHP-1 in
DLBCL.

Methods:

DLBCL cell lines including ABC-like cell lines U2932, Ly-3 and GC-like
cell lines DHL-6, Ly-7 and DB were used for in vitro studies. Cell
viability was examined by MTT assay. Apoptotic effects were examined by
flow cytometry and Western blot. Signal transduction pathways in cells
were assessed by Western blot. In vivo therapeutic testing of SHP-1
agonists were performed in nude mice with DLBCL xenografts.

Results:

We first examined the protein expression of SHP-1 and its downstream
p-STAT3 in a panel of DLBCL cell lines, and identified in general
SHP-1/p-STAT3 expression was higher in ABC-like cells. Interestingly, the
expressions of p-Lyn (Tyr396), p-BTK (Tyr223), key members of B-cell
receptor (BCR) signaling pathway, were also higher in ABC-like cells.
Knockdown or overexpression of SHP-1 protein expression revealed a
reciprocal change of p-Lyn, suggesting SHP-1 negatively regulates
phosphorylation of Lyn kinase. Immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed
SHP-1 interact with Lyn in DLBCL cells. We previously developed direct
SHP-1 agonists, namely SC-43 and SC-60, which could increase SHP-1
activities and induce apoptosis. Here we tested SC-43 and SC-60 in
comparison to ibrutinib, a selective Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK)
inhibitor. The SHP-1 agonists showed in general superior
anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects, comparing to ibrutinib.
Mechanistically, SHP-1 agonists enhanced SHP-1 activity, decreased BCR
signaling p-Lyn and p-BTK, which led to apoptosis. In addition, SHP-1
agonists also down-regulated p-STAT3 as previously reported, which also
contributes to anti-cancer effects. In vivo, SC-43 at doses of
10mg/kg/day and 30mg/kg/day orally showed comparable anti-tumor effects
with ibrutinib at doses of 12.5 mg/kg/day and 25 mg/kg/day in mice
bearing U2932 xenografts, respectively. Western blot confirmed SC-43
downregulation on p-Lyn and p-BTK in vivo.

Conclusions:

SHP-1 negatively regulates phosphorylation of Lyn, and targeting
SHP-1/p-Lyn with direct SHP-1 agonists shows therapeutic potential in
DLBCL.


