Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline mutation burden in an endometrial cancer cohort from an
integrated health care system.


Endometrial cancer (EMCA) is the most common gynecologic malignancy in
the United States. We sought to explore germline mutations in 301
patients with a diagnosis of EMCA (EMCA cohort), who underwent whole
exome sequencing as part of the Geisinger Health System’s (GHS) MyCode
project. We additionally compared these mutations to germline and somatic
mutations in the TCGA array as well as a non-affected cohort at GHS.
Whole exome sequencing was performed using 75 bp paired-end sequencing on
an Illumina v4 HiSeq 2500 to a coverage depth sufficient to provide
greater than 20x haploid read depth of over 85% of targeted bases in 96%
of samples (approximately 80x mean haploid read depth of targeted bases).
Control groups consisted of 1150 female patients over the age of 85 with
no cancer diagnosis (Wellderly cohort) and the entire Geisinger’s
MyCode population of 50,000+ patients (GHS cohort). Somatic and germline
mutations in EMCA were downloaded from the TCGA portal. We retrieved
somatic mutations from 248 patients as a mutation annotation format (MAF)
that consisted of 181,930 point mutations, while 2,931 indels were
removed for the comparison. In addition to somatic mutations, germline
mutations with the controlled access, obtained as a variant call format
(VCF). Demographic characteristics, treatment and outcomes were
identified through a manual chart review of the EHR. 2205 coding variants
with 30 LOF and 802 missense mutations were noted in the germline.
Approximately 24.67% of patients in the EMCA cohort had predictive
pathogenic variants compared to control cohort. Genes with most
predictive pathogenic variants among EMCA cohort are ATM, TSC2, ROS1,
NOTCH2, NOTCH1. LOF mutations were found in 19 unique genes. When
compared to pathogenic variants identified in other hormone related
cancers or a Wellderly cohort; 26 unique variants were identified in the
EMCA cohort. Overall 53.57% (2590/4836) of germline mutations were found
in EMCA Cohort when compared to the overlapping mutations between
DiscovEHR cohort and TCGA (5874 variants). In contrast, only (11/4836)
0.28% of germline mutations in EMCA Cohort overlap with TCGA somatic
mutations (3164 variants). Based on the results, cancer predisposing
germline mutations were found in a substantial number of MyCode
participants with EMCA. Knowledge of these mutations and potential
integration with somatic information will help to improve our
understanding of the disease. This will lead to more specific
communication of individual cancer risk and prognosis, cascade screening
of their families and more personalized and disease-specific care, an
important step towards precision medicine.


