Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory cytokines and hematopoietic stem cells are associated
with fatigue and insomnia in breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant
radiation therapy.


Introduction: Breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant radiation
therapy (RT) commonly experience fatigue and insomnia. We previously
reported that this fatigue is associated with a reduction in circulating
hematopoetic stem cells (HSCs; CD34+); the role of inflammatory cytokines
in mediating this process however, has not been clearly elucidated.

Materials and Methods: Breast cancer patients (n=147) undergoing adjuvant
RT underwent phlebotomies for analysis of CD34+, CD45+, CBC, as well as
17 inflammatory cytokines using a multiplexed ELISA platform, during 5
time points: prior to RT (D1); after Days 2, 5, during final week of RT
(D2, D5, and Df, respectively); as well as one month post RT-completion
(M1). At the same time, patients also completed questionnaires for the
multidimensional fatigue inventory (MFI-20), hospital anxiety and
depression scale (HADS), and insomnia severity index (ISI).

Results: General fatigue worsened over the course of RT from D1 to Df,
being most severe at the end of treatment (Df), but returned to baseline
at M1. This trend was statistically significant (pResults: General
fatigue worsened over the course of RT from D1 to Df, being most severe
at the end of treatment (Df), but returned to baseline at M1. This trend
was statistically significant (p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety,
depression, and insomnia. The levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell,
as well as lymphocyte counts decreased over time, with the lowest levels
observed at Df (pResults: General fatigue worsened over the course of RT
from D1 to Df, being most severe at the end of treatment (Df), but
returned to baseline at M1. This trend was statistically significant
(p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety, depression, and insomnia. The
levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell, as well as lymphocyte counts
decreased over time, with the lowest levels observed at Df (p<0.001 for
all). General fatigue correlated inversely with CD34+ counts (adjusted
for anxiety, depression, and ISI), and was also negatively associated
with hemoglobin, RBC, and lymphocyte counts (pResults: General fatigue
worsened over the course of RT from D1 to Df, being most severe at the
end of treatment (Df), but returned to baseline at M1. This trend was
statistically significant (p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety,
depression, and insomnia. The levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell,
as well as lymphocyte counts decreased over time, with the lowest levels
observed at Df (p<0.001 for all). General fatigue correlated inversely
with CD34+ counts (adjusted for anxiety, depression, and ISI), and was
also negatively associated with hemoglobin, RBC, and lymphocyte counts
(p<0.001 for all). There was also a significant correlation between
increasing insomnia with lower CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell and
lymphocyte counts (all pResults: General fatigue worsened over the course
of RT from D1 to Df, being most severe at the end of treatment (Df), but
returned to baseline at M1. This trend was statistically significant
(p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety, depression, and insomnia. The
levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell, as well as lymphocyte counts
decreased over time, with the lowest levels observed at Df (p<0.001 for
all). General fatigue correlated inversely with CD34+ counts (adjusted
for anxiety, depression, and ISI), and was also negatively associated
with hemoglobin, RBC, and lymphocyte counts (p<0.001 for all). There was
also a significant correlation between increasing insomnia with lower
CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell and lymphocyte counts (all p<0.05). Serum
concentrations of TGF-β1, MCP-1, MMP-2, IL-1ra and IFN-α2a changed
significantly during RT (pResults: General fatigue worsened over the
course of RT from D1 to Df, being most severe at the end of treatment
(Df), but returned to baseline at M1. This trend was statistically
significant (p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety, depression, and
insomnia. The levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell, as well as
lymphocyte counts decreased over time, with the lowest levels observed at
Df (p<0.001 for all). General fatigue correlated inversely with CD34+
counts (adjusted for anxiety, depression, and ISI), and was also
negatively associated with hemoglobin, RBC, and lymphocyte counts
(p<0.001 for all). There was also a significant correlation between
increasing insomnia with lower CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell and
lymphocyte counts (all p<0.05). Serum concentrations of TGF-β1, MCP-1,
MMP-2, IL-1ra and IFN-α2a changed significantly during RT (p<0.01 for
all), with either the highest or lowest levels observed at Df. Increasing
levels of MCP-1, TNF-RII and TNF-a were associated with worsening general
physical fatigue, reduced activity, decreased motivation, as well as
increased insomnia (pResults: General fatigue worsened over the course of
RT from D1 to Df, being most severe at the end of treatment (Df), but
returned to baseline at M1. This trend was statistically significant
(p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety, depression, and insomnia. The
levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell, as well as lymphocyte counts
decreased over time, with the lowest levels observed at Df (p<0.001 for
all). General fatigue correlated inversely with CD34+ counts (adjusted
for anxiety, depression, and ISI), and was also negatively associated
with hemoglobin, RBC, and lymphocyte counts (p<0.001 for all). There was
also a significant correlation between increasing insomnia with lower
CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell and lymphocyte counts (all p<0.05). Serum
concentrations of TGF-β1, MCP-1, MMP-2, IL-1ra and IFN-α2a changed
significantly during RT (p<0.01 for all), with either the highest or
lowest levels observed at Df. Increasing levels of MCP-1, TNF-RII and
TNF-a were associated with worsening general physical fatigue, reduced
activity, decreased motivation, as well as increased insomnia (p<0.001
for all). Furthermore, there appeared a trend between increasing MMP-2,
as well as decreasing IL-1ra and TGF-β1, with reduced CD34+, CD45+, WBC
and lymphocyte counts (pResults: General fatigue worsened over the course
of RT from D1 to Df, being most severe at the end of treatment (Df), but
returned to baseline at M1. This trend was statistically significant
(p<0.001), after adjusting for anxiety, depression, and insomnia. The
levels of CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell, as well as lymphocyte counts
decreased over time, with the lowest levels observed at Df (p<0.001 for
all). General fatigue correlated inversely with CD34+ counts (adjusted
for anxiety, depression, and ISI), and was also negatively associated
with hemoglobin, RBC, and lymphocyte counts (p<0.001 for all). There was
also a significant correlation between increasing insomnia with lower
CD34+, CD45+, white blood cell and lymphocyte counts (all p<0.05). Serum
concentrations of TGF-β1, MCP-1, MMP-2, IL-1ra and IFN-α2a changed
significantly during RT (p<0.01 for all), with either the highest or
lowest levels observed at Df. Increasing levels of MCP-1, TNF-RII and
TNF-a were associated with worsening general physical fatigue, reduced
activity, decreased motivation, as well as increased insomnia (p<0.001
for all). Furthermore, there appeared a trend between increasing MMP-2,
as well as decreasing IL-1ra and TGF-β1, with reduced CD34+, CD45+, WBC
and lymphocyte counts (p<0.001). The 52 patients who received prior
adjuvant chemotherapy demonstrated significantly higher fatigue, anxiety,
and insomnia scores.

Conclusions: This study represents one of the most comprehensive
longitudinal evaluations of the effects of RT on fatigue and insomnia,
demonstrating that this process was associated with increased levels of
the pro-inflammatory cytokines MCP-1, TNF-RII and TNF-a, and reductions
in circulating HSCs and other hematologic parameters. Further
understanding of the roles of these cytokines would provide important
insights into both quality of life for patients undergoing cancer
therapies, as well as the interactions between RT with immunotherapy.


