Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIR002: a new POLA1 inhibitor endowed with a large spectrum of
antitumor activity.


A recent work from Han et al. disclosed DNA polymerase 1 alpha (POLA1) as
the key target for the anti-cancer effects of CD437, a molecule belonging
to the class of Retinoid Related Molecules (RRMs). Before this evidence,
this family of compounds, of which CD437 and ST1926 represent the
prototypes, has been characterized for its antiproliferative, antitumor
and pro-apoptotic activity. With aim to identify a new RRM with an
improved pharmacological profile, we recently selected MIR002 as a novel
compound endowed with a potent antitumor activity and a peculiar
pharmacological profile. In vitro treatment with MIR002 leads to a G1/S
arrest and exerts a potent anti-tumor/proapoptotic activity in a wide
range of cancer cell lines, including H460-R9A cells, which are cross
resistant to ST1926 and CD437 (IC50>70 fold of H460-R9A vs H460).
Moreover, in H460-R9A cells, we identified the L764F mutation in POLA1,
already described as a mutation conferring resistance to CD437. We also
demonstrated that POLA1 is the molecular target of both MIR002 and ST1926
and that, interestingly, the expression of the L764F mutant, although
associated with the resistance to RRMâ€™s, only marginally reduces the
cytotoxic effects of MIR002. In order to investigate the activity of
MIR002 against tumor growth, we examined a panel of in vivo xenograft
tumor models, including those originating from human Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC) and Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma (MPM). In these models,
using a q2dx5x3w schedule in doses ranging from 50 to 70 mg/Kg
administered orally, we observed a strong tumor growth inhibition
(TGI>70%). Interestingly, the combination of MIR002 with Cisplatin
(4mg/Kg; qd7x3w; i.v.) in MPM models showed a synergistic antitumor
efficacy, reaching a TGI>90%, and cured animals. Interestingly, we
previously identified POLA1 as a key pro-proliferative player in 9
primary MPM samples. The ex-vivo analyses indicated that POLA1 expression
was strongly modulated upon MIR002 treatment. Furthermore, in the same
models, we also observed that the expression/secretion of multiple
circulating factors is affected by MIR002 and we identified some of them
as potential biomarkers of tumor responsiveness to MIR002. Taken
together, our results identify MIR002 as a novel anti-cancer compound and
suggest POLA1 as a target for new antitumor strategies to be investigated
in Clinical Trials.


