Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disrupting redox regulated cancer stem cell state equilibrium by
co-inhibition of glycolysis and thioredoxin/glutathione antioxidant
pathways.


Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) exist in a dynamic equilibrium of
mesenchymal- (M) and epithelial-like (E) states that coordinately drive
tumorigenesis, metastasis, and treatment resistance. Here, we show that
BCSCs in both states display hyperactive aerobic glycolysis or oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS), depending on the availability of glucose. This
metabolic plasticity is enabled by activation of genes regulating
glycolysis and OXPHOS, as well as increased mitochondrial mass/activity.
Despite their metabolic plasticity, E- and M-BCSCs exhibit markedly
different vulnerabilities to inhibitors of glycolysis and redox
metabolism. Glycolysis inhibition or hypoxia, by inducing oxidative
stress, facilitates invasive M-BCSCs transition to their proliferative E
state. This process is reversible by addition of the antioxidant
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) and mediated by AMPK-dependent HIF1Î±
stabilization, providing a molecular link between hypoxic/oxidant stress
and BCSC phenotypic plasticity. Moreover, E-BCSCs are endowed with
heightened thioredoxin (TXN) and glutathione (GSH) mediated antioxidant
defenses, which are two major metabolic pathways to detoxify cellular
hydrogen peroxide. We demonstrated that inhibition of the TXN pathway by
Auranofin (AUR, an inhibitor of thioredoxin reductase) in SUM149 and
human breast cancer xenograft tumor cells is sufficient to abrogate their
tumorsphere forming activity and selectively deplete E-BCSCs by inducing
their terminal differentiation and subsequent apoptosis. We also found
that, although the inhibition of the GSH pathway by BSO (an inhibitor of
GSH synthesis) was not sufficient to abrogate tumorsphere formation and
E-BCSCs, co-inhibition of TXN and GSH pathways with low doses of AUR and
BSO had a synergistic effect in suppressing tumorsphere forming activity,
which could be rescued by NAC. Using patient-derived xenograft models of
human triple negative breast cancer, we further validated that
co-inhibition of glycolysis and TXN/GSH antioxidant pathways delivers
synergistic antitumor effects to suppress tumor growth and regenerative
potential by eliminating both M- and E-BCSCs. Hence, exploiting metabolic
vulnerabilities of distinct BCSC states provides a potential therapeutic
approach. As the CSC state equilibrium may be similarly regulated across
a spectrum of tissue malignancies with diverse oncogenic drivers, the
conceptual framework we build in this work to target metabolic
vulnerabilities of distinct BCSC phenotypic states may have broad
therapeutic applicability.


