Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PHIP is a therapeutic target for triple negative solid tumors.


Targeted therapy relies on the classification of tumors according to the
major molecular drivers of the malignant phenotype, which can then help
decide the therapeutic treatment. However, a substantial subset of solid
tumors does not express these markers, exemplified by the triple-negative
subtype of breast cancer. Shared molecular factors that promote the
progression of these tumors, and that represent a target for their
therapy, are missing. We previously described a role for PHIP (Pleckstrin
Homology domain-Interacting Protein) in the progression of melanoma, and
demonstrated PHIP activation in triple-negative melanomas. Analysis of
the TCGA profiling efforts in melanoma, breast and lung cancer revealed
PHIP expression to be enriched in triple-negative breast cancer and in
the bronchiad subtype of triple-negative lung cancer. Here we show the
broad-based role of PHIP in the progression of triple-negative subtypes
of three solid tumors (breast and lung cancer, and melanoma) defined by
different mutational drivers and targeted therapies. By using a
shRNA-based targeting of PHIP in in vitro and in vivo models, we have
suppressed the malignant phenotype of triple-negative MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-436 human breast carcinoma cells. In addition, PHIP knockdown
resulted in significant anti tumor effects in H1703 and Calu3 human lung
cancer cells lacking mutations in EGFR, KRAS, and ALK, and in two
short-term triple wild type melanoma cultures lacking mutations in BRAF,
NRAS, and NF1. Suppression of PHIP expression resulted in inhibition of
both tumor cell proliferation by cell survival and colony formation
assays and invasion into matrigel in each of the tumor models examined,
and was accompanied by suppression of pAKT, CCND1, TLN1, and ITGÎ²1
expression when assessed by western-blot or quantitative
immunofluorescence. The PHIP protein contains two bromodomains that can
be therapeutically targeted by small molecules. However, the functional
activity of the PHIP bromodomains has been poorly characterized. We show
that PHIP co-localizes with and binds to the acetylated histone
modification H4K91ac, and that both are coordinately regulated upon
growth factor stimulation suggesting a new function for PHIP as a
chromatin remodeler. To conclude, our results identify a novel role for
PHIP in the progression of solid tumors lacking the major molecular
drivers, and suggest PHIP as a druggable target for the therapy of these
malignancies.


