Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of novel mediators of
tumor-induced T-cell dysfunction.


Immunotherapies targeting T-cell functionality have been shown to have
efficacy in numerous cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, treatment with currently available therapeutics, such
as anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4, induce responses only in a subset of
patients. This raises the possibility that numerous other effectors of
T-cell dysfunction remain to be elucidated. To evaluate possible novel
mediators of T-cell dysfunction, we isolated CD8+ T-cells from orthotopic
KrasG12D/p53-/- murine lung adenocarcinomas (HKP-1) that exhibited either
stable or progressive disease as a function of tumor growth. RNAseq
analysis revealed increased expression of several genes including Tim3,
PD-1, Lag3, 2B4, and CISH, and decreased expression of GzmB and Eomes in
CD8+ T-cells isolated from progressive tumors indicative of a
dysfunctional state, as well as multiple novel genes not previously
associated with T-cell dysfunction. To explore the functional role of the
novel candidate genes, we have developed in vitro and in vivo assays
leveraging Ova and GFP overexpression in our HKP-1 cell line
(KP1-Ova-GFP). We have begun to target these unique set of candidate
genes in tumor-specific T-cells associated with dysfunction through
innovative RNAi/shRNA and adoptive transfer approaches to facilitate
therapeutic reprogramming and enhanced T-cell-mediated immunity in lung
cancer. We expect to provide novel strategies for designing rational
immunotherapies targeting dysfunctional tumor-specific CD8+ T-cells to
generate durable anti-tumor immune responses for the treatment of lung
adenocarcinoma.


