Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alginate hydrogels for three-dimensional culture and real-time
monitoring of cancer cell metabolism and radiation response.


The purpose of this study was to characterize a three-dimensional calcium
alginate culture system for real-time monitoring of cancer cell
metabolism and radiation response. HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were
encapsulated in 2.5% calcium alginate using a custom electrostatic rig
adapted from a previously published system. Bead diameter was a function
of voltage and alginate concentration: 4 x 107 cells/mL encapsulated at 4
and 8 kV resulted in mean diameters of 880 and 584 µm, respectively. The
distribution of bead radii for all voltages showed positive excess
kurtosis (4 kV = 1.6, 8 kV = 3.0) and 72.9% of 4 kV and 77.2% of 8 kV
bead diameters fell within one standard deviation of the mean.
Encapsulated cell viability was assessed by staining with Trypan Blue and
clonogenic survival assays (CSAs). The baseline viability of cells
immediately after encapsulation was 93.2%, which decreased 2 days after a
single 10 Gy dose (90.7%, pThe purpose of this study was to characterize
a three-dimensional calcium alginate culture system for real-time
monitoring of cancer cell metabolism and radiation response. HCT116
colorectal cancer cells were encapsulated in 2.5% calcium alginate using
a custom electrostatic rig adapted from a previously published system.
Bead diameter was a function of voltage and alginate concentration: 4 x
107 cells/mL encapsulated at 4 and 8 kV resulted in mean diameters of 880
and 584 µm, respectively. The distribution of bead radii for all
voltages showed positive excess kurtosis (4 kV = 1.6, 8 kV = 3.0) and
72.9% of 4 kV and 77.2% of 8 kV bead diameters fell within one standard
deviation of the mean. Encapsulated cell viability was assessed by
staining with Trypan Blue and clonogenic survival assays (CSAs). The
baseline viability of cells immediately after encapsulation was 93.2%,
which decreased 2 days after a single 10 Gy dose (90.7%, p<0.05). After
two weeks of continuous culturing, 84.1% of non-irradiated and 73.8% of
irradiated encapsulated cells remained viable (pThe purpose of this study
was to characterize a three-dimensional calcium alginate culture system
for real-time monitoring of cancer cell metabolism and radiation
response. HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were encapsulated in 2.5%
calcium alginate using a custom electrostatic rig adapted from a
previously published system. Bead diameter was a function of voltage and
alginate concentration: 4 x 107 cells/mL encapsulated at 4 and 8 kV
resulted in mean diameters of 880 and 584 µm, respectively. The
distribution of bead radii for all voltages showed positive excess
kurtosis (4 kV = 1.6, 8 kV = 3.0) and 72.9% of 4 kV and 77.2% of 8 kV
bead diameters fell within one standard deviation of the mean.
Encapsulated cell viability was assessed by staining with Trypan Blue and
clonogenic survival assays (CSAs). The baseline viability of cells
immediately after encapsulation was 93.2%, which decreased 2 days after a
single 10 Gy dose (90.7%, p<0.05). After two weeks of continuous
culturing, 84.1% of non-irradiated and 73.8% of irradiated encapsulated
cells remained viable (p<0.003). Pimonidazole staining demonstrated the
presence of hypoxic cores proportional to bead size. CSAs of 8 kV beads
showed a dose modifying factor (DMF) of 1.06 relative to cells grown in a
monolayer, while larger 4 kV beads showed a DMF of 1.58. Mean oxygen
consumption rate rose with increasing number of 8 kV beads/well: 1 bead,
35.5; 2 beads, 97.4; 3 beads, 175.5; 4 beads, 209.9; 2.0 x 104 monolayer
cells, 92.6 (all pmol/min, ~8.2 x103 cells/bead, pThe purpose of this
study was to characterize a three-dimensional calcium alginate culture
system for real-time monitoring of cancer cell metabolism and radiation
response. HCT116 colorectal cancer cells were encapsulated in 2.5%
calcium alginate using a custom electrostatic rig adapted from a
previously published system. Bead diameter was a function of voltage and
alginate concentration: 4 x 107 cells/mL encapsulated at 4 and 8 kV
resulted in mean diameters of 880 and 584 µm, respectively. The
distribution of bead radii for all voltages showed positive excess
kurtosis (4 kV = 1.6, 8 kV = 3.0) and 72.9% of 4 kV and 77.2% of 8 kV
bead diameters fell within one standard deviation of the mean.
Encapsulated cell viability was assessed by staining with Trypan Blue and
clonogenic survival assays (CSAs). The baseline viability of cells
immediately after encapsulation was 93.2%, which decreased 2 days after a
single 10 Gy dose (90.7%, p<0.05). After two weeks of continuous
culturing, 84.1% of non-irradiated and 73.8% of irradiated encapsulated
cells remained viable (p<0.003). Pimonidazole staining demonstrated the
presence of hypoxic cores proportional to bead size. CSAs of 8 kV beads
showed a dose modifying factor (DMF) of 1.06 relative to cells grown in a
monolayer, while larger 4 kV beads showed a DMF of 1.58. Mean oxygen
consumption rate rose with increasing number of 8 kV beads/well: 1 bead,
35.5; 2 beads, 97.4; 3 beads, 175.5; 4 beads, 209.9; 2.0 x 104 monolayer
cells, 92.6 (all pmol/min, ~8.2 x103 cells/bead, p<0.005). Hyperpolarized
13C-NMR spectroscopy of 400 uL of 8 kV beads containing 1.2 x 108
cells/mL showed a detectable conversion of [1-13C]-pyruvate to
[1-13C]-lactate; 1 hour after a single 10 Gy dose, the lactate:pyruvate
ratio decreased by 25%. Unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t-tests were used
to determine significance between and one-way ANOVA was used to determine
significance among groups with α set at p≤0.05. These data demonstrate
the versatility of alginate hydrogels for real-time metabolic and
radiation response studies which are non-invasive, higher throughput, and
lower cost compared to in vivo systems. Future directions include
additional metabolic flux analysis and hyperpolarized 13C-NMR
spectroscopy to further investigate the cancer cell metabolic response to
drug and/or radiation therapy.


