Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD47 promotes metastasis and proliferation of colorectal cancer
via MAPK/ERK pathway.


Background and Aim: A number of studies demonstrated that CD47 was
overexpressed in several kinds of tumors including colorectal cancer
(CRC). Furthermore, the level of CD47 was positively correlated with
tumor proliferation, stemness and metastasis. The aim of this study is to
evaluate the role of CD47 in the metastasis and proliferation in CRC.

Methods: We used the data from GEO database GSE8671 to analyze the
expression level of CD47 and its relationship with prognosis in CRC. The
expression levels of CD47 in normal and CRC tissues from our hospital
were detected using quantitative RT-PCR and western blot. CD47 was
downregulated or overexpressed via lentiviral vector system. Then the
RTCA assay and migration assay were carried out to investigate the
function of CD47 in cell proliferation and migration. Western blot for
cancer related pathways was performed to find out the downstream
signaling pathways of CD47.

Results: Increased expression of CD47 was found in CRC tissues.
Inhibition of CD47 expression in HCT116 by ShRNA attenuated the capacity
of cell proliferation and migration. On the other hand, overexpression of
CD47 in DLD1 increased the capacity for cell proliferation and migration.
CD47 induced cell proliferation and migration was found to be associated
with the activation of MAPK/ERK pathway.

Conclusions: High expression of CD47 was found to be associated with the
proliferation and metastasis in CRC via the activation of MAPK/ERK
signaling pathway. These findings provide an SIRPÎ±-independent mechanism
for CD47 in the progression of CRC, which may find a novel therapy target
for the precise treatment of CRC.


