Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-25 can sensitize cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cells to
cisplatin through enhancing cisplatin-mediated G2/M arrest.


Recurrent chemoresistant ovarian cancer is responsible for the high
mortality rate in ovarian cancer patients. The molecular mechanisms
underlying the chemoresistant ovarian cancer are not fully understood.
MicroRNAs (miRs) expression has been recognized as one of the core
regulators of gene expression in recent years. However, whether miRs are
involved in chemoresistance of ovarian cancer has not been fully
elucidated. Current study was performed to interrogate the role of a
number of critical miRs in chemoresistance of ovarian cancer. These miRs
include miR-21, miR-25, miR-128a, miR-141, miR-182, miR-214, miR-29c,
miR-200a, miR-506 which have been identified to play key roles in ovarian
cancer by previous study. The association between expression pattern of
these miRs and chemoresistance of ovarian cancer was revealed through
comparing their expression in chemosensitive versus -resistant ovarian
cancer cell lines or chemosensitive and treated recurrent chemoresistant
patient derived xerograph (PDX) samples via Taqman real-time quantitative
PCR. Involvement of aberrant expressied miRs in chemoresistant ovarian
cancer was further validated through treating cells with antagomers or
mimics for corresponding miRs. Cell cycle analysis was performed to study
the role of miRs in cell cycle progression. We demonstrate that miR-21,
miR-25, miR-128a, miR-141, miR-182, miR-214 and miR-506 are upregulated,
while miR-29c and miR-200a are downregulated in chemoresistant ovarian
cancer cells or PDX samples. Inhibiting miR-21, miR-128a, miR-182 or
overexpression of miR-101 does not lead to significant sensitization,
suggesting the differential expression of these miRs in chemoresistant
cells does not contribute directly to ovarian cancer cell-mediated
chemoresistance. However, inhibiting miR-25 leads to a 3-fold decrease in
the IC50 to cisplatin in A2780CP20 cells (from 1 μM to 0.333 μM),
indicating sensitization to chemotherapy. Furthermore, inhibiting miR-25
can arrest more cells in G2/M phase by itself or in combination with
cisplatin. Collectively, these data indicate that miR-25 could be a
potential therapeutic target for treating cisplatin resistant ovarian
cancer patients.


