Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LIN28B/MYC loop regulates aerobic glycolysis and tumor acidic
microenvironment to promote cancer stemness and cancer progression.


Substantial evidences have proven that targeting cancer addictive
metabolism could suppress tumor progression. Tumor microenvironment (TME)
supports the development of metabolic reprograming of tumor cells. The
function of cancer stem cells (CSCs) closely related with its own
metabolic alteration. However, the relationship between CSCsâ€™ metabolic
reprograming and their supportive TME, as well as underlying mechanism
remains largely unknown. In this study, we have demonstrated a novel
mechanism that the LIN28B/MYC positive regulation loop could promote the
aerobic glycolysis of cancer cells and glycolysis-derived lactate and
further enhance the cancer stemness to facilitate tumor progression. 1)
Metabolic analysis revealed that glycolysis (ECAR) was suppressed after
LIN28B was knocked down in MDA-MB-231 or H1299 cancer cells respectively.
Consistently, both the glucose-uptake and lactate-secretion were
attenuated in shLIN28B cancer cells. Importantly, either the glucose
accumulation in cancer tissues or lactate secretion in serum was reduced
in mouse injected with shLIN28B cancer cells. 2) Metabolic analysis
revealed that CSCs possessed higher ECAR and higher level of LIN28B, MYC
and HIF1a. Furthermore, glycolysis-derived lactate not only increase the
proportion of ALDH+ cells, but also enhance the tumorsphere forming
ability and mobility of cancer cells. 3) MicroRNAs screening analysis
revealed that 6 miRNAs were up-regulated above 2 folds after LIN28B was
knocked down in MDA-MB-231 cells. Metabolic analysis revealed that
miR-34a-5p could suppress the aerobic glycolysis (ECAR) in MDA-MB-231
cells. 4) LIN28B inhibitor could reduce the expression of LIN28B and MYC
in vitro and then suppressed tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Taken
together, our study demonstrated that LIN28B/MYC loop could sustain the
aerobic glycolysis of cancer cells and then enhance the function of CSCs
via regulating the tumor acid microenvironment, thus, established the
LIN28B/MYC as a central node in connecting tumor metabolism and tumor
microenvironment, and could serve as a therapeutical target.


