Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of an oncokinase inhibitor merestinib with anti-PD-L1
results in enhanced immune mediated antitumor activity in CT26 murine
tumor model.


The combination of tumor targeted therapeutics with PD-L1 checkpoint
blockade is being explored as a method to increase the clinical benefits
of immunotherapy, and expand response to additional cancer types.
Merestinib (Mer) is a kinase inhibitor targeting several oncokinases1
(including MET, MST1R, AXL, MERTK, and MKNK1/2) that can potentially
modulate immune function, angiogenesis, as well as target the tumor 1-5.
To determine the combinatorial potential with immunotherapy, the effects
of Mer were evaluated in vitro on human T cells, PBMCs and murine tumor
lines CT26 colon carcinoma (harbors KRASmt G12D expresses low Met/no
p-Met/high Axl/p-Axl) and B16F10 melanoma (expressing high
Met/pMet/peIF4E). Additionally, the anti-tumor effect of Mer was tested
in vivo on established CT26 and B16F10 tumors compared to MET specific
TKIs (savolitinib, PF4217903) alone or in combination with PD-L1 antibody
(Ab) blockade. In vitro, Mer showed no significant effects on either T
cells or PBMCs, but was able to inhibit downstream signaling in both CT26
and B16F10 showing activity on murine tumor cell lines. In vivo, daily
Mer monotherapy (6, 12 or 24 mg/kg) showed significant anti-tumor effect
at all doses in both CT26 and B16F10, that was not seen with either
savolitinib or PF4217903. Concurrent combination of Mer (12 mg/kg) and
anti-PD-L1 Ab (0.5 mg qw) in CT26 was found to have anti-tumor activity
that was synergistic as compared to each single agent alone. While the
effect of Mer monotherapy was lost when treatment ended, tumors continued
to regress in the combination group even upon cessation of therapy. The
combination was well tolerated and resulted in 90% complete responders
compared to 30% with anti-PD-L1 Ab alone, 35 days after completing
dosing. To test the ability to generate immunologic memory, complete
responders were re-challenged with CT26 cells on the contralateral side.
All mice in the combination group resisted re-challenge, showing that
Mer/PD-L1 Ab combination was triggering immunologic memory. Although
there was no significant change in intra-tumor immune cell populations
between groups, combination therapy showed an enhanced and unique
intra-tumor immune activation/inflammation gene expression signature
compared to PD-L1 Ab monotherapy. The enhanced immune activation of the
combination therapy, leading to synergistic anti-tumor efficacy,
demonstrates that merestinib has the potential to augment immunotherapy
while targeting the tumor directly. This preclinical data provides the
rationale for the clinical investigation of merestinib in combination
with checkpoint therapies targeting the PD-L1/PD1 axis (NCT02791334). 1 -
Yan et al. Invest New Drugs 2013;31:833-44 2 - Balan et al. J Biol Chem
2015;290:8110-20 3 - Eyob et al. Cancer Discov 2013;3:751-60 4 - Lemke G.
CSH Persp Biol 2013;5:a009076 5 - Piccirillo et al. Nat Immunol
2014;15:503-11


