Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of a public versus private hospital in New York City in
delivering timely adjuvant chemotherapy among stage III colon cancer
patients.


Background: Although the optimal timing of adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) for
stage III colon cancer patients has been debated, most studies recommend
initiating AC within approximately 60 days of surgery. Significant
disparities in timeliness of AC initiation in colon cancer have been
reported in public versus private hospitals, with longer time to AC at
public hospitals. We evaluated whether timeliness of AC differed between
a public and a private hospital, both affiliated with the same major
academic institution in New York City.

Methods: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of Stage III colon
cancer patients who underwent surgery and received AC at the same
institution from 2008-2015 at NYU Langone Medical Center’s affiliated
public hospital (Bellevue) or its private hospital (Tisch). Patient data
were obtained through review of hospital tumor registry and electronic
medical records. Patient characteristics were compared by hospital. We
defined timeliness as receipt of AC within 60 days postoperatively.
Univariate and stepwise multivariable logistic regressions were used to
identify factors associated with timely AC.

Results: Forty three patients at Bellevue Hospital and 79 patients at
Tisch Hospital who underwent surgery and received AC at the same
institution were included. Median number of days to AC was significantly
greater among patients receiving care at Bellevue (53, range 31-231)
compared to Tisch (43, range 25-105; p=0.002). However, the percentage of
patients who received timely AC did not differ substantially at Bellevue
and Tisch (74% vs 81%, p=0.40). Individual characteristics significantly
associated with timely initiation of AC were non-Hispanic ethnicity (OR:
2.71, 95% CI: 1.06-6.95), married (OR: 2.89, 95%CI: 1.15-7.30), and
laparoscopic (vs open) surgery (OR: 4.30, 95%CI: 1.64-11.25). The odds of
receiving timely AC at Bellevue compared to Tisch was not significant
(OR: 0.68, 95% CI: 0.28-1.65). When hospital and other factors were
examined jointly, only age (OR: 0.95/year, 95% CI: 0.91-0.99) and
laparoscopic (vs open) surgery (OR: 5.65, 95% CI: 1.92-16.62) remained as
important factors associated with receiving timely AC (Likelihood Ratio
Chi-Square=14.95, p=0.0019). When hospital was omitted from multivariable
analysis, age and surgery type still remained the only significant
factors associated with timely AC (OR’s unchanged, Likelihood Ratio
Chi-Square=14.81, p-value=0.0006).

Conclusions: The proportion of patients receiving timely AC within 60
days of surgery was similar at both an affiliated public and private
hospital at NYU Langone Medical Center. Age and type of surgery were
significant predictors of timeliness in our population. Further research
should be conducted to understand how system-level factors may promote
timely receipt of care.


