Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Time dependent analysis for the combination of standardized Annona
cherimola and Solanum nigrum extracts with 5-FU against head and neck
cancer cells.


Phytochemicals of natural origin constitutes very initiative field of
anticancer drug discovery. Annona sp. and Solanum nigrum are folk herbs
with reported use for the treatment of several neoplasias. Natural herb
products and folk medicine might not be potent anticancer remedies and
are recommended for combination therapy. In the current work, we
mathematically evaluated the influence of combining standardized extracts
of A. cherimola and S. nigrum to the cytotoxic profile of 5-FU against
head and neck cancer cells (HEP-2). Cytotoxicity assessment and
combination analysis were calculated after MTT assays followed by fitting
to Emax model and calculating the combination index (CI-value). After 24
h exposure, both A. cherimola and S. nigrum extracts were more potent
than 5-FU with IC50 of 29.4±4.4, 7.3±1.3 and 3.4±4.4 µg/ml,
respectively. Both A. cherimola and S. nigrum extracts significantly
decreased the IC50 of 5-FU to 5.2±0.55 and 7.6±0.85 µg/ml,
respectively; however the CI-values were indicative of additive and
antagonistic interactions, respectively (0.91 and 2.49, respectively).
After 48 h of exposure, the IC50 of 5-FU, A. cherimola and S. nigrum
extracts were 3.1±0.45, 0.87±0.22 and 7.2±0.65 µg/ml, respectively.
Similarly, combination of A. cherimola and S. nigrum extracts with 5-FU
showed additive and antagonistic interaction with CI-values of 1.05 and
3.37, respectively. After 72 h of exposure, the IC50 of 5-FU, A.
cherimola and S. nigrum extracts were 1.9±0.1, 2.1±0.24 and 2.1±0.1
µg/ml, respectively. Similarly, combination of A. cherimola and S.
nigrum extracts with 5-FU showed additive and antagonistic interaction
with CI-values of 1.2 and 2.21, respectively. Then, CnT model was used to
assess the relative influence of drug concentration and exposure time on
the cytotoxic profile of treatments under investigation. For S. nigrum
and its combination with 5-FU, n-values were 0.9 and 0.63 which is
indicative of relatively high influence of drug concentration. On the
other hand, n-value for 5-FU treatment was 0.37; this indicates higher
influence of drug exposure time compared to other treatment. The n-values
of A. cherimola and its combination with 5-FU were 0.51 and 0.54,
respectively; this indicate comparable influence of both drug
concentration and exposure time. As a confirmatory measure, expression of
the apoptotic gene, BAX, was increased after 5-FU combination with A.
cherimola and decreased after combination with S. nigrum. In conclusion,
some natural herb remedies such as A. cherimola might influence the
cytotoxic profile of 5-FU and particularly after short exposure time;
while on the other hand, some herb remedies such as S. nigrum
significantly antagonizes its cytotoxic activity against head and neck
cancer cells.


