Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the immune landscape in stage II-III melanoma
using qIF.


Background: The tumor microenvironment plays a crucial role in cancer
progression, often supporting immune evasion. This is of particular
importance in melanoma, where immune checkpoint therapies have resulted
in significant clinical benefit, yet only in a subset of melanoma
patients respond. Precise biomarkers are urgently needed to characterize
the tumor immune micro-environment, both for prognostication and to
predict the benefit of immuno-therapeutic intervention. HLA-DR on tumor
cells and Ki67 on cytotoxic (CD8+) T cells have been proposed as
biomarkers of anti-PD1 activity. Quantitative immunofluorescence (qIF)
allows for automated quantitation of phenotypes and spatial distributions
of immune cell populations within formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)
tissues.

Methods: To characterize the tumor immune microenvironment, we screened
databases at the Herbert Irving Cancer Center (HICC) at Columbia
University for early stage melanoma patients with documented clinical
follow up. We identified a preliminary population of 40 stage II-III
melanoma patients diagnosed between 2000 and 2012. Clinical follow up was
available on 21 patients, 12 of whom were alive with no evidence of
recurrence, 1 who died of another malignancy, and 8 who died of melanoma.
19 patients had more than 24 months of survival information available but
no detailed clinical information. 5Âµm slides from either primary biopsy
or subsequent wide local excision procedure were stained using qIF for
DAPI, CD3, CD8, CD68, SOX10, HLA-DR and Ki67. Cell phenotypes within
representative fields selected by a trained dermatopathologist (BH), were
visualized using multispectral imaging, and analysis of spatial
distribution of cells were analyzed using inForm image analysis software
(Perkin Elmer), and Spotfire software (TIBCO).

Results: We were able to quantify and identify coordinates for multiple
immune cell subsets in melanoma tissues. In 21 patients with clinical
follow up, we found that higher densities of CD3+CD8+ T cells in tumor
and stroma trended towards correlation with non-recurrence. In addition,
CD68+HLA-DR- predicts poor prognosis (pResults: We were able to quantify
and identify coordinates for multiple immune cell subsets in melanoma
tissues. In 21 patients with clinical follow up, we found that higher
densities of CD3+CD8+ T cells in tumor and stroma trended towards
correlation with non-recurrence. In addition, CD68+HLA-DR- predicts poor
prognosis (p<0.05), whether in tumor or stroma. Assessment of spatial
distribution across all 40 tumors demonstrated that CD3+CD8+ cells are
closer to CD68+ cells and Sox10+ tumor cells when they express HLA-DR
(pResults: We were able to quantify and identify coordinates for multiple
immune cell subsets in melanoma tissues. In 21 patients with clinical
follow up, we found that higher densities of CD3+CD8+ T cells in tumor
and stroma trended towards correlation with non-recurrence. In addition,
CD68+HLA-DR- predicts poor prognosis (p<0.05), whether in tumor or
stroma. Assessment of spatial distribution across all 40 tumors
demonstrated that CD3+CD8+ cells are closer to CD68+ cells and Sox10+
tumor cells when they express HLA-DR (p<0.001). Conversely, CD3+CD8+
cells are significantly farther from tumor cells when they express Ki-67,
(pResults: We were able to quantify and identify coordinates for multiple
immune cell subsets in melanoma tissues. In 21 patients with clinical
follow up, we found that higher densities of CD3+CD8+ T cells in tumor
and stroma trended towards correlation with non-recurrence. In addition,
CD68+HLA-DR- predicts poor prognosis (p<0.05), whether in tumor or
stroma. Assessment of spatial distribution across all 40 tumors
demonstrated that CD3+CD8+ cells are closer to CD68+ cells and Sox10+
tumor cells when they express HLA-DR (p<0.001). Conversely, CD3+CD8+
cells are significantly farther from tumor cells when they express Ki-67,
(p<0.001). Among patients with clinical follow up, CD3+CD8+ cells were
closer to CD68+HLA-DR- cells in recurrent patients (p Results: We were
able to quantify and identify coordinates for multiple immune cell
subsets in melanoma tissues. In 21 patients with clinical follow up, we
found that higher densities of CD3+CD8+ T cells in tumor and stroma
trended towards correlation with non-recurrence. In addition,
CD68+HLA-DR- predicts poor prognosis (p<0.05), whether in tumor or
stroma. Assessment of spatial distribution across all 40 tumors
demonstrated that CD3+CD8+ cells are closer to CD68+ cells and Sox10+
tumor cells when they express HLA-DR (p<0.001). Conversely, CD3+CD8+
cells are significantly farther from tumor cells when they express Ki-67,
(p<0.001). Among patients with clinical follow up, CD3+CD8+ cells were
closer to CD68+HLA-DR- cells in recurrent patients (p < 0.05).

Conclusion: Using qIF imaging and analysis we find that density and
spatial relationships of immune cell subsets correlates with recurrence
status. qIF may offer the potential for the development of prognostic
biomarkers in stage II/III melanoma.


