Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP53INP1 negatively regulates ERK1/2 via p73-dependent DUSP10
expression to promote metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma.


The recurrence and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) portends
a poor prognosis and represents important clinical challenges. There is a
great need to identify critical factors involved in HCC metastasis that
will facilitate the development of new therapeutic strategies. We have
previously found that the initiation, growth and self-renewal of CD133+
liver tumors to be fine-tuned by a balance of miR-130b overexpression and
tumor protein 53 inducible nuclear protein 1 (TP53INP1) down-regulation,
suggesting that TP53INP1 is a critical effector driving
hepatocarcinogenesis. In this study, we aimed to further investigate the
role of TP53INP1 in HCC metastasis. We showed TP53INP1 to be frequently
down-regulated in advanced stage IV and metastatic human HCC tumors as
compared with early stage (I-III) and primary tumors. Functional studies
in immortalized normal liver cell line MIHA and HCC cell line MHCC-97L
found TP53INP1 suppression in HCC to promote metastasis in vitro and in
vivo. To elucidate the downstream signaling mechanism by which TP53INP1
regulates HCC metastasis, a Proteome Profiler Human Phospho-Kinase Array
was utilized. Phospho-ERK was found to be consistently up-regulated in
HCC cell lines with TP53INP1 knocked down, with its involvement in
TP53INP1-mediated metastasis subsequently validated by rescue experiments
using an ERK inhibitor U0126 or shERK1/2 knockdown approach. ERK1/2 is
known to be negatively regulated by a family of dual-specificity MAPK
phosphatase called DUSP/MKP. Screening of a panel of DUSP/MKP family
members by qPCR identified DUSP10 to be commonly down-regulated in both
MIHA and MHCC-97L cells with TP53INP1 suppressed as compared to controls.
The importance of DUSP10 inactivation on ERK in TP53INP1-mediated HCC was
substantiated by rescue experiments whereby DUSP10 ectopic expression in
TP53INP1 suppressed cells reversed up-regulated phospho-ERK expression
and enhanced HCC aggressiveness. Subsequent analysis of the DUSP10
promoter region by open-access database revealed four putative binding
sites for p73, of which transcriptional activity has previously been
found to be modulated by TP53INP1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
luciferase reporter assays collectively demonstrated that TP53INP1 is
vital for p73 transcriptional activity of DUSP10. Taken together,
TP53INP1 down-regulation promotes HCC metastasis through a p73-dependent
DUSP10/ERK signaling pathway.


