Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: β-hydroxybutyrate inhibits histone deacetylase activity and
radiosensitizes malignant glioma cells.


Several preclinical studies support the use of the therapeutic ketogenic
diet (KD) and/or caloric restriction (CR) as an adjuvant to cancer
therapy. This data not only suggests that this approach alters multiple
hallmarks of cancer growth, but that it may also enhance other
therapeutic modalities. We have demonstrated that the unrestricted KD
greatly increases survival in a mouse model of malignant glioma when
administered in combination with radiation, yet the underlying mechanisms
are not fully elucidated. Mounting evidence suggests that the abnormal
epigenetic landscape in tumors may, among other things, impact
radiosensitivity. Specifically, many cancers exhibit increased histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity which contributes to the epigenetic milieu
found in tumors and alters DNA damage repair. It was recently
demonstrated that the ketone body β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) inhibits HDAC
activity in normal mouse tissue. As the use of HDAC inhibitors as
anti-cancer agents has generated great interest, we examined the effect
of BHB on HDAC activity and radiosensitivity in the context of malignant
glioma. We found that BHB radiosensitizes mouse glioma, human glioma and
human glioma stem-like cells in vitro. We also demonstrate that BHB
inhibits HDAC activity in a dose dependent manner and alters key
components of DNA damage repair. Taken together this data opens up
another avenue for understanding the mechanisms underlying the KD and its
impact on radiation therapy, ultimately helping us better understand how
to implement it for clinical use in oncology.


