Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel identification of STAT1 as a crucial mediator of
ETV6-NTRK3-induced tumorigenesis.


Chromosomal rearrangements that facilitate tumor formation and
progression through activation of oncogenic tyrosine kinase are
frequently observed in cancer. The ETV6-NTRK3 (EN) fusion has been
implicated in various cancers, including infantile fibrosarcoma,
secretory breast carcinoma and acute myeloblastic leukemia, and has
exhibited in vivo and in vitro transforming ability. In the present
study, we analyzed transcriptome alterations using RNA-Seq in
EN-transduced NIH3T3 fibroblasts to identify the mechanisms that are
involved in EN-mediated tumorigenesis. Through functional profile
assessment of EN-regulated transcriptome alterations, we found that EN
up-regulated genes mainly associated with cell motion, membrane
invagination, and cell proliferation, while down-regulated genes are
involved in cell adhesion, which described the transforming potential and
increased proliferation in EN-transduced cells. Notably, KEGG pathway
analysis identified the JAK-STAT signaling pathway with the highest
statistical significance. Moreover, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and gene
regulatory network analysis identified the Stat1 transcription factor and
its target genes as top EN-regulated molecules. We further demonstrated
that EN enhanced STAT1 phosphorylation but attenuated STAT1 acetylation,
thereby inhibiting the interaction between NF-κB p65 and acetylated
STAT1. Consequently, nuclear translocation of NF-κB p65 and subsequent
anti-apoptotic NF-κB activity were increased by EN. Taken together, here
we report, for the first time, STAT1 as a significantly EN-regulated
transcription factor and a crucial mediator of EN-induced tumorigenesis.
[This work was supported by a National Research Foundation grant of Korea
(NRF-2014M3A9B5073918) funded by the Korea government.]


