Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is associated with
prostate cancer progression and chemo-/radio-resistance in vitro and in
vivo.


Aims: Prostate cancer (CaP) is the most common cancer in males in
Australia which caused more than 3000 deaths in 2015. EpCAM is a
transmembrane protein that is expressed at low levels in a variety of
human epithelial tissues, but overexpressed in most solid tumors. Our
previous study indicated that EpCAM was strongly expressed in metastatic
CaP cell lines, primary human CaP tissues and lymph node metastasis and
is a biomarker involved in CaP progression, and chemo-/radio-resistance.
However, the role of EpCAM in CaP progression and therapeutic resistance
is still uncertain. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of
EpCAM in CaP progression and chemo-/radio-resistance as well as
underlying mechanisms in vitro and in vivo.

Methods: EpCAM gene was knocked down (KD) in PC-3, DU145 and LNCaP CaP
cell lines using shRNA. Proliferation assay, colony formation assay,
docetaxel (DTX) and radiation dose-response assay were carried out to
evaluate the effect of KD of EpCAM on proliferation and therapeutic
response of CaP cells in vitro. Subcutaneous (s.c) and orthotopic CaP
animal models were established using PC-3-EpCAM-KD and
PC-3-EpCAM-scramble (scr) control cells in NOD/SCID mice, to assess the
effect of EpCAM on CaP tumourigenecity, chemotherapy (DTX) and radiation
response. Signal transduction proteins in PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling
pathway, as well as proliferation, apoptotic and radiation response
markers were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in xenografts.

Results: KD of EpCAM reduced CaP proliferative potential and enhanced DTX
and radiation sensitivity in three CaP cell lines. Both s.c and
orthotopic EpCAM-KD xenografts displayed suppressed tumor growth and
increased DTX and radiation responsiveness compared to EpCAM-scr control
xenografts in NOD/SCID mice. Marked down-regulation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway proteins (p-Akt and p-mTOR) and proliferation marker (Ki-67) and
significant up-regulation of apoptotic (Caspase-3) and radiation
(É£-H2AX) responses to chemo-/radio-therapies were found in EpCAM-KD
xenografts, compared with control xenografts. In addition, Kaplan-Meier
curve analysis demonstrated that KD of EpCAM improved median survival
(MS) of tumor-bearing mice by 21.5 days compared with the control group
(HR=26.94, CI95% 4.317-168.1, p=0.0004) and that KD of EpCAM improved MS
of tumor-bearing mice which received docetaxel (50mg/kg, single dose,
i.p.) by 11 days (HR=20.95, CI95% 3.599-121.9, p=0.0007), and
radiotherapy (2Gy/day for 4 days) by 12 days (HR=11.00, CI95% 2.11-57.36,
p=0.0044) compared with the control group, respectively.

Conclusions: EpCAM plays an important role in CaP progression and
chemo-/radio-resistance via PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway in vitro and
in vivo and it is a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of
CaP. EpCAM targeted therapy combined with chemo-/radio-therapy could be a
novel modality for treatment-resistant CaP.


