Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation between vitamin D levels and DNA repair capacity in
breast cancer patients stratified by molecular subtypes.


Vitamin D exists as vitamin D2 and D3, which are metabolized to
25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], the major circulating vitamin D
metabolite. Besides its physiological functions, vitamin D levels have
also been studied as a risk factor for several hormonal cancers including
breast cancer (BC). Worldwide, BC accounts for nearly a quarter of all
cancers in women. Nutritional studies report that vitamin D intake is
associated with a lower BC risk. Several discrepancies exist regarding
the role of serum vitamin D in BC risk. While some studies report BC risk
reduction by vitamin D only in premenopausal, others propose that it only
occurs in postmenopausal women. BC tumors may (+) or may not (-) have
three hormonal receptors: estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and HER2.
Based on their status, four principal molecular BC subtypes have been
identified: luminal A (ER+/−, PR+/−, HER2-), luminal B (ER+/−,
PR+/−, HER2+), HER2+ (ER−, PR−, HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER−, PR−, HER2−). If BC is analyzed in terms of molecular
subtypes, low vitamin D levels have been associated with aggressive
phenotypes and worse prognosis. Vitamin D also influences estrogen
synthesis. Since we have previously shown that a low DNA repair capacity
(DRC), measured through the nucleotide excision repair pathway, is a risk
factor for BC and vitamin D has also been found to affect DNA repair, the
focus of this study is to examine the role of plasma vitamin D levels and
DRC in BC. The main aim is to elucidate whether there is an association
between vitamin D and DRC levels among the four molecular BC subtypes. We
hypothesize that a negative correlation between 25(OH)D and DRC levels
will be observed among these subtypes. As an initial effort, 47 BC cases
and 20 controls without BC were selected from our large BC cohort. DRC
was measured in lymphocytes of untreated women using the host cell
reactivation assay. Pathology reports were examined to divide BC cases
according to their molecular BC subtype: luminal A (n=13), luminal B
(n=11), HER2+ (n=10), and TN (n=13). Plasma 25(OH)D levels were measured
using the UniCel DxC System at a CLIA-certified lab. Our results show a
negative correlation between 25(OH)D and DRC levels (p=0.04).
Statistically significant differences were found for vitamin D levels
among the different groups (p=0.0019, ANOVA). Moreover, higher 25(OH)D
levels (47.97±2.4 ng/mL) were found in ER- BC cases (p=0.03, t-test).
When comparing vitamin D levels in BC subtypes, a significant difference
was found in HER2+ and TN groups when compared with the control group
(pVitamin D exists as vitamin D2 and D3, which are metabolized to
25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D], the major circulating vitamin D
metabolite. Besides its physiological functions, vitamin D levels have
also been studied as a risk factor for several hormonal cancers including
breast cancer (BC). Worldwide, BC accounts for nearly a quarter of all
cancers in women. Nutritional studies report that vitamin D intake is
associated with a lower BC risk. Several discrepancies exist regarding
the role of serum vitamin D in BC risk. While some studies report BC risk
reduction by vitamin D only in premenopausal, others propose that it only
occurs in postmenopausal women. BC tumors may (+) or may not (-) have
three hormonal receptors: estrogen (ER), progesterone (PR), and HER2.
Based on their status, four principal molecular BC subtypes have been
identified: luminal A (ER+/−, PR+/−, HER2-), luminal B (ER+/−,
PR+/−, HER2+), HER2+ (ER−, PR−, HER2+), and triple negative (TN)
(ER−, PR−, HER2−). If BC is analyzed in terms of molecular
subtypes, low vitamin D levels have been associated with aggressive
phenotypes and worse prognosis. Vitamin D also influences estrogen
synthesis. Since we have previously shown that a low DNA repair capacity
(DRC), measured through the nucleotide excision repair pathway, is a risk
factor for BC and vitamin D has also been found to affect DNA repair, the
focus of this study is to examine the role of plasma vitamin D levels and
DRC in BC. The main aim is to elucidate whether there is an association
between vitamin D and DRC levels among the four molecular BC subtypes. We
hypothesize that a negative correlation between 25(OH)D and DRC levels
will be observed among these subtypes. As an initial effort, 47 BC cases
and 20 controls without BC were selected from our large BC cohort. DRC
was measured in lymphocytes of untreated women using the host cell
reactivation assay. Pathology reports were examined to divide BC cases
according to their molecular BC subtype: luminal A (n=13), luminal B
(n=11), HER2+ (n=10), and TN (n=13). Plasma 25(OH)D levels were measured
using the UniCel DxC System at a CLIA-certified lab. Our results show a
negative correlation between 25(OH)D and DRC levels (p=0.04).
Statistically significant differences were found for vitamin D levels
among the different groups (p=0.0019, ANOVA). Moreover, higher 25(OH)D
levels (47.97±2.4 ng/mL) were found in ER- BC cases (p=0.03, t-test).
When comparing vitamin D levels in BC subtypes, a significant difference
was found in HER2+ and TN groups when compared with the control group
(p<0.05, Kruskal-Wallis). Based on these preliminary results we conclude
that plasma vitamin D levels may be correlated with DRC levels in women
with BC. Ongoing studies with a larger sample size are aimed at
elucidating more precisely the potential association between vitamin D
and DRC in these molecular BC subtypes.


