Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTHrP regulate CSC and promote EMT in the PyMT model of breast
cancer progression.


PTH-related peptide (PTHrP) was first discovered in cancer patients as
the primary cause of humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (HHM). We
previously showed that PTHrP ablation in the MMTV-PyMT murine model of
breast cancer progression can dramatically prolongs tumor latency, slows
tumor growth & metastases suggesting that PTHrP may regulate cancer stem
cells (CSCs). CSCs & epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have been
recognized as driving forces in tumor initiation & progression, & have
been characterized previously using ALDH & CD49/EpCAM markers. Here, we
aim to determine the role of PTHrP in CSCs & EMT regulation. For this
purpose, we analyzed tumor cells derived from Pthrpflox/flox;Cre-
(Control) & Pthrpflox/flox;Cre+ (KO) tumors. Cells were incubated with
ALDH reagent followed by CD49f/EpCAM antibody labelling & subjected to
FACS analysis. Using CD49f/EpCAM labelling, cells separated into two
distinct populations, luminal progenitor cells (CD49f+EpCAM+) & EMT cells
(CD49f+EpCAM-). In control tumors, ~85% of cells were characterized as
luminal progenitor and ~15% as EMT. In contrast, in KO tumors, ~97% of
cells were characterized as luminal progenitor whereas only ~2% were EMT.
Using ALDH staining alone, ~8% & ~10% of the cells from the control & KO
tumor were ALDH+, respectively. Furthermore, the majority of the ALDH+
cells were predominately contained within the luminal progenitor
population in both the control & KO tumors cells. Next, we confirmed the
dividing capacity of the two cell populations using a lipophilic
fluorescent dye, PKH26. As expected, luminal progenitor cells exhibited a
fast-dividing phenotype, whereas EMT cells displayed a slow dividing
phenotype. However, using mammosphere assay, we did not see any
significant difference in mammosphere forming efficiency between control
& KO tumor. In summary, PTHrP ablation significantly diminishes the EMT
population in KO compared to the control tumor. In conclusion, PTHrP may
shift the tumor cell phenotype towards EMT, which suggests a mechanism
underlying PTHrP - driven metastases.


