Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of miRNAome deregulation in the pathogenesis of non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH)-derived hepatocellular carcinoma.


Recent epidemiological studies have attributed the growing incidence of
liver cancer, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), in the United
States to NASH, an advanced form of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Elucidating the molecular pathways that lead to the development of
NASH-derived HCC is critical not only for identifying early diagnostic
biomarkers of the disease, but also for treatment and prevention. We have
investigated the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the development of
NASH-derived HCC by using a Stelic Animal Model (STAM) of liver
carcinogenesis. Using Liver miFinder PCR arrays, we examined the miRNA
profiles in the livers of STAM mice and identified 25 and 35 miRNAs that
were differentially expressed at a NASH-fibrotic stage (12 weeks) and in
full-fledged HCC (20 weeks), respectively. Among these differentially
expressed miRNAs, 18 miRNAs were in common. Multi-algorithm target
prediction analysis of the common differentially expressed miRNAs
revealed the involvement of these miRNAs in the deregulation of major
molecular processes associated with the development of HCC, including
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, HCC stem cell activation, and the
induction of the Î²-catenin/Wnt and Hippo signaling pathways. These
findings were confirmed by a marked up-regulation of Yes-associated
protein 1 (YAP1), the main effector of the Hippo-pathway, the activation
of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and an increased-expression of
hepatic progenitor cell markers. In addition to the common differentially
expressed miRNAs, 10 miRNAs, including 5 members of the polycistronic
oncomir miR-17-92 cluster, were found to be over-expressed in only HCC.
These results indicate the fundamental role of miRNAs in the development
of NASH-associated HCC. This is evidenced by the early occurrence of
miRNA alterations at the preneoplastic stage of liver carcinogenesis, the
persistence of these changes in HCC, and the accumulation of additional
miRNA alterations in HCC, and by the existence of a mechanistic link
between miRNA alterations and deregulation key cancer-related pathways.


