Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Household stove improvement and risk of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease in Xuanwei, China: a cohort study.


Background: In Xuanwei County, China, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) rates are over twice the national average. Patients with
COPD have higher risks of both lung cancer and poor treatment outcomes
after lung cancer diagnosis. In a prior retrospective cohort study
(1976-1992), household stove improvement was found to be associated with
decreased COPD incidence among lifetime smoky (bituminous) coal users.
However, whether the protective effects persist over time is unclear. Our
objective was to evaluate the associations between risk of COPD, and
vented and portable stove use with extended follow-up (1976-2011).

Methods: The study population comprised 22,833 residents who were born
between 1917 and 1951 and lived in Xuanwei as of January 1, 1976.
Participants were followed retrospectively from 1976 to 1992, and then
followed prospectively through 2011. We conducted two surveys in 1992 and
2011. During each survey, we collected comprehensive information on
household stove type, fuel use, family size and number of rooms in each
residence during the lifetime, smoking, education, age started cooking
food and time spent indoor from each subject. Participants were also
asked to report any medically diagnosed chronic bronchitis or emphysema,
age and place of diagnosis, which we combined into a single category of
COPD. COPD cases diagnosed before January 1, 1976 were excluded.
Sex-specific time-dependent Cox regression models were used to estimate
the hazard ratio (HR) of stove improvement for COPD incidence among
lifetime smoky coal users.

Results: The analysis was restricted to lifetime smoky coal users. A
significant reduction in COPD incidence was found after change to vented
stoves (Men’s model: HR=0.66, 95% confidence interval(CI): 0.59-0.75;
Women’s model: HR=0.63, 95% CI: 0.55-0.72) and portable stoves (Men’s
model: HR=0.77, 95% CI: 0.67-0.88; Women’s model: HR=0.63, 95% CI:
0.54-0.74). There was a downward trend of COPD incidence over time after
change to vented stove or portable stove (p-trendResults: The analysis
was restricted to lifetime smoky coal users. A significant reduction in
COPD incidence was found after change to vented stoves (Men’s model:
HR=0.66, 95% confidence interval(CI): 0.59-0.75; Women’s model:
HR=0.63, 95% CI: 0.55-0.72) and portable stoves (Men’s model: HR=0.77,
95% CI: 0.67-0.88; Women’s model: HR=0.63, 95% CI: 0.54-0.74). There
was a downward trend of COPD incidence over time after change to vented
stove or portable stove (p-trend<0.01). Similar findings were noted in
both men and women.

Conclusion: Consistent with prior research, our findings suggest that
household stove improvement was associated with a substantially decreased
risk of COPD, a strong risk factor for lung cancer. Domestic smoky coal
use and unvented coal combustion are important risk factors for COPD. Our
findings support the need for replacing smoky coal with less carcinogenic
fuels in areas where domestic coal use is common for cooking and heating,
especially in the developing countries.


