Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vopp1 physically interacts with Wwox and inhibits its apoptotic
function in breast cancer.


WWOX is a tumor suppressor gene spanning the fragile site FRA16D and
targeted by loss of heterozygosity or homozygous deletion in several
tumor types. Wwox protein consists of two N-terminal WW domains that
mediate protein-protein interactions and a C-terminal short-chain
Dehydrogenase/Reductase domain (SDR). The WW1 module acts as a versatile
platform linking WWOX with numerous multiprotein complexes. Thus, Wwox
suppressor activity relies on its binding capacities to various partners.
Wwox has been shown to interact with known proto-oncogenes such as p73,
deltaNp63, AP2Î³, c-jun, Erbb4, c-Met, Runx2 and Dvl-2. At the cellular
level, Wwox has been shown to be a pro-apoptotic protein that induces
cell death by acting in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. More recently,
emerging evidence also suggest an important role of WWOX in DNA damage
response. By using a yeast two-hybrid system and co-immunoprecipitation
assays, we characterized Vopp1 (Vesicular Over-expressed in cancer
Pro-survival Protein 1) as a new molecular partner of the tumor
suppressor Wwox. VOPP1 gene localizes at the frequently amplified 7p11.2
locus and is often co-amplified with EGFR. It is overexpressed in
multiple malignancies such as glioblastoma, gastric, head and neck and
lung cancers. In this study, we demonstrate that VOPP1 physically
interacts with Wwox in breast cancer cells. Upon binding, Wwox is
recruited to the Vopp1-containing lysosomal compartment. This recruitment
inhibits Wwox-mediated apoptosis at least in part by preventing Wwox-p73
interaction. In addition, Vopp1 acts as an oncogene as shown by its
capacity to potentiate cellular transformation. Moreover, in breast
cancer clinical samples, VOPP1 overexpression was detected predominantly
in tumors retaining Wwox expression. Vopp1 overexpression is associated
to a reduced survival of breast cancer patients, especially patients with
luminal B tumor types. Remarkably, the VOPP1/WWOX expression ratio showed
a significantly worst prognosis outperforming either gene alone. These
findings highlight the importance of Wwox compartimentation in addition
to Wwox loss in human cancer pathogenesis and define Vopp1 as a novel
negative regulator of Wwox whose overexpression induces breast
carcinogenesis by affecting the tumor suppressive activity of Wwox.


