Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Brush biopsy miRNA based OSCC detection and diagnosis.


RNA based diagnosis and prognosis of squamous cell carcinoma has been
slow to come to the clinic. Improvements in RNA measurement, statistical
evaluation, and sample preservation still have not made these methods
accurate enough to allow truly independent external validation. We
propose that in the case of squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity
that a chief source of variability is sample dissection which leads to
variable amounts of stroma mixed in with tumor epithelium. We have used
brush biopsy of suspicious lesions to characterize miRNA expression in
OSCC epithelium. We used it to show an 11 miRNA signature for OSCC that
can differentiate OSCC in both smokers and never smokers from normal
tissue. We will report on efforts to optimize this classifier to
distinguish OSCC from benign oral lesions such as lichen planus and
leukoplakia that can be mistaken for OSCC. We also provide evidence that
body fluid samples show similar changes in RNAs with OSCC that are seen
in brush biopsy samples -suggesting much of the RNA is coming from the
same source tumor epithelium. Finally, using a variation of mirPath
designed to eliminate false positive, we have identified the neurotrophin
signaling pathway as disregulated in most OSCC epithelium, and for the
first time highlight the miRNAs that may control this pathway in OSCC,
miR-486-5p, miR-7-5p, miR-146-5p, miR-101-3p, miR-18b-5p, miR-10b-5p,
miR-21-5p, miR-20b-5p, miR-126-3p and miR-31-5p.


