Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of miR-214-3p is associated with resistance
to p53-induced apoptosis through up-regulation of gankyrin expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third leading cause of cancer death
worldwide. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate
gene expression and can act as tumor suppressors or oncogenes. To
identify miRNA involved in the development of HCC, a genome-wide miRNA
gene expression analysis was performed using the human miRNA microarray
(Agilent) in paired HCC tumors and non-tumorous liver tissues from
patients with primary HCC. The array-based miRNA expression profiles were
validated by quantitative PCR. We also screened for genes with promoter
DNA hypermethylation using a genome-wide DNA methylation microarray
analysis (the Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip) in the same samples.
We found that miR-214-3p were significantly down-regulated by aberrant
promoter hypermethylation in HCC tumors compared to the non-tumorous
liver tissues. We identified PSMD10, which encodes gankyrin, as a direct
target of miR-214-3p using luciferase assay and immunoblotting. Gankyrin,
an oncoprotein commonly overexpressed in HCC, binds to MDM2, a major E3
ubiquitin ligase for p53, and increases ubiquitylation and degradation of
p53. Our experiments showed that reduced miR-214-3p expression was
associated with resistance to p53-induced apoptosis through up-regulation
of gankyrin expression in HCC cells. In conclusion, our results suggest
that epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor miR-214-3p is involved in
hepatocarcinogenesis through up-regulation of gankyrin expression.


