Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization by mass spectrometry of protein kinase C
substrates differentially phosphorylated in LNCaP cells in response to
phorbol ester and bryostatin 1 treatment.


Bryostatin 1 (bryo 1) is a natural product of therapeutic interest for
cancer and Alzheimer disease. Its unique behavior as a protein kinase C
activator that paradoxically antagonizes many but not all phorbol ester
responses has led to intense interest in its mechanism of action.
Recently, using microarray analysis in two different cellular systems
(LNCaP prostate cancer and U937 leukemia cell lines) where the typical
phorbol ester PMA and bryo 1 have different biology, we have shown that a
core mechanism contributing to the unique biology of bryo 1 is transiency
of action resulting in a variable extent of decreased or missing late
responses. We have excluded that there is a class of genes whose
transcription is uniquely regulated at early times by bryo 1. In
continuing to explore the mechanisms underlying the variable transiency
of the responses by bryo 1 we have evaluated the substrates
phosphorylated after treatment with PMA and bryo 1. Since PMA and bryo 1
induce differential subcellular localization of PKCs, they should result
in differential access to substrates and consequent differences in the
pattern of substrate phosphorylation. Whole cell lysates of LNCaP cells
treated for 30 min with fully effective doses (100 nM) of PMA and bryo 1
and with DMSO as vehicle control were subjected to mass spectroscopic
analysis. The comprehensive analysis identified several thousand
phosphopeptides after drug treatment including the expected
phosphopeptides for ERK2 (S185, Y187) and PKCdelta (S299, S302, S304).
Many of peptides were similarly phosphorylated in response to both drugs
(e.g. S641/S646 of Fam129B, S310 of actin-related protein 2/3 complex
subunit 1B, S876 of RhoGEF and pleckstrin domain-containing protein 2, or
multiple previously unknown sites for PKD1 (S239, S247), while a limited
number were differentially phosphorylated. PMA specific phosphorylations
included PKCdelta at Y313, mTOR at T2471, MAP4 at S624 and/or T627, E3
ubiquitin-protein ligases ZNRF2 at S82 and HUWE1 at S3818. Bryo 1
specific phosphorylations included BCL2-like 13 at S303, TOM1L2 at S424,
and MAP2K2 in the T17, T25, S26 region. Selected specific
phosphorylations are being validated using phostag gels, a method that
enables the separation of phosphorylated proteins from their
non-phosphorylated counterparts on SDS-gels. The identification of PKC
substrates that are differentially phosphorylated by bryo 1 should both
facilitate screening of other ligands capturing the biological behavior
of bryo 1 as well as further illuminate the specifics of the pathways
downstream of PKC activation by these differently acting ligands.


