Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adenine nucleotide translocase2 mediates 18F-FDG uptake in
dedifferentiated thyroid cancer.


Objectives: 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), an analogue of glucose,
provides valuable functional information based on the increased glucose
uptake and glycolysis in malignant tumor cells. Although both glucose
transporter-1 (GLUT-1) and hexokinase2 (HK2) activity have been
considered to associate with FDG uptake, the molecular mechanisms that
determine FDG uptake are still largely unknown. Adenine nucleotide
translocase 2 (ANT2) in the mitochondria inner membrane was reported to
relate with tumor malignancy. We investigated the correlation between FDG
uptake and Glut-1, HK2, and ANT2 expression in thyroid cancers throughout
various spectrums of differentiation status.

Methods: N-thy-ori (normal human thyroid cells), WRO (follicular cancer),
BHP10-3 and TPC-1 (papillary cancer), and FRO (anaplastic cancer) were
used for this research. GLUT-1, HK2, and ANT2 expressions were measured
by western blot. ANT2 siRNAs and pcDNA3.1-ANT2 vectors were used to
modify ANT2 expression. FDG uptakes were measured in thyroid cells and
human embryonic kidney cells (293FT) with HK2 or ANT2 transfection. For
patient tissue analysis, 95 thyroid tissue-array cores were evaluated,
and which are classified 36 as normal, 44 as poorly differentiated (PD),
and 15 as anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC). ANT2 expression was measured
by immunostaining, scored from 1 to 5.

Results: FDG uptake in thyroid cancer cells was increased in anaplastic
and poorly differentiated cells (PResults: FDG uptake in thyroid cancer
cells was increased in anaplastic and poorly differentiated cells
(P<0.001). GLUT-1 expression was higher in both TPC-1 and FRO than other
cells. Whereas, HK2 was expressed only in cancer cells. ANT2 was
expressed only in FRO cells and the highest FDG accumulation was also
observed in FRO. ANT2 siRNA showed decreased FDG uptake (0.55-fold) and
ANT2 overexpression increased FDG uptake (1.7-fold). In 293FT cells, HK2
and ANT2 transfection increased FDG uptake (PResults: FDG uptake in
thyroid cancer cells was increased in anaplastic and poorly
differentiated cells (P<0.001). GLUT-1 expression was higher in both
TPC-1 and FRO than other cells. Whereas, HK2 was expressed only in cancer
cells. ANT2 was expressed only in FRO cells and the highest FDG
accumulation was also observed in FRO. ANT2 siRNA showed decreased FDG
uptake (0.55-fold) and ANT2 overexpression increased FDG uptake
(1.7-fold). In 293FT cells, HK2 and ANT2 transfection increased FDG
uptake (P<0.01). PD tissues (mean = 41.7, SD = 19.7) and ATC (mean =
48.0, SD = 25.6) tissues from patients showed higher ANT2 expression than
normal (PResults: FDG uptake in thyroid cancer cells was increased in
anaplastic and poorly differentiated cells (P<0.001). GLUT-1 expression
was higher in both TPC-1 and FRO than other cells. Whereas, HK2 was
expressed only in cancer cells. ANT2 was expressed only in FRO cells and
the highest FDG accumulation was also observed in FRO. ANT2 siRNA showed
decreased FDG uptake (0.55-fold) and ANT2 overexpression increased FDG
uptake (1.7-fold). In 293FT cells, HK2 and ANT2 transfection increased
FDG uptake (P<0.01). PD tissues (mean = 41.7, SD = 19.7) and ATC (mean =
48.0, SD = 25.6) tissues from patients showed higher ANT2 expression than
normal (P<0.05).

Conclusion: We showed that ANT2 was expressed only in anaplastic thyroid
cancer cells, and this was related to FDG uptake. Higher level of ANT2
expression was observed in dedifferentiated cancer, and this indicates
that ANT2 can be used as a marker of malignancy in thyroid cancer.


