Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of spicatoside A, a steroidal saponin, via
induction of switch from autophagy to apoptotic cell death.


The antitumor activity of spicatoside A (SA), a steroidal saponin
isolated from the tuber of Liriope platyphylla (Liliaceae), and its
underlying mechanisms were investigated in HCT116 human colorectal cancer
cells. SA induced autophagy and apoptotic cell death and inhibited tumor
growth in a nude mouse xenograft model implanted with HCT116 cells.
Treatment with SA for 24 h enhanced the formation of acidic vesicular
organelles in the cytoplasm, indicating the induction of the onset of
autophagy. This event was associated with the regulation of autophagic
markers including microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3
(LC3)-II, p62, beclin 1, lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1, and
cathepsin D by inhibiting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, regulating
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, and increasing p53 levels.
However, a prolonged exposure to SA resulted in apoptosis characterized
by the accumulation of a sub-G1 cell population and an annexin
V/propidium iodide-positive cell population. Apoptosis induced by SA was
associated with the regulation of apoptotic proteins including Bcl-2,
Bax, and Bid, the release of cytochrome c into the cytosol, and the
accumulation of cleaved poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP). Further study
revealed that cleavage of beclin 1 by caspase-8 plays a critical role in
the SA-mediated switch from autophagy to apoptosis. Taken together, these
findings highlight the significance of SA in the modulation of crosstalk
between autophagy and apoptosis, as well as the potential use of SA as a
novel candidate in the treatment of human colorectal cancer cells.
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by a National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (MEST)
(No. 2009-0083533)


