Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of gene amplifications with a next-generation
sequencing cancer panel.


TruSight® Tumor 15* (TST15) uses next-generation sequencing technology
to detect somatic point mutations, insertions, and deletions in 15 genes
that are commonly mutated in solid tumors. It accurately detects
low-frequency mutations with low DNA input and is optimized for
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissue. The test is a
multiplexed PCR panel that includes primers to support amplification
detection in the EGFR, ERBB2, and MET genes.

Here we describe development of a bioinformatics analysis method to
enable detection of these gene amplifications. DNA extracted from 31 FFPE
samples with amplifications in EGFR, ERBB2, or MET—some with dual
amplifications—were diluted with DNA extracted from 18 normal FFPE
samples to create a total of 67 unique samples at low-level
amplification. Undiluted and diluted samples were assessed for quality
based on amplifiability (ΔCq or library yield) and tested with TST15.
For comparison, the samples were also tested with droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) to determine the copy ratio of target to wild type. For
amplifiable samples, the TST15 algorithm was able to detect
amplifications in EGFR and ERBB2 at ddPCR ratios of 1.4 and 1.6,
respectively. ddPCR was unable to accurately quantify low MET
amplifications; therefore, expected ddPCR ratios were used for
comparison. The TST15 algorithm was able to detect amplifications in MET
samples at an expected ddPCR ratio of 1.3. Poor sample quality (i.e.,
high ΔCq or low library yield) impaired amplification detection. In some
samples, the presence of multiple amplifications also impaired detection.

The addition of this algorithm to the TST15 workflow will allow
researchers to more accurately characterize tumor samples by detecting
somatic mutations and amplifications simultaneously.

*For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.


