Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of enhanced Tagged-Amplicon Sequencing and digital PCR
for circulating tumor DNA analysis in advanced breast cancer.


Background Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) analysis allows non-invasive
detection of tumor mutations and amplifications in advanced breast
cancer. Multiple technologies have been developed to analyse ctDNA and
here we compared two leading ctDNA detection technologies, enhanced
Tagged-Amplicon Sequencing™ (eTAm-Seq™) and digital PCR (dPCR)
assays, in advanced breast cancer.

Methods We recruited a cohort of 35 women with advanced breast cancer, of
whom 23 had two separate blood samples taken in a standard EDTA tube
processed immediately or in preservative Streck tubes processed up to 120
hours after venipuncture. Digital PCR was conducted with assays for
hotspot actionable mutations in 3 known drivers in breast cancer: PIK3CA
exon 9 and 20, ESR1 ligand binding domain and AKT1 (c.49G>A; p.E17K), and
ctDNA sequencing was conducted with eTAm-Seq method using a 35-gene panel
including cancer hotspots, entire coding regions and copy number variants
(CNVs).

Results Across both assays, 37 mutations were detected in 35 patients,
with PIK3CA mutation in 13 patients (37%), ESR1 mutations in 10 patients
(29%), and no AKT1 mutations. ESR1 mutations were polyclonal in 8
patients, with ctDNA eTAm-Seq method revealing substantially more
diversity in mutations, with up to 8 individual mutations detected in a
patient. There was 96.15% agreement for PIK3CA mutation detection between
assays (Kappa 0.89, 95% CI 0.743 to 1.000), 100% agreement for ESR1
mutations (Kappa 1.00, 95% CI 1.000 to 1.000). There was very high
correlation in mutation allele frequency between eTAm-Seq and dPCR
(r=0.93, 95%CI 0.86 to 0.96, pResults Across both assays, 37 mutations
were detected in 35 patients, with PIK3CA mutation in 13 patients (37%),
ESR1 mutations in 10 patients (29%), and no AKT1 mutations. ESR1
mutations were polyclonal in 8 patients, with ctDNA eTAm-Seq method
revealing substantially more diversity in mutations, with up to 8
individual mutations detected in a patient. There was 96.15% agreement
for PIK3CA mutation detection between assays (Kappa 0.89, 95% CI 0.743 to
1.000), 100% agreement for ESR1 mutations (Kappa 1.00, 95% CI 1.000 to
1.000). There was very high correlation in mutation allele frequency
between eTAm-Seq and dPCR (r=0.93, 95%CI 0.86 to 0.96, p<0.0001). The
sensitivity and specificity for HER2 amplification detection by eTAm-Seq
was 100% compared to tumor HER2 status. Comparison of immediate
processing and Streck tubes revealed 97.92% agreement (Kappa 0.95, 95% CI
0.868 to 1.000) for mutation calling.

Conclusions This study demonstrates that ctDNA analysis using eTAmSeq and
dPCR have very high agreement in mutation detection in patients with
advanced breast cancer patients. Streck tubes present a robust
alternative to immediate processing of samples. eTAm-Seq and digital PCR
have high clinical validity in mutation detection.


