Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations in SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex sensitize tumors
to OXPHOS inhibition.


Recent large-scale cancer genomic studies have established a framework in
which biological functions and genetic interactions of established and
novel cancer genes can be explored. One of the major findings of these
studies has been the discovery of frequent genetic alterations in
chromatin and epigenetic regulators including inactivating mutations in
components of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. In lung
adenocarcinoma in particular, a quarter of tumors have inactivating
mutations in the SWI/SNF components Smarca4, ARID1A or the histone
modifier SETD2. With the aim of understanding the mechanism of tumor
development and identifying potential vulnerabilities of SWI/SNF mutant
tumor, we developed a genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) of lung
adenocarcinoma by selectively ablating Smarca4 in the respiratory
epithelium. We demonstrate that Smarca4 acts as a bona fide tumor
suppressor and cooperates with p53 loss. Cross species integrative gene
expression analyses revealed signatures of enhanced oxidative
phosphorylation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) response in Smarca4
mutant murine and human lung tumors. We further show that Smarca4 mutant
cells have increased oxygen consumption, enhanced basal and maximal
respiratory capacity and production of ROS. This is primarily driven by
activation of the mitochondrial master regulator, PGC1alpha. Finally, we
show that Smarca4 and other SWI/SNF mutant lung cancer cell lines have
exquisite sensitivity to inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation using a
novel small molecule that is under development. These findings provide a
mechanistic basis for further development of OXPHOS inhibitors as
therapies in SWI/SNF mutant tumors.


