Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anticancer effects of combined γ-tocotrienol and
pterostilbene is associated with a suppression in Rac1/WAVE 2 signaling
in highly malignant breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of
cancer death in American women. Rho GTPases play a crucial role in
regulating different cellular functions, including cell proliferation,
gene expression, cell morphology, actin polymerization, cell motility,
metastasis and apoptosis. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein family
verprolin-homologous protein2 (WAVE2) is a member within the
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) family displays a significant
role in actin polymerization and cytoskeletal organization which, are
essential for cellular migration and invasion. γ-Tocotrienol is a
natural isoform within the vitamin E family that displays anticancer
activity against a variety of cancer cell types. Pterostilbene is a
natural dimethyl ether analog of resveratrol that has several beneficial
effects such as anticancer activity. Studies were conducted to examine
the effects of combined γ-tocotrienol and pterostilbene on Rac1/WAVE 2
signaling in mouse +SA and human MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells and
cellular migration. Results show that combined treatment of
γ-tocotrienol and pterostilbene caused a synergistic inhibition of both
mouse +SA and human MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells growth, and
corresponding reduction in Rac1/WAVE2 signaling as characterized by a
significant inhibition in the levels of phospho-Rac1/cdc42, WAVE2, Arp2,
and Arp3 expression. Additional studies indicated that this combination
resulted in a significant inhibition in mammary cancer cell migration. In
summary, these findings strongly suggest that combined treatment of
γ-tocotrienol with pterostilbene may provide great benefit as a
therapeutic approach in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.
Supported by a grant from the Louisiana Cancer Foundation.


