Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NGS reveals specimen characteristics have minimal impact on immune
gene expression signature.


Background: Therapeutic antibodies targeting immune checkpoint molecules
have been approved by the FDA for the treatment of several types of
cancer. Currently, evaluation of the tumor checkpoint blockade is limited
to FDA-approved IHC assays measuring PD-L1 ligand status which is
subjective and not analytically robust. As the number of antibodies
targeting immune checkpoints expands, assays that can evaluate additional
biomarkers in tumor specimens are needed to accurately predict patient
response to these drugs. To address these issues, a custom immune
response NGS assay was developed to measure the transcript level of 54
genes involving T-cell receptor signaling (TCRS) and tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) in solid tumors of various characteristics including
heterogeneity, disease, biopsy type and age. As part of the study, we
evaluated the impact these variable have on the immune gene expression
signature and their role as possible assay interferents.

Methods: Studies were designed to evaluate the analytical performance of
a targeted RNA-seq assay for FFPE samples from NSCLC, melanoma, RCC,
HNSCC, kidney and bladder cancer. To assess degree of assay tolerance to
the wide range of specimen characteristics that are inherent in tumors,
samples and mixed samples of various histopathologic characteristics were
included. PCA and unsupervised clustering was performed on samples with
checkpoint inhibition, TCRS and TILs genes to reveal sample groups with
three distinct immune signatures (low, indeterminate and high). Further
correlation and over-representation analysis was performed to determine
impact of specimen characteristics on these three immune signatures.

Results: Immune signatures were maintained for the majority of
characteristics studied within a specified range. As expected, only TIL
status was significantly associated with the high expression group. Other
factors including architecture, neoplastic content, percent necrosis,
stroma quality/quantity, T-Path, PMR, specimen type, tissue amount and
specimen age were not over-represented in any immune signature.

Conclusion: Tumor samples harbor a mixture of potential assay
interferents including variable benign, neoplastic and immune cells
populations with both na√Øve and reactive stroma contributing to a
complex tumor microenvironment that is difficult to catalogue prior to
testing. Our study demonstrates that the immune signature present in the
tumor microenvironment is sufficiently strong to withstand a wide range
of tumor heterogeneity, thereby reducing the need of extensive tissue
macrodissection and the exclusion of samples previously thought to be
non-evaluable.


