Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gr1-MDSCs and Tregs modulate the prostate cancer progression.


Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and Regulatory T cells (Tregs)
are the major components of immunosuppressive network that play a
critical role in tumor immune evasion. The mechanisms by which tumors
induce expansion of suppressive cells and the crosstalk between Gr1-MDSCs
(Gr1+, CD11b+, F4/80+) and Tregs relative to TGF-β secretion remain
incompletely defined. Prior studies have suggested that MDSCs may
contribute to Treg recruitment in cancer. Herein, the goal of this
investigation is to examine the role of TGF-β mediated generation of
Tregs and Gr1-MDSCs during prostate cancer progression and clearance. To
achieve this goal, matrigel system was used along with transgenic
adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP-C1, C2 and C3 cell) in C57BL/6
mice. Interestingly, TRAMP-C3 cells are characterized as non-tumorigenic;
however, TRAMP-C1 and TRAMP-C2 cells do form tumor. Mice were
administered with serial log concentration of TRAMP (C1, C2 and C3) cells
along with the matrigel. After three weeks, matrigels along with or
without tumor were excised from tumor bearing mice, single cell
suspensions was prepared and cells were flow analyzed for GR1-MDSCs and
Tregs. Additionally, the TGF-β level was also estimated (colorimetric)
in culture supernatant in context to MDSCs and Treg expansion. Our
initial findings suggest that the expression of Gr1-MDSCs (Gr1+, CD11b+,
F4/80+) and Foxp3+ Tregs increased in TRAMP-C1 and C2 as compared to
TRAMP-C3 bearing C57BL/6 mice. These findings indicate that the
modulation of Gr1-MDSCs and Tregs could help in tumor suppression.


