Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acid synthase is a risk factor for bleomycin-induced lung
fibrosis in mice.


Pulmonary fibrosis is a significant complication in cancer patients
treated with radiation or various chemotherapeutic agents. One such
reagent, bleomycin, is used to treat a variety of cancers including, but
not limited to, lymphoma, ovarian cancer, and melanoma. Its efficacy,
however, is impacted by the incidence of significant pulmonary fibrosis,
which often becomes dose limiting. In studies investigating the role(s)
of metabolism in the profibrotic actions of transforming growth factor
beta, we previously determined that increased fatty acid synthase (FASN)
expression was observed in the fibrotic areas of lungs from idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients compared to healthy controls. In that
FASN levels are significantly increased in numerous human tumors
including breast, prostate, colorectal, and ovarian, we wished to
integrate these findings by examining whether inhibiting FASN activity
could reduce pulmonary fibrosis. To that end, the cerulenin-derived FASN
inhibitor C75 was tested in a murine treatment model of bleomycin-induced
lung fibrosis. Following addition of C75, there was significant
diminution in a number of profibrotic targets including collagen 1Î±1,
fibronectin, connective tissue growth factor, and total lung collagen as
assessed by hydroxyproline content. Not only was there a C75
dose-dependent decrease in the aforementioned targets, but lung function
as assessed by peripheral blood oxygenation (on room air) was also
stabilized/improved. Thus, FASN inhibition might reflect a possible
target to maintain normal lung physiology in the context of cancer
chemotherapy.

This work was supported by Public Health Service grants GM-055816 and
GM-054200 from the National Institutes of General Medical Sciences.


