Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Linking AP/MS-derived protein-protein interaction networks and
pairwise sgRNA screens defines new KRAS effectors in non-small cell lung
cancer.


The KRAS oncogene is mutated in over one fourth of human cancers. Despite
decades of work studying known effector pathways, no drugs in clinical
use specifically target KRAS-mutant tumors. Uncharacterized feedback
mechanisms and parallel pathways have stymied the treatment of
KRAS-mutant tumors in patients, and the KRas protein does not easily
accommodate the binding of inhibitory small molecules. These challenges
demand better characterization of the physical and genetic relationships
between Ras regulators and effectors. To that end, we used tandem
affinity purification of Kras, Hras and Nras and twelve proteins with
known regulatory or effector roles to generate a high-confidence
protein-protein interaction (PPI). Interactions were cross-referenced
with public PPI, genetic susceptibility, and patient data to assemble a
physical PPI map annotated with important functional determinants. The
final map contains 287 genes and 990 physical interactions among them.
This map was used to construct a library of >1000 sgRNAs covering >100
genes of probable relevance to the Ras pathway. This library was screened
for pairwise genetic effects in a dual sgRNA vector system to identify
quantitative changes in the growth of the A549 NSCLC line. We will
present the quantitative results of this screen and additional validation
studies on several previously undescribed regulators and effectors of the
Ras proteins. In particular, we highlight unknown interactions between
KRAS and the cell adhesion regulator RADIL, and the specificity of
Ras-family protein interaction with the Raf and Ral GEF family proteins.
These data underscore the limitations of our current understanding of
Kras-driven cancers and reveal their genetic vulnerabilities.


