Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histopathology of patient derived organoids for the quantitative
analysis of response to microenvironmental perturbations.


Patient derived organoids are becoming a popular 3D in vitro model that
more accurately recapitulate in vivo conditions compared to standard 2D
culture systems. Organoids consist of epithelial cells and lack stroma
and mesenchyme, allowing cells of interest to be studied as an isolated
system. However, the tunability of the organoid model also permits the
re-addition of microenvironmental factors, i.e. cancer associated
fibroblasts (CAFs), resulting in a wide range of experimental
capabilities. Organoids are easily scalable, making them more efficient
and cost-effective than traditional animal models. Despite the popularity
of animal models for pre-clinical drug testing, there still remain issues
with translating results from animal testing to patient outcomes; even
patient-derived xenograph models experience non-physiological mouse-human
interactions. Therefore, studying the impact of microenvironmental
perturbations, such as the presence of CAFs, or nutrient and drug
gradients, on organoids may reduce translational error. Using our
biorepository of patient derived colon cancer (primary and liver
metastases) organoids, we can observe changes in tumor architecture and
cell growth or death, allowing us to more accurately assess the efficacy
of drug therapies and observe how interpatient heterogeneity impacts
their efficacy. Here we focus on the histopathology of different patient
derived organoids to quantitatively study cell growth or death under drug
treatments (+/- CAFs) which could ultimately become a standard procedure
for drug screening.

Here we investigate the effects of CAF co-culture in patient derived
organoids in response to standard chemotherapies such as Irinotecan and
Oxaliplatin. Following treatment, the organoids are paraffin fixed to
retain their structural integrity, then sectioned. The samples are
stained with H&E to show the tumor architecture, and immunofluorescent
antibodies (IF) to identify cells that are proliferating (Ki67) or
apoptotic (TUNEL). As a result, we are able to investigate how tumor
microenvironmental factors affect the tumor architecture of an individual
patient tumor. We also examine the cytotoxic or cytostatic effects of
standard chemotherapies by quantitating the number of proliferative and
apoptotic cells, as well as their location within the tumor, in response
to the presence of both CAFs and therapy.

Ultimately, we envision the method outlined here will further personalize
medicine by allowing physicians to more rapidly assess an individual
patientâ€™s response to therapy and adjust treatment accordingly.
Additionally, this method could prove to be a more inexpensive and faster
means of screening new drug compounds. By creating a system that more
closely recapitulates patient outcomes, we hope to move therapies towards
faster approval while still retaining results representative of in vivo
outcomes.


