Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bulk lung cancer cell migration is more common than single cell
migration and regulated by different genes.


Introduction: There are two different forms how tumor cells migrate:
single cell or small cell cluster movement as it is seen in small cell
carcinoma, and movement by large clusters of organized cells as seen most
often in adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma. This latter migration
form is not understood. Drosophila border cells forming wings migrate in
large cell complexes similar to what is seen in the carcinomas and the
genes identified in these cells might regulate the same process in
carcinomas. Methods: 30 cases of pulmonary squamous cell and
adenocarcinomas were selected based on the identification of large tumor
cell clusters visible within the stroma as well as in blood vessels.
Immunohistochemistry was done for receptor of activated C kinase (Rack1),
brinker (brk), mother against dpp (mad), and saxophone (sax), proteins
shown to be responsible for bulk cell movement in drosophila development.
In addition immunohistochemistry was also done for Src-kinase, Twist,
Snail, and TGFÎ²1 Tyrosine kinase substrate 5 (Tks5), E-cadherin, SARI
(suppressor of AP-1), and vimentin, all known to be associated with
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and formation of invadopodia.
Results and Conclusion: Most well differentiated pulmonary carcinomas
migrate in large cell clusters, for example acinar adenocarcinomas form
nicely structured acini deep within the stroma and even within blood
vessels. These carcinomas do not undergo classical EMT. Proteins
expressed by the four genes (Rack1, brk, mad, and sax) associated with
border cell movement in drosophila could also be identified in pulmonary
carcinomas and might coordinate bulk cell movement. Other members of
TGF-beta signaling cascade were identified. Inhibition of Src by Rack1
may be important for border cell migration and cluster cohesion
maintenance. Proteins usually seen in single tumor cell migration, such
as vimentin (a sign of EMT) could not be proven in the tumor cell
clusters. Findings of this study show that similar mechanisms are working
in pulmonary carcinomas and that bulk cell migration is probably another
way of metastasis. Further investigation using cell culture system and
genetically designed adenocarcinomas expressing these genes should prove
our findings and contribute in understanding migration of carcinoma bulk
complexes.


