Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src-like adaptor protein 2 negatively regulates FLT3 and KIT
downstream signaling.


Type III receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) including FLT3 and KIT play a
major role in cell differentiation, proliferation, and survival of
hematopoietic stem cells. FLT3-ITD and KIT-D816V mutations are the most
common oncogenic mutations in FLT3 and KIT found in hematological
cancers. These mutations lead to constitutive activation of proliferative
and survival signals. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in combination
with chemotherapy display promising results in a clinical setting, but
patients develop resistant disease after short-term treatment,. Hence,
proteins that regulate the activity of RTKs can be alternative targets
for patients carrying these mutations. Activation of FLT3 and KIT results
in phosphorylation on several tyrosine residues that recruit SH2
domain-containing signaling proteins. In this study we identified
Src-like adaptor protein 2 (SLAP2) as a potent FLT3 and KIT interacting
protein. The interaction requires an intact SH2 domain of SLAP2 as well
as phosphorylation of the receptor. Overexpression of SLAP2 in murine
proB Ba/F3 cells inhibited oncogenic FLT3-ITD-mediated cell proliferation
and colony formation. SLAP2 displayed a similar inhibitory potential in
cells expressing KIT-D816V. SLAP2 partially blocked phosphorylation of
several FLT3 and KIT downstream signaling proteins such as AKT, ERK and
p38. Moreover, SLAP2 expression inhibited FLT3-ITD-mediated STAT5
phosphorylation and KIT-D816V-mediated STAT3 phosphorylation. SLAP2
expression significantly accelerated ubiquitination-mediated degradation
of FLT3 and KIT. Collectively, these data suggest that SLAP2 negatively
regulates FLT3 and KIT signaling and therefore, modulation of SLAP2
expression levels may become a potential target for anticancer therapy.


