Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interethnic germline variants in mitochondrial DNA polymerase
(POLG1) induce mitochondrial dysfunction and confer tumorigenic
properties.


Purpose: Germline variants contribute to large fraction of the diversity
observed among different ethnic groups and could give better insights in
genetic predisposition and susceptibility from one population to another
for certain disease including cancer. Decreased mitochondrial OXPHOS is
one of the most common phenotypes of cancer cells. Mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) depletion impairs OXPHOS and adaptive metabolic responses. In
this context, DNA polymerase Î³ (POLG1) is known to function in human
mitochondria and performs critical function of mtDNA replication and
repair. POLG1 is the most frequent target of gene mutation and is
involved in variety of mitochondrial diseases. POLG1 protein consists of
exonuclease, linker and polymerase domain, each with distinct functions.
Mutations in exonuclease domain leads to erroneous proofreading and is
responsible for increased mutations in mtDNA whereas mutations in
polymerase domain leads to erroneous replication and hence depletion in
mtDNA. Germline variants in these domains of POLG1 may serve as important
signature markers in association studies of individuals in a population
study. Through our present study, we identified germline variants,
examined copy number variation, expression and regulation of POLG1 gene
in human cancers. We provide evidence that altered POLG1 expression as
well as germline variations in POLG1 gene contribute to tumorigenesis.

Methods: A comprehensive race based bioinformatics analysis of POLG1 gene
in European-American and African-American was conducted and several
unique germline mutations were discovered. To analyze functional
contribution of these unique germline mutations in tumor progression,
these unique prevalent mutations in the evolutionary conserved regions of
exonuclease and polymerase domains we generated by site directed
mutagenesis and functional and tumorigenic analysis was performed.

Results: We observed marked differences in copy number variation of POLG1
through cBioPortal and Cosmic databases and validated the analysis in
primary tumors and cancer cell lines. Our results also indicate that
mtDNA copy number in cancer cell is governed by regulation of POLG1
methylation and demethylation status, suggestive of epigenetic regulation
of POLG1. We identified a mitochondrial disease causing missense
variation in polymerase domain of POLG1 at amino acid 1143 (E1143G) to be
25 times more prevalent in European-Americans when compared to
African-Americans population. Expression of this germline variant
(E1143G) increased glucose consumption, decreased ATP production and
increased matrigel invasion.

Discussion/ Conclusion: We demonstrate that POLG1 is epigenetically
regulated and its unique germline variants contribute to disruption of
mitochondrial function. Thus contributes to differences in increased
predisposition to cancer in inter-ethnic population.


