Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted gene therapy Â· c-MYC and hTERT in the scope.


In the past decade immunotherapy and kinase inhibitors have
revolutionized the approach for cancer therapy, particularly for melanoma
which has benefit from this new therapy in the last 5 years. Although,
new treatment increase patient survival, there is no cure and treatments
are often limited to a subtype of patients. Therefore there is still an
urgent need for efficient therapy for melanoma. Among potential targets
for cancer therapy, c-MYC and hTERT which are overexpressed in up-to 85%
of all cancers are the most promising. The overexpression of hTERT
provides indefinite division to cancer cells. Deregulation of c-MYC
affect a large array of genes involved in cell cycle,
proliferation/differentiation and apoptosis. Notably, both c-MYC and
hTERT genes have in their promoter area a G-rich sequence that form
secondary structure called G-quadruplex. These G-quadruplex structures
are part of the silencers and are required for the repression of c-MYC or
hTERT transcription. Mutations in the G-rich sequences of hTERT promoter
destabilize the G-quadruplex and are associated with incidence of
melanoma. We have shown that oligonucleotides encoding for the
G-quadruples sequences of these genes promoter downregulate their
respective gene expression and inhibit cell growth in different cell
lines. We investigated the effect of targeting c-MYC or hTERT gene
expression in melanoma cell lines using oligonucleotides targeted to the
silencer G-quadruplex sequence. Four cell lines where investigated
(SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-3, SK-Mel-28 and A375) for the effect of Pu27
(targeting c-MYC) and Tert-FL (targeting hTERT) on cell proliferation
using MTT assay. The treatment for 6 days resulted in 60% growth
inhibition in the presence of Pu27 and 50% in the presence of Tert-FL for
SK-Mel-2, SK-Mel-3, SK-Mel-28 while A375 was less sensitive. Gene
expression evaluated by QRT-PCR showed down-regulation of c-MYC and hTERT
in cell exposed to Pu27 and hTERT in cells exposed to Tert-FL. hTERT
expression is regulated by c-MYC and in our experiment the
down-regulation of c-MYC correlate with down-regulation of hTERT
suggesting a cascade effect. In addition, SOX2 gene expression was also
down-regulated by Pu27 suggesting an effect on the cancer stem cells
(CSC). Our data demonstrate that oligonucleotides targeted to c-MYC and
hTERT down-regulate gene expression associated with melanoma cell growth
inhibition and possibly on metastasis.


