Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species modulator 1 (Romo1) predicts unfavorable
prognosis in colorectal cancer patients.


Reactive oxygen species modulator 1 (Romo1) is a novel protein that has
been reported to be crucial for cancer cell proliferation and invasion.
However, its clinical implications in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients
are not well-known. For the first time, we investigated the association
between Romo1 and the clinical outcomes of CRC patients. We examined
Romo1 expression in resected tumor tissues immunohistochemically and
assessed it with histological scores. We conducted survival analyses for
patients who had curative resection (n=190) in accordance with clinical
parameters including level of Romo1 expression, and we examined the
association between Romo1 expression and cell invasion using Matrigel
invasion assay in CRC cell lines. We observed significantly longer mean
disease-free survival (DFS) in the low Romo1 group compared with the high
Romo1 group (161 vs 127.6 months, p=0.035), and the median overall
survival (OS) of the low Romo1 group was significantly longer than that
of the high Romo1 group (196.9 vs 171.3 months, p=0.036). Cell
invasiveness decreased in the Romo1 knockdown CRC cells in contrast to
the controlled cells. Romo1 overexpression in tumor tissue was associated
with a high lymph node ratio (LNR) between the metastatic and examined
lymph nodes (p=0.025). Romo1 overexpression in tumor tissue was
significantly associated with survival in curatively resected CRC
patients, suggesting Romo1 expression as a potential adverse prognostic
marker. Increased Romo1 expression was found to be associated with high
LNR. Cancer invasiveness appeared to be a key reason for the poor
survival related to highly expressed Romo1.


