Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A 3D culture system identifies a new mode of cetuximab resistance
and disease-relevant genes in colorectal cancer.


We previously reported that single cells from a human colorectal cancer
(CRC) cell line (HCA-7) formed either hollow single-layered polarized
cysts or solid spiky masses when plated within type-I collagen in 3D. To
begin in-depth analyses into whether clonal cysts and spiky masses
possessed divergent malignant properties, individual colonies of each
morphology were isolated and expanded. The lines thus derived faithfully
retained the parental cystic and spiky morphologies and were termed CC
(cystic) and SC (spiky), respectively. Although both CC and SC expressed
EGF receptor (EGFR), cetuximab strongly inhibited growth of CC, whereas
SC was resistant to growth inhibition and this was coupled to increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of MET and RON. Addition of the dual MET/RON
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, crizotinib, to cetuximab in SC restored
cetuximab sensitivity. To characterize genome-wide divergence between CC
and SC, we performed comprehensive genomic and transcriptomic analysis of
CC and SC in 3D. One of the most upregulated genes in CC was the tumor
suppressor 15-PGDH/HPGD and the most upregulated gene in SC was versican
(VCAN) in 3D and xenografts. Analysis of a human CRC tissue microarray
showed that epithelial, but not stromal, VCAN staining strongly
correlated with reduced survival, and combined epithelial VCAN and absent
HPGD staining portended a poorer prognosis. Thus, with this 3D system, we
have identified a new mode of cetuximab resistance and a potential
prognostic marker in CRC. As such, this represents a potentially powerful
system to identify additional therapeutic sensitivities and
disease-relevant genes for CRC.


