Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single cell RNA sequencing dissects cellular growth factor
dependencies and oncogenic driver effects in an organoid model of gastric
cancer.


Gastric cancer is a lethal malignancy with few therapeutic options.
Gastric tumors rely on complex intercellular signaling “crosstalk”
that enables tumor development, metastasis, and therapeutic resistance.
To recapitulate the intercellular communications among various cell
populations that exist in vivo, we are using a three-dimensional culture
system to grow and manipulate mouse gastric tissue in vitro, otherwise
referred to as organoids. Importantly, this organoid model contains
epithelium with its endogenous mesenchymal niche and does not require
exogenous Wnt stimulation. To systematically analyze the distinct
cellular lineages and their interactions, we applied a massively-scaled
single cell RNA-Seq platform to sequence thousands of individual cells
from organoid cultures. With PCA and t-SNE analysis of the
high-dimensional data generated from single cell RNA-seq, we
characterized two major cell types, i.e. epithelial and mesenchymal
cells. Leverage the information from single cell transcriptome profiles,
we identified specific niche factors of the Wnt signaling pathways that
are activated in different stomach cell lineages. These results suggest
that the mesenchymal cell populations provide a potential source of the
R-spondin, a Wnt agonist, that sustains the growth of epithelium.
Furthermore, we compared cell populations from Cdh1-/-/Trp53-/- and
Trp53-/-organoids, and characterized changes on the transcriptome
profiles due to the loss of Cdh1, an early oncogenic event in diffuse
gastric cancer development. Overall, using organoid model and
high-throughput single cell RNA-Seq provides a novel approach to study
early tumor transformation and critical cancer-stroma interactions.


