Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low miR-222 expression levels predict long-term survival of
patients affected by glioblastoma.


Introduction MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs which are known
to play an important role in proliferation, differentiation, invasion and
angiogenesis of different malignant tumors. The role of tissue and blood
level of miRNAs as useful bio-markers of gliomagenesis is also
increasing. Interest is growing on tissue and plasma miR-222 level as
prognostic marker in first line chemo- and radiotherapy treated patients
with glioma, the mechanisms of action and the target genes of this miRNA
in gliomagenesis being under extensive investigation. Furthermore, some
evidence exist that miR-221 and miR-222 are upregulated in glioblastoma
(GBM) patients and that these paralogues target O(6)-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) mRNA. Here we focused on the prognostic role of
tissue miR-222 in GBM patients.

Experimental procedures 63 GBM patients were included in the analysis
(overall survival (OS) range: 8-122 months). For each patient
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples at first surgery were
collected. miR-222 expression level was analyzed by qRT-PCR with TaqMan
probe, normalizing miR-222 level on miR-U6 level. OS was analyzed by
Kaplan-Meyer (K-M) survival curves. MGMT methylation analysis by
pyrosequencing on tumoral DNA is on-going.

Results In silico analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for GBM
defined a median OS of 13.6 months in the whole sample population
(n=199). Comparison of median OS, done stratifying two groups according
to median tissue miR-222 expression level (low 222 vs high 222), showed a
significant increased OS in low 222 patients (14.3 vs 13.1 months,
p=0.017). Interestingly, K-M curves overlapped for the first 14 months
and then diverged after. In particular, K-M analyses starting from 14
months revealed a significantly increased hazard ratio for high 222
patients (HR 1.96, 95% CI = 1.25 - 3.09, pResults In silico analysis of
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for GBM defined a median OS of 13.6 months
in the whole sample population (n=199). Comparison of median OS, done
stratifying two groups according to median tissue miR-222 expression
level (low 222 vs high 222), showed a significant increased OS in low 222
patients (14.3 vs 13.1 months, p=0.017). Interestingly, K-M curves
overlapped for the first 14 months and then diverged after. In
particular, K-M analyses starting from 14 months revealed a significantly
increased hazard ratio for high 222 patients (HR 1.96, 95% CI = 1.25 -
3.09, p<0.004) in respect to low 222 patients, being the median OS
prolonged of further 15.1 months in low 222 and of 6.6 months in high 222
patients. On this basis, we tested the hypothesis of a possible role of
miR-222 in a local sample population of 63 GBM patients with prolonged
survival. MiR-222 expression level was measured as described above.
Therefore, patients were stratified in two groups according to median
tissue miR-222 expression level (low 222 vs high 222) and OS analysed on
a K-M curve. The Hazard Ratio for high 222 patients was significantly
higher (HR=5.30, 95% CI = 2.53-11.11, pResults In silico analysis of The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for GBM defined a median OS of 13.6 months in
the whole sample population (n=199). Comparison of median OS, done
stratifying two groups according to median tissue miR-222 expression
level (low 222 vs high 222), showed a significant increased OS in low 222
patients (14.3 vs 13.1 months, p=0.017). Interestingly, K-M curves
overlapped for the first 14 months and then diverged after. In
particular, K-M analyses starting from 14 months revealed a significantly
increased hazard ratio for high 222 patients (HR 1.96, 95% CI = 1.25 -
3.09, p<0.004) in respect to low 222 patients, being the median OS
prolonged of further 15.1 months in low 222 and of 6.6 months in high 222
patients. On this basis, we tested the hypothesis of a possible role of
miR-222 in a local sample population of 63 GBM patients with prolonged
survival. MiR-222 expression level was measured as described above.
Therefore, patients were stratified in two groups according to median
tissue miR-222 expression level (low 222 vs high 222) and OS analysed on
a K-M curve. The Hazard Ratio for high 222 patients was significantly
higher (HR=5.30, 95% CI = 2.53-11.11, p<0.0001), being the median OS of
55 month in low 222 vs 30 months in high 222 GBM patients, respectively.

Conclusions Quantitative analysis of miR-222 expression in the tumor
tissue obtained at first surgery might provide a relevant prediction of
prolonged survival in GBM patients. Further conclusions will be presented
on the relationship between miR-222 and MGMT which will shed light on a
possible role of miR-222 on gene methylation and GBM epigenetics.


