Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual mTORC1/2 inhibition sensitizes testicular cancer cell lines
toward cisplatin treatment.


Testicular cancer (TC) patients with metastatic disease and poor
prognosis have a 50% 5-year survival. It has been reported that resistant
TC cell lines show hyperactivation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. In this
study we investigated the potential benefit from PI3K, Akt and mTOR
inhibition in combination with cisplatin in TC.

Our panel of embryonal carcinoma cell lines include the
cisplatin-sensitive cells: Tera and 833KE and the cisplatin-resistant
cells: Scha, TeraCP and NCCIT. Western blotting showed that the resistant
TC cell line TeraCP expresses higher levels of p-Akt compared to the
sensitive cell line Tera. To evaluate sensitization towards cisplatin, TC
cell lines were treated with cisplatin and/or PI3K inhibitor GDC0941, Akt
inhibitor MK2206, mTORC1 inhibitor everolimus and mTORC1/2 inhibitors
AZD8055 and AZD2014 for 24 hours and DilC5/PI staining was performed to
estimate apoptosis with flow cytometry. All TC cell lines were strongly
sensitized by mTORC1/2 inhibition by increasing cisplatin induced
apoptosis to 60-80% when cisplatin alone induced only 15-30%. TC cells
were also sensitized by mTORC1 and PI3K inhibition but to a lesser
extent. Akt inhibition did not sensitize Scha or Tera cells to cisplatin,
while TeraCP was marginally sensitized. We then evaluated clonogenic
capacity in cells pretreated with AZD8055 for 24 hours and seeded in the
presence of different concentrations of cisplatin for 6 days. Clonogenic
capacity was reduced in Tera and TeraCP after mTORC1/2 inhibition with
AZD8055 compared with control cells treated with cisplatin only. Western
blot done with Scha, Tera and TeraCP lysates treated for 24 hours with
AZD8055, everolimus, GDC0941 and MK2206 showed that only mTOR inhibition
was able to block S6 phosphorylation. In addition, we performed
immunohistochemistry of p-S6 and Ki-67 in paraffin embedded tissue from
TC patients. IHC showed that patient derived xenografts showed high
expression of these markers compared to non-cancerous tissue, meaning
that the mTOR pathway is very active in this tumor type.

These data indicate that TC relies on the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway for
survival and mTORC1/2 inhibition showed the stronger sensitizing effect
towards cisplatin treatment. We consider adding mTORC1C/2 inhibition to
cisplatin based treatment a potential therapeutic option for
chemoresistant TC patients that warrants further in vivo investigations.

Supported by CONACYT grant 381543 and Dutch Cancer Society grant RUG
2014-6691


