Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HTI-1511, a novel anti-EGFR-ADC, overcomes mutation resistance and
demonstrates significant activity against multiple tumor types in
preclinical studies.


Multiple solid tumor types over-express epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR). Antibodies that target the receptor are often accompanied by
adverse skin reactions due to interaction with receptors expressed in
normal tissue. Additionally, downstream mutations (KRAS, BRAF) within
tumors can result in EGFR-independent activation and resistance to
treatment. We have previously described HTI-1511, an antibody-drug
conjugate in pre-clinical development that targets EGFR. HTI-1511 carries
the potent cytotoxin MMAE and a novel bis-alkylating linker, connected to
a monoclonal antibody engineered to have improved specificity for EGFR in
the tumor microenvironment (Huang et. al. AACR National Meeting, 2016,
New Orleans, LA). Here we screened a panel of over 70 tumor cell lines
derived from various solid tumor malignancies for both EGFR expression by
flow cytometry and sensitivity to cell growth inhibition by HTI-1511 in
vitro. Cell lines derived from head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC15, CAL27, FaDu, CAL33, SCC25 [IC50 0.52 nM - 3.1 nM]), non-small
cell lung cancer (HCC827, NCI-H1666, PC-9, NCI-H1650 [IC50 0.04 nM - 6.2
nM]), and pancreatic carcinoma (BxPC-3, PANC-1, AsPC-1 [IC50 0.99 nM -
4.44 nM]) showed particular sensitivity to HTI-1511. In conjunction,
HTI-1511 efficacy was assessed in vivo for tumor growth inhibition (TGI)
in several human tumor xenograft models. Evaluations in the human
xenografts A431 (epidermoid, 93% TGI at 3.0 mg/kg, p100% TGI at 3.0
mg/kg, p100% TGI at 3.0 mg/kg, p100% TGI at 3.0 mg/kg, p100% TGI at 3.0
mg/kg, p<0.05) indicated dose dependent tumor regressions in all cases,
and no observed toxicity when administered weekly at dose levels up to 3
mg/kg for up to eight weeks. HTI-1511 anti-tumor activity was also
investigated in a group of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models. An
initial study evaluated weekly administration of a single dose level of
2.5 mg/kg HTI-1511 in three different PDX models. TGI of 83% (p100% TGI
at 3.0 mg/kg, p<0.05) indicated dose dependent tumor regressions in all
cases, and no observed toxicity when administered weekly at dose levels
up to 3 mg/kg for up to eight weeks. HTI-1511 anti-tumor activity was
also investigated in a group of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models.
An initial study evaluated weekly administration of a single dose level
of 2.5 mg/kg HTI-1511 in three different PDX models. TGI of 83% (p<0.05)
was observed in a BRAFmut colorectal cancer model and 57% (p100% TGI at
3.0 mg/kg, p<0.05) indicated dose dependent tumor regressions in all
cases, and no observed toxicity when administered weekly at dose levels
up to 3 mg/kg for up to eight weeks. HTI-1511 anti-tumor activity was
also investigated in a group of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models.
An initial study evaluated weekly administration of a single dose level
of 2.5 mg/kg HTI-1511 in three different PDX models. TGI of 83% (p<0.05)
was observed in a BRAFmut colorectal cancer model and 57% (p<0.05) in a
wildtype colorectal cancer model, as well as 46% (not significant) TGI
seen in a wild type renal cell carcinoma model. A separate study in a
NSCLC (KRASmut) PDX model demonstrated a dose dependent response with
greater than 100% TGI at 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg (both p100% TGI at 3.0 mg/kg,
p<0.05) indicated dose dependent tumor regressions in all cases, and no
observed toxicity when administered weekly at dose levels up to 3 mg/kg
for up to eight weeks. HTI-1511 anti-tumor activity was also investigated
in a group of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models. An initial study
evaluated weekly administration of a single dose level of 2.5 mg/kg
HTI-1511 in three different PDX models. TGI of 83% (p<0.05) was observed
in a BRAFmut colorectal cancer model and 57% (p<0.05) in a wildtype
colorectal cancer model, as well as 46% (not significant) TGI seen in a
wild type renal cell carcinoma model. A separate study in a NSCLC
(KRASmut) PDX model demonstrated a dose dependent response with greater
than 100% TGI at 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg (both p<0.05, and also p100% TGI at
3.0 mg/kg, p<0.05) indicated dose dependent tumor regressions in all
cases, and no observed toxicity when administered weekly at dose levels
up to 3 mg/kg for up to eight weeks. HTI-1511 anti-tumor activity was
also investigated in a group of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models.
An initial study evaluated weekly administration of a single dose level
of 2.5 mg/kg HTI-1511 in three different PDX models. TGI of 83% (p<0.05)
was observed in a BRAFmut colorectal cancer model and 57% (p<0.05) in a
wildtype colorectal cancer model, as well as 46% (not significant) TGI
seen in a wild type renal cell carcinoma model. A separate study in a
NSCLC (KRASmut) PDX model demonstrated a dose dependent response with
greater than 100% TGI at 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg (both p<0.05, and also p<0.05
to a non-cognate antibody ADC control). The non-cognate antibody control
yielded 67.4% (not significant) TGI by itself compared to the vehicle
control group. These results support further development of HTI-1511 as a
possible treatment for EGFR overexpressing tumors, including those with
downstream activating mutations in the KRAS/BRAF pathway.


