Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of atypical protein kinase C in colorectal cancer cell
growth and proliferation.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cancer in the world and
death from colorectal cancer accounts for 8% of all cancer deaths both in
men and women in the United States. CRC is life threatening disease due
to therapy resistant cancerous cells. The exact mechanisms of cell
growth, survival, metastasis and inter & intracellular signaling pathways
involved in colon cancer are still a major challenge for scientists.
Hence, investigating the signaling pathways that lead to colon
carcinogenesis may give insight into the therapeutic target. In this
study, the role of atypical Protein kinase C (aPKC) on colon cancer was
identified by using four inhibitors of that particular protein class: 1)
ACPD (2-acetyl-1,3-cyclopentanedione and 2) DNDA (3,4-diamino-2,7
naphthalenedisulfonic acid) are non-specific inhibitors of aPKCs; 3)
ζ-Stat (8-hydroxy-1, 3, 6-naphthalenetrisulfonic acid) is a specific
inhibitor of PKC-ζ; and 4) ICA-I (4, 5-amino-4-carbamoylimidazol-1-yl-2,
3-dihydroxycyclopentyl) methyl dihydrogen phosphate) is a specific
inhibitor of PKC-ι. The cell lines tested were HT-29 colon cancer and
CCD18CO normal colon epithelial. Although PKC-ι is an oncogene in many
cancers, we found that the PKC-ζ was responsible for the abnormal growth
and proliferation in HT-29 colon cancer cells. Additionally, the
inhibition of aPKCs did not bring any significant toxicity on CCD18CO
normal colon cell line. These results suggest the potentiality of
utilizing aPKC-ζ inhibitors to block colon cancer cell growth and
proliferation.


