Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of sub-cellular specific reactive oxygen species in heart
regeneration after cancer therapy.


Introduction: Cardiovascular disease and cancer are the two leading
causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. As advancements in radiation
therapy (RT) have significantly increased the number of cancer survivors,
the risk of radiation-induced cardiovascular disease in this group is a
growing concern. However, the molecular mechanism of radiation-induced
heart failure is still elusive. Recently, it has been discovered that the
reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated oxidative DNA damage is the
primary upstream mechanism that prevents cardiomyocyte proliferation.
Therefore, elucidating the spatial and temporal aspects of ROS production
will lead to the development of countermeasures to prevent heart injury
following chest radiotherapy.

Methods: We have generated GSH redox potential (Grx-roGFP) ROS probe
targeted to cytoplasm, chromatin, nucleolus, telomere, nuclear inner
membrane and heterochromatin. These probes have been inserted into
cardiomyocytes specific AAV9 vectors which were used to infect
cardiomyocytes both in vitro an in vivo. For in vivo study, we infected
three months old mice with high-titer AAV particles via tail vein
injection and then exposed to chest-only radiation (5-10 Gy). At
different post-radiation times, fresh heart slices of 300-500 ÂµM
thickness were either mock- or treated with mitochondrial electron
transport complex (ETC) inhibitors and then subjected to live tissue
imaging using a confocal microscope.

Results: Interestingly, our results showed that the distribution of basal
ROS levels is not uniform in different sub-nuclear compartments.
Significantly, upon the induction of oxidative stress, the ROS levels was
elevated in all the cellular compartments, but the extent of ROS level
was significantly higher in the cytoplasm. Similarly, radiation altered
ROS levels in all the cellular compartments; however the effect of
radiation on the ROS levels was sub-nuclear compartment-specific.
Intriguingly, we found that the complex IV of the ETC was critical for
the maintenance of ROS levels in different cellular compartments as
compared with complexes I and II.

Conclusion and Future Directions: Our data clearly indicate that the
spatial and temporal levels of ROS are not uniform across the cell and
the mitochondrial ETC plays a major role in regulation ROS levels in
different sub-nuclear compartments. The results obtained from this study
can be utilized to develop sub-cellular compartment specific targeted
both genetic and pharmacological ROS scavengers that will help to
regenerate adult heart by re-activating the proliferative capacity of
cardiomyocytes following cancer therapy. Finally, our novel approach can
be applied to assess alterations in ROS levels in different cancers.

Funding: This work was supported by the NASA (NNX13AD57G/NNX15AE06G)
CPRIT (RP160520) and NIH R01AG053341 grants.


