Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a porcine model for pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains a lethal disease with a
5-year survival rate of 4%. Without significant advances in early
detection and treatment, PDAC is estimated to become the second leading
cause of cancer deaths in the United States by 2020. Many advancements in
PDAC have come from murine models and retrograde studies of patient
samples. A supplemental pig model would allow such studies as noninvasive
image-guided technologies, radiation oncology, drug metabolism, surgical
experimentation/training, and early detection screening to be more
readily performed. Here, we sought to develop an orthotopic model of
porcine pancreatic cancer using transformed pancreatic tumor cells to
help address some of these issues.

We isolated primary porcine epithelial cells from pancreatic ducts
harvested from a normal pig. We isolated epithelial cells from
fibroblasts by serial dilutions and stained our final population with
cytokeratin 19 (specific for pancreatic ductal epithelium), E cadherin,
alpha-SMA, and collagen I to show that our population of primary cells
were indeed of epithelial origin and not mesenchymal. We used these cells
to generate 3 different tumorigenic cell lines: PGKP (contains mutated
Kras and p53), PGKPS (PGKP + SMAD4 shRNA), and PGKPSC (PGKPS + p16
shRNA). We tested these cell lines using in vitro assays to test their
tumorigenic properties. The PGKP cells outperformed the primary cells in
proliferation, population doubling time, and soft agar growth with
p-values We isolated primary porcine epithelial cells from pancreatic
ducts harvested from a normal pig. We isolated epithelial cells from
fibroblasts by serial dilutions and stained our final population with
cytokeratin 19 (specific for pancreatic ductal epithelium), E cadherin,
alpha-SMA, and collagen I to show that our population of primary cells
were indeed of epithelial origin and not mesenchymal. We used these cells
to generate 3 different tumorigenic cell lines: PGKP (contains mutated
Kras and p53), PGKPS (PGKP + SMAD4 shRNA), and PGKPSC (PGKPS + p16
shRNA). We tested these cell lines using in vitro assays to test their
tumorigenic properties. The PGKP cells outperformed the primary cells in
proliferation, population doubling time, and soft agar growth with
p-values <0.03. The additional hits in the PGKPS and PGKPSC cells
generated more pronounced invasion through matrigel, migration rate,
anchorage-independent growth, proliferation capacity, and population
doubling times with pWe isolated primary porcine epithelial cells from
pancreatic ducts harvested from a normal pig. We isolated epithelial
cells from fibroblasts by serial dilutions and stained our final
population with cytokeratin 19 (specific for pancreatic ductal
epithelium), E cadherin, alpha-SMA, and collagen I to show that our
population of primary cells were indeed of epithelial origin and not
mesenchymal. We used these cells to generate 3 different tumorigenic cell
lines: PGKP (contains mutated Kras and p53), PGKPS (PGKP + SMAD4 shRNA),
and PGKPSC (PGKPS + p16 shRNA). We tested these cell lines using in vitro
assays to test their tumorigenic properties. The PGKP cells outperformed
the primary cells in proliferation, population doubling time, and soft
agar growth with p-values <0.03. The additional hits in the PGKPS and
PGKPSC cells generated more pronounced invasion through matrigel,
migration rate, anchorage-independent growth, proliferation capacity, and
population doubling times with p<0.01 when compared both to primary cells
and the PGKP cells.

We used all three cell lines in a subcutaneous injection model in nude
mice to determine if they could produce tumors in vivo. We injected 5x106
cells into the hind flanks of mice with groups of 10 mice/cell line. Of
the 30 mice injected, 28 grew tumors that were â‰¥1.8 cm2 in size within
5 weeks. All of the tumors had large necrotic centers, were
hypervascular, and mucous producing. Upon H&E analysis, all tumors
displayed an undifferentiated morphology with mild desmoplasia.
Representative tumor sections were stained for the same markers as used
above in the primary cell isolates with the addition of vimentin. These
stains indicate that our tumorigenic cells formed undifferentiated
carcinomas with mild desmoplasia.

Here, we demonstrate for the first time development of porcine pancreatic
tumor cells that can induce tumors in vivo. The expression of vimentin in
our tumor slides indicates that our cells may have the potential to
recapitulate metastatic disease when orthotopically injected into the
pancreas of syngeneic pigs. We feel that this model could greatly
supplement the existing murine models of pancreatic cancer to help
improve imaging, surgical, and future diagnostic techniques.


