Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK signaling marks resistance to synthetic lethality induced by
PI3K/Akt and BCL-XL inhibition in PTEN-mutant cancers.


Background: Loss of PTEN represents one of the most common disruptions of
tumor suppressor activity in the progression of human neoplasia. There
are no established precision medicine approaches defined in
PTEN-deficient neoplasms which include prostate, breast, glioblastoma
(GBM) and uterine cancers. In PTEN-mutant prostate cancer cells, the
PI3K/Akt pathway collaborates with BCL-XL specifically, to regulate the
apoptotic threshold (Ren, MCR 2016). Whereas single agent PI3K/Akt
inhibitors are ineffective in inducing cell death, combined inhibition of
PI3K/Akt and BCL-XL in PTEN-mutant prostate cancer cells results in
synergistic apoptosis suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy with
translational potential in this important subset of disease.

Hypothesis: We hypothesized that synthetic lethality following
combinatorial PI3K/BCL-XL inhibition is conserved across the range of
PTEN-mutant cancers.

Methods: PTEN-mutant cell lines (ATCC), validated for PTEN-loss and p-Akt
expression, were assessed in apoptosis (cleaved Parp) and cell-viability
assays following combined PI3K (Buparlisib, SelleckChem) and BCL-XL
(A-1331852, AbbVie) inhibition (1µM each, 24h). Since MEK signaling has
been associated with resistance to PI3K pathway inhibition, p-Erk was
profiled as a candidate marker of resistance. The contribution of MEK
signaling to the apoptotic threshold in p-Erk expressing PTEN-mutant
cells was tested with pharmacological MEK inhibition (Trametinib,
SelleckChem; 1,3,5 µM 48h) in combination.

Results:

MEK signaling and PI3K/BCL-XL inhibition in PTEN-mutant cancers





Source

Cell line

PTEN

p-Akt

p-Erk

Synergistic

Apoptosis with PI3K / BCL-XL

inhibition

Loss of cell viability

p-Erk

suppression with MEK inhibition

Apoptosis with concomitant MEK inhibition



Prostate

PC3

Absent

Present

Absent

Yes

Yes

N/A

N/A



Prostate

LNCaP

Absent

Present

Absent

Yes

Yes

N/A

N/A



Prostate

C4-2B

Absent

Present

Absent

Yes

Yes

N/A

N/A



Breast

ZR-75-1

Absent

Present

Weak

Yes

Yes

N/A

N/A



Uterine

SK-UT-1

Absent

Present

Present

No

No

Yes

Yes



GBM

A-172

Absent

Present

Present

No

No

Yes

No



Cervix

C33-A

Absent

Present

Present

No

No

-

-





Conclusions: Synthetic lethality in PTEN-mutant tumor cells with
PI3K/BCL-XL inhibition was confined to tumor cells without active MEK
signaling. MEK inhibition inconsistently overcomes resistance to therapy
suggesting heterogeneity of survival pathways in p-erk expressing
PTEN-deficient tumors. These data have implications for precision
medicine approaches in PTEN-deficient tumors as absence of p-Erk
expression may predict for a responsive phenotype.


