Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting phosphatidylserine in combination with adoptive T cell
transfer eliminates advanced tumors without off-target toxicities in a
melanoma preclinical model.


A viable strategy to treat advanced cancers includes transferring of
tumor-specific T cells. T cells that recognize tumor antigens can be
expanded and reinvigorated ex-vivo. Furthermore, autologous T cells can
be genetically modified to express anti-tumor T cell receptors or
chimeric antigen receptors. Although the potency and specificity of
tumor-specific T cells can be manipulated ex-vivo, once re-infused into
patients, the T cells are subjected to immunosuppressive mechanisms
established by the tumor. An important immune checkpoint regulator within
tumors is phosphatidylserine (PS). Innate immune cells exposed to PS
secrete suppressive cytokines and chemokines that can significantly
impair the function and activation of anti-tumor T cells. Therefore,
monoclonal antibodies that block PS activity can increase the anti-tumor
potency of transferred T cells to treat aggressive cancers. Here we show
that a PS targeting monoclonal antibody in combination with CD4+ T cells
that recognize the melanoma antigen Trp1 can regress very advanced
melanomas in all treated mice. Combination of anti-Trp1 CD4+ T cells with
other immunomodulatory modalities such as anti-OX40 antibodies, can
achieve equivalent treatment rates but these are typically accompanied by
severe immune related adverse events. In contrast, in this setting, PS
blockade did not show any off-target toxicities. Flow cytometry analysis
revealed lower levels of CD206 expression concomitant with higher
activation markers in macrophages and neutrophils in tumors from anti-PS
treated mice. These results suggest that diminishing suppressive
mechanisms locally in adoptive transfer protocols is a highly desirable
strategy that can eliminate tumors while minimizing related adverse
events.


