Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The first in class FLI1 inhibitor TK-216 presents both in vitro
and in vivo anti-tumor activity in lymphoma.


Background. ETS transcription factors, such as FLI1 and SPIB, are
recurrently deregulated in human lymphomas (Bonetti et al, Blood 2013;
Lenz et al, PNAS 2008). The small molecule YK-4-279 inhibits binding of
EWS1-FLI1 fusion protein to RHA resulting in growth arrest and apoptosis
in Ewing sarcoma cells (Erkizan et al, Nat Med 2009) and we previously
showed that YK-4-279 has in vitro anti-lymphoma activity (Chung et al,
AACR 2015). TK-216 is a YK-4-279 clinical derivative that is in phase 1
for patients with relapsed or refractory Ewing sarcoma (NCT02657005).
Here, we present extensive preclinical results obtained with TK-216 in
lymphoma models.

Methods. 56 cell lines [27 diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL); 10
mantle cell lymphoma; 6 marginal zone lymphoma; 5 anaplastic large T-cell
lymphoma; 8 others] were exposed to TK-216 increasing doses for 72h using
a Tecan D300e Digital Dispenser and 384well plates; cell proliferation
was measured with MTT. In vivo studies were performed in NOD-SCID mice
and treatments started with approximately sc 60mm3 tumor volumes.

Results. TK-216 displayed high activity: median IC50 was 449 nM (95%CI:
367-506). Sensitivity was not affected by the lymphoma cell of origin [B
vs T; activated B cell type (ABC) vs germinal center type DLBCL] or MYC
and TP53 status. There was a non-statistically significant trend for
lower sensitivity in cell lines bearing BCL2 chromosomal translocation
(P=0.07, DLBCL only; P=0.06, all cell lines). Anti-tumor activity was
mainly cytotoxic as confirmed by performing cell cycle analysis and
Annexin V staining in 6 DLBCL cell lines (TMD8, U2932, HBL1, OCI-LY-18,
WSU-DLCL2, DOHH2 for 24, 48, 72h), in which a time-dependent apoptosis
was preceded by G2/M arrest.

Antitumor activity was confirmed in DLBCL TMD8 xenografts. Compared with
control group (n=10), mice treated with TK-216 (100 mg/Kg, BID; n=9)
clearly presented a reduction in tumor growth, already evident at day 3
and becoming much stronger with time (D3, D5, D8, D11: PAntitumor
activity was confirmed in DLBCL TMD8 xenografts. Compared with control
group (n=10), mice treated with TK-216 (100 mg/Kg, BID; n=9) clearly
presented a reduction in tumor growth, already evident at day 3 and
becoming much stronger with time (D3, D5, D8, D11: P<0.01; D13, P not
available since control group had to be stopped due to tumor volume) and
a 4 times reduction in tumor volume at D11 (PAntitumor activity was
confirmed in DLBCL TMD8 xenografts. Compared with control group (n=10),
mice treated with TK-216 (100 mg/Kg, BID; n=9) clearly presented a
reduction in tumor growth, already evident at day 3 and becoming much
stronger with time (D3, D5, D8, D11: P<0.01; D13, P not available since
control group had to be stopped due to tumor volume) and a 4 times
reduction in tumor volume at D11 (P<0.01).

TK-216 was tested in combination with other targeted agents in DLBCL cell
lines. A benefit was observed with the combination of TK-216 with the
immunomodulator lenalidomide (synergism in 2/2 ABC DLBCL), with the BET
inhibitor OTX015 (MK-8628) (synergism in 2/4 cells and additive effect in
1/4), the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab (synergism in 2/3
cells) and the BCL2 inhibitor venetoclax (synergism in 3/4 cells). The
latter synergism could be linked to the previously mentioned negative
trend between TK-216 IC50 values and the presence of BCL2 translocation.

Conclusions. The novel small molecule TK-216 presented strong preclinical
anti-lymphoma activity, which provides evidence for further preclinical
and clinical development as single agent and in combination.


