Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage
in tumor hypoxia, poor radiotherapy response, and metastatic progression
of rectal cancer.


Background: Hypoxia is an important feature of the tumor microenvironment
and correlates with radiotherapy resistance and metastatic progression.
Additionally, as the malignant phenotype promotes aerobic glycolysis and
contributes to the microenvironmental acidification, an underlying
mechanism in radiation resistance and metastasis is likely linked to
metabolic changes caused by mitochondrial reprogramming. We hypothesized
that ROS and mtDNA damage might be indicators of poor therapy response
and dissemination of rectal cancer.

Methods: Three colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines (HCT116, HT29, LoVo)
were cultured under hypoxia (0.2% O2) or normoxia (21% O2) for 24 hours.
In a prospective rectal cancer trial, serum was sampled from patients at
the time of diagnosis. Levels of ROS were determined by the ability to
oxidize dihydrochlorofluoroscein into a fluorescent derivative. mtDNA
damage was quantified by the ability of modification on template DNA to
inhibit restriction enzyme cleavage. For the study patients, histologic
tumor response to neoadjuvant radiotherapy was evaluated according to
standard ypTN staging and tumor regression grade (TRG) scoring. Groups
were compared using Studentâ€™s t-test. Survival differences were
assessed by the log-rank test.

Results: Compared to normoxic conditions, hypoxia significantly reduced
ROS levels in all CRC cell lines. Moreover, in serum samples, ROS levels
were lower for T4 cases than for patients with T2-3 disease (p = 0.037),
and accordingly, low circulating ROS was associated with adverse
metastasis-free survival (MFS; p = 0.004) and overall survival (p
Results: Compared to normoxic conditions, hypoxia significantly reduced
ROS levels in all CRC cell lines. Moreover, in serum samples, ROS levels
were lower for T4 cases than for patients with T2-3 disease (p = 0.037),
and accordingly, low circulating ROS was associated with adverse
metastasis-free survival (MFS; p = 0.004) and overall survival (p <
0.001). Hypoxic HCT116 and HT29 cell lines, but not the LoVo cells,
showed significantly higher mtDNA damage than under normoxia. Given the
indicated dependence of ROS and mtDNA damage to hypoxia, a low ratio of
ROS to mtDNA damage turned out to be a promising indicator of hypoxic CRC
cells. This ratio was lower in serum samples from patients who obtained
poor histologic tumor response to radiotherapy (ypT3-4 versus ypT0-2 and
poor versus good TRG; p = 0.044 for both). Accordingly, a high ratio of
circulating ROS to mtDNA damage was associated with longer MFS (p =
0.021).

Conclusion: We showed that culturing of CRC cells under hypoxia caused
decrease in ROS levels but increase in mtDNA damage. Interestingly, in
serum samples from rectal cancer patients, low ROS levels were associated
with T4 disease, representing a bulky and often hypoxic tumor, and thus
adverse survival. Moreover, low ratio of ROS to mtDNA damage was
correlated with poor histologic tumor response to neoadjuvant
radiotherapy. These parameters may reflect an aggressive biological
phenotype instigated by a hostile tumor microenvironment. The results are
currently under validation in an independent patient cohort. Trial
registration: NCT00278694


