Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Profile of common prostate cancer risk variants in an unscreened
Romanian population.


In the present study we investigated for the first time the profile of
common prostate cancer risk variants in an unscreened Romanian
population. The study population consisted of 990 unrelated
histopathologically confirmed prostate cancer (PCa) cases and 1,034 male
controls consisting of patients admitted for urological and surgical
conditions, excluding cancer. DNA was extracted from whole blood at
deCODE Genetics (Reykjavik, Iceland) and genotyped using Illumina SNP
arrays, 24.295.558 variants were imputed using the 1000 Genomes dataset
in the 2,024 Romanian subjects. A systematic literature review for
variants associated with prostate cancer identified in previous GWASâ€˜
was done using the NHGRI catalog as a starting point, identifying 238
unique variants from 28 studies. None of the tested variants in a
Romanian only GWAS reached a genome wide significance (p-value lower than
5x10-8) but 807 markers reached p-values of 1x10-6. Thirty-one of the
previously-reported SNPs replicated in the Romanian cohort, with the
strongest associations seen at: 8q24.21, 11q13.3, 6q25.3, 5p15.33,
22q13.2, 17q12 and 3q13.2. The most signficantly replicated variants in
Romania are rs1016343 at 8q24.21 (P = 2.2x10-4), rs7929962 at 11q13.3 (P
= 2.7x10-4) and rs9364554 at 6q25.2 (P = 4.7x10-4). Our present study is
the first GWAS on prostate cancer performed on a Romanian cohort. The
high proportion of clinically significant disease in the Romanian
prostate cancer cases will allow the dissection of the association
between genetic variation and severe disease. Acknowledgements: This
study was funded in part by the European Union FP7 Program (ProMark
project 202059) and by the EEA grant (ROMCAN project RO14-0017;
EEA-JRP-RO-NO-20131-10191).


