Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genomic analysis of metastatic breast cancers
reveals ESR1 fusions as a recurrent mechanism of endocrine therapy
resistance.


Metastatic breast cancer is often intractable due to its inherent ability
to overcome current therapies. Genomic alterations are frequently
responsible for therapeutic resistance. To better understand genomic
mechanisms of acquired resistance in breast cancer we undertook a
detailed characterization of single nucleotide variation (SNV) and
structural variation (SV) in paired primary-metastasis metachronous
tumors from 6 breast cancer patients (median time to recurrence 7.3
years). In ER-positive recurrent tumors treated with endocrine therapies,
we identified multiple metastatic-acquired variants in ESR1 including a
novel constitutively active, ligand-independent ESR1-DAB2 gene fusion.
Importantly, this fusion resulted from a breakpoint in intron 4,
retaining the DNA-binding domain but eliminating the ligand-binding
domain (LBD), concordant to a similar fusion reported previously in a
xenograft model. Hybrid capture based genomic profiling from >7,800
breast cancers identified similar exon/intron 4 fusions in 5 tumors with
direct paired-read evidence. Using a novel copy number shift detection
strategy, 58 additional tumors showed indirect evidence of a
rearrangement at exon 4 based on a novel copy number shift detection
strategy. ESR1 fusion and copy number shift positive tumors are strongly
enriched in metastatic disease (78%; pMetastatic breast cancer is often
intractable due to its inherent ability to overcome current therapies.
Genomic alterations are frequently responsible for therapeutic
resistance. To better understand genomic mechanisms of acquired
resistance in breast cancer we undertook a detailed characterization of
single nucleotide variation (SNV) and structural variation (SV) in paired
primary-metastasis metachronous tumors from 6 breast cancer patients
(median time to recurrence 7.3 years). In ER-positive recurrent tumors
treated with endocrine therapies, we identified multiple
metastatic-acquired variants in ESR1 including a novel constitutively
active, ligand-independent ESR1-DAB2 gene fusion. Importantly, this
fusion resulted from a breakpoint in intron 4, retaining the DNA-binding
domain but eliminating the ligand-binding domain (LBD), concordant to a
similar fusion reported previously in a xenograft model. Hybrid capture
based genomic profiling from >7,800 breast cancers identified similar
exon/intron 4 fusions in 5 tumors with direct paired-read evidence. Using
a novel copy number shift detection strategy, 58 additional tumors showed
indirect evidence of a rearrangement at exon 4 based on a novel copy
number shift detection strategy. ESR1 fusion and copy number shift
positive tumors are strongly enriched in metastatic disease (78%; p<10-4)
supporting their expected involvement in endocrine therapy resistance.
Clinical follow up was available for 7 patients. 6/7 tumors were
clinically ER-positive and received extensive endocrine therapy with
progressive disease. Together, these data indicate that ESR1 fusions
involving exon/intron 4 are a recurrent, albeit rare, mechanism of
endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer. The absence of the LBD
implies these fusions will not respond to other ERÎ± targeted therapies.
Additional studies are needed to identify appropriate treatment options
to overcome this mechanism of resistance.


