Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mortalin precursor as potential marker for chemoprevention with
SHetA2.


Introduction: The flexible heteroarotinoid (Flex-Het), SHetA2, is a novel
anticancer drug that induces both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis and
autophagy in cancer cells, but not in normal cells. Protein isolation /
mass spectrometry analysis using SHetA2-coupled polystyrene magnetic
beads yielded three SHetA2-binding proteins all belonging to HSPA family
namely, HSPA9/mortalin, HSPA8/Hsc70 and HSPA5/BiP. Mortalin, in addition
to its vital chaperoning roles in other organelles of the cell, is
essential for import and folding of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
proteins. The precursor form of mortalin has a 46-amino acid N-terminal
region that functions as a mitochondrial localization sequence (MLS) and
is cleaved by proteases after import into the mitochondrial matrix.

Hypothesis: SHetA2 binding to mortalin causes alterations that can be
measured to study mechanism and monitor drug effects in animal models and
clinical trials.

Methods: Western blots of whole cell or subcellular protein extracts made
from cultures of normal human fallopian tube secretory or mammary
epithelial cells, rat mammary tumors or human ovarian cancer cell lines
treated with SHetA2 or solvent were probed with an antibody that
recognizes total mortalin, a custom-made rabbit polyclonal antibody
specific for the mortalin MLS (PA8238) or antibodies to loading control
proteins. Immunocytochemistry using these antibodies was performed with
an automated (Leica Bond III) IHC work station on cells treated with
SHetA2 or solvent.

Results: Using a commercial antibody against total mortalin, we observed
a lower-mobility band closely moving above the specific (mature) mortalin
band in Western blots. Our mortalin MLS-specific antibody recognized only
the lower-mobility band confirming it as the precursor form of mortalin
in the SHetA2-treated cell extracts. Subcellular fractionation of the
drug-treated cells revealed that the precursor protein accumulated only
in the cytoplasm and not in the mitochondria. Staining of whole cells
with an antibody to total mortalin showed no effect of SHetA2 treatment
on the punctate pattern of expression consistent with mitochondrial
localization. In contrast, staining with the mortalin MLS-specific
antibody demonstrated that SHetA2 increased the intensity of the diffuse
cytoplasmic staining consistent with localization of mortalin throughout
the cytoplasm. These results were consistently observed among the various
cell types.

Conclusions: SHetA2 is the only known drug that blocks the translocation
of the precursor mortalin to mitochondria and its processing to mature
protein. Such cytoplasmic accumulation of the precursor form of mortalin
can potentially serve as pharmacodynamic endpoint to study SHetA2â€™s
effect in laboratory experimental tumor models as well as in human
clinical trials. Funding: NCI PREVENT Task Order HHSN26100002


