Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A stromal liver gene signature predictive of HCC risk across all
liver disease etiologies.


Background & Aims: HCC risk-predictive biomarkers will enable
identification of patients who most need close monitoring and cancer
preventive intervention. We previously reported a stromal liver gene
signature predictive of HCC risk in multiple independent patient cohorts
mainly affected with HCV (Hoshida 2008, Hoshida 2013, King 2014). We
aimed to determine whether the gene signature is similarly prognostic in
HBV, alcohol abuse, and NAFLD/NASH patients. Methods: The liver gene
signature was analyzed using an FDA-approved diagnostic platform
(NanoString), and an independent cohort of curatively resected
early-stage HCC patients (n=223, median follow up 4.5 years, HCV [n=67,
30%], HBV [n=39, 17%], alcohol [n=51, 23%], NAFLD [n=66, 30%], and NASH
[n=52, 23%, a subset of 66 NAFLD patients]) were analyzed. Complete
surgical resection was radiologically and histologically confirmed, and
HCC recurrence in the cohort was confirmed to be mainly late recurrence,
i.e., de novo carcinogenesis, based on a recurrence hazard plot.
Prognostic prediction was performed by using a previously developed model
without making any modification, and evaluated for association with de
novo HCC recurrence in multivariable modeling and subgroup analyses.
Results: The gene signature assay classified the patients into high-
(n=49, 22%), intermediate- (n=127, 57%), and low- (n=47, 21%) risk
groups. The high-risk prediction was associated with higher HCC
recurrence (HR=4.8, p&lt0.001) as well as overall death (HR=4.8,
p&lt0.001) in multivariable modeling. The association with HCC risk
remained significant in subgroups of patients with HCV (HR=3.0, p=0.028),
HBV (HR=6.1, p&lt0.001), alcohol (HR=6.1, p=0.023), and NASH (HR=10.9,
p=0.03) in multivariable models including cirrhosis and AJCC stage 2/3.
The association was diminished in NAFLD patients (HR=3.02, p=0.16),
suggesting that presence of active inflammation and/or fibrosis is
critical for the signature to predict HCC risk in NAFLD. Established
cirrhosis was less frequent in NAFLD/NASH (23%/21%) compared to other
etiologies (50%). Conclusions: The prognostic liver gene signature was
implemented in a clinically applicable assay, and successfully validated
for de novo HCC recurrence after curative resection of early-stage HCC in
all major etiologies of chronic liver disease and HCC. The assay will
enable prioritization of patients for HCC surveillance and enrichment of
high risk patients for more cost-effective clinical trials of new HCC
chemopreventive therapies.


