Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT3 and STAT5a are potential therapeutic targets in
castration-resistant prostate cancer.


Background: Currently, there is no effective pharmacotherapy for
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). The mechanisms
underlying mCRPC are not clearly understood, thus hindering
rational-based drug design. Evidence suggests that signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and 5a/b (STAT5a/b), key components
of the JAK/STAT pathway, play a significant role in aggressive PC.
However, expression of STAT3/5 in prostate tumor samples have not been
studied. Here, we evaluated the possible role of STAT3/5a in aggressive
PC.

Materials and Methods: Expression of STAT3 and STAT5a in high grade PC
(HGPC, n=15) and in benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH, n=15) tissue
sections were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) according to the
protocol approved by Institutional Review Board. Age ranged from 59 to 95
years (median = 81) in the former and 57 years to 86 years (median = 68
years) in the latter category. In addition, the effects of STAT
inhibitor, Pimozide, on androgen-sensitive LNCaP and its
castration-resistant subline C4-2 PC cell growth were assessed in vitro.

Results: A strong nuclear immunoreactivity for STAT3 and STAT5a in 93%
(n=14) and 80% (n=12) of HGPC cases, respectively, were observed. Only
one BPH case showed strong STAT3 expression. Focal and weak positivity
for STAT3 and STAT5a were noted in 47% (n=7) and 67% (n=10) of BPH cases.
None of the BPH cases showed strong STAT5a expression. HGPC cases showed
significantly higher STAT3 positivity compared with BPH (p=0.01). No
significant differences were observed for STAT5a expression between HGPC
and BPH group (p=0.4). However, multifocal or diffuse and strong STAT3
(pResults: A strong nuclear immunoreactivity for STAT3 and STAT5a in 93%
(n=14) and 80% (n=12) of HGPC cases, respectively, were observed. Only
one BPH case showed strong STAT3 expression. Focal and weak positivity
for STAT3 and STAT5a were noted in 47% (n=7) and 67% (n=10) of BPH cases.
None of the BPH cases showed strong STAT5a expression. HGPC cases showed
significantly higher STAT3 positivity compared with BPH (p=0.01). No
significant differences were observed for STAT5a expression between HGPC
and BPH group (p=0.4). However, multifocal or diffuse and strong STAT3
(p<0.0001) and STAT5a (pResults: A strong nuclear immunoreactivity for
STAT3 and STAT5a in 93% (n=14) and 80% (n=12) of HGPC cases,
respectively, were observed. Only one BPH case showed strong STAT3
expression. Focal and weak positivity for STAT3 and STAT5a were noted in
47% (n=7) and 67% (n=10) of BPH cases. None of the BPH cases showed
strong STAT5a expression. HGPC cases showed significantly higher STAT3
positivity compared with BPH (p=0.01). No significant differences were
observed for STAT5a expression between HGPC and BPH group (p=0.4).
However, multifocal or diffuse and strong STAT3 (p<0.0001) and STAT5a
(p<0.0001) expression was significantly higher in HGRPC than BPH.
Pimozide exposure significantly inhibited LNCaP cell proliferation at 10
μM and C4-2 cell proliferation at 20 μM concentration.

Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that increased expression of STAT3
and STAT5a may serve as a predictive biomarker for efficacy of the
JAK/STAT targeted therapy. Since JAK/STAT and androgen receptor signaling
are functionally synergistic in contributing PC progression, the
inhibition of JAK/STAT-alone or in combination with AR may lead to a
novel treatment modality for mCRPC.


