Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Underlying mechanisms of genome-proteome discordance in squamous
cell lung cancer.


Introduction: Genomic analyses have yielded a tremendous amount of data
on the genetic changes in lung cancers, but translating these experiments
into actionable information benefitting lung squamous cell carcinoma
(SQLC) patients has proven more difficult. Studies by the NCI Clinical
Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC), our group, and others have
demonstrated that gene and protein expression show only moderate
correlation, demonstrating limitations in explaining phenotypic changes
from genomics alone. These findings indicate a clear need for integrative
proteogenomics to better understand tumor biology, especially in a
complex disease like SQLC.

Experimental: We have assembled a comprehensive proteogenomic dataset
including DNA copy number (Affymetrix CytoScan HD Assay), targeted exome
sequencing (Agilent Comprehensive Cancer Panel), RNA-sequencing (Illumina
NextSeq), and shotgun proteomics (Q Exactive LC-MS/MS) on 116 surgically
resected SQLC tumor samples with extensive clinical and follow up data.

Results: We have identified 6584 high confidence proteins from
preliminary proteomic analysis. After quality control filtering, we
utilized 5562 gene-protein pairs for further analysis. Clustering of
patient RNA expression in this patient cohort has been unable to fully
reproduce the molecular classification previously published for SQLC.
Furthermore, proteomic results indicate yet another potential
classification strategy selecting patient subgroups that differ at
protein level. We observed a 0.29 median Spearmanâ€™s correlation of 5562
gene-protein pairs. There were 2781 highly correlated gene-protein pairs
(greater than median) and 2781 poorly correlated gene-protein pairs (less
than median) including 773 anti-correlated gene-protein pairs (less than
0). We hypothesized that poorly correlated gene-protein pairs could be
functionally related in a pathway-dependent manner. Enrichment analysis
of poorly correlated proteins identified pathways related to mRNA
processing, growth factor signaling (EGFR, FGFR), and nonsense-mediated
decay (NMD). Interestingly, there were 9 frequently mutated SQLC genes in
the low correlation gene-protein pairs but only 3 in the highly
correlated pairs. We found three distinct patient subgroups by clustering
poorly correlated proteins. Analysis of these subgroups showed
differentially expressed pathways related to mRNA processing,
ubiquitination, and NMD.

Conclusion: Differential modulation of the proteome outside of genomic
regulation may suggest important regulatory mechanisms in cancer and give
new insights into treating SQLC. Analysis of poorly correlated
gene-protein pairs suggests certain pathways are dysregulated in cancer,
and ongoing DNA analysis and future analyses involving miRNAs,
RNA-binding proteins, and the ubiquitin proteome system will help
elucidate our preliminary findings.


