Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clarification of the molecular mechanism for cancer development in
Xp11.2 translocation renal cell carcinoma.


Xp11.2 translocation renal cell carcinoma (Xp11.2 tRCC) is a newly
defined subset of RCC, which have chromosomal translocations involving
the TFE3 transcription factor at Xp11.2. All translocations seen in
Xp11.2 tRCC, including PRCC-TFE3, PSF-TFE3, ASPL-TFE3, CTLC-TFE3 and
NONO-TFE3 produce chimeric TFE3 genes, which encode fusion TFE3 proteins
retaining the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH-Zip) structure
for DNA binding, suggesting that these fusion TFE3 proteins function as
oncogenic transcription factors. To clarify the molecular mechanism for
Xp11.2 tRCC development, we have established cell lines, which express
fusion TFE3 proteins (NONO-TFE3, PRCC-TFE3, PSF-TFE3) in a doxycycline
dependent manner. Genes upregulated universally in all fusion TFE3 cell
lines upon doxycycline addition were identified. In addition, we have
generated an Xp11.2 translocation RCC mouse model, in which a floxed
Neomycin cassette followed by a PRCC-TFE3 cDNA is inserted in the Rosa26
locus. By crossing these mice with cadherin 16-Cre transgenic mice, we
can induce kidney specific PRCC-TFE3 expression resulting in RCC
development. We will report and discuss the role of fusion TFE3 target
genes in our mouse model and in clinical samples of Xp11.2 tRCC. Funded
in part by FNLCR Contract HHSN261200800001E to LSS.


