Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neutralization of IGF-I and -II ligands with the fully humanized
bispecific monoclonal antibody xentuzumab inhibits AR-V7-induced
enzalutamide resistance in castration-resistant prostate cancer.


Background: Recent data from multiple investigators have shown that an
increase in constitutively active androgen receptor (AR) variants such as
AR-V7 is associated with more aggressive prostate cancer and a
significantly shortened overall survival. Additionally, expression of
AR-V7 in circulating tumor cells or increased expression in metastatic
tissue is a biomarker for resistance to currently available anti-androgen
therapies, including enzalutamide (ENZA) and abiraterone, resulting in
castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) signaling pathways have been incriminated as mechanisms of
resistance but little is known about the potential role of IGFs in CRPC
growth in relation to AR variants. In this preclinical study we examined
the effects of IGF-I and -II inhibition in LuCaP 96CR, an ENZA resistant
prostate cancer patient-derived xenograft.

Hypothesis: IGF-I and -II neutralization will block AR-V7 activity and
inhibit castration-resistant prostate cancer growth.

Study procedures: LuCaP 96CR was implanted s.c. into castrate SCID mice
(15 mice per group). When tumors exceeded 150mm3 animals were randomized
into groups: 1) Control; 2) ENZA (50 mg/kg, QD, po), 3) xentuzumab (BI
836845[1], 200 mg/kg QW IP) in combination with ENZA. At the end of the
study, tumors were collected for preparation of RNA and protein lysates
and histology.

Results: ENZA did not show significant inhibitory effects on LuCaP 96CR,
but the combination of xentuzumab and ENZA resulted in significant tumor
inhibition (pResults: ENZA did not show significant inhibitory effects on
LuCaP 96CR, but the combination of xentuzumab and ENZA resulted in
significant tumor inhibition (p<0.001) vs. ENZA alone. AR full length
(AR-FL) mRNA and protein increased after ENZA treatment (pResults: ENZA
did not show significant inhibitory effects on LuCaP 96CR, but the
combination of xentuzumab and ENZA resulted in significant tumor
inhibition (p<0.001) vs. ENZA alone. AR full length (AR-FL) mRNA and
protein increased after ENZA treatment (p<0.001) but did not further rise
significantly when xentuzumab was co-administered. In contrast,
significantly elevated AR-V7 mRNA and protein levels were detected in
tumors from mice treated with the xentuzumab and ENZA combination
(pResults: ENZA did not show significant inhibitory effects on LuCaP
96CR, but the combination of xentuzumab and ENZA resulted in significant
tumor inhibition (p<0.001) vs. ENZA alone. AR full length (AR-FL) mRNA
and protein increased after ENZA treatment (p<0.001) but did not further
rise significantly when xentuzumab was co-administered. In contrast,
significantly elevated AR-V7 mRNA and protein levels were detected in
tumors from mice treated with the xentuzumab and ENZA combination
(p<0.001). Downstream markers of AR-V7 activity, UBE2C and UGT2B17 mRNA,
increased after ENZA treatment when compared to vehicle (UGT2B17,
pResults: ENZA did not show significant inhibitory effects on LuCaP 96CR,
but the combination of xentuzumab and ENZA resulted in significant tumor
inhibition (p<0.001) vs. ENZA alone. AR full length (AR-FL) mRNA and
protein increased after ENZA treatment (p<0.001) but did not further rise
significantly when xentuzumab was co-administered. In contrast,
significantly elevated AR-V7 mRNA and protein levels were detected in
tumors from mice treated with the xentuzumab and ENZA combination
(p<0.001). Downstream markers of AR-V7 activity, UBE2C and UGT2B17 mRNA,
increased after ENZA treatment when compared to vehicle (UGT2B17,
p<0.01); no further significant increase of UGT2B17 was detected after
combination treatment and UBCE2C significantly decreased (pResults: ENZA
did not show significant inhibitory effects on LuCaP 96CR, but the
combination of xentuzumab and ENZA resulted in significant tumor
inhibition (p<0.001) vs. ENZA alone. AR full length (AR-FL) mRNA and
protein increased after ENZA treatment (p<0.001) but did not further rise
significantly when xentuzumab was co-administered. In contrast,
significantly elevated AR-V7 mRNA and protein levels were detected in
tumors from mice treated with the xentuzumab and ENZA combination
(p<0.001). Downstream markers of AR-V7 activity, UBE2C and UGT2B17 mRNA,
increased after ENZA treatment when compared to vehicle (UGT2B17,
p<0.01); no further significant increase of UGT2B17 was detected after
combination treatment and UBCE2C significantly decreased (p<0.001).

Summary: These data show that addition of xentuzumab provides tumor
inhibition of ENZA-resistant CRPC. Interestingly, associated with a
significant decrease in tumor growth, this treatment resulted in
increased AR-V7 mRNA and protein expression but no significant increases
in downstream markers of AR-V7 activity, UBE2C and UGT2B17.

Conclusion: Our results suggest that the IGF-I and -II neutralizing
antibody xentuzumab may reverse AR-V7-mediated ENZA resistance.


