Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical validation of a serum protein panel (FLNA, FLNB and
KRT19) for diagnosis and prognosis of prostate cancer.


Background: Prostate cancer (PrCa) is a leading cause of cancer deaths in
males in the US. Current tests of prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
screening and the diagnostic prostate biopsy are often inconclusive. Many
patients with a PSA positive blood test often undergo invasive repeat
biopsy procedures. Additionally, there is a need for diagnostic tests
that differentiate between low and high-risk cancers. This study reports
on the development of a novel serum protein panel of three PrCa
biomarkers, Filamin A, Filamin B and Keratin-19 (FLNA, FLNB and KRT19)
using multivariate models for disease screening and prognosis.

Methods: ELISA and IPMRM (LC-MS/MS) based assays were developed and
analytically validated by quantitative measurements of the biomarkers in
serum. Retrospectively collected and clinically annotated serum samples
with PSA values and Gleason scores (GS) were analyzed from 503 subjects
who underwent prostate biopsy, and showed no evidence of cancer with or
without indication of prostatic hyperplasia, or had a definitive
pathology diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma. Probit linear regression
models were used to combine the analytes into score functions to address
the following clinical questions: does the biomarker test augment PSA for
population screening? Can aggressive disease be differentiated from lower
risk disease, and can the panel discriminate between benign prostate
hyperplasia (BPH) and PrCa? Results: Table 1: Berg PrCa Panel AUC summary
for the four clinical indications.

Conclusion: As shown in Table 1, modelling of the data demonstrated that
the new PrCa biomarkers and PSA in combination were better than PSA alone
in identifying PrCa, improved the prediction of high and low risk
disease, and improved prediction of BPH versus PrCa.


