Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemical library screen identifies compounds that target
S100A8/S100A9 complex and MDSC accumulation.


We previously demonstrated that MDSC subsets accumulated in primary tumor
and distant organs regulate tumor plasticity. The mouse transcriptome
analysis of in vitro co-cultures and samples from syngeneic mouse model
revealed that granulocytic subset of myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(gMDSCs) from metastatic 4T1 tumor bearing mice regulate several hundred
genes in tumor cells upon co-culture. The top genes are S100A8, S100A9,
MMP8, FPR1, CCL3, and TGFβ2 which also predicted poor survival in human
solid tumors including breast cancer. Therefore, we called these 6 genes
as “metastatic gene signature”. It has been reported that
S100A8/S100A9 heterotetramer, called calprotectin, play a key role in
inflammation-associated cancer progression. To investigate the role of
calprotectin (S100A8/A9) in tumor-mediated immunosuppression and
metastasis, we first utilized Tasquinimod, a small molecule targeting
S100A9 only. However, Tasquinimod treatment of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice had
a moderate anti-tumor activity which may be due to a limited activity on
granulocytic MDSC accumulation. In addition, we determined that there was
a significant upregulation of S100A8 in MDSCs from Tasquinimod treated
mice. This data suggested that inhibiting only S100A9 leads to activation
of S100A8 and thus may be ineffective targeting of MDSCs. We therefore
run a computational screen of the NCI chemical library against the
crystal structure of calprotectin (S100A8/S100A9) and identified 40 lead
compounds. We then performed in vitro screening assay to identify
compounds that inhibit MDSC induction. We identified 3 compounds that
significantly suppressed gMDSC differentiation. We are currently
performing in vivo studies with these 3 candidate drugs in our murine
breast cancer model and will present our findings at the AACR meeting. We
believe that this study will provide a novel drug targeting S100A8/S100A9
heterotetramer, a key molecule in MDSC induction and its regulatory
functions during tumor progression.


