Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of GABRP as a novel therapeutic target in triple
negative breast cancer.


Triple Negative breast cancers (TNBC) represent nearly 20% of all breast
cancers but do not have any targeted therapies available due to lack of
amplification of HER2 and expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors. To identify potentially druggable targets for TNBC, we
compared TNBC to non-TNBC tumors in large independent gene expression
clinical datasets to identify highly expressed genes in TNBC that encode
for proteins expressed on the cell surface. We found gamma-aminobutyric
acid type A receptor pi (GABRP) to be the most overexpressed receptor
protein gene in TNBC, while its expression in normal tissues was low and
comparable to that of proteins targeted by drugs or therapeutic
antibodies already in clinical testing. We compared GABRP mRNA and
protein expression across panel of breast cancer cell lines and found it
to be particularly elevated in HCC1143 and MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells.
Knockdown of GABRP using siRNA suppressed TNBC cell growth and stable
GABRP knock-down by shRNA suppressed growth of MDA-MB-468 xenografts in
nude mice. Sub-cellular fractionation of TNBC cells and subsequent
Western blot analysis confirmed that GABRP is located predominantly in
the cell membrane. GABRP protein expression on cell surface was also
detected by flowcytometry. Interestingly, treatment with 5-100Î¼g/ml of
anti-GABRP antibody that binds to the extracellular domain (ECD) itself
inhibited growth of TNBC cell lines expressing higher GABRP, while the
same doses of a control antibody had no effect in these cells in culture.
Our goal is to generate an antibody drug conjugate (ADC) for TNBC by
conjugating anti-GABRP antibody with a maytansinoid such as DM1, which
has proven cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. Together, our results
suggest that GABRP is a potential therapeutic target for triple-negative
breast cancers.


