Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between ALDH1A1 polymorphisms, alcohol consumption,
and mortality among Hispanic and non-Hispanic White women diagnosed with
breast cancer: The Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study.


ALDH1A1 is a marker of normal tissue stem cells and cancer stem cells,
where it is involved in self-renewal, differentiation and
self-protection. ALDH1A1 is also associated with alcohol sensitivity and
dependence, and functions in the detoxification of acetaldehyde. Few
epidemiological studies have examined the association between ALDH1A1 and
mortality among women with breast cancer (BC). To date, none of these
studies have included Hispanic women or evaluated the modifying effect of
alcohol consumption.

Using data from the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study, we evaluated
the associations between nine SNPs of ALDH1A1 (rs348481, rs168351,
rs1888202, rs63319, rs722921, rs348461, rs348463, rs7027604, rs1424482)
and overall mortality among 1134 Hispanic and 1160 non-Hispanic white
(NHW) women diagnosed with incident invasive BC. Demographic and
lifestyle factors were collected via in-person interviews. Modes of
inheritance were considered for each SNP accordingly using their
genotypes. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression models were
used to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence interval (CIs).
Models were adjusted for percentage of Native American (NA) ancestry, BC
summary stage, and study site. To detect effect modification, interaction
terms were created between percentage of NA ancestry (low â‰¤0.28 versus
high >0.28), alcohol consumption (ever versus never) and the SNPs. The
likelihood ratio test was used to evaluate whether the interaction terms
were significant. The Bonferroni correction was used to adjust for
multiple comparisons.

After a median follow-up time of 11 years from BC diagnosis to death, a
total of 542 deaths occurred. The following four SNPs were significantly
associated with overall mortality: rs1424482 (HRCC =1.33; 95% CI
1.04-1.70), rs63319 (HRAA =1.30; 95% CI 1.06-1.60), rs7027604 (HRAA
=1.37; 95% CI 1.11-1.70), and rs722921 (HRTA/AA =0.78; 95% CI 0.64-0.96).
However, only rs7027604 remained significant after adjustment for
multiple comparisons (Padj=0.035). Among women with low NA ancestry,
rs63319 significantly increased risk of mortality (HRAA= 1.55; 95% CI
1.20-1.99), while a non-significant inverse association was observed
among women of high NA ancestry. Among ever drinkers, rs1888202
significantly decreased risk of mortality (HRCG/GG=0.62; 95%CI
0.45-0.85), while a non-significant inverse association was observed
among non-drinkers. The adjusted P-values for these interactions were not
significant.

This study provides evidence that rs7027604 is associated with worse
prognosis after BC diagnosis among Hispanic and NHW women. Future BC
survival studies examining the relationship between ALDH1A1 and mortality
should also explore the modifying effects of alcohol consumption with
rs1888202 and NA ancestry with rs63319.


