Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of proto-oncogenes by enhancer-hijacking in high‚Äêrisk
neuroblastoma.


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB), a neural crest-derived tumor of the
sympathetic nervous system, is the most common extracranial solid tumor
in children. We have previously shown that genomic rearrangements
activate proto-oncogenic telomerase by juxtaposing active enhancer
elements to the TERT gene in a large fraction of high-risk NBs. In the
present study, we applied a global approach integrating whole genome
sequencing (WGS), Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data of NB cells and tumors to identify further
key oncogenes activated by enhancer-hijacking in NB.

Methods: WGS was applied to search for structural rearrangements in 120
NB tumors and five NB cell lines. Corresponding RNA-seq data were used to
discover mono-allelic and/or outlier expression of candidate genes
potentially involved in enhancer hijacking events. ChIP-seq of 34 NB
tumors and 17 NB cell lines was applied to identify active enhancer
elements in NB. Circular chromatin conformation capture sequencing
(4C-seq) was used to confirm physical promoter-enhancer interactions in
NB cell lines.

Results: WGS analyses revealed that chromosomal rearrangements are common
events in NB tumors and cell lines and frequently affect regions
harboring proto-oncogenes and lineage specific enhancers. ChIP-seq
analyses of the chromatin mark histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac),
surrogate for enhancer activity, confirmed that these rearrangements
recurrently juxtapose active enhancer elements to oncogenes including
MYCN and MYC in NB. Intriguingly, quantification of H3K27ac ChIP-seq
profiles uncovered that the enhancer elements translocated to MYC were
among the most active ones within the respective epigenomes. 4C-seq
analyses proofed physical interactions between translocated enhancer
elements and promoters of the respective oncogenes, which is in line with
their elevated expression in rearranged cases.

Conclusions: Our study reveals that structural rearrangements in
high-risk neuroblastoma frequently juxtapose strong enhancers to key
oncogenes, including MYCN and MYC, leading to physical promoter-enhancer
interactions which likely drive overexpression of the oncogenes observed
in rearranged cases. The common mechanism of oncogene activation by
enhancer-hijacking may open a therapeutic window for epigenetic drugs
including BET or CDK7 inhibitors in high-risk NBs.


