Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MSI2 binds LncRNAs and promotes self-renewal and oncogenesis
through MYC expression.


Backgrounds and Aims: RNA-binding protein MSI2 is elevated in several
cancers and is linked to poor prognosis. Here, we sought to elucidate the
role of MSI2 in regulating the expression of proto-oncogenes or tumor
suppressor genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

Methods: We performed RIP-seq using anti-MSI2 antibody in
tumor-initiating stem-like cells (TICs) and subsequent validation by qPCR
analysis.

Results: Among the MSI2-bound RNAs, MYC mRNA and long noncoding RNA
(LncRNA) miR22 host gene (MIR22HG) and MARAT1 were identified by RIP-qPCR
analysis. MSI2-MARAT1 binding dereppresses polycomb reppressor to recruit
E2F1 in MYC promoter regions. It is known that the 5’-untranslated
region of MYC contains an internal ribosome entry sequence (IRES) which
allows IRES-dependent translation initiation along with canonical
cap-dependent mechanisms. Our data show that MSI2 acts as an IRES
trans-acting factors for MYC mRNA translation. MSI2 does not have any
effect on the steady state level of MYC mRNA but significantly increases
MYC protein levels, indicating that MSI2 regulates MYC at the
post-transcriptional level. Further, we observed that MSI2 reduced the
level of mature miR22 derived from MIR22HG processing. We showed that
miR22 suppresses the expression of MYC thorough a 3’-UTR dependent
process. Overexpression of MSI2 promotes TIC self-renewal and tumor
initiation property in xenograft tumor mouse models, whereas silencing
MSI2 reduces this occurrence.

Conclusion: we demonstrate that MSI2 promotes liver tumorigenesis by
maintenance of MYC expression through dereppression of polycomb repressor
and an IRES-dependent translation mechanism and possibly by inhibition of
miR22 processing. Thus, MSI2 may be a useful prognostic factor for HCC
and MSI2 targeted therapy and thus may be beneficial in the treatment of
HCC patients.


