Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of CD19 targeted T cells in relapsed or refractory ALL
patients unable to afford allogenic bone marrow transplant in India.


CAR-T cell therapy has demonstrated remarkable success in long-term
remission of relapsed or refractory B-ALL. Unlike western countries, most
of the relapsed/refractory B-ALL patients in India are unable to afford
allogeneic stem cell transplant (allo-SCT), and simply choose palliation.
To assess the potential use of CAR-T cells as a first line therapy, it is
critical to evaluate CAR-T cell efficacy in patients unable to undergo
allo-SCT. As a first step, a novel anti-CD19 CAR was designed and
CD19-vector was produced using lentiviral mediated gene delivery system.
To generate CD19+CAR T cells, T cells from healthy subjects were
transduced and expanded either with rIL-2 or rIL-15. Almost 20-50%
transduced T cells express CD19-CAR on their surface as analysed by flow
cytometry. Next, efficacy of CD19-CAR-T cells was examined by
cytotoxicity assay using CD19+ malignant B cell lines (Raji cells) and
autologous B cells. CAR-T cells were able to kill majority of CD19+B
cells effectively (100% killing). In addition, CAR-T cells secreted high
levels of IFNÎ“ and IL-2. The CAR-T cells expanded in presence of rIL-15
showed fewer Treg compared to CAR-T cells expanded using rIL-2, however,
there were no differences in numbers of T stem cells (TSC) and central
memory T cells (TCM). In addition to data on healthy volunteers reflected
above, results of above tests in relapsed/ refractory B-ALL patients is
ongoing and being collated for inclusion in the final analysis. In
conclusion, our data demonstrate the successful development of an
indigenous CAR-T cell platform for subsequent use in clinical trials of
CD19+B cell malignancies.


