Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure, in vitro biology and in vivo pharmacodynamic
characterization of a novel clinical IDO1 inhibitor.


The enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) catalyzes the degradation
of tryptophan along the kynurenine pathway, and is frequently expressed
in human malignancies. The activity of IDO1 induces an immunosuppressive
microenvironment in tissues by inhibiting T-cell function through local
depletion of tryptophan and through generation of kynurenine pathway
metabolites. Inhibition of IDO1 is expected to diminish the
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and improve cancer patient
outcomes, particularly when used in combination with cancer immunotherapy
agents such as nivolumab and ipilimumab. In this presentation, we will
disclose the chemical structure, enzyme inhibitory mechanism, in vitro
potency and in vivo pharmacodynamic (PD) activity of BMS’ IDO1
inhibitor currently in Phase I clinical trials. The compound is a potent
and selective IDO1 inhibitor with no activity against another tryptophan
degrading enzyme, tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO). It exhibited potent
cellular activity, suppressing kynurenine production in HEK293 cells
overexpressing human IDO1 (IC50 = 1.1 nM) and in HeLa cells stimulated
with IFNγ (IC50 = 1.7 nM). The compound also potently restored T-cell
proliferation in a co-culture of T cells and human cancer cells and in a
mixed lymphocyte reaction where T cells were co-cultured with allogeneic
IDO1-expressing dendritic cells (EC50 = 1.2 nM). In vivo, when given once
a day orally, the compound exhibited significant PD activity in mouse
tumors grown subcutaneously in syngeneic hosts and in human tumors grown
as xenografts in nude mice.


