Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adherence to cancer prevention guidelines and risk of cancer among
older white and black adults in the Health ABC Study.


Background: About one-third of cancers can be prevented by healthy
lifestyle behaviors. The American Cancer Society (ACS) have guidelines
for reducing the risk of cancer by maintaining a healthy body weight,
being physically active, eating well and limiting alcohol. Few studies
have examined adherence to cancer preventive behavior and subsequent
cancer risk in older populations that are inclusive of men, women and
minorities.

Methods: We evaluated adherence to ACS cancer prevention guidelines and
subsequent risk of all incident cancer in the Health, Aging and Body
Composition Study. The population included 2,124 white and black men and
women aged 71-80 years who were initially free of cancer at baseline
(1998-1999). Adherence to ACS guidelines was scored from 0 (lowest
adherence) to 8 (greatest adherence). Maintenance of healthy body weight
was determined from body mass index at ages 25 and 50 (recalled at
baseline) and measured height and weight at baseline. Physical activity
and alcohol intake were assessed by questionnaire. Diet was assessed by
food frequency questionnaire (servings of fruits and vegetables, the
ratio of whole grains to refined grains and intake of red meat and
processed meats). Incident cancer (all types except non-melanoma skin
cancer) was confirmed from pathology reports when available, or medical
records and death certificates. Risk of cancer was determined with cox
regression adjusted for gender, age and study site. Participants with the
lowest adherence to ACS guidelines were the referent.

Results: The lowest adherence category (scores 0-2) had 297 participants
(14% of all participants), 1,316 (62%) were in the moderate adherence
category (scores 3-5), and 511 (24%) were in the highest adherence
category (scores 6-8). Adherence was lower among men (PResults: The
lowest adherence category (scores 0-2) had 297 participants (14% of all
participants), 1,316 (62%) were in the moderate adherence category
(scores 3-5), and 511 (24%) were in the highest adherence category
(scores 6-8). Adherence was lower among men (P<0.001), black (PResults:
The lowest adherence category (scores 0-2) had 297 participants (14% of
all participants), 1,316 (62%) were in the moderate adherence category
(scores 3-5), and 511 (24%) were in the highest adherence category
(scores 6-8). Adherence was lower among men (P<0.001), black (P<0.001)
and older participants (PResults: The lowest adherence category (scores
0-2) had 297 participants (14% of all participants), 1,316 (62%) were in
the moderate adherence category (scores 3-5), and 511 (24%) were in the
highest adherence category (scores 6-8). Adherence was lower among men
(P<0.001), black (P<0.001) and older participants (P<0.01). After a
median follow-up of 12.5 years, 517 people developed incident cancer.
Participants with moderate adherence had a 23% lower risk of cancer
[HR=0.77, 95% CI=0.60-0.97]. Participants with the greatest adherence had
a 26% lower risk of cancer [HR=0.74, 95% CI=0.56-0.98].

Conclusions: Only 1 in 4 older adults closely followed healthy lifestyle
behaviors outlined by the ACS for cancer prevention. Greater adherence to
recommendations was associated with lower likelihood of total cancer in
older white and black adults. Public health efforts to increase
preventive lifestyle behaviors may be particularly needed among men,
black and older individuals.


