Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive analysis delineating the immunotherapeutic terrain
of cancer-related clinical trials.


Technological innovations have facilitated a greater understanding of how
the tumor microenvironment contributes to cancer, leading to rapid FDA
approval of four immunotherapies. To assess how these therapies are being
further investigated in combination with other therapies and in tumor
types outside of the current FDA approval, we performed a comprehensive
analysis of the curated clinical trials in the JAX Clinical Knowledgebase
(JAX-CKB). In brief, clinical trials investigating Atezolizumab,
Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab, and Ipilimumab, curated from
clinicaltrials.gov, were queried in the JAX-CKB and then analyzed for
comparison. Further analyses were executed to illustrate possible unmet
needs within the field of cancer therapeutics. Of the four
immunotherapies, Pembrolizumab was identified with the greatest number of
clinical trials overall, with 305 compared to Atezolizumab, 79,
Nivolumab, 183, and Ipilimumab, 126. Of these trials the number of trials
investigating Pembrolizumab, Atezolizumab, Nivolumab, or Ipilimumab in
combination with another therapy was higher than those investigating one
of the four immunotherapies as a monotherapy. Phase II trials for both
single therapy and combinatorial therapies were greater than both Phase I
and Phase III for the same groups, regardless of therapy. On average, 12%
Â± 3.8% of the combined trials for all four drugs included any advanced
solid tumor. Nivolumab combined with Ipilimumab demonstrated the greatest
number of trials (61) investigating an immunotherapy in combination with
another immunotherapy. Among those, 30 were Phase II trials, 16 were
Phase I, and 14 were Phase III. Across five cancer indications (lung,
pancreatic, ovarian, prostate, and colon), lung cancer was most commonly
indicated in the trials, among all four drugs. Prostate was indicated in
the least number of trials, with Ipilimumab ranking the highest (10). The
recent success with immunotherapies has garnered significant interest in
understanding how these therapies will perform in different tumor types
and whether specific combinations will have a greater impact.
Interrogation of the clinical trial terrain in the JAX-CKB provides a
basis for determining additional investigations that might be warranted.


