Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Jackson Laboratory Repository: Mouse models for cancer
research.


The mouse is a well-established model organism for research of the
biology, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. Among the
advantages of this valuable biomedical research tool are a relatively
short reproductive cycle, an accelerated lifespan, and the ease of
genetic manipulation and modification. Serving as a resource to the
scientific community, the JAX Repository collection encompasses over
10,000 mouse strains and acquires hundreds of new models each year. Some
of these new models are highlighted in this poster. Many of these strains
have applications for modeling human cancer, including genetically
engineered mouse models for specific cancers and xenograft models.
Research tool strains, such as cas9-expressing (CRISPR) lines, a suite of
immunodeficient mice, and recombinase expressing strains, are available
to investigators to generate customized mutant lines for specialized
purposes. JAX offers supplementary research tools that include
specialized strain platforms and other useful resources. The JAX
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cancer model resource leverages the
immunodeficient NSG strain for tumor engraftment.

The Repository maintains a searchable online resource to find mice
(www.jaxmice.jax.org) and an Oncology Therapeutic Area page
(www.jax.org/jax-mice-and-services/solutions-by-therapeutic-area/oncology) 
as a launch pad to featured JAX strains and resources related to oncology
research.

The Repository has a rigorous quality control program that inspects and
confirms expected mutation identity and genetic background. JAX mouse
lines are also screened for alleles (GFP, cre, lacZ, etc.) that may
contaminate strains in mouse lines shared between labsâ€”an
underappreciated problem that may contribute to inconsistencies of
reproducibility. In addition, the Reproductive Sciences group at JAX
safeguards each strain by cryopreservation, and can create cohorts for
studies rapidly using IVF technology. Researchers can submit their
strains to be considered for inclusion in the Repository by using the
on-line form available at The Jackson Laboratory website:
www.jax.org/donate-a-mouse.

The Jackson Laboratory Repository is supported by the NIH, The Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, and other private charitable foundations.


