Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: First-in-human dose selection for ALKS 4230, an investigational
immunotherapeutic agent.


ALKS 4230 is an engineered fusion protein comprised of a circularly
permuted interleukin-2 (IL-2) and the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) α chain,
CD25, designed to selectively activate the intermediate-affinity IL-2R,
but not the high-affinity IL-2R. Selective activation of the
intermediate-affinity IL-2R by ALKS 4230 has the potential to provide
enhanced tumor killing as well as improved safety and tolerability.
Various in vitro and in vivo studies were conducted to characterize the
primary and secondary pharmacodynamics (PD) of ALKS 4230 as well as its
pharmacokinetics (PK). The results guided the selection of the starting
dose for the ALKS 4230 first-in-human (FIH) clinical study based upon the
Minimal Anticipated Biological Effect Level (MABEL) approach. The PK-PD
relationship for ALKS 4230 was evaluated in in vitro pharmacology studies
in target cells from murine, non-human primate and human donors. The mean
EC10 values for activation of NK cells, memory CD8 T-cells and Tregs in
target cells from human donors were 0.09, 0.18 and 0.13 nM, respectively.
Using the lowest EC10 value of 0.09 nM (0.0031µg/mL) as a surrogate for
the MABEL, assuming IV administration to a 70 kg human with 3 L plasma
volume, a dose of 0.1 µg/kg would be expected to result in an immediate
post-dose concentration of 0.0031 µg/mL. The mean EC50 values for
activation of NK cells, memory CD8 T cells and Tregs in target cells from
human donors were 0.46, 1.1 and 0.59 nM, respectively. Using the EC50
value as surrogate for minimal effective ALKS 4230 concentration that
induces activation of human IL-2R complex, the projected minimal
efficacious dose (MED) in humans to achieve a concentration of 0.46 nM
(0.016 µg/mL) to 1.1 nM (0.038 µg/mL) is 0.7- 1.6 µg/kg. Based on a
MABEL dose of 0.1 µg/kg and projected MED of 0.7- 1.6 µg/kg, the
proposed doses to be evaluated in the FIH Phase 1 study are 0.1, 0.3, 1,
3, 10, and 30 µg/kg. In comparison, the projected Cmax at the proposed
starting dose of 0.1 µg/kg is > 750-fold lower than the Cmax at the
no-observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) in a repeat-dose toxicology
study in monkeys. It is also about 3-fold lower than the lowest
concentration of ALKS 4230 (0.01 µg/mL) tested in the cytokine release
assays at which only slight elevations were observed for IL-6, IL-8, and
IFN-γ in a small number of whole blood samples from healthy human
donors, similar to those in the low-response control across the
concentration range evaluated. Therefore, 0.1 µg/kg is considered a safe
starting dose for the FIH study. The PK, PD and toxicology assessments
conducted to date support the FIH investigation of ALKS 4230 at the
proposed starting dose of 0.1 µg/kg.


