Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The food additive agent potassium bromate prevents growth and
aggressive phenotypes by targeting multiple molecular signatures in
breast cancer cells.


Potassium bromate (KBrO3) is by-product of ozone that has found
multifunctional purpose in modern society. It is used as disinfectant in
drinking water, a bleaching agent to improve flour, a component of
cold-wave hair lotion and an ingredient in the production of fish paste
and fermented beverages. Potassium bromide has also been used in America
for bread-baking as a safe food additive since 1914. Despite the
commercial value of this chemical, some studies suggest that KBrO3 could
be a carcinogen. During the bread-baking process, Potassium bromate is
normally converted into a stable and inert compound, potassium bromide
(KBr). However, due to incomplete reduction, the residual KBrO3 remains
in the bread, which eventually acts as a potential carcinogen to humans.
Interestingly, our studies, in breast cancer cells, found contrasting
results. We found that KBrO3 delays growth of ER-Î± positive luminal type
breast cancer cells and triple-negative breast cancer cells (TNBC) via
inducing apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. KBrO3-induced apoptosis is
mediated via targeting BCL-2/Bax and Caspase-3 signaling pathway.
Moreover, aggressive phenotypes such as migration, invasion and
sphere-forming ability of breast cancer cells are significantly impaired
by KBrO3-treatment via targeting multiple molecular signatures in breast
cancer cells. The growth inhibition effect of KBrO3 is also documented in
a tumor xenograft model. Collectively, our findings provide a rationale
for the basic and pre-clinical evaluation of the role of KBrO3 in breast
cancer progression and therapy.


