Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-CDK inhibition efficiently suppresses AR function and cell
growth in prostate cancer.


Metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) continues to
result in over 26,000 deaths per year in the United States. For 70 years,
therapy for advanced prostate cancer has relied on AR-directed therapies.
Unfortunately, even with the second generation androgen deprivation
compounds, treated cancers commonly progress to castration resistance and
lethality. This progression to castration resistance remains the central
therapeutic roadblock for advanced prostate cancer. Importantly, in the
vast majority of CRPC cases, the tumor still depends on AR signaling, but
this signaling becomes androgen independent. The most common mechanisms,
including mutation, protein truncation, and alternative splicing, affect
the C-terminal domain, suggesting that antagonism of AR function via the
N-terminal domain may be a promising target for CRPC therapy. Several
groups have shown that CDKs 1, 5 and 9 activate AR by phosphorylation of
the N-terminal domain. Here, we show that the multi-CDK inhibitor
roniciclib (BAY1000394) inhibits activation of AR in a panel of prostate
cancer cell lines, including several cell lines which exhibit
androgen-independent AR signaling via AR-V7 alternative splicing. In
vivo, roniciclib inhibited growth of prostate cancer xenografts. Since AR
inhibition in prostate cancer has been shown to induce compensatory PI3K
signaling, we also treated xenografts with a combination of roniciclib
and the PI3K inhibitor copanlisib (BAY 80-6946). This combination was
especially effective, and was well tolerated by the mice. Our results
suggest that a combination of a multi-CDK inhibitor and a PI3K inhibitor
may be promising for CRPC therapy.


