Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical validation of an epigenetic field of susceptibility to
detect significant prostate cancer from 2 non-tumor biopsies.


Background: An epigenetic field of cancer susceptibility exists for
prostate cancer that gives rise to multifocal disease in the peripheral
zone. In a previous studies (Neoplasia 2013, J Urol 2014) we identified
using methylation arrays over 50 altered regions in normal prostate
tissue of men with prostate cancer. In the current multicenter study, a
validation was performed to determine the predictive strength of this
approach.

Methods: We evaluated 2 archived, cancer negative prostate biopsy core
tissue from 129 subjects from 4 urological centers. All negative cases
(controls) underwent 2 or more repeat negative biopsies within 24 mo with
a central review of all histopathology. Cancer cases were negative
biopsies selected from patients who ultimately went prostate removal to
confirm a final grade >Gleason Score 7. Biopsies were analyzed using
pyrosequencing for DNA methylation changes at multiple CpGs surrounding
the genes EVX1, CAV1, PLA2G16, FGF1, SPAG4 and NCR2. Analyses used
multiplex logistic regression modeling with backward elimination.

Results: Patients diagnosed with GS>7 cancer (77) and the control group
(52) were similarly matched except for PSA (7 vs 5.8; pResults: Patients
diagnosed with GS>7 cancer (77) and the control group (52) were similarly
matched except for PSA (7 vs 5.8; p<0.03) and prostate size (46 vs 36;
pResults: Patients diagnosed with GS>7 cancer (77) and the control group
(52) were similarly matched except for PSA (7 vs 5.8; p<0.03) and
prostate size (46 vs 36; p<0.02). We observed robust methylation
differences for all genes (pResults: Patients diagnosed with GS>7 cancer
(77) and the control group (52) were similarly matched except for PSA (7
vs 5.8; p<0.03) and prostate size (46 vs 36; p<0.02). We observed robust
methylation differences for all genes (p<0.05) (Table). A multiplex
regression model for biomarker performance incorporating a gene
combination of EVX1, NCR2, PLAG2 and SPAG4 discriminated non-tumor from
tumor-associated tissues (AUC 0.744, p7 prostate cancers (AUC 0.808,
p=0.001).

Conclusions: A widespread epigenetic field defect can be used to detect
GS>7 prostate cancers in patients with histologically negative biopsies.
This assay is sensitive in requiring only 2 biopsies and detects
alterations in nontumor cells at distance from the cancer. This has the
potential to decrease the need for repeat prostate biopsies, a procedure
associated with cost and complications.

Support: UW Ignitor; Gen X foundation


