Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Complement regulatory protein expression in solid tumors:
implications for resistance to antibody-mediated immunotherapy.


Background: Resistance to anti-cancer therapies results in
relapsed/refractory disease of Glioblastoma (GBM) and Ewing’s Sarcoma.
Up-regulation of membrane-bound complement regulatory proteins (mCRPs)
CD46, CD55, and CD59 can enable solid tumors to confer resistance to
antibody-mediated immunotherapy by preventing complement and
antibody-dependent cytotoxicity. mCRPs’ inhibitory role in monoclonal
antibody treatments for liquid tumors have been reported, but their role
and regulation in solid tumors has not been explored. In the context of
refractory tumors, others have reported that vascular endothelial growth
factor-A (VEGF-A) can induce mCRP expression in endothelial cells.
Notably, p53 mutational status induces VEGF-A and its receptor (VEGFR2)
in breast cancer cell lines. To investigate potential links among p53
status, VEGF-A, and mCRP, we screened wildtype (wt-p53) and mutant p53
solid tumor cell lines for mCRP expression and VEGF-A secretion. Our data
suggest that p53 mutational status is associated with expression of CD55
and VEGF-A secretion. These studies provide foundation for potentially
recognizing mCRPs as immune biomarkers in solid tumors, ultimately,
resulting in development of novel immunotherapies for improved clinical
outcomes.

Methods: Pediatric Ewing’s sarcoma (CHLA9 and CHLA10) and adult GBM
(GBM10 and GBM43) cell lines differing in p53 status were selected for in
vitro studies. GBM43 originates from a primary GBM, while GBM10 is from a
recurrent GBM patient. Ewing’s Sarcoma cell lines, CHLA9 and CHLA10,
were generated from the same patient at primary diagnosis and at relapse
respectively. Western blot, and sequencing confirmed the expression and
p53 mutational status. mCRP expression was evaluated using RT-PCR and
flow cytometry. Milliplex platform assessed VEGF-A expression in cell
supernatants.

Results: Whole genome sequencing data confirmed p53 mutations in all cell
lines. CHLA9 and GBM10 harbor wt-p53. CHLA10 cells have p53 deletion and
GBM43 cells have a F270C p53 mutation in both alleles CD55 transcripts
were undetected in wt-p53 lines (CHLA9 and GBM10), but CD55 transcripts
were increased in mutant/deleted p53 lines (CHLA10 and GBM43). Flow
cytometry data show increased CD55 expression in mutant p53 glioblastoma
(GBM43) versus wt-p53 (GBM10) cells (pResults: Whole genome sequencing
data confirmed p53 mutations in all cell lines. CHLA9 and GBM10 harbor
wt-p53. CHLA10 cells have p53 deletion and GBM43 cells have a F270C p53
mutation in both alleles CD55 transcripts were undetected in wt-p53 lines
(CHLA9 and GBM10), but CD55 transcripts were increased in mutant/deleted
p53 lines (CHLA10 and GBM43). Flow cytometry data show increased CD55
expression in mutant p53 glioblastoma (GBM43) versus wt-p53 (GBM10) cells
(p<0.001). Transcript and flow cytometric analysis of CD46 and CD59 in
Ewing’s sarcoma and GBM cell lines are in progress. Mutant p53
Ewing’s sarcoma and GBM cell lines secreted more VEGF-A compared to
wt-p53 cell lines (pResults: Whole genome sequencing data confirmed p53
mutations in all cell lines. CHLA9 and GBM10 harbor wt-p53. CHLA10 cells
have p53 deletion and GBM43 cells have a F270C p53 mutation in both
alleles CD55 transcripts were undetected in wt-p53 lines (CHLA9 and
GBM10), but CD55 transcripts were increased in mutant/deleted p53 lines
(CHLA10 and GBM43). Flow cytometry data show increased CD55 expression in
mutant p53 glioblastoma (GBM43) versus wt-p53 (GBM10) cells (p<0.001).
Transcript and flow cytometric analysis of CD46 and CD59 in Ewing’s
sarcoma and GBM cell lines are in progress. Mutant p53 Ewing’s sarcoma
and GBM cell lines secreted more VEGF-A compared to wt-p53 cell lines
(p<0.05 and pResults: Whole genome sequencing data confirmed p53
mutations in all cell lines. CHLA9 and GBM10 harbor wt-p53. CHLA10 cells
have p53 deletion and GBM43 cells have a F270C p53 mutation in both
alleles CD55 transcripts were undetected in wt-p53 lines (CHLA9 and
GBM10), but CD55 transcripts were increased in mutant/deleted p53 lines
(CHLA10 and GBM43). Flow cytometry data show increased CD55 expression in
mutant p53 glioblastoma (GBM43) versus wt-p53 (GBM10) cells (p<0.001).
Transcript and flow cytometric analysis of CD46 and CD59 in Ewing’s
sarcoma and GBM cell lines are in progress. Mutant p53 Ewing’s sarcoma
and GBM cell lines secreted more VEGF-A compared to wt-p53 cell lines
(p<0.05 and p<0.001, respectively).

Conclusion: These findings highlight the importance of further
investigating role of VEGF-A in regulating mCRPs in wt-p53 versus mutant
p53 solid tumor cell lines. Elucidating mechanisms for mCRP regulation is
critical for immune biomarker development and in facilitating the use of
antibody-based therapeutic approaches for solid tumors.


