Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of PEN-221, an SSTR2-targeting maytansinoid conjugate
with potent activity in vitro and in vivo.


Here we describe the discovery and the structure of PEN-221, a
somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) targeting peptide conjugated to DM1.
PEN-221 is the first clinical compound from Tarvedaâ€™s Pentarin
platform, which utilizes miniaturized drug conjugates that diffuse
rapidly and deeply into solid tumors. Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs)
have garnered a significant amount of attention in their ability to
direct cytotoxic drugs to cancer cells; however, the efficacy of ADCs in
solid tumors is limited by the slow diffusion of such large molecules
through solid tumor tissue. Pentarins are designed to improve the
efficacy of targeted therapies through effective tumor cell targeting and
enhanced tumor penetration.

SSTR2, a GPCR overexpressed in multiple types of neuroendocrine tumors,
including small cell lung cancers, internalizes rapidly upon agonist
stimulation, making it an ideal vector for delivering cytotoxic payloads.
Examination of a variety of SSTR2 targeting ligands, as well as several
potential conjugation sites, led to the identification of the C-terminal
side chain of [Tyr3]-octreotate amide as the best conjugation site for a
lipophilic payload. The use of DM1 as a payload afforded superior
receptor affinity and receptor internalization when compared to other
similarly potent microtubule-targeting agents. In vitro studies show that
PEN-221 has receptor-dependent cytotoxic effects, and preclinical studies
demonstrate PEN-221 induces tumor regression in several SSTR2 expressing
xenograft models.


