Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in the 16q24.3 region of melanocortin-1-receptor
(MC1R) and prostate cancer risk: A Mendelian randomization analysis of
39,000 cases and 25,000 controls.


We previously reported that men with naturally red hair had a
significantly lower risk of prostate cancer (HR=0.46, 95% CI 0.24-0.89)
compared with the most prevalent hair color, light brown (Br J Cancer
2013;109(3):747-750). The red hair phenotype is encoded by variants in
the melanocortin-1-receptor (MC1R) gene that controls expression of the
eumelanin and pheomelanin pigments. In order to re-examine this
association through the relatively unbiased Mendelian randomization
approach, we examined single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in and near
MC1R in relation to prostate cancer risk using data from the Prostate
Cancer Association Group to Investigate Cancer Associated Alterations in
the Genome (PRACTICAL) consortium. The analysis includes 38,868 men
diagnosed with prostate cancer and 25,210 controls from 35 studies
participating in PRACTICAL Consortium (Nat Gen 2014;46(10)1103-1109).
Logistic regression modeling was used to estimate the odds ratio (OR) and
confidence interval (CI) for the per allele prostate risk associations
with 148 genotyped SNPs and 164 imputed SNPs. Variants demonstrating
nominal significance (alpha-error pWe previously reported that men with
naturally red hair had a significantly lower risk of prostate cancer
(HR=0.46, 95% CI 0.24-0.89) compared with the most prevalent hair color,
light brown (Br J Cancer 2013;109(3):747-750). The red hair phenotype is
encoded by variants in the melanocortin-1-receptor (MC1R) gene that
controls expression of the eumelanin and pheomelanin pigments. In order
to re-examine this association through the relatively unbiased Mendelian
randomization approach, we examined single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in and near MC1R in relation to prostate cancer risk using data
from the Prostate Cancer Association Group to Investigate Cancer
Associated Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) consortium. The analysis
includes 38,868 men diagnosed with prostate cancer and 25,210 controls
from 35 studies participating in PRACTICAL Consortium (Nat Gen
2014;46(10)1103-1109). Logistic regression modeling was used to estimate
the odds ratio (OR) and confidence interval (CI) for the per allele
prostate risk associations with 148 genotyped SNPs and 164 imputed SNPs.
Variants demonstrating nominal significance (alpha-error p<0.05) as well
as those reaching a stringent Bonferroni threshold of pWe previously
reported that men with naturally red hair had a significantly lower risk
of prostate cancer (HR=0.46, 95% CI 0.24-0.89) compared with the most
prevalent hair color, light brown (Br J Cancer 2013;109(3):747-750). The
red hair phenotype is encoded by variants in the melanocortin-1-receptor
(MC1R) gene that controls expression of the eumelanin and pheomelanin
pigments. In order to re-examine this association through the relatively
unbiased Mendelian randomization approach, we examined single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in and near MC1R in relation to prostate cancer risk
using data from the Prostate Cancer Association Group to Investigate
Cancer Associated Alterations in the Genome (PRACTICAL) consortium. The
analysis includes 38,868 men diagnosed with prostate cancer and 25,210
controls from 35 studies participating in PRACTICAL Consortium (Nat Gen
2014;46(10)1103-1109). Logistic regression modeling was used to estimate
the odds ratio (OR) and confidence interval (CI) for the per allele
prostate risk associations with 148 genotyped SNPs and 164 imputed SNPs.
Variants demonstrating nominal significance (alpha-error p<0.05) as well
as those reaching a stringent Bonferroni threshold of p<0.0003 adjustment
for multiple comparisons were examined. We identified prostate cancer
risk associations with 30 genotyped and 36 imputed polymorphisms that
were nominally significant, three of which achieved Bonferroni
significance and were in a region of 16q24.3 that includes MC1R, GAS8
(growth arrest specific-8, an alleged tumor suppressor that is deleted in
some prostate cancers), and transcription factor-25 (TCF25). These were
rs4628973 and rs3743824 that were in high LD (r2=0.931; prostate cancer
risk associations p=0.00029 and 0.00023, respectively), as well as
rs6500461 that was independently associated with risk (r2=0.20 with
rs4628973; p=0.00020). This large-scale Mendelian randomization analysis
suggests genetic variants near MC1R, which directs melanocyte melanin
synthesis, secretion and human pigmentation, may be associated with risk
of prostate cancer.


