Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MYC expression correlates with PD-L1 expression and related poor
clinical outcome in non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) is widely used biomarker
for the response prediction of immune checkpoint inhibitors, but its
usefulness has been challenged. MYC, a transcriptional factor which is
overexpressed in various cancers, plays critical roles in preventing
immune cells from attacking tumor cells by inducing PD-L1 expression. We
evaluated that MYC expression is positively related that of PD-L1 in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) clinical specimens and that it has
potential as a predictor of response to immune checkpoint inhibitors in
NSCLC.

Methods: Eighty-four cases who were diagnosed as NSCLC and underwent
surgical resection were evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). PD-L1
expression was evaluated by FDA-approved PD-L1, 22C3 PharmDxTM protocol
using the Dako Automated Link 48 platform at Clarient Diagnostic
Services, Inc (Aliso Viejo, CA, USA). Its expression was determined by
using Tumor Proportion Score (TPS), which is the percentage of viable
tumor cells showing partial or complete membrane staining. If TPS >= 50%
of the viable tumor cells exhibit membrane staining at any intensity, it
was considered positive. IHC of MYC was performed using anti-c-MYC
antibody [Y69] (ab32072, Abcam, USA) and its expression was evaluated by
scoring system using product of nuclear staining intensity and percentage
of positive cells.

Results: When MYC cDNA was transfected into KRAS-dependent lung cancer
cell lines that did not express both MYC and PD-L1, the protein
expression and mRNA of PD-L1 were induced in a dose-dependent manner. On
the other hands, knockdown of MYC with siRNA inhibited protein expression
and mRNA indicating MYC regulates PD-L1 at transcriptional level. Of 84
NSCLC tumor tissues, PD-L1 was expressed in 14 (16.7%) and MYC in 30
(35.7%) cases. Dual positive patients were 9 (10.7%) and dual negative
patients were 49 (58.3%). When the relationship between PD-L1 and MYC
expression was evaluated, significant positive correlation was observed
between PD-L1 and MYC expression (Î³=0.267, P=0.014). Dual positive
patients showed significantly shorter disease free survival (16.1 vs.
62.5 months, P=0.004) and overall survival (24.9 vs. 70.9 months,
P=0.002) than dual negative patients.

Conclusion: MYC expression correlates with PD-L1 expression in the NSCLC
and the patients with overexpression of both MYC and PD-L1 showed
significantly poor survival. This suggest that it is worth of
investigation of MYC expression as a surrogate predictive marker for
treatment of immune checkpoint inhibitors in NSCLC.


