Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tissue-engineered bone for longitudinal intravital microscopy of
solid tumor growth and therapy response.


Bone metastases are the initial site of progression and account for many
of the complications experienced by men with metastatic prostate cancer
(PCa), including therapy resistance. Besides cell intrinsic mechanisms,
the interaction between PCa cells and the bone microenvironment
critically contributes to lesion expansion and drug sensitivity. We here
developed a mouse model amenable to intravital multiphoton microscopy
(iMPM) to longitudinally study PCa-stromal cell interactions and therapy
response in a partially humanized neobone, established in the dermis of
the mouse. Tissue engineered bone constructs, TEBCs, were generated by
functionalizing polymeric polycaprolactone scaffolds with human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) differentiated to osteoblasts followed by
cell-derived calcification of the inter-scaffold space. 30 days after
implantation of functionalized scaffolds under the skin of the mouse,
bone and bone marrow maturation resulted in a 30mm3 cavity surrounded by
optically transparent cortical bone of 50-60 Î¼m thickness, as monitored
by microCT and iMPM. Intra-bone tumor growth and osteolysis dynamics
caused by human fluorescent PCa cells (PC3) were three-dimensionally
reconstructed by multi-parameter detection through a body window,
including collagen and bone matrix (SHG), calcified bone (fluorescent
bisphosphonates), osteoclasts (cathepsin K), bone surface (THG), blood
vessels and stromal phagocytes (fluorescent dextran), and PC3 cells
(nuclear H2B/eGFP, cytoplasmatic DsRed2). As a proof of concept, the
efficacy to halt bone remodeling during bisphosphonate therapy was
detected, revealing the composition and kinetics of the bone-tumor
interface. Combining engineered neobone with an optical window is suited
to detail the 3D organization and dynamics of cancer lesions in bone and
provides mechanistic insight and efficacy predictions for therapy
response. Thus, this strategy will be implied to dissect the therapeutic
effect of radium 223, a radioisotope with bone seeking properties, and
the first agent that improves the duration and quality of life of
advanced metastatic PCa patients. By using this model we will test the
hypothesis that 223Ra alters stromal niches, structurally and
molecularly, in a manner that accounts for the clinical observations in
established macroscopic lesions.


