Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Meta-analysis of genomic predictors of response to immune
checkpoint therapy in metastatic melanoma.


Introduction: Immune checkpoint therapies benefit a subset of patients
with metastatic melanoma, but ability to predict clinical outcomes is
limited. This meta-analysis of genomic predictors of outcomes to aPD1 and
aCTLA4 in melanoma combines 220 sequenced tumors from 3 published
cohorts, aiming to validate existing hypotheses regarding response to
immune checkpoint therapies and discover new relationships with greater
power.

Methods: Genomic data and clinical annotations from published cohorts
were analyzed with standardized pipelines for somatic variant calling,
mutational signature deconvolution, and neoantigen prediction. Patients
were stratified into clinical benefit (CB) and no clinical benefit (NCB)
as described in Van Allen et al. 2015. Analyses were repeated using two
other published response metrics (CB=PFS>6 months; CB=CR or PR).

Results: Nonsynonymous mutational burden was significantly higher in CB
vs. NCB using all 3 response metrics, though significance was less
pronounced using PFS alone (pResults: Nonsynonymous mutational burden was
significantly higher in CB vs. NCB using all 3 response metrics, though
significance was less pronounced using PFS alone (p<0.01 vs. pResults:
Nonsynonymous mutational burden was significantly higher in CB vs. NCB
using all 3 response metrics, though significance was less pronounced
using PFS alone (p<0.01 vs. p<0.0001; Wilcoxon rank sum), partially due
to 3 patients with high mutational burden who experienced PR for C
substitutions (S5), mismatch repair (S6), alkylating agents (S11), UV
(S7), and T>G substitutions (S17). The proportion of mutations in S7 or
S11 was positively correlated with mutational burden (Spearman’s
rho=0.66), while S5 and S1 were anti-correlated (rho=-0.62). In a
multivariate logistic model, S7 and S11 activity were independent
predictors of CB adjusting for mutational load (pC substitutions (S5),
mismatch repair (S6), alkylating agents (S11), UV (S7), and T>G
substitutions (S17). The proportion of mutations in S7 or S11 was
positively correlated with mutational burden (Spearman’s rho=0.66),
while S5 and S1 were anti-correlated (rho=-0.62). In a multivariate
logistic model, S7 and S11 activity were independent predictors of CB
adjusting for mutational load (p<0.05), with the sum of S7 and S11
activity being a strong predictor (pC substitutions (S5), mismatch repair
(S6), alkylating agents (S11), UV (S7), and T>G substitutions (S17). The
proportion of mutations in S7 or S11 was positively correlated with
mutational burden (Spearman’s rho=0.66), while S5 and S1 were
anti-correlated (rho=-0.62). In a multivariate logistic model, S7 and S11
activity were independent predictors of CB adjusting for mutational load
(p<0.05), with the sum of S7 and S11 activity being a strong predictor
(p<0.001). Of the patients with low mutational burden (1/2 of mutations
in S7 or S11, compared to only 36/71 of low-mutation NCB (p500 genes were
mutated more frequently in either CB or NCB (p500 genes were mutated more
frequently in either CB or NCB (p<0.05, Fisher’s exact). Restricting
analysis to genes recurrently mutated in cancer and correcting for
patient mutational burden by permutation, nonsynonymous mutations in
ACSL3 and MET and truncating alterations in ARID2 were significantly
enriched in CB.

Conclusions: In this meta-analysis of 220 patients, harmonized clinical
and whole exome analysis confirmed that mutational burden correlates with
CB from aPD1 and aCTLA4 therapy, while mutational signatures and
alterations in specific genes potentially provide additional predictive
power.


