Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 2 Kinase (eEF-2K) is a novel
therapeutic target in BRCA1+ mutated breast cancer.


BReast CAncer 1 and 2 (BRCA1/2) tumor suppressor genes are frequently
mutated in familial breast and ovarian cancers. Recent clinical trials in
breast cancers with BRCA1/2 mutations indicate that 50-75% of patients
may not have response to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARP)
inhibitors. Thus, identification of novel molecular targets and
therapeutic interventions are needed to improve poor clical outcome and
patient survival. Here we report that Eukaryotic Elongation Factor-2
Kinase (EF2K), an atypical kinase, is highly upregulated in BRCA1+
mutated cell lines and involved in colony formation, migration/ invasion
and enhances the effect of PARP inhibitors. Furthermore, in vivo
therapeutic targeting of EF2K by once a week systemic injections with
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) incorporating EF2K siRNA significantly
inhibits growth of BRCA1+ tumors in orthotopic xenograft models in mice
by inhibition of tumor cell proliferation, angiogenesis and induction of
robust apoptosis, which were associated with in vivo inhibition of
clinically relevant molecular pathways including, proliferation,
survival/drug resistance (PI3K/Akt, c-Myc), cell cycle (Cyclin D1),
motility/invasion (Src/FAK/Paxillin), translation (4E-BP1), angiogenesis
(VEGF) and stem-cell markers. No toxicity was detected during the study
and by postmortem analysis of major organs, indicating that targeting
EF2K is safe. The combination of PARP inhibitor (AZD2281, Oleparib) with
MNP-EF2K siRNA enhanced significantly growth inhibition in MDA-MB-436
cells indicting EF2K siRNA sensitize BRCA1 + mutation breast cancer cells
to PARP inhibitors. Collectively, our results suggest, for the first
time, that EF2K is involved in tumorigenesis and progression and may
serve as a potential therapeutic target in BRCA1+ mutated breast cancers.


