Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic enhancement of aminolevulinic acid-mediate tumor
fluorescence and photodynamic therapy with kinase inhibitors.


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves the combination of a photosensitizer
and light of a specific wavelength. Upon light activation in the presence
of oxygen, photosensitizer molecules generate reactive oxygen species
that cause cytotoxicity by inducing oxidative stress. Aminolevulinic acid
(ALA) is a pro-drug used for the diagnosis and PDT treatment of various
solid tumors based on endogenous production of heme precursor
protoporphyrin IX (PpIX). Although all human cells express heme
biosynthesis enzymes and produce PpIX, tumor cells are often found to
have higher PpIX production and accumulation than normal cells, allowing
for the detection and treatment of solid tumors. In exploring ALA-based
tumor detection and therapy in breast cancer, we have reported that high
ABCG2 transporter activity in triple negative breast cancer cells (TNBC)
contributes to reduced PpIX levels in tumor cells, causing cell
resistance to ALA-PDT. The administration of an ABCG2 inhibitor Ko143 was
able to reverse cell resistance to ALA-PDT by increasing PpIX levels. In
this study, we showed that some kinase inhibitors were able to increase
ALA-mediated PpIX by inhibiting ABCG2 activity. Particularly, our results
demonstrate that lapatinib, a dual inhibitor of EGFR and Her2, increased
the ALA-PpIX level and cell sensitivity to ALA-PDT in the MDA-MB-231 TNBC
cells. Lapatinib treatment had little effect on MCF10A breast epithelial
cells. These results indicate that small molecule kinase inhibitors such
as lapatinib can be used for enhancing ALA-based tumor detection and PDT
in tumors with high ABCG2 activity.


