Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere biology gene methylation and cancer risk.


Background: Telomeres maintain genomic stability and regulate cellular
senescence. Numerous studies have examined blood telomere length (BTL)
and cancer risk, including our own which previously identified a dynamic
relationship between BTL and cancer risk over time: Relative to subjects
who remained cancer-free, those who later developed cancer experienced
accelerated telomere shortening until 3-4 years prior to cancer
diagnosis/censoring, at which point BTL in the incident cancer group
stabilized. Other studies have suggested that cancer cells are able to
hijack telomere maintenance mechanisms (e.g., telomerase) in order to
circumvent the Hayflick limit, which will otherwise induce senescence and
limit cancer cellsâ€™ ability to multiply. As DNA methylation
dysregulation is a known epigenetic hallmark of cancer, our objective was
to understand whether DNA methylation of telomere biology genes is
associated with cancer risk and BTL.

Methods: We studied 915 blood measurements from 491 subjects in the
Normative Aging Study taken between 1999 and 2013, who were cancer free
in 1999 and randomly selected for whole-epigenome DNA methylation
profiling using the Illumina 450K BeadChip array. Among these subjects,
125 cases developed cancer and 366 controls remained cancer free for our
entire follow up (median 10.1 years). Our analysis focused on 2,731 CpG
sites on 142 genes related to telomere length maintenance. We used linear
models to identify CpGs differentially methylated by cancer status at the
first blood draw only, followed by mixed models using our full data to
determine the final CpG sites of interest for Cox models of cancer risk,
and another set of mixed models to compare trajectories over time of
methylation in cancer patients vs. controls. Finally an additional mixed
model explored the temporal relationship between methylation measured at
the first visit and BTL measured at the second visit.

Results: Our screening identified 167 CpG sites, 10 of which were
associated with time-dependent cancer risk at FDR Results: Our screening
identified 167 CpG sites, 10 of which were associated with time-dependent
cancer risk at FDR <0.05. Methylation of one CpG on each of CDC73,
NSMCE2, and RPA1 was associated with decreased cancer risk. Methylation
of one CpG on each of DCLRE1C, DDB1, H2AFY, HNRNPA2B1, and TEP1, as well
as two CpGs on TERF2, was associated with increased cancer risk. DNA
methylation trajectory at three CpGs was significantly different across
cancer status (cg20772347 on DDB1, cg23157637 on TEP1, and cg04818274 on
TERF2). One CpG on NSMCE2 and one on TERF2 were associated with BTL in
cancer-free subjects, while another CpG on TERF2 was associated with BTL
in subjects who later developed cancer.

Conclusion: These findings suggest that methylation changes in telomere
maintenance genes may be a mechanism by which cancer cells alter telomere
length, thus undermining genomic stability and protecting cancer cells
from senescence. Future studies should confirm these findings, and
explore these CpG sites and genes as potential early detection biomarkers
and therapeutic targets.


