Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of bone health in breast cancer survivors compared to
cancer-free women: A prospective study within a young familial risk
cohort.


Background: Bone loss has been consistently reported among long-term
older breast cancer (BC) survivors. However, it remains unclear how early
and to what degree BC survivors experience bone loss compared to their
cancer-free peers and to what extent this can be attributed to age and
premature menopause.

Methods: We studied 796 women (210 BC survivors, 586 cancer-free) with
familial risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer in the Breast and Ovarian
Surveillance Service (BOSS) cohort at Johns Hopkins Hospital. Survivors
were diagnosed with stage I-III BC Methods: We studied 796 women (210 BC
survivors, 586 cancer-free) with familial risk of breast and/or ovarian
cancer in the Breast and Ovarian Surveillance Service (BOSS) cohort at
Johns Hopkins Hospital. Survivors were diagnosed with stage I-III BC <5
years prior to baseline (mean time from diagnosis to enrollment=1.4
years; mean age at diagnosis=47 years). Osteopenia and osteoporosis were
ascertained based on self-reported physician diagnosis in baseline and
follow-up questionnaires. Prevalent cases of osteopenia or osteoporosis
were excluded. Multivariable (MV)-adjusted Cox proportional hazard models
were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) of osteopenia and osteoporosis incidence among BC survivors
compared to cancer-free women. MV models were adjusted for age, race,
menopause status, body mass index, physical activity, smoking, hormone
replacement therapy and early oophorectomy.

Results: BC survivors were slightly older (mean age 48 vs. 45 years),
more likely to be post-menopausal (51% vs. 29%) and had higher current
vitamin D use (21% vs. 8%) compared to cancer-free women. During a mean
follow-up time of 6.2 years, 77% of BC survivors and 60% of cancer-free
women reported having â‰¥1 bone density exam and 115 incident osteopenia
and/or osteoporosis cases were identified (75% osteopenia only). In
MV-adjusted models, BC survivors had 66% higher risk of being diagnosed
with osteopenia and/or osteoporosis compared to cancer-free women
(HR=1.66, 95% CI=1.11-2.47). BC survivors with no current vitamin D or
calcium use had 76% and 93% higher osteopenia and/or osteoporosis risk
compared to cancer-free women, respectively (MV HR=1.76, 95%
CI=1.14-2.72; MV HR=1.93, 95% CI=1.15-3.24). BC survivors ever treated
with chemotherapy or hormone therapy had higher osteopenia and/or
osteoporosis risk compared to cancer-free women (MV HR=2.00, 95%
CI=1.14-3.50; MV HR=1.79, 95% CI=1.14-2.82, respectively). Analyses
restricted to women with no change in menopause status during follow-up
were only slightly attenuated (MV HR=1.58, 95% CI=0.96-2.59).

Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that bone loss is significantly
greater than and occurs early in young BC survivors compared to
cancer-free women even after taking into consideration increasing age and
premature menopause. Our findings also provide support for a baseline
evaluation of bone density at diagnosis with subsequent monitoring in
young BC survivors with familial risk. Further analyses are ongoing to
evaluate the effect of specific BC treatments on bone health in this
cohort.


