Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative RNA-seq analysis reveals dys-regulation of major
canonical pathways in ERG-inducible LNCaP cell progression model of
prostate cancer.


Prostate Cancer (CaP) is the most common non-cutaneous form of cancer in
men and is the second leading cause of cancer mortality in men in the
USA. In human CaP, gene fusion between androgen responsive regulatory
elements at the 5' untranslated region of TMPRSS2 and ETS-related genes
(ERG) is present in at least 50% of the prostate tumors. To identify and
investigate the underlying mechanisms of ERG-associated CaP, we developed
ERG-inducible LNCaP cell system. In this present study, we investigated
the unique cellular transcriptome associated with over-expressed ERG in
CaP cells. Our data from comprehensive transcriptome analyses, illustrate
a distinct signature that distinguishes ERG-dependent and ERG-independent
CaP. The data highlight the significant heterogeneity among the
transcript. Out of the 527 differentially expressed genes, 232 genes were
up-regulated and 295 genes were down-regulated in response to ERG.
Subsequent, in silico analyses indicate that these differentially
expressed genes were associated with many pathways and functions. The
most significantly differentially expressed genes were associated with
cell cycle regulation. The top-ranked biological functions affected by
ERG over-expression include Cell Cycle (p Prostate Cancer (CaP) is the
most common non-cutaneous form of cancer in men and is the second leading
cause of cancer mortality in men in the USA. In human CaP, gene fusion
between androgen responsive regulatory elements at the 5' untranslated
region of TMPRSS2 and ETS-related genes (ERG) is present in at least 50%
of the prostate tumors. To identify and investigate the underlying
mechanisms of ERG-associated CaP, we developed ERG-inducible LNCaP cell
system. In this present study, we investigated the unique cellular
transcriptome associated with over-expressed ERG in CaP cells. Our data
from comprehensive transcriptome analyses, illustrate a distinct
signature that distinguishes ERG-dependent and ERG-independent CaP. The
data highlight the significant heterogeneity among the transcript. Out of
the 527 differentially expressed genes, 232 genes were up-regulated and
295 genes were down-regulated in response to ERG. Subsequent, in silico
analyses indicate that these differentially expressed genes were
associated with many pathways and functions. The most significantly
differentially expressed genes were associated with cell cycle
regulation. The top-ranked biological functions affected by ERG
over-expression include Cell Cycle (p < 1.42E-04), Cellular Growth and
Proliferation (p Prostate Cancer (CaP) is the most common non-cutaneous
form of cancer in men and is the second leading cause of cancer mortality
in men in the USA. In human CaP, gene fusion between androgen responsive
regulatory elements at the 5' untranslated region of TMPRSS2 and
ETS-related genes (ERG) is present in at least 50% of the prostate
tumors. To identify and investigate the underlying mechanisms of
ERG-associated CaP, we developed ERG-inducible LNCaP cell system. In this
present study, we investigated the unique cellular transcriptome
associated with over-expressed ERG in CaP cells. Our data from
comprehensive transcriptome analyses, illustrate a distinct signature
that distinguishes ERG-dependent and ERG-independent CaP. The data
highlight the significant heterogeneity among the transcript. Out of the
527 differentially expressed genes, 232 genes were up-regulated and 295
genes were down-regulated in response to ERG. Subsequent, in silico
analyses indicate that these differentially expressed genes were
associated with many pathways and functions. The most significantly
differentially expressed genes were associated with cell cycle
regulation. The top-ranked biological functions affected by ERG
over-expression include Cell Cycle (p < 1.42E-04), Cellular Growth and
Proliferation (p < 1.23E-04), Cellular Development (p Prostate Cancer
(CaP) is the most common non-cutaneous form of cancer in men and is the
second leading cause of cancer mortality in men in the USA. In human CaP,
gene fusion between androgen responsive regulatory elements at the 5'
untranslated region of TMPRSS2 and ETS-related genes (ERG) is present in
at least 50% of the prostate tumors. To identify and investigate the
underlying mechanisms of ERG-associated CaP, we developed ERG-inducible
LNCaP cell system. In this present study, we investigated the unique
cellular transcriptome associated with over-expressed ERG in CaP cells.
Our data from comprehensive transcriptome analyses, illustrate a distinct
signature that distinguishes ERG-dependent and ERG-independent CaP. The
data highlight the significant heterogeneity among the transcript. Out of
the 527 differentially expressed genes, 232 genes were up-regulated and
295 genes were down-regulated in response to ERG. Subsequent, in silico
analyses indicate that these differentially expressed genes were
associated with many pathways and functions. The most significantly
differentially expressed genes were associated with cell cycle
regulation. The top-ranked biological functions affected by ERG
over-expression include Cell Cycle (p < 1.42E-04), Cellular Growth and
Proliferation (p < 1.23E-04), Cellular Development (p <1.23E-04), Cell
Death and Survival (p Prostate Cancer (CaP) is the most common
non-cutaneous form of cancer in men and is the second leading cause of
cancer mortality in men in the USA. In human CaP, gene fusion between
androgen responsive regulatory elements at the 5' untranslated region of
TMPRSS2 and ETS-related genes (ERG) is present in at least 50% of the
prostate tumors. To identify and investigate the underlying mechanisms of
ERG-associated CaP, we developed ERG-inducible LNCaP cell system. In this
present study, we investigated the unique cellular transcriptome
associated with over-expressed ERG in CaP cells. Our data from
comprehensive transcriptome analyses, illustrate a distinct signature
that distinguishes ERG-dependent and ERG-independent CaP. The data
highlight the significant heterogeneity among the transcript. Out of the
527 differentially expressed genes, 232 genes were up-regulated and 295
genes were down-regulated in response to ERG. Subsequent, in silico
analyses indicate that these differentially expressed genes were
associated with many pathways and functions. The most significantly
differentially expressed genes were associated with cell cycle
regulation. The top-ranked biological functions affected by ERG
over-expression include Cell Cycle (p < 1.42E-04), Cellular Growth and
Proliferation (p < 1.23E-04), Cellular Development (p <1.23E-04), Cell
Death and Survival (p < 1.37E-04), and Cellular Assembly and Organization
(p Prostate Cancer (CaP) is the most common non-cutaneous form of cancer
in men and is the second leading cause of cancer mortality in men in the
USA. In human CaP, gene fusion between androgen responsive regulatory
elements at the 5' untranslated region of TMPRSS2 and ETS-related genes
(ERG) is present in at least 50% of the prostate tumors. To identify and
investigate the underlying mechanisms of ERG-associated CaP, we developed
ERG-inducible LNCaP cell system. In this present study, we investigated
the unique cellular transcriptome associated with over-expressed ERG in
CaP cells. Our data from comprehensive transcriptome analyses, illustrate
a distinct signature that distinguishes ERG-dependent and ERG-independent
CaP. The data highlight the significant heterogeneity among the
transcript. Out of the 527 differentially expressed genes, 232 genes were
up-regulated and 295 genes were down-regulated in response to ERG.
Subsequent, in silico analyses indicate that these differentially
expressed genes were associated with many pathways and functions. The
most significantly differentially expressed genes were associated with
cell cycle regulation. The top-ranked biological functions affected by
ERG over-expression include Cell Cycle (p < 1.42E-04), Cellular Growth
and Proliferation (p < 1.23E-04), Cellular Development (p <1.23E-04),
Cell Death and Survival (p < 1.37E-04), and Cellular Assembly and
Organization (p < 1.42E-04). Further analyses indicate a strong
association with known cancer networks. The top-ranked canonical pathways
enriched in ERG-positive compared to ERG-negative LNCaP cells include,
Cell Cycle Control of Chromosomal Replication (p=2.69E-16), Role of CHK
Proteins in Cell Cycle Checkpoint Control (p=3.16E-11), Cell Cycle: G2/M
DNA Damage Checkpoint Regulation (p=1.34E-09), Role of BRCA1 in DNA
Damage Response (p=4.05E-08) and Estrogen-mediated S-phase Entry (p
=5.51E-08). These findings indicate new insights into the complexity of
TMPRESS2-ERG gene fusion, and may help understand mechanistic pathways
which promote growth and progression of CaP.


