Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Number of risky lifestyle behaviors and breast cancer subtypes in
a large nested case-control study from Norway.


Background: Alcohol, smoking, physical inactivity, high body mass index
(BMI) and menopausal hormone therapy have been shown to be associated
with increased risk of breast cancer. However, it is unclear how these
risk factors combined influence overall breast cancer risk, and whether
they are associated with only certain subtypes.

Methods: We conducted a case-control study nested within a cohort of
457,036 women who participated in the Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening
Program (NBCSP) in 2006-2014, and who completed a questionnaire at
baseline screening. In all, 4 686 breast cancer cases with information on
risk factors and hormone receptor status (i.e. estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)
occurred during the follow-up. The following surrogate definitions of
breast cancer subtypes were used: ER+PR+HER2- ("luminal A-like"),
ER+PR-HER2- ("luminal B-like, HER2 negative"), ER+ PR+/PR-HER2+ ("luminal
B-like, HER2 positive"), ER-PR-HER2+ ("HER2 positive") and ER-PR-HER2-
("triple negative"). We defined risky lifestyle behaviors as ever
smoking, weekly consumption of more than 2 glasses of alcoholic beverage,
less than 3 hours leisure time physical activity per week, ever use of
menopausal hormone (estrogen or estrogen and progesterone) therapy and
BMI (kg/cmÂ²) >25. We used conditional logistic regression to estimate
odds ratios (ORs), with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), adjusted for age,
education, age at menarche, number of pregnancies and menopausal status.

Results: Number of risky lifestyle behaviors was associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer overall (p-trendResults: Number of risky
lifestyle behaviors was associated with an increased risk of breast
cancer overall (p-trend<0.0001). Compared to women with no risky
lifestyle behaviors, women with 1 (OR=1.28, 95% CI 0.87-1.88), 2
(OR=1.63, 95% CI 1.13-2.36), 3 (OR=1.85, 95% CI 1.28-2.68), 4 (OR=2.27,
95% CI 1.56-3.29) and 5 (OR=2.38, 95% CI 1.58-3.59) risky lifestyle
behaviors had increased risk of the luminal A-like subtype
(p-trendResults: Number of risky lifestyle behaviors was associated with
an increased risk of breast cancer overall (p-trend<0.0001). Compared to
women with no risky lifestyle behaviors, women with 1 (OR=1.28, 95% CI
0.87-1.88), 2 (OR=1.63, 95% CI 1.13-2.36), 3 (OR=1.85, 95% CI 1.28-2.68),
4 (OR=2.27, 95% CI 1.56-3.29) and 5 (OR=2.38, 95% CI 1.58-3.59) risky
lifestyle behaviors had increased risk of the luminal A-like subtype
(p-trend<0.0001). However, number of risky lifestyle behaviors was not
associated with an increased risk of the triple negative subtype
(p-trend=0.27).

Conclusions: This study showed that number of risky lifestyle behaviors
was positively associated with a marked increased risk for luminal A-like
breast cancer. These findings suggest that healthy lifestyle choices may
play an important role in the prevention of the commonest form of this
cancer.


