Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of bromodomain and extra-terminal motif inhibitor
(BETi) sensitivity in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) lack expression of estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and amplifications in the
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). With currently no
FDA-approved targeted therapies for TNBC, patients with TNBC have a
higher risk of local and distant recurrence, and an overall increased
rate of mortality. Recent studies have demonstrated increased sensitivity
of TNBC to the anti-proliferative effects of BETi compared to the other
breast cancer subtypes. To determine mechanisms of sensitivity to BET
inhibition, we analyzed the effect of two BET inhibitors, INCB054329 and
OTX-015, across a panel of TNBC cell line models and identified cell
lines that were both sensitive and insensitive to BETi. With the intent
of identifying biomarkers of sensitivity, we performed RNA-seq and
precision nuclear run-on and sequencing (PRO-seq) on both sensitive and
resistant cell line models and data generated identified significant
differences in key growth regulatory and apoptotic signaling pathways,
including notable differences in Myc-dependent signaling. Our data
suggest potential biomarkers of BETi sensitivity that may be of value in
further pre-clinical studies. Further, our results provide mechanistic
rationale for combinations of BETi with select, targeted therapies in a
disease that is in need of new therapeutic intervention.


