Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic stress sensor MondoA mediates in vivo aggressiveness of
common ALL by induction of HIF1Î±.


Tumor cells evolve adaptive mechanisms to survive hypoxia, nutrient
deprivation, oxidative or genotoxic stress to ultimately drive tumor
progression (Sorensen et al. 2015). We previously described MondoA (also
known as MLXIP, MAX like protein X interacting protein) as a metabolic
stress sensor, required for leukemogenesis. Lymphocytes, in particular B
Lymphocytes are adapted to hypoxic environments from their very
beginning. They are destined to travel from the hypoxic bone marrow via
normoxic peripheral blood to hypoxic lymph nodes. They thus are
specialized in glycolysis to compensate the lack of oxidative
phosphorylation under hypoxic conditions. Leukemic counterparts of
B-lymphocytes exploit these features for their survival. Glucose-derived
metabolites control the nuclear activity of the transcription factor
MondoA. Here we report on the expression of MondoA in common B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL) compared to other malignancies, its role in
malignancy of cALL in vivo, downstream pathways and correlation with
relapse risk.

Methods. Our human/murine xenotransplantation model with immunodeficient
RAG2-/-gc-/- mice was used (Richter et al. 2009). NALM6 and 697 cALL
lines were lentivirally transduced with MondoA short hairpin RNA. Upon
successful MondoA knock down (KD), KD and control lines were injected
into the mice; CD10+ blasts in blood, spleen and marrow were assessed.

Results. We found MondoA to be most strongly expressed in pediatric cALL
and AML. Moreover MondoA expression was high in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. MondoA KD in cALL cell lines and
their subsequent analysis in xenograft mice resulted in a reduced number
of leukemic blasts in blood, marrow and spleen. Spleen size and weight
normalized in mice after MondoA KD. Further microarray analysis revealed
an enrichment of glycolytic and hypoxia response gene sets by MondoA.
Moreover, HIF1a induction under hypoxia required MondoA. We demonstrate
that hypoxia facilitates vincristine resistance of cALL. MondoA is
induced under hypoxia and confers cALL cells chemotherapeutic resistance.
Tied to these results, MondoA overexpression correlated with relapse
risk; its expression was 63% higher in the very high-risk group as
compared to the non-high-risk group of cALL. In conclusion, our findings
demonstrate that MondoA maintains leukemic burden and aggressiveness of
cALL in vivo possibly by modulating metabolic and hypoxia stress
response, in particular by induction of HIF1a.


