Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSD1 stimulates cell survival and epigenetic homeostasis via snail
in hepatocellular carcinoma.


HCC is the fifth most common malignancy in the world. HCC generally
arises in the context of chronic liver diseases, or other metabolic,
dietary or toxic factors. Hypoxia is a critical microenvironment in
hepatcarcinogenesis. It occurs in series of distinct steps that include
tumor cell invasion and proliferation. The process of EMT required for
liver cancer cell invasion is regulated by a family of E-box-binding
transcription repressors, which include Snail and Slug. Protein N, the
first discovered histone methylase, is an epigenetic enzyme playing
important role in regulation of gene expression and function by removing
mono- or dimethyl moieties from H3K4 and H3K9. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying these biological behaviors have not been completely
elucidated. Here, we present the first evidence that expression of
Protein N was transcriptionally induced by Hif1 under hypoxia condition.
We also showed that the up-regulated Protein N enhanced HCC cell survival
and sustained epigenetic homeostasis via activating Snail under hypoxic
conditions in vitro/in vivo. Furthermore, we revealed that Protein
N/Snail stimulated Hif1 expression by a positive feedback loop.
Conclusively, we elicited that Protein N is an essential mediator in
epigenetic aberrances of HCC (This work was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government
(MEST) (NRF-2016R1D1A1B03933763)).


