Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 in combination with immune check point inhibition in ovarian
cancer mouse model demonstrates potential for novel therapeutic
strategies.


Chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 are the most highly expressed
chemokine axis in serous ovarian cancer. CXCR4 promotes tumor growth,
angiogenesis, and metastasis. High CXCR4 expression is associated with
poor survival, making it an attractive therapeutic target. The objective
of this study was to establish an immune competent murine ovarian cancer
model with high CXCR4 expression and to test single agent CXCR4 blockade
and combination therapy to optimize emerging treatment strategies for
future clinical trials. CXCR4 expression was evaluated by flow cytometry
in ID8, ID8-VEGF, IE9-MP1, BR5, BR5-Akt, BR5-C2k, and BR5-Kras mouse
ovarian cancer cell lines as well as IE9-MP1 tumor samples. Subsequently
an exploratory study was undertaken utilizing the ID8 immune competent
mouse model to assess the efficacy of AMD3100, the only commercially
available CXCR4 inhibitor, alone and in combination with bevacizumab and
anti-PD-1. Immune analysis of circulating lymphocytes by flow cytometry
was performed during treatment to monitor changes of immune cell subsets.
Surface expression of CXCR4 receptor was minimal in ID8 (1.6%), ID8-VEGF
(0.9%), IE9-MP1 (1.8%), BR5 (0.9%), BR5-Akt (1.2%), BR5-C2k (2.3%), and
BR5-Kras (1.1%), however intracellular staining revealed widespread CXCR4
expression in ID8 (99.6%), ID8-VEGF (99.7%) BR5 (96.7%), BR5-Akt (94.3%),
BR5-C2k (98.2%), and BR5-Kras (98.7%) cell lines. Using the ID8
intraperitoneal ovarian cancer mouse model in C57BL/6J mice, treatment
with immunotherapy significantly increased cell surface expression of
CXCR4 from 2% in the control group to 79.6-91.8% in the treatment group.
Treatment with AMD3100 as a single agent showed no improvement in
survival over control. However, AMD3100 in combination with anti-PD-1
therapy significantly improved survival. The addition of bevacizumab
demonstrated no further survival benefit and bevacizumab as a single
agent showed no improvement in survival over control, either alone or in
combination with anti-PD-1. Analysis of circulating lymphocytes revealed
a trend toward higher CD4 to CD8 ratio in mice who were treated with
anti-PD1 therapy. Targeting the CXCL12-CXCR4 axis in combination with
other immunotherapies such as immune checkpoint inhibitors is a novel
therapeutic strategy which may provide benefit over single-agent
immunotherapy and warrant investigation in a clinical trial.


