Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thyroid carcinoma in The Sudan.


Introduction: Goiter is endemic in Sudan and thyroidectomy is a daily
practice in most surgical lists across the country. The most common
indications are cosmoses and pressure with respiratory choking. In 10% of
cases a surprise histopathology on cancer is reported . This study aims
to report on thyroid carcinoma on patients presenting to the surgical
department in Khartoum Teaching Hospital.

Methods: This study is an overview on pattern, clinical presentation a
management of thyroid carcinoma in Khartoum during the period 2007 -
2014. Thyroidectomy was the standard procedure when feasible and
postoperative radio iodine given. External radiotherapy was given in
aggressive anaplastic carcinoma.

Results: 166 patients with thyroid cancer were studied. The mean age was
51 +/-SD 17yrs and the age range between 15 - 85 years. Male to female
ratio was 1.0:2.4. Clinical presentation was a goiter that was showing a
recent rapidly growth with either respiratory choking, pain and
dysphagia. Follicular carcinoma was 43%,papillary 27%, anaplastic 10%
2%medullary. Sarcoma and lymphoma 5% and missing data in 13%. Six per
cent of patients presented with lung and bone metastasis. 20 patients had
long standing goiter before development of cancer. Different types of
total thyroidectomy done in 81%, no surgery in 7% and missing data in
12%. 18 patients needed postoperative tracheostomy, 7 developed permanent
hypocalcaemia, 15 recurrent nerve palsy and a 30 days mortality was 10%
and all were anaplastic carcinoma where recurrence occurred within weeks
following thyroidectomy or dublking in most cases.

Conclusion: Patients with thyroid cancer presents late. The dominance of
follicular type indicates the significance of underlying endemic goiter
in its etiology. Anaplastic is very aggressive and lethal outcome.


