Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multifaceted targeting of drug-resistant EGFR+ and HER2+ breast
tumors.


Unmet needs in the breast cancer field include the development of
effective treatments for 1) drug-resistant HER2+ breast cancers, 2)
Triple-Negative (HER2-, ER-, PR-) Breast Cancers (TNBCs), and 3)
Inflammatory Breast Cancers (IBCs). Treatment-refractory HER2+ tumors
retain HER2 expression after acquiring drug resistance, and large
fractions of TNBCs and IBCs overexpress either HER2 or EGFR. Thus, drugs
that selectively kill breast tumors that overexpress EGFR or HER2 could
benefit patients suffering from these three classes of
treatment-refractory tumors. Our team has identified a class of compounds
termed Disulfide bond Disrupting Agents (DDAs) that selectively kill
cancer cells that overexpress HER2 or EGFR. DDA-mediated cancer-selective
cytotoxicity results from A) downregulation of the EGFR/HER2/HER3
proteins, B) inactivation of the Akt oncogene, and C) activation of the
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). Importantly DDAs only elicit these
responses in cancer cells that overexpress EGFR or HER2. DDAs exhibit
striking anticancer activity in human HER2+ xenograft tumors grown
orthotopically in mice, with no evidence of toxicity. DDAs function
through mechanisms distinct from those of HER2 specific monoclonal
antibodies and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and biochemical studies
indicate that DDAs are complementary with Lapatinib with respect to
blockade of HER2 driven proliferative and survival signaling. Current
efforts are directed toward identifying mechanism-based drugs that
synergize with DDAs to potentiate HER1-3 downregulation, Akt inhibition,
and UPR, and to kill HER2+/EGFR+ patient-derived xenograft tumors that
are refractory to current therapies.


