Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germ free mice accelerate cachexia-associated cancer.


The syndrome of cancer cachexia is currently defined as a state of ill
health, malnutrition and physical wasting with marked white adipose
tissue (WAT) and skeletal muscle mass wasting, representing the clinical
consequence of a chronic and systemic inflammatory response. Over the
last decade, WAT has been recognized as an important endocrine organ, and
earning a lot of attention during cancer cachexia development. We
investigated the role of microbiota along the cachexia associated cancer.
We performed experiments with conventional and Germ Free mice (GF) (n=6
in each group) of 8-10 weeks old C57B/6, which were subcutaneously
injected with LLC cells [4x106 cells in 0.2 mL; Tumor-bearing, (TB) or
PBS control (C)]. We performed Immunohistochemistry, RT- qPCR, and
Western Blot. We observed that GF Tumor-bearing mice have increased
several symptoms of the cachexia compared to conventional TB mice. The
WAT mass was decreased 50% in GF Tumor-bearing mice compared to all
groups, which indicates a pathway related to lipolysis, as we found
increased level of phosphorylated enzymes in GF Tumor-bearing mice. We
also observed that GF Tumor bearing mice decreased skeletal muscle mass
and gene expression that are related with atrophy were increased in GF
Tumor bearing mice. Our data suggested that homeostasis of microbiota may
impair the development of the cachexia syndrome.


