Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel tumor-promoting role for miR-4516 in glioblastoma.


Background: Glioblastomas are the most aggressive high-grade brain
tumors, which are often life-threatening due to their location and rapid
growth. Although survival rates differ depending on a variety of genetic
and environmental factors, the average survival rate for a glioblastoma
(GBM) patient is less than 15 months. Although the mechanisms of
tumorigenesis are still being elucidated, miRNAs are promising candidates
to explore as novel and prognostic biomarkers in GBM. Here we demonstrate
a novel role for miR-4516 in promoting growth and migration of GBM and
establish the molecular mechanisms mediating these functions. Methods:
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks (n=268) were collected
for all patients and total RNA was isolated. miRNAs were analyzed
simultaneously using the nCounter human miRNA v2 assay (NanoString
Technologies; Seattle,WA). Functional characterization studies were
conducted in vitro and in vivo. The effect of miR-4516 on GBM cell growth
and motility were evaluated by cell proliferation assay, migration and
invasion assay, and Annexin-V assay. Realtime PCR, immunoblotting, and
3â€™ untranslated region luciferase assays were used to analyze miR-4516
targets and signaling pathways. Intracranial injection will be performed
to investigate the role of miR-4516 in tumor growth in vivo. Results:
Univariate analysis showed that miR-4516 expression in GBM patients was
inversely correlated with overall survival (FDR=0.002, p=1.02E-05).
Knockdown of miR-4516 blocked tumor growth and induced cell apoptosis.
Tumor cell growth, migration and invasion were induced in both transient
miR-4516 overexpressed GBM cells (LN229, LN18, and U87) and stable
miR-4516 overexpressed GBM cells (U87-EGFRvIII). These miR-4516
tumor-promoting effects were mediated in part via direct targeting PTPN14
and CDKN1A. Investigation of the other miR-4516 targets and in vivo
functional study are in process. Conclusion: Taken together, these
results suggest that miR-4516 acts as a prognostic biomarker for GBM
patients. Funding Information: 1R01CA169368 (PI: Houghton;
Co-I:Chakravarti); 1R01CA11522358 Multiple-PI R01: Chakravarti (PI); Xia
(PI); 1R01CA1145128 Baroukhim (PI); Chakravarti (Co-PI) 7/2015-6/2020;
R01CA108633 (PI:Chakravarti); 1RC2CA148190 (Scientific PI: Chakravarti)


