Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid decay of engulfed extracellular miRNA by XRN1 exonuclease
promotes transient epithelial-mesenchymal transition.


Background: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been shown to play an
important role in intercellular communication as carriers of DNA, RNA and
proteins. While the intercellular transfer of miRNA thorough EVs has been
widely studied, the stability of extracellular miRNA (ex-miRNA) once
engulfed by recipient cell remains to be determined.

Materials and Methods: Lung cancer cells (A549 cell line) were incubated
with neutrophils or their supernatant or isolated EVs from these
supernatant. Kinetics of expression of miR-223-3p were followed by
RT-qPCR. FOXO1 expression and EMT expression markers were used as
endpoints to follow effective effect or miR-223-3p in recipient cells.

Results: We identified the ex-miRNA-directed phenotype to be transient
due to the rapid decay of the ex-miRNA. We demonstrated that the
ex-miR-223-3p transferred from neutrophils to cancer cells was functional
as demonstrated by the decreased expression of its target, FOXO1, and the
occurrence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition reprogramming. We showed
that the engulfed ex-miRNA, unlike endogenous miRNA, was unstable,
enabling dynamic regulation and a return to a non-invasive phenotype
within less than 8 hours. This transient phenotype could be modulated by
targeting XRN1/PACMAN exonuclease. Indeed, its silencing was associated
with slower decay of ex-miR-223-3p and subsequently prolonged the
invasive properties.

Conclusion: We showed that the “steady step” level of engulfed miRNA
(ex-miR-223-3p) and its subsequent activity was dependent on the presence
of a donor cell in the surroundings to constantly fuel the recipient cell
with ex-miRNAs and of XRN1 exonuclease, which is involved in the decay of
these imported miRNAs.


