Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel orthotopic mouse model in sarcomas.


Pediatric sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of bone and soft tissue
malignancies affecting children and young adults. One of the most
important prognostic factors of those diseases is the presence of
metastasis at diagnosis. In that context, we have developed a novel
orthotopic model which consists in injecting Ewing Sarcoma (ES) or
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) tumor cells at the gastrocnemius muscle of mice
and extracting the tumor at a of 10 mm x 13 mm volume. After surgery,
animals maintain a complete functional extremity and can live until lung
metastasis detection (about 60 days post-injection).

Moreover, we have validated the suitability of the model with an Ewing
Sarcoma EphA2-low expression cell line. Epha2 is a tyrosine kinase
receptor that has been found overexpressed in a wide variety of tumors
and correlated with malignant phenotype. In this study we report that
EphA2 receptor is phosphorylated at S897 in a panel of ES cell lines,
which is related to the oncogenic properties of the receptor. Stable
silencing of EphA2 in two different ES cell lines resulted in a decrease
in the clonogenic, proliferation, migration and invasion capacity in
vitro. Moreover, we performed an experimental metastasis assay, injecting
tumor cells through the tail vain of mice and observed a reduction in the
lung metastasis incidence in EphA2 silenced cells. We then used this new
orthotopic metastasis model to validate the impairment in the invasion
capacity of EphA2 silenced cells and confirm the decrease in lung
metastasis incidence, indicating an oncogenic role for EphA2 in ES. This
novel orthotopic metastasis model is a valuable tool both for the study
of spontaneous metastasis and also for evaluating therapeutic index in
the onset of metastasis, which can also be applied to the study of other
pedriatric sarcomas.


