Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary amphiphilic polyphenols modulate the biophysical
properties of plasma membrane organization and membrane-dependent
macropinocytosis.


Ras-driven cancers exhibit a distinct high metabolic demand necessary for
biosynthetic growth/proliferation, in some cases resulting in over
stimulation of macropinocytosis, a process intended for nutrient
acquisition. A hallmark of Ras-driven macropinocytosis is plasma membrane
ruffling resulting in invaginations and the formation of macropinosomes,
extracellular nutrient-packed vesicles distinct from other endocytic
processes due to their size, independence of vesicle-coating proteins,
and are the result of rapid polymerization and branching of cytoskeletal
actin filaments. These cytoskeletal manipulations are driven by
spatial/temporal regulators downstream of Ras along with lipid rafts and
their components. Drugs and other extrinsic factors, e.g.,
polyunsaturated fatty acids, have been shown to biophysically modulate
these lipid domains. We hypothesize that unique dietary polyphenolic
amphiphilic molecules [1] modulate plasma membrane fluidity, [2] disrupt
macropinocytosis, and [3] suppress macropinocytosis-dependent
proliferation.

Young adult mouse colonocyte (YAMC) cells, expressing an HRas mutation,
were treated with 1, 10, and 100 ÂµM (+)-catechin or procyanidin B2 for
30 min. For macropinocytosis assessment, cells were stimulated with 25
ng/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF) for 5 min following a 30-minute
pretreatment. Membrane order was measured in whole cells and giant plasma
membrane vesicles (GPMV) utilizing a lipid-packing detection dye,
Di-4-ANEPPDHQ, and assayed using a combination of fluorescence
image-based flow cytometry (Amnis FlowSight) and confocal microscopy. In
addition, macropinocytosis was determined by uptake of fluorescently
labeled 70 kDa dextran (FITC-dextran). The uptake was visualized by
fluorescence image-based flow cytometry. In the GPMV model, (+)-catechin
increased membrane fluidity, and procyanidin B2 decreased membrane
fluidity in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, in the whole cell
model, interaction of (+)-catechin and procyanidin B2 with the plasma
membrane resulted in an increase in membrane fluidity in a dose-dependent
manner.

Interestingly, plasma membrane fluidification in the whole cell model was
associated with a significant 27-67% inhibition of macropinocytosis.
These observations indicate that dietary amphiphilic molecules (DAMs)
modulate plasma membrane organization, which is linked to
macropinocytosis, an essential fuel-obtaining process. Establishing a
role for DAMs in membrane-dependent oncogenesis is noteworthy because
these molecules are innocuous and found in high abundance in a variety of
fruits, vegetables, and walnuts.

This work was support by NIH grant R35CA197707.


