Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The humanized anti-CD47 monclonal antibody, CC-90002, has
antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo.


Cluster of differentiation 47 (CD47) is a transmembrane protein
ubiquitously expressed on human cells but overexpressed on many different
tumor cells. The interaction of CD47 with signal-regulatory protein alpha
(SIRPα) expressed on macrophages results in the inhibition of
phagocytosis. Thus, tumor cell overexpression of CD47 enables escape from
immune surveillance via the blockade of phagocytic mechanisms. We report
here the characterization of CC-90002, a humanized anti-CD47 monoclonal
antibody (mAb) that is being developed as a potential therapeutic for
hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. CC-90002 has a high affinity
for binding to CD47 with a subnanomolar dissociation constant (Kd) value.
The IC50 required for the blockade of the CD47-SIRPα interaction was
also in the subnanomolar range. CC-90002 is unique among previously
reported anti-CD47 antibodies for its inability to promote
hemagglutination while maintaining high affinity binding to CD47 and
inhibition of the CD47-SIRPα interaction. CC-90002 enabled
antibody-mediated phagocytosis of a panel of hematological cancer cell
lines in vitro, including ALL, multiple myeloma (MM) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) cells, and primary AML patient samples. The phagocytosis
index for this panel (at 1 μg/mL) ranged from approximately 20% to 60%
for all the cell lines tested. Antibody concentration-response studies
indicated that the CC-90002 effect was concentration-dependent in the ALL
and AML cell lines. CC-90002 treatment significantly enabled the
phagocytosis of two lenalidomide-resistant MM cell lines and primary AML
cells from three patients. Additionally, CC-90002 treatment elicited the
phagocytosis of solid tumor lines, including those from ovarian, breast,
head and neck, lung, and pancreatic cancers. The in vivo efficacy of
CC-90002 was evaluated across cell line-derived and patient-derived
xenograft models. Significant dose-dependent antitumor activity was
observed with CC-90002 treatment in the MM cell line-derived xenograft
models, RPMI 8226 and the parental NCI-H929 and lenalidomide-resistant
NCI-H929 (H929/R1). Treatment with CC-90002 demonstrated significant
tumor regression in solid tumor xenografts including a cell line-derived
model of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), MDA-MB-231, and a
patient-derived TNBC model, AA1126 and significantly prolonged survival
in the HL-60-disseminated AML tumor model. Mechanistic studies in the
RPMI 8226 xenograft model confirmed binding of CC-90002 to tumor cells
and recruitment of F4-80-positive macrophages into the tumor. RPMI 8226
tumor lysates from CC-90002-treated animals demonstrated an increase in
select chemokines and cytokines of murine origin. Taken together, the in
vitro and in vivo data demonstrate the potential for activity of CC-90002
across both hematological malignancies and solid tumors. CC-90002 is
currently in early clinical development.


