Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Next generation targeted sequencing reveals four unknown mutations
in the Mexican population with Gorlin syndrome.


Aim: Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS), an autosomal dominant
disorder, is characterized by the presence of a variety of developmental
anomalies, and predisposition to multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs),
and other neoplasias. NBCCS mainly results from germinal mutations in the
PTCH1 gene, that encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein, component of the
hedgehog signalling pathway. The incidence of NBCCS in general population
is estimated at 1 in 150000. Data related to NBCCS in Mexican patients is
reduced to clinical case reports, without molecular testing. Therefore,
we conducted next-generation sequencing (NGS) of PTCH1, in 9 Mexican
patients with diagnosis of NBCCS.

Material and methods: NGS of PTCH1 was performed, in the context of a
hereditary cancer gene panel. The PTCH1 regions with insufficient
coverage (Material and methods: NGS of PTCH1 was performed, in the
context of a hereditary cancer gene panel. The PTCH1 regions with
insufficient coverage (<30Ã— read depth), were complemented by Sanger
sequencing, to ensure 100% coverage of the gene. In-silico analysis was
perfomed for missenses mutations. The identified pathogenic mutations
were verified by capillary sequencing.

Results: Targeted analysis of PTCH1 gene, looking for deletions,
insertions, splice-site alterations, nonsense and missense mutations, was
done. Four PTCH1 mutations (4/9) were identified: a deletion
(c.1044delG); one insertion (c.631dupA); a non-sense mutation
(c.3406G>T), and a missense mutation (c.1488C>A). None of the mutations
had been previously reported.

Conclusions : NGS of PTCH1 gene in 9 Mexican patients with clinical
criteria for NBCCS allowed the identification of four novel pathogenic
mutations (44% frequency). This is the first molecular overview of PTCH1
in NBCCS patients of our population. The perspectives of the current
study lie in the molecular testing of other genes involved in NBCCS
(PTCH2, SUFU), and other mechanisms (whole gene deletion), as well as the
review of possible phenotype-genotype correlations.


