Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The contribution of deleterious germ-line mutations of
susceptibility genes to ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancers
in Japanese.


Different ethnic groups present specific morphological features in
ovarian cancer (OC). High-grade serous OC is more frequently found in
Caucasian women, in contrast clear cell OC is more frequently found in
East Asian women. Although inherited mutations of BRCA1 or BRCA2
(BRCA1/2) and other genes are known to predispose to OC, the
contributions of these inherited mutations on disease burden is not well
characterized in Japanese OC patients. Using a comprehensive genetic
testing panel, the aim of our study was to identify the prevalence of
pathogenic germ-line mutations of candidate genes associated with genetic
predisposition to OC in Japanese patients with ovarian, fallopian tube,
or peritoneal cancer.Samples from 236 individuals with unselected
ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancer, which were obtained from
the Keio Womenâ€™s Health Biobank (KWB) from the School of Medicine at
Keio University (Tokyo, Japan), were used for this study. Germ-line DNA
was enriched using the SureSelect XT Target Enrichment System (Agilent
Technologies) designed for 75 or 79 genes as a custom OC panel, followed
by sequencing using MiSeq (Illumina). Detected variants, including point
mutations, small indels, and a gross deletion, were classified according
to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)
recommendations. Furthermore, BRCA1/2 variants were interpreted using
resources from Myriad Genetic Laboratories.Forty-two (17.8%) OC patients
had germ-line mutations of cancer predisposition genes. BRCA1/2
pathological germ-line mutations were found in 27 cases (11.4%) while six
cases (2.5%) had a mutation in a mismatch repair gene (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
or PMS2). Furthermore, ten cases (4.2%) had germ-line mutations in the
RAD51D, ATM, MRE11A, FANCC, or GABRA2 genes. Of patients with a BRCA1/2
mutation (n=27), we found that the most common histological subtype was
high-grade serous OC, but we also found two cases with clear cell
carcinoma. Of 42 cases with an inherited mutation, we found that 25%
(6/24) had no family history of cancer, and 78% (31/41) were under 60
years old at diagnosis.We found that approximately 18% of unselected
Japanese patients with ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancer were
associated with inherited mutations of cancer-predisposing genes. Our
study demonstrates that comprehensive genetic testing is informative for
all women with ovarian, fallopian tube, and peritoneal cancers to
establish personalized clinical management and genetic counseling,
irrespective of the patient's histological subtypes, ages or family
histories.


