Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Zymelink drug conjugate platform: redefining the therapeutic
window for ADCs.


Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) combine the specificity of monoclonal
antibodies with potent antineoplastic small molecules, and promise
efficacy without the systemic toxicity of chemotherapy. Despite this
tremendous potential, most clinical ADCs have failed to provide
sufficient therapeutic benefit before the onset of off-target
dose-limiting platform toxicities.

Here we report the development of proprietary protease cleavable N-acyl
sulfonamide linked hemiasterlin and auristatin payloads, Zymelink, that
allow the generation of an efficacious ADC platform with improved
tolerability. Both Zymelink drug-linkers were conjugated via maleimides
to endogenous cysteines. As Zymelink drug-linkers are more polar than
maleimide valine citrulline monomethyl auristatin E drug-linker, the
resulting ADCs can be produced with potential advantages in PK, efficacy
and safety. The resulting ADCs exhibit potent in vitro cytotoxicity. A
trastuzumab-based ADC prepared with Zymelink drug-linker and demonstrated
at least equivalent efficacy compared to a trastuzumab-based ADC prepared
with MMAE, promoting durable complete regressions in a patient-derived
xenograft model.

Zymelink hemiasterlin and auristatin ADCs were tolerated at 5-6 fold
higher doses compared to a MMAE ADC in cynomolgus monkeys. The maximum
tolerated dose of the MMAE ADC was just 3 mg/kg based on severe
neutropenia. Zymelink hemiasterlin ADC was tolerated at 15 mg/kg with no
evidence of neutropenia or elevations in transaminases. Zymelink
auristatin ADC was tolerated at 18 mg/kg based on increased levels of
transaminases at 24 mg/kg. Moreover, Zymelink ADCs exhibited greater
serum exposure at equivalent doses. These results suggest Zymelink ADCs
have a greatly expanded therapeutic window compared to MMAE conjugates.


