Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unanticipated cardiotoxicity due to targeted anti-cancer therapy
in hematologic malignancies patients: Natural history and risk factors.


INTRODUCTION: Unanticipated cardiotoxicity is now identified as a
significant clinical problem associated with new anti-cancer targeted
agents. Risk factors and natural history are still poorly understood. We
aim to determine potential clinical risk factors for cardiotoxicity among
patients with hematologic malignancies (HM) who were treated with
targeted therapies over a 10-year period.

METHODS: We used 114 diagnosis codes for HM and 17 codes for cardiac
diseases in order to identify patients in our electronic medical records
(EPIC) and identify patients with HM who met above criteria.
Cardiotoxicity was defined mainly by left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) of METHODS: We used 114 diagnosis codes for HM and 17 codes for
cardiac diseases in order to identify patients in our electronic medical
records (EPIC) and identify patients with HM who met above criteria.
Cardiotoxicity was defined mainly by left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) of < 50%, arrhythmias, or ischemic cardiovascular event that
occurred after initiation of the drug of interest. The targeted agents of
interest include tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), proteasome
inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, hypomethylating agents, and
immunomodulatory agents. Multivariable logistic regression was performed
to estimate the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI)
of the potential risk factors. Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank test
were used to evaluate the effect of cardiotoxicity on the overall
survival of the patients.

RESULTS: Of 820 patients with both HM and cardiac diagnosis, 29 patients
developed cardiotoxicity after initiation of targeted therapies. We
selected 70 matched controls based on type of targeted therapy. In the
study group, the median time from exposure to cardiac event was 120 days
(range, 1-1176). Significantly higher number of patients had prior
exposure to anthracyclines in study versus control group (65.5% vs 42.8%,
P=0.04), however, this was not significant in multivariable analysis.
Multiple other variables, including traditional risk factors for heart
disease, were analyzed and did not differ significantly between the two
groups. Only two variables remained significant in the multivariable
analysis, including prior history of DVT/PE (OR 4.88, 95% CI: 1.44-16.54,
P=0.011), and Karnofsky score of â‰¥80% (OR 3.99, 95% CI: 1.51-10.6, P=
0.005). With median follow-up of 27 months (range, 1-120), 17 patients in
the study group died, but only 2 of cardiac causes. Repeat
echocardiograms showed worsening of LVEF in 4 patients while
stable/improved in 23 patients, and 21 patients were able to receive
further chemotherapy. There was a trend towards worse overall survival in
the study group (P= 0.071).

CONCLUSIONS: About 3.5% of patients with HM experience unanticipated
cardiotoxicity due to targeted anti-cancer agents with related mortality
of 6.8 %. Most patients do well with stable compensated cardiac function
and 35% have an objective improvement in LVEF. Risk of cardiotoxicity was
significantly higher in patients with known history of DVT/PE. Future
studies of possible underlying genetic predisposition will be of great
importance.


