Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel panel of 325 biomarkers is part of a large interconnected
network representing multiple cell signaling pathways and allowing
development of predictive tests for oncology drugs.


Background: We developed an algorithm based on the gene expression of
tumor biopsies to identify the best combination of biomarkers to reliably
predict a patientâ€™s response to relevant cancer treatments. This
algorithm is derived from 325 genes whose expression showed significant
changes during differentiation of non-malignant human mammary epithelial
cells cultured in laminin-rich extracellular matrix. Of these 325 genes,
251 are novel and not present in 9 other cancer based gene expression
panels such as FoundationOne or PAM50. These differentiated cells formed
multicellular structures with defined lumens and tight junctions and with
specific localizations of cadherin and integrins. In contrast, cells from
breast cancers displayed a general loss of structure. Previous work
showed that different sets of these 325 biomarkers accurately predicted
overall breast cancer patients' survival or response to neoadjuvant
therapy in multiple independent studies.

Objective: Predict cell-signaling pathways, drug associations, and
disease associations for the 325 biomarkers (BA325) in contrast to other
cancer gene panels.

Methods and Results: The Qiagen Ingenuity program was used to identify
pathways and disease states containing significant overlap with BA325.
Multiple cell signaling pathways including cell proliferation, migration,
invasion, and metabolism were found in BA325, while most other cancer
biomarker panels were highly concentrated in cell proliferation. Examples
of significant pathway associations relevant for oncology drug discovery
and targeted treatments include Cell Cycle Control of Chromosomal
Replication (p=8.1E-14), Polo-like-kinase and HSP90 complex (p=6.3E-07),
G2/M DNA Damage Checkpoint (p=6.4E-07), Integrin Signaling (p=3E-05),
Integrin Linked Kinase Signaling (p=4.51E-05), BRCA1 DNA Damage Response
(p=1.75E-04), Estrogen Mediated S-phase entry (p=4.24E-04), Regulation of
Actin Based Motility by RHO (p=4.55E-04), Adherins Junction Remodeling
(p=5.6E-04), Actin Cytoskeleton Signaling (p=7.25E-04), Mismatch Repair
(p=1.6E-03), RAN Signaling (p=1.64E-03), Protein Ubiquitination
(p=1.78E-03) and Cholesterol Biosynthesis (p=4.8E-03). This wide coverage
of cellular signaling pathways provides an advantage in developing
predictive tests for treatments targeting highly complex cell signaling
networks. Surprisingly, even though the BA325 panel was obtained during
non-malignant differentiation, the most significant disease state
associated with these genes was mammary tumor, demonstrating the validity
of this approach to probe breast cancer biology.

Conclusion: This analysis demonstrates that the BA325 panel is useful
both in understanding non-malignant mammary epithelial differentiation
and breast cancer tumors.


