Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitotic regulation of the tumor suppressor phosphatase PHLPP1.


The PH domain Leucine-rich repeat Protein Phosphatases (PHLPP) are tumor
suppressors originally discovered for their ability to directly
dephosphorylate and inactivate the pro-survival kinase Akt, a key
transducer of growth factor signaling. In the decade since this
discovery, a number of other PHLPP targets have been elucidated, but
still little is known about the molecular mechanisms governing the
function and regulation of PHLPP itself. Here we report that PHLPP1 is
hyperphosphorylated during mitosis and that, additionally, PHLPP1
suppresses the phosphorylation of the mitotic kinase CDK1. Specifically,
we show that PHLPP1 undergoes an electrophoretic mobility shift in
mitotic cells that is lost when lysates are treated in vitro with lambda
phosphatase, suggesting that PHLPP1 is phosphorylated during mitosis. In
addition to a cell cycle-dependent change in its post-translational
modifications, PHLPP1 suppresses the phosphorylation of the main mitotic
cyclin dependent kinase, CDK1, at Tyr15, an inhibitory phosphorylation
that must be removed in order for cells to progress through mitosis.
First, Tyr15 phosphorylation is increased in phlpp1-/- mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) compared to wild-type MEFs. Second, pharmacological
inhibition of PHLPP1 in wild-type MEFs results in an increase in Tyr15
phosphorylation. Activation of key mitotic kinases, such as CDK1, and
inactivation of phosphatases is required for the large increase in
protein phosphorylation that occurs during mitosis. As such, reversible
protein phosphorylation plays a role in regulating proper progression
through mitosis, which is essential as errors in mitosis can result in
aneuploidy, a hallmark of cancer. Our data support a previously
undescribed role for PHLPP1 in regulating mitotic progression,
potentially providing novel insight into how PHLPP suppresses
tumorigenesis.


