Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A chemotherapeutic approach to kill cancer stem cell rich ovarian
ascites.


Purpose: More than one third of ovarian cancer patients present with
cancer cells in the abdomen (also known as ascites) at diagnosis, and
almost all have ascites at recurrence (Ahmed and Stenvers 2013). It is
well-documented that subpopulations of the ascites show cancer stem
cell-like characteristics which possess enhanced resistance to
chemotherapies and the capacity for distal metastatic spread and
recurrent disease. Therefore, ascites are a major source of morbidity and
mortality for ovarian cancer patients. The major deficiency that
currently exists is that there is no effective and safe therapy for
ascites since they are rich in cancer stem cells (CSCs) and resistant to
chemotherapy. To overcome this deficiency, it is our objective to develop
an effective chemotherapy approach that can destroy the CSC-rich ascites
and inhibit recurrence.

Methods: Several established human ovarian cancer cells as well as
ascites obtained from the abdomen of an ovarian cancer patient (ASCITES)
were cultured. Cells were sorted by FACS Cell Sorter to determine the
percentage of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in each cell line. Dose response
curves of different chemotherapeutic drugs such as Cisplatin (CDDP),
6-Methylpurine (6-MP), 5-Flurouracil (5-FU), SN-38, Monomethyl auristatin
E (MMAE) and Etoposide were studied in suspension culture enriched with
cancer stem cells. The relative change in total CSC-rich spheroid mass
which considers both number and volume of spheroids was used to determine
Killing Index for each chemotherapeutic drug. To investigate inhibition
of recurrence, the spheroids were monitored for 30 days post treatment
and the viability of CSC-rich spheroids were studied by fluorescent
microscopy.

Results: Primary human ovarian A2780 and ASCITES (derived from ovarian
cancer patient Ascitic fluid) were found to have CSCs with unlimited
renewal capacity in suspension culture. While Cisplatin, 5-FU, 6-MP and
Etoposide showed efficacy in killing CSC spheroids at effective doses
around 1-10 Î¼M, but MMAE and SN-38 showed the ability to either
significantly diminish or completely eradicate CSC spheroids with
effective doses as low as 10 nM. Importantly, no evidence of recurrence
(repopulation of spheroids) was observed in MMAE and SN-38 treated group
even after 30 days of post treatment.

Conclusion: These promising results with the two chemotherapeutic drugs
that show their ability to kill highly drug-resistant CSC-rich ovarian
spheroids open the door to further investigate their use in the clinic.
Currently, we are investigating the potential use of these two drugs in
combination but at very low concentrations for the treatment of abdominal
ovarian metastasis.


