Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of hypoxia-induced ectonucleoside triphosphate
diphosphohydrolase 2 (ENTPD2) restrains myeloid-derived suppressor cell
(MDSC) accumulation and sensitizes tumors to immune checkpoint inhibition.


Background and Objective: Rapidly expanding knowledge on cancer
immunology has introduced promising anti-cancer therapeutic approaches
which involve the activation of T cells to combat cancer cells.
Accumulating studies have indicated that the efficacy of immunotherapies
is critically determined by the stromal cell components in tumors.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), are regarded as one of the
major immune cell types that possess immunosuppressive activities against
T cells which allow cancers to escape immune surveillance and become
non-responsive to immune checkpoints blockade. To increase the efficacy
of immunotherapy, novel strategies to target MDSC in tumors are
warranted. Hypoxia, oxygen (O2) shortage, frequently occurs in tumors due
to abnormal vasculature. Using hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) as a model,
we have previously observed MDSC preferentially accumulates in hypoxic
regions of human HCC tissues. Here, we aim to identify hypoxia-induced
therapeutic targets that are critical for MDSC accumulation in tumors.

Experimental Procedures: Transcriptome sequencing in multiple HCC cell
lines exposed to hypoxia and normoxia and HCC clinical specimens was
performed to identify potential hypoxia-induced genes relevant to HCC
development. MDSCs were isolated from HCC-bearing mice by magnetic bead
sorting for different functional assays. LC-MS was performed to evaluate
the level of extracellular metabolites. Flow cytometry was used to detect
the frequencies of tumor-infiltrating MDSCs in orthotopic and
subcutaneous HCC mouse models.

Results: We showed that hypoxia, through stabilization of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), induced ectoenzyme, ectonucleoside
triphosphate diphosphohydrolase 2 (ENTPD2/ CD39L1), in cancer cells,
causing its over-expression in HCC clinical specimens. Over-expression of
ENTPD2 was found as a poor prognostic indicator for HCC patients.
Mechanistically, we demonstrated that ENTPD2 converted extracellular ATP
to 5â€™-AMP which prevents the differentiation of monocytic MDSCs to
dendritic cells, therefore promoting the maintenance of MDSCs in vitro
and in vivo. Therapeutically, we found that ENTPD2 inhibitor POM-1
restrained MDSC accumulation and tumor growth, substantially enhancing
the efficiency and efficacy of immune checkpoints inhibitors.

Conclusion: Our study reveals a novel mechanism whereby hypoxia/HIF-1 in
cancer cells governs tumor-infiltrating MDSCs. Our data suggest that
ENTPD2 may be a good prognostic marker and therapeutic target for cancer
patients especially those receiving immune therapy.


