Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation and characterization of novel anti-glycan monoclonal
antibody against acute myeloid leukemia.


Hematological malignancies encompass a wide spectrum of cancers from
hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. Under this grouping, the various
forms of leukemia, lymphoma and myeloma have been classified into more
than 60 distinct disease types, each having particular clinical features
and disease outcomes. Among these diseases, curative treatments with high
long-term survival rate have been developed for some, e.g. Chronic
Myeloid Leukemia, while such effective regimens are still unavailable for
many others, e.g. Multiple Myeloma and Acute Myeloid Leukemia. In this
study, a panel of antibodies was raised against SLAMF7, a cell surface
marker that was associated to Multiple Myeloma. Among the antibodies,
TAG-HC2 was surprisingly found to have preferential binding to SLAMF7
expressed on Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) cell lines instead.
Characterization of TAG-HC2 revealed that the binding of TAG-HC2 to
SLAMF7 requires the N-glycosylation of the antigen. Functionally, TAG-HC2
does not have non-specific binding to normal cell lines when tested via
flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry. TAG-HC2, when complexed with
saporin-conjugated secondary mAb, was able to internalize into and kill
AML cell lines. These results suggest that TAG-HC2 has the potential to
be developed into an Antibody Drug Conjugate against AML.


