Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of paclitaxel and Sym015, a mixture of two monoclonal
antibodies directed at MET receptor, to increase anti-tumor effects in
gastric cancer.


MET is a proto-oncogene that encodes a protein known as hepatocyte growth
factor receptor (HGFR), involved in proliferative, survival and
invasive/metastatic abilities of cancer cells. MET has received
considerable attention as a potential target for cancer therapy,
including gastric cancer (GC). MET amplification is present in 4-5% of GC
patients, and associated with poor outcomes and significantly shorter
median survival. Although intensive efforts have been directed toward the
development of HGF-MET axis inhibitors, there are some issues for
clinical translation; 1) proper biomarker to select patients, 2) proper
chemotherapy combination partner and 3) proper line of treatment.
Therefore, exploring drug to inhibit HGF-MET axis is essential. Among
them, Sym015 (Copenhagen, Demark), a mixture of two monoclonal antibodies
directed at MET receptor, is one of the leading agents in the pipeline.
In this study, we had 49 GC cell lines including 27 Korean cancer
patients. Those cells were analyzed by whole exome sequencing (WES) and
RNA sequencing to understand biological and molecular characteristics.
Also, expression levels of MET and MET-associated molecules were
determined by western blot and HGF expression was evaluated by ELISA.
Sensitivity of Sym015 was screened in 49 GC cell lines and combination
with paclitaxel was performed in 6 MET amplification cell lines by CCK-8
assay. Combination index (CI) and dose reduction index (DRI) were
evaluated by CalcuSyn software. Among 49 GC cell lines, we confirmed 6
cell lines with MET amplification including 2 novel Korean cancer patient
cell lines (YCC-31 and YCC-34) and 17 (34.7 %) cell lines were sensitive
to Sym015 with 20~68 % inhibition rate at 100 nM. And our data showed
that Sym015 was related to MET amplification, c-Met/p-Met overexpression
and exon 14 deletion, as we expected. Also, the 6 MET amplified cell
lines (SNU5, SNU520, MKN45, YCC-31, YCC-34 and Hs746T) were all sensitive
to Sym015 and down-regulate expression of c-Met/p-Met. Using MET
amplified GC cell lines, we evaluated the efficacy and potential
mechanism of Sym015 in combination with paclitaxel, which is the standard
agent for second line treatment of metastatic GC. CI values determined at
the ED50 indicated that 3 of 6 cell lines (MKN45, SNU520 and YCC-31) had
synergistic effects (CI values MET is a proto-oncogene that encodes a
protein known as hepatocyte growth factor receptor (HGFR), involved in
proliferative, survival and invasive/metastatic abilities of cancer
cells. MET has received considerable attention as a potential target for
cancer therapy, including gastric cancer (GC). MET amplification is
present in 4-5% of GC patients, and associated with poor outcomes and
significantly shorter median survival. Although intensive efforts have
been directed toward the development of HGF-MET axis inhibitors, there
are some issues for clinical translation; 1) proper biomarker to select
patients, 2) proper chemotherapy combination partner and 3) proper line
of treatment. Therefore, exploring drug to inhibit HGF-MET axis is
essential. Among them, Sym015 (Copenhagen, Demark), a mixture of two
monoclonal antibodies directed at MET receptor, is one of the leading
agents in the pipeline. In this study, we had 49 GC cell lines including
27 Korean cancer patients. Those cells were analyzed by whole exome
sequencing (WES) and RNA sequencing to understand biological and
molecular characteristics. Also, expression levels of MET and
MET-associated molecules were determined by western blot and HGF
expression was evaluated by ELISA. Sensitivity of Sym015 was screened in
49 GC cell lines and combination with paclitaxel was performed in 6 MET
amplification cell lines by CCK-8 assay. Combination index (CI) and dose
reduction index (DRI) were evaluated by CalcuSyn software. Among 49 GC
cell lines, we confirmed 6 cell lines with MET amplification including 2
novel Korean cancer patient cell lines (YCC-31 and YCC-34) and 17 (34.7
%) cell lines were sensitive to Sym015 with 20~68 % inhibition rate at
100 nM. And our data showed that Sym015 was related to MET amplification,
c-Met/p-Met overexpression and exon 14 deletion, as we expected. Also,
the 6 MET amplified cell lines (SNU5, SNU520, MKN45, YCC-31, YCC-34 and
Hs746T) were all sensitive to Sym015 and down-regulate expression of
c-Met/p-Met. Using MET amplified GC cell lines, we evaluated the efficacy
and potential mechanism of Sym015 in combination with paclitaxel, which
is the standard agent for second line treatment of metastatic GC. CI
values determined at the ED50 indicated that 3 of 6 cell lines (MKN45,
SNU520 and YCC-31) had synergistic effects (CI values < 0.7). When used
in combination to treat 4 cell lines (MKN45, SNU520, YCC-31 and Hs-746T),
the dose at ED50 of Sym015 could be reduced by 2.2-13.6 fold, based on
DRI analysis. Also, the DRI for paclitaxel indicated that dose reductions
up to 4.7-7.1 fold (MKN45 and SNU520) could be obtained. Our results
indicate that Sym015 was sensitive to MET amplified cell lines and the
Sym015 combined with paclitaxel therapy had synergistic effects in MET
amplified GC.


