Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SDF-1/CXCR4 axis-mediated tumor-tropism of monocyte
membrane-coated nanoparticles.


Tumor-associated macrophages are one of the most abundant infiltrating
cells in solid tumors. These cells are originated from the bone marrow
and circulating in peripheral blood. Through the specific chemoattractant
released by the tumor cells or stromal cells, bone marrow-derived
monocytes (BMDMs) are able to accumulate at the tumor site by their
corresponding receptors. In this study, we utilized the characteristics
of tumor-tropism of BMDMs on a nanoparticle-based drug delivery system.
We hypothesized that the cellular membrane of BMDMs can provide
nanoparticle protection from the mononuclear phagocyte system and the
chemokine receptor on the membrane can enhance the tumor-tropism of the
nanoparticles. To prove the hypothesis, the cellular membrane was
extracted from BMDMs and then coated on the drug-loaded nanoparticles. We
also found that the expression of chemokine receptor CXCR4 on the bone
BMDMs can be induced following the stimulation of tumor conditioned
medium. The tumor targeting effect of the monocyte membrane-coated
nanoparticles is diminished against SDF-1 knockdown tumor cells. These
results indicate that the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis is contributed to the
tumor-tropism of the monocyte membrane-coated nanoparticles toward
astrocytoma cell line, ALTS1C1, and this effect can be boosted by the
stimulation of tumor conditioned medium. In conclusion, we established a
nanoparticle-based drug delivery platform against brain tumor with the
cellular membrane coating technology and maximized the effect of
tumor-targeting by tumor conditioned medium stimulation.


