Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing a mouse model to investigate GRB7-mediated signaling
in development and triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacks expression of the estrogen and
progesterone steroid receptors and HER2; thus TNBC patients cannot
benefit from the recent successes of targeted therapies, and instead rely
on cytotoxic chemotherapeutic combinations. As such, tumor recurrence is
high and patient prognosis is poor. GRB7 is a cytoplasmic adaptor protein
required for cell migration, invasion, and proliferation in TNBC. We have
previously reported that a high GRB7 mRNA level was the strongest
predictor of tumor recurrence in a cohort of 246 TNBC patients treated
with doxorubicin. GRB7 was confirmed in a smaller, independent cohort as
an indicator of poor prognosis. After the observation of both decreased
doxorubicin sensitivity and elevated GRB7 expression levels in TNBC
tumors, we hypothesized that GRB7 was mediating a signaling pathway
critical for drug resistance and cell survival.

To determine the role of GRB7 in mouse development and tumorigenesis, the
current study focuses on the Grb7tm1a(EUCOMM)Wtsi knockout-first
transgenic mouse, in which the insertion of the 1L2_Bact_P cassette
upstream of the critical exons of GRB7 renders an effective knockout of
GRB7, and the inclusion of loxP sites flanking critical exons of GRB7
facilitates the creation of tissue-specific, conditional GRB7 deletions.
Herein, we investigate GRB7 expression in the homozygous Grb7tm1a mouse
and derivative tissue-specific deletions, and evaluate their suitability
for modeling GRB7-mediated events in mammary gland development and
tumorigenesis in a TNBC model. Primary cell lines from the Grb7tm1a mouse
and breast cancer cell lines will then be used to delineate the effects
of altered GRB7 levels on the mechanism of developmental and TNBC cell
signaling, respectively.


