Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spatially positioned tumor infiltrating lymphocytes predict
survival in metastatic HER2 positive breast cancer treated with
trastuzumab.


Background: Disease outcomes of HER2+ breast cancers have dramatically
changed after targeted therapies, such as trastuzumab, came to clinical
practice but predictive factors for trastuzumab sensitivity and
resistance are frequently unknown.

Methods: Metastatic breast cancer patients (n=48), who were treated with
trastuzumab and had pre-treatment tumor samples available, were studied.
The tumors were immunostained for T-cell (CD3, CD8) and NK-cell (CD56)
markers and quantitative analysis of the immune cells was carried out
using a computer-assisted image analysis in different tumor locations.

Results: High number of CD3 and CD8 positive T-cells was associated with
significant survival benefit in the center of the tumor (CT) (p=0.007,
p=0.001), but not in the invasive region. NK-cell tumor infiltration was
infrequent and they could not be reliably analyzed. In a subgroup
analyses, high density of CD8 CT cells was associated with significant
survival benefit in non-bone only disease, in TX-3, and in ER+ tumors
(p=0.006, p=0.003, p=0.001). Moreover, high CD8 CT cell density was
associated with good trastuzumab responses (p=0.042).

Conclusion: High number of CD3 and CD8 positive tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes in the CT area is associated with survival benefit in some
patient groups with HER2+ breast cancer treated with trastuzumab.
Furthermore, high number of CD8 CT cells predicts benefit from
trastuzumab.


