Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PGRMC1 is a biomarker for breast cancer cell proliferation and
early relapse.


Background: Breast cancers may recur following a long latency period,
implying a dormant or quiescent phase, however little is known about the
biology of cellular quiescence and few markers exist for this clinically
important state. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
progesterone receptor membrane component family 1 (PGRMC1), which is
expressed in both proliferating and quiescent tumor cells, is a
prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer and to define its expression
in breast cancer subtypes.

Methods: Seventeen publicly available data sets were combined to analyze
PGRMC1 expression in 4,463 invasive breast cancers as a function of
established molecular and phenotypic markers, estimates of cellular
proliferation, and recurrence-free survival data. A gene expression
signature-based assay was utilized to estimate cellular proliferation.
Association between gene expression and relapse-free survival was
assessed using Cox proportional hazards regression while controlling for
the effect of proliferation.

Results: PGRMC1 expression was analyzed stratified by immunohistochemical
and molecular subtype, tumor grade and size and compared with a known
triple negative breast cancer biomarker, BCL11a. PGRMC1 and BCL11a each
exhibited a robust positive correlation of comparable magnitude with
proliferation across all breast cancer subtypes (r=0.27, p=6.5x10-17 and
r=0.29, 1.7x10-41, respectively), and PGRMC1 was strongly associated with
proliferation within the basal subtype (r=0.42, p=2.4x10-37 PGRMC1 versus
0.31, p=1.1x10-8 BCL11a). PGRMC1 expression was associated with a higher
risk of early breast cancer recurrence (HR=1.25, 95% CI [1.12,1.39],
p=6.4x10-5) and this association was dependent upon its association with
proliferation.

Conclusions: PGRMC1 is a breast cancer proliferation biomarker. Further
study of the function of this protein is warranted.


