Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of cross talk between AR and wnt/beta-catenin pathways
in prostate cancer.


Prostate Cancer (PCa) is the second most commonly diagnosed cancer in the
United States with 180,890 males diagnosed and is predicted to cause
approximately 26,000 deaths in 2016. The current treatment of androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT) initially depletes circulating androgens;
however, intratumoral androgens rescue androgen receptor (AR) signaling
and promotes the development of castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC). The dysregulation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway has
been implicated in the development of many cancers including PCa. The
disruption of this signaling leads to the stabilization of β-catenin
which upregulates many genes involved in tumorigenesis. Additionally,
β-catenin acts as AR cofactor. Our previous studies show that AR is a
direct target of miR-644a. We hypothesized that targeting the expression
of both the β-catenin pathway and AR by conventional drugs and/or tumor
suppressor miR-644a would have synergistic therapeutic benefits. In this

study, we are investigating miR-644a mediated posttranscriptional
downregulation of GSK3-β and β-catenin in the wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway. The effect of miR-644a in combination with inhibitors
(β-catenin or GSK3-β) was also assessed using proliferation assays and
a significant downregulation was observed. We will further study the
posttranscriptional effects of tumor suppressor miR-644a on the
wnt/β-catenin pathway and also the processing and regulation of miR-644a
in PCa.


