Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HLA and NKG2D ligand abnormalities and IFN-γ unnresponsiveness in
human colorectal carcinoma cell lines.


Background: Cetuximab, an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody, has shown promising efficacy on wild-type RAS
metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. Cetuximab demonstrates
anti-cancer effect via NK cells and subsequent immunogenic cell death.
Chemotherapy or targeted therapy may change immune surface markers.

Methods: We characterized a panel of 6 CRC cell lines with different
genetic features. The impacts of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) on cell surface
expressions of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I (including
subtypes), MHC class II (including subtypes), MHC class 1 related
molecule A (MICA, the NK cell ligand), Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 1
(ICAM-1, the immunoglobulin superfamily), EGFR, and Chondroitin Sulfate
Proteoglycan 4 (CSPG-4, pericyte attaching marker) before and after
treatment with IFN-γ (100 U/ml, 48 h) were explored in selected cell
lines

Results:

Among six human colon cancer cell lines analyzed, DLD-1, HCT15, and LoVo

exhibited no expression of HLA-A and HLA-B,C. Colo-320 demonstrated both
low HLA-A and HLA-B,C expression and irresponsive to IFN-γ stimulation.
In contrast, both HT-29 and SW-480 showed low HLA-A and HLA-B,C
expression, but the expression of both HLA-A and HLA-B,C was corrected
after IFN-γ stimulation. All six cell lines possessed low MHC class II
expression and irresponsive to IFN-γ stimulation. All six cell lines
possessed low MIC expression and irresponsive to IFN-γ stimulation. All
six cell lines showed low ICAM-1 expression, but only HT-29 and SW-480
were responsive to IFN-γ stimulation. LOVO and SW-480 demonstrated high
EGFR expression and irresponsive to IFN-γ stimulation. Only HT-29
possessed high CSPG-4 expression.

Conclusion:

These findings reveal that regardless of their genetic features, all six
CRC cell lines possess a phenotype that may allow them to escape
cytotoxic T and NK cell attack.

Table





Cell Line

MSI

CIMP

KRAS

BRAF

PI3KCA

TP53



DLD-1

MSI

+

G13D

WT

E545K

S241F



HCT-15

MSI

+

G13D

WT

E545K

S241F



LOVO

MSI

-

G13D

WT

WT

WT



COLO-320

MSS

-

WT

WT

WT

R248W



HT-29

MSS

+

WT

V600E

P449T

R273H



SW-480

MSS

-

G12V

WT

WT

R273H


