Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CK-101 (RX518), a mutant-selective inhibitor of EGFR that
overcomes T790M-mediated resistance in NSCLC.


Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations initially respond to
small molecule inhibitors of the EGFR tyrosine kinase such as gefitinib
and erlotinib. However, secondary mutations in the kinase domain lead to
acquired resistance to these inhibitors and limited clinical efficacy,
with the EGFR T790M mutation being the most common mechanism of acquired
resistance in more than half the patients that experience disease
progression. CK-101 (also known as RX518) is a novel, irreversible,
orally administered EGFR kinase inhibitor that specifically targets the
mutant forms of EGFR, including T790M, while exhibiting minimal activity
toward the wild-type (WT) EGFR. WT EGFR inhibition is believed to drive
the commonly observed side effects of skin rash and diarrhea. The 50%
inhibitory concentrations (IC50s) of CK-101 and 2 reference compounds,
afatinib and AZD-9291, were determined in cell proliferation assays in
human cancer cell lines in vitro after incubation for 72 hours. Xenograft
studies were conducted in BALB/c nude mice or SCID/Beige mice using once
daily oral administration of CK-101 or afatinib for 14 or 21 days. CK-101
selectively inhibited cell proliferation of cell lines expressing both
the activating (e.g. HCC827, IC50 Patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) with activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations initially respond to small molecule inhibitors of the EGFR
tyrosine kinase such as gefitinib and erlotinib. However, secondary
mutations in the kinase domain lead to acquired resistance to these
inhibitors and limited clinical efficacy, with the EGFR T790M mutation
being the most common mechanism of acquired resistance in more than half
the patients that experience disease progression. CK-101 (also known as
RX518) is a novel, irreversible, orally administered EGFR kinase
inhibitor that specifically targets the mutant forms of EGFR, including
T790M, while exhibiting minimal activity toward the wild-type (WT) EGFR.
WT EGFR inhibition is believed to drive the commonly observed side
effects of skin rash and diarrhea. The 50% inhibitory concentrations
(IC50s) of CK-101 and 2 reference compounds, afatinib and AZD-9291, were
determined in cell proliferation assays in human cancer cell lines in
vitro after incubation for 72 hours. Xenograft studies were conducted in
BALB/c nude mice or SCID/Beige mice using once daily oral administration
of CK-101 or afatinib for 14 or 21 days. CK-101 selectively inhibited
cell proliferation of cell lines expressing both the activating (e.g.
HCC827, IC50 <0.015 µM) and resistance mutations (NCI-H1975, IC50 0.5
µM; i.e., CK-101 was over 100 fold less potent against A431 than against
NCI-H1975). Single agent CK-101 significantly inhibited tumor growth in
EGFR-mutated NSCLC tumor xenograft models, with no activity in a WT EGFR
tumor xenograft model. In a xenograft study of PC-9 cells (exon 19
deletion) in SCID/Beige mice, CK-101 inhibited tumor growth by up to 90%
(p 0.5 µM; i.e., CK-101 was over 100 fold less potent against A431 than
against NCI-H1975). Single agent CK-101 significantly inhibited tumor
growth in EGFR-mutated NSCLC tumor xenograft models, with no activity in
a WT EGFR tumor xenograft model. In a xenograft study of PC-9 cells (exon
19 deletion) in SCID/Beige mice, CK-101 inhibited tumor growth by up to
90% (p <0.001). In a xenograft study of NCI-H1975 cells (L858R/T790M
double mutant) in BALB/c nude mice, CK-101 inhibited tumor growth by up
to 95% (p 0.5 µM; i.e., CK-101 was over 100 fold less potent against
A431 than against NCI-H1975). Single agent CK-101 significantly inhibited
tumor growth in EGFR-mutated NSCLC tumor xenograft models, with no
activity in a WT EGFR tumor xenograft model. In a xenograft study of PC-9
cells (exon 19 deletion) in SCID/Beige mice, CK-101 inhibited tumor
growth by up to 90% (p <0.001). In a xenograft study of NCI-H1975 cells
(L858R/T790M double mutant) in BALB/c nude mice, CK-101 inhibited tumor
growth by up to 95% (p <0.001). The pre-clinical findings from this work
strongly supported the clinical development of CK-101, and a
first-in-human study of CK-101 was initiated in September 2016.


