Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intra-individual genomic heteroneity of ovarian cancer and
clinical utility of ascitic cancer cells for mutation profiling.


Intra-individual tumoural heterogeneity (ITH) is a hallmark of solid
tumours and impedes accurate genomic diagnosis and selection of proper
therapy. The purpose of this study was to identify ITH of ovarian
high-grade serous carcinomas (OSCs) and to determine the utility of
ascitic cancer cells as a resource for mutation profiling in spite of
ITH. We performed whole-exome sequencing, copy number profiling, and DNA
methylation profiling of four OSC genomes using multiregional biopsy from
13 intra-ovarian lesions, 12 extra-ovarian tumour lesions
(omentum/peritoneum), and ascitic cells. We observed substantial levels
of heterogeneity in mutations and copy number alterations (CNAs) of the
OSCs. We categorized the mutations into 'common', 'shared' and 'private'
according to the regional distribution. Six common, 8 shared, and 24
private mutations were observed in known cancer-related genes. Common
mutations had a higher mutant allele frequency and included TP53
mutations in all four OSCs. Region-specific chromosomal amplifications
and deletions involving BRCA1, PIK3CA, and RB1 were also identified. Of
note, the mutations detected in ascitic cancer cells represented
92.3-100% of overall somatic mutations in the given case. Phylogenetic
analyses of ascitic genomes predicted a poly-seeding origin of somatic
mutations in ascitic cells. Our results demonstrate that despite ITH,
somatic mutations, CNAs, and DNA methylations in both “common”
category and cancer-related genes were highly conserved in ascitic cells
of OSCs, highlighting the clinical relevance of genome analysis of
ascitic cells. Ascitic tumour cells may serve as a potential resource to
discover somatic mutations of primary OSC with diagnostic and therapeutic
relevance.


