Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral rinse point of care test to predict head and neck cancer.


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most
common cause of cancer mortality throughout the world affecting some
50,000 people in the US and 600,000 worldwide each year. The ability to
detect the disease in a potentially malignant phase and earlier stage
could have significant impact on overall outcome. Previous studies have
demonstrated that a combined salivary CD44, a tumor-initiating marker,
and total protein assay was able to aid in the diagnosis of HNSCC. We
sought to understand the performance characteristics of these biomarkers
in a prospective population using a qualitative, point-of-care assay
(POC) which consists of a cassette with a colorimetric read-out based on
a pre-determined threshold for both CD44 and total protein. We also
performed results from same samples with a quantitative lab-based test.

Methods: Saline oral rinse specimens (~5ml) from 134 patients (84 HNSCC
cases; 50 controls) were obtained from biorepositories. Samples were
thawed, gently swirled, placed in a standard collection cup. 600ul were
removed for lab assay prior to POC test. The tapered end of the POC
cassette was submerged in rinse for 20’; levels of CD44 and total
protein (TP) were evaluated by two operators. POC test results were
compared between operators and with lab test results using Cohen’s
kappa coefficient and McNemar’s test, sensitivity(Se), specificity(Sp),
NPV and PPV.

Results: 95% HNSCC patients (cases) were mean 60 years of age, 60% male,
97% white and 74% smokers vs. 43 years, 28%, 96% and 0% respectively, for
controls. POC was positive with either CD44 or TP above threshold.
Weighted kappa yielded 75% and 72% for CD44 and TP respectively between
operators. With a prevalence of 9.27: POC: NPV 94%, PPV 10%; variable TP
cut-off produced Se71-84% and Sp30%-50%. McNemar and Kappa for both lab
CD44 and TP vs POC indicated moderate agreement; independently both POC
and lab produced NPV >90%.

Conclusions: Concordance of the POC assay between operators and moderate
agreement with a quantitative lab assay provides supportive evidence for
clinical application of the POC assay as an aid in the diagnosis for
HNSCC. Additional studies are underway to confirm these observations.


