Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Secretory autophagy in tumor associated fibroblasts promotes head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma progression and emerges as a novel
therapeutic target.


As the fifth most common cancer worldwide, head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is a leading global health burden. Despite therapeutic
advancements, the survival rate has remained relatively unchanged for the
last fifty years. To improve treatment and survival, there is a need to
better understand the underlying biology of this disease. The tumor
microenvironmentâ€™s role in promoting cancer progression and resistance
to therapy has gathered great attention. In HNSCC, the predominant
microenvironment cell type is tumor associated fibroblasts (TAFs).
Studies in our lab and others have demonstrated the significant tumor
promoting role of TAFs; however, little is understood of the underlying
biology of TAFs. In this study, we identify that TAFs have upregulated an
unconventional pathway of secretion: secretory autophagy. Although
paradigmatically a degradation pathway, there has been a growing
appreciation for a novel role of autophagy in cellular secretion. We
hypothesized HNSCC induces secretory autophagy in the TAFs, modulating
secreted factors responsible for tumor progression. We assessed the role
of autophagy inhibition in alleviating TAF-facilitated HNSCC progression,
and uncovered a significant reduction in proliferation, migration, and
invasion of the cancer cells. This was achieved by both siRNA knockdown
of Beclin-1, and therapeutic inhibition of the lysosome through
chloroquine. We discovered that NFs placed in co-culture with HNSCC had a
significantly upregulated level of autophagy marker LC3-II. By
characterizing the role of known HNSCC secreted factors in inducing TAF
autophagy, we identified basic fibroblast growth factor is responsible
for the LC3-II accumulation. To understand which TAF factors are secreted
by an autophagy dependent mechanism, we assessed TAF-conditioned media in
the presence of autophagy knockdown. Key cytokines, such as IL-6 and
IL-8, were identified as autophagy dependent. Rescue of these cytokines
in autophagy inhibited TAF-conditioned media restored HNSCC migration.
Although autophagy has been identified as upregulated in a variety of
cancer types, no one has previously characterized the role of autophagy
in HNSCC, and both early pre-clinical and clinical studies of autophagy
inhibition as a cancer therapy have been limited by the lack of a
specifically targeted inhibitor. We demonstrate a significant decrease in
HNSCC progression in preclinical models by using a new and highly
specific small molecule inhibitor of autophagy, SAR405, which inhibits
Vps34, an upstream autophagy pathway kinase. In summary, we uncover a
novel role for secretory autophagy in the tumor microenvironment which
promotes tumor progression, and can be uniquely targeted for therapy.


