Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance and tumor suppressive functions of SDCT2
in renal cell carcinoma.


Introduction: Five-year survival of metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC) patients is Introduction: Five-year survival of metastatic renal
cell carcinoma (mRCC) patients is < 10% and African American (AA) males
have the highest incidence. Identification of the molecular determinants
of mRCC and racial disparity in RCC is critical for biomarker development
and targeted therapy. SDCT2 is expressed in kidney epithelial cells and
is a succinate and citrate transporter, but its role has not been
examined in any benign diseases or cancer. We examined SDCT2 expression
in normal and RCC tissues and correlated it with clinical outcome and
racial disparity. We also evaluated the biological functions and
molecular signaling regulated by SDCT2 in RCC cells.

Methods: Differential gene expression in the matched normal and RCC
tissues (n=6/category) was evaluated by microarray analysis; results were
validated by quantitative-PCR and immunoblotting in normal and RCC
tissues from 53 patients (White=21; Hispanic=19; AA=13). VHL+ and VHL-
RCC cells were stably transfected with a Flag-tagged SDCT2 construct.
Transfectants were characterized for cell proliferation, cell cycle,
motility, succinate/citrate transport and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
measurement assays under normoxia and hypoxia (1% O2); cell death and
senescence pathway markers were also evaluated. SDCT2 induction was
evaluated following 5-azacytidine plus Trichostatin A treatment

Results: SDCT2 was 63- and 100-fold downregulated in low- and high-stage
RCC tissues, respectively. Q-PCR validation showed that SDCT2 levels were
40-fold downregulated in tumor tissues when compared to normal kidney
(PResults: SDCT2 was 63- and 100-fold downregulated in low- and
high-stage RCC tissues, respectively. Q-PCR validation showed that SDCT2
levels were 40-fold downregulated in tumor tissues when compared to
normal kidney (P<0.0001 Mann-Whitney test). Downregulation was 40-fold in
White and Hispanic patients, but 198-fold in AA patients (P=0.0049) and
also correlated with tumor stage and metastasis (P=0.009). Under hypoxia,
SDCT2 expression caused over 3-fold inhibition of proliferation,
cell-cycle (G1-S block), and motility in both VHL+ and VHL- cells
(PResults: SDCT2 was 63- and 100-fold downregulated in low- and
high-stage RCC tissues, respectively. Q-PCR validation showed that SDCT2
levels were 40-fold downregulated in tumor tissues when compared to
normal kidney (P<0.0001 Mann-Whitney test). Downregulation was 40-fold in
White and Hispanic patients, but 198-fold in AA patients (P=0.0049) and
also correlated with tumor stage and metastasis (P=0.009). Under hypoxia,
SDCT2 expression caused over 3-fold inhibition of proliferation,
cell-cycle (G1-S block), and motility in both VHL+ and VHL- cells
(P<0.01), only VHL+ cells were inhibited under normoxia. SDCT2 expression
induced ROS levels and succinate transport by 3-fold in RCC cells
(PResults: SDCT2 was 63- and 100-fold downregulated in low- and
high-stage RCC tissues, respectively. Q-PCR validation showed that SDCT2
levels were 40-fold downregulated in tumor tissues when compared to
normal kidney (P<0.0001 Mann-Whitney test). Downregulation was 40-fold in
White and Hispanic patients, but 198-fold in AA patients (P=0.0049) and
also correlated with tumor stage and metastasis (P=0.009). Under hypoxia,
SDCT2 expression caused over 3-fold inhibition of proliferation,
cell-cycle (G1-S block), and motility in both VHL+ and VHL- cells
(P<0.01), only VHL+ cells were inhibited under normoxia. SDCT2 expression
induced ROS levels and succinate transport by 3-fold in RCC cells
(P<0.01). SDCT2 expression induced the p16INK4a-RB pathway and apoptosis
(caspase-3 and PARP activation). 5-AZA+TSA treatment caused a 50-fold
induction (PResults: SDCT2 was 63- and 100-fold downregulated in low- and
high-stage RCC tissues, respectively. Q-PCR validation showed that SDCT2
levels were 40-fold downregulated in tumor tissues when compared to
normal kidney (P<0.0001 Mann-Whitney test). Downregulation was 40-fold in
White and Hispanic patients, but 198-fold in AA patients (P=0.0049) and
also correlated with tumor stage and metastasis (P=0.009). Under hypoxia,
SDCT2 expression caused over 3-fold inhibition of proliferation,
cell-cycle (G1-S block), and motility in both VHL+ and VHL- cells
(P<0.01), only VHL+ cells were inhibited under normoxia. SDCT2 expression
induced ROS levels and succinate transport by 3-fold in RCC cells
(P<0.01). SDCT2 expression induced the p16INK4a-RB pathway and apoptosis
(caspase-3 and PARP activation). 5-AZA+TSA treatment caused a 50-fold
induction (P<0.0001) of SDCT2 expression.

Conclusion: This is the first study on a functional biomarker in RCC,
SDCT2, that is a possible novel tumor suppressor gene. SDCT2 loss
promotes RCC growth, survival and inhibits cellular senescence and its
downregulation correlates with metastasis and racial disparity. Support:
Grant NCI/NIH 5R01CA72821; 5R01CA176691


