Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CCR2 potentiates checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy
in murine model of pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignancy with a 5 year survival rate
of less than five percent. The predominant immune cells infiltrating the
tumor microenvironment are monocytes/macrophages, which are reported to
support tumor growth by suppressing host immune responses to the tumor.
Recruitment of monocytes to various tissues, including tumors, is
dependent upon activation of the chemokine receptor CCR2 by one or more
of the chemokines CCL2, CCL8 and CCL13. In preclinical and clinical
studies, inhibition of CCR2 in pancreatic cancer has shown to decrease
tumor progression by blocking recruitment and accumulation of
monocytes/macrophages in the tumor microenvironment. Analysis of human
pancreatic tumors revealed elevation of both CCL2 and CSF1, which recruit
monocytes, as well as the monocyte marker CD14, in advanced pancreatic
cancers. Current immunotherapy using checkpoint inhibitors are effective
in some tumors, but lack efficacy in immune insensitive cancers,
including pancreatic cancer. Here, we report that the inhibition of CCR2
using a small molecule antagonist potentiates anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in
a syngeneic, orthotropic mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Our data
reveal that blocking CCR2 decreases tumor burden by blocking monocyte
infiltration and creating a microenvironment more favorable for CD8 T
cells activity, and provide a mechanistic rationale for investigating the
combination of a CCR2 antagonist and an immune checkpoint inhibitor in
pancreatic cancer.


