Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early feasibility and development of multiplexed, single-reaction
assays for ALK, ROS1 and RET novel ddPCR RNA fusions.


We have previously described a targeted genomic Laboratory Developed Test
(LDT) that includes variant specific Droplet Digitalâ„¢ PCR (ddPCR)
testing for EGFR, KRAS and BRAF in plasma. This test supports the rapid
delivery of molecular diagnostic test results, with >95% of tests results
delivered in 72 hours of receipt in our Laboratory. This test then meets
the key clinical need for the delivery of results that can result in
faster treatment decisions. Additionally, the test may be of utility for
those patients who need mutation results quickly or for whom tissue may
be unavailable or insufficient for molecular testing. This is especially
true for patients diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In
this report we will update on new test concepts created using the
recently available design software engine for ddPCR assays. Specifically,
we will describe studies on the development of single-reaction,
multiplexed assays for the respective detection of ROS1 (up to 11
variants), RET (up to 8 variants) and EML4-ALK (v1 - v3). Design
considerations, specificity and sensitivity, as well as reproducibility
and robustness studies for these complex assays will be reviewed. Similar
studies were conducted for the development of the commercially available
test for the EML4-ALK fusion variants. EML4-ALK concordance studies
compared the fusions found in blood with known positives and negatives
found using FISH and PCR based methods (n=24 evaluable matched pair
samples). Clinical sensitivity, specificity and concordance were 85%,
100% and 92% respectively. In this study we also report on test
performance of the ALK RNA fusion test over 3 consecutive months of
testing. Of note, we have delivered greater than 95% of tests (n = 272
samples) with an observed positive sample frequency of 2%. The robust
detection of rare variant, RNA fusions from plasma within 72 hours
represents a molecular testing option of value to patients with NSCLC and
their physicians.


