Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression levels of UL16 binding protein 1 and natural killer
group 2 member D in patients with gastric cancer.


UL16 binding protein 1 (ULBP1) expressed on the tumor cell surface binds
to the natural killer group 2 member D (NKG2D) receptor presenting on
natural killer (NK), CD8+ T, and gamma delta T cells. However, the roles
of ULBP1 and NKG2D expression and associated immune responses in gastric
cancer are unclear. Here, we investigated the relationships between ULBP1
and NKG2D expression and clinical outcomes in patients with gastric
cancer. The expression levels of ULBP1 and NKG2D were examined in human
gastric cancer cell lines and gastric cancer tissues from 98 patients who
underwent surgery from 2004 to 2008. MKN-72 cells expressed ULBP1 with
ULBP2, -5, or -6. NKG2D was expressed at a higher level after activation
on T cells and NK cells. Among tissue sections positive for NKG2D
expression, six cases were positive for CD8 and CD56. In all tissues,
NKG2D-expressing cells were typically aCD8+ T cells. Patients with NKG2D
expression in tumors had significantly longer overall survival (OS) than
patients without NKG2D expression in tumors (p = 0.0217). The longest OS
was observed in patients positive for both ULBP1 and NKG2D, whereas the
shortest OS was observed in patients negative for both ULBP1 and NKG2D.
The interaction between ULBP1 and NKG2D may improve OS in patients with
gastric cancer and may have applications in immunotherapy for induction
of adaptive immunity in patients with cancer. Moreover, ULBP1 and NKG2D
may be useful as prognostic biomarker in gastric cancer.


