Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma thioredoxin reductase 1 as a diagnostic marker for
non-small cell lung cancer.


Non-invasive diagnostic markers for patients with suspicious non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) may provide needed guidance on invasive
diagnostic and therapeutic decisions. Thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1) is
a pivotal intracellular redox sensor and antioxidant enzyme, and plays an
important part in tumor growth, progression, metastasis, and chemotherapy
resistance. The goal of this study is to test the feasibility of
developing plasma TrxR1 as a novel diagnostic marker for NSCLC. The
plasma TrxR1 activity was determined spectrophotometrically by monitoring
the NADPH-dependent production of 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoate at 412nm and at
37℃. All detection kits and automatic analyzer possess independent
intellectual property rights, and have been widely used in breast cancer
screening. In this study, the plasma levels of TrxR1 were measured in 45
treatment-naïve NSCLC patients and 10 individuals with benign tumor-like
pulmonary diseases. Taking plasma TrxR1 activity of 4 as reference, the
overall concordance rate was 73.3%, while those of CEA, CA199, CA125,
NSE, CYFRA21-1 and SCC were 19.0%, 7.1%, 16.7%, 35.7%, 24.4% and 2.5%,
respectively. Furthermore, using TNM staging (AJCC 7th ed.) as
classifier, the concordance rates of TrxR1 in local, local regional and
advanced stage subgroups were 66.7% (20/30), 77.8% (7/9) and 100% (4/4),
respectively. A multipoint linear fitting correlation model was created,
and the equation was TrxR1 = 5.821 + 0.396*Stage. Besides, the
concordance rates of TrxR1 in benign tumor-like pulmonary diseases was
60% (6/10). Our data suggest that plasma TrxR1 activity is a useful
non-invasive diagnostic marker for NSCLC, and there may be a linear
correlation between TrxR1 activity and pathological stage.


