Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring small molecules and macromolecules methyltransferase
activities using homogenous luminescent assay.


It is well recognized that methylation/demethylation of not only DNA,
RNA, Proteins but also methylation of small molecules play major roles in
modulation of the epigenome, transcriptome, neurotransmitter uptake and
metabolic regulation. Recent biochemicval and biological data suggest
that the activity of these enzymes and their expression level are under
very strict regulation and any abnormal alteration in either one or both
results in a wide varieties of pathogenic conditions such as cancer,
inflammation, and neurodegenerative diseases. In addition to chromatin
modulation, altered methylation of DNA and more recently mRNA have been
recognized to regulate the transcriptome and the rate of message
translation and stability. Furthermore, methylation of small molecules
such as catechols and nicotinamide play critical roles in
neurotransmitters uptake and function, and metabolic regulation,
respectively. Thus, pharmacological modulation of these enzymes by small
molecules will be beneficial in developing novel therapeutics for
multiple unmet medical needs. Towards this goal of searching for
activators/inhibitors of these enzymes for the development of next
generation of drugs, screening assays for these modulators are urgently
needed. To address these unmet needs, we have developed a novel assay
that monitors the activities of these enzymes and their modulation by
small molecules. The assay is bioluminescent based, HTS formatted and
highly sensitive. A unique feature of this assay is its universality
since it is based on monitoring the formation of the universal product
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), i.e., capable of detecting changes in
activity of a broad range of methyltransferases such as DNA, RNA,
protein, and small molecules. In addition, the assay has been validated
for all classes of protein methyltransferases (Lysine and Arginine), and
with different types of substrates (small peptides, large proteins, or
even nucleosomes). This enables determining the specificity of these
enzymes and their substrate requirements. The assay has high signal to
background, low C.V., robust (Zâ€™ value > 0.7), and has been validated
using various plate densities such as 96-, 384, and 1536-well plates. A
strong feature of this assay is its utility with broad range of
substrates concentrations or the composition of the substrates (short vs.
long peptides), thus enabling the generation of kinetic data and
determining the mechanism of action of various modulators of
methyltransferases of interest.


