Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of circulating tumor cells in stage IV non-small cell
lung cancer.


Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) is the most common cause of cancer
related deaths in both men and women. Some lung cancer patients have a
unique challenge of a tissue access due to tumor location or baseline
lung disorders such as emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Liquid biopsy technologies can overcome tissue assess
difficulties. However, as of today there are no commercially approved
assays for CTC enumeration in lung cancer. Multiple non-commercial assays
exist and some show correlation of CTC enumeration and changes in CTC
counts on therapy with prognosis and response to therapy. Outside of
absolute number of CTC there is little published data regarding
prognostic significance of CTC morphologic heterogeneity in late stage
NSCLC and its ability to predict treatment outcomes. Here we investigate
CTC counts in 81 patients with stage IV NSCLC using a fluid phase biopsy
and high definition (HD) diagnostic pathology imaging of all nucleated
cells. HD-CTCs were detected in 51 (63%) patients at initiation of
therapy with a median of 2.20 (range 0-509.20) and a mean of 26.21
HD-CTCs/mL (±15.64). There was no correlation between the absolute
number of HD-CTCs at the time of initiation of new therapy and patient
outcomes. A subset of 25 patients was further analyzed to determine the
significance of HD-CTC kinetics, which may follow three distinct
patterns: an increase in HD-CTCs with therapy, unchanged HD-CTCs numbers
(stable), and a decline in HD-CTCs numbers. Patients that experienced an
increasing, stable, or decreasing HD-CTC profile had an overall change of
118.40, 0.54, and 81.40 HD-CTCs/mL respectively during the first 3
months. The overall survival (OS) for increasing profiles was 31.08
months (±13.08, median 32.46, range 15.11-43.50), for stable profiles OS
was 8.82 months (±3.57, median 7.23, range 3.91-19.75), and for
decreasing profiles it was 15.30 months (±6.39, median 14.06, range
3.81-28.06) months. CTCs are identifiable in patients with stage IV
NSCLC, but correlation of absolute HD-CTC counts with disease progression
was not statistically significant. However, change in CTC counts were
predictive of OS in patients with metastatic lung cancer receiving
chemotherapy.


