Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-derived miR-200c and 141 contribute to high levels of plasma
microRNA-200c and 141 through exosomes.


Circulating microRNAs (miRs) have potential as cancer biomarkers, but
their regulatory mechanisms remain elusive. Here we used a breast cancer
model (Foxp3 heterozygous Scurfy mutant female mice, Foxp3sf/+) for
identification of circulating miR biomarkers, and the formation and
regulation of these miRs were investigated. Aging Foxp3sf/+ female mice
developed spontaneous breast cancers and lung metastases. Levels of
miR-200c and 141 were lower in the Foxp3sf/+ breast cancer cells than in
normal breast epithelial cells, but plasma levels of miR-200c and 141 in
the Foxp3sf/+ mice increased during tumor progression, especially during
metastasis to the lung. Likewise, 259 participants, including patients
with breast cancer or benign breast tumors, members of breast cancer
families, and matched normal healthy controls, were assessed for
circulating levels of candidate miRs. The results showed that: 1) the
levels of miR-200c and 141 were lower in the FOXP3low breast cancer cells
relative to those with FOXP3high, especially for late-stage and
metastatic cancer cells; 2) the levels of miR-200c and 141 were higher in
plasma of patients with metastatic breast cancer than in plasma of those
with localized breast cancer, with benign breast tumors, with a family
history of breast cancer, or normal healthy controls. Furthermore, in
Foxp3sf/+ mice, plasma miR-200c and 141 were released from tumor cells
through exosomes. Thus, plasma levels of miR-200c and 141 are potential
biomarkers for early detection of metastases. MiR-200c and 141 appear to
be released from breast cancer cells, through exosomes, into the
circulation.


