Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Attenuation of pancreatic tumor growth by a small molecule tubulin
inhibitor.


Introduction: Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is one of the most fatal cancers
and is ranked as the fourth common cause of cancer-related deaths among
both men and women in the US. The management of PanCa is exceptionally
difficult due to the extremely poor response to available
chemotherapeutic drugs. Microtubules are dynamic structures composed of
α-β-tubulin heterodimers that are essential in cell division and are
important targets for several clinical drugs (paclitaxel, docetaxel and
vinblastine). However, clinical use of these tubulin-targeting drugs have
toxicity and drug resistance issues in cancer patients. Thus,
identification of more potent non-toxic inhibitors of β-tubulin is
urgently required for cancer therapy purposes. In this study, we have
identified a synthetic compound (ABI-231) which is a potent inhibitor of
β-tubulin and evaluated its therapeutic efficacy against PanCa in vitro,
and in vivo model systems.

Methods: ABI-231 ((2-(1H-indol-3-yl)-1H-imidazol-4-yl) (3, 4,
5-trimethoxyphenyl)) - methanone was synthesized and characterized in our
department. Effect of ABI-231 on proliferation, migration and invasion of
human PanCa cells (ASPC1, HPAFII, and PANC1) was performed by in vitro
functional assays (MTS, wound healing, and Boyden chamber migrations).
Effect of ABI-231 on the expression of β-tubulin isoforms was determined
and compared with other clinical inhibitors of β-tubulin by Western
blot, and qRT-PCR. Moreover, the effect of ABI-231 on the expression of
β-tubulin III in PanCa cells was determined by confocal microscopy.
Therapeutic efficacy of ABI-231 against PanCa was evaluated in an ectopic
xenograft mouse model.

Results: ABI-231 treatment inhibited cell proliferation, invasion,
migration and colony formation abilities of PanCa cells in a
dose-dependent manner (1-100 nM) compared to vehicle treated group.
Aberrant expression of β-tubulin III is involved in aggressiveness and
drug resistance of various type of cancers including PanCa. ABI-231
effectively inhibited the protein levels and mRNA expression of total
β-tubulin (TBB), TBB1, TBB2c, TBB3 and TBB4 in PanCa cells via
destabilization. Our confocal microscopy results further showed
inhibition of β-tubulin in ABI-231 treated PanCa cells. Upregulation of
micro RNA 200c (miR-200c) has been shown to inhibit the expression of
β-tubulin III in cancer cells. ABI-231 treatment of PanCa cells showed
significant (pResults: ABI-231 treatment inhibited cell proliferation,
invasion, migration and colony formation abilities of PanCa cells in a
dose-dependent manner (1-100 nM) compared to vehicle treated group.
Aberrant expression of β-tubulin III is involved in aggressiveness and
drug resistance of various type of cancers including PanCa. ABI-231
effectively inhibited the protein levels and mRNA expression of total
β-tubulin (TBB), TBB1, TBB2c, TBB3 and TBB4 in PanCa cells via
destabilization. Our confocal microscopy results further showed
inhibition of β-tubulin in ABI-231 treated PanCa cells. Upregulation of
micro RNA 200c (miR-200c) has been shown to inhibit the expression of
β-tubulin III in cancer cells. ABI-231 treatment of PanCa cells showed
significant (p<0.01) induction of miR-200c as determined by qRT-PCR.
ABI-231 administration (intra-tumoral; 50μg/mouse), three times/week
significantly (pResults: ABI-231 treatment inhibited cell proliferation,
invasion, migration and colony formation abilities of PanCa cells in a
dose-dependent manner (1-100 nM) compared to vehicle treated group.
Aberrant expression of β-tubulin III is involved in aggressiveness and
drug resistance of various type of cancers including PanCa. ABI-231
effectively inhibited the protein levels and mRNA expression of total
β-tubulin (TBB), TBB1, TBB2c, TBB3 and TBB4 in PanCa cells via
destabilization. Our confocal microscopy results further showed
inhibition of β-tubulin in ABI-231 treated PanCa cells. Upregulation of
micro RNA 200c (miR-200c) has been shown to inhibit the expression of
β-tubulin III in cancer cells. ABI-231 treatment of PanCa cells showed
significant (p<0.01) induction of miR-200c as determined by qRT-PCR.
ABI-231 administration (intra-tumoral; 50μg/mouse), three times/week
significantly (p<0.01) inhibited the growth of ASPC1 cells derived
xenograft tumors in athymic nude mice.

Conclusion: Taken together, our results suggest that ABI-231 is a potent
β-tubulin inhibitor and chemotherapeutic agent which could be used for
the treatment of pancreatic cancer.


