Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long RNA sequencing of human plasma exosomes reveals full coverage
of diverse protein coding and long non coding RNA.


Growing research in oncology implicates exosomes in cell-to-cell
communication and various cancer patho-physiologies. Vesicle-mediated
signaling is thought to occur via both protein and RNA transport.
However, there is a fundamental lack of understanding regarding the long
RNA cargo within exosomes. Previous RNASeq studies on exosomes have
largely focused on the small RNA fraction, although the clinical
biomarker space remains dominated by mRNA. These studies have reported a
relatively small proportion and poor transcript coverage of long RNA
which has led many to conclude that exosomes only carry short fragments
of mRNA and ncRNA.

To address this, we have developed a novel platform specifically designed
to perform RNASeq on long RNA from exosomes to efficiently interrogate
these as RNA biomarkers. Paired-end sequencing revealed the presence of a
wider diversity of annotated mRNA and ncRNAs than previously recognized
in exosomes. Employing our whole transcriptome unique molecular indexing
strategy, we were able to accurately quantify the number of unique RNA
molecules. We detected a total of over 1.4 million unique RNA molecules
in our libraries, with 271,308 mapped to protein-coding regions from as
little as 2 ml of plasma. We observed that even at a shallow sequencing
depth (15 million read pairs), we could detect more than 10,000 genes,
composed of 40,000 mRNA and 37,000 ncRNA annotated transcripts. ERCC
spike-in analysis indicates that our RNASeq platform is highly sensitive,
detecting as few as 8 copies of RNA. Long non-coding RNAs dominated the
ncRNA classes and accounted for over 95% of all uniquely detected ncRNAs.
We also observed a bimodal distribution of transcript coverage, similar
to cellular and tissue derived RNA. In excess of 15,000 transcripts were
detected with â‰¥80% coverage and of these high-coverage transcripts,
more than 25% were over 1kb in length, the longest being 17.6kb. Taken
together, these findings suggest exosomes harbor more than just small RNA
transcripts and short fragments of mRNAs as was previously thought and is
a treasure trove of RNA biomarkers.

Current research in the liquid biopsy space has been limited to variant
detection in cell-free DNA and circulating tumor cells but
transcriptional dysregulation is also an important feature of cancer. Our
results shed new light on the biology of exosomes and indicate that, in
addition to well-recognized small RNA cargo, plasma exosomes carry an
abundance of long RNAs that can be interrogated by our optimized
workflow. As exosomes provide a rich and protected source of RNA in
biofluids, sequencing both long and small RNA from exosomes has the
potential to identify biomarkers without the need for invasive tissue
biopsies and allow us to have a more complete picture of how the RNA
transcriptome in plasma changes in health and disease.


