Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying CDCA7 as a novel regulator of tumor-initiating cells
in triple-negative breast cancer.


Tumor-initiating cells (TICs) are a small fraction of cancer cells that
stands at the apex of the tumor hierarchy. Given their tumor-initiating
ability and resistance to conventional chemotherapies, TICs are
considered potential therapeutic targets for preventing the relapse and
metastasis of malignancies. Our group has identified a novel gene, Cell
division cycle associated 7 (CDCA7), as an important regulator of TICs in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). CDCA7 is a target gene of MYC and
NOTCH. Ectopic expression of CDCA7 has been demonstrated to induce
neoplastic transformation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo. Despite its
potential tumor-initiating ability, CDCA7 has not yet been well-studied
in breast cancer. We found that CDCA7 was highly expressed in TNBC
compared to other subtypes of breast cancer according to the
RNA-sequencing data from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Furthermore, our
Kaplan-Meier analysis of multiple datasets demonstrated that higher
expression of CDCA7 was associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer.
When we knocked down CDCA7 by siRNA in TNBC cell lines including SUM149,
HCC1937, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-436, CD44+/CD24- stem-like cell
population and primary and secondary mammosphere formation were
significantly decreased. In addition to suppressing the stem-like
properties, knockdown of CDCA7 also inhibited the invasion and migration
of breast cancer cells. These phenotypes indicated the inhibition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which was in accordance with
the up-regulation of E-Cadherin and down-regulation of Vimentin after
CDCA7 knockdown in TNBC cell lines. In conclusion, our results have
demonstrated that CDCA7 is an important regulator of TICs in TNBC.
Loss-of-function of CDCA7 leads to the inhibition of EMT and stemness in
TNBC cells.


