Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Physiologically relevant target engagement using the cellular
thermal shift assay (CETSA).


Targeted therapies are dependent on adequate occupancy and target
engagement to reach their efficacy measure. Yet, more than half of novel
candidate drugs entering clinical trial stage fail before proof of
concept is achieved. Inadequate target engagement is often at the root
cause of these failures. Therefore, we have developed a versatile
label-free method to quantify the target engagement of drugs on their
native physiological relevant targets. The method is validated in
multiple sample matrices, using different technical platforms to allow
studies of target engagement from bench to bedside: in living cells and
tissue from rodents and man.

CETSA(®) is a patented biophysical method measuring the thermal
stability of drug target proteins and the shift induced by their ligands.
By quantifying the melting temperature and shift induced by the ligand we
can quantify the potency of target engagement. This potency determination
allows filtering of candidate drugs by their ability to engage the target
in its physiologically relevant form, in relevant sample formats such as
intact cells or tissue.

We present several applications of the method and the utility in
preclinical in vitro studies and translation to in vivo systems. In
addition, new powerful detection formats are being evaluated and will be
presented.

The utility and value of the CETSA(®) method enabling preclinical
development of novel drugs is substantiated by the examples included
here. We show the value of the method both for compound/drug profiling,
for target profiling and for unbiased drug profiling on whole proteomes
in response to drug treatments.

Such datasets can be generated from in vitro systems to clinical samples
and may reduce the high attrition rate in proof of concept studies by
facilitating the discovery, development and evaluation of novel drugs.


