Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic exposure to a novel AR-NTD inhibitor induces resistance
via a selective metabolism pathway.


Background: The androgen receptor (AR) is recognized as playing a crucial
role in prostate cancer (PCa) maintenance and progression; therefore its
inhibition has been the cornerstone of modern therapy for men who fail
primary treatment. Current treatments are initially effective, however
resistance ultimately develops and the disease progresses to a lethal
form termed castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Our lab has
discovered a new class of molecules (EPI) which inhibit the AR by binding
to the N-terminal domain (NTD). The NTD interacts with transcriptional
machinery, and its presence is vital for a transcriptionally functional
receptor. We have previously shown that EPI-002 specifically inhibits
both full-length AR and constitutively active AR splice variants. The
efficacy of EPI-506, the prodrug of EPI-002, is currently being tested in
a Phase I/II clinical trial for CRPC. Here we propose novel resistance
mechanisms arising from sustained AR-NTD inhibition, with the goal of
preemptively developing backup compounds.

Methods: The androgen sensitive human PCa cell line LNCaP was used in all
experiments. A resistant cell line (LNCaP-EPIR) was generated by
passaging parental LNCaP cells weekly in media supplemented with EPI-002
beginning in September 2012. In vitro and in vivo studies using LNCaP and
LNCaP-EPIR cells were employed to confirm biological resistance. A human
affymetrix microarray identified possible resistance mechanisms and was
validated using qRT-PCR, western blot and functional studies. LNCaP and
LNCaP-EPIR cells were challenged with EPI-045, an EPI-analog predicted to
remain effective in the context of EPI-002 resistance.

Results: LNCaP-EPIR cells treated with 25 ÂµM EPI-002 displayed similar
growth rates to vehicle treatment, both in vitro and in vivo. Conversely,
parental LNCaP cells showed significant growth inhibition in response to
EPI-002. LNCaP-EPIR cells retained sensitivity to anti-androgens and AR
knock-down by targeted siRNA, implying functional AR remains essential
for growth. qRT-PCR data demonstrated that EPI-002 had reduced ability to
block AR mediated gene transcription. Interrogation of microarray data
revealed candidate genes (UGT2B family) which were specifically
upregulated in the resistant line, and may function to metabolize
EPI-002. Supporting this hypothesis EPI-045 which is predicted to be
resistant to UGT2B metabolism, was able to significantly inhibit
LNCaP-EPIR proliferation and AR transcriptional activity.

Conclusions: Taken together these data suggest an EPI-specific mechanism
of resistance, whereby EPI-002 is preferentially metabolized and removed
from the cell. LNCaP-EPIR cells remain dependent upon AR signalling, and
are sensitive to anti-androgens used clinically as well as a novel
EPI-analog. This work highlights the potential for combination or
sequential therapy in the context of drug-resistant CRPC.


