Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic drug combination prediction through drug differential
dependency network analysis.


In an effort to discover strategies which identify effective drug
combinations, we analyzed 39 of the 480 compounds screened in the Cancer
Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP) where combinations of two compounds
were tested against 860 cancer cell lines; this enabled a comparison of
the drug sensitivity of the combinations versus that of the individual
compounds. More than half of the drug combinations (n=21) did not
significantly improve the drug sensitivity, compared to individual
compounds alone. In fact, some of the combinations showed reduced drug
sensitivity. In EDDY-CTRP* analysis, the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) RNAseq data and CTRP compound response measurements were analyzed
to discover both 1) pathways enriched with differential dependencies
between sensitive and non-sensitive cell lines for each compound and 2)
the mediators of cell line response to a drug. A mediator is a gene in a
pathway that plays a significantly different role between sensitive and
non-sensitive conditions. The significance is assessed for either
essentiality, measured as a nodeâ€™s centrality change, or specificity,
measured as the difference in condition specific edges. These
drug-pathway-mediator connections are predicted to reveal crucial
molecular determinants of drug sensitivity that otherwise are hidden in
the complexities of the molecular networks of the cell (Speyer et al.,
PSB 22:497-508, 2017). We further investigated whether mediators
identified for single compounds could predict sensitivity to drug
combinations. This analysis revealed that if two single compounds share
the same specificity mediators, i.e. the genes with the most significant
re-wiring of gene dependencies between sensitive and non-sensitive cell
lines, combination of these two compounds correlate with improved
sensitivity. The converse was also found: compounds that do not share
mediators rarely show synergy. Further analysis and empirical testing of
predicted combinations promises to prioritize synergistic drug
combinations. We believe that this methodology may predict synergistic
drug combinations from cancer cell line drug screening data. Supported by
NIH U01CA168397.

*available at http://biocomputing.tgen.org/software/EDDY/CTRP


