Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCN5/WISP-2 is a negative regulator of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition and stemness in breast cancer.


Background and Objective: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in
women and a leading cause of cancer mortality in western countries. CCN5
(also known as Wnt-1-induced signaling protein-2 or WISP-2) is a
29-31-kDa matricellular protein that plays as a negative regulator of
breast carcinoma. Our previous studies had shown the importance of CCN5/
WISP-2 in the suppression of breast and pancreatic cancer progression
through the regulation of the invasive phenotypes. Considering the
previous report, our aim is to investigate whether human recombinant CCN5
inhibit pathobiological events like epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT), migration and stemness in triple negative breast cancer cells.

Methods: To investigate the negative impact of CCN5 on EMT and stemness
of TNBC, we performed several techniques like western blot, clonoogenic
assay, soft agar assay, sphere formation assay etc.

Results and Conclusions: The exposure of triple negative human breast
cancer cells (TNBC), MDA-MB-231 and HCC-70, to recombinant CCN5 (hrCCN5),
resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell-proliferation through the
induction of apoptotic cell death. The treatment of hrCCN5 regulates
various pathobiological events in breast cancer cells, such as
reprogramming the mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) followed by
reduction of stemness features as confirmed by sphere formation assay and
delaying in vitro migration. Finally, treatment with hrCCN5 in TNBC cells
significantly inhibited anchorage-dependent and independent growth of
TNBC. Collectively, CCN5â€™s control of cancer cell physiology indicates
that hrCCN5 has the potential of being used as a major therapeutic agent
against triple negative breast cancer.


