Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel antimetabolite, DFP-11207, with self-toxicity
protection and its promising preclinical and clinical profiles.


Background: For over 50 years, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) has played a
critical role in the systemic chemotherapy of various gastrointestinal
cancers including gastric, colorectal and pancreatic cancer which are the
leading causes of cancer death globally. Although systemic cytotoxics
such as 5-FU can modestly prolong overall survival in the adjuvant and
advanced settings, but at the cost of unpleasant toxicities. Therefore
better drug formulations are desirable.

Methods: To this end, we developed a new conceptual fluoropyrimidine,
DFP-11207 that is engineered to reduce toxicity without loss of antitumor
activity as well in addition to providing sustained concentrations of the
active anticancer moiety. DFP-11207 contains three components in one
formulation: 1-ethoxymethyl-5-fluorouracil (EM-FU) as a prodrug of 5-FU,
5-chloro-2,4-dihyroxypyridine (CDHP) as a potent inhibitor of 5-FU
degradation and cytrazinic acid (CTA) as a gastrointestinal regulator of
5-FU phosphorylation.

Results: In in vitro metabolism studies using cell-free extracts from
plasma, liver and tumors or intact tumor cells, DFP-11207 was rapidly
hydrolyzed to 3 components and subsequently EM-FU was specifically
converted to 5-FU by liver microsomes, and CDHP and CTA strongly
inhibited 5-FU degradation and phosphorylation, respectively. Following
consecutive oral administration to human tumor-bearing nude rats,
DFP-11207 attained favorable antitumor efficacy and long-sustained PK
profiles with lack of GI- and myelo-toxicities. Next, in investigational
clinical study in patients with solid tumors, 12 patients were treated at
8 unique dose levels of DFP-11207, ranging from 40 to 440mg/m2/day by
each 1 pt. MTD and RD of daily and 28-day consecutive DFP-11207 was found
to be 440 (n=2) and 330 mg/m2 (n=6), respectively. The main AEs were
nausea,, anemia, neutropenia, febrile neutropenia but these events were
very mild, and no thrombocytopenia was observed as expected. Furthermore,
review of the preliminary PK data, DFP-11207 at 330 mg/m2 resulted in a
desirable low but efficacious (~15- 30 ng/ml) steady-state plasma
concentration of 5-FU. Interestingly, some of patients heavily treated
with therapeutic drugs had a stable-disease for long periods.

Conclusion: Our preclinical and early clinical data with DFP-11207
suggest that itâ€™s a promising compound for the treatment of
gastrointestinal cancers and can overcome the shortcomings of all other
oral fluoropyrimidines.


