Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting glutamine addiction of PIK3CA mutant colorectal cancers.


Glutamine addiction is a major metabolic reprogramming event that occurs
in cancer cells. Many tumors exhibit oncogene-dependent addiction to
glutamine. PIK3CA, which encodes the p110α catalytic subunit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase α, is the most frequently mutated oncogene
in human cancers. However, whether PIK3CA mutations reprogram cancer
metabolism is an important unaddressed question. Here we show that
oncogenic PIK3CA mutations render colorectal cancers (CRCs) more
dependent on glutamine to growth. As a metabolite, glutamine is first
converted to glutamate by glutaminase (GLS) and then to α-ketoglutarate
(α-KG) by either a transaminase or a glutamate dehydrogenase. Calithera
Biosciences recently developed a potent GLS inhibitor called CB-839,
which is currently in phase I clinical trials in cancer patients. Using
isogenic colorectal cancer cell lines with either WT or mutant PIK3CA
allele knockout, we demonstrated that CRCs with PIK3CA mutations are more
sensitive to growth inhibition by CB-839. Remarkably, combination of
CB-839 with 5-FU induces regression xenograft tumors in PIK3CA mutant CRC
models, suggesting that this combinational therapy may be effective
approach to treat CRC patients whose tumors harbor PIK3CA mutations.
Mechanistically, mutant p110α up-regulates gene expression of glutamate
pyruvate transaminase 2 (GPT2) through an AKT-independent PDK1-RSK2-ATF4
signaling axis, thereby facilitating conversion of glutamate to α-KG.
Together, our data establish oncogenic PIK3CA mutations as a cause of
glutamine addiction in CRCs and that targeting glutamine metabolism may
be effective approach to treat CRCs with PIK3CA mutations.


