Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Desmin+pericyte subpopulations correlated with blood-tumor barrier
permeability in brain metastases of breast cancer.


Breast cancer brain metastases remain incurable. The blood-brain barrier
(BBB) is a multicellular dynamic structure regulating exchanges between
the blood and the central nervous system. As cancer cells colonize the
brain, the BBB evolves into a blood-tumor barrier (BTB). The BTB limits
compound penetration and therefore contributes to poor efficacy of
chemotherapy. While the BBB has been well characterized in developmental
and neurodegenerative disease studies, the BTB composition remains
unknown.

We have characterized the BTB in three model systems of brain metastasis
of breast cancer developed in the laboratory: a triple negative
(231-BR6), and two HER2 overexpressing (SUM190-BR3, JIMT-1-BR3) subtypes.
Using Texas Red dextran (TRD) as a marker of permeability and
quantitative immunofluorescence staining, we analyzed the cellular and
molecular composition of: 1) unaltered BBB vs. BTB, and 2) BTB in highly
permeable metastases vs. BTB in poorly permeable metastases.

The BTB developed from the BBB in a series of alterations, including a
neuroinflammatory reaction with astrogliosis, endothelial cell dilation,
increased VEGF, reduced astrocyte endfoot polarity, and decrease in
PDGFR+ pericytes. Only 10% of the metastatic lesions harbored a profound
TRD exudation, which correlated with paclitaxel efficacy. We hypothesized
that specific cellular and molecular changes account for the
heterogeneity and increase in TRD diffusion. When metastases with
relatively low- and high-TRD diffusion were compared, highly permeable
metastases correlated with an increased expression of desmin+ pericytes
in three models (231-BR6 p=0.0002; JIMT-1-BR3 p=0.004; SUM190-BR3
p=0.008) and a decrease in CD13+ pericytes in two model systems (231-BR6
p=0.014; JIMT-1-BR3 p=0.002). Decreased expression of laminin Î±2 in the
parenchymal basement membrane (231-BR6 p=0.001; JIMT-1-BR3 p=0.049;
SUM190-BR3 p=0.023) were associated with higher permeability. Desmin+
pericytes have been associated with pathological conditions such as
fibrosis and spinal cord injury. Seven over nine human craniotomy
specimens were positive for Desmin staining, validating clinically the
relevance of our findings. We subsequently hypothesized that the desmin+
pericyte subpopulation functionally contributes to increased
permeability. Desmin+ pericytes were produced in vitro by co-culturing
primary mouse pericytes with astrocytes. When desmin+ or CD13+ pericytes
were added to in vitro transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER)
models of the BBB, the desmin+ pericytes exhibited less resistance,
indicative of higher permeability. The data suggest that desmin+
pericytes may facilitate the permeability of the BTB. These studies show
that the BTB in brain metastasis model systems involves consistent
molecular changes. These data may identify new strategies to selectively
permeabilize the BTB and enhance chemotherapeutic efficacy.


