Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of circulating immune biomarkers of cervical disease
using proteome arrays.


Introduction: More than 260,000 women die of cervical cancer every year.
Screening methods have reduced the incidence of cervical cancer in
high-income countries, but detection continues to lag in low and middle
income countries (LMICs). IgG antibody (Ab) immunity to early (E) HPV
antigens (Ags) are potential biomarkers of disease progression. Since
HPV16 accounts for only ~50% of invasive cervical cancers, we developed
protein microarrays expressing the proteomes of 12 HPV types to detect
host IgG Abs to a broad spectrum of viral Ags to detect pre-invasive and
invasive cervical disease.

Methods: We developed custom HPV protein microarrays displaying the
proteomes of two low-risk HPV types (HPV6 and 11) and ten oncogenic
high-risk HPV types (HPV16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52 and 58).
Arrays were probed with serum samples obtained from women with invasive
cervical cancer (ICC; n=80), no or low-grade cervical disease (CIN 0/I;
n=60), and high-grade cervical dysplasia (CIN II/III; n=60). To identify
positive serologic responses, arrays were scanned and the signal
intensity of each protein spot was quantified and normalized. Visual
examination of diffused signal (ring) around each spot was performed and
the Ab response to each protein was scored on a scale from 0 to 5.

Results: To verify array quality and reproducibility, we confirmed high
protein expression levels for 98% (96/98) of the antigens printed and
high correlation (R â‰¥ 0.90) of protein expression signals between
different randomly selected arrays. Epitope expression was confirmed
using four commercial monoclonal Abs raised against HPV16 Ags. Host Abs
to at least one early antigen (E1, E2, E4, E6, or E7) were detected in
the sera of 31.2% and 43.3% of ICC and CINII/III patients, respectively,
compared with 11.7% of women with CIN 0/I. 73.1% of CINII/III cases
detected had Abs only to non-HPV16 Ags. Abs to E1, E2, E4, E6, and E7 Ags
were detected in 3.8%, 7.7%, 54%, 19%, and 31% of CINII/III versus 16%,
16%, 32%, 32%, and 40% of ICC cases that were positive. The
immunodominant Ags in women with CINII/III and ICC were E4 (54%) and E7
(40%), respectively. These results are consistent with the difference in
tissue expression levels of these proteins in these two disease stages.
This emphasizes the importance of broadening the scope of serological
detection to include non-HPV16 proteomes.

Conclusions: This study demonstrates that Abs against high risk HPV16 and
non-HPV16 serotypes are potential biomarkers for both the diagnosis of
cervical cancer and the differentiation between high grade and low-grade
pre-invasive cervical lesions. These results suggest that serology is a
potential minimally invasive tool for early detection of cervical cancer.
High-throughput immunoprofiling of HPV-associated cancers and
pre-invasive lesions may be informative for understanding the diversity
of host immunity and viral progression.


