Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rgs8 and Rgs16 are tumor suppressor genes in mouse pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma.


We have identified regulators of G protein signaling (Rgs8 and Rgs16) as
a new class of tumor suppressor genes in a mouse model of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). PDA is the 3rd leading cause of cancer
related deaths in the United States. Kras mutations (e.g. KrasG12D) are
associated with over 90% of human PDA and are an early event in the
multistep process leading to PDA. Kras can be activated by protein kinase
and G-Protein Coupled Receptor (GPCR) signaling. Rgs proteins regulate
GPCR signaling by accelerating the GTPase activity of Gq- and Gi class
alpha subunits. Activating alleles of Gq that are resistant to Rgs
inhibition are associated with PDA in humans. We found Rgs8 and Rgs16 are
in vivo reporters of Kras activity in pancreatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PanIN), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), and
PDA progression (DMM 8, 2015). Rgs8 and Rgs16 are expressed in PanIN and
IPMN, precursors of PDA, in KC mice (LSL-KrasG12D; p48::Cre). To test if
Rgs8-16 function as tumor suppressor genes, we crossed the Rgs8-16 double
knockout into KC (termed KCR8-16) mice. Compared to KC, PDA initiates
earlier, is more aggressive, and KCR8-16 mice die earlier. Our study
suggests that Rgs8 and Rgs16 control Kras-dependent PDA initiation and
progression.


