Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RARalpha interactome in breast cancer, the S100 calcium binding
protein A3 binds tothe retinoid receptor.


All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) is used in the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia. ATRA is endowed with promising anti-tumor
activity in other tumor types, including breast cancer. In breast cancer,
the anti-tumor activity of ATRA is mediated by the retinoid nuclear
receptor, RARα (EMBO Mol Med. 2015 7:950-972). RARα is a
ligand-dependent transcriptional factor, which is part of nuclear
complexes regulating the expression of target genes. To define the RARα
interactome in breast cancer cells we took a proteomic approach. We
performed mass-spectrometric analysis of RARα immuno-precipitates from
nuclear extracts of an ATRA-sensitive breast cancer cell line
over-expressing the receptor. We identified 30 proteins differentially
interacting with RARα in the absence/presence of ATRA. Three of these
proteins FABP5, HSP27 and S100A3 interact with RARα in the absence of
ATRA and their binding to the receptor is dramatically reduced upon
addition of the retinoid ligand. Binding of the three proteins to RARα
was validated by different types of immuno-precipitation experiments. We
focused our attention on S100A3, a calcium binding protein whose function
is largely unknown. Pull-down and Far-Western experiment indicated that
S100A3 binds directly to RARα. Binding is specific to this nuclear
receptor isotype as similar interactions with S100A3 are not observed
with RARβ, RARγ or RXRα. S100A3 over-expression inhibited RARα
ligand-dependent transcriptional activity, suggesting that the
calcium-binding protein is a co-repressor. We designed specific shRNAs
targeting S100A3 and we are in the process of evaluating their functional
effects on ATRA-dependent anti-tumor activity in retinoid sensitive
breast cancer cell lines.


