Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of recurrent high-affinity MHC class I restricted
neo-epitopes in neuroblastoma using ProTECT.


Introduction: T-cells are trained to differentiate between cell-surface
MHC-displayed peptide sequences from self- and non-self proteins and act
on the latter. The numerous mutations often associated with cancers can
occur in coding regions of the genome and modify the sequence of
wild-type proteins, potentially creating targets for immunotherapies. We
have developed an analysis pipeline ProTECT (Prediction of T-cell
Epitopes for Cancer Therapy) to identify and rank neo-epitopes in terms
of immunogenicity. Running ProTECT on a set of Neuroblastomas patients
predicted hotspot mutations that bind well to high-frequency MHC alleles
-- combinations that would potentially benefit a large subset of NBL
patients.

Methods: ProTECT accepts paired tumor and normal DNA sequencing fastq
files, and tumor RNA sequencing fastqs. Mutations are called using a
panel of callers [1-4], and are annotated[5] to identify coding
mutations. Prediction of self-MHC:mutated-peptides is carried out[6] and
the final binding predictions are ranked using an in-house algorithm.

Summary: Running ProTECT on 6 Neuroblastoma samples (NBL) from the TARGET
(Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments)
project revealed 2 well-known hotspot mutations in NBL (NRAS Q61K and ALK
R1275Q) that bind to common MHC alleles (A*01:01 and B*15:01
respectively). We also found 2 closely related mutations in ALK F1174L
and F1174I that are predicted to C*04:01 and C*07:02.

We carried out in-vitro refolding and crystallization assays [7] for the
five highest-ranking mutant NRAS and ALK R1275Q predictions. Properly
conformed MHC trimers were verified by a monodisperse peak after anion
exchange chromatography. SDS gel electrophoresis and Mass-spec confirmed
bound peptide for 4/5 tested predictions and 3 of these were used to set
up hanging-drop crystallization trials in various conditions. Positive
hits were obtained for one (AQDIYRASY::HLA-B*15:01) and the structure was
obtained at 1.7A. The structure suggested the binding of the 10-mer
(AQDIYRASYY) to the MHC and this was shown to bind better than the 9-mer
using Differential Scanning Fluorimetry[9].

We will run ProTECT on the remaining 100+ TARGET NBL trios, and on
relevant cohorts within The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We aim to reveal
clinically relevant hotspot-mutation:MHC pairs.

Conclusion: We have described a pipeline for identification and ranking
of therapeutically relevant neo-epitopes. We have predicted potential
targets for NBL that have been validated in-vitro.

References

1. Cibulskis, K. et al. Nat Biotech 31, 213-219 (2013)

2. Radenbaugh, A. J. et al. PLoS ONE 9, e111516 (2014)

3. Larson, D. E, et.al. Bioinformatics 28 (3) (2012)

4. Saunders, C. T, et.al Bioinformatics 28 (14) (2012)

5. Cingolani, P. et al. Fly 6, 80-92 (2012)

6. Vita, R. et al. Nucl. Acids Res. (2014)

7. Garboczi, D. N. et.al. PNAS 89 (8) (1992)

9. Lance M. Hellman et.al. J Imm Meth 432:95-101 (2016)


