Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glutamine deprivation-elicited sensitization of multiple myeloma
to venetoclax is associated with electron transport chain inhibition.


Cancer cells exhibit altered glucose and glutamine metabolism to sustain
survival and proliferation. Altered nutrient utilization also contributes
to the development of resistance to apoptosis via regulation of pro and
anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family members. We previously reported that
glutamine deprivation enhanced binding of BIM to BCL-2 thereby
sensitizing myeloma cell lines and patient samples to Venetoclax
(ABT-199). In this study we investigated the metabolites regulated by
glutamine withdrawal that contribute to enhanced BIM-BCL-2 association
and ABT-199 sensitivity. Metabolite profiling and isotope tracing flux
analyses of glutamine deprived myeloma cell lines revealed specific
reduction of TCA cycle metabolites including succinate, that were not
maintained by glucose present in the medium. Cellular bioenergetics end
points i.e. OCR and ATP were also suppressed upon glutamine withdrawal
correlating with a suppression of the TCA cycle and oxidative
phosphorylation. Supplementation of cell permeant
dimethyl-Î±-ketoglutarate (DMK), a TCA cycle metabolite derived from
glutaminolysis, to glutamine deprived cells reversed sensitivity to
ABT-199. This ability of DMK to reverse ABT-199 sensitization in
glutamine deprived cells was associated with a replenishment of TCA cycle
intermediates without restoration of ATP levels. Therefore, we sought to
further interrogate the TCA cycle and electron transport chain (ETC) in
facilitating glutamine withdrawal-associated ABT-199 sensitization. TCA
cycle metabolites are linked to mitochondrial respiration through ETC
complexes. Inhibition of ETC complexes I, II, III or V in myeloma cell
lines enforced similar effects as glutamine deprivation and sensitized
cells to ABT-199. Among all five complexes, complex II is more explicitly
linked with the TCA cycle through succinate dehydrogenase (SDH). SDH
facilitates the oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the TCA cycle
through its subunit SDHA, and transfers the released electrons to
ubiquinone via its SDHB, C and D subunits supporting the ETC activity of
complex II. Competitive inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase by 3-nitro
propionic acid (3NPA) induced BIM expression and sensitized myeloma cells
to ABT-199, similar to that detected upon glutamine deprivation. Our
observations thus narrow down a role for ETC inhibition in facilitating
ABT-199 sensitivity and underscore the importance of further
interrogation of ways to metabolically perturb and sensitize cancer cells
to the highly potent BH3 mimetic ABT-199.


