Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel liquid biopsy method for development of aptamer libraries
that bind blood plasma exosomes from breast cancer patients.


Improved technologies capable of characterizing system-wide changes
associated with complex diseases will be required to be able to detect
millions of proteins and their isoforms as well as multi-molecular
complexes. We present a method for developing aptamer libraries using
blood plasma exosomes that provides unprecedented system-wide coverage of
native exosomal complexes. To train a naïve aptamer library toward
cancer samples (positive selection), the library (~1013 biotinylated
ssODN species) was incubated with plasma from individual cancer patients
and aptamer-bound exosomes were isolated using polymer-based
precipitation. Negative selection was performed by contacting the aptamer
library with exosomes from donors without breast cancer and recovering
unbound aptamers from the supernatant. In all, 12 libraries trained
toward 12 individual breast cancer patients were used to probe additional
samples. Exosome-bound aptamers were identified and quantified by Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) to build highly accurate signatures for
cancer/healthy donor classification. Using these signatures, cancer
patients’ binding profiles were easily distinguishable from controls.
Interestingly, cancer-trained libraries did not distinguish any of the
negative control samples from each other, indicating that the selection
pressure for cancer was high and noise due to inherent inter-healthy
donor heterogeneity was minimal. Full validation studies are ongoing.
Aptamer libraries may ultimately be deployed as a minimally-invasive
diagnostic adjunct in breast and other cancers.


