Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A serum multiomics signature for enhancing prostate cancer
diagnosis and prognosis.


Introduction and Objective: Diagnosis of prostate cancer (CaP) has relied
on prostate specific antigen (PSA) level and digital rectal examination
(DRE) followed by prostate biopsies. These modalities have the potential
to yield false-positive and false-negative results for CaP. These
challenges prompted efforts to develop more specific body fluid based
assays including PCA3, TMPRSS2:ERG, K4csore and PHI tests. Further,
emerging data on significant racial differences of common CaP driver
genes, e.g., PTEN and ERG in CaP can lead to significant limitations in
biomarker performance. Thus, the goal of our study was to discover CaP
serum markers with equal performance among African American (AA) and
Caucasian American (CA) men. We employed proteomics, signal- and
structural lipidomics and metabolomics platforms to discover serum
biomarkers and evaluate their utility for diagnosis and prognosis of CaP
in AA and CA men.

Methods: Sera from 700 individuals were analyzed, which included AA and
CA CaP patients stratified for ERG oncoprotein expression by
immunohistochemistry (N=495). Sera from age-matched healthy control men
were also included (N=205) in this study. Quantitative global profiles of
lipidome, proteome and metabolome were analyzed by high resolution
MS-based technologies. Random forest and Interrogative BiologyÂ®
analytical platforms were used to identify analytes differentiating
healthy from CaP cases including clinical-pathologic data.

Results: The unbiased global profiling and integration of the data and
clinical-pathologic features have led to the identification of molecular
fingerprints differentiating cancer patients from healthy controls.
Specifically, three analytes in serum metabolome showed robust separation
between both AA and CA CaP and control groups. Elevated levels of
nicotinamide and eicosenoic acid and decreased levels of a
decanoylcarnitate alone have indicated strong separation between cases
and controls. Further inclusion of additional 9 analytes provided an
optimal multi-omics panel for distinguishing the combined cohort of AA
and CA cases vs. healthy controls.

Conclusions: The findings presented here support that an integrated
multiomics approach has the potential to define serum marker panels for
diagnosis of CaP in the context of racial diversity and molecular
annotation (e.g., ERG) of CaP. These promising data are undergoing
validation in additional patient cohorts.


