Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibiotic use and breast cancer risk: results from the Sister
Study.


Background: Regular antibiotic use is hypothesized to influence breast
cancer risk by a number of mechanisms including disruption of intestinal
microflora which plays a role in the conversion of food-based
phytochemicals into bioactive substances suggested to be protective
against cancer, and by influences on the immune system and inflammatory
response. Previous results have been mixed, and given the sparse and
conflicting data in epidemiologic literature, we analyzed the association
between regular antibiotic use and breast cancer risk, overall and by
different classes of antibiotics.

Methods: Regular antibiotic use, as characterized by class type and
number, duration, and indication for use, was evaluated for its
association with breast cancer risk among participants of the NIEHS
Sister Study, a prospective cohort of 50,884 US women aged 35-74 without
breast cancer who have had a sister diagnosed with breast cancer.

Results: 5,312 (10.4%) of women in the Sister Study reported ever having
regular antibiotic use (at least 3 times per week for 3 months in a row
or longer) with a median duration of 1.50 years (0.25 â€“ 53.8). 34% of
regular uses reported use greater than 2 years. Skin conditions including
acne and rosacea were the most common indications for use (6.02%). The
hazard ratio (HR) was 1.10 (0.99-1.27) for ever regular antibiotic use
and 1.40 (1.16-1.69) for greater than 2 years of regular use. Results are
suggestive of an increased risk among regular users who have only ever
used one class rather than more than one class of antibiotics. Adjusted
hazard ratios were 1.40 (0.99-1.99) for tetracyclines only, 1.45
(0.95-2.20) for penicillins only, 1.42 (0.94-2.15) for macrolides alone.
However, there does not appear to be an association between ever regular
use of more than one class of antibiotics and breast cancer. Furthermore,
there was no association between indications for ever regular use and
breast cancer risk, among all women reporting regular use of antibiotics,
regardless of class.

Conclusion: Overall, there is a suggestion that ever regular use of a
single class of antibiotics, but not use of more than one class, may be
associated with increased breast cancer risk. However, given that most
individuals reported only a single episode of regular antibiotic use for
a duration of less than 2 years; further exploration is warranted to rule
out effects of underlying indication for use or explore other possible
class specific-confounders.


