Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Schlafen 11 (SLFN11) induces lethal S-phase arrest in response to
DNA damage: A novel mechanism of how cancer cells are killed by DNA
damaging agents.


The putative DNA/RNA helicase, Schlafen 11 (SLFN11), is a recently
discovered determinant of sensitivity to DNA damaging agents such as
platinums, topoisomerase I and II inhibitors (camptothecins, etoposide,
doxorubicin), cisplatin, gemcitabine (1-3) and PARP inhibitors (olaparib,
talazoparib) (4). Because SLFN11 expression is suppressed in ~45% cancer
cell lines, SLFN11 inactivation is potentially one of the most prevalent
mechanisms of resistance to DNA damaging agents. However, the molecular
mechanisms of SLFN11 action in the DNA damage response have not been
solved. Using isogenic cell lines of SLFN11-knockout and
SLFN11-overexpression, we will show that SLFN11 binds to chromatin in
response to camptothecin within 2 hours. ChIP-seq analysis reveals that
SLFN11 preferentially binds to replication origins under camptothecin
treatment. We identify two helicases DHX9 and MCM3, which are involved in
replication and origin firing, as binding partners of SLFN11 by IP-MS
analysis. Cell cycle analyses revealed that SLFN11 inhibits replication
in response to camptothecin, which irreversibly lasts until apoptosis is
exerted. Notably, the S-phase arrest by SLFN11 is independent of
ATR-mediated S-phase checkpoint. Unscheduled origin firing by ATR
inhibition under camptothecin treatment is suppressed in the presence of
SLFN11. Hence, SLFN11 enforces irreversible S-phase arrest in damaged
cells possibly by inhibiting dormant origin firing and inactivating the
MCM helicase in conjunction with DXH9. We conclude that the irreversible
S-phase arrest by SLFN11 leads to cell death in response to DNA damaging
agents, which is a novel mechanism of how cancer cells are killed by DNA
damaging agents.

1.

Sousa FG, Matuo R, Tang SW, Rajapakse VN, Luna A, Sander C, et al.
Alterations of DNA repair genes in the NCI-60 cell lines and their
predictive value for anticancer drug activity. DNA Repair (Amst)
2015;28:107-15.

2.

Zoppoli G, Regairaz M, Leo E, Reinhold WC, Varma S, Ballestrero A, et al.
Putative DNA/RNA helicase Schlafen-11 (SLFN11) sensitizes cancer cells to
DNA-damaging agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109(37):15030-5.

3.

Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S,
et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 2012;483(7391):603-307.

4.

Murai J, Feng Y, Yu GK, Ru Y, Tang SW, Shen Y, et al. Resistance to PARP
inhibitors by SLFN11 inactivation can be overcome by ATR inhibition.
Oncotarget 2016.


