Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylomics profiling reveals epigenetically silenced HS3ST2
sensitize IL6 signaling and confers poor prognosis of ovarian cancer.


The attempts of target therapy in ovarian cancer therapy mostly fail.
There is a need of biomarkers for better patient stratification in
clinical trials. Epigenetics is a driving force for cancer development
and may serve as a molecular marker of disease. The present study was to
analyze the clinical relevance of methylation phenotypes and figure out
the mechanism in ovarian cancer. We integrated the analysis using public
dataset of epigenomics and transcriptomics, and our hospital-based
methylomic database and tissue arrays of patients diagnosed with
epithelial ovarian cancers (EOC). Bioinformatics results were verified
and validated in cell lines and clinical samples. From 25 genes, we
identified even genes, ADRA1A, CD248, HS3ST2, NEFH, IGSF21, POU4F2, and
TWIST1, of which hypermethylation was significantly related to the poor
overall survival (OS). The association of NEFH and HS3ST2
hypermethylation and poor 5-year OS was validated in our independent
dataset and TCGA database. The NEFH/HS3ST2 hypermethylated signature was
an independent risk factor for 5-year OS (adjusted Hazard ratio = 2.93,
95% confidence interval = 1.25 to 6.85, P = 0.013). In vitro experiment
re-expressing HS3ST2 repressed migration and invasion, and suppressed
IL-6 signaling pathways. The combination of hypermethylation of HS3ST2
and high expression of IL-6 confers the worse outcome. Our data suggested
that methylation of NEFH/HS3ST2 constituted a poor prognostic signature
of ovarian cancer. The sulfation status of proteoglycan modified by
HS3ST2 implicates an intrinsic sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to
IL-6, which shed a new light on the application of HS3ST2 as a biomarker
for personalized medicine of targeting IL-6.


