Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-9-5p expression in breast cancer correlates with hormone
receptor status and affects patients survival.


miR-9 (hsa-miR-9-5p, miR-9-5p) is a highly conserved microRNA (miRNA)
primarily expressed in the central nervous system. The three promoters of
miR-9 (miR-9-1 at 1q22, miR-9-2 at 5q14.3 and miR-9-3 at 15q26.1) are
embedded within CpG islands, and hypermethylation in at least one of
these regions has been reported in several tumor types, thus miR-9-5p has
been designated as an epigenetically regulated miRNA. However, only a
partial or none correlation between methylation status of miR-9 loci and
miR-9-5p expression has been demonstrated so far. Furthermore, the
expression levels of miR-9-5p resulted highly variable across different
carcinomas and conflicting evidences also exist about its functional role
within the tumor context. In light of this, we took the effort of
clarifying the role of miR-9-5p in primary breast cancer tissues and of
evaluating its potential as clinical relevant prognostic biomarker. We
analysed miR-9-5p expression and miR-9 promoters methylation status in
129 breast cancer cases and 12 normal breast tissues (NBTs), by qRT-PCR
and MSP respectively. Overall, miR-9-5p was increased in tumors compared
to NBTs (PmiR-9 (hsa-miR-9-5p, miR-9-5p) is a highly conserved microRNA
(miRNA) primarily expressed in the central nervous system. The three
promoters of miR-9 (miR-9-1 at 1q22, miR-9-2 at 5q14.3 and miR-9-3 at
15q26.1) are embedded within CpG islands, and hypermethylation in at
least one of these regions has been reported in several tumor types, thus
miR-9-5p has been designated as an epigenetically regulated miRNA.
However, only a partial or none correlation between methylation status of
miR-9 loci and miR-9-5p expression has been demonstrated so far.
Furthermore, the expression levels of miR-9-5p resulted highly variable
across different carcinomas and conflicting evidences also exist about
its functional role within the tumor context. In light of this, we took
the effort of clarifying the role of miR-9-5p in primary breast cancer
tissues and of evaluating its potential as clinical relevant prognostic
biomarker. We analysed miR-9-5p expression and miR-9 promoters
methylation status in 129 breast cancer cases and 12 normal breast
tissues (NBTs), by qRT-PCR and MSP respectively. Overall, miR-9-5p was
increased in tumors compared to NBTs (P<0.001). No significant
correlation between promoter methylation and miR-9-5p expression was
found either in tumors or in NBTs. Interestingly, miR-9-5p expression was
inversely correlated with ER and PgR positivity (P=0.004 and P=0.003,
respectively). Consistently, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) showed
the highest miR-9-5p levels and luminal subtype the lowest (P=0.04). The
analysis of the TCGA Breast Cancer dataset (n=256) confirmed our results
and further demonstrated that miR-9-5p was differentially expressed
between the two luminal subtypes (P=0.009) and HER2-amplified compared to
TNBCs (PmiR-9 (hsa-miR-9-5p, miR-9-5p) is a highly conserved microRNA
(miRNA) primarily expressed in the central nervous system. The three
promoters of miR-9 (miR-9-1 at 1q22, miR-9-2 at 5q14.3 and miR-9-3 at
15q26.1) are embedded within CpG islands, and hypermethylation in at
least one of these regions has been reported in several tumor types, thus
miR-9-5p has been designated as an epigenetically regulated miRNA.
However, only a partial or none correlation between methylation status of
miR-9 loci and miR-9-5p expression has been demonstrated so far.
Furthermore, the expression levels of miR-9-5p resulted highly variable
across different carcinomas and conflicting evidences also exist about
its functional role within the tumor context. In light of this, we took
the effort of clarifying the role of miR-9-5p in primary breast cancer
tissues and of evaluating its potential as clinical relevant prognostic
biomarker. We analysed miR-9-5p expression and miR-9 promoters
methylation status in 129 breast cancer cases and 12 normal breast
tissues (NBTs), by qRT-PCR and MSP respectively. Overall, miR-9-5p was
increased in tumors compared to NBTs (P<0.001). No significant
correlation between promoter methylation and miR-9-5p expression was
found either in tumors or in NBTs. Interestingly, miR-9-5p expression was
inversely correlated with ER and PgR positivity (P=0.004 and P=0.003,
respectively). Consistently, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) showed
the highest miR-9-5p levels and luminal subtype the lowest (P=0.04). The
analysis of the TCGA Breast Cancer dataset (n=256) confirmed our results
and further demonstrated that miR-9-5p was differentially expressed
between the two luminal subtypes (P=0.009) and HER2-amplified compared to
TNBCs (P<0.0001). In Univariable Cox regression analysis miR-9-5p
expression was significantly associated with higher risk of death
(P=0.023). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis exploring the putative interactions
among miR-9-5p, ER and PgR upstream and downstream regulators suggested a
regulatory loop by which miR-9-5p is induced by steroid hormone receptor
and acts within hormone-receptor regulated pathways. Our data suggest
miR-9-5p may help refine the molecular classification of breast cancer
subtypes and provide additional prognostic information.


