Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TP73's regulation and expression in human cancer cell lines.


TP73 is the homologue of the master tumor suppressor TP53. It is involved
in cellular responses to stress and development. The TP73 gene encodes
two different proteins, TAp73 and ΔNp73 and maps to a region on
chromosome 1p36 that is frequently deleted in neuroblastoma and other
tumors, and thought to contain multiple tumor suppressor genes. However,
the analysis of p73-knockout mice yielded conflicting results with
respect to tumor suppression. World-wide efforts in sequencing the TP73
gene in patient tumor samples have not provided evidence for genetic
alterations as a common cause of p73 inactivation in human cancer. The
role of TP73 in tumorigenesis has remained elusive to date. In this
study, we isolated two stem cell lines from normal young and old human
liver tissues and determined TP73 expression in human breast cancer cell
lines (MCF7 & MDA321), human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines
(HepG2, SNU398, SNU449 & SNU475), neuroblastoma cell lines (IMR32 &
SK-N-SH), normal liver stem cell, non-cancerous Li-Fraumeni Syndrome
(LFS) skin fibroblasts cells and normal skin fibroblasts. Results show
that TAp73 only expresses in cancer cell lines. Moreover, when HepG2 and
MDA231 were treated with paclitaxel, a cytoskeletal drug that targets
tubulin, TAp73 expression was drastically down-regulated in HepG2 cells
and abrogated in MDA231 cells at 1 to 5 µmol/L concentrations.
Furthermore, ChIP assay results demonstrated that TP53 and CTCF (a
chromosomal networking protein CCCTC binding factor) bind to TP73
promoter and regulate TP73 expression. Our observation may prove
significant for the development of future therapeutic and diagnostic
applications.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.


