Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the SF3B1 inhibitor E7107 in triple
negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are the most aggressive subtype of
breast cancer and account for roughly 15% of human breast cancers. No
effective targeted therapies are currently available against these
tumors, at least in part due to their genetic and epigenetic
heterogeneity. Yet, TNBCs are commonly enriched for cells arrested in a
progenitor-like state. We therefore performed a genome-wide siRNA
lethality screen to identify selective TNBC dependencies associated with
this particular phenotype in vitro. These studies led to the
identification of several spliceosome genes, including the core splicing
factor SF3B1, as selectively and recurrently essential for
progenitor-like (or basal-A) TNBC cell lines. On this basis, we examined
the antitumor effect of E7107, a clinically tested SF3B1 inhibitor, on
multiple TNBC cell lines. In vitro, treatment with E7107 for 24-48 hr
selectively killed basal-A cell lines relative to differentiated luminal
cell lines, decreasing viability by ≈40% or more in 5 of 6 basal-A
lines tested. E7107-treated cells appeared to die of apoptosis based on
immunoblotting for multiple apoptotic markers. In mice, E7107 (5 mg/kg
i.v. for 4 consecutive days) suppressed the growth of preformed tumors by
≈80% and ≈50% in 2 different cell-line-derived xenograft models and
was remarkably well-tolerated at this dose. Of note, tumor response in
vivo closely mirrored cell sensitivity in vitro, suggesting that in vitro
analysis provides a fair estimate of TNBC response to E7107 in mice.
Amongst 2 additional patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models tested, E7107
inhibited tumor growth by ≈50% in one model. Thus, E7107 was
therapeutically active against 3 of 4 xenograft models tested.
Preliminary mechanistic studies in vitro and in vivo pointed to MCL1
inactivation as a major mechanism of action of E7107 in top responders.
Together, these data suggest that the spliceosome is a druggable target
in TNBC, and that E7107 or similar SF3B1 inhibitors could be effective in
a TNBC subset that needs to be further defined.


