Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical and phase-2 clinical study of valproic acid
administered in combination with cisplatin and cetuximab in
recurrent/metastatic head and neck cancer.


Recurrent metastatic (R/M) squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
(SCCHN) is a devastating malignancy with a poor prognosis and the
combination of cisplatin (CDDP) and cetuximab (CX) is one of the gold
standard for treatment. However, this therapy is often associated with
high toxicity and resistance, suggesting that the concomitant use of
novel compounds represents a critical strategy to improve treatment
results. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) enhance the activity of
several anticancer drugs including CDDP and anti-Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor (EGFR) compounds. EGFR overexpression is involved in
chemotherapy resistance and recently it has been demonstrated that EGFR
nuclear localization represents one of the mechanism of resistance to
both CDDP and CX. Our group have demonstrated that HDACi synergize with
anti-EGFR agents by modulating ErbB receptors expression including EGFR.
In this study we evaluated the capability of Valproic acid (VPA), a
generic low-cost anticonvulsivant drug with HDACi activity, to enhance
the efficacy of CDDP-CX association in SCCHN cells with different EGFR
basal expression and genetic backgrounds. We showed, by the calculation
of combination indexes, an antiproliferative synergistic interaction
between equipotent doses of VPA and CDDP-CX in CAL27 and FaDu SCCHIN
cells using either simultaneous or sequential (with 24 h delay) schedule
of administration. Notably, this effect was not observed in immortalized
human fibroblasts BJ-hTERT, suggesting a selective effect toward tumor
cells. Next, we confirmed synergistic interaction by testing clinically
achievable concentrations of VPA/ CDDP-CX combination also on CAL27 and
FaDu 3D spheroid cultures, showing inhibition of first- and
second-generation spheroids formation by triple combination, compared to
single agent treatments. Moreover we demonstrated that VPA was able to
down-regulate EGFR and to prevent EGFR nuclear translocation induced by
CDDP and CCDDP/CX combination, thus preventing the activation of DNA
repair and survival pathways. Indeed, we showed that VPA was able to
increase DNA damage and apoptosis induced by CDDP-CX combination,
evaluated by gamma H2AX foci and annexin V-FITC assay, respectively. In
vivo preclinical study is currently ongoing. All together these data
represent the rationale of the ongoing V-CHANCE phase-2 clinical trial
evaluating VPA/ CDDP-CX combination in R/M SCCHN patients. We are also
currently investigating pharmacodynamics/predictive biomarkers of
treatment efficacy/resistance on patientâ€™s samples.


