Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacitidine on 3D
chromatin structure measured by Hi-C.


Therapies targeting epigenetic modifiers such as the DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor, 5-azacytidine (Aza), are used in
treating hematologic malignancies and also show promising results in
subsets of solid tumors. The molecular mechanisms for these results,
however, are not fully understood. Nonetheless, a number of clinical
studies using combinations of epigenetic therapies plus chemo or
immunotherapy to enhance the tumor response are ongoing. HCT-116, a colon
cancer cell line genetically defined by microsatellite instability (MSI),
resulting in a highly mutated, yet primarily diploid genome, has been
routinely used to study epigenetic mechanisms and response to DNMT
inhibition. In a previous study, we integrated a combination of data
types including DNA methylation, DNA accessibility, histone modifications
and transcriptomic data that revealed strong correlations between
epigenomic changes and gene expression following Aza treatment. However,
for some genes, we could not predict expression changes using these
unidimensional, region-specific analysis methods. As others have
demonstrated, genes do not work as single, isolated units, but rather
interact with distal regulatory elements. These regulatory elements,
often several Mb away can control gene expression through physical
interactions such as bending and looping. We reason that in addition to
direct demethylation of the immediate regulatory elements within the
gene, Aza treatment can affect long-range chromosomal communications. In
order to further understand the chromatin remodeling effect of Aza
treatment, we performed high resolution genome-wide chromosome
conformation capture (Hi-C) followed by NGS. HCT-116 cells were treated
with DMSO or 1 Î¼M Aza for 42 and 96 hours. Hi-C and RNA-Seq data was
analyzed and integrated with other datatypes. The results showed that AZA
treatment alters topologically associating domains (TAD), with the
formation of new TAD boundaries and disappearance of others. The genome
was then separated into 25K base pair consecutive bins, with each bin
marked as type A (active) or type B (inactive). We observed bin switching
following AZA treatment and differential loop formations (e.g.
promoter-enhancer). Bins that switched from B to A at both time points
were found enriched in genes that are related to acute phase response,
interferon pathway, and cancer including PI3KCB, DDX58, CD274 and CDKN2A.
Our findings using Hi-C were found to be in agreement with previous
results using alternative experimental methods, which identified Aza and
CTCF as the top upstream regulators of these genes. Our data also
suggests that overall changes in 3D chromatin activities measured by Hi-C
could be a better predictor of transcriptional regulation compared to
H2K27me3 and H3K4me3 alone, particularly in situations where there are no
significant changes in those marks but where changes in gene expression
exist.


