Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The dopamine (DA) D3 receptor antagonists (PG01037, NGB2904,
SB-277011A, and U99194) significantly attenuate ABCG2-mediated multidrug
resistance .


ATP-binding family G2 (ABCG2) transporters are known to produce multidrug
resistance (MDR) and limit successful cancer chemotherapy. Using
molecular modeling, we obtained data indicating that highly potent and
selective dopamine (DA) D3 receptor antagonists had significant docking
scores for the active site of the ABCG2 transporter. In this in vitro
study, we determined the effect of the D3 receptor antagonists (PG01037,
NGB2904, SB-277011A, and U99194) on MDR resulting from the overexpression
of ABCG2 transporters. The D3 receptor antagonists alone did not
significantly affect the viability of HEK293/ABCG2, H460/MX-20, S1-M1-80
or A549-MX-10 cells, which overexpress ABCG2 transporters. However, the
D3 receptor antagonists (PG01037, NGB2904, SB-277011A, and U99194)
significantly increased the efficacy of the anticancer drugs mitoxantrone
and doxorubicin in the above mentioned cell lines. Efflux studies
indicated that both PG01037 and NGB2904 significantly decreased the
efflux of rhodamine 123 from H460-MX20 cells. Interestingly, PG01037 and
NGB2904 significantly decreased the expression levels of the ABCG2
protein levels as shown by immunocytochemical and Western blot analysis.
This suggests that D3 antagonists inhibit both function and expression of
ABCG2 transporters at relevant non-toxic concentrations. In conclusion,
our in vitro results indicate that PG01037, NGB2904, SB-277011A, and
U99194 reverse resistance to mitoxantrone and doxorubicin mediated by
overexpression of ABCG2 transporters. Further mechanistic and animal
studies are warranted to establish the clinical use of D3 receptor
antagonists in reversing ABCG2-mediated MDR.


