Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone deacetylase-1 promotes urothelial cell migration and
invasion by modulating p63-pMLC2 signaling.


Background: Altered expression of histone deacetylases (HDAC) and p63
transcription factor are associated with poor prognosis in invasive
urothelial tumors. The current study focused on HDAC-evoked epigenetic
modification of p63 and its downstream effects.

Methods: Primary human urothelial cells (HUC) and urothelial cancer cell
lines (HT1376, T24, TCCSUP) were cultured either on human bladder
fibroblast-embedded collagen-I to establish 3D-organotypic rafts or as
2D-monolayers. Scratch wound assay was used to study the rate of cell
migration before studying the differential mRNA and protein expressions
of HDAC1,2,3, p63, p21, p27, Rho-kinase1 (ROCK1), 14-3-3 eta and myosin
light chain-2 (MLC2).

Results: T24 and TCCSUP cells exhibited invasive incidents on
3D-organotypic rafts, which coincided with their enhanced cell migration
capabilities. qPCR and Western blotting analysis demonstrated enhanced
expression of HDAC1, HDAC3, p27, p-p27-Thr157 and 14-3-3 eta alongside
depleted levels of p63, ROCK1, pMLC2-Ser19, pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 and p21 in
invasive cells compared to normal (N=5, pResults: T24 and TCCSUP cells
exhibited invasive incidents on 3D-organotypic rafts, which coincided
with their enhanced cell migration capabilities. qPCR and Western
blotting analysis demonstrated enhanced expression of HDAC1, HDAC3, p27,
p-p27-Thr157 and 14-3-3 eta alongside depleted levels of p63, ROCK1,
pMLC2-Ser19, pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 and p21 in invasive cells compared to
normal (N=5, p<0.05). These results coincided with the loss of stress
fiber formations visualized by immunofluorescence detection of F-actin in
invasive cells indicating that cytoskeletal reorganization may be pivotal
for cell migration. Treatment with HDAC inhibitors (vorinostat (pan) and
entinostat (HDAC1, 3)) attenuated the number of invasive incidents in T24
and TCCSUP cells, restored expression of p63, p21, pMLC2-Ser19,
pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 (N=5, pResults: T24 and TCCSUP cells exhibited invasive
incidents on 3D-organotypic rafts, which coincided with their enhanced
cell migration capabilities. qPCR and Western blotting analysis
demonstrated enhanced expression of HDAC1, HDAC3, p27, p-p27-Thr157 and
14-3-3 eta alongside depleted levels of p63, ROCK1, pMLC2-Ser19,
pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 and p21 in invasive cells compared to normal (N=5,
p<0.05). These results coincided with the loss of stress fiber formations
visualized by immunofluorescence detection of F-actin in invasive cells
indicating that cytoskeletal reorganization may be pivotal for cell
migration. Treatment with HDAC inhibitors (vorinostat (pan) and
entinostat (HDAC1, 3)) attenuated the number of invasive incidents in T24
and TCCSUP cells, restored expression of p63, p21, pMLC2-Ser19,
pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 (N=5, p<0.05), and normalized expression of 14-3-3 eta
and p-p27-Thr157. Reappearance of stress fiber formations traversing
across the cell after HDAC inhibitor treatments was supportive of these
results, while nuclear enrichment of p27 indicated its enhanced
cytoplasm-to-nuclear trafficking. Transient knockdown of HDAC1 in the
invasive population mimicked the effect of HDAC inhibitors (N=5,
pResults: T24 and TCCSUP cells exhibited invasive incidents on
3D-organotypic rafts, which coincided with their enhanced cell migration
capabilities. qPCR and Western blotting analysis demonstrated enhanced
expression of HDAC1, HDAC3, p27, p-p27-Thr157 and 14-3-3 eta alongside
depleted levels of p63, ROCK1, pMLC2-Ser19, pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 and p21 in
invasive cells compared to normal (N=5, p<0.05). These results coincided
with the loss of stress fiber formations visualized by immunofluorescence
detection of F-actin in invasive cells indicating that cytoskeletal
reorganization may be pivotal for cell migration. Treatment with HDAC
inhibitors (vorinostat (pan) and entinostat (HDAC1, 3)) attenuated the
number of invasive incidents in T24 and TCCSUP cells, restored expression
of p63, p21, pMLC2-Ser19, pMLC2-Thr18-Ser19 (N=5, p<0.05), and normalized
expression of 14-3-3 eta and p-p27-Thr157. Reappearance of stress fiber
formations traversing across the cell after HDAC inhibitor treatments was
supportive of these results, while nuclear enrichment of p27 indicated
its enhanced cytoplasm-to-nuclear trafficking. Transient knockdown of
HDAC1 in the invasive population mimicked the effect of HDAC inhibitors
(N=5, p<0.05), while successive depletion of p63 appeared to abolish the
effects of HDAC1 knockdown by upregulating 14-3-3 eta and depleting ROCK1
expression, respectively.

Conclusions: Inhibition of HDAC1 activity attenuates urothelial cell
migration and invasion by restoring the expression of p63 which, (a)
upregulates the expression and activity of ROCK1, and (b) suppresses the
expression of 14-3-3 eta, thereby alleviating the cytoplasmic p27 levels
and facilitating the pMLC2-mediated cytoskeletal remodeling. These
findings provide further support and mechanistic evidence for the
potential use of HDAC inhibitors to treat invasive/poor-prognosis bladder
cancer.


