Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel quinoxaline-isoselenourea targeting
STAT3 pathway as a potential melanoma therapeutic.


The prognosis for patients with metastatic melanoma remains very poor.
Constitutive STAT3 activation has been correlated to larger tumor size,
metastasis, acquired resistance against vemurafenib (PLX-4032), and poor
patient survival suggesting its potential as a molecular target. We
recently designed a series of isoseleno- and isothio-urea derivatives of
several biologically active heterocyclic scaffolds. The cytotoxic effects
of lead isoseleno-/isothio-urea derivatives (compounds 1/3) were studied
in a panel of five melanoma cell lines, including B-RAFV600E mutant and
wild type (WT) cells. Compound 1 (IC50 range 0.8-3.8 µM) showed lower
IC50 values than 3 (IC50 range 8.1-38.7 µM) and the mutant B-RAF
specific inhibitor PLX-4032 (IC50 range 0.4->50 µM), especially at
shorter treatment time (24 h). These effects are long-lasting since
melanoma cells did not recover their proliferative potential after 14
days of the treatment. In addition, we confirmed that compound 1 induces
cell death by apoptosis using Live and Dead, Annexin V and Caspase3/7
apoptosis assays. Furthermore, compound 1 reduces protein levels of STAT3
and its phosphorylation, as well as decreases the expression of STAT3
regulated genes involved in survival and metastasis such as survivin and
c-myc. Compound 1 also upregulates the cell cycle inhibitor p21. Docking
studies further revealed the favorable binding of 1 with SH2 domain of
STAT3 suggesting its activity through STAT3 inhibition. Taken together,
our results suggest that compound 1 induces apoptosis by means of the
inhibition of STAT3 pathway to non-specifically target both B-RAF mutant
and WT melanoma cells with much better cytotoxicity than the current
therapy PLX-4032.


