Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RS-41, a multi-targeted kinase inhibitor, induces cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in p53 mutant and wild type models of upper
gastrointestinal cancers.


Introduction: Upper Gastrointestinal Cancers (UGCs) are a leading cause
of cancer-related mortality and account for approximately 1.1 million
deaths worldwide. UGCs respond poorly to conventional chemotherapy due to
constitutive over activity of multiple oncogenic signaling mechanisms,
including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), ERBB2/HER-2,
Aurora kinases, and JAK-STAT pathways. In addition, presence of mutant
P53 further imparts resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic agents.
Therefore, novel small molecule inhibitors that target multiple kinases
associated with oncogenic

progression could pave the way for improved chemotherapy and better
therapeutic outcomes. In this study, we characterized the anticancer
activity of RS-41, an investigational
4-phenylbenzamidopyrrolo[2,3-d]-pyrimidin-4-amine multi-kinase inhibitor,
in P53 mutant and wild type models of UGC.

Methods: Target kinase inhibition and selectivity screening assays were
performed to determine potency and selectivity of kinase inhibition for
RS-41. In addition, MTT-cell viability assay, clonogenic cell survival
assay, cell cycle analyses, and western blot analyses were done to
evaluated the effect of RS-41 treatment on cell viability, survival, cell
cycle progression, and expression of apoptotic markers in P53 mutant
(FLO-1) and P53 wild type (AGS) UGC cells, respectively.

Results: The kinase selectivity screening assay characterized RS-41 for
its selectivity against a panel of 90 human kinases. The kinase screening
analyses showed that RS-41 selectively inhibits AURKA
(IC50-0.96±0.03µM), JAK2 (IC50-1.21±0.17µM), and EGFR
(IC50-5.92±0.75µM) kinases, respectively. The cell viability data
indicate that treatment with RS-41 mediates significant (P≤0.05)
inhibition of FLO-1 and AGS UGC cell viability. The clonogenic cell
survival data showed that treatment with RS-41 for 24 hrs. suppresses
subsequent formation of colonies in both FLO-1 and AGS UGC cells. The
cell cycle data

exhibited a marked increase (P≤0.05) in the percentage of FLO-1 and AGS
cells in the sub-G1-phase (cell death) after treatment with RS-41 for 24
and 72 hrs., respectively. The western blotting data further confirmed
induction of apoptosis in FLO-1 and AGS cells as evidenced by an increase
in expression of various markers of apoptosis (P73/P53, cleaved PARP,
and/or cleaved caspase 3) following treatment with RS-41 for 24 and 72
hrs.

Conclusions: Our in vitro data indicate that inhibition of various
oncogenic kinases with RS-41 is an effective therapeutic strategy for
inducing apoptosis in both P53 mutant and wild type UGC cells. Our study
suggests that RS-41 is a promising multi-kinase inhibitor with a
potential to further enhance chemotherapeutic options for treatment of
UGC.


