Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel therapeutic targets in head and neck cancer.


HNSCC is 6th most common malignancy in the world. Despite advances in
diagnosis and treatment, the survival rates remain low due to frequent
recurrences the biology of which remains unclear. Using functional
genomic technologies, we identified new therapeutic targets for
metastatic disease in HNSCC. Whole genome shRNA screens were conducted in
matched sets of cell lines derived from primary tumors and respective
metastatic sites, identifying genes essential for cell survival only
following metastasis. To test if knockdown of selected targets inhibits
metastasis in a therapeutic setting, we established orthotropic model of
HNSCC that metastasize to lymph nodes in the mouse. Components of Notch
pathway were identified as essential for survival of cells derived from
metastatic sites. Whole exome sequencing identified a novel mutation in
one of the EGF domains of Notch3 that was acquired only in the metastatic
line. Utilizing CRISPR methodology, we established that “fixing” the
mutation results in reversal of metastatic phenotype of the cells, making
them Notch independent similar to their primary tumor counterparts.
Mutations in EGF domains have been reported to influence interaction with
specific ligands, dictating which ligand can activate Notch signaling.
Our data indicate that a distinct set of target genes is induced upon
interaction between Notch3 and Jag2 ligand. Furthermore, our results
indicate that suppression of Notch3 improves survival in mice bearing
orthotropic tumors derived from the metastatic HNSCC lines. Overall, our
data demonstrate that metastatic cells from head and neck tumors acquire
dependency on Notch3 signaling. Novel treatments targeting components of
this pathway may prove effective in targeting metastatic cells alone or
in combination with conventional therapies.


