Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of efficacy and immune response to PD1 checkpoint
inhibition in human immune-reconstituted mice using patient-derived
xenograft models.


Background: Human Immune-reconstituted Mice, generated by transplanting
pre-validated human CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) into
immune-compromised mice, are extremely useful in basic and applied human
disease research. Many cancer therapies, including immune checkpoint
inhibitors such as the anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody, rely on an intact
immune system to release immunosuppression and destroy cancer cells.

Material and methods: We evaluated the effects of anti-PD-1 in humanized
mice in donor cohorts utilizing the cancer matrix of 5 HSC donor cohorts
of humanized animals with PDX models from 7 small cell lung cancer
(SCLC). We also tested anti-PD-1 in 1 triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) model and in 1 MDA-MB-231 study.

Results: Here, we show that HSC derived human immune cell engraftment
does not have significant effects on patient derived xenograft (PDX)
tumor growth. However, humanization is required for anti-tumor response
to anti-PD-1. In MDA-MB-231 study, tumors showed complete regression
after the first round of treatment. Re-engraftment of same animals with
MDA-MB-231 cells showed minor tumor growth before complete regression
again. Aged match control na√Øve animals engrafted with same cells showed
normal tumor growth. In SCLC studies anti-PD-1 efficacy varied between
the models, which clearly underscores the inherent donor to donor
variability in this humanized model system. Tumors from these studies
were then analyzed to determine target engagement of anti-PD-1, tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) characterization and histology comparing
anti-PD-1 responders vs non-responders. As expected, in this study, we
demonstrate humanization of the animals is necessary to evaluate the
efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy and can elicit an immunotherapy mediated
anti-tumor effect.

Conclusion: Here we demonstrate the development of humanized mouse
studies with ability to run multi point analysis to determine the outcome
of treatment.


