Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capsaicin suppresses pancreatic tumor growth by inhibiting tumor
cell metabolism.


Tumor cell metabolism is considered to be a hallmark of tumorigenic
progression. Pancreatic cancer cells are shown to develop addiction
towards the metabolic pathways like glycolysis and mitochondrial
respiration to meet energy demands. Pancreatic tumor cells predominantly
utilize cytosolic aerobic glycolysis for energy production. In our
previous studies, we have reported that capsaicin treatment inhibits the
survival of AsPC-1 and BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cell lines. In this
study, we evaluated the effect of capsaicin on glycolysis and
mitochondrial respiration in pancreatic cancer cells. Our results showed
that capsaicin treatment reduced the extra-cellular acidification rate
(glycolysis) and oxygen consumption rate (mitochondrial respiration) in
AsPC-1 and BxPC-3 cells in a concentration-dependent manner after 24h of
treatment. Capsaicin treatment caused 86% and 55% down-regulation of
glycolysis process in AsPC-1and BxPC-3 cells respectively. Our results
also indicate the inhibition of glycolytic capacity and glycolytic
reserve by capsaicin treatment indicating the potential of capsaicin to
inhibit glycolysis. In addition, capsaicin treatment reduced 98% of basal
oxygen consumption rate and ATP production in AsPC-1 cells. Furthermore,
capsaicin treatment inhibited spare respiratory capacity & proton leak in
a concentration dependent manner in AsPC-1 cells. Treatment of AsPC-1 and
BxPC-3 with capsaicin for 48h also inhibited the expression of LDH-A and
its upstream regulators such as HIF-1Î±, pSTAT3 (Y705) and EGFR as
evaluated by Western blot. Our study thus indicate that capsaicin
suppresses pancreatic tumor growth by down-regulating glycolysis and
mitochondrial respiration. Further mechanistic studies are in progress.
[Supported in part by R01 grant CA129038, awarded to (S.K.S.) by the
National Cancer Institute].


