Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation regulates HEY1 expression in glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) remains one of the most lethal and
difficult-to-treat cancers of the central nervous system despite the
existence of multi-modal therapeutic approaches. The poor prognosis in
GBM patients is due in part to its resistance to available treatments,
which calls for identifying novel molecular therapeutic targets. In this
study, we identified an interesting biomarker, Hairy/Enhancer-Of-Split
related with YRPW Motif (HEY1), a mediator of Notch signaling, which
contributes to the pathogenesis of GBM. Datamining studies and our
immunohistochemistry and immunoblot analysis showed that HEY1 is highly
expressed in GBM patient specimens. Recent studies indicate that
methylation status may control the expression of cancer phenotype. Our
studies using bisulphite sequencing on the patient samples showed that
HEY1 promoter was hypermethylated in the normal brain when compared to
GBM specimens. Treatment on the 4910 and 5310 xenograft cell lines with
sodium butyrate (NaB) greatly decreased HEY1 expression owing to its
promoter hypermethylation with a concomitant increase in DNMT1 expression
confirming that promoter methylation regulate the HEY1 expression in GBM.
NaB treatment also induced cell apoptosis as evaluated by flow cytometric
analysis. Silencing HEY1 reduced invasion, migration and proliferation in
4910 and 5310 cells. Further, immunoblot and q-PCR analysis demonstrated
the existence of a potential positive regulatory loop between HEY1 and
p53. Additionally, DNA microarrays with HEY1 recombinant protein
demonstrated good correlation with p53 and provided various bonafide
targets of HEY1. Collectively, these studies suggest HEY1 as an important
predictive marker for GBM, thus indicating a potential target for future
GBM therapy.


