Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolic flux analysis reveals targets to sensitize
chemoresistance in acute myeloid leukemia induced by mesenchymal stromal
cell-derived exosomes.


The tumor microenvironment has a pleiotropic role in supporting cancer
cell growth, metastasis and drug resistance. Exosomes from mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSC) were found to regulate metabolism of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) cells that led to a chemoresistant phenotype. Exosomes
carry a host of proteins, nucleotides and metabolites that can induce
metabolic reprogramming recipient cells via direct supply of metabolite
cargo or through signaling. We utilized 13C tracer techniques and two
metabolic flux analysis techniques to reveal the mechanism of metabolic
reprogramming induced by MSC-derived exosomes. First, 13C metabolic flux
analysis was used to quantify intracellular fluxes of central carbon,
amino acids and fatty acid metabolism in AML cells cultured with and
without exosomes in media with 13C substrates. Second, we employed a
novel technique, exosome-mediated metabolic flux analysis (Exo-MFA), to
estimate direct support provided by metabolite supply from exosome cargo
by introducing 13C-labeled exosomes. The combined analysis dissected the
metabolite supply from exosome cargo from the overall reprogramming of
metabolic pathways due to exosomes. Our results revealed key metabolic
pathways that could be targeted to inhibit exosome-induced reprogramming
to reverse the chemoresistant phenotype.


