Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Replication obstacles formed within common fragile sites under
replication stress are targeted by the global genomic nucleotide excision
repair pathway.


CFS’s are genomic loci present in higher vertebrates that are
particularly sensitive to various forms of replication stress and suffer
from increased breakage and rearrangements in tumors. They have rather
enigmatic evolutionary role and employ various DNA repair and checkpoint
mechanisms promoting their stability. We used an original approach for
identification of CFS’s associated factors based on DNA probe designed
to match the high flexibility island sequences typically present in some
of the highly expressed CFS’s. This probe was used as affinity bait for
fishing specifically enriched proteins which were further identified
using SILAC and quantitative mass spectrometry. Among already known
CFS’s stabilizers we identified also hits so far not implicated in
CFS’s maintenance. Interestingly, most of these novel hits are
components of the global genomic nucleotide excision repair pathway
(GG-NER). Knock down-based functional experiments revealed that GG-NER
works most likely as an important trigger turning the CFS’s-associated
replication obstacles into DNA lesion further recognized by the
ATR-promoted cellular checkpoint which function is to block an escape of
DNA replication intermediates into mitosis and the next cell generation.
Work was supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic 13-17555S,
Czech-BioImaging project (LM2015062 funded by MEYS, CR) and Ministry of
Education of the Czech Republic (LO1304).


