Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting HER2 enriches Jagged1 high cancer stem cells in breast
cancer.


The human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive subtype of
breast cancer is characterized by gene amplification and/or protein
overexpression of HER2. It is driven by a subpopulation of cells
possessing stem cell properties of self-renewal and differentiation,
known as Cancer Stem cells (CSCs). CSCs are implicated in tumor growth as
well as radiotherapy and chemotherapy associated resistance. Notch
receptors promote breast CSCs survival and self-renewal, and
overexpression of a Notch ligand Jagged1 mRNA predicts poor prognosis in
women with breast cancer. Our lab has published that Jagged1 or Notch1 is
a critical target in trastuzumab/lapatinib (LAP) resistant HER2+ breast
cancer. The study aimed to determine whether anti-HER2 therapy selects
for Jagged-1/Notch-dependent CSCs that are responsible for tumor
initiation. Surface expression of Notch1 and Jagged1 upon HER2 blockade
using LAP was measured in HER2+ breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-453 and
HCC1954) using flow cytometry. LAP treatment increased the
Jagged1-positive subpopulation compared to vehicle. Cells were sorted
based on Jagged1 cell surface expression and assessed for CSC-like
properties (i.e. mammosphere forming efficiency, Aldefluor activity,
expression of CD44high /CD24low, Notch target transcripts expression, and
limiting dilution tumor initiating potential in athymic, nude mice). In
addition, immunohistochemistry was performed on 145 HER2+ breast tumor
microarray to detect cytoplasmic, membrane, or nuclear Jagged1 protein
expression. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to determine overall
survival. The results showed that upon HER2 inhibition, Jagged1 cell
surface expression increased and Notch1 cell surface expression was
unchanged. The Jagged1high subpopulation of cells showed elevated levels
of Aldehyde dehydrogenase activity, Notch target gene transcripts, and
mammosphere formation efficiency compared to vehicle treated cells. The
MRK-003 Î³-secretase inhibitor (GSI) prevented mammosphere formation in
the Jagged1high cells indicating that Notch activation drives Jagged1high
CSC survival. Also, we confirmed that Jagged1 expression is required for
the enrichment of CSCs using a Jagged1 siRNA. Combined knockdown of
Notch1 and Notch3 receptors was necessary to reduce LAP-enriched
mammospheres suggesting that targeting HER2 enriches for a
Jagged1-Notch1+Notch3 driven CSC phenotype. Importantly, higher membrane
expression of Jagged1 protein in 145 HER2+ breast tumor specimens
correlated with significantly lower overall cumulative survival. These
results reveal that HER2 blockade in breast cancer cells enriches for a
Jagged1high subpopulation that has higher CSC potential and is resistant
to HER2 inhibitors. The implications of this work are that dual blockade
of Jagged-1/Notch1/Notch3 and HER2 could be more effective than either
therapy alone to eliminate both HER2 and Jagged-1-dependent cancer cells.


