Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum interleukin-18 and metalloproteinase-1 predict long-term
prognosis of breast cancer.


Introduction: Intrinsic subtyping and twenty-one gene expression assay
using tumor tissue indicates gene expression profile had advantage to
predict breast cancer(BC) patients’ prognosis. However, these tumor
biomarker assays had many limitations as like as high cost, demand for
large amount of tumor sample and limited use for specific subtype of BC.
Therefore, we conducted this study to find serum biomarker predicting BC
prognosis.

Materials and Methods: This study was conducted by retrospective analysis
of patients with stage I to IIIC invasive breast cancer who received
curative surgery at Samsung Medical Center between 2003 and 2004. We
performed multiplex immunoassay using 45 cytokine and 8 MMP multiplex
immunoassay panels (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc, Irvine, CA, USA). Among
clinical factors, operational stage was re-categorized into stage I & II
vs. stage III and Hormone receptor(HR) status was grouped into HR
positive vs. negative. For each protein, proteins significantly
associated with overall survival(OS) in univariate analyses were
candidates for the multivariate analysis.

Results: In total, 246 patients who received curative surgery for breast
cancer were enrolled. Of 246 patients, serum cytokine analyses were
performed in 229 patients. Of clinical characteristics, ten year OS of BC
with stage III was 76.2% compared to 92.7% of stage I and 88.6% of stage
II (hazard ratio (Stage III vs. stage I/II) : 2.62 (95% CI: 1.26-5.48),
p-value =0.016) and HR expressed BC had 91.1% of 10year OS, compared to
81.9%of HR negative BC (hazard ratio (HR positive): 0.47 (95% CI:
0.23-0.95), p-value =0.035). In terms of serum biomarker, high expression
of IL-18 was associated with good prognosis (hazard ratio: 0.45 (95% CI:
0.21-0.96), p-value =0.033) in contrast with poor prognosis of MMP-1
expression (hazard ratio: 1.96 (95% CI: 0.94-4.08), p-value =0.067).
Multivariate analysis showed that BC stage, HR positivity, serum IL-18
and MMP-1 affected patients’ OS. Stage I/II HR positive BC with low
MMP-1 and high IL-18 increased OS about 5 times compared to stage III HR
negative BC with high MMP-1 and low IL-18 (hazard ratio:0.21 (95%
CI:0.1-0.48), c-index:0.731, p-value Results: In total, 246 patients who
received curative surgery for breast cancer were enrolled. Of 246
patients, serum cytokine analyses were performed in 229 patients. Of
clinical characteristics, ten year OS of BC with stage III was 76.2%
compared to 92.7% of stage I and 88.6% of stage II (hazard ratio (Stage
III vs. stage I/II) : 2.62 (95% CI: 1.26-5.48), p-value =0.016) and HR
expressed BC had 91.1% of 10year OS, compared to 81.9%of HR negative BC
(hazard ratio (HR positive): 0.47 (95% CI: 0.23-0.95), p-value =0.035).
In terms of serum biomarker, high expression of IL-18 was associated with
good prognosis (hazard ratio: 0.45 (95% CI: 0.21-0.96), p-value =0.033)
in contrast with poor prognosis of MMP-1 expression (hazard ratio: 1.96
(95% CI: 0.94-4.08), p-value =0.067). Multivariate analysis showed that
BC stage, HR positivity, serum IL-18 and MMP-1 affected patients’ OS.
Stage I/II HR positive BC with low MMP-1 and high IL-18 increased OS
about 5 times compared to stage III HR negative BC with high MMP-1 and
low IL-18 (hazard ratio:0.21 (95% CI:0.1-0.48), c-index:0.731, p-value
<0.001). Internal validation using 10,000 times of bootstrapping showed
that this prediction model was suitable for BC prognosis prediction
(c-index: 0.705, p-value =0.041).

Conclusion: Our research suggested that the level of serum IL-18 and
MMP-1 would help to predict BC patients’ prognosis. Further external
validation of these biomarkers would be warranted.


