Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of surgical stress in altering host immunity in breast cancer
patients.


Background : Stress of any kind can alter the immune system. Surgery is a
form of stress that can have significant effects on immune system. There
occurs a reduction in the ability to fight the disease progression and
also metastatic spread. Cell mediated immunity plays an important role in
the control of malignancy. A reduction in cellular immunity can have
adverse effects on the body. The objective of the study was to understand
the effects of surgical stress on cell mediated immunity in breast cancer
patients.

Methods : 31 women with operable early stage breast cancer, who underwent
surgery and were also receiving adjuvant chemotherapy were included in
the study. Blood samples were collected from the patients during the
pre-operative period and twice during the post-operative period, after 72
hours and after 21 days. Peripheral Blood mononuclear cells were
subjected to flow cytometry analysis. The mean values of lymphocyte
sub-populations as percentage were calculated. A questionnaire was also
given to all study participants to assess the levels of stress of having
breast cancer. An informed consent was taken from all the participants
involved in the study.

Results : The mean values of lymphocyte sub-population were found to be
significantly lower (pResults : The mean values of lymphocyte
sub-population were found to be significantly lower (p<0.5) in the early
post-operative period in breast cancer patients. However, the values
returned to near pre-operative levels after 21 days. A positive
correlation existed between psychological stress of having the disease
and low host immunity. This indicates that any intervention that further
suppresses immunity in breast cancer patients following surgery should
not be used for at least 3 weeks after surgery.


