Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Long-term folate intake and prostate cancer risk in the health
professionals follow-up study.


Background: Randomized trials of supplemental folate and observational
studies of circulating folate support a positive association with
prostate cancer risk. However, epidemiological studies of dietary and
synthetic folate intake are conflicting. Given mandatory folic acid
fortification of grains in the US beginning in 1998, evaluation of
long-term folate intake from natural and synthetic sources in relation to
prostate cancer risk is warranted.

Methods: We examined the association between folate intake and prostate
cancer risk among 47,884 men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study
who were free from diagnosed cancer at baseline in 1986. Total, natural
(from food sources), and synthetic (from supplements/fortification)
folate intake was assessed every 4 years using a validated food frequency
questionnaire, and categorized as the cumulative average and lagged (0-4,
4-8, 8-12, and 12-16 years in the past) intakes. Cox proportional hazards
regression was used to calculate multivariable hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (CI).

Results: We identified 6,186 incident prostate cancer cases from
1986-2012, including 1,078 with lethal disease (distant metastasis or
death). Mean total folate intake was 481 µg/day in 1986 and increased to
671 µg/day by 2010. The proportion of men meeting the recommended intake
of 400 µg/day increased from 47% in 1986 to 74% after fortification
began in 1998. Folate intake was positively correlated with physical
activity, multivitamin use, and PSA testing, and inversely correlated
with smoking. Total folate intake averaged over time was not
significantly associated with total prostate cancer risk: HR≥800 vs.
400-599=1.03 (95% CI: 0.95-1.13, p-trend=0.76). Neither natural nor
synthetic folate intake was associated with risk of total prostate
cancer. No associations were observed between total, natural, or
synthetic folate intake and risk of lethal, advanced stage, or high-grade
disease.

Conclusions: Our findings do not support strong associations between
intakes of total, natural, or synthetic folate and prostate cancer risk.
We found no indication that folate intake of ≥800 µg/day (twice the
recommended level) increases prostate cancer risk.


