Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oligomenorrhea, polycystic ovary syndrome, and risk of ovarian
cancer histotypes, evidence from the Ovarian Cancer Association
Consortium.


Background: Oligomenorrhea, defined as infrequent or irregular periods
has been shown to be associated with epithelial ovarian cancer risk in
some but not all studies. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), which is
characterized by oligomenorrhea and abnormal hormone levels including
hyperandrogenism, hyperinsulinemia, and gonadotropin imbalance, has been
suggested to increase ovarian cancer risk. However, these associations
have been rarely examined by histologic subtype. We sought to examine
these associations among 14 studies participating in the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium.

Methods: Participants included 16,594 patients with invasive (n=13,719)
or borderline (n=2,875) ovarian cancers and 17,718 controls who had
answered questions regarding menstrual cycle irregularity, menstrual
cycle length, and/or PCOS. Study specific odds ratios (ORs; 95%
confidence intervals [95% CI]), adjusted for ovarian cancer risk factors,
were calculated and then combined using a random-effects meta-analysis.
Pooled histologic subtype specific ORs (95% CI) were calculated using
polytomous logistic regression.

Results: Women reporting menstrual cycle length >35 days had decreased
risk of invasive ovarian cancer compared to women reporting cycle length
≤35 days (OR=0.70; 95% CI=0.58-0.84). Decreased risk of invasive
ovarian cancer was also observed among women who reported irregular
menstrual cycles compared to women with regular cycles (OR=0.83; 95%
CI=0.76-0.89). No significant association was observed between
self-reported PCOS and invasive ovarian cancer risk (OR=0.87; 95%
CI=0.65-1.15). For menstrual cycle length >35 days, decreased risk was
observed for all invasive histotypes: low grade serous (OR=0.48; 95%
CI=0.25-0.92), high grade serous (OR=0.62; 95% CI=0.48-0.80), mucinous
(OR=0.38; 95% CI=0.19-0.76), endometrioid (OR=0.75; 95% CI=0.54-1.06),
and clear cell (OR=0.70; 95% CI=0.43-1.13) but not for serous borderline
tumors (OR=1.18; 95% CI=0.87-1.59) (pheterogeneity=0.006). An increased
risk of serous borderline disease was observed among women reporting
irregular cycles (OR=1.34; 95% CI=1.16-1.55) (pheterogeneityResults:
Women reporting menstrual cycle length >35 days had decreased risk of
invasive ovarian cancer compared to women reporting cycle length ≤35
days (OR=0.70; 95% CI=0.58-0.84). Decreased risk of invasive ovarian
cancer was also observed among women who reported irregular menstrual
cycles compared to women with regular cycles (OR=0.83; 95% CI=0.76-0.89).
No significant association was observed between self-reported PCOS and
invasive ovarian cancer risk (OR=0.87; 95% CI=0.65-1.15). For menstrual
cycle length >35 days, decreased risk was observed for all invasive
histotypes: low grade serous (OR=0.48; 95% CI=0.25-0.92), high grade
serous (OR=0.62; 95% CI=0.48-0.80), mucinous (OR=0.38; 95% CI=0.19-0.76),
endometrioid (OR=0.75; 95% CI=0.54-1.06), and clear cell (OR=0.70; 95%
CI=0.43-1.13) but not for serous borderline tumors (OR=1.18; 95%
CI=0.87-1.59) (pheterogeneity=0.006). An increased risk of serous
borderline disease was observed among women reporting irregular cycles
(OR=1.34; 95% CI=1.16-1.55) (pheterogeneity<0.0001). No statistically
significant differences by histologic subtype were observed for
self-reported PCOS.

Conclusion: In this large consortium analysis we observed a decreased
risk of most invasive epithelial ovarian cancer histotypes among women
reporting longer or irregular menstrual cycles. In contrast, such cycles
were associated with increased risk of the serous borderline tumors.


