Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation analysis using next-generation sequencing in
histologically heterogeneous of primary lung cancers.


Rare cases of primary lung cancer are known to have different
histological types. Recently, small cell carcinoma was reported to be
developed in adenocarcinoma patients with epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutations after EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI)
treatment. The purposes of this study are to evaluate mutational status
in two different histological types separately, and to further understand
the molecular pathogenesis. Twelve tumor samples from 6 patients were
collected in our institution. 4 patients had primary adenocarcinoma and
small cell carcinoma transformed after EGFR-TKI. One patient had primary
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma transformed after EGFR-TKI.
The other one patient had carcinosarcoma in a surgically resected tumor.
Two samples per patient were collected from histologically different
areas within a resected tumor or the 2 distinct metastatic sites. DNA was
extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues.
Next-generation sequencings in the 12 samples were performed on 160
cancer-related genes using GeneReadâ„¢ DNAseq Targeted Panels V2 Human
comprehensive Cancer Panel (QIAGEN). In a carcinosarcoma case with
deletional mutation in EGFR gene, a total 504 in adenocarcinoma and 595
in sarcoma variants in 160 genes were detected with high confidence. The
gene of identical alterations, as truncal alterations, were EGFR, CBLB,
TP53 and MEN1 and the number of that as an unique alteration
corresponding to each histology is 25 for adenocarcinoma and 85 for
sarcoma. We show relations between the histological types and the genomic
alterations, identical alterations and unique alterations, in each
patient. Furthermore, we raise essential factors for the histological
transformation.


