Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adjuvant therapy associated with improved survival in gall bladder
cancer: A single institution retrospective study.


Introduction: The survival outcome of resected gallbladder carcinoma
remains poor. We conducted a retrospective study to examine factors
affecting patient outcomes in resectable gallbladder carcinoma.

Methods: We retrospectively collected data on patients treated at our
institution between January 2005 and June 2015 from the electronic
medical record using a standardized data collection tool. The univariate
Cox proportional hazard model was used for evaluating predictors of
overall survival. Kaplan-Meier method was used to compare time-to-events
among subgroups and the p values were calculated by the log-rank method.
Overall survival (OS) was defined as the time between surgery and death,
or censored at the last follow-up date. Progression-free survival (PFS)
was defined as the time to recurrence or death.

Results: Of 67 evaluable patients, 65.7% were female. While clinical
staging determined 51% to be stage 2 or less, interval portal
lymphadenectomy and hepatic resection upstaged 20% to stage 3 or 4.
Adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) was given to 18% and adjuvant chemoradiation
(CRT) to 15%. About 46% did not receive any post-operative treatment and
data was not available in 21%. On multivariate analysis, albumin 2 were
independent predictors of OS and PFS. Median 5 yrs OS and PFS of pstage 2
were independent predictors of OS and PFS. Median 5 yrs OS and PFS of
pstage < 2 was 54% and 54% respectively. Median 5 yr OS and PFS of stage
≥3 was 10.9% and 5.8% respectively. Adjuvant therapy was administered
commonly for stage 3 and 4 (20 patients) compared to stage 1 and 2 (2
patients). In stage ≥3, adjuvant therapy improved OS (17.5% vs 8.9% for
surgery alone) and PFS (12% vs 0%). Adjuvant chemoradiation for stage 3/4
had better median OS advantage compared to chemotherapy alone (54 m vs
15m, p=0.0008).

Conclusion: The use of adjuvant treatment may improve long-term disease
control in patients with node positive tumors. A significant difference
between CRT and CT was demonstrated in our series and needs further
validation in a larger cohort.

Overall survial (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) among various
subgroups



Group (n)

Median OS (months)

5 year OS

Median PFS (months)

5 year PFS



stage 1&2 (21)

NA

54%

NA

54%



stage 3&4 (46)

13.4

10.9%

9.4

5.8%



Surgery + Adjuvant treatment (22)

25.1

15.9%

16.9

10.9%



Surgery alone (31)

26.1

34.4%

21.3

31.8%



Surgery + CRT (10)

54.2

35%

45.7

24%



Surgery + CT (12)

14.9

0%

13.4

0%



Stage 3 and 4- Surgery + Adjuvant treatment (20)

27.3

17.5%

22.5

12%



Stage 3 and 4- Surgery alone (15)

2.7

8.9%

2.1

0%


