Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disease-specific markers may be used for the identification of
disseminated tumor cells in the bone marrow of patients with prostate
cancer.


Introduction: The detection of microscopic disseminated disease in
prostate cancer has largely been attempted with the study of circulating
tumor cells (CTCs). Little is known about the character and clinical
significance of disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) that have reached the
bone marrow (BM) niche, and prior studies has relied on epithelial
markers. Yet, it is known that such markers are also expressed on normal
erythroid precursor cells in the BM, thus we developed an assay for
prostate-specific DTC identification.

Materials and Methods: BM aspirates from 18 men with localized and 2 men
with metastatic prostate cancer were collected at time of RP or clinic
visit respectively, and processed with the AccuCyte system (RareCyte,
Inc., Seattle, WA). Slides were immunostained with DAPI (nuclear),
anti-pan-cytokeratin (epithelial), anti-CD45/CD66b/CD11b/CD14/CD34 (white
blood cell), and the prostate-specific markers HOXB13 and NKX3.1
(prostate). DTCs were detected using the CyteFinder system. DTCs were
required to have positive prostate channel staining and no white blood
cell signal.

Results: DTCs were present in 89% (16/18) of patients at time of RP, with
range 0 to 3592 cells/4 mL sample (average 270, median of 39.5). Two
patients with metastatic prostate cancer had 52 and 105 DTCs/4mL BM
(Table 1). Notably, only 5% of all DTCs were epithelial marker positive
(CK+), and only 44% (8/18) of patients had any CK+ DTCs.

Conclusions: The RareCyte system is a promising selection-free system for
DTCs detection that does not rely on epithelial markers. Here we report
on a novel assay to distinguish DTCs from other cells in the bone marrow
using the presumed prostate-specific markers HOXB13 and NKX3.1.
Furthermore, we show that the majority of prostate-specific marker
positive DTCs did not express the epithelial marker CK. Analyses of the
association of DTC count with clinicopathologic variables are ongoing.

Table 1. Clinicopathologic Data and DTC Counts of the Cohort





Bx

Gleason

RP Gleason

Metastatic/Localized

PSA

# of DTCs

CK+ DTCs

CK- DTCs

% of CK- DTCs



3+3=6

3+3=6

Localized

4.3

0

0

0

N/A



3+3=6

3+3=6

Localized

6.3

9

0

9

100%



3+3=6

4+3=7

Localized

3.9

48

12

36

75%



3+3=6

3+4=7

Localized

3.46

15

0

15

100%



3+4=7

3+4=7

Localized

5

25

0

25

100%



3+4=7

3+4=7

Localized

4.5

27

9

18

100%



3+4=7

3+4=7

Localized

8.1

12

0

12

100%



3+4=7

3+4=7

Localized

7.5

34

0

34

100%



3+4=7

3+4=7

Localized

6.7

81

21

60

74%



4+3=7

4+3=7

Localized

16.3

114

24

90

79%



4+3=7

4+3=7

Localized

5.9

135

27

108

80%



4+3=7

3+4=7

Localized

8.3

45

0

45

100%



4+3=7

3+4=7

Localized

3.1

225

48

177

79%



4+3=7

4+3=7

Localized

9

429

117

312

73%



4+3=7

3+4=7

Localized

4.3

3592

0

3592

100%



4+5=9

4+5=9

Localized

10.1

0

0

0

N/A



4+5=9

4+4=8

Localized

9.1

6

0

6

100%



4+5=9

4+5=9

Localized

9.4

60

9

51

85%



4+5=9

N/A

Metastatic

5.79

105

15

90

86%



4+5=9

N/A

Metastatic

65

52

8

44

85%


