Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protochadherin 7 acts through SET and PP2A to potentiate MAPK
signaling by EGFR and KRAS during lung tumorigenesis.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of
cancer-associated deaths worldwide. Given the efficacy of membrane
proteins as therapeutic targets in human malignancies, we examined
cell-surface receptors that may act as drivers of lung tumorigenesis.
Here we report that Protocadherin 7 (PCDH7), a transmembrane receptor and
member of the Cadherin superfamily, is frequently overexpressed in NSCLC
tumors, and high expression of PCDH7 is associated with poor clinical
outcome. PCDH7 overexpression synergizes with KRAS and EGFR to induce
MAPK signaling and tumorigenesis. Conversely, PCDH7 depletion suppresses
ERK activation, sensitizes cells to MEK inhibitors, and reduces tumor
growth. PCDH7 potentiates ERK signaling by facilitating interaction of
protein phosphatase PP2A with its potent inhibitor, the SET oncoprotein.
By establishing a previously unanticipated oncogenic role for PCDH7 in
lung tumorigenesis, these results provide proof-of-concept support for
the development of novel therapies that target PCDH7 at the cell surface
of NSCLC cells. Experiments to evaluate the role of Pcdh7 in
Kras-mediated lung tumorigenesis in vivo using autochthonous mouse
models, which we expect to lend further support for therapeutic targeting
of this protein, are in progress.


