Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High caveolin-1 expression in a cohort of African American women
with triple-negative breast cancer.


In the U.S., the incidence rates of breast cancer (BC) among Caucasian
(CA) women are lower than those of African American (AA), however, AA
women have a significantly higher mortality rate. AA women often present
at a younger age, with later stage and higher grade tumors. In fact, AA
women are 3 times more likely to be diagnosed with the more aggressive
molecular subtype, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), than CA women.
Socioeconomic and lifestyle factors may be contributory; however, it is
imperative that we investigate the underlying molecular biology that may
be the cause of health disparities between AA and CA with TNBC. In this
study, gene expression profiling, using the Almac BC DSA Research Tool,
was performed on archived FFPE samples, obtained from CA and AA women
diagnosed with early stage (Node 0) TNBC. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering revealed a pattern of differential gene expression in the AA
cohort compared to CA. Using the TNBC type: A Subtyping Tool for TNBC, we
found a distinct distribution pattern of TNBC molecular subtypes in the
AA cohort, which was very different than the CA cohort; Basal-like (14%),
Immunomodulatory (43%) and Mesenchymal (43%). Gene expression analyses,
comparing the AA and CA cohort (fold change > 2.0, p-value In the U.S.,
the incidence rates of breast cancer (BC) among Caucasian (CA) women are
lower than those of African American (AA), however, AA women have a
significantly higher mortality rate. AA women often present at a younger
age, with later stage and higher grade tumors. In fact, AA women are 3
times more likely to be diagnosed with the more aggressive molecular
subtype, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), than CA women.
Socioeconomic and lifestyle factors may be contributory; however, it is
imperative that we investigate the underlying molecular biology that may
be the cause of health disparities between AA and CA with TNBC. In this
study, gene expression profiling, using the Almac BC DSA Research Tool,
was performed on archived FFPE samples, obtained from CA and AA women
diagnosed with early stage (Node 0) TNBC. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering revealed a pattern of differential gene expression in the AA
cohort compared to CA. Using the TNBC type: A Subtyping Tool for TNBC, we
found a distinct distribution pattern of TNBC molecular subtypes in the
AA cohort, which was very different than the CA cohort; Basal-like (14%),
Immunomodulatory (43%) and Mesenchymal (43%). Gene expression analyses,
comparing the AA and CA cohort (fold change > 2.0, p-value <.05),
resulted in 190 deferentially expressed genes (DEG). Pathway enrichment
analysis conducted in MetaCore GeneGo, revealed that the DEGs were
over-represented in cytoskeletal remodeling, cell adhesion, tight
junctions, and immune response in the AA TNBC cohort. Furthermore,
several genes in the Wnt/Î²-catenin pathways were over-expressed in the
top 10-enrichment pathways. We validated our results using RT-qPCR and
identified Caveolin-1 (CAV1) as being significantly expressed in the
AA-TNBC cohort (p-value 1.22 x 10-05). An independent cohort of FFPE
samples, from AA and CA women with early stage TNBC, was used to create a
tissue microarray (TMA). Immunohistochemistry results showed no
difference in localization of Cav1 between the AA and CA cohorts,
however, the AA cohort had significantly higher levels of Cav1 staining
(p-value 0.04). Additionally, using RT-qPCR, we demonstrated that CAV1
mRNA was significantly higher in the AA TNBC Cohort (p-value 0.48).
Furthermore, endogenous Cav1 was shown to be highly over-expressed in a
cell line panel of TNBC, in particular, those of the mesenchymal and
basal-like molecular subtype. Finally, using siRNA, we demonstrated that
CAV1 silencing resulted in a significant decrease in cell proliferation,
for each of the TNBC cell lines while it showed no effect on the luminal
ER+ cell lines. Our combined study results suggest that CAV1 over
-expression may be a biological contributor to the observed health
disparity between AA women and CA diagnosed with early stage TNBC.


