Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of drug-target interactions through rapid selection
of drug resistant protein variants generated by CRISPR/Cas9-induced NHEJ.


Identification and validation of the cellular target of bioactive hits
identified in a phenotypic screen is crucial for their further
development into a drug. The gold standard proof for identification of a
small molecule's target is the discovery of mutations that confer
resistance. However, selection of drug resistance and subsequent
deconvolution of the relevant mutations that confer drug resistance
remains time consuming. Therefore, a methodology that can accelerate the
drug resistance selection process and that can simplify identification of
relevant drug resistance mutations would benefit the drug discovery and
development process greatly.

Here we report a simple method to rapidly identify the mechanism of
action of small molecules with anti-cancer activity. The method utilizes
the positive selection of in-frame drug resistance mutations in the
target protein of a small molecule derived from the localized genetic
variation created by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair of
CRISPR/Cas9-induced double strand breaks. In brief, we introduced double
strand breaks in the target proteins of selinexor, ispinesib and
triptolide and treated these cells with the respective drug. Resistance
was obtained rapidly and sequencing of resistant colonies revealed known
as well as many new drug resistant protein variants. Next, we
investigated whether this approach can be applied as a screening strategy
on a subset of genes to identify the direct cellular target protein of a
small molecule. We therefore, as proof of concept, designed a pooled
sgRNA tiling library targeting all PAM sites of multiple genes and
applied this to ispinesib. Drug resistant colonies formed rapidly and
were enriched with sgRNAs targeting the ispinesib binding site in KIF11,
ispinesibâ€™s target protein. Further sequencing of the sgRNA target gene
locus revealed drug resistance mutations in KIF11, validating the
feasibility of the methodology to uncover the target of a small molecule
from a small pool of candidate genes. To conclude, we provide a new
method for identification of the cellular target protein and binding site
of a small molecule based on positive selection of drug resistant protein
variants generated by targeted CRISPR/Cas-induced NHEJ repair.


