Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dj-1 confers maintenance of stemness and radioresistance by
regulating EGFRvIII expression in glioma stem cells.


DJ-1 is involved in many key cellular processes including cell
proliferation, transcriptional regulation, differentiation, oxidative
stress protection, and mitochondrial function maintenance. Deregulation
of DJ-1 has been implicated in the pathogenesis of many human diseases
such as Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, infertility,
and cancer. DJ-1 was initially identified as an oncogene product involved
in human tumorigenesis in numerous cancer types. Alteration in expression
of DJ-1 is associated with tumorigenesis in several types of cancers.
Herein, we aimed to clarify the effect of DJ-1 on stemness and
radioresistance of glioma stem cells (GSCs). Firstly, we found that the
reduction in expression of DJ-1 in brain tumor tissues when compared with
tumor adjacent normal brain tissues, as indicated by reduced DJ-1
staining. Knock-down of DJ-1 inhibited self-renewal activity of GSCs in
vitro as evidenced by neurosphere formation, limiting dilution, and soft
agar clonogenic assays. DJ-1 knock-down suppressed maintenance of
stemness by suppressing the expression of Notch intracellular domain,
Sox2, and phosphorylated STAT3 proteins. Intriguingly, DJ-1 knock-down
inhibited the expression of EGFRvIII in GSCs which might be the cause of
suppression of stemness pathways. In addition, knockdown of DJ-1 induced
apoptosis, reduced cell invasiveness, and sensitized GSCs to ionizing
radiation. Based on these data, we propose that DJ-1 could be considered
as a crucial diagnostics and therapeutics target for malignant glioma.


