Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymidine quinoxaline conjugates as a novel selective and
effective photosensitizer for anticancer photodynamic therapy.


Thymidine quinoxaline conjugates are a new class anticancer agent that
exhibits selective anticancer activity by targeting the abnormally high
level of thymidine kinase of the thymidine salvage pathway in cancer
cells. In addition, the conjugated quinoxaline moiety could also act as a
photosensitizer to generate reactive oxygen species that would
significantly enhance the anticancer activity. Therefore, a variety of
structural derivatives were synthesized and investigated for the
potential of combined anticancer activity. We found that the thymidine
moiety was critical for the accumulation of compounds in cancer cells and
thus their activity. On the other hand, the substitutions and additional
conjugation of quinoxaline moiety had significant impact on the
effectiveness to generate reactive oxygen species for enhanced potency.
Among all the compounds studied, dT-QP exhibited a potent activity
against liver cancer cells with IC50 at 20 nM under photo-irradiation at
400 nm wavelength for 20 min. This potent activity of dT-QP was 12 times
more effective than that of the clinically used photosensitizer
protoporphyrin IX (IC50 at 250 nM) under the same condition and 5 times
more potent than anticancer drug doxorubicin (IC50 at 100 nM). In
addition, thymidine quinoxaline conjugates were found to form aggregates
with an average size of 200 nm. Further optimization of the aggregating
condition led to a highly stable suspension of 90 nm size nanoparticles
containing a tumor-specific peptide that could be used for in vivo study.
Therefore, thymidine quinoxaline analogs could be a selective anticancer
agent and effective photosensitizer for potential photodynamic therapy.


