Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell-derived extracellular vesicles stimulate tumor
angiogenesis by delivering VEGF to endothelial cells.


Angiogenesis is essential for tumor growth and metastasis, and is
orchestrated by a repertoire of growth factor signaling pathways that
stimulate endothelial cell growth, migration and vessel formation. Recent
studies have shown that angiogenesis can also be regulated by
cell-derived extracellular vesicles. Exosomes are small endosomal-derived
membrane vesicles that contain various biomolecules such as RNA and
proteins, and are increasingly thought to play important roles in
transferring informational cargo between cancer cells and stromal cells.
In the majority of studies to date, the effects of cancer cell-derived
exosomes have been attributed to their RNA cargo. In this study, we
identified that exosomes derived from ovarian, colon and renal cancer
cells contain abundant vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Cancer
cell-derived exosomes were found to activate the VEGF signaling pathway
in endothelial cells and to stimulate endothelial cell migration and tube
formation. Furthermore, our studies using inhibitors of VEGF signaling
demonstrated that the stimulatory effects of cancer cell-derived exosomes
on endothelial cells depend on the presence of VEGF in exosomes and are
mediated via the VEGF signaling pathway. These findings indicate that
cancer cell-derived exosomes promote tumor angiogenesis by delivering
VEGF to endothelial cells.


