Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cell-dependent bispecific antibody anti-CD79b/CD3 as a potential
therapy for B-cell malignancies.


T-cell recruiting bispecific antibodies and antibody fragments have been
used to harness the cytotoxic potential of T cells for cancer treatment.
We have adopted a knobs-into-holes antibody format and produced T-cell
dependent bispecific antibodies (TDB), as full length, humanized IgG1
antibodies with natural antibody architecture, which allow one arm to
target various B cell antigens while the other arm recruits T cells by
binding to the CD3Îµ subunit of the T-cell receptor. One B cell antigen
targeted is CD79b, a component of the B cell receptor complex, which has
been clinically validated by an anti-CD79b antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)
as a safe and effective therapeutic target for B cell malignancies
(Leukemia 2015 Pfeifer et.al).

In the present work, we show that anti-CD79b/CD3 TDB is active against
lymphoma cells with a wide range of CD79b antigen levels in vitro. In
addition, anti-CD79b/CD3 TDB appears to be insensitive to the status of
cellular signaling pathways in lymphoma cells as it is active against
cell lines that are resistant to the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib or an
anti-CD79b ADC with a cleavable tubulin inhibitor as the payload. In
vivo, anti-CD79b/CD3 TDB administration inhibited tumor growth in B-cell
lymphoma xenograft models and resulted in potent B-cell depletion in the
blood and spleens in a humanized murine model.

To assess the safety of targeting CD79b with a T-cell recruiting
bispecific antibody in non-human primates, a surrogate anti-cynoCD79b/CD3
TDB with comparable in vitro potency was produced with a target arm that
recognizes cynomolgus monkey CD79b and the same anti-CD3 arm. In a single
dose pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamics/safety study, anti-cynoCD79b/CD3
TDB administration at 1mg/kg resulted in potent B cell depletion, as well
as T cell activation and proliferation, which was assessed by flow
cytometry on blood and lymphoid tissue and immunohistochemistry on
lymphoid tissue. The pharmacokinetic properties of anti-cynoCD79b/CD3 TDB
resembled that of IgG antibodies; though with a faster clearance likely
due to CD79b antigen internalization and enhanced binding to CD3 when
compared to previously described anti-CD20/CD3 TDB. Transient cytokine
release was observed as elevated levels of IL-2, IL-6, IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha were detected within 24 hours following administration.
Anti-cynoCD79b/CD3 TDB was well-tolerated in the majority of dosed
animals without toxicologically significant findings.

Collectively, these preclinical data suggest anti-CD79b/CD3 TDB can be a
potential therapeutic agent in B cell malignancies.


