Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RAS-MAPK signal is required for enhanced PD-L1 expression in human
lung cancers.


Ectopic programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) is related to immune evasion by cancer, and it
is a molecular target of immune checkpoint therapies. Since the precise
mechanisms responsible for ectopic PD-L1 expression remains obscure, we
analyzed the molecular mechanisms of ectopic PD-L1 expression in human
lung cancers, focusing on the MAPK signal. Because we found a higher
frequency of EGFR/KRAS mutations in NSCLC cell lines with high PD-L1
expression (p Ectopic programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression
in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) is related to immune evasion by
cancer, and it is a molecular target of immune checkpoint therapies.
Since the precise mechanisms responsible for ectopic PD-L1 expression
remains obscure, we analyzed the molecular mechanisms of ectopic PD-L1
expression in human lung cancers, focusing on the MAPK signal. Because we
found a higher frequency of EGFR/KRAS mutations in NSCLC cell lines with
high PD-L1 expression (p < 0.001), we evaluated the relationships between
downstream signals and PD-L1 expression, particularly in three
KRAS-mutant adenocarcinoma cell lines. The MEK inhibitor U0126 (20 μM)
significantly decreased the surface PD-L1 levels by 50-60% compared with
dimethyl sulfoxide (p Ectopic programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1)
expression in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) is related to immune
evasion by cancer, and it is a molecular target of immune checkpoint
therapies. Since the precise mechanisms responsible for ectopic PD-L1
expression remains obscure, we analyzed the molecular mechanisms of
ectopic PD-L1 expression in human lung cancers, focusing on the MAPK
signal. Because we found a higher frequency of EGFR/KRAS mutations in
NSCLC cell lines with high PD-L1 expression (p < 0.001), we evaluated the
relationships between downstream signals and PD-L1 expression,
particularly in three KRAS-mutant adenocarcinoma cell lines. The MEK
inhibitor U0126 (20 μM) significantly decreased the surface PD-L1 levels
by 50-60% compared with dimethyl sulfoxide (p < 0.0001). Phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation (100 nM, 15 min) increased (p Ectopic
programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs) is related to immune evasion by cancer, and it is a
molecular target of immune checkpoint therapies. Since the precise
mechanisms responsible for ectopic PD-L1 expression remains obscure, we
analyzed the molecular mechanisms of ectopic PD-L1 expression in human
lung cancers, focusing on the MAPK signal. Because we found a higher
frequency of EGFR/KRAS mutations in NSCLC cell lines with high PD-L1
expression (p < 0.001), we evaluated the relationships between downstream
signals and PD-L1 expression, particularly in three KRAS-mutant
adenocarcinoma cell lines. The MEK inhibitor U0126 (20 μM) significantly
decreased the surface PD-L1 levels by 50-60% compared with dimethyl
sulfoxide (p < 0.0001). Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation (100
nM, 15 min) increased (p < 0.05) and two ERK2 siRNAs as well as KRAS
siRNAs decreased (p Ectopic programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1)
expression in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) is related to immune
evasion by cancer, and it is a molecular target of immune checkpoint
therapies. Since the precise mechanisms responsible for ectopic PD-L1
expression remains obscure, we analyzed the molecular mechanisms of
ectopic PD-L1 expression in human lung cancers, focusing on the MAPK
signal. Because we found a higher frequency of EGFR/KRAS mutations in
NSCLC cell lines with high PD-L1 expression (p < 0.001), we evaluated the
relationships between downstream signals and PD-L1 expression,
particularly in three KRAS-mutant adenocarcinoma cell lines. The MEK
inhibitor U0126 (20 μM) significantly decreased the surface PD-L1 levels
by 50-60% compared with dimethyl sulfoxide (p < 0.0001). Phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation (100 nM, 15 min) increased (p < 0.05)
and two ERK2 siRNAs as well as KRAS siRNAs decreased (p < 0.05) PD-L1
expression. Post-transcriptional mechanism by miR-200s appears not to be
in general under the downstream of MAPK in the PD-L1 expression. The
transcriptional activity of the potential AP-1 site (+4785 to +5056 from
the transcription start site) in the PD-L1 gene was demonstrated by
luciferase assays, which was inhibited by U0126. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated the binding of cJUN to the AP-1
site. Two STAT3 siRNAs decreased PD-L1 expression by 10-32% in two of the
three KRAS-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (p Ectopic programmed
cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs) is related to immune evasion by cancer, and it is a molecular
target of immune checkpoint therapies. Since the precise mechanisms
responsible for ectopic PD-L1 expression remains obscure, we analyzed the
molecular mechanisms of ectopic PD-L1 expression in human lung cancers,
focusing on the MAPK signal. Because we found a higher frequency of
EGFR/KRAS mutations in NSCLC cell lines with high PD-L1 expression (p <
0.001), we evaluated the relationships between downstream signals and
PD-L1 expression, particularly in three KRAS-mutant adenocarcinoma cell
lines. The MEK inhibitor U0126 (20 μM) significantly decreased the
surface PD-L1 levels by 50-60% compared with dimethyl sulfoxide (p <
0.0001). Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation (100 nM, 15 min)
increased (p < 0.05) and two ERK2 siRNAs as well as KRAS siRNAs decreased
(p < 0.05) PD-L1 expression. Post-transcriptional mechanism by miR-200s
appears not to be in general under the downstream of MAPK in the PD-L1
expression. The transcriptional activity of the potential AP-1 site
(+4785 to +5056 from the transcription start site) in the PD-L1 gene was
demonstrated by luciferase assays, which was inhibited by U0126. The
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated the binding of cJUN to
the AP-1 site. Two STAT3 siRNAs decreased PD-L1 expression by 10-32% in
two of the three KRAS-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (p < 0.05),
while the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 (40 μM) did not change the expression
level. Supervised cluster analysis and gene set enrichment analysis
between the PD-L1-high and -low NSCLCs revealed a correlation between
PD-L1 expression and genes/pathways related to cell motility/adhesion.
These results indicate that MAPK signaling is the dominant downstream
signal responsible for ectopic PD-L1 expression at a transcriptional
level, in which STAT3 is also involved to some extent. Furthermore, MAPK
signaling may control the expression of PD-L1 and several genes related
to enhanced cell motility. Our findings suggest that MAPK is important
for determining PD-L1 expression, which could be useful for targeted
therapies against lung cancers.


