Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noncoding RNA distribution in clear cell renal cell cancer: small
RNA-seq data.


Small noncoding RNAs (sncRNAs) play pivotal roles in biological processes
and may prove to be a tool in cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment.
Noncoding RNAs such as microRNAs (miRNAs), piwi-interacting-RNAs
(piRNAs), long noncoding RNA (lncRNAs) and small nuclear/nucleolar RNAs
(sn/snoRNAs) have recently been investigated to identify their role in
cancer. Approximately 62,700 new cases of kidney cancer are expected each
year in the United States leading to 14,240 deaths, with rates rising
over the past 20 years. Nearly 90% of all kidney cancers will be renal
cell carcinoma, of which 70% will be a clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC) subtype. When detected early most cases can be treated
effectively, however there is a lack of early detection tests. We sought
to identify molecular markers for early detection and diagnosis. We
downloaded publically available (NIH bioproject PRJNA162397) ccRCC small
RNA sequence raw data for noncoding RNA analysis. 22 ccRCC and 11
non-tumor renal cortex patient samples were evaluated. Data was analyzed
by PartekFlow software. sRNA-seq data was annotated to miRNAs with 69
miRNAs aberrantly expressed in ccRCC with 37 being upregulated (top five:
miR-122, miR-210, miR155, miR-224 and miR-21) and 32 being downregulated
(top five: miR-200c, miR-502, miR-20b, miR10a and miR-204). Utilizing
MetaCore software for pathway analysis the majority of expressed miRNAs
were involved in metabolism related signaling pathways. Examining data
for piRNAs revealed 22 which were significantly expressed (8 upregulated
and 14 downregulated). Investigation of lncRNAs revealed 15 to be
downregulated and 27 upregulated. We also uncovered 2 mitochondrial
rRNAs, 10 miscRNAs, 1 snRNA, 7 snoRNAs, and 5 rRNAs in ccRCC samples. Our
comprehensive analysis of publically available small RNA-seq data
identified numerous sncRNAs associated with ccRCC. Pending further
validation, they may prove useful as early detection biomarkers in this
common cancer.


