Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic classification of longitudinally observed small colorectal
polyps.


Introduction:

Colorectal polyps are very common in elderly people with a prevalence of
15-30% reported in screening series. However, only a minority of 5% of
these lesions is estimated to develop into invasive cancers, whereas
others will remain stable or regress over time. In standard practice all
polyps observed during colonoscopy are removed by polypectomy and
therefore, knowledge about their natural history is limited. In this
study, small (6-9mm) colorectal polyps were followed over time and
subsequently resected during colonoscopy.

Aim:

The prevalence of DNA copy number alterations (CNAs), a feature
associated with adenoma to carcinoma progression, was compared in polyps
that morphologically progressed versus those that did not.

Methods:

In the CT-colonography (CTC) arm of the COCOS-trial1 small 6-9mm polyps
were left in situ. After a three-year surveillance interval, growth
according to CTC of 95 small polyps was measured. Based on overall
volumetric change on CTC, polyps were classified as either progressed
(>30% growth), stable (30% to -30% growth) or regressed (In the
CT-colonography (CTC) arm of the COCOS-trial1 small 6-9mm polyps were
left in situ. After a three-year surveillance interval, growth according
to CTC of 95 small polyps was measured. Based on overall volumetric
change on CTC, polyps were classified as either progressed (>30% growth),
stable (30% to -30% growth) or regressed (<-30% growth). From 65 resected
polyps, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded material was retrieved and
reviewed by an expert pathologist (GAM). Of these polyps, 48% (31/65)
progressed, 41% (27/65) remained stable and 11% (7/65) regressed.
Seventy-two percent (47/65) were tubular adenomas, 14% (9/65)
tubulovillous adenomas, 3% (2/65) sessile serrated lesions and 11% (7/65)
hyperplastic polyps. Subsequently, the samples that yielded sufficient
quality DNA were analyzed with low-coverage whole genome sequencing
(HiSeq, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). DNA copy number status was called
with the R-package QDNAseq.

Results:

From 50/68 resected polyps, originating from 38 individuals (mean age of
66.8 years (s.d. 7.0); 63% male), sufficient DNA was available. The mean
surveillance interval of these polyps was 3.27 years (s.d. 0.29).

The mean number of CNAs per sample was 0.8 (range 0-8), the most
frequently observed was 13q gain (20%). No significant differences in
number, or regions of CNAs were observed between polyps that progressed
and the ones that did not change or diminished in size (stable or
regressed). Larger polyps showed more CNAs, of which specifically 13q
gain was more often present (43% in ≥10mm and 8% in The mean number of
CNAs per sample was 0.8 (range 0-8), the most frequently observed was 13q
gain (20%). No significant differences in number, or regions of CNAs were
observed between polyps that progressed and the ones that did not change
or diminished in size (stable or regressed). Larger polyps showed more
CNAs, of which specifically 13q gain was more often present (43% in
≥10mm and 8% in <10mm polyps). Of note, no serrated lesions were
≥10mm. No differences in CNAs were found between the different
histological subtypes.

Conclusions:

In a series of colorectal polyps left in situ for an average 3.27 years,
no difference in prevalence of DNA copy number alterations was observed
between polyps that volumetrically progressed and those that did not. Of
the CNAs observed, 13q gain was most prevalent and found in 43% of the
≥10mm polyps.

1. Stoop, E. M. et al. Participation and yield of colonoscopy versus
non-cathartic CT colonography in population-based screening for
colorectal cancer: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 13, 55-64
(2012).


