Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Familial lung cancer is significantly linked to cancer-associated
genes on five chromosomes.


Lung cancer (LC) is the leading cancer killer of Americans; an estimated
158,000 people will die in the U.S. from LC in 2016. While it is
well-known that LC risk is affected by the environment, particularly
tobacco smoking, there is a substantial genetic risk to LC also. We
examined genotype data from Illumina HumanCore-12v1-0 array (297,000
SNPs) on 175 individuals in 25 extended families with a strong history of
LC recruited by the Genetic Epidemiology of Lung Cancer Consortium. The
purpose of this study is to determine which families are segregating a
high-penetrance genetic risk haplotype so that the most informative
families can be selected for DNA sequencing studies. Quality control was
performed to remove SNPs and individuals with greater than 1% missingness
as well as monomorphic SNPs. SNPs with Mendelian errors in more than one
family were dropped. Identity-by-descent values were calculated to
confirm correct familial relationships; 1 individual was dropped. After
quality control we were left with approximately 245,000 SNPs for
analysis. We performed three types of parametric linkage analyses using
an autosomal dominant model with 40% penetrance in carriers and 1%
penetrance in non-carriers. A disease allele frequency of 0.01 was used.
Standard single variant two-point analysis between the disease and each
marker was performed using TwoPointLods. Multipoint linkage analysis was
performed using SimWalk2. We also performed regional-based linkage
analyses using SEQLinkage and MERLIN. SEQLinkage builds a multiallelic
regional marker (similar to a microsatellite) that corresponds to a gene
or a portion of a gene. Two-point linkage analyses were then performed on
the regional markers using MERLIN. We identified five loci that were
genome-wide significant (HLOD score â‰¥ 3.3) from the regional-based
linkage analyses on 18p11.23 (HLOD = 4.1), 2p22.2 (3.9), 14q13.1 (3.7),
16p13.1 (3.4), and 20q13.11 (3.4). It is particularly exciting that the
scores centered on prospective cancer genes. Our highest score was
centered on PTPRM, a protein tyrosine phosphatase on chromosome 18 that
has been implicated as a LC oncogene. The signal on 20q13 also centered
on another protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPRT) that has been shown to be
mutated in LC cells. The source of the signal on 16p13 was RNA binding
protein RBFOX1, which has been shown to be deleted in LC cell lines and
the source of the signal on 2p22 was LRP1B, a LDL receptor-related
protein that is often inactivated in LC cells. The source of the final
signal on 14q13 was NPAS3, a transcription factor that is a tumor
suppressor in brain tumors. It should be noted that all previous evidence
linking these genes to cancer was based on somatic mutations; this is the
first time any of these genes has been shown to be significantly linked
to germline disease risk in a family-based study. We plan to perform
targeted sequencing on the linked regions to elucidate the exact causal
variant.


