Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: xCT inhibition disrupts redox homeostasis in CD44v-expressing
tumor cells showing glutaminolytic metabolism in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma.


Metabolic changes favoring aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis may
influence the sensitivity of tumor cells to anticancer drugs. We
previously showed that sulfasalazine, an inhibitor of xCT-dependent
cystine transport, selectively induces oxidative damage in
undifferentiated tumor cells that express CD44 variant (CD44v) at a high
level, without affecting CD44v-negative differentiated tumor cells, in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, whether metabolic
changes contribute to the xCT dependency of CD44v-expressing HNSCC cells
has remained unknown. Here we show that CD44v-expressing HNSCC cells
manifest a highly glutaminolytic phenotype and constitutively generate
reactive oxygen species through glutamine metabolism pathway, and that
xCT plays a key role in maintaining redox homeostasis in these cells.
Inhibition of xCT suppressed the consumption of glutamine without
affecting that of glucose in these cells, indicating that
CD44v-expressing HNSCC cells also rely on xCT for maintenance of
glutaminolysis. Furthermore, administration of sulfasalazine, but not
that of the anticancer drug cisplatin, selectively depleted
CD44v-expressing undifferentiated tumor cells positive for the glutamine
transporter ASCT2 in human HNSCC tumors formed in nude mice. Targeting of
xCT is thus a potential therapeutic approach for ASCT2-expressing HNSCC
tumors in which cellular metabolism is shifted toward enhanced
glutaminolysis.


