Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FH (rs367543046, chr1:241661227 A/ATTT) heterozygous carrier
status does not confer risk to hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell
cancer (HLRCC) and prostate cancer.


Fumarate Hydratase (FH) mutations underpin the autosomal recessive
syndrome Fumarate Hydratase deficiency and the autosomal dominant
syndrome Hereditary Leiomyomatous and Renal Cell Carcinoma (HLRCC). The
variant rs367543046, a duplication leading to p. Lys477_Asn478insLys in
FH has strong evidence for risk towards fumarate hydratase deficiency
when occurring in trans to another germline alteration in the FH gene. In
addition, this variant in the heterozygous state has been reported in
ClinVar to predispose to the autosomal dominant condition HLRCC, given
other heterozygous mutations have shown to be pathogenic. Population
level data is sparse to determine the variant’s impact in the
heterozygous state. Here, we show in a series of 1375 cancer cases the
(rs367543046, chr1: 241661227 A/ATTT), variant detected in 7 (0.5%)
individuals with cancer. One patient with bladder cancer had a history of
uterine leiomyomas, but the immunohistochemistry for 2SC was negative,
suggesting that the leiomyomas were not associated with HLRCC. None of
the other 6 carriers of this variant had any features of HLRCC. Notably,
this variant was not detected in any of the patients with renal cancer
(n=178) participating in the study. Since 4/7 prostrate cancer patients
of Ashkenazi ethnicity harbored this variant, we performed a genetic
epidemiology study using 856 Ashkenazi Jewish prostate cancer patients.
The allele frequencies were compared with 557 Ashkenazi Jewish non-cancer
controls. A fisher’s two sided exact test showed that the variant is
not associated with prostate cancer in Jews (P=1, OR 1.12(CI 95%
0.21-7.25). Our findings suggest that the variant, which is pathogenic
for autosomal recessive fumarate hydratase deficiency does not confer
pathogenicity in the heterozygous form for Hereditary Leiomyomatous and
Renal Cell Carcinoma or prostate cancer.

Ashkenazi Jewish Prostate Cancer Patients vs Ashkenazi Jewish Non-Cancer
Patients



Attribute

Ashkenazi Jewish Prostate Cancer Patients

Ashkenazi Jewish Non-Cancer patients



CT

5

3



CC

1707

1151


