Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An ultra-sensitive multiplex allele-specific real-time PCR
(Udx-PCR) assay for detection of ESR1 mutations in metastatic breast
cancer.


Activating mutations of estrogen receptor Î± (ESR1) are attributed to
acquired resistance to estrogen-deprivation therapy in patients with
metastatic breast cancer (MBC). Thus, detection of these mutations is
clinically critical for monitoring early progression and effective
therapeutic options in treatment of BC patients under hormonal therapy.
However, current investigations for detection ESR1 mutations mainly focus
on digital PCR technology due to low abundance of the cfDNA in plasma
samples, which is not a currently feasible method for clinical diagnosis.

Herein, we developed a multiplex allele-specific real-time (ARMS) PCR
assay for detection of ESR1 four mutations (Y537S, Y537C, Y537N, and
D538G) in a single tube reaction. In this real-time PCR system, the
wild-type ESR1 DNA is completely blocked by a modified probe with a
higher annealing temperature, and the mutant gene is selectively
amplified by the modified ARMS primers. The assay was found to be highly
specific and sensitive. With this assay, as low as 0.1% mutant DNA
template in the background of a total of 10ng wild-type genomic DNA could
be detected.

By using this assay, we analyzed the ESR1 mutations in 50 Chinese MBC
FFPE and plasma samples. The ESR1 mutations were detected in 3 FFPE and 6
plasma samples, which were confirmed by pyrophosphate sequencing.

The multiplex allele-specific real-time PCR assay provides a rapid and
reliable diagnostic tool for accurate detection of ESR1 mutations with
potential for clinical application.


