Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell ribogenesis: MYC and the integrity of the RNA
polymerase I-rRNA machinery.


Upregulation of RNA Polymerase (Pol I)-mediated transcription of
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and increased ribogenesis, which are necessary to
sustain the increased metabolic demand of highly proliferating cancer
cells, are hallmarks of cancer. Increased rRNA transcription can be due
deregulation of tumor suppressors and oncogenes that affect Pol I
activity. Overexpression of the MYC oncogene, a potent Pol I activators,
is particularly frequent in cancer. In addition, based on our analysis of
the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), amplification/upregulation of genes
encoding for basal components of the Pol I transcriptional machinery is
also frequent in cancers of various histotype (Rossetti et al., Cell
Cycle, 2016). By using breast and ovarian epithelial cells, we
mechanistically found that: 1) ectopic expression of either MYC or RRN3
(TIF-IA), a key Pol I basal component, by increasing rRNA synthesis, is
sufficient to induce in vitro transformation phenotypes and to promote
cell proliferation; 2) there is a causal link between MYC overexpression
and RRN3 upregulation; 3) MYC- or RRN3-induced rRNA upregulation
sensitizes cells to the anti-proliferative action of drugs inhibiting
rRNA transcription. Our findings provide a rationale for using drugs
targeting rRNA transcription to curb proliferation of cancers cells due
to rRNA upregulation by MYC.

Funding for this study was provided by an RPCI-UPCI Ovarian Cancer Spore
DRP award (NS), the NCI R01 CA127614 grant (NS), the Terri Brodeur Breast
Cancer Foundation (SR), the Susan Komen Foundation (SR), and the NCI P30
CA016056 institutional grant.


