Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the anti-angiogenic properties of merestinib
(LY2801653), an oncokinase inhibitor.


Merestinib (LY2801653) is an orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor
of several oncokinases, including MET, AXL, DDR1/2, MERTK, ROS1, Tie2
(aka TEK), and MKNK1/2. Merestinib has been extensively characterized in
a wide range of preclinical tumor xenograft models and shown to potently
inhibit MET driven and non-MET driven tumor growth. In addition to its
direct antitumor activity, merestinib inhibits angiogenesis and induces a
tumor vessel normalization phenotype in xenograft tumors1. While MET
signaling is important for angiogenesis, the effect of merestinib on
angiogenesis is likely not exclusively driven by MET inhibition. In
co-culture angiogenesis assays, merestinib inhibited VEGF-dependent and
VEGF-independent endothelial cell cord formation2,3 and sprouting4 with
potencies in the low nM range (3-30 nM). In contrast, the MET-specific
kinase inhibitor, PF04217903, only weakly inhibited cord formation and
endothelial sprouting. In an established in vivo matrigel co-implant
vasculogenesis model where VEGFR2 or MET selective inhibition had minimal
effect, merestinib decreased vascular density by 69%. In addition, while
MET antibody emibetuzumab (human anti-MET antibody) plus ramucirumab
(human anti-VEGFR2 antibody) decreased vascular density by 64%,
merestinib plus ramucirumab decreased it by 92%. In a mouse
adenovirus-driven VEGF-A ear angiogenesis model5, treatment with DC101, a
mouse anti-VEGFR2 antibody, or merestinib inhibited angiogenesis; however
the combination of DC101 and merestinib appeared to inhibit it even more.
Finally, in the MKN45 gastric tumor xenograft model, merestinib (T/C =
4.8%) and DC101 (T/C = 15.3%) each significantly inhibited tumor growth
alone and the combination resulted in 27.6% tumor regression and was
significantly better than either single agent alone. Together, these
studies indicate that merestinib has greater effects on angiogenesis than
selective MET inhibition and its actions are not dependent on VEGFR2. In
addition, while in vitro studies show reductions in VEGFR2
phosphorylation with high concentration of merestinib, treatment with
merestinib did not inhibit VEGF dependent phosphorylation of VEGFR2 in
mouse lung tissue at clinically relevant exposures. These data suggest
that the anti-angiogenic activity of merestinib includes activities of
other kinases targeted by merestinib. These data provide rationale and
support for the clinical evaluation of combination of merestinib with
ramucirumab (NCT02745769). 1-Yan et. al. Invest New Drugs.
2013;31:833-844, 2- Falcon et. al. J Hematol Oncol. 2013;6:31, 3- Falcon
et. al. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e106901, 4- Nakatsu et. al. Methods Enzymol.
2008;433:65-82, 5- Nagy et. al. Methods Enzymol. 2008;444:43-64.


