Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of EBV infection in aerobic glycolysis in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.


Accumulating evidence indicates that oncogenic viral protein exerts a
crucial role in activating aerobic glycolysis during tumorigenesis, but
the underlying mechanisms are largely undefined. The Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a trans-membrane
protein with potent cell signaling properties and has tumorigenic
transformation property. Activation of NF-κB is a major signaling
pathway mediating many downstream transformation properties of LMP1. Here
we report that activation of mTORC1 by LMP1 is a key modulator for
activation of NF-κB signaling to mediate aerobic glycolysis. NF-κB
activation is involved for LMP1-induced upregulation of glucose
transptor-1 (Glut-1) transcription and growth of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC) cells. Collectively, blocking the activity of mTORC1 signaling
effectively suppressed LMP1-induced NF-κB activation and Glut-1
transcription. Interfering NF-κB signaling has no effect on mTORC1
activity but effectively altered Glut-1 transcription. Luciferase
promoter assay of Glut-1 also confirmed that Glut-1 is a direct target
gene of NF-κB signaling. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the LMP1
C-terminal activating region (CTAR) 2 is the key domain involved in
mTORC1 activation, mainly through IKKβ-mediated phosphorylation of TSC2
at Ser939. Depletion of Glut-1 effectively led to suppression of aerobic
glycolysis, inhibition of cell proliferation, colony formation, and
attenuation of tumorigenic growth property of LMP1-expressing
nasopharyngeal epithelial (NPE) cells. These findings suggest that
targeting the signaling axis of mTORC1/NF-κB/Glut-1 represents a novel
therapeutic target against NPC.

Acknowledgement: 96 800x600 This project was supported by the General
Research Fund (HKU 779810M, 17120814 and 17161116), CRF equipment grant
(1061402980, Health and Medical Research Fund of Hong Kong (12110782),
AoE grant (AoE/M-06/08) and TBRS grant (T12-401/13-R). We thank Prof.
Dongyan Jin (Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong) for
the kind gifts of IKK related plasmids and Prof. Zhenguo Wu (Division of
Life Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology) for the
discussion and interpretation of the data. We also thank Mr. Tony Chan
for his technical support.


