Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutation detection by target sequence analyses using
tissue-specific panels in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Whole-exome sequencing (WES) studies on esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) have revealed that only a small number of frequently
mutated genes, such as TP53, NOTCH1, NRF2, and ZNF750, are present in
individual tumors, whereas hundreds of others less frequently mutated
genes are accumulated. The mutation detection rate by target sequence
analyses is an important factor for clinical sequence in the course of
ESCC treatment. This study aimed to evaluate the mutation detection rates
of several target sequence analyses for ESCC. Ten pairs of surgically or
endoscopically acquired tumor tissues and corresponding peripheral blood
mononuclear cells were obtained from ESCC patients. We used three types
of target sequence panels for mutation screening in 10 ESCC patients as
follows: 1) Cancer Hotspot Panel (CHPv2), targeting mutation hotspot
regions in the most common 50 human cancer genes that are frequently
mutated (panel size: 22,027 bp), for five patients; 2) TP53 Panel,
covering all exons of TP53 (panel size: 2,359 bp), for five patients; and
3) ESCC Panel, originally designed to target 31 frequently mutated genes
in ESCC (panel size: 210,570 bp), for seven patients. Four missense and
two nonsense mutations in TP53 were detected in CHPv2 and the TP53 Panel.
Furthermore, one missense mutation in FBXW7 and one intronic mutation in
the vicinity of exon 8 in TP53 were also observed in CHPv2 and the TP53
Panel, respectively. In the ESCC Panel, 47 mutations in 17 genes were
detected in seven patients. The mutation detection rates by the TP53
Panel, CHPv2, and ESCC Panel were 593.0/Mb, 63.5/Mb, and 30.4/Mb,
respectively. These mutation detection rates were more than 20-fold
higher than that of WES, which has been reported to be 3.1/Mb for ESCC.
These results suggest that tissue-specific cancer-related gene panels are
a highly effective approach for mutation detection in ESCC.


