Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting jak/stat adaptive mechanism with jak1 inhibitor azd4205
reduces residual disease and prolongs benefit of osimertinib.


EGFR kinase inhibitors have provided tremendous benefit for non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients with EGFR driver mutations. However,
many patients fail to respond or have responses of limited duration.
Accumulating evidence suggests that the JAK1/STAT3 axis plays a role in
tumor escape, and that combined inhibition of EGFR and JAK1 may drive
more complete and durable responses. Here we report AZD4205, a potent
ATP-competitive inhibitor that inhibits JAK1 with a Ki of 2.8 nM and
exhibits excellent selectivity vs. other JAK family kinases and across
the kinome.

Combination of AZD4205 (dosed at 12.5, 25 or 50 mg/kg BID, PO) with
Osimertinib (doses ranging from 1 to 25 mg/kg QD, PO) led to enhanced in
vivo anti-tumor activity in several NSCLC xenograft models driven by
mutant EGFR: H1975 (L858R/T790M), PC-9 (del19), and HCC827 (del19). In
the H1975 model, after 18 days of treatment beginning with 189mm3
established tumors, treatment with osimertinib at 2.5 mg/kg led to tumor
growth inhibition of 92% relative to vehicle. Addition of AZD4205 at 12.5
and 50 mg/kg led to 30% and 69% tumor regression, respectively. AZD4205
dosed at 12.5 and 50 mg/kg BID resulted in pSTAT3 (Y705) knockdown of 72%
and 91% at peak plasma concentration (2H) respectively, and 42% and 86%
at 8H. In the PC-9 model, after 22 days of treatment beginning with
234mm3 established tumors, osimertinib at 1 mg/kg induced an average 41%
regression, and increased to 74% with the addition of 50 mg/kg BID
AZD4205. The volume of vehicle treated tumors increased by 3.7-fold over
this treatment period. In the HCC827 model, beginning with 127mm3
established tumors, osimertinib at 25 mg/kg induced a complete response
in 100% of mice after 11 days of treatment, but tumors regrew to the
average starting volume ~24 days after stopping treatment. When 50 mg/kg
of AZD4205 was added to the osimertinib treatment, regrowth was delayed
by an additional ~7 days. Combination activity was also observed in the
PDX (patient-derived xenograft) model LG1049 (del19 and T790M EGFR
mutations). Beginning with 189mm3 established tumors, osimertinib at 25
mg/kg induced an average 39% regression after 28 days of treatment, which
increased to 56% with the addition of 25 mg/kg AZD4205 on a 4 days on / 3
days off / week schedule. AZD4205 treatment led to 67% knockdown of
pSTAT3 after 4H of treatment in this model.

Our experiments establish AZD4205 as a potent and selective JAK1
inhibitor with desirable biophysical properties. While additional work is
needed to build a patient enrichment strategy, the data generated
supports targeting the adaptive JAK1/STAT3 axis with JAK1 inhibitor
AZD4205 in clinic as a strategy to reduce residual disease and prolong
the benefit of Osimertinib in lung cancer patients with EGFR activating
mutations.


