Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PATZ1 promotes migration and invasion of thyroid cancer cells
through upregulation of the activity of plasminogen activator and matrix
metalloproteinases.


Background: PATZ1, a transcription regulator, has been reported to
function as oncogene or tumor suppressor in several human malignant
neoplasms. The aim of the study was to examine involvement of PATZ1 in
carcinogenesis and progression of thyroid cancer.

Materials and methods: PATZ1 expression in 165 clinical thyroid specimens
obtained from 87 patients were evaluated by IHC. We examined the function
of PATZ1 using an immortalized normal thyroid follicular epithelial cell
line (Nthy-ori 3-1), and four thyroid cancer cell lines; TPC-1 (papillary
cancer), FTC-133 (follicular cancer), FRO and ACT-1 (anaplastic cancer).
Knockdown of PATZ1 in Nthy-ori 3-1 and thyroid cancer cell lines was
performed with siRNA-PATZ1, and overexpression of PATZ1 in thyroid cancer
cell lines was performed with pcDNA3-FLAG-PATZ1.

Results: In the IHC analysis of clinical specimens, nuclear PATZ1
expression in anaplastic carcinoma was significantly less frequently than
that in normal thyroid tissue or well-differentiated carcinoma (Table 1).
Knockdown of PATZ1 in Nthy-ori 3-1 and differentiated thyroid cancer cell
lines (TPC-1, FTC-133) induced morphological change of the cells and
significant increase of cell proliferation and migration as well as
moderate increase of invasion. Furthermore, the expression of u-PA, MMP2
and MMP11 was increased by inhibition of PATZ1 in TPC-1 and FTC-133. On
the other hand, overexpression of PATZ1 in anaplastic cancer cell lines
(FRO and ACT-1) decreased proliferation and migration of the cells along
with the decreased expression of u-PA, MMP2, MMP9 and MMP11.

Conclusion: Our study suggests that PATZ1 might play an important role as
a tumor suppressor in thyroid follicular epithelial cells and might be
involved in progression of thyroid cancer.

Expression of nuclear PATZ1 in thyroid tumor



type

Normal thyroid/ goiter (N=68)

Follicular adenoma (N=5)

Papillary cancer (N=39)

Follicular cancer (N=8 )

Poorly differentiated cancer (N=12)

Anaplastic cancer (N=28)

Medullary cancer (N=5)



positive (%)

68(100%)

4(80.0%)

35(89.7%)

5(62.5%)

7(58.3%)

3(10.7%)

4(80.0%)



negative (%)

0(0%)

1(20.0%)

4(10.3%)

3(37.5%)

5(41.7%)

25(89.3%)

1(20.0%)


