Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human mesodermal-derived CNS metastasis-associated stromal cells
induce a fibrotic response to limit tumor growth.


Metastasis to the central nervous system (CNS) remains a major cause of
mortality and morbidity in patients with systemic cancer. However, the
mechanistic interactions of the neural niche with disseminated tumors
cells in CNS metastases (CM) are still poorly understood. To better
understand the cross-talk between the neural niche and metastatic tumors,
we generated five different patient-derived cell lines (PDCs) originating
from surgically resected CM. To assess the genetic and epigenetic
characteristics of each PDC, DNA and RNA sequencing, and DNA methylation
analysis was performed. Non-tumoral PDCs revealed normal copy number
profiles, and retention of germline mutations as seen in patient-matched
germline DNA. In contrast, one PDC (CM04) resembled its patient tumor,
showing numerous copy number and somatic alterations. RNA-seq and DNA
methylation analysis demonstrated that non-tumoral PDCs highly resembled
each other, suggestive of a common cell of origin. Additionally, PDCs
revealed gene expression signatures associated with cancer associated
fibroblasts, epithelial to mesenchymal transition, and mesenchymal stem
cells. Further in vivo studies demonstrated that CM04 cells were
tumorigenic, whereas non-tumoral PDC (CM08) cells were unable to form
tumors in mice. However, CM04:CM08 mixed tumors were significantly
smaller than CM04 only tumors and revealed induction of a fibrotic
response by immunohistochemistry. These data offer the first evidence
that CNS metastasis-associated stromal cells (cMASCs) produce a collagen
and fibronectin-rich extracellular matrix constituting a protective host
response, which impedes growth of tumor cells. The therapeutic potential
of these cells merits further exploration.


