Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired lapatinib resistant induces EMT-phenotype in breast
cancer cells via Src and RUNX3.


Background: Lapatinib is an effective EGFR and HER2 targeting small
molecular tyrosine kinase inhibitor which is widely used for HER2
positive breast cancer patients. However, patients eventually acquire
resistance, limiting its long-term use. Overexpression of heregulin, a
HER3 ligand, acquired stemness were mechanism that confers resistance to
the anti-HER2 lapatinib. However, still, unknown mechanisms of developing
lapatinib resistant remain as a question to solve. Thus, we tried to find
out there is a novel mechanism which related to lapatinib resistant, and
any specified molecules were involved in this process.

Methods: Acquired resistant SK-BR-3 cells were established by chronic
exposure to lapatinib or trastuzumab. Lapatinib or trastuzumab
sensitivity were confirmed by MTT assay. Western blotting was used to
determine signal transduction molecule changes. Wound healing assay and
Boyden chamber assay were conducted for verifying invasive ability. Whole
exome sequencing (WES) and siRNA knock-down system were used for further
analysis.

Results: Lapatinib resistant (LR) cell lines showed down-regulation of
p-HER2, p-Akt, and p-Erk. The activity of Src family kinase was increased
in LR cells. Vimentin, famous EMT marker, is also increased in LR cells.
Migration and invasion were significantly increased in LR cells.
Correlated with a missense mutation of RUNX3, which identified by WES,
expression of RUNX3 was decreased in LR cells. Moreover, siRNA knock-down
parental cells showed more resistance to lapatinib.

Conclusion: The increase of Src activation, cell migration, and invasion
was observed in LR cells. RUNX3, which identified by WES, affected to
lapatinib sensitivity in SK-BR-3 cells. Therefore, RUNX3 might be a
specified molecule, which partially contributes resistance to lapatinib.


