Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic role of GAEC1 and its potential modulation with p53 in
pathogenesis of colon cancer.


Introduction: GAEC1 (Gene amplified in esophageal cancer 1), is
frequently amplified and overexpressed in colon cancer tissues. In the
present study, we aimed to unveil the oncogenic potential of GAEC1 in
carcinogenesis of colon cancer by studying the underlying cellular
functions and molecular interactions by in vitro and in vivo experiments.

Method: Transient overexpression of GAEC1 with pcDNA3.1-GAEC1 and
silencing with GAEC1-siRNA was performed and several downstream assays
were done such as migration, clonogenic and apoptotic assay. Analysis of
cell kinetics was done using flow cytometry and cell counting kit-8 was
used for cell proliferation assay. Immunofluorescence and Western blot
assay were used to determine the expression of different target proteins.
Co-immunoprecipitation was used to confirm the protein-protein
interaction. For xenotransplantation the severely combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mice (4 groups, 6 in each group) were injected
subcutaneously with GAEC1 shRNA and control shRNA transfected (stable)
SW480 and SW48 colon cancer cells.

Result: The overexpression of GAEC1 increased cell proliferation,
migration, reduced apoptosis in colon cancer cells. Also, these cells
showed cell cycle arrest at the synthetic phase, activation of Bcl-2,
K-ras, pAKT proteins as well as inhibition of p53, PUMA, p21 and BAX
proteins. Conversely, knockdown of GAEC1 reduced cell proliferation,
migration, decreased the phosphorylation of AKT, and induced apoptosis,
G2/M phase arrest and cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP).
Co-immunoprecipitation revealed GAEC1â€™s interaction with p53. In
addition ectopic over expression and silencing of GAEC1 lead to
reciprocal effects of p53 protein expression. Moreover, knockdown of
GAEC1 reduced the nuclear translocation of murine double minute 2 protein
(mdm2) indicating that GAEC1 is responsible for the degradation of p53
through the direct interaction between mdm2-p53 in nucleus. Furthermore,
our in vivo data demonstrate that the loss of GAEC1 inhibits the tumor
formation in xenograft model.

Conclusion: Collectively our study demonstrates that GAEC1 exhibits the
oncogenic role in colon cancer by reducing expression of p53 through
protein-protein interaction which leads to the inhibition of PUMA, p21,
BAX, and activation of Bcl-2, K-ras and pAKT protein expression.


