Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Crosstalk between MDSCs and Th17.


Expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) within the tumor is
a known barrier to successful cancer immunotherapy. MDSCs are
heterogeneous population of immature myeloid cells with potent
immunosuppressive activity. Emerging evidences in the recent years define
the role of immunosuppressive activity of MDSCs on different subsets of
CD4+ T cells, however the exact effect of MDSCs on inflammatory Th17
cells during tumor progression is not clear. Here we demonstrate the
immunosuppressive effect of MDSCs on Th17 cells. We further show that the
interaction between MDSCs and Th17 is not unilateral and reveal that Th17
cells can promote the immunosuppressive effect of MDSCs. MDSCs, either
isolated from tumor bearing mice or generated in vitro from bone marrow
(BM-derived MDSCs), can both suppress IL-17A expression. Our data also
demonstrate that IFNg, produced by Th17 cells is essential for the
immunosuppressive activity of BM-derived MDSCs on IL-17A expression and
further that the IFNgR1-driven signaling is important for Nos2-mediated
immunosuppressive effect of BM-derived MDSCs on IL-17A expression.
Understanding the molecular mechanism of the interplay between MDSCs and
Th17 cells may help to develop more specific targeted therapy for cancer
immunotherapy and improve therapeutic efficacy of the existing therapies
against cancer.


