Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ELMO1 promotes metastasis in colorectal cancer cells via
activation of MAPK/ERK signaling pathway.


Background and Aim: Engulfment and cell motility 1 (ELMO1) has been
linked to the invasive phenotype of various types of cancer cells such as
glioma cells, rhabdomyosarcoma cells, ovarian cancer cells and so on.
However, the biological functions of ELMO1 in colorectal cancer (CRC)
cells remains unclear. The aim of this study is to evaluate the role of
ELMO1 in the metastasis in CRC.

Methods: The expression level of ELMO1 was detected using quantitative
RT-PCR and western blot in 9 CRC cell lines and 1 human colon epithelial
cell line NCM460. ELMO1 was overexpressed via lentiviral vector system
and silenced using specific small interference RNA (si-ELMO1) in HCT116
and SW620. Then wound-healing, migration assay and invasion assay were
carried out to investigate the function of ELMO1 in CRC cells. Western
blot was performed to detect the change of signaling molecule
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) following the
down-regulated or up-regulated expression of ELMO1.

Results: ELMO1 expression was inhibited by si-ELMO1 and was overexpressed
by ELMO1-cDNA in HCT116 and SW620. Ectopic expression of ELMO1 in HCT116
and SW620 was shown to promote migration and invasion, while inhibited
ELMO1 expression suppressed the capacity of cell migration and invasion.
Furthermore, ELMO1 induced migration and invasion in CRC cells was found
to be associated with the activation of MAPK/ERK pathway.

Conclusions: High expression of ELMO1 was found to be associated with the
metastasis via the activation of MAPK/ERK signaling pathway. This finding
provides a molecular basis for the role of ELMO1 in the progression of
CRC, which may suggest a novel target for the treatment of CRC.


