Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of amphiregulin in breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide and
afflicts more than 3.1 million women in the US alone. The epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently overexpressed in breast
cancer and is associated with poor clinical outcome. Several therapies
involving anti-EGFR agents have been developed to target breast cancer.
However, clinical trials have shown mixed outcomes with these therapies.
Amphiregulin (AREG) is a ligand for EGFR that mediates estrogen-induced
mammary ductal morphogenesis during development. Expression of AREG is
enriched in invasive breast carcinomas, particularly ERÎ±-positive breast
tumors. Studies have shown that AREG increases the in vitro invasiveness
of breast cancer cells. Furthermore, suppression of AREG expression in
transformed human breast epithelial cells reduces tumor formation when
injected in nude mice. These observations suggest that AREG plays an
important role in breast cancer development and progression. To
investigate the role of AREG in breast cancer development and
progression, we utilized a spontaneous mammary tumor mouse model where
oncogenesis is driven by expression of the polyoma middle T oncoprotein
(PyMT) through the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. We have
crossed AREG knockout mice with the MMTV-PyMT mice to generate AREG KO
mice that spontaneously form mammary tumors. Tumors in AREG KO PyMT mice
initially grow more quickly but eventually reach 2 cm in diameter at a
relatively time as compared to tumors formed in AREG WT PyMT mice.
Histologically, AREG KO tumors appear more differentiated and display a
greater proportion of tumor stroma. This prompted us to further
hypothesize that AREG may have diverse effects in the tumoral or stromal
compartment of developing tumors. To individually assess the effects of
AREG knockout in the tumor cells and the stroma, we utilized a
transplantation model in which we prepared tumor chunks from AREG WT and
KO PyMT tumors and transplanted them into AREG WT and KO mice. Through
this model, we have found that AREG expression in the tumor has a greater
impact on tumor growth and progression than the tumor stroma. Regardless
of the AREG status of the recipient mice, AREG KO tumors display a
significant growth impairment and reduced transplant efficiency. In
summary, these results demonstrate that AREG is important for mammary
tumor progression.


