Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR/Cas9-based oncogene editing enables characterization of
rare mutations in cancer cells.


In the past decade new insights into key oncogenic pathways and the
development of targeted therapies enabled the success of precision
medicine. However, only a small part of the cancer genome can be targeted
effectively. This is in part due to the fact that the number of cancer
cell models for a given oncogenic mutation is limited. We hypothesized
that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing may enhance the ability to
functionally study rare genomic lesions or resistance mutations that
arise in patients under therapy. As a proof of concept we established,
genetically modified PC9 lung cancer cells that harbor an activating EGFR
ex19 deletion (EGFRdel E746-A750) into double mutated (EGFRdel
E746-A750+T790M) or triple mutated (EGFRdel E746-A750+T790M+C797S) EGFR
in order to induce resistance against known EGFR inhibitors. These cell
lines fully recapitulated the phenotypic response pattern to first and
third generation EGFR inhibitors that have been observed in patients
harboring these clinically relevant resistance mutations. In a next step
we switched the dependency of PC9 cells from the intrinsic oncogenic EGFR
mutation into a rare ex20 SVDins mutation (EGFRD770_N771insSVD) that is
typically associated with resistance towards all known EGFR inhibitors.
Again, we observed a shift in the response to targeted inhibition of EGFR
when compared to parental cells. Since the methodological principles can
be applied to an array on known oncogenic mutations our approach may
serve as a versatile platform for the functional study of oncogenic
mutations that are found in patients. We envision that such reprogrammed
cells may be of use for the screening of novel targeted therapeutics and
therefore may enable the development of mutation specific drugs that are
currently lacking for the majority of patients.


