Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Psychosocial predictors of life satisfaction among married women
with breast cancer.


Introduction: Breast cancer presents a challenge to the totality of a
womanâ€™s life. Correlates of life satisfaction among married women with
breast cancer have not been very well explored. Purpose: This study seeks
to determine the relationship that exists between life satisfaction with
depression, cognitive emotional regulation, sexuality, self-concept,
dejection, interpersonal conflict and social support among married women
with breast cancer in Southwest Nigeria. It also seeks to ascertain which
of these variables predict life satisfaction among the respondents.

Method: The variables in the study were assessed using modified
standardized instruments which were revalidated for cultural suitability
after ethical approvals were obtained in each of the 5 centres involved
in the study. The instruments were given to breast cancer patients after
informed consent to participate in the study have been obtained.

Result: The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were in
the age range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease.
Analysis of data showed that significant linear relationship exists
between life satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and
depression (r = .200**; p Result: The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)}
of the participants were in the age range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%)
had stage III disease. Analysis of data showed that significant linear
relationship exists between life satisfaction of married women with
breast cancer and depression (r = .200**; p < .001), self-concept (r =
.306**; p Result: The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the
participants were in the age range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had
stage III disease. Analysis of data showed that significant linear
relationship exists between life satisfaction of married women with
breast cancer and depression (r = .200**; p < .001), self-concept (r =
.306**; p < .001), cognitive emotional regulation (r = .398**; p Result:
The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were in the age
range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease. Analysis of
data showed that significant linear relationship exists between life
satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and depression (r =
.200**; p < .001), self-concept (r = .306**; p < .001), cognitive
emotional regulation (r = .398**; p < .001), dejection (r = .226**; p
Result: The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were in
the age range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease.
Analysis of data showed that significant linear relationship exists
between life satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and
depression (r = .200**; p < .001), self-concept (r = .306**; p < .001),
cognitive emotional regulation (r = .398**; p < .001), dejection (r =
.226**; p < .001), interpersonal conflict (r = .352**; p Result: The
larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were in the age
range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease. Analysis of
data showed that significant linear relationship exists between life
satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and depression (r =
.200**; p < .001), self-concept (r = .306**; p < .001), cognitive
emotional regulation (r = .398**; p < .001), dejection (r = .226**; p <
.001), interpersonal conflict (r = .352**; p < .001), anxiety (r =.316**;
p Result: The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were
in the age range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease.
Analysis of data showed that significant linear relationship exists
between life satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and
depression (r = .200**; p < .001), self-concept (r = .306**; p < .001),
cognitive emotional regulation (r = .398**; p < .001), dejection (r =
.226**; p < .001), interpersonal conflict (r = .352**; p < .001), anxiety
(r =.316**; p < .001), sexuality (r =.305*; p Result: The larger
proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were in the age range of
46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease. Analysis of data
showed that significant linear relationship exists between life
satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and depression (r =
.200**; p < .001), self-concept (r = .306**; p < .001), cognitive
emotional regulation (r = .398**; p < .001), dejection (r = .226**; p <
.001), interpersonal conflict (r = .352**; p < .001), anxiety (r =.316**;
p < .001), sexuality (r =.305*; p < .001) and social support (r = .534; p
Result: The larger proportion {148 or 40.5%)} of the participants were in
the age range of 46-55 years and 112 (30.7%) had stage III disease.
Analysis of data showed that significant linear relationship exists
between life satisfaction of married women with breast cancer and
depression (r = .200**; p < .001), self-concept (r = .306**; p < .001),
cognitive emotional regulation (r = .398**; p < .001), dejection (r =
.226**; p < .001), interpersonal conflict (r = .352**; p < .001), anxiety
(r =.316**; p < .001), sexuality (r =.305*; p < .001) and social support
(r = .534; p < .001). There were also significant correlations among the
independent variables.

Conclusion: Psychosocial factors are potent predictors of life
satisfaction among married women with breast cancer. Based on the
findings, it was recommended that psycho-social intervention based on the
factors identified as causative agents of life satisfaction should be
developed and implemented for married individuals.


