Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The emergence of resistance to tamoxifen in relation to menopausal
status, HER-2 status, status of steroid receptor and lymph nodes
metastases status.


Background: The study used data from medical and counselling of patients
who were diagnosed with hormonedependent breast cancer. Aim: The
objective of the paper is to identify within a group of patients
diagnosed with hormone sensitive breast cancer and those who have
received adjuvant tamoxifen, and then to isolate the patients with whom
the therapeutic effect of tamoxifen stopped.

Methods: The study analyzed 153 patients in the period from 2005 to 2011,
at the Public Health Institution Hospital, Sveti Vraƒçevi" in Bijeljina.
Resistance to tamoxifen was developed by 60 patients (39.2%) and 93
patients (60.8%) did not develop resistance to it.

Results: More common emergence of resistance is in the premenopausal
group of patients (pResults: More common emergence of resistance is in
the premenopausal group of patients (p<0.001). Statistically significant
difference in frequency of resistance to tamoxifen was observed in the
group of patients with ER-/PrR+ status of steroid receptors (pResults:
More common emergence of resistance is in the premenopausal group of
patients (p<0.001). Statistically significant difference in frequency of
resistance to tamoxifen was observed in the group of patients with
ER-/PrR+ status of steroid receptors (p<0.001). In relation to HER-2
status of diagnosed cancer, a statistically significant difference in
frequency of resistance emergence during tamoxifen therapy in patients
with HER2-positive status (pResults: More common emergence of resistance
is in the premenopausal group of patients (p<0.001). Statistically
significant difference in frequency of resistance to tamoxifen was
observed in the group of patients with ER-/PrR+ status of steroid
receptors (p<0.001). In relation to HER-2 status of diagnosed cancer, a
statistically significant difference in frequency of resistance emergence
during tamoxifen therapy in patients with HER2-positive status (p<0.001)
was observed. We found that there is a statistically significant
difference between patients with metastatic in lymph nodes compared to
patients who had no metastases in lymph nodes (X2=39.494; pResults: More
common emergence of resistance is in the premenopausal group of patients
(p<0.001). Statistically significant difference in frequency of
resistance to tamoxifen was observed in the group of patients with
ER-/PrR+ status of steroid receptors (p<0.001). In relation to HER-2
status of diagnosed cancer, a statistically significant difference in
frequency of resistance emergence during tamoxifen therapy in patients
with HER2-positive status (p<0.001) was observed. We found that there is
a statistically significant difference between patients with metastatic
in lymph nodes compared to patients who had no metastases in lymph nodes
(X2=39.494; p<0.001).

Conclusions: The analysis of menopausal status of patients, status of
ER/PgR receptors status, HER-2 status of diagnosed cancer and status of
lymph nodes trying to sort out the parameters on the basis of which a
group of patients who can be expected to develop resistance to tamoxifen
could be differentiated.


