Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene 33/Mig6 regulates apoptosis and the DNA damage response
through independent mechanisms.


Gene 33 (Mig6, ERRFI1) is an inducible adaptor/scaffold protein whose
expression can be induced by both stress and mitogenic signals. It
contains multiple domains for protein-protein interaction and is involved
in a broad spectrum of cellular functions including cell proliferation,
cell migration, cell apoptosis, and cell senescence. Many functions of
Gene 33 are attributable to its ability to bind to the kinase domain of
the EGFR family receptor tyrosine kinases thereby inhibiting their
activities. Gene 33 also binds and activates tyrosine kinase c-Abl and is
involved in other signing pathways such as NF-ÎºB, HGF, and JNK. Growing
evidence at the genetic, cellular, and animal levels indicates that Gene
33 functions as a tumor suppressor in the lung. Gene 33 has been shown to
promote apoptosis. A recent study has linked this protein to the DNA
damage response induced by hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)]. In the current
study we find that ectopic expression of Gene 33 strongly induces
apoptosis by both activating the c-Abl/p73 pathway and inhibiting the
EGFR/AKT pathways in BEAS-2B lung epithelial cells and A549 lung
carcinoma cells. Surprisingly, ectopic expression of Gene 33 also
triggers the DNA damage response in an ATM-dependent fashion and through
pathways with and without association with apoptosis. We observed
striking presence of Gene 33 in the nucleus and chromatin, which is in
contrast with the belief that Gene 33 is an exclusively cytoplasmic
protein. Our data show that chromatin localization of Gene 33 is
partially dependent on the EBD motif of Gene 33, a domain required for
interaction with EGFR and c-Abl. Our data also indicate that Gene 33 may
regulate chromatin targeting of c-Abl and EGFR. Furthermore we find that
both endogenous and ectopically expressed Gene 33 strongly interact with
histone H2AX. Our data have revealed potential
nuclear/chromatin-associated mechanisms that underline the function of
Gene 33 in apoptosis and the DNA damage response.


