Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TET1 mediated hypomethylation activates oncogenic signaling
pathways in triple negative breast cancer.


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast cancer that
occurs in 15-20% of patients, and is defined by tumors that do not
overexpress the estrogen, progesterone and HER2 receptors. This
aggressive subtype has a significantly worse overall survival compared to
non-TNBC and importantly, these patients lack options for targeted
therapy. To identify novel subtype-specific therapeutic targets, we must
first understand the biological underpinnings of the disease. DNA
methylation is a hallmark of cancer, as it can regulate gene expression
of both tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. We have found that TN
tumors have widespread genome-wide hypomethylation when compared to other
breast cancer subtypes and normal breast controls. TET1 is a DNA
demethylase that converts 5-methyl cytosine into 5-hydroxymethyl
cytosine, which can be further oxidized into un-methylated cytosine. To
determine if TET1 could possibly play a role in TNBC hypomethylation, we
analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation, DNA mutation and RNA-seq datasets
from the TCGA breast cancer cohort. We identified a subset of TN patients
that upregulate TET1 and display DNA hypomethylation. To identify the
hypomethylated TET1 target genes, we computed Spearman correlations
between TET1 expression and methylation % for 450,000 sites (450K array)
across 67 TNBC patients. Filtering for sites with rTriple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast cancer that occurs in 15-20% of
patients, and is defined by tumors that do not overexpress the estrogen,
progesterone and HER2 receptors. This aggressive subtype has a
significantly worse overall survival compared to non-TNBC and
importantly, these patients lack options for targeted therapy. To
identify novel subtype-specific therapeutic targets, we must first
understand the biological underpinnings of the disease. DNA methylation
is a hallmark of cancer, as it can regulate gene expression of both tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes. We have found that TN tumors have
widespread genome-wide hypomethylation when compared to other breast
cancer subtypes and normal breast controls. TET1 is a DNA demethylase
that converts 5-methyl cytosine into 5-hydroxymethyl cytosine, which can
be further oxidized into un-methylated cytosine. To determine if TET1
could possibly play a role in TNBC hypomethylation, we analyzed
genome-wide DNA methylation, DNA mutation and RNA-seq datasets from the
TCGA breast cancer cohort. We identified a subset of TN patients that
upregulate TET1 and display DNA hypomethylation. To identify the
hypomethylated TET1 target genes, we computed Spearman correlations
between TET1 expression and methylation % for 450,000 sites (450K array)
across 67 TNBC patients. Filtering for sites with r<-0.3 revealed 42,559
sites negatively correlated with TET1 expression. Cluster analysis of the
sites that lose methylation compared to normal breast (12,807 CpG sites)
revealed two distinct clusters. Cluster 1 (42% of TNBC cases) were TET1
high and hypomethylated, while cluster 2 (58%) looked more like normal
breast controls. Gene set enrichment analysis of the hypomethylated genes
revealed Hippo Signaling, Pathways in Cancer and PI3K-Akt Signaling as
significantly enriched, with pTriple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a
subtype of breast cancer that occurs in 15-20% of patients, and is
defined by tumors that do not overexpress the estrogen, progesterone and
HER2 receptors. This aggressive subtype has a significantly worse overall
survival compared to non-TNBC and importantly, these patients lack
options for targeted therapy. To identify novel subtype-specific
therapeutic targets, we must first understand the biological
underpinnings of the disease. DNA methylation is a hallmark of cancer, as
it can regulate gene expression of both tumor suppressor genes and
oncogenes. We have found that TN tumors have widespread genome-wide
hypomethylation when compared to other breast cancer subtypes and normal
breast controls. TET1 is a DNA demethylase that converts 5-methyl
cytosine into 5-hydroxymethyl cytosine, which can be further oxidized
into un-methylated cytosine. To determine if TET1 could possibly play a
role in TNBC hypomethylation, we analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation,
DNA mutation and RNA-seq datasets from the TCGA breast cancer cohort. We
identified a subset of TN patients that upregulate TET1 and display DNA
hypomethylation. To identify the hypomethylated TET1 target genes, we
computed Spearman correlations between TET1 expression and methylation %
for 450,000 sites (450K array) across 67 TNBC patients. Filtering for
sites with r<-0.3 revealed 42,559 sites negatively correlated with TET1
expression. Cluster analysis of the sites that lose methylation compared
to normal breast (12,807 CpG sites) revealed two distinct clusters.
Cluster 1 (42% of TNBC cases) were TET1 high and hypomethylated, while
cluster 2 (58%) looked more like normal breast controls. Gene set
enrichment analysis of the hypomethylated genes revealed Hippo Signaling,
Pathways in Cancer and PI3K-Akt Signaling as significantly enriched, with
p<0.001. In addition, only 4% of patients in cluster 1 have
mutations/genomic alterations in the PI3K pathway, compared to 29% of
cluster 2 patients, p=0.01. Most strikingly, analysis of phosphorylated
EIF4EBP1 RPPA proteomic data revealed TET1 high patients have increased
PI3K pathway activity, even though they lack mutations in the pathway,
p=0.02. We hypothesize that the PI3K hyper-activation, in part, can be
explained by TET1 upregulation and target gene demethylation. In TET1
knock out MDA-MB-231 cells, we observed a reduction in phosphorylated
4E-BP1, suggesting loss of PI3K activity is concomitant with loss of TET1
as well as decreased cellular proliferation (pTriple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) is a subtype of breast cancer that occurs in 15-20% of
patients, and is defined by tumors that do not overexpress the estrogen,
progesterone and HER2 receptors. This aggressive subtype has a
significantly worse overall survival compared to non-TNBC and
importantly, these patients lack options for targeted therapy. To
identify novel subtype-specific therapeutic targets, we must first
understand the biological underpinnings of the disease. DNA methylation
is a hallmark of cancer, as it can regulate gene expression of both tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes. We have found that TN tumors have
widespread genome-wide hypomethylation when compared to other breast
cancer subtypes and normal breast controls. TET1 is a DNA demethylase
that converts 5-methyl cytosine into 5-hydroxymethyl cytosine, which can
be further oxidized into un-methylated cytosine. To determine if TET1
could possibly play a role in TNBC hypomethylation, we analyzed
genome-wide DNA methylation, DNA mutation and RNA-seq datasets from the
TCGA breast cancer cohort. We identified a subset of TN patients that
upregulate TET1 and display DNA hypomethylation. To identify the
hypomethylated TET1 target genes, we computed Spearman correlations
between TET1 expression and methylation % for 450,000 sites (450K array)
across 67 TNBC patients. Filtering for sites with r<-0.3 revealed 42,559
sites negatively correlated with TET1 expression. Cluster analysis of the
sites that lose methylation compared to normal breast (12,807 CpG sites)
revealed two distinct clusters. Cluster 1 (42% of TNBC cases) were TET1
high and hypomethylated, while cluster 2 (58%) looked more like normal
breast controls. Gene set enrichment analysis of the hypomethylated genes
revealed Hippo Signaling, Pathways in Cancer and PI3K-Akt Signaling as
significantly enriched, with p<0.001. In addition, only 4% of patients in
cluster 1 have mutations/genomic alterations in the PI3K pathway,
compared to 29% of cluster 2 patients, p=0.01. Most strikingly, analysis
of phosphorylated EIF4EBP1 RPPA proteomic data revealed TET1 high
patients have increased PI3K pathway activity, even though they lack
mutations in the pathway, p=0.02. We hypothesize that the PI3K
hyper-activation, in part, can be explained by TET1 upregulation and
target gene demethylation. In TET1 knock out MDA-MB-231 cells, we
observed a reduction in phosphorylated 4E-BP1, suggesting loss of PI3K
activity is concomitant with loss of TET1 as well as decreased cellular
proliferation (p<0.01). Furthermore, breast cancer cell lines with high
TET1 (but not low TET1) are sensitive to drugs targeting the PI3K/ERK
pathway (XMD8-85, AZ628, TGX221). In addition to explaining and
predicting PI3K inhibitor sensitivity in breast cancer, our studies may
establish TET1 as a TNBC specific oncogene that could serve as a novel
druggable target for therapeutic intervention.


