Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of thyroid nodules in residents of Belarus exposed to
Chernobyl fallout as children and adolescents.


Context: The relationship between childhood radiation exposure and
thyroid nodules has not been comprehensively evaluated in young adults or
for nodules with varying histological or ultrasound features.

Objective: To examine the association between internal I-131 thyroid
radiation dose and thyroid nodules in young adults exposed during
childhood.

Design, setting, and participants: In this cross-sectional study, we
screened 11,970 residents of Belarus aged ≤18 years at the time of the
Chernobyl nuclear accident (April 1986) for thyroid disease (median age
21 years). Screening consisted of thyroid palpation, ultrasonography,
blood and urine analysis, and medical follow-up when appropriate.
Eligible participants (N=11,421) had intact thyroid glands and doses
estimated using direct individual thyroid activity measurements.

Main outcome measures: Excess odds ratios per gray (EOR/Gy) for any
thyroid nodule and for nodules grouped by histological and ultrasound
characteristics selected a priori.

Results: Risk of any thyroid nodule was associated with increasing I-131
in the entire dose range (0.001-39 Gy) and radiation-related risk
increased with younger age at exposure. For participants exposed to
Results: Risk of any thyroid nodule was associated with increasing I-131
in the entire dose range (0.001-39 Gy) and radiation-related risk
increased with younger age at exposure. For participants exposed to <5
Gy, we found EORs/Gy (95% CI) of 0.70 (0.33, 1.18) for any nodule, 0.32
(Results: Risk of any thyroid nodule was associated with increasing I-131
in the entire dose range (0.001-39 Gy) and radiation-related risk
increased with younger age at exposure. For participants exposed to <5
Gy, we found EORs/Gy (95% CI) of 0.70 (0.33, 1.18) for any nodule, 0.32
(<-0.03, 0.70) for non-neoplastic nodules, 3.82 (0.87, 15.52) for
neoplastic nodules, 0.27 (Results: Risk of any thyroid nodule was
associated with increasing I-131 in the entire dose range (0.001-39 Gy)
and radiation-related risk increased with younger age at exposure. For
participants exposed to <5 Gy, we found EORs/Gy (95% CI) of 0.70 (0.33,
1.18) for any nodule, 0.32 (<-0.03, 0.70) for non-neoplastic nodules,
3.82 (0.87, 15.52) for neoplastic nodules, 0.27 (<-0.13, 0.70) for
nodules Results: Risk of any thyroid nodule was associated with
increasing I-131 in the entire dose range (0.001-39 Gy) and
radiation-related risk increased with younger age at exposure. For
participants exposed to <5 Gy, we found EORs/Gy (95% CI) of 0.70 (0.33,
1.18) for any nodule, 0.32 (<-0.03, 0.70) for non-neoplastic nodules,
3.82 (0.87, 15.52) for neoplastic nodules, 0.27 (<-0.13, 0.70) for
nodules <10 mm, 2.12 (0.96, 4.60) for nodules ≥10 mm, 0.67 (0.30, 1.19)
for single nodules, and 0.59 (Results: Risk of any thyroid nodule was
associated with increasing I-131 in the entire dose range (0.001-39 Gy)
and radiation-related risk increased with younger age at exposure. For
participants exposed to <5 Gy, we found EORs/Gy (95% CI) of 0.70 (0.33,
1.18) for any nodule, 0.32 (<-0.03, 0.70) for non-neoplastic nodules,
3.82 (0.87, 15.52) for neoplastic nodules, 0.27 (<-0.13, 0.70) for
nodules <10 mm, 2.12 (0.96, 4.60) for nodules ≥10 mm, 0.67 (0.30, 1.19)
for single nodules, and 0.59 (<-0.29, 2.05) for multiple nodules
(centered at age 5 years at exposure).

Conclusions: Childhood exposure to internal I-131 is associated with
thyroid nodules of various histological/ultrasound characteristics, but
magnitude of the risk varies substantially.


