Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of KRAS variant in a cohort of resected HPV negative
HNSCC.


Background: A single nucleotide polymorphism in let-7 complementary site
6 (LCS-6) of the KRAS 3’UTR reduces KRAS inhibition by the let-7 family
of miRNA. It is associated with increased risk and greater proliferation
of NSCLC tumors, and poor outcomes in ovarian cancers. It is also
associated with platinum resistance in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). The excision repair cross-complementing group 1 enzyme
(ERCC1) plays an important role in nucleotide excision repair and double
strand break repair, also affecting platinum resistance. We measured
ERCC1 expression and KRAS LCS-6 variant status as prognostic markers for
HNSCC outcome in a series of p16 negative tumors.

Methods: KRAS variant status was determined by PCR (MiraDx) from DNA
extracted from 99 available cases of p16 negative HNSCC in the Fox Chase
Cancer Center Biosample Repository. Pearson’s Chi-squared tests and
Wilcoxon tests were used to compare patient/tumor characteristics,
including ERCC1 (HPA029773, Sigma) expression which was analyzed
previously, by KRAS variant status. Overall survival was examined using
Kaplan-Meier curves with log-rank tests for significance, and Cox
proportional hazards regressions controlling for stage, grade, and tumor
site.

Results: A set of 99 p16 negative tumors (1990-2002) were analyzed: 62%
male, 92% white, 53% moderately differentiated, 29% poorly
differentiated. 72% stage III/IV disease. Smoking status was: 32%
current, 15% never, 32% past smoker. Primary site of disease: 13%
glottis, 44% oral cavity, 14% oropharynx, 20% oral tongue. The KRAS
variant was identified in 27/99 (27%) of tissue samples, and in 21/62
(33%) of male patients versus 6/37 (16%) of female patients (P=0.06).
Comparing by histologic grade the KRAS-variant was identified in 2/11
(18%) well differentiated tumors, 15/37 (40%) moderately differentiated
and 9/29 (31%) poorly differentiated tumors (P=0.81). On univariate
analysis, there was a non-significant increase in OS among all
KRAS-variant patients (p=0.09) and those treated with surgery and
adjuvant radiation (p=0.08). On multivariate analysis, the direction of
the effect was maintained (all patients: HR=0.65, P=0.23; radiation
subgroup: HR=0.41, P=0.06). There was no association between KRAS variant
and ERCC 1 expression analyzed as a continuous variable (p = 0.70).

Conclusions: In this small series, there was no association between the
KRAS-variant and ERCC1 expression. Trends suggesting improved outcomes
among KRAS-variant HPV negative patients treated with adjuvant radiation
warrant further study.


