Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-additive and interaction effects of HLA class 2 polymorphism
contributing to risk of glioma.


Although genome-wide association studies have identified a number of
susceptibility loci for adult glioma, little is still known regarding
whether polymorphisms in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region
contribute risk. HLA associations have previously been reported for a
number of malignancies, with selected HLA polymorphisms investigated in a
subset of glioma studies. However, no systematic analysis has been
conducted to date, and no investigation into potential non-additive
effects of such associations has been described. In this study, we
conducted comprehensive genetic analyses of HLA variants in the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region among 1,746 adult glioma patients
and 2,312 controls from the GliomaScan Consortium. Genotype data were
generated with the Illumina 660-Quad array, containing 1,822 SNP probes
across the MHC region. We imputed HLA alleles using a reference panel of
5,225 individuals in the Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium who
underwent high-resolution HLA typing via next-generation sequencing.
Subjects were of European-ancestry, and case-control comparisons were
adjusted for population stratification using ancestry-informative
principal components. Because alleles in different loci across the MHC
region are linked, we created multi-locus haplotypes consisting of genes
DRB1, DQA1, and DQB1. Although none of the haplotypes were associated
with glioma in additive models, DRB1*15:01-DQA1*01:02-DQB1*06:02 showed
an improvement in model fit after the inclusion of a non-additive term,
which was significant after Bonferroni correction (P = 2.5x10-3).
Furthermore, the interaction of DRB1*15:01-DQA1*01:02-DQB1*06:02 with
haplotype DRB1*04:01-DQA1*03:01- DQB1*03:01 resulted in a 3.80-fold
increase in the odds of glioma (P = 8.8x10-3). Our results indicate that
the DRB1*15:01-DQA1*01:02-DQB1*06:02 haplotype contributes to the risk of
glioma via a dominant effect, with heterozygosity conferring greater risk
of glioma than expected from homozygote disease risk in an additive model.


