Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cadherins control Src kinase induced fibroblast cell motility.


Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a part of the tumor
microenvironment, and help remodel the extracellular matrix to pave the
way for tumor cells to forge invasive fronts. Src tyrosine kinase
activity is often increased in the tumor microenvironment, and has been
shown to induce cell motility and disrupt adherens junctions. Adherens
junctions are formed by cadherin proteins that mediate intercellular
adhesion and control cell migration. Previous studies have found
correlations between cadherin expression and cancer cell motility.
However, effects of cadherin expression on CAF motility have not been
thoroughly elucidated. We are investigating how junctions formed by
E-cadherin (ECAD) and N-cadherin (NCAD) affect individual and collective
migration of fibroblasts expressing different levels of Src kinase
activity. We are utilizing fluorescently tagged ECAD or NCAD to study the
localization and effects of cadherin proteins in real time by live cell
imaging along with wound healing and Transwell migration assays. Results
from these studies indicate that ECAD and NCAD have different effects on
migration of cells depending on Src kinase activity. Src kinase activity
did not affect collective cell migration, but increased individual cell
migration by over 4 fold (pCancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a
part of the tumor microenvironment, and help remodel the extracellular
matrix to pave the way for tumor cells to forge invasive fronts. Src
tyrosine kinase activity is often increased in the tumor
microenvironment, and has been shown to induce cell motility and disrupt
adherens junctions. Adherens junctions are formed by cadherin proteins
that mediate intercellular adhesion and control cell migration. Previous
studies have found correlations between cadherin expression and cancer
cell motility. However, effects of cadherin expression on CAF motility
have not been thoroughly elucidated. We are investigating how junctions
formed by E-cadherin (ECAD) and N-cadherin (NCAD) affect individual and
collective migration of fibroblasts expressing different levels of Src
kinase activity. We are utilizing fluorescently tagged ECAD or NCAD to
study the localization and effects of cadherin proteins in real time by
live cell imaging along with wound healing and Transwell migration
assays. Results from these studies indicate that ECAD and NCAD have
different effects on migration of cells depending on Src kinase activity.
Src kinase activity did not affect collective cell migration, but
increased individual cell migration by over 4 fold (p<0.0001 by t-test)
in the absence of forced cadherin expression. In addition, our data
indicate that ECAD increases collective cell motility, while NCAD
decreases collective cell migration in the absence of strong Src kinase
activity. Collective migration by ECAD expressing cells was over 4 fold
higher than cells expressing NCAD or control transfectants (pCancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a part of the tumor microenvironment,
and help remodel the extracellular matrix to pave the way for tumor cells
to forge invasive fronts. Src tyrosine kinase activity is often increased
in the tumor microenvironment, and has been shown to induce cell motility
and disrupt adherens junctions. Adherens junctions are formed by cadherin
proteins that mediate intercellular adhesion and control cell migration.
Previous studies have found correlations between cadherin expression and
cancer cell motility. However, effects of cadherin expression on CAF
motility have not been thoroughly elucidated. We are investigating how
junctions formed by E-cadherin (ECAD) and N-cadherin (NCAD) affect
individual and collective migration of fibroblasts expressing different
levels of Src kinase activity. We are utilizing fluorescently tagged ECAD
or NCAD to study the localization and effects of cadherin proteins in
real time by live cell imaging along with wound healing and Transwell
migration assays. Results from these studies indicate that ECAD and NCAD
have different effects on migration of cells depending on Src kinase
activity. Src kinase activity did not affect collective cell migration,
but increased individual cell migration by over 4 fold (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of forced cadherin expression. In addition, our
data indicate that ECAD increases collective cell motility, while NCAD
decreases collective cell migration in the absence of strong Src kinase
activity. Collective migration by ECAD expressing cells was over 4 fold
higher than cells expressing NCAD or control transfectants (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of strong Src activity. Conversely, collective
migration of cells expressing NCAD was over 5 fold lower than control
transfectants, and over 30 fold lower than cells expressing ECAD (pCancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a part of the tumor microenvironment,
and help remodel the extracellular matrix to pave the way for tumor cells
to forge invasive fronts. Src tyrosine kinase activity is often increased
in the tumor microenvironment, and has been shown to induce cell motility
and disrupt adherens junctions. Adherens junctions are formed by cadherin
proteins that mediate intercellular adhesion and control cell migration.
Previous studies have found correlations between cadherin expression and
cancer cell motility. However, effects of cadherin expression on CAF
motility have not been thoroughly elucidated. We are investigating how
junctions formed by E-cadherin (ECAD) and N-cadherin (NCAD) affect
individual and collective migration of fibroblasts expressing different
levels of Src kinase activity. We are utilizing fluorescently tagged ECAD
or NCAD to study the localization and effects of cadherin proteins in
real time by live cell imaging along with wound healing and Transwell
migration assays. Results from these studies indicate that ECAD and NCAD
have different effects on migration of cells depending on Src kinase
activity. Src kinase activity did not affect collective cell migration,
but increased individual cell migration by over 4 fold (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of forced cadherin expression. In addition, our
data indicate that ECAD increases collective cell motility, while NCAD
decreases collective cell migration in the absence of strong Src kinase
activity. Collective migration by ECAD expressing cells was over 4 fold
higher than cells expressing NCAD or control transfectants (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of strong Src activity. Conversely, collective
migration of cells expressing NCAD was over 5 fold lower than control
transfectants, and over 30 fold lower than cells expressing ECAD (p<0.005
by t-test) without strong Src kinase activity. In contrast, both
cadherins decrease individual cell motility promoted by Src kinase
activity. ECAD and NCAD transfected cells migrated over 4 fold less than
control transfectants with high levels of Src kinase expression (pCancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a part of the tumor microenvironment,
and help remodel the extracellular matrix to pave the way for tumor cells
to forge invasive fronts. Src tyrosine kinase activity is often increased
in the tumor microenvironment, and has been shown to induce cell motility
and disrupt adherens junctions. Adherens junctions are formed by cadherin
proteins that mediate intercellular adhesion and control cell migration.
Previous studies have found correlations between cadherin expression and
cancer cell motility. However, effects of cadherin expression on CAF
motility have not been thoroughly elucidated. We are investigating how
junctions formed by E-cadherin (ECAD) and N-cadherin (NCAD) affect
individual and collective migration of fibroblasts expressing different
levels of Src kinase activity. We are utilizing fluorescently tagged ECAD
or NCAD to study the localization and effects of cadherin proteins in
real time by live cell imaging along with wound healing and Transwell
migration assays. Results from these studies indicate that ECAD and NCAD
have different effects on migration of cells depending on Src kinase
activity. Src kinase activity did not affect collective cell migration,
but increased individual cell migration by over 4 fold (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of forced cadherin expression. In addition, our
data indicate that ECAD increases collective cell motility, while NCAD
decreases collective cell migration in the absence of strong Src kinase
activity. Collective migration by ECAD expressing cells was over 4 fold
higher than cells expressing NCAD or control transfectants (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of strong Src activity. Conversely, collective
migration of cells expressing NCAD was over 5 fold lower than control
transfectants, and over 30 fold lower than cells expressing ECAD (p<0.005
by t-test) without strong Src kinase activity. In contrast, both
cadherins decrease individual cell motility promoted by Src kinase
activity. ECAD and NCAD transfected cells migrated over 4 fold less than
control transfectants with high levels of Src kinase expression (p<0.0001
by t-test). Interestingly, human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
cells that express high levels of both ECAD and NCAD exhibit collective
migration equal to cells with low Src kinase activity, but individual
migration over 5 fold higher than nontransformed cells (pCancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a part of the tumor microenvironment,
and help remodel the extracellular matrix to pave the way for tumor cells
to forge invasive fronts. Src tyrosine kinase activity is often increased
in the tumor microenvironment, and has been shown to induce cell motility
and disrupt adherens junctions. Adherens junctions are formed by cadherin
proteins that mediate intercellular adhesion and control cell migration.
Previous studies have found correlations between cadherin expression and
cancer cell motility. However, effects of cadherin expression on CAF
motility have not been thoroughly elucidated. We are investigating how
junctions formed by E-cadherin (ECAD) and N-cadherin (NCAD) affect
individual and collective migration of fibroblasts expressing different
levels of Src kinase activity. We are utilizing fluorescently tagged ECAD
or NCAD to study the localization and effects of cadherin proteins in
real time by live cell imaging along with wound healing and Transwell
migration assays. Results from these studies indicate that ECAD and NCAD
have different effects on migration of cells depending on Src kinase
activity. Src kinase activity did not affect collective cell migration,
but increased individual cell migration by over 4 fold (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of forced cadherin expression. In addition, our
data indicate that ECAD increases collective cell motility, while NCAD
decreases collective cell migration in the absence of strong Src kinase
activity. Collective migration by ECAD expressing cells was over 4 fold
higher than cells expressing NCAD or control transfectants (p<0.0001 by
t-test) in the absence of strong Src activity. Conversely, collective
migration of cells expressing NCAD was over 5 fold lower than control
transfectants, and over 30 fold lower than cells expressing ECAD (p<0.005
by t-test) without strong Src kinase activity. In contrast, both
cadherins decrease individual cell motility promoted by Src kinase
activity. ECAD and NCAD transfected cells migrated over 4 fold less than
control transfectants with high levels of Src kinase expression (p<0.0001
by t-test). Interestingly, human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
cells that express high levels of both ECAD and NCAD exhibit collective
migration equal to cells with low Src kinase activity, but individual
migration over 5 fold higher than nontransformed cells (p<0.0001 by
t-test). This system should prove useful to elucidate how cadherins and
Wnt signaling pathways affect motility of CAFs and tumor cells. For
example, western blotting analysis suggest that both ECAD and NCAD may
protect β-catenin from destruction initiated by Src kinase activity.
Taken together this work should elucidate how cadherins affect the
ability of the Src kinase to increase CAF motility, and identify
mechanisms that can be exploited to identify potential chemotherapeutic
targets.


