Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of the antisense transcriptome in cancer.


Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) are the most abundant class of long
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). Importantly, NATs are one of the most unknown
ncRNAs. However, due to their highly gene locus-specific effects, NATs
may provide a unique entry point for therapeutic intervention in targeted
gene regulation. For this reason we are interested in studying the
regulation of sense/antisense transcription in cancer related locus. In
our previous work we found that, at the important cancer-related locus
vimentin (VIM) there is a previously uncharacterized antisense transcript
(VIM-AS1), which is transcribed head-to-head with VIM gene. This
antisense transcript enhances R loop formation; it allows the binding of
transcription factors as NF-kB, low nucleosome occupancy and the
transcription of VIM gene. Our results are the first example of R loop
mediated enhancement of gene expression involving head-to-head antisense
transcription at cancer related locus. We also observed that in colon and
breast cancer there was a positive expression correlation between VIM and
VIM-AS1 and we have observed that hypermethylation silences both
transcripts in colon primary tumors. In the present work we have seen
that this positive correlation between sense and antisense transcripts is
present in most of the tumor types from patients that we have obtained
from Genomic Data Commons Data Portal (GDC Portal). Importantly this
positive correlation correlates better in the cases in which the
antisense transcript is downregulated or maintains the expression than in
tumors where VIM and VIM-AS1 are up-regulated. Furthermore, we wanted to
see if the cellular function is also coordinated. VIM is a component of
the intermediate filament family of proteins that has an important role
in epithelial mesenchymal transition. We found that specific depletion of
VIM-AS1 results in a decrease of VIM expression, and now we have found
that this depletion produces low migration rate and more invasion
capability, as expected. On the other hand, the mechanisms used by
antisense transcripts to regulate their corresponding sense mRNAs are not
fully understood and in view of these results we are investigating from a
genome-wide perspective the regulation of sense/antisense transcription,
the involvement of R loop structures and DNA methylation in cancer. For
this, we have applied a number of techniques: RNAseq strand specific,
Illuminaâ€™s HumanMethylation450 Bead Chip array, RNAseq strand specific
with overexpression of RNaseH (which specifically degrades the RNA in
RNA/DNA hybrids), and DRIPseq (which immunoprecipitates the hybrids
DNA-RNAs). The analysis of these data sheds light on the study of the
role of sense/antisense transcripts in cancer-related locus.


