Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct pattern of alterations in tp53 mutated and wild type
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients.


Background: Mutations in TP53 gene predict a poor prognosis in patients
with AML. The reported TP53 mutation rate in AML is low (2.1%) by
contrast AML with a complex karyotype (CK) is higher (69-78%) and have a
poor outcome. Quite common is to found paired TP53 mutation together and
a segmental 17p deletion.

Aims: To investigate the frequency, the types of mutations, the
associated cytogenetic, the correlation with known molecular alterations
and the prognostic role TP53 mutations in adult AML pts. Moreover we
would identify genes/pathways that are mainly affected in the mutated
TP53 group compared to the wt one.

Patients and Methods: 258 adult AML pts with miscellaneous cytogenetic
abnormalities and normal karyotype were examined in our Institution for
TP53 mutations using several methods, including Sanger sequencing, NGS
and HiSeq2000 platform and were correlated with cytogenetic analysis.
124/258 samples were genotyped with SNP arrays (Affymetrix, 3 250K, 43
SNP 6.0, 78 CytoScan HD). Copy Number Alterations (CNAs) analyses were
performed using Chromosome Analysis Suite (Affymetrix) and Nexus Copy
Number (BioDiscovery) software.

Results: Mutation analysis detected TP53 mutations on 39 patients with 48
different types of mutations (32 deleterious point mutations; 4
deletions); nine pts have 2 mutations. We found 34/48 (70%) missense
mutations, 5 mutations in the splice sites, 4 deletions ,2 intronic and
and 3 others mutations. The mutation rate is of 15.1%. Mostly (28/39) of
the TP53 mutated pts (71.8%) had CK while only 11/39 (28.2%) mutated pts
have “no CK” (P>0.0001). Alterations of TP53 were significantly
associated with poor outcome (OS and EFS pResults: Mutation analysis
detected TP53 mutations on 39 patients with 48 different types of
mutations (32 deleterious point mutations; 4 deletions); nine pts have 2
mutations. We found 34/48 (70%) missense mutations, 5 mutations in the
splice sites, 4 deletions ,2 intronic and and 3 others mutations. The
mutation rate is of 15.1%. Mostly (28/39) of the TP53 mutated pts (71.8%)
had CK while only 11/39 (28.2%) mutated pts have “no CK” (P>0.0001).
Alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcome (OS
and EFS p<0.0001). To take advantage of different methodological
characteristics, on TP53 locus, we matched two software and cytogenetic
analysis results. We identify 16 mutated pts that were also deleted and
one pt that presented only a deletion. Therefore 50% of mutated pts
present a concomitant deletion. OS of TP53 mutated and deleted pts is
statistically inferior respect to muted pts (pResults: Mutation analysis
detected TP53 mutations on 39 patients with 48 different types of
mutations (32 deleterious point mutations; 4 deletions); nine pts have 2
mutations. We found 34/48 (70%) missense mutations, 5 mutations in the
splice sites, 4 deletions ,2 intronic and and 3 others mutations. The
mutation rate is of 15.1%. Mostly (28/39) of the TP53 mutated pts (71.8%)
had CK while only 11/39 (28.2%) mutated pts have “no CK” (P>0.0001).
Alterations of TP53 were significantly associated with poor outcome (OS
and EFS p<0.0001). To take advantage of different methodological
characteristics, on TP53 locus, we matched two software and cytogenetic
analysis results. We identify 16 mutated pts that were also deleted and
one pt that presented only a deletion. Therefore 50% of mutated pts
present a concomitant deletion. OS of TP53 mutated and deleted pts is
statistically inferior respect to muted pts (p<0.0061). Comparing 32 TP53
mutated and 92 TP53 wt pts CNAs results that: a) chromosomes
significantly alterated are 5q, 17p, 12p, 16q, 22q13.33 and 7q; b) over
900 genes are differentially involved (all in Loss); c) and that pathway
categories mainly enriched are Signal Transduction, Metabolism, Immune
System, Transmembrane transport of small molecules, Gene expression, Cell
Cycle.

Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that TP53 mutations occur in 15.1% of
AML with a higher frequency in the subgroup of CK-AML (pConclusions: Our
data demonstrated that TP53 mutations occur in 15.1% of AML with a higher
frequency in the subgroup of CK-AML (p<0.0001). They predicted to be
deleterious and significantly correlated with worse prognosis especially
if TP53 is both mutated and also deleted. For these reasons, TP53
mutation/deletion screening should be recommended. Different pattern of
alterations in mutated and wt groups have to be deeper investigated. ELN,
AIL, AIRC, progetto Regione-Università 2010-12 (L. Bolondi), FP7 NGS-PTL
project.


