Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of RAD51 with a cell penetrating antibody, 3E10.


Many human malignancies arise in the setting of defective DNA repair
pathways, leading to genetic instability, carcinogenesis and tumor
progression. However, DNA repair deficiency can provide for a therapeutic
window that can be exploited with targeted agents. One such anti-cancer
agent is 3E10, a unique cell penetrating, anti-DNA autoantibody. 3E10 by
itself is considered non-toxic to normal cells but has been shown to have
deleterious effects on cells with DNA repair deficiencies. Specifically,
3E10 has been shown to reduce the efficiency of homologous recombination
(HR). This has been attributed to its ability to preferentially binding
to ssDNA tails, thereby inhibiting Rad51 mediated strand exchange. Prior
work has shown that treatment with 3E10 alone can selectively kill cells
with genetic mutations that lead to abnormal DNA repair. For example,
3E10 has been shown to be synthetically lethal in BRCA2 deficient human
cancer cells. Additionally, 3E10 sensitizes cells to radiation and other
DNA damaging therapies. The goal of this project is to characterize the
specific mechanism by which 3E10 inhibits DNA repair pathways.
Previously, the mechanism by which 3E10 inhibits HR was attributed to
3E10’s DNA binding ability. Through the biochemical evaluation of 3E10
variants, new evidence now suggests that 3E10 inhibits HR independently
of 3E10’s ability to bind DNA. We have found that this HR inhibition is
a result of a physical interaction between 3E10 and Rad51. Biochemical
analysis revealed that 3E10 binds to the N-terminal domain of Rad51, the
domain that plays a role in Rad51 homo-oligomerization and filament
formation. This 3E10-Rad51 interaction impairs Rad51’s ability to
localize to the nucleus and form repair foci. Taken together, this data
suggests that 3E10 inhibits HR by physically interacting with Rad51.
Overall, 3E10 holds promise as a novel therapeutic agent for certain
subsets of cancer.


