Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic and functional studies identify DCAF7 as major partner
of DYRK1A.


Human DYRK1A protein kinase is encoded by dosage-dependent gene since an
extra copy contributes to Down syndrome (DS) pathogenesis while loss of
one allele causes severe developmental defects. Current knowledge of
DYRK1Aâ€™s role in phosphorylation of proteins involved in cell cycle
control, transcription and tumor suppression does not fully explain
dosage-dependent function of this important kinase. Using MudPIT
proteomic analysis, we identified DYRK1A interacting proteins in human
T98G cell line. Four independent DYRK1A-HA pull-down samples were
analyzed to identify 50 proteins that were specifically detected in 3 out
of 4 replicates. This analysis identified WD-repeat protein DCAF7 as
major partner of DYRK1A that was most highly enriched among
DYRK1A-binding proteins. Furthermore, glycerol gradient
ultracentrifugation showed almost exact co-fractionation of DCAF7 and
DYRK1A. DCAF7 has been shown to bind several protein kinases including
DYRK1A, DYRK1B, HIPK2 and MAP3K1 suggesting that it serves as a scaffold
protein in signal transduction. However, the function of DCAF7 is not
established yet. In order to understand the functional relationship
between DCAF7 and DYRK1A, we undertook MudPIT proteomic analysis of DCAF7
binding proteins in T98G cells and compared the data with the DYRK1A
interactome dataset. Analysis of three independent DCAF7-HA pull-down
samples identified 32 proteins specifically detected in all three
replicates including DCAF7, DYRK1A and five proteins earlier detected in
DYRK1A MudPIT analysis. Given the proposed role of DCAF7 as a scaffold
protein, we tested whether DCAF7 mediates its interaction with some of
its interacting proteins. Interestingly, we found that RNF169, a recently
characterized RING-domain ubiquitin ligase involved in the DNA
double-strand break (DSB) repair, binds to N-terminus of DYRK1A
independently of DCAF7. Furthermore, our data show that DYRK1A is
required for DCAF7-RNF169 interaction because this interaction was
abolished in human U-2 OS cells where DYRK1A gene was disrupted using
CRISPR-Cas9 editing (DYRK1A-KO cells). Interestingly, stable
overexpression of DCAF7 in DYRK1A-KO U-2 OS cells rescued some of the
phenotypes observed in these cells, suggesting that DCAF7 could be an
effector downstream of DYRK1A. Our findings revealed an unexpected
scaffolding role of DYRK1A that is required for mediating the interaction
between DNA repair protein RNF169 and the WD-repeat protein DCAF7. While
further studies are needed to understand the exact role of the
RNF169-DCAF7 interaction in DNA repair, the novel role of DYRK1A as a
scaffold protein could explain some aspects of the dosage-dependent
function of this protein kinase. In addition, we report here an initial
functional characterization of the DCAF7-DYRK1A interaction in human
cells and discuss novel functional interactions of DCAF7 that could be
independent of DYRK1A.


