Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune cell profiles and β-catenin signaling in melanoma.


Introduction

Immune profiling is a necessary step in understanding tumor
microenvironment and predicting the response to immunotherapies.

Methods

We used the expression of genes exclusively expressed by immune cells in
tumors1, to classify 703 formalin-fixed primary melanomas from the Leeds
Melanoma Cohort. Transcriptomes were generated from tumor cores using
Illumina DASL HT 12.4 array. In the obtained tumor subgroups with
differing immune profiles, we tested the hypothesis that β-catenin
signaling controls immune suppression in primary tumors as earlier
reported in vitro and murine data2.

Results

We found and validated 6 tumor classes, which showed consistency with
other published gene signatures, and predicted melanoma-specific survival
(HR=1.8, P=0.003, adjusted for AJCC stage, site, age, sex, ulceration,
mitotic rate, BRAF/NRAS mutation). Tumors of good prognosis expressed
markedly a large number of markers of T cell cytotoxicity, dendritic
cells, macrophages, NK CD56 dim cells and genes coding for checkpoint
co-inhibitor molecules (Table 1). They also had upregulation of
β-catenin suppressors3 and downregulated β-catenin itself (Table 1). By
contrast, poor prognosis tumors (the largest group) lacked both innate
and adaptive immunity, and had activation of canonical β-catenin
signaling (CTNNB1, its targets and WNT receptors) and WNT-independent
β-catenin signaling (Table 1).

Conclusion

In a large subset of this population-based cohort of primary tumors, we
report evidence of immune evasion through β-catenin signaling pathway.
These results obtained from archival material suggest that transcriptomic
profiling is a viable alternative to flow cytometry in understanding
tumor biology and in determining the effectiveness of immunotherapies.

Table 1. Immune scores and β-catenin signaling in good/bad prognosis
groups





Gene expression derived characteristic

Good prognosis

Bad prognosis



A. Immune scores from gene expression





Cytotoxic T cell (e.g. GZMA, GZMH, KLRB1, KILRD1)

up

down



Dendritic cells (e.g. CD1B, CCL13, CCL22, IDO1, IDO2)

up

down



NK CD56 dim (e.g. IL21R, GZMB, KIR2DS5, KIR3DL1)

up

down



Macrophages (e.g. PTGDS, GM2A, CD68, SC5, ATG7)

up

down



B. Checkpoint molecules





PDL1

up

down



CTLA4

up

down



VISTA

up

down



TIM3

up

down



LAG3

up

down



BTLA

up

down



C. β-catenin inhibitors

up

down



DKK2 (secreted)

up

down



DKK3 (secreted)

up

down



SFRP2 (secreted)

up

down



AXIN2 (intracellular)

up

down



NKD2 (intracellular)

up

down



D. β-catenin, its targets and WNT receptors





CTNNB1 (β-catenin)

down

up



DVL1, DVL2, DVL3

down

up



TCF12, TCF1

down

up



APC2, APC,c-MyC

down

up



FZ5, FZ9

down

up



E. WNT-independent β-catenin signaling





FGFR4

down

up



PYGO1

down

up



BCL9

down

up



FOXM1

down

up



NUP98

down

up



SMAD4

down

up





References

1. Bindea et al. 2013. Immunity 39 (4): 782-95.

2. Spranger et al. (2015). Nature 523:231-5.

3. MacDonald et al. (2009). Developmental Cell 17(1): 9-26.


