Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of extracellular vesicles in chemotherapy resistance in
gastric cancer.


Gastric adenocarcinoma (GAd) is the fourth most common cancer and the
second cause of cancer death in the world. Chemotherapy has been largely
used to treat this disease however acquired drug resistance is a common
event and is associated to the development of new more aggressive clones
of tumor cells. Herein, a gastric adenocarcinoma cell line (AGS)
resistant to the 5-fluorouracil (rAGS-FU) was generated in order to
establish mechanisms associated to acquire drug resistance. In the
presence of 5-FU (10Î¼M) resistant cells show a 2-3 times higher
proliferation ratio than parental cells, a plating efficiency of 38%
compared to 1% of parental cells and a higher invasive phenotype.
Remarkable, when compared to parental cells, rAGS-FU resistant cells
secreted 2-3 times more extracellular vesicles, EVs (85-175nm). When
parental cells were treated with EVs from rAGS-5-FU resistant cells they
acquired the same phenotype of the latter cells regarding higher
proliferation, plating efficiency and invasion. The proteomic analysis of
parental and rAGS-FU cells showed 306 differentially expressed proteins,
while 66 differentially expressed proteins were found when EVs secreted
from these cells were compared. Our data suggest that cells resistant to
chemotherapy have a more aggressive phenotype and are able to transfer
these characteristics to non-resistant cells. These findings point to
mechanisms of chemoresistance mediated by components that are carried
from cell to cell by EVs, what may indicate novel approaches that can be
addressed to impair drug resistance and improve treatment response.

Supported by FAPESP


