Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing germline and somatic alterations in DNA repair pathway
in cancer.


Introduction: DNA repair genes are involved with repair of single strand
breaks as well as double strand breaks which ultimately maintain the
genome integrity. The genes involved with DNA repair are frequently
deregulated in cancer and these defects can be exploited therapeutically.
Our study aims to explore somatic and germline changes in DNA repair
genes across multiple cancer types.

Methods: Genomic profiling was performed on 226 tumor samples from 24
cancer types with ages ranging 19-82 years. We performed targeted exome
sequencing of 562 genes in tumor and paired normal DNA which included 112
genes associated with cancer predisposition syndromes. In addition to
identifying genomic changes in 33 key DNA repair genes (ATM, ATR, ARID1A,
BAP1, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1, CHEK2, ERCC2, ERCC3,
ERCC4, FANCA gene family, MMR genes, NBS1, PALB2, PTEN, RAD50, RAD51,
TP53 and POLE), we also characterized germline mutations using public
databases (ClinVar, Ensembl).

Results: Profiled specimens included breast cancer (17.5%), ovarian
cancer (15%), CRC (11%), NSCLC (10%), uterine (6%), sarcoma (6%) and
other cancers. The most commonly deleted or mutated (somatic) DNA repair
genes included TP53 (55%), PTEN (16%), ARID1A (13%), FANCA (11%), ERCC2
(10%), and ATM, BAP1, CDK12, CHEK2 at 6% each and BRCA1/2 combined at
(9%). Deleterious mutations in MMR genes were noted in 3.5% (8/226) which
included 1 case of germline PMS2-S46I mutation. Interestingly, a 55 yr
old male African American CRC patient harbored germline XPC-P334H
mutation along with somatic MLH1-Y548fs. No mutations were found in
FANCC, FANCF, FANCG and RAD51. Germline analysis revealed a total of 47
pathogenic and presumed pathogenic variants out of which 61.7%(29/47)
were DNA repair genes. A total of 13% (30/226) of cases harbored germline
variants in DNA repair genes. Germline events included 9 cases with BRCA1
and BRCA2 clinically significant mutations. Presence of loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) at the BRCA locus in 5/9 cases and somatic mutations
in 3/9 cases were noted in germline BRCA mutated samples. Germline and
somatic BRCA1 and BRCA2 alterations were present in 10% (22/226) of total
cohort and as expected, the majority were present in breast and
epithelial ovarian cancer. Genetic deficiencies in DNA repair pathway
genes are being exploited therapeutically with PARP inhibitors as well as
DNA damaging chemotherapeutics.

Conclusions: Exome sequencing identified subsets of patients with loss of
function events in DNA repair genes that may be associated with benefit
from PARP inhibitors and platinum agents. Somatic and germline biomarker
testing revealed occurrence of BRCA1/2 as well as other DNA repair gene
alterations across multiple cancers. It is imperative to explore the DNA
repair pathway beyond BRCA1 and BRCA2 in patient selection for PARP
inhibitors and DNA damaging agents and further investigation of this
pathway is warranted in ongoing clinical trials.


