Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of hyaluronic acid-labeled chitosan
nanoparticles against CD44 overexpressed endothelial cell for tumor
angiogenesis therapy.


Objective: RNA interference (RNAi)-based approaches hold great potential
for cancer therapy. Here, we developed siRNA-incorporated chitosan
nanoparticles coated with hyaluronic acid (HA-CH-NP/siRNA) to target CD44
receptor on the surface of tumor endothelial cells

Methods: Size and zeta potential of HA-CH-NP were measured by light
scattering with a particle size analyzer and Zeta Plus. Morphology of
HA-CH-NP was observed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). HA-based
selective binding of HA-CH-NP on the CD44 positive cells was assessed by
flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis. Therapeutic
efficacy was examined in orthotopic mouse models of ovarian carcinoma.
PLXDC1 mRNA was quantified using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Additionally,
biological effect on angiogenesis (MCD), cell proliferation (Ki67), and
apoptosis (TUNEL) in the tumor tissue were examined by IHC analysis.

Results: HA-CH-NP/siRNA was 185 ± 10 nm in size and zeta potential was
26.4 mV, respectively. The loading efficiency of siRNA into
HA-CH-NP/siRNA was up to 60%. We confirmed selective binding efficiency
of HA-CH-NP/siRNA with CD44+ tumor endothelial cells was increased
2.1-fold compared to CH-NP/siRNA. PLXDC1 silencing using HA-CH-NP/siRNA
significantly inhibited tumor growth in A2780 tumor growth in A2780
tumor-bearing mice compared to control (p Results: HA-CH-NP/siRNA was 185
± 10 nm in size and zeta potential was 26.4 mV, respectively. The
loading efficiency of siRNA into HA-CH-NP/siRNA was up to 60%. We
confirmed selective binding efficiency of HA-CH-NP/siRNA with CD44+ tumor
endothelial cells was increased 2.1-fold compared to CH-NP/siRNA. PLXDC1
silencing using HA-CH-NP/siRNA significantly inhibited tumor growth in
A2780 tumor growth in A2780 tumor-bearing mice compared to control (p <
0.0001), and mRNA expression of PLXDC1 was significantly decreased in
HA-CH-NP/siRNA treated group. In addition, treatment with HA-CH-NP/siRNA
resulted in significant inhibition of cell proliferation (p Results:
HA-CH-NP/siRNA was 185 ± 10 nm in size and zeta potential was 26.4 mV,
respectively. The loading efficiency of siRNA into HA-CH-NP/siRNA was up
to 60%. We confirmed selective binding efficiency of HA-CH-NP/siRNA with
CD44+ tumor endothelial cells was increased 2.1-fold compared to
CH-NP/siRNA. PLXDC1 silencing using HA-CH-NP/siRNA significantly
inhibited tumor growth in A2780 tumor growth in A2780 tumor-bearing mice
compared to control (p < 0.0001), and mRNA expression of PLXDC1 was
significantly decreased in HA-CH-NP/siRNA treated group. In addition,
treatment with HA-CH-NP/siRNA resulted in significant inhibition of cell
proliferation (p < 0.05), microvessel density ( p Results: HA-CH-NP/siRNA
was 185 ± 10 nm in size and zeta potential was 26.4 mV, respectively.
The loading efficiency of siRNA into HA-CH-NP/siRNA was up to 60%. We
confirmed selective binding efficiency of HA-CH-NP/siRNA with CD44+ tumor
endothelial cells was increased 2.1-fold compared to CH-NP/siRNA. PLXDC1
silencing using HA-CH-NP/siRNA significantly inhibited tumor growth in
A2780 tumor growth in A2780 tumor-bearing mice compared to control (p <
0.0001), and mRNA expression of PLXDC1 was significantly decreased in
HA-CH-NP/siRNA treated group. In addition, treatment with HA-CH-NP/siRNA
resulted in significant inhibition of cell proliferation (p < 0.05),
microvessel density ( p < 0.05), and increased cell apoptosis (p Results:
HA-CH-NP/siRNA was 185 ± 10 nm in size and zeta potential was 26.4 mV,
respectively. The loading efficiency of siRNA into HA-CH-NP/siRNA was up
to 60%. We confirmed selective binding efficiency of HA-CH-NP/siRNA with
CD44+ tumor endothelial cells was increased 2.1-fold compared to
CH-NP/siRNA. PLXDC1 silencing using HA-CH-NP/siRNA significantly
inhibited tumor growth in A2780 tumor growth in A2780 tumor-bearing mice
compared to control (p < 0.0001), and mRNA expression of PLXDC1 was
significantly decreased in HA-CH-NP/siRNA treated group. In addition,
treatment with HA-CH-NP/siRNA resulted in significant inhibition of cell
proliferation (p < 0.05), microvessel density ( p < 0.05), and increased
cell apoptosis (p < 0.05).

Conclusion: This study demonstrated that HA-CH-NP/siRNA was a novel and
highly selective delivery system for siRNA with potential for broad
applications for tumor angiogenesis therapy.


