Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity of melanoma cells to a novel class of Ras inhibitors.


A high percentage of human cancers arise from mutations in the ras gene
that encodes an abnormal Ras protein locked in a constitutively active
GTP-bound state that promotes tumor cell proliferation, survival, and
metastasis. These gain-in-function mutations in the ras gene or
constitutive activation of tyrosine kinase receptors upstream of the Ras
protein drive tumor cell growth by activating Raf/MAPK and PI3K/AKT
signaling pathways. Ras has been an elusive drug target for which no
inhibitors are available to treat Ras-driven cancers. Screening a library
of indene derivatives in a differential phenotypic assay identified a
novel compound class displaying high potency and selectivity to inhibit
the growth of tumor cells harboring mutant Ras relative to tumor cells
with wild type (WT) Ras. Lead optimization resulted in a drug development
candidate (DC070-547) and several back-up analogs (e.g. ADT-006) with
IC50 values in the low nanomolar range and selectivity indices of 100
fold or greater to inhibit the growth of tumor cells with constitutively
activated Ras relative to tumor cells with low levels of activated Ras.
Sensitivity among a large panel of tumor cell lines to this compound
class strongly correlated with levels of activated Ras, but did not
appear to be limited to a specific ras gene mutation or Ras protein
isoform. Here, we report that DC070-547 and ADT-006 potently and
selectively inhibit the growth of the human melanoma cell line, SK-MEL-2,
harboring a mutation in the ras gene that encodes the constitutively
active N-Ras protein with IC50 values of 7 and 25 nM, respectively. In
addition, both compounds potently inhibited the growth of the murine
melanoma cell line, B16-F10 with WT ras, but harboring a mutation in a
tyrosine kinase receptor upstream of Ras, specifically PDGFRÎ±, which
results in high levels of active, GTP-bound Ras as confirmed by Ras-RBD
pull-down assays. To determine if treatment can disrupt Ras signaling,
B16-F10 cells were incubated with the compounds before being subjected to
Western blotting for phosphorylated signaling molecules downstream of
Ras. Treatment reduced levels of phosphorylated c-Raf and MEK at
concentrations that inhibit tumor cell growth. These findings support
further investigation of this novel class of Ras inhibitors for the
treatment of Ras-driven melanoma.


