Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenome-wide association study reveals differential DNA
methylation consistent with progression of multiple myeloma.


Purpose: Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematological
malignancy in the US. It is characterized by a clonal expansion of plasma
cells in the bone marrow and extramedullary sites and is preceded by two
precursor conditions including monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance (MGUS) and smoldering myeloma (SMM). Strong evidence
suggests a germline and environmental etiology. However, efforts to
characterize heritable changes in gene activity, such as DNA methylation,
have not been widely reported.

Methods: We examined epigenome-wide DNA methylation as markers of MGUS,
SMM and MM in peripheral blood obtained from treatment-na√Øve European
American cases with heavy-chain IgG or IgA MGUS (n=60), SMM (n=31) and MM
(n=54) and age- and sex-matched controls (n=79) included from the
University of Alabama at Birmingham, University of Chicago and the Mayo
Clinic, Rochester [54.5% males; mean age, 64 years (range, 36 to 86)]. We
quantified DNA methylation of over 450,000 CpG and non-CpG loci using the
Infinium HumanMethylation450 array (Illumina). Differentially methylated
positions were calculated using a general linear model framework adjusted
for confounders and cellular heterogeneity.

Results: A total of 6 CpGs were differentially methylated in MM cases
compared to controls at a level of genome-wide statistical significance.
MM was associated with hypomethylation at differentially methylated
positions inside SBNO2 (P=3.37x10-10), WIZ (P=1.12x10-8), CA6
(P=4.29x10-8) and ADORA1 (P=3.68x10-8) as well as intergenic positions
proximal to TNFRSF8 (Chr 1p36.22; P=2.24x10-9) and ENDOV (Chr 17q25.3;
P=2.74x10-8). Each of these loci, with the exception of CA6 and ADORA1,
were hypomethylated in each of the 3 plasma cell dyscrasia phenotypes
including MGUS and SMM and MM cases compared to controls (PResults: A
total of 6 CpGs were differentially methylated in MM cases compared to
controls at a level of genome-wide statistical significance. MM was
associated with hypomethylation at differentially methylated positions
inside SBNO2 (P=3.37x10-10), WIZ (P=1.12x10-8), CA6 (P=4.29x10-8) and
ADORA1 (P=3.68x10-8) as well as intergenic positions proximal to TNFRSF8
(Chr 1p36.22; P=2.24x10-9) and ENDOV (Chr 17q25.3; P=2.74x10-8). Each of
these loci, with the exception of CA6 and ADORA1, were hypomethylated in
each of the 3 plasma cell dyscrasia phenotypes including MGUS and SMM and
MM cases compared to controls (P<0.03), albeit not at a level of
genome-wide statistical significance.

Conclusions: These preliminary findings suggest that differences in DNA
methylation may contribute to altered risk of MM, as well as its
precursor conditions, and may play a role in plasma cell dyscrasia
progression as a consequence of heritable changes in gene activity due to
past exposures. Replication in a large yet similarly well-characterized
population is warranted.


