Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostanoid EP4 receptor induces cleavage of HSP90 via ROS
generation in human colon cancer cells.


Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been reported to play critical roles in cell
fate decision by interacting with four types of G protein-coupled
membrane receptors such as EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4. We previously reported
that EP4 stimulation by treatment with its agonist CAY10598 induced
apoptosis via reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation in colon cancer
HCT116 cells. Moreover, treatment with CAY10598 diminished the
phosphorylation of JAK2 and induced degradation of this oncoprotein,
leading to the attenuation of STAT3 activation in HCT116 cells. In the
present study, we attempted to delineate the molecular mechanisms
underlying the degradation of JAK2 by activation of EP4. HSP90, a member
of the heat shock protein family, is a molecular chaperone that supports
stability of client proteins, such as, EGFR, MET, Akt and JAK2.
HSP90-mediated stabilization/activation of these client proteins
contributes to the acquisition of cancer cell hallmarks, including
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and invasion. It has been recently
reported that the chaperoning function of HSP90 may be disrupted by
post-translational modification induced by oxidative stress. Treatment of
human colon cancer HCT116 cells with CAY10598 down-regulated expression
of HSP90 client proteins in a concentration- and time-dependent manner
and the down-regulation was restored by pretreatment with ROS scavenger
N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) or proteasome inhibitor MG132. However,
cotreatment with cycloheximide, protein synthesis inhibitor, accelerated
the CAY10598-induced degradation of HSP90 client proteins. These data
suggest that CAY10598-induced HSP90 client protein degradation may be
caused by ROS generation. In renal carcinoma Caki cells, CAY10598 also
down-regulated expression of HSP90 client proteins, suggesting that EP4
stimulation may regulate HSP90 activity in colon cancer cells as well as
renal cancer cells. We found that HSP90α was cleaved to 40 or 55 kDa,
while HSP90β cleaved to 25 kDa by CAY10598 treatment and the cleavage of
HSP90α and β was blocked by NAC treatment. Furthermore, EP4 inhibition
by treatment with antagonist GW627368x attenuated not only degradation of
HSP90 client proteins but also cleavage of HSP90 in CAY105998-treated
HCT116 cells. In conclusions, EP4 agonist CAY10598 induces degradation of
HSP90 client proteins via ROS-dependent HSP90 cleavage, leading to
apoptosis in HCT116 cells. This is a novel mechanism by which EP4
activation induces apoptosis of cancer cells that involved inhibiting
HSP90 function.


