Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genistein inhibits renal cancer progression through long
non-coding RNA HOTAIR suppression.


Genistein, a soy isoflavone, has been shown to have anticancer effects on
various cancers in vitro and in vivo including renal cancer. Long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are differentially expressed in various tissues
and have important functions in cellular processes such as cell
proliferation, motility and apoptosis in various malignancies. HOX
transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR) is a lncRNA localized in the Homeobox C
gene cluster on chromosome 12. HOTAIR interacts with the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which enhances H3K27 trimethylation and
represses the expression of tumor suppressors. In various cancers, HOTAIR
is highly expressed and involved in their progression and metastasis. In
this study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms of genistein action
through a novel pathway that represses HOTAIR. We found that HOTAIR
expression is higher in renal cancer cell lines compared to normal
controls. Genistein treatment was found to significantly decrease HOTAIR
expression in renal cancer cells (786-O and ACHN cells). Genistein
treatment also reduced expression of epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition
(EMT)-related proteins (ZEB1, Vimentin and Snail), causing reduced cell
migration, invasion, and increased apoptosis. We performed RNA
immunoprecipitation assays, and found that genistein inhibits HOTAIR
binding to PRC2. One of the other EMT markers, a tight junction protein
ZO-1, is upregulated by genistein. We are currently investigating if
genistein represses PRC2 recruitment to the ZO-1 promoter by inhibiting
binding of HOTAIR to PRC2. Our results indicate that genistein is a
potent therapeutic agent for renal cancer.


