Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel trifunctional immunoliposome delivery system to minimize
resistance and side effects for anticancer therapy.


Background: Breast cancer (BC) is the second leading cause of cancer
death in women worldwide. About 25% of BCs have overexpression of the
HER2 receptor. Although HER2 targeted therapies have shown considerable
improvement in HER2-positive BC patientsâ€™ outcome, treatment resistance
remains a clinical challenge. Here, we sought to develop and evaluate a
novel tri-functional immune-liposome (TFIL) that overcomes HER2 treatment
resistance and associated cardiotoxicity by dually targeting HER2 on BC
cells and CD3 receptors on cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs).

Material and methods: Anti-HER2 (Trastuzumab) and anti-CD3 (OKT-3)
antibodies, were conjugated to lipid nanoparticles by the
micelle-transfer method, and the resulting formulation was purified by
dextran gradient ultra-centrifugation. Targeted lipid nanoparticles were
formulated with a fluorescent lipophilic dye, DiD, for studying receptor
binding and internalization. Studies were conducted with HER2-positive
BT474 cells and CD3-positive Jurkat cells using flow cytometry analyses.
Doxorubicin (DXR) was encapsulated in the nanoparticles by the
remote-loading technique for cell-kill experiments. In vitro cell-kill
studies were conducted by co-culturing BT474 as the target cells, and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells as the effector cells, at varying
ratios.

Results: Purified formulations were successfully characterized for
conjugation by determining the protein to lipid ratio. Flow cytometry
analyses demonstrated successful cell binding and/or internalization of
the TFIL with both the HER2 and CD3-positive cell lines. Moreover, these
dual-targeted nanoparticles were able to retarget T cells to kill HER2
positive BC cells, and showed improved efficacy compared to non-targeted
and plain HER2-targeted formulations in vitro.

Conclusion: A novel drug delivery system, TFIL, that targets HER2
receptors on tumor cells, CD3 on CTLs, and is able to slowly release DXR
was successfully developed and evaluated in vitro on HER2 overexpressing
BC cells. Our findings show great promise at overcoming resistance and
associated cardiotoxicity to present HER2 targeted BC therapies, and may
translate into improved anti-tumor activity clinically compared to other
treatment options.


