Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genomic analysis demonstrates concordance of PDX
models and patient tumor cohorts.


The Jackson Laboratory has established more than 400 unique
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cancer models from patient tumors in the
immunocompromised NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (aka, NSGTM) mouse
strain, spanning across more than 30 tumor types. At low passages, these
engrafted models are known to retain similar molecular characteristics
and heterogeneity to the originating human tumor. As such, PDX models
offer an excellent preclinical platform to test drug responses of novel
cancer therapeutics and a powerful resource for conducting preclinical
cancer pharmacogenomic studies. To aid the selection of suitable PDX
models for preclinical studies and for the research purpose to understand
tumor biology and response or resistance to a given treatment, we have
characterized the PDX models for their transcriptomic, mutational and
copy number profiles using sequencing and array approaches. We have
established a compendium of PDX-tailored computational pipelines as the
analysis of genomic data from PDX models could be challenging due to a)
the contamination of PDX sample with mouse stroma, which complicates
downstream bioinformatics analyses as mouse genome is almost 90%
homologous to the human genome, and b) the lack of matched normal
material to call somatic events. Our pipelines incorporate various
filters to identify tumor specific single nucleotide variants, indels,
copy number changes and expression profile in the PDX model. For the
purpose of validating the accuracy of our analysis pipelines and
demonstrating that the JAX PDX models are indeed representative of
patient tumors, we compared JAXâ€™s PDX cohort with patient cohorts in
TCGA for mutations, copy number aberrations and RNA expression
concordance. Using gene sets representative of each tumor type, we found
that the overall genomic profile of each PDX tumor type is more
correlated to the same tumor type in TCGA than other tumor types. In
addition, an integrative analysis across all data types reveals that
there are more common affected pathways between the same tumor type in
PDX and TCGA. This comprehensive analysis revealed that the PDX and
patient cohorts exhibit similar molecular characteristics, hence
establishing the suitability of JAX PDX models as in vivo models to study
fundamental tumor biology as well as to carry out preclinical studies of
cancer drugs, including identification of biomarkers of response or
resistance.


