Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fisetin treatment reduces tumor growth and metastasis by
modulating PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways in a BRAFV600E/PTENNULL mouse
model of melanoma.


Melanoma is the deadliest form of skin cancer due to its propensity to
metastasize. It accounts for about 80% of skin cancer-related deaths. A
substitution of valine for glutamic acid at position 600 results in the
BRAFV600E mutation found in approximately 50% of melanomas. The BRAFV600E
mutation drives activation of MEK/ERK signaling and also cooperates with
the PI3K/AKT pathway, thus enhancing tumor initiation, progression,
metastasis, and drug resistance. Fisetin (3,3',4',7-tetrahydroxyflavone),
a naturally occurring flavonoid found in fruits, vegetables, nuts, and
wine, exhibits anti-proliferative, anti-invasive, and anti-tumorigenic
properties. Earlier, we showed that fisetin treatment downregulates the
PI3K/AKT pathway and reduces phosphorylation of MEK/ERK in melanoma. In
this study we determined the effects of fisetin on tumor growth and
metastasis in a genetically engineered transgenic mouse model of
metastatic melanoma. Melanocyte specific Cre activity was induced in
six-week-old BRAFV600E/PTENNull/CreTg mice by topical application of
4-hydroxytamoxifen on shaved backs once per day for 3 consecutive days.
Mice were observed daily until a highly pigmented measurable tumor
appeared. Size of the tumors was measured twice weekly and treatment with
fisetin (45mg/kg b.wt. & 90mg/kg b.wt.; orally 5 times/week) was started
when tumor size reached 100 mm3. Measurement and quantification of tumor
volume showed that fisetin administration inhibited melanoma growth in
these mice as compared to the control group. Hematoxylin and eosin
staining revealed that fisetin treatment reduced pigmented cells in the
ear and skin. In addition, fisetin treatment reduced the metastasis of
melanoma cells into the spleen and draining lymph nodes. Furthermore,
evaluation of tumor tissues revealed that fisetin treatment reduced the
(i) expression of PI3Kp110Î± and p85, (ii) phosphorylation of AKT at
Ser473 and Thr308, (iii) phosphorylation of mTOR at Ser2481, and (iv)
expression of raptor and rictor. In addition, fisetin treatment reduced
the phosphorylation of MEK and ERK when compared to control tumor
samples. Fisetin treatment also resulted in (i) cleavage of caspase-3,
(ii) inhibition of Bcl2 and Bcl-xL, (iii) induction of Bax, and (iv)
inhibition of PCNA and Ki67 expression. Further, fisetin treatment
reduced the expression of mesenchymal marker proteins (N-cadherin and
vimentin) with concomitant increase in epithelial marker proteins
(E-cadherin and desmoglein). These data suggest the ability of fisetin to
exhibit anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic, anti-tumorigenic, and
anti-metastatic potentials in a mouse model of melanoma. We suggest that
fisetin could be used as an adjuvant chemotherapy to prevent drug
resistance and improve the therapeutic efficacy of anti-melanoma drugs
for the management of melanoma.


