Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating CD9-GFAP-survivin exosomes during active specific
immunotherapy, a potential biomarker for glioma.


Background: We evaluated circulating exosomes isolated from the serum of
malignant glioma patients enrolled in a completed phase I clinical trial
of an anti-survivin vaccine (SurVaxM). Exosomes are microvesicular bodies
with potential mechanisms for cell-cell communication. Identifying
circulating exosomes from cancer patients as potential indicators of
disease status and response to therapy is of interest. The inhibitor of
apoptosis protein (IAP) survivin (SVN) promotes cancer cell proliferation
and resistance to chemotherapy. Survivin is expressed in many cancer
types including malignant gliomas and is a potential target for active
immunotherapy. In the above mentioned clinical trial, five patients
experienced early tumor progression with a mean of 2.8 months (1.9-5.4
months) from study entry, while three patients had either late (20.5-22.5
months) or no tumor progression (no evident disease at 48 months in one
patient).

Methods: To determine whether changes in CD9+/GFAP+/SVN+ exosomes
correlated with disease progression, patient serum was evaluated prior to
treatment (study entry), 8-10 weeks after initial vaccination, and at the
time of MRI-defined tumor progression. By employing ImageStream flow
cytometry technology we were able to analyze multiple markers on
individual exosomes, identifying highly specific populations of survivin+
exosomes which co-expressed the brain/tumor marker protein GFAP. The
combination of these markers made it possible to differentiate patient
exosomes from those of healthy individuals.

Results: The levels of CD9+/GFAP+, CD9+/SVN+, and CD9+/GFAP+/SVN+ (SVN+)
exosomes were significantly increased in patients. Serum from three
patients who experienced the longest progression-free intervals, showed
98-99% decreases in SVN+ exosomes after treatment with SurVaxM, and
maintained similarly low exosome levels over several months. Five early
progressing patients experienced a detectable persistence of, or increase
in SVN+ exosomes at 9 weeks following initial vaccination. One patient
had rising SVN+ exosomes detectable 16 weeks prior to the discovery of
tumor progression by brain MRI scan. One patient with no tumor
progression sustained a 99% reduction in serum SVN+ exosomes which was
sustained over 48+ months.

Conclusion: This study demonstrates that increased numbers of
CD9+/GFAP+/SVN+ specific exosomes appear to be associated with early
tumor progression in recurrent malignant glioma patients. Larger studies
are needed to determine whether the correlation between SVN+ exosome
levels and disease progression is specific to SurVaxM treatment, and
whether rises in SVN+ exosomes levels are predictive of generalized
glioma progression. Our study suggests that levels of circulating SVN+
exosomes may be altered during anti-survivin immunotherapy and could
serve as a potential biomarker for clinical trials and tumor monitoring.


