Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1, a novel target of omega-3 fatty acids
for reducing breast cancer risk in obese postmenopausal women.


Preclinical and epidemiologic data suggest that a unique feature of
lipogenesis in cancer cells which has received limited attention is the
accumulation of monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) which are largely
derived from saturated fatty acids (SFA) by the action of stearoyl-Co-A
desaturase (SCD-1). Activation of SCD-1, a delta-9 fatty acid desaturase,
is considered to be an important factor in the development of obesity and
several types of cancer including breast cancer. However, no data are
available on how changes in SCD-1 activity induced by potential
chemopreventive agents relate to established biomarkers of breast cancer
risk. To address this issue, we measured the activity of SCD-1, expressed
as the ratios of palmitoleic acid (C16:ln7) to palmitic acid (C16:0)
(SCD-16) and oleic acid (C18:ln9) to steric acid (C18:0) (SCD-18) in
plasma samples of postmenopausal women enrolled in our recently published
clinical trial (Sandhu N, et al Cancer Prev Res 9:275, 2016) designed to
test the individual and combined effect of the antiestrogen Raloxifene
and the omega-3 preparation Lovaza on breast density, a validated
biomarker of breast cancer risk. We observed that daily administration of
Lovaza (1,860 mg eicosapentaenoic [EPA] + 1,500 mg docosahexaenoic [DHA])
significantly reduced SCD-1 activity, an effect which was sustained for
the two-year duration of the trial. Raloxifene, on the other hand, did
not significantly alter SCD-1 activity in our subjects. SCD-1 activity
was positively correlated with BMI (for SCD-16, r=0.45, pPreclinical and
epidemiologic data suggest that a unique feature of lipogenesis in cancer
cells which has received limited attention is the accumulation of
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) which are largely derived from
saturated fatty acids (SFA) by the action of stearoyl-Co-A desaturase
(SCD-1). Activation of SCD-1, a delta-9 fatty acid desaturase, is
considered to be an important factor in the development of obesity and
several types of cancer including breast cancer. However, no data are
available on how changes in SCD-1 activity induced by potential
chemopreventive agents relate to established biomarkers of breast cancer
risk. To address this issue, we measured the activity of SCD-1, expressed
as the ratios of palmitoleic acid (C16:ln7) to palmitic acid (C16:0)
(SCD-16) and oleic acid (C18:ln9) to steric acid (C18:0) (SCD-18) in
plasma samples of postmenopausal women enrolled in our recently published
clinical trial (Sandhu N, et al Cancer Prev Res 9:275, 2016) designed to
test the individual and combined effect of the antiestrogen Raloxifene
and the omega-3 preparation Lovaza on breast density, a validated
biomarker of breast cancer risk. We observed that daily administration of
Lovaza (1,860 mg eicosapentaenoic [EPA] + 1,500 mg docosahexaenoic [DHA])
significantly reduced SCD-1 activity, an effect which was sustained for
the two-year duration of the trial. Raloxifene, on the other hand, did
not significantly alter SCD-1 activity in our subjects. SCD-1 activity
was positively correlated with BMI (for SCD-16, r=0.45, p<01; for SCD-18,
r=0.23, pPreclinical and epidemiologic data suggest that a unique feature
of lipogenesis in cancer cells which has received limited attention is
the accumulation of monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) which are largely
derived from saturated fatty acids (SFA) by the action of stearoyl-Co-A
desaturase (SCD-1). Activation of SCD-1, a delta-9 fatty acid desaturase,
is considered to be an important factor in the development of obesity and
several types of cancer including breast cancer. However, no data are
available on how changes in SCD-1 activity induced by potential
chemopreventive agents relate to established biomarkers of breast cancer
risk. To address this issue, we measured the activity of SCD-1, expressed
as the ratios of palmitoleic acid (C16:ln7) to palmitic acid (C16:0)
(SCD-16) and oleic acid (C18:ln9) to steric acid (C18:0) (SCD-18) in
plasma samples of postmenopausal women enrolled in our recently published
clinical trial (Sandhu N, et al Cancer Prev Res 9:275, 2016) designed to
test the individual and combined effect of the antiestrogen Raloxifene
and the omega-3 preparation Lovaza on breast density, a validated
biomarker of breast cancer risk. We observed that daily administration of
Lovaza (1,860 mg eicosapentaenoic [EPA] + 1,500 mg docosahexaenoic [DHA])
significantly reduced SCD-1 activity, an effect which was sustained for
the two-year duration of the trial. Raloxifene, on the other hand, did
not significantly alter SCD-1 activity in our subjects. SCD-1 activity
was positively correlated with BMI (for SCD-16, r=0.45, p<01; for SCD-18,
r=0.23, p<0.01) and paralleled changes in BMI in the same direction over
the two years of the study. These findings support the role of this
enzyme in the development of obesity. Importantly, decreasing levels of
SCD-1 were found to be associated with a progressive reduction in breast
density in obese women (BMI≥30) (for SCD-16; r=0.47, pPreclinical and
epidemiologic data suggest that a unique feature of lipogenesis in cancer
cells which has received limited attention is the accumulation of
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) which are largely derived from
saturated fatty acids (SFA) by the action of stearoyl-Co-A desaturase
(SCD-1). Activation of SCD-1, a delta-9 fatty acid desaturase, is
considered to be an important factor in the development of obesity and
several types of cancer including breast cancer. However, no data are
available on how changes in SCD-1 activity induced by potential
chemopreventive agents relate to established biomarkers of breast cancer
risk. To address this issue, we measured the activity of SCD-1, expressed
as the ratios of palmitoleic acid (C16:ln7) to palmitic acid (C16:0)
(SCD-16) and oleic acid (C18:ln9) to steric acid (C18:0) (SCD-18) in
plasma samples of postmenopausal women enrolled in our recently published
clinical trial (Sandhu N, et al Cancer Prev Res 9:275, 2016) designed to
test the individual and combined effect of the antiestrogen Raloxifene
and the omega-3 preparation Lovaza on breast density, a validated
biomarker of breast cancer risk. We observed that daily administration of
Lovaza (1,860 mg eicosapentaenoic [EPA] + 1,500 mg docosahexaenoic [DHA])
significantly reduced SCD-1 activity, an effect which was sustained for
the two-year duration of the trial. Raloxifene, on the other hand, did
not significantly alter SCD-1 activity in our subjects. SCD-1 activity
was positively correlated with BMI (for SCD-16, r=0.45, p<01; for SCD-18,
r=0.23, p<0.01) and paralleled changes in BMI in the same direction over
the two years of the study. These findings support the role of this
enzyme in the development of obesity. Importantly, decreasing levels of
SCD-1 were found to be associated with a progressive reduction in breast
density in obese women (BMI≥30) (for SCD-16; r=0.47, p<0.01; for
SCD-18; r=0.36, pPreclinical and epidemiologic data suggest that a unique
feature of lipogenesis in cancer cells which has received limited
attention is the accumulation of monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) which
are largely derived from saturated fatty acids (SFA) by the action of
stearoyl-Co-A desaturase (SCD-1). Activation of SCD-1, a delta-9 fatty
acid desaturase, is considered to be an important factor in the
development of obesity and several types of cancer including breast
cancer. However, no data are available on how changes in SCD-1 activity
induced by potential chemopreventive agents relate to established
biomarkers of breast cancer risk. To address this issue, we measured the
activity of SCD-1, expressed as the ratios of palmitoleic acid (C16:ln7)
to palmitic acid (C16:0) (SCD-16) and oleic acid (C18:ln9) to steric acid
(C18:0) (SCD-18) in plasma samples of postmenopausal women enrolled in
our recently published clinical trial (Sandhu N, et al Cancer Prev Res
9:275, 2016) designed to test the individual and combined effect of the
antiestrogen Raloxifene and the omega-3 preparation Lovaza on breast
density, a validated biomarker of breast cancer risk. We observed that
daily administration of Lovaza (1,860 mg eicosapentaenoic [EPA] + 1,500
mg docosahexaenoic [DHA]) significantly reduced SCD-1 activity, an effect
which was sustained for the two-year duration of the trial. Raloxifene,
on the other hand, did not significantly alter SCD-1 activity in our
subjects. SCD-1 activity was positively correlated with BMI (for SCD-16,
r=0.45, p<01; for SCD-18, r=0.23, p<0.01) and paralleled changes in BMI
in the same direction over the two years of the study. These findings
support the role of this enzyme in the development of obesity.
Importantly, decreasing levels of SCD-1 were found to be associated with
a progressive reduction in breast density in obese women (BMI≥30) (for
SCD-16; r=0.47, p<0.01; for SCD-18; r=0.36, p<0.05). No correlation
between breast density and SCD-1 was observed in non-obese subjects
(r=0.02 for SCD-16 and 0.04 for SCD-18). Our results suggest that
BMI-related factors play an important role in the reduction of breast
density by omega-3 fatty acids. They also indicate that SCD-1 may be a
useful biomarker in future clinical trials testing the benefit of
nutritional interventions in reducing obesity associated breast cancer
risk.


