Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying pathways that regulate the turnover of
gain-of-function p53 mutant proteins in ovarian cancer cells.


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause for cancer-associated deaths
among women in the US. High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma is the most
common histological subtype and is characterized by frequent (>90%)
mutations in the TP53 (p53) gene. Gain-of-function (GOF) p53 mutant
proteins form highly stable aggregates that accumulate in ovarian cancer
cells and have been shown to have oncogenic activity. Increasing evidence
indicates the stabilization of GOF p53 mutants to be important for tumor
progression and drug resistance. Therefore, selective degradation of the
GOF p53 mutant proteins is a highly attractive therapeutic strategy to
specifically target ovarian cancer cells. We identified that a small
molecule named MCB-613, originally discovered as a stimulator of steroid
receptor coactivator-3 (SRC-3), causes rapid degradation of the usually
stable p53R175H conformational mutant aggregates leading to catastrophic
cell death in human ovarian cancer cell lines. Our results indicate this
effect is independent of SRC-3 mediated gene expression, but rather by
post-translational modification of p53 mutant protein. Upon MCB-613
treatment, the p53R175H mutant is rapidly exported from the nucleus,
ubiquitinated and degraded through a lysosomal pathway. Interestingly, in
contrast to its effect on the p53R175H mutant, MCB-613 causes a slight
stabilization of wild type (WT) p53 but had less of an effect on the
turnover of other frequently observed p53 mutants (R248Q and R273H) in
human ovarian cancer cell lines. MCB-613 also causes a rapid decrease in
MDM2 protein but not mRNA. Further, the effect of MCB-613 on p53R175H is
phenocopied by multiple deubiquitinase (DUB) inhibitors, confirming the
role of ubiquitination in the selective turnover of p53R175H mutant
aggregates. Taken together, these results show that different pathways
regulate the turnover of WT p53 and the specific GOF p53 mutant proteins.
We are currently investigating the precise mechanism by which MCB-613 and
the different DUB inhibitors induce selective turnover of p53R175H mutant
protein. We anticipate the proposed work to significantly advance our
understanding of pathways important in ovarian cancer progression and
pave way for the development of new targeted therapies for ovarian cancer
patients with specific p53 mutations. This work is funded by
NIH-CA-181808, NIH-HD-07857 and NIH-HD-076596.


