Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide association study of prostate cancer in Uganda.


The greater incidence of prostate cancer in men of African ancestry
remains one of the most important unanswered health disparities globally.
No established environmental/lifestyle risk factors have been identified,
with the only established risk factors being age, race/ethnicity and
family history, all of which implicate genetic susceptibility. GWAS have
clearly validated the importance of genetic susceptibility in prostate
cancer, with ~100 common risk loci identified to date which in aggregate
explain 33% of the familial risk. Genetic studies in African ancestry
populations have provided strong evidence for genetic factors in
contributing to the greater incidence of prostate cancer in men of
African ancestry. To further explore this hypothesis, we conducted a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of prostate cancer among Ugandan
men. Specifically, we genotyped the Illumina OncoArray, which includes a
260K GWAS backbone, in 560 prostate cancer cases (119 with Gleason score
â‰¥8) and 480 controls and tested the associations of 448,939 genotyped
and 16,396,662 imputed variants with >1% frequency. The most
statistically significant variants were observed at the 8q24 risk locus
(rs72725854, OR=3.37, P=2.14x10-13). We also observed suggestive signals
with 106 variants outside of known risk regions with p-values 10-7. Of
the 104 known risk variants, 100 are polymorphic in Uganda men, of which,
66 (66%) had effects that were directionally consistent in their
association with prostate cancer risk as previously reported and 8 (8%)
were significantly associated with risk at p 10-7. Of the 104 known risk
variants, 100 are polymorphic in Uganda men, of which, 66 (66%) had
effects that were directionally consistent in their association with
prostate cancer risk as previously reported and 8 (8%) were significantly
associated with risk at p < 0.05, with the most statistically significant
variants being rs16901979 at 8q24 (OR=1.45, p=0.0001) and rs1512268 at
8p21.2 (OR=1.31, p=0.0087). In addition to these findings, we will also
present the results from replication testing of the most significant
associations from the GWAS in the Ghana Prostate GWAS Study and the
African Ancestry Prostate Cancer Consortium, as well as provide a
detailed comparison of polygenic risk models of the known prostate cancer
variants between these two African populations, African Africans and men
of European ancestry.


