Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Double somatic mutations as a cause of tumor mismatch
repair-deficiency in population-based colorectal and endometrial cancer
with Lynch-like syndrome.


Background: Tumour mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency, determined by
immunohistochemical (IHC) loss of MMR protein expression, is used
diagnostically to identify individuals with Lynch syndrome. A high
proportion of colorectal cancers (CRCs) and endometrial cancers (ECs)
that demonstrate tumor MMR-deficiency are categorised as having
“Lynch-like syndrome” due to the absence of tumor MLH1 methylation or
germline MMR gene mutations after standard screening approaches. The aim
of this study was to investigate somatic causes of tumor MMR-deficiency
in patients with Lynch-like syndrome.

Methods: Population-based participants with incident MMR-deficient
colorectal (n=193; ACCFR and MCCS) or endometrial cancer (n=197; ANECS
and MCCS) were categorised as either Lynch syndrome, MLH1 methylated or
Lynch-like after screening for germline MMR gene mutations and for tumor
MLH1 gene promoter hypermethylation. Lynch-like tumors were tested for
somatic MMR gene mutations (point mutations and loss of heterozygosity)
using AmpliSeq-Ion Proton custom capture sequencing and for MSH2 or MSH6
gene promoter methylation. Overall survival for molecularly defined
subgroups of Lynch-like CRCs were compared to Lynch syndrome related CRCs
using cox regression models to estimate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals adjusting for age at CRC diagnosis, sex, AJCC stage
and grade.

Results: Lynch-like tumors comprised 32% (63/193) and 23% (45/197) of the
MMR-deficient CRCs and ECs, respectively compared with 27% and 15% for
Lynch syndrome and 41% and 62% for MLH1 methylated CRCs and ECs,
respectively. Two somatic mutations were identified in the MMR gene
indicated by the pattern of MMR IHC loss of expression were identified in
36.7% (18/49) and 47.8% (11/23) of the Lynch-like CRCs and ECs tested.
The proportion of tumors with double somatic alterations was highest for
both CRC and EC tumors showing MSH2-deficiency (40% and 64.3%). The mean
age at diagnosis for the Lynch-like CRCs with double somatic mutations
was 49.7 ± 15.8years which was not significantly different from the
Lynch syndrome CRCs (n=52; 45.4 ± 11.3years; p=0.2) but was
significantly different compared with the MLH1 methylated CRCs (n=83; 70
± 8.9years; p=0.0001). The adjusted HR for double somatic Lynch-like
CRCs was 2.58 (95% CI, 0.77-8.67) compared with Lynch syndrome CRCs
(p=0.1). No evidence of tumor MSH2 or MSH6 gene promoter methylation was
identified in either MSH2-deficient or MSH6-deficient Lynch-like CRCs or
ECs tested (n=34 and n=12, respectively).

Conclusions: Double somatic mutations in the MMR genes represent a
significant proportion of the unexplained Lynch-like MMR-deficient
subtype for both population-based CRC and EC. Triaging strategies used to
identify Lynch syndrome for both CRC and EC should include tumor testing
for somatic mutations in the MMR genes.


