Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of UCK2 protein expression as a potential predictive
biomarker of RX-3117.


Background: A novel, orally bioavailable nucleoside analogue, RX-3117, is
a prodrug activated intracellularly by Uridine Cytidine Kinase 2 (UCK2)
that is thought to be expressed predominantly in tumor tissue. RX-3117 is
currently being evaluated in a Phase Ib/IIa multi-center, open-label
clinical study in patients with advanced pancreatic and bladder cancer.
In this study, we aimed to determine the relation between UCK2 tissue
protein expression and the efficacy of RX-3117 in mice xenograft models
and also UCK2 protein expression in a panel of human cancer tissues
relative to normal tissue.

Methods: The UCK2 protein expression in tumor tissues was analyzed by
immunoblotting using clone 22-1 rabbit monoclonal antibody. The validated
procedure for the immunohistochemistry (IHC) of UCK2 with clone 22-1 was
performed in a panel of human formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
cancer and normal tissues.

Results: The immunoblotting protein level of UCK2 normalized to Î²-actin
and corresponding tumor growth inhibition (oral RX-3117 dose of 500mg/kg,
TIWK) were 57 and 67% in MiaPaCa2, 30 and -5% in BxPC3, 199 and 92% in
Colo-205, 21 and 90% in Caki-1, 2 and 39% in A549, and 146 and 79% in
H460, respectively. This data indicates an anti-tumor efficacy trend in a
UCK2-dependent manner. The IHC of UCK2 showed that positive staining of
UCK2 in cancer tissues was observed in 20/20 bladder cancer tissues (100%
frequency), 19/20 CRC tissues (95% frequency), 18/20 NSCLC tissues (90%
frequency), and 19/20 pancreatic cancer tissues (95% frequency). Average
H-Scores of UCK2 in cancer tissues vs. normal tissues were 104 vs. 9 in
lung, 97 vs. 20 in bladder, 67 vs. 41 in pancreas and 39 vs. 21 in colon,
respectively.

Conclusions: The current data showed a correlation trend between UCK2
protein expression level and degree of antitumor activity of RX-3117 in
xenograft models. It also supports a higher UCK2 protein expression level
in human cancer tissues compared to their normal tissues. This suggests
that RX-3117 activity may be specific to tumor tissue, and quantification
of UCK2 expression in human cancer tissues may be useful as a predictive
biomarker to select patients for their sensitivity to RX-3117 in future
clinical studies.


