Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic drug treatment overcomes osteoblast-induced
chemoprotection by suppressing cell adhesion and related signaling.


Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer
in pediatric patients. Recent advances have allowed for improved efficacy
of treatment allowing 95% of patients to achieve remission following
chemotherapy. However, nearly 20% will have a second recurrence that is
often more aggressive and difficult to treat. One reason for this high
rate of relapse may be due to the role of the bone marrow
microenvironment (BM) consisting of osteoblasts, endothelial cells,
adipocytes, and stromal cells as well as extracellular matrix proteins.
Interaction between leukemic cells and BM elements activates
intracellular signaling pathways that protect ALL cells from
chemotherapy. Many of these pathways can be aberrantly activated due to
changes in methylation patterns during leukemogenesis. Therefore,
utilizing epigenetic modifiers offers a unique approach to overcoming the
chemoprotective effects of the BM. The aim of our study is to identify if
the combination of the epigenetic drugs azacitidine (DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor) and panobinostat (histone deacetylase
inhibitor) is successful in overcoming these effects.

We demonstrated that azacitidine and panobinostat are more effective in
killing ALL cells in coculture with osteoblasts than chemotherapy alone.
This required direct interaction between ALL cells and osteoblasts and
could not be replicated when ALL cells were suspended in Transwells above
the osteoblast monolayer. Additionally, ALL cells pretreated with
non-killing concentrations of azacitidine and panobinostat were
sensitized to chemotherapy even in the presence of osteoblasts. These
effects were replicated ex vivo in primary ALL patient samples with a
variety of cytogenetic characteristics. These patient samples have been
xenografted in mice to observe the efficacy of this combination with
chemotherapy in comparison to chemotherapy alone.

We also observed that treatment with azacitidine and panobinostat
decreases the ability of ALL cells to effectively adhere to osteoblasts,
suggesting a role that down-regulation of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs)
may play in mediating this response. Due to the need for direct contact
of ALL cells with osteoblasts for the chemoprotective effects, we
investigated how treatment with azacitidine and panobinostat could affect
the expression levels of certain CAMs. We found that N-cadherin was
induced in ALL cells in coculture with osteoblasts and that increase was
partially reversed by azacitidine and panobinostat. Î²-catenin, which is
known to interact with N-cadherin, was also up-regulated in ALL cells
cocultured with osteoblasts and was reversed by azacitidine and
panobinostat. These data suggests that azacitidine and panobinostat may
overcome microenvironment-induced chemoprotection by decreasing the
expression of certain CAMs like N-cadherin and interfering with their
downstream signaling pathways.


