Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LSR promotes ovarian cancer cell growth following the activation
of β-oxidation and its antibody inhibits lipid catabolism.


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy; thus developing
new treatment options is urgently required. Molecular targeted therapies
for cancers, which are generally more tolerable than widely used
cytotoxic agents, have shown highly specific inhibition of target
molecules. In this study, we aimed to identify a new ovarian cancer
antigen and to develop a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb). Furthermore we
evaluated its preclinical efficacy and analyzed the function of its
antigen in ovarian cancer.To identify a new ovarian cancer antigen, cell
surface membrane proteins of normal ovarian epithelial and ovarian cancer
cell lines were analyzed by iTRAQ-based proteomic technology. We
identified lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor (LSR) as the new
therapeutic target for ovarian cancer. By the immunohistochemical
analysis, significant poor prognosis was observed in high-LSR expression
patients with ovarian cancer compared to patients with low-LSR expression
by survival assay (p Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy; thus developing new treatment options is urgently required.
Molecular targeted therapies for cancers, which are generally more
tolerable than widely used cytotoxic agents, have shown highly specific
inhibition of target molecules. In this study, we aimed to identify a new
ovarian cancer antigen and to develop a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb).
Furthermore we evaluated its preclinical efficacy and analyzed the
function of its antigen in ovarian cancer.To identify a new ovarian
cancer antigen, cell surface membrane proteins of normal ovarian
epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by iTRAQ-based
proteomic technology. We identified lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein
receptor (LSR) as the new therapeutic target for ovarian cancer. By the
immunohistochemical analysis, significant poor prognosis was observed in
high-LSR expression patients with ovarian cancer compared to patients
with low-LSR expression by survival assay (p < 0.05). Our newly developed
anti-LSR mAb showed significant inhibition of tumor growth in vivo
against xenograft model of LSR-positive ovarian cancer cell line and
patient derived LSR-positive ovarian cancer tissue (p Ovarian cancer is
the most lethal gynecologic malignancy; thus developing new treatment
options is urgently required. Molecular targeted therapies for cancers,
which are generally more tolerable than widely used cytotoxic agents,
have shown highly specific inhibition of target molecules. In this study,
we aimed to identify a new ovarian cancer antigen and to develop a novel
monoclonal antibody (mAb). Furthermore we evaluated its preclinical
efficacy and analyzed the function of its antigen in ovarian cancer.To
identify a new ovarian cancer antigen, cell surface membrane proteins of
normal ovarian epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by
iTRAQ-based proteomic technology. We identified lipolysis-stimulated
lipoprotein receptor (LSR) as the new therapeutic target for ovarian
cancer. By the immunohistochemical analysis, significant poor prognosis
was observed in high-LSR expression patients with ovarian cancer compared
to patients with low-LSR expression by survival assay (p < 0.05). Our
newly developed anti-LSR mAb showed significant inhibition of tumor
growth in vivo against xenograft model of LSR-positive ovarian cancer
cell line and patient derived LSR-positive ovarian cancer tissue (p <
0.05). In LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells, high number and large lipid
droplets were observed compared to LSR-negative cells and anti-LSR mAb
decreased these droplets. Moreover addition of VLDL to LSR-positive
ovarian cancer cells significantly promoted the cell proliferation (p
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy; thus developing
new treatment options is urgently required. Molecular targeted therapies
for cancers, which are generally more tolerable than widely used
cytotoxic agents, have shown highly specific inhibition of target
molecules. In this study, we aimed to identify a new ovarian cancer
antigen and to develop a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb). Furthermore we
evaluated its preclinical efficacy and analyzed the function of its
antigen in ovarian cancer.To identify a new ovarian cancer antigen, cell
surface membrane proteins of normal ovarian epithelial and ovarian cancer
cell lines were analyzed by iTRAQ-based proteomic technology. We
identified lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein receptor (LSR) as the new
therapeutic target for ovarian cancer. By the immunohistochemical
analysis, significant poor prognosis was observed in high-LSR expression
patients with ovarian cancer compared to patients with low-LSR expression
by survival assay (p < 0.05). Our newly developed anti-LSR mAb showed
significant inhibition of tumor growth in vivo against xenograft model of
LSR-positive ovarian cancer cell line and patient derived LSR-positive
ovarian cancer tissue (p < 0.05). In LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells,
high number and large lipid droplets were observed compared to
LSR-negative cells and anti-LSR mAb decreased these droplets. Moreover
addition of VLDL to LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells significantly
promoted the cell proliferation (p < 0.05) and anti-LSR mAb inhibited
that in vitro (p Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy; thus developing new treatment options is urgently required.
Molecular targeted therapies for cancers, which are generally more
tolerable than widely used cytotoxic agents, have shown highly specific
inhibition of target molecules. In this study, we aimed to identify a new
ovarian cancer antigen and to develop a novel monoclonal antibody (mAb).
Furthermore we evaluated its preclinical efficacy and analyzed the
function of its antigen in ovarian cancer.To identify a new ovarian
cancer antigen, cell surface membrane proteins of normal ovarian
epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by iTRAQ-based
proteomic technology. We identified lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein
receptor (LSR) as the new therapeutic target for ovarian cancer. By the
immunohistochemical analysis, significant poor prognosis was observed in
high-LSR expression patients with ovarian cancer compared to patients
with low-LSR expression by survival assay (p < 0.05). Our newly developed
anti-LSR mAb showed significant inhibition of tumor growth in vivo
against xenograft model of LSR-positive ovarian cancer cell line and
patient derived LSR-positive ovarian cancer tissue (p < 0.05). In
LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells, high number and large lipid droplets
were observed compared to LSR-negative cells and anti-LSR mAb decreased
these droplets. Moreover addition of VLDL to LSR-positive ovarian cancer
cells significantly promoted the cell proliferation (p < 0.05) and
anti-LSR mAb inhibited that in vitro (p < 0.05). Supporting these data,
addition of VLDL to LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells significantly
promoted β-oxidation-mediated lipid catabolism (p Ovarian cancer is the
most lethal gynecologic malignancy; thus developing new treatment options
is urgently required. Molecular targeted therapies for cancers, which are
generally more tolerable than widely used cytotoxic agents, have shown
highly specific inhibition of target molecules. In this study, we aimed
to identify a new ovarian cancer antigen and to develop a novel
monoclonal antibody (mAb). Furthermore we evaluated its preclinical
efficacy and analyzed the function of its antigen in ovarian cancer.To
identify a new ovarian cancer antigen, cell surface membrane proteins of
normal ovarian epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by
iTRAQ-based proteomic technology. We identified lipolysis-stimulated
lipoprotein receptor (LSR) as the new therapeutic target for ovarian
cancer. By the immunohistochemical analysis, significant poor prognosis
was observed in high-LSR expression patients with ovarian cancer compared
to patients with low-LSR expression by survival assay (p < 0.05). Our
newly developed anti-LSR mAb showed significant inhibition of tumor
growth in vivo against xenograft model of LSR-positive ovarian cancer
cell line and patient derived LSR-positive ovarian cancer tissue (p <
0.05). In LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells, high number and large lipid
droplets were observed compared to LSR-negative cells and anti-LSR mAb
decreased these droplets. Moreover addition of VLDL to LSR-positive
ovarian cancer cells significantly promoted the cell proliferation (p <
0.05) and anti-LSR mAb inhibited that in vitro (p < 0.05). Supporting
these data, addition of VLDL to LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells
significantly promoted β-oxidation-mediated lipid catabolism (p < 0.05)
and anti-LSR mAb also inhibited that (p Ovarian cancer is the most lethal
gynecologic malignancy; thus developing new treatment options is urgently
required. Molecular targeted therapies for cancers, which are generally
more tolerable than widely used cytotoxic agents, have shown highly
specific inhibition of target molecules. In this study, we aimed to
identify a new ovarian cancer antigen and to develop a novel monoclonal
antibody (mAb). Furthermore we evaluated its preclinical efficacy and
analyzed the function of its antigen in ovarian cancer.To identify a new
ovarian cancer antigen, cell surface membrane proteins of normal ovarian
epithelial and ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by iTRAQ-based
proteomic technology. We identified lipolysis-stimulated lipoprotein
receptor (LSR) as the new therapeutic target for ovarian cancer. By the
immunohistochemical analysis, significant poor prognosis was observed in
high-LSR expression patients with ovarian cancer compared to patients
with low-LSR expression by survival assay (p < 0.05). Our newly developed
anti-LSR mAb showed significant inhibition of tumor growth in vivo
against xenograft model of LSR-positive ovarian cancer cell line and
patient derived LSR-positive ovarian cancer tissue (p < 0.05). In
LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells, high number and large lipid droplets
were observed compared to LSR-negative cells and anti-LSR mAb decreased
these droplets. Moreover addition of VLDL to LSR-positive ovarian cancer
cells significantly promoted the cell proliferation (p < 0.05) and
anti-LSR mAb inhibited that in vitro (p < 0.05). Supporting these data,
addition of VLDL to LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells significantly
promoted β-oxidation-mediated lipid catabolism (p < 0.05) and anti-LSR
mAb also inhibited that (p < 0.05). In addition, this anti-LSR mAb which
cross-reacted with mouse LSR did not show any cytotoxicity on normal
organs and lipid metabolism in mice. In summary, high expression of LSR
in ovarian cancer was the poor prognostic factor. Our newly developed
anti-LSR mAb showed significant tumor growth inhibition against not only
LSR-positive ovarian cancer cell line but also patient derived
LSR-positive ovarian cancer tissue. In LSR-positive ovarian cancer cells,
high number and large lipid droplets were observed and LSR promoted cell
proliferation following β-oxidation-mediated lipid catabolism. Anti-LSR
mAb inhibited these processes. Our preclinical data demonstrated that
targeting LSR by mAb is a promising therapy for patients with
LSR-positive ovarian cancer.


