Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular pathogenesis and drug synergism in a zebrafish model of
high risk neuroblastoma.


We have developed a transgenic zebrafish model that overexpresses MYCN
and harbors loss-of-function mutations of the nf1 tumor suppressor. In
this model, loss of nf1 leads to aberrant activation of RAS-MAPK
signaling, promoting both increased tumor cell survival and rapid tumor
cell proliferation. These neuroblastomas are very aggressive in that
almost all of the fish develop neuroblastoma by 3 weeks of age.
Three-week old juvenile fish are very small, making it feasible to test
the effectiveness of many drugs and drug combinations in vivo for
activity against the primary tumors. We demonstrate these advantages of
the model by showing marked synergistic anti-tumor effects of a MEK
inhibitor (trametinib) and a retinoid (isotretinoin) in vivo at several
different dosage combinations by in vivo isobologram analysis. Thus,
inhibition of RAS-MAPK signaling can significantly improve the treatment
of this very aggressive form of neuroblastoma when it is combined with
the inhibition of other key pathways. Because of the very high penetrance
and rapid onset of neuroblastoma in our nf1-deficient, MYCN-transgenic
zebrafish model, it is one of the only model systems in which extensive
analysis of the synergistic activity of two or more drugs can be
evaluated in primary tumors in vivo. This capability is especially
valuable given that mutations causing RAS-MAPK pathway hyperactivation
have been shown to arise frequently at the time of relapse of childhood
neuroblastomas, indicating the need to eliminate these mutated tumor
cells as a component of the primary treatment.


