Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Survival among lung cancer patients in the U.S. Military Health
System: a comparison with the SEER population.


The U.S. military health system (MHS) provides universal access to its
beneficiaries. However, little is known about whether the universal
access has translated into improved patient outcomes. We compared
survival among non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases in MHS with that
of NSCLC cases from the general U.S. population. The MHS data were
obtained from The Department of Defense’s (DoD) Automated Central Tumor
Registry (ACTUR). The U.S. population data were drawn from the National
Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) program18 registries (1973- 2012) which represents 27.8% of the
U.S. population. NSCLC patients in ACTUR and SEER who were diagnosed
between January 1, 1987 and December 31, 2012 were included. The ACTUR
and SEER cases were then matched by age group, sex, race, and year of
diagnosis group at a matching ratio of 1:4, which comprised of 16,257
cases from ACTUR and 65,028 cases from SEER. Kaplan-Meir curves and
log-rank test were used to compare overall survival between the two
populations. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models for matched
data were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CI with adjustment
for potential confounders. Compared to the SEER cases, the ACTUR cases
were more likely to be diagnosed at stage I or stage II (PThe U.S.
military health system (MHS) provides universal access to its
beneficiaries. However, little is known about whether the universal
access has translated into improved patient outcomes. We compared
survival among non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases in MHS with that
of NSCLC cases from the general U.S. population. The MHS data were
obtained from The Department of Defense’s (DoD) Automated Central Tumor
Registry (ACTUR). The U.S. population data were drawn from the National
Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) program18 registries (1973- 2012) which represents 27.8% of the
U.S. population. NSCLC patients in ACTUR and SEER who were diagnosed
between January 1, 1987 and December 31, 2012 were included. The ACTUR
and SEER cases were then matched by age group, sex, race, and year of
diagnosis group at a matching ratio of 1:4, which comprised of 16,257
cases from ACTUR and 65,028 cases from SEER. Kaplan-Meir curves and
log-rank test were used to compare overall survival between the two
populations. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models for matched
data were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CI with adjustment
for potential confounders. Compared to the SEER cases, the ACTUR cases
were more likely to be diagnosed at stage I or stage II (P<0.0001) and
less likely to be diagnosed at stage IV. ACTUR cases also had a lower
percentage of poorly differentiated tumors than did SEER cases, who had a
higher percentage of well differentiated and moderately differentiated
tumors (PThe U.S. military health system (MHS) provides universal access
to its beneficiaries. However, little is known about whether the
universal access has translated into improved patient outcomes. We
compared survival among non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases in MHS
with that of NSCLC cases from the general U.S. population. The MHS data
were obtained from The Department of Defense’s (DoD) Automated Central
Tumor Registry (ACTUR). The U.S. population data were drawn from the
National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) program18 registries (1973- 2012) which represents 27.8%
of the U.S. population. NSCLC patients in ACTUR and SEER who were
diagnosed between January 1, 1987 and December 31, 2012 were included.
The ACTUR and SEER cases were then matched by age group, sex, race, and
year of diagnosis group at a matching ratio of 1:4, which comprised of
16,257 cases from ACTUR and 65,028 cases from SEER. Kaplan-Meir curves
and log-rank test were used to compare overall survival between the two
populations. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models for matched
data were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CI with adjustment
for potential confounders. Compared to the SEER cases, the ACTUR cases
were more likely to be diagnosed at stage I or stage II (P<0.0001) and
less likely to be diagnosed at stage IV. ACTUR cases also had a lower
percentage of poorly differentiated tumors than did SEER cases, who had a
higher percentage of well differentiated and moderately differentiated
tumors (P<0.0001). Kaplan-Meir survival curves showed significantly
better survival among ACTUR cases than SEER cases (Log Rank PThe U.S.
military health system (MHS) provides universal access to its
beneficiaries. However, little is known about whether the universal
access has translated into improved patient outcomes. We compared
survival among non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases in MHS with that
of NSCLC cases from the general U.S. population. The MHS data were
obtained from The Department of Defense’s (DoD) Automated Central Tumor
Registry (ACTUR). The U.S. population data were drawn from the National
Cancer Institute’s (NCI) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) program18 registries (1973- 2012) which represents 27.8% of the
U.S. population. NSCLC patients in ACTUR and SEER who were diagnosed
between January 1, 1987 and December 31, 2012 were included. The ACTUR
and SEER cases were then matched by age group, sex, race, and year of
diagnosis group at a matching ratio of 1:4, which comprised of 16,257
cases from ACTUR and 65,028 cases from SEER. Kaplan-Meir curves and
log-rank test were used to compare overall survival between the two
populations. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models for matched
data were used to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% CI with adjustment
for potential confounders. Compared to the SEER cases, the ACTUR cases
were more likely to be diagnosed at stage I or stage II (P<0.0001) and
less likely to be diagnosed at stage IV. ACTUR cases also had a lower
percentage of poorly differentiated tumors than did SEER cases, who had a
higher percentage of well differentiated and moderately differentiated
tumors (P<0.0001). Kaplan-Meir survival curves showed significantly
better survival among ACTUR cases than SEER cases (Log Rank P<0.001). In
Cox proportional hazards model analysis, ACTUR cases exhibited
significantly better overall survival than did SEER cases (HR=0.78, 95%
CI=0.76 to 0.81). The survival advantage of ACTUR cases remained after
stratification on cancer stage, age group, sex and race. Further analyses
revealed that ACTUR cases were more likely to receive surgery for
early-stage (stages I and II) tumors (OR=1.41, 95% CI =1.28 to 1.55), and
radiation therapy for late stage (stages III to IV) tumors (OR=1.09, 95%
CI=1.03 to 1.15). Our results suggest that the survival of NSCLC patients
in the MHS is better than that in the general population, implying that
lung cancer care and programs within the MHS has translated into improved
patient outcomes.


