Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline single nucleotide polymorphisms in DNA repair genes in
urothelial cancer patients.


Introduction: Germline single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been
investigated in several cancers. Repair of DNA damage is a key cellular
process involved in the development of chemotherapy-resistance. The role
of germline SNPs in DNA damage repair genes (DRGs) in determining
resistance to DNA-damaging agents in urothelial carcinoma (UC) patients
is not completely understood.

Methods: We examined a cohort of 53 UC patients (median age 67, 42 males)
enrolled in our IRB-approved Precision Medicine program. Patients had
histologically confirmed UC (43 bladder, 10 upper tract UC) and received
treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. We isolated germline DNA from
peripheral blood lymphocytes or buccal swabs, and used whole exome
sequencing (WES) to examine germline SNPs. As a reference for SNP
frequencies we used the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database,
which represents the largest, randomly selected, germline WES database in
the general population, including 60,706 individuals, among which 7,601
patients with multiple cancer types from the Tumor Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) cohort.

Results: Twelve different DRG SNPs were identified in germline DNA
samples from 53 patients, affecting genes involved in non-homologous
end-joining (RECQL4, n = 18, 54.50%; POLQ, n = 2, 6%), nucleotide
excision repair (ERCC6, n = 2, 6%; XPA, n = 1, 3%; CCNH, n = 1, 3%; POLK,
n = 1, 3%), homologous recombination (RNF168, n = 1, 3%; RAD17, n = 1,
3%; POLE, n = 1, 3%), Fanconi anemia pathway (POLN, n = 1, 3%), mismatch
repair (EXO1, n = 1, 3%) and mitochondrial DNA repair (POLG, n = 2, 6%).
The frequency of rs11342077 of the DNA helicase RECQL4 was significantly
higher in our cohort (18/53, 34%) compared to its frequency in the ExAC
database (pResults: Twelve different DRG SNPs were identified in germline
DNA samples from 53 patients, affecting genes involved in non-homologous
end-joining (RECQL4, n = 18, 54.50%; POLQ, n = 2, 6%), nucleotide
excision repair (ERCC6, n = 2, 6%; XPA, n = 1, 3%; CCNH, n = 1, 3%; POLK,
n = 1, 3%), homologous recombination (RNF168, n = 1, 3%; RAD17, n = 1,
3%; POLE, n = 1, 3%), Fanconi anemia pathway (POLN, n = 1, 3%), mismatch
repair (EXO1, n = 1, 3%) and mitochondrial DNA repair (POLG, n = 2, 6%).
The frequency of rs11342077 of the DNA helicase RECQL4 was significantly
higher in our cohort (18/53, 34%) compared to its frequency in the ExAC
database (p<0.01%). There was no significant difference in overall
survival (OS) between patients with and without DRG SNPs (log-rank
p=0.46). There was no significant association between the most commonly
identified SNP, rs11342077, and overall survival among UC patients with
DRG SNPs (log-rank p=0.39). Overall, the presence of DRG SNPs in our
cohort occurred at a significantly higher frequency (33/53, 62.3%)
compared to the ExAC database (0.56%, chi-square pResults: Twelve
different DRG SNPs were identified in germline DNA samples from 53
patients, affecting genes involved in non-homologous end-joining (RECQL4,
n = 18, 54.50%; POLQ, n = 2, 6%), nucleotide excision repair (ERCC6, n =
2, 6%; XPA, n = 1, 3%; CCNH, n = 1, 3%; POLK, n = 1, 3%), homologous
recombination (RNF168, n = 1, 3%; RAD17, n = 1, 3%; POLE, n = 1, 3%),
Fanconi anemia pathway (POLN, n = 1, 3%), mismatch repair (EXO1, n = 1,
3%) and mitochondrial DNA repair (POLG, n = 2, 6%). The frequency of
rs11342077 of the DNA helicase RECQL4 was significantly higher in our
cohort (18/53, 34%) compared to its frequency in the ExAC database
(p<0.01%). There was no significant difference in overall survival (OS)
between patients with and without DRG SNPs (log-rank p=0.46). There was
no significant association between the most commonly identified SNP,
rs11342077, and overall survival among UC patients with DRG SNPs
(log-rank p=0.39). Overall, the presence of DRG SNPs in our cohort
occurred at a significantly higher frequency (33/53, 62.3%) compared to
the ExAC database (0.56%, chi-square p<0.01).

Conclusions: Germline SNPs in DNA repair pathway genes are common in UC.
Additional study of the role of these SNPs as potential biomarkers of
response DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents, including platinum-based
chemotherapy or/and PARP inhibitors is needed in a larger cohort.


