Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of AZD2811, an aurora kinase B inhibitor, incorporated
into an AccurinTM nanoparticle for use in haematological and solid
cancers.


A nanoparticle formulation of AZD2811, a selective aurora kinase B
inhibitor, is currently under clinical development for the treatment of
both haematological and solid tumour disease. AZD2811 is the active
derivative of the prodrug Barasertib (AZD1152) which gave promising
clinical activity in elderly AML patients delivered as a 7-day infusion
(Kantarjian et al, Cancer, 119, 2611-2619, 2013). To address the
limitations associated with the clinical utility of Barasertib and other
cell cycle inhibitors in the clinic, AZD2811 has been incorporated into
an AccurinTM nanoparticle using a pamoic acid ion pairing approach to
optimise drug release rate (Song et al, Journal of Controlled Release,
229, 106-119, 2016), improve the drug exposure to tumour and reduce the
duration of administration. A proof of principle formulation of AZD2811
as an AccurinTM nanoparticle established the principle that anti-tumour
activity and improved therapeutic index could be achieved (Ashton et al,
Science Translational Medicine, 325, 1-10, 2016). The clinical
nanoparticle formulation of AZD2811 has been optimised for drug loading
and release rate. In pre-clinical models, the clinical formulation can be
used flexibly to optimise drug delivery for use in both haematological
disease such as AML, or in solid tumour settings. Anti-tumour activity in
solid tumours can be achieved at doses where bone marrow toxicity is
reduced compared to Barasertib. In sensitive xenograft and PDX solid
tumour models greater than 90% tumour regression is observed after a
total dose of 50mg/kg with no tumour progression for greater than 40
days. In contrast, for AML, increasing the dose intensity by 2-4 fold
leads to neutropenia and to complete tumour regression in a range of AML
xenograft models for greater than 60 days. These data establish the
concept that drug delivery using nanoparticles is able to resolve
therapeutic index challenges, and is able to do so across different
disease types. AZD2811 is currently in Phase 1 clinical trial
(D6130C0000). The current pre-clinical and clinical data with this novel
approach to inhibition of the cell cycle will be discussed.


