Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-reactive protein and ovarian cancer risk: preliminary results
from the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3).


Background: C-reactive protein (CRP), a general marker of inflammation
has been consistently associated with increased ovarian cancer risk.
However, few studies have had the ability to evaluate differences in
association by ovarian tumor subtype.

Methods: We pooled existing data on CRP and ovarian cancer risk among
nested case-control studies conducted within 6 studies participating in
the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3): CLUEII, EPIC, NHS, NHSII,
NYUWHS, and PLCO. Cohort-specific tertiles and quartiles were analyzed
using conditional logistic regression, as were common cutpoints at
Methods: We pooled existing data on CRP and ovarian cancer risk among
nested case-control studies conducted within 6 studies participating in
the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3): CLUEII, EPIC, NHS, NHSII,
NYUWHS, and PLCO. Cohort-specific tertiles and quartiles were analyzed
using conditional logistic regression, as were common cutpoints at
<1mg/L, 1-Methods: We pooled existing data on CRP and ovarian cancer risk
among nested case-control studies conducted within 6 studies
participating in the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3): CLUEII,
EPIC, NHS, NHSII, NYUWHS, and PLCO. Cohort-specific tertiles and
quartiles were analyzed using conditional logistic regression, as were
common cutpoints at <1mg/L, 1-<10mg/L and ≥10mg/L and Odds Ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using random-effects
meta-analysis. We also evaluated differences in the association between
serous and non-serous cancers.

Results: There was no significant association between the top vs. bottom
tertile (OR: 1.10; 95% CI: 0.91-1.32) or the top vs. bottom quartile (OR:
1.10; 95% CI: 0.89-1.36). However, there was a strong, positive
association between very high CRP (≥10mg/L vs. Results: There was no
significant association between the top vs. bottom tertile (OR: 1.10; 95%
CI: 0.91-1.32) or the top vs. bottom quartile (OR: 1.10; 95% CI:
0.89-1.36). However, there was a strong, positive association between
very high CRP (≥10mg/L vs. <1 mg/L: OR: 1.96; 95% CI: 1.36-2.84).
Associations of very high (≥10 mg/L vs. Results: There was no
significant association between the top vs. bottom tertile (OR: 1.10; 95%
CI: 0.91-1.32) or the top vs. bottom quartile (OR: 1.10; 95% CI:
0.89-1.36). However, there was a strong, positive association between
very high CRP (≥10mg/L vs. <1 mg/L: OR: 1.96; 95% CI: 1.36-2.84).
Associations of very high (≥10 mg/L vs. < 1 mg/L) did not differ by
histologic type: serous OR: 1.63; 95% CI: 1.11-2.43; endometrioid OR:
1.78; 95% CI: 0.63-5.00; mucinous OR: 10.43; 95% CI: 1.27-85.86; clear
cell OR: 2.30; 95% CI: 0.39-13.34).

Conclusion: Our results confirm the consistent observation of a positive
association between very high CRP levels and ovarian cancer risk. Pooled
analyses accounting for potential confounders are ongoing.


