Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulation of CUL4A and CUL4B ubiquitin ligases in lung cancer.


Background: The Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligases 4 (CRL4) is implicated in
controlling cell cycle, DNA damage repair and checkpoint response based
on studies employing cell lines and mouse models. CRL4 proteins,
including CUL4A and CUL4B are often highly accumulated in human
malignancies. Elevated CRL4 attenuates DNA damage repair and increases
genome instability that is believed to facilitate tumorigenesis. However,
this has yet to be evaluated in human cancer patients.

Methods: 352 lung cancer and 62 benign lung specimens of Asian origin
were constructed into tissue microarrays (TMAs) of four distinct lung
cancer subtypes. Expression of CUL4A, CUL4B and their substrates was
detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC), and analyzed statistically for
their prognostic value and association with DNA damage response and
genomic instability.

Results: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in the majority of lung
carcinomas (PCUL4AResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in the
majority of lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4BResults: Both CUL4A and
CUL4B are overexpressed in the majority of lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001,
PCUL4B<0.001), and significantly associated with tumor size
(PCUL4AResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in the majority of
lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), and significantly
associated with tumor size (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002), lymphatic
invasion (PCUL4A=0.004, PCUL4BResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are
overexpressed in the majority of lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001,
PCUL4B<0.001), and significantly associated with tumor size
(PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002), lymphatic invasion (PCUL4A=0.004,
PCUL4B<0.001), metastasis (PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006), and advanced TNM
stage (PCUL4AResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in the
majority of lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), and
significantly associated with tumor size (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002),
lymphatic invasion (PCUL4A=0.004, PCUL4B<0.001), metastasis
(PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006), and advanced TNM stage (PCUL4A<0.001,
PCUL4BResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in the majority of
lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), and significantly
associated with tumor size (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002), lymphatic
invasion (PCUL4A=0.004, PCUL4B<0.001), metastasis (PCUL4A=0.019,
PCUL4B=0.006), and advanced TNM stage (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), which
parallels gene amplification and abnormal activation of the canonical Wnt
signaling. Moreover, overexpression of CUL4A, but not CUL4B, is
significantly associated with tobacco smoking (P=0.01), and inversely
correlated with XPC and p21, both of which are substrates of CUL4A
(PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006). Higher levels of CUL4A or CUL4B are
significantly associated with patients’ OS (PCUL4AResults: Both CUL4A
and CUL4B are overexpressed in the majority of lung carcinomas
(PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), and significantly associated with tumor
size (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002), lymphatic invasion (PCUL4A=0.004,
PCUL4B<0.001), metastasis (PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006), and advanced TNM
stage (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), which parallels gene amplification
and abnormal activation of the canonical Wnt signaling. Moreover,
overexpression of CUL4A, but not CUL4B, is significantly associated with
tobacco smoking (P=0.01), and inversely correlated with XPC and p21, both
of which are substrates of CUL4A (PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006). Higher
levels of CUL4A or CUL4B are significantly associated with patients’ OS
(PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4BResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in
the majority of lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), and
significantly associated with tumor size (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002),
lymphatic invasion (PCUL4A=0.004, PCUL4B<0.001), metastasis
(PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006), and advanced TNM stage (PCUL4A<0.001,
PCUL4B<0.001), which parallels gene amplification and abnormal activation
of the canonical Wnt signaling. Moreover, overexpression of CUL4A, but
not CUL4B, is significantly associated with tobacco smoking (P=0.01), and
inversely correlated with XPC and p21, both of which are substrates of
CUL4A (PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006). Higher levels of CUL4A or CUL4B are
significantly associated with patients’ OS (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001)
and PFS (PCUL4AResults: Both CUL4A and CUL4B are overexpressed in the
majority of lung carcinomas (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001), and
significantly associated with tumor size (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.002),
lymphatic invasion (PCUL4A=0.004, PCUL4B<0.001), metastasis
(PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006), and advanced TNM stage (PCUL4A<0.001,
PCUL4B<0.001), which parallels gene amplification and abnormal activation
of the canonical Wnt signaling. Moreover, overexpression of CUL4A, but
not CUL4B, is significantly associated with tobacco smoking (P=0.01), and
inversely correlated with XPC and p21, both of which are substrates of
CUL4A (PCUL4A=0.019, PCUL4B=0.006). Higher levels of CUL4A or CUL4B are
significantly associated with patients’ OS (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B<0.001)
and PFS (PCUL4A<0.001, PCUL4B=0.001).

Conclusion: Our findings revealed that CUL4A and CUL4B are differentially
associated with etiological factors for pulmonary malignancies and are
independent prognostic markers for survival of distinct lung cancer
subtypes.


