Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput functional evaluation of variants of unknown
significance in EGFR.


Since transforming mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor gene
(EGFR) were first identified in non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC),
advancement of diagnostics for such mutations, and evolution of targeted
therapeutics against EGFR has driven unprecedented improvements in the
management as well as outcome of patients with this lethal disease.
However, next-generation sequencer (NGS)-driven extensive analyses on
NSCLC have revealed a large number of variants of uncertain significance
(VUS) in EGFR and other regions in the cancer genome that await further
investigation. Here we present a mixed all nominated mutants in one
(MANO) method to evaluate the transforming potential and drug sensitivity
of VUS of oncogenes, and applied this method to 101 non-synonymous EGFR
mutants in a high-throughput manner. The sensitivity of individual
mutants to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) against EGFR was shown
diverged, ranging from relatively insensitive mutations such as missense
mutations within exon 19 to a highly resistant mutation within exon 21.
Our data thus support the importance of examining uncommon mutations
within EGFR, and also of functional evaluation of such mutations. Our
MANO method may become a novel foundation for in vitro and in vivo
assessments of variants of cancer-related genes to deliver precision
medicine to individual cancer patients.


