Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking exposure and quantitative levels of estrogen-receptor
expression in ER+ breast tumors.


Introduction: Smoking is a suspected risk factor for breast cancer and
has been linked to increased risk of estrogen-receptor positive (ER+)
disease in some epidemiologic studies. Cigarette smoke has also been
shown to have antiestrogenic effects, leading to a potentially
contradictory hypothesis that smoking would lead to decreased risk of
breast tumors driven by estrogen-signaling. Binary classification of
breast tumors with respect to ER may mask quantitative associations
between smoking and ER expression. Methods: Using data from the Carolina
Breast Cancer Study (CBCS), we examined relationships between smoking and
quantitative levels of ER expression from tumors of 1,297 women with ER+
disease (i.e., â‰¥ 10% of tumor cells ER+ by immunohistochemical
analysis). We used multinomial logistic regression to estimate
associations between categorical measures of smoking and quartiles of ER
protein or ESR1 mRNA expression, represented by odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI). We also examined associations between
smoking and quantitative ER levels among women with ER+ breast tumors,
stratified by menopausal status. Multivariate regression models include
adjustment for age, race, stage, grade, and tumor size. Results:
Quantitative ESR1 was positively associated with any history of smoking
(i.e., current at time of diagnosis or former smoking) (OR: 1.96 and 95%
CI: 1.24 to 3.10). In addition, smoking more than 1 pack of cigarettes
per day was associated with high ESR1 expression (OR: 3.19 and 95% CI:
1.29 to 7.91) as was smoking duration of > 20 years (OR: 2.08 and 95% CI:
1.16 to 3.74). Among former smokers, we observed higher ESR1 expression
among those who quit 5-10 years prior to diagnosis. The magnitudes of
association between smoking and quantitative levels of ESR1 expression
were similar for both pre- and post-menopausal women, but were not
reflected in similar association on the protein level. Conclusions: Among
women with ER+ breast cancer, smoking dose and duration was positively
associated with elevated ESR1 mRNA levels, regardless of menopausal
status. Absence of this association for protein suggests that ESR1 RNA
merits further consideration, but may suggest that ESR1 RNA more
sensitively captures biological differences than ER protein expression.


