Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTL-CEBPA activates the transcription factor CEBPalpha leading to
inhibition of hepatocellular cancer growth.


CCATT/enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA) is a transcription factor
that can act as a tumor suppressor. Its expression is downregulated in a
number of cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We have
investigated the role of CEBPA in models of HCC using small activating
RNAs (saRNA) to transcriptionally upregulate its expression.

Three liver tumor cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B, PLCPRF5) were transfected
with 20nM CEBPA-saRNAs (CEBPA51). The transcriptional regulation of two
key members of the CEBP family: CEBPA and CEBPB and their protein
expression level were measured. The impact on cell growth was assessed by
way of an SRB and WST-1 assay. To investigate the role of CEBPB in
protecting cells from the activity of CEBPA, siRNAs were used to knock
down CEBPB. Using i.v. delivery of CEBPA51 oligonucleotide, the impact on
tumor growth was investigated in a DEN (N-nitrosodiethylamine) model of
liver cancer. Rats were treated with DEN for 7 weeks, followed by a 2
week wash out and then treated with the CEBPA51 (3-4mg/kg) complexed with
PAMAM-dendrimers or encapsulated in a nanoparticle formulation
(SMARTCLES). The impact on CEBPA mRNA levels in the liver, tumor growth
and liver functions (including, bilirubin, ALT and AST) were measured.

Transfection of CEBPA51 into HepG2, Hep3B or PLCPRF5 cells after 72hr led
to a significant increase in both CEBPA mRNA (1.7-2.5 fold by qPCR) and
protein expression measured by western blot in all 3 cell lines. A
significant inhibition in cell growth compared to either PBS or control
oligonucleotide was observed in HepG2 and Hep3B but not in PLCPRF5 cells
measured by both SRB and WST-1 assays. The levels of CEBPB mRNA and
protein, which may act as an antagonist of CEBPA, were found to be higher
(1.4-2 fold) in PLCRF5 cells compared to HepG2 and Hep3B cells.
Co-transfection of PLCPRF5 cells with siRNAs to CEBPB and CEBPA51 saRNA
led to downregulation of CEBPB and senstized the PLCPRF5 cells to growth
inhibition by CEBPA51. Administration of CEBPA51 complexed to either
dendrimers or encapsulated in SMARTCLES nanoparticle at doses of 3-4mg/kg
i.v. over 2 weeks led to a significant elevation of CEBPA mRNA in the
liver. This was accompanied by a reduction (80-90%) in the size of DEN
induced liver tumour nodules compared to a control oligonucleotide using
both delivery vehicles. The antitumor effects following treatment with
CEBPA51 using both delivery vehicles were also accompanied by reduction
in markers of liver injury (bilirubin, ALT and AST).

These studies support an important role for CEBPA in suppressing
progression of HCC. Activation of the CEBPÎ± gene by saRNA leading to
restoration of CEBPA levels in the liver represents a promising novel
approach for inhibiting the growth of HCC whilst improving normal liver
function. The SMARTCLES formulation, MTL-CEBPA, was chosen for clinical
development and is currently in a Phase 1 trial in patients with liver
cancer (NCT02716012).


