Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel NM23 inhibitors as potential
anti-angiogenic agents.


Exogenous nucleoside diphosphate kinase (eNDPK or NM23) has been shown to
promote endothelial cell proliferation and migration and tumor-mediated
angiogenesis. This is facilitated by its transphosphorylase activity, in
which a gamma terminal phosphate group from a triphosphate nucleoside is
transferred to a diphosphate nucleoside, resulting in elevated ATP
levels. Increased levels of ATP in the tumor microenvironment can
activate purinergic receptors (P2Y1) on adjacent endothelial cells to
promote angiogenesis, independent of VEGF stimulation. Triple negative
human breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) cells have been shown to elaborate
exosomes that contain NM23. These exosomes have implications in targeting
specific tissues/cells to promote angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. Our lab
has shown that inhibition of eNDPK and the P2Y1 receptor reduces
endothelial cell tubulogenesis (Rumjahn, et al., 2007) and breast cancer
metastasis (Yokdang, et al., 2015). Therefore, targeted inhibition of
eNDPK may have implications as a treatment for early tumor-mediated
angiogenesis. For this study, we utilized a transphosphorylation activity
assay to perform a drug screen on compounds from the Prestwick chemical
library. Recombinant NDPK-B was added to FDA-approved drug compounds
along with ADP and UTP substrates. Subsequent ATP generation was detected
with a luciferase luciferin reaction. Decreased luminescence
signal/inhibition of NDPK was compared to ellagic acid control, a known
inhibitor of NDPK. From our initial screen, we identified eight potential
compounds that inhibited NDPK at comparable levels to ellagic acid. These
eight compounds were further examined to determine the dose response
curve. We found that Chicago Sky Blue 6B inhibited NDPK at an IC50 value
of 1.88ÂµM. The results from this study demonstrate a drug screening
method to discover alternative small molecule inhibitors of NDPK as a
potential treatment of angiogenesis and breast cancer metastasis.


