Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioavailability, pharmacodynamics and safety profile of a novel
anti-angiogenic compound JFD in pre-clinical models.


JFD, isoindole (1, 3-dioxo-2, 3-dihydro-1H-isoindol-4-yl)-amide, is a
small molecule that was developed using molecular modeling to
specifically antagonize Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor 2
(VEGFR2) and associated kinase activity, thereby producing
anti-angiogenic and anti-cancer effects. Since the original form of JFD
is hydrophobic, it was recently modified into a water soluble form
(JFD-WS) to increase its water solubility and bioavailability. Initially,
we investigated the in vitro pharmacodynamics effect of both JFD and
JFD-WS by utilizing MatrigelÂ® tube formation assays, scratch and cell
migration assays followed by inhibition of VEGFR2 phosphorylation in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). In vivo tumor growth
inhibition of JFD and JFD-WS was tested using GI-101A breast
adenocarcinoma cells implanted xenograft animals. Subsequently, the blood
samples and the tumor proteins were extracted from the control and
experimental animals to measure the pro-apoptotic signals and the levels
of plasma biomarker such as MUC1 (mucin 1). The safety profile was
established using Balb-c mice that were injected intraperitoneally (i.p)
with JFD (6 mg/Kg body weight) and JFD-WS (100 mg/Kg body weight) for 30
days. The pharmacokinetics (PK) of JFD including the plasma
concentration, excretion, elimination and distribution in the
experimental animals were analyzed using a simple HPLC method. As
expected, the JFD effectively inhibited HUVECs migration, tube formation,
and VEGFR2 phosphorylation. Moreover, both JFD and JFD-WS exhibited
strong anti-tumorigenic effects in xenograft implanted experimental
animals that were evidenced by the decreasing plasma levels of MUC1. The
western blot analysis of apoptotic markers and DNA fragmentation analysis
further confirmed the pro-apoptotic effects of JFD as well as JFD-WS in
our experimental system. Following i.p. injection, there was a
significant distribution of JFD original into the liver, kidney, and
brain, which contained the highest concentration compared to other two
organs. When hematological, hepatic, renal and cardiac function markers
were analyzed in the experimental animals, that were treated with JFD-WS
for four weeks, no significant alterations were found in the test group
compared to the control animals. Thus, whether used as a single agent or
in combination with the other anti-cancer drugs, JFD shows strong
antitumor effects without producing severe toxicities. The efficient
delivery of JFD original to the brain suggests that this drug would be
useful in treating solid tumors of the brain with pro-angiogenic
abilities. (This project was supported by the Community Foundation of
Broward, Ft. Lauderdale, FL and The Royal Dames of Cancer Research Inc.,
Ft. Lauderdale, FL).


