Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selecting the right chemotherapy partner for checkpoint
inhibitors: an in vivo comparison of different drugs and dosages.


Anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies (checkpoint inhibitors,
CIs) have shown a remarkable clinical activity in a variety of types of
solid cancers and hematological malignancies. However, complete and/or
long-lasting clinical responses have been observed only in a minority of
patients. The clinical response to CIs depends on a complex balance
between tumor-associated and circulating CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ T,
regulatory, B, NK and myeloid/suppressor cell subsets. We have used
immunocompetent mice to generate orthotopic models of breast cancer (BC,
injecting 4T1 triple negative murine cells) and of non-Hodgkinâ€™s
lymphoma (NHL, injecting A20 murine malignant B cells). In these models
and in cancer-free mice we studied by 10-color flow cytometry the effect
of different doses of 3 widely-used, orally-active chemotherapy drugs
(cyclophosphamide, CTX; capecitabine, 5FU; and vinorelbine, VNR) over a
variety of immune cell subsets including CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+ T cells,
CD56+ NKs, CD19+ B cells, CD3+CD4+CD25++CD127low/neg Tregs,
GR1-CD11b+CD11c+ monocytes, SSClowCD11b+GR1+ total Myeloid-Derived
Suppressor Cells (t-MDSC, monocytic and polymorphonuclear),
SSChighCD11b+GR1+ granulocytes and CD11c+CD11b-GR1- antigen-presenting
cells (APCs). Chemotherapy drugs were given alone or in combination with
murine anti-PD-1 or anti PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies (Bioxcell clones J43
and 10F.9G2, respectively). For every type of chemotherapy drugs, we
selected 3 dosages representative of clinical low-dose metronomic (LDM),
medium (M), or maximum tolerable (MT) dosages. Mice were treated for 3
weeks, blood cell subsets were measured weekly. CTX and 5FU, at M and MT
dosages, reduced significantly the number of T, B, and NK cells and of
t-MDSC. CTX, but not 5FU, reduced Tregs and APCs. 5FU, but not CTX,
reduced t-MDSC. At variance, VNR at LDM, M and MT doses did not reduce T,
NK and t-MDSC. At M and MT doses, VNR reduced Tregs, B and
SSChighCD11b+GR1+ granulocytes. Considering these data, we designed
preclinical protocols in both BC and NHL models associating CTX, 5FU and
VNR with CIs. Cumulative and unbearable toxicities were observed in mice
treated with 2 or more chemotherapy drugs at MT doses plus CIs. In both
models, anti-PD-L1 plus M or LDM combinatory doses of CTX and VNR were
the most effective therapies for reducing local and metastatic neoplastic
growth. Our data indicate that chemotherapy drugs have relevant effects
on immune cell subsets involved in the anti-neoplastic activity of CIs,
and that the type and the dosage of chemotherapy are crucial to obtain
synergy with CIs. Further studies are ongoing to find the right
chemotherapy/CI balance to a) maintain an adequate T, APC and NK cell
activity, b) reduce Tregs and myeloid suppressors, c) avoid toxicity, and
d) target cancer cells.


