Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro and in vivo assessment of the mechanism of action of the
PARP inhibitor rucaparib.


Background: Rucaparib (CO-338) is an oral small molecule inhibitor of
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) that is being developed for patients
with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutated and homologous recombination deficient
ovarian cancer (Swisher et al., 2016; Lancet Oncol. Epub). The mechanism
of action (MOA) of rucaparib was characterized in the studies reported
here.

Methods: Enzymatic and cellular reporter assay profiling were performed
by BPS Biosciences. Rucaparib potency was assessed using 6-day cell
viability assays (CellTiter-Glo). In vivo PK/PD and efficacy studies in
the MDA-MB-436 (BRCA1 mutant) and the HBCx-17 (BRCA2 mutant) TNBC models
were performed at Crown Biosciences and XenTech, respectively.

Results: In biochemical assays rucaparib inhibited PARP-1, PARP-2 and
PARP-3, with IC50 values of 0.8, 0.5, and 28 nM, respectively. Rucaparib
weakly inhibited PARP5a (tankyrase 1[TNKS1]) and PARP5b (tankyrase
2[TNKS2]) with an IC50 of 796 and 486 nM; however rucaparib did not
inhibit TNKS1/2 in a cellular reporter assay evaluating Wnt pathway
signaling (IC50 >10 ÂµM). Rucaparib cytotoxicity was evaluated in the
BRCA1 mutant (UWB1.289) and wild-type (UWB1.289+BRCA1) isogenic pair, and
a panel (n=26) of breast and ovarian cancer cell lines. The UWB1.289 cell
line was more sensitive to rucaparib (IC50 = 375 nM) than the
UWB1.289+BRCA1 cell line (IC50 = 5430 nM). Rucaparib also decreased the
cell viability of several BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutant ovarian and breast
cancer cell lines. Mechanistic analyses in the UWB1.289 cell line
demonstrated a dose dependent decrease in poly (ADP) ribosylation (PAR;
IC50 = 2.8 nM), and an increase in DNA damage and apoptosis. Taken
together, these results are consistent with the concept of synthetic
lethality, where simultaneous inhibition of multiple DNA repair pathways
results in irreparable DNA damage and cell death. In vivo PK/PD and
efficacy studies assessed the MOA and activity of rucaparib in the
MDA-MD-436 (BRCA1 mutant) xenograft model. In a PK/PD study, dose
dependent inhibition of PAR was observed in the tumors of mice treated
with 15, 50 and 150 mg/kg BID rucaparib, resulting in statistically
significant (p 2-fold) than the levels of rucaparib measured in plasma.
Dose dependent and statistically significant tumor growth inhibition was
observed in both subcutaneous and orthotopic xenograft studies evaluating
the anti-tumor activity of rucaparib in the MDA-MB-436 model. Rucaparib
also demonstrated potent activity in the BRCA2 mutant HBCx-17
patient-derived xenograft model.

Conclusion: These results demonstrate that rucaparib is a potent and
selective inhibitor of PARP1, PARP-2, and PARP-3 with in vitro and in
vivo activity in BRCA1/2 deficient tumors.


