Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a selective small molecule inhibitor of Tankyrase by
structure-based screening.


The Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is critical for colorectal cancer
(CRC) development, progression and metastasis. Tankyrase enzymes (TNKS1
and TANKS2), members of the PARP (Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerases)
superfamily, PARsylate and target Axin for degradation via
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, leading to accumulation of β-catenin into
nucleus. In addition, aberrant YAP/TAZ singling contributes to anticancer
drug resistance, but inhibition of TNKS suppresses YAP/TAZ signaling
through stabilizing Angiomotin (AMOT). Therefore, inhibition of TNKS has
emerged as an attractive strategy for treatment of cancers. To identify
potent and selective small molecule inhibitors of TNKS1, a TNKS1-ligand
docking was used for computational-based virtual screen of a chemical
library containing 1.6 million compounds and 24 virtual hits were further
subjected to in vitro evaluation for TNKS1 inhibition. Using an in vitro
TNKS1 enzyme assay, we identified a novel pyridine derivative (AZ236106)
significantly inhibited TNKS1 enzyme activity in a
concentration-dependent manner, but not PARP1/2. Treatment of AZ236106
stabilized Axin, reduced β-catenin in nucleus and downregulated
β-catenin target genes in DLD-1 cells harboring adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC) mutation. Moreover, we observed that AZ236106 inhibited
accumulation of YAP in the nucleus and expression of YAP garget genes.
Combination treatment of AZ236106 with either radiation or PLX4032, a
BRAF inhibitor, decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptotic cell
death in DLD-1 and SK-MEL28 cells, compare to AZ236106, radiation or
PLX4032 alone. Our findings suggest that AZ236106 may have therapeutic
potential in cancers, and could be further refined for efficacy and
safety to develop a lead compound.


