Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Probiotics ameliorate Porphyromonas gingivalis-promoted pancreatic
cancer progression in oncogenic Kras transgenic mice.


Periodontal disease has been shown to play important roles in the
pathogenesis of many chronic diseases. Recent epidemiological studies and
microbiome analysis have suggested that periodontal disease may be
associated with the progression of pancreatic cancer. Our recent study
has demonstrated that oral-smear of a periodontitis pathogen
Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis) significantly induced pancreatic
cancer deterioration in the KrasG12D/-Pdx-1-Cre transgenic mouse model.
Higher expression levels of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
markers, such as N-Cadherin, Î±SMA, SNAIL-1, Vimentin and ZEB1, were
observed in P. gingivalis-treated KrasG12D/-Pdx-1-Cre mice than the
untreated controls. In an attempt to develop a prophylactic treatment for
pancreatic cancer, the mice were fed with a combination of two
probiotics, Lactobacillus reuteri and Lactobacillus paracasei, for four
consecutive weeks after oral-smear of P. gingivalis. These probiotic
strains have been demonstrated to have the efficacy of either
anti-inflammation or enhancement of cell-mediated immunity, respectively.
Our results demonstrated that oral administration of the probiotics
significantly suppressed oncogenic Kras-induced pancreatic cancer
development and reversed P. gingivalis-stimulated cancer deterioration in
mice. Significantly reduced expression of the aforementioned EMT markers
in pancreatic cancer tissues was observed in KrasG12D/-Pdx-1-Cre
transgenic mice treated with the probiotics. Our results suggest that the
microbiota profile is very important for pancreatic cancer development.
The manipulation of microbiota for enhancing antitumor immunity may be an
emerging strategy for cancer prevention.


