Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KIRnome: KIR genotyping for whole genome/exome sequencing data.


In this study, we tried to develop valid KIR calling algorithm from
WES/WGS data. As a consequence, here we suggest KIRnome (KIR typing for
whole genome and exome sequencing) which is a KIR typing method for
applying sequencing data such as WES/WGS. A total of 71 sequencing data
(18 WES and 53 WGS data, respectively) and matched experimentally
validated KIR genotype data are used to train and validate. Before
developing this method, two types of allele references (genomic and
coding, here after called gSeq and cSeq) are constructed by allele
sequence of IPD/KIR. KIRnome consists of two part, first part is
calculating normalized depth (here after called depth) of 16 KIR genes
and considering allele reference length and second is estimating KIR type
based on depth. In general, we get higher normalized depth when using
genomic references for WGS data and using coding references for WES data.
This coincides with scheme KIRnome and the characteristics of WGS and WES
data. Given 71 samples of 3 data sets, we evaluated KIR genotyping
performance of KIRnome per each KIR gene. For all 16 KIR genes, KIRnome
shows >=98.5% accuracy. When KIRnome performance was tested only in 13
WES samples, the accuracy slightly drops to 94%. We assume this is
attributable to relatively small number of the samples. In conclusion, we
developed a novel and unique method named KIRnome for KIR typing from NGS
data. KIRnome could determine KIR genotype accurately from WES and WGS
data respectively. We expect KIRnome would facilitate revealation of
immunogenetic facts in various disease. Moreover, future generation of
KIR specific NGS data and improved reference sequence information of KIR
would enable KIRnome to type KIR at allele level in a near future.


