Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of FAK in tumor microenvironment.


Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic non-receptor tyrosine kinase
important in mediating signal transduction in cell migration, survival
and proliferation. Up-regulation of FAK in the tumor cells has been shown
to enhance tumor malignancy and correlate with poor prognosis. FAK
signaling has also been implicated in impacting tumor microenvironment,
including endothelial cells and fibroblasts. However, much less is known
about how FAK in the tumor stroma affects tumor progression, or how
stromal FAK cross-talks with cancer cells. Here we use an inducible
Col1α2-creERT, FAK f/f genetic engineered mouse model (GEMM) to
specifically delete FAK in the fibroblasts. Using the GEMM, we found that
FAK in stromal fibroblasts facilitates breast tumor growth and metastasis
in vivo. We further showed that conditioned media (CM) from human breast
cancer cells induced FAK Y397 autophoslphorylation and expression of
smooth muscle actin (SMA, a marker for cancer-associated-fibroblasts
[CAFs]) of normal human lung fibroblasts. Interestingly, only the breast
cancer CM educated fibroblasts, but not the naive un-treated fibroblasts,
were able to promote breast cancer cell migration and invasion. Lastly,
knockdown of FAK in these “educated” fibroblasts abolished their
ability to promote breast cancer cell migration and invasion. Taken
together, these data suggest a potential role of stromal FAK in creating
a pro-tumorigenic microenvironment for breast cancer development and
progression, and provide further rationale in therapeutic benefits of FAK
inhibition against various solid tumors.


