Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunoprofiling circulating blood as a means to early detection of
solid tumors.


Our goal was to evaluate whether profiling Myeloid Derived Suppressor
Cells (MDSCs) in circulation correlated with the existence and stage of
multiple, biopsy-verified solid tumor types and to evaluate whether such
analyses could enable early detection. The tumor micro-environment (TME)
is replete with numerous immune cells, and the type and concentration of
such cells can provide prognostic information. The link between high
concentrations of MDSCs and poor prognosis is most likely due to the
immuno-suppressive effects of such cells. Some fraction of these cells
spill into the blood stream. We utilized flow cytometry to phenotypically
quantify subsets of MDSCs and other leukocytes in the circulation of
biopsy-verified cancer patients, as well as in age and sex matched
healthy donors. Our results indicate a marked increase in MDSC levels in
the circulation of tumor patients relative to healthy donors. We have
analyzed patients presenting over a dozen solid tumor types (lung,
breast, ovarian, colon, melanoma, liver, thyroid, pancreatic, uterine,
osteosarcoma, appendiceal, leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and vulvar) and
found notable differences in the immune-profiles of circulating blood in
these patients. It appears that the immune response, as measured by our
flow cytometry technique, is general for most tumor types. We will
present correlations and inter-relations between different cell types and
evidence of tumors. While our studies to date have been performed in an
unblinded manner, we will present performance data (specificity and
sensitivity) for our approach.


