Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-targeting salmonella typhimurium a1-r inhibited angiogenesis
of osteosarcoma cells visualized by color-coded imaging in the in vivo
absorbable gelatin sponge assay.


INTRODUCTION We already have reported a color-coded imaging model that
showed the sponge agngiogenesis assay using absorbable gelatin sponge
implanted in nestin-driven green fluorescent protein (ND-GFP) nude mice
and that osteosarcoma cells promote angiogenesis in this sponge assay. We
report here that Salmonella typhimurium A1-R (A1-R) inhibits angiogenesis
of osteosarcoma cells in the sponge angiogenesis assay in ND-GFP mice.

METHODS Sponge was initially transplanted subcutaneously in the flank of
transgenic ND-GFP nude mice. Seven days after transplantation of sponge,
skin flaps were made and 143B-RFP human osteosarcoma cells expressing red
fluorescent protein (RFP) were injected into the transplanted sponge.
After establishment of tumors in the sponge, the control-group mice were
treated with PBS via tail-vein injection and A1-R treated group with A1-R
likewise. Skin flaps were made at days 14, 21, and 28 after
transplantation of the sponge to allow imaging of vascularization in the
sponge using a variable-magnification small animal imaging system and
confocal fluorescence microscopy.

RESULTS: Vessel length in the sponge was measured after treatment with
FV10-ASW Fluoview software. Nascent blood vessels grew in the sponge in a
time-dependent manner. A random 3 fields were quantified in each group).
The mean length of ND-GFP expressing blood vessels in the sponge in mice
with A1-R treated group were 9.40, 12.40, and 10.12 mm/mm2, at days 14,
21, and 28, respectively. The mean length of ND-GFP expressing blood
vessels in the sponge in mice of the control group were 8.86, 14.50, and
15.81 mm/mm2 on day 14, 21, and 28, respectively. ND-GFP expressing blood
vessels of the mice in the osteosarcoma cells treated with A1-R had
shorter vessels than the control group (on days 28, P RESULTS: Vessel
length in the sponge was measured after treatment with FV10-ASW Fluoview
software. Nascent blood vessels grew in the sponge in a time-dependent
manner. A random 3 fields were quantified in each group). The mean length
of ND-GFP expressing blood vessels in the sponge in mice with A1-R
treated group were 9.40, 12.40, and 10.12 mm/mm2, at days 14, 21, and 28,
respectively. The mean length of ND-GFP expressing blood vessels in the
sponge in mice of the control group were 8.86, 14.50, and 15.81 mm/mm2 on
day 14, 21, and 28, respectively. ND-GFP expressing blood vessels of the
mice in the osteosarcoma cells treated with A1-R had shorter vessels than
the control group (on days 28, P < 0.05), suggested the extent of nascent
blood vessel growth was significantly inhibited by A1-R treatment.
Besides, we evaluated the RFP colored area of the sponge in both groups,
which almost represent the viable tumor size. The mean RFP colored area
of A1-R treated group in the sponge were 4.49, 7.53 and 8.15 mm2, at days
14, 21, and 28, respectively and that of control group were 3.78, 6.40,
and 7.49 mm2 at days 14, 21, and 28, respectively. The size of possibly
viable RFP colored tumor area between A1-R treated group and control
group at days 28 did not show significant area difference, indicated A1-R
treated osteosarcoma cells showed shorter nascent vessel length than
control group, not due to the tumor size difference but due to the
difference of angiogenesis inhibitory effect. As a result of both
outcomes above, the extent of nascent blood vessel growth was
significantly inhibited by A1-R treatment on days 28.

CONCLUSION: In the present study, we reported the effect of angiogenesis
inhibition of A1-R in vivo sponge assay, and suggest A1-R has potential
for anti-angiogenic target therapy for osteosarcoma.


