Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Binding of soluble DC-HIL to endothelial cell creates
immunosuppression on premetastatic niches.


Highly metastatic attribute of melanoma can be recapitulated in a mouse
model by high potential of B16 melanoma-derived soluble factors that form
more premetastatic niches (PMNs) in distal organs than those of LL2 lung
carcinoma. Having shown that the T cell-inhibitory receptor DC-HIL is a
potent promoter of B16 melanoma growth and that B16 cells secrete it into
blood circulation as a soluble receptor (sDC-HIL), we hypothesized that
sDC-HIL accounts for the metastatic nature. We tracked sDC-HIL in various
organs of melanoma-bearing mice by immunoblotting and showed that sDC-HIL
was expressed in particular organs; at highest levels in bone marrow (BM)
and lung; and no-to-little in lymphoid organs and liver. We next examined
effects of sDC-HIL on LL2 cells (no DC-HIL expression). In a model of
spontaneous metastasis quantified by colonogenic assay, syngeneic mice
implanted subcutaneously with LL2- transfected-sDC-HIL cells produced
6-fold more lung mets than mice with LL2-transfected-GFP. We obtained
similar results in a model of experimental metastasis (EM), in which LL2
cells injected i.v. in tumor-bearing mice. To establish specificity,
similar mice were treated i.v. with anti-DC-HIL mAb 2 h before and 24 h
after infusion of LL2 cells: The mAb led to 80% reduction in lung mets in
mice with sDC-HIL-LL2 tumor. Next we infected tumor-free mice with
lentiviruses for sDC-HIL/GFP or GFP gene and then performed the EM assay:
lung mets in mice expressing sDC-HIL were 5-fold greater than control. To
determine whether sDC-HIL is responsible for the ability of
B16-conditioned media (CM) to induce metastasis, tumor-free mice were
injected i.p. daily with CM from LL2, B16, or DC-HIL-knocked down (KD)
B16 cells and then assayed for EM. B16-CM induced significantly more lung
mets than LL2-CM, with mets almost corresponding to that produced by
KD-B16-CM. We tracked the fate of sDC-HIL in lung by immunofluorescence
and showed sDC-HIL accumulated on particular (not all) endothelial cells
(EC), at sites where LL2 and BM-cells migrated. Kinetic studies in
BM-chimera mice showed that sDC-HIL arrives at lung sites before VEGFR1+
BM-progenitors, which initiate formation of PMNs. Since the
mets-enhancing effect of sDC-HIL was not seen in immunodeficient mice, we
asked whether lungs expressing sDC-HIL were immunosuppressive.
CFSE-labeled CD8+ T cells were infused into mice with sDC-HIL- or GFP-LL2
tumors, and their proliferation assayed by FACS: T-cell proliferation in
lungs expressing sDC-HIL was reduced significantly (28%) vs. control
(81%). Because sDC-HIL by itself is not suppressive, we asked whether
binding of sDC-HIL by EC makes immunosuppressive. CD8+ T cells were
co-cultured with sDC-HIL-bound EC and then co-stimulated: sDC-HIL-bound
EC completely suppressed the IFN-Î³ response. Thus, sDC-HIL critically
contributes to the highly metastatic potential by making PMNs
immunosuppressive even before the arrival of tumor cells.


