Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating heart-hate variability, salivary cortisol and physical
activity as predictors of cancer-related fatigue recovery in
breast-cancer survivors over a 12 week period by use of a smartphone
application.


Introduction Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) is one of the most prevalent
and debilitating problems in breast cancer survivors (BCS) that can
persist many years beyond successful cancer treatment. Parasympathetic
nervous system activity (measured via heart-rate variability; HRV),
cortisol dysregulation and decreased physical activity are plausible, but
understudied contributors to CRF. Repeated daily measurements of CRF and
tracking daily physical activity over a 12-week period should give more
information regarding temporal patterns of CRF among BCS.

Objective The purpose of this study is 1) to investigate patterns of CRF
in fatigued BCS over time; 2) to assess HRV, salivary cortisol and level
of physical activity as predictors of cancer-related fatigue (CRF) in BCS
over a 12-week period; and 3) to explore whether a smartphone application
intervention results in increased daily physical activity, as well as
improved HRV, salivary cortisol and CRF in BCS relative to healthy female
controls over a 12 week period.

Methods A total of 30 fatigued breast cancer survivors (FACIT-F score â‰¤
34) and 30 aged-matched female controls will be randomly assigned to
either an intervention or control group. Both groups will receive a
smartphone application tracking daily physical activity. While the
intervention group will receive this application with feedback regarding
their daily physical activity, the control groups will receive the
application without feedback. Behavioral data will be collected by means
of GPS and Wi-Fi for localization, and accelerometer, barometer,
magnetometer and gyroscope for activity recognition. HRV and salivary
cortisol will be collected at rest, as well as during and after a
significant stressor (Trier Social Stress Test). Fatigue will be measured
by the FACIT-F Scale, which will be completed at baseline (T1), 4 weeks
(T2) and 12 weeks (T3). Group differences will be tested by one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) and intervention effects will be analyzed
using mixed models with repeated measurements.

Hypotheses We hypothesize that HRV, cortisol dysregulation and level of
physical activity at baseline can predict CRF-recovery over a 12-week
period. The smartphone application will be associated with improved
physical activity in the BCS intervention group and that changes of
physiological correlates of CRF can be observed (i.e., HRV and salivary
cortisol).

Conclusion This study will examine associations between HRV, salivary
cortisol, physical activity and CRF in BCS over time. The results of this
study may provide insight into factors that contribute to the
development, persistence and/or consequences of CRF by use of an
innovative mobile application.


