Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 expression as a prognosis marker and a new therapeutic target
in patient with duodenal adenocarcinoma.


Background: Mucin1 (MUC1) is a glycoprotein as a member of the mucin
family. The expression has been associated with poor prognosis in
patients with several types of cancer. Duodenal cancer is rare, therefore
details are not known including carcinogenesis and clinical treatment. We
verify the association of MUC1 expression and prognosis in patient with
duodenal adenocarcinoma. We also assess the function of MUC1 in vitro.
Materials and Methods: Between 1989 and 2014, eighteen patients of
duodenal adenocarcinoma with surgery at Jichi Medical University Hospital
were included in this study. MUC1 expression was evaluated
immunohistochemically with anti-MUC1 antibody to examine the association
of MUC1 expression and prognosis clinicopathologically. A human-derived
duodenal cancer cell line, HuTu-80, is used for the experiments of
invasiveness and proliferation in vitro. The invasive capacity was
evaluated by transfection of siRNA into HuTu80 with matrigel invasion
assay. Viability assay with the anti-MUC1 peptide GO201 was assessed to
determine whether MUC1 associate with cell growth of duodenal
adenocarcinoma. Results: Seven cases were MUC1 positive and 11 were MUC1
negative immunohistochemically. TMN staging was not associated with MUC1
expression. Kaplan-Meir analysis showed a poor prognosis with MUC1
positive patients in cumulative overall survivals (MUC1 positive : MUC1
negative, 18M : 52M; HR:20.6, 95%CI 3.247-130.7,p=0.002). Lymph node
metastasis of MUC1 positive patients (71.4%) was significantly higher
than MUC1 negative patients (9%) (p = 0.01). In vitro experiment, the
expression of MUC1 was confirmed by RT-PCR and flowcytometry. Knockdown
experiment with transduction of siRNAs to HuTu80 decreased the expression
of the MUC1 gene. Transduction of siRNAs significantly reduced invasive
capacity (47.02±21.65%, 95%CI 3.046-102.9, p= 0.04). Growth of HuTu80
cells was inhibited by GO201 (5 μM : 95%CI 0.109-0.3565, 10μM :95%CI
0.024-0.389 pBackground: Mucin1 (MUC1) is a glycoprotein as a member of
the mucin family. The expression has been associated with poor prognosis
in patients with several types of cancer. Duodenal cancer is rare,
therefore details are not known including carcinogenesis and clinical
treatment. We verify the association of MUC1 expression and prognosis in
patient with duodenal adenocarcinoma. We also assess the function of MUC1
in vitro. Materials and Methods: Between 1989 and 2014, eighteen patients
of duodenal adenocarcinoma with surgery at Jichi Medical University
Hospital were included in this study. MUC1 expression was evaluated
immunohistochemically with anti-MUC1 antibody to examine the association
of MUC1 expression and prognosis clinicopathologically. A human-derived
duodenal cancer cell line, HuTu-80, is used for the experiments of
invasiveness and proliferation in vitro. The invasive capacity was
evaluated by transfection of siRNA into HuTu80 with matrigel invasion
assay. Viability assay with the anti-MUC1 peptide GO201 was assessed to
determine whether MUC1 associate with cell growth of duodenal
adenocarcinoma. Results: Seven cases were MUC1 positive and 11 were MUC1
negative immunohistochemically. TMN staging was not associated with MUC1
expression. Kaplan-Meir analysis showed a poor prognosis with MUC1
positive patients in cumulative overall survivals (MUC1 positive : MUC1
negative, 18M : 52M; HR:20.6, 95%CI 3.247-130.7,p=0.002). Lymph node
metastasis of MUC1 positive patients (71.4%) was significantly higher
than MUC1 negative patients (9%) (p = 0.01). In vitro experiment, the
expression of MUC1 was confirmed by RT-PCR and flowcytometry. Knockdown
experiment with transduction of siRNAs to HuTu80 decreased the expression
of the MUC1 gene. Transduction of siRNAs significantly reduced invasive
capacity (47.02±21.65%, 95%CI 3.046-102.9, p= 0.04). Growth of HuTu80
cells was inhibited by GO201 (5 μM : 95%CI 0.109-0.3565, 10μM :95%CI
0.024-0.389 p<0.0001). Conclusions: MUC1 expression is a predictive
marker for poor prognosis in patients with duodenal adenocarcinoma.
Functional Interference of MUC1 core protein reduces cell growth and
invasiveness. Taken together, MUC1 is associated with malignant potential
and a novel target for the treatment.


