Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translation initiation factor DAP5 plays an essential role in
translational control of breast cancer metastasis.


Metastasis is the cause of 90% of cancer-related deaths. Selective mRNA
translation has been found to be crucial for breast cancer development,
progression and metastasis; however, there is a poor biological and
mechanistic understanding of the role of translation in these processes.
Our work and others have pioneered an understanding of translational
regulation in breast cancer. We have previously shown that overexpression
of initiation factor eIF4GI in advanced breast cancer cells selectively
increases the translation of mRNAs encoding survival, cell cycle
inhibition, and DNA damage and repair proteins, among other DNA
damage-protective mRNAs. eIF4G consists of three family members: eIF4GI,
eIF4GII, and the poorly studied eIF4G homolog, DAP5, the subject of this
study. DAP5 lacks the N-terminal domain for eIF4E and PABP binding. DAP5
is therefore suspected to promote eIF4E-independent or IRES-driven
translation of mRNAs involved in cell stress and oncogenesis, but its
role in metastasis hasnâ€™t been investigated. We analyzed the NCI human
tissue genome cancer atlas (TCGA) and found that higher DAP5 mRNA
expression is strongly associated with estrogen receptor negative breast
cancer metastasis with lower overall survival. We then engineered a
highly metastatic breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231TR to express
dox-inducible shRNA to DAP5 or a non-silencing (NS) control. Tumors were
developed in clinically relevant orthotopic mouse models, with and
without DAP5 silencing by addition of dox to the drinking water.
Remarkably, reduction of DAP5 expression by ~70% had no impact on primary
tumor growth but fully eliminated metastasis to the lung. Genome-wide
transcriptome and translatome analysis of DAP5 and in vivo
ultraviolet-crosslinking and high-throughput sequencing (HITS-CLIP)
identified specific mRNAs that interact directly with DAP5. A significant
fraction of DAP5 mRNA targets are involved in cell death and survival,
cell proliferation, cell mobility, DNA repair and translation initiation
and do not have IRESs, suggesting a novel role for DAP5 in a
non-classical translation initiation process upon cellular stress and
metastasis. Our results suggest that the translation initiation factor
DAP5 likely plays a critical role in breast cancer metastasis by a unique
mechanism for metastasis-specific translation initiation and provides new
concepts for therapeutic strategies involving translational regulation.


