Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inverse relationship between exon 8 single nucleotide polymorphism
(c.1293 C>T) of gigaxonin and human tumor cell growth.


Gigaxonin, a product of the Giant Axonal Neuropathy (GAN) gene located on
chromosome 16, is involved in intermediate filament processing of neural
cells and vimentin fibers in fibroblasts. Previous studies have shown an
interaction between p16 and gigaxonin in cisplatin mediated
ubiquitination of NFkB. Genomic studies have indicated higher frequency
(44.25%) of exon 8 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (c.1293 C>T) of
gigaxonin in the individuals of Caucasian population compared to normal
population (22%). The polymorphism frequency is much lower in individuals
of other ethnicities. To determine the relationship to tumors, we
analyzed exon 8 polymorphism in HPV positive and negative cervical and
head and tumors. Our studies showed a 47.25% polymorphic frequency in
these tumors. There was no relationship between the presence of
polypmorphism and HPV status. However, there was an inverse relationship
between polymorphism and tumor recurrence. Our studies have further shown
higher expression of gigaxonin protein in cancer cell lines containing
the polymorphic T allele. Growth assays in vitro and in soft agar have
shown a direct relationship between the presence of the T allele and
slower cell line growth. Our results therefore indicate that in addition
to p16 expression, exon 8 SNP could also serve as a diagnostic marker of
chemo sensitivity in human tumors.


