Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of the PARP inhibitor rucaparib in
combination with PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibition in a syngeneic BRCA1 mutant
ovarian cancer model.


Background: Rucaparib (CO-338) is an oral small molecule inhibitor of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1, PARP-2 and PARP-3 that has shown
clinical activity in patients with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutated advanced
ovarian cancer. Monoclonal antibodies against programmed death receptor-1
(PD-1) and programmed death-ligand (PD-L1) have also shown efficacy in
advanced ovarian cancer patients. It has been reported that BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutated tumors have a higher mutational load and increased CD8+ T
cell infiltration, suggesting that the combination of rucaparib and
immune checkpoint inhibition may be complementary. However, PARP
inhibition has also been reported to have an immunosuppressive effect in
preclinical studies.

Methods: Subcutaneous syngeneic models using the BRCA1 wild-type C2Km
(P53-/-, myc, Kras-G12D, Akt-myr) and BRCA1 mutant BrKras (BRCA1-/-;
P53-/-; myc; Kras-G12D; Akt-myr) murine ovarian cell lines were developed
in the murine FVB/N background. Antibodies targeting PD-1 (RMP1-14) and
PD-L1 (10F.9G2) were dosed by intraperitoneal injection at 5-10 mg/kg
twice weekly, while rucaparib was administered by oral gavage at 150
mg/kg twice daily. Treatment was initiated at a tumor volume of ~150mm3
(n=15/group). Animals were dosed for 21 days, and tumors were allowed to
regrow to day 76.

Results: In vitro cytotoxicity assays demonstrated that rucaparib was
155-fold more potent in the BRCA1 deficient BrKras cell line (IC50 = 84
nM) than the isogenic BRCA1 wild-type C2Km cell line (IC50 = 13 Î¼M). An
in vivo study using the syngeneic BrKras model was performed in mice
treated with: vehicle, rucaparib, PD-1, PD-L1, rucaparib+PD-1, and
rucaparib+PD-L1. All monotherapy and combination groups resulted in
significant tumor growth inhibition and were followed for survival
analysis. The median survival time (MST) and % cures (defined as
undetectable growth at Day 76 post-tumor implantation) for vehicle,
PD-L1, PD-1 and rucaparib monotherapy treated animals was 34 days (0%),
41 days (13%), 76 days (40%) and >76 days (56%), respectively. The
rucaparib+PD-1 and rucaparib+PD-L1 combination groups demonstrated
greater efficacy than the monotherapies, with a MST of >76 days (100%)
and >76 days (88%), respectively. Dose response and immune profiling
studies are ongoing. In vivo studies were also performed in the BRCA1/2
wild-type models EMT-6, Pan02, and MC38. As expected, as a single agent,
rucaparib showed limited activity in these homologous recombination
competent models, whereas a range of tumor growth inhibition was observed
with monotherapy PD-L1 treatment. No impact on anti-tumor activity was
observed in animals treated with rucaparib+PD-L1 as compared to PD-L1
monotherapy in the BRCA1/2 wild-type syngeneic models examined.

Conclusions: The combination of rucaparib with PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibition
improved survival in a BRCA1 mutant syngeneic model.


