Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations of the immune microenvironment with PD-L1 copy number
alterations and PD-L1 expression in resected non-small cell lung cancer.


Background: The relationships between tumor PD-L1 expression and the
tumor immune microenvironment (TIM) have gained attention in a variety of
cancers including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the
relevance of TIM according to the tumor PD-L1 copy number alterations
(CNAs) whose significance have been shown in several malignancies remains
to be uncovered.

Methods: We evaluated PD-1+, CD8+, and Foxp3+ lymphocytes in tumor nest
and surrounding stroma separately using microarrayed 636 resected NSCLC.
Their associations with PD-L1 CNAs and PD-L1 expression were analyzed.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were counted under high-power
fields (×200). PD-L1 CNAs were assessed with fluorescent in situ
hybridization, and were classified into three categories (amplification,
polysomy, and disomy). PD-L1 expression was evaluated using
immunohistochemistry (clone E1L3N), and positivity of ≥5% was used as
the cut-off.

Results: In the entire cohort, the median age was 68 years (23-88 years).
The cohort comprised 444 (68.0%) men and 197 (30.2%) never-smokers. The
median follow-up duration was 3.6 years. The numbers of TILs in stroma
were much greater than those in tumor nest. Smoking history and squamous
histology were significantly associated with immune cell infiltration in
both stroma and tumor nest, except for CD8+ TILs in stroma. There were 20
tumors with PD-L1 amplification (1.7%) and 84 tumors with polysomy
(13.2%). PD-L1 expression was positive in 201 tumors (30.8%). In tumor
nest, the numbers of individual TILs significantly increased according to
the increase of PD-L1 copy number (Kruskal-Wallis, p Results: In the
entire cohort, the median age was 68 years (23-88 years). The cohort
comprised 444 (68.0%) men and 197 (30.2%) never-smokers. The median
follow-up duration was 3.6 years. The numbers of TILs in stroma were much
greater than those in tumor nest. Smoking history and squamous histology
were significantly associated with immune cell infiltration in both
stroma and tumor nest, except for CD8+ TILs in stroma. There were 20
tumors with PD-L1 amplification (1.7%) and 84 tumors with polysomy
(13.2%). PD-L1 expression was positive in 201 tumors (30.8%). In tumor
nest, the numbers of individual TILs significantly increased according to
the increase of PD-L1 copy number (Kruskal-Wallis, p < 0.001 for PD-1+, p
Results: In the entire cohort, the median age was 68 years (23-88 years).
The cohort comprised 444 (68.0%) men and 197 (30.2%) never-smokers. The
median follow-up duration was 3.6 years. The numbers of TILs in stroma
were much greater than those in tumor nest. Smoking history and squamous
histology were significantly associated with immune cell infiltration in
both stroma and tumor nest, except for CD8+ TILs in stroma. There were 20
tumors with PD-L1 amplification (1.7%) and 84 tumors with polysomy
(13.2%). PD-L1 expression was positive in 201 tumors (30.8%). In tumor
nest, the numbers of individual TILs significantly increased according to
the increase of PD-L1 copy number (Kruskal-Wallis, p < 0.001 for PD-1+, p
< 0.001 for CD8+, and p = 0.0087 for Foxp3+). In stroma, only PD1+ TILs
were significantly associated with PD-L1 CNAs (p = 0.0032), and CD8+ TILs
tended to correlate with PD-L1 CNAs (p = 0.079). The numbers of CD8+,
PD-1+, and FOXP3+ TILs were significantly greater in PD-L1-positive
tumors than in PD-L1-negative tumors, in both tumor nest and stroma (p
Results: In the entire cohort, the median age was 68 years (23-88 years).
The cohort comprised 444 (68.0%) men and 197 (30.2%) never-smokers. The
median follow-up duration was 3.6 years. The numbers of TILs in stroma
were much greater than those in tumor nest. Smoking history and squamous
histology were significantly associated with immune cell infiltration in
both stroma and tumor nest, except for CD8+ TILs in stroma. There were 20
tumors with PD-L1 amplification (1.7%) and 84 tumors with polysomy
(13.2%). PD-L1 expression was positive in 201 tumors (30.8%). In tumor
nest, the numbers of individual TILs significantly increased according to
the increase of PD-L1 copy number (Kruskal-Wallis, p < 0.001 for PD-1+, p
< 0.001 for CD8+, and p = 0.0087 for Foxp3+). In stroma, only PD1+ TILs
were significantly associated with PD-L1 CNAs (p = 0.0032), and CD8+ TILs
tended to correlate with PD-L1 CNAs (p = 0.079). The numbers of CD8+,
PD-1+, and FOXP3+ TILs were significantly greater in PD-L1-positive
tumors than in PD-L1-negative tumors, in both tumor nest and stroma (p <
0.001). Neither kind of TILs, PD-L1 expression, nor PD-L1 CNAs alone was
independent prognostic factor for overall survival in a multivariate
analysis with Cox hazards models. However, when the PD-L1 copy numbers
were combined with Foxp3+ TILs, cases with tumor high PD-L1 copy numbers
(≥5 copies per nucleus) and high Foxp3+ TILs had independently worse
prognoses in both tumor nest and stroma infiltration (hazard ratio (HR),
4.38; 95% confidence interval, 2.26-8.49, for tumor nest model. HR, 1.96;
95% CI, 1.04-3.68, for stroma model).

Conclusion: CD8+, Foxp3+, and PD-L1+ lymphocytes in tumor nest were
significantly associated with PD-L1 CNAs and PD-L1 expression. Cases with
both increased PD-L1 copy numbers and Foxp3+ TILs have independently
worse survival outcomes. Additional data of other TIL subgroups related
to PD-L1 CNAs and expression will be discussed.


