Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidation of the role of miR-575 on tumorigenesis in
glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM) patients currently face poor survival outcomes with an
average survival rate less than 15 months, with only 3-5% of patients
survive more than 36 months. Although the mechanisms of tumorigenesis are
still being elucidated, miRNAs are promising candidates to explore as
novel and prognostic biomarkers in GBM. MiRNAs are small regulatory
molecules that play a crucial role in carcinogenesis via repression of
oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes either transcriptionally or
post-transcriptionally. Our clinical data (n=268) shows that miR-575 is
one of the top miRNAs associated with GBM overall survival (FDR: 0.0036,
p-value: 5.77E-05) by univariate analysis (NanoString Technologies;
Seattle, WA). This study was designed to investigate the expression and
function of miR-575 in GBM. Basal expression of miR-575 was first
detected in GBM cell lines prior to functional experimentation. Cell
proliferation, colony formation, migration and invasion assays were
performed to understand the role of miR-575 in GBM. We found that
overexpression of miR-575 significantly increased cell proliferation and
cell motility in LN229 and U251 cell lines. Additionally, BLID, a
tumor-suppressor gene, was negatively regulated by miR-575 at the
transcriptional level by qRT-PCR, which will be further investigated at
the post-transcriptional level by western blot. Up-regulation of miR-575
in GBM cell lines suggests that it could be acting as an oncogene by
degrading the mRNA of BLID. Luciferase assays also showed negative
regulation of BLID expression by miR-575, supporting our hypothesis and
findings in other cancers. In conclusion, miR-575 might act as an
oncogene in GBM, and BLID may be a putative target gene of miR-575. This
mechanism could potentially be useful as a novel prognostic biomarker for
GBM patients after further in vitro and in vivo validation. Funding:
1R01CA169368 (PI: Houghton; Co-I:Chakravarti); 1R01CA11522358 Multiple-PI
R01: Chakravarti (PI); Xia (PI); 1R01CA1145128 Baroukhim (PI);
Chakravarti (Co-PI) 7/2015-6/2020; R01CA108633 (PI:Chakravarti);
1RC2CA148190 (Scientific PI: Chakravarti).


