Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A branching evolution model at relapse characterizes multiple
myeloma patients who responded to upfront combination therapy including
new drugs.


Intro: Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a biologically complex disease, whose
genetic plasticity favors the coexistence of genetically heterogeneous
subclones, selected in a Darwinian fashion throughout the disease course.
Therapy might represent a major selective pressure over the different
subclones, thus supporting an evolutionary model of the disease.

Aim: To explore the existence of different clonal evolution patterns in
MM, eventually driven by therapeutic selective pressure.

P&M The study included 33 pts with symptomatic MM, up-front treated
either with combination regimens including a proteasome inhibitor (28),
or with cyclophosphamide. For each pts, paired BM samples were collected
both at diagnosis and at relapse. SNPs array analyses were performed on
the CD138+ enriched cell fractions.

Results: Two approaches were applied: a) monitoring the variations of
macro CNAs; b) focusing on changes of CNAs frequencies, as observed in 27
genes of interest. Both approaches were consistent in highlighting three
major evolution patterns: in 7/33 (21%) pts, the genomic background at
relapse was almost identical to that of diagnosis. In 13/33 (39%) pts, an
overall increase in the frequencies of the same CNAs as observed at
diagnosis was detected at relapse. Finally, in 13/33 (39%) pts, either
increased or decreased frequencies of several CNAs, as well as several
differences in the CNAs typeâ€™s prevalence were observed at relapse, as
compared to diagnosis. Of interest, even if an overall CNAs median number
increase was observed from diagnosis to relapse (226 vs 507,
respectively) - supported by acquisition of CNAs either commonly
described as secondary genomic events (i.e. del17p13, amp1q21, del1p23),
or associated to the resistance to bortezomib (i.e. del8p21) - any
peculiar CNAs resulted significantly prevalent in the 3 identified
subgroups of pts.

A high rate (92%) of achievement of VGPR or better quality of response to
upfront therapy characterized the third subgroup of pts, whereas the rate
of VGPR in the remaining pts was only 20% and PR or SD were observed in 9
and 7 pts, respectively. Finally, the median time to first progression of
this subgroup of pts was significantly shorter as compared to that of pts
with branching evolution (24 vs 35 months, range 4-41 and 7-123 months,
respectively, p=0,01).

Conclusion: The genomic architecture of a subgroup of relapsed MM pts,
up-front responsive to new drugs-based combination therapies, resulted
overall different from that of diagnosis, suggesting a branching
evolution of the disease, sustained by the shrinking of the most
prevalent clone (therapy-sensitive), as well as by the expansion of
subclones (therapy-resistant) not already evident at diagnosis. This
observation raises the question whether re-treatment of relapsed pts
should be appropriate in the case of branching evolution.

Acknowledgements: AIRC (MC), Fondazione Berlucchi (CT), FUV (EB).


