Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a gold nanoparticle platform capable of selective
homing to tumor tissues for intravenous antitumor therapy.


Intratumoral administration of high mobility group nucleosome-binding
protein 1 (HMGN1) and R848/resiquimod together with a checkpoint
inhibitor can eradicate large established tumors. However, the
intratumoral route of administration is difficult to use on cancers of
internal organs. To improve potential clinical use of HMGN1 and R848, it
is necessary to deliver HMGN1 and R848 systemically to the tumor tissue.
Gold nanoparticles (AuNP) have been extensively studied as a vehicle for
various types of drugs, including anticancer compounds. In this study, we
established a means of generating PEGylated Au-HMGN1-R848
(Au-PEG-HMGN1-R848) complexes, which, upon intravenous IV administration,
preferentially target ectopic hepatoma or colon tumor tissue and avoids
uptake of the particles by liver and spleen of tumor-bearing mice.
Additionally, Au-PEG-HMGN1-R848 complexes were stable and preserved the
capacity of HMGN1 and R848 to stimulate the maturation of dendritic
cells. IV administration of Au-PEG-HMGN1-R848 complexes plus a checkpoint
inhibitor had effective antitumor activity in curing 80% of C57BL/6 mice
bearing large (1 cm in diameter) Hepa1-6 hepatoma and Balb/c mice bearing
CT26 colon tumors. Therefore, an Au nanoparticle platform capable of
selectively delivering HMGN1 and R848 systemically to tumor tissues can
be used to effectively to cure ectopic Hepa1-6 hepatoma and CT26 colon
carcinoma.


