Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Size based enrichment and sorting of Ov90 cancer cells and
clusters with a new multistage filtration cartridge reveals distinct
phenotypes.


Background: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are released in blood from the
primary tumor, but although very heterogeneous both in size and marker
expression, are very rare and provide information not available from the
primary tumor. The identification of CTC cells and clusters could advance
our understanding of metastasis and help personalize therapy.1,2 Notably,
CTC clusters were shown to have a higher metastatic potential than single
cells3 but the process remains poorly understood.

We present a multistage filtration system with pore sizes from 20 down to
8 μm for the size-selective enrichment of Ov90 ovarian cancer cells and
clusters from blood. Each captured cell population was released, cultured
and characterized independently.

Methods: We developed a 3D printed multistage filtration cartridge and
polymer filters with 20, 15, 12, 10 and 8 μm-diameter pores. Filters
were stacked from 20 (top) to 8 μm (bottom) and used to enrich and sort
Ov-90 cells spiked in 1:6 mL of blood:PBS. Captured cells were released
by removing individual filters from the cartridge, reverse flowing OSE
medium, and then cultured separately.

Results: Ov-90 clusters were found mostly on the top filter (20 μm) and
interestingly, few small clusters (3-4 cells) were found on the 8 and 10
μm filters, suggesting alignment of cluster cells as they pass through
the pores.4 Cell and nucleus diameters were measured, and a general
correlation was found between filter pore size and cell and nucleus size.
Interestingly, nucleus size was found to be the single most significant
parameter in determining passage of single cells and small clusters
through pores.

Following cell culture, two distinct phenotypes were observed: cell
captured on small pore filters (8-12 μm) grew primarily in a monolayer.
Cells captured on filters with larger pores (15-20 μm) first grew as
monolayer, but rapidly formed cell aggregates that subsequently detached
from the surface. Staining for E-Cadherin, a cell-cell adhesion protein,
revealed a loss of expression of cells from filter with larger pores.

Conclusion: We developed a new multistage filtration method and
selectively enriched and sorted cells based primarily on their nucleus
size. We identified two Ov-90 populations with different growth behaviors
with low E-cadherin expression on the cells forming clusters, which is
known to correlate with metastasis. The application of multistage filters
may also reveal different CTC populations based on nucleus and cell size.

References:

(1) Baccelli, I. et al. A. Nat. Biotech. 2013, 31, 539-544.

(2) Pecot, C. V. et al. Cancer discovery 2011, 1, 580-586.

(3) Cheung, K. J. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2016, 113,
E854-E863.

(4) Au, S. H. et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2016, 113, 4947-4952.


