Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic strategies for osteosarcoma stem cells by regulating
adipocyte differentiation based on actin dynamics.


We generated induced cancer stem cells that initiate osteosarcoma (OS) by
overexpression of c-MYC and loss of Ink4a/Arf in bone marrow-derived
stromal cells, and found that the loss of adipogenic potential is an
essential event for OS tumorigenesis. Therefore, our understanding of
regulatory mechanisms of adipocyte differentiateon would greatly
contribute to control OS tumorigenesis. Here, we show that regulation of
the transcriptional coactivator MKL1 (megakaryoblastic leukemia 1) by
actin cytoskeleton dynamics drives adipocyte differentiation mediated by
PPARγ. Exposure of preadipocytes to an adipogenic cocktail results in
the rapid disruption of actin stress fibres as a consequence of
downregulation of RhoA-ROCK signaling, which regulates the formation of
actin stress fibers and focal adhesions, and the consequent increase in
monomeric G-actin levels. The resulting increase in the amount of G-actin
leads to the interaction of G-actin with MKL1, which prevents nuclear
translocation of MKL1 and allows expression of PPARγ followed by
adipogenic differentiation. We further found that depletion of MKL1 can
drive adipocyte differentiation in preadipocytes and even in
nonadipogenic fibroblasts in the absence of an adipogenic cocktail, and
these data revealed that MKL1 functions as a gatekeeper that controls
adipocyte differentiation. In addition, we found that treatment with ROCK
inhibitors induced terminal adipocyte differentiateon even in OS stem
cells through regulation of MKL1 by actin cytoskeleton dynamics, which
resulted in a significant suppression of tumorigenesis. Our findings
provide new insight into the regulatory mechanism of adipogenesis, and
trans-differentiation approach by controlling actin cytoskeleton dynamics
may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for targeting cancer stem cells.


