Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression-free survival curves suggest a dichotomous determinant
of PD-L1 inhibitor efficacy.


Background: PD-L1 expression varies across tumors but does not accurately
predict PD-L1 inhibitor efficacy. Some negative tumors respond and some
positive tumors fail. PD-L1 inhibitor progression-free survival (PFS)
curve shape in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) suggests that a
dichotomous (present vs absent) factor might drive sensitivity rather
than it being driven by a continuous variable like PD-L1 expression. PFS
curves may follow first order kinetics, with a straight line if log % PFS
is plotted vs time. If the population had 2 distinct subgroups with
differing rates of progression then one would expect an inflection point
on the log-linear curve, and the curve would fit a 2-phase decay model in
nonlinear regression analysis (NLRA). A more homogeneous population would
not fit a 2-phase model.

Methods: We used arohatgi.info/WebPlotDigitizer/app/ to digitize
published PFS curves, then GraphPad Prism5 for 2-phase NLRA, with the
constraints Y0=100, plateau=0. To generate standardized 2-phase curves,
we utilized 1) unselected NSCLC patients treated with epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR TKIs) where we expected
a high proportion of curves to fit a 2-phase model as only some patients
would have a sensitizing EGFR mutation; 2) NSCLC EGFR mutant and wild
type (WT) patients treated with EGFR TKIs, and patients treated with
platinum-based chemotherapy, taxanes or placebo/best supportive care
(BSC), where we expected a lower proportion of curves to fit 2-phase
models; 3) PD-L1 PFS curves in NSCLC and other tumor types.

Results: With EGFR TKIs in unselected patients, 58 of 79 (73%) curves
were fit by 2-phase models, vs 5 of 37 (14%) with EGFR TKIs in EGFR
mutant patients (pResults: With EGFR TKIs in unselected patients, 58 of
79 (73%) curves were fit by 2-phase models, vs 5 of 37 (14%) with EGFR
TKIs in EGFR mutant patients (p<0.0001), 13 of 27 (48%) in EGFR WT
patients (pResults: With EGFR TKIs in unselected patients, 58 of 79 (73%)
curves were fit by 2-phase models, vs 5 of 37 (14%) with EGFR TKIs in
EGFR mutant patients (p<0.0001), 13 of 27 (48%) in EGFR WT patients
(p<0.02), 4 of 37 (11%) with platinum-based therapy (pResults: With EGFR
TKIs in unselected patients, 58 of 79 (73%) curves were fit by 2-phase
models, vs 5 of 37 (14%) with EGFR TKIs in EGFR mutant patients
(p<0.0001), 13 of 27 (48%) in EGFR WT patients (p<0.02), 4 of 37 (11%)
with platinum-based therapy (p<0.0001), 15 of 47 (32%) with a taxane
(pResults: With EGFR TKIs in unselected patients, 58 of 79 (73%) curves
were fit by 2-phase models, vs 5 of 37 (14%) with EGFR TKIs in EGFR
mutant patients (p<0.0001), 13 of 27 (48%) in EGFR WT patients (p<0.02),
4 of 37 (11%) with platinum-based therapy (p<0.0001), 15 of 47 (32%) with
a taxane (p<0.0001), and 6 of 22 (27%) with placebo/BSC (p=0.0001). With
PD-L1 inhibitors in NSCLC, 30 of 32 (94%) curves fit 2-phase models
(pResults: With EGFR TKIs in unselected patients, 58 of 79 (73%) curves
were fit by 2-phase models, vs 5 of 37 (14%) with EGFR TKIs in EGFR
mutant patients (p<0.0001), 13 of 27 (48%) in EGFR WT patients (p<0.02),
4 of 37 (11%) with platinum-based therapy (p<0.0001), 15 of 47 (32%) with
a taxane (p<0.0001), and 6 of 22 (27%) with placebo/BSC (p=0.0001). With
PD-L1 inhibitors in NSCLC, 30 of 32 (94%) curves fit 2-phase models
(p<0.0001 vs each of EGFR TKIs in EGFR mutants, EGFR WTs, platinum and
taxane chemotherapy and placebo/BSC). In other tumor types, 27 of 32
(84%) PD-L1 curves fit 2-phase models.

Conclusions: Most PD-L1 inhibitor PFS curves fit a 2-phase model. This is
similar to what we observed with EGFR TKIs in unselected patients and
different from EGFR TKIs in EGFR mutant and WT patients, and from
chemotherapy or placebo/BSC. This leads us to hypothesize the existence
of a dichotomous (present vs absent) factor such as a gene mutation,
deletion or silencing that sensitizes tumors to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors. If
found, such a dichotomous factor could prove to be a highly useful
biomarker that could permit accurate prediction of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor
efficacy. Since PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor efficacy is higher in tumors with
high PD-L1 expression, any sensitizing dichotomous factor might also
drive PD-L1 expression.


