Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How many tumor indications should be initially studied in clinical
development of next-generation immunotherapies.


An experimental oncology immunotherapy may have the potential to be
effective in a large number of tumor indications. Once a recommended
Phase II dose (RP2D) is determined, under resource constraint, a natural
strategy is to conduct Phase II proof-of-concept (POC) trials in two
waves. A cohort of potential tumor indications is selected for the first
wave investigation and the second wave investigation in a different
cohort of tumor indications is initiated only after the drug has been
demonstrated to be effective in the first wave. Immunotherapy development
is a dynamic environment with rapidly evolving mechanistic understanding,
constant flow of new data and frequent changes in the competitive
landscape. How many tumor indications should be investigated in the first
wave given the uncertainties? We attempt to answer this question by
maximizing a benefit-cost ratio, defined to be the expected number of
effective tumor indications correctly identified in the two waves divided
by the expected total sample size for the POC trials in the two waves and
the total sample size for the Phase III trials triggered by those with a
positive outcome in the first wave. It is found that the optimal number
of the first wave POC trials is in a range of approximately three to six,
which may vary with the resource constraint but is otherwise robust to
the key factors we have considered. A recommendation is made on how much
resource should be invested in the first wave.


