Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting CX3CR1 impairs the reseeding of cancer cells
recirculating from metastatic tumors.


Cancer cells re-enter systemic blood from established metastatic tumors.
Recent evidence indicates that these recirculating cancer cells further
seed and colonize skeleton and soft tissues to expand metastatic
dissemination, thus precipitating the clinical progression to terminal
disease. We have previously shown that the chemokine receptor CX3CR1 is
implicated in the metastatic seeding of breast cancer cells and that
novel small-molecule antagonists for this receptor effectively contains
the number and size of secondary tumors in animal models. Using the same
models, we now report that targeting CX3CR1 also restrains the re-seeding
of skeleton and soft-tissue by circulating cancer cells (CTCs) departing
from existing metastatic lesions. Notably, we also found that CTCs unable
to re-seed are forced to remain in the blood circulation longer,
eventually succumbing to apoptotic death. It has been proposed that when
either spontaneously or forcibly (re)circulating in the blood, cancer
cells from solid tumors are more vulnerable to the effects of both
cytotoxic and targeted therapeutics. Given the role of CX3CR1 antagonists
in prolonging the time spent by CTCs in the blood, we sought to assess
whether these compounds could synergize with docetaxel by extending
bioavailability and its cytotoxic effects. Thus, we tested this paradigm
on CTCs departing from skeletal and soft-tissue lesions generated by
breast and prostate cancer cells in mice. Based on the results obtained
from these experiments, it can be concluded that implementing the
development of CX3CR1 antagonists and promoting their clinical use will
provide novel and effective tools to contain the progression of
metastatic disease in cancer patients.


