Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic targeting of DNMT1 in adipocytes inhibits high-grade
serous ovarian cancer cell migration and invasion through TIMP3
upregulation.


Ovarian cancer frequently metastasizes to the omentum and adipocytes play
a significant role in tumor progression. As methylation levels in obese
adipose tissue are increased due to increased DNMT1 levels and activity,
it was of interest to test the hypothesis that inhibiting DNMT1 would
reverse adipocyte methylation, alter adipokine secretion, and decrease
migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells towards adipocytes. Human
adipocytes were seeded in a 24-well plate and treated with low-dose
guadecitabine (100nM daily for 3 days). Ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3,
Kuramochi, OVCAR4, OVCAR8) were seeded in the Boyden chamber and allowed
to migrate or invade toward adipocytes for 8 and 16h, respectively.
Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transiton (EMT) markers (SLUG, FN1,
TWIST1) were assessed by qRT-PCR. Adipocyte-conditioned media was used to
culture ovarian cancer cells in clonogenicity assay and a human adipokine
array (R&D Systems) was used to assess changes in cytokine secretion.
DNMT1 protein levels in adipocytes were determined by western blot. To
determine a possible mechanism, DNA and RNA from guadecitabine-treated
adipocytes were subjected to methylcapture-sequencing (MBD-seq) and
RNA-seq, respectively. Guadecitabine treatment of adipocytes decreased
(POvarian cancer frequently metastasizes to the omentum and adipocytes
play a significant role in tumor progression. As methylation levels in
obese adipose tissue are increased due to increased DNMT1 levels and
activity, it was of interest to test the hypothesis that inhibiting DNMT1
would reverse adipocyte methylation, alter adipokine secretion, and
decrease migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells towards
adipocytes. Human adipocytes were seeded in a 24-well plate and treated
with low-dose guadecitabine (100nM daily for 3 days). Ovarian cancer
cells (SKOV3, Kuramochi, OVCAR4, OVCAR8) were seeded in the Boyden
chamber and allowed to migrate or invade toward adipocytes for 8 and 16h,
respectively. Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transiton (EMT)
markers (SLUG, FN1, TWIST1) were assessed by qRT-PCR.
Adipocyte-conditioned media was used to culture ovarian cancer cells in
clonogenicity assay and a human adipokine array (R&D Systems) was used to
assess changes in cytokine secretion. DNMT1 protein levels in adipocytes
were determined by western blot. To determine a possible mechanism, DNA
and RNA from guadecitabine-treated adipocytes were subjected to
methylcapture-sequencing (MBD-seq) and RNA-seq, respectively.
Guadecitabine treatment of adipocytes decreased (P<0.05) migration of
OVCAR4 and OVCAR8 (35% and 40%, respectively, compared to control), and a
50% decrease (POvarian cancer frequently metastasizes to the omentum and
adipocytes play a significant role in tumor progression. As methylation
levels in obese adipose tissue are increased due to increased DNMT1
levels and activity, it was of interest to test the hypothesis that
inhibiting DNMT1 would reverse adipocyte methylation, alter adipokine
secretion, and decrease migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells
towards adipocytes. Human adipocytes were seeded in a 24-well plate and
treated with low-dose guadecitabine (100nM daily for 3 days). Ovarian
cancer cells (SKOV3, Kuramochi, OVCAR4, OVCAR8) were seeded in the Boyden
chamber and allowed to migrate or invade toward adipocytes for 8 and 16h,
respectively. Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transiton (EMT)
markers (SLUG, FN1, TWIST1) were assessed by qRT-PCR.
Adipocyte-conditioned media was used to culture ovarian cancer cells in
clonogenicity assay and a human adipokine array (R&D Systems) was used to
assess changes in cytokine secretion. DNMT1 protein levels in adipocytes
were determined by western blot. To determine a possible mechanism, DNA
and RNA from guadecitabine-treated adipocytes were subjected to
methylcapture-sequencing (MBD-seq) and RNA-seq, respectively.
Guadecitabine treatment of adipocytes decreased (P<0.05) migration of
OVCAR4 and OVCAR8 (35% and 40%, respectively, compared to control), and a
50% decrease (P<0.05) in invasion towards adipocytes after guadecitabine
treatment was observed for OVCAR4, OVCAR8, and Kuramochi cells.
Expression of EMT markers SLUG, FN1 and TWIST1 decreased (POvarian cancer
frequently metastasizes to the omentum and adipocytes play a significant
role in tumor progression. As methylation levels in obese adipose tissue
are increased due to increased DNMT1 levels and activity, it was of
interest to test the hypothesis that inhibiting DNMT1 would reverse
adipocyte methylation, alter adipokine secretion, and decrease migration
and invasion of ovarian cancer cells towards adipocytes. Human adipocytes
were seeded in a 24-well plate and treated with low-dose guadecitabine
(100nM daily for 3 days). Ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3, Kuramochi, OVCAR4,
OVCAR8) were seeded in the Boyden chamber and allowed to migrate or
invade toward adipocytes for 8 and 16h, respectively. Expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transiton (EMT) markers (SLUG, FN1, TWIST1) were
assessed by qRT-PCR. Adipocyte-conditioned media was used to culture
ovarian cancer cells in clonogenicity assay and a human adipokine array
(R&D Systems) was used to assess changes in cytokine secretion. DNMT1
protein levels in adipocytes were determined by western blot. To
determine a possible mechanism, DNA and RNA from guadecitabine-treated
adipocytes were subjected to methylcapture-sequencing (MBD-seq) and
RNA-seq, respectively. Guadecitabine treatment of adipocytes decreased
(P<0.05) migration of OVCAR4 and OVCAR8 (35% and 40%, respectively,
compared to control), and a 50% decrease (P<0.05) in invasion towards
adipocytes after guadecitabine treatment was observed for OVCAR4, OVCAR8,
and Kuramochi cells. Expression of EMT markers SLUG, FN1 and TWIST1
decreased (P<0.05) after guadecitabine treatment. Conditioned media from
guadecitabine-treated adipocytes decreased (POvarian cancer frequently
metastasizes to the omentum and adipocytes play a significant role in
tumor progression. As methylation levels in obese adipose tissue are
increased due to increased DNMT1 levels and activity, it was of interest
to test the hypothesis that inhibiting DNMT1 would reverse adipocyte
methylation, alter adipokine secretion, and decrease migration and
invasion of ovarian cancer cells towards adipocytes. Human adipocytes
were seeded in a 24-well plate and treated with low-dose guadecitabine
(100nM daily for 3 days). Ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3, Kuramochi, OVCAR4,
OVCAR8) were seeded in the Boyden chamber and allowed to migrate or
invade toward adipocytes for 8 and 16h, respectively. Expression of
epithelial-mesenchymal transiton (EMT) markers (SLUG, FN1, TWIST1) were
assessed by qRT-PCR. Adipocyte-conditioned media was used to culture
ovarian cancer cells in clonogenicity assay and a human adipokine array
(R&D Systems) was used to assess changes in cytokine secretion. DNMT1
protein levels in adipocytes were determined by western blot. To
determine a possible mechanism, DNA and RNA from guadecitabine-treated
adipocytes were subjected to methylcapture-sequencing (MBD-seq) and
RNA-seq, respectively. Guadecitabine treatment of adipocytes decreased
(P<0.05) migration of OVCAR4 and OVCAR8 (35% and 40%, respectively,
compared to control), and a 50% decrease (P<0.05) in invasion towards
adipocytes after guadecitabine treatment was observed for OVCAR4, OVCAR8,
and Kuramochi cells. Expression of EMT markers SLUG, FN1 and TWIST1
decreased (P<0.05) after guadecitabine treatment. Conditioned media from
guadecitabine-treated adipocytes decreased (P<0.05) clonogenic survival
by 18% compared to control. Adipokine array results revealed increased
secretion of LIF (lipoprotein lipase inhibitor) and TIMP3
(metalloproteinase inhibitor) after guadecitabine treatment (1.6- and
1.8-fold increase, respectively; verified by qRT-PCR). Treatment with
recombinant TIMP3 (50nM) decreased invasion of OVCAR8 (63%, POvarian
cancer frequently metastasizes to the omentum and adipocytes play a
significant role in tumor progression. As methylation levels in obese
adipose tissue are increased due to increased DNMT1 levels and activity,
it was of interest to test the hypothesis that inhibiting DNMT1 would
reverse adipocyte methylation, alter adipokine secretion, and decrease
migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells towards adipocytes. Human
adipocytes were seeded in a 24-well plate and treated with low-dose
guadecitabine (100nM daily for 3 days). Ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3,
Kuramochi, OVCAR4, OVCAR8) were seeded in the Boyden chamber and allowed
to migrate or invade toward adipocytes for 8 and 16h, respectively.
Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transiton (EMT) markers (SLUG, FN1,
TWIST1) were assessed by qRT-PCR. Adipocyte-conditioned media was used to
culture ovarian cancer cells in clonogenicity assay and a human adipokine
array (R&D Systems) was used to assess changes in cytokine secretion.
DNMT1 protein levels in adipocytes were determined by western blot. To
determine a possible mechanism, DNA and RNA from guadecitabine-treated
adipocytes were subjected to methylcapture-sequencing (MBD-seq) and
RNA-seq, respectively. Guadecitabine treatment of adipocytes decreased
(P<0.05) migration of OVCAR4 and OVCAR8 (35% and 40%, respectively,
compared to control), and a 50% decrease (P<0.05) in invasion towards
adipocytes after guadecitabine treatment was observed for OVCAR4, OVCAR8,
and Kuramochi cells. Expression of EMT markers SLUG, FN1 and TWIST1
decreased (P<0.05) after guadecitabine treatment. Conditioned media from
guadecitabine-treated adipocytes decreased (P<0.05) clonogenic survival
by 18% compared to control. Adipokine array results revealed increased
secretion of LIF (lipoprotein lipase inhibitor) and TIMP3
(metalloproteinase inhibitor) after guadecitabine treatment (1.6- and
1.8-fold increase, respectively; verified by qRT-PCR). Treatment with
recombinant TIMP3 (50nM) decreased invasion of OVCAR8 (63%, P<0.001) and
OVCAR4 cells (73%, P10; FDR 1.5; FDR 1.5; FDR <0.05). Guadecitabine
treatment of adipocytes alters adipokine secretion resulting in decreased
cancer cell migration and invasion. In addition to direct effects on
ovarian cancer cells, hypomethylating agents may impact the tumor
microenvironment to alter adipokine secretion leading to decreased
metastasis.


