Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic modifiers outperform chemotherapy in prolonging
survival in patient-derived xenograft models of Down syndrome AML.


Children with Down syndrome (DS) are at a 500-fold increased risk for
developing acute myeloid leukemia (AML) before they reach five years of
age. DS-AML blasts have somatic mutations in the gene encoding the
essential hematopoietic transcription factor GATA-1 resulting in
hypersensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs such as cytarabine and
daunorubicin. However, therapy-induced toxicity results in greater
morbidity and remains a major barrier in attaining higher survival rate.
Thus, alternate therapy approaches to minimize toxicity and increase
efficacy are needed. Trisomy 21 and GATA-1 mutations in DS-AML are known
to alter the epigenetic landscape in multiple ways. Therefore, we
evaluated the efficacy of epigenetic drugs in comparison to chemotherapy
in two patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of DS-AML.

We developed two distinct PDX models by successfully engraftment and
serial passage of primary DS-AML cells in NSG-B2m mice. Both PDX lines
possessed GATA-1 mutation resulting in the expression of a truncated form
of GATA-1. NTPL-60 had a nonsense mutation generating a premature stop
codon after the initiation codon, while NTPL-386 had a 136 bp deletion in
exon 2 resulting in the loss of the initiation codon. The mouse passaged
cells were intravenously injected into 6-8 week old NSG-B2m mice. Once
disease establishment was confirmed based on the presence of human cells
in mouse peripheral blood, five mice per group were treated with vehicle
or DNA methylation inhibitor azacitidine and histone deacetylase
inhibitor panobinostat either singularly or in combination at a
previously determined maximally tolerated dose of 2.5 mg/Kg each.
NTPL-386 xenografted mice treated with azacitidine or panobinostat
survived 29 and 21 days longer than the vehicle-treated mice
respectively, while the mice treated with the combination survived the
longest (35 days). Similarly, azacitidine and panobinostat extended the
survival of mice transplanted with NTPL-60 by 48 and 31 days respectively
compared to the vehicle-treated mice. NTPL-60 mice treated with the
epigenetic drug combination are alive at 57 days. Thus, we observed that
the azacitidine-panobinostat combination showed statistically significant
(p We developed two distinct PDX models by successfully engraftment and
serial passage of primary DS-AML cells in NSG-B2m mice. Both PDX lines
possessed GATA-1 mutation resulting in the expression of a truncated form
of GATA-1. NTPL-60 had a nonsense mutation generating a premature stop
codon after the initiation codon, while NTPL-386 had a 136 bp deletion in
exon 2 resulting in the loss of the initiation codon. The mouse passaged
cells were intravenously injected into 6-8 week old NSG-B2m mice. Once
disease establishment was confirmed based on the presence of human cells
in mouse peripheral blood, five mice per group were treated with vehicle
or DNA methylation inhibitor azacitidine and histone deacetylase
inhibitor panobinostat either singularly or in combination at a
previously determined maximally tolerated dose of 2.5 mg/Kg each.
NTPL-386 xenografted mice treated with azacitidine or panobinostat
survived 29 and 21 days longer than the vehicle-treated mice
respectively, while the mice treated with the combination survived the
longest (35 days). Similarly, azacitidine and panobinostat extended the
survival of mice transplanted with NTPL-60 by 48 and 31 days respectively
compared to the vehicle-treated mice. NTPL-60 mice treated with the
epigenetic drug combination are alive at 57 days. Thus, we observed that
the azacitidine-panobinostat combination showed statistically significant
(p < 0.0001) differences in leukemic burden and mouse survival compared
to treatments with either drug alone in both NTPL-386 and NTPL-60 PDX
models.

We also tested the efficacy of epigenetic therapy followed by
chemotherapy. The inclusion of epigenetic therapy before chemotherapy
prolonged survival by 39 days compared to vehicle-treated mice. Taken
together, our data indicate that epigenetic therapy may be of benefit for
the treatment of children with DS-AML.


