Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Susceptibility of cells from cervical transformation zone to
HPV-16 induced immortalization and dysplastic differentiation.


Persistent infection of high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is a major
risk factor for cervical cancer. Greater than 90% of these cancers
originate in the cervical transformation zone (CTZ), a narrow band of
squamous metaplastic epithelium between ectocervix and endocervix. It is
unclear why the CTZ has high susceptibility to malignant transformation
and few studies have specifically examined cells from this region. We
hypothesized cells cultured from human CTZ are uniquely susceptible to
cellular immortalization and dysplastic differentiation, two alterations
that contribute to malignant development. Primary epithelial cells were
cultured from each region of human cervix (ectocervix, endocervix and
CTZ) and characterized for expression of differentiation markers to
assess their origin. We examined susceptibility of cells from each region
to immortalization after transfection with the complete HPV-16 genome or
infection of HPV-16 E6/E7 retroviruses. In addition, we evaluated the
extent of dysplastic epithelial differentiation in organotypic cultures
of HPV16-immortalized cell lines derived from each region of cervix. Our
results showed that cells from the CTZ express specific keratin markers
(keratin 14 and 18) that confirm their origin. Primary cell cultures from
CTZ and ectocervix are more susceptible to immortalization by the HPV16
complete genome or E6/E7 retroviruses. In contrast, preliminary results
indicate that HPV-immortalized CTZ and endocervical cells are more
susceptible to dysplastic differentiation when maintained in organotypic
culture. Our results may help to identify important signal pathways or
biomarkers that are unique to cells from CTZ and that can be targeted for
improved screening, prevention or therapy.


