Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The plasma and cerebrospinal fluid pharmacokinetics of pegylated
liposomal doxorubicin after intravenous administration in non-human
primates.


Background: Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD) exhibits altered plasma
pharmacokinetics (PK) compared to doxorubicin, with a longer half-life
(55 hours), large area under the concentration-time curve (AUC), lower
rate of clearance, and markedly smaller volume of distribution. The
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) PK of PLD are unknown. We evaluated the plasma
and CSF PK of PLD in a non-human primate (NHP) model.

Methods: PLD was given as single dose (1 mg/kg = low adult recommended
dose of 20 mg/m2) intravenously over 60 minutes to 3 NHP with indwelling
central venous catheters and central nervous system ventricular
reservoirs or lumbar ports. Serial blood and CSF samples were obtained
for 96 hours after completion of the infusion. The total doxorubicin
concentration (liposome bound + protein bound + free) was quantified with
a validated liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry assay (lower
limit of quantification plasma=0.29 ng/mL, and CSF=0.06 ng/mL). PK
parameters were estimated using non-compartmental methods. CSF
penetration was calculated from the AUCCSF:AUCplasma.

Results: PLD was well tolerated. Total doxorubicin plasma concentration
time curves were characterized by sustained PLD exposure, comparable to
the exposure observed in humans at a similar dose. The terminal
elimination phase was not captured. In CSF, doxorubicin was measurable
and still present at the last time point in all animals, but the CSF
penetration was limited (Table).

Conclusions: Using a sensitive assay, we could quantify doxorubicin in
CSF. However, the CSF penetration is limited in NHP with intact blood
brain barrier. Our assay analyzed the total doxorubicin concentration in
plasma. It is unknown if PLD can penetrate into the CSF, therefore we
could not determine if the CSF penetration represents total versus free.

Plasma and CSF PK of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in NHP



Animal

Cmax Plasma(ng/mL)

Tmax Plasma(h)

AUC0-96h Plasma(ng*h/mL)

Cmax CSF (ng/mL)

Tmax CSF (h)

AUC0-96h CSF (ng*h/mL)

CSF Penetration (%)



1

9396

48

7.24E+05

1.84

5

24.21

0.33



2

30449

0

1.76E+06

0.71

6

18.75

0.11



3

37467

0.08

1.91E+06

3.25

10

36.41

0.2



Mean

25770

16

1.46E+06

1.93

7

26.46

0.21


