Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIRT1 regulates Mxd1 throughout melanoma progression.


In a murine melanoma model of malignant transformation promoted by
sustained stress, increased levels of reactive oxygen species were found
to result in DNA damage and were related to massive epigenetic
alterations. Since the chromatin modifier Sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) is a protein
attracted to double-stranded DNA break (DSB) sites and can recruit other
components of the epigenetic machinery, we aimed to define the role of
SIRT1 in melanomagenesis through our melanoma model. The DNA damage
marker, Î³H2AX was found increased in melanocytes after 24 hours of
deadhesion, accompanied by increased SIRT1 expression and decreased
levels of its target, H4K16ac. Moreover, SIRT1 started to be associated
to DNMT3B during the stress condition, and this complex was maintained
along malignant progression. Mxd1 was identified by ChIP-seq among the
DNA sequences differentially associated with SIRT1 during deadhesion and
was shown to be a common target of both, SIRT1 and DNMT3B. In addition,
Mxd1 was found down-regulated from pre-malignant melanocytes to
metastatic melanoma cells. Treatment with DNMT inhibitor 5AzaCdR reversed
the Mxd1 expression. Sirt1 stable silencing increased Mxd1 mRNA
expression and led to up-regulation of MYC targets, such as Cdkn1a, Bcl2
and Psen2, the upregulation of which is associated with human melanoma
aggressiveness and poor prognosis. We demonstrated a novel role of the
stress responsive protein SIRT1 in malignant transformation of
melanocytes associated with deadhesion. Mxd1 was identified as a new
SIRT1 target gene. SIRT1 promoted Mxd1 silencing, which led to increased
activity of MYC oncogene contributing to melanoma progression.


