Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HEC73543 is a novel potent, selective Flt3 receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTK) Inhibitor for the treatment of refractory acute myeloid
leukemia (AML).


Background: Adults acute myeloid leukemia (AML) account for ~30% of
leukemia and ~40% of leukemia-related deaths. FLT3 is a receptor tyrosine
kinase that is normally expressed on immature hematopoietic cells and
functions in the development of both stem cells and the immune system.
FLT3 is the most frequently mutated gene in AML, with an estimated 30 %
of AML patients harboring FLT3 mutations. FLT3-ITD is a common mutation
in AML and correlates with a poor prognosis and higher risk of relapse of
AML patients.

Methods and Results: HEC73543 is a potent, orally bioavailable small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) against FLT3 which have been
implicated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) pathogenesis. In cell-based
assays, HEC73543 showed IC50s = 1.5 and 1.4 nM against MV-4-11 and
MOLM-13 cells in proliferation (both cell lines are FLT3-ITD+). Induction
of apoptosis following treatment of FLT3-ITD leukemic MV-4-11 cells for
48 h was assayed by flow cytometry. In MV-4-11 cells, a concentration of
10 nM HEC73543 induced 64.8% of the cells to undergo apoptosis and had a
dose dependent increase. When single dosed orally (4.5mg/kg) to MV-4-11
tumor-bearing nude mice, HEC73543 potently inhibited the phosphorylation
of FLT3 and its downstream signaling kinases STAT5, AKT and ERK1/2 for up
to 8 hours in tumor tissues. The antitumor activity of HEC73543 was
evaluated using an FLT3-ITD subcutaneous tumor xenograft model (MV-4-11
and MOLM-13) in athymic mice. Groups of 8 tumor-bearing mice were treated
with vehicle alone or with HEC73543 administered orally at 0.5, 1.5, or
4.5mg/kg/day. The compound was well tolerated and no significant body
weight loss or lethality was observed. The antitumor activity of HEC73543
was dose dependent. At the 1.5 mg/kg/day dose level all animals had a
complete regression (CR) in MV-4-11 model, and the CR induced by
4.5mg/kg/day in MOLM-13 model. HEC73543 can significant prolong mice
survival time at 1 mg/kg/day dose level in MOLM-13 systemic xenograft
model. We have studied cytotoxic interactions of HEC73543 with
conventional antileukemic agents cytarabine using two leukemia cell lines
carrying FLT3-ITD (MOLM-13, MV-4-11) The combination of HEC73543 with
cytarabine produced additive effects in MV-4-11 and MOLM-13 cell lines.
HEC73543 displayed excellent oral bioavailability and desirable drug
exposures in mice, rats, dogs and monkeys.

Conclusions: Together, HEC73543 exhibits potent target inhibition and
efficacy in FLT3-ITD models suggests that this compound may have a
therapeutic benefit for patients with FLT3-ITD leukemia.


