Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urokinase-derived peptide UP-7 effectively inhibits metastatic
growth of breast cancer through suppression of FAK activation.


The recombinant kringle domain of urokinase-type plasminogen activator
(UK1) has been shown to inhibit angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo and
suppress brain tumor in vivo. To avoid limitations in application due to
mass production of recombinant proteins, we dissected UK1 sequences to
seven peptides based on structure and amino acid characteristics, and
examined the anti-angiogenic activities for the constructed peptides.
UP-7 peptide derived from ÃŸ-sheets region of UK1 was the most potent
inhibitor of the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells (ECs)
in vitro, and it also inhibited in vivo angiogenesis in the mouse
matrigel plug assay. Such anti-angiogenic activities were not exerted by
the scrambled peptide. At molecular level, UP-7 inhibited the VEGF or
bFGF-induced phosphorylation of FAK and ERK1/2 and suppressed formation
of stress fibers and focal adhesions. It also inhibited the attachment
and spreading of ECs onto immobilized fibronectin. In a lung cancer
animal model xenografted with UP-7-non-sensitive NCI H460, systemic
treatment of UP-7 effectively suppressed tumor growth through inhibition
of angiogenesis. Interestingly, breast cancer cells such as MDA-MB231
were sensitive to UP-7 in proliferation differently from other cancer
cells. It inhibited the migration and invasion of LM-2-MDA-MD231 and
suppressed the phosphorylation of FAK. Accordingly, UP-7 potently
inhibited lung metastatic growth of LM2-MDA-MB-231 in experimental
metastasis model. Taken together, these results suggest that novel
UK1-derived peptide, UP-7 can be effectively used for treatment of the
metastatic growth of breast cancer. (NRF-2012R1A1A2007175,
NRF-2012R1A5A2051476)


