Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic kinase-induced PKM2 Y105 phosphorylation promotes
tumorigenesis and cancer stem cell-like property.


The role of pyruvate kinase M2 isoform (PKM2) in tumor progression is
controversial. Previously, it was reported that PKM2 has an oncogenic
function in promoting tumor growth in xenograft models; however, PKM2 was
indicated non-oncogenic or even anti-oncogenic because depletion of PKM2
accelerates mammary tumor growth in the Brca1 knockout mouse model of
breast cancer. Since tumors frequently harbor various abnormally
activated oncogenic kinases, we hypothesized that phosphorylation of PKM2
by oncogenic kinases in tumor cells enables PKM2 to promote tumor growth,
while unphosphorylated PKM2 in non-transformed cells cannot promote tumor
growth. Here, we report that PKM2 proteins were largely unphosphorylated
and formed tetramers in normal mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A, MCF12A).
On the other hand, PKM2 proteins were phosphorylated at Y105 and formed
dimers in breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-435). Knocking down
PKM2 didnâ€™t affect normal mammary epithelial cell (MCF10A) growth but
significantly decreased breast cancer cell MDA-MB-231 proliferation. In
addition, introducing the PKM2-Y105D phosphomimetic mutant into MCF10A
cells induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition, increased
CD44Hi/CD24Neg stem cell-like cell population, and induced colony
formation in soft agar, promoted cell migration and invasion.
Interestingly, PKM2-Y105D increased YAP1 protein nuclear localization in
MCF10A cells, whereas inhibiting YAP1 by siRNA or a chemical inhibitor
(Verteporfin) decreased PKM2-Y105D-induced cancer stem cell-like
population and colony formation ability. The data indicate that YAP1 is a
novel downstream target of pY105-PKM2 in promoting the stem-like property
and triggering mammary tumor initiation. Next, we performed receptor
tyrosine kinase array and identified several oncogenic tyrosine kinases
(AXL, EPHA2, FAK, Src, JAK3 and so on) that effectively phosphorylates
PKM2 at Y105. Currently, we are testing the efficacy of targeting these
oncogenic tyrosine kinases in reversing the phosphorylation of PKM2 and
blocking its tumor-promoting function. Together, our data indicate that
oncogenic kinases-induced phospho-Y105-PKM2, but not the unphosphorylated
PKM2, promotes mammary tumor initiation by increasing cancer stem cell
populations.


