Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A regulatory circuit HP1 gamma/miR-451a/c-Myc promotes prostate
cancer progression.


Heterochromatin protein 1 gamma (HP1 gamma), as a reader of the histone
codes, is involved in the determination of higher order of chromatin
structure. It has also been implicated in carcinogenesis of various
cancer types. However, the role of HP1 gamma in prostate cancer (PCa)
progression and the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely
unknown. Using the public microarray data from GEO and TCGA database, we
found that HP1 gamma was upregulated in PCa, comparing with benign
prostate tissues. PCa patients with higher level of HP1 gamma had shorter
disease-free survival, indicating that HP1 gamma level can serve as
prognostic marker in PCa patients (p = 0.016). In addition, depletion of
HP1 gamma by shRNA in PCa cells not only repressed proliferation and
induced apoptosis, but also impaired tumorigenicity in vitro and in vivo.
We also found that c-Myc was capable of upregulating HP1 gamma by
directly binding to the E-box element in the first exon of HP1 gamma
gene, and the upregulated HP1 gamma, in turn, repressed the expression of
miR-451a by enhancing H3K9 methylation at the promoter region of
miR-451a. Furthermore, reduction of miR-451a significantly reversed HP1
gamma loss-induced PCa cell apoptosis, whereas miR-451a overexpression
repressed cell survival by targeting and downregulating c-Myc. The
association among mRNA and protein expression levels of c-Myc, HP1 gamma
and miR-451a were further confirmed in human clinical samples using
Spearman correlation analysis. Therefore, we propose that an HP1
gamma/miR-451a/c-Myc regulatory circuit exists in PCa cells and this
circuit plays a crucial role in PCa progression.


