Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Refining breast cancer characterization through single-cell
analysis of ex vivo reprogrammed tumor and adjacent normal cells.


Discovery of inter-individual functional variations in gene regulatory
elements and the observation that tumor and normal tissues of the same
organ are in different differentiation states necessitate rethinking of
gene expression based subclassification/characterization of tumors. To
address this issue, we performed single cell genomics of breast tumors
and adjacent-normal cells propagated using epithelial reprogramming
growth conditions for a short duration. Epithelial cells analyzed were
either unselected for specific subpopulation or phenotypically defined
undifferentiated ALDH+/CD49f+/EpCAM+ luminal progenitors present in the
normal breast, which express both basal and luminal-enriched genes.
Expression of 93 genes that included PAM50 intrinsic subtype classifier
and stemness-related genes was analyzed in 420 tumor and 284
adjacent-normal cells. ALDH+/CD49f+/EpCAM+ tumor and normal cells
clustered differently compared to unselected tumor and normal cells.
PAM50 genes-set analyses of ALDH+/CD49f+/EpCAM+ populations efficiently
identified major and minor clones of tumor cells with the major clone
resembling clinical parameters of the tumor. Similarly,
stemness-associated gene set identified clones with divergent stemness
pathway activation within the same patient sample. This refined technique
distinguished genes truly deregulated in cancer from genes that identify
cellular precursors of tumors. Collectively, assays presented here may
enable precise identification of genes deregulated in cancer, early
identification of therapeutically-targetable minor population of tumor
cells, and eventually to refinement of precision therapeutics.


