Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human PGBD5 DNA transposase promotes site-specific oncogenic
mutations in rhabdoid tumors.


Genomic rearrangements are a hallmark of childhood solid tumors, but
their mutational causes remain poorly understood. Here, we identify the
piggyBac transposable element derived 5 (PGBD5) gene as an enzymatically
active human DNA transposase expressed in the majority of rhabdoid
tumors, a lethal childhood cancer. Using assembly-based whole-genome DNA
sequencing, we observed previously unknown somatic genomic rearrangements
in primary human rhabdoid tumors. These rearrangements were characterized
by deletions and inversions involving PGBD5-specific signal (PSS)
sequences at their breakpoints, with some recurrently targeting tumor
suppressor genes, leading to their inactivation. PGBD5 was found to be
physically associated with human genomic PSS sequences that were also
sufficient to mediate PGBD5-induced DNA rearrangements in rhabdoid tumor
cells. We found that ectopic expression of PGBD5 in primary human cells
was sufficient to promote penetrant cell transformation in vitro and in
immunodeficient mice in vivo. This activity required specific catalytic
residues in the PGBD5 transposase domain, as well as end-joining DNA
repair, and induced distinct structural rearrangements, involving
PSS-associated breakpoints, similar to those found in primary human
rhabdoid tumors. Thus, PGBD5 defines a distinct class of oncogenic
mutators and induces site-specific somatic DNA rearrangements in human
cancer.


