Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk factors by molecular subtypes of breast cancer: a pooled
analysis of nine cohorts.


Etiological differences between molecular subtypes of breast cancer,
defined by estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), have been examined in previous
studies but results are inconsistent, most likely due to small numbers of
rarer subtypes. In a recent systematic review of these studies, only six
of the possible 44 associations had consistent findings, primarily with
the most common luminal A subtype (ER+ or PR+/HER2-). To provide larger
numbers from prospective studies for these associations, we utilized a
harmonized dataset of nine cohort studies (Cancer Prevention Study-II
Nutrition Cohort, Melbourne Cancer Cohort Study, the National Cancer
Institute-American Association of Retired Persons cohort study, Nurses’
Health Study, Nurses’ Health Study-2, Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and
Ovarian Cancer Screening cohort, Swedish Mammographic Cohort, Swedish
Women’s Lifestyle and Health Study, and Women’s Health Initiative)
that had case data on ER, PR, and HER2 from medical records or state
tumor registry records. Multivariate, joint Cox proportional hazard
regression models were used to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI), and to compare associations across subtypes.
Among 616,109 study participants, 11,861 invasive breast cancer cases
were diagnosed, including 8,777 luminal A, 1,388 luminal B (ER+ or PR+/
HER2+), 532 HER2-enhancing (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and 1,164 triple negative
(ER-/PR-/HER2-) subtypes. The mean age at baseline of the study
participants was 54.8 (SD=12.2) years for cases and 54.2 (SD=14.4) years
for controls, and the majority self-described as white. We found that the
associations of race, benign breast disease, parity, number of live
births, age at first birth, age at menopause, alcohol consumption, and
smoking initiation relative to first birth were
statistically-significantly different for at least one of the molecular
subtypes compared to the associations for the ER+ or PR+/HER2- subtype
(p-value for tumor homogeneityEtiological differences between molecular
subtypes of breast cancer, defined by estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2), have been examined in previous studies but results are
inconsistent, most likely due to small numbers of rarer subtypes. In a
recent systematic review of these studies, only six of the possible 44
associations had consistent findings, primarily with the most common
luminal A subtype (ER+ or PR+/HER2-). To provide larger numbers from
prospective studies for these associations, we utilized a harmonized
dataset of nine cohort studies (Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition
Cohort, Melbourne Cancer Cohort Study, the National Cancer
Institute-American Association of Retired Persons cohort study, Nurses’
Health Study, Nurses’ Health Study-2, Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and
Ovarian Cancer Screening cohort, Swedish Mammographic Cohort, Swedish
Women’s Lifestyle and Health Study, and Women’s Health Initiative)
that had case data on ER, PR, and HER2 from medical records or state
tumor registry records. Multivariate, joint Cox proportional hazard
regression models were used to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI), and to compare associations across subtypes.
Among 616,109 study participants, 11,861 invasive breast cancer cases
were diagnosed, including 8,777 luminal A, 1,388 luminal B (ER+ or PR+/
HER2+), 532 HER2-enhancing (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and 1,164 triple negative
(ER-/PR-/HER2-) subtypes. The mean age at baseline of the study
participants was 54.8 (SD=12.2) years for cases and 54.2 (SD=14.4) years
for controls, and the majority self-described as white. We found that the
associations of race, benign breast disease, parity, number of live
births, age at first birth, age at menopause, alcohol consumption, and
smoking initiation relative to first birth were
statistically-significantly different for at least one of the molecular
subtypes compared to the associations for the ER+ or PR+/HER2- subtype
(p-value for tumor homogeneity<0.05). For example, women who drank ≥2
drinks/ day were at increased risk of the luminal A-like (HR=1.44, 95% CI
1.28 - 1.63) and luminal B-like subtypes (HR=1.33, 95% CI 0.97 - 1.81),
but not HER2-enhancing (HR=0.92, 95% CI 0.52 - 1.62) or triple negative
subtypes (HR=0.89, 95% CI 0.61 - 1.30; p-value for homogeneityEtiological
differences between molecular subtypes of breast cancer, defined by
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), have been examined in previous studies
but results are inconsistent, most likely due to small numbers of rarer
subtypes. In a recent systematic review of these studies, only six of the
possible 44 associations had consistent findings, primarily with the most
common luminal A subtype (ER+ or PR+/HER2-). To provide larger numbers
from prospective studies for these associations, we utilized a harmonized
dataset of nine cohort studies (Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition
Cohort, Melbourne Cancer Cohort Study, the National Cancer
Institute-American Association of Retired Persons cohort study, Nurses’
Health Study, Nurses’ Health Study-2, Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and
Ovarian Cancer Screening cohort, Swedish Mammographic Cohort, Swedish
Women’s Lifestyle and Health Study, and Women’s Health Initiative)
that had case data on ER, PR, and HER2 from medical records or state
tumor registry records. Multivariate, joint Cox proportional hazard
regression models were used to calculate hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI), and to compare associations across subtypes.
Among 616,109 study participants, 11,861 invasive breast cancer cases
were diagnosed, including 8,777 luminal A, 1,388 luminal B (ER+ or PR+/
HER2+), 532 HER2-enhancing (ER-/PR-/HER2+), and 1,164 triple negative
(ER-/PR-/HER2-) subtypes. The mean age at baseline of the study
participants was 54.8 (SD=12.2) years for cases and 54.2 (SD=14.4) years
for controls, and the majority self-described as white. We found that the
associations of race, benign breast disease, parity, number of live
births, age at first birth, age at menopause, alcohol consumption, and
smoking initiation relative to first birth were
statistically-significantly different for at least one of the molecular
subtypes compared to the associations for the ER+ or PR+/HER2- subtype
(p-value for tumor homogeneity<0.05). For example, women who drank ≥2
drinks/ day were at increased risk of the luminal A-like (HR=1.44, 95% CI
1.28 - 1.63) and luminal B-like subtypes (HR=1.33, 95% CI 0.97 - 1.81),
but not HER2-enhancing (HR=0.92, 95% CI 0.52 - 1.62) or triple negative
subtypes (HR=0.89, 95% CI 0.61 - 1.30; p-value for homogeneity<0.001).
Younger age at menarche, first degree family history of breast cancer,
ever use of oral contraceptives, ever use of menopausal hormones, higher
education, and postmenopausal body mass index were positively associated
with all molecular subtypes. Our results highlight the importance of
considering molecular subtype when evaluating breast cancer associations
by risk factors, and provide precise estimates of association for the
development of molecular subtype-specific risk prediction models.


