Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of microbeam versus conventional broadbeam radiation
therapy on tumor delivery enhancement of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin
in a triple negative breast cancer mouse model.


Background: Recent meta-analyses have reported that the tumor delivery of
nanoparticles (NPs) is lower than expected and inefficient. Thus, there
is a strong need to develop new methods to enhance the tumor delivery of
NPs without increasing toxicity. Microbeam radiation therapy (MRT) is an
experimental therapy utilizing an array of parallel microplaner X-ray
beams to deliver periodically oscillating high and low dose regions in
the treatment volume. MRT has been shown to eradicate tumors and causes
significantly less toxicity compared to equivalent radiation doses
delivered by conventional broadbeam radiation therapy (BRT). Our prior
studies reported that MRT significantly altered tumor microvasculature
and enhanced the tumor delivery of PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD)
compared to PLD alone in mice (Chang et al. AACR 2015). In this study we
compared MRT and the clinically widely used BRT in their ability to
enhance the tumor delivery of PLD in a preclinical murine tumor model.

Methods: Plasma and tumor PK studies of PLD were performed in a
genetically engineered mouse model of claudin-low triple-negative breast
cancer (T11) in 4 treatment regimens: 1) PLD alone, 2) BRT 28 Gy + PLD,
3) MRT 28 Gy + PLD, 4) MRT 100 Gy + PLD. Mice received a single radiation
treatment 24 h prior to administration of PLD at 6 mg/kg IVP x 1 via a
tail vein. Following administration of PLD, mice were harvested at 5 min
and 24 h. Encapsulated and released doxorubicin concentrations (conc) in
plasma and sum total (encapsulated + released) doxorubicin conc in tumor
were measured by HPLC with fluorescence.

Results: The mean ± SD conc of sum total doxorubicin in tumor at 24 h
after administration of PLD alone, BRT 28 Gy + PLD, MRT 28 Gy + PLD, and
MRT 100 Gy + PLD were 2,575 ± 459, 8,601 ± 1,552*, 7,579 ± 4,428, and
12,911 ± 3,445* ng/mL, respectively (*PResults: The mean ± SD conc of
sum total doxorubicin in tumor at 24 h after administration of PLD alone,
BRT 28 Gy + PLD, MRT 28 Gy + PLD, and MRT 100 Gy + PLD were 2,575 ± 459,
8,601 ± 1,552*, 7,579 ± 4,428, and 12,911 ± 3,445* ng/mL, respectively
(*P<0.05 vs PLD alone). In addition, the ratio of tumor sum total conc to
plasma encapsulated conc at 24 h for PLD alone, BRT 28 Gy + PLD, MRT 28
Gy + PLD, and MRT 100 Gy + PLD were 0.21 ± 0.04, 0.51 ± 0.17*, 0.39 ±
0.22, and 1.45 ± 0.70*, respectively (*PResults: The mean ± SD conc of
sum total doxorubicin in tumor at 24 h after administration of PLD alone,
BRT 28 Gy + PLD, MRT 28 Gy + PLD, and MRT 100 Gy + PLD were 2,575 ± 459,
8,601 ± 1,552*, 7,579 ± 4,428, and 12,911 ± 3,445* ng/mL, respectively
(*P<0.05 vs PLD alone). In addition, the ratio of tumor sum total conc to
plasma encapsulated conc at 24 h for PLD alone, BRT 28 Gy + PLD, MRT 28
Gy + PLD, and MRT 100 Gy + PLD were 0.21 ± 0.04, 0.51 ± 0.17*, 0.39 ±
0.22, and 1.45 ± 0.70*, respectively (*P<0.05 vs PLD alone). The
exposures of sum total doxorubicin in tumor at 5 min were similar in all
groups. The plasma PK of PLD was also similar in all groups.

Conclusions: MRT and BRT administered 24 h prior to PLD increased the
tumor exposure of sum total doxorubicin compared to PLD alone with 100Gy
MRT having the greatest increase in tumor delivery of PLD. In addition,
MRT exhibits significantly lower toxicity to normal tissues in comparison
to BRT allowing for enhanced PLD tumor delivery with low toxicity.
Studies are ongoing to evaluate the mechanism(s) for the enhanced tumor
uptake of PLD induced by MRT. Future studies include investigating dose
dependence of MRT-induced tumor delivery enhancement and effects on other
NP agents and tumor models.


