Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential cytotoxic effects of Piperlongumine analogues and
their radiotherapeutic response in breast cancer.


Background: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the
United Kingdom. The glutathione (GSH) system is a major redox buffering
system involved in regulating radioresponse of cancer cells.
Overexpression has been shown to cause multidrug and radiation
resistance. Its modulation may increase radiosensitivity and improve
radiotherapy efficacy. Piperlongumine (PL) can reportedly inhibit GSH
system function and reduce proliferation of a variety cancer cells in
vitro. The current study investigates novel PL analogues to determine
efficacy in triple-negative (TNBC) and luminal breast cancer cell lines,
as both single agents and in combination with ionising radiation.

Methods: Two novel PL analogues (LH91 and LH92) were used along with the
parental drug, PL. Cell proliferation assays were conducted in MDA-MB-231
(TNBC) and T47D (luminal) lines at various drug concentrations and times.
At 48hr post treatment, cells were also assessed for clonogenic survival.
Clonogenic radiosensitisation was assessed by treating with PL agents or
L-buthionine-S, R-sulfoximine (BSO, a well characterised GSH
radiosensitiser) for 48hr then irradiation with 0-8Gy X-rays. ROS levels
were evaluated using H2DCFDA flow cytometry following IC50 drug treatment
alone or with subsequent exposure to 1mM H2O2 for 1hr.

Results: PL, LH91 and LH92 inhibited proliferation and decreased
clonogenic survival in both lines. From proliferation assays, MDA-MB-231
cells were more sensitive to PL at 48hr (P=0.047) and 72hr (P=0.01) with
an IC50 dose of approx. 4μM versus approx. 12μM in T47D’s. There was
a significant difference between IC50 doses of LH91 in MDA-MB-231 (5μM)
and T47D (12μM) cell lines at 72hr (P=0.006), however this was not
observed at 48hr treatment (P=0.178). In contrast, there was no
differential sensitivity of LH92 in cell proliferation between the two
cell lines at 48 and 72hr. Interestingly, in clonogenic assays,
MDA-MB-231’s were more sensitive to LH92 (P=0.01) with an IC50 of 4μM
versus 11μM in T47D’s. There were no significant differences in
clonogenic survival between each line after treatment with PL or LH91. No
radiosensitisation was observed with PL or PL analogues in MDA-MBA-231
however BSO, as a drug comparator, enhanced radiation response with a
sensitizer enhancement ratio (SER) of 1.13 at 1% iso-survival. Radiation
and drug combinations in T47D cells are ongoing. There were no changes in
ROS levels with the drug alone in MDA-MB-231; however, with subsequent
exposure of H2O2, there was a 1.7-fold increase in ROS level with LH91 at
48hr (P=0.002).

Conclusion: The TNBC cell line is more sensitive to the cytotoxic effect
of PL agents (PL and LH91 in cell proliferation and LH92 in clonogenic
assays) in comparison to the luminal cell line; however no altered
radiosensitisation was observed. The mechanism of such differential
sensitivity is yet to be determined.


