Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osimertinib (AZD9291), a mutant-selective EGFR inhibitor, reverses
ABCB1-mediated drug resistance in cancer cells.


In recent years, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have been shown
capable of inhibiting the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter-mediated
multidrug resistance (MDR). In this study, we determine whether
osimertinib, a novel selective, irreversible EGFR (epidermal growth
factor receptor) TKI inhibitor, could reverse ABC transporter-mediated
MDR. The results showed that at non-toxic concentrations, osimertinib
significantly sensitized both ABCB1-transfected and drug-selected cell
lines to substrate anticancer drugs colchicine, paclitaxel, and
vincristine. Osimertinib significantly increased the accumulation of
[3H]-paclitaxel in ABCB1 overexpressing cells by blocking the efflux
function of ABCB1 transporter. In contrast, no significant alteration in
the expression levels and localization pattern of ABCB1 was observed when
ABCB1 overexpressing cells were exposed to 0.3Î¼M osimertinib for 72 h.
In addition, ATPase assay showed osimertinib stimulated ABCB1 ATPase
activity. Molecular docking and molecular dynamic simulations showed
osimertinib has strong and stable interactions at transmembrane domain of
human homology ABCB1. Taken together, our findings suggest that
osimertinib, a clinically approved third-generation EGFR TKI, can reverse
ABCB1-mediated MDR, which supports the combination therapy with
osimertinib and ABCB1 substrates may potentially be a novel therapeutic
treatment in ABCB1-positive drug resistant cancers.


