Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversal of drug resistance in prostate cancer using PBM
nanoparticle.


Multidrug-resistance (MDR) is the major reason behind the failure of
prostate cancer (PCa) therapy. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters
contribute to drug resistance via ATP-dependent drug efflux.
P-glycoprotein (Pgp), which is encoded by MDR1 gene, confers resistance
to certain anticancer agents. The development of agents able to modulate
MDR mediated by Pgp and other ABC transporters remained a major goal for
PCa therapy. The proposed study evaluated a novel method for targeted
delivery of resveratrol alone or in combination with docetaxel at desired
rates for reversal of drug resistance. We described a proprietary
planetary ball milling approach (PBM) that uses a natural polysaccharide
(starch; FDA approved) to create a drug-polysaccharide nanoparticle as a
core that is subsequently coated with novel folate-conjugated poly
(ε-caprolactone) / poly (ethylene glycol) co-polymer, which allows
binding to high-affinity folate receptors presents on PCa cells. The
resulting PBM nanoparticles were shown to be rapidly internalized and
induce significant cancer cell apoptosis at lower doses compared to
unformulated resveratrol and/or docetaxel. Our data showed that
resveratrol potently synergizes with docetaxel to inhibit proliferation
and induce cell death in resistance PCa cells. The up-regulation of
pro-apoptotic (BAX, BID, BAK), p53 and down regulation of anti-apoptotic
(BCL-2, MCL-1), Pgp and NF-κB protein confirmed that a synergistic
combination of resveratrol-docetaxel with targeted delivery to tumor
cells could provide a more potent therapeutic effect at lower drug
concentrations and improve the therapeutic index. These results suggested
that the co-delivery of resveratrol, and a cytotoxic agent in a PBM
nanoparticle might potentially improve the treatment of drug-resistant
tumors. [This work is supported from Grant # 5SC1CA193758-03]


