Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elotuzumab can costimulate NK cell responses by engaging SLAMF7.


Elotuzumab (Elo) is an IgG1 monoclonal antibody targeting SLAMF7 (CS1,
CRACC, CD319) protein, which is highly and uniformly expressed on
multiple myeloma cells. Improved survival has been observed in multiple
myeloma patients treated with Elo in combination with immunomodulatory
drugs such as dexamethasone and lenalidomide. Previous work showed that
the main mechanism of Elo action in vitro is CD16-mediated antibody
dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) via Fc interaction with CD16
(FcÎ³RIIIa) receptor on NK cells. However, SLAMF7 is also expressed on NK
cells where it transmits an activating signal. We hypothesized that Elo
can directly activate NK cells via SLAMF7 ligation. Utilizing
non-fucosylated Elo that has higher affinity to CD16 and Elo mutant that
has an Fc region mutation that abrogates binding to CD16, we confirmed
that Elo promotes NK cell activation and degranulation in a
CD16-dependent manner. Specifically, non-fucosylated Elo had higher
potency, whereas Elo mutant did not stimulate degranulation or CD69
expression.

To test for co-stimulatory effects of Elo and Elo mutant we measured
calcium signaling responses triggered by those antibodies in combination
with antibodies to engage the activating receptors NKp46 and NKG2D. Elo
or Elo mut alone had no effect on calcium signaling, but when added in
combination with multimeric engagement of NKp46 and NKG2D both antibodies
co-stimulated calcium signaling responses.

We conclude that Elo stimulates NK cells via interaction with CD16, but
direct engagement with SLAMF7 can also transduce co-activating signals to
potentiate calcium signals generated through NKp46 and NKG2D in a
CD16-independent manner. Our results provide evidence that direct
engagement with SLAMF7 by Elo has the potential to reduce the threshold
of NK cell activation triggered through other activating receptors.


