Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATR inhibitor BAY 1895344 shows potent anti-tumor efficacy in
monotherapy and strong combination potential with the targeted alpha
therapy Radium-223 dichloride in preclinical tumor models.


The integrity of the genome of eukaryotic cells is secured by complex
signaling pathways, known as DNA damage response (DDR). Recognition of
DNA damage activates DDR pathways resulting in cell cycle arrest,
induction of DNA repair, or cell death. Proteins that directly recognize
aberrant DNA structures recruit and activate kinases of the DDR pathway,
such as ATR (ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related). ATR responds to a
broad spectrum of DNA damage, including double-strand breaks (DSB) and
lesions derived from interference with DNA replication as well as
increased replication stress. Therefore, inhibition of ATR kinase
activity could be the basis for a novel anti-cancer therapy in tumors
with increased DNA damage, deficiency in DNA damage repair or replication
stress. Radium-223 dichloride (XofigoÂ®) is the first and only approved
targeted alpha therapy so far. It is indicated for the treatment of
patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), symptomatic
bone metastases and no known visceral metastatic disease, based on
improvement of overall survival. It exhibits strong cytotoxic effects on
adjacent cells via the induction of DNA DSB.

Here, we disclose for the first time the structure and functional
characterization of the novel ATR kinase inhibitor BAY 1895344. In vitro,
BAY 1895344 is a selective low-nanomolar inhibitor of ATR kinase
activity, potently inhibiting proliferation of a broad spectrum of human
tumor cell lines (median IC50 of 78 nM). A clear separation between
highly sensitive (IC50 Here, we disclose for the first time the structure
and functional characterization of the novel ATR kinase inhibitor BAY
1895344. In vitro, BAY 1895344 is a selective low-nanomolar inhibitor of
ATR kinase activity, potently inhibiting proliferation of a broad
spectrum of human tumor cell lines (median IC50 of 78 nM). A clear
separation between highly sensitive (IC50 <10 nM) and less sensitive cell
lines was observed. The majority of the sensitive cell lines are
characterized by mutations affecting the ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
mutated) pathway. In cellular mechanistic assays BAY 1895344 inhibited
hydroxyurea-induced H2AX phosphorylation demonstrating the anticipated
mode of action. BAY 1895344 is an ATR inhibitor that exhibits strong in
vivo anti-tumor efficacy in monotherapy in a variety of xenograft models
of different indications that are characterized by DDR deficiencies,
inducing stable disease in ovarian and colorectal cancer or even complete
tumor remission in mantle cell lymphoma models. In addition, we could
demonstrate that combination treatment with BAY 1895344 and Radium-223
exhibits clear synergistic anti-tumor activity in a bone metastases
xenograft model of CRPC.

Our findings validate the concept of synthetic lethality of genetically
determined DNA repair deficiency and ATR blockade by demonstrating strong
monotherapy efficacy of the highly potent ATR inhibitor BAY 1895344 in a
variety of tumor indications. Furthermore, the mechanism-based
combination potential of DNA damage induction by Radium-223 with BAY
1895344 creates a powerful new treatment option for CRPC patients with
bone metastases.

The start of clinical investigation of BAY 1895344 is planned early 2017.


