Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mismatch repair defects in lethal prostate cancer.


INTRODUCTION: A subset of prostate cancers (PCs) has a hypermutated
phenotype. We hypothesized that lethal PCs with a high mutational load
(ML) have DNA repair defects including mismatch-repair (MMR) aberrations
and that such aberrations may impact outcome. METHODS: Diagnostic and
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) tissues were
tested by A) immunohistochemistry (IHC) for MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2;
B) microsatellite instability (MSI) (Promega v1.2 assay); C) targeted
next generation sequencing (NGS) of the coding regions of 113 genes, a
panel enriched for DNA-repair genes that includes MMR genes. Utilizing
NGS data we also evaluated ML and MSI by NGS (MSINGS; Pritchard et al,
2014). IHC was used as reference for sensitivity (SE) and specificity
(SP) of methods B) and C).Youdenâ€™s index was used to determine the
optimal cut off for the ROC for IHC in relation to MSINGS and ML.
Demographics and clinical data were retrospectively collected from
electronic records. Relationship between ML in diagnostic and mCRPC
samples was evaluated by paired t-test. The relationship between ML and
MMR deficient tumors on IHC (MMRd) and/or MSI tumors by PCR (MMRd/MSI)
was analyzed by negative binomial regression model. The relationship
between MMRd/MSI tumors and overall survival (OS) was analyzed using
univariate and multivariate Cox regression, adjusting for radical
treatment (prostatectomy or radiotherapy), Gleason score, age, PSA and
stage and presence of metastatic disease at diagnosis.

RESULTS: We analyzed 306 PC biopsies (180 hormone-sensitive [HS] and 126
castration resistant [CR]) from 208 patients. Overall 16 patients (7.7%)
had either MMRd or MSI. Matched, same-patient, HSPC and mCRPC tumor
biopsies were available for 82 patients. Only one case with MMRd status
in HS was not confirmed in matched mCRPC. This patient was considered MMR
proficient for the survival analysis. MSI had a SE of 80% and a SP of
97%. An MSI by NGS cut-off of 0.096 had SE of 60% and SP of 99%, with an
area under ROC curve of 0.83. A ML cut-off of 11 mutations per panel had
SE of 60% and SP of 99%, with an area under ROC curve of 0.79. Although
ML in diagnostic samples correlates with ML in mCRPC, ML was
significantly higher in mCRPC MMRd/MSI cases (p RESULTS: We analyzed 306
PC biopsies (180 hormone-sensitive [HS] and 126 castration resistant
[CR]) from 208 patients. Overall 16 patients (7.7%) had either MMRd or
MSI. Matched, same-patient, HSPC and mCRPC tumor biopsies were available
for 82 patients. Only one case with MMRd status in HS was not confirmed
in matched mCRPC. This patient was considered MMR proficient for the
survival analysis. MSI had a SE of 80% and a SP of 97%. An MSI by NGS
cut-off of 0.096 had SE of 60% and SP of 99%, with an area under ROC
curve of 0.83. A ML cut-off of 11 mutations per panel had SE of 60% and
SP of 99%, with an area under ROC curve of 0.79. Although ML in
diagnostic samples correlates with ML in mCRPC, ML was significantly
higher in mCRPC MMRd/MSI cases (p <0.001; predicted ML of 14 versus 4
mutations per panel). MMRd/MSI and MMR proficient patients were balanced
for type of radical treatments, Gleason score, presence of metastatic
disease, PSA, age and stage at diagnosis. Despite this, median OS from
start of LHRH for the MMRd/MSI group was significantly shorter than in
the MMR proficient group in univariable and multivariable analysis (3.84
vs 6.81 years; aHR: 2.44; 95% CI 1.27 -4.70; p = 0.008).

CONCLUSION: We provide evidence that MMRd/MSI status represents a
negative prognostic factor for survival for metastatic CRPC. MMRd/MSI
status in diagnostic biopsies accurately identifies MMRd/MSI in mCRPC.
MSINGS and ML can detect MMRd/MSI tumors.


