Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide association study of prostate cancer in Latinos.


Recent studies estimate that individuals of African or Latin American
ancestry represent less than 4% of samples analyzed to date in
genome-wide association studies. The clinical value of genetic
information in guiding personalized medicine in populations of
non-European ancestry will require additional discovery and risk locus
characterization efforts in these populations. Here, we performed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis of prostate cancer in
Latino men to search for risk loci that may be important in this
population. We combined GWAS data for 1034 cases and 1046 controls
genotyped with the Illumina 660 Beadarray with GWAS data for 1235 cases
and 1053 controls genotyped with the Illumina Oncoarray as part of the
ELLIPSE U19 GAME-ON Consortium. A total of ~11 million genotyped and
imputed SNPs of ≥1% frequency were tested for association with prostate
cancer risk in logistic regression models controlling for age, study and
genetic ancestry. Genome-wide significant associations were observed with
24 variants all located at 8q24 (128.484-128.548), and which capture the
first reported prostate cancer susceptibility locus in ‘region 1’ of
8q24. The most significant association genome-wide was with SNP rs7824776
(risk allele frequency, 0.35; OR=1.69, p=3.4x10-11). No novel genome-wide
significant associations were noted outside of 8q24. We observed a high
degree of generalizability of known prostate cancer risk loci, with 78
(76%) of the 103 known risk variants having effects that were
directionally consistent in their association with prostate cancer risk
as previously reported, of which 31 (30%) were statistically significant
with p Recent studies estimate that individuals of African or Latin
American ancestry represent less than 4% of samples analyzed to date in
genome-wide association studies. The clinical value of genetic
information in guiding personalized medicine in populations of
non-European ancestry will require additional discovery and risk locus
characterization efforts in these populations. Here, we performed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis of prostate cancer in
Latino men to search for risk loci that may be important in this
population. We combined GWAS data for 1034 cases and 1046 controls
genotyped with the Illumina 660 Beadarray with GWAS data for 1235 cases
and 1053 controls genotyped with the Illumina Oncoarray as part of the
ELLIPSE U19 GAME-ON Consortium. A total of ~11 million genotyped and
imputed SNPs of ≥1% frequency were tested for association with prostate
cancer risk in logistic regression models controlling for age, study and
genetic ancestry. Genome-wide significant associations were observed with
24 variants all located at 8q24 (128.484-128.548), and which capture the
first reported prostate cancer susceptibility locus in ‘region 1’ of
8q24. The most significant association genome-wide was with SNP rs7824776
(risk allele frequency, 0.35; OR=1.69, p=3.4x10-11). No novel genome-wide
significant associations were noted outside of 8q24. We observed a high
degree of generalizability of known prostate cancer risk loci, with 78
(76%) of the 103 known risk variants having effects that were
directionally consistent in their association with prostate cancer risk
as previously reported, of which 31 (30%) were statistically significant
with p < 0.05. In addition to these findings from the largest GWAS of
prostate cancer in Latinos conducted to date, we will also present the
results investigating effect heterogeneity by local ancestry (i.e.
proportion Native American vs. European). In addition, we will present a
comparison of polygenic risk models between Latinos, African Africans and
men of European ancestry that incorporate the known risk loci to better
understand how genetic risk tracks with population differences in
prostate cancer incidence.


