Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative comparison of hydrocortisone and prednisone in the
postoperative hormone therapy of hypercortisolism.


Tumors and several types of malignancies including lung cancer,
pancreatic cancer, pituitary tumor, and most often adrenal adenoma, may
cause hypercortisolism, which requires glucorticoid (GC) replacement
following adrenalectomy and/or surgical resection of the tumor. Based on
our previous report of a simplified GC therapy scheme and the
perioperative observation, we further investigated its efficacy and
safety up to 6 months post-surgery in this retrospective cohort study.
All patients received no GC before surgery. The i.v. doses of
hydrocortisone (HC) were 100 mg during surgery, 100 mg bid on day 0 and
day 1, followed by 100 mg qd on the morning of day 2 post-surgery.
Patients were grouped by oral reception of either HC or prednisone since
day 2. The doses and the withdrawal schedule are shown in Table. We found
in adrenal adenoma patients, the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
levels were normal, and sufficient to stimulate the recovery of the
dystrophic adrenal cortex, thus exogenous supplemental ACTH might not be
necessary. By 6 months post-surgery, prednisone and HC exhibited similar
efficacy in correcting hypertension, hyperglycemia, and hypokalemia
(p>0.05). Most patients lost weight. Both groups reported significant
improvement in a subjective evaluation questionnaire. HC showed
advantages over prednisone in improving liver function (p=0.035), but
also caused significant leg edema (p=0.034). Both groups developed
adrenal insufficiency (AI) during GC withdrawal, with no significant
difference regarding the incidence rate or severity. Most AI symptoms
were relieved by resuming the prior oral doses, while the severe cases
were treated in hospital. No particular variable was identified as risk
factor for AI. The withdrawal process may last longer time for HC than
prednisone. HC may be prioritized for patients with hyperglycemia or
abnormal liver function, while prednisone may reduce the incidence of leg
edema.



hydrocortisone

prednisone



pathology

22

20



adrenal adenoma

14/22

16/20



Cushing's Disease

8/22

4/20



oral glucorticoid scheme





dose on day 2

40 mg, tid

10 mg, tid



withdrawal

20 mg/week

5 mg/week



average length (month)

6.6

4.9



correction of symptoms





hypertension

10/15

12/19



hyperglycemia

6/11

7/10



hypokalemia

12/12

11/11



abnormal liver panel

7/8

2/7 *



weight loss

20/22

17/20



adrenal insufficiency

10/22

7/20



severe case

1/10

1/7



leg edema

6/22

0/20 *


