Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization and preclinical development of STRO-001, a novel
CD74-targeting antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) for the treatment of B-cell
malignancies.


CD74 is a type II transmembrane glycoprotein involved in the formation
and transport of MHC class II protein. CD74 is highly expressed in many
B-cell malignancies with limited expression in normal tissues (Stein R.
et al., CCR 2007). STRO-001 is a novel CD74-targeting ADC containing an
anti-CD74 aglycosylated human IgG1 antibody (SP7219) conjugated to a
non-cleavable dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO)-maytansinoid linker-warhead.
SP7219 was discovered from a Fab ribosome display library based on
Sutro’s Xpress CFTM technology. Highly efficient site-specific
conjugation enabled by our cell-free antibody production and click
chemistry results in a well-defined homogeneous ADC drug product with a
drug-antibody ratio (DAR) of 2. Conjugation sites were selected based on
highest stability both in vitro and in vivo, thereby limiting loss of
drug moiety from STRO-001 in circulation. Due to its limited cell
permeability, the major catabolite released by STRO-001 has 1000X lower
cell killing activity on CD74 positive and negative cells compared to the
reference cytotoxic maytansine. In vitro cytotoxicity assays show potent
activity of STRO-001 in a diverse panel of B-cell tumor lines including 4
multiple myeloma (MM), 9 germinal center B-cell (GCB) diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 3 activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL, and 3 mantle
cell lymphoma (MCL) cell lines with IC50 ranging from 0.17-20 nM. CD74
cell surface expression is required for STRO-001 cytotoxic activity but
expression level, as measured by antibody-binding capacity, does not
correlate with in vitro potency (R2=0.4640). STRO-001 inhibits the
formation of visceral tumors (pCD74 is a type II transmembrane
glycoprotein involved in the formation and transport of MHC class II
protein. CD74 is highly expressed in many B-cell malignancies with
limited expression in normal tissues (Stein R. et al., CCR 2007).
STRO-001 is a novel CD74-targeting ADC containing an anti-CD74
aglycosylated human IgG1 antibody (SP7219) conjugated to a non-cleavable
dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO)-maytansinoid linker-warhead. SP7219 was
discovered from a Fab ribosome display library based on Sutro’s Xpress
CFTM technology. Highly efficient site-specific conjugation enabled by
our cell-free antibody production and click chemistry results in a
well-defined homogeneous ADC drug product with a drug-antibody ratio
(DAR) of 2. Conjugation sites were selected based on highest stability
both in vitro and in vivo, thereby limiting loss of drug moiety from
STRO-001 in circulation. Due to its limited cell permeability, the major
catabolite released by STRO-001 has 1000X lower cell killing activity on
CD74 positive and negative cells compared to the reference cytotoxic
maytansine. In vitro cytotoxicity assays show potent activity of STRO-001
in a diverse panel of B-cell tumor lines including 4 multiple myeloma
(MM), 9 germinal center B-cell (GCB) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), 3 activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL, and 3 mantle cell lymphoma (MCL)
cell lines with IC50 ranging from 0.17-20 nM. CD74 cell surface
expression is required for STRO-001 cytotoxic activity but expression
level, as measured by antibody-binding capacity, does not correlate with
in vitro potency (R2=0.4640). STRO-001 inhibits the formation of visceral
tumors (p<0.004) and prevents growth of CD138+ plasma cells in bone
marrow (BM) after 4 weekly doses of 3 mg/kg in the ARP-1 disseminated MM
xenograft model. STRO-001 dosed at 3 mg/kg weekly x 3 also eradicates
malignant BM plasma cells (p90 days). STRO-001 exhibits dose-dependent
tumor growth inhibition in SU-DHL-6 xenografts starting at 2.5 mg/kg
weekly x 3 doses. The combination of bendamustine/rituximab (BR) +
STRO-001 further improves tumor suppression in SU-DHL-6 xenografts
compared to vehicle (p = 0.002) or BR alone (p = 0.02). Preliminary
studies with a MCL xenograft model, Jeko-1, demonstrate potent anti-tumor
activity compared to vehicle (p90 days). STRO-001 exhibits dose-dependent
tumor growth inhibition in SU-DHL-6 xenografts starting at 2.5 mg/kg
weekly x 3 doses. The combination of bendamustine/rituximab (BR) +
STRO-001 further improves tumor suppression in SU-DHL-6 xenografts
compared to vehicle (p = 0.002) or BR alone (p = 0.02). Preliminary
studies with a MCL xenograft model, Jeko-1, demonstrate potent anti-tumor
activity compared to vehicle (p<0.0001) starting at a single STRO-001
dose of 3 mg/kg, with ongoing tumor stasis up to 21 days after treatment.
STRO-001 reduces normal B-cells in cynomologous monkeys, providing
pharmacodynamic evidence of B-cell targeting. Based on these encouraging
observations, STRO-001 is advancing to IND-enabling studies for the
treatment of CD74-expressing B-cell malignancies.


