Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drug repurposing for hepatocellular carcinoma enabled via
transcriptomics data from experimental models of sorafenib resistance.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is often diagnosed in patients with
advanced disease who are ineligible for curative surgical therapies.
Sorafenib is the only approved drug for treating late stage HCC patients.
However, patients rapidly become unresponsive due to inherent and
acquired drug resistance. The promise of drug repurposing is that
identifying new uses for existing drugs may reduce the high costs and
time required for drug discovery. This is the first study employing
connectivity mapping, a transcriptomics-based drug repurposing method, to
identify drugs for use against sorafenib resistant (SR)-HCC via reversal
of gene expression patterns. As a first step, we characterized gene
expression signatures of different models of sorafenib resistance. We
obtained gene expression signatures from an in vitro and an in vivo model
of (SR)-HCC (publicly available microarray data) as well as from
sorafenib-resistant (pool and clone) Huh7 cells generated in our lab. We
determined the presence of the SR-HCC gene signatures across six
patient-derived HCC gene expression datasets from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database using the nearest template method
(FDRHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is often diagnosed in patients with
advanced disease who are ineligible for curative surgical therapies.
Sorafenib is the only approved drug for treating late stage HCC patients.
However, patients rapidly become unresponsive due to inherent and
acquired drug resistance. The promise of drug repurposing is that
identifying new uses for existing drugs may reduce the high costs and
time required for drug discovery. This is the first study employing
connectivity mapping, a transcriptomics-based drug repurposing method, to
identify drugs for use against sorafenib resistant (SR)-HCC via reversal
of gene expression patterns. As a first step, we characterized gene
expression signatures of different models of sorafenib resistance. We
obtained gene expression signatures from an in vitro and an in vivo model
of (SR)-HCC (publicly available microarray data) as well as from
sorafenib-resistant (pool and clone) Huh7 cells generated in our lab. We
determined the presence of the SR-HCC gene signatures across six
patient-derived HCC gene expression datasets from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database using the nearest template method (FDR<0.05), and
found that the gene signatures performed similarly in distinguishing
tumor vs. normal liver tissue (FET pHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is
often diagnosed in patients with advanced disease who are ineligible for
curative surgical therapies. Sorafenib is the only approved drug for
treating late stage HCC patients. However, patients rapidly become
unresponsive due to inherent and acquired drug resistance. The promise of
drug repurposing is that identifying new uses for existing drugs may
reduce the high costs and time required for drug discovery. This is the
first study employing connectivity mapping, a transcriptomics-based drug
repurposing method, to identify drugs for use against sorafenib resistant
(SR)-HCC via reversal of gene expression patterns. As a first step, we
characterized gene expression signatures of different models of sorafenib
resistance. We obtained gene expression signatures from an in vitro and
an in vivo model of (SR)-HCC (publicly available microarray data) as well
as from sorafenib-resistant (pool and clone) Huh7 cells generated in our
lab. We determined the presence of the SR-HCC gene signatures across six
patient-derived HCC gene expression datasets from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database using the nearest template method (FDR<0.05), and
found that the gene signatures performed similarly in distinguishing
tumor vs. normal liver tissue (FET p<0.05). We also analyzed RNAseq data
from HCC patients (n=423) in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for the
presence of these SR gene signatures, and observed that patients
harboring the SR-HCC gene signatures generated by our lab had
significantly reduced survival (log-rank p=0.036 SR Huh7 pool; p=0.009 SR
Huh7 clone). Utilizing drug-induced gene expression profiles (n= 3,740
drugs) in the HepG2 HCC cell line from the Library of Integrated
Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) database, we applied
connectivity mapping analysis to the SR-HCC gene signatures. Dasatinib, a
Src family kinase inhibitor, was prioritized as a top drug candidate from
our LINCS analysis to reverse HCC sorafenib resistance. We confirmed
up-regulated activity of Src family kinases in SR-Huh7 cells, as compared
to sorafenib sensitive Huh7 cells (two-tailed t test, pHepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is often diagnosed in patients with advanced disease who
are ineligible for curative surgical therapies. Sorafenib is the only
approved drug for treating late stage HCC patients. However, patients
rapidly become unresponsive due to inherent and acquired drug resistance.
The promise of drug repurposing is that identifying new uses for existing
drugs may reduce the high costs and time required for drug discovery.
This is the first study employing connectivity mapping, a
transcriptomics-based drug repurposing method, to identify drugs for use
against sorafenib resistant (SR)-HCC via reversal of gene expression
patterns. As a first step, we characterized gene expression signatures of
different models of sorafenib resistance. We obtained gene expression
signatures from an in vitro and an in vivo model of (SR)-HCC (publicly
available microarray data) as well as from sorafenib-resistant (pool and
clone) Huh7 cells generated in our lab. We determined the presence of the
SR-HCC gene signatures across six patient-derived HCC gene expression
datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database using the
nearest template method (FDR<0.05), and found that the gene signatures
performed similarly in distinguishing tumor vs. normal liver tissue (FET
p<0.05). We also analyzed RNAseq data from HCC patients (n=423) in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for the presence of these SR gene signatures,
and observed that patients harboring the SR-HCC gene signatures generated
by our lab had significantly reduced survival (log-rank p=0.036 SR Huh7
pool; p=0.009 SR Huh7 clone). Utilizing drug-induced gene expression
profiles (n= 3,740 drugs) in the HepG2 HCC cell line from the Library of
Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) database, we applied
connectivity mapping analysis to the SR-HCC gene signatures. Dasatinib, a
Src family kinase inhibitor, was prioritized as a top drug candidate from
our LINCS analysis to reverse HCC sorafenib resistance. We confirmed
up-regulated activity of Src family kinases in SR-Huh7 cells, as compared
to sorafenib sensitive Huh7 cells (two-tailed t test, p<0.05). We
validated the use of dasatinib against sorafenib-resistant HCC cells in
vitro alone and in combination with sorafenib using cell viability and
clonogenic survival assays. In summary, we provide physiological
relevance of SR models and proof of concept evidence for the validity of
this novel drug repurposing approach for SR-HCC with implications for
personalized medicine.


