Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis promotes EpCAM positive cancer stem
cells mediated tumorigenesis in immunocompetent mouse model of
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Introduction: Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH) is one of the major
risk factors for cirrhosis and its progression to Hepatocellular
Carcinoma (HCC). Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are sub-population of cells
that bear stem-like properties, and are believed to contribute in tumor
initiation and recurrence in tumor microenvironment. Understanding role
of CSCs in tumorigenesis was limited to immunocompromised nude/SCID mouse
models, and should be investigated in immunocompetent mouse model(s)
representing clinical conditions. In this study, (1) we have investigated
and confirmed CSCs properties in HCC cells lines, and (2) investigated
tumor initiation capability of EpCAM positive CSCs in novel
immunocompetent mouse model of HCC. Methods: In vitro CSC enrichment was
achieved by treating murine (Hepa1-6) and human (HepG2, Hep3B) HCC cells
in serum-free condition. To confirm CSCs, we analyzed CSC biomarkers
(EpCAM,CD90,CD44,CD133) using flow-cytometry and Immunocytochemistry
(ICC), and functional markers using Aldeflour assay and Hoechst-33342
efflux. Drug resistance property of CSCs was studied using Doxorubicin
(anthracycline antibiotic) and Sorafenib (multikinase inhibitor) by MTT
assay. To study in vivo tumorigenesis, immunocompetent mouse model was
established using C57L/J mouse and copGFP expressing Hepa1-6 cells.
Capability of EpCAM CSCs for tumor initiation was tested in 3 diet
induced groups, i.e. control (10% dietary fat), high-fat (60% dietary
fat), and NASH (60% dietary fat MCD diet with 0.1% methionine). 2 million
FACS sorted EpCAM+/+ or EpCAM-/- cells were orthotopically injected into
left liver lob. Tumor growth was monitored using high-frequency
ultrasound and animals were euthanized after 18 days. Histology and ICC
analysis was performed to confirm the tumors and findings. Results:
Spheroid forming HCC-CSCs showed significant higher EpCAM expression and
significant higher chemoresistance compared with control HCC cells. Our
in vivo findings confirmed that EpCAM CSCs required NASH
microenvironment. In NASH group mice, EpCAM+/+ CSCs have shown
significant tumorigenesis compared with no tumors in EpCAM-/- (n=9,
pIntroduction: Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH) is one of the major
risk factors for cirrhosis and its progression to Hepatocellular
Carcinoma (HCC). Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are sub-population of cells
that bear stem-like properties, and are believed to contribute in tumor
initiation and recurrence in tumor microenvironment. Understanding role
of CSCs in tumorigenesis was limited to immunocompromised nude/SCID mouse
models, and should be investigated in immunocompetent mouse model(s)
representing clinical conditions. In this study, (1) we have investigated
and confirmed CSCs properties in HCC cells lines, and (2) investigated
tumor initiation capability of EpCAM positive CSCs in novel
immunocompetent mouse model of HCC. Methods: In vitro CSC enrichment was
achieved by treating murine (Hepa1-6) and human (HepG2, Hep3B) HCC cells
in serum-free condition. To confirm CSCs, we analyzed CSC biomarkers
(EpCAM,CD90,CD44,CD133) using flow-cytometry and Immunocytochemistry
(ICC), and functional markers using Aldeflour assay and Hoechst-33342
efflux. Drug resistance property of CSCs was studied using Doxorubicin
(anthracycline antibiotic) and Sorafenib (multikinase inhibitor) by MTT
assay. To study in vivo tumorigenesis, immunocompetent mouse model was
established using C57L/J mouse and copGFP expressing Hepa1-6 cells.
Capability of EpCAM CSCs for tumor initiation was tested in 3 diet
induced groups, i.e. control (10% dietary fat), high-fat (60% dietary
fat), and NASH (60% dietary fat MCD diet with 0.1% methionine). 2 million
FACS sorted EpCAM+/+ or EpCAM-/- cells were orthotopically injected into
left liver lob. Tumor growth was monitored using high-frequency
ultrasound and animals were euthanized after 18 days. Histology and ICC
analysis was performed to confirm the tumors and findings. Results:
Spheroid forming HCC-CSCs showed significant higher EpCAM expression and
significant higher chemoresistance compared with control HCC cells. Our
in vivo findings confirmed that EpCAM CSCs required NASH
microenvironment. In NASH group mice, EpCAM+/+ CSCs have shown
significant tumorigenesis compared with no tumors in EpCAM-/- (n=9,
p<0.005). Histology analysis of NASH liver tissue confirmed lobular and
portal inflammation, hepatocellular ballooning, and fibrosis. Control and
high-fat diet group mice failed to develop tumors. Conclusions: We have
developed a novel mouse model to study CSCs to overcome confounding
limitations of immunocompromised mouse models for lacking functional
immune system components. Our findings using immunocompetent mouse model
suggest that, in HCC, (1) EpCAM+ CSCs cannot initiate tumor by itself
within normal liver microenvironment in the presence of functional immune
components, (2) NASH microenvironment promotes EpCAM+ CSCs mediated
tumorigenesis while EpCAM-/- non-CSCs subset failed to develop tumor.


