Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosomal Del-1 as a potent diagnostic marker for breast cancer: A
prospective cohort study.


Background: We previously demonstrated a diagnostic role of exosomal
del-1 with two separated groups of breast cancer patients. In the current
study, therefore, we aimed to confirm the diagnostic role in a
prospective study with breast cancer by measuring plasma exosomal del-1
before and after surgery.

Patients and methods: To identify the optimal time of sampling after
surgery, serial blood at day 1, 3, 5, and 7 after surgery was collected
from 22 patients with early breast cancer. Thereafter, One hundred
fifteen patients with breast cancer who underwent curative surgery were
enrolled in the prospective cohort study to compare difference in plasma
exosomal del-1 measured by ELISA at the time of diagnosis and
post-surgery.

Results: Among all 22 patients for optimal sampling time after surgery,
exosomal del-1 was higher than 0.5 at the time of diagnosis and then
normalized at POD1. Among 115 patients for the confirmatory set, 109
(94.8%) patients showed a normalization of del-1 lower than 0.5 after
surgery and 10 patients showed del-1> 0.4 . Median f/u duration of 22
months, 9 patients experienced relapse (4 locoregional and 5 distant),
where 3 out of 6 in high group (>0.5), and 2 out of 4 in borderline group
(0.4-0.5), and 4 out of 105 in normalized group (Results: Among all 22
patients for optimal sampling time after surgery, exosomal del-1 was
higher than 0.5 at the time of diagnosis and then normalized at POD1.
Among 115 patients for the confirmatory set, 109 (94.8%) patients showed
a normalization of del-1 lower than 0.5 after surgery and 10 patients
showed del-1> 0.4 . Median f/u duration of 22 months, 9 patients
experienced relapse (4 locoregional and 5 distant), where 3 out of 6 in
high group (>0.5), and 2 out of 4 in borderline group (0.4-0.5), and 4
out of 105 in normalized group (<0.4). In particular, patients who
relapsed in higher del-1 group showed relatively earlier relapse compared
to lower del-1 group.

Conclusion: In a prospective cohort study, we confirmed that exosomal
del-1 has a potent diagnostic role in breast cancer. Furthermore, del-1
was also identified to dramatically decrease after curative surgery. Our
current findings suggest its potential prognostic role as well as
diagnostic role in breast cancer patients.

Changes of Exosomal Del-1 level between baseline and after-surgery (n=115)



sampling time

baseline

after surgery

p-value(paired t-test)



Del-1 (mean±SD)

1.237±0.453

0.188±0.124

<0.001


