Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of PD-L1 expression and the immune cell
microenvironment in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and non-cirrhotic
liver tissue adjacent to HCC.


Still-emerging evidence suggests that HCC is at least moderately
responsive to therapeutic agents that target tumor immune suppression
pathways, specifically the programmed death 1/programmed death ligand 1
(PD-L1) pathway. Prior studies raise the possibility that PD-L1 is a
prognostic biomarker in HCC, where its expression levels have been
reported to correlate with tumor aggressiveness and recurrence following
surgical resection. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
expression of PD-L1 in non-cirrhotic liver tissue adjacent to HCC and HCC
itself in 68 procured tissue samples, as well as elucidate the immune
cell composition of the HCC tumor microenvironment. All cases showed the
typical morphology of HCC and were classified as low- to high-grade
trabecular, pseudoglandular, or solid with the common cytoplasmic
features. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for PD-L1 in tumor-free
liver (TFL) revealed PD-L1 staining in sinusoidal lining cells
(macrophages [Mφ] and endothelial cells [EC], as confirmed by double
labeling for CD68 and CD31), although there was considerable
heterogeneity in the extent of PD-L1 staining. More specifically, in TFL,
some but not all CD68+ Mφ were also PD-L1+, whereas most CD31+ EC were
also PD-L1+. Furthermore, we evaluated PD-L1 staining qualitatively and
semiquantitatively in HCC. Only few tumor cells displayed membranous
PD-L1 staining, and 62/68 of the cases (91.2%) were categorized as PD-L1-
vs 6/68 (8.8%) PD-L1+ (≥1% and Still-emerging evidence suggests that
HCC is at least moderately responsive to therapeutic agents that target
tumor immune suppression pathways, specifically the programmed death
1/programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) pathway. Prior studies raise the
possibility that PD-L1 is a prognostic biomarker in HCC, where its
expression levels have been reported to correlate with tumor
aggressiveness and recurrence following surgical resection. The purpose
of this study was to evaluate the expression of PD-L1 in non-cirrhotic
liver tissue adjacent to HCC and HCC itself in 68 procured tissue
samples, as well as elucidate the immune cell composition of the HCC
tumor microenvironment. All cases showed the typical morphology of HCC
and were classified as low- to high-grade trabecular, pseudoglandular, or
solid with the common cytoplasmic features. Immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining for PD-L1 in tumor-free liver (TFL) revealed PD-L1 staining in
sinusoidal lining cells (macrophages [Mφ] and endothelial cells [EC], as
confirmed by double labeling for CD68 and CD31), although there was
considerable heterogeneity in the extent of PD-L1 staining. More
specifically, in TFL, some but not all CD68+ Mφ were also PD-L1+,
whereas most CD31+ EC were also PD-L1+. Furthermore, we evaluated PD-L1
staining qualitatively and semiquantitatively in HCC. Only few tumor
cells displayed membranous PD-L1 staining, and 62/68 of the cases (91.2%)
were categorized as PD-L1- vs 6/68 (8.8%) PD-L1+ (≥1% and <25% =
PD-L1+); instead, PD-L1 expression within the tumor microenvironment
predominantly emanated from immune cell infiltrates (as confirmed by
PD-L1/pan-cytokeratin double labeling). Then we assessed the immune
milieu in HCC tissue specimens using quantitative IHC. We found
considerable interspecimen variation in the number of CD68+ Mφ, CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and FoxP3+ regulatory T lymphocytes. Comparing
the number of immune cells in different tumor compartments showed that
the prevalence of CD68+ cells (p=.0005), CD8+ cells (p=.0004), and FoxP3+
cells (p=.05) was significantly higher within the invasive margin vs the
center of the tumor. Quantitative analysis of the immune cell content
also showed that there was no correlation between T lymphocyte
infiltration (CD8+/FoxP3+) and Mφ infiltration in any compartment. Taken
together, our findings confirm the intertumoral heterogeneity of the
immune cell microenvironment in HCC; however, future studies are needed
to correlate these findings to the clinical setting with immunooncologic
treatments.


