Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of CDK1 and HSP90 destabilizes HIF1α and
synergistically induces cancer cell death.


Solid tumors are often characterized by intratumoral hypoxia.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) has been implicated in cell
proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, invasion and migration. The
expression of HIF-1α is increased in a variety of cancers but this is
not restricted to hypoxic regions. We have previously shown that
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) stabilizes HIF1α through direct
phosphorylation of its Ser668 residue in a Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL)-independent manner both under hypoxia and at G2/M under normoxia
(Warfel et al., Cell Cycle, 2013). Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is also
an acknowledged VHL-independent HIF1α stabilizer. We sought to explore
the link between CDK1-mediated and HSP90-mediated HIF1α stabilization.
Administration of the CDK1 inhibitor, Ro-3306, reverses the heat shock
(40°C)-increased level of HIF1α in normoxia suggesting that CDK1
activity may contribute to HSP90-mediated HIF1α stabilization. Under
hypoxia, combination treatment with HSP90 inhibitor geldanamycin and CDK1
inhibition/knockdown decreases HIF1α levels more robustly than either
treatment alone. This led us to investigate whether combined CDK1 and
HSP90 inhibition results in synergistic anti-cancer effects. Indeed, dual
inhibition of CDK1 and HSP90 synergistically decreases HCT116 colon
cancer cell viability. PARP cleavage and sub-G1 analysis indicate the
combinational treatment triggers cancer cell death through apoptosis.
Consistent with these findings, we observed that inhibition of cell
viability by the combination is impaired in HCT116 Bax-/- cells.
Furthermore, the dual inhibition also suppresses cell migration in vitro.
We further validated our results with CDK1 and HSP90 inhibitors that have
entered clinical trials. Second-generation HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib and
Ro3306 synergistically inhibit cell viability in HCT116 cells. We have
previously demonstrated that CDK4 also contributes to the stabilization
of HIF1α under hypoxia (Warfel et al., Cell Cycle, 2013). Interestingly,
the combination of CDK4 and HSP90 inhibitors is also able to improve
downregulation of HIF1α as compared to either agent alone in various
cancer cell lines (eg. colon cancer, gliobastoma, etc). The FDA-approved
CDK4 inhibitor palbociclib along with ganetespib synergistically inhibits
cell viability in HCT116 cells under hypoxia. Such effect is not observed
in WI38 normal cells under normoxia at similar concentrations. Our
findings demonstrate that CDK1 inhibition disrupts the interaction
between HSP90 and HIF1α providing a rationale for therapeutic targeting
of HIF1α through the combination of CDK1/4 and HSP90 inhibitors in
cancer. Ongoing studies are examining the effects of CDK1/4 plus HSP90
dual inhibition in other tumor types and in vivo.


