Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating de novo PATRR-mediated t(3;8) balanced translocation
and clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


Palindromic AT-Rich Repeat (PATRR) - mediated translocations entail
exchange across chromosomes at sites enriched in palindromic repeats of
the nucleotides adenine (A) and thymine (T). Their precise embryologic
origin and associated pathobiology with clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC) remain incompletely described. In the present study we document
an individual with familial non-VHL ccRCC (7 primary renal tumors) who
harbors a germline de novo PATRR mediated balanced translocation
involving chromosomes 3 and 8 [t(3;8)] validated by spectral karyotyping
(SKY).

Using translocation specific PCR and DNA sequencing we determined the
chromosome 3 breakpoint to be located in an AT-rich palindromic sequence
in the third intron of the FHIT gene (chr3p14.2) and the chromosome 8
breakpoint in the first intron of the TRC8 gene (chr8q24.1). Genotyping
analysis, using a high density custom exomechip array by Illumina,
revealed a loss of the entire aberrant chromosome 8 carrying the 3p
segment [der(8)] in all renal tumors tested. We also determined that the
[46, XY, t(3;8), (p14.2, q24.1)] translocation was paternally derived by
performing a genotypic assessment of the regions that differ between the
parental alleles and then establishing which haplotypes are associated
with the translocation. The somatic mutational landscape was assessed by
Whole Exome sequencing of the renal tumors and the probandâ€™s germline
DNA. No germline or somatic deleterious mutations were detected in VHL
gene suggesting that the ccRCC phenotype is not associated with Von
Hippel-Lindau disease.

Furthermore, we measured the transcriptomic profiles of the renal tumors
and matched normal tissues employing barcoded probe hybridization
technology (NanoString) and RNASeq to fully characterize differential
gene expression and define gene ontology networks that are dysregulated.
Most significantly, no difference in expression of the VHL gene was
detected between tumors and normal counterparts. Aberrant regulation was
detected in members of WNT signaling pathway, TGF-beta and MAPK pathways,
in addition to NOTCH signaling pathway genes and members of the VEGF
family. In summary, in this study we employed advanced genomic and
transcriptomic techniques, to delineate the embryologic origin and
deleterious biological consequences of the PATRR-mediated t(3;8) balanced
translocation associated with clear cell renal cell carcinoma.


