Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Panitumumab interacts with TAS-102 leading to combinational
anti-cancer effects by blocking EGFR-mediated tumor response to
trifluridine.


Panitumumab is a monoclonal antibody raised against the human epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR). TAS-102 is a novel chemotherapeutic agent
containing trifluridine (FTD) as the active cytotoxic component. Both
panitumumab and TAS-102 have been approved for the treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). In this study, we show the mechanism
underlying the anti-cancer effects of the panitumumab/TAS-102 combination
in preclinical models. Co-treatment with panitumumab and FTD exerted
additive and synergistic anti-proliferative effects in LIM1215 and SW48
colon cancer cells, respectively. Consistent with the in vitro effects,
panitumumab/TAS-102 combination led to tumor regression in LIM1215 and
COL-01-JCK colon cancer patient-derived xenograft models. In LIM1215
cells, FTD induced ERK/Akt/STAT3 phosphorylation and subsequent
serine/threonine phosphorylation of EGFR, while it had no effects on EGFR
tyrosine phosphorylation. Panitumumab and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor
erlotinib reduced the basal level of EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation and
reversed the FTD-induced ERK/Akt/STAT3 and EGFR serine/threonine
phosphorylation. These results suggested that FTD together with the basal
activity of the EGFR tyrosine kinase induced downstream pro-survival
signaling through ERK/Akt/STAT3. Collectively, we propose that
panitumumab interacts with FTD by targeting EGFR-mediated adaptive
responses, thereby exerting anti-cancer effects in combination with
TAS-102. These preclinical findings provide a compelling rationale to
evaluate anti-EGFR antibodies combined with TAS-102 against mCRC.


