Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDKI-15, a novel and highly selective CDK4/6 inhibitor: discovery,
in vitro and in vivo anticancer efficacy.


Cyclin D dependent kinases CDK4 & CDK6 are crucial regulators of the G1
to S phase transition of the cell cycle. The facts that myriad cancer
types show aberrance in INK4-CDK4/6-cyclin D-Rb-E2F pathway, & the
rapidly emerging positive clinical data of pharmacological inhibitors
have validated CDK4/6 as anticancer drug targets. As the first
commercialized CDK inhibitor, palbociclib in combination with letrozole
or fulvestrant has received regulatory approval for the treatment of
breast cancer. This represents an important scientific advance in the
field. However, the limited structural diversity & undesired side effects
due to broader kinase interactions of existing inhibitors mean that the
hunt for new & highly selective CDK4/6 inhibitor drug candidates
continues. Using our advanced medicinal chemistry, targeted biochemical &
cell-based assays, & animal pharmacology, we synthesized & evaluated a
novel series of inhibitors. Many compounds were highly potent & selective
against CDK4/6, & exhibited low nanomolar potency against a range of
human cancer cell lines. Notably, inhibition of CDK4D1 by compound
CDKI-15 (Ki = 4 nM) was over 3 orders of magnitude greater than CDK1B,
CDK2A, CDK7H & CDK9T1. Interrogation of a panel of 369 protein kinases
revealed CDKI-15 to be highly selective for CDK4/6 with only 3 other
kinases inhibited potently. CDKI-15 reduced the level of Rb
phosphorylation & induced G1 cell cycle arrest, confirming cellular
inhibition of CDK4/6 in cancer cells. Moreover, CDKI-15 possesses
superior pharmacokinetic profile with oral bioavailability of 100% in
mice. Treatment of nude BALB/c mice bearing human MV4-11 acute myeloid
leukemia cells with CDKI-15 at daily dose of 100 mg/kg by oral
administration resulted in a robust inhibition of tumor growth compared
to vehicle treated animals (T/C = 30%, p Cyclin D dependent kinases CDK4
& CDK6 are crucial regulators of the G1 to S phase transition of the cell
cycle. The facts that myriad cancer types show aberrance in
INK4-CDK4/6-cyclin D-Rb-E2F pathway, & the rapidly emerging positive
clinical data of pharmacological inhibitors have validated CDK4/6 as
anticancer drug targets. As the first commercialized CDK inhibitor,
palbociclib in combination with letrozole or fulvestrant has received
regulatory approval for the treatment of breast cancer. This represents
an important scientific advance in the field. However, the limited
structural diversity & undesired side effects due to broader kinase
interactions of existing inhibitors mean that the hunt for new & highly
selective CDK4/6 inhibitor drug candidates continues. Using our advanced
medicinal chemistry, targeted biochemical & cell-based assays, & animal
pharmacology, we synthesized & evaluated a novel series of inhibitors.
Many compounds were highly potent & selective against CDK4/6, & exhibited
low nanomolar potency against a range of human cancer cell lines.
Notably, inhibition of CDK4D1 by compound CDKI-15 (Ki = 4 nM) was over 3
orders of magnitude greater than CDK1B, CDK2A, CDK7H & CDK9T1.
Interrogation of a panel of 369 protein kinases revealed CDKI-15 to be
highly selective for CDK4/6 with only 3 other kinases inhibited potently.
CDKI-15 reduced the level of Rb phosphorylation & induced G1 cell cycle
arrest, confirming cellular inhibition of CDK4/6 in cancer cells.
Moreover, CDKI-15 possesses superior pharmacokinetic profile with oral
bioavailability of 100% in mice. Treatment of nude BALB/c mice bearing
human MV4-11 acute myeloid leukemia cells with CDKI-15 at daily dose of
100 mg/kg by oral administration resulted in a robust inhibition of tumor
growth compared to vehicle treated animals (T/C = 30%, p < 0.00001).
Strikingly, CDKI-15 caused a complete & sustained tumor regression in
one-third of the animals. No detectable toxicity was observed in the
animals during & post treatment. Taken together, our data provide a
rationale for CDKI-15 to be developed towards clinic for cancer therapy.


