Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-affinity Optide (optimized peptide) inhibitor of the Hippo
pathwayâ€™s YAP-TEAD interaction.


The HIPPO pathway plays a critical role in contact inhibition, a pathway
that is commonly dysregulated in many human cancers (including liver,
colon, ovarian, and lung). The signaling pathway culminates in the
intranuclear interaction of the transcriptional co-activator YAP and the
transcription factor TEAD. This is representative of a number of cancer
driving pathways that have proven nearly impossible to drug, as they are
mediated by intracellular protein-protein interactions. High throughput
screening campaigns with small molecule libraries have failed to provide
specific, high affinity binders capable of disrupting larger
protein-protein interfaces (such as YAP-TEAD), while at the same time,
antibodies cannot penetrate the cell membrane to access cytosolic and
nuclear targets. Optides are small disulfide-knotted peptides (knottins)
that are large enough to interfere with protein-protein interactions, but
small enough to access compartments beyond the reach of antibodies.
Examples include the calcines, activators of sarcoplasmic reticulum
ryanodine receptors, and BLZ-100, a knottin-fluorophore conjugate that is
capable of accumulating in a wide range of tumor types. Using the
computational design software Rosetta, we created a library of Optides
designed to interact with TEAD in locations that overlap YAP binding.
Mammalian surface display screening against soluble TEAD yielded a
candidate (Hit1) that binds TEAD with nanomolar affinity and inhibits YAP
binding. Affinity maturation, using site saturation mutagenesis, produced
an improved sub-nanomolar variant (IV1) with potent YAP inhibition. This
variant was also found to be highly resistant to reduction and
proteolysis, crucial for a disulfide-knotted peptide with a cytosolic
target in the proteinase-rich tumor milieu. With this highly potent YAP
inhibitor, efforts are now focused on cell penetration and
biodistribution with the long-term goal of advancing a clinical
development candidate.


