Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of MEDI0680, a fully human
anti-PD1 monoclonal antibody, in patients with advanced malignancies.


Background: MEDI0680 (AMP-514) is a humanized immunoglobulin gamma 4,
kappa (IgG4κ) monoclonal antibody (mAb) specific for human programmed
cell death-1 (PD-1), developed for the treatment of cancer. The primary
objectives of this analysis were to (a) describe the pharmacokinetics
(PK) of MEDI0680 and quantitate the impact of patient/disease
characteristics on PK variability (b) to compare body weight (WT)-based
and fixed dosing regimens of MEDI0680 and (c) to characterize
PK-pharmacodynamic (receptor occupancy) relationship.

Methods: A total of 905 serum concentration records from 58 patients in
Phase 1 study (D6020C00002) designed to evaluate safety, tolerability and
PK following 0.1, 0.5, 2.5, 10, and 20 mg/kg every 3 weeks (Q3W), every 2
weeks (Q2W) or weekly doses (QW) as intravenous (IV) infusion of MEDI0680
were included in this analysis. The population PK analysis was performed
using a non-linear mixed effects modeling approach in NONMEM (version
7.2) software. Impact of patient demographics, clinical indices and
biomarkers on PK parameters were explored. The appropriateness of the
final model was tested using visual predictive check (VPC). A sequential
PK-PD analysis was performed using receptor occupancy (RO) data from 35
subjects.

Results: MEDI0680 PK profiles were best described using a 2-compartment
model with linear clearance. The clearance (CL), volume of distribution
(Vc) were 0.27 L/day, 5.07 L with a modest between-subject variability of
30% and 19%, respectively. None of the evaluated covariates showed any
impact on PK parameters except a minor (not clinically relevant) impact
of body weight on volume of distribution. VPC results demonstrated good
predictability of the final population PK model. A direct Emax model
described the PK-PD relationship of MEDI0680. The estimate of EC50 was
approximately 9.3 µg/mL. PK/PD simulations indicate that following 20
mg/kg Q2W dose, >90% receptor occupancy can be maintained in all
subjects. Based on preclinical/clinical PK, PD, and safety data, a dose
of 20 mg/kg Q2W was selected for phase 2 studies.

Conclusions: A population PK model of MEDI0680 was developed and
validated. Modeling results indicate no need for dose adjustment based on
patient/disease characteristics. Similar PK is expected following both
WT-based and fixed dosing regimens. PK/PD findings support the dose of 20
mg/kg Q2W. Clinical studies are ongoing in various tumor types.


