Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic trioxide targets BCL6 oncoprotein for degradation in
BCL6-dependent diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.


Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common type of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma throughout the world. B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6)
overexpression is frequently observed in DLBCL. Several recent studies
have supported that BCL6 is a critical pathogenic oncoprotein in DLBCL.
BCL6 represses various downstream genes, including ATR, TP53 and CDKN1A,
thereby impairing DNA repair leading to derangement of cellular
proliferation. Most importantly, a specific small molecule inhibitor
targeting BCL6 successfully suppressed growth of BCL6-dependent DLBCL
cell lines and primary human DLBCL cells, further suggesting that BCL6
plays an important pathogenetic role. Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) has been
reported to target various oncogenic proteins, including PML-RARA in
acute promyelocytic leukemia, cyclin D1 in mantle cell lymphoma, NPMc+ in
acute myeloid leukemia and NPM-ALK in anaplastic large cell lymphoma, for
degradation through ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In this study, we
investigated the effects of As2O3 on BCL6 in DLBCL.

As2O3 was found to inhibit cell proliferation and induce cell death via
apoptosis in DLBCL cells. More interestingly, BCL6-dependent DLBCL cells
were found to show higher sensitivity towards As2O3-induced cytotoxicity.
BCL6 was found to be degraded by As2O3 at posttranslational level through
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Such degradation led to an upregulation
of several downstream targets of BCL6, including PRDM1, CD44 and CD69.
Moreover, As2O3 synergized with cisplatin to inhibit cell proliferation
and enhance apoptosis in BCL6-dependent DLBCL cell lines. Concomitant
treatment with As2O3 and cisplatin further enhanced the phosphorylation
of Chk1 and Î³H2AX in these cells.

In conclusion, our data suggest that As2O3 is a potential therapeutic
agent for the treatment of BCL6-dependent DLBCL. On top of that, new
combination therapies can be developed to expand the therapeutic spectrum
of As2O3 to other neoplasms.


