Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of microRNAs in breast cancer.


Background: Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common cancer in women
around the world and the second leading cause of death worldwide.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) expression participates in breast cancer.

Objectives: The purpose of this study is to investigate the expression of
miR-133a and miR-155 in breast cancer serum and study their correlation
with tumor suppressor protein (p53), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and
cancer antigen-15.3 (CA-15.3) concentrations in serum of breast cancer
patients and also study their correlations with clinicopathological
features.

Material and methods: In this study the expression of miR-133a and
miR-155 in serum were measured using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR), P53 concentration was measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA), CEA and CA-15.3 concentration were measured
using ARCHITECT immunoassay in women with breast cancer (n=60) and
controls (n = 80).

Results: In this study miRNA-155 was significantly overexpressed
(PResults: In this study miRNA-155 was significantly overexpressed
(P<0.001) while miR-133a had significant down expression (PResults: In
this study miRNA-155 was significantly overexpressed (P<0.001) while
miR-133a had significant down expression (P<0.001) in the serum of breast
cancer patients compared to control serum. P53 had no significant
correlations with any of the studied miRNAs. Carcinoembryonic antigen and
CA-15.3 have significant higher concentration in the serum of breast
cancer patients compared to control serum. A significant association was
observed between miR-133a with tumor grade (PResults: In this study
miRNA-155 was significantly overexpressed (P<0.001) while miR-133a had
significant down expression (P<0.001) in the serum of breast cancer
patients compared to control serum. P53 had no significant correlations
with any of the studied miRNAs. Carcinoembryonic antigen and CA-15.3 have
significant higher concentration in the serum of breast cancer patients
compared to control serum. A significant association was observed between
miR-133a with tumor grade (P<0.05) and miR-155 with lymph node
involvement (PResults: In this study miRNA-155 was significantly
overexpressed (P<0.001) while miR-133a had significant down expression
(P<0.001) in the serum of breast cancer patients compared to control
serum. P53 had no significant correlations with any of the studied
miRNAs. Carcinoembryonic antigen and CA-15.3 have significant higher
concentration in the serum of breast cancer patients compared to control
serum. A significant association was observed between miR-133a with tumor
grade (P<0.05) and miR-155 with lymph node involvement (P<0.05). A
significant correlation between miR-155 and CEA (PResults: In this study
miRNA-155 was significantly overexpressed (P<0.001) while miR-133a had
significant down expression (P<0.001) in the serum of breast cancer
patients compared to control serum. P53 had no significant correlations
with any of the studied miRNAs. Carcinoembryonic antigen and CA-15.3 have
significant higher concentration in the serum of breast cancer patients
compared to control serum. A significant association was observed between
miR-133a with tumor grade (P<0.05) and miR-155 with lymph node
involvement (P<0.05). A significant correlation between miR-155 and CEA
(P<0.05). No correlations between miR-133a and P53, CEA, CA-15.3. By
using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the two miRNAs
showed higher sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and
negative predictive value than routine markers.

Our Conclusion: These miRNAs have a significant signature in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer and can be used as non-invasive potential
biomarkers for breast cancer detection.


