Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endogenous ADAMTS-13 regulates angiogenesis in cultured human
endothelial cells.


ADAMTS-13, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type
1 motif, member 13, is a zinc-containing metalloprotease that cleaves von
Willebrand factor (vWf). Previous publications by our laboratory have
shown that ADAMTS-13 may also be involved in angiogenesis; for example;
addition of exogenous ADAMTS-13 enhances endothelial cell (Lee et al.
Microvascular Res 2012; 84:109) and glioblastoma cell (Lee et al. Blood
2013; 122:#2306) migration and proliferation. For this study, we report
the successful transient knockdown of endogenous ADAMTS-13 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) via siRNA. 30pmols of ADAMTS-13
siRNA in a six-well plate inhibited HUVEC ADAMTS-13 expression levels by
90% after 24hr incubation, whereas control siRNA did not affect
endogenous ADAMTS-13 levels. The knockdown effect was decreased over
time: 72hr after the initial knockdown, ADAMTS-13 expression was reduced
by only 50%. The effects of reduced endogenous ADAMTS-13 on HUVEC
angiogenesis functions were studied. Transfection of HUVEC with 10pmols
of ADAMTS-13 siRNA in a 24-well plate resulted in a 21% and 22% decrease
in proliferation after 24hr and 48hr incubation, respectively. The
effects of ADAMTS-13 knockdown on migration of HUVEC across a scratch
wound were also evaluated. 24hr after transfection with control siRNA,
there was robust cell migration across the scratch wound. This dramatic
migration did not occur with ADAMTS-13 knockdown cells. Decreased
expression of endogenous ADAMTS-13 also affected angiogenesis as measured
by endothelial cell tube formation using a Matrigel matrix method. The
tube lengths, sizes and junction numbers of the ADAMTS-13 knockdown cells
were all significantly lower compared to control cells by about 40%.
Activity of the AKT pathway, one of the angiogenesis downstream signaling
pathways was down-regulated by ADAMTS-13 siRNA while ERK, a component of
the MAP kinase pathway was not affected upon knockdown of ADAMTS-13.
These data indicate that in cultured endothelial cells, one role of
endogenous ADAMTS-13 is regulation of angiogenesis, mediated through the
AKT signaling pathway. Overall, our data suggest an additional model of
endogenous ADAMTS-13 functionality, beyond that of cleaving von
Willebrand factor.


