Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of lung cancer risk prediction models for selecting
smokers for CT lung cancer screening.


Background: The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends
computed-tomography (CT) lung-cancer screening for ever-smokers ages
55-80 years who smoked at least 30 pack-years with no more than 15 years
since quitting. 8.9 million U.S. ever-smokers are eligible for screening
under USPSTF criteria. Instead, selecting ever-smokers for screening
using individualized lung-cancer risk calculations may be more effective
and efficient than current recommendations. We examined the performance
of 8 risk models for estimating risk in 2 U.S. cohorts and compared the
U.S. populations selected for screening by the models.

Methods: We examined 8 models: Lung Cancer Death Risk Assessment Tool and
Lung Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (Katki et. al., JAMA 2016), PLCOM2012
(Tammemagi et al, N Engl J Med 2013), Bach (Bach et. al., JNCI 2003), LLP
(Cassidy et al, Br J Cancer, 2008), LLPi (Marcus et al, Cancer Prev Res
2015), Hoggart (Hoggart et al, Cancer Prev Res 2012), and Spitz (Spitz et
al, JNCI 2007). We examined the predictive ability of each model among
(1) 337,388 ever-smokers in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study
(NIH-AARP), and (2) 72,338 ever-smokers in the American Cancer Society
Cancer Prevention Study II (CPSII) Nutrition Survey Cohort. For each
model we estimated the calibration (number of model-predicted cases
divided by number of observed cases (Estimated/Observed)) and the
discrimination (Area-Under-Curve (AUC)). Each of the 8 risk models and
the USPSTF criteria were used to select a population of 8.9 million
individuals at highest risk of lung cancer from among U.S. ever-smokers
ages 50-80 (as characterized by data from the 2010-12 National Health
Interview Surveys).

Results: In both NIH-AARP and CPSII, 4 models were well-calibrated
(Expected/Observed from 0.92 to 1.12) and had higher AUCs (0.76 to 0.79).
The other 4 models had worse calibration (Expected/Observed from 1.72 to
3.69) and worse AUCs (0.62 to 0.75). When the models were used to choose
the 8.9 million U.S. ever-smokers at highest lung-cancer risk, only ~1.8
million individuals were chosen by all 8 models. For a screening
eligibility risk-threshold of 2.0% lung-cancer risk over 5 years, the 8
models chose populations including 7.6 million to 26 million U.S.
ever-smokers.

Conclusions: Some risk models were more externally-valid and had superior
predictiveness than others. Differences in calibration led to risk models
choosing very different screening population sizes under a fixed
risk-threshold. The models did not achieve consensus on selected
populations for screening.


