Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of zinc transporters in prostate cancer and a potential
association with racial disparity.


Optimal intracellular zinc concentration is essential for many cellular
functions as it serves as a catalytic and/or structural cofactor for a
variety of proteins. Although, a number of proteins are tangled in
regulating cellular zinc homeostasis, the most important are two protein
families of zinc transporters, 14 members of solute carrier family 39
(SLC39A) and 10 members of solute carrier family 30 (SLC30A). These two
families are known to transport zinc into- and out of- the cytoplasm,
respectively. Prostate cells accumulate a high amount of zinc to sustain
a metabolic condition unique to the prostate which is characterized by a
truncation of the Krebs cycle and production of high amounts of citrate.
Zinc depletion has frequently been noted in the progression of prostate
cancer (PCa). Whether zinc transporters are a steering cause of zinc
depletion in PCa development and progression and/or are key determinants
in the racial disparity in PCa is not well studied. In this study, we
determined the connection of zinc transporters (SLC39A 1-14 and SLC30A
1-10) in PCa, in the perspective of racial health disparity in human PCa
samples taken from African-American (AA) and European-American (EA)
patients and compared them with respective adjacent benign samples. We
also assessed the mRNA level of zinc transporters in normal prostate
epithelial cells (NrPEC and RWPE1) and among PCa cells derived from AA
(MDA PCa 2b, E006AA-PAR, E006AA-HT) and EA patients (DU145, PC3, 22RÎ½1,
LNCaP, C4-2B). In addition, we performed a dataset analysis of the
Oncomine database for differential expression profile of zinc
transporters in PCa versus normal prostate. We found that SLC39As mRNA
levels were differentially expressed in PCa with a significant
downregulation of SLC39A1, SLC39A10, SLC39A11, SLC39A13 and SLC39A14, and
upregulation of SLC39A3, SLC39A5, SLC39A6 and SLC39A8. Further, SLC30As
showed a significant downregulation of SLC30A5 and SLC30A6 and
upregulation of SLC30A1, SLC30A9 and SLC30A10, in PCa. Further, compared
to EA samples, the AA PCa showed an increasing trend of SLC39A5, SLC39A6
and SLC30A9. In addition, compared to AA samples, the EA PCa showed a
trend of increasing SLC30A1 and SLC30A9 and decreasing SLC39A10. These
data provide evidence that the zinc transporters may be linked to racial
disparity of PCa in AA versus EA. Moreover, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
revealed regulatory interactions between zinc transporters and tumor
suppressor/promoter genes proven to be modulated in PCa. These genes are
HOXB13, ELAVL1, DIRAS3, ALPP, CSF2, CCL4, INSR, AKT, IL6, TGFBP1, CHI3L1,
EGFR and HNF4A. Overall, our study provides interesting data about the
expression profiles of zinc transporters and their interaction with tumor
suppressor and promoter genes in PCa, which may offer novel strategies
for the management of PCa by pharmacologically modulating zinc
transporters.


