Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel Notch-YAP circuit drives stemness and tumorigenesis in
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.


Introduction: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a tumor characterized by skeletal
muscle features, is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children and
adolescents. The standard of care treatment has not changed in over 40
years, resulting in a stagnant survival rate of less than 30% for high
risk groups. Previous studies have identified the developmental pathways
Notch and YAP as potent oncogenic signals in the embryonal subtype of RMS
(eRMS). Understanding the signaling between Notch and YAP in cancers
driven by these pathways, such as eRMS, will be crucial to designing
rational combination therapies.

Experimental Procedures: For in vitro assays, we utilized 3D sphere cell
culture methods that permit the study of stem cell behavior. To analyze
signaling, we performed genetic gain and loss-of-function (dox-inducible
shRNAs and constitutively active constructs), and pharmacologic
inhibition. Target validation was assessed by qPCR and immunoblot, and
mechanism was determined by ChIP and limiting dilution assays. For in
vivo experiments, we performed subcutaneous xenografts in
immunocompromised mice. Immunohistochemistry was used to analyze protein
expression in human and murine tumors. Statistical analysis was performed
to assess significant differences.

Results: We have discovered a novel Notch-YAP circuit that drives cancer
cell stemness and tumorigenesis. In eRMS 3D spheres, Notch
transcriptionally upregulates YAP and increases its activity, while YAP
transcriptionally upregulates the Notch ligands JAG1 and DLL1 and the
core Notch transcription factor RBPJ to provide positive feedback. In
vivo, YAP suppression decreases Notch signaling, stemness, and
proliferation. This circuit boosts expression of the stem cell gene SOX2,
which is functionally required for eRMS cell stemness. Inhibiting one
node of the circuit, for example through Notch pharmacologic blockade, is
not sufficient to shut down the circuit, as stemness and cell growth can
be rescued by ectopic YAP. Rather, dual inhibition of Notch and YAP is
necessary to silence the circuitâ€™s signaling and sphere growth.
Importantly, nuclear Notch and YAP protein expression correlate in eRMS
patient tumor samples, suggesting this circuit is intact in human eRMS
tumors.

Conclusions: While unidirectional signaling between these two pathways
has been reported in metazoan development and rarely in human malignancy,
this is the first finding of an intact bidirectional circuit between
Notch and YAP that supports cancer cell stemness and tumorigenesis. This
study provides mechanistic insight into the long-standing question of how
eRMS cancer stem cells maintain plasticity. Additionally, while this
signaling is identified here in RMS, it could be applicable to many
cancer types that are Notch and YAP-dependent. Lastly, this work provides
evidence and rationale for research into combination therapies targeting
this Notch-YAP signaling circuit.


