Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular barcoding improves confidence in variant calling with
low input FFPE tissue samples.


FFPE tissue archiving is the most widely used method for clinical sample
preservation, and provides a valuable source of diverse genetic
information for cancer biomarker discovery. NGS library preparation is
often challenging, however, as FFPE-derived DNAs exhibit varying degrees
of fragmentation and chemical modification depending on how tissues were
handled and processed. Moreover, the presence of low allele frequency
variants because of tumor heterogeneity, sample degradation, and high
rate of formalin-induced mutations make SNV calling a challenging task.
To improve variant calling and consistency across FFPE samples of varying
quality, we developed a complete workflow solution that features DNA
pre-qualification, molecular barcodes for uniquely tagging each DNA
fragment, pre-capture indexing for tracking up to 192 samples,
accelerated hybrid capture, and one-tube library prep, to enable the
preparation of complex enriched libraries in less than 8 hours from
10-200ng of FFPE-derived DNA. We incorporate molecular barcodes at the
ligation step to enable de-duplication and generation of consensus reads
using SureCall software, which significantly improves confidence of
variant calling (99% of calls >150 variant call quality threshold) at low
allelic frequencies.

Using ClearSeq Comprehensive Cancer Panel which targets 151 genes
frequently mutated in solid and hematological cancers, we routinely
obtain high quality libraries (with 1000X sequencing depth and after
deduplication) with >99% of the targeted region covered at 20X for high
quality gDNA (FF tissue), and greater than 95% and 90% covered at 20X for
medium and low quality FFPE samples, respectively. Using multiplex
reference samples, we demonstrate detection of low frequency variants (at
1-5%) including SNVs, small indels, and RET and ROS1 translocations. As
we will further show, FFPE integrity scores determined by qPCR and
TapeStation (ddCq and DIN) enable researchers to choose the appropriate
quantification method, PCR cycling, and sequencing depth for optimal
sequencing coverage.


