Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: E7090, a novel and selective FGFR inhibitor, for the treatment of
cholangiocarcinoma cells harboring FGFR2-fusion genes.


Genetic abnormalities (gene fusion, mutation and amplification) of
fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family members are known to
cause constitutive activation of their signaling pathways, which play an
important role in proliferation, survival and migration of cancer cells,
as well as tumor angiogenesis. Several recent studies have identified
that FGFR2 gene fusions were found in about 10% of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma and acted as oncogenes. E7090, an orally available
FGFR1, 2 and 3 inhibitor, whose chemical-structure and basic kinase
inhibitory profile have been disclosed at AACR2015, is currently under a
first-in-human study (NCT02275910). The antitumor activity of E7090
against NIH3T3 and human cholangiocarcinoma cells harboring FGFR2-fusion
genes was investigated. NIH3T3 cells stably infected of five FGFR2-fusion
genes (FGFR2-AHCYL1, FGFR2-BICC1 type1, FGFR2-BICC1 type2, FGFR2-TXLNA,
or FGFR2-KCTD1), all of which were discovered in human intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma patients, were successfully established and exhibited
anchorage-independent cell growth in soft agar assay. E7090 revealed an
inhibitory activity on soft agar colony formation of these cells with
IC50 values of 0.9 to 17.3 nmol/L in a dose dependent manner. E7090 also
reduced activation of downstream pathways of FGFR signaling (MAPK and
STAT3) in these cells. Subcutaneous transplantation of FGFR2-BICC1 type2,
FGFR2-TXLNA, or FGFR2-KCTD1 expressing cells into immune-deficient mice
produced tumor growth, and then oral administration of E7090 at 12.5, 25
and 50 mg/kg showed significant tumor growth inhibition. Finally,
antitumor activity of E7090 was examined in a patient derived xenograft
(PDX) model of human cholangiocarcinoma harboring FGFR2-BICC1 fusion
gene. E7090 also showed dose-dependent antitumor activity and more than
50% of tumor regression was achieved at a dose of 50 mg/kg. In
conclusion, E7090 showed potent antitumor activity against FGFR2-fusion
genes found in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma both in vitro and in vivo
models, suggesting that E7090 may provide therapeutic opportunities for
cholangiocarcinoma harboring FGFR2-fusion genes.


