Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new method to infer clonal sequences and phylogenies from
personal tumor genome profiles.


Tumor progression involves the evolution of clonal cell populations that
mutate and spread in the body. Genetic profiling has revealed the
presence of extensive variation in tumor samples from individual
patients. However, a tumor sample for genetic profiling is mixture of
different clonal cell populations and needs to be decomposed into clonal
sequences to infer the evolutionary history of the tumor. Therefore, we
have developed a new method, CloneFinder, and show that the clone
sequences present in each tumor sample can be accurately inferred from
the analysis of multiple tumor sample profiles with our new CloneFinder
method. CloneFinder is unique in its use of molecular evolutionary
principles to deduce clone sequences at a single-nucleotide resolution
along with their frequencies in each sample. It performs better than
existing methods, which we found to produce incorrect numbers of clones,
clone sequence errors, errors in clonal phylogenies, and biased estimates
of cancerous cells in tumors. Application of CloneFinder to a large
number of empirical datasets revealed that both early and recently
evolved tumors contain ancestral clones at high frequencies. Therefore,
our new method provides new insights into the clonal structure of tumors
and their evolution within a personal life time.


