Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosome 9p24.1 deletions as a determinant of tumor immune
surveillance and immune checkpoint blockade therapy in non-small cell
lung cancer.


Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade therapy requires the presence
of PD-L1/PD-L2 and MHC class I antigens on the tumor cell surface. We
previously found JAK1 truncating mutations in endometrial cancer cells
that impairs JAK1/JAK2-STAT1-IRF1-mediated signaling pathway, which
regulates MHC class I antigen presentation. To determine the potential
role and genetic defects in the IFN-γ-IRF1 pathway in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), we analyzed the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data.
Expression of IRF1 correlated with cytolytic activity markers GZMA and
PRF1. Loss-of-function (LOF) genetic alterations in the IFN-γ-IRF1
pathway genes were found in 64 cases (6.3%) among 1016 patients. These
genetic defects occurred prevalently in the JAK2 gene (33 cases) and
often through deletions (29 cases) of chromosome 9p24.1. JAK2 gene
deletions were frequently associated with deletions of CD274 and PDCD1LG2
genes that encode PD-L1 and PD-L2, respectively, whereas CD274 and
PDCD1LG2 deletions were always accompanied by JAK2 deletions. Chromosome
9p is frequently deleted in NSCLC. This has been attributed to
CDKN2A/CDKN2B and PTPRD tumor suppressor genes located at the chromosome
9p21.3-9p24.1. Interestingly, JAK2, CD274, and PDCD1LG2 genes are
co-localized at chromosome 9p24.1 near the CDKN2A/CDKN2B and PTPRD genes.
JAK2, CD274, and PDCD1LG2 deletion often but not always coincided with
CDKN2A/CDKN2B and PTPRD deletions. IFN-γ induced IRF1 expression and
cell surface HLA-ABC levels in A549 cells that contain wildtype JAK2 but
not in H1573 cells that had a truncating JAK2. Deletion of JAK2 or
inhibition of JAK2 kinase activity in A549 cells resulted in loss of
IFN-γ-regulated IRF1 and cell surface HLA-ABC, whereas expression of
exogenous JAK2 in H1573 cells restored IFN-γ responses. These findings
reveal a previously unrecognized significance of chromosome 9p deletion
in NSCLC and point to chromosome 9p24.1 as a determinant of immune
checkpoint therapy.


