Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A microRNA signature for the classification of renal cell
carcinoma subtypes.


Introduction: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 90% of all kidney
cancers. It comprises a heterogeneous group of renal tumors with distinct
genetic and molecular characteristics including

clear cell RCC (ccRCC), papillary RCC (pRCC) and chromophobe RCC (chRCC).
The differential diagnosis of RCC subtypes relies on distinct morphology
which is not always accurate. Accurate classification of RCC subtypes is
critical since each exhibits different clinical behaviour, prognosis and
response to therapy. The purpose of this study is to determine whether a
limited number of

miRNAs can classify RCC subtypes with high accuracy.

Experimental Design: We extracted RNA from 90 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues including 27 clear cell RCC, 29
papillary RCC, 19 chromophobe RCC, 4 unclassified RCC tumors and 11
oncocytomas. We measured the absolute expression of six miRNAs by
qRT-PCR. Receiver operator characteristic curves were constructed and the
area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to assess diagnostic
performance. We also tested miRNA expression by in situ hybridization
(ISH) in an independent set of ninety-eight FFPE renal tumors.

Results: We developed a two-step miRNA classifier. In the first step,
expressions of selected miRNAs were found to discriminate clear cell RCC
and papillary RCC from chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytoma. Two miRNAs
were able to discriminate clear cell RCC and papillary RCC from
chromophobe RCC and oncocytoma. miR-221 was significantly overexpressed
in chromophobe RCC and oncocytoma compared to clear cell RCC and
papillary RCC (4.49-fold change, p= 6.398e-010) and was able to
discriminate between the two groups (AUC: 0.9637, 95% CI: 0.9132 to
1.014, pResults: We developed a two-step miRNA classifier. In the first
step, expressions of selected miRNAs were found to discriminate clear
cell RCC and papillary RCC from chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytoma. Two
miRNAs were able to discriminate clear cell RCC and papillary RCC from
chromophobe RCC and oncocytoma. miR-221 was significantly overexpressed
in chromophobe RCC and oncocytoma compared to clear cell RCC and
papillary RCC (4.49-fold change, p= 6.398e-010) and was able to
discriminate between the two groups (AUC: 0.9637, 95% CI: 0.9132 to
1.014, p<0.0001). In the second step, the absolute expression of two
miRNAs could distinguish clear cell RCC from papillary RCC (10.4-fold
change, p = 1.243e-013). Moreover, an additional two miRNAs could
differentiate chromophobe RCC from renal oncocytoma (3.30- fold change, p
= 1.751e-006). In situ hybridization revealed that miRNAs display a
nuclear staining pattern that was able to distinguish clear cell RCC from
papillary RCC (pResults: We developed a two-step miRNA classifier. In the
first step, expressions of selected miRNAs were found to discriminate
clear cell RCC and papillary RCC from chromophobe RCC and renal
oncocytoma. Two miRNAs were able to discriminate clear cell RCC and
papillary RCC from chromophobe RCC and oncocytoma. miR-221 was
significantly overexpressed in chromophobe RCC and oncocytoma compared to
clear cell RCC and papillary RCC (4.49-fold change, p= 6.398e-010) and
was able to discriminate between the two groups (AUC: 0.9637, 95% CI:
0.9132 to 1.014, p<0.0001). In the second step, the absolute expression
of two miRNAs could distinguish clear cell RCC from papillary RCC
(10.4-fold change, p = 1.243e-013). Moreover, an additional two miRNAs
could differentiate chromophobe RCC from renal oncocytoma (3.30- fold
change, p = 1.751e-006). In situ hybridization revealed that miRNAs
display a nuclear staining pattern that was able to distinguish clear
cell RCC from papillary RCC (p<0.001) and chromophobe RCC from renal
oncocytoma (p =0.009).

Conclusion: miRNA expressions were able to distinguish between RCC
subtypes and renal oncocytoma. miRNA assessment by in situ hybridization
is a clinically useful diagnostic tool that can complement current
methods for RCC classification.


