Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PKR promotes EphA2 and other proteins degradation and is predictor
of survival in lung cancer.


Relative expression of PKR and EphA2 was a significant predictor of
survival in non-small cell lung cancer. To study the PKR-regulated
protein, we evaluated expression of 149 proteins in lung cancer cells by
reverse-phase protein assay (RPPA) after induction of PKR. Expression of
several proteins (EphA2, IRS1, Chk1 and c-Raf and paxillin) was inhibited
by PKR. In validating the downregulated proteins by western blot
analysis, we observed that PKR reduced EphA2, IRS1, Chk1 and paxillin
protein expression. We next investigated the involvement of the
proteasomes and lysosomes in PKR-induced protein degradation. Human lung
cancer H1299 and A549 cells were transfected with Ad-PKR for 48 h in the
presence or absence of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 or lysosome
inhibitor (3MA: 3-methyladenine). We observed that MG132 prevented
PKR-induced IRS1 and Chk1 degradation, but not PKR-induced EphA2 and
paxillin degradation in these cells. However, we found that 3MA prevented
PKR-induced EphA2 and paxillin degradation in these cells. These data
suggest that PKR is involved in proteasome as well as lysosome function.
To study the involvement of autophagy pathway in PKR mediated protein
degradation, we evaluated proteins which known involved in autophagy by
Western blotting after induction of PKR on these cancer cells. We
observed slightly decrease of LC-3, ATG5 and Beclin1 in these cancer
cells after induction of PKR. Our data suggest that PKR may directly
involve in in lysosome function.


