Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel targeted adjuvant therapy for triple negative
breast cancer.


There is an unmet clinical need for targeted adjuvant therapy in Triple
Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) to overcome its poor prognosis, short
disease-free interval and metastatic dissemination. We previously
reported that blocking interactions between the PAH2 domain of chromatin
regulator Sin3 and Sin3 interaction domain (SID) containing proteins like
PF1 and TGIF1 by SID decoys (peptides and small molecule, C16) decreased
the cancer stem cell population, invasion, EMT, and metastases. This,
programmed upregulation of retinoid signaling that sensitized TNBC cells
to AM80, a novel clinically available RARα-specific agonist. Here we
report preclinical investigations on effects of SID decoys and AM80
treatments on cellular heterogeneity, primary tumors, metastatic
dissemination, minimum residual disease (MRD) and host microenvironment.
Using CyTOF2, we made single cell measurements of markers of
differentiation, proliferation and stemness in CSC-enriched 4T1
tumorspheres. Treatment with SID peptide decreased cell populations
expressing nanog, sox2, vimentin and β-catenin with increase in γH2AX.
Addition of AM80 in combination with C16, resulted in populations with
increased expression of differentiation marker CD24 with decrease in
vimentin, β-catenin and Ki-67. To interrogate the neo-adjuvant effects
of C16-AM80 treatments, primary 4T1 tumors in Balb/c mice were treated
with C16 and AM80 alone or in combination. Compared to DMSO, ~40 %
decrease in tumor weight, 60% decrease in ALDH activity and 60% decrease
in lung metastasis was seen in mice treated with C16-AM80 combination. In
post-surgical adjuvant settings, in both 4T1 and MMTV-myc xenografts, we
observed 100% disease-free survival and absence of macrometastasis in
mice receiving minimally toxic adjuvant therapy with the C16-AM80
combination for 90 days. However, MRD was found consisting of a small
number of single CK8+ cells which failed to form colonies when recovered
from the bone marrow and selectively cultured in vitro. Upon stopping the
treatments, 20-40% animals developed macrometastases within the first
three months. To test the influence of C16-AM80 to condition the host
microenvironment to prevent macrometastases mice received only
pretreatment with C16 and AM80 followed by 4T1 cells injected in the tail
vein. The percentage of parenchyma occupied by metastatic nodules were:
DMSO = 50%; AM80 = 25%; C16 >10% and C16-AM = There is an unmet clinical
need for targeted adjuvant therapy in Triple Negative Breast Cancer
(TNBC) to overcome its poor prognosis, short disease-free interval and
metastatic dissemination. We previously reported that blocking
interactions between the PAH2 domain of chromatin regulator Sin3 and Sin3
interaction domain (SID) containing proteins like PF1 and TGIF1 by SID
decoys (peptides and small molecule, C16) decreased the cancer stem cell
population, invasion, EMT, and metastases. This, programmed upregulation
of retinoid signaling that sensitized TNBC cells to AM80, a novel
clinically available RARα-specific agonist. Here we report preclinical
investigations on effects of SID decoys and AM80 treatments on cellular
heterogeneity, primary tumors, metastatic dissemination, minimum residual
disease (MRD) and host microenvironment. Using CyTOF2, we made single
cell measurements of markers of differentiation, proliferation and
stemness in CSC-enriched 4T1 tumorspheres. Treatment with SID peptide
decreased cell populations expressing nanog, sox2, vimentin and
β-catenin with increase in γH2AX. Addition of AM80 in combination with
C16, resulted in populations with increased expression of differentiation
marker CD24 with decrease in vimentin, β-catenin and Ki-67. To
interrogate the neo-adjuvant effects of C16-AM80 treatments, primary 4T1
tumors in Balb/c mice were treated with C16 and AM80 alone or in
combination. Compared to DMSO, ~40 % decrease in tumor weight, 60%
decrease in ALDH activity and 60% decrease in lung metastasis was seen in
mice treated with C16-AM80 combination. In post-surgical adjuvant
settings, in both 4T1 and MMTV-myc xenografts, we observed 100%
disease-free survival and absence of macrometastasis in mice receiving
minimally toxic adjuvant therapy with the C16-AM80 combination for 90
days. However, MRD was found consisting of a small number of single CK8+
cells which failed to form colonies when recovered from the bone marrow
and selectively cultured in vitro. Upon stopping the treatments, 20-40%
animals developed macrometastases within the first three months. To test
the influence of C16-AM80 to condition the host microenvironment to
prevent macrometastases mice received only pretreatment with C16 and AM80
followed by 4T1 cells injected in the tail vein. The percentage of
parenchyma occupied by metastatic nodules were: DMSO = 50%; AM80 = 25%;
C16 >10% and C16-AM = <There is an unmet clinical need for targeted
adjuvant therapy in Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) to overcome its
poor prognosis, short disease-free interval and metastatic dissemination.
We previously reported that blocking interactions between the PAH2 domain
of chromatin regulator Sin3 and Sin3 interaction domain (SID) containing
proteins like PF1 and TGIF1 by SID decoys (peptides and small molecule,
C16) decreased the cancer stem cell population, invasion, EMT, and
metastases. This, programmed upregulation of retinoid signaling that
sensitized TNBC cells to AM80, a novel clinically available
RARα-specific agonist. Here we report preclinical investigations on
effects of SID decoys and AM80 treatments on cellular heterogeneity,
primary tumors, metastatic dissemination, minimum residual disease (MRD)
and host microenvironment. Using CyTOF2, we made single cell measurements
of markers of differentiation, proliferation and stemness in CSC-enriched
4T1 tumorspheres. Treatment with SID peptide decreased cell populations
expressing nanog, sox2, vimentin and β-catenin with increase in γH2AX.
Addition of AM80 in combination with C16, resulted in populations with
increased expression of differentiation marker CD24 with decrease in
vimentin, β-catenin and Ki-67. To interrogate the neo-adjuvant effects
of C16-AM80 treatments, primary 4T1 tumors in Balb/c mice were treated
with C16 and AM80 alone or in combination. Compared to DMSO, ~40 %
decrease in tumor weight, 60% decrease in ALDH activity and 60% decrease
in lung metastasis was seen in mice treated with C16-AM80 combination. In
post-surgical adjuvant settings, in both 4T1 and MMTV-myc xenografts, we
observed 100% disease-free survival and absence of macrometastasis in
mice receiving minimally toxic adjuvant therapy with the C16-AM80
combination for 90 days. However, MRD was found consisting of a small
number of single CK8+ cells which failed to form colonies when recovered
from the bone marrow and selectively cultured in vitro. Upon stopping the
treatments, 20-40% animals developed macrometastases within the first
three months. To test the influence of C16-AM80 to condition the host
microenvironment to prevent macrometastases mice received only
pretreatment with C16 and AM80 followed by 4T1 cells injected in the tail
vein. The percentage of parenchyma occupied by metastatic nodules were:
DMSO = 50%; AM80 = 25%; C16 >10% and C16-AM = <<10%; the mitotic features
were greatly reduce from 0-5 in DMSO to 0-1 per 400x/field in the
C16-AM80 combination. The predominant effects were observed with C16
treatment, which was enhanced to a small degree in combination with AM80.
These results suggest that C16 can potentially induce changes in the host
microenvironment to prevent the colonization and metastatic growth of
cancer cells in TNBC. Altogether, our preclinical studies merit expansion
of a pre-clinical program for development of C16-AM80 combination as a
targeted adjuvant therapy to treat TNBC.


