Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic identification of therapeutics targets for Enzalutamide
resistance in Castration Resistant Prostate Cancer.


Prostate cancer (PC) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in Canadian
men and is the 3rd cause of cancer mortality. The Androgen Receptor (AR)
is activated by androgens (e.g. testosterone), which leads to prostatic
cell proliferation. The primary treatment for advanced PC is
androgen-deprivation therapy, which is achieved via surgical or chemical
castration. Nevertheless, most PC will become castration-resistant
(CRPC). Although new anti-androgens (e.g. Enzalutamide) were developed to
improve patientsâ€™ survival, their efficacy is still very limited and
most CRPC patients will die from the disease within a few years. We
postulate that by gaining insights into AR signalling networks in the
context of CRPC, we could better direct patients towards the best-suited
therapy and propose new therapeutic targets.

To this aim, we took advantage of an innovative proteomics approach,
namely proximity-labeling (BioID), to characterize global AR signalling
networks in hormone-dependant LAPC4 cells. We identified 45 AR-associated
proteins in non-stimulated cells, 35 of which were not previously
reported. Upon androgenic stimulation, the AR signalling network
increased to 320 proteins, including 278 (253 were novel) that were
restricted to androgen-stimulated cells. Enzalutamide treatment resulted
in a loss of 259 proteins from the network when compared to stimulated
cells. As expected, this reproduced quite faithfully the status of
non-stimulated LAPC4 cells. Interestingly, we identified 4 proteins in
the AR network specifically after Enzalutamide treatment. These are
interesting targets that may be relevant for the acquisition or the
prediction of Enzalutamide resistance. Hence, they could become in time
alternative therapeutic targets for CRPC treatment, to be used when
Enzalutamide fails.


