Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of autophagy enhances mitochondria-mediated apoptosis
in malignant mesothelioma cells by cisplatin and sulforaphane.


Drug resistance to current chemotherapy regimens has been considered a
cell survival adaptive response in malignant mesothelioma cells.
Therefore, new strategies to enhance the apoptotic signal and overcome
resistance to chemotherapeutics are necessary to improve treatment
outcomes for this deadly disease. Here, the effect of sulforaphane, an
isothiocyanate compound derived from glucoraphanin present in cruciferous
vegetables, on enhancing anticancer role of cisplatin was investigated in
malignant mesothelioma cells. At concentrations showing little toxicity
in normal human mesothelial MeT-5A cells, the combined treatment with
both compounds exhibited synergistic growth-inhibiting and
apoptosis-promoting effects, as demonstrated in a series of pro-apoptotic
events including reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation, loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential, up-regulation of p53, increased
Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, activation of caspase-3, and the occurrence of a
sub-G0/G1 peak with an increase in the cells with pyknotic and fragmented
nuclei, Annexin V-PE(+), and G2/M phase transition delay in the cell
cycle. The levels of phosphorylation of both Akt and mTOR were decreased
by the combined treatment, which was accompanied by a significant
increase in the level of autophagosomal marker protein LC3-II and the
accumulation of acidic vesicular organelles. Furthermore, scavenging of
ROS by antioxidant N-acetylcysteine inhibited both the apoptosis and
autophagy, while the inhibition of autophagy by bafilomycin A1
potentiated apoptotic cell death following the combination treatment of
sulforaphane and cisplatin, indicating the cytoprotective role of
autophagy counteracts apoptosis of malignant mesothelioma cells.
Considering the pro-oxidant-based combinational approach, our data
provide a rationale for targeting cytoprotective autophagy as a potential
therapeutic strategy for malignant mesothelioma.


