Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of SCID mouse gender on tumorigenicity, xenograft growth
and drug-responses in patient derived orthotopic xenograft models (PDOX)
of malignant brain tumors.


Brain tumor is the leading cause of cancer related death in children. To
develop new therapies and to understand tumor biology, many efforts are
made to develop patient derived orthotopic xenograft mouse models (PDOX).
There are, however, some concerns about the potential impact of animal
genders on tumor take rate, xenograft growth and in vivo drug responses.
To systematically analyze such impact, we retrospectively examined >1,000
mice of 59 PDOX models, including glioblastoma (GBM), medulloblastoma
(MB), primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PENT) and ependymoma (EPN) and
diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG), in which there were age-matched
(within 2 wks differences) with relatively even numbers of male and
female animals. All the animals were injected with identical number of
tumor cells (1x10^5) in the mouse brains matching that in human patients.
Animals were monitored daily and euthanized when they were moribund.
Differences between male and female mice were analyzed by t-test. In 25
GBM models (15 adult and 10 pediatric) involving 419 mice, there was an
average of number of mice was 17.8±9.5 mice per model (male: female =
9.88±5.8:7.93±3.6) (P>0.05). In 26 MB models with total 488 mice, the
average animal number was 17.24±8.8 mice per model (male:female=
9.54±5.34 :7.71±3.45) (P>0.05). The tumor take rate was near >95% in
both male and female mice (P>0.05). In GBM models, the survival times was
94.1±21.7 days in male mice and 92.3±20.8 days in female (P>0.05);
wherease in MB models, they were 134.95±39.86 day in male and
121.08±31.68 days in female mice (P>0.05). The impact of animal gender
on drug responses in vivo is essential to the preclinical drug testing. A
total of 468 mice from 11 GBM, 5 MB, 3 EPN, 3 DIPG and 2 PNET were
treated a series of standard and investigational drugs/compounds,
including radiation, oncolytic virus (SVV-001), ABT888, BMI1-inhibitor,
MLN8237, TMZ, Flavopiridol, SYC-435, SYC-719, SYC-836, Olig 2 inhibitor,
VPA, SAHA, Echinomycin, MCB613, and PARPi. The overall survival times
were 104.55±23.63 day in male mice, and 98.64±25.66 in female mice
(P>0.05). The only model that exhibited the increased responses in male
mice was found in IC-2305GBM treated with TMZ and PTC-596 (PBrain tumor
is the leading cause of cancer related death in children. To develop new
therapies and to understand tumor biology, many efforts are made to
develop patient derived orthotopic xenograft mouse models (PDOX). There
are, however, some concerns about the potential impact of animal genders
on tumor take rate, xenograft growth and in vivo drug responses. To
systematically analyze such impact, we retrospectively examined >1,000
mice of 59 PDOX models, including glioblastoma (GBM), medulloblastoma
(MB), primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PENT) and ependymoma (EPN) and
diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG), in which there were age-matched
(within 2 wks differences) with relatively even numbers of male and
female animals. All the animals were injected with identical number of
tumor cells (1x10^5) in the mouse brains matching that in human patients.
Animals were monitored daily and euthanized when they were moribund.
Differences between male and female mice were analyzed by t-test. In 25
GBM models (15 adult and 10 pediatric) involving 419 mice, there was an
average of number of mice was 17.8±9.5 mice per model (male: female =
9.88±5.8:7.93±3.6) (P>0.05). In 26 MB models with total 488 mice, the
average animal number was 17.24±8.8 mice per model (male:female=
9.54±5.34 :7.71±3.45) (P>0.05). The tumor take rate was near >95% in
both male and female mice (P>0.05). In GBM models, the survival times was
94.1±21.7 days in male mice and 92.3±20.8 days in female (P>0.05);
wherease in MB models, they were 134.95±39.86 day in male and
121.08±31.68 days in female mice (P>0.05). The impact of animal gender
on drug responses in vivo is essential to the preclinical drug testing. A
total of 468 mice from 11 GBM, 5 MB, 3 EPN, 3 DIPG and 2 PNET were
treated a series of standard and investigational drugs/compounds,
including radiation, oncolytic virus (SVV-001), ABT888, BMI1-inhibitor,
MLN8237, TMZ, Flavopiridol, SYC-435, SYC-719, SYC-836, Olig 2 inhibitor,
VPA, SAHA, Echinomycin, MCB613, and PARPi. The overall survival times
were 104.55±23.63 day in male mice, and 98.64±25.66 in female mice
(P>0.05). The only model that exhibited the increased responses in male
mice was found in IC-2305GBM treated with TMZ and PTC-596 (P<0.05). In
conclusion, our data demonstrated that the gender of SCID mice does not
have major impact on animal development nor in drug responses, and SCID
mice of both genders are appropriate for brain tumor PDOX model
development.


