Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel epithelial ovarian cancer loci in women of
African ancestry from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium.


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a rare but deadly disease for which
there is notably poorer survival in women of African Ancestry (AA)
compared to women of European Ancestry (EA). Previous EA-based
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 30 common, low
penetrant EOC susceptibility alleles. Using the custom-designed 533,631
SNP Illumina OncoArray and imputation to ~12 million genetic variants in
the 1000 Genomes Phase 3, we conducted a GWAS in 755 AA EOC cases,
including 537 high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) cases, and 1,235
AA controls from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC). We
identified novel susceptibility loci with suggestive evidence of
association with EOC, based on a threshold of PEpithelial ovarian cancer
(EOC) is a rare but deadly disease for which there is notably poorer
survival in women of African Ancestry (AA) compared to women of European
Ancestry (EA). Previous EA-based genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have identified 30 common, low penetrant EOC susceptibility alleles.
Using the custom-designed 533,631 SNP Illumina OncoArray and imputation
to ~12 million genetic variants in the 1000 Genomes Phase 3, we conducted
a GWAS in 755 AA EOC cases, including 537 high-grade serous ovarian
cancer (HGSOC) cases, and 1,235 AA controls from the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium (OCAC). We identified novel susceptibility loci
with suggestive evidence of association with EOC, based on a threshold of
P<1x10-6, at three distinct loci including 10p15.1 (lead SNP rs4525119,
intronic to AKR1C3, P=4.9 x 10-7, minor allele frequency [MAF]=0.33),
3p25.3 (lead SNP rs7643459, intronic to LOC101927394, P=8.4 x 10-7,
MAF=0.36), and 4q13.3 (lead SNP rs4286604, 15 kb 3’ of UGT2A1,
P=8.5x10-7, MAF=0.27). In analysis of HGSOC, we identified suggestive
evidence of association at six distinct loci including 5q11.2 (lead SNP
rs37792, 132 kb 5’ of FST, P=6.0x10-8, MAF=0.34), Xq27.2 (lead SNP
rs57403204, 81 kb 3' of MAGEC1, P=1.7x10-7, MAF=0.06), 10p15.1 (lead SNP
rs79079890, LOC105376360 intronic, P=3.0x10-7, MAF=0.03), 17p25.1 (lead
SNP rs66459581, 5 kb 5’ of PRPSAP1, P=5.1x10-7, MAF=0.23), 15p12 (lead
SNP rs116046250, GABRG3 intronic, P=8.7x10-7, MAF=0.05), and 4q21.21
(lead SNP rs192876988, 30 kb 3’ of GK2, P=9.2x10-7, MAF=0.05). These
SNPs showed no evidence of association with risk in the OCAC EA GWAS
including up to 23,543 EOC cases and 29,444 controls. Of the SNPs
identified with suggestive evidence of association in our GWAS, two are
located near genes known to regulate hormones and previously reported in
relation to diseases of the ovary (AKR1C3 and FST), two have been linked
to cancer (AKR1C3 and MAGEC1) and one represents testis-specific
expression (GK2). Of the 30 SNPs identified previously in a EA EOC GWAS,
we observed nominally significant associations (PEpithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC) is a rare but deadly disease for which there is notably
poorer survival in women of African Ancestry (AA) compared to women of
European Ancestry (EA). Previous EA-based genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified 30 common, low penetrant EOC susceptibility
alleles. Using the custom-designed 533,631 SNP Illumina OncoArray and
imputation to ~12 million genetic variants in the 1000 Genomes Phase 3,
we conducted a GWAS in 755 AA EOC cases, including 537 high-grade serous
ovarian cancer (HGSOC) cases, and 1,235 AA controls from the Ovarian
Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC). We identified novel susceptibility
loci with suggestive evidence of association with EOC, based on a
threshold of P<1x10-6, at three distinct loci including 10p15.1 (lead SNP
rs4525119, intronic to AKR1C3, P=4.9 x 10-7, minor allele frequency
[MAF]=0.33), 3p25.3 (lead SNP rs7643459, intronic to LOC101927394, P=8.4
x 10-7, MAF=0.36), and 4q13.3 (lead SNP rs4286604, 15 kb 3’ of UGT2A1,
P=8.5x10-7, MAF=0.27). In analysis of HGSOC, we identified suggestive
evidence of association at six distinct loci including 5q11.2 (lead SNP
rs37792, 132 kb 5’ of FST, P=6.0x10-8, MAF=0.34), Xq27.2 (lead SNP
rs57403204, 81 kb 3' of MAGEC1, P=1.7x10-7, MAF=0.06), 10p15.1 (lead SNP
rs79079890, LOC105376360 intronic, P=3.0x10-7, MAF=0.03), 17p25.1 (lead
SNP rs66459581, 5 kb 5’ of PRPSAP1, P=5.1x10-7, MAF=0.23), 15p12 (lead
SNP rs116046250, GABRG3 intronic, P=8.7x10-7, MAF=0.05), and 4q21.21
(lead SNP rs192876988, 30 kb 3’ of GK2, P=9.2x10-7, MAF=0.05). These
SNPs showed no evidence of association with risk in the OCAC EA GWAS
including up to 23,543 EOC cases and 29,444 controls. Of the SNPs
identified with suggestive evidence of association in our GWAS, two are
located near genes known to regulate hormones and previously reported in
relation to diseases of the ovary (AKR1C3 and FST), two have been linked
to cancer (AKR1C3 and MAGEC1) and one represents testis-specific
expression (GK2). Of the 30 SNPs identified previously in a EA EOC GWAS,
we observed nominally significant associations (P<0.05) with consistent
direction of effect for eight SNPs in AA women. Our investigation
presents evidence of (1) variants for EOC shared among EA and AA women
and (2) novel EOC risk loci of importance for AA women.


