Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is FGD3 a potentially prognostic marker for breast cancer.


Background: Prognostic factors are capable of providing information on
clinical outcomes at the time of diagnosis; they are usually indicators
of growth, invasion, and metastatic potential (Gasparini G. et al. 1993;
Hayes DF. et al. 1998). Tissue marker is one of the prognostic factors;
to date, only a small proportion of markers are ultimately clinically
useful, including Ki-67 and HER2. Faciogenital dysplasia 3 protein
(FGD3), a putative regulator of cell morphology and motility, has been
shown to regulate cell migration. In a study of 3,256 tumors, low
expression of FGD3 mRNA indicates poor outcome (Hayakawa M. et al. 2008;
Scooter W. et al. 2014). However, an immunohistochemistry (IHC) study to
evaluate FGD3 protein expression has not been done. We hypothesize that
the expression levels of FGD3 protein by IHC might improve the prediction
of patient outcomes, and FGD3 might be a potentially prognostic marker of
breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: 322 cases of breast cancer Tissue Microarrays
(TMA) (BR1504a, BR1505b, HBre-Duc068Bch-01, and BR20837) were purchased
from US Biomax, Inc (Rockville, MD). Rabbit polyclonal antibody against
FGD3 was purchased from Novus Biologicals, LLC (Littleton, CO). Tissue
cores were stained for FGD3 with Dakoâ€™s EnVision + Dual Link System.
Image acquisition was performed using an Olympus camera and software.
FGD3 protein expression by IHC was quantitatively determined in the range
of 0-4. Unpaired t-test was used for data analyses.

Results: 1) Benign tumor and breast adenocarcinomas in lower stages
showed strong expression of FGD3, whereas the breast adenocarcinomas in
higher stages showed mild ~ weak expression. 2) Invasive breast cancer in
stage IIA showed strong FGD3 expression compared to matched metastatic
carcinoma which showed mild expression of FGD3. 3) FGD3 protein levels
for tumors (n=135) with N0 indicating no regional lymph node metastasis
were compared with tumors with lymph node metastasis (N1-3; n=98) and
corresponding matched metastatic tissue (n=103). An unpaired t-test
comparing N0 vs. N1-3 showed lymph node metastasis is associated with
lower FGD3 protein levels (pResults: 1) Benign tumor and breast
adenocarcinomas in lower stages showed strong expression of FGD3, whereas
the breast adenocarcinomas in higher stages showed mild ~ weak
expression. 2) Invasive breast cancer in stage IIA showed strong FGD3
expression compared to matched metastatic carcinoma which showed mild
expression of FGD3. 3) FGD3 protein levels for tumors (n=135) with N0
indicating no regional lymph node metastasis were compared with tumors
with lymph node metastasis (N1-3; n=98) and corresponding matched
metastatic tissue (n=103). An unpaired t-test comparing N0 vs. N1-3
showed lymph node metastasis is associated with lower FGD3 protein levels
(p<0.0001).

Conclusion: FGD3 protein expression levels within breast tumors were
different according to metastatic status. Our IHC results suggest the
possibility of FGD3 to be a prognostic marker in patients with breast
cancer.


