Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risks of familial breast cancer associated with known and proposed
breast cancer susceptibility genes.


A better understanding of gene-specific risks for development of breast
cancer will lead to improved screening, prevention, and therapeutic
strategies for individuals identified to carry germline mutations. We
performed targeted massively-parallel sequencing to identify mutations
and large genomic rearrangements in 26 known or proposed breast cancer
susceptibility genes in 2134 BRCA-negative women with familial breast
cancer (FBC). A case-control analysis was performed comparing the
frequency of internally classified mutations identified in FBC cases to
that in non-Finnish European controls from the Exome Aggregation
Consortium (ExAC) excluding samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Including large genomic rearrangements, mutations were identified in 8.2%
of FBC cases compared to 6.2% of ExAC controls, including mutations in
high-penetrance genes (0.6% in cases vs. 0.1% in controls),
moderate-penetrance genes (3.7% vs 1.7%), and seven cases with two
mutations (0.3%). The remainder of FBC cases and ExAC controls had
mutations in proposed breast cancer genes (1.6% of cases vs 2.4% of
controls), Lynch syndrome genes (0.5% vs. 0.5%) or were heterozygous
MUTYH carriers (1.5% vs. 1.5%). Case-control analysis demonstrated
significant associations with FBC for ATM, PALB2, and TP53 mutations
(OR>3.0, pA better understanding of gene-specific risks for development
of breast cancer will lead to improved screening, prevention, and
therapeutic strategies for individuals identified to carry germline
mutations. We performed targeted massively-parallel sequencing to
identify mutations and large genomic rearrangements in 26 known or
proposed breast cancer susceptibility genes in 2134 BRCA-negative women
with familial breast cancer (FBC). A case-control analysis was performed
comparing the frequency of internally classified mutations identified in
FBC cases to that in non-Finnish European controls from the Exome
Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) excluding samples from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. Including large genomic rearrangements, mutations were identified
in 8.2% of FBC cases compared to 6.2% of ExAC controls, including
mutations in high-penetrance genes (0.6% in cases vs. 0.1% in controls),
moderate-penetrance genes (3.7% vs 1.7%), and seven cases with two
mutations (0.3%). The remainder of FBC cases and ExAC controls had
mutations in proposed breast cancer genes (1.6% of cases vs 2.4% of
controls), Lynch syndrome genes (0.5% vs. 0.5%) or were heterozygous
MUTYH carriers (1.5% vs. 1.5%). Case-control analysis demonstrated
significant associations with FBC for ATM, PALB2, and TP53 mutations
(OR>3.0, p<10-4), BARD1 mutations (OR=3.2, p=0.012), and CHEK2 truncating
mutations (OR=1.6, p=0.041). Our results therefore demonstrate that only
approximately 4% of BRCA1/2 negative FBC patients have mutations in genes
definitively associated with breast cancer at this time. Large
case-control studies are needed to fully evaluate the breast cancer risks
associated with moderate penetrance and proposed breast cancer
susceptibility genes.


