Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel 40kDa CPE-ΔN isoform promotes proliferation and invasion
in pancreatic cancer cells.


Carboxypeptidase E (CPE) is a prohormone processing exopeptidase that
cleaves C-terminal basic residues from peptide hormones liberated
endoproteolytically from prohormones. It is a 476- amino acid protein
with a signal peptide in its N-terminus and is mainly expressed in
neuropeptide-rich areas of brain and endocrine tissues. As a
multifunctional protein, CPE plays many non-enzymatic roles such as
prohormone sorting, vesicle transport, and secretion in addition to its
carboxypeptidase activity. Moreover, high expression of CPE is found in
metastatic tumor tissues, including liver cancer, renal clear cell
carcinoma, colorectal cancer, cervical cancer and melanoma, suggesting
CPE may be involved in tumor metastasis and progression. In this study, a
novel CPE splice isoform mRNA was identified by Northern blotting, which
is ~1.83kb in size. RACE assay and sequence analysis confirmed existence
of this CPE isoform mRNA, which partially lacks a N-terminus region, and
has a shorter 3’-UTR compared to WT-CPE mRNA, by removal of 188
nucleotides within the first exon and 589 nucleotides out of the
3’-UTR, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that this CPE
isoform mRNA has a shortened ORF, which starts coding from the 3rd ATG
relative to wild-type (WT) CPE mRNA and encodes a 40kDa CPE-αN protein
with the N-terminus truncated. Western blot analysis showed that 40kD
CPE-αN is expressed in multiple cancer cell lines and tumor tissues. In
Panc-1pancreatic cancer cells, knockdown of endogenous CPE(s) inhibited
cell growth and invasion; in contrast, ectopic expression of 40kD CPE
isoform significantly promoted proliferation, colony formation, invasion
and migration, whereas overexpression of WT-CPE had only a small effect.
These results suggest that the 40kD CPE-αN isoform plays a role in cell
growth and metastasis.


