Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of Bcl-2 antisense therapeutic in aggressive
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.


Aggressive non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) progresses rapidly. It makes up
about 60% of all NHL cases in the United States. The chemotherapy regimen
R-CHOP could cure up to 70% of patients with aggressive NHL. Nonetheless,
up to 30% of patients with aggressive NHL relapse from R-CHOP within 2
years of initial treatment. Novel therapeutics are urgently needed for
patients with relapsed, aggressive NHL. Bcl-2 is a potential therapeutic
target for aggressive NHL because high expression of Bcl-2 has been
reported in NHL and correlated with adverse prognosis for NHL patients.
To inhibit the expression of Bcl-2 protein, BP1002 was developed. BP1002
is comprised of an uncharged P-ethoxy antisense oligodeoxynucleotide
targeted against Bcl-2 mRNA. The P-ethoxy antisense backbone does not
have an adverse effect on bleeding and complement activation, which are
some of the toxicities that have been reported for other antisense
analogs. The Bcl-2 antisense is incorporated in neutral liposomes so that
it can be delivered systemically via intravenous infusion. The inhibitory
activity of BP1002 was determined in human lymphoma cell lines, which
included germinal center B-cell (GCB) diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL, mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) and
Burkitt’s lymphoma (BL). The lymphoma cell lines were incubated with
BP1002 for four days. The sulforhodamine B cytotoxicity assay showed that
BP1002, at 200 micrograms/mL, induced ≥50% inhibition in 5 of 8 GCB
DLBCL lines, 3 of 3 ABC DLBCL lines, 1 of 1 MCL line, and 1 of 1 BL line.
We also determined the activity of BP1002 in animal models. Severe
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice were implanted with CJ cells, which
are transformed follicular lymphoma cells that express high levels of
Bcl-2 protein. In experiment I, 4 groups of mice were used: Group 1 -
untreated mice; Group 2 - mice treated with 10 mg of BP1002 per kg of
mouse body weight; Group 3 - mice treated with 20 mg of BP1002 per kg of
mouse body weight; Group 4 - mice treated with control empty liposomes
equivalent to 20 mg/kg of BP1002. One week after tumor implantation, mice
were injected with BP1002 or empty liposomes intravenously twice per
week. When mice were euthanized in week 5, all untreated mice and mice
treated with control empty liposomes reached moribund state. However, no
mouse in the BP1002 treatment groups reached moribund state. In
experiment II, 3 groups of mice were used: Group 1 - untreated mice;
Group 2 - mice treated with 20 mg/kg of liposome-incorporated control
oligodeoxynucleotide; Group 3 - mice treated with 20 mg/kg of BP1002. All
untreated mice and control mice were moribund in week 5, but only 40% of
BP1002-treated mice were moribund. These in vivo experiments indicate
that BP1002 could extend the survival of mice bearing aggressive NHL.
Together, our data indicate that BP1002 is a novel therapeutic for
aggressive NHL.


