Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic activity of p97 inhibitors with histone deacetylase 6
inhibitors in mantle cell lymphoma.


p97, or valosin-containing protein (VCP), is an ATPase whose function is
essential to restore protein homeostasis in cells. Working in concert
with the ubiquitin proteasome system, p97 promotes the retrotranslocation
of misfolded proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum and/or their
degradation. Consequently, p97 inhibition has emerged as a novel
therapeutic target in cancer cells, especially those that depend on high
protein turnover and/or ER function. p97 is also present in a complex
with many protein complexes including the HSP90, histone deacetylase
(HDAC) 6 and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)-also called the repressive
complex. p97 participates in the disaggregation of the repressive complex
to regulate HSP90 and HSF1 function under stressed conditions.
Accumulation of misfolded polyubiquitylated proteins in the cytosol or on
damaged organelles promotes the binding of p97 to polyubiquitylated
proteins in an HDAC6-dependent manner and promotes their turnover by
autophagic degradation. Given that perturbation of protein homeostasis
and ER function induces apoptosis as well as autophagy in B cell
malignancies such as multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), we
hypothesized that inhibition of p97 function in combination with HDAC6
inhibitors would induce proteotoxic stress and/or apoptotic cell death in
MCL cells. In this study, we report that the p97 inhibitors DBeQ, ML240
and NMS-873 induce a dose-dependent loss of cell viability in cultured
and primary MCL cells. Treatment of MCL cells with ML240 induces the
accumulation of polyubiquitylated proteins and induces markers of ER
stress such as glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and phosphorylated
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) Î± as well as the autophagic
markers LC3-B and p62 (protein whose accumulation is suggestive of
reduced autophagic clearance of misfolded proteins). Co-treatment with
ML240 and the HDAC6 inhibitor ACY-1215 induces more accumulation of
polyubiquitylated proteins and markers of enhanced ER stress as well as
autophagy, than either agent alone. Mechanistically we determined that
co-treatment with ML240 and ACY-1215 inhibits the binding of p97 to
polyubiquitylated proteins and HDAC6, resulting in the reduced clearance
of cytotoxic protein aggregates in the cells. Co-treatment with ML240 and
ACY-1215 also induces the accumulation of cytosolic polyubiquitylated
proteins and their co-localization with LC-3B puncta as demonstrated by
immunofluorescent microscopy. These observations are suggestive of
enhanced initiation of autophagy but not its completion. Consequently,
treatment of MCL cells with ML240 and ACY-1215 resulted in enhanced
proteotoxic stress and synergistic apoptotic cell death in MCL cells.
Collectively our studies create a strong rationale to test efficacy of
the combination of p97 inhibitors in combination with HDAC6 inhibitors in
MCL.


