Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liquid diet introduction of tracers into mice for stable
isotope-resolved metabolomics (SIRM) investigations.


Tracer-based mapping of metabolic networks in vivo is a powerful approach
for revealing metabolic reprogramming in human cancer. However, current
in vivo labeling techniques for model animals face important challenges
including insufficient depth of pathway coverage (e.g. inability to
detect labeled nucleotides, proteins, and lipids) and stress-related
artifacts. Here, we report stress-free administration of 13C6-glucose via
liquid diet into mice. 13C enrichment was observed in metabolites of
glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, the pentose phosphate pathway, nucleobases,
UDP-sugars, as well as macromolecules glycogen, lipids, and proteins from
major organs in NSG mice. We have applied the liquid diet method to map
the glucose metabolic networks in NSCLC tumors in a patient-derived
xenograft (PDX) model. We observed a high enrichment in the metabolites
of glycolysis, Krebs cycle, and PPP as well as de novo synthesized
nucleotides and amino acids by IC-UHR-FTMS analysis. Lung PDX displayed
unexpected metabolic complexity, such as the use of pyruvate to fuel
anaplerosis as well as gluconeogenesis. We also found high 13C enrichment
in both tumor and plasma glutamine, which implies that glutamine in the
PDX tumors largely came from other organs via the blood rather than being
synthesized in situ. Our data showed that liquid diet is an effective and
noninvasive means for comprehensive analysis of glucose-associated
metabolic networks in human tumor xenografts, which can also be extended
to SIRM studies with other fuel sources.

Acknowledgements: This work was supported in part by grants:
1R01ES022191-01 (to TWMF and RMH), 1P01CA163223-01A1 (to ANL and TWMF),
and 1U24DK097215-01A1 (to RMH, TWMF, and ANL)

R.C. Sun was supported by a T32 training grant to M. Vore
(5T32ES007266-25)


