Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Validation of hypoglycosylated MUC1-CIN85 protein-protein
interaction as a new therapeutic target for prevention of cancer invasion
and metastasis.


Overexpression and abnormal glycosylation of the epithelial glycoprotein
MUC1 in cancer cells promotes metastasis. We have identified CIN85
(Cbl-interacting protein 85 KDa), as a binding partner of MUC1 in tumors.
MUC1/CIN85 complex is found in early as well as advanced clinical stages
of breast, ovarian, colon and prostate cancers among others.
Co-localization of MUC1 and CIN85 on invadopodia structures enhances
invasion and migration of cancer cells. Our hypothesis is that preventing
the formation or dissociating existing CIN85/MUC1 complexes may result in
a less aggressive tumor by decreasing local invasion and preventing
distant metastases. To test this hypothesis, we have already identified
and tested two novel compounds that significantly reduce the association
between hypoglycosylated form of MUC1 and CIN85, and at 10Î¼M
concentration drastically reduce the migratory activity of mouse and
human epithelial cancer cells. Our preliminary data also suggest that
dissociation of the MUC1 and CIN85 complex decreases expression of
hypoglycosylated MUC1, restoring the expression of its normal, fully
glycosylated form. We are currently investigating the
MUC1/CIN85-dependent signaling pathway with a particular focus on the
ability of CIN85 to modulate MUC1 glycosylation by controlling its plasma
membrane-Golgi trafficking. Ongoing experiments in an in vivo mouse model
will confirm the ability of these drug compounds to decrease tumor growth
and metastasis and validate CIN85/MUC1 complex as a viable therapeutic
target and support development and testing of more potent antagonists.


