Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local and abscopal effects in oncolytic virotherapy are boosted by
immune checkpoint blockade, immunogenic chemotherapy, or IFNAR blockade.


Athough the clinical efficacy of oncolytic viruses has been demonstrated
for local treatment, the ability to induce immune-mediated regression of
distant metastases is still poorly documented. We here report that an
engineered oncolytic Vaccinia Virus, VVWR-TK-RR--Fcu1, is able to induce
an immunogenic cell death and thus to generate a systemic immune
response. Effect on tumor growth and survival is largely driven by CD8+
T-cells, and we could demonstrate that the immune cell infiltrate in the
tumor could be reprogrammed towards a higher ratio of effector T-cells to
regulatory CD4+ T-cells. The key role of the type 1-IFN pathway in
oncolytic virotherapy was also highlighted, and we could show a strong
abscopal response in Ifnar-/- tumors. In this model, the single
administration of the virus directly into the tumors, on one flank, led
to regression in the contralateral flank (i.e. opposite to the virus
injection site). Moreover, we observed that these effects are further
enhanced when the oncolytic treatment is combined with either immunogenic
chemotherapy such as oxaliplatin, or with immune checkpoint blockers such
as anti-PD-1 or anti-CTLA-4. Altogether, these data suggest that local
oncolytic virotherapy in patients with tumors altered in IFNAR signaling
could increase immune-mediated abscopal regression of distant metastases.


