Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the inhibitory role of plant alkaloids in breast
cancer metastasis.


Despite extremely high morbidity and mortality of >90% from metastasis,
it remains one of the most challenging process for targeted therapeutic
interventions. Identification and characterization of chemically active
and bioavailable compounds from medicinal plants targeting the
cell-signaling pathways of Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs), tumor cells and
their microenvironment that abet metastasis is of great clinical
significance. Hence, MCF-7; a breast cancer cell line, was treated with
fractionated alkaloidal extracts from Rhazya stricta with previously
documented anti-cancer activity in lung and pancreatic cancer cell lines.
RNA-seq. analysis was performed for samples treated with compounds that
actively inhibited cell migration in scratch assay to further
substantiate their anti-metastatic role at the cellular and molecular
level. Genomic data corroborated the presence of anti-metastatic
compounds that actively down-regulated genes involved in promoting
metastasis (CDC6), cell migration (KIF23, DLGAP5), invasion and CSCsâ€™
expansion (PTTG1). We also found down-regulation of GAS1 expression, an
enhancer of Hedgehog signaling pathway. To our knowledge, this study,
first of its kind, sets precedence in exploiting the anti-metastatic
potential of these compounds. Further proof of concept studies in mouse
models of breast cancer to establish precise mechanism-of-action(s),
would certainly open up avenues for the development of new chemical
entities (NCEs), targeting metastasis regulating gene(s) with precision.


