Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of first-in-class small molecule CD99 inhibitors for
targeted therapy of Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive bone and soft tissue malignancy that
affects predominantly children and adolescents with a high propensity to
metastasize and poor prognosis. CD99 is a transmembrane cell surface
protein that is highly expressed on ES cells, and routinely used as a
marker for histological diagnosis of ES. We screened small molecule
libraries for their binding to recombinant CD99 protein and subsequent
selective inhibition of ES cell growth. We identified two structurally
similar FDA-approved nucleoside analogues, clofarabine and cladribine
that selectively inhibited the growth of ES cells in a panel of 14 ES vs.
28 non-ES cell lines. A significant negative correlation was found in
human cell lines between CD99 expression and IC50 values for clofarabine
and cladribine. Both drugs inhibited CD99 dimerization and its
interaction with downstream signaling components cyclophilin A and
PKA-RIIÎ± as well as led to reduced ROCK2 protein expression and
migration in ES cells. A membrane-impermeable analog of clofarabine
showed similar cytotoxicity in ES cells, suggesting that it can function
through inhibiting CD99 alone without any effect on DNA metabolism.
Clofarabine and cladribine led to a significant increase in hypodiploid
DNA content of ES cells, which was diminished by suppression of CD99
expression. Both drugs drastically inhibited anchorage-independent growth
of ES cells, but clofarabine was more effective in inhibiting ES
xenografts. Finally, the screening of a set of chemotherapy drugs
revealed a synergy for the combination of anti-CD99 drugs and dasatinib
in ES cells, which may translate into increased survival and reduced
toxicity. Overall, our findings suggest that clofarabine is a good
candidate for early phase clinical trials in children with ES.


