Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor (AR): A novel target for radiosensitization in
triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC).


Purpose: Increased rates of local recurrence (LR) have been observed in
TNBC despite chemotherapy and radiation (RT). Thus, approaches that
result in radiosensitization in TNBC are critically needed. We
characterized the RT response of 21 breast cancer cell (BCC) lines using
clonogenic survival assays and paired this with high-throughput drug
screen data, identifying AR as a top target for radiosensitization. We
demonstrate that AR inhibition confers radiosensitization in vitro and in
vivo, identified a biomarker of response, and characterize the mechanism
of AR-mediated radiosensitization in TNBC.

Materials/Methods: Clonogenic survival assays determined the intrinsic RT
sensitivity of 21 BCC lines. IC50 values were determined for 130 clinical
compounds and correlation coefficients were calculated using IC50 values
and SF-2Gy. Gene and protein expression was measured using RNA Seq and
RPPA arrays, respectively, in tumor samples (n=2,061) and BCC lines
(n=51). AR function was assessed using gene knockdown (KD) or functional
inhibition with anti-androgen drugs. We measured in vivo tumor growth
with varying control and treatment groups (16-20 tumors/group).
Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to estimate local control. A Cox
proportional hazards model and MVA were used to determine variables
associated with LRF survival.

Results: Our unbiased drug radiosensitizer screen nominated bicalutamide
as an effective drug in treating RT-resistant BCC lines (R2= 0.46,
p-value 2000 human breast tumor samples and 51 BCC lines and found
heterogeneity in AR expression with strongly correlated expression of
protein and RNA levels in TNBC (R2=0.89, p-value 2000 human breast tumor
samples and 51 BCC lines and found heterogeneity in AR expression with
strongly correlated expression of protein and RNA levels in TNBC
(R2=0.89, p-value <0.001). Inhibition of AR, using both KD and drug
(MDV3100) induced RT sensitivity with an enhancement ratio (ER) of
1.35-1.42 in AR+ TNBC lines with no effect on controls.
Radiosensitization was at least partially dependent on impaired dsDNA
break repair mediated by DNAPKcs. AR inhibition with MDV3100
significantly radiosensitized TNBC xenografts in mouse models and
markedly delayed tumor tripling time (TTT) and tumor growth (median TTT
17.4 days for RT alone vs. not reached after 50 days for MDV3100+RT,
p-value 2000 human breast tumor samples and 51 BCC lines and found
heterogeneity in AR expression with strongly correlated expression of
protein and RNA levels in TNBC (R2=0.89, p-value <0.001). Inhibition of
AR, using both KD and drug (MDV3100) induced RT sensitivity with an
enhancement ratio (ER) of 1.35-1.42 in AR+ TNBC lines with no effect on
controls. Radiosensitization was at least partially dependent on impaired
dsDNA break repair mediated by DNAPKcs. AR inhibition with MDV3100
significantly radiosensitized TNBC xenografts in mouse models and
markedly delayed tumor tripling time (TTT) and tumor growth (median TTT
17.4 days for RT alone vs. not reached after 50 days for MDV3100+RT,
p-value <0.001). Activated DNAPK was identified as a biomarker of
response. Clinically, TNBC patients whose tumors had higher than median
expression of AR had higher rates of LR after RT (HR for LR ~3, p-value
2000 human breast tumor samples and 51 BCC lines and found heterogeneity
in AR expression with strongly correlated expression of protein and RNA
levels in TNBC (R2=0.89, p-value <0.001). Inhibition of AR, using both KD
and drug (MDV3100) induced RT sensitivity with an enhancement ratio (ER)
of 1.35-1.42 in AR+ TNBC lines with no effect on controls.
Radiosensitization was at least partially dependent on impaired dsDNA
break repair mediated by DNAPKcs. AR inhibition with MDV3100
significantly radiosensitized TNBC xenografts in mouse models and
markedly delayed tumor tripling time (TTT) and tumor growth (median TTT
17.4 days for RT alone vs. not reached after 50 days for MDV3100+RT,
p-value <0.001). Activated DNAPK was identified as a biomarker of
response. Clinically, TNBC patients whose tumors had higher than median
expression of AR had higher rates of LR after RT (HR for LR ~3, p-value
<0.01, 2 independent datasets). In MVA, high AR expression was the
variable most significantly associated with worse LRF survival after RT
in TNBC patients, outperforming all other variables (HR of 3.58; p-value
2000 human breast tumor samples and 51 BCC lines and found heterogeneity
in AR expression with strongly correlated expression of protein and RNA
levels in TNBC (R2=0.89, p-value <0.001). Inhibition of AR, using both KD
and drug (MDV3100) induced RT sensitivity with an enhancement ratio (ER)
of 1.35-1.42 in AR+ TNBC lines with no effect on controls.
Radiosensitization was at least partially dependent on impaired dsDNA
break repair mediated by DNAPKcs. AR inhibition with MDV3100
significantly radiosensitized TNBC xenografts in mouse models and
markedly delayed tumor tripling time (TTT) and tumor growth (median TTT
17.4 days for RT alone vs. not reached after 50 days for MDV3100+RT,
p-value <0.001). Activated DNAPK was identified as a biomarker of
response. Clinically, TNBC patients whose tumors had higher than median
expression of AR had higher rates of LR after RT (HR for LR ~3, p-value
<0.01, 2 independent datasets). In MVA, high AR expression was the
variable most significantly associated with worse LRF survival after RT
in TNBC patients, outperforming all other variables (HR of 3.58; p-value
< 0.01).

Conclusion: Our results implicate AR as a mediator of radioresistance in
breast cancer and support the rationale for developing clinical
strategies, including clinical trials, to inhibit AR as a novel
radiosensitizing target in TNBC.


