Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of the Wnt antagonist DKK1 with a humanized
monoclonal antibody in oncology indications.


Wnt signaling is a fundamental pathway that is dysregulated in oncology.
The Wnt antagonist DKK1 is expressed in a variety of tumor types which
frequently correlates with a poor prognosis, including overall survival.
DKK1 has known oncogenic activity by stimulating proliferation,
metastasis, and angiogenesis, and recently been implicated in
contributing to an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. The
neutralization of DKK1 is hypothesized to have efficacy from both a
direct antitumor effect and through an immune stimulated response. Here
we describe the characterization of DKN-01, a humanized monoclonal
therapeutic antibody to DKK1. DKN-01 binds DKK1 with high affinity and
selectivity, disrupts the interaction of DKK1 with the LRP6 co-receptor,
and neutralizes DKK1 activity in a cell based assay. In vivo, DKN-01 has
efficacy both as a monotherapy and in combination with chemotherapies in
a non-small cell lung (NSCLC) cancer A549 xenograft model. Results
suggest that DKN-01 has an antiangiogenic effect and may stimulate a NK
cell mediated antitumor response. Clinically, DKN-01 is being evaluated
in relapsed/refractory esophageal cancer patients in combination with
paclitaxel, and preliminary results demonstrate promising activity.
Archival patient tumor samples are currently being analyzed genetically
and by IHC for DKK1 and Î²-catenin staining for biomarker identification.
Taken together, our results suggest that DKN-01, a novel therapeutic, has
clinical efficacy by disrupting Wnt signaling, which results in a direct
anti-tumor effect and stimulates a pro-inflammatory tumor response.


