Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of p62 (SQTSM1) in the transforming growth factor β
signaling pathway.


Transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) is a cytokine that regulates many
cellular processes, including cellular adhesion, proliferation and
apoptosis. Its canonical downstream effectors include Smad2/3 proteins,
which are phosphorylated and then translocate to the nucleus to alter
gene transcriptional programs and promote processes such as
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Previous studies in our lab
have shown that atypical Protein Kinase C (aPKC) isoforms associate with
TGFβ receptors and modulate receptor trafficking and signal
transduction. An aPKC-associated protein, p62 (SQSTM1) has been
implicated in TGFβ-dependent EMT, however the mechanisms remain
unclear.Here, we investigate the localization of p62 and its potential
roles in modulating TGFβ signaling via knockdown and overexpression
studies. Using antibody feeding and immunofluorescence microscopy, we
support previous findings showing that p62 localizes to late endosomes.
In addition, using a co-immunoprecipitation approach, we observed that
p62 may associate with TGFβ type II receptor. To explore the functional
role of p62 in TGFβ signaling, we conducted protein silencing using
siRNA. We observed TGFβ-independent decreases in E-cadherin expression.
However these changes were independent of the phosphorylation status or
nuclear translocation of Smad2.P62 also plays an important role in
autophagy by targeting proteins for degradation. Recently, prolonged
TGFβ stimulation has been shown to induce cellular autophagy. Therefore,
it is in our interest to characterize the relationship between
TGFβ-dependent EMT and autophagy, and to determine whether p62 has a
regulatory role between these two processes.


