Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL11 mediates tumor resistance to anti-VEGF therapy in lung cancer.


Anti-angiogenic therapy has been used for the treatment of a number of
solid tumors in clinic, however, survival benefit is often limited due to
development of tumor resistance to the therapy. In previous studies, we
developed a mouse Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) tumor model that is
resistant to anti-VEGF therapy. In this model, we identified that
Interleukin 11 (IL11) was among the most significantly upregulated genes
in the resistant tumors. In current study, we demonstrated that IL11 was
a pro-angiogenic factor and played a key role in the development of
resistance to anti-VEGF therapy in LLC tumor. IL11 could effectively
induce HUVEC proliferation, migration and capillary tube formation in
vitro. It enhanced expression of MMP9 in endothelial cells. The
conditioned medium from the resistant LLC cell culture could induce HUVEC
migration, even VEGF was blocked, and this effect was attenuated by
recombinant IL11 decoy receptor, an IL-11 inhibitor. Furthermore,
combination therapy of anti-VEGF agent and IL11 blockade exhibited
enhanced anti-tumor activity in lung cancer model. In addition, based on
bioinformatics analysis on over 500 RNA-seq data deposited to The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA), we found that IL11 was highly expressed in various
tumor types in patients. Data showed that high IL11 can predict a poor
outcome in the lung cancer. The patients with the lower IL11 expression
have significantly longer median survival time than those with higher
expression. These findings support a role of IL11 signal as a
compensatory angiogenic pathway that might trigger tumor resistance to
anti-VEGF treatment. Therapeutically targeting IL11 could have a value in
overcoming tumor resistance to anti-VEGF therapy.


