Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishing reference intervals of human urine proteome for
monitoring physiological and pathological changes.


Urine as a true non-invasive sampling source holds great potential for
biomarker discovery. But the lack of method for profiling urine proteome
in high throughput and systematic evaluation of variations in urine
proteomes based on large number of population have been being the major
obstacles for successfully finding new biomarkers from urine. Due to low
throughput, only limited number of urine samples can be measured in
discovery phase of biomarker studies, which make it hard to determine
whether proteins differentially expressed between groups represent actual
differences between control and disease states or just physiological
variations among individuals. So, candidate biomarkers often fail in
validation phase. Here, we report a streamlined workflow with capacity of
measuring 8 urine proteomes per day per MS at the coverage of more than
1500 proteins. With this workflow, we systematically evaluated variations
in 497 human urine proteomes from 167 apparently healthy donors, allowing
us to evaluate day to day and inter-personal variation in human urine
proteome. Then personal and pan-human reference intervals (RIs) of urine
proteome were established based on this large-scale dataset. We
demonstrated that RIs can be used to monitor physiological changes by
detecting transient outlier proteins, such as trans-continental travel
and common flu. And it was also found that if the underlying cause is
physiological variation, outlier proteins will fall back to the normal
range in the follow up measurement, as exemplified in the
intercontinental travel case. Persistent outlier proteins may be
indicative of non-physiological conditions. These results indicate that
periodical measurements of a personâ€™s urine proteome could establish a
personal health archive that would be valuable for detecting future
health issues. Furthermore, we proposed a complete novel strategy
dependent on RIs-based algorithm for biomarker discovery and validation
to screen for diseases, which were exemplified by analyzing 154 urine
proteomes from patients with 7 types of cancers. The algorithm can
distinguish normal people from cancer patients with specificity of 0.95
and sensitivity of 0.85. This study paves a way to use urine proteome for
health monitoring and disease screening.


