Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMX-513 polyamine depletion therapy inhibits tumor growth and
reverses immunosuppression in cancers including MYC-driven neuroblastoma
and pancreatic cancer.


Tumorigenesis is associated with increased polyamine levels and involves
the induction of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), the initial rate-limiting
enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis, and increased uptake of polyamines from
the blood and diet. As well as contributing to proliferation, polyamines
are reported to exert an immunosuppressive effect. Amplification of the
MYC/MYCN oncogenes has been shown to directly induce ODC activity and
inhibition of this enzyme by α-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) markedly
delays tumor development. Aminex Therapeutics is developing a polyamine
depletion approach targeting both biosynthesis and transport of
polyamines with AMX-513, a combination of the approved ODC inhibitor,
DFMO, together with AMXT 1501, an alkylated polyamine mimetic which
blocks polyamine uptake.

In the syngeneic CT26.CL25 mouse model of colorectal cancer, AMX-513,
dosed daily for four weeks, reduced tumor growth > 75% compared to
vehicle-treated control in immunocompetent Balb/C mice. There was no
effect in athymic nude mice indicating that tumor growth inhibition by
AMX-513 is T-cell-dependent. In the induced transgenic K6/ODC squamous
tumor mouse model, stable regression was sustained 10 weeks after
treatment ended and was accompanied by tumor infiltrate increases in
IFNɣ and in CD3+ and CD8+ T-cells. Tumor infiltrates from
AMX-513-treated KPC pancreatic cancer transgenic mice with tumor
regressions showed >90% reductions in myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs; CD11b+ Gr-1+) but no changes in mature myeloid cells
(CD11+Gr-1neg) by FACS analysis. AMX-513 treatment did not impact the
percentage or number of CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs, but did significantly
increase the percentage of activated CD8+ T cells in tumors.

Neuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer frequently associated
with MYCN and ODC deregulation. In neuroblastoma cell lines, the AMX-513
combination was highly synergistic (CINeuroblastoma is an aggressive
childhood cancer frequently associated with MYCN and ODC deregulation. In
neuroblastoma cell lines, the AMX-513 combination was highly synergistic
(CI<0.5). Prophylactic treatment of neuroblastoma-prone TH-MYCN
transgenic mice with AMX-513 significantly extended survival compared to
either agent alone (median survival time = 81.0±11.8 days versus DFMO
alone = 57.1±7.1 days; PNeuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer
frequently associated with MYCN and ODC deregulation. In neuroblastoma
cell lines, the AMX-513 combination was highly synergistic (CI<0.5).
Prophylactic treatment of neuroblastoma-prone TH-MYCN transgenic mice
with AMX-513 significantly extended survival compared to either agent
alone (median survival time = 81.0±11.8 days versus DFMO alone =
57.1±7.1 days; P<0.0001). Treatment of mice with small palpable tumors
with AMX-513 in combination with cyclophosphamide/topotecan significantly
improved survival compared with either AMX-513 or cyclo/topo alone (5/9
long term survivors compared to 0/10 and 0/9 for cyclo/topo and AMT-513,
respectively; PNeuroblastoma is an aggressive childhood cancer frequently
associated with MYCN and ODC deregulation. In neuroblastoma cell lines,
the AMX-513 combination was highly synergistic (CI<0.5). Prophylactic
treatment of neuroblastoma-prone TH-MYCN transgenic mice with AMX-513
significantly extended survival compared to either agent alone (median
survival time = 81.0±11.8 days versus DFMO alone = 57.1±7.1 days;
P<0.0001). Treatment of mice with small palpable tumors with AMX-513 in
combination with cyclophosphamide/topotecan significantly improved
survival compared with either AMX-513 or cyclo/topo alone (5/9 long term
survivors compared to 0/10 and 0/9 for cyclo/topo and AMT-513,
respectively; P<0.001 in each case). Polyamine levels were significantly
decreased in mice undergoing AMX-513 treatment compared to DFMO or AMXT
1501 alone.

In conclusion, AMX-513 treatment alone or in combination with other
cancer therapies results in significant tumor growth reduction in
multiple cancer models and demonstrates novel immunotherapeutic
potential. Clinical evaluation of AMX-513 is planned in 2017.


