Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Signature Study: Molecular analysis of pediatric tumors with
establishment of tumor models in a biology study.


Background: Pediatric cancer is the leading cause of death by disease in
children in the US. Significant advances have been made in survival in
the past 30 years and genomic understanding of tumors is underway. Gains
in the identification of biomarkers, drug targets, and the molecular
characterization of cancer are due to improved technology including gene
sequencing, proteomics, and epigenetics. Still, this remains limited
primarily to large academic centers and patients with high
risk/metastatic disease experience Background: Pediatric cancer is the
leading cause of death by disease in children in the US. Significant
advances have been made in survival in the past 30 years and genomic
understanding of tumors is underway. Gains in the identification of
biomarkers, drug targets, and the molecular characterization of cancer
are due to improved technology including gene sequencing, proteomics, and
epigenetics. Still, this remains limited primarily to large academic
centers and patients with high risk/metastatic disease experience < 30%
survival. Phase 1/2 trials not based on precision medicine result in poor
response rates (Background: Pediatric cancer is the leading cause of
death by disease in children in the US. Significant advances have been
made in survival in the past 30 years and genomic understanding of tumors
is underway. Gains in the identification of biomarkers, drug targets, and
the molecular characterization of cancer are due to improved technology
including gene sequencing, proteomics, and epigenetics. Still, this
remains limited primarily to large academic centers and patients with
high risk/metastatic disease experience < 30% survival. Phase 1/2 trials
not based on precision medicine result in poor response rates (<10%).
Therefore, genomic understanding of tumors and molecular targeted
therapies with aims of reaching all children and reducing toxicity while
improving efficacy is needed.

Methods: The Signature Study is an IRB-approved biology study that seeks
to perform genomic analysis, high throughput (HTP) drug testing, and
creation of patient derived xenograft (PDX) models of all pediatric
cancer patients diagnosed/relapsed at Helen DeVos Childrenâ€™s Hospital.
Patients are consented, clinical history is collected in RedCap, and
tumors are collected flash frozen and in cell culture media. Blood is
collected for germline analysis. Tumors are analyzed through gene
expression arrays, DNA panels and exomes and RNA sequencing. Tumors in
cell culture are used for generation of primary patient cell lines
(confirmed by IHC and STR) and immediate injection into NSG mice for PDX
models. Cell lines undergo HTP drug testing using the Prestwick and NCI
drug libraries, novel therapeutics and combinations.

Results: Enrollment has increased since inception in 2011 with now >50
patients/year; a total of 284 pediatric tumors collected representing
over 30 tumor types. The most common diagnosis is neuroblastoma, followed
by medulloblastoma, osteosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Sequencing for
genomic analysis has been performed on 166 tumors to identify mutations,
fusions, CNV, and deletions. To date 184 have been grown as primary
patient cell lines and 75 as PDX models. Over 60 samples have been
evaluated in HTP drug testing. Genomic analysis of cultured tumor cells
has been correlated with response to drug libraries to establish
correlative predictive markers for therapeutic decision making to be
tested in clinical trials. The study stores remaining tissue, cell lines,
and PDX models for additional future research. Conclusion: This study
shows it is feasible for a mid-sized hospital system to coordinate and
collect tumors for genomic analysis in real time for clinical decision
making in the future. This resource is an integrated TransMed database
system which is a powerful resource which correlates clinical outcomes,
therapies, genomic sequencing, PDX models and HTP drug testing used to
answer research questions of biomarkers, biological characterization,
drug sensitivity, and driver pathways within and between pediatric
cancers.


