Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput and sensitive quantification of circulating tumor
DNA.


Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) has a great potential to serve as
non-invasive biomarkers for monitoring disease progression and treatment
response. However, its broad clinical applications have been hindered by
sensitivity, throughput and complexity of existing ctDNA detection
methods. Here we report an adaptation of a multiplex PCR
pre-amplification (PreAmp) into the microfluidic multiplex PCR (MMP-Seq)
technology for high-throughput and sensitive quantitation of ctDNA. We
have demonstrated that PreAmp MMP-Seq enabled sensitive (down to 0.6%
allele frequency), reproducible (R2=0.97), accurate and quantitative
mutation detection from as low as 1.6 ng DNA input. An Empirical Bayesian
Model has been established to estimate background error rates for every
base of amplicons in the ctDNA panel using data from 43 normal plasmas.
0.1-0.3% of median error rates were observed across all positions. 149
longitudinal plasma samples from 12 ovarian and 10 pancreatic cancer
patients of PhI DMUC5754A anti-MUC16 ADC trials were then profiled using
PreAmp MMP-Seq. 79% (11/14) driver mutations found in tissue samples were
also identified in matching baseline plasma samples at frequencies well
above estimated error rates. Moreover, we found that changes of
corresponding ctDNA concentration in post-treatment plasma samples were
correlated with changes in tumor burdens and circulating protein marker
levels. In conclusion, the MMP-seq PreAmp workflow provides an
inexpensive, reproducible and flexible solution for mutation detection in
plasma DNA samples.


