Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting BRCA1 and BRCA2 with NEBNext Directâ„¢.


The screening and detection of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are
critical for the effective management of patients with breast or ovarian
cancer and for the identification of individuals with a high risk of
developing these cancers. In addition, somatic detection of pathogenic
variants in BRCA1/2 can influence treatment decisions due to the
susceptibility of tumors with BRCA mutations to PARP inhibitors.

Here we introduce the NEBNext DirectTM BRCA enrichment panel for the
interrogation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 by Illumina sequencing. NEBNext DirectTM
is a novel, hybridization-based method to selectively enrich nucleic acid
targets ranging from a single gene to several hundred genes. This
approach includes features such as the incorporation of unique molecule
identifiers (UMIs) and the ability to capture degraded DNA, enabling
accurate detection of low-frequency variants from formalin-compromised
DNA and other challenging sample types.

We applied the NEBNext Direct BRCA1/2 panel to frozen tissue and achieved
a high specificity for the BRCA targets (96% of the sequenced reads
mapped to BRCA1 and BRCA2 and 80% of the sequenced bases were within the
targeted regions). In addition, the resulting libraries were highly
uniform in coverage, with 91% of the targeted bases covered at a value of
at least 50% of the mean depth of coverage and 100% of the bases covered
at 20% of the mean or greater. Some variability in the specificity was
observed with formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) samples, and this
effect was dependent on the quality of the FFPE DNA. The UMIs were used
to identify PCR duplicates prior to variant calling, as well as for error
correction, enabling the accurate detection of low-frequency variants.
The library preparation for all samples was completed in one day, and the
entire process of library preparation, sequencing on the Illumina Miseq,
and data analysis was completed in a total of two days.

In summary, we demonstrate that application of the NEBNext DirectTM
method to the enrichment of BRCA1 and BRCA2 provides a tractable approach
for the rapid and highly sensitive analysis of these cancer-associated
genes.


