Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prior irradiation results in elevated programmed death 1 (PD-1) in
T cells.


It is well known that radiation has long-lasting effects on the immune
system. In this study we address the question whether these
radiation-induced adverse effects on T cell activation are associated
with alterations of T cell inhibitory receptors. Expression levels of
inhibitory receptors on T cells were analyzed at multiple post-radiation
time points ranging from one to four weeks in mice receiving whole body
irradiation. The level of the checkpoint receptor, PD-1, on different T
cell subpopulations was determined. Our results showed that prior
irradiation resulted in significant elevated expression of PD-1 in both
CD4+ and CD8+ populations. T cells with elevated PD-1 mostly were either
central memory or na√Øve cells. In addition, the feedback induction of
PD-1 expression in activated T cells declined with time after radiation.
Taken together, the elevated PD-1 level observed at weeks after radiation
exposure is connected to T cell dysfunction. Similar changes were seen in
samples from tumor patients receiving radiotherapy. Recent preclinical
and clinical studies have shown that radiation alters the
immune-modulatory microenvironment in tumor tissue, and implies that a
combination of radiotherapy and T cell checkpoint blockade immunotherapy
including targeting the PD-L1/PD-1 axis may potentiate the antitumor
response. Therefore, understanding the dynamic changes in PD-1 levels in
T cells after radiation should help in the development of a more
effective therapeutic strategy.


