Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bioluminescent metabolite assays enable easy measurement of
changes in tumor biology.


Tumor cells rely on metabolic reprogramming to meet their increased
demands for energy and biomass. Such reprogramming is exemplified by
increased rates of glucose uptake, greater utilization of glycolysis, and
a reliance on glutaminolysis. Cancer cells also have a strong dependence
on lipids and cholesterol and thus feature enhanced rates of biosynthesis
and uptake of these molecules as well. We have developed a suite of
bioluminescent assays that can monitor metabolites in all of these
important pathways. These assays share a core technology that couples the
production of NAD(P)H to the generation of light through a variety of
metabolite specific dehydrogenases. Changes in glycolysis and
glutaminolysis can be followed by measuring glucose, lactate, glutamate,
and/or glutamine through their respective dehydrogenases (and
glutaminase). Glucose uptake is typically monitored through the
accumulation and phosphorylation of 2-deoxyglucose to produce
2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate, and this can be measured by employing
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. These bioluminescent assays are
homogeneous and can be multiplexed with viability, cytotoxicity, and
protein quantitation assays. Metabolites can be measured extracellularly
(i.e. from media) or intracellularly and the assays can be performed in
96- or 384-well plates. These assays are simple and sensitive and can
provide a greater understanding of how various treatments affect the
metabolic state of a tumor cell.


