Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating microRNA expression profiles as a novel diagnostic
biomarker for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Background: The findings of a recent analysis on microRNAs (miRNAs)
suggest that circulating miRNAs have potential as biomarkers of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). In order to identify specific
miRNAs of ESCC, we analyzed the circulating miRNAs of patients who
underwent endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and esophagectomy. Method:
After obtaining written informed consent, we collected paired (pre and
post treatment) blood samples from 60 superficial ESCC patients and 42
pretreatment advanced ESCC patients between 2011 and 2015. Samples were
divided into training (40 superficial ESCC and 22 advanced ESCC) and test
(15 superficial ESCC and 20 advanced ESCC) cohorts according to the
period at which they were obtained (between 2011 and 2013 and between
2014 and 2015). Fifty-five patients underwent EMR and were confirmed as
stage 0 or Stage 1a. Microarray analyses of blood samples were performed
using the 3D-Gene miRNA microarray platform (Toray). Normalization was
achieved using the Quantile method, and poor quality samples were
excluded from the analysis. Any two clinical groups were compared using a
two-sided Student’s t-test. miRNAs exhibiting significant differences
were subsequently evaluated using a logistic regression analysis (LRA).
Multivariate LRA, Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC), and Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC) analyses were performed in order to
evaluate the diagnostic power of miRNA combinations. In all series, we
used post-EMR patients as control cases.

Results: Twelve miRNAs (miR-6722-5p, 489, 4525, 409-3p, 6088, 3678-5p,
197-5p, 4281, 5090, 3173-3p, 762, and 1470) were selected as discriminant
markers (S-combination: AUC 1.00) of superficial ESCC, while 4 miRNAs
(miR-4723-3p, 4646-3p, 2392, and 1236-3p) were selected as discriminant
markers (A-combination: AUC 1.00) of advanced ESCC in the training
cohort. There were no overlap miRNAs between the two combinations. In the
test cohort, the S-combination discriminated superficial ESCC (AUC 1.00),
while the A-combination discriminated advanced ESCC (AUC 1.00) from
post-EMR patients. Furthermore, the S-combination discriminated advanced
ESCC in the test cohort (AUC 1.00). However, the A-combination did not
clearly discriminate superficial ESCC (AUC 0.833).

Conclusion: Our results suggest that selected miRNAs are useful
biomarkers for the discrimination of ESCC. However, biomarkers of
superficial ESCC and advanced ESCC may differ.


