Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1 inhibits mammary carcinogenesis via suppressing
c-myc-induced metabolism reprogramming in breast cancer stem cells.


Purpose: Caveolin-1(CAV1), a membrane constituent protein, exhibits tumor
suppressor activities in multiple malignancies, whereas the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. The current study aimed to determine the
significance of CAV-1 in regulating cancer metabolism and its relation to
breast cancer stem cells (CSCs).

Experimental Design: The anti-carcinogenic function of CAV1 was evaluated
by in vitro cell model, CAV1 knockout mice and MMTV-PyMT spontaneous
breast cancer xenografts. Glycolysis activity and mitochondrial
metabolism were assessed by immunoblotting, oxygen consumption and
mitotacker staining analysis. Mammosphere formation, tumorigenic ability,
reattachment differentiation and signaling pathway analysis were applied
to study the regulation effects of CAV1 on breast CSCs. The clinical
significance of CAV1 was also analyzed by human tissue microarray.

Results: In both mammary transformed cells and spontaneous breast cancer
xenografts, CAV1 is found significantly downregulated and positively
correlated to increased glycolysis activity and impaired mitochondrial
metabolism. Cav1 knockout results in increased ductal hyperplasia,
associating with increased stem cell population and glycolysis
metabolism. Breast CSCs exhibits glycolytic phenotype and decreased CAV1
expression compared to normal mammary stem cells, and CAV1 overexpression
significantly limits CSCsâ€™ self-renewal via inhibiting c-myc induced
glycolysis. Clinical investigation suggests that high CAV1 expression is
revealed with better overall survival and decreased CSCs population.

Conclusions: CAV1 loss facilitates mammary carcinogenesis via enhancing
glycolytic activity in breast CSCs, and CAV1 based therapy might become a
novel strategy for breast cancer prevention.


