Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Higher tumor mutation burden (TMB) is associated with the presence
of DNA repair gene mutations, T-cell infiltration, and favorable survival
outcome in ovarian carcinoma.


Immunotherapy is being explored as a promising therapeutic option in
ovarian cancer. However, little progress has been made in our
understanding of the immune cell landscape in the tumor microenvironment
and its association with genomic features in ovarian cancer.

The RNA-seq values of immune “metagene” markers that are specific to
each of 28 cell types (Angelova et al. 2015) from the TCGA database were
analyzed to determine the tumor infiltration by immune cells in 307
patient samples (185 sequenced) with ovarian carcinoma.

Tumor tissues were most frequently infiltrated by all T cells (46.91%),
activated CD4 T(19.87%) and activated CD8 T(16.94%) cells. Activated CD8
T cells were significantly co-infiltrated by NK56 bright, effector memory
CD4 T, activated CD4 T, myeloid dendritic cell (DC) and plasmacytoid DC.
The tumors with mutated homologous recombination (HR) genes, including
ATR, ATM, CHEK1, CHEK2, BRCA1, BRCA2, BAP1, BARD1, FANCD2, FANCE, FANCC,
FANCA, RAD50, RAD51, and PALB2, demonstrated a significant 1.36-fold
increase in average mutation counts compared to the wild-types (p Tumor
tissues were most frequently infiltrated by all T cells (46.91%),
activated CD4 T(19.87%) and activated CD8 T(16.94%) cells. Activated CD8
T cells were significantly co-infiltrated by NK56 bright, effector memory
CD4 T, activated CD4 T, myeloid dendritic cell (DC) and plasmacytoid DC.
The tumors with mutated homologous recombination (HR) genes, including
ATR, ATM, CHEK1, CHEK2, BRCA1, BRCA2, BAP1, BARD1, FANCD2, FANCE, FANCC,
FANCA, RAD50, RAD51, and PALB2, demonstrated a significant 1.36-fold
increase in average mutation counts compared to the wild-types (p <
0.01). Mutations in mismatch repair genes had no statistically
significant association with the average mutation counts. Tumors with
high mutation counts showed a significantly increased infiltration by
activated CD8 T cells and immature DCs (Table1, p Tumor tissues were most
frequently infiltrated by all T cells (46.91%), activated CD4 T(19.87%)
and activated CD8 T(16.94%) cells. Activated CD8 T cells were
significantly co-infiltrated by NK56 bright, effector memory CD4 T,
activated CD4 T, myeloid dendritic cell (DC) and plasmacytoid DC. The
tumors with mutated homologous recombination (HR) genes, including ATR,
ATM, CHEK1, CHEK2, BRCA1, BRCA2, BAP1, BARD1, FANCD2, FANCE, FANCC,
FANCA, RAD50, RAD51, and PALB2, demonstrated a significant 1.36-fold
increase in average mutation counts compared to the wild-types (p <
0.01). Mutations in mismatch repair genes had no statistically
significant association with the average mutation counts. Tumors with
high mutation counts showed a significantly increased infiltration by
activated CD8 T cells and immature DCs (Table1, p < 0.05). The highest
quartile in tumor mutation burden (TMB) was associated with a significant
16.7 months longer overall survival (OS) compared to the lowest quartile
(p Tumor tissues were most frequently infiltrated by all T cells
(46.91%), activated CD4 T(19.87%) and activated CD8 T(16.94%) cells.
Activated CD8 T cells were significantly co-infiltrated by NK56 bright,
effector memory CD4 T, activated CD4 T, myeloid dendritic cell (DC) and
plasmacytoid DC. The tumors with mutated homologous recombination (HR)
genes, including ATR, ATM, CHEK1, CHEK2, BRCA1, BRCA2, BAP1, BARD1,
FANCD2, FANCE, FANCC, FANCA, RAD50, RAD51, and PALB2, demonstrated a
significant 1.36-fold increase in average mutation counts compared to the
wild-types (p < 0.01). Mutations in mismatch repair genes had no
statistically significant association with the average mutation counts.
Tumors with high mutation counts showed a significantly increased
infiltration by activated CD8 T cells and immature DCs (Table1, p <
0.05). The highest quartile in tumor mutation burden (TMB) was associated
with a significant 16.7 months longer overall survival (OS) compared to
the lowest quartile (p < 0.01).

Our study demonstrated that higher TMB is associated with the presence of
DNA repair gene mutations, activated CD8 T cell infiltration, and
favorable survival outcome in ovarian carcinoma.

Fold change in the percent of patients with infiltration by each immune
cell





High TMB

Low TMB

Fold change†

p-value††



Immune cell subtypes*

Percent of patients with infiltration (%)

Percent of patients without infiltration (%)

Percent of patients with infiltration (%)

Percent of patients without infiltration (%)





iDC

3.24

47.57

0.00

49.19

NA

0.01



Th17

2.16

48.65

0.54

48.65

4.00

0.19



Immature B cells

3.24

47.57

1.08

48.11

3.03

0.16



Mast cells

2.70

48.11

1.08

48.11

2.50

0.27



Macrophages

3.78

47.03

1.62

47.57

2.36

0.21



Activated CD8

11.89

38.92

5.41

43.78

2.48

0.03



Effector Memory CD4

5.41

45.41

2.70

46.49

2.05

0.20



mDC

3.78

47.03

2.16

47.03

1.75

0.38



Activated B cells

4.32

46.49

3.24

45.95

1.32

0.62



All B cells

5.41

45.41

4.32

44.86

1.24

0.67



All immune cells

31.35

19.46

27.57

21.62

1.26

0.43



All T cells

23.78

27.03

23.78

25.41

0.94

0.83



NK56 dim

2.16

48.65

2.16

47.03

0.97

0.96



Activated CD4

8.11

42.70

9.19

40.00

0.83

0.62



Th1

3.78

47.03

4.32

44.86

0.83

0.74



Treg

1.08

49.73

1.62

47.57

0.64

0.62



NKT

1.62

49.19

2.70

46.49

0.57

0.44



Central Memory CD8

1.08

49.73

2.70

46.49

0.37

0.23



*Excluded cell types with *Excluded cell types with <5 tumor
infiltrations. iDC, immature dentric cells; mDC, myeloid dendritic cells;
NKT, NK T cells; Treg, regulatory T cells. †Fold change = Proportion of
tumors infiltrated by immune cells among high TMB tumors / Proportion of
tumors infiltrated by immune cells among low TMB tumors.
††Chi-squared test


