Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and characterization of small molecules targeting the
DNA-binding ETS domain of ERG in prostate cancer.


Genomic alterations involving translocations of the ETS-related gene ERG
occur in approximately half of prostate cancer cases. These alterations
result in aberrant, androgen-regulated production of ERG protein variants
that directly contribute to disease development and progression. This
study describes the discovery and characterization of a new class of
small molecule ERG antagonists identified through rational in silico
methods. These antagonists are designed to sterically block DNA binding
by the ETS domain of ERG and thereby disrupt transcriptional activity. We
confirmed the direct binding of a lead compound, VPC-18005, with the
ERG-ETS domain using biophysical approaches. We then demonstrated
VPC-18005 reduced migration and invasion rates of ERG expressing prostate
cancer cells, and reduced metastasis in a zebrafish xenograft model.
These results demonstrate proof-of-principal that small molecule
targeting of the ERG ETS domain can suppress transcriptional activity and
reverse transformed characteristics of prostate cancers aberrantly
expressing ERG. Clinical advancement of the developed small molecule
inhibitors may provide new therapeutic agents for use as alternatives to,
or in combination with, current therapies for men with ERG-expressing
metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer.


