Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The stem cell factor LIN28B regulates proliferation and apoptosis
in diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma.


Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Glioma (DIPG) is an incurable, invasive and
aggressive pediatric brain tumor. Identifying molecular markers that
regulate tumor growth and invasion are needed for developing efficient
treatment strategies. LIN28B is a stem cell factor expressed during
normal fetal development and re-expressed in cancer cells. We had
previously shown that LIN28A, another family member of LIN28 proteins,
regulates invasion and tumorigenicity in adult high grade gliomas. We
observed increased LIN28B expression in patient-derived DIPG neurosphere
cell lines using western blotting. We hypothesized that LIN28B promotes
proliferation and prevents apoptosis in DIPG. Using two different
lentiviral transduced short hairpin RNAs (shRNA), we suppressed LIN28B
protein levels in DIPG neurospheres, as confirmed by western blotting.
DIPG neurospheres that have been treated with LIN28B shRNA showed reduced
proliferation as measured by BrdU incorporation (PDiffuse Intrinsic
Pontine Glioma (DIPG) is an incurable, invasive and aggressive pediatric
brain tumor. Identifying molecular markers that regulate tumor growth and
invasion are needed for developing efficient treatment strategies. LIN28B
is a stem cell factor expressed during normal fetal development and
re-expressed in cancer cells. We had previously shown that LIN28A,
another family member of LIN28 proteins, regulates invasion and
tumorigenicity in adult high grade gliomas. We observed increased LIN28B
expression in patient-derived DIPG neurosphere cell lines using western
blotting. We hypothesized that LIN28B promotes proliferation and prevents
apoptosis in DIPG. Using two different lentiviral transduced short
hairpin RNAs (shRNA), we suppressed LIN28B protein levels in DIPG
neurospheres, as confirmed by western blotting. DIPG neurospheres that
have been treated with LIN28B shRNA showed reduced proliferation as
measured by BrdU incorporation (P<0.01) and increased apoptosis as
measured by cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3) expression (PDiffuse Intrinsic
Pontine Glioma (DIPG) is an incurable, invasive and aggressive pediatric
brain tumor. Identifying molecular markers that regulate tumor growth and
invasion are needed for developing efficient treatment strategies. LIN28B
is a stem cell factor expressed during normal fetal development and
re-expressed in cancer cells. We had previously shown that LIN28A,
another family member of LIN28 proteins, regulates invasion and
tumorigenicity in adult high grade gliomas. We observed increased LIN28B
expression in patient-derived DIPG neurosphere cell lines using western
blotting. We hypothesized that LIN28B promotes proliferation and prevents
apoptosis in DIPG. Using two different lentiviral transduced short
hairpin RNAs (shRNA), we suppressed LIN28B protein levels in DIPG
neurospheres, as confirmed by western blotting. DIPG neurospheres that
have been treated with LIN28B shRNA showed reduced proliferation as
measured by BrdU incorporation (P<0.01) and increased apoptosis as
measured by cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3) expression (P<0.01). To determine
the molecular mechanism of LIN28B-mediated phenotypes in DIPG, we studied
the canonical downstream effector of LIN28B called HMGA2, which is a
DNA-binding protein that functions as a transcriptional regulator. Using
western blotting, we found decreased HMGA2 protein levels in DIPG
neurospheres infected with LIN28B shRNA. Taken together, our results
suggest that LIN28B is important for promoting DIPG cell proliferation
and preventing apoptotic cell death. Additionally, we also found that
LIN28B regulates HMGA2 expression in DIPG neurospheres. Future studies
will focus on expanding our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
LIN28B-regulated malignancy in DIPG.


