Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative network variomics reveals complex genotype to
phenotype relationships in cancer.


Proteins interact with other macromolecules in complex cellular networks
for signal transduction and biological functions. Recently a deluge of
genomic information becomes available from patients stricken by a variety
of cancer types. In cancer, genetic aberrations have been traditionally
thought to abolish the entire gene function. It has been increasing
appreciated that each genomic mutation of a gene could have a subtle but
unique effect on protein function or network rewiring, contributing to
diverse phenotypic consequences across cancer patient populations. In
this study, we designed an integrative multi-omics platform using systems
biology approaches to functionally assess the effects of cancer genetic
variants. We compared a broad spectrum of mutation classes for a wide
range of mechanistic effects on gene function in the context of signaling
networks. Our results reveal a functional landscape of context-specific
signaling network perturbations underlying cancer genetic heterogeneity
at the base-pair resolution. Such information is critical for
understanding the complex pleiotropic effect of cancer genes, and
provides a possible link between genotype and phenotype in cancer.
Furthermore, this study suggests new perspectives in targeted therapy and
precision medicine.


