Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of STAT3 vs AKT in cellular survival.


Cell to cell adhesion is mediated by the cadherin family of proteins. We
previously demonstrated that cadherin engagement (which is favored under
conditions of confluence) triggers a dramatic increase in Rac protein
levels, followed by an increase in IL6 secretion and Stat3 (Signal
Transducer and Activator of Transcription-3) activation. This is critical
for survival of both normal and neoplastic cells. On the other hand, cell
adhesion to the substratum, ie the extracellular matrix at the focal
adhesion sites, is mediated by the integrin receptors. The focal adhesion
kinase (FAK) binds Î²1-integrins and this forces FAK in an open
configuration and autophosphorylation at tyr397 which constitutes a
binding site for Src-SH2. This results in phosphorylation of FAK at tyr
576, 577, 861 and 925. The FAK/Src complex then activates downstream
effectors such as Ras/Erk and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3k)/Akt.

Our results demonstrate that mouse fibroblasts or epithelial cells placed
in suspension (ie in the absence of anchorage to a substratum or cell to
cell adhesion) have very low levels of activated Akt-pser473, but levels
are increased dramatically upon subsequent aggregation, ie cadherin
engagement. Interestingly, cells growing attached in monolayers had high
Akt-pser473 levels at low densities, which increased only slightly with
confluence. This pointed to the possibility that a kinase may be
phosphorylating Akt upon attachment to the substratum. The results showed
that FAK knockout cells have very low Akt-pser473 at low cell densities,
while reintroduction of wt-FAK reinstated the high Akt-pser473 levels.
Furthermore, expression of a mutant form of FAK where the 5 sites that
are phosphorylated by Src are converted to phenylalanine, did not result
in an increase in Akt-pser473 levels, demonstrating a Src requirement for
Akt, pser473 phosphorylation.

Conclusions: Cell survival signals are a prerequisite for tissue
function, as well as drug resistance. In cultured, non-neoplastic cells
grown to low densities the integrin/FAK/cSrc signal activates PI3k/Akt
and promotes survival, in the absence of cadherin engagement.
Interestingly, the integrin/FAK signal does not activate Stat3, despite
the fact that mutationally activated Src is a potent Stat3 activator.
Additional mechanisms, perhaps involving Jak and/or activated receptors
may also be required for Stat3 activation in cells grown attached but at
low densities.

On the other hand, upon cadherin engagement at high cell densities,
activation of both the cadherin/Stat3 and integrin/FAK/Akt pathways can
promote survival. Therefore, co-ordinate activation of these
complementary pathways could greatly enhance survival and growth of
disseminated tumor cells at distant metastastic sites, and might promote
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. In this scenario, pharmacological
inhibition of both FAK/Src and Stat3 would enhance patient survival.


