Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole-genome, virome, and immuno-genome of liver cancer indicate
its genomic feature associated with virus infection and inflammation.


Liver cancer is prevalent worldwide, mainly associated with virus
infection and chronic inflammation, but its underlying molecular
mechanism is quite heterogeneous. We performed virome and immuno-genomic
analyses, in addition to whole-genome landscape of somatic alterations
and transcriptome in 300 liver cancers. Our whole-genome analysis
elucidated point mutations in non-coding regions, structural variations,
and virus integrations (HBV and AAV), in addition to coding mutations. We
discovered novel recurrently mutated coding and non-coding regions, such
as NEAT1/MALAT1 lincRNAs, promoters, CTCF-binding sites, and novel
regulatory regions, and known cancer genes (CDKN2A, APC, TERT) and novel
cancer genes (ASH1L, NCOR1, MACROD2) that were recurrently affected by
SVs. For virome analysis, we performed ultra-deep sequencing after
capturing HBV sequences from DNAs of 100 liver cancers or adjacent
HBV-infected liver tissues, which demonstrated genome-wide
HBV-integrations (1794 sites) in liver cancers and infected liver tissues
and eliminated pathological mechanism of viral integration. We also
generated immuno-genomic profiles of these liver cancers, including HLA
genotypes and mutations, neo-antigen presentation, immune signatures, and
TCR repertories, which suggested some distinct immunological features and
underlying molecular pathways of liver cancer associated with
inflammation. These trans-omics data demonstrated comprehensive and
distinct immuno-genomic feature of virus-related liver cancer, as well as
its distinct whole-genome profiles, and can help to understand the
molecular and microenvironment pathways underlying carcinogenesis and
treatment response of liver cancer.


