Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D ex-vivo assay platform using primary lung cancer cells in
malignant pleural effusions as predictor for clinical outcome of
personalized chemotherapy.


Background:

Despite advances in therapeutic programs to treat various cancer types,
dismal overall response rates for several entities has posed dilemma for
oncologists and researchers alike. Therefore, there is an immense need in
accelerating therapeutic programs towards clinical success in cancer
patients. It is well established that patients suffering from same cancer
type may respond very differently to a given chemotherapeutic regimen. We
propose the development of a unique patient-derived 3D ex-vivo drug
testing platform as a valid decision making tool for 2nd or 3rd line
treatment regimens.

Materials and Methods: In this ex-vivo platform freshly collected
malignant pleural effusions from patients were processed for cytological
diagnosis on cell blocks, using respective immune-histochemical markers.
Effusions were prepared for a 96 well based 3D ex vivo assay format using
the hanging drop method and a parallel 2D cell culture format.
Subsequently, we compared the original cell composition of the malignant
effusion with respective microtumors generated in the 3D format.
Microtumors were then fixed, embedded in paraffin and processed like
original cell blocks. IHC including respective markers for tumour cells
such as TTF1, CDX2 and oestrogen receptor and for non-tumour cellular
fractions like calretinin, CD45, and MPO were processed.

Results: The microtumors generated (ranging from 300 to 500Âµm) retained
the native tumor morphology and cellular composition, thereby presenting
tumour microenvironment like conditions in this ex vivo system. These
cultures contain all cellular components of a malignant effusion at the
beginning. Next to cancer cells, mesothelial cells, lymphocytes and
granulocytes were main constituents. Cellular ratios were measured by
computerized image analysis. Both cell sediments and supernatants are
amenable to profiling strategies by next generation sequencing and mass
spectrometry.

Conclusion: Our model presents an optimal condition to conduct
chemosensitivity/-resistance profiling in individual cancer patients
using standard drug combinations. Furthermore, we are currently
developing an immune competent 3D model to access cancer cell interaction
with surrounding immune cells. We expect that original immune cells will
be quenched out during culture, thus these micro tumors can be
supplemented with activated effectors in particular, T and NK cells
(autologous system) to investigate novel drug combination approaches
including immune-stimulating agents such as anti-PD-L1 antibodies.


