Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of phenyl alpha-galactosylceramide C34 and
chemotherapy on 4T1-tumor bearing mouse model.


Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells represent a unique subpopulation
of innate immune cells which have immune modulatory effects on many
immune effector cells such as CD4 T cells and CD8 T cells.
Alpha-galactosylceramide (a-GalCer) is a well-known iNKT-stimulating
glycolipid. Using a-GalCer as a template, we have generated a more potent
a-GalCer analog C34, which contains two aromatic rings at the acyl chain
and demonstrated its anti-cancer effect on tumor bearing mice model. It
has been reported that NKT cells killed cancer cell lines treated with
chemotherapy agents through TRAIL- and FasL-mediated pathways. In this
study, we evaluated the anti-cancer effects of chemotherapy and C34 on
tumor-bearing mouse model. First, BALB/c mice bearing 4T1 breast cancer
were injected with various dose of chemotherapy agents weekly x 5 and the
sub-optimal dose of docetaxel and doxorubicin was determined to be 0.5
mg/Kg. Similarly, sub-optimal dose of cisplatin and docetaxel in TC1 lung
cancer-bearing C57BL/6 mice was determined to be 1 mg/Kg and 2 mg/Kg,
respectively. In both tumor models, the suboptimal dose of C34 was found
to be 0.1 ug per mouse. The treatment schedules of combination of
chemotherapy and C34 were examined by administration of C34 at the same
day (0D), three days (-3D) and one day (-1D) before chemotherapy and one
day (+1D) after chemotherapy. We observed a survival benefit in mice
injected with C34 one day after docetaxel treatment in 4T1-bearing mice
as compared to those treated with the other schedules. Moreover, the
survival of mice was significantly prolonged when C34 was injected three
days after cisplatin treatment in TC1-bearing mice (median survival: 46
days for cisplatin and 55 days for cisplatin+C34, log-rank test p =
0.041). In the 4T1 tumor microenvironment, we found the number of
CD3+CD8+ T cells was significantly greater in mice treated with
docetaxel+C34 (23,536 +/- 901.4) than those treated with docetaxel only
(2,270 +/- 1,536, t-test P Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells
represent a unique subpopulation of innate immune cells which have immune
modulatory effects on many immune effector cells such as CD4 T cells and
CD8 T cells. Alpha-galactosylceramide (a-GalCer) is a well-known
iNKT-stimulating glycolipid. Using a-GalCer as a template, we have
generated a more potent a-GalCer analog C34, which contains two aromatic
rings at the acyl chain and demonstrated its anti-cancer effect on tumor
bearing mice model. It has been reported that NKT cells killed cancer
cell lines treated with chemotherapy agents through TRAIL- and
FasL-mediated pathways. In this study, we evaluated the anti-cancer
effects of chemotherapy and C34 on tumor-bearing mouse model. First,
BALB/c mice bearing 4T1 breast cancer were injected with various dose of
chemotherapy agents weekly x 5 and the sub-optimal dose of docetaxel and
doxorubicin was determined to be 0.5 mg/Kg. Similarly, sub-optimal dose
of cisplatin and docetaxel in TC1 lung cancer-bearing C57BL/6 mice was
determined to be 1 mg/Kg and 2 mg/Kg, respectively. In both tumor models,
the suboptimal dose of C34 was found to be 0.1 ug per mouse. The
treatment schedules of combination of chemotherapy and C34 were examined
by administration of C34 at the same day (0D), three days (-3D) and one
day (-1D) before chemotherapy and one day (+1D) after chemotherapy. We
observed a survival benefit in mice injected with C34 one day after
docetaxel treatment in 4T1-bearing mice as compared to those treated with
the other schedules. Moreover, the survival of mice was significantly
prolonged when C34 was injected three days after cisplatin treatment in
TC1-bearing mice (median survival: 46 days for cisplatin and 55 days for
cisplatin+C34, log-rank test p = 0.041). In the 4T1 tumor
microenvironment, we found the number of CD3+CD8+ T cells was
significantly greater in mice treated with docetaxel+C34 (23,536 +/-
901.4) than those treated with docetaxel only (2,270 +/- 1,536, t-test P
< 0.0001). In addition, the number of PD1+ CD8 T cells was slightly
higher, but did not reach statistical significance (t-test p = 0.3), in
mice treated with docetaxel+C34 (23.3 +/- 8.5) than in mice treated with
docetaxel only (14.6 +/- 10.1). In short, we have established an optimal
treatment schedule for the combination of C34 and chemotherapy that
showed synergistic anti-tumor efficacy. We also demonstrated that C34
could increase the number of CD8+ T cells in the tumor microenvironment
in mice receiving chemotherapy. These results indicate that combination
of C34 and chemotherapy administered with an optimal treatment schedule
might have synergistic therapeutic efficacy for patients with lung cancer
and breast cancer.


