Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATM protein loss and clinical outcomes with platinum chemotherapy
in patients with advanced solid tumors.


Background Loss of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), a key protein
regulating DNA damage repair signaling, appears to sensitize tumors to
platinum chemotherapy in preclinical studies. In this study, the
incidence of ATM loss in patients with advanced solid tumors and clinical
outcomes with platinum chemotherapy was analyzed.

Methods Archival tumor and biopsy samples of primary or metastatic sites
of patients treated in a phase I trial unit were retrieved and ATM
immunohistochemistry (IHC), as well as targeted next generation
sequencing (NGS) was performed. Analytic validation and assay
optimization of rabbit monoclonal antibody [Y170] to ATM (Abcam ab32420)
was undertaken using known positive (VCaP xenograft material and GM14680
cell pellet) and negative (GM01526 cell pellet) controls. IHC slides were
assessed by a trained pathologist for nuclear staining intensity of ATM
and semi-quantitatively scored. ATM loss was defined as a nuclear H score
of â‰¤10. Clinical data were collected retrospectively from case records.
Duration on platinum therapy was defined as time from start of first
platinum therapy to time to subsequent therapy (adjuvant platinum
excluded).

Results Overall, 679 samples of 587 patients were tested for ATM IHC, of
which 517 samples had NGS performed; 5% of patients (n = 31) had ATM IHC
loss, and 5% (n = 27) had somatic ATM mutations detected by NGS (Table
1). In 70 matched primary/metastatic or different metastatic sites,
concordance of ATM IHC loss occurred in 99% (n = 69; 7 with ATM IHC loss)
of samples. Of the colorectal cancer cohort (n = 223), duration on
platinum therapy was significantly longer for the ATM loss group (11 vs 8
months, HR: 0.57, 95% CI: 0.35 to 0.93, p = 0.04).

Discussion Loss of ATM expression was detected among 5% of this cohort of
advanced solid cancers, primarily in breast and gastrointestinal tumors.
Sensitivity to platinum therapy is significantly higher in ATM loss
colorectal cancer. Further prospective studies with larger cohorts are
required to validate these findings.

ATM IHC and ATM mutation by NGS by tumor group



Tumor types

Total

ATM IHC loss (%)

ATM mutation (%)

Concomitant ATM loss and ATM mutation

Concomitant TP53 mutation with ATM IHC loss or mutation





Total

Misense n

Frameshift n

Truncating n

(as % of those with ATM IHC loss)

(as % of those with ATM IHC loss/mutation)



Colorectal

223

16(7)

9(4)

5



4

4 (25)

10 (48)



Gynaecological

105

1(1)

7(7)

4

1

2



5 (63)



Thoracic

80

1(1)

3(4)

2



1

1 (100)

2 (67)



Breast

44

8(18)

4(9)

2

2



3 (38)

4 (44)



Upper GI

37

2(5)

1(3)





1



2 (67)



Hepatobiliary

22

1(5)

1(5)

1





1 (50)



Others

76

2(3)

2(3)





2

1 (50)





Total

587

31(5)

27(5)

14 (52)

3 (11)

10 (37)

9 (29)

24 (49)


