Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of germline single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
ERBB-family genes and genes associated with homologous recombination
deficiency (HRD) on response to taxotere, platinum and trastuzumab (TCH)
based therapy in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer patients.


BACKGROUND: We have shown that ERBB (EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB and ERBB4)
germline single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have a negative impact on
the outcome of trastuzumab treated HER2-positive breast cancer (BC)
patients. Currently TCH (taxotere, platinum and trastuzumab) based
therapy is used to treat early stage HER2-positive BC. We investigate the
importance of germline SNPs in ERBB genes and those genes involved in
homologous recombination deficiency (HRD), on how patients respond to TCH
therapy.

PATIENTS AND METHODS: ERBB/HRD SNPs were identified in a panel of 32
HER2-positive BC patients by next generation sequencing (NGS). Agena
MassArray analysis confirmed the genotype of these SNPs in a further 157
women. Kaplan-Meier estimates and Cox regression analysis identified that
both ERBB/HRD SNPs were associated with relapse free survival (RFS) in
patients who received a TCH based treatment versus those who received
alternate therapies. Protein extracted from formalin fixed paraffin
embedded tumours (n=60), was run on an RPPA platform to measure
expression and phosphorylation of proteins (69 antibodies). Logistical
regression identified protein levels associated with the presence/absence
of ERBB/HRD SNPs that were significantly associated with RFS.

RESULTS: Ten ERBB/HRD SNPs were profiled in 157 trastuzumab treated
HER2-positive BC patients. The minor alleles of the ERBB2 (rs1136201),
ERBB3 (rs2229046) and BARD1 (rs2070096) SNPs significantly associated
with a worse RFS in patients who received TCH based therapy relative to
those who had the reference allele (ERBB2: HR=2.67 (CI=1.05-6.78),
p=0.04; ERBB3 rs2229046: HR=4.95 (CI=1.91-12.79), p=9.75x10-4; BARD1:
HR=3.27 (CI =1.16-9.17), p=0.02). The impact of ERBB/HRD SNPs on RFS was
not observed in patients who did not receive TCH treatment. The minor
allele of the RNF8 rs2284922 SNP is associated with a worse RFS (RNF8:
HR=12.42 (CI =2.00-77.19), p=6.89x10-3) relative to those who had the
reference allele only in patients who did not receive TCH treatment. RPPA
analysis identified that patients who received TCH therapy and had the
minor allele of the ERBB3 SNPs were significantly associated with the
expression of HER2, p27 and MEK1/2 (rs2229046; minor allele associated
with low expression of p27 (p=7.22x10-3) and with high expression of HER2
(p=6.53x10-3); rs773123, minor allele associated with low expression of
p27 (p=5.38x10-4) and with high expression of MEK1/2 (p=6.24x10-3).

CONCLUSIONS: The presence of germline ERBB/HRD SNPs may play an important
role in how a patient responds to TCH based therapy, and clinical
assessment of these SNPs by targeted genetic screening of patients' blood
may allow for stratification of patients prior to treatment.


