Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Noninvasive monitoring of endogenous Pdl1 expression by using a
dual reporter system.


Programmed death-ligand 1 (Pdl1) is a key immune checkpoint protein
facilitating tumor escape from host immune system. Clinical approval of
anti-PD1 and anti-PDL1 antibodies for the treatment of a variety of
malignancies underscores the promise of immune checkpoint therapy.
Further progress in this promising area of research is likely to come
from better understanding of the mechanisms for regulation of immune
checkpoint proteins such as PDL1. In the present study, we designed a
dual reporter imaging system to monitor Pdl1 expression by use of the
CRSPR-Cas9 technology. A fusion reporter that consists of eGFP and Luc2
was introduced into downstream of the endogenous Pdl1 gene, right before
the stop codon, through CRISPR-Cas9 mediated homologous recombination. A
P2A self-cleaving motif is inserted between the fusion reporter gene
(eGFP-Luc2) and Pdl1. The reporter system was introduced into two murine
tumor cell lines, 4T1 and B16F10. In vitro, an increase in eGFP intensity
and bioluminescence of the reporter cells was observed after exposure to
ionizing radiation or IFN-gamma, which has been reported to upregulate
the expression of Pdl1. In vivo, we were able to observe radiation
induced increase in bioluminescence signals from tumor established by use
of the reporter cells. Our study therefore provided proof of principle
for the use of our endogenous Pdl1 reporter imaging system to monitor the
expression levels of Pdl1 in vitro and in vivo noninvasively and serially.


