Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic acquisition of HER2 expression on circulating tumor cells
in gastric cancer patients correlates to developing therapeutic
resistance.


Introduction: It has been hypothesized that molecular characters of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) is dynamically evolved during cancer
development. However, how the evolutive CTC subtypes support tumor
progression and drug resistance remains unclear. In this study, converted
phenotypic HER2 expression and karyotypic chromosome 8 ploidy of CTCs in
gastric cancer patients who developed therapeutic resistance were
systematically investigated.

Methods: Ninety-eight prospectively enrolled patients with diagnosis of
advanced gastric cancer (AGC) were histo-pathologically classified into 2
cohorts of HER2+ (hHER2+, 53 patients, subjected to the combined chemo-
and anti-HER2 targeted therapy), and HER2- (hHER2-, 45 patients,
subjected to chemotherapy alone). Integrated EpCAM-independent
subtraction enrichment and immunostaining-fluorescence in situ
hybridization (SE-iFISH) was applied to monitor and characterize HER2
expression and chromosome 8 ploidy of CTCs in patients following multiple
courses of therapy until disease progression.

Results: HER2 expression on CTCs was heterogeneous and interconverted
compared to its relatively stable status on primary tumor. Among those
prior-to-therapy patients, HER2+ CTCs were only detected in 30.2% (16/53)
hHER2+ patients, which whereas can also be detected in 29.5% (13/44)
hHER2- cohort. Following several courses of therapy, additional 34% (18
out of 53, total: 34% + previous 30.2% = 64.2%) in hHER2+ and 15.9% (7
out of 44, total: 15.9% + previous 29.5% = 45.4%) in HER2- cohort
revealed acquired HER2 expression on CTCs. Acquired HER2+ phenotype on
CTCs closely correlated to the decreased therapeutic efficacy. Twenty one
patients in hHER2+ and 8 in hHER2- cohorts have developed therapeutic
resistance at the time of analysis. Among those patients, HER2+ CTCs were
identified in 19 of hHER2+ (19 out of 21, 90.5%) and 6 of hHER2- cohorts
(6 out of 8, 75%), respectively. Further karyotyping of CTCs in those
patients developing therapeutic resistance indicated that most of the
CTCs with acquired HER2 expression had multiploid (â‰¥5) chromosome 8,
implying that aneuploid chromosome 8 in acquired HER2+ CTCs were likely
relative to development of therapeutic resistance, both chemotherapy
alone and the combined chemo- and targeted therapy. Genomic profiling of
the single CTC subtyped by iFISH upon phenotypic HER2 expression and
karyotypic chromosome 8 ploidy is currently under investigation.

Conclusion: Dynamic profiling gene signature and molecular
characterization of CTCs might be significant in terms of predicting
therapeutic resistance, and further help select an alternative effective
intervention to overcome the acquired therapeutic resistance.


