Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity-induced modifications in the mammary gland
microenvironment promote TNBC progression even after weight loss.


Obesity contributes to 20% of US female cancer deaths and is linked to
increased risk for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), as well as
increased risk of vascular invasion, metastasis, and mortality in breast
cancer patients. We previously showed that obesity-induced elevation of
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signaling through its receptor, cMET,
accelerated development of tumors in the C3(1)-TAg GEMM of TNBC compared
to low fat diet (LFD)-fed lean controls. Weight loss significantly
reduced HGF/cMET signaling in normal mammary glands and cMET in tumors,
and reversed high fat diet (HFD)-driven tumor progression, while
crizotinib-mediated cMET inhibition limited tumor development and
microvascular density in both lean and obese C3(1)-TAg mice. To
differentiate tumor-intrinsic versus microenvironment-associated
mechanisms, we employed an orthotopic transplant model of a C3(1)-TAg
TNBC cell line to investigate tumor growth dynamics in lean, obese, or
formerly obese (FOb) microenvironments. We hypothesized that TNBC tumors
derived from lean C3(1)-TAg mice and transplanted into obese mice would
grow more rapidly, contain more macrophages (MFs) and exhibit greater
blood vessel density than tumors in lean or FOb mice due to
obesity-induced MF and/or endothelial secretion of HGF. At 8 weeks of
age, female FVB/NJ mice were randomized to diet groups (N=20/diet): 1)
lean (LFD, 10% kcal from fat), 2) obese (HFD, 60% kcal from fat) 3) or
FOb (HFD, 5 weeks; LFD, 5 weeks). Following 10 weeks on diets mice were
injected with 2x105 luciferase-tagged C3(1)-TAg cells. Tumor volume was
measured by calipers. At 21 days post-injection mice were sacrificed for
tissue collection. Normal mammary gland, tumors, and tumor-adjacent
adipose + tumor-draining lymph node were collected for histological
examination and gene expression analysis. Mammary fat pad mass in obese
FVB/NJ mice (0.27 g) was significantly greater than lean (0.14 g) or FOb
animals (0.11 g) (PObesity contributes to 20% of US female cancer deaths
and is linked to increased risk for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC),
as well as increased risk of vascular invasion, metastasis, and mortality
in breast cancer patients. We previously showed that obesity-induced
elevation of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signaling through its
receptor, cMET, accelerated development of tumors in the C3(1)-TAg GEMM
of TNBC compared to low fat diet (LFD)-fed lean controls. Weight loss
significantly reduced HGF/cMET signaling in normal mammary glands and
cMET in tumors, and reversed high fat diet (HFD)-driven tumor
progression, while crizotinib-mediated cMET inhibition limited tumor
development and microvascular density in both lean and obese C3(1)-TAg
mice. To differentiate tumor-intrinsic versus microenvironment-associated
mechanisms, we employed an orthotopic transplant model of a C3(1)-TAg
TNBC cell line to investigate tumor growth dynamics in lean, obese, or
formerly obese (FOb) microenvironments. We hypothesized that TNBC tumors
derived from lean C3(1)-TAg mice and transplanted into obese mice would
grow more rapidly, contain more macrophages (MFs) and exhibit greater
blood vessel density than tumors in lean or FOb mice due to
obesity-induced MF and/or endothelial secretion of HGF. At 8 weeks of
age, female FVB/NJ mice were randomized to diet groups (N=20/diet): 1)
lean (LFD, 10% kcal from fat), 2) obese (HFD, 60% kcal from fat) 3) or
FOb (HFD, 5 weeks; LFD, 5 weeks). Following 10 weeks on diets mice were
injected with 2x105 luciferase-tagged C3(1)-TAg cells. Tumor volume was
measured by calipers. At 21 days post-injection mice were sacrificed for
tissue collection. Normal mammary gland, tumors, and tumor-adjacent
adipose + tumor-draining lymph node were collected for histological
examination and gene expression analysis. Mammary fat pad mass in obese
FVB/NJ mice (0.27 g) was significantly greater than lean (0.14 g) or FOb
animals (0.11 g) (P<0.0001). Tumor volume at sacrifice was significantly
greater in obese vs lean animals (190 mm3 vs 89.96 mm3, respectively;
PObesity contributes to 20% of US female cancer deaths and is linked to
increased risk for triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), as well as
increased risk of vascular invasion, metastasis, and mortality in breast
cancer patients. We previously showed that obesity-induced elevation of
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signaling through its receptor, cMET,
accelerated development of tumors in the C3(1)-TAg GEMM of TNBC compared
to low fat diet (LFD)-fed lean controls. Weight loss significantly
reduced HGF/cMET signaling in normal mammary glands and cMET in tumors,
and reversed high fat diet (HFD)-driven tumor progression, while
crizotinib-mediated cMET inhibition limited tumor development and
microvascular density in both lean and obese C3(1)-TAg mice. To
differentiate tumor-intrinsic versus microenvironment-associated
mechanisms, we employed an orthotopic transplant model of a C3(1)-TAg
TNBC cell line to investigate tumor growth dynamics in lean, obese, or
formerly obese (FOb) microenvironments. We hypothesized that TNBC tumors
derived from lean C3(1)-TAg mice and transplanted into obese mice would
grow more rapidly, contain more macrophages (MFs) and exhibit greater
blood vessel density than tumors in lean or FOb mice due to
obesity-induced MF and/or endothelial secretion of HGF. At 8 weeks of
age, female FVB/NJ mice were randomized to diet groups (N=20/diet): 1)
lean (LFD, 10% kcal from fat), 2) obese (HFD, 60% kcal from fat) 3) or
FOb (HFD, 5 weeks; LFD, 5 weeks). Following 10 weeks on diets mice were
injected with 2x105 luciferase-tagged C3(1)-TAg cells. Tumor volume was
measured by calipers. At 21 days post-injection mice were sacrificed for
tissue collection. Normal mammary gland, tumors, and tumor-adjacent
adipose + tumor-draining lymph node were collected for histological
examination and gene expression analysis. Mammary fat pad mass in obese
FVB/NJ mice (0.27 g) was significantly greater than lean (0.14 g) or FOb
animals (0.11 g) (P<0.0001). Tumor volume at sacrifice was significantly
greater in obese vs lean animals (190 mm3 vs 89.96 mm3, respectively;
P<0.05). However, mean final tumor volume in FOb animals (148.0 mm3) did
not differ significantly from either lean or obese mice. Our findings
show that obesity accelerated tumor progression relative to lean mice.
C3(1)-TAg cells transplanted into FOb mice resulted in an intermediate
rate of tumor growth, suggesting that obesity-mediated changes to the
microenvironment were not fully corrected by weight loss despite
normalization of body weight and adiposity. To elucidate how the FOb
mammary microenvironment persists in driving TNBC tumor promotion,
planned analyses include histological examination of candidate mediators,
including MF infiltration and regional lymph node metastasis by diet
group, as well as quantification of pro-growth and pro-angiogenic
signaling molecules (e.g., HGF, VEGF, Ang2) in lysates of tumors and
tumor-adjacent adipose.


