Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput combinatorial profiling of checkpoint inhibitor
antibodies on the iQue® Screener PLUS.


Checkpoint inhibitors have become valuable immuno-modulatory targets in
the advancement of cancer treatment. Looking for the synergy between new
checkpoint inhibitor antibodies and known inhibitors is an important
aspect of this research. The iQue Screener PLUS platform is a powerful
tool to simultaneously assess these interactions in a single well of a
microtiter plate. ForeCyt® software provides plate-level analytics and
high content visualization to generate deep insight rapidly. Using a
mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) model, we profiled potential synergies of
several known checkpoint inhibitors antibodies. Responses of PD-1, PD-L1,
and CD73 inhibitors both individually, and in combination with CTLA-4
inhibitors, were assessed for proliferation, viability and cytokine
secretion simultaneously in the same well. MultiCyt® cell-based and
bead-based reagents were used for this analysis. Synergies ranging from
2-10 fold increase over CTLA-4 alone were observed in the secretion of
TNFα and IL-1β. Results were obtained and analysis completed in a
384-well plate in 30 minutes. In conclusion, this study highlights the
power of the iQue Screener PLUS platform to rapidly characterize multiple
endpoints and the ForeCyt software to provide high content visualization
that reveals actionable insights.


