Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic re-wiring of breast cancer by pharmacological targeting
of C-terminal binding protein.


The C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) is a family of dimeric nuclear
proteins whose levels are increased in cancers of the colon, ovaries,
prostate and breast. Elevated CtBP expression is associated with poor
cancer survival and can also distinguish those node negative breast
cancer patients who will show worse survival. This implicates CtBP as
both a biomarker and a promising candidate for therapeutic intervention.
As a dimer, CtBP provides a scaffold that couples multiple different
DNA-binding transcriptional regulators with a variety of chromatin
modifying protein complexes to alter the epigenetic landscape throughout
the nucleus. These properties provide the rationale for pharmacological
targeting of CtBP to change epigenetically regulated gene expression in
cancer cells. In this study, we employ computer assisted drug design to
screen for optimal quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSARs)
between small molecules and CtBP to identify 24 potential CtBP
inhibitors. Functional screening of these compounds identifies 4 lead
compounds with low toxicity and high water solubility. Treatment of
breast cancer cells at micro-molar concentrations of these small
molecular inhibitors induces significant de-repression of epigenetically
silenced pro-epithelial genes in the mesenchymal, triple negative breast
cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231. This re-activation is associated with
eviction of CtBP from the respective gene promoters, disrupted
recruitment of CtBP-chromatin modifying protein complexes, increased
deposition of activating epigenetic histone marks, and upregulation of
both pro-epithelial gene mRNA and protein expression. In functional
assays, CtBP inhibition by these small molecular inhibitors decreases
cellular invasion, and improves DNA repair. FRET (FÃ¶rster resonance
energy transfer) analysis demonstrates that CTBP inhibition results in
decreased FRET intensity, suggesting that CTBP dimerization is repressed
by CTBP inhibition. In addition, pharmacological inhibition of CtBP
combines with established epigenetically targeted drugs to
synergistically decrease cell migration and potentiate the reactivation
of silenced pro-epithelial gene expression in triple negative cancer
cells. Finally, CTBP inhibition results in transcriptional repression of
MDR1 expression and reduces the population of Doxorubicin resistant cells
in the triple negative breast cancer cell lines. These findings implicate
the possible use of this class of compounds in strategies for therapeutic
intervention that may increase the efficacy and decrease the acquired
resistance to targeted therapeutic intervention in breast cancer.


