Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between genetic polymorphisms in genes related to
estrogen metabolism and function and prostate cancer risk: results from
the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial.


Background: Substantial preclinical data corroborate the critical role of
estrogen in prostate cancer development; however, epidemiological studies
found no associations between circulating estrogen levels and prostate
cancer risk. It was hypothesized that intraprostatic estrogen milieu may
play a more important role than circulating estrogen in prostate
carcinogenesis. Since it is difficult to obtain data on prostatic
estrogen levels, we tested the hypothesis indirectly by investigating
associations of prostate cancer risk with genetic variations of enzymes
that are involved in estrogen synthesis, metabolism and function, and may
affect intraprostatic estrogen milieu.

Methods: A panel of 36 potentially functional single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in estrogen-related genes was assembled based on
information obtained in the literature. After removing SNPs with call
rate Methods: A panel of 36 potentially functional single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in estrogen-related genes was assembled based on
information obtained in the literature. After removing SNPs with call
rate <95% (1 SNP) or minor allele frequency Methods: A panel of 36
potentially functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
estrogen-related genes was assembled based on information obtained in the
literature. After removing SNPs with call rate <95% (1 SNP) or minor
allele frequency <3% (10 SNPs), a total of 25 SNPs in 13 genes (PGR,
ESR1, ESR2, CYP17A1, HSD17B1, CYP19A1, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, COMT, UGT1A6,
UGT1A10, UGT2B7, UGT2B15) were examined for associations with prostate
cancer risk using data and DNA samples from 1617 cases and 1731 controls
in the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT). Cases and controls were
frequency-matched on age, treatment arm and family history. Logistic
regression was used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) separately in the placebo and finasteride arms, adjusting
for age, race and family history. Results were similar when restricting
analysis to white men only.

Results: Panels of SNPs that were significantly associated with prostate
cancer risk were different according to treatment arm, showing rs1801132
in ESR1, rs700518 in CYP19A1, and rs4124874 in UGT1A6 in the placebo arm
and rs2445765 in CYP19A1 and rs4680 in COMT in the finasteride arm. When
stratified by circulating estrogen and androgen levels, significant
associations were only observed in either the high or low category of
serum hormone levels; no SNPs were significantly associated with prostate
cancer risk in both categories. CYP19A1 was the only gene harboring SNPs
that were significantly associated with prostate cancer risk in both the
placebo (rs700518) and finasteride arms (rs2445765). In haplotype
analysis using all three CYP19A1 SNPs genotyped in the study (rs700518,
rs2445765 and rs700519), compared with non-risk haplotype (GCC), certain
CYP19A1 haplotypes were significantly associated with increased prostate
cancer risk in both arms.

Conclusion: Associations between prostate cancer risk and SNPs in genes
involved in estrogen metabolism and function are complicated, and
markedly modified by other factors such as finasteride treatment or
circulating hormone levels. Supported by grant U10CA37429, 5UM1CA182883
and P01CA108964 from the NCI.


