Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AK4 promotes colorectal cancer progression and metastasis.


Metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is a fatal disease with a poor
prognosis. It is crucial to understanding the underlying pathogenesis to
battle this dismal condition. We previously identified that AK4, a gene
on chromosome 1p31.3 encoding a member of adenylate kinase family
enzymes, was progressively up-regulated from normal colon, primary CRC to
metastasis by mRNA gene expression microarray of paired CRC samples. This
study was aimed to validate the overexpression of AK4 and explore
in-vitro effects in CRC. We firstly examined the mRNA expression level of
AK4 in a panel of CRC cell lines. AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC
cell lines (n=8) than normal colon cell line, and significantly higher in
advanced stage cell lines (n=4, Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones
(n=4, Dukes’ A and B) (P=0.03). We further evaluated expression level
of AK4 in two different cohorts of clinical samples. The first cohort
consisted of 18 paired primary CRCs and its corresponding normal colonic
mucosa, and 27 metastatic CRC (including 15 cases with paired primary CRC
and normal colonic mucosa). AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in
metastatic CRC than normal colon (PMetastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is
a fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is crucial to understanding the
underlying pathogenesis to battle this dismal condition. We previously
identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3 encoding a member of
adenylate kinase family enzymes, was progressively up-regulated from
normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene expression
microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was aimed to validate the
overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects in CRC. We firstly
examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC cell lines.
AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than normal colon
cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage cell lines (n=4,
Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and B) (P=0.03).
We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two different cohorts of
clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18 paired primary CRCs
and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27 metastatic CRC
(including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal colonic mucosa).
AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic CRC than normal
colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC (PMetastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC) is a fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is
crucial to understanding the underlying pathogenesis to battle this
dismal condition. We previously identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome
1p31.3 encoding a member of adenylate kinase family enzymes, was
progressively up-regulated from normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis
by mRNA gene expression microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was
aimed to validate the overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects
in CRC. We firstly examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel
of CRC cell lines. AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8)
than normal colon cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage
cell lines (n=4, Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A
and B) (P=0.03). We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two
different cohorts of clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18
paired primary CRCs and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27
metastatic CRC (including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal
colonic mucosa). AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic
CRC than normal colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC
(P<0.001). Among 15 cases with paired primary and metastatic tumors, 14
(93.3%) demonstrated higher AK4 in metastatic tumors than their primary
counterparts(PMetastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is a fatal disease with
a poor prognosis. It is crucial to understanding the underlying
pathogenesis to battle this dismal condition. We previously identified
that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3 encoding a member of adenylate
kinase family enzymes, was progressively up-regulated from normal colon,
primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene expression microarray of paired
CRC samples. This study was aimed to validate the overexpression of AK4
and explore in-vitro effects in CRC. We firstly examined the mRNA
expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC cell lines. AK4 mRNA expression
was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than normal colon cell line, and
significantly higher in advanced stage cell lines (n=4, Dukes’ C and D)
than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and B) (P=0.03). We further
evaluated expression level of AK4 in two different cohorts of clinical
samples. The first cohort consisted of 18 paired primary CRCs and its
corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27 metastatic CRC (including 15
cases with paired primary CRC and normal colonic mucosa). AK4 mRNA level
was significantly higher in metastatic CRC than normal colon (P<0.001),
and metastatic CRC than primary CRC (P<0.001). Among 15 cases with paired
primary and metastatic tumors, 14 (93.3%) demonstrated higher AK4 in
metastatic tumors than their primary counterparts(P<0.05). The second
cohort composed of 190 consecutive primary CRCs. Upregulation of AK4
protein expression evaluated by immunohistochemistry was found in 68.4%
of CRC, and associated with advanced AJCC stage (PMetastatic colorectal
cancer (CRC) is a fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is crucial to
understanding the underlying pathogenesis to battle this dismal
condition. We previously identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3
encoding a member of adenylate kinase family enzymes, was progressively
up-regulated from normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene
expression microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was aimed to
validate the overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects in CRC.
We firstly examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC
cell lines. AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than
normal colon cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage cell
lines (n=4, Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and
B) (P=0.03). We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two
different cohorts of clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18
paired primary CRCs and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27
metastatic CRC (including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal
colonic mucosa). AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic
CRC than normal colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC
(P<0.001). Among 15 cases with paired primary and metastatic tumors, 14
(93.3%) demonstrated higher AK4 in metastatic tumors than their primary
counterparts(P<0.05). The second cohort composed of 190 consecutive
primary CRCs. Upregulation of AK4 protein expression evaluated by
immunohistochemistry was found in 68.4% of CRC, and associated with
advanced AJCC stage (P<0.001), poorer overall survival (P=0.002) and
worse disease-free survival (PMetastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is a
fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is crucial to understanding the
underlying pathogenesis to battle this dismal condition. We previously
identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3 encoding a member of
adenylate kinase family enzymes, was progressively up-regulated from
normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene expression
microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was aimed to validate the
overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects in CRC. We firstly
examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC cell lines.
AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than normal colon
cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage cell lines (n=4,
Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and B) (P=0.03).
We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two different cohorts of
clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18 paired primary CRCs
and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27 metastatic CRC
(including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal colonic mucosa).
AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic CRC than normal
colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC (P<0.001). Among 15
cases with paired primary and metastatic tumors, 14 (93.3%) demonstrated
higher AK4 in metastatic tumors than their primary counterparts(P<0.05).
The second cohort composed of 190 consecutive primary CRCs. Upregulation
of AK4 protein expression evaluated by immunohistochemistry was found in
68.4% of CRC, and associated with advanced AJCC stage (P<0.001), poorer
overall survival (P=0.002) and worse disease-free survival (P<0.001). To
evaluate functional properties of AK4 in CRC, we knocked down AK4 on a
CRC cell lines with high endogenous AK4 expression (DLD1, HCT116 and
SW620) by siRNA. knockdown of AK4 significantly reduced
anchorage-dependent colony forming ability (PMetastatic colorectal cancer
(CRC) is a fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is crucial to
understanding the underlying pathogenesis to battle this dismal
condition. We previously identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3
encoding a member of adenylate kinase family enzymes, was progressively
up-regulated from normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene
expression microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was aimed to
validate the overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects in CRC.
We firstly examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC
cell lines. AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than
normal colon cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage cell
lines (n=4, Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and
B) (P=0.03). We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two
different cohorts of clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18
paired primary CRCs and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27
metastatic CRC (including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal
colonic mucosa). AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic
CRC than normal colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC
(P<0.001). Among 15 cases with paired primary and metastatic tumors, 14
(93.3%) demonstrated higher AK4 in metastatic tumors than their primary
counterparts(P<0.05). The second cohort composed of 190 consecutive
primary CRCs. Upregulation of AK4 protein expression evaluated by
immunohistochemistry was found in 68.4% of CRC, and associated with
advanced AJCC stage (P<0.001), poorer overall survival (P=0.002) and
worse disease-free survival (P<0.001). To evaluate functional properties
of AK4 in CRC, we knocked down AK4 on a CRC cell lines with high
endogenous AK4 expression (DLD1, HCT116 and SW620) by siRNA. knockdown of
AK4 significantly reduced anchorage-dependent colony forming ability
(P<0.05) and eliminated migratory (PMetastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is
a fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is crucial to understanding the
underlying pathogenesis to battle this dismal condition. We previously
identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3 encoding a member of
adenylate kinase family enzymes, was progressively up-regulated from
normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene expression
microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was aimed to validate the
overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects in CRC. We firstly
examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC cell lines.
AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than normal colon
cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage cell lines (n=4,
Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and B) (P=0.03).
We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two different cohorts of
clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18 paired primary CRCs
and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27 metastatic CRC
(including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal colonic mucosa).
AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic CRC than normal
colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC (P<0.001). Among 15
cases with paired primary and metastatic tumors, 14 (93.3%) demonstrated
higher AK4 in metastatic tumors than their primary counterparts(P<0.05).
The second cohort composed of 190 consecutive primary CRCs. Upregulation
of AK4 protein expression evaluated by immunohistochemistry was found in
68.4% of CRC, and associated with advanced AJCC stage (P<0.001), poorer
overall survival (P=0.002) and worse disease-free survival (P<0.001). To
evaluate functional properties of AK4 in CRC, we knocked down AK4 on a
CRC cell lines with high endogenous AK4 expression (DLD1, HCT116 and
SW620) by siRNA. knockdown of AK4 significantly reduced
anchorage-dependent colony forming ability (P<0.05) and eliminated
migratory (P<0.05) and invasive (PMetastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is a
fatal disease with a poor prognosis. It is crucial to understanding the
underlying pathogenesis to battle this dismal condition. We previously
identified that AK4, a gene on chromosome 1p31.3 encoding a member of
adenylate kinase family enzymes, was progressively up-regulated from
normal colon, primary CRC to metastasis by mRNA gene expression
microarray of paired CRC samples. This study was aimed to validate the
overexpression of AK4 and explore in-vitro effects in CRC. We firstly
examined the mRNA expression level of AK4 in a panel of CRC cell lines.
AK4 mRNA expression was higher in CRC cell lines (n=8) than normal colon
cell line, and significantly higher in advanced stage cell lines (n=4,
Dukes’ C and D) than early stage ones (n=4, Dukes’ A and B) (P=0.03).
We further evaluated expression level of AK4 in two different cohorts of
clinical samples. The first cohort consisted of 18 paired primary CRCs
and its corresponding normal colonic mucosa, and 27 metastatic CRC
(including 15 cases with paired primary CRC and normal colonic mucosa).
AK4 mRNA level was significantly higher in metastatic CRC than normal
colon (P<0.001), and metastatic CRC than primary CRC (P<0.001). Among 15
cases with paired primary and metastatic tumors, 14 (93.3%) demonstrated
higher AK4 in metastatic tumors than their primary counterparts(P<0.05).
The second cohort composed of 190 consecutive primary CRCs. Upregulation
of AK4 protein expression evaluated by immunohistochemistry was found in
68.4% of CRC, and associated with advanced AJCC stage (P<0.001), poorer
overall survival (P=0.002) and worse disease-free survival (P<0.001). To
evaluate functional properties of AK4 in CRC, we knocked down AK4 on a
CRC cell lines with high endogenous AK4 expression (DLD1, HCT116 and
SW620) by siRNA. knockdown of AK4 significantly reduced
anchorage-dependent colony forming ability (P<0.05) and eliminated
migratory (P<0.05) and invasive (P<0.05) abilities. In conclusion, AK4 is
a potential oncogene upregulated in metastatic CRC and exhibiting
in-vitro oncogenic properties. AK4 may play an important role in tumor
progression and metastasis.


