Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lipid elongation: an unexplored therapeutic target in prostate
cancer.


Dysregulated lipid metabolism is one of the hallmarks of cancer,
particularly for prostate cancer (PCa). PCa cells exhibit distinctive
metabolic features such as upregulation of enzymes involved in de novo
synthesis, uptake and beta-oxidation of lipids, which promote prostate
cancer growth, metastasis, and drug resistance. Androgen signalling is a
major driver of both PCa growth and lipid metabolism in PCa cells,
however the precise effects of androgens on cellular lipid composition
and the molecular pathways by which androgens regulate lipid metabolism
in PCa cells are yet to be elucidated. In this study we investigated the
effect of androgens on the lipid composition of PCa cell membranes and
the enzymes involved in lipid metabolism, and explored the influence of
these enzymes on tumour cell behaviour such as cell migration,
proliferation and attachment. PCa cell lines (AR positive and negative)
were cultured in the absence or presence of androgens or the
anti-androgen enzalutamide, and changes in intact phospholipid species
were assessed by ESI-MS/MS-based lipidomics. This analysis revealed a
complexity of changes in phospholipid profiles in response to androgen
treatment. Strikingly, elongation of the fatty acyl chains was
consistently observed for multiple phospholipid classes in response to
the androgens mibolerone or 5Î±-dihydotestosterone, whereas inhibition of
elongation was observed in the presence of enzalutamide. Transcriptional
analysis of critical lipid metabolism pathways revealed that the enzymes
that catalyse lipid elongation (ELOVLs) were markedly induced by
androgens in multiple PCa cell lines, and siRNA depletion of these
enzymes, either alone or in combination, reversed the androgen-induced
fatty acyl elongation phenotype. The androgenic regulation of ELOVL
enzymes was confirmed in clinical PCa cohorts and in primary tumours
cultured as explants. Targeting ELOVL gene expression also significantly
attenuated the tumorigenic properties of PCa cells. ELOVL downregulation
decreased LNCaP cell migration, and adhesion to fibronectin. Furthermore,
ELOVL knock down significantly decreased three-dimensional spheroid
growth of LNCaP cells using a hang drop assay. The impact of these
enzymes on the lipid profile of PCa cell membrane and cell viability,
adhesion and migration suggests that they may represent promising and
previously unexplored therapeutic targets.


