Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Age of cancer onset differentiated by sex and TP53 codon change in
Li-Fraumeni Syndrome patient population.


Introduction:Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a highly penetrant autosomal
dominantly inherited cancer predisposition disorder. Germline mutations
of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene cause >80% of LFS and confer an
increased risk of a range of early onset cancers, as well as of second
tumors even in the absence of a family history of cancer. For this
reason, we previously reported the implementation of a comprehensive
life-long clinical surveillance protocol for individuals with a germline
TP53 mutation for early tumor detection. Here, we set out to build a
predictive model of age of onset of cancer in LFS patients to inform this
screening protocol aiming to make it more targeted. We identify
characteristics that differentiate the age of cancer onset consistently,
across multiple LFS patient cohorts.

Methods:The LFS cohort at Torontoâ€™s Hospital for Sick Children
(SickKids) (n = 171 patients) was used as a discovery set to identify
factors that distinguish age of onset among LFS patients. This project
focused specifically on patient characteristics such as sex and mutations
within TP53, both as they appear on the genome and manifest in the
protein, as predictors for age of onset. These predictors were tested in
an exponential parametric survival model. Findings from the SickKids
discovery set were tested for replication in the International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC) TP53 database (n = 2374 patients).

Results:In the discovery cohort, female sex was associated with a 1.53
fold later age of cancer onset than in males (p = 0.019). This did not
replicate in the IARC TP53 set with 0.99 fold earlier onset for females
than males (p = 0.843). However, in the discovery set, there appears to
be a point at which female and male age of onset converges at 43 years.
Controlling for onset before vs after 43 years in our replication set
shows 1.12 (p= 0.0204) times later age of cancer onset in females than in
males which is the same direction and significance as in our discovery
set. The discovery cohort also showed 2.23 (p = 0.08) later cancer onset
for individuals with a germline Arginine to Cysteine (Arg>Cys) codon
change (model significance p = 0.047). This finding replicated in the
IARC TP53 data set which showed individuals with an Arg>Cys codon change
having onset 1.29 (p = 0.043) times later than those with a TP53 mutation
that did not result in this codon change.

Conclusions:Our study identified two LFS patient characteristics, sex and
TP53 Arg>Cys codon change, which consistently differentiate age of cancer
onset within the LFS patient population. Females under the age of 43 when
compared to males under the age of 43 appear to have later tumor onset,
an effect which disappears after the age of 43. Individuals with an
Arg>Cys TP53 codon change are expected to have later onset cancer than
those with TP53 mutations that do not result in this change. Future work
will disentangle these findings further and build a more comprehensive
predictive model of cancer onset in LFS patients.


