Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel non-genetic mechanisms drive rhabdomyosarcoma tumorigenesis.


Most pediatric solid tumors originate from perturbations during
development, however the mechanisms that drive these disruptions and
promote tumor progression are still poorly understood. We believe that
epigenetic deregulation of cancer genes and developmental pathways is a
common driver in pediatric cancers, especially those with a low mutation
rate. To test this novel idea, we are focusing on rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS),
a developing muscle tumor with striking genetic differences between two
of the major subtypes. We hypothesize that differential epigenetic
deregulation of differentiation programs and cancer genes between the
major subtypes are essential for tumorigenesis. Indeed, our preliminary
integrative analysis reveal distinct epigenetic landscapes between the
two subtypes particularly at the loci of HOX cluster genes A-C, including
an oncogenic HOXC long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) called HOTAIR. Knockdown
of HOTAIR led to derepression of HOXD10, a candidate tumor suppressor,
and a decrease in RMS proliferation, migration, and invasion. Thus, we
believe HOX gene deregulation is required for tumorigenesis, and their
implication in several adult cancers suggests this currently
unappreciated mechanism is likely to be more broadly relevant. In
addition, we identified a group of RMS specific novel lncRNAs, of which
one demonstrates an essential role in cell survival. Our innovative
approach to integrate epigenetic data sets from tumor types with varying
genetic differences shed light on the mechanisms that drive
tumorigenesis, which may lead to identifying previously unknown potential
therapeutic targets. Since current therapeutic options have not changed
over the last twenty-five years, these data will especially provide a
strong translational impact for children with RMS, whose survival
outcomes are less than 20% in the case of metastatic disease.


