Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying candidate antigens for a ductal carcinoma in situ
vaccine that are essential to breast cancer survival across multiple
subtypes.


Vaccine therapy may be ideal to destroy ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
and prevent recurrence. A vaccine can induce type 1 T-cells against DCIS
antigens that could migrate from the circulation to invade and destroy
the tumor as well as generate immunologic memory to provide long lasting
protective immunity. One of the limitations to developing a DCIS vaccine
is identifying antigens that target all subtypes of DCIS. DCIS has many
of the same molecular abnormalities as invasive breast cancer (IBC),
including overexpressed proteins that may be drivers of progression to
invasive disease. Eliminating cells that are overexpressing driver
proteins by vaccination may prevent progression to IBC if such proteins
could be determined.

In this study, we identified proteins that were overexpressed from normal
breast in both DCIS and IBC across fifteen Geo and Array Express data
sets. From 68 candidate proteins, we identified twelve whose expression
was necessary for cancer cell survival across breast cancer subtypes. We
selected overexpressed proteins necessary for cancer survival using a
high throughput siRNA screen and chose candidates that increased
apoptosis and decreased cell survival in HER2 positive (HER2), triple
negative (TN), and hormone receptor positive HER2 negative (HR) human
breast cancer cell lines with decreased expression of the target protein.
For example, decreased expression of NDC80 caused decreased cell survival
to 56±3% in HR, 46±3% in TN, and 77±2% in HER2 breast cancer cell
lines and increased apoptosis by 1.4±0.03 fold in HR and 1.2±0.03 fold
in TN breast cancer cell lines. Decreased expression of RRM2 caused
decreased cell survival to 66±3% in HR and 89±2% in HER2 breast cancer
cell lines and increased apoptosis by 1.6±0.08 fold in HR, 1.4±0.07
fold in TN, and 2.4±0.3 fold in HER2 breast cancer cell lines. Twelve
proteins (AURKA, KIF11, NDC80, RRM2, SDC1, UBE2C, HJURP, CENPA, CENPF,
HIST2H2AA3, HIST1H2BD, and TOP2A) were essential for cancer cell survival
in at least 2 breast cancer subtypes.

These protein targets are immunogenic in patients with DCIS. In the sera
of women without breast atypia (n=36), autoantibodies to NDC80 were
detected with a mean of 5.3±1.8 ng/mL while in women with fibroadenoma
(n=36) autoantibodies were detected with a mean of 8.3±1.5 (p=0.05). In
the sera of women without breast atypia (n=36), autoantibodies to RRM2
were detected with a mean of 0.16±0.7 ng/mL while in women with
fibroadenoma (n=36) autoantibodies were detected with a mean of 7.2±2.1
(p=0.05) and in women with DCIS (n=59) autoantibodies were detected with
a mean of 2.6±0.6 ng/mL (p=0.0003). These proteins represent DCIS
antigens of biologic importance in tumor growth and, potentially,
progression to IBC and are candidate immunogens for a vaccine to treat
DCIS.


