Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer mortality by antiarrhythmic drug use in a population-based
cohort of Finnish men.


Introduction: In-vitro studies have suggested that antiarrhythmic drug
digoxin might restrain the growth of cancer cells by inhibiting
Na+/K+-ATPase. A non-selective beta-blocker sotalol has similar effect on
K+-channels. We evaluated the association between cancer mortality and
digoxin, sotalol and general antiarrhythmic drug use in a retrospective
cohort study.

Materials and methods: The study population consists of 78,615 men
originally identified for the Finnish Randomized Study for Screening of
Prostate Cancer. Men were 55-69 years old at baseline. Prevalent prostate
cancer cases were excluded; no exclusions were made based on other cancer
types. Information on antiarrhythmic drug purchases was collected from
the national prescription database. We used Cox regression method to
analyze the overall cancer mortality and individually mortality from the
most common causes of cancer death.

Results: A total of 8,064 men (10.3%) had used antiarrhythmic drugs. Of
these 5,668 had used digoxin and 2,540 had used sotalol. During the
median follow-up of 16.9 years after baseline 26,790 (34.1%) men died, of
these 8,225 (30.7% of deaths) due to cancer. Overall cancer mortality was
elevated among antiarrhythmic drug users compared to non-users (HR 1.25,
95% CI 1.12-1.40). Similar results were observed for digoxin (HR 1.44,
95% CI 1.26-1.63) but not for sotalol (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.68-1.24).
Furthermore, the antiarrhythmic drug use was associated with elevated
risk of lung-cancer death (HR 1.76 95% CI 1.46-2.14). However, the risk
associations disappeared in long-term use. When we restricted the
analysis to cancer cases only, no differences were observed in survival
after the cancer diagnosis for any cancer type.

Conclusion: Cancer mortality was elevated among users of antiarrhythmic
drugs compared to non-users. This association is probably due to the
differences between users and non-users as it was related to short-term
use, and disappeared in long-term use. Use of digoxin or sotalol was not
associated with improved cancer-specific survival.


