Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity and ovarian cancer survival revisited.


Research on the impact of obesity on ovarian cancer survival is
inconsistent but previous studies did not consider the possible impact of
ascites, bowel obstruction, or cachexia, which commonly occur in
late-stage disease. We evaluated this association in a cohort study of
primary invasive epithelial ovarian cancers diagnosed from 2000-2013 in
Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) (n=1,157). Deaths were
identified through December 2014, with median follow-up of 37 months.
Proportional hazards regression was used to estimate overall and ovarian
cancer-specific mortality, accounting for prognostic variables including
age at diagnosis, race, stage, grade, histology, comorbidities,
treatment, post-treatment CA125 levels, ascites, and bowel obstruction.
There was no evidence of an association between BMI and overall or
ovarian cancer-specific survival. However, we found strong effect
modification by stage (PinteractionResearch on the impact of obesity on
ovarian cancer survival is inconsistent but previous studies did not
consider the possible impact of ascites, bowel obstruction, or cachexia,
which commonly occur in late-stage disease. We evaluated this association
in a cohort study of primary invasive epithelial ovarian cancers
diagnosed from 2000-2013 in Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC)
(n=1,157). Deaths were identified through December 2014, with median
follow-up of 37 months. Proportional hazards regression was used to
estimate overall and ovarian cancer-specific mortality, accounting for
prognostic variables including age at diagnosis, race, stage, grade,
histology, comorbidities, treatment, post-treatment CA125 levels,
ascites, and bowel obstruction. There was no evidence of an association
between BMI and overall or ovarian cancer-specific survival. However, we
found strong effect modification by stage (Pinteraction<.01). Compared to
normal pre-diagnosis BMI (18.5-24.9 kg/m2), for women who were obese
before diagnosis (BMIâ‰¥35 kg/m2) risk of ovarian cancer-specific
mortality was increased among those diagnosed at stages I/II (Hazard
ratio [HR]: 3.40; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.16-9.99), but reduced
among those diagnosed with stage IV disease (HR: 0.58; 95%CI: 0.35-0.96).
Associations persisted after excluding those diagnosed with cachexia
(n=91) and further adjusting for ascites and bowel obstruction, with no
evidence of effect modification by these factors. Associations of obesity
with ovarian cancer survival differ by stage, with decreased survival
among those with localized disease and increased survival among those
with late-stage disease. Stage-specific effects of obesity on survival
suggest a tailored approach to improve prognosis may be appropriate.


