Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral injection of the toll-like receptor 4 agonist G100
induces a T-cell response in the soft tissue sarcoma microenvironment.


Introduction: Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are heterogeneous mesenchymal
tumors which are both morbid and lethal. G100 is a stable oil-in-water
emulsion of glucopyranosyl lipid adjuvant, a highly potent toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4) agonist, which has been utilized for intratumoral (IT)
injections and as vaccine adjuvants without significant toxicity. We
hypothesized that IT G100 would induce a robust local and potentially
systemic anti-tumor immune response in the STS microenvironment, leading
to improved outcomes.

Methods: 15 metastatic STS patients who had a superficial injectable
lesion were treated with weekly IT G100 for 8-12 weeks; 12 patients
received concurrent radiation for 2 weeks at the start, while 3 got IT
G100 alone for 6 weeks prior to radiation. Biopsies and blood were
collected pre and post treatment, and flow cytometry was performed on
fresh tumor samples. T-cell receptor (TCR) deep sequencing of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) and peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) was performed on 7 patients. RECIST v1.1 and the Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events were used to monitor clinical
outcomes.

Results: Patients had a median of 3 (0~5) prior lines of therapy and mean
tumor size of 5.6cm (1~20cm). No grade 3 or higher treatment-related
toxicity was observed, and local tumor control was achieved in 93%
(14/15). 6 (40%) had stable disease after treatment, and 1 (P06) had
complete regression of injected tumor. This tumor had a high percentage
of infiltrating pre-treatment immune cells (12% CD45+ on flow cytometry
versus 2.7% for all other tumors). TCR sequencing showed that the
increase in clonality of PBMC after treatment was greater in P06 (389%)
compared to 6 other patients (mean 34%). There was also higher overlap in
TCR sequence between TIL versus PBMC after treatment (13% versus 22%),
suggesting systemic expansion of tumor-specific T-cells. In 7 patients
evaluable for tumor-associated macrophages (tumors with >1000 CD45+CD11b+
cells), 71% had a shift from an M2 to M1 phenotype. In all patients who
received G100 alone, there was an increase in T-cell infiltration into
tumor after treatment. In one patient (P14), the proportion of CD3+ live
cells in tumor went from Results: Patients had a median of 3 (0~5) prior
lines of therapy and mean tumor size of 5.6cm (1~20cm). No grade 3 or
higher treatment-related toxicity was observed, and local tumor control
was achieved in 93% (14/15). 6 (40%) had stable disease after treatment,
and 1 (P06) had complete regression of injected tumor. This tumor had a
high percentage of infiltrating pre-treatment immune cells (12% CD45+ on
flow cytometry versus 2.7% for all other tumors). TCR sequencing showed
that the increase in clonality of PBMC after treatment was greater in P06
(389%) compared to 6 other patients (mean 34%). There was also higher
overlap in TCR sequence between TIL versus PBMC after treatment (13%
versus 22%), suggesting systemic expansion of tumor-specific T-cells. In
7 patients evaluable for tumor-associated macrophages (tumors with >1000
CD45+CD11b+ cells), 71% had a shift from an M2 to M1 phenotype. In all
patients who received G100 alone, there was an increase in T-cell
infiltration into tumor after treatment. In one patient (P14), the
proportion of CD3+ live cells in tumor went from <1% to 62%; of these,
51% were CD4+ and 44% were CD8+. TIL from P14 had a 251% increase in
clonality after treatment; at the same time, percentage of live tumor
cells that were PD-L1+ increased from 0.02% to 1.3%.

Conclusion: IT G100 provides a potentially viable agent for local control
of metastatic STS. With or without radiation, G100 appears to shift the
tumor microenvironment into a more inflammatory state with significant
infiltration of T cells. The increase in clonality in PBMC and TIL, as
well as increased overlap of tumor-associated versus peripheral TCR
sequences, suggest induction of a tumor-specific response. Combination of
G100 with other immunomodulators may further enhance the adaptive
anti-tumor response.


