Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase 3 trial of adjuvant sunitinib in patients with high-risk
renal cell carcinoma: exploratory molecular analysis of tumor biomarkers.


Background: Adjuvant therapy with sunitinib (SU) compared with placebo
(PBO) prolonged disease-free survival (DFS) in patients (pts) with
loco-regional high-risk renal cell carcinoma (HR=0.76, 95% CI: 0.59-0.98;
P=0.03; median[m] DFS, 6.8 vs 5.6 years). Here, we report the results of
a retrospective exploratory molecular biomarker analysis using
nephrectomy biospecimens from the S-TRAC trial.

Materials and Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissue
blocks from patients who provided informed consent were used for
immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of PD-L1, CD4, CD8, and CD68.
Biomarker quantification was done by automated image analysis of the
regions of interest (ROI). The analysis algorithm utilized an immunoscore
approach applied to ROI, reflecting assessment of both the center and
invasive margin of tumors (for PD-L1 and CD8 staining). DFS was compared
between biomarker stratum by Materials and Methods: Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor tissue blocks from patients who provided informed
consent were used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of PD-L1, CD4,
CD8, and CD68. Biomarker quantification was done by automated image
analysis of the regions of interest (ROI). The analysis algorithm
utilized an immunoscore approach applied to ROI, reflecting assessment of
both the center and invasive margin of tumors (for PD-L1 and CD8
staining). DFS was compared between biomarker stratum by < median vs ≥
median values of a particular IHC parameter using Kaplan-Meier (K-M)
analysis. Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curves were generated
to further assess the potential clinical utility of biomarkers for which
significant (P Materials and Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tumor tissue blocks from patients who provided informed consent were used
for immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining of PD-L1, CD4, CD8, and CD68.
Biomarker quantification was done by automated image analysis of the
regions of interest (ROI). The analysis algorithm utilized an immunoscore
approach applied to ROI, reflecting assessment of both the center and
invasive margin of tumors (for PD-L1 and CD8 staining). DFS was compared
between biomarker stratum by < median vs ≥ median values of a
particular IHC parameter using Kaplan-Meier (K-M) analysis. Receiver
Operating Characteristics (ROC) curves were generated to further assess
the potential clinical utility of biomarkers for which significant (P <
0.05) results were obtained in K-M analysis.

Results: In total, 191/615 (101, SU and 90, PBO) pts in the
intent-to-treat population were included for IHC analysis. Baseline
characteristics were similar in the subpopulations with and without IHC
data. Shorter DFS was observed in the PBO group for pts with PD-L1+ vs
PD-L1- tumors, although not statistically significant (HR=1.75; 95% CI:
0.89-3.46; P=0.103). In pts with PD-L1+ tumors, DFS was numerically
longer for SU vs PBO (mDFS=6.17 vs 2.67 years) (HR=0.58; 95% CI:
0.26-1.29; P=0.175). In the SU group, pts with CD8+ T-cell density ≥
median (cutoff=269.5 CD8+ cells/mm2) had longer DFS (mDFS=not reached
[NR]; 95% CI: 6.83-NR) than pts with CD8+ T-cell density Results: In
total, 191/615 (101, SU and 90, PBO) pts in the intent-to-treat
population were included for IHC analysis. Baseline characteristics were
similar in the subpopulations with and without IHC data. Shorter DFS was
observed in the PBO group for pts with PD-L1+ vs PD-L1- tumors, although
not statistically significant (HR=1.75; 95% CI: 0.89-3.46; P=0.103). In
pts with PD-L1+ tumors, DFS was numerically longer for SU vs PBO
(mDFS=6.17 vs 2.67 years) (HR=0.58; 95% CI: 0.26-1.29; P=0.175). In the
SU group, pts with CD8+ T-cell density ≥ median (cutoff=269.5 CD8+
cells/mm2) had longer DFS (mDFS=not reached [NR]; 95% CI: 6.83-NR) than
pts with CD8+ T-cell density < median (mDFS=3.47 years; 95% CI: 1.73-NR),
and the difference was statistically significant (HR=0.40, 95% CI:
0.20-0.81; P=0.009), while CD8+ T-cell density showed no significant
difference in DFS for PBO pts (HR=0.80, 95% CI: 0.42-1.50; P=0.484). The
sensitivity and specificity for CD8+ T-cell density in predicting DFS
were 0.604 and 0.658, respectively, and the optimal cutoff was 222.22
cells/mm2 with an area under ROC curve of 0.622.

Conclusions: Increased density of CD8+ T-cells in tumor tissue was
associated with longer DFS in SU-randomized pts but not PBO, suggesting
this may be predictive of treatment effect. Further validation in an
independent cohort is warranted. The prognostic value of PD-L1 expression
in primary tumors from patients with high-risk non-metastatic RCC should
be further explored.


