Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of new treatment options for Merkel cell carcinoma
using high throughput chemical screening.


Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare and aggressive neuroendocrine skin
cancer with limited treatment options. Approximately 80% of MCC tumors
have Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) DNA integrated into the host
genome, and viral oncogenes are thought to drive carcinogenesis. In
contrast, MCPyV-negative (MCPyV-) tumors have higher rates of
proto-oncogene mutations. Transcriptome differences between MCPyV+ and
MCPyV- tumors further suggests divergent underlying pathologies. In order
to develop efficacious treatments for MCC and elucidate the
pathophysiologies underlying MCPyV+ and MCPyV- MCC, we screened the
effects of mechanistically annotated drug libraries on MCC cell viability
(CellTiter-Glo). We screened ~4,500 compounds including the NCGC
Pharmaceutical Collection of approved and investigational drugs and the
oncology-focused MIPE (Mechanism Interrogation PlatE) library against six
MCC cell lines (3 MCPyV+ and 3 MCPyV-). We ran follow-up screens on the
above cell lines as well as non-MCC control cells to identify agents that
specifically reduced viability in MCC. DNA topoisomerase inhibitors,
proteasome inhibitors, and PI3K inhibitors potently and efficaciously
reduced viability in all MCC cell lines tested. Moreover, using
hierarchical clustering we found that viral status impacted
pharmacological responses. For example, a subset of HDAC inhibitors were
more potent in MCPyV+ than MCPyV- MCC cells. In contrast, a dual
RasGAP/ERK inhibitor more potently reduced viability in MCPyV- MCC cells
relative to MCPyV+ MCC cells. Together these results identify existing
drugs that can be repurposed for treating MCC. Moreover, they help
elucidate the distinct pathophysiology driving MCPyV+ and MCPyV- MCC.


