Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of miR-186 expression modifies inflammatory markers in
normal epithelial and prostate cancer cell models.


Dysregulation of miRNAs and chronic inflammation are strongly implicated
in the development of various malignancies, including prostate cancer
(PCa). Previously, our lab identified several inflammatory and immune
response sequence variants in CCL5 and CCR5 significantly modified PCa
risk. Recently, we propose an oncogenic role for miR-186-5p based on its
up-regulation in serum from PCa patients and metastatic PCa cell lines.
Moreover, miR-186-5p inhibition reduced proliferation, anchorage
independent growth and invasion in metastatic PC cells (PC3, MDA-PCA-2b).
We hypothesize dysregulation of inflammatory and immune response markers
may enhance immune surveillance leading to a reduced aggressive tumor
phenotype. Following modulations in miRNA-186 levels in normal prostate
epithelial (RWPE1) and metastatic PCa (PC3) cell lines, we evaluated
alterations in mRNA expression using micro-array analysis. Ectopic
expression of miRNA-186 in the RWPE1 resulted in a 1.3-2.6-fold
down-regulation in TLR2, IRAK2, CCL20, IL1RAP, IL1RAP, IL15, and IL17RD
(FDR p-value â‰¥7.8x10-06). Whereas, inhibition of miR-186 in PC3 cells
corresponded with a 1.4-fold up-regulation of IL18R1 (p=0.0095). Notably,
these inflammatory markers are involved in cell invasion (TLR2),
apoptosis (IL17RD), tumorigenesis (TLR2, IRAK2) and autoimmune diseases
(CCL20). Validation of these targets is underway using qRT-PCR, western
blots and luciferase reporter assays. We will assess the mechanism by
which these miR-186 targets suppress aggressive cancer behavior using
knock-out and knock-in cell and ultimately animal models. Future studies
may identify inflammatory targets that may guide immune therapies for the
effective treatment of aggressive prostate cancer.


