Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The m6A hallmark of cancer: RNA demethylase ALKBH5 maintains
tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem-like cells by sustaining FOXM1
expression and cell proliferation.


N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is the most prevalent internal modification on
mRNA, but its functions in human diseases are poorly understood. The
dynamic and reversible m6A modification installed and erased by
N6-methyltransferases and demethylases regulates cell fate and gene
expression. We show that the m6A demethylase ALKBH5 is highly expressed
in patient-derived glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) and informs poor
survival of patients with glioblastoma. Silencing ALKBH5 suppresses the
proliferation of GSCs in vitro and in vivo. Results of integrated
transcriptome and m6A-seq analyses reveal a global change of gene
expression enriched in cell cycle and altered expression of select ALKBH5
targets. Among these targets, Ingenuityâ€™s upstream regulator analysis
identified FOXM1, an essential transcription factor for GSC
proliferation, as a key mediator responsible for the disrupted
proliferation program. Using multiple molecular and biochemical
approaches, we demonstrate that ALKBH5 binds to and demethylates FOXM1
nascent transcripts. This promotes the interaction of FOXM1 pre-mRNA with
HuR, thereby maintaining FOXM1 expression. Further, a long noncoding RNA
antisense to the FOXM1 (FOXM1-AS) interacts with ALKBH5 as well as FOXM1
pre-mRNA and promotes their interaction. Depleting ALKBH5 and FOXM1-AS
abolishes GSC tumorigenesis through the FOXM1 axis. The vulnerability of
GSCs to disruptions in ALKBH5-dependent gene expression suggests that m6A
has a central role in tumor development and provides a rationale for
therapeutically targeting epitranscriptomic modulators in patients with
glioblastoma.


