Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV16 E6 oncoprotein modulates the DPPIV/CD26 in primary
keratinocytes.


Cervical cancer is related to the persistent infection by high-risk human
papillomavirus (HPV) subtypes, such as types 16 and 18. The E6 and E7
oncoproteins significantly contribute to the carcinogenic potential of
high-risk HPV, through the degradation of p53 and pRb, respectively. The
exoprotease dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV) also known as CD26, is a
multifunctional protein involved in several processes related to cancer.
DPPIV/CD26 has an intrinsic peptidase activity, able to degrade some
bioactive peptides and chemokines, thereby regulating cell migration,
proliferation and survival. It has been reported that the reduction in
DPPIV/CD26 expression is associated with tumor progression in different
types of cancer. Moreover, studies in cervical cancer samples and cell
lines point to a reduction in the expression of this protein. However,
there are no studies addressing the relationship between HPV infection
and DPPIV/CD26 expression. We analyzed the influence of HPV oncoproteins
on DPPIV/CD26 expression in human keratinocyte transduced with E6, E7 and
E6E7. We observed that HPV16 E6 expression is associated to a reduction
in DPPIV/CD26 expression at mRNA and protein levels, whereas HPV16 E7
does not affect DPPIV/CD26 expression. HPV16 E6E7 co-expression leads to
a reduction in DPPIV/CD26 expression similar to that found in E6
transduced cells. In addition, we note a more pronounced reduction in
DPPIV/CD26 expression in immortalized cells expressing E6E7. Furthermore,
keratinocytes expressing HPV16 E6 mutant sequence and HPV11 E6, that do
not bind to E6AP and do not degrade p53, have no effect on DPPIV/CD26
expression. Our results suggest that the HPV16 E6 oncoprotein can
downregulates DPPIV/CD26. In addition, preliminary results suggest that
modulation of DPPIV/CD6 mediated by E6 can be dependent on degradation of
p53, since HPV16 E6 mutant and low-risk HPV E6 were not able to affect
CD26 expression. Furthermore, the process of cell immortalization also
appears to be related to the reduction of DPPIV/CD26 expression.
Therefore, these results indicate that HPV oncoproteins promote imbalance
DPPIV/CD26 expression which may be relate to cervical carcinogenesis.


