Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Twist1 modulates paclitaxel-induced cancer stem cell enrichment in
triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), the most aggressive subtype of
breast cancers, is highly refractory to chemotherapy and has a high
incidence of metastasis and tumor relapse. Targeted therapies for TNBC do
not exist because this subtype lacks druggable hormone receptors and HER2
amplification or overexpression. Although Taxane-based chemotherapy is a
standard of care for TNBC treatment, paclitaxel (Taxol)-induced cancer
stem cell (CSC) enrichment presents a significant challenge to the
success of breast cancer treatment. Thus, there is a critical need to
understand the mechanisms by which chemotherapy induces CSC enrichment in
residual tumors following anticancer therapies. Here we report that
Taxol-induced enrichment for CSCs correlates well with a marked
upregulation of Twist1 expression in human TNBC cells. Knockdown of
Twist1 inhibits the clonogenic capacity of TNBC cells in vitro and TNBC
tumorigenesis in vivo. Mammosphere formation assays indicate that
silencing of Twist1 greatly diminishes the tumor sphere-forming potential
of breast CSCs. Furthermore, limited dilution assays and stem cell
xenotransplantation reveal that knockdown of Twist1 expression decreases
the frequency of CSCs by 72-fold in human TNBC cells. More importantly,
we show that silencing of Twist1 blocks Taxol-induced CSC enrichment in
residual tumor cells that have survived drug treatment. Together, these
results demonstrate a previously unrecognized role for Twist1 in
mediating Taxol-induced CSC enrichment in residual tumors of human TNBC
and suggest that targeted inhibition of the Twist1 signaling pathway may
represent a novel therapeutic strategy to tackle therapy-induced CSC
enrichment in breast cancer treatment.


