Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathogenic germline variants in Mexican patients with hereditary
breast and ovarian cancer syndrome.


Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) is an autosomal
dominant disease that represents approximately 5-10% of all patients with
breast cancer. This syndrome is mainly associated to high risk pathogenic
alleles in BRCA1/2 genes, but only for 25% of HBOC cases. More than 25
genes have been associated with familial breast and/or ovarian cancer and
still more are expected to emerge. In the Mexican population there have
been some efforts to analyze this syndrome, but they are limited to BRCA
genes. This work aims to find new pathogenic alleles in exonic and splice
sites in a panel of 143 cancer-predisposing genes in 309 Mexican cancer
patients with suspicion of HBOC and 27 non-cancer patients with a severe
family history of cancer, using massive parallel sequencing technology.
In the group of cancer patients 14.6% (45/309) had pathogenic variants,
23.9% (74/309) harbored variants with unknown clinical significance (VUS)
and 61.5% (109/309) were negative. The genes most frequently affected
with pathogenic variants were BRCA2 24.4% (11/45), BRCA1 8.9% (4/45),
MSR1 4.4% (2/45), ATM 4.4% (2/45), PDE11A 4.4% (2/45) and FANCI 4.4%
(2/45). The non-cancer group had a 18.5% (5/27) of patients with
pathogenic variants and 81.5% (22/27) were negative. In this group
pathogenic variants were found in BRCA2, FANCF, PDE11A, POLH and WRN.
Private or ultra-rare variants defined as VUS (ClinVar, deleterious in
SIFT/Polyphen2, less than 0.001% in ExAC/1KG/ESP6500) were found in 53
genes. This study demonstrates that there is a higher contribution of
pathogenic alleles in other susceptibility cancer genes (66.7%) than
BRCA1/2 (33.3%), confirming that clinical sequencing of expanded gene
panels will identify new, rare and private, variants and eventually will
translate in better molecular diagnosis and personalized risk assessment
in carriers. Clinical impact of the VUS identified here must be further
evaluated. This work was supported by the National Autonomous University
of Mexico, PAPIIT (IA204215).


