Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomere length genetic risk score is associated with breast
cancer risk.


Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
associations of telomere maintenance genes with breast cancer risk. This,
coupled with the recognized role of telomere dysfunction as a cancer
hallmark, has motivated the need for further study of telomeres and
breast cancer. Further, the meta-GWAS discovery of seven single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with telomere length (TL)
enables the use of an aggregated genetic risk score (GRS) for TL. We
hypothesized that a higher GRS (representing shorter TL) would be
associated with increased risk of breast cancer, and that a strengthened
association may exist between higher TL GRS and aggressive breast cancer
risk.

Methods: In a race/ethnically diverse sample of invasive breast cancer
cases (N=1,108) and non-cases (N=20,023) from the Womenâ€™s Health
Initiative, we derived an unweighted TL GRS using seven previously
identified TL-associated SNPs. Women were postmenopausal and the average
age at enrollment was 63.9 years. We tested TL GRS associations with
overall breast cancer risk and for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PR), and her2/neu (HER2) status-specific breast cancer risk
using Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for age and race/ethnicity
(in the entire sample) and age in strata of European American (EA;
N=9,796), African American (AA; N=7,504), and Hispanic American (HA;
N=3,229) women. We also considered reproductive risk factors, family
history of breast cancer, hormone therapy, tumor characteristics, BMI,
physical activity, smoking, alcohol, and US region as potential
confounders.

Results: We observed a small but statistically significant association
between higher TL GRS (shorter TL) and reduced risk of overall breast
cancer in the entire sample (HR=0.96, 95% CI: 0.93-1.00). Results of
race/ethnicity-stratified analyses for TL GRS and overall breast cancer
risk were not significant. The TL GRS was independently associated with
decreased risk of ER-negative, PR-positive, and HER2-positive breast
cancer risk in the entire sample (HR=0.82, 95% CI: 0.71-0.94, HR=0.94,
95% CI: 0.89-0.99, and HR=0.88, 95% CI: 0.79-0.99, respectively).
Similarly, the TL GRS was associated with a reduced risk of ER-negative
breast cancer in AA (HR=0.79, 95% CI: 0.64-0.97) and independently with
PR-positive and HER2-positive breast cancer risk in HA (HR=0.85, 95% CI:
0.75-0.97 and HR=0.79, 95% CI: 0.58-0.99, respectively). Adjustment for
other covariates did not influence hazards.

Conclusions: Our results suggest that higher TL GRS is associated with
reduced risk of overall breast cancer and with the development of
specific breast cancer subtypes, such as ER negativity and/or PR and HER2
positivity. While our focus on GWAS-implicated SNPs may not encompass the
full spectrum of genes involved in TL, further studies into the potential
mechanism for shorter TL and reduced breast cancer risk are needed.


