Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSAIDs: Multiple roles in multiple environments.


Non steroidal drugs are mainly known for their activities and use as
anti-inflammatory, antipyretic compounds. But, in recent observations,
they are exposed to use as an effective alternative compounds to prevent
or stimulate different metabolic activities and help in preventing
various neoplastic progression. They have specific role in controlling
estrogen metabolism during breast cancer progression. Sometimes, they are
used as an apoptotic induction in various cancers. Their role in hypoxia
induced proliferation is also showing promising results. Different NSAIDs
will help to induce the activities of various tumor suppressor genes. As
chronic inflammation increases the risk for various cancers, therefore,
it is important to eliminate inflammation through anti-Inflammatory
compounds where NSAIDs are playing a vital role. Most of them are acting
to prevent inflammation either via selective or non-selective COX based
mechanism. The non-selective COX inhibitor sulindac and the COX-2
selective inhibitor etodolac etc. have been shown to prevent the
formation and cause regression of adenomas in patients with familial
polyposis. Unfortunately, COX-1 and/or COX-2 inhibition and depletion of
physiologically important prostaglandins is associated with
gastrointestinal, renal and cardiovascular toxicities that limit the use
of NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors for cancer chemoprevention In this
particular study, we are using various NSAIDs in a radiation-induced
estogren treated breast cancer model to establish their role in
differential expression of various cancer related genes selected from
different cell cycle pathways microarray. Selection of biomarkers from
these altered genes will help to develop a valid strategy for cancer
prevention through precision based molecular targeted therapy.

Supported by Office of Academic Affairs, Honors Program, COBI,
Hostos-CUNY, NY, USA (DR) and Tarapac√° University, Arica, Chile (GMC).


