Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ACTN4 stabilises RIPK1 to function as an oncogenic driver in
melanoma.


We have recently reported that receptor-interacting protein kinase 1
(RIPK1) is commonly up-regulated through cellular inhibitor apoptosis
protein (cIAP)-mediated stabilization and functions as an oncogenic
driver via activation of NF-κB in melanoma cells. Here we show that
α-actinin-4 (ACTN4), an isoform of α-actinins of spectrin superfamily
proteins that is emerging as an oncogenic regulator, is required for
cIAP-mediated stabilization of RIPK1 and plays a pro-oncogenic role in
melanoma. Similar to RIPK1, ACTN4 was found to be commonly increased in
melanoma cells. While knockdown of ACTN4 inhibited melanoma cell
proliferation that was associated with down-regulation of RIPK1 and
reduction in the basal levels of NF-κB activation, overexpression of
ACTN4 resulted in enhanced proliferation of melanocytes that was
associated with elevation in RIPK1 expression and increased NF-κB
activation. The inhibitory effect of ACTN4 knockdown on melanoma cell
proliferation and activation of NF-κB was due to decreased expression of
RIPK1, as it was abolished by overexpression of RIPK1. On the other hand,
knockdown of RIPK1 diminished ACTN4 overexpression-triggered enhancement
in proliferation in melanocytes. Strikingly, knockdown of ACTN4
attenuated the association between cIAPs and RIPK1 and reduced K63-linked
ubiquitination of the protein, leading to RIPK1 protein degradation.
Mechanistic studies showed that ACTN4 bound to RIPK1 through its
N-terminus, whereas it was associated with cIAPs via its C-terminus, and
that dimerization of ACTN4 in an anti-parallel manner is required for the
interaction between cIAPs and RIPK1. Collectively, ACTN4 is necessary for
stabilization of RIPK1 by cIAPs and functions as an oncogenic driver in
melanoma.


