Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive target enrichment panel for fusion detection.


Growing interest in cancer classification and progression has accelerated
the rate of novel gene fusions discovery with increasing recognition of
their roles as biomarkers. RNA-Seq is an attractive method for expressed
fusion discovery and detection because of its ability to provide unbiased
fusion sequencing information. The ability to detect low expressing
fusion transcripts, however, require high sequencing depth and represents
a significant financial barrier and identification of clinically relevant
fusion sequences from a large data set can be a bioinformatics challenge.

To address these challenges we have tested the OvationÂ® Fusion Panel
Target Enrichment System V2, a targeted RNA sequencing method using the
Single Primer Enrichment Technology (SPET), with a number of control and
clinical samples. Initial studies were performed using a comprehensive
target enrichment panel targeting 502 genes with three samples from
Horizon DX containing known fusions. Target enriched libraries were
constructed with 10 ng and 100 ng inputs and the data was analyzed using
the NuFuseD pipeline (available as a point and click BaseSpace
application or downloadable linux package) which has been optimized for
fusion analysis from this data. Expected fusions were identified at both
input levels, even when down sampled to 500K reads, with fewer fusion
calls compared to other publically available fusion detection software
(Chimerascan and SOAPFuse), suggesting a lower false positive rate.
NuFuseD fusion calls are provided with a P-value to help prioritize the
identified fusions for subsequent validation. Additionally, NuFuseD
detected novel fusions in the control samples demonstrating the advantage
of a comprehensive panel compared to more restricted panels. We further
validated the target panel using control RNA (UHR and Human Brain) and
fresh or FFPE cell lines (NCI-H2228, HCC1937) to further demonstrate our
ability to identify known fusions.

Finally, the system was evaluated at an external site using patient FFPE
samples. These samples (N=8) were from a set of breast, liver and ovarian
cancers, containing a unique fusion in 4 of the samples based on DNA
based sequencing. Only 1 of the 4 expected fusions were identified using
whole transcriptome data (100 million reads) while 3 of the 4 fusions
were detected with this assay (10 million reads) demonstrating its
ability to generate targeted RNA sequencing libraries with increased
sensitivity of gene fusion detection and reduced sequencing costs
compared to standard RNA-Seq methods.


