Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ephrin-A ligands regulate cutaneous tumor etiology and metastasis
through cell autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms.


Glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored ephrin-A ligands target EphA receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) to promote keratinocyte differentiation.
Accordingly, genetic ablation of the major epidermal EphA subtype, EphA2,
increases susceptibility to DMBA/TPA-induced cutaneous chemical
carcinogenesis. Defining the corresponding role of ligands for EphA2 in
skin cancer has been more cumbersome as the three ephrin-A genes (Efna1,
Efna3, Efna4) are all prominently expressed in skin. We met this
challenge by utilizing a triple Efna1/3/4 knockout (TKO) mice that
reflects the pattern of reduced Efna gene expression found in mouse and
human cutaneous SCCs. Skin tumors developed earlier and grew faster in
mice lacking EphA2 or these three ephrin-A ligands. Interestingly TKO
mice displayed accelerated malignant progression toward invasive SCC that
metastasized to the lymph nodes and lungs by 25 weeks following DMBA-TPA
treatment. Using keratinocyte culture models, we found that ephrin-A
ligands act within the epidermis to limit keratinocyte migration in a
manner that depends on their targeting of EphA2. We also illustrated a
key role for ephrin-A ligands in the surrounding tumor microenvironment
by re-introducing isogenic SCC cell lines into the skin of wild-type or
TKO mice on congenic FVB background; tumor growth and metastasis was
facilitated in mice lacking ephrin-A ligands. Importantly, the invasive
phenotype of TKO mouse tumor cell lines was normalized by genetic
reintroduction of either Efna1 or Efna3. Integrating our findings from
human tumors, mouse models, primary cell cultures, and allograft models
provides strong support for the notion that ephrins operate within tumor
cells and also in the microenvironment to suppress skin tumor initiation
and metastasis.


