Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanisms of dianhydrogalactitol (VAL-083) in
overcoming chemoresistance in glioblastoma.


Standard treatments for glioblastoma (GBM) include surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ). Nearly all tumors recur and 5-year
survival is less than 3%, largely due to chemoresistance. Evidence shows
that cancer cells utilize DNA damage repair pathways to overcome
cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy. GBM tumors expressing
O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT) display intrinsic
chemoresistance to TMZ and nitrosoureas, while a deficient DNA mismatch
repair system (MMR) confers chemoresistance to TMZ and platinum agents.
Alterations in p53, particularly gain-of-function mutations, are
correlated with increased MGMT-expression and poor prognoses in GBM.
Second line anti-angiogenic treatment with bevacizumab has not improved
overall survival and has been shown to induce intratumor hypoxia and
increased chemoresistance. VAL-083 is a bi-functional alkylating agent
that readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, accumulates in brain tumor
tissue and has demonstrated activity against GBM in prior NCI-sponsored
clinical trials. VAL-083 induces interstrand cross-links at guanine-N7
causing DNA double-strand breaks and cancer cell death. VAL-083 is
equiactive against GBM cancer stem cells (CSCs) and non-CSCs independent
of MGMT and p53 status, in vitro. We recently showed that VAL-083 leads
to irreversible S/G2-phase cell cycle arrest, proposing synergy with
S-phase specific chemotherapeutics, including topoisomerase and PARP
inhibitors. VAL-083 further showed persistent activation of the
homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair pathway and its potency was
increased when HR was impaired, demonstrating that VAL-083-induced
lesions are repaired via HR suggesting increased VAL-083 potency in
HR-impaired tumors. Further, hypoxic cancer cells are known to
downregulate their HR pathway, proposing increased VAL-083 potency in
hypoxic tumors. Bevacizumab treatment increases hypoxia in tumor cells,
presumably impairing HR, proposing VAL-083 as a treatment option in
HR-deficient or hypoxic cancers following, or as part of a combination
treatment with, bevacizumab. Here, VAL-083 cytotoxicity and DNA damage
response was evaluated by crystal violet assays, western blot and flow
cytometry. VAL-083â€™s ability to overcome MMR-related chemoresistance
was investigated using lentiviral MLH1 and MSH2 vectors in HCT116 and
LoVo cancer cells. We report synergy between VAL-083 and etoposide or
camptothecin in A549 and PC3 cancer cell lines. We also investigated the
potency of VAL-083 in GBM under hypoxia either in vitro or in vivo as
part of a combination treatment with bevacizumab. Our results demonstrate
a distinct anti-cancer mechanism for VAL-083, resulting in the ability to
overcome resistance to TMZ and nitrosoureas, increased activity in
cancers with impaired HR and synergy with etoposide or camptothecin.


