Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective study of oral microbiome and colorectal cancer risk in
low-income and African American populations.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in both men and
women worldwide, and the third leading cause of cancer death in the USA.
Recent research suggests that oral microbiome may play important roles in
the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer and other chronic diseases. We
conducted a nested case-control study within the Southern Community
Cohort Study to investigate the association of oral microbiome with
subsequent risk of developing CRC. This study included 231 incident CRC
cases and 462 controls individually matched on age, race, smoking,
alcohol drinking, season-of-study enrollment and recruitment method, with
~74% subjects of African descent. The V4 region of 16S rRNA gene of the
pre-diagnostic mouth rinse samples was deeply sequenced. Sequencing data
were processed using QIIME and sequence reads were clustered into
Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs). In total, 11 phyla, 73 families and
134 genera were observed from study samples, and only 5 phyla, 12
families and 11 genera showed relative abundance >1%. Multiple bacteria
taxa showed significant associations with CRC risk at P Colorectal cancer
(CRC) is the third most common cancer in both men and women worldwide,
and the third leading cause of cancer death in the USA. Recent research
suggests that oral microbiome may play important roles in the
pathogenesis of colorectal cancer and other chronic diseases. We
conducted a nested case-control study within the Southern Community
Cohort Study to investigate the association of oral microbiome with
subsequent risk of developing CRC. This study included 231 incident CRC
cases and 462 controls individually matched on age, race, smoking,
alcohol drinking, season-of-study enrollment and recruitment method, with
~74% subjects of African descent. The V4 region of 16S rRNA gene of the
pre-diagnostic mouth rinse samples was deeply sequenced. Sequencing data
were processed using QIIME and sequence reads were clustered into
Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs). In total, 11 phyla, 73 families and
134 genera were observed from study samples, and only 5 phyla, 12
families and 11 genera showed relative abundance >1%. Multiple bacteria
taxa showed significant associations with CRC risk at P <0.05. Notably,
within the phylum Firmicutes, four genera were associated with increased
risk of CRC, including Peptococcus, Ruminococcaceae_ [G-1],
Clostridiales_[F-1][G-1], and Mollicutes_[G-2], with ORs (95% CIs) being
1.34(1.11-1.63), 1.20(1.01-1.44), 1.44(1.07-1.92), and 2.24(1.38-3.63),
respectively. Multiple taxa within other phyla were also associated with

increased risk of CRC, such as the family Bifidobacteriaceae within
phylum Actinobacteria with OR (95% CI) being 1.31(1.08-1.61), and genus
Lautropia within phylum Proteobacteria with OR (95% CI) being
1.23(1.02-1.48), and phylum SR1 with OR (95% CI) being 1.27(1.07-1.52).
We also found that the phylum Firmicutes and the species sp. Oral taxon
070, which belongs to the genus Streptococcus, were associated with
decreased risk of CRC, with ORs (95% CIs) being 0.79(0.65-0.96) and
0.77(0.63-0.93), respectively. Most of these associations were observed
among both African- and European- Americans. None of the associations
remained significant after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing,
which may be conservative. The tests were not independent because the
higher-level taxa is an aggregate of lower-level taxa. In addition, most
taxa showed low relative abundance and prevalence and we have low
statistical power to investigate them.

Conclusion: Our study suggested that multiple bacteria taxa may be
associated with risk of CRC, and raised the possibility that the oral
microbiome may play an important role in CRC etiology.


