Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive genetic analysis of myxofibrosarcoma and comparison
with other soft tissue sarcomas.


Background:

Myxofibrosarcoma (MFS) is a relatively common subtype of soft tissue
sarcomas (STSs) in the elderly, which is characterized by the
proliferation of pleomorphic spindle cells with varying degrees of the
myxoid component and on the basis of this unique histological picture,
together with other clinical characteristics, is separated from other
STSs. However, the genetic basis of MFS is poorly understood.

Aims and Methods:

The purpose of this study is to clarify the comprehensive registry of
genetic alterations in MFS and other STSs using whole exome/genome
sequencing (WES/WGS) of paired tumor/normal DNA from 41 samples with MFS,
combined with the WES data of 25 samples with MFS and 234 with STS, which
were available from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. WGS was
performed in 2 cases. Data for DNA methylation and gene expression from
the TCGA registry were also analyzed. Moreover, the genetic basis of
mixed histological components characteristic of MFS and its chronological
changes was interrogated using multi-regional and/or multi-time points
sampling.

Results:

A total of 8,661 mutations were identified in WES of 66 primary MFS
samples with a median of 131.2 mutations/sample, which were dominated by
age-related C to T transitions at CpG sites. WGS (n = 2) detected 491 and
198 somatic structural variations in each case, which suggested MFSs have
undergone complex chromosomal rearrangements. Most frequently mutated
genes included TP53 (n = 19, 28.8%), ATRX (n = 10, 15.5%), and RB1 (n =
8, 12.1%), which were also detected in several types of STSs (n = 234) at
similar frequencies with no mutations being specifically associated with
MFS compared to other STSs. However, interestingly, STSs were
reproducibly clustered into four distinct subtypes based on DNA
methylation and gene expression (Cram√©r's V = 0.73), regardless of the
histological classification. These subtypes based on DNA methylation and
gene expression showed stronger correlations with the prognosis (p-value:
0.025, 0.028, respectively) than the histological classification (p-value
= 0.528). Paired multi-regional sampling (n = 4) analysis disclosed high
degrees of intratumor heterogeneity with less than 27% (range 9.5-26.6%)
mutations being shared by different sampling. Multi-time points sampling
analysis (n = 6) showed that the number of mutations did not
significantly differ between primary and relapsed tumors (p-value =
0.35). There were no recurrent morphological feature-associated or
relapse-specific mutational/copy number alterations.

Conclusions:

MFS is characterized by frequent mutations in TP53, ATRX, and RB1. STSs,
including MFS, are classified into 4 distinct subgroups based on DNA
methylation and gene expression, which correlated well with clinical
outcomes. There were high degrees of intratumor heterogeneity in terms of
mutations, which however, showed no clear correlation with morphological
features.


