Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arginine metabolism is modulated by androgen signalling and
prostate cancer progression.


Background: Metabolic reprogramming has been described as one of the
hallmarks of cancer. A pathway of promise in prostate cancer management
is arginine (Arg) metabolism. Phase 2 clinical trials are underway to
study arginine deprivation as a treatment of prostate cancer. However,
heterogeneous response has been noted and further studies are needed to
better identify prostate tumors most reliant on Arg metabolism. The aim
of this study was to investigate if Arg metabolism was associated with
androgen signalling and prostate cancer progression from androgen
dependent (AD) to androgen independent (AI) phenotype.

Methods: The LNCaP prostate cancer cell line was used. Four sets of
conditions were tested: LNCaP control, LNCaP in the presence of
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), LNCaP with MDV3100 (an AR inhibitor), and a
subline of LNCaP (CSS90) which has become AI. MTT viability assay was
used to assess cell viability. The Seahorse XF bioenergetics analyzer was
used to measure metabolic oxygen consumption. Gas Chromatography and Mass
Spectroscopy (GC/MS) was used for metabolomics characterization.

Results: LNCaP cells at a baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation led
to a 63% decrease in LNCaP cell viability (pResults: LNCaP cells at a
baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation led to a 63% decrease in LNCaP
cell viability (p<0.0001) in 24hrs. By contrast, the AI CSS90 only
demonstrated a 23% decrease in cell viability when depleted of Arg
(pResults: LNCaP cells at a baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation
led to a 63% decrease in LNCaP cell viability (p<0.0001) in 24hrs. By
contrast, the AI CSS90 only demonstrated a 23% decrease in cell viability
when depleted of Arg (p<0.01 with Arg control, pResults: LNCaP cells at a
baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation led to a 63% decrease in LNCaP
cell viability (p<0.0001) in 24hrs. By contrast, the AI CSS90 only
demonstrated a 23% decrease in cell viability when depleted of Arg
(p<0.01 with Arg control, p<0.001 between LNCaP and CSS90) demonstrating
AD cells were much more dependent on exogenous Arg. Enhanced AR signaling
with DHT further sensitized cells to arginine depletion with a 73%
decrease, and low level AR inhibition decreased response to arginine
depletion with only a 21% decrease in cell viability (pResults: LNCaP
cells at a baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation led to a 63%
decrease in LNCaP cell viability (p<0.0001) in 24hrs. By contrast, the AI
CSS90 only demonstrated a 23% decrease in cell viability when depleted of
Arg (p<0.01 with Arg control, p<0.001 between LNCaP and CSS90)
demonstrating AD cells were much more dependent on exogenous Arg.
Enhanced AR signaling with DHT further sensitized cells to arginine
depletion with a 73% decrease, and low level AR inhibition decreased
response to arginine depletion with only a 21% decrease in cell viability
(p<0.001 for all changes). Metabolic characterization by GC/MS
demonstrated a 33.8 fold increase in buildup of an arginine metabolism
intermediate, ornithine in the CSS90 cells vs LNCaP (pResults: LNCaP
cells at a baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation led to a 63%
decrease in LNCaP cell viability (p<0.0001) in 24hrs. By contrast, the AI
CSS90 only demonstrated a 23% decrease in cell viability when depleted of
Arg (p<0.01 with Arg control, p<0.001 between LNCaP and CSS90)
demonstrating AD cells were much more dependent on exogenous Arg.
Enhanced AR signaling with DHT further sensitized cells to arginine
depletion with a 73% decrease, and low level AR inhibition decreased
response to arginine depletion with only a 21% decrease in cell viability
(p<0.001 for all changes). Metabolic characterization by GC/MS
demonstrated a 33.8 fold increase in buildup of an arginine metabolism
intermediate, ornithine in the CSS90 cells vs LNCaP (p<0.0001) reflecting
compensatory ability of the CSS90 cells to endogenously manage Arg
metabolism. Modulation of androgen signaling with DHT and MDV3100
demonstrated similar increased reliance of exogenous Arg for AD cells
with increased androgen signaling with a 2.2 fold increase in Arg
dependent oxygen consumption with DHT and 95% drop with MDV (pResults:
LNCaP cells at a baseline are Arg-dependent. Arg starvation led to a 63%
decrease in LNCaP cell viability (p<0.0001) in 24hrs. By contrast, the AI
CSS90 only demonstrated a 23% decrease in cell viability when depleted of
Arg (p<0.01 with Arg control, p<0.001 between LNCaP and CSS90)
demonstrating AD cells were much more dependent on exogenous Arg.
Enhanced AR signaling with DHT further sensitized cells to arginine
depletion with a 73% decrease, and low level AR inhibition decreased
response to arginine depletion with only a 21% decrease in cell viability
(p<0.001 for all changes). Metabolic characterization by GC/MS
demonstrated a 33.8 fold increase in buildup of an arginine metabolism
intermediate, ornithine in the CSS90 cells vs LNCaP (p<0.0001) reflecting
compensatory ability of the CSS90 cells to endogenously manage Arg
metabolism. Modulation of androgen signaling with DHT and MDV3100
demonstrated similar increased reliance of exogenous Arg for AD cells
with increased androgen signaling with a 2.2 fold increase in Arg
dependent oxygen consumption with DHT and 95% drop with MDV (p<0.0001 for
both).

Conclusions: Arginine is potentially an important aspect of prostate
cancer metabolism. Arg targeted therapies may best be suited towards
earlier stage tumors and Arg metabolism characterization may have
potential as a biomarker of progression to AI prostate cancer.


