Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision lung cancer medicine based on information on cancer and
the host genomes.


Aberrations of oncogene, such as EGFR mutation; and ALK, RET, and ROS1
fusions, function as a driver in the development of lung adenocarcinoma
(LADC). They are a solid target of therapy using tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, as represented by a high response rate of RET-fusion positive
LADC to vandetanib (LURET study, Yoh et al., Lancet Resp Med, 2016). Our
genome-wide sequencing study revealed that oncogene aberration positive
LADCs carry less numbers of mutations in cancer-related genes than
negative ones (Saito, Cancer Res, 2015), indicating a small mutation
burden in the development of the formers. Consistently, a clinical trial
of anti-PD-1 therapy indicated that EGFR-mutation positive cases do not
benefit well from the therapy (Borghaei et al., N Engl J Med. 2015). LADC
driven by somatic EGFR mutations is more prevalent in East Asians
(30-50%) than in European/Americans (10-20%). We recently revealed that
variations in HLA-class II loci underlie the risk of the disease, by
conducting a genome-wide association study of 3,173 patients and 15,158
controls, combined with imputation of HLA alleles using a
Japanese-specific panel (Shiraishi et al., Nature Comm, 2016). The result
indicates that LADC develops in vivo through interaction between somatic
mutations and germline variations that modulate immune reaction.
Therefore, efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade targeting therapy might
also be influenced by such germline variations. On the other hand,
oncogene-negative LADCs show a high mutation burden associated with
nonsynonymous mutations in chromatin remodeling and other cancer-related
genes. Thus, these cases would respond well to immune checkpoint blockade
targeting therapies. We would like to discuss here precision lung cancer
medicine based on information on cancer and the host genomes.


