Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) inhibitor synergistically
prolongs animal survival with standard therapies in patient-derived IDH1
mutant glioma xenograft mouse models.


Background: Mutation in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) occurs in > 70%
of WHO grades II and III astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas and
secondary glioblastoma (GBM). The mutant enzyme catalyze the reduction of
α-ketoglutaric acid to D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid, leading to cancer
initiation. In this study, we examined the therapeutic efficacy of
SYC-435 (1-hydroxypyridin-2-one), a newly developed mutant IDH1inhibitor,
both in vitro and in vivo in IDH1 mutant gliomas as compared with IDH1
wild type GBMs.

Methods: An established neurosphere line (BT142) of anaplastic
oligoastrocytoma (AOA), and a patient-derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX)
model of recurrent AOA (IC-V0914AOA), and 2 PDOX models of GBM
(IC-4687GBM and IC-3752GBM) were included. IDH1 mutations (R132H and
R132C) were analyzed by pyrosequencing. To determine the in vitro
antitumor activities, tumor cells were exposed to SYC-435 (0.02 to 20
µM) and examining for changes of cell proliferation every 3-4 days till
day 13 by Cell Counting Kit-8 assay. For in vivo effects, orthotopic
xenograft mouse models of IC-BT142AOA and IC-V0914AOA were treated with
vehicle (as control), SYC-435 (i.p., 15 mg/kg/day x 28 days),
temozolomide (TMZ, oral, 50 mg/kg/day x 5 days) + fractionated radiation
(XRT, 2 Gy/day x 5 days) (as standard therapy), and combination of
SYC-435 with standard therapy starting 2 weeks after intracranial tumor
implantation. Animal survival times were analyzed by log rank analysis.

Results: IDH1 R132H mutation (homozygous) was detected in BT142AOA
neurosphere line and R132C mutation (mutant allele frequency 39-42%) in
IC-V0914AOA xenograft cells, while the two GBM models (IC-4687GBM and
IC-3752GBM) carried wild-type IDH1. Suppression of cell growth was
observed in time- and dose-dependent manner by SYC-435, particularly at
the IDH1 mutant models. At 0.5 µM, SYC-435 inhibited cell growth by 90%
in BT142 and 60% in IC-V0914AOA cells, whereas in IDH wild-type GBMs only
by 17% in IC-4687GBM and 19% in IC-3752GBM cells at day 13, indicating
the high selectivity of SYC-435 of mutant over wild type IDH1. Systematic
in vivo treatment with SYC-435 alone did not alter survival times in
neither IC-BT142AOA nor IC-V0914AOA models when compared with the control
group. Although standard therapy significantly prolonged animal survival
times in both models (PResults: IDH1 R132H mutation (homozygous) was
detected in BT142AOA neurosphere line and R132C mutation (mutant allele
frequency 39-42%) in IC-V0914AOA xenograft cells, while the two GBM
models (IC-4687GBM and IC-3752GBM) carried wild-type IDH1. Suppression of
cell growth was observed in time- and dose-dependent manner by SYC-435,
particularly at the IDH1 mutant models. At 0.5 µM, SYC-435 inhibited
cell growth by 90% in BT142 and 60% in IC-V0914AOA cells, whereas in IDH
wild-type GBMs only by 17% in IC-4687GBM and 19% in IC-3752GBM cells at
day 13, indicating the high selectivity of SYC-435 of mutant over wild
type IDH1. Systematic in vivo treatment with SYC-435 alone did not alter
survival times in neither IC-BT142AOA nor IC-V0914AOA models when
compared with the control group. Although standard therapy significantly
prolonged animal survival times in both models (P<0.0005), combining
SYC-435 with standard therapies further extended the median survival
times from 106 days (in the standard therapy group) to 124 days
(PResults: IDH1 R132H mutation (homozygous) was detected in BT142AOA
neurosphere line and R132C mutation (mutant allele frequency 39-42%) in
IC-V0914AOA xenograft cells, while the two GBM models (IC-4687GBM and
IC-3752GBM) carried wild-type IDH1. Suppression of cell growth was
observed in time- and dose-dependent manner by SYC-435, particularly at
the IDH1 mutant models. At 0.5 µM, SYC-435 inhibited cell growth by 90%
in BT142 and 60% in IC-V0914AOA cells, whereas in IDH wild-type GBMs only
by 17% in IC-4687GBM and 19% in IC-3752GBM cells at day 13, indicating
the high selectivity of SYC-435 of mutant over wild type IDH1. Systematic
in vivo treatment with SYC-435 alone did not alter survival times in
neither IC-BT142AOA nor IC-V0914AOA models when compared with the control
group. Although standard therapy significantly prolonged animal survival
times in both models (P<0.0005), combining SYC-435 with standard
therapies further extended the median survival times from 106 days (in
the standard therapy group) to 124 days (P<0.05) in IC-V0914AOA and
exhibited similar trend in IC-BT142AOA.

Conclusion: SYC-435 possesses antitumor effects that are highly selective
in IDH1 mutant gliomas, and generated strong synergistic activities with
standard therapies in vivo. Our data support the clinical testing of
SYC-435 in patients with IDH1 mutant glioma.


