Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant expression of PDZ binding kinase modulates human
pancreatic cancer cell invasion.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths and projected to be the second leading cause of
cancer deaths by 2030. Incidence to mortality ratio for PDAC is almost
one suggesting its aggressive phenotype. The poor survival rate of PDAC
patients is due to metastasis to distant organs, and therefore, recent
focus has been aimed towards the identification of molecular targets that
drives metastatic disease. We are investigating an under-studied kinase,
PDZ-domain binding kinase (PBK) as a target for pancreatic cancer (PanCa)
therapy. PBK is a dual-specificity serine/threonine kinase involved in
mitosis and invasive behavior of cancer cells. It is expressed
physiologically in testis, but aberrant expression results in an
aggressive phenotype in a variety of cancers. Our results demonstrate
that PBK expression varies across a panel of human PanCa cell lines, and
directly correlates with their invasive ability. Similarly, a panel of
patient-derived primary PanCa shows higher PBK levels associated with
aggressive behavior and invasion. To assure specificity of PBK to this
invasive phenotype, we measured the effect of PBK overexpression or
knockdown on the PanCa linesâ€™ invasive ability. Overexpression of PBK
in low PBK expressing cells increased PanCa invasion ~10-fold, while PBK
knockdown reduced invasive ability ~5-fold. Immunohistochemical analyses
of resected human PanCa specimens revealed that PBK is present in the
majority of human PanCa tissue samples tested but not in the adjacent
normal pancreatic tissue. Interestingly, aberrant PBK localization was
found in even early stages of PanCa development and was sustained
throughout its progression. In search of molecular effectors of invasion
regulated by the PBK, we examined various genes/proteins that are
involved in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. RelB a well-known
metastatic inducer in various cancers was found to be a major payer in
PanCa and regulated by PBK. These data indicate a novel molecular pathway
of PBK where its presence plays a role in invasion of human PanCa cells.
Therefore, the role of PBK in promoting cancer cell invasion, combined
with its general lack of expression in normal cells, nominates PBK as a
potentially important therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer.


