Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small non-coding RNA profiling from prostate cancer plasma by deep
sequencing.


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common non-skin cancer
among American men. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are critical post-transcriptional
regulators and involved in prostate cancer tumorigenesis. The aim of this
study is to identify a PCa-specific expression profile of miRNAs from
plasma to guide prostate cancer diagnosis and therapeutic treatment.

Methods: Plasma was collected from 5 PCa patients and 5 normal men.
Circulating RNA was extracted from 1) 200ul plasma or 2) the pellets of
anti-Ago2 immunoprecipitations from 500ul plasma using the miRNeasy
Serum/Plasma kit (Qiagen), with addition of glycogen as a carrier. Small
RNA libraries were constructed using the NEBNext Multiplex Small RNA Prep
Set for IlluminaÂ® (New England. BioLabs). The cDNA library fragments
were purified by Blue Pippin (Sage Science) for extraction of 140-160 bp
size fraction containing small RNA inserts. Equimolar amounts of cDNA
library samples were pooled and were sequenced in a single flowcell on an
Illumina HiSeq2500 with 50 cycle kit and rapid run model.

Bioinformatics analysis: Adaptor was firstly removed from the raw reads,
and the sequences were mapped to several small RNA databases by using
bowtie1 with 1 mismatch. The multiple aligned reads were weighted to the
mapped small RNAs based on their unique mapped reads counts. We then
calculated the RPM (reads per million) as indicator of the expression
levels of the small RNA. To get confident analysis results, we discarded
the small RNAs whose averages of the raw reads counts in cancer and
normal groups are smaller than 25 and only focus on the mature microRNAs.
The moderate t-test is applied to find the differently expressed (DE)
microRNAs between normal and cancer group.

Results: Two major small RNA classes identified from total plasma are
miRNA (47.7%) and yRNA (35.0%). The percentage of miRNA increased to
85.3% by Ago2-IP method. The compositions of categories of small RNAs in
cancer and normal samples are similar. We identified 28 and 22
differential miRNAs (>2 fold change between cancer and normal group) by
total plasma and Ago-2 IP methods respectively.

Conclusions: We discovered a unique expression profile of miRNA
detectable in the plasma from prostate cancer patients. Extracted RNA
from the pellets of anti-Ago2 immunoprecipitations can enhance the
detection of miRNA. Expand study to confirm these findings are needed.


