Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated USP22 is a potential therapeutic target for human
non-small cell lung cancer.


Elevated ubiquitin-specific protease 22 (USP22) is associated with
enhanced malignancy, therapeutic resistance, and poor prognosis of
various human cancers. In this study, the clinicopathological
significance of USP22, therapeutic implication of targeting USP22, and
underlying molecules of USP22 knockdown were investigated in human
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Immunohistochemistry analysis
revealed that USP22 protein was dramatically elevated in ~ 67% of 197
NSCLC tissues compared with adjacent normal lung tissues. Importantly,
statistical analysis demonstrated that elevated USP22 was positively
associated with advanced cancer stage and a trend to poor prognosis of
NSCLC patients. Moreover, siRNA-mediated knockdown of USP22 induced a
cell cycle arrest in G1/S phase and significantly suppressed cell
proliferation and soft agar colony formations in NSCLC cell lines. In
addition, knockdown of USP22 significantly enhanced cisplatin-induced
genotoxic effects in NSCLC cell lines. Furthermore, USP22 silencing
substantially down-regulated SIRT1 and upregulated p53 tumor suppressor
in NSCLC cells, indicating downregulation of USP22 may boost p53-mediated
tumor suppression and DNA damage response in NSCLC cells. Knockdown of
USP22 also increased global histone H2B monoubiquitylation, H3K4 and
H3K79 trimethylation leading to global gene expression profile changes in
these NSCLC cells. These results suggest that targeting USP22 will have
broad anti-cancer effects via altering multiple cancer signaling
pathways. Taken together, data of this study further indicate that the
elevated USP22 may potentially represent a prognostic factor and
therapeutic target for NSCLC patients.


