Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of MSLN impairs pancreatic cancer growth in the peritoneal
cavity.


Mesothelin (MSLN) is a cell surface glycoprotein that is expressed in at
least 85% of pancreatic adenocarcinoma but not on cells of the healthy
pancreas nor in the parenchyma of other vital organs. Due to this
differential expression, MSLN has been used as a target for various
antibody based treatments and cancer vaccines. The physiologic role of
MSLN is unknown. Previous reports have suggested that overexpression of
MSLN may increase tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. To further define the role of MSLN in this disease, we
deleted MSLN from the human pancreatic cancer cell line, KLM1, using
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Successful deletion of MSLN was confirmed via
flow cytometry and immunoblotting. Furthermore, KLMΔMSLN cells were
rendered invulnerable to the MSLN-targeted immunotoxin, RG7787, which
depends on the presence of surface MSLN for cytotoxicity. In cell
culture, KLMΔMSLN cells grew at the same rate as control cells.
KLMΔMSLN formed subcutaneous tumors in nude mice with the same frequency
as control cells and these tumors grew at the same rate. However, when
nude mice were inoculated with KLMΔMSLN or control cells
intraperitoneally, a marked decrease in tumor burden was observed in
cells lacking MSLN. In summary, we have engineered a pancreatic cancer
cell line that lacks MSLN and demonstrated that loss of MSLN impairs
tumor growth and spread specifically within the peritoneal cavity.
Further experiments are in progress to identify the factors contributing
to this phenotype.


