Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adipocytes sequester and metabolize daunorubicin.


Obesity is associated with poorer outcome from many cancers, including
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We have previously shown
that adipocytes protect ALL cells from the anthracycline, daunorubicin
(DNR). We therefore investigated whether adipocytes sequester and/or
metabolize DNR in the ALL microenvironment. Using fluorescence and LC/MS
measures, we demonstrated that adipocytes absorb DNR, reducing the
intracellular DNR concentration in co-cultured BV173 ALL cells (after 48
hours, median fluorescent intensity of ALL cultured with adipocytes was
1.7±1.0 vs. 5.0±1.7 of those cultured alone, pObesity is associated
with poorer outcome from many cancers, including childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We have previously shown that adipocytes
protect ALL cells from the anthracycline, daunorubicin (DNR). We
therefore investigated whether adipocytes sequester and/or metabolize DNR
in the ALL microenvironment. Using fluorescence and LC/MS measures, we
demonstrated that adipocytes absorb DNR, reducing the intracellular DNR
concentration in co-cultured BV173 ALL cells (after 48 hours, median
fluorescent intensity of ALL cultured with adipocytes was 1.7±1.0 vs.
5.0±1.7 of those cultured alone, p<0.01). Mouse adipocytes convert DNR
to the less active metabolite, daunorubicinol (DNR-ol); over 48 hours,
media DNR decreased to 0.1±0.2 (vs. 24.8±8.76 ng/mL in control wells).
At the same time, DNR-ol increased to 15.0±1.9 (vs. 0.7±0.6 in control
wells; both pObesity is associated with poorer outcome from many cancers,
including childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We have
previously shown that adipocytes protect ALL cells from the
anthracycline, daunorubicin (DNR). We therefore investigated whether
adipocytes sequester and/or metabolize DNR in the ALL microenvironment.
Using fluorescence and LC/MS measures, we demonstrated that adipocytes
absorb DNR, reducing the intracellular DNR concentration in co-cultured
BV173 ALL cells (after 48 hours, median fluorescent intensity of ALL
cultured with adipocytes was 1.7±1.0 vs. 5.0±1.7 of those cultured
alone, p<0.01). Mouse adipocytes convert DNR to the less active
metabolite, daunorubicinol (DNR-ol); over 48 hours, media DNR decreased
to 0.1±0.2 (vs. 24.8±8.76 ng/mL in control wells). At the same time,
DNR-ol increased to 15.0±1.9 (vs. 0.7±0.6 in control wells; both
p<0.05). Similar conversion of DNR to DNR-ol was observed in both mouse
adipose explants and human adipose tissue biopsy samples ex vivo. qPCR
confirmed human subcutaneous adipose tissue expresses several enzymes
capable of metabolizing DNR, including AKR1A1, 1B1, 1C1, 1C2, 1C3, 7A2,
and CBR1 and 3 (expression ranged between 20 and 195% β-actin). Using
immunohistochemistry, we confirmed expression of AKR1C1, 1C2, and 1C3 in
bone marrow adipocytes of children during the first month of treatment
for ALL. Finally, two hours after an intravenous dose of DNR in mice, we
found that the DNR-ol to DNR ratio was higher in subcutaneous
(0.60±0.26) and omental (0.55±0.21) adipose than in white blood cells
(0.16±0.11), bone marrow (undetectable DNR-ol), and spleen (undetectable
DNR-ol). Together, these data demonstrate that adipocytes sequester and
inactivate DNR, likely due to their expression of AKR and CBR enzymes.
These findings uncover a novel and important mechanism which could
promote local anthracycline resistance by cancer cells in
microenvironment rich in adipocytes, such as bone marrow, omentum, and
breast.


