Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polatuzumab vedotin significantly enhances in vitro cell death and
overall survival against CD79b+ Burkitt lymphoma (BL)/primary mediastinal
large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) NSG xenograft mice.


Background: Mature B-NHL, including Burkitt lymphoma and primary
mediastinal large B cell lymphoma express CD79b+ and have an excellent
prognosis with chemo-immunotherapy (Cairo et al Blood, 2007,
Gerrard/Cairo et al. Blood, 2013). However, a subset of patients with
relapsed/refractory mature B-NHL has chemoimmunotherapy resistant disease
a dismal prognosis (≤ 10% 5 years, EFS) (Cairo et al. JCO, 2012). The
antibody drug conjugates (Polatuzumab Vedotin, PV) has demonstrated
significant preclinical activity against indolent CD79b+NHL (Polson et
al.Can. Res. 2009). More recently PV has been safe and well tolerated in
adult with CD79b refractory CLL (Palanca-Wessels et al. Lancet Oncol,
2014) but its preclinical activity against mature B-NHL (BL/PMBL) is
unknown.

Objective: To determine the efficacy of the PV against CD79b+ PMBL and
rituximab (RTX) sensitive/resistant BL tumor cell lines in-vitro and
in-vivo.

Design/Methods: Raji/Raji4RH (BL, provided by M. Barth, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute) and Karpas1106P and MedB-1(PMBL) were cultured in
10-20% RPMI. Tumor cells were incubated with hu anti-CD79b-vc-MMAE,
and/or anti-CD79b, MMAE or huIgG1 (generously supplied by Genentech Inc.)
for 24 hrs. Cell death was evaluated by staining with annexin V/7AAD and
analyzed by flow cytometry, n=3. Six to 8 week old female NSG
(NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ), were divided into 5 groups: PBS only
(control), isotype control (IgG), PV (5mg/kg), anti-CD79b mAb (5 mg/kg)
and MMAE (5 mg/kg). Mice were xenografted with intravenous injections of
Luc+ Raji/Raji4RH and Karpas1106P cells as we have previously
demonstrated (Awasthi/Cairo et al, BJH, 2015). Mice were treated twice a
week for 6 weeks. Tumor burden was monitored by IVIS spectrum system.

Results: Anti-CD79b-vc-MMAE compared to anti-CD79b Ab or IgG1 Ab alone
(10µg/ml, 24hrs), significantly enhanced cell death in Raji, 47.2±1.3%
vs 29.1±6.0% vs. 28.2±4.3%, (p=0.0008 and p=0.00006), Raji4RH,
29.8±9.1% vs 25.4±3.9% vs. 18.0±8.2% (p=NS and p=0.03), Karpas1106P,
46.8±5.3% vs 33.8±3.5% vs. 26.2±0.4% (p=0.02 and 0.006) and MedB-1,
47.4±2.2% vs 27.6±2.4% vs. 23.9±1.7% (p=0.002 and 0.0001),
respectively. Further, median survival time in mice receiving 5 mg/kg of
PV was significantly increased when compared to mice receiving 5 mg/kg of
anti-CD79b Ab or isotype control in Raji, Raji4RH and Karpas1106P (35.5
vs.17 vs. 19.5 days, p=0.0001, 0.0003, 50 vs. 18 vs. 18.5 days and 150 vs
89 vs 64 days, p=0.03 ,0.003, respectively)

Conclusions: Our preliminary data indicates that PV significantly
enhances cell death in RTX sensitive/ resistant BL and PMBL compared to
CD79b Ab or isotype control. Furthermore, PV significantly increased
survival in BL and PMBL NSG xenografts


