Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amentoflavone regulate Hh-Gli1 signaling pathway and inhibits
tumorsphere formation in U251 glioblastoma cells.


Cancer stem cells represent a rare population of cells with a
self-renewal capacity, and potentially are involved in tumor progression,
tumor relapse, and resistance to cancer chemotherapies. In this study, we
investigated the effect of an active ingredient of chamaecyaris obtuse,
amentoflavone, on stemness of U251 glioblastoma cells. We first found
that amentoflavone from 1 to10 μM suppressed tumorsphere formation and
inhibited the expression of glioblastoma stem cell markers CD133 and
ALDH1 in a dose dependent manner. In addition, amentoflavone
significantly reduced the expression of Nanog involved in cancer stem
cells maintenance in tumorsphere culture. As an upstream modulator,
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling mediator Gli1 was confirmed to be highly
expressed in tumorsphere culture where the suppression of Gli1 by the
treatment of Hh inhibitors (vismodegib and GANT 61) or Gli1-siRNA
significantly suppressed the expression of stem cell markers CD133,
ALDH1, and Nanog as well as tumorsphere formation in U251 glioblastoma
cells. These results indicate that Hh signaling plays an important role
in maintaining tumorsphere and stemness of U251 glioblastoma cells. Next,
we also found that the treatment of amentoflavone from 1 to10 μM
inhibited the expression of Gli1 and its downstream mediator Nanog in
tumorsphere culture of U251 glioblastoma cells. Taken together,
amentoflavone significantly suppressed Hh/Gli1 signaling which results in
inhibition of stemness of U251 glioblastoma cells.


