Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abviximab manifests striking anti-tumor effects in sensitive and
chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells.


Introduction: We have recently reported myeloperoxidase (MPO) to be
expressed in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells and tissues. This
finding was surprising, as MPO is known to be expressed only in cells of
myeloid origin. We have also found that targeting β2 integrin
(CD11b/CD18), a known ligand for MPO, resulted in significant anti-tumor
effects. The objective of this study was to determine if targeting CD11b
with a clinically approved drug that cross-reacts with CD11b will have
anti-tumor efficacy for the treatment of sensitive and chemoresistant
ovarian cancer.

Methods: Human EOC cell lines MDAH-2774, SKOV-3, and A2780 and their
chemoresistant counterparts were utilized for this study. Cells were
treated for 24 hrs with increasing doses of docetaxel (0.0075, 0.01, and
0.025 μM) or cisplatin (0.1, 0.5 and 1.0 μM) with our without abciximab
(5 or 10 μg/ml), an existing clinically approved anticoagulant drug.
Abciximab is a human-murine chimeric antibody Fab fragment against
platelet integrin glycoprotein IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa). Cytotoxicity was
determined by the TACS MTT Cell Proliferation Assay. Data was analyzed
using SPSS and significant cytotoxic effects were determined by one-way
analysis of variance within groups (sensitive, resistant to docetaxel or
cisplatin) followed by Tukey’s post hoc tests, and independent t-tests
for comparison between groups. For the synergistic effect of abciximab
and chemotherapy, the automated calculation of combination index values
was conducted by CompuSyn software. A combination index method provides
qualitative information on the nature of compound interaction
(antagonistic, additive or synergistic effect) and was used to analyze
the results. Statistical significance of pMethods: Human EOC cell lines
MDAH-2774, SKOV-3, and A2780 and their chemoresistant counterparts were
utilized for this study. Cells were treated for 24 hrs with increasing
doses of docetaxel (0.0075, 0.01, and 0.025 μM) or cisplatin (0.1, 0.5
and 1.0 μM) with our without abciximab (5 or 10 μg/ml), an existing
clinically approved anticoagulant drug. Abciximab is a human-murine
chimeric antibody Fab fragment against platelet integrin glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa (GP IIb/IIIa). Cytotoxicity was determined by the TACS MTT Cell
Proliferation Assay. Data was analyzed using SPSS and significant
cytotoxic effects were determined by one-way analysis of variance within
groups (sensitive, resistant to docetaxel or cisplatin) followed by
Tukey’s post hoc tests, and independent t-tests for comparison between
groups. For the synergistic effect of abciximab and chemotherapy, the
automated calculation of combination index values was conducted by
CompuSyn software. A combination index method provides qualitative
information on the nature of compound interaction (antagonistic, additive
or synergistic effect) and was used to analyze the results. Statistical
significance of p<0.05 was considered significant for all analyses.

Results: Abciximab had significant cytotoxic effects in sensitive (40.8
± 10.3 and 56.7 ± 5.3%), docetaxel resistant (30.0 ± 11.6 and 46.6 ±
10.0%), and cisplatin resistant (27.3 ± 7.9 and 41.9 ±7.0%) EOC cells
at the 5 and 10 μg/ml dose, respectively, as compared to untreated
controls (pResults: Abciximab had significant cytotoxic effects in
sensitive (40.8 ± 10.3 and 56.7 ± 5.3%), docetaxel resistant (30.0 ±
11.6 and 46.6 ± 10.0%), and cisplatin resistant (27.3 ± 7.9 and 41.9
±7.0%) EOC cells at the 5 and 10 μg/ml dose, respectively, as compared
to untreated controls (p<0.01). Abciximab is significantly more cytotoxic
to sensitive as compared to cisplatin resistant cells (pResults:
Abciximab had significant cytotoxic effects in sensitive (40.8 ± 10.3
and 56.7 ± 5.3%), docetaxel resistant (30.0 ± 11.6 and 46.6 ± 10.0%),
and cisplatin resistant (27.3 ± 7.9 and 41.9 ±7.0%) EOC cells at the 5
and 10 μg/ml dose, respectively, as compared to untreated controls
(p<0.01). Abciximab is significantly more cytotoxic to sensitive as
compared to cisplatin resistant cells (p<0.01), with no significant
difference in killing as compared to docetaxel resistant cells (p=0.057).
Treatment with chemotherapy combined with abciximab resulted in a
synergist cytotoxic effect in all sensitive EOC cell lines, and in
chemoresistant MDAH-2774 and SKOV-3 cell lines. For the cisplatin
resistant A2780 cell line, synergist effects were only observed when
combining abciximab with 1.0 μM cisplatin.

Conclusions: The observed intriguing anti-tumor effects of abcixiamb in
ovarian cancer cells indicates the potential for abciximab to be
repurposed as a novel therapy for ovarian cancer.


