Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trichostatin A overcomes chemotherapeutic resistance of urothelial
carcinoma cells through the inactivation of c-Raf/ERK pathway.


Trichostatin A (TSA), a potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, has
been reported to elicit anti-proliferative response in various tumors.
Here, we investigated antitumor effect of TSA alone or in combination
with conventional chemotherapeutic agents on urothelial carcinoma (UC)
cells. We use one high-grade UC cell line (T24) and another UC cells
(NTUUC) obtained by primary culture from the surgical specimen of a women
with high-grade and metastatic bladder UC. The cytotoxicity and apoptosis
induced by TSA alone , chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, gemcitabine
and doxorubicin) and combined treatment were assessed by MTT assay and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting and flow cytometry. The expression of
phosphor c-Raf, phosphor-MEK1/2, and phosphor-ERK1/2 were measured by
Western blot. urther elucidation on the role of Raf/MEK/ERK pathoway on
the TSA-enhanced cytoxicity were exmained by using ERK1 siRNA knockdown
and the specific MEK inhibitor (PD98059). Our results showed TSA markedly
enhances the cytotoxicity and apoptosis of three chemotherapeutic agents
in UC cells with concurrent suppression of Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway.
Consistently, inhibition of Down-regulation of ERK by MEK inhibitor or by
ERK 1 siRNA knockdown potentiated the chemotherapeutic agnet-induced
cytotoxicity of TSA in UC cells. We concluded that TSA potentiates the
therapeutic efficacy of cisplatin, gemcitabine and doxorubicin in human
UC cells through Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway. These findings provide a
new treatment strategy against UC.


