Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PD-L1 blockade enhances T cell cytotoxicity against primary
mediastinal B cell lymphoma.


Background:

Primary Mediastinal B cell Lymphoma (PMBL) represents 2-4% of Non-Hodgkin
Lymphomas (NHL) in adolescents and young adults (AYA) (Gerrard/Cairo et
al., Blood, 2013). Disease progression, relapse and long-term toxicity
remain a concern for patients treated on current chemo-immunotherapy and
mediastinal radiotherapy. Alternative therapeutic regimens are urgently
needed, especially in patients without an early response to therapy.
Programmed Death 1 (PD-1) is a negative co-stimulatory receptor critical
for suppression of T-cell activation, with binding of PD-1 and Programmed
Death Ligand 1 (PD-L1) resulting in T cell exhaustion (Postow/Wolchok et
al., J Clin Oncol, 2015). Gain in 9p associated with amplification of
PD-L1 has been reported in up to 60% of PMBL specimens, leading to
overexpression of PD-L1 and potential immune cell evasion of PMBL
(Rosenwald/Staudt et al., J Exp Med, 2003; Twa/Steidl et al., Blood,
2014). Blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction, therefore, constitute a
potentially promising alternative for treatment of resistant PMBL.

Objective:

In the current study, we sought to investigate whether PD-L1 blockade
enhances T cell responses in PD-L1 expressing PMBL.

Methods:

PD-L1 expression on Karpas 1106p PMBL treated with or without IFN γ was
investigated by western blotting and flow cytometry analyses. T cells
were isolated from human PBMC followed by activation and expansion using
anti-CD2, anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 Biotinylated MACSiBead particles. T cell
activation was confirmed by CD25 and CD69 expression using flow
cytometry. Activated T cells were incubated with or without anti-PD-L1
(Clone 6E11, Genentech) at a dose of 10 ug/ml together with Karpas 1106p
cells treated with or without IFN γ. Cell proliferation was assessed
with MTS assays after incubation for 24 hours.

Results:

We demonstrated that Karpas 1106p cells express a low level of PD-L1.
However, following IFN γ treatment (48 hours) there was a significant
increase in PD-L1 expression. Anti-PD-L1 had no significant effect on T
cell mediated inhibition of cell proliferation in Karpas 1106p cells with
low PD-L1 expression. However, anti-PD-L1 and T cell treatment
significantly inhibited cell proliferation in IFN γ treated Karpas 1106p
cells when compared to T cell treatment alone (32±18% vs. 3±3% at
E:T=5:1, p=0.048).

Conclusion:

PD-L1 blockade enhances T cell cytotoxicity against PMBL, which is
dependent on PD-L1 expression level on PMBL cells. Future in-vivo NSG
xenograft studies are ongoing.


