Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A hybrid mapping approach improves genomic and transcriptomic
analysis of patient derived orthotropic xenograft (PDOX) models of
pediatric CNS tumors.


Background. Patient derived orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) models are an
important tool for cancer research, including personalized preclinical
testing of targeted therapies. PDOX models of CNS tumors faithfully
replicate the invasive nature of patient tumors, resulting in variable
contamination of the harvested xenograft tissues by mouse brain cells.
This presents technical challenges to genomic and transcriptomic
analyses, including correct alignment of sequencing reads to human or
mouse genomes, and can result in identification of false positive tumor
mutations. Improved bioinformatic methods for systematic correction of
such errors are needed.

Methods. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on 32 diverse
childhood CNS tumors (mean of 109 M reads/sample) and matching PDOX
models (mean of 62 M reads/sample), including atypical teratoid rhabdoid
tumor (ATRT), glioblastoma (GBM), and medulloblastoma (MB).
Patient-matched blood DNA was also subjected to WES. Whole transcriptome
sequencing (WTS) was performed on a subset of tumors and PDOX models
(mean of 94 M reads/sample). Integrated WES and WTS analysis pipelines
were constructed to unequivocally identify each sequencing readsâ€™
species-of-origin prior to genomic and transcriptomic variant calling,
expression profiling, and fusion gene analysis. Xenograft NGS reads were
competitively mapped to a hybrid reference created by merging the human
(hg19) and mouse (mm10) genomes, with reads segregating to their
respective genomes based on mapping score. Reads that mapped exclusively
to the human reference were selected for analysis.

Results. Mouse DNA contamination varied widely between PDOX tumors (1% to
94%; mean 40%). Hybrid mapping resulted in 2.4-fold higher combined
sensitivity and specificity for identification of somatic variants as
compared to direct human reference mapping followed by mouse polymorphism
subtraction. WES analysis confirmed the maintenance of somatic driver
mutations in PDOX models, including SMARCB1 in ATRT, TP53 and NF1 in GBM,
and DDX3X in MB. Interestingly, 37% of tumor and 55% of PDOX somatic
mutations exhibited significant allele fraction changes between the
primary tumor and PDOX model. WTS analysis based on hybrid mapping
resulted in an increase in positive predicted value (PPV) for correlation
of FPKM values between tumor and PDOX model, with greater PPV in cases
with high levels of mouse contamination, albeit with lower sensitivity
due to decreasing coverage.

Conclusions. Hybrid mapping based WES and WTS analysis identifies fewer
false positives than direct hg19 mapping and represents a more
streamlined process of species-of-origin sequencing read classification
and filtering at the alignment stage. This method has the potential to
improve molecular characterization of PDOX models and inform the design
of rational preclinical studies.


