Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of primary cilia promotes LPA-driven proliferation in
glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma is one of the most common brain cancers with a median
survival of 13 months. Therapeutic approaches for this type of cancer are
very limited, creating an urgent need to develop new strategies for the
treatment. Recently several groups reported that glioblastoma have a
drastic decrease in primary cilia, suggesting that loss of cilia might be
important for glioblastoma biology. The primary cilium is a ubiquitous
microtubule based organelle presented on most of human cells. It plays
significant role in embryonic development and tissue homeostasis, serving
as a hub for multiple signaling cascades including RTK, Sonic Hedgehog,
Wnt and Hippo. Here we report that loss of primary cilia in immortalized
astrocytes stimulate cell proliferation and drastically change ERK1/2
activation in response to serum. These changes depend on lysophosphotidic
acid (LPA), a water-soluble lipid metabolite, implicated in chemotactic
and proliferative signaling. The receptor to LPA type 1 tends to
accumulate in the primary cilia, indicating its potential role in
inhibition/restriction of LPA-dependent mitogenic signaling via dynamic
changes in primary cilium. Loss of primary cilia can lead to LPA
receptors 1 redistribution to the plasma membrane and switch cellular
response for the LPA, allowing it to act as mitogen. Inhibition of LPA
receptors with a small molecule inhibitor, Ki16425, is significantly
decreasing the growth of glioblastoma PDXs. Overall, our findings clearly
indicate that loss of primary cilia is sufficient to severely change
mitogen-driven signal transduction and point towards the new therapeutic
target for glioblastoma.


