Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding the dose and schedule dependence of efficacy for the
Wee1 inhibitor AZD1775 in xenograft and patient derived explant models by
mathematical modelling.


AZD1775 is a highly selective, small-molecule inhibitor of WEE1 being
developed to treat patients with advanced solid tumors, as monotherapy
and in combination with olaparib.

Experimental Procedures Patient-derived explant (PDX) and xenografted
models with a range of sensitivities to AZD1775 were tested for response
to different doses and schedules of AZD1775. WEE1 inhibition was assessed
by pCDK1 as a direct substrate of Wee1 and RRM2 as a surrogate of CDK2
activity. Concentration of AZD1775 in plasma was measured in the same
animals. Mathematical models were developed to describe the relationship
between drug exposure, biomarker modulation and resulting tumour growth
inhibition.

Results The PKPD relationship of both pCDK1 and RRM2 could be described
by the mathematical model with significant delay between PK and RRM2
reduction due to this being a protein degradation event. Three factors
influenced anti-tumour activity in the A427 xenograft and three TNBC PDX
models, namely the AZD1775 dose, the number of consecutive days of dosing
and the number of days between AZD1775 doses. The minimally effective
preclinical dose with anti-tumour activity was 60 mg/kg od. TGI was seen
to increase with increased days of consecutive AZD1775 dosing from 3 days
on, such that a 5 days on/9 days off schedule was more efficacious than 3
days on/4 days off schedule for two weeks. A mathematical model
successfully described this efficacy by using the predicted dose and
schedule dependent reduction in pCDK1.

Conclusions The insights from this predictive modelling informed the
starting dose of 125mg BID AZD1775 on a 5 day on/9 day off schedule; with
the clinical goal to optimize the days of consecutive AZD1775 dosing as
well as the maximum tolerated dose.


