Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for the membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase in the
transcriptional regulation of carcinogen-induced inflammasome components.


BACKGROUND : Signal transducing functions driven by the cytoplasmic
domain of membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) are believed
to regulate many inflammation-mediated cancer cell functions including
migration, proliferation, and survival. Besides the upregulation of the
inflammation biomarker cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression, MT1-MMP’s
role in relaying the signals triggered from pro-inflammatory cues remain
poorly understood.

METHODS : Here, we treated HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells with
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA), a well-known carcinogen and
inducer of COX-2 and of MT1-MMP. In order to assess the global
transcriptional regulatory role that MT1-MMP may exert on inflammation
biomarkers, we combined gene array screens to transiant MT1-MMP gene
silencing strategy.

RESULTS : We found that MT1-MMP expression exerted both stimulatory and
repressive transcriptional control of several inflammasome-related
biomarkers such as IL-1B, IL-6, IL-12A, and IL-33, as well as of
transcription factors such as EGR1, ELK1, and ETS1/2 in PMA-treated
cells. Among the signal transducing pathways explored, silencing of
MT1-MMP prevented PMA from phosphorylating Erk, IκB, and p105 KF-κB
intermediates. We also highlight a signaling axis linking MT1-MMP to
MMP-9 transcriptional regulation.

CONCLUSIONS : Altogether, our data evidence an important involvement of
MT1-MMP in the transcriptional regulation of inflammatory biomarkers
consolidating its contribution in signal transducing functions, in
addition to its classical hydrolytic activity.


