Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventive effect of aerosolized bexarotene in three major
subtypes of lung cancer: adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and
small cell lung cancer in mice.


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
States. The 5 year survival rate for lung cancer patients has remained a
dismal 15% for 3 decades. Thus, the development of chemopreventive agents
that could prevent lung cancer could potentially reduce the incidence and
mortality of pulmonary neoplasms. Bexarotene has exhibited inhibitory
effects in preclinical in vivo models of mammary and lung tumorigenesis,
has been approved for clinical use in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma, and has shown efficacy in phase I/II trials of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Preclinical studies have demonstrated that it is
highly effective in the prevention of all three major subtypes of lung
cancer in mouse models: adenocarcinoma (AD), squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The major side effects of
bexarotene when administered orally to rodents or human patients have
been hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia. Previous studies in a
mouse model of lung AD have demonstrated that aerosol delivery of
bexarotene through nasal inhalation exhibited potent chemopreventive
activity similar to that observed following oral administration (59 to74%
reductions in lung tumor multiplicity). The significant decreases in
tumor multiplicity and tumor load were achieved without
hypertriglycerides that accompany oral bexarotene administration. In this
study, aerosolized delivery of 10-30 mg/ml bexarotene showed a
significant chemopreventive effect in all three major subtypes. In the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) induced mouse SCC model, 1 week
after the first dose of NTCU a dose dependent decrease in tumor formation
was observed, with the highest dose causing 75% (pLung cancer is the
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. The 5 year
survival rate for lung cancer patients has remained a dismal 15% for 3
decades. Thus, the development of chemopreventive agents that could
prevent lung cancer could potentially reduce the incidence and mortality
of pulmonary neoplasms. Bexarotene has exhibited inhibitory effects in
preclinical in vivo models of mammary and lung tumorigenesis, has been
approved for clinical use in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma,
and has shown efficacy in phase I/II trials of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Preclinical studies have demonstrated that it is highly
effective in the prevention of all three major subtypes of lung cancer in
mouse models: adenocarcinoma (AD), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and
small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The major side effects of bexarotene when
administered orally to rodents or human patients have been
hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia. Previous studies in a
mouse model of lung AD have demonstrated that aerosol delivery of
bexarotene through nasal inhalation exhibited potent chemopreventive
activity similar to that observed following oral administration (59 to74%
reductions in lung tumor multiplicity). The significant decreases in
tumor multiplicity and tumor load were achieved without
hypertriglycerides that accompany oral bexarotene administration. In this
study, aerosolized delivery of 10-30 mg/ml bexarotene showed a
significant chemopreventive effect in all three major subtypes. In the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) induced mouse SCC model, 1 week
after the first dose of NTCU a dose dependent decrease in tumor formation
was observed, with the highest dose causing 75% (p<0.001) and 42% (pLung
cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
States. The 5 year survival rate for lung cancer patients has remained a
dismal 15% for 3 decades. Thus, the development of chemopreventive agents
that could prevent lung cancer could potentially reduce the incidence and
mortality of pulmonary neoplasms. Bexarotene has exhibited inhibitory
effects in preclinical in vivo models of mammary and lung tumorigenesis,
has been approved for clinical use in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma, and has shown efficacy in phase I/II trials of non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Preclinical studies have demonstrated that it is
highly effective in the prevention of all three major subtypes of lung
cancer in mouse models: adenocarcinoma (AD), squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The major side effects of
bexarotene when administered orally to rodents or human patients have
been hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia. Previous studies in a
mouse model of lung AD have demonstrated that aerosol delivery of
bexarotene through nasal inhalation exhibited potent chemopreventive
activity similar to that observed following oral administration (59 to74%
reductions in lung tumor multiplicity). The significant decreases in
tumor multiplicity and tumor load were achieved without
hypertriglycerides that accompany oral bexarotene administration. In this
study, aerosolized delivery of 10-30 mg/ml bexarotene showed a
significant chemopreventive effect in all three major subtypes. In the
N-nitroso-tris-chloroethylurea (NTCU) induced mouse SCC model, 1 week
after the first dose of NTCU a dose dependent decrease in tumor formation
was observed, with the highest dose causing 75% (p<0.001) and 42%
(p<0.01) decreases in SCC tumor burden and the percentage of SCC tumors,
respectively. Tumor load was decreased by 73% in A/Jp53 mouse AD model
and by 41% in A/Jp53Rb mouse SCLC model. Aerosol delivery of bexarotene
had no effect on animal body weight and other signs of toxicity, and no
effect on triglyceride and cholesterol level. Aerosolized bexarotene
formulation was effective against all 3 major lung cancer cell types and
would be a major advance achieving significant reductions in preventing
lung cancer incidence in persons at high risk of lung cancer e.g. former
or present smokers.


