Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: OncoGxSelectTM - a beneficial supplement to comprehensive cancer
genetic test.


Genetic profiling of tumor has been widely accepted both in oncology
research and clinical field. However, clinical doctors are sometimes
overwhelmed by tremendous and complicated information provided by
comprehensive genetic tests, although they are welcomed by
research-oriented oncologists. In order to provide accurate key findings
to aid diagnosis and treatment in clinical practice, a careful tailored
NGS based test - OncoGxSelectTM was developed and validated. Targeting 7
popular cancer types (NSCLC, Colorectal cancer, Breast cancer, Melanoma,
Thyroid cancer, Esophageal and GIST cancer), OncoGxSelectTM detects all 4
types of genomic alterations including single nucleotide mutation,
insertion/deletion, copy number variation and gene rearrangement in tumor
tissue for 12 well-characterized clinical actionable genes strictly
following NCCN (National Comprehensive Cancer Network) guidelines.
OncoGxSelectTM offers high sensitivity and specificity greater than 99%,
low cost and fast turnaround time using both DNA and RNA as starting
material from FFPE samples with as low as 10% tumor cell content. This
CLIA certified and CAP accredited genetic test panel is a valuable
supplement to clinical oncologists to further facilitate diagnosis and
treatment choosing.


