Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tobacco smoking, alcohol use and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: The Liver Cancer Pooling Project.


Background: Since 1980, liver cancer has been among the most rapidly
increasing cancer types in the United States (US), with 5-year survival
rates of approximately 17%. While tobacco and alcohol are known to be
associated with primary liver cancer, it is unclear whether they only
increase the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most common type
of liver cancer, or whether they also increase risk of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), second most common histologic type.
Additionally, it is unclear what amount of alcohol consumption is
associated with an increased risk of liver cancer. As liver cancer is a
rare cancer type, we conducted a study of pooled data from the National
Cancer Institute Cohort Consortium to examine the associations between
smoking and alcohol use and liver cancer, stratified by histologic
subtype.

Methods: In the Liver Cancer Pooling Project, a consortium of US-based
cohort studies, we pooled data from 1,518,741 individuals (HCC n=1,423,
ICC n=410) in 14 cohorts. Multivariable-adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated using proportional hazards
regression. Cubic splines were used to model the association between
alcohol and liver cancer risk.

Results: Compared to never smokers, both former and current smokers at
study baseline had an increased risk of ICC (HR=1.32, 95% CI: 1.03-1.68
and HR=1.47, 95% CI: 1.07-2.02, respectively) and HCC (HR=1.24, 95% CI:
1.08-1.43 and HR=1.86, 95% CI: 1.57-2.20, respectively). This finding was
consistent for heavier smoking intensity, longer duration of smoking, and
more pack-years of smoking. Heavy alcohol consumption was associated with
an 87% increased risk of HCC (HR≥7 drinks/day v. non-drinker=1.87, 95%
CI: 1.41-2.47) and a non-significant 68% increased risk of ICC (HR≥5
drinks/day v. non-drinker=1.68, 95% CI: 0.99-2.86). Risk of HCC
significantly increased at 4.5 alcoholic drinks per day, while risk of
ICC was non-significantly increased with any amount of consumption.

Conclusions: These findings suggest that, in a US population, cigarette
smoking is associated with an increased risk of both histologic subtypes
of primary liver cancer - HCC and ICC. In contrast, alcohol consumption
was primarily associated with an increased risk of HCC. These results
suggest that smoking cessation and alcohol reduction programs could be
important intervention opportunities for these lethal cancer types.


