Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: H3K9 methyltransferase G9a epigenetically regulates breast cancer
cell iron homeostasis via repressing ferroxidase hephaestin expression,
promotes breast cancer growth.


G9a is a H3K9 methyltransferase with elevated expression observed in many
types of human cancers, seems to be required for the maintenance of the
malignant phenotype. However, the tumorigenic role of G9a in breast
cancer is still far from clear. In addition, growing evidence revealed
that the disruption of iron homeostasis may contribute to the development
of breast cancer (BC). Pathways of iron acquisition, efflux, storage and
regulation are all perturbed in BC, suggesting that reprogramming of iron
metabolism is a central aspect of tumor cells survival. Hephaestin (HEPH)
is a ceruloplasmin homologue that converts iron (II) to iron (III), and
mediates iron efflux in concert with ferroportin to transport iron across
the basolateral membrane. It retains unclear whether HEPH concentration
has any impact on the iron status of breast tissue, and breast cancer
growth. In this study, we demonstrate that G9a exerts its oncogenic
function by destruction cellular iron homeostasis. We revealed that G9a
knockdown, and G9a specific inhibitors significantly up-regulated HEPH
expression, decreased intracellular labile iron content, and then
suppressed BC cells proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. This idea is
further validated by the finding that the enhanced iron content and
decreased HEPH expression are required for the increased proliferation of
G9a-overexpressed breast cancer cells. Further, our CHIP and co-IP data
demonstrate a traditional role of G9a as a transcriptional repressor that
co-existed with YY1 and HDAC1, contribute to the reduction of HEPH
transcription. In addition, depletion of HEPH with an increase in labile
iron reversed cells growth in G9a silencing BC cells. These observations
prompted us to investigate the relevance of G9a-HEPH pathway to human
disease. The immunohistochemistry analysis of 75 breast cancer specimens
revealed inverse staining patterns between G9a and HEPH expression in
breast cancer tissues independent of BC type (Spearman's nonparametric
correlation test, correlation coefficient: -0.678, pG9a is a H3K9
methyltransferase with elevated expression observed in many types of
human cancers, seems to be required for the maintenance of the malignant
phenotype. However, the tumorigenic role of G9a in breast cancer is still
far from clear. In addition, growing evidence revealed that the
disruption of iron homeostasis may contribute to the development of
breast cancer (BC). Pathways of iron acquisition, efflux, storage and
regulation are all perturbed in BC, suggesting that reprogramming of iron
metabolism is a central aspect of tumor cells survival. Hephaestin (HEPH)
is a ceruloplasmin homologue that converts iron (II) to iron (III), and
mediates iron efflux in concert with ferroportin to transport iron across
the basolateral membrane. It retains unclear whether HEPH concentration
has any impact on the iron status of breast tissue, and breast cancer
growth. In this study, we demonstrate that G9a exerts its oncogenic
function by destruction cellular iron homeostasis. We revealed that G9a
knockdown, and G9a specific inhibitors significantly up-regulated HEPH
expression, decreased intracellular labile iron content, and then
suppressed BC cells proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. This idea is
further validated by the finding that the enhanced iron content and
decreased HEPH expression are required for the increased proliferation of
G9a-overexpressed breast cancer cells. Further, our CHIP and co-IP data
demonstrate a traditional role of G9a as a transcriptional repressor that
co-existed with YY1 and HDAC1, contribute to the reduction of HEPH
transcription. In addition, depletion of HEPH with an increase in labile
iron reversed cells growth in G9a silencing BC cells. These observations
prompted us to investigate the relevance of G9a-HEPH pathway to human
disease. The immunohistochemistry analysis of 75 breast cancer specimens
revealed inverse staining patterns between G9a and HEPH expression in
breast cancer tissues independent of BC type (Spearman's nonparametric
correlation test, correlation coefficient: -0.678, p<0.05). Patients who
owned a G9ahigh tumor had an even worse prognosis in this retrospective
analysis, with a median overall survival of 56.9 months compared to 103.4
months in the G9alow tumors. And we revealed for the first time that low
level of HEPH also correlated with overall lower disease-free survival.
Finally, expression of high G9a and low HEPH correlated a worse
prognosis. In summary, we propose that G9a has an upstream regulatory
role in HEPH-mediated cellular iron hemostasis, leads to iron
accumulation and stimulates breast cancer progression through its
epigenetic silencing machinery. Our observations raise exciting
possibilities regarding G9a and HEPH might be potential prognostic
markers of breast cancer progression and targets for therapeutic
intervention.


