Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating tumor cells at disease recurrence in patients with
head and neck cancer after curative therapy.


Background: Circulating tumor cell (CTC) has been prognostic and
predictive in numerous types of cancer; however, its role in early
diagnosis of relapse remains unclear.

Methods: Eighty-six patients were prospectively enrolled between March
2015 and June 2016. Among these patients, 51 head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) patients had suspicious recurrent lesion(s), whilst 35
HNSCC patients were newly diagnosed. CTC test was performed by negative
selection strategy and CD45-negative and EpCAM-positive cells were
identified as CTCs. Biopsy on suspicious lesion(s) and CTC analysis were
performed simultaneously. We analyzed the differences of CTC numbers
among HNSCC patients with true recurrence, biopsy-negative and
newly-diagnosed.

Results: Mean±standard deviation(SD) of CTC numbers in baseline at
diagnosis (n=35), true recurrence (n=40) and biopsy-negative (n=11)
groups were 41.98±32.02, 81.75±64.91 and 16.55±6.82 cells/mL,
respectively. The difference of CTC numbers among three groups was
significant (P Results: Mean±standard deviation(SD) of CTC numbers in
baseline at diagnosis (n=35), true recurrence (n=40) and biopsy-negative
(n=11) groups were 41.98±32.02, 81.75±64.91 and 16.55±6.82 cells/mL,
respectively. The difference of CTC numbers among three groups was
significant (P <0.001). CTCs (mean±SD) among different failure types
were 110.89±84.69, 105.67±50.77, 73.31±37.82 and 59.11±54.09 in lung
metastasis, second primary tumor, extrapulmonary metastasis and
locoregional recurrence respectively and significantly different (P =
0.049). Also, CTC numbers between first cancer (baseline at diagnosis)
and second primary tumor were different (P = 0.004).

Conclusion: CTCs numbers are significantly higher in true recurrence than
the biopsy-negative group when a patient had a lesion suspected to be a
recurrence. CTC test may be useful to help distinguish true recurrence in
HNSCC patients after curative therapy.


