Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of exosomes in fibrosarcoma progression.


Among pediatric cancers, sarcomas, especially those with large tumor
burdens and metastatic disease, often result in poor outcome. Thus, new
treatments are urgently needed to inhibit tumor progression, prevent
metastasis, and improve overall survival.

To understand the mechanisms driving sarcoma progression, we employed two
mouse fibrosarcoma cell lines that display different growth phenotypes
when transplanted into syngeneic immune competent mice. Progressor
fibrosarcomas evade detection by the immune system and develop large
tumor burdens, while regressor fibrosarcomas regress shortly after a
period of limited tumor growth. This difference in the growth phenotype
is mediated in part by immune cells, but the mechanisms by which
progressor and regressor cells influence immune cell activity are not
fully elucidated.

Our research has focused on exosomes, 50-100 nm secreted nanovesicles,
that contain bioactive cargoes and have emerged as mediators of
intercellular communication between various cells. Here, we hypothesize
that fibrosarcoma exosomes determine the aggressiveness of the disease by
either educating tumor cells themselves or altering interactions with
host cells.

To investigate the role of fibrosarcoma exosomes, we first educated
regressor tumor cells with progressor exosomes for 3 weeks in vitro, and
vice versa. Upon in vivo inoculation, progressor cells conditioned with
regressor cell-derived exosomes grew significantly slower compared to
untreated progressor cells. In contrast, regressor cells educated with
progressor exosomes did not regress and overgrew significantly compared
to untreated regressor cells. These results indicate that exosomes have
an ability to reprogram a tumor phenotype.

To determine if fibrosarcoma exosomes specifically impact the host, we
evaluated whether conditioning na√Øve mice with progressor exosomes
alters in vivo growth of regressor tumor cells injected after three weeks
of education. Twenty percent of regressor tumors continued to grow
following progressor exosome education, while all tumors regressed in the
control PBS group. These data suggest that exosomes also play an
important role in the interaction with the host cells influencing tumor
growth and disease progression.

Next, to determine which exosomal cargo may mediate these effects, we
sought to characterize the proteome of exosomes from progressor and
regressor cells using mass spectrometry. We found basigin, also known as
CD147, a transmembrane embryonic glycoprotein reported to regulate cell
proliferation, tumor migration and metastasis as one of the candidate
proteins highly expressed in progressor-derived exosomes.

We conclude that exosomes derived from fibrosarcoma progresssors and
regressors can alter the tumor phenotype both directly and indirectly.
Exosomal cargo, such as basigin, may mediate the aggressive behavior of
tumor cells, making it a potential therapeutic target to inhibit
fibrosarcoma progression.


