Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of a BiTE® antibody construct with
extended half-life that targets the tumor differentiation marker
mesothelin.


Bispecific T cell engager (BiTE®) antibody constructs redirect T cells
to induce lysis of tumor cells. The anti-CD19/CD3 BiTE® Blincyto® can
deplete target cells in both the blood and tissue compartment in B cell
malignancies, suggesting that the BiTE® mechanism of action will also be
effective against solid tumors. The tumor differentiation antigen
mesothelin (MSLN) is an attractive target for the BiTE® approach. MSLN
is highly expressed in >80% of ovarian and pancreatic tumors and
mesothelioma. Expression of MSLN in normal tissues appears restricted to
mesothelial cell surfaces such as the pleural, pericardial, and
peritoneal layer.

Here, we report the preclinical characterization of an anti-MSLN/CD3
BiTE® antibody construct with extended half-life. The BiTE® antibody
construct binds MSLN and CD3 with low nM affinity and has low pM
cytotoxic activity against MSLN-positive ovarian, pancreatic and lung
cancer cell lines in vitro. Activity of the anti-MSLN/CD3 BiTE® antibody
construct is observed at low effector to target cell ratios, and in
cancer cells that express low levels of MSLN. This BiTE® antibody
construct is also cytotoxic to cell lines that are resistant to
chemotherapy. In mice, significant tumor growth inhibition of an
established ovarian tumor xenograft model was achieved by IV dosing of
the anti-MSLN/CD3 BiTE® antibody construct every 5 days. Pharmacokinetic
evaluation of the anti-MSLN/CD3 BiTE® antibody construct in non-human
primates demonstrated a half-life of 4-10 days. The potency and
specificity of the anti-MSLN/CD3 BiTE® antibody construct, together with
projected ability to dose once a week IV in humans, supports development
of this BiTE® for treatment of MSLN-positive tumors.


