Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment schedules influence acquisition of Doxorubicin
resistance through epigenetic mechanism in breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer related mortality in women.
Chemotherapy resistance is a major limitation in clinical treatment of
breast cancer. Mounting evidence implicates the epigenetic aberrations in
acquired chemoresistance. However, the influence of treatment schedules
and associated epigenetic changes on acquisition of doxorubicin
resistance in breast cancer is not clear. Therefore, objective of this
study was to evaluate the impact of treatment schedules on acquisition of
doxorubicin resistance and the molecular mechanistic basis of this
process in breast cancer cells. To address this question, two different
treatment strategies viz, continuous exposure and intermittent exposure
were used to generate doxorubicin resistant cells lines from ER-positive
MCF-7 and triple negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines. The level
of resistance against doxorubicin and the temporal sequence of molecular
changes associated with the resistance phenotype were evaluated at 4
months and 18 monthsâ€™ following exposure to doxorubicin. Results
revealed that intermittent exposure to doxorubicin resulted in
significantly higher level of resistance as compared to continuous
exposure. ER-positive MCF-7 cells developed relatively earlier and high
level of resistance when compared to MDA-MB-231 cells. Additionally, the
resistance to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity was associated with
transient acquisition of EMT and CSC-like phenotype in breast cancer
cells around 4 months following doxorubicin. Gene and protein expression
analysis further revealed temporal changes in the expression of
epigenetic regulatory genes and histone modifications respectively. The
temporal changes in expression of genes were positively correlated with
doxorubicin exposure time during resistance development. In summary, the
result of this study for the first time suggests that the treatment
schedules influence the acquisition of doxorubicin resistance potentially
through epigenetic mechanisms. The findings of this study will be helpful
in chemotherapy of breast cancer to achieve the best clinical result


