Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of potent and selective antibody-drug conjugates with
pyrrole-based KSP inhibitors as novel payload class.


The number of cytotoxic payload classes with different modes-of-action
which have been successfully employed in antibody-drug conjugates (ADC)
is still rather limited. So far, only ADCs with microtubule inhibitors,
DNA binding payloads or topoisomerase I inhibitors have been advanced
into clinical testing. To this end, the identification of ADC payload
classes with a novel mode of action will increase therapeutic options and
potentially help to overcome resistance. Inhibitors of kinesin spindle
protein (KSP/Eg5) have generated interest due to their high antitumor
potency. However, transferring the preclinical potency of small molecule
KSP inhibitors (KSPis) into highly efficient clinical regimens with a
sufficient therapeutic window has remained challenging. We have
investigated a new pyrrole subclass of KSPis which showed subnanomolar
potency against a large panel of tumor cell lines for their utility as a
novel payload class in ADCs. Towards this goal different attachment sites
for linkers have been explored in the KSPi molecule which were found
compatible with cleavable and/or non-cleavable linkers. Subnanomolar
potency and selectivity of ADCs with antibodies targeting either HER2,
EGFR or TWEAKR could be demonstrated in vitro. For selected ADCs, the
intracellular trafficking and metabolite formation was investigated and
KSP inhibition was confirmed as the ADC mode of action. Depending on the
linker composition differential profiles of the ADC metabolites with
regard to efflux, cellular permeation, and bystander effect have been
achieved. Moreover, specific accumulation in the tumor versus other
tissues was demonstrated in biodistribution studies in vivo. In
conclusion, KSP inhibitors have been established as a versatile new
payload class for the generation of highly potent and selective ADCs.


