Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A small molecule pan Id protein antagonist shows strong antitumor
activity.


The Id family of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins, Id1, Id2, Id3 and Id4,
play a critical role in inhibiting differentiation during mammalian
embryogenesis. They function in part by sequestering ubiquitously
expressed E protein bHLH transcription factors via direct protein-protein
interactions. Various Id proteins are re-expressed in adults in a number
of pathologic states including cancer and diseases of the vasculature,
where their activity has been shown to be essential for disease
progression. The present study describes the solving of the Id1-E47 dimer
crystal structure and subsequent development and characterization of a
small molecule antagonist of the Id protein family, AGX51. AGX51 was
identified in an in silico screen for compounds that could bind a
hydrophobic crevice adjacent to the loop region of Id1, highly conserved
in the Id family. AGX51 inhibits the endogenous Id1-E protein interaction
leading to the degradation of Id1 via ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. The
stability of all four members of the Id family are antagonized by AGX51
leading to a G0-G1 arrest and profound inhibition of viability with no
acquired resistance observed in multiple cell lines after continuous
exposure to the compound. Administration of AGX51 is well tolerated in
mice and phenocopies genetic loss of Id expression analyses: suppression
of breast cancer metastases to the lung associated with a reduced
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, perturbation of the vasculature
within the primary tumor, and growth regression of paclitaxel resistant
breast tumors in combination with paclitaxel therapy. These studies
identify a novel, first-in-class compound capable of antagonizing the
activity of a protein family formerly considered undruggable and point to
the possible utility of AGX51 in the management of multiple disease
processes in patients.


