Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer efficacy of imipridones in pancreatic cancer: single
agent ONC212 or combination of ONC201 with IGF1-R inhibition.


Pancreatic cancer is a highly chemo-resistant tumor type known to
aggressively metastasize at an early stage with an overall five-year
survival rate of ~6%. In this study we tested the efficacy of ONC201 and
ONC212 in a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines and patient-derived
models in vitro and in vivo. ONC201 is the founding member of the
imipridone class of small molecules with anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects in various tumor types. Kline et al. and Allen et
al. previously showed that ONC201 stimulates the integrated stress
response by up-regulating ATF4, CHOP and DR5 followed by induction of
apoptosis by up-regulating TRAIL. While the spectrum of ONC201 efficacy
is broad among tumor types, pancreatic cancer cells are relatively
insensitive. ONC201 exhibits low micromolar GI50 values in 3 out of 7
pancreatic cancer cell lines and 2 out of 9 patient-derived cells that
were most sensitive among the pancreatic cell lines and samples tested.
ONC201 induces the integrated stress response in both ONC201-sensitive
and â€“insensitive pancreatic cancer cell lines. Interestingly,
ONC201-treated resistant cells arrest in G1 and do not go through
apoptosis. In order to address insensitivity to ONC201 in pancreatic
cancer we explored two approaches. The first approach included treating
with the ONC201 analogue ONC212, an imipridone that is currently under
pre-clinical development. In vitro and in vivo studies consistently show
a higher potency of ONC212 as compared to ONC201 in pancreatic cancer,
especially in ONC201-insensitive models. We are currently investigating
the mechanism of action of ONC212 in comparison to ONC201. The second
approach to address ONC201-insensitive pancreatic cancer was combination
treatment with the IGF1-R inhibitor AG1024. Western blot analysis of
receptor tyrosine kinase expression levels in the panel of pancreatic
cancer cell lines revealed a strong correlation between resistance to
ONC201 and high expression of IGF1-R. Therefore we hypothesized that
IGF1/IGF1-R might play a role in the resistance of pancreatic cancer
cells to ONC201. Indeed, treatment of resistant pancreatic cancer cells
with the IGF1-R inhibitor AG1024 sensitized the cells to ONC201. We are
currently further exploring the involvement of IGF1-R in the ONC201
resistance mechanism. Furthermore, in-vivo studies are ongoing to
validate the efficacy of the combination treatment. In summary, although
pancreatic cancer is known to be refractory to many drugs, this study
introduces two different approaches with imipridone small molecules
ONC212 and ONC201 that show promising therapeutic potential for
pancreatic cancer.


