Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two miR-34 loci, miR-34a and miR-34b/c, have differential
anticancer effects in lung adenocarcinomas.


Three miR-34 family members (miR-34a, miR-34b, and miR-34c) are clustered
on two different chromosomal loci, miR-34a and miR-34b/c, and have
identical seed-sequences predicted to target the same set of genes;
however, miR-34a and miR-34c have different sets of negatively correlated
genes in TCGA data of human lung adenocarcinomas. Therefore, we
hypothesized that miR-34 family members, which are tumor suppressive
miRNAs, might have differential effects on lung tumorigenesis. To prove
this, we overexpressed each miR-34 cluster, miR-34a and miR-34b/c, in
murine lung cancer cells. miR-34b/c enhanced cancer cell attachment and
suppressed cell growth and invasion compared with miR-34a. In a syngeneic
mouse model, both miR-34a and miR-34b/c blocked lung metastasis; whereas,
miR-34b/c suppressed tumor growth more than miR-34a. miR-34b/c also
decreased mesenchymal markers (Cdh2 and Fn1), and increased epithelial
markers (Inadl, Crb3, Ocln, and Dsp) and miR-200 family members better
than miR-34a, implying that miR-34b and miR-34c partially inhibit EMT.
Furthermore, miR-34b and miR-34c are better prognostic markers than
miR-34a in human lung adenocarcinoma patients. Collectively, we suggest
that miR-34b and miR-34c are more effective tumor suppressors than
miR-34a.


