Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAGE gene family expression in pediatric medulloblastoma:
frequency and possible therapeutic target.


Background: The melanoma antigen gene family (MAGE) is a group of related
genes that were first discovered in malignant melanoma. Among the
approximately 40 MAGE genes in the human genome, two thirds are
classified as Type I (MAGE-A, MAGE-B, and MAGE-C), referred to also as
cancer testis antigens (CTAs), proteins that are restricted to testis but
often aberrantly expressed in many adult cancers. Despite their common
expression in adult cancers and their oncogenic potential, little is
known about their expression and role in pediatric cancers. To determine
the frequency of MAGE expression in pediatric medulloblastoma, we
measured expression levels of Type I MAGEs in patient tumors. In
addition, we examined how MAGE expression in medulloblastoma cells
affects their growth and oncogenic potential.

Methods: We searched the Childrenâ€™s Health pathology database for
pediatric medulloblastoma between 2008 - 2015 and were able to recover an
adequate amount of RNA from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
samples of 34 patients. The RNA was converted to cDNA using reverse
transcriptase, and the relative expression of 23 Type I MAGE genes was
measured by qRT-PCR.

To determine if MAGE expression is critical for medulloblastoma cell
survival we knocked down several MAGEs using siRNAs in two
MAGE-expressing medulloblastoma cell lines (D283 and DAOY) and evaluated
the effect by cell viability (Alamar Blue and Cell titer Glo), apoptosis
assays (Annexin V), and colony formation in soft agar.

Results: In 34 medulloblastoma patient samples we found that 10 (29.4%)
expressed at least one MAGE gene, and one case had high levels of
expression of 10 of the 23 Type I MAGEs. MAGE expression was associated
with the non-WNT/SHH (G3/G4) molecular subgroup of tumors in our study.
There was no correlation between MAGE expression and histologic subtype.
Furthermore, using MAGE-A/-B2 positive medulloblastoma cell lines, we
showed that siRNA knock down of multiple MAGE-As and -B2 decreased cell
viability by 15 - 80%, increased apoptosis (-B2), and decreased growth of
cells in soft agar.

Conclusion: Type I MAGE genes are expressed in 30% of pediatric
medulloblastoma in our study. In MAGE positive medulloblastoma cells,
MAGE genes are important for cell survival and clonogenic growth. The
decreased cell survival after MAGE knockdown appears to be related, at
least in part, to increased apoptosis. Our results indicate that
targeting of MAGEs in medulloblastoma may be a potential therapeutic
option.


