Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A machine learning approach to predict platform specific gene
essentiality in cancer.


Loss-of-function (LOF) screenings across a set of diverse cancer cell
lines has the potential to reveal novel synthetic lethal interactions,
cancer-specific vulnerabilities, and guide treatment options. These were
traditionally done using shRNAs, but with the recent emergence of CRISPR
technology there has been a shift in methodology. The Achilles project is
to date the largest cancer LOF screening effort undertaken, however we
found a large amount of inconsistency between their shRNA and CRISPR-Cas9
essentiality results for the same set of cell lines. Here we characterize
the differences between genes found to be essential in either CRISPR or
shRNA screens. We found that certain features such as gene expression,
network connectivity and conservation could accurately separate out
essential genes that were found exclusively in either one of these
screens. This information could be tremendously useful in understanding
the differences in the CRISPR and shRNA screening results. Furthermore,
one limitation with Project Achilles was that they conducted shRNA
screens on 216 cell lines, but only 33 cell lines in CRISPR. Therefore we
developed a model that integrates these genetic, network, and population
features to predict CRISPR results from shRNA screenings, and found that
our model can accurately identify CRISPR essential genes better than
approaches just based on the shRNA results (p-value Loss-of-function
(LOF) screenings across a set of diverse cancer cell lines has the
potential to reveal novel synthetic lethal interactions, cancer-specific
vulnerabilities, and guide treatment options. These were traditionally
done using shRNAs, but with the recent emergence of CRISPR technology
there has been a shift in methodology. The Achilles project is to date
the largest cancer LOF screening effort undertaken, however we found a
large amount of inconsistency between their shRNA and CRISPR-Cas9
essentiality results for the same set of cell lines. Here we characterize
the differences between genes found to be essential in either CRISPR or
shRNA screens. We found that certain features such as gene expression,
network connectivity and conservation could accurately separate out
essential genes that were found exclusively in either one of these
screens. This information could be tremendously useful in understanding
the differences in the CRISPR and shRNA screening results. Furthermore,
one limitation with Project Achilles was that they conducted shRNA
screens on 216 cell lines, but only 33 cell lines in CRISPR. Therefore we
developed a model that integrates these genetic, network, and population
features to predict CRISPR results from shRNA screenings, and found that
our model can accurately identify CRISPR essential genes better than
approaches just based on the shRNA results (p-value < 10-5, d-statistic
=~0.5 ). This potentially eliminates the need for a costly CRISPR screen,
predicts essential genes that would be missed in the shRNA screen, and
provides new data on thousands of genes in almost 200 cell lines.
Additionally we integrated prior screening results to build a second set
of models to predict gene essentiality for untested genes with no LOF
screening needed. We found this accurately predicted whether a gene would
be marked as essential as well as what type of platform (CRISPR or shRNA)
was more likely to accurately identify essentiality. When predicting
genes which were exclusively essential in CRISPR we observed an area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.82. Overall,
these methods allow for a more comprehensive essentiality analysis of
genes; which is not possible by single screening platforms.


