Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GenoCTC, a liquid biopsy device using microfluidic enrichment for
affinity-based isolation of circulating tumor cells.


To achieve a complete remission of cancer is still challenging that most
patients with solid cancer ultimately experience metastasis. Detection of
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from the peripheral blood is promising key
to solve the cancer cell dissemination and make accurate diagnosis,
therefore, many efforts have been made to isolate the CTCs. Here, we
newly developed the liquid biopsy device, GenoCTC, with microfluidic
chips isolating CTCs from the patient whole blood. To isolate CTCs,
EpCAM+ CTCs in the whole blood are first bound with magnetic beads
conjugated with human-EpCAM antibody, and GenoCTC and its chip can
isolate the EpCAM+ CTCs through magnetic based method. With 7.5 mL whole
blood from lung cancer patient, we isolated EpCAM+ CTCs, and these CTCs
were validated by immunofluorescence assay using anti-CK and anti-CD45.
We also enumerated EpCAM+ CTCs in 17 whole blood samples from 10 lung
cancer patients that various number, 2 to 114, of CTCs were found from
each patient. The number of CTCs is known to have a correlation with
disease progression and chemo-resistance, so the clinical meaning of this
result is needed to be investigated. Furthermore, some CTCs are also
found to be EpCAM independent which is regarded to have clinical utility
involved in EMT. We used plastin-3 as its marker, and it was confirmed
with HS 578T breast cancer cell line which shows low expression of EpCAM
but high expression of plastin-3. The various molecules expressed on CTCs
can be isolated with GenoCTC for further study. The characterization of
CTCs is not only limited to EpCAM expression that it is important to be
elucidated the complex biology of CTCs to apply companion diagnosis for
personalized medicine.


