Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of chemotherapy-induced autophagy and
epigenetic remodeling.


Cytotoxic chemotherapy has been shown to enhance tumor cell
immunogenicity by promoting the secretion of damage-associated molecular
pattern (DAMP) molecules which, in turn, stimulates the immune response.
These effects can be further stimulated by combining chemotherapy with an
immunotherapy designed to enhance effector cell (CD8 T cell or NK cell)
anti-tumor activity. Our studies demonstrate that knockdown of the
epigenetic regulator NURF increases DNA damage (gamma H2AX staining) and
autophagy (acridine orange staining) in breast tumor cells exposed to
doxorubicin and enhances growth inhibition as well as suppressing the
capacity of the cells to recover and proliferate. Similar increases in
autophagy were observed using a small molecule inhibitor of NURF,
suggesting that NURF can be targeted therapeutically. Sensitization was
not observed with ionizing radiation or cisplatin. Studies are in
progress to assess the nature of autophagy in the NURF KD and NURF WT
cells, distinguishing between the cytoprotective, cytotoxic, cytostatic
and nonprotective forms. How NURF regulates doxorubicin induced DNA
damage is being investigated by mapping sites of damage genome wide. It
is anticipated that enhanced cell autonomous tumor cell sensitivity in
concert with improvements in tumor cell antigenicity (cell non-autonomous
sensitization) achieved by NURF depletion could improve anti-tumor
immunogenicity, achieve tumor regression, reduce metastasis, and possibly
achieve long term remission in breast cancer.


