Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting NEDD8 to uncover an exceptional responder molecular
subtype in glioblastoma.


Neddylation is a post-translational mechanism that marks proteins for
degradation through activity of NEDD8 Activating Enzyme (NAE). NAE blocks
cullin-RING ligases from initiating proteosomal degradation of select
substrates including cell cycle regulators and apoptosis modulators.
MLN4924, or Pevonedistat, targets NAE and inhibits Neddylation and
induces apoptosis in sensitive cells. We have discovered, in a cohort of
glioblastoma PDX models, an exceptional responder to MLN4924 (GBM102).
Most pertinently the effects we observe are in a PDX cultured as 3D
neurospheres that more closely resemble the true tumor architecture,
heterogeneity, and “stem-like” phenotype characteristic of tumor
growth. We have leveraged RNAseq expression data from Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) and Pevonedistat response data from The Cancer
Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP) to apply a network-based analysis to
identify pathways enriched with differential dependencies between cell
lines sensitive and non-sensitive to MLN4924. The analysis also
identifies potential mediating genes that appear to play critical roles
in such differential dependency networks. Identified differential
networks and mediators provide insight for cellular mechanisms underlying
drug response. Additionally, we also investigated the efficacy of MLN4924
against orthotopic glioma PDX models (GBM102 and GBM116) in vivo to
validate our findings in vitro. Thus genomic characterization of patient
samples may lead to the identification of a molecular signature which is
associated with a subset of GBMs vulnerable to MLN4924. As the treatment
options for GBM are extremely limited, this may highlight a novel
alternative opportunity to treat a select fraction of patients with this
aggressive disease.


