Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CT179 degrades the olig2 transcription factor in glioblastoma
stem-like cells and prolongs survival.


Olig2 is a bHLH transcription factor that has been shown to be a key
driver of glioblastoma (GBM) tumorigenesis. Olig2 is expressed in human
tumor-derived glioma stem-like cells. A growing body of evidence suggests
that glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) are more representative of their
parent tumors when cultured under defined serum-free conditions with the
mitogens epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fibroblast growth factor
(FGF). Furthermore, recent research has indicated that human Proneural
GSCs grown in vitro in PDGF are more tumorigenic in vivo. We have
designed and synthesized a potent inhibitor of Olig2 that possesses all
the necessary properties for clinical development as an important new GBM
therapeutic. CT179 dose dependently causes the degradation of Olig2 in
multiple GBM cell lines and this correlates to G2/M arrest and increased
apoptosis. CT179 also induces the loss of expression of EGFR and PDGFR in
human GSCs. CT179 achieves high concentrations in the CNS with a long
duration of pharmacologic action. Furthermore, CT179 significantly
extends survival of mice implanted orthotopically with patient-derived
human tumor GSCs. Immunohistochemistry demonstrates a marked reduction of
Olig2 positive cells in the tumor bearing animals. Together, these
results indicate that CT179 has significant promise as a new therapeutic
for the treatment of human GBM.


