Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of temozolomide resistance: Identification of a new
drug tolerant stage in glioblastoma cells.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) are the most aggressive and common brain
tumors in adults. Despite surgery and combined radio-chemotherapy with
temozolomide (TMZ), tumor reccurence always occurs. The median survival
time for patients diagnosed with GBM is about 14 months with less than 5%
survival at 5 years. Today the main marker of TMZ resistance is the
methylation status of MGMT promoter. Patients with a methylated promoter
usually have a better response to treatment than patients with an
unmethylated promoter. Indeed MGMT is an enzyme involved in DNA repair
mechanisms that abrogates TMZ effects. However, in clinical trials
targeting the MGMT enzyme, median survival of patients was not improved.
It is thus essential to decipher the mechanisms involved in the
acquisition of TMZ resistance to identify new therapeutic targets. To
achieve this goal TMZ resistant cells were generated by continuous
treatment of the U251 human glioblastoma cell line. These cells are
sensitive to TMZ and do not express MGMT. We performed transcriptomic
analysis by RNA-Seq on U251 treated with TMZ (50ÂµM) for different time
and selected differentially expressed genes. We also evaluated target
genes expression in single cells by RT-qPCR using C1-HD-Biomark
technology (Fluidigm). Transcriptome profiling allowed to identify a
transient phase with TMZ tolerant cells before acquisition of complete
resistance. These cells are characterized by a modified morphology and a
no proliferative state. In this population we identified a subset of
genes with the same transient overexpression. Similar results were
observed in other glioblastoma cell lines and under other stress
conditions. In contrast, stable expression of MGMT appeared later with
the emergence of the TMZ resistant population. Interestingly single cell
qPCR showed that MGMT expression in the resistant cells could not be
explained by clonal selection of MGMT positive cells. Drug screening on
the TMZ tolerant cells revealed a potent killing activity of histone
deacetylating agents (HDAC inhibitors). In conclusion, we have shown that
glioblastoma cells become resistant after a transient state of TMZ
tolerance. Identification of this singular population highlights new
molecular targets and a new therapeutic window. Targeting these tolerant
cells could avoid emergence of resistance and tumor recurrence, thereby
patients survival could be improved.


