Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker-driven targeted oral treatment strategy for bladder
cancer.


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Hyaluronic acid (HA) family of molecules,
HA-synthases (HAS-1,2,3), HA-receptors (CD44, RHAMM) and hyaluronidase
(HYAL-1) are markers for bladder cancer (BCa) diagnosis and predicting
prognosis. HA-family promotes tumor growth and metastasis by inducing
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). 4-Methylumbelliferone (4-MU) is
an orally bioavailable dietary supplement that inhibits HA synthesis. We
evaluated the expression of HA family and EMT markers in bladder tissues
as well as the antitumor effects of 4-MU as a potential targeted
therapeutic agent in preclinical models of BCa.

METHODS: Quantitative PCR was used to measure mRNA expression of
HA-family and EMT genes (β-catenin, Twist, and Snail) in 72 bladder
tissue specimens (28 normal; 44 tumor); follow-up: 20.3±2.5 months;
median 17 months. The effect of 4-MU (0-0.6 mM) on cell proliferation,
apoptosis, intracellular signaling, and the expression of HA receptors,
and EMT genes were examined in BCa cell lines by Q-PCR, immunoblotting,
proximal ligation and PI-3K activity assays. Mechanism of action was
analyzed by HA addition and mAkt overexpression. Effect of oral
administration of 4-MU (100, 200-mg/kg) on tumor growth was analyzed in
subcutaneous xenografts.

RESULTS: HAS-1, -2 -3, HYAL-1 and Snail levels were 10-20-fold elevated
in BCa tissues as compared to normal bladder (PRESULTS: HAS-1, -2 -3,
HYAL-1 and Snail levels were 10-20-fold elevated in BCa tissues as
compared to normal bladder (P<0.001). In univariate analysis, HAS-1, -2,
HYAL-1 and Twist levels correlated with metastasis (P3-fold) via the
death receptor pathway. 4-MU downregulated HA-signaling, specifically
transcript and/or protein levels of CD44, RHAMM, p-Akt, β-catenin,
pβ-catenin(S552). Snail and twist were downregulated by 2-5-fold, but
pβcatenin((T41/S45), pGSK-3α/β and E-cadherin levels were increased.
4-MU also inhibited CD44/PI-3K complex formation and PI-3K activity. HA
addition or myristoylated Akt expression attenuated 4-MU effects. In
xenograft studies, 4-MU oral treatment abrogated tumor growth of
established tumors (vehicle, day 50: 766±221 mm3; 4-MU: 128±61, day 50)
by abrogating HA-synthesis. No weight loss or serum or organ toxicity was
observed in treated mice.

CONCULUSION: This study demonstrates that HA-family signaling is
upregulated in BCa and can be specifically targeted for treatment by a
non-toxic dietary supplement. Support: 7R01 CA072821-16; 7R01CA176691-03


