Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative study of PD-L1 IHC 22C3 and 28-8 FDA-approved
diagnostic assays in cancer.


Background: Higher levels of PD-L1 expression at the surface of tumor
cells have been associated with increased response to anti-PD-1 therapies
(Santabarbara G et al. Ann Transl Med. 2016;4:215; Borghaei H et al. N
Engl J Med. 2015;373:1627-1639; Brahmer J et al. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:123-135). The FDA has 2 approved tests associated with the use
of these agents. The Dako PD-L1 IHC 22C3 kit is approved as a companion
diagnostic for the use of pembrolizumab in the first- and second-line
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) settings, where diagnostic testing is
required for its use. The Dako PD-L1 IHC 28-8 kit is approved as a
complementary diagnostic for nivolumab therapy in second-line NSCLC,
where testing is not required for its use. NeoGenomics Laboratories
stained a subset of the samples received for PD-L1 testing with both 22C3
and 28-8 on the same biopsy specimen. This dataset presents an
opportunity to explore real-world concordance testing for 22C3 and 28-8
antibodies.

Methods: The analysis was performed on a dataset obtained from Symphony
Health Solutions describing the PD-L1 biomarker test results and
annotations reported by NeoGenomics Laboratories between Oct 7, 2015, and
Aug 31, 2016. A total of 5217 biomarker test results were available for
4528 patients afflicted by diverse malignancies. Concordance testing was
performed on 556 unique patients that had a single 22C3/28-8 pairing
collected from the same biopsy specimen. All staining was performed using
the FDA-approved in vitro diagnostic assay using the 22C3 antibody or the
28-8 antibody on the Dako Link 48. Cases were reviewed and scored
randomly across multiple pathologists, who received special training and
certification in scoring. All statistical analyses were performed in SAS.

Results: Paired biopsy specimens stained with both 22C3 and 28-8
displayed high degrees of correlation (Spearman’s correlation
co-efficient = 0.97). In addition, Bland-Altman analysis revealed that
the mean difference in the percentage of tumor cells positively stained
for PD-L1 between the paired 22C3 and 28-8 assay findings was 0.48% [95%
prediction limit (-12.41% to 13.37%)]. Across expression levels both
antibodies displayed a similar probability of being interpreted as
greater than one another (43 of 556 where 28-8>22C3 and 40 of 556 where
22C3>28-8), with no clear direction of a single antibody displaying
greater sensitivity. When analyzed at the ≥ 1%, ≥ 5%, ≥ 10%, ≥
25% and ≥ 50% thresholds, the overall rate of agreement was between
96.8% and 98.2% and associated with a level of agreement (Cohen’s
kappa) between 0.92 and 0.96.

Conclusion: Both the 22C3 and 28-8 diagnostic assays show strong
agreement in a single central laboratory real-world setting. These data,
in conjunction with recent findings from analytical comparability studies
reported elsewhere, support the potential interchangeability of these
assays for diagnostic interpretation.


