Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The coactivator oncogene AF1Q associates with STAT3 activation
downstream of MET action in gastro-esophageal cancer patients.


AF1Q was initially identified as an oncogene in acute myeloid leukemia.
In breast cancer, AF1q mediates tumor progression by boosting
STAT3-signalling. In addition, AF1q enhances wnt-signalling resulting in
transcriptional activation of CD44 and promotes tumor cell proliferation,
migration and chemo-resistance. In gastrointestinal malignancies both
pathways are linked to enhanced MET tyrosine kinase receptor action,
accelerating tumor progression and metastases. We showed that Af1q
overexpression in the gastro-esophageal cancer cell lines SK-GT-4, FLO-1
and OE33 led to increased sphere formation and increased invasive
capacity in the case of FLO-1 and OE33. We investigated the role of AF1q
in a retrospective collective of 460 resected gastro-esophageal cancer
specimens (74.3% adenocarcinomas (AC), 25.7% esophageal squamous cell
cancers (SCC)). With respect to topographic location, 40.4% of tumors
were esophageal (EC), 20% gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6% gastric
cancers (GC). Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of AF1q in
205, and of CD44 in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q overexpression was
found more often in EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007) and associated
with HER2 (p=0.035), pySTAT3 (pAF1Q was initially identified as an
oncogene in acute myeloid leukemia. In breast cancer, AF1q mediates tumor
progression by boosting STAT3-signalling. In addition, AF1q enhances
wnt-signalling resulting in transcriptional activation of CD44 and
promotes tumor cell proliferation, migration and chemo-resistance. In
gastrointestinal malignancies both pathways are linked to enhanced MET
tyrosine kinase receptor action, accelerating tumor progression and
metastases. We showed that Af1q overexpression in the gastro-esophageal
cancer cell lines SK-GT-4, FLO-1 and OE33 led to increased sphere
formation and increased invasive capacity in the case of FLO-1 and OE33.
We investigated the role of AF1q in a retrospective collective of 460
resected gastro-esophageal cancer specimens (74.3% adenocarcinomas (AC),
25.7% esophageal squamous cell cancers (SCC)). With respect to
topographic location, 40.4% of tumors were esophageal (EC), 20%
gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6% gastric cancers (GC).
Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of AF1q in 205, and of CD44
in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q overexpression was found more often in
EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007) and associated with HER2 (p=0.035),
pySTAT3 (p<0.001) and MET (p=0.004) expression as well as neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (pAF1Q was initially identified as an oncogene in acute
myeloid leukemia. In breast cancer, AF1q mediates tumor progression by
boosting STAT3-signalling. In addition, AF1q enhances wnt-signalling
resulting in transcriptional activation of CD44 and promotes tumor cell
proliferation, migration and chemo-resistance. In gastrointestinal
malignancies both pathways are linked to enhanced MET tyrosine kinase
receptor action, accelerating tumor progression and metastases. We showed
that Af1q overexpression in the gastro-esophageal cancer cell lines
SK-GT-4, FLO-1 and OE33 led to increased sphere formation and increased
invasive capacity in the case of FLO-1 and OE33. We investigated the role
of AF1q in a retrospective collective of 460 resected gastro-esophageal
cancer specimens (74.3% adenocarcinomas (AC), 25.7% esophageal squamous
cell cancers (SCC)). With respect to topographic location, 40.4% of
tumors were esophageal (EC), 20% gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6%
gastric cancers (GC). Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of
AF1q in 205, and of CD44 in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q
overexpression was found more often in EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007)
and associated with HER2 (p=0.035), pySTAT3 (p<0.001) and MET (p=0.004)
expression as well as neoadjuvant chemotherapy (p<0.001). AF1q and CD44
overexpression correlated in the overall group (pAF1Q was initially
identified as an oncogene in acute myeloid leukemia. In breast cancer,
AF1q mediates tumor progression by boosting STAT3-signalling. In
addition, AF1q enhances wnt-signalling resulting in transcriptional
activation of CD44 and promotes tumor cell proliferation, migration and
chemo-resistance. In gastrointestinal malignancies both pathways are
linked to enhanced MET tyrosine kinase receptor action, accelerating
tumor progression and metastases. We showed that Af1q overexpression in
the gastro-esophageal cancer cell lines SK-GT-4, FLO-1 and OE33 led to
increased sphere formation and increased invasive capacity in the case of
FLO-1 and OE33. We investigated the role of AF1q in a retrospective
collective of 460 resected gastro-esophageal cancer specimens (74.3%
adenocarcinomas (AC), 25.7% esophageal squamous cell cancers (SCC)). With
respect to topographic location, 40.4% of tumors were esophageal (EC),
20% gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6% gastric cancers (GC).
Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of AF1q in 205, and of CD44
in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q overexpression was found more often in
EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007) and associated with HER2 (p=0.035),
pySTAT3 (p<0.001) and MET (p=0.004) expression as well as neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (p<0.001). AF1q and CD44 overexpression correlated in the
overall group (p<0.001) and in AC (pAF1Q was initially identified as an
oncogene in acute myeloid leukemia. In breast cancer, AF1q mediates tumor
progression by boosting STAT3-signalling. In addition, AF1q enhances
wnt-signalling resulting in transcriptional activation of CD44 and
promotes tumor cell proliferation, migration and chemo-resistance. In
gastrointestinal malignancies both pathways are linked to enhanced MET
tyrosine kinase receptor action, accelerating tumor progression and
metastases. We showed that Af1q overexpression in the gastro-esophageal
cancer cell lines SK-GT-4, FLO-1 and OE33 led to increased sphere
formation and increased invasive capacity in the case of FLO-1 and OE33.
We investigated the role of AF1q in a retrospective collective of 460
resected gastro-esophageal cancer specimens (74.3% adenocarcinomas (AC),
25.7% esophageal squamous cell cancers (SCC)). With respect to
topographic location, 40.4% of tumors were esophageal (EC), 20%
gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6% gastric cancers (GC).
Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of AF1q in 205, and of CD44
in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q overexpression was found more often in
EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007) and associated with HER2 (p=0.035),
pySTAT3 (p<0.001) and MET (p=0.004) expression as well as neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (p<0.001). AF1q and CD44 overexpression correlated in the
overall group (p<0.001) and in AC (p<0.001). In SCC CD44 was expressed
more frequently compared to AC (pAF1Q was initially identified as an
oncogene in acute myeloid leukemia. In breast cancer, AF1q mediates tumor
progression by boosting STAT3-signalling. In addition, AF1q enhances
wnt-signalling resulting in transcriptional activation of CD44 and
promotes tumor cell proliferation, migration and chemo-resistance. In
gastrointestinal malignancies both pathways are linked to enhanced MET
tyrosine kinase receptor action, accelerating tumor progression and
metastases. We showed that Af1q overexpression in the gastro-esophageal
cancer cell lines SK-GT-4, FLO-1 and OE33 led to increased sphere
formation and increased invasive capacity in the case of FLO-1 and OE33.
We investigated the role of AF1q in a retrospective collective of 460
resected gastro-esophageal cancer specimens (74.3% adenocarcinomas (AC),
25.7% esophageal squamous cell cancers (SCC)). With respect to
topographic location, 40.4% of tumors were esophageal (EC), 20%
gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6% gastric cancers (GC).
Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of AF1q in 205, and of CD44
in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q overexpression was found more often in
EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007) and associated with HER2 (p=0.035),
pySTAT3 (p<0.001) and MET (p=0.004) expression as well as neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (p<0.001). AF1q and CD44 overexpression correlated in the
overall group (p<0.001) and in AC (p<0.001). In SCC CD44 was expressed
more frequently compared to AC (p<0.001). Analysis of the matched primary
and metastatic tumors revealed that primary AF1q-positive tumor samples
were largely overlapping with AF1q-positive tumors lymph node metastases
(23/32) and distant metastases (6/7). AF1q overexpression correlated with
shorter disease free survival (DFS) (p=0.003) and shorter disease
specific survival (DSS) (p=0.036), but overall survival (OS) was similar
(p=0.117). In a subgroup analysis a shorter OS was observed in EC/GEC
(p=0.03, log rank test). In a Cox regression model AF1q and CD44
expression was associated with shorter DFS (pAF1Q was initially
identified as an oncogene in acute myeloid leukemia. In breast cancer,
AF1q mediates tumor progression by boosting STAT3-signalling. In
addition, AF1q enhances wnt-signalling resulting in transcriptional
activation of CD44 and promotes tumor cell proliferation, migration and
chemo-resistance. In gastrointestinal malignancies both pathways are
linked to enhanced MET tyrosine kinase receptor action, accelerating
tumor progression and metastases. We showed that Af1q overexpression in
the gastro-esophageal cancer cell lines SK-GT-4, FLO-1 and OE33 led to
increased sphere formation and increased invasive capacity in the case of
FLO-1 and OE33. We investigated the role of AF1q in a retrospective
collective of 460 resected gastro-esophageal cancer specimens (74.3%
adenocarcinomas (AC), 25.7% esophageal squamous cell cancers (SCC)). With
respect to topographic location, 40.4% of tumors were esophageal (EC),
20% gastro-esophageal (GEC) and 39.6% gastric cancers (GC).
Immunohistochemistry revealed overexpression of AF1q in 205, and of CD44
in 114 patient tumor samples. AF1q overexpression was found more often in
EC/GEC as compared to GC (p=0.007) and associated with HER2 (p=0.035),
pySTAT3 (p<0.001) and MET (p=0.004) expression as well as neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (p<0.001). AF1q and CD44 overexpression correlated in the
overall group (p<0.001) and in AC (p<0.001). In SCC CD44 was expressed
more frequently compared to AC (p<0.001). Analysis of the matched primary
and metastatic tumors revealed that primary AF1q-positive tumor samples
were largely overlapping with AF1q-positive tumors lymph node metastases
(23/32) and distant metastases (6/7). AF1q overexpression correlated with
shorter disease free survival (DFS) (p=0.003) and shorter disease
specific survival (DSS) (p=0.036), but overall survival (OS) was similar
(p=0.117). In a subgroup analysis a shorter OS was observed in EC/GEC
(p=0.03, log rank test). In a Cox regression model AF1q and CD44
expression was associated with shorter DFS (p<0.001 and p=0.025) and DSS
(p=0.005 and p=0.035), but OS remained unchanged. Prognostic significance
was limited to AF1q (p=0.003 and p=0.04, respectively). We conclude, that
AF1q overexpression is associated with progression and metastases in GEC.
AF1q and downstream pathway markers such as pySTAT3- as well as CD44 and
MET are linked with AF1q expression. Therefore we propose AF1q as a novel
prognostic marker for GECs.


