Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of survival-associated genomic
features across tumor types.


The basic biology that differentiates a primary cell from a transformed
cell has been elucidated over the past several decades. Mutations in a
limited number of oncogenes and tumor suppressors free the cell from
growth-inhibitory checkpoints and allow proliferation in the absence of
external stimuli, leading to tumor formation. Yet, primary tumors
themselves are rarely deadly: greater than 90% of cancer mortality
results from metastasis. What drives metastasis, and, more broadly, what
distinguishes a lethal cancer from one with a favorable prognosis, is
poorly understood.

To address this question, we have performed a comprehensive meta-analysis
on genomic data from primary tumors that are linked to patientsâ€™
clinical outcomes. Utiliizing data from >20,000 patients, we have
identified protein-coding genes, lncRNAs, miRNAs, methylation sites, and
CNVs in primary tumors that are significantly associated with patient
prognosis across cancer types. Multivariate analysis reveals a hierarchy
of survival determinants: the strongest mortality-associated factors are
enriched for components of the mitotic cell cycle, while secondary
clusters of genes are involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, cell
motility, and angiogenesis. Survival-associated genomic features are
indicative of immune infiltration into primary tumors and oxidative
phosphorylation activity.

In vitro and in vivo analyses reveal that mortality-associated genes
rarely promote the direct transformation of primary cells. Instead,
CRISPR mutagenesis reveals that these genes largely represent tumor
dependencies, and in their absence cancer cells fail to proliferate.
Through this analysis, we have identified new genetic dependencies common
across cancer cells, including C16ORF59 and C5ORF46. In total, our
results represent the largest assessment of genomic features linked to
cancer prognosis completed to date, and offer several lines of insight
into the biological differences between fatal and benign cancers.


