Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldh expressing stem cells mediate tumor initiation and metastasis
in triple negative breast cancers across different ethnicities.


TNBC is the only subtype of breast cancer for which there are no approved
targeted therapies. In the US, its incidence is highest in women with
African ancestry (AA); in western sub-Saharan Africa, single-institution
studies show that TNBC constitutes 40- 80% of all breast cancers. Given
the Caucasian/AA survival disparity in breast cancer, there is an urgent
need to find actionable targets in TNBC of all ethnicities, but
especially in TNBC in AA, which are suspected to be more aggressive.
Breast cancer stem cells, the small population of cells that have been
shown to mediate breast tumor initiation, metastasis, and resistance to
conventional therapy have also been reported to mediate the heterogeneity
of TNBC and are especially abundant in TNBC in AA women. Here, we sought
to better understand the biology of TNBC by finding genes and pathways
that are differentially expressed in the stem cell population of patient
derived xenografts (PDX) from TNBC from Ghanaian (G), AA and Caucasian
(C) women and the effect of these differentially expressed genes on the
stem cell phenotype in these primary tumors. We isolated the ALDH+ and
the CD44+/CD24- stem cell populations from the bulk cells from 15 PDXs
using flow cytometry. We performed RNA sequencing (Illumina HiSeq
platform) on the isolated populations and bulk cells (45). Comprehensive
bioinformatics analyses led to the identificationof highly significantly
differentially expressed genes and pathways between the cell populations.
By principal component analysis, the tumors were very heterogeneous.
However, the ALDH+ cells separated out from the CD44+/CD24- and the bulk
cells. We identified 14 genes that were simultaneously differentially
expressed between the ALDH+ vs the CD44+/CD24- as well as ALDH+ VS bulk
(p-value TNBC is the only subtype of breast cancer for which there are no
approved targeted therapies. In the US, its incidence is highest in women
with African ancestry (AA); in western sub-Saharan Africa,
single-institution studies show that TNBC constitutes 40- 80% of all
breast cancers. Given the Caucasian/AA survival disparity in breast
cancer, there is an urgent need to find actionable targets in TNBC of all
ethnicities, but especially in TNBC in AA, which are suspected to be more
aggressive. Breast cancer stem cells, the small population of cells that
have been shown to mediate breast tumor initiation, metastasis, and
resistance to conventional therapy have also been reported to mediate the
heterogeneity of TNBC and are especially abundant in TNBC in AA women.
Here, we sought to better understand the biology of TNBC by finding genes
and pathways that are differentially expressed in the stem cell
population of patient derived xenografts (PDX) from TNBC from Ghanaian
(G), AA and Caucasian (C) women and the effect of these differentially
expressed genes on the stem cell phenotype in these primary tumors. We
isolated the ALDH+ and the CD44+/CD24- stem cell populations from the
bulk cells from 15 PDXs using flow cytometry. We performed RNA sequencing
(Illumina HiSeq platform) on the isolated populations and bulk cells
(45). Comprehensive bioinformatics analyses led to the identificationof
highly significantly differentially expressed genes and pathways between
the cell populations. By principal component analysis, the tumors were
very heterogeneous. However, the ALDH+ cells separated out from the
CD44+/CD24- and the bulk cells. We identified 14 genes that were
simultaneously differentially expressed between the ALDH+ vs the
CD44+/CD24- as well as ALDH+ VS bulk (p-value <0.001, FDR TNBC is the
only subtype of breast cancer for which there are no approved targeted
therapies. In the US, its incidence is highest in women with African
ancestry (AA); in western sub-Saharan Africa, single-institution studies
show that TNBC constitutes 40- 80% of all breast cancers. Given the
Caucasian/AA survival disparity in breast cancer, there is an urgent need
to find actionable targets in TNBC of all ethnicities, but especially in
TNBC in AA, which are suspected to be more aggressive. Breast cancer stem
cells, the small population of cells that have been shown to mediate
breast tumor initiation, metastasis, and resistance to conventional
therapy have also been reported to mediate the heterogeneity of TNBC and
are especially abundant in TNBC in AA women. Here, we sought to better
understand the biology of TNBC by finding genes and pathways that are
differentially expressed in the stem cell population of patient derived
xenografts (PDX) from TNBC from Ghanaian (G), AA and Caucasian (C) women
and the effect of these differentially expressed genes on the stem cell
phenotype in these primary tumors. We isolated the ALDH+ and the
CD44+/CD24- stem cell populations from the bulk cells from 15 PDXs using
flow cytometry. We performed RNA sequencing (Illumina HiSeq platform) on
the isolated populations and bulk cells (45). Comprehensive
bioinformatics analyses led to the identificationof highly significantly
differentially expressed genes and pathways between the cell populations.
By principal component analysis, the tumors were very heterogeneous.
However, the ALDH+ cells separated out from the CD44+/CD24- and the bulk
cells. We identified 14 genes that were simultaneously differentially
expressed between the ALDH+ vs the CD44+/CD24- as well as ALDH+ VS bulk
(p-value <0.001, FDR < 0.05). The 3 most significant genes were MMP2 and
PCDH7, both known to be involved in breast cancer metastasis and CPXM1, a
carboxylase. Inhibiting MMP2 expression in the PDX cells grown in
suspension resulted in significant reduction in the ALDH+ cell
population. Also, the ALDH+ and not the CD44+/CD24- cells formed spheres
in serum free media. The WNT, MAPK and TGF-beta pathways known to mediate
metastasis were all significantly up-regulated in the ALDH+ population
with down regulation of biosynthetic pathways which were up-regulated in
the CD44+/CD24- population. Further studies are ongoing on pathway
modulation in ALDH1+ cells based on these findings. Our data demonstrate
that the ALDH+ stem cell population is enriched for tumor initiating
cells in aggressive TNBCs across different ethnicities. These cells may
play a role in mediating the aggressive behavior of TNBCâ€™s found in
African women.


