Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTCH53 as a potential secondary modifier in Li-Fraumeni syndrome.


Germline mutations in the TP53 gene have been established as the
underlying genetic event in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), predisposing
affected families to a wide spectrum of early onset cancers. Despite
rapid progress in elucidating the role of wild-type p53 in maintenance of
genome stability, and mutant p53 in cellular transformation, much of the
molecular basis underlying LFS remains unclear. Lack of predictability in
age of onset, type(s) of cancers, and likelihood of subsequent
malignancies prompts further research to examine secondary modifiers on
the underlying TP53 genotype. Patched-domain containing 4 (a.k.a PTCHD4
or PTCH53) is a repressor of canonical Hedgehog signaling that is also
described to be transcriptionally activated by p53. Furthermore, our
group has identified significant hypomethylation at the PTCH53 locus in a
mutant TP53 LFS cohort, compared to TP53 wildtype carriers. These results
suggest a potential role of PTCH53 in modifying LFS phenotype. The study
examines the expression profile of PTCH53 in the presence of different
germline TP53 mutations using primary LFS patient-derived fibroblasts,
and aims to elucidate the functional role of PTCH53. PTCH53
transcriptional expression was assessed using digital droplet PCR in 10
LFS non-transformed fibroblast cell lines representing a spectrum of
heterozygous germline TP53 mutations. Our data demonstrate that PTCH53
expression indeed depends on TP53 genotype where different TP53 mutations
correspond with varied PTCH53 mRNA levels. Nonetheless, mutant TP53
fibroblasts have overall lower PTCH53 transcripts compared to wild-type
TP53 fibroblasts. Fold-change increase in PTCH53 expression was detected
upon doxorubicin and Î³-irradiation induced activation of the p53
protein. These results suggest that induction of p53 via DNA damage
activates a signaling cascade involving PTCH53 up-regulation. Further
experiments will examine the functional consequences to PTCH53
de-regulation via shRNA knockdown and CRISPR knockout models, and will
examine possible modifying effects of PTCH53 on the functional phenotype
(cell viability, colony formation and migration potentials) of cell lines
harboring different p53 mutants. Elucidating the functional profile of
PTCH53 in the context of Li-Fraumeni syndrome will contribute to
understanding the complex molecular basis underlying this cancer
predisposition syndrome.


