Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The contribution of rare and low-frequency variants to colorectal
cancer heritability.


Studies that estimate complex disease heritability based on genome-wide
common SNP array data have shown that a large fraction of heritability is
contributed from variants that do not reach genome-wide significance at
current genome-wide association study (GWAS) sample sizes. The
contribution of rare variants to heritability has yet to be explored for
many complex diseases. Despite the decreasing cost of sequencing, it
still remains prohibitively expensive to sequence sufficient samples for
well-powered genetic association studies of rare variants. However, with
increasingly large and denser imputation reference panels it has become
feasible to accurately impute variants with minor allele frequencies
(MAFs) as low as 0.1%, enabling study of a subset of rare risk variants.
In previous work, we used restricted maximum likelihood (REML) to
estimate the total additive heritability of colorectal cancer (CRC) based
on common SNP array genotypes. Here, we expand this work using imputed
genotype data and a larger sample size. We performed whole-genome
sequencing of 1,961 CRC cases and 981 controls, and subsequently imputed
these haplotypes into 11,895 unrelated CRC cases and 14,659 unrelated
controls that are part of the Colorectal Cancer Family Registry (CCFR)
and the Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium
(GECCO). We estimated heritability from individual-level imputed genotype
data using LD- and MAF-stratified GREML, as implemented in GCTA. In
total, we analyzed 17,649,167 imputed genetic variants with minor allele
count >3. Published heritability estimates for CRC from family-based
studies vary from 12% to 35%. Based on common genotyped SNPs, we
previously estimated heritability to be 7.42% (95% CI: 4.71-10.12%) on
the underlying liability scale, assuming a population prevalence of
0.004. For imputed genotypes, we estimate the total heritability to be
12.0% (95% CI: 9.65-14.35). Using a likelihood ratio test, we demonstrate
a significant contribution of variants with MAF â‰¤1% to CRC genetic risk
(P=0.003). Because of the imperfect imputation accuracy for very rare
variants, their contribution is likely higher. These results suggest that
with additional sequencing, improved imputation accuracy, and larger
GWAS, we should expect to start discovering rare variant associations for
CRC risk.


