Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitory activity of lichen secondary metabolite, physciosporin,
against lung cancer cell motility.


Lichens produce various unique chemicals that can be used for
pharmaceutical purposes. To screen for novel lichen secondary metabolites
showing inhibitory activity against lung cancer cell motility, we tested
acetone extracts of 13 lichen samples collected in Chile. Physciosporin,
isolated from Pseudocyphellaria coriacea (Hook f. & Taylor) D.J. Galloway
& P. James, was identified as an effective compound and showed
significant inhibitory activity in migration and invasion assays against
human lung cancer cells. Physciosporin treatment reduced both protein and
mRNA levels of N-cadherin with concomitant decreases in the levels of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers such as snail and twist.
Physciosporin also suppressed KITENIN (KAI1 C-terminal interacting
tetraspanin)-mediated AP-1 activity in both the absence and presence of
epidermal growth factor stimulation. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis
showed that the expression of the metastasis suppressor gene, KAI1, was
increased while that of the metastasis enhancer gene, KITENIN, was
dramatically decreased by physciosporin. Particularly, the activity of
3'-untranslated region of KITENIN was decreased by physciosporin.
Moreover, Cdc42 and Rac1 activities were decreased by physciosporin.
These results demonstrated that the lichen secondary metabolite,
physciosporin, inhibits lung cancer cell motility through novel
mechanisms of action.


