Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRCA1 controls the cell division axis and governs ploidy and
phenotype in human mammary cells.


BRCA1 deficiency alters the relative proportions of progenitor cells in
preneoplastic mammary tissue, and typically associates with breast
cancers characterized by genomic instability and a basal-like cell
phenotype. Oriented division of progenitor cells is one mechanism these
cells use to maintain tissue homeostasis, and to suppress tumor
formation. We now show that shRNA-mediated reduction of BRCA1 levels in
non-tumorigenic and immortalized or freshly isolated, normal human
mammary cells alters their plane of division with graded consequences
that include the induction of aneuploidy in progeny cells, perturbation
of polarity in spheroid cultures, and inhibition of clonal growth with
favored expression of basal features. We also demonstrate a requirement
for BRCA1 in establishing cortical asymmetry of NUMA-dynein complexes.
Mutation of a single BRCA1 allele (BRCA1 185delAG/+) altered the division
axis of isolated cells but their deficient spindle positioning was
supervised by CDH1-positive adherens, which sustained oriented divisions
and produced colonies with luminal features. These findings reveal a
previously unrecognized consequence of mutant BRCA1 on the cell division
axis, post-mitotic integrity and phenotype control in normal human
mammary epithelial cells.


