Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of Pin1 suppresses Hedgehog-driven medulloblastoma
tumorigenesis.


Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children.
Therapeutic approaches to medulloblastoma (combination of surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy) have led to significant improvements, but
are achieved at a high cost to quality of life. Alternative therapeutic
approaches are needed. Genetic mutations leading to the activation of the
Hedgehog pathway drive tumorigenesis in ~30% of medulloblastoma. In a
yeast two-hybrid proteomic screen, we discovered a novel interaction
between GLI1, a key transcription factor for the mediation of Hedgehog
signals, and PIN1, a peptidylprolyl cis/trans isomerase that regulates
the post-phosphorylation fate of its targets. The GLI1/PIN1 interaction
was validated by reciprocal pulldowns using epitope-tagged proteins in
HEK293T cells as well as by co-immunoprecipiations of the endogenous
proteins in a medulloblastoma cell line. Our results support a molecular
model in which PIN1 promotes GLI1 protein abundance, thus contributing to
the positive regulation of Hedgehog signals. Most importantly, in vivo
functional analyses of Pin1 in the GFAP-tTA;TRE-SmoA1 mouse model of
Hedgehog-driven medulloblastoma demonstrate that the loss of Pin1 impairs
tumor development and dramatically increases survival. In summary, the
discovery of the GLI1/PIN1 interaction uncovers PIN1 as a novel
therapeutic target in Hedgehog-driven medulloblastoma tumorigenesis.


