Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nobiletin synergizes cytotoxicity of antimicrotubule agents by
inhibiting Pin1 pathway.


Nobiletin is a citrus polymethoxy flavonoid that suppresses cell
proliferation, angiogenesis and metastatic properties in various cancer
cells. In this study, we investigated the combined effects of nobiletin
and various chemotherapeutic agents on the cytotoxicity of human colon
and esophageal cancer cells. We cultured cancer cells at serial dilution
of chemotherapeutic agents with or without nobiletin and assessed cell
cytotoxicity at 5 days after drug treatment. The addition of a suboptimal
dose of nobiletin did not alter the growth of cancer cells, however
cytotoxic effect of antimetabolites (gemcitabine and 5-FU) and
DNA-platinating agent (cisplatin) were markedly attenuated by nobiletin.
By contrast, nobiletin markedly enhanced antitumor effect of
antimicrotubule agents such as docetaxel, paclitaxel, vincristine and
MMAE. Moreover, enhanced cytotoxicity by nobiletin was also verified in
the combination with MMAE- or DM1-conjugated antibodies to EpCAM and
EphA2. We found the inhibition of phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of Pin1 (peptidyl-prolyl isomerase) by nobiletin,
suggesting a rational molecular target of nobiletin is Pin1. Overall,
these data suggest that nobiletin might useful for the chemotherapeutic
treatment of microtubule inhibitors.


