Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perceived stressfulness of life events impacts breast cancer risk.


Background: Breast cancer is the most prevalent malignancy and the second
most common cause of cancer mortality among women. Approximately 60% of
variability in breast cancer risk remains unexplained. It is imperative
to perform further research focusing on identifying preventable risk
factors for breast cancer. The relationship between psychological stress
and breast cancer risk is unclear. Psychological stress arises when
environmental demands are appraised as going beyond oneâ€™s coping
abilities. Higher perceived stress has been linked to increased cortisol
levels and HPA perturbations. The purpose of this study is to understand
the relationship between stressfulness appraisal of salient life events
and breast cancer risk.

Methods: A case-control design was used and included 664 female cases
identified through the Cancer Surveillance Program of Orange County, CA
and 203 female population-based controls. Participants completed a risk
factor questionnaire that included a life event section. Participants
were asked to determine if events occurred and if they were considered to
be significantly stressful or not. Multivariate unconditional logistic
regression was used to calculate ORs while adjusting for known breast
cancer covariates.

Results: Cumulative adverse life events perceived as stressful were
associated with increased breast cancer risk in a dose response fashion
(OR=1.63, 95% CI=1.00-2.66, Ptrend=0.045). Conversely, cumulative adverse
life events not reported as stressful did not have a significant impact
on breast cancer risk (OR=2.04, 95% CI=0.77-5.43). History of personal
illness was directly related to increased breast cancer risk, when
perceived as stressful (OR=2.84, 95% CI=1.96-4.11) or non-stressful
(OR=3.47, 95% CI=1.34-8.94). Interestingly, abortion and relocation were
observed to have a protective effect on breast cancer risk only when
reported as being stressful (OR=0.54, 95% CI=0.32-0.92; OR=0.63, 95%
CI=0.43-0.93 respectively).

Conclusions: This study broadens our understanding of the relationship
between major life events and breast cancer risk and underscores the
importance of stressfulness appraisal. Our results indicate the
importance of incorporating assessments of perceived stressfulness in
future epidemiological investigations focusing on the assessment of life
events and breast cancer risk.


