Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bevacizumab potentiates the proteomic response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in breast cancer patients: Rppa exploration of consecutive
tumor samples in the NeoAva randomized phase II trial.


Antiangiogenic therapy using bevacizumab has proven effective for a
number of cancers; however, in breast cancer there is an unmet need to
identify patients that benefit from such treatment. Sampling of tumor
biopsies before and during treatment, as well as at the time of surgery
enables the assessment of response at multiple molecular levels. At the
proteomic level reverse phase protein analysis (RPPA) support expression
of numerous cancer associated proteins simultaneously, which can further
be used to unravel molecular mechanisms associated with clinical response
to bevacizumab treatment.

In this phase II clinical trial, patients with HER2 negative primary
tumors of â‰¥25 mm were treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (4 x FEC100
+ 12 weeks of taxane-based therapy) and randomized (1:1) to receive
bevacizumab or not. Mammography, ultrasound and MR imaging were used for
response evaluation, in addition to final pathology assessment. Tumor
responses were evaluable in 132 patients; of which 66 received
bevacizumab. Ratio of the tumor size at final pathology assessment, and
at inclusion was calculated to obtain a continuous scale of response
reflecting the percentage of tumor shrinkage in response to therapy.
Tumor biopsies were removed before start of treatment, at week 12 at the
start of taxane-based tharapy and at the time of surgery. Lysates from
each sample was analyzed on reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA) for
expression levels of 210 proteins of which 54 were phospho-specific.

The addition of bevacizumab to the chemotherapy do not alter proteomic
response from week 0 to 25 to such extent that this patient group cluster
naturally together. While the proteomic response from week 0 to 12 in
both treatment arms had an overall similar profile regarding up- and
down-regulated proteins, the combination treatment (FEC100 + bevacizumab)
induced substantially more effect on the regulation of each protein. This
suggests that bevacizumab treatment have the capability to potentiate the
effects of the anthracyclin based chemotherapy from week 0 to 12.
Conversely, from week 12-25 (taxane-based therapy + bevacizumab) this
effect was lost or even reversed, possibly due to a de-vascularized and
less accessible tumor. An exception to this observation was a few
phospho-proteins that do seem to have sustained stronger regulation over
the whole treatment period. We are in the process of analyzing in more
detail the impact of phosphorylation and thus protein activation states
on treatment response.

Deciphering molecular response and activity regulation at the proteomic
level is a promising approach and may reveal novel knowledge with
potential important clinical relevance.


