Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a potent, dual pan-PIM/FLT3 inhibitor for the
treatment of heme malignancies.


Despite huge effort spent on understanding the pathogenesis of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), current standards of care are still based on the
same chemotherapy agents as two decades ago - combinational treatment of
cytarabine with an anthracycline. Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 internal
tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) is one of the most common genetic lesions
in AML. Although FLT3 inhibitors initially exhibit clinical activity,
resistance to treatment inevitably occurs within months. PIM kinases are
thought to be major drivers of the resistance phenotype and their
inhibition in relapsed samples restores cell sensitivity to FLT3
inhibitors. Thus, simultaneous PIM and FLT3 inhibition represents a
promising strategy in AML therapy. Selvita has developed a potent and
selective first-in-class, dual PIM/FLT3 kinase inhibitor, the SEL24-B489
compound, and profiled its activity for in vitro and in vivo AML models
showing significantly broader anti-tumor activity of SEL24-B489 than
selective FLT3-ITD or PIM inhibitors. We compared SEL24-B489 head-to-head
with a selective PIM inhibitor (AZD1208) and a selective FLT3-ITD
inhibitor (AC220) in a panel of AML cell lines with FLT3-ITD or unmutated
kinase (FLT3-WT) as well as peripheral AML cells and CD34+ bone marrow
blasts. SEL24-B489 exhibited a significantly broader activity,
irrespective of FLT3 status, than either of the selective inhibitors.
Since PIM kinases have emerged as important mediators of FLT3-inhibitor
resistance, we hypothesized that the dual specificity of SEL24-B489 might
overcome the phenotype of resistance. We utilized previously developed
MOLM-14 cells transduced with either FLT3-WT or FLT3 alleles containing
TKD point mutations to show that neither of the these mutations decreased
the cellular sensitivity to SEL24-B489. Higher cellular activity and
biomarker response of SEL24-B489 than competitive inhibitors was shown by
inhibition of specific biomarkers such as S6 and STAT5 phosphorylation at
nanomolar concentrations in both FLT3-ITD positive and FLT3-WT cell lines
in vitro. We have also demonstrated SEL24-B489 superior potency of
SEL24-B489 in xenograft models in vivo. Consistent with the experiments
in vitro showing marked synergy between SEL24-B489 and AraC, a
combination of these agents resulted in almost completely blocked tumor
growth in vivo. Most importantly, SEL24-B489 has been selected as a
clinical candidate and is currently in phase I clinical trials.


