Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ciclopirox inhibits tumor cell motility by suppressing protein
expression of small GTPases and phosphorylation of paxillin.


Ciclopirox olamine (CPX), an off-patent antifungal drug, is used for the
treatment of superficial mycoses. Recent studies have demonstrated that
CPX also possesses potent anticancer activity by inhibiting cell
proliferation and inducing cell death in tumor cells. However, it is
unknown whether CPX inhibits cell motility. In the present study, we
found that CPX potently inhibited cell motility in a
concentration-dependent manner in rhabdomyosarcoma (Rh30 and RD) cells,
which was independent of the reduction of cell viability. As small
GTPases (RhoA, Cdc42, and Rac1) and focal adhesion proteins (paxillin)
play critical roles in the regulation of cell motility, we further
studied whether CPX affects these proteins. Our Western blot analysis
revealed that CPX did inhibit cellular protein expression of RhoA, Cdc42
and Rac1. However, by RT-PCR analysis, CPX did not alter the mRNA levels
of the small GTPases. As microRNAs (miRNAs) can regulate protein
expression at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels, we
investigated the effect of CPX on the expression of miRNAs. Our miRNA PCR
array revealed that treatment with 10 Î¼M of CPX for 24 hours upregulated
the expression of 27 miRNAs by 2.04-6.10 fold, and downregulated the
expression of 7 miRNAs by 2.00-7.89 fold in Rh30 cells. Further research
is ongoing to identify whether these up/downregulated miRNAs are linked
to the reduced expression of small GTPases and potentially more proteins.
In addition, we found that CPX inhibited the phosphorylation of paxillin,
despite no effect on the total cellular protein expression. The results
suggest that CPX inhibits tumor cell motility at least by suppressing the
protein expression of small GTPases and the phosphorylation of paxillin.
Supported by the Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, LSU Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA.


