Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Satisfying the fatty acid demand of prostate cancer: Outlier
overexpression of genes involved in de novo synthesis vs fatty acid
uptake define two different and potentially synergistic prostate cancer
phenotypes.


Malignant transformation increases cellular demand for fatty acids (FA).
Many cancers, including prostate cancer (PCa), show increased expression
of fatty acid synthase (FASN), the enzyme that catalyzes the de novo
synthesis of the FA palmitate. De novo FA synthesis is energetically
expensive; in most normal cells FASN expression is low and de novo
synthesis suppressed in favor of utilization of exogenous FA. In
contrast, in cancer cells, de novo FA synthesis is an important source of
precursors needed to support tumor growth. Much of the research effort on
FA in cancer has focused on FASN and the other genes involved in de novo
FA synthesis. However a number of observations suggest that alternate
mechanisms for FA acquisition are also important, most notably studies
showing that cancer cells can be rescued from the pro-apoptotic effect of
FASN inhibition by exogenous palmitate. Using a biopsy-based approach
designed to identify high risk prostate cancer phenotypes that are common
in African American (AA) men, we identified a PCa subtype with outlier (>
10 fold) mRNA overexpression of fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5).
FABP5 facilitates the utilization of palmitate and other FAs from outside
the cell, and a FABP5 overexpression phenotype may confer a selective
advantage when dietary FAs are abundant or when FASN is targeted as a
therapy. The FABP5 outlier overexpression phenotype was observed in 7%
Gleason sum (GS) 7-10 PCas. We also observed a second molecular subtype
with outlier FASN overexpression in 9% of GS 7-10 PCas. With few
exceptions these two PCa subtypes showed an “either-or” pattern with
top quartile overexpression of FABP5 or FASN but not both (Spearman r =
0.385; P Malignant transformation increases cellular demand for fatty
acids (FA). Many cancers, including prostate cancer (PCa), show increased
expression of fatty acid synthase (FASN), the enzyme that catalyzes the
de novo synthesis of the FA palmitate. De novo FA synthesis is
energetically expensive; in most normal cells FASN expression is low and
de novo synthesis suppressed in favor of utilization of exogenous FA. In
contrast, in cancer cells, de novo FA synthesis is an important source of
precursors needed to support tumor growth. Much of the research effort on
FA in cancer has focused on FASN and the other genes involved in de novo
FA synthesis. However a number of observations suggest that alternate
mechanisms for FA acquisition are also important, most notably studies
showing that cancer cells can be rescued from the pro-apoptotic effect of
FASN inhibition by exogenous palmitate. Using a biopsy-based approach
designed to identify high risk prostate cancer phenotypes that are common
in African American (AA) men, we identified a PCa subtype with outlier (>
10 fold) mRNA overexpression of fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5).
FABP5 facilitates the utilization of palmitate and other FAs from outside
the cell, and a FABP5 overexpression phenotype may confer a selective
advantage when dietary FAs are abundant or when FASN is targeted as a
therapy. The FABP5 outlier overexpression phenotype was observed in 7%
Gleason sum (GS) 7-10 PCas. We also observed a second molecular subtype
with outlier FASN overexpression in 9% of GS 7-10 PCas. With few
exceptions these two PCa subtypes showed an “either-or” pattern with
top quartile overexpression of FABP5 or FASN but not both (Spearman r =
0.385; P < 0.0001). Interestingly, in low grade (GS 6) PCas, median
FABP5 mRNA overexpression is higher in AA than in European American (EA)
men (P Malignant transformation increases cellular demand for fatty acids
(FA). Many cancers, including prostate cancer (PCa), show increased
expression of fatty acid synthase (FASN), the enzyme that catalyzes the
de novo synthesis of the FA palmitate. De novo FA synthesis is
energetically expensive; in most normal cells FASN expression is low and
de novo synthesis suppressed in favor of utilization of exogenous FA. In
contrast, in cancer cells, de novo FA synthesis is an important source of
precursors needed to support tumor growth. Much of the research effort on
FA in cancer has focused on FASN and the other genes involved in de novo
FA synthesis. However a number of observations suggest that alternate
mechanisms for FA acquisition are also important, most notably studies
showing that cancer cells can be rescued from the pro-apoptotic effect of
FASN inhibition by exogenous palmitate. Using a biopsy-based approach
designed to identify high risk prostate cancer phenotypes that are common
in African American (AA) men, we identified a PCa subtype with outlier (>
10 fold) mRNA overexpression of fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5).
FABP5 facilitates the utilization of palmitate and other FAs from outside
the cell, and a FABP5 overexpression phenotype may confer a selective
advantage when dietary FAs are abundant or when FASN is targeted as a
therapy. The FABP5 outlier overexpression phenotype was observed in 7%
Gleason sum (GS) 7-10 PCas. We also observed a second molecular subtype
with outlier FASN overexpression in 9% of GS 7-10 PCas. With few
exceptions these two PCa subtypes showed an “either-or” pattern with
top quartile overexpression of FABP5 or FASN but not both (Spearman r =
0.385; P < 0.0001). Interestingly, in low grade (GS 6) PCas, median
FABP5 mRNA overexpression is higher in AA than in European American (EA)
men (P < 0.01) with GS6 PCas from AA men showing median FABP5 expression
levels as high as that observed in GS 7-10 PCas. IHC confirmed variable
expression of both FABP5 and FASN, including “patchwork” PCas with
high Gleason pattern (GP) areas overexpressing FABP5 next to low GP areas
overexpressing FASN. The net result may be a selective advantage for the
high grade cancer if FABP5 allows it to exploit the FA being synthesized
by the adjacent low grade focus. In a subset of PCas, FABP5 IHC showed
robust nuclear staining consistent with its proposed role in regulating
fatty acid mediated gene expression; the ratio of FABP5
nuclear/cytoplasmic staining was higher in PCa from AA than from EA
patients (P Malignant transformation increases cellular demand for fatty
acids (FA). Many cancers, including prostate cancer (PCa), show increased
expression of fatty acid synthase (FASN), the enzyme that catalyzes the
de novo synthesis of the FA palmitate. De novo FA synthesis is
energetically expensive; in most normal cells FASN expression is low and
de novo synthesis suppressed in favor of utilization of exogenous FA. In
contrast, in cancer cells, de novo FA synthesis is an important source of
precursors needed to support tumor growth. Much of the research effort on
FA in cancer has focused on FASN and the other genes involved in de novo
FA synthesis. However a number of observations suggest that alternate
mechanisms for FA acquisition are also important, most notably studies
showing that cancer cells can be rescued from the pro-apoptotic effect of
FASN inhibition by exogenous palmitate. Using a biopsy-based approach
designed to identify high risk prostate cancer phenotypes that are common
in African American (AA) men, we identified a PCa subtype with outlier (>
10 fold) mRNA overexpression of fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5).
FABP5 facilitates the utilization of palmitate and other FAs from outside
the cell, and a FABP5 overexpression phenotype may confer a selective
advantage when dietary FAs are abundant or when FASN is targeted as a
therapy. The FABP5 outlier overexpression phenotype was observed in 7%
Gleason sum (GS) 7-10 PCas. We also observed a second molecular subtype
with outlier FASN overexpression in 9% of GS 7-10 PCas. With few
exceptions these two PCa subtypes showed an “either-or” pattern with
top quartile overexpression of FABP5 or FASN but not both (Spearman r =
0.385; P < 0.0001). Interestingly, in low grade (GS 6) PCas, median
FABP5 mRNA overexpression is higher in AA than in European American (EA)
men (P < 0.01) with GS6 PCas from AA men showing median FABP5 expression
levels as high as that observed in GS 7-10 PCas. IHC confirmed variable
expression of both FABP5 and FASN, including “patchwork” PCas with
high Gleason pattern (GP) areas overexpressing FABP5 next to low GP areas
overexpressing FASN. The net result may be a selective advantage for the
high grade cancer if FABP5 allows it to exploit the FA being synthesized
by the adjacent low grade focus. In a subset of PCas, FABP5 IHC showed
robust nuclear staining consistent with its proposed role in regulating
fatty acid mediated gene expression; the ratio of FABP5
nuclear/cytoplasmic staining was higher in PCa from AA than from EA
patients (P < 0.05). Identification of a PCa subtype with high levels of
FABP5 overexpression suggests a previously unrecognized mechanism by
which some PCas can increase FA supply without de novo synthesis. Such a
PCa subtype might be particularly sensitive to dietary interventions and
relatively insensitive to FASN inhibitors.


