Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differentially expressed small noncoding RNAs in triple-negative
breast cancer.


Cancer is the second leading cause of death in the United States and is a
major public health concern worldwide. Basic, clinical and
epidemiological research is leading to improved cancer detection,
prevention, and outcomes. Recent technological advances have allowed
unbiased and comprehensive screening of genome-wide gene expression.
Small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) have been shown to play an important role
in biological processes and could serve as a diagnostic, prognostic and
therapeutic biomarker for specific diseases. Recent findings have begun
to reveal and enhance our understanding of the complex architecture of
sncRNA expression including miRNAs, piRNAs, sn/snoRNAs and their
relationships with biological systems. We used publicly available small
RNA sequencing data that was derived from 24 triple negative breast
cancers (TNBC) and 14 adjacent normal tissue samples to remap various
types of sncRNAs. We found a total of 55 miRNAs were aberrantly expressed
(pCancer is the second leading cause of death in the United States and is
a major public health concern worldwide. Basic, clinical and
epidemiological research is leading to improved cancer detection,
prevention, and outcomes. Recent technological advances have allowed
unbiased and comprehensive screening of genome-wide gene expression.
Small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) have been shown to play an important role
in biological processes and could serve as a diagnostic, prognostic and
therapeutic biomarker for specific diseases. Recent findings have begun
to reveal and enhance our understanding of the complex architecture of
sncRNA expression including miRNAs, piRNAs, sn/snoRNAs and their
relationships with biological systems. We used publicly available small
RNA sequencing data that was derived from 24 triple negative breast
cancers (TNBC) and 14 adjacent normal tissue samples to remap various
types of sncRNAs. We found a total of 55 miRNAs were aberrantly expressed
(p<0.005) in TNBC samples (8 miRNAs upregulated; 47 downregulated)
compared to adjacent normal tissues whereas the original study reported
only 25 novel miRs. In this study, we used pathway analysis of
differentially expressed miRNAs which revealed TGF-beta signaling
pathways to be profoundly affected in the TNBC samples. Furthermore, our
comprehensive re-mapping strategy allowed us to discover a number of
other differentially expressed sncRNAs including piRNAs, sn/snoRNAs,
rRNAs, miscRNAs and nonsense-mediated decay RNAs. We believe that our
sncRNA analysis workflow is extremely comprehensive and suitable for
discovery of novel sncRNAs changes, which may lead to the development of
innovative diagnostic and therapeutic tools for TNBC.


