Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Data-driven approach to detecting novel gene interactions in
cancer with applications to drug response prediction and cancer
stratification.


The effect of a gene’s activity on a phenotype depends on the context
of a complex network of functionally interacting genes. Several genetic
interactions (GIs), such as Synthetic lethality and Synthetic Rescues,
have been reported to have a significant functional role in cancer
progression and provide potential candidates for selective cancer
treatments. However, numerous other types of GIs with potential clinical
significance are yet to be explored. In this work we generalize the
concept of GI and detect ~70,000 GIs of different types with both
molecular and clinical signature. We demonstrate their clinical
predictive value as well as their ability to stratify breast cancer
patients into refined clinical subtypes that might allow for better
diagnosis and modified course of treatment. These results compare
favorably with previous sequence based approaches and provide evidence
for the importance of context specific genomic events and their effect on
tumor progression. Additionally, the GI network accurately predicts
patients’ drug response, where difference GI types are found to be
predictive of distinct drugs in a complementary manner. This work
provides the basis for future exploration of novel GI types as well as
individual interactions with major impact on cancer progression.


