Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of a 4 lncRNA signature in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer: a lncRNA expression analysis.


Recently, increasing evidence indicates that lncRNA plays an important
role in the cancer development and progression. In this study, we are
aimed to identify lncRNA signature for predicting survival of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A total of 366 NSCLC cases, which were
divided into a training and validation set, were detected by lncRNA
microarray (containing 2412 lncRNA probes), and another 73 cases as an
independent set were analyzed by qRT-PCR. LncRNA microarray analysis
identified a total of 305 differentially expressed lncRNAs (138
up-regulated and 167 down-regulated) between NSCLC and normal tissues in
the training set. We then validated the microarray data by qRT-PCR
analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2 up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in 30 paired
NSCLC and adjacent lung tissues randomly selected from the training set.
We then used a stepwise forward process to select the best combination of
lncRNAs with the most significance in prediction of NSCLC prognosis and a
4-lncRNA prognostic signature was established, which was significantly
associated with overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563, 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 2.118-5.995, P Recently, increasing evidence
indicates that lncRNA plays an important role in the cancer development
and progression. In this study, we are aimed to identify lncRNA signature
for predicting survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A
total of 366 NSCLC cases, which were divided into a training and
validation set, were detected by lncRNA microarray (containing 2412
lncRNA probes), and another 73 cases as an independent set were analyzed
by qRT-PCR. LncRNA microarray analysis identified a total of 305
differentially expressed lncRNAs (138 up-regulated and 167
down-regulated) between NSCLC and normal tissues in the training set. We
then validated the microarray data by qRT-PCR analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2
up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in 30 paired NSCLC and adjacent lung
tissues randomly selected from the training set. We then used a stepwise
forward process to select the best combination of lncRNAs with the most
significance in prediction of NSCLC prognosis and a 4-lncRNA prognostic
signature was established, which was significantly associated with
overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563, 95% confidence interval [CI]:
2.118-5.995, P <0.001) and disease-free survival (HR: 3.236, 95% CI:
2.116-4.940, P Recently, increasing evidence indicates that lncRNA plays
an important role in the cancer development and progression. In this
study, we are aimed to identify lncRNA signature for predicting survival
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A total of 366 NSCLC
cases, which were divided into a training and validation set, were
detected by lncRNA microarray (containing 2412 lncRNA probes), and
another 73 cases as an independent set were analyzed by qRT-PCR. LncRNA
microarray analysis identified a total of 305 differentially expressed
lncRNAs (138 up-regulated and 167 down-regulated) between NSCLC and
normal tissues in the training set. We then validated the microarray data
by qRT-PCR analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2 up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in
30 paired NSCLC and adjacent lung tissues randomly selected from the
training set. We then used a stepwise forward process to select the best
combination of lncRNAs with the most significance in prediction of NSCLC
prognosis and a 4-lncRNA prognostic signature was established, which was
significantly associated with overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 2.118-5.995, P <0.001) and disease-free
survival (HR: 3.236, 95% CI: 2.116-4.940, P <0.001) in the training set.
This prognostic signature was validated in the validation (OS, HR: 3.186,
95% CI: 1.849-5.488, P Recently, increasing evidence indicates that
lncRNA plays an important role in the cancer development and progression.
In this study, we are aimed to identify lncRNA signature for predicting
survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A total of 366
NSCLC cases, which were divided into a training and validation set, were
detected by lncRNA microarray (containing 2412 lncRNA probes), and
another 73 cases as an independent set were analyzed by qRT-PCR. LncRNA
microarray analysis identified a total of 305 differentially expressed
lncRNAs (138 up-regulated and 167 down-regulated) between NSCLC and
normal tissues in the training set. We then validated the microarray data
by qRT-PCR analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2 up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in
30 paired NSCLC and adjacent lung tissues randomly selected from the
training set. We then used a stepwise forward process to select the best
combination of lncRNAs with the most significance in prediction of NSCLC
prognosis and a 4-lncRNA prognostic signature was established, which was
significantly associated with overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 2.118-5.995, P <0.001) and disease-free
survival (HR: 3.236, 95% CI: 2.116-4.940, P <0.001) in the training set.
This prognostic signature was validated in the validation (OS, HR: 3.186,
95% CI: 1.849-5.488, P <0.001; DFS, HR: 2.967, 95% CI: 1.949-4.517, P
Recently, increasing evidence indicates that lncRNA plays an important
role in the cancer development and progression. In this study, we are
aimed to identify lncRNA signature for predicting survival of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A total of 366 NSCLC cases, which were
divided into a training and validation set, were detected by lncRNA
microarray (containing 2412 lncRNA probes), and another 73 cases as an
independent set were analyzed by qRT-PCR. LncRNA microarray analysis
identified a total of 305 differentially expressed lncRNAs (138
up-regulated and 167 down-regulated) between NSCLC and normal tissues in
the training set. We then validated the microarray data by qRT-PCR
analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2 up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in 30 paired
NSCLC and adjacent lung tissues randomly selected from the training set.
We then used a stepwise forward process to select the best combination of
lncRNAs with the most significance in prediction of NSCLC prognosis and a
4-lncRNA prognostic signature was established, which was significantly
associated with overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563, 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 2.118-5.995, P <0.001) and disease-free
survival (HR: 3.236, 95% CI: 2.116-4.940, P <0.001) in the training set.
This prognostic signature was validated in the validation (OS, HR: 3.186,
95% CI: 1.849-5.488, P <0.001; DFS, HR: 2.967, 95% CI: 1.949-4.517, P
<0.001) and independent sets (OS, HR: 4.703, 95% CI: 1.923-11.50, P
Recently, increasing evidence indicates that lncRNA plays an important
role in the cancer development and progression. In this study, we are
aimed to identify lncRNA signature for predicting survival of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. A total of 366 NSCLC cases, which were
divided into a training and validation set, were detected by lncRNA
microarray (containing 2412 lncRNA probes), and another 73 cases as an
independent set were analyzed by qRT-PCR. LncRNA microarray analysis
identified a total of 305 differentially expressed lncRNAs (138
up-regulated and 167 down-regulated) between NSCLC and normal tissues in
the training set. We then validated the microarray data by qRT-PCR
analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2 up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in 30 paired
NSCLC and adjacent lung tissues randomly selected from the training set.
We then used a stepwise forward process to select the best combination of
lncRNAs with the most significance in prediction of NSCLC prognosis and a
4-lncRNA prognostic signature was established, which was significantly
associated with overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563, 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 2.118-5.995, P <0.001) and disease-free
survival (HR: 3.236, 95% CI: 2.116-4.940, P <0.001) in the training set.
This prognostic signature was validated in the validation (OS, HR: 3.186,
95% CI: 1.849-5.488, P <0.001; DFS, HR: 2.967, 95% CI: 1.949-4.517, P
<0.001) and independent sets (OS, HR: 4.703, 95% CI: 1.923-11.50, P
<0.001; DFS, HR: 4.549, 95% CI: 2.139-9.674, P Recently, increasing
evidence indicates that lncRNA plays an important role in the cancer
development and progression. In this study, we are aimed to identify
lncRNA signature for predicting survival of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients. A total of 366 NSCLC cases, which were divided into a
training and validation set, were detected by lncRNA microarray
(containing 2412 lncRNA probes), and another 73 cases as an independent
set were analyzed by qRT-PCR. LncRNA microarray analysis identified a
total of 305 differentially expressed lncRNAs (138 up-regulated and 167
down-regulated) between NSCLC and normal tissues in the training set. We
then validated the microarray data by qRT-PCR analysis of 5 lncRNAs (2
up-regulated and 3 down-regulated) in 30 paired NSCLC and adjacent lung
tissues randomly selected from the training set. We then used a stepwise
forward process to select the best combination of lncRNAs with the most
significance in prediction of NSCLC prognosis and a 4-lncRNA prognostic
signature was established, which was significantly associated with
overall survival (hazard ratio [HR]: 3.563, 95% confidence interval [CI]:
2.118-5.995, P <0.001) and disease-free survival (HR: 3.236, 95% CI:
2.116-4.940, P <0.001) in the training set. This prognostic signature was
validated in the validation (OS, HR: 3.186, 95% CI: 1.849-5.488, P
<0.001; DFS, HR: 2.967, 95% CI: 1.949-4.517, P <0.001) and independent
sets (OS, HR: 4.703, 95% CI: 1.923-11.50, P <0.001; DFS, HR: 4.549, 95%
CI: 2.139-9.674, P <0.001). This 4-lncRNA signature has been demonstrated
as an independent prognostic factor, which significantly improves the
prognostic accuracy of TNM staging system in a combined model as assessed
by ROC curve analyses in the three sets, respectively. Therefore, the
4-lncRNA signature has potential prognostic role in NSCLC patients.


