Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distribution of single nucleotide polymorphisms related to
paclitaxel and carboplatin toxicity in ovarian cancer patients.


Introduction: Standard first-line treatment for ovarian cancer consists
in the combined use of taxanes and platinum, with neuropathies and
neutropenia the most frequent and complex adverse drug reactions (ADRs)
requiring clinical management. These adverse effects may be related to
differing levels of drug transport and metabolism brought about by
intrinsic genetic characteristics of the patients. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) are now recognized as key factors in the variability
of drug response. In a cohort of Chilean ovarian cancer patients we
analyzed the frequencies of several SNPs previously reported to be
associated with paclitaxel and carboplatin ADRs.

Methods: Blood samples were obtained with informed consent from adult
ovarian cancer patients (n = 120). DNA was extracted and SNPs within the
ABC transporter and CYP P450 gene families were genotyped. High
specificity Taqman probes were used.

Results: Four SNPs associated with risk of ADR within the ABC transporter
family showed genotypic frequencies ranging between 0 - 23%. Frequencies
for the ADR-associated variants in the CYP P450 family were 4 - 90%.
Finally, for the CYP2C8 enzyme, whose function is essential in paclitaxel
metabolism, the frequencies of risk-associated SNPs ranged from 2.10% to
13.6%.

Conclusions: SNPs associated with paclitaxel and carboplatin ADRs are
highly prevalent in the Chilean population of ovarian cancer patients
studied. The identification of these variants may help avoid severe ADRs
associated with chemotherapy regimes. Funding: CORFO 13CTI21526-P6 &
13IDL2-18608


