Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exosome-mediated transfer of miR-183-5p from tumor cells to
macrophages contributes to regulate TAMs phenotypes and promote tumor
progression and metastasis.


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) perform supportive roles in promoting
tumor progression and metastasis. In tumor microenvironment, the
phenotypes of TAMs are regulated by a variety of factors, such as
cytokines, ligends and products of metabolism. Recently, Exosome-mediated
transfer of miRNAs is proved to be a significant way for intercellular
communications. Whether exosomal miRNAs derived from tumor cells
contribute to TAMsâ€™ phenotypes remains unclear. In this study, we aim
to identify the miRNAs in exosomes transferred from tumor cells to
macrophages and explore how these miRNAs regulate the TAMs phenotypes. In
the beginning we transferred CY3-labled miRNA NC to 4T1 mouse breast
cancer cells and then co-cultured with bone marrow-derived macrophages
(BMDMs). The CY3 fluorescence could be observed in BMDMs after 48 hour,
suggesting that miRNAs could be transferred from tumor cells to
macrophages. Next, we performed miRNAs sequencing in either BMDM or
exosomes derived from 4T1 cancer cells. We analyzed and compared the
miRNAseq data by bio- informatics and found that there were 30 of the
most abundant miRNAs in 4T1 exosomes, and nearly all of which were rich
in BMDMs. However, it was found interestingly that miR-183-5p was
extremely low in BMDMs. Furthermore, we treated BMDMs with exosomes
isolated form 4T1 cell conditioned medium, and then we found importantly
the miR-183-5p in BMDMs was increased significantly, while cultured with
exosome-depleted 4T1 conditioned medium, the expression of miR-183-5p in
BMDMs was not changed. Meanwhile, we isolated TAMs from 4T1 mouse breast
tumor while spleen macrophages from normal mouse as a control. The
expression of miR-183-5p in TAMs was much higher than that in spleen
macrophages. Moreover, it was determined that expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF and IL-6 in BMDM were increased
significantly in BMDMs treated with 4T1-derived exosomes.
Correspondingly, transferred miR-183-5p mimic into BMDMs, the expression
of TNF and IL-6 were also increased. Finally we co-cultured 4T1 cells
with BMDMs transferred with miR-183-5p, and the migration and invasion of
4T1 cells were significantly enhanced. Taken together, our study
demonstrate that miR-183-5p that high expression in 4T1 exosomes can
transferred into macrophages to regulated their phenotypes and promote
tumor progression and metastasis in breast tumor microenvironment.


