Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the anticancer activity of two flexible heteroarotinoid
analogs on breast cancer.


Flexible heteroarotiniods (flex-hets) are compounds derived from retinoic
acid and recent studies have indicated that these compounds exhibit
anti-cancer activity. Amongst the flexible heteroarotinoids, SHetA2 has
been to shown block the growth of cervical, head and neck, kidney, lung,
and ovarian cancers, and most recently, prostate and breast cancers.
However, due to SHetA2’s limitations— a high degree of
hydrophobicity, non-selectivity, and potential liver toxicity— a second
generation of analogs was developed. Results from our recent study
suggest that one of the second-generation analogs,
1-(1-(naphthalen-1-yl)ethyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)thiourea (SL-1-09) exhibits
anti-cancer activities against both ERα+ and ER- breast cancer cells at
micromolar concentrations. Since SL-1-09 is a racemic mixture, the R
(SL-1-29) and S (SL-1-30) enantiomers were purified and investigated for
their anti-cancer properties. Our results suggest that SL-1-30 has
greater growth inhibitory effects on T47D, MCF7, MDA-MB-453, MDA-MB-468
cells in comparison to SL1-29, suggesting that the activity observed in
SL-1-09 is likely associated with the S enantiomer. Consistent with this
data, breast cancer cells treated with SL-1-09 and SL-1-30 express lower
levels of proteins that regulate the cell cycle (i.e, cyclin A, cyclin B,
cyclin D1, cyclin E and cdk2). These results demonstrate that SL-1-30 and
SL-1-09 inhibit breast cancer cell growth, potentially by blocking cell
cycle progression, however further studies are necessary for determining
the mechanisms of action.


