Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sodium phenylbutyrate has an antineoplastic effect and enhances
the cytotoxicity of 5-fluorouracil and irinotecan in colorectal cancer
cell lines.


Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in the world and it is
the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States.
About 25% of colorectal cancer cases present with metastases at time of
diagnosis and 50% of patients who undergo surgery will ultimately develop
metastatic disease. Consequently, adjuvant chemotherapy is required in
many cases and it aims to prevent tumor progression and metastasis.

Resistance to chemotherapy is the biggest obstacle in the treatment path
of advanced colorectal cancer. Thus, highlighting the urgent need for the
identification of new therapeutic agents that can enhance the
cytotoxicity of the currently approved anticancer drugs.

Sodium phenylbutyrate (NaPB), a salt of a short chain fatty acid that is
used for treatment of urea cycle disorders, is under investigation for
its antineoplastic potential. NaPB acts as a histone deacetylase
inhibitor and it has been shown to be associated with reduced ER stress
and enhanced JNK signaling pathway. This indicates that NaPB may enhance
the cytotoxicity of the currently approved agents for colorectal cancer
including oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and irinotecan.

The aims of this study were to identify the antineoplastic potential of
NaPB in colorectal cell lines, and to identify its effect on the
cytotoxicity of oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and irinotecan.

MTT proliferation assay showed that NaPB possessed a concentration
dependent killing effect against HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cancer cell
line (IC50 values were 5 and 10 mM respectively). Moreover, at clinically
achievable and nontoxic concentration (2.5 mM), NaPB showed a synergistic
effect in HCT-116 on 5-fluorouracil (R=14.176, p=0.006), on irinotecan
(R=53.86, p=0.0117), and on oxaliplatin (R=20, p=0.004), but resulted in
extensive cytotoxicity when used at 5 mM and 10 mM.

In HT-29 cells, NaPB at concentrations 5 mM and 10 mM, showed a
synergistic effect on 5-fluorouracil (R=5.5, pIn HT-29 cells, NaPB at
concentrations 5 mM and 10 mM, showed a synergistic effect on
5-fluorouracil (R=5.5, p<0.001; and R=125, pIn HT-29 cells, NaPB at
concentrations 5 mM and 10 mM, showed a synergistic effect on
5-fluorouracil (R=5.5, p<0.001; and R=125, p<0.001 respectively), on
irinotecan (R=5.7, p=0.016; and R=21.3, p=0.018 respectively), and on
oxaliplatin (R=2.4, p=0.003; and R=3, p=0.002 respectively). The addition
of NaPB at concentration of 20 mM to the previous drugs resulted in
profound cytotoxic effect toward HT-29 cells.

As a conclusion, NaPB is a promising new adjuvant antineoplastic agent
that can be used to enhance the cytotoxicity of 5-fluorouracil,
irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in colorectal cancer.


