Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput mutagenesis reveals novel mechanisms of drug
resistance in the proto-oncogene Src kinase.


Kinase inhibitors are integral for the treatment of certain cancers, but
the emergence of drug resistance limits their long-term effectiveness.
Resistance can arise through multiple routes, including via mutations in
the kinase that render it insensitive to drug. Although some resistance
mutations for a few inhibitors are well characterized, most remain
uncharacterized or even unidentified, particularly in new or emerging
kinase targets. Ideally, we could characterize every possible resistance
mutation that could arise during treatment with each inhibitor. The
resulting comprehensive data could improve clinical decision-making for
patients with drug-resistant tumors. However, current experimental
methods for discovering resistance mutations cannot achieve the required
scale, preventing us from realizing this goal.

We developed a method for parallel assessment of the degree of inhibitor
resistance of nearly all possible single mutants of the promising drug
target Src kinase. We generated a comprehensive single mutant library of
Src and subjected it to selection for Src activity either alone or in the
presence of the inhibitor dasatinib. Then, we measured the change in
frequency of each mutant during selection by deep sequencing.

Using this data, we classified the impact of each Src mutant, both in
terms of activity and resistance to dasatinib. Our method identified
dozens of previously uncharacterized dasatinib-resistance mutations in
Src. As expected, some of these novel resistance mutations cluster near
the ATP-binding cleft of the catalytic domain. However, a surprisingly
large number occur at residues distal to dasatinibâ€™s binding site.
Biochemical validations of a subset of these newly identified resistance
mutants are ongoing. Although dasatinib is not currently approved for Src
inhibition, these results could be useful to direct treatment for those
patients currently enrolled in dasatinib clinical trials.

Our results demonstrate the power of our method for the characterization
of resistance mutations in drug targets. In contrast with previous
low-throughput and retrospective methods, our approach enables the
comprehensive and prospective identification of resistance mutations. The
approach can reveal resistance mechanisms, even before a drug is
clinically approved. Importantly, our method allows for the rapid
profiling of other Src inhibitors and potentially the discovery of
inhibitor-specific resistance mutations. Finally, we are using our data
to explore hypotheses regarding the structure, function, or regulation of
Src kinase.


