Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel epigenetic approach to relapsed mantle cell lymphoma based
on dual inhibition of EZH1/EZH2.


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a well-defined and aggressive type of B
cell non-Hodgkinâ€™s lymphoma that is genetically characterized by the
t(11;14)(q13;q32) chromosomal translocation, which results in
constitutive overexpression of CYCLIN D1. Although newly developed drugs
such as ibrutinib show promising clinical outcomes, relapsed MCL often
acquires drug resistance, which is a critical obstacle to treatment.
Alternative approaches to overcoming the drug resistance of relapsed MCL
are urgently needed. PRC1 and 2 are important epigenetic regulators that
maintain the stemness of embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells. EZH1 and
2 are catalytic components of PRC2, which trimethylates histone H3 at
lysine 27 (H3K27) to repress transcription of target genes. Mutation and
overexpression of EZH1/2 are associated with cancers, including
hematopoietic malignancies. Here, we used a novel dual inhibitor of
EZH1/2 to show that inhibiting EZH1/2 is a promising therapeutic strategy
for MCL. First, we developed a xenograft (PDX) mouse model using cells
from a heavily pretreated and relapsed MCL patient, and then orally
administered an inhibitor of EZH1/2, called OR-S1. OR-S1 strongly
impaired proliferation of the patient-derived tumors and did not cause
any serious side effects. Additionally, an in vitro assay using MCL cell
lines showed that OR-S1 inhibited the growth of MCL cells, and that the
effect was much more significant than that using the single EZH2
inhibitor (GSK126). The IC50 of OR-S1 was about one tenth that of GSK126.
These results strongly suggest that dual inhibition of EZH1/2 could be a
promising therapeutic strategy for relapsed MCL. Next, to investigate the
effect induced by dual inhibition of EZH1/2, we conducted further
analyses of the MCL cell lines. Cells exposed to OR-S1 showed cell cycle
arrest (G1 arrest) along with a dose-dependent reduction in phospho-Rb
and cell differentiation, coupled with increased cell surface expression
of hCD138. We then used RNA-seq analysis of MCL cell lines to compare
OR-S1-treated cells with vehicle-treated cells and found that cell
cycle-related signaling was significantly affected and that a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, CDKN1C (TP57), was one of the genes
most markedly upregulated by OR-S1. ChIP qPCR of MCL cell lines showed
that the CDKN1C locus was strongly marked by H3K27 trimethylation, and
that OR-S1 induced a significant reduction in the level of this histone
marker. Furthermore, administration of OR-S1 alone to PDX mice induced
increased expression of CDKN1C (as in the in vitro assay). Thus, dual
inhibition of EZH1/2 in MCL induces expression of CDKN1C, which in turn
causes cell cycle arrest and reduced growth of MCL. Taken together, these
results strongly suggested that dual inhibition of EZH1 and EZH2 is a
promising therapeutic strategy for MCL, illustrating the potential of
novel epigenetic approaches to overcoming drug resistance of relapsed MCL.


