Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR pooled screening of hundreds of cancer cell lines
identifies differential dependencies on epigenetic pathways and synthetic
lethal relationships.


Target identification is a critical step in drug discovery, but the
process has many challenges including non-specific reagents, limited
ability to test numerous models, and incomplete target inhibition. Pooled
screening with CRISPR/Cas9 permits the quick and accurate examination of
proliferation effects across many genes and many cell lines. To determine
the specific dependencies of cell lines on epigenetic pathways, we
designed a CRISPR/Cas9 library to target 640 epigenetic genes and
screened more than 200 cell lines covering a variety of oncology
indications, including breast, lung, and renal cell carcinoma (RCC). We
find that CRISPR pooled screening is a highly effective approach for
target identification and provides robust, highly reproducible data as
long as a sufficient number of small guide RNAs are used. We identify
known pan-essential genes, including in the transcription (CDK9),
translation (EIF4A1 and EIF4A3) and splicing (SRSF2) machinery. We
additionally identify many novel pan-essential genes across a variety of
epigenetic pathways, including histone acetylases and deacetylases,
chromatin remodeling factors, helicases and others. We also investigated
epigenetic synthetic lethal interactions that have been previously
reported. For example, it has been reported that the SWI/SNF family
displays paralog synthetic lethality for SMARCA2 in the context of
SMARCA4 mutations, and for ARID1B in the context of ARID1A mutations.
While we do see that some of the same trends hold, the synthetic lethal
relationship appears to be more complex than previously realized,
including the need to examine mRNA levels in addition to mutation type.
Most importantly, we identify more than 100 epigenetic genes which show
selective sensitivity, i.e. where knockout shows an anti-proliferative
effect in only a subset of the cell lines. These are the most promising
targets for further drug discovery programs. We have used additionally
CRISPR/Cas9-domain based screening to identify the functionally relevant
sites for many of these genes. Furthermore, we can overlay gene
expression and mutation data to identify novel synthetic lethal
relationships. One gene that displays selective sensitivity is EGLN1, the
prolyl hydroxylase for the hypoxia-inducible factor, HIF1Î±. We find that
EGLN1 is required for proliferation only in RCC cell lines which retain
wild-type VHL, another component of the hypoxia response pathway, which
is frequently lost in RCC. As such, EGLN1 loss is synthetically lethal in
the presence of wild-type VHL in RCC cells. Thus this approach not only
identifies an enzymatic drug target but also a patient stratification
method. Other novel synthetic lethal interactions have also been
identified. Our data demonstrates that CRISPR pooled screening is a
powerful technique for identification of epigenetic synthetic lethal
interactions.


