Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of volatile organic compounds for the diagnosis of lung
cancer.


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
the world. The prognosis of lung cancer depends on disease detection at
an early stage. Recently, effectiveness of lung cancer screening by using
low dose computed tomography scanning have been showing. However, it
still has problems such as cost of screening and radiation exposure.
Thus, less invasive and cost beneficial lung cancer screening procedure
would be needed. In this context, several study to understand the
efficacy of molecules from expiration of patients as a lung cancer
screening were showing, but it was still controversial. In this study, we
investigated to determine whether volatile organic compounds (VOC) from
patients could be used for the detection for lung cancer by using novel
small and unique absorbent material named MonoTrap .

Method: The subjectsâ€™ gas was collected from skin and exhaled breath in
a MonoTrap (GL sciences), and the VOCs were analyzed by gas
chromatography/ mass spectrometry (GC/MS). First of all, we preliminary
analyzed for both sample from skin and exhaled breath for 12 patients and
11 healthy volunteers to clarify which samples were more sensitive to
diagnose lung cancer. Subsequently, each VOC was determined in detail for
7 healthy individuals and 4 lung cancer patients and these values were
statistically analyzed.

Results: By preliminary study, characteristics of VOC derived from skin
were significantly correlated with cancer condition as compared with
healthy volunteer by using comprehensive multivariate analysis.
Therefore, we performed further quantitative analysis by targeting unique
individual molecules derived from skin. In VOCs from skin, Mann-Whitney U
test showed that 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-pentanone, hexadecane, and
acetamide were significantly higher in lung cancer patients (p=0.036,
p=0.006, p=0.036, respectively).

Conclusion: In this study, we found that 3 kinds of VOCs could be a
potential diagnostic biomarkers of lung cancer. Further prospective study
is now planning to validate these data using large number samples.


