Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of androgen signaling axis and tumor suppressive
function of miR-149-5p in prostate cancer.


Prostate cancer growth and proliferation depends on androgen signaling
mediated by transactivation of Androgen Receptor (AR). Androgen ablation
remains the mainstay therapy for treatment of the disease. However,
despite androgen ablation, the disease relapses to more aggressive form
known as castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Androgen Signaling
Inhibitor such as Abiraterone Acetate and Enzalutamide are the most
effective treatment methods currently being used to treat CRPC. However,
more than one-third of CRPC patients develop resistance to these
treatments, mostly due to the gain of function in the AR protein and
increase in intratumoral dihydrotestosterone (DHT) synthesis.
Intratumoral DHT synthesis from steroid precursors in tumors is augmented
by up-regulation of enzymes of cholestrogenesis and steroidogenesis, such
as HMG-CoA reductase, SCARB1, and 17Î²HSD respectively. Tumor-specific
downregulation of microRNAs which regulate the AR and steroid
biosynthesis has been implicated in tumor growth and resistance to
therapeutics in CRPC. We are focusing on tumor suppressive role of
miR-149-5p in PCa. We discovered that miR-149-5p expression was
significantly lower in prostate cancer tissues compared to normal
tissues. The mechanistic investigation revealed that miR-149-5p
downregulates wild type and alternatively spliced variant of AR. It also
down regulates the expression of SCARB1, HMGCS and HMG-CoA reductase, the
proteins known to facilitate intratumoral DHT synthesis. Ectopic
expression of miR-149-5p negatively regulated the expression of
prostate-specific antigen, a downstream target of androgen signaling and
it also inhibited invasion and proliferation of CRPC cells. Our findings
indicate a significant role of miR-149-5p in regulating androgen
signaling and possibly DHT synthesis in CRPC. This provides a strong
rationale for further investigating the significance of miR-149-5p for
generation of new therapeutic for CRPC.


