Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stage 1 in vivo evaluation of multi-receptor tyrosine-kinase
inhibitor lenvatinib in osteosarcoma patient derived mouse xenograft
models.


Background: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone tumor in
children and young adults. Over the past three decades improvement in
outcomes for children with OS have remained stagnant. Novel therapies are
needed to improve outcomes for these patients. Lenvatinib is an oral
small-molecule tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI), targeting multiple
receptors including VEGFR1-3, FGFR 1-4, PDGFRÎ±, RET, and c-kit. Prior
studies have shown that PDGFR-VEGF/VEGFR and FGFR3 are overexpressed in
human OS cell lines. Lenvatinib is FDA-approved for the treatment of
differentiated thyroid cancer, and, in combination with mTOR inhibitor
everolimus, for the treatment of renal cell carcinoma. The current study
assessed the in vivo efficacy of lenvatinib in osteosarcoma xenograft
models.

Materials and Methods: Single agent lenvatinib was tested against 5
well-established osteosarcoma patient derived mouse xenograft models.
Lenvatinib was administered using a dose of 7.5mg/kg given by oral route
daily (5/7 days) for 6 weeks or until study endpoints were met. Tumor
volume and mouse body weight were measured bi-weekly. Tumor volume was
compared to baseline tumor volume to calculate the relative tumor volume
(RTV). The RTV was compared between the control and experimental groups
utilizing the student t-test. P-values Materials and Methods: Single
agent lenvatinib was tested against 5 well-established osteosarcoma
patient derived mouse xenograft models. Lenvatinib was administered using
a dose of 7.5mg/kg given by oral route daily (5/7 days) for 6 weeks or
until study endpoints were met. Tumor volume and mouse body weight were
measured bi-weekly. Tumor volume was compared to baseline tumor volume to
calculate the relative tumor volume (RTV). The RTV was compared between
the control and experimental groups utilizing the student t-test.
P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant. Additional
statistical analyses were conducted as per the Pediatric Preclinical
Testing Program analysis plan.

Results: Lenvatinib was generally well tolerated in vivo, without noted
toxicity in any of the treated animals. Lenvatinib treatment led to
delayed tumor progression in 4/5 models tested. Relative tumor volumes in
the treatment group compared to the control group at week 3 in xenografts
OS1, OS2, OS17, OS31, and OS33 were 0.77 (p=0.013), 0.88 (p=0.147), 0.49
(pResults: Lenvatinib was generally well tolerated in vivo, without noted
toxicity in any of the treated animals. Lenvatinib treatment led to
delayed tumor progression in 4/5 models tested. Relative tumor volumes in
the treatment group compared to the control group at week 3 in xenografts
OS1, OS2, OS17, OS31, and OS33 were 0.77 (p=0.013), 0.88 (p=0.147), 0.49
(p<0.001), 0.66 (pResults: Lenvatinib was generally well tolerated in
vivo, without noted toxicity in any of the treated animals. Lenvatinib
treatment led to delayed tumor progression in 4/5 models tested. Relative
tumor volumes in the treatment group compared to the control group at
week 3 in xenografts OS1, OS2, OS17, OS31, and OS33 were 0.77 (p=0.013),
0.88 (p=0.147), 0.49 (p<0.001), 0.66 (p<0.001), and 0.40 (pResults:
Lenvatinib was generally well tolerated in vivo, without noted toxicity
in any of the treated animals. Lenvatinib treatment led to delayed tumor
progression in 4/5 models tested. Relative tumor volumes in the treatment
group compared to the control group at week 3 in xenografts OS1, OS2,
OS17, OS31, and OS33 were 0.77 (p=0.013), 0.88 (p=0.147), 0.49 (p<0.001),
0.66 (p<0.001), and 0.40 (p<0.001), respectively. Despite delayed
progression observed in the OS xenografts treated with lenvatinib, all
groups experienced progressive disease by the end of the study period.

Conclusions: Single agent lenvatinib demonstrates consistent anti-tumor
activity in osteosarcoma patient derived mouse xenograft models.
Preclinical studies, as well as clinical trials, have demonstrated the
efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibition in combination with inhibition of
mTOR in a variety of malignancies. The current study, along with prior
data, suggests that targeting receptor tyrosine kinases, in addition to
mTOR, may lead to more effective inhibition of osteosarcoma cell growth.
Ongoing studies are assessing the efficacy of lenvatinib, administered in
combination with mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, in osteosarcoma patient
derived mouse xenografts.


