Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 6-diazo-5-oxo-norleucine resistant MYC-driven medulloblastoma
tumors are sensitive to inhibition of glutaminase suggesting a possible
glutaminase-independent mechanism of resistance.


Increased MYC levels can alter cellular metabolism, creating a reliance
on glutamine. Glutamine PET and MRI spectroscopy demonstrate that
aggressive brain malignancies have increased uptake of glutamine and
increased glutamate relative to normal brain, suggesting that agents
targeting glutamine metabolism may be active in brain tumors.
6-diazo-5-oxo norleucine (DON) is a glutamine analog that was tested
extensively in adult and pediatric malignancies but never advanced beyond
phase I clinical trials. We hypothesized that DON would be effective
against the MYC-driven subgroup of the pediatric brain tumor
medulloblastoma. DON treatment increased the median survival of mice
bearing D425Med xenografts by 246 percent (26 days for vehicle treated
mice compared to 90 days DON treated mice, p=0.0018) and the median
survival of mice bearing the MYC-driven patient derived xenograft MED211
by 80 percent (49 days for vehicle treated mice compared to 88 days for
DON treated mice, p=0.0017). We also tested DON prodrugs designed for
improved oral bioavailability and CNS penetration. Our novel DON prodrugs
increased the median survival of mice bearing MYC-driven D425MED
orthotopic xenografts by 60 percent (22 days for vehicle treated mice
compared to 35 days for prodrug treated mice, pIncreased MYC levels can
alter cellular metabolism, creating a reliance on glutamine. Glutamine
PET and MRI spectroscopy demonstrate that aggressive brain malignancies
have increased uptake of glutamine and increased glutamate relative to
normal brain, suggesting that agents targeting glutamine metabolism may
be active in brain tumors. 6-diazo-5-oxo norleucine (DON) is a glutamine
analog that was tested extensively in adult and pediatric malignancies
but never advanced beyond phase I clinical trials. We hypothesized that
DON would be effective against the MYC-driven subgroup of the pediatric
brain tumor medulloblastoma. DON treatment increased the median survival
of mice bearing D425Med xenografts by 246 percent (26 days for vehicle
treated mice compared to 90 days DON treated mice, p=0.0018) and the
median survival of mice bearing the MYC-driven patient derived xenograft
MED211 by 80 percent (49 days for vehicle treated mice compared to 88
days for DON treated mice, p=0.0017). We also tested DON prodrugs
designed for improved oral bioavailability and CNS penetration. Our novel
DON prodrugs increased the median survival of mice bearing MYC-driven
D425MED orthotopic xenografts by 60 percent (22 days for vehicle treated
mice compared to 35 days for prodrug treated mice, p<0.01). In non-human
primates, our DON prodrugs exhibited superior 10-fold enhanced CSF/plasma
ratio versus regular DON. Though DON treatment causes a dramatic increase
in survival, resistance eventually develops. To investigate the mechanism
of DON resistance, we tested the effect of other glutamine metabolic
inhibitors on multiple cell lines generated from DON-resistant
xenografts. DON-resistant xenograft derived cell lines maintained DON
resistance in culture, but were sensitive to treatment with the
glutaminase inhibitor compound 968 and the glutamine analog Acivicin.
Compound 968 treatment decreased growth of DON-resistant cell lines by an
average of 79 percent (pIncreased MYC levels can alter cellular
metabolism, creating a reliance on glutamine. Glutamine PET and MRI
spectroscopy demonstrate that aggressive brain malignancies have
increased uptake of glutamine and increased glutamate relative to normal
brain, suggesting that agents targeting glutamine metabolism may be
active in brain tumors. 6-diazo-5-oxo norleucine (DON) is a glutamine
analog that was tested extensively in adult and pediatric malignancies
but never advanced beyond phase I clinical trials. We hypothesized that
DON would be effective against the MYC-driven subgroup of the pediatric
brain tumor medulloblastoma. DON treatment increased the median survival
of mice bearing D425Med xenografts by 246 percent (26 days for vehicle
treated mice compared to 90 days DON treated mice, p=0.0018) and the
median survival of mice bearing the MYC-driven patient derived xenograft
MED211 by 80 percent (49 days for vehicle treated mice compared to 88
days for DON treated mice, p=0.0017). We also tested DON prodrugs
designed for improved oral bioavailability and CNS penetration. Our novel
DON prodrugs increased the median survival of mice bearing MYC-driven
D425MED orthotopic xenografts by 60 percent (22 days for vehicle treated
mice compared to 35 days for prodrug treated mice, p<0.01). In non-human
primates, our DON prodrugs exhibited superior 10-fold enhanced CSF/plasma
ratio versus regular DON. Though DON treatment causes a dramatic increase
in survival, resistance eventually develops. To investigate the mechanism
of DON resistance, we tested the effect of other glutamine metabolic
inhibitors on multiple cell lines generated from DON-resistant
xenografts. DON-resistant xenograft derived cell lines maintained DON
resistance in culture, but were sensitive to treatment with the
glutaminase inhibitor compound 968 and the glutamine analog Acivicin.
Compound 968 treatment decreased growth of DON-resistant cell lines by an
average of 79 percent (p<0.0008), and Acivicin treatment decreased growth
by an average of 78 percent (pIncreased MYC levels can alter cellular
metabolism, creating a reliance on glutamine. Glutamine PET and MRI
spectroscopy demonstrate that aggressive brain malignancies have
increased uptake of glutamine and increased glutamate relative to normal
brain, suggesting that agents targeting glutamine metabolism may be
active in brain tumors. 6-diazo-5-oxo norleucine (DON) is a glutamine
analog that was tested extensively in adult and pediatric malignancies
but never advanced beyond phase I clinical trials. We hypothesized that
DON would be effective against the MYC-driven subgroup of the pediatric
brain tumor medulloblastoma. DON treatment increased the median survival
of mice bearing D425Med xenografts by 246 percent (26 days for vehicle
treated mice compared to 90 days DON treated mice, p=0.0018) and the
median survival of mice bearing the MYC-driven patient derived xenograft
MED211 by 80 percent (49 days for vehicle treated mice compared to 88
days for DON treated mice, p=0.0017). We also tested DON prodrugs
designed for improved oral bioavailability and CNS penetration. Our novel
DON prodrugs increased the median survival of mice bearing MYC-driven
D425MED orthotopic xenografts by 60 percent (22 days for vehicle treated
mice compared to 35 days for prodrug treated mice, p<0.01). In non-human
primates, our DON prodrugs exhibited superior 10-fold enhanced CSF/plasma
ratio versus regular DON. Though DON treatment causes a dramatic increase
in survival, resistance eventually develops. To investigate the mechanism
of DON resistance, we tested the effect of other glutamine metabolic
inhibitors on multiple cell lines generated from DON-resistant
xenografts. DON-resistant xenograft derived cell lines maintained DON
resistance in culture, but were sensitive to treatment with the
glutaminase inhibitor compound 968 and the glutamine analog Acivicin.
Compound 968 treatment decreased growth of DON-resistant cell lines by an
average of 79 percent (p<0.0008), and Acivicin treatment decreased growth
by an average of 78 percent (p<0.00003). Glutaminase catalyzes the first
step in glutamine metabolism--the conversion of glutamine to glutamate.
The sensitivity of DON-resistant cells to glutaminase inhibition
indicates continued tumor reliance on glutaminase activity. We are
continuing to investigate the mechanism DON resistance, with the goal of
developing a rational combinatorial therapy to treat resistant tumors.
This knowledge could increase the potential utility of DON as a clinical
agent.


