Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A high-throughput process for the development and characterization
of chimeric antigen receptors (CARs).


INTRODUCTION: Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) expressed by T cells bind
to surface antigens via a single-chain variable fragment (scFv) and are
able to elicit potent anti-tumor efficacy. To our knowledge no rapid CAR
development platforms exist to facilitate the high-throughput generation
and characterization of novel CARs to allow head-to-head comparisons and
to determine the influence of scFv properties on CAR T cell activation,
phenotype, and persistence.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES: We have established a rapid process for the
development of functional novel CARs using fully human antibody phage
display, vector systems for bacterial and mammalian expression, as well
as high-throughput functional and biochemical characterization assays. We
validated individual parts of the workflow using different tumor antigens
and completed the entire workflow for one model antigen expressed on the
surface of multiple myeloma cells. An initial population of scFvs against
the model antigen was selected from a large na√Øve fully-human antibody
phage display library by panning. The reactivity of the polyclonal phage
population was then confirmed by time-resolved fluorescence before
reformatting into various monoclonal binder formats. We established a
high-throughput flow cytometry assay simultaneously determining CAR
surface expression and antigen binding. In addition, we adapted protocols
for small-scale lentiviral transduction and expansion of primary CAR T
cells followed by a sensitive, high-throughput luciferase-based
cytotoxicity assay. Finally, in collaboration with Wasatch Microfluidics
we performed high-throughput surface plasmon resonance measurements as
well as epitope binning of candidate binding domains.

RESULTS: We obtained 1,323 scFvs after two rounds of antibody phage
selection. The subsequent bacterial screen of 163 clones identified 23
unique monoclonal binders. In a comparison of all 23 binders in different
formats we determined that none of the traditional screening formats,
including soluble scFv or scFv-Fc fusion constructs, correlated with CAR
binding. CAR constructs with high expression and antigen binding were
found to have affinities in the low nanomolar range (18-22nM) and
evidenced strong killing of human cancer cell lines spontaneously
expressing the antigen (53-79% killing at an effector:target ratio of
10:1), but not healthy cells expressing lower levels of the antigen.
Importantly, in a murine xenograft model of multiple myeloma we observed
specific killing of tumor cells and no overt toxicities.

CONCLUSION: We show that our process allows the generation, screening, as
well as functional and biochemical characterization of novel CARs within
2 months. Our approach enables researchers to easily carry out
head-to-head comparisons allowing comprehensive lead identification and
the determination of binding domain properties which may shape CAR T cell
function and phenotype.


