Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAPK pathway mutations in head and neck cancer and its clinical
significance.


The PI3K pathway is the most frequently mutated mitogenic pathway in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) [1]. Clinical testings of PI3K
inhibitors are ongoing based on the mutational status of the patients’
tumors. Second to the PI3K pathway, the MAPK pathway mutations are
commonly found in 16% (83/510 cases) of HNSCC primary tumors (TCGA,
Provisional), with the pathway components defined as: GRB2 SHC1 SHC2 SHC3
HRAS KRAS NRAS ARAF BRAF RAF1 DUSP1 DUSP4 MAP2K1 MAP2K2 MAPK1 MAPK3
RPS6KA1 RPS6KA4 RPS6KA5. Similar to the PI3K pathway, mutations of the
entire MAPK pathway gene components are not associated with patient
overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) (p=n.s.). With
HRAS, MAPK1, BRAF and RPS6KA1 gene mutations being most commonly mutated
in 6%, 1.7%, 1.7% and 1.7% in the US-TCGA cohort, we conducted survival
analyses of each of the mutated gene component alone to examine their
individual clinical correlation based on the available clinical data. Our
results show that HRAS mutation, BRAF mutation and RPS6KA1 mutation do
not associate with patient OS nor DFS (OS: P=0.285, P=0.300 and P=0.197,
respectively; DFS: P=0.714, P=0.995 and P=0.0786 respectively). This is
similar to the findings that PIK3CA mutation alone is also not associated
with HNSCC patient OS (P=0.976), nor DFS (P=0.469). MAPK1 mutation alone
shows a trend for better OS (P=0.162) in this TCGA cohort.

Notably, MAP2K2(or MEK-2)-mutated patients show a trend for poor OS
(P=0.0768), and a subset of HNSCC patients with MAP2K2-mutation/or
overexpression (RNA seq, Expression >5 SD) has very poor OS (P=0.00459,
with median survival of 18.53 months vs. 56.9 months in the
MAP2K2-unaltered group), as well as significantly poorer DFS (P=0.0188;
median time to progression= 17.05 vs. 67.74 months). Our findings first
implicate that MAP2K2 activation by genomic events may contribute to HNC
tumorigenesis and progression. However, MAP2K1 (also called MEK1) mutated
patients only show a weak trend for better OS (P= 0.216). Lastly, we note
that except

for MAP2K2, patients with somatic mutations of multiple positive
regulators of the MAPK pathway (RAF1 MAP2K1 MAPK1 HRAS BRAF) are
associated with significant better OS (p=0.0293). Proteomic analysis
suggests that mutations of these MAPK positive regulators are associated
with downregulation of snai1 (P=2.8x10-7; via cbioportal) and, likely a
pan-downregulation of multiple components of the PI3K/AKT signaling in
patients’ tumors.

Acknowledgements:

VWYL is funded by the Research Grant Council, Hong Kong (#17114814,
General Research Fund), Theme-based Research Scheme (T12-401/13-R), and
the Start-up Fund from the School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Reference:

1. Lui, V.W., et al., Frequent mutation of the PI3K pathway in head and
neck cancer defines predictive biomarkers. Cancer Discov, 2013. 3(7): p.
761-9.


