Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to BET inhibitors involves the β-catenin pathway in
uveal melanoma.


Uveal melanoma (UM) is an aggressive intraocular malignancy with high
tendency to metastasize to the liver. Currently available drugs have
shown limited clinical activity in patients with UM and there is an
urgent need for new effective therapies. Recent findings from our
laboratory demonstrated that UM cells are sensitive to BET inhibitors
(BETi) through the induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. However,
despite the initial inhibitory effects, UM cells acquire resistance to
this class of drugs following chronic drug exposure. In order to
understand the mechanistic basis for BETi resistance in UM, we assessed
genome-wide CpG methylation patterns in UM cell lines that had been
rendered resistant to the clinical BET inhibitor PLX51107 (Plexxikon,
Berkeley, CA) following chronic drug exposure. The comparison between BET
inhibitor-resistant versus sensitive cell lines revealed differential
methylation of 1700 genes, including several involved in Wnt/β-catenin
signaling, as well as other signaling pathways. Immunoblotting analysis
confirmed that β-catenin protein was induced and activated in the
resistant cells, while depletion of β-catenin by siRNA re-sensitized the
resistant cells to the BET inhibitor. We then explored several
combinations of PLX51107 with drugs that block β-catenin transcriptional
activity through inhibition of its phosphorylation by PAK4 or through the
inhibition of binding partners like Cdk8 and CBP. All these combinations
increased the activity of the BET inhibitor in both sensitive and
resistant cells, and these effects were synergistic, with combination
indexes (CI) Uveal melanoma (UM) is an aggressive intraocular malignancy
with high tendency to metastasize to the liver. Currently available drugs
have shown limited clinical activity in patients with UM and there is an
urgent need for new effective therapies. Recent findings from our
laboratory demonstrated that UM cells are sensitive to BET inhibitors
(BETi) through the induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. However,
despite the initial inhibitory effects, UM cells acquire resistance to
this class of drugs following chronic drug exposure. In order to
understand the mechanistic basis for BETi resistance in UM, we assessed
genome-wide CpG methylation patterns in UM cell lines that had been
rendered resistant to the clinical BET inhibitor PLX51107 (Plexxikon,
Berkeley, CA) following chronic drug exposure. The comparison between BET
inhibitor-resistant versus sensitive cell lines revealed differential
methylation of 1700 genes, including several involved in Wnt/β-catenin
signaling, as well as other signaling pathways. Immunoblotting analysis
confirmed that β-catenin protein was induced and activated in the
resistant cells, while depletion of β-catenin by siRNA re-sensitized the
resistant cells to the BET inhibitor. We then explored several
combinations of PLX51107 with drugs that block β-catenin transcriptional
activity through inhibition of its phosphorylation by PAK4 or through the
inhibition of binding partners like Cdk8 and CBP. All these combinations
increased the activity of the BET inhibitor in both sensitive and
resistant cells, and these effects were synergistic, with combination
indexes (CI) <1. These observations support the evidence that acquired
resistant to BET inhibitors is mediated, at least in part, by activation
of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, and inhibitors of this pathway may provide
a means to overcome acquired BET inhibitor resistance in UM patients
treated with this class of drugs.


