Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome sequencing of pediatric hepatocellular carcinoma
reveals genomic events involving APC and TERT.


Background: The goal of this project is to molecularly characterize a
cohort of pediatric HCCs in order to understand the spectrum of genetic
drivers for this disease. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a rare
pediatric liver tumor with a poor prognosis. The fibrolamellar variant of
HCC (FL-HCC) has a characteristic DNAJB1-PRKACA gene fusion. In
non-FL-HCC a genetic cause has not been identified. We hypothesize that
alterations in known cancer genes play a role in non-FL-HCC tumorigenesis.

Methods: We have used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on fresh frozen tissue to
survey a cohort of 8 FL-HCCs, 4 pediatric HCCs, and 6 normal liver
samples for chimeric transcripts. Fusion transcripts in the tumor samples
were detected using deFuse on FASTQ files followed by subtraction of
fusions called in the normal liver dataset. Fusions were verified using
BLAST and validated by RT-PCR. On average the deFuse algorithm predicted
150 fusion transcripts per tumor; filtering by normal liver reduced the
number of calls in the tumors by ~60%. As expected, DNAJB1-PRKACA fusions
were identified in the FL-HCC cohort with no additional fusions.
Filtering by the COSMIC Cancer Gene Census list reduced the total number
of fusion calls to 5 for the HCC dataset (3 unique events, 2 of which
were confirmed by RT-PCR).

Results: The first event is an inversion disrupting APC, resulting in two
in-frame fusion transcripts between APC and AP3B1. This fusion was
confirmed and the intronic breakpoints were mapped in tumor and germline
DNA through WGS by 10X GenomicsÂ®. Variant calling by Platypus on tumor
RNA-seq reads did not identify additional variants in APC. Reports of
inversion of APC are rare, however we have identified an additional
published case of APC inversion in a patient with pediatric HCC. We will
perform WGS on germline DNA from this patient to determine if the APC
inversion breakpoint is recurrent. The second event is a deletion
encompassing the TERT promoter and results in an in-frame fusion between
TERT and LPCAT1. An increase in TERT expression is seen in this tumor as
compared to both normal liver and other pediatric HCCs.

Conclusions: The detection of chimeric transcripts by RNA-seq has allowed
us to identify two structural variants involving known cancer genes in
two tumors, including an inversion of APC which have been historically
difficult to detect. These events present a possible genetic cause for
these tumors and provide genes for further analysis in the remaining
cases with no identified fusions. These results will inform future
studies as we expand this cohort to include 18 additional pediatric HCCs
which we plan to characterize through NGS and targeted sequencing.


