Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BPM31510, an anti-cancer agent selectively causes activation and
proliferation of T cells, demonstrating potential utility in an
immune-oncology setting.


BPM 31510, a clinical stage, nanodispersion of ubidecarenone has a unique
mechanism of action that effectuates an anti-Warburg switch in cancer
cell metabolism and activation of apoptosis. Given the observed central
role of BPM 31510 in regulating mitochondrial function in cancer cells,
it is of great interest to investigate the ability of BPM 31510 to
modulate immune cells and their functionality. Therefore, the effects of
BPM 31510 on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were investigated
to elucidate the immuno-metabolic mechanism of BPM 31510. Healthy donor
PBMCs activated with PHA or PWM was used as model system, and the effect
of BPM 31510 on immune cells viability was determined using flow
cytometry. In addition, the effect of BPM31510 on immune cell function
was evaluated by measuring a panel cytokines released in these cells,
using a quantitative ELISA platform from Meso Scale Discovery.

Results: BPM 31510 has been shown in previous studies to effectively
induce apoptosis on a variety of cancer cell lines while sparing normal
cells. Interestingly, increasing concentrations of BPM31510 lead to an
increased frequency of viable CD3+ cells. Further phenotypic analysis
revealed that cytotoxic T cells (CD8+/CD3+) and T helper cells
(CD4+/CD3+), as well as NKT cells (CD56+/CD3+) contributed to the
observed increase in T cells frequency. On the other hand, B cells
(CD19+), NK cells (CD56+/CD3-), and the monocytes (CD14+) showed a
decrease in frequency, an effect reflected also by a reduction in
viability with increasing BPM 31510 concentrations. Cytokine analysis
indicated that effector cytokines IL-2, IFN-γ, and TNF- α were secreted
at significantly higher levels with increasing concentration of BPM
31510. Interestingly, IL-10 level, an immuno-regulatory cytokine, was
strongly decreased in the supernatant of PBMCs treated with BPM31510.
Taken together, we demonstrated that BPM 31510 has a direct effect on
immune cells and their functionality. Although BPM 31510 induced
apoptosis of cancer cells, our data indicate that it supports cell
proliferation of T cells, and effector function of adaptive immune cells,
likely by providing a higher energy supply for effector T cells.
Subsequently, a higher activation state of effector T cells may result in
increased levels of cytotoxic effector molecules (perforin, granzymes,
Fas ligand) and macrophage activating effector molecules (IFN-γ, IL-2,
TNF-α) which supports and attracts other immune cells like NK cells to
the tumor.


