Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The design and characterization of a selective TRIM24 degrader.


A fundamental biological understanding of the individual contributions of
functional domains within multidomain proteins is critical to inform
therapeutic approaches to targeting mechanisms driving human disease.
TRIM24 is a multi-domain protein that has been broadly characterized as a
co-regulator of transcription. It is therapeutically relevant as it is
implicated as a dependency in many human cancers, however, the potent and
selective inhibitors of the TRIM24 bromodomain do not have
well-characterized phenotypic consequences. Where inhibition of one
activity of a protein does not appear to be efficacious, chemical
knockdown tools allow for the acute depletion of the entire protein,
therefore eliminating all protein activities. In this study, we have used
chemical degradation as one strategy to target the entire TRIM24 protein,
where we have shown that a bifunctional degrader molecule hijacks the
ubiquitin ligase machinery for targeted TRIM24 degradation. We have shown
that TRIM24 degradation is required to perturb the oncogenic state in
leukemia. In this context, TRIM24 degradation rather than bromodomain
inhibition alone is required to displace TRIM24 from chromatin. Using
this probe, a further understanding of the contribution of TRIM24 domains
to its transcriptional activation function will provide mechanistic
insight as to how TRIM24 promotes a gene expression program permissive of
the oncogenic state, as well as inform a therapeutic approach to target
multidomain proteins, such as TRIM24, that are tightly linked to disease.


