Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel MGMT variant association in Mexican patients with
astrocytoma.


Introduction: Astrocytomas are the most common and lethal brain tumors
with a median survival of 15 months. Different biomarkers have arisen to
classify and treat this type of tumors; one of these markers is MGMT. The
methylation status of this gene is a prognostic and predictive factor.
The MGMT (O-6-Methylguanine-DNA Methyltransferase) is involved in the
cellular response to the effects of O6-methylguanine (O6-MeG) in DNA.
Repairs alkylated guanine in DNA by transferring the alkyl group at the
O-6 position to a cysteine residue in the enzyme. The dysregulation of
this methylation is critical in the development of certain cancers.

Objective: To identify germinal MGMT gene variations in patients with
astrocytoma.

Material and methods: 55 randomly selected Mexican patients diagnosed
with astrocytoma between 2008-2014 were consented to perform the
molecular analysis of the whole gene and 5´UTR and 3´UTR regions of
MGMT at Ion Torrent platform. Each amplified region had a depth of
minimum 1500x. Ion Reporter software was used to analyze the genetic
variants and using Integrative Genomic Viewer we confirmed that each
variant had a Phred higher than 25. Genotypic frequencies were compared
with HapMapMex and Mexican ancestry population from the 1000 Genomes
project.

Results. In lymphocytes DNA, eight genetic variants were found, and two
of them were statistically significant risk factors: rs7896488
alternative allele A with a frequency of 15% in patients with
astrocytoma, and only 4% of the control group (OR=5.53, IC 1.96-15.59 p =
0.0007) and rs2308326 ancestral allele C, where 93% of the patients were
carriers of allele C in contrast with 73% of controls (OR=5.39, IC
2.29-12.69 p = 0.000019). These variants are non-coding single nucleotide
polymorphisms, rs7896488 is a 3' UTR genetic variant, while rs2308326 is
an intronic variant.

Conclusion: Our study found two new risk SNV for Astrocytoma in a Mexican
population.


