Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of disseminated prostate tumor cells in bone marrow
during radical prostatectomy from patients with localized prostate cancer.


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES In prostate cancer, disseminated tumor cells
(DTC) can escape the primary lesion and enter the bone marrow (BM) niche,
representing an initial step towards conventionally detectable
metastasis. The frequency of occurrence is elusive in clinically
localized prostate cancer. We detected and characterized these cells by
measuring gene expression of prostate-specific markers from BM samples
collected at the time of radical prostatectomy (RP).

METHODS 5 mL of BM were harvested at RP for 36 clinically localized
patients. A whole cell extract was assayed with the AdnaTest
ProstateCancerSelect kit (Qiagen). Reverse transcription (SensiScript RT
kit, Qiagen) and real-time qPCR quantified expression of RPL13A (control,
ribosomal protein), EPCAM (epithelial), NKX3.1 and HOXB13
(prostate-specific), and AR-FL (androgen receptor full length). Prostate
markers known to be less sensitive or specific were also assayed in a
subset of patients (TMPRSS2-ERG, AR-V7, PSA, and PSMA). DTC detection was
defined as prostate-specific marker expression in the BM. Quality control
was performed with Sanger sequencing. The associations of PSA and Gleason
score (GS) with DTC detection were evaluated with the Mann-Whitney U Test
and Fisherâ€™s exact test respectively.

RESULTS DTC were detected via NKX3.1 expression in 30/36 patients (83%).
100% of patients were EPCAM+, consistent with the known non-specific
expression of EPCAM in the BM. HOXB13, AR-V7, and TMPRSS2-ERG were not
detected in any sample. AR-FL was also non-specifically expressed in 67%
of NKX3.1+ and 83% of NKX3.1- patients. There was a pattern with DTC
detection and higher PSA and GS, with 100% of NKX3.1- patients having
low-risk PSA less than 10, and only one with primary GS greater than 3
(17%, 1/6). Conversely 47% (14/30) of NKX3.1+ patients had primary GS
greater than or equal to 4, and 27% (8/30) had PSA greater than 10. Yet,
this was not statistically significant (GS p=0.367, PSA p=0.302), and DTC
were detected across all Gleason scores.

CONCLUSIONS DTC were detected based on NKX3.1 positivity in a large
portion of clinically localized prostate cancer patients at all Gleason
scores. Ongoing investigation with healthy patient BM will clarify
whether NKX3.1 is truly prostate-specific, and if its expression
associates with clinico-pathologic outcomes.


