Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in ataxia
telangiectasia patients reveals tight link between ATM mutations and
chromothripsis.


Recent developments in sequencing technologies lead to the discovery of a
novel form of genome instability, termed chromothripsis. This
catastrophic genomic event, involved in cancer formation, is
characterized by tens to hundreds of locally clustered rearrangements on
one chromosome, acquired simultaneously. We hypothesized that leukemias
developing in individuals with Ataxia Telangiectasia, who are born with
two mutated copies of the ATM gene, essential guardian of genome
stability, would show a higher prevalence for chromothripsis due to the
defect in DNA double-strand break repair. Using whole-genome sequencing,
fluorescence in situ hybridization and RNA sequencing, we characterized
the genomic landscape of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) in patients
with Ataxia Telangiectasia. We detected a high frequency of
chromothriptic events in these tumors, specifically on acrocentric
chromosomes, as compared to tumors from individuals with other types of
DNA repair syndromes (27 cases in total, of which 10 with Ataxia
Telangiectasia). Our data show that the genomic landscape of Ataxia
Telangiectasia ALL is clearly distinct from that of sporadic ALL.
Mechanistically, short telomeres and compromised DNA damage response in
cells of Ataxia Telangiectasia patients are linked with frequent
chromotripsis. Additionally, we show that ATM loss is associated with
increased chromothripsis prevalence in further tumor entities.


