Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: African polyherbal formulation alleviates benzene-induced leukemia
in Wistar rats.


Background: Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are effective cancer treatment
options but they are accompanied by serious side effects. Therefore, more
effective therapies are sorely needed. This study investigated the
chemotherapeutic effects of a polyherbal formulation on benzene induced
leukemia in Wistar rats. The polyherbal formulation is composed of fruits
such as Orange, Lime, Lemon, Pineapple, Grape and Vegetables like;
Pumpkin leave, Garden egg in honey medium.

Method: Leukemia was induced by injecting 0.2 ml of benzene solution
intravenously through the tail at 48 h intervals for four weeks. Leukemia
developed in 92% of rats within 2 to 4 weeks after the last benzene
injection and further observed for leukemia development in appropriate
rat groups. Leukemia burden was assessed using indicator parameters such
as total leukocyte, red blood cell count, hematocrit, and hemoglobin
concentration. Immunophenotyping enumeration of CD 19 expression also
corroborated the leukemia assessment by providing specific cellular
marker for differentiation of the developed leukemia type. Exactly 0.48
ml of the polyherbal formulation was administered orally by gavage using
oral cannular once daily post leukemia induction for four weeks.

Results: Leukemia induction reflected in significant reduction in
hematocrit, hemoglobin concentration, red cell count and a marked and a
significant increase in leukocyte count and CD 19 expression over the
control (p Results: Leukemia induction reflected in significant reduction
in hematocrit, hemoglobin concentration, red cell count and a marked and
a significant increase in leukocyte count and CD 19 expression over the
control (p < 0.05). There is significant difference between the leukemia
group treated with polyherbal formulation and the leukemia positive
control group untreated.

Conclusion: This study reveals profound chemotherapeutic activity of the
polyherbal formulation against experimentally developed leukemia by
reversing the induced leukemia in the positive control rat group, hence
the ability of the polyherbal formulation in alleviating the cancer
symptoms.

Table1.Hematological parameters in polyherbal formulation treated
leukemia bearing Wistar rats.





Estimated parameters

Negative control rats

(Mean±SD)

Leukemia Positive rats. (Mean±SD)

Polyherbal formulation treated leukemic rats (Mean±SD)



CD 19 (X 109/L)

47.59±1.39

89.41±1.72

62.32 + 1.42*



Total Leukocyte count (X 109/L)

6.84 + 0.30

11.08 + 0.31

7.45 + 0.65*



Red blood cells(X 1012/L)

6.30 + 0.38

3.5 + 0.38

5.10 + 0.03*



Hematocrit (L/L)

0.43 + 0.17

0.26. + 0.20

0.37 + 0.08*



Hemoglobin (g/dl)

13.62 + 0.69

6.63 + 0.96

11.80 + 2.96*



Platelets (X 109/L)

554.80 + 92.23

389.50 + 146.10

425.10 + 60.8*





*Significance at p*Significance at p<0.05


