Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Coordinated chemical-genetics approach identifies PTP4A3-mediated
regulation of colon cancer cell migration and extracellular matrix
interactions.


Aberrant regulation of protein phosphorylation is an exceedingly common
driver of human cancers. It is notable that we understand much less about
the role of protein tyrosine phosphatases in human malignancies compared
to tyrosine kinases. The membrane-associated, intracellular, protein
tyrosine PTP4A3 is highly overexpressed in multiple tumor types including
colorectal cancer and has been associated with tumor metastases. We have,
therefore, investigated the role of PTP4A3 in colon cancer migration and
invasion. The Ptp4a3 gene was expunged from colon tumor cells derived
from Ptp4a3flox/flox mice and the resulting cells exhibited impaired
migration, invasion, and colony formation compared to the wildtype
isogenic cells. We characterized a potent, selective, and noncompetitive
small molecule inhibitor of PTP4A3, JMS-631-053, which also disrupted
colon cancer cell migration, invasion, and colony formation. PTP4A3
deletion increased the expression of extracellular matrix and adhesion
genes, including the tumor suppressor Emilin 1. Expression of these
extracellular matrix genes is mutually exclusive with PTP4A3 expression
in tumors derived from patients with colorectal cancer. These chemical
and biological reagents reveal a previously unknown communication between
the intracellular PTP4A3 phosphatase and the extracellular matrix and
support continued efforts to pharmacologically target PTP4A3 for cancer
therapy.


