Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the tumor microenvironment: inhibition of carbonic
anhydrase 9 impedes brain tumor initiating cell chemoresistance and
delays glioblastoma growth in vivo.


Brain tumor initiating cells (BTICs) are resistant to chemo- and
radiotherapy, providing a reservoir for tumor recurrence and a desirable
target for glioma treatments. Standard of care for glioblastoma (GBM;
grade IV astrocytoma) includes the chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide,
which prolongs life expectancy by months and is not curative. Prior
studies suggested the efficacy of chemotherapies including temozolomide
was increased by reducing expression of carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9). CA9
is a hypoxia responsive gene elevated in tumors that is important for
regulating intracellular pH and contributing to the acidic extracellular
microenvironment. After confirming basal and hypoxia-induced expression
of CA9 in GBM BTICs, we targeted CA9 activity with the small molecule
inhibitor SLC-0111 alone or in combination with temozolomide. In multiple
GBM BTIC lines, SLC-0111 reduced cell growth in vitro and showed
additional benefit when used concurrently with temozolomide. Importantly,
SLC-0111 inhibited the enrichment of BTICs after temozolomide treatment
as determined via BTIC marker expression and neurosphere formation
capacity. These data suggested the potential of SLC-0111 as a
chemosensitizer, which we next evaluated in preclinical studies using a
subcutaneous recurrent GBM model. GBMs treated with SLC-0111 in
combination with temozolomide significantly regressed and the resulting
in vivo growth delay was greater than that of temozolomide or SLC-0111
alone. Together, our data suggest that SLC-0111 can sensitize GBM BTICs
to the chemotherapy temozolomide and significantly delay disease
progression.


