Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of tumor treating fields on cell proliferation and
synergistic antitumor efficacy in combination with ionizing radiation.


Alternating electric fields at an intermediate frequency (100~300 kHz),
called tumor treating fields (TTFs), are reported to interrupt the
process of mitosis via apoptosis and to act as an inhibitor of cell
proliferation. Although the presence of an antimitotic effect of TTFs has
been widely reported, the efficacy of TTFs is still controversial issue
among medical experts. To resolve this controversial issue, the
comparison study between the effects of TTFs and the effect of other
conventional cancer treatment techniques need to be carried out. In this
study, experimental evidence of the synergistic antimitotic effect of
TTFs in combination with ionizing radiation (IR) is reported. For these
experiments, aggressive brain cancer cells, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
cells (U373 and U87), were treated either with TTFs alone, with IR alone
or with TTFs followed by ionizing radiation (IR). The percentages of cell
apoptosis, DNA damage, and mitotic abnormalities were increased by the
application of TTFs alone and its quantity was markedly increased when
TTFs were combined with IR. Our results also suggested that radiotherapy
together with TTFs may be clinically beneficial since the combination
treatment seemed to synergistically suppress both cell migration and
invasion, based on the inhibition of MMP-9 and vimentin.


