Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incidence rates and outcomes of fallopian tube carcinomas: Data
from the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries.


Background: Serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) is hypothesized
to give rise to many cancers that have been historically classified as
ovarian primaries. Although STIC is gaining status as a diagnostic
entity, similar appearing lesions would likely have been reported as
fallopian tubal carcinoma in-situ (FT-CIS) in the past. Accordingly to
characterize patterns of reporting and behavior for tubal cancers, we
analyzed population-based data for incidence rate trends, co-occurrence
with cancer at other sites and survival of FT-CIS and invasive fallopian
tube carcinoma (FT-Inv).

Methods: We analyzed data for FT-CIS and FT-Inv included within 33
registries using the Cancer Incidence in North America Deluxe Analytical
Files provided by the North American Association of Central Cancer
Registries (1995-2012). Primary site of invasive carcinomas were defined
according to the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology
(3rd edition) topography codes (ovarian (C56.9), fallopian tube (C57.0),
and primary peritoneal cancers (C48.1-.2, 48.8)). We excluded cancers
with non-epithelial histology. Total counts, incidence rates per 1
million adjusted to the 2000 standard US population and age-standardized
stage-specific survival were computed. Temporal incidence rate patterns
were analyzed by joinpoint regression with estimates of annual percentage
change (APC).

Results: Cases in which the first cancer diagnosis was FT-CIS, included
98 FT-CIS alone; 27 FT-CIS followed by another cancer diagnosis within 1
year and 172 cases in which FT-CIS was diagnosed concurrently with
another cancer as compared with 5513 invasive tubal carcinomas over the
same period. The incidence rate of FT-CIS was stable from 1995-2002, then
significantly increased from 2002-2012 [APC (95% CI) = 16.2%
(10.9-21.7)]. Rates of early stage high-grade serous FT-Inv increased
significantly from 2002-2012 [10.4% (6.1-14.9)] and rates of late stage
high-grade serous FT-Inv rose sharply from 2002-2012 [20.0% (17.5-22.6)].
Five-year age-standardized survival for women with FT-CIS only was 75.6%
overall, reflecting 89.1% survival for women less than 50 years and 70.9%
for women 50 years or older; survival for high-grade early stage serous
FT-Inv was 77.8%.

Conclusions: Diagnoses of FT-CIS and FT-Inv have increased dramatically,
likely reflecting changes in diagnostic pathology practice. Developing
standardized reporting for FT-CIS (and in the future, STIC) when present
with concurrent invasive cancer are needed, given that this occurs often.
Based on limited data, 5-year survival for FT-CIS and early stage FT-Inv
are similar, but future studies to evaluate data for STIC will be
required, which will likely be achievable only through national
registries that are large enough to capture sufficient cases.


