Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor regulates the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier to
fuel oncometabolism in prostate cancer.


The metabolic underpinnings of androgen receptor (AR)-driven growth in
prostate cancer (PCa) are underexplored, hindering the development of
strategies to leverage the metabolic properties differentiating PCa from
normal tissue. To this end, we discovered a subunit of the mitochondrial
pyruvate carrier (MPC), MPC2, is a direct AR target gene that is
increased in PCa specimens and associated with clinical outcomes. Our
observation suggests a targetable link between AR signaling and carbon
trafficking in PCa. Indeed, MPC inhibition delays proliferation and
alters metabolic properties in hormone sensitive and castrate resistant
AR-driven PCa models. Next, using 13C metabolic flux analysis coupled
with a reverse phase protein array, we determined MPC inhibition results
in activation of the eIF2Î±/ATF4 integrated stress response pathway to
partially compensate for MPC inhibition by coordinating increased
glutamine incorporation into the citric acid cycle. Therefore, to amplify
the effect of MPC inhibition, we restricted glutamine availability during
MPC inhibition and found this combination resulted in proliferative
arrest. Last, we extended our efforts in-vivo and demonstrated
combinatorial MPC/glutaminase inhibition resulted in a significant
reduction in castrate-resistant prostate tumor xenograft growth in mice
with no overt host toxicity. We anticipate our findings will accelerate
the development of clinical strategies to therapeutically manipulate
carbon flux to starve clinically lethal castrate-resistant PCa.


