Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the mutant p53-PARP-MCM chromatin axis as a
triple negative breast cancer replication stress target.


Approximately 15% of all breast cancer is triple-negative and of these
about 80% are found to have mutations in the gene for the tumor
suppressor p53 (TP53). Many TP53 mutations encode gain-of-function
oncogenic mutant p53 (GOF mtp53) protein. We used inducible knockdown of
endogenous GOF mtp53 in MDA-MB-468 cells in conjunction with stable
isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and subcellular
fractionation. We sequenced over 70,000 total peptides for chromatin and
cytoplasmic reciprocal data sets and were able to identify 3,010 unique
cytoplasmic fraction proteins and 3,403 unique chromatin fraction
proteins. We found that the heterohexomeric minichromosome maintenance
(MCM) complex (MCM 2-7) along with PARP are high mtp53-chromatin
associated pathways. When we depleted R273H mtp53 we found a large
reduction of the amount of MCM complex and PARP proteins on the
chromatin. Furthermore a direct mtp53-MCM2 interaction was detected.
Overexpressed mtp53, but not wild type p53, showed a protein-protein
interaction with MCM2 and MCM4. We treated cells with the PARP inhibitor
talazoparib and the alkylating agent temozolomide and detected
synergistic activation of apoptosis only in the presence of functional
MCM2-7 and mtp53. The mtp53-PARP-MCM axis has potential use as a
therapeutic and diagnostic target.


