Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenesis may result from multiple different combinations of a
small number of tumorigenic mutations.


Cancer is known to result from genetic mutations, both inherited and
somatic. Yet, decades of investigation and the availability of extensive
genomic data, have failed to reveal the specific mutations that directly
result in tumorigenesis for most cancers. One possible reason is that
tumorigenesis may result from one or more of multiple different
combinations of mutations, while investigators generally search for a
single set of mutations. A mathematical model of the probability of
“hitting” one of many possible combinations of a small number of
mutations was compared to the actual distribution of accumulated
mutations at diagnosis as reported on the cancer genome atlas (TCGA).
This “multi-combination multi-hit” model reproduces the distribution
of accumulated mutations from the TCGA database with surprising accuracy
(RMSD = 1.5%) for a model where one or more of 100 different possible
combinations of three mutations result in tumorigenesis. We speculate
that each of the three mutations affects one of the several genes in
three distinct cell proliferation control pathways, such as senescence,
apoptosis, autophagy and necrosis, and different combinations of
mutations affecting three of these pathways may result in tumorigenesis.
We have identified several such combinations for further investigation.


