Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting multiple immune checkpoints and their ligands using a
humanized mouse model of ovarian cancer.


We have recently reported that multiple immune checkpoints are expressed
in the TILs (tumor infiltrating T lymphocytes) and TALs (tumor associated
T lymphocytes) from a murine ovarian cancer model and that blockade of
one checkpoint pathway induces an upregulation of the other unblocked
checkpoints. We hypothesized that resistance to single agent blockade
(e.g. anti-PD1) is resulted from the compensatory upregulation of the
other pathways (e.g. CTLA4 or LAG-3). To test this hypothesis in human
ovarian cancer, we first examined the level of several immune checkpoints
and their ligands in TILs or TALs from ovarian cancer patients. In
addition to the highly expressed PD-1 and CTLA4, other checkpoint
molecules such as TIM3, LAG3, VISTA, and TIGIT are also elevated in TALs
as compared with control PBMC. The levels of multiple ligands for the
immune receptors in the tumor samples were also analyzed. To translate
the results from mice to humans, we developed several aggressive human
ovarian cancer cell lines from patient derived xenografts to test the
combinatorial checkpoint blockade strategies. Using a humanized mouse
model of ovarian cancer we observed that adaptive transfer of autologous
T cells in combination with checkpoint blockade of PD1 mildly delays
ovarian tumor growth. The effect of blocking PD-1 and CTLA-4 pathways on
tumor growth and the upregulation of other checkpoints are currently
underway.


