Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic variation discovery with GATK4.


The Genome Analysis Toolkit or GATK, developed at the Broad Institute, is
currently one of the most widely used software toolkits for germline
short variant discovery and genotyping in whole genome and exome data.
GATK4 is the next generation of GATK; it runs faster and covers more
ground, adding somatic SNVs, Indels and CNVs to its variant discovery
portfolio.

Given the breathtaking increase in the amount of genomic data produced in
recent years, GATK development has come to tackle multiple challenges: a)
reflect the cutting-edge of science in terms of depth as well as breadth
of analyses offered, b) scale to petabytes of data and c) provide a way
to navigate the tradeoff between turn-around-time and cost of analyses.
GATK4 addresses all of these challenges through a complete redesign and
reimplementation of the original GATK software.

This new version greatly expands the toolkit's scope of action within the
variant discovery space by improving somatic mutation calling and adding
copy number, structural variant and tumor-heterogeneity analysis tools.
For the established tools and algorithms composing the GATK Best
Practices pipelines for short variant discovery (including MuTect2, the
next generation of the DREAM challenge-winning somatic SNV caller MuTect,
developed originally in the Cancer Genome Analysis group at the Broad
Institute), GATK4 is a substantial upgrade that streamlines the tools'
operation, providing functionally equivalent results in a much faster
timeframe through greatly increased efficiency and leaner engineering.

Designed with cloud infrastructure in mind (although it still runs on
local infrastructure), GATK4 is implemented with support for Apache
Spark, makes key operations hundreds of times faster than previous
generations of GATK and comes with end-to-end pipeline implementations
that run out of the box on select cloud platforms.


