Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DCIS to invasive progression in breast cancer is delayed by
restoring CCN5.


Malignant progression of breast cancer from pre-invasive to invasive
lesions remains a mechanistically unknown event and a major challenge in
medical research. By revealing the mechanism of action, our new and
substantially different approach aims to demonstrate that CCN5/WISP2
might play a role in negative regulation of progression of pre-invasive
lesion ductal carcinoma in-situ (DCIS) to invasive carcinoma (IC). DCIS
to IC transition results primarily from the loss of the myoepithelial
cell (MEC) layer surrounding the breast ducts & lobules and basement
membrane (BM) degradation followed by invasion of cancer cells into the
surrounding stromal tissue and vasculature. It has been recently
discovered that CCN5, a matricellular protein, is highly expressed in
DCIS patient specimens and facilitates regression of aggressive
phenotypes. Our in-vitro studies with myoepithelial cell lines (MECs)
indicate that CCN5 may prevent the DCIS to IC transition through the
protection of the MEC layer. CCN5 performs itâ€™s protective role by
regulating sonic hedgehog (SHh) expression in MECs. It has been
previously shown in separate studies that Neuropilin1 (Nrp1) positively
regulates expression of SHh and Nrp1 is exclusively expressed in MEC
layer in breast tissues. An extension of our studies indicate that CCN5
might regulate the integrity of the mammary ductal architecture by
protecting the MEC layer through a novel Nrp1-SHh signaling axis.
Collectively, our studies indicate that regulating CCN5 expression level
in breast cancer tissues might help us controlling the rate of
progression of the disease from DCIS to an invasive stage.


