Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of L1TD1 suppresses Notch1 induced LINE1 methylation and
genomic stability.


The silencing of endogenous retrotransposon like LINE1 is critical for
the maintenance of genomic stability and the LINE-1 type transposase
domain containing 1 (L1TD1) gene possesses the repeated, putative LINE-1
RNA-binding domains and was hypothesized to regulate the activity of
LINE-1 through DNA methylation. To verify if L1TD1 is responsible for
LINE-1 silencing and the maintenance of somatic genome stability,
CRSPR/Cas9 system was used to knockout (KO) L1TD1 locus in gastric, colon
and breast cancer cells so as in the mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). We
observed that L1TD1 KO blocked the entrance of SUV39H1, histone methyl
transferase, into cell nuclear which suppressed the tri-methylation of
histone 3 at lysine 9 (H3k9me3) and LINE-1 methylation. A global
demethylation and reduced HP1Î± recruitment were also observed. The
global distribution of CTCF binding loci was also distorted as well as
the bivalent histone marks. Further, L1TD1 KO distorted normal
distribution of RassF1A expression, cytoskeleton conformation and
therefore cell stiffness. The MSC-to-neuron differentiation was also
blocked by the KO. Further, we found that overexpressed Notch-1 increased
DNA methylation within LINE1 promoter, and this increase was attenuated
by L1TD1 KO. Therefore, we conclude that the external signals like Notch1
affect L1NE1 methylation and genome stability through possible LINE1
interacting L1TD1. Since L1TD1 hypermethylation was observed in colon
(n=100), gastric (n=19) and breast (n=79) cancers, L1TD1 abnormality is
then a candidate for cancer biomarker. (Supported by:
MOST-105-2320-B-194-004, MOST-105-2314-B-182A-134, MOST Taiwan and
CMRPG6F0092, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan)


