Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRC2 mediated repression of SMARCA2 predicts for EZH2 inhibitor
activity in tumors with SWI/SNF mutations.


A synthetic lethality caused by EZH2 inhibition in the context of SNF5
mutations is supported by both preclinical and recent clinical data,
however the extent of the synthetic lethal relationship in the context of
other SWI/SNF subunit mutations is not well understood. We determined
that a subset of SMARCA4 mutant cancer models are sensitive to EZH2
inhibition. EZH2 inhibition resulted in a heterogenous phenotypic
response characterized by senescence and/or apoptosis amongst models, and
further lead to tumor growth inhibition in vivo. The differential
sensitivity to EZH2 inhibition was not caused by a differential
pharmacodynamic effect of the drug, nor differences in basal histone
methylation or PRC2 subunit levels. However, expression of the SWI/SNF
subunit, SMARCA2, delineated sensitivity amongst SMARCA4 mutant models
tested. Expression of SMARCA2 further delineated sensitivity amongst
other SWI/SNF mutant models tested, including SNF5 and ARID1A mutants. We
determined that SMARCA2 is under PRC2 mediated suppression and the
derepression of SMARCA2 was necessary for apoptosis, but not senescence,
in response to EZH2 inhibition. SMARCA2 has been shown to be concurrently
lost in a high percentage of SNF5 mutant malignant rhabdoid tumors and
SMARCA4 mutant SCCOHT tumors, however we determined that â‰ˆ15% of
SMARCA4 mutant NSCLCs concurrently lose SMARCA2. Our data supports
monitoring SMARCA2 expression as a predictive biomarker for EZH2-targeted
therapies that are currently being developed in the context of SWI/SNF
mutant cancers.


