Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transformation by ENO1 highlights the positive relationship
between HIF1A's and VEGFA's RNA expression levels, putatively by
counteracting heterogeneity in glioblastomas.


Analysis of metabolic gene expression is compromised by tumor
heterogeneity. Therefore, we investigated the use of RNA expression
levels from ENO1, which encodes enolase 1, to adjust for glycolytic
heterogeneity within glioblastomas attributed to irregular vascularity,
necrosis, surgical removal, etc. Recently, this approach revealed
relationships between carbonic anhydrases and amplified oncogenes
(Beckner, et al. BBA Clinical 5 (2016):1-15). Here in frozen tissue
samples from 22 glioblastomas, expressions of the metabolic gene encoding
hypoxia inducible factor - 1A (HIF1A) and its target, vascular
endothelial growth factor A (encoded by VEGFA), were contrasted with two
non-metabolic genes, i.e. those encoding platelet derived growth factor A
(PDGFA) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) using RT-qPCR analysis. Genes
of interest (GOI) were initially normalized with delta-delta crossing
threshold methodology using housekeeping genes, ACTB and GAPDH. Then,
concurrent expressions of ENO1 (ave 0.83 +/- 0.18 CI (95%), range of 0.22
- 1.97 times normal) were used to mathematically transform expressions of
GOI to multiples of ENO1 to putatively correct for glycolytic variation.
Expressions of PDGFA (ave 1.90 +/- 0.69 CI (95%), 0.17 - 4.01 times
normal) and EGF (ave 1.25 +/- 0.57 CI (95%), 0.07 - 5.14 times normal),
had correlations, r = 0.65 and 0.66, unranked (Pearson's) and ranked
(Spearman's) data, respectively, among the 22 tumors. After ENO1
transformation, r = 0.68 for their unranked data & the difference in
their ranges rose to 1.31-fold. Prior to ENO1 transformation, expressions
of HIF1A (ave 1.33 +/- 0.28 CI (95%), 0.25 - 2.55 times normal) and VEGFA
(ave 2.89 +/- 1.36 CI (95%), 0.17 - 9.94 times normal) had negative
correlations, r = - 0.15 and - 0.09, unranked and ranked data,
respectively. However, after transforming HIF1A and VEGFA expressions to
multiples of concurrent ENO1 expression, their correlation became
positive in both unranked and ranked data, with r = 0.30 for the ranked
(Spearman) data. The difference in the ranges of the two metabolic genes
expanded to 6.76-fold. Whereas the Wilcoxon Rank Sum of VEGFA's
untransformed values, with versus without 2.02-fold elevations of HIF1A
expression, was insignificant, p = 0.704, using ENO1 transformed values
indicated a significant relationship, p = 0.042. Therefore, ENO1
transformation revealed the anticipated relationship between HIF1A and
its target, VEGFA, at the RNA expression level that was not initially
apparent in this small group of tumors. Transformation via expression
levels of ENO1 compensates for glycolytic heterogeneity to reveal and
highlight relationships among metabolic genes when analyzing resected
tumors. Support from The Pittsburgh Foundation's Walter L. Copeland Fund
for Cranial Research (D2006-0379) and the Molecular Lab, Dept. of
Pathology, Univ. of Pittsburgh Medical Center.


