Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming pd1 targeting antibody resistance using combination
strategies.


PD-1 targeting antibodies (nivolumab, pembrolizumab) are now approved in
various tumor types either as second line treatment (locally advanced or
metastatic urothelial carcinoma, advanced renal cell carcinoma, recurrent
or metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, classical Hodgkin
lymphoma) or even as first line therapy (metastatic melanoma, metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer). Despite an increase in response rate as well
as survival, there is still issue with resistance to PD-1 targeting
therapies. Selection biomarkers as well as response biomarkers are still
under intensive research. In addition, combination strategies are needed
to increase response rate and overcome resistance.

Combination strategies were therefore tested in one well characterized
syngeneic mouse model, i.e. EMT-6 breast carcinoma. The model is known to
be highly sensitive to CTLA-4 targeting antibody (optimum tumor to
control ratio (T/C) of 3%), a moderate responder to PD-1 targeting
treatment (best T/C of 54%) and a well immune infiltrated tumor.
Antibodies targeting co-stimulatory receptor such as OX40, GITR and 4-1BB
as well as co-inhibitory receptor such as Tim3 were combined to anti-PD-1
antibody. In all cases, combination arm produces better therapeutic
activity when compared to single treatment alone. Moreover, both
strategies, meaning combination of two antibodies targeting co-inhibitory
receptors (PD-1 + Tim3) and combination targeting one co-inhibitory (i.e.
PD-1) and one co-stimulatory receptors (OX40, GITR or 4-1BB) worked.
Detailed results will be presented including response rate, immune
infiltrates and cytokines profiles in order to rationally choose the best
therapeutic treatment.


