Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Astrocytic S1P3 regulates blood-brain/tumor barrier permeability.


Introduction: Incidence of breast cancer brain metastasis is increasing
owing to prolonged life-span and better detection techniques. Prognosis
of patients with brain metastases is extremely poor with median survival
time of one year. One of the major impediments in treating brain
metastases is presence of blood-brain/tumor barrier that limits the
permeability of chemotherapeutic drugs into the brain parenchyma.
Understanding the mechanisms that regulate blood-brain/tumor barrier
permeability in context of brain metastases is imperative to developing
successful therapy.

Methods: Mouse models with brain-tropic sublines of MDA-MB-231 (231),
JIMT-1, and SUM190 were used to generate breast cancer brain metastases.
Using laser capture microscopy, the permeable and non-permeable lesions
from mouse brains were isolated and profiled for gene expression using
microarray. Immortalized human brain endothelial cells, astrocytes, and
pericytes were used for developing in vitro blood-brain/tumor barrier
model along with spheres generated with 231-BR6 or JIMT-1-BR3 cells.
Secreted cytokines were evaluated using human cytokine profiler.
Transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) was measured using EVOM2
volt/ohm meter.

Results: Gene expression profiling and immunostaining of mouse brains,
harboring breast cancer metastases showed that astrocytes at permeable
regions express elevated S1P3. Pharmacological inhibition of S1P3 using
antagonist TY-52156 (10mg/kg) in mice bearing 231-BR6 brain metastases
showed reduction in 3KDa Texas red dextran (TRD) uptake. To investigate
the role of S1P3 in regulating barrier permeability, we established in
vitro blood-brain/tumor barrier models. Treatment of astrocytes with
TY-52156 (2μM) significantly increased mean TEER values (33.9 to 55.8
Ω.cm2; pResults: Gene expression profiling and immunostaining of mouse
brains, harboring breast cancer metastases showed that astrocytes at
permeable regions express elevated S1P3. Pharmacological inhibition of
S1P3 using antagonist TY-52156 (10mg/kg) in mice bearing 231-BR6 brain
metastases showed reduction in 3KDa Texas red dextran (TRD) uptake. To
investigate the role of S1P3 in regulating barrier permeability, we
established in vitro blood-brain/tumor barrier models. Treatment of
astrocytes with TY-52156 (2μM) significantly increased mean TEER values
(33.9 to 55.8 Ω.cm2; p<0.001, after 24 hrs), while there was a decrease
in permeability for TRD (1.9 fold; pResults: Gene expression profiling
and immunostaining of mouse brains, harboring breast cancer metastases
showed that astrocytes at permeable regions express elevated S1P3.
Pharmacological inhibition of S1P3 using antagonist TY-52156 (10mg/kg) in
mice bearing 231-BR6 brain metastases showed reduction in 3KDa Texas red
dextran (TRD) uptake. To investigate the role of S1P3 in regulating
barrier permeability, we established in vitro blood-brain/tumor barrier
models. Treatment of astrocytes with TY-52156 (2μM) significantly
increased mean TEER values (33.9 to 55.8 Ω.cm2; p<0.001, after 24 hrs),
while there was a decrease in permeability for TRD (1.9 fold; p<0.0001)
and doxorubicin (1.3 folds; pResults: Gene expression profiling and
immunostaining of mouse brains, harboring breast cancer metastases showed
that astrocytes at permeable regions express elevated S1P3.
Pharmacological inhibition of S1P3 using antagonist TY-52156 (10mg/kg) in
mice bearing 231-BR6 brain metastases showed reduction in 3KDa Texas red
dextran (TRD) uptake. To investigate the role of S1P3 in regulating
barrier permeability, we established in vitro blood-brain/tumor barrier
models. Treatment of astrocytes with TY-52156 (2μM) significantly
increased mean TEER values (33.9 to 55.8 Ω.cm2; p<0.001, after 24 hrs),
while there was a decrease in permeability for TRD (1.9 fold; p<0.0001)
and doxorubicin (1.3 folds; p<0.05). Immunostaining on endothelial
monolayer showed increased membranous ZO-1 and VE-cadherin expression.
The dynamics of increase in TEER was faster when 231-BR6 spheres were
included. We observed similar results when S1P3 was knocked down using
shRNA. Astrocytes with down-modulated S1P3 showed decreased secretion of
various cytokines including IL-6, IL-8, CCL2, CXCL1, and GM-CSF.
Inhibition of these cytokines individually using neutralizing antibodies
recapitulated the effects of S1P3 inhibition, while treatment of
endothelial monolayer with activated cytokines increased the
permeability. This study provides a proof of concept for role of S1P3 and
downstream cytokine signaling in regulating blood-brain/tumor barrier
permeability in breast cancer brain metastases.

Conclusion: Our study shows that astrocytic S1P3 regulates
blood-brain/tumor barrier permeability in breast cancer brain metastases
by modulating cytokine secretion. This observation might lead to
discovery of novel strategies for augmenting drug efficacy.


