Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunoclassification of gastric cancer in the context of clinical
outcome.


Background: Gastric cancer (GC) plays a leading role in all cancer deaths
especially in Eastern Asia. Current classifications including WHO,
Lauren, and TCGA defined molecular classification have illuminated the
clinicopathological characteristics or genetic profile of GC. However,
these classifications were lack of association with clinical outcome and
guidance for medication selection.

Objective: We aimed to identify a new immunoclassification for GC to
predict patient’s prognosis and provide evidence for choosing proper
medication.

Methods: Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples of GC were
obtained along with the clinical outcome of the patient. Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) infection was measured by RT-PCR. Immune markers including
CD3, CD8 and PD-L1 were measured by immunohistochemistry (IHC) at tumor
infiltration area (TI) and invasive margin area (IM). The expression of
PD-L1 in tumor microenvironment (TME) was assessed by immune reactive
score (IRS) system. For immunoclassification, patients were classified
into two subgroups: strong immunoreaction (SIR) and weak immunoreaction
(WIR) defined by the number of CD8+ T cells and PD-L1 expression at TI.

Results: EBV infection was associated with the number of CD3+T cells and
PD-L1 expression in TME. EBV+ patients also showed a poor overall
survival (OS) compared with EBV- patients. Importantly, WIR patients
lived significantly shorter than SIR patients. Moreover, patients who
were treated by taxanes in WIR group had a shorter OS compared with those
not using taxanes.

Conclusion: In this study, we suggest a new immunoclassification for
gastric cancer which is associated with patients’ outcome and may
provide a way to guide chemotherapy.


