Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional and mechanistic interrogation of BET bromodomain
degraders for the treatment of metastatic castration resistant prostate
cancer.


Metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) is a lethal
disease with about 30,000 estimated annual deaths in U.S, with a vast
majority of CRPC driven by androgen receptor (AR) signaling. AR-signaling
is critical for the development and progression of prostate cancer, and
AR also the main therapeutic clinical target. AR-targeted therapies, such
as AR-antagonists, provide substantial benefits in the treatment of
mCRPC; however, majority of patients fail these therapies and succumb to
the disease. Therefore, there is a clear and pressing need to develop new
therapeutics against the AR axis in CRPC. One such novel strategy for
targeting the AR-pathway and inhibiting the growth of CRPC has been the
use of bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) protein inhibitors such a JQ1.
However, a new class of molecules that target BET bromodomain proteins
through their proteasomal degradation can improve efficacy and
specificity of these inhibitors. Based on our findings, we hypothesized
that pharmacologic BET degradation represents an important advance in the
treatment of CRPC, and may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for
advanced prostate cancer. These inhibitors affect AR-positive prostate
cancer cells preferentially over AR-negative and benign prostate
epithelial cells, and proteomic and genomic mechanistic studies confirm
disruption of oncogenic AR and MYC signaling, both in vivo and in vitro.
The overall goal is to develop very potent small molecule that leads to
the proteasomal-degradation of BET proteins, with optimized in vivo
properties, and to provide a compelling scientific rationale, including
detailed mechanistic insight, to facilitate advancement of BET degraders
as a novel potential therapeutic strategy for patients with mCRPC.


