Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of GDC-0077, a specific PI3K alpha
inhibitor in early clinical development.


The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt)/
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway is a major
regulator of tumor cell growth, proliferation and survival. Dysregulation
of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway through multiple mechanisms has
been described in solid tumor malignancies, including activating and
transforming “hotspot” mutations as well as amplification of PIK3CA
that encodes the p110 alpha subunit of PI3K. Hotspot mutations of PIK3CA
mutation are frequently observed in breast cancer with a prevalence of
approximately 30%. GDC-0077 is a potent inhibitor of PI3K alpha (IC50 =
0.038 + 0.003 nM) and exerts its activity by binding to the ATP binding
site of PI3K, thereby inhibiting the phosphorylation of PIP2 to PIP3.
Biochemically, GDC-0077 is more than 300-fold selective over other Class
I PI3K isoforms such as beta, delta, and gamma and more than 2000 fold
more selective over PI3K class II and III family members. Importantly,
GDC-0077 is more selective for mutant versus wild-type PI3K alpha in cell
based assays. Compared to the PI3K inhibitor, taselisib, the improved
biochemical selectivity of GDC-0077 against PI3K delta is demonstrated in
human CD69+ B-cells, which are primarily dependent on PI3K delta for
proliferation and survival and were more sensitive to taselisib than
GDC-0077. Mechanism of action studies indicate that GDC-0077 induces
depletion of mutant PI3K alpha protein resulting in reduction of PI3K
pathway biomarkers such as pAkt and pPRAS40, inhibition of cell
proliferation and increased apoptosis in human PIK3CA mutant breast
cancer cell lines to a greater extent when compared to PIK3CA wild-type
cells. In vivo, daily oral treatment with GDC-0077 in
cell-culture-derived and patient derived PIK3CA mutant breast cancer
xenograft models, resulted in tumor regressions, induction of apoptosis
and a reduction of pAkt, pPRAS40, and pS6RP in a dose-dependent fashion.
In vivo efficacy in a PIK3CA-mutant human breast cancer xenograft model
was also improved when GDC-0077 was combined with standard-of-care
therapies for hormone-receptor positive (HR+) breast cancer such as
anti-estrogens (fulvestrant) or CDK4/6 inhibitor (palbociclib).
Collectively, the preclinical data provide rationale for evaluating
GDC-0077, a PI3K alpha mutant selective inhibitor, as a single agent and
in combination with standard-of-care endocrine and targeted therapies
that may provide additional benefit to patients that harbor PIK3CA
mutations.


