Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: How does RAC1 GTP-ase signal Wnt-beta-catenin pathway-mediated
integrin-directed metastasis-associated tumor cell phenotypes in TNBC.


Introduction: We reported that Wnt Pathway (WP) upregulation, one of the
salient genetic features of metastatic TNBC, controls the acquisition of
integrin-directed metastasis-associated (ID-MA) phenotypes of TNBC cells
(Dey et al., 2013). RAC-GTPases, small G-proteins which transduce signals
from cell surface proteins including integrins, have been implicated in
tumorigenesis and metastasis by their role in essential cellular
functions like motility. Aim: Here we tested the role of the mechanism of
involvement of RAC1 in the regulation of WP-mediated ID-MA phenotypes in
TNBC cells and examined how WP signals are transduced via RAC1 in the
context of ID-MA phenotypes in TNBC.

Method: Oncoprints showed that the major alterations of RAC1 gene in TNBC
were constituted by the amplification/gain of the gene. The collective
percentage of alteration(s) in RAC1 in ER+ve BC was 35% as compared to
57% in ER-ve BC (brca/tcga/pub2015). Using pharmacological agents
(sulindac sulfide), genetic tools (siRNA), WP modulators (Wnt-C59,
XAV939), RAC1 inhibitors (NSC23766, W56) and WP stimulations (LWnt3ACM,
Wnt3A recombinant) in a panel of 6-7 TNBC cell lines, we studied
fibronectin-directed migration and various motility parameters (actin
dynamics, filopodia and lamellipodia by confocal microscopy) in the
context of fibronectin-directed RAC1 and Cdc42 activation.

Result: Breaking down by molecular subtypes of BC, RAC1 gene alterations
are observed in 20% in PAM50 Luminal A, 35% in PAM50 Luminal B, 37% in
PAM50 HER2 enriched and 40% in PAM50 Basal-like. For the samples set of
TCGA, Cell 2015, RAC1 gene was altered in 42% total while it was altered
37% in PAM50 Luminal A, 57% in PAM50 Luminal B, 55% in PAM50 HER2
enriched and 60% in PAM50 basal-like. An attenuation of WP, which (a)
decreased cellular levels of beta-catenin, as well as its nuclear
active-form, (b) decreased fibronectin-induced migration, (c) altered
actin dynamics and (d) decreased podia-parameters was successful in
blocking fibronectin-mediated RAC1/Cdc42 activity. Both Wnt-antagonists
and RAC1 inhibitors blocked fibronectin-induced RAC1 activation and
inhibited the fibronectin-induced ID-MA phenotypes following specific WP
stimulation. To test a direct involvement of RAC1-activation in
WP-mediated ID-MA phenotypes, we stimulated brain-metastasis specific
MDA-MB231BR cells with LWnt3ACM. LWnt3ACM-stimulated fibronectin-directed
migration was blocked by RAC1 inhibition in MDA-MB231BR cells. In the
light of our previous report (De et al., 2016) that WP upregulation
stimulates ID-MA phenotypes in TNBC tumor cells, here we provide the
first mechanism based evidence to demonstrate that WP upregulation
signals ID-MA tumor cell phenotypes in an RAC1-GTPase dependent manner
involving exchange-factors like TIAM1 and VAV2.


