Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenetics of doxorubicin, gemcitabine and docetaxel in the
GeDDiS soft tissue sarcoma trial.


Introduction

The treatment of locally advanced or metastatic soft tissue sarcoma
remains a significant clinical challenge, with overall survival rates of
approximately 12 months observed with current first line palliative
chemotherapy. A recently completed randomised phase III clinical trial
entitled GeDDiS (ISRCTN07742377), was designed to compare first line
treatment with gemcitabine in combination with docetaxel (GemDoc) versus
current standard treatment with doxorubicin. A pharmacogenetic sub-study
was incorporated into the trial to assess potential impact of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes associated with the pharmacology
of the three drugs.

Methods

A total of 240 patients were recruited to the sub-study with 119 on the
doxorubicin arm and 121 on the GemDoc arm. A 4 ml blood sample was taken
from each participant and genomic DNA extracted. Individual candidate
SNPs were assessed by Taqman PCR in 7 genes associated with doxorubicin
pharmacology, 7 genes associated with gemcitabine and 5 genes associated
with the pharmacology of docetaxel. Association between the SNPs and
efficacy and toxicity was assessed.

Results

SNPs within the solute transporter SLC22A16, associated with the
intracellular influx of doxorubicin, were associated with worse PFS (HR =
1.72, p=0.04) and decreased frequency of grade 3/4 adverse events (71% vs
48%, p=0.04) in the doxorubicin arm of the study but not in the GemDoc
arm.

Conclusions

The association of genetic variants of SLC22A16 with decreased efficacy
and decreased incidence of toxicity is consistent with a loss of function
in the transporter and previous observation of increased AUC in
pharmacokinetic studies assuming that distribution of the drug into
target and collateral tissues is restricted.


