Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of late-arising driver mutations using multi-sample
tumor sequencing data.


Whole-genome sequencing of tumors has identified genetic mutations that
drive the origination, growth, and spread of cancer. Most driver
mutations detected from sequencing tumors have been categorized as
early-occurring and are believed to play a role in initial tumor
formation. However, single-region primary tumor samples represent just
one snapshot of the continuously changing mutational landscape of a
tumor. Drivers of initial tumor formation, occurring early on in tumor
development, are present in more tumor cells and are more likely to be
identified from a single tumor sample than drivers of later events like
metastasis, which are likely to be found in only one or a few tumor
samples. We analyzed 101 multi-region and/or multi-tumor sequencing data
sets using driver mutation annotation and phylogenetic inference to
determine whether driver mutations occur preferentially early on. We
found driver mutations frequently arise late in the course of tumor
evolution, even when statistically accounting for small amounts of total
drivers and many early total mutations. In addition, the timing of driver
mutation occurrence varies widely depending on cancer type as well as
among different individuals with a single cancer subtype. Finally, we
identify known cancer genes that are enriched in either early or late
driver mutations, reflecting different selective pressures at various
stages of cancer development. These results illustrate how drivers of
primary tumorigenesis must be distinguished from drivers of treatment
resistance, metastasis, or recurrence in order to better understand the
genetic changes behind cancer progression.


