Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-blockade of mTORC1, ERBB and estrogen receptor signalling
pathways in endocrine resistance breast cancer: Combating tumor
plasticity.


Introduction The majority of breast cancers (BC) are estrogen (E)
receptor positive (ER+). Endocrine therapies target E stimulation of
tumour growth but resistance remains problematic, often a result of
enhanced crosstalk between ER and growth factor pathways. Previously we
reported the antiproliferative efficacy of combining everolimus (RAD001,
mTORC1 inhibitor) with endocrine therapy in resistance models, but
potential routes of escape from treatment via ERBB2/3 signalling were
observed. We hypothesised that combined targeting of three cellular nodes
(ER, ERBB and mTORC1) may target tumour rewiring and provide enhanced
long-term clinical utility in endocrine resistant BCs.

Methods Several ER+ BC lines adapted to long term E deprivation (LTED),
modelling relapse to an aromatase inhibitor (AI), were treated in vitro
with a combination of RAD001 and neratinib (pan ERBB inhibitor) in the
presence or absence of estradiol (E2), tamoxifen or fulvestrant. Effects
on proliferation, cell signalling, cell cycle and transcription were
assessed. Additionally, an in vivo model of AI resistance was treated
with monotherapies or combinations to evaluate efficacy in delaying
tumour progression.

Results All cell lines showed dose dependent decreases in proliferation
in response to RAD001 (IC50 0.6-50nM without E2; 1-10nM with E2).
Neratinib showed a wide range of IC50 values in the presence of E2
(300-1000nM). In the absence of E2, wild type (wt) cell lines showed IC50
values in excess of 1800nM with hormetic response curves, whilst in the
LTED IC50 values ranged between 400-900nM. Combination of either agent
with endocrine therapy caused a concentration dependent decrease in
proliferation in both wt and LTED lines but the maximum effect was
observed with a triple combination of RAD001, neratinib and endocrine
therapy. Expression of pS6 was suppressed by RAD001 in all cells tested,
whilst neratinib caused a cell specific reduction in expression of ERBB
family proteins. Upregulation of pAKT was observed in all cell lines upon
treatment with RAD001. Combination of RAD001 with neratinib suppressed
the upregulation of pAKT and reduced cell cycle progression. In the
absence of E2, RAD001 reduced ER mediated transcription and recruitment
of ER and CREB binding protein to the TFF1 promoter, contrasting with
neratinib, which caused a marked increase. In vivo study using LTED
tumour xenografts showed the triple combination of RAD001, neratinib and
fulvestrant was the most effective at reducing tumour volume (89%,
pResults All cell lines showed dose dependent decreases in proliferation
in response to RAD001 (IC50 0.6-50nM without E2; 1-10nM with E2).
Neratinib showed a wide range of IC50 values in the presence of E2
(300-1000nM). In the absence of E2, wild type (wt) cell lines showed IC50
values in excess of 1800nM with hormetic response curves, whilst in the
LTED IC50 values ranged between 400-900nM. Combination of either agent
with endocrine therapy caused a concentration dependent decrease in
proliferation in both wt and LTED lines but the maximum effect was
observed with a triple combination of RAD001, neratinib and endocrine
therapy. Expression of pS6 was suppressed by RAD001 in all cells tested,
whilst neratinib caused a cell specific reduction in expression of ERBB
family proteins. Upregulation of pAKT was observed in all cell lines upon
treatment with RAD001. Combination of RAD001 with neratinib suppressed
the upregulation of pAKT and reduced cell cycle progression. In the
absence of E2, RAD001 reduced ER mediated transcription and recruitment
of ER and CREB binding protein to the TFF1 promoter, contrasting with
neratinib, which caused a marked increase. In vivo study using LTED
tumour xenografts showed the triple combination of RAD001, neratinib and
fulvestrant was the most effective at reducing tumour volume (89%,
p<0.001). Antitumor effects persisted after therapy removal with
exception of RAD001 alone or in combination with neratinib where a slow
increase in tumour growth was observed.

Conclusion The combination of RAD001, neratinib and endocrine agents may
be effective in patients who have relapsed on endocrine therapy but
retain a functional ER by combating ERBB pathway upregulation.


