Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The genetic aberrations in carcinogenic sequence of
colitis-associated cancer.


Colitis-associated cancer (CAC) is a common complication among patients
with a long history of ulcerative colitis (UC). Previous studies revealed
that dysplasia precedes CAC development, and more than 20% of CACs are
multicentric, suggesting the presence of a field effect on colorectal
carcinogenesis in UC patients. However, the genetic basis of the field
effect in UC patients is poorly understood.To address this issue, we
isolated single crypts from non-tumorous colon mucosa from 6 UC patients,
as well as those from apparently normal mucosa from non-UC patients, and
“single crypt-derived DNA” was analyzed for somatic mutations using
whole-exome sequencing (WES). In total, 19 crypts from histologically
non-dysplastic, but inflamed mucosa, and 2 from apparently normal mucosa
were isolated from 6 UC patients, including 4 with pancolitis, 1 with
left-sided colitis and 1 with proctitis, while 32 crypts were obtained
from normal mucosa from 20 non-UC patients, including 10 with colorectal
cancer, 6 with adenoma and 4 healthy volunteers. Regardless of the
disease status, mutations were detected in all crypts analyzed with the
median of 43/crypt (3 − 121), showing high variant allele frequencies
(VAFs) (~0.5), suggesting that these mutations were shared by all cells
within single crypts and therefore by crypt-maintaining stem cells. The
number of mutations increased with age, in crypts from both UC and non-UC
patients (P Colitis-associated cancer (CAC) is a common complication
among patients with a long history of ulcerative colitis (UC). Previous
studies revealed that dysplasia precedes CAC development, and more than
20% of CACs are multicentric, suggesting the presence of a field effect
on colorectal carcinogenesis in UC patients. However, the genetic basis
of the field effect in UC patients is poorly understood.To address this
issue, we isolated single crypts from non-tumorous colon mucosa from 6 UC
patients, as well as those from apparently normal mucosa from non-UC
patients, and “single crypt-derived DNA” was analyzed for somatic
mutations using whole-exome sequencing (WES). In total, 19 crypts from
histologically non-dysplastic, but inflamed mucosa, and 2 from apparently
normal mucosa were isolated from 6 UC patients, including 4 with
pancolitis, 1 with left-sided colitis and 1 with proctitis, while 32
crypts were obtained from normal mucosa from 20 non-UC patients,
including 10 with colorectal cancer, 6 with adenoma and 4 healthy
volunteers. Regardless of the disease status, mutations were detected in
all crypts analyzed with the median of 43/crypt (3 − 121), showing high
variant allele frequencies (VAFs) (~0.5), suggesting that these mutations
were shared by all cells within single crypts and therefore by
crypt-maintaining stem cells. The number of mutations increased with age,
in crypts from both UC and non-UC patients (P < 10-9), showing clear
age-related C to T transition in both normal and UC-inflamed crypts.
Strikingly, however, the age-adjusted number of mutations was
significantly higher in UC-derived crypts than in those from non-UC
individuals (P Colitis-associated cancer (CAC) is a common complication
among patients with a long history of ulcerative colitis (UC). Previous
studies revealed that dysplasia precedes CAC development, and more than
20% of CACs are multicentric, suggesting the presence of a field effect
on colorectal carcinogenesis in UC patients. However, the genetic basis
of the field effect in UC patients is poorly understood.To address this
issue, we isolated single crypts from non-tumorous colon mucosa from 6 UC
patients, as well as those from apparently normal mucosa from non-UC
patients, and “single crypt-derived DNA” was analyzed for somatic
mutations using whole-exome sequencing (WES). In total, 19 crypts from
histologically non-dysplastic, but inflamed mucosa, and 2 from apparently
normal mucosa were isolated from 6 UC patients, including 4 with
pancolitis, 1 with left-sided colitis and 1 with proctitis, while 32
crypts were obtained from normal mucosa from 20 non-UC patients,
including 10 with colorectal cancer, 6 with adenoma and 4 healthy
volunteers. Regardless of the disease status, mutations were detected in
all crypts analyzed with the median of 43/crypt (3 − 121), showing high
variant allele frequencies (VAFs) (~0.5), suggesting that these mutations
were shared by all cells within single crypts and therefore by
crypt-maintaining stem cells. The number of mutations increased with age,
in crypts from both UC and non-UC patients (P < 10-9), showing clear
age-related C to T transition in both normal and UC-inflamed crypts.
Strikingly, however, the age-adjusted number of mutations was
significantly higher in UC-derived crypts than in those from non-UC
individuals (P < 10-3). KRAS and TP53 mutations were reported to be the
most prevalent alterations in UC-associated CAC, but only rarely seen in
UC-derived normal crypts. Next, to evaluate clonal expansion of mutated
clones, we performed WES for the bulk specimens composed of 20 - 30
mutually adjacent crypts. However, this time, mutations and copy number
alterations (CNAs) with high VAFs were detected only in UC-inflamed
mucosa, suggesting that clonal crypt expansion occurred only in
UC-derived mucosa. WES was also performed for 14 CACs. The number of
non-synonymous mutations (101/sample) in CAC were significantly higher
than that in UC-derived normal crypts (38/sample) and recurrently
involved known driver genes, such as TP53 (71%) and KRAS (36%). CNAs were
also more frequent in CAC than UC-derived, normal crypts. In conclusion,
our study revealed that somatic mutations accumulated in normal mucosa of
both UC and non-UC cases, but the mutational burden increased in
UC-inflamed mucosa. Chronic inflammation caused clonal expansion of
crypts even in histologically non-dysplastic mucosa in UC case,
accompanied by acquisition of driver mutations and CNAs, which could
trigger the development of CAC. Our findings provide novel insights into
the carcinogenic sequence in UC-derived CAC.


