Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-338-5p regulates radioresistance by directly targeting
survivin in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Radioresistance is a challenge in the treatment of esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are known to play an important
role in the functional modification of cancer cells and resent studies
have reported the miRNA-mediated radiotherapy resistance. However,
further research would be necessary to reveal the regulation mechanisms
and the treatment strategies using miRNA have yet to be established in
ESCC. We compared the miRNA expression profile in ESCC parental (TE-4)
and acquired radioresistance (TE-4R) cell line using miRNA microarray and
qRT-PCR. Our data showed that miR-338-5p, one of the target miRNA
biomarkers, was significantly downregulated in TE-4R. Ectopic
overexpression of the miR-338-5p induced apoptosis and sensitivity to
radiation treatment by interfering the survivin, which is known to play
an inhibitor of apoptosis. Over expression of survivin using plasmid
vector reversed miR-338-5p induced apoptosis. From tumor xenograft
experiments, we found that therapeutic delivery of the miR-338-5p mimics
via direct injection to tumor mass increased sensitivity to radiation
therapy. In conclusion, these findings suggested that miR-338-5p is a
potential radiosensitizer and may be one of the therapeutic biomarkers
for radioresistant in ESCC.


