Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Additive benefits of radium-223 dichloride and bortezomib
combination in a syngeneic 5TGM1 multiple myeloma mouse model.


Radium-223 dichloride (radium-223, Xofigo®), a targeted alpha-therapy,
improves overall survival in prostate cancer patients with bone
metastases. It inhibits disease progression by reducing tumor growth and
tumor-induced pathological bone reaction in breast and prostate cancer
mouse models. Radium-223 is actively incorporated into the bone matrix by
osteoblasts. Multiple myeloma (MM) is characterized by increased
osteoclast and reduced or no osteoblast activity. Bortezomib (Velcade®),
a treatment for MM, restores the impaired osteoblast activity in MM.
Here, we report the effects of radium-223, bortezomib and their
combination on myeloma cell proliferation in vitro and on myeloma bone
disease model in mice.

Proliferation assays were performed with human plasma cell leukemia
(JJN-3, L-363), human MM (LP-1, MOLP-8, RPMI-8226 and OPM-2), and mouse
MM (5TGM1) cells. Corresponding in vivo effects were studied in a
syngeneic 5TGM1 mouse MM model. Female C57BL/KaLwRij mice (7 weeks old,
n=15/group) were inoculated with 5TGM1 cells via tail vein and 26 days
later, radium-223 (300 kBq/kg, single iv injection) and/or bortezomib (1
mg/kg ip, twice a week; total of 3 doses) or vehicle control were
administered. The development of osteolytic lesions was detected by
radiography. Hind limbs were used for histological analyses and total
activity measurement was performed by a gamma-counter. TRAP-stained
osteoclasts were counted at tumor-bone interface.

Bortezomib inhibited proliferation of all cancer cell lines tested at 25
nM (JJN3 and OPM-2 at 2.5 nM) and radium-223 at 0.8 kBq/ml (L-363 and
MOLP-8 at 0.2 kBq/ml) concentrations. Additive effects were observed with
combination treatment in vitro. The 5TGM1 in vivo model demonstrated that
both bortezomib and radium-223 decreased osteolytic lesion area as
monotherapy (pBortezomib inhibited proliferation of all cancer cell lines
tested at 25 nM (JJN3 and OPM-2 at 2.5 nM) and radium-223 at 0.8 kBq/ml
(L-363 and MOLP-8 at 0.2 kBq/ml) concentrations. Additive effects were
observed with combination treatment in vitro. The 5TGM1 in vivo model
demonstrated that both bortezomib and radium-223 decreased osteolytic
lesion area as monotherapy (p<0.05 and pBortezomib inhibited
proliferation of all cancer cell lines tested at 25 nM (JJN3 and OPM-2 at
2.5 nM) and radium-223 at 0.8 kBq/ml (L-363 and MOLP-8 at 0.2 kBq/ml)
concentrations. Additive effects were observed with combination treatment
in vitro. The 5TGM1 in vivo model demonstrated that both bortezomib and
radium-223 decreased osteolytic lesion area as monotherapy (p<0.05 and
p<0.01, respectively), with the combination being more effective than
either monotherapy alone (pBortezomib inhibited proliferation of all
cancer cell lines tested at 25 nM (JJN3 and OPM-2 at 2.5 nM) and
radium-223 at 0.8 kBq/ml (L-363 and MOLP-8 at 0.2 kBq/ml) concentrations.
Additive effects were observed with combination treatment in vitro. The
5TGM1 in vivo model demonstrated that both bortezomib and radium-223
decreased osteolytic lesion area as monotherapy (p<0.05 and p<0.01,
respectively), with the combination being more effective than either
monotherapy alone (p<0.001). Bortezomib decreased the number of
osteoclasts at tumor-bone interface (pBortezomib inhibited proliferation
of all cancer cell lines tested at 25 nM (JJN3 and OPM-2 at 2.5 nM) and
radium-223 at 0.8 kBq/ml (L-363 and MOLP-8 at 0.2 kBq/ml) concentrations.
Additive effects were observed with combination treatment in vitro. The
5TGM1 in vivo model demonstrated that both bortezomib and radium-223
decreased osteolytic lesion area as monotherapy (p<0.05 and p<0.01,
respectively), with the combination being more effective than either
monotherapy alone (p<0.001). Bortezomib decreased the number of
osteoclasts at tumor-bone interface (p<0.05) and an additive decrease was
observed with combination therapy (pBortezomib inhibited proliferation of
all cancer cell lines tested at 25 nM (JJN3 and OPM-2 at 2.5 nM) and
radium-223 at 0.8 kBq/ml (L-363 and MOLP-8 at 0.2 kBq/ml) concentrations.
Additive effects were observed with combination treatment in vitro. The
5TGM1 in vivo model demonstrated that both bortezomib and radium-223
decreased osteolytic lesion area as monotherapy (p<0.05 and p<0.01,
respectively), with the combination being more effective than either
monotherapy alone (p<0.001). Bortezomib decreased the number of
osteoclasts at tumor-bone interface (p<0.05) and an additive decrease was
observed with combination therapy (p<0.01) resulting in almost complete
eradication of osteoclasts. Incorporation of radium-223 to bone was
higher with combination therapy based on total activity measurements. All
treatments were well tolerated.

In conclusion, radium-223 dichloride (Xofigo®) therapy in combination
with bortezomib decreased osteolytic lesion area and almost completely
eradicated tumor-associated osteoclasts in a mouse model of myeloma bone
disease. Incorporation of radium-223 to bone matrix was improved,
possibly via induction of osteoblast activity by bortezomib. These data
suggest that combination of radium-223 and bortezomib could be a new
effective therapy in MM, which is currently being investigated in a Phase
Ib/II trial in patients with early relapsed MM (NCT02928029).


