Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic importance of EGFR expression and Kras gene mutations
in gallbladder carcinoma.


Gallbladder carcinomas involve multiple cascades of oncogenes like EGFR
and Kras. Activation of Kras downstream pathways predict the sensitivity
to anti EGFR treatment. In 2012, for the first time it was established
that GBC and cholangiocarcinomas have their unique somatic genomic
landscape and thus be studied independently. This study evaluates whether
EGFR is a prognostic factor in GBC and identifies the frequency of codon
12 and codon 13 Kras mutations along with its association with subject
survival. Seventy two GBC curative resections from North India were
immunostained with anti EGFR monoclonal antibody and assessed for codon
12 and 13 KRAS mutation by real time PCR. Strong EGFR expression was
observed in 25.4percent cases. About 28/72; G12C, 17/72; G12R, 10/72;
G12D and 18/72; G13D cases harboured point mutations in Kras gene, which
was significantly higher as compared to control tissues. Multivariate
analysis revealed that EGFR expression (p=0.01; HR=3.14; 95percent
CI=1.28-7.71) and codon-13 mutation (p=0.001; HR=38.34; 95percent
CI=4.90-300.01) had a significant impact on survival and were independent
prognostic factors in GBC. Our study suggests that EGFR expression and
codon 13 mutations are independent prognostic factors in the selected GBC
cohort and showed a high frequency of Kras codon 12 mutations as well.


