Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A study of dynamic changes in PD-L1 expression in KRAS mutant
adenocarcinoma of the lung exposed to signal transduction inhibitors.


Aim

MEK and AKT inhibitors inhibit signaling down steam of KRAS and are being
evaluated as single agents or in combination with other anticancer drugs
for the treatment of KRAS mutant adenocarcinoma of the lung
(adeno-NSCLC). We investigated whether increased PD-L1 expression with
functional T cell inhibitory consequences were a common mechanism of
resistance to these drugs in this setting.

Material and Methods

A panel of 10 KRAS mutant adeno-NSCLC cell lines were studied. Cells were
exposed to GI50 concentrations of a MEK (trametinib) and AKT (AZD5363)
inhibitor for 6hrs, 24hrs and 3 weeks. PD-L1 expression on cell lines was
studied by immunofluorescence. Immunofluorescence at various time points
were expressed as a ratio of values in drug treated cells compared to
untreated control. Functional consequences of PD-L1 expression were
studied using a T cell cancer cell line (Jurkat) transfected with a
luciferase reporter where co-culture of cancer cells expressing PD-L1 led
to reduction in luminescence. Luminescence at various time points were
expressed as ratio of luminescence values of drug treated cells compared
to untreated controls.

Results

Following characterization of expression of PD-L1 in 10 KRAS mutant
adeno-NSCLC cell lines, 5 cell lines with the highest expression of PD-L1
was chosen for functional assays (H441, H2291, H23, H2030 and A549). When
exposed to trametinib for 3 weeks, 3/5 cell lines (H23, H2030 and A549)
showed an statistically significant increase in expression of PD-L1
(range 1.1-2.4) however significant reduction of luciferase activity was
only observed in H23 and H2030, 0.93 and 0.75, p= 0.018 and p=0.01
respectively. When exposed to AZD5363 for 3 weeks, 3/5 cell lines (H441,
H23 and H2030) showed a statistically significant increase in PD-L1
expression (range 1.3-1.9) however significant reduction in luciferase
reduction was seen in only H441 and H23, 0.86 and 0.76, p= 0.03 and p=
0.04 respectively.

Conclusion

Chronic exposure of KRAS mutant cell lines to MEK and AKT inhibitors
cause minor increases in PD-L1 expression but this does not result in
functional inhibition of T cells in all instances. Consequently, a
functional increase in PD-L1 expression is unlikely to be a common
mechanism of resistance to MEK and AKT inhibitors in KRAS mutant
adeno-NSCLC.

1


