Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted delivery of nanoparticulate cytochrome c into GL261
glioma cells through the proton-coupled folate transporter.


In this study we identified the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT)
as a route for targeted delivery of drugs to glioma cells. Using the
techniques of confocal imaging, western blotting, and siRNA knockdown
against the PCFT (encoded by the SLC46A1 gene), we demonstrated that
Gl261 glioma cells, but not primary cultured astrocytes, express the
PCFT, which provides selective internalization of folic acid
(FA)-conjugated cytochrome c-containing nanoparticles (FA-Cyt c NPs),
followed by glioma cell death. FA-Cyt c NPs, used at a concentration of
100 Âµg/ml, had no cytotoxic effects in astrocytes but caused 40% death
in GL261 cells. Whole-cell patch clamp recording revealed FA-induced
membrane currents, with maximum activity at pH 6.0, which is specific for
the PCFT. Currents were reduced by siRNA PCFT knockdown in a similar
manner as by application of FA-Cyt c NPs, indicating that the PCFT is a
major carrier of FA and a route for internalization of FA-conjugated NPs
in GL261 cells. We conclude that the PCFT provides a mechanism for
targeted delivery of FA-conjugated nanodrugs to glioma cells with high
specificity for GL261 cells, effectively causing apoptosis in these
cells, and provides a starting point for the development of efficient
methods for treating gliomas. The research was supported by NIH grants
SC2GM102040, SC2GM095410, G12MD007583, R25GM110513, and US Department of
Education Grant P031S130068.


