Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NFκB p65 overexpression promotes bladder cancer migration via
FBW7-mediated degradation of RhoGDIα protein.


Since bladder cancer (BC) is one of the most lethal urological malignant
tumors worldwide, understanding the molecular mechanisms that trigger the
migration, invasion and metastasis of BC has great significance in
reducing the mortality of this disease. RelA/p65, a member of the
NF-kappa B transcription factor family, is increasingly recognized as a
crucial player in many steps of cancer initiation and progression. In
this study, we unexpectedly found that p65 protein expression increased
in the bladder carcinogen N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)-nitrosamine
(BBN)-induced high invasive bladder tumor tissues, and in human bladder
cancer cell lines. We also observed that p65 overexpression promoted
bladder cancer cell migration by inhibiting RhoGDIα expression. We
further demonstrate that the regulatory effect of p65 on RhoGDIα
expression is mediated by its upregulation of FBW7, which specifically
interacted with RhoGDIα and promoted RhoGDIα ubiquitination and
degradation. Mechanistic studies revealed that p65 stabilizing the E3
ligase FBW7 protein was mediated by its attenuating Pten transcription.
Taken together, p65 overexpression results in Pten downregulation, and
FBW7 protein degradation, and in turn leading to RhoGDIα protein
degration and promotings human BC cell migration. The identification of
p65/PTEN/FBW7/RhoGDIα axis provides a significant insight into
understanding the nature of BC migration.


