Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chromatin remodelers RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 are prognostic factors
and therapeutic targets in non-small cell lung cancer due to their roles
in DNA replication, repair, and radiosensitization.


Despite advances in targeted agents and immunotherapy, non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) remains the number one cause of cancer-related death.
To identify new therapeutic targets in NSCLC, we performed an siRNA
screen directed against genes involved in chromatin remodeling. This
screen showed that RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 (herein collectively referred to as
RUVBL1/2) were universally but differentially required for the viability
of 24 NSCLC cell lines, which was an on-target effect. Various
independent gene expression datasets/platforms show that NSCLC patient
tumors have increased levels of RUVBL1 and RUVBL2 mRNAs, in comparison to
normal lung, and that patients with high levels of RUVBL1 or RUVBL2 have
a poorer prognosis, suggesting that RUVBL1/2 may play an important role
in NSCLC tumors. To confirm this at the protein level, we validated an
antibody against RUVBL1 for immunohistochemistry, stained clinically
annotated NSCLC tissue microarrays for RUVBL1, and found that patients
with higher levels of RUVBL1 protein also have a poorer prognosis. To
better understand the role of RUVBL1/2 in NSCLC at a molecular level, we
measured the distribution of cells in the cell cycle following RUVBL1/2
KD, determined RUVBL1/2 interacting proteins by immunoprecipitation
followed by tandem mass-spec (IP-MS/MS), and measured gene expression
changes following RUVBL1/2 KD by RNA-seq. Depletion of RUVBL1/2 arrested
cells in S-phase and promoted pan-Î³H2AX positivity, IP-MS/MS showed an
over-representation of proteins involved in DNA repair and replication,
and gene set enrichment analysis of the RNA-seq data displayed a
downregulation of transcripts involved in DNA replication and repair,
strongly implicating RUVBL1/2 in these processes. To further probe the
effects of RUVBL1/2 loss, we performed low-level knock down (KD) of
RUVBL1/2, such that viability is largely unaffected, and then measured
the viability of cells in response to various drugs (n=35). These drugs
target a wide variety of biological processes; however, the only drugs
with increased efficacy in the presence of RUVBL1/2 KD were those that
damage DNA, target ATR or its downstream partner CHEK1, or target some
mitotic proteins, further implicating RUVBL1/2 in DNA replication and/or
repair. Due to their roles in replication, we reasoned that RUVBL1/2 KD
may enhance the effects of ionizing radiation, a treatment frequently
given to NSCLC patients. Low level KD of RUVBL1/2 decreased the
clonogenic potential of multiple NSCLC cell lines, which can be
phenocopied by depleting independent subunits of RUVBL1/2-containing
chromatin remodeling complexes. Finally, we show that RUVBL1/2 depend
upon their ATPase activity to support NSCLC viability, suggesting that
small molecule inhibitors of this protein may be efficacious in the
treatment of NSCLC, especially when combined with radiation therapy.


