Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NCI mouse repository: Cancer models and miRNA-ES cell resource.


The NCI Mouse Repository, located at the Frederick National Laboratory
for Cancer Research (FNLCR), Frederick, Maryland, is an NCI-funded
resource of approximately 150 genetically-engineered mouse cancer models
and associated strains, including mice bearing conditional and
point-mutant alleles in cancer-related genes. In addition, the Repository
houses a unique collection of over 1500 different mouse ES cell clones
bearing conditionally-activated miRNA transgenes to facilitate in vivo
exploration of miRNA functions. The NCI Mouse Repository makes strains
and mESCs available to all members of the scientific community (academic,
non-profit, and commercial). The mouse models and ES cell clones are
cryo-archived and distributed as frozen germplasm or cells.

Requests may be placed through the NCI Mouse Repository website
(https://ncifrederick.cancer.gov/Lasp/MouseRepository/Default.aspx). In
addition to the request form, this website includes detailed description
for each strain accepted into the Repository and the associated
publications provided by the donating scientist. The miR-harboring ESCs,
originally generated at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories for the NCI,
are described in full detail and include validation data for each miRNA
ES cell clone. These resources are available for nominal cost to NCI,
NIH, and other US government-funded investigators, as well as to
Investigators at non-profit organizations.


