Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determination of sensitivity to BET and HDAC inhibitors in lung
cancer cell lines.


Purpose: To determine the sensitivity of lung cancer cell lines to
different combinations of BET and HDAC inhibitors and to inquire possible
associations with the genetic and molecular profiles.

Methods: A panel of lung cancer cell lines were treated in vitro with BET
and HDAC inhibitors. The capability of each compound, administered
individually or in combination (IC50), to inhibit cell proliferation was
assessed by MTT assays. Drug interaction analysis was performed using
Compusyn software. The protein and gene expression levels were determined
using western blot and real time PCR, respectively.

Results: We found that about 70% of the cell lines tested were sensitive
to BET inhibitors and about 60% responded to HDAC inhibitors. In both
cases, increased sensitivity was accompanied by changes in cell
morphology, a reduction of the MYC protein levels and an increase in the
levels of apoptotic-related markers. We also determined the effects of
the combination of these epigenetic treatments in cell growth. Our
results showed a synergic effect in about 75% of the cell lines which was
also correlated with dramatic changes in cell morphology, in apoptosis
and in decreasing the levels of the MYC protein. Finally, we determined
the possible correlation of the sensitivity to these epigenetic drugs and
the expression levels of some genes implicated in lung carcinogenesis.

Conclusions: Our data showed that lung cancer cells responded to BET and
HDAC inhibitors and that the combination of both drugs has a synergistic
effect in cell growth inhibition, suggesting that this could be an
effective treatment in lung cancer. Our data also point out to certain
genes as potential biomarkers to determine sensitivity to these compounds.


