Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of IL-13 signaling through IL-13Rα2 in human brain tumor
specimens in situ.


Previously, we have demonstrated that IL-13 receptor alpha2 (IL-13Rα2),
a high affinity receptor for Th2 cytokine IL-13, is overexpressed in most
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines and approximately 78% of the
patient-derived samples. We have also demonstrated that IL-13Rα2 can be
targeted by a number of immunotherapeutic agents including chimeric
antigen receptor modified T (CAR-T) cells, targeted lentivirus and
adenovirus vectors, and a chimeric fusion immunotoxin consisting of IL-13
and truncated Pseudomonas exotoxin (IL-13-PE). However, the signal
transduction initiated by IL-13 in GBM tumor is not known to occur
through the IL13Rα2, which has a high affinity for IL-13. We have
recently observed that IL-13 can signal through IL-13Rα2 by activating
AP-1 transcription factors in human brain tumor cell lines. In this
study, we have examined IL-13Rα2 expression in human brain tumor and
normal brain specimens, and the subsequent signaling through the AP-1
pathway in situ. Using six human glioblastoma and three astrocytoma
specimens, we evaluated the expression of AP-1 transcription factors by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and compared the extent of immunostaining and
percent positive fields with three normal brain specimens. Six GBM
specimens examined showed high degree of immunostaining for c-Fos, c-Jun,
Jun D and Fra-1 (AP-1 family of transcription factors) and a high
percentage of positive fields. These specimens also showed strong
immunostaining for IL-13Rα2 (4+) in >70% fields (P2+ and 32% fields, P2+
and 32% fields, P<0.01 compared to normal brain), but the extent of
staining was lower compared to GBM. Similar to IL-13Rα2 expression, the
extent of staining and percentage of positive fields for AP-1
transcription factors were highly statistically significant between
tumors and normal brain (P2+ and 32% fields, P<0.01 compared to normal
brain), but the extent of staining was lower compared to GBM. Similar to
IL-13Rα2 expression, the extent of staining and percentage of positive
fields for AP-1 transcription factors were highly statistically
significant between tumors and normal brain (P<0.001 for GBM compared to
normal brain and P2+ and 32% fields, P<0.01 compared to normal brain),
but the extent of staining was lower compared to GBM. Similar to
IL-13Rα2 expression, the extent of staining and percentage of positive
fields for AP-1 transcription factors were highly statistically
significant between tumors and normal brain (P<0.001 for GBM compared to
normal brain and P<0.01 for astrocytoma compared to normal brain). The
extent of immunostaining in GBM was highest for c-Fos (4+, 78% fields)
followed by c-Jun (3+, 57% fields), Fra-1 (2+, 70% fields) and Jun-D (2+,
28% fields). Jun-B expression was the lowest among the AP-1 transcription
factors (2+ and 32% fields, P<0.01 compared to normal brain), but the
extent of staining was lower compared to GBM. Similar to IL-13Rα2
expression, the extent of staining and percentage of positive fields for
AP-1 transcription factors were highly statistically significant between
tumors and normal brain (P<0.001 for GBM compared to normal brain and
P<0.01 for astrocytoma compared to normal brain). The extent of
immunostaining in GBM was highest for c-Fos (4+, 78% fields) followed by
c-Jun (3+, 57% fields), Fra-1 (2+, 70% fields) and Jun-D (2+, 28%
fields). Jun-B expression was the lowest among the AP-1 transcription
factors (<1+, 7% fields) in GBM specimens. Astrocytoma specimens showed
lesser extent of immunostaining for AP-1 members compared to GBM; c-Fos
showed 2+ staining and 42% positive fields followed by c-Jun (2+, 12%
fields), Fra-1 (2+, 48% fields) and Jun-D (2+ and 32% fields, P<0.01
compared to normal brain), but the extent of staining was lower compared
to GBM. Similar to IL-13Rα2 expression, the extent of staining and
percentage of positive fields for AP-1 transcription factors were highly
statistically significant between tumors and normal brain (P<0.001 for
GBM compared to normal brain and P<0.01 for astrocytoma compared to
normal brain). The extent of immunostaining in GBM was highest for c-Fos
(4+, 78% fields) followed by c-Jun (3+, 57% fields), Fra-1 (2+, 70%
fields) and Jun-D (2+, 28% fields). Jun-B expression was the lowest among
the AP-1 transcription factors (<1+, 7% fields) in GBM specimens.
Astrocytoma specimens showed lesser extent of immunostaining for AP-1
members compared to GBM; c-Fos showed 2+ staining and 42% positive fields
followed by c-Jun (2+, 12% fields), Fra-1 (2+, 48% fields) and Jun-D
(<1+, 18% fields). Jun-B staining intensity was 2+ and 32% fields, P<0.01
compared to normal brain), but the extent of staining was lower compared
to GBM. Similar to IL-13Rα2 expression, the extent of staining and
percentage of positive fields for AP-1 transcription factors were highly
statistically significant between tumors and normal brain (P<0.001 for
GBM compared to normal brain and P<0.01 for astrocytoma compared to
normal brain). The extent of immunostaining in GBM was highest for c-Fos
(4+, 78% fields) followed by c-Jun (3+, 57% fields), Fra-1 (2+, 70%
fields) and Jun-D (2+, 28% fields). Jun-B expression was the lowest among
the AP-1 transcription factors (<1+, 7% fields) in GBM specimens.
Astrocytoma specimens showed lesser extent of immunostaining for AP-1
members compared to GBM; c-Fos showed 2+ staining and 42% positive fields
followed by c-Jun (2+, 12% fields), Fra-1 (2+, 48% fields) and Jun-D
(<1+, 18% fields). Jun-B staining intensity was <1+ in only 6% fields.
Normal brain specimens showed no immunostaining for AP-1 family members.
Our results generally corroborate with data obtained from GBM cell lines
and confirm that IL-13 can signal in IL-13Rα2 positive GBM tumors
in-situ through the AP-1 pathway, thus indicating that this pathway may
be an important target for therapeutic intervention of GBM in addition to
targeting IL-13Rα2.


