Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNORD-X in glioblastoma: regulation and functional analysis.


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is a kind of brain tumor which arises from
astrocytes present in the brain. It represents approximately 15% of all
primary brain tumor and has been considered as one of the deadliest type
of cancer with very poor prognosis. Thus, there is an urgent need to
identify novel targets for GBM therapy. Recently, non-coding RNAs
(ncRNAs) such as miRNAs and lncRNAs have emerged as one of the promising
tools as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers and as novel targets for
therapy. There are recent evidences that small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs),
a subtype of ncRNAs might also play a key role in various cancers. In
this context, we aimed at studying the role of snoRNAs in GBM. For this,
we did snoRNA profiling in GBM patients and found that a particular
cluster of snoRNA called SNORD-X was highly downregulated in adult as
well as pediatric GBM patients. We also found SNORD-X promoter to be
methylated and shows maternal imprinting. We next did functional analyses
of SNORD-X by generation of an overexpression construct. Our preliminary
data suggests that overexpression of SNORD-X in GBM cell lines (U87MG and
A172) increases cell proliferation in vitro. It also enhances the colony
forming capability of GBM cells. Further, its overexpression causes
decrease in apoptosis in a caspase-dependent manner. A target analysis of
SNORD-X was done using RNAhybrid software. We found EGR1, DCUN1D3 and
BRCA1 to be the direct targets of SNORD-X using a combination of qRT-PCR
and wild-type/mutated 3â€™UTR luciferase analyses. Overall, our work
shows for the first time correlation and functional analysis of SNORD-X
cluster in GBM.


