Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapeutic effects of naturally occurring colossolactones
against solid tumor cells in-vitro.


Colossolactones were isolated previously from the Vietnamese mushroom
ganoderma colossum, such triterpenoids. The different colossolactone
compounds (schisanalactonoe a, colossolactone I, ergosterol,
colossolactone III, colossolactone II, colossolactone IV, colossolactone
E) characterized by the presence of a six-membered lactone ring (ring D)
with or without a seven-membered lactone rings (ring A) were isolated. In
the current study, using DPPH free radical scavenging assay, all
colossolactone compounds showed weak antioxidant activity with EC50’s
of 99.46, 220.32, 219.65, 100.81, 238.54, 116.57 and 131.94 µM,
respectively. Isolated compounds were examined for their potential
anticancer activity against breast (MCF-7), cervix (HeLa), colorectal
(HCT-116) and liver (HepG2) cancer cells. Cytotoxicity of the isolated
compounds was assessed in the aforementioned cell lines using SRB assay
after 72 h of exposure and fitted using Emax model. Amongst
colossolactones, schisanalactonoe-A and colossolactone-IV showed the best
cytotoxic profile in all cell lines under investigation with IC50’s
ranged from 4.9 to 64.2 µM; and R-fraction less than 47.5%. Further
mechanistic studies for the detailed mechanism of cytotoxicity of
schisanalactonoe-A and colossolactone-IV are currently carried out.


