Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prmt6 promotes lung tumor growth via modulation of Ilf2 expression.


Lung cancer kills more people in the US than any other malignancy. High
mortalities are in part due to the diagnosis at an advanced inoperable
stage where the 5-year survival is only 4%. Therefore improving survival
will require increased knowledge of genes that drive the complex
mechanisms of lung cancer initiation and progression. Emerging data
implicate novel roles for protein arginine methylation in lung cancers.
In protein arginine methylation, nitrogen/s of arginine can be
post-translationally modified via the addition of a methyl group,
catalyzed by a class of enzymes, protein arginine methyl transferases
(PRMTs). Protein arginine methyl transferase 6 (PRMT6) is a methyl
transferase that modifies histone tails, and its expression is
upregulated in lung cancers, correlating with a worse overall patient
survival. However, the in vivo role of PRMT6 has never been examined. In
this study, we show that targeted over-expression of PRMT6 in the mouse
lungs (PRMT6 gain-of-function mouse model) results in an increased
chemical carcinogen-induced lung tumorigenesis. We also performed
proteomics on PRMT6-associated proteins from the mouse lung and
identified Interleukin-enhancer binding protein 2 (ILF2) a.k.a. nuclear
factor 45 (NF45) as a novel PRMT6 interacting protein. By using a battery
of cell-based assays, we show that PRMT6 plays an essential role in the
regulation of the pro-proliferative functions of ILF2. Therefore,
targeting PRMT6/ILF2 axis might open new possibilities for the
therapeutic intervention of lung cancer.


