Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of convolutional neural networks to breast biopsies to
uncover tissue correlates of mammographic breast density.


Background: High percent mammographic density (MD), which reflects the
relative fibroglandular tissue content of the breast, is one of the
strongest breast cancer risk factors; however, the pathologic mediators
of this risk are unknown. We hypothesize that analysis of breast tissue
sections using deep learning approaches may characterize histologic
features that underpin risk associated with high MD.

Methods: Non-targeted H&E stained breast tissue sections of diagnostic
image-guided breast biopsies were evaluated among 588 women enrolled
following an abnormal mammogram in the Breast Radiology Evaluation and
Study of Tissues (BREAST) Stamp Project (2007-2010). Overall volumetric
percent MD for the biopsied breast and localized volumetric percent MD
surrounding the biopsy site were determined for each participant. A deep
convolutional neural network (CNN) model was trained to identify and
quantitatively assess breast epithelial, stroma and fat tissue and their
organizational and spatial arrangements. Least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator (Lasso) regression was used to determine relationships
between MD measures and pathological features. To ensure reliability of
the model, a cross-validation strategy was employed to build and assess
the performance of the fitted model. Finally, Spearman correlation
coefficients were estimated to test the association between the predicted
density values by each model (predicting overall or localized MD) and the
actual MD measurements. We report the average and standard deviation (SD)
of the correlation coefficients.

Results: In an independent validation set, the CNN model was 95.5%
accurate in classifying epithelial, stromal and fat tissue. The mean (SD)
correlations between the predicted model and the actual measurements for
overall and localized MD were 0.70 (0.06) and 0.65 (0.06) respectively.
The amount of stroma identified (normalized to tissue area) had the
highest selection probability (P-value) by the Lasso model and thus the
strongest positive relationship with MD (P-value >0.9 for each MD
measurement). In contrast, the amount of normalized epithelial tissue was
not related to MD (P-value=0.01 for each MD measurement). No association
was observed for the total normalized fat area with MD (P-value Results:
In an independent validation set, the CNN model was 95.5% accurate in
classifying epithelial, stromal and fat tissue. The mean (SD)
correlations between the predicted model and the actual measurements for
overall and localized MD were 0.70 (0.06) and 0.65 (0.06) respectively.
The amount of stroma identified (normalized to tissue area) had the
highest selection probability (P-value) by the Lasso model and thus the
strongest positive relationship with MD (P-value >0.9 for each MD
measurement). In contrast, the amount of normalized epithelial tissue was
not related to MD (P-value=0.01 for each MD measurement). No association
was observed for the total normalized fat area with MD (P-value <0.31 for
each MD measurement). In addition, the number of distributed epithelial
regions was positively associated, whereas the distance between
epithelial regions was inversely associated with overall MD (P-value
Results: In an independent validation set, the CNN model was 95.5%
accurate in classifying epithelial, stromal and fat tissue. The mean (SD)
correlations between the predicted model and the actual measurements for
overall and localized MD were 0.70 (0.06) and 0.65 (0.06) respectively.
The amount of stroma identified (normalized to tissue area) had the
highest selection probability (P-value) by the Lasso model and thus the
strongest positive relationship with MD (P-value >0.9 for each MD
measurement). In contrast, the amount of normalized epithelial tissue was
not related to MD (P-value=0.01 for each MD measurement). No association
was observed for the total normalized fat area with MD (P-value <0.31 for
each MD measurement). In addition, the number of distributed epithelial
regions was positively associated, whereas the distance between
epithelial regions was inversely associated with overall MD (P-value
<0.87 and 0.62, respectively).

Conclusions: These results show that greater stromal tissue amount and
spatial distribution patterns of epithelial regions, rather than total
epithelial amounts, had the strongest relationships with elevated MD.
Future work will determine the relationship of these MD features with
biopsy diagnosis.


