Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNS-062 demonstrates efficacy in chronic lymphocytic leukemia in
vitro and inhibits C481S mutated Bruton tyrosine kinase.


Introduction: In order to address the issue of acquired resistance to
ibrutinib, we sought to characterize the Bruton agammaglobulinemia
tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor SNS-062 in preclinical models of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Methods: Primary CLL B cells were isolated
from the whole blood of consented patients by ficoll density
centrifugation and Rosette-Sep negative selection. Annexin V and
propidium iodide flow cytometry was used to measure patient CLL cell
viability and 7-AAD was used to measure viability in stromal co-culture.
CD40 and CD86 expression was evaluated via flow cytometry subsequent to
sustained 3.2uM CpG stimulation. BCR signaling in primary CLL cells was
investigated by immunoblot following 1 hour treatment and following 1
hour or 24 hours of incubation with SNS-062 in XLA cell lines. ITK
inhibition was investigated via immunoblot after stimulation with
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 and incubation with SNS-062 for 1 hour. SNS-062
was used at a concentration of 1uM in preclinical studies unless
otherwise noted. Measurement of kinase activity in human recombinant WT
BTK or C481S BTK was performed in a FRET kinase assay. Results:
Immunoblots of BTK and ERK phosphorylation of XLA cells transfected with
WT or C481S BTK demonstrated that SNS-062 inhibition is comparable to
that of ibrutinib in WT BTK and greater than that of ibrutinib in C481S
BTK. Using a recombinant kinase assay, we found the IC50 of SNS-062
against WT BTK to be 4.6nM and C481S BTK to be 1.1nM, suggesting that
SNS-062 retains activity against the mutated BTK variant. Additionally,
SNS-062 was found to be six times more potent than ibrutinib and greater
than 640 times more potent than acalabrutinib against C481S BTK. SNS-062
demonstrates dose-dependent inhibition of BTK in primary patient CLL
cells comparable to ibrutinib via immunoblot for BTK phosphorylation. The
viability of primary patient cells treated with 0.1uM, 1.0uM, and 10.0uM
SNS-062 for 48 hours was measured to be 96.7%, 96.1%, and 88.1%,
respectively, that of the untreated condition. At 48 hours, SNS-062
decreased viability of primary CLL cells in the presence of HS5 stromal
protection by 5.5%. SNS-062 was found to decrease CpG induced CD40 and
CD86 expression by 8.7% and 15.7%, respectively. Using an in vitro kinase
assay, SNS-062 inhibited ITK with an IC50 value of 24nM. An immunoblot of
anti-CD3/CD28 stimulated Jurkat cells revealed that SNS-062 decreased the
phosphorylation of ERK, implying inhibition of ITK. Conclusion: Unlike
ibrutinib, SNS-062 inhibits BTK signaling in the presence of the C481S
mutation and may address acquired resistance to covalent BTK inhibitors.
SNS-062 decreases B cell activation markers, viability, and stromal cell
protection in primary patient CLL cells and was shown to inhibit ITK,
suggesting support of T cell mediated antitumor activities. These data
support further investigation of this molecule and advancement into
clinical trials.


