Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPARC overexpression alters microRNA expression profiles involved
in tumor progression.


Medulloblastoma is the most common of malignant brain tumor in children.
SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine), a multicellular
non-structural glycoprotein is known to be involved in multiple processes
in various cancers. Previously, we reported that SPARC expression
significantly impairs medulloblastoma tumor growth in vivo and alters
chemo sensitivity. MicroRNAs are a class of post-transcriptional gene
regulators with critical functions in tumor progression. In addition,
they also play role in regulation of vital genes that control mechanisms
of chemo-resistance. Herein, we assessed microRNA (miRNA) profiling to
identify the functional network and biological pathways altered in
SPARC-overexpressed medulloblastoma cells. A total of 27 differentially
expressed miRNAs were identified between the control and
SPARC-overexpressed samples. Potential messenger RNA (mRNA) targets of
the differentially expressed miRNA were identified using Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA). Network-based functional analyses were performed
on the available human protein interaction and miRNA-gene association
data to highlight versatile miRNAs among the significantly deregulated
miRNAs using the IPA, and the biological pathway analysis using the
PANTHER web-based tool. We identified six miRNAs (miR-125b1*,
miR-146a-5p, miR-181a-5p, miR-204-5p, miR-219-5p and miR-509-3p) which
are differentially regulated with SPARC expression in medulloblastoma
cells. Furthermore, pathway enrichment analysis outline that these six
microRNAs mainly belong to biological processes related to cancer related
signaling pathways. Collectively, these results suggest that a perturbed
expression for these six miRNAs and their complex regulatory loops
contribute to tumor suppressive effects in SPARC overexpressed
medulloblastoma cells.


