Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ONC201 targets AR and AR-V7 signaling pathways, reduces PSA and
synergizes with everolimus in castration resistant prostate cancer.


Androgen receptor (AR) signaling plays a key role in prostate cancer
progression; thus Androgen Deprivation Therapy (ADT) is a mainstay
therapy for patients with advanced prostate cancer. However, in most
cases the tumor becomes androgen-independent and resistant to ADT with
patients ultimately progressing to metastatic castration resistant
prostate cancer (mCRPC). Constitutively activated AR splice variants
(AR-Vs) have emerged as major mediators of resistance to AR-targeted
therapy and progression of mCRPC, representing an important therapeutic
target for mCRPC. Out of at least 15 AR-Vs described thus far, AR-V7 is
the most abundant in prostate cancer and its expression correlates with
ADT resistance. ONC201 is the founding member of the imipridone class of
small molecules that induces apoptosis in a variety of tumor types
tested. It is currently in Phase I/II clinical trials for advanced solid
tumors and hematological malignancies, including mCRPC with encouraging
activity observed in patients in early clinical testing (Stein et al.,
ASCO, 2016). We demonstrate here that ONC201 treatment induces apoptosis
in both castration-resistant and â€“sensitive human prostate cancer cell
lines. Furthermore, an in-vitro synergistic effect is observed with
ONC201 and FDA approved drugs for prostate cancer such as enzalutamide,
docetaxel and everolimus. Mechanistically, we found that ONC201 inhibits
both AR and AR-V7 signaling pathways. Analysis of AR+ cell lines
stimulated with DHT showed a significant decrease in both RNA and protein
levels of AR, AR-V7, PSA and other AR-target genes following ONC201
treatment. Ongoing experiments are aimed at better understanding the
molecular and cellular mechanisms that enable ONC201 to inhibit the AR
signaling pathway. In-vivo studies with AR-negative hormone refractory
prostate cancer xenografts demonstrate single agent ONC201 anti-tumor
efficacy. Ongoing studies are further evaluating the in-vivo efficacy of
ONC201 as a single agent or in combination with enzalutamide and
everolimus using mouse models of both castration-resistant and -sensitive
prostate cancer. These preclinical results indicate that ONC201 is well
suited to address mCRPC, including tumors that harbor AR-V7, as a single
agent that may be combined synergistically with enzalutamide or
everolimus . With these observations we envision further development a
combination of ONC201 plus everolimus in CRPC with or without
enzalutamide resistance.


