Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell analysis reveals an adaptive, transiently heritable,
slowly-dividing, drug-resistant state inhibitable by drug combinations.


Adaptation and fractional response of tumor cells to targeted inhibitors
of oncogenic pathways creates a population of viable tumor cells from
which fully resistant clones can ultimately arise. Thus, understanding
transient drug adaptation is key for both improving the effectiveness of
treatment and delaying/controlling acquired resistance. Despite the
wealth of information available about feedback mechanisms associated with
adaptive resistance, most of our knowledge in this area comes from
studying drug response in bulk tumor cell populations. Furthermore, the
phenotypic consequences of drug adaptation have been often studied at a
few fixed time-points, when drug-adapted cells exhibit a high
population-average activity in multiple pro-growth signaling cascades. It
therefore remains unclear how the initial responses to drug relate to
subsequent phenotypes such as cell death or adaptation. This is likely a
key point for designing novel approaches to overcome fractional drug
response in tumor cells and to achieve durable therapy.

We use real-time live-cell imaging, single-cell analysis and molecular
profiling to show that exposure of BRAFV600E melanoma cells to RAF/MEK
inhibitors elicits a time-variable and heterogeneous response in which
some cells die, some arrest and the remainder adapt to drug. Drug-adapted
cells up-regulate markers of the neural crest (e.g. NGFR), a melanocyte
precursor, and grow slowly. The drug-induced slowly-cycling NFGRHigh
state is only transiently stable, reverting to the drug-na√Øve state
within two weeks of drug withdrawal as measured by the restoration of
RAF/MEK inhibitor sensitivity, accelerated rate of cell division and
reduced expression of NGFR. Transcriptional and biochemical profiling of
cell lines and human tumors implicates a role for the c-Jun/ECM/FAK/Src
cascade in driving the de-differentiated resistance program. We identify
multiple drugs targeting this cascade as well as BET bromodomain
inhibitors that block this resistance program in cell lines and in a
BRAFV600E melanoma xenograft model and increase sensitivity and maximal
effect (Emax) of RAF/MEK inhibitors. Our study reveals directly how drug
adaptation happens in individual tumor cells leading to emergence of
heterogeneous cell sub-populations with reduced drug-sensitivity that may
be targeted by drug combinations.


