Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functionally null RAD51D missense mutation is strongly
associated with ovarian carcinoma.


Background and goal: RAD51D is a key player in DNA repair by homologous
recombination (HR) and carriers of truncating RAD51D mutations have an
increased risk for ovarian cancer (OC). However, the contribution of
non-truncating RAD51D variants to cancer predisposition remains
uncertain. We sought to fully characterize the previously described
missense RAD51D variant c.620C>T;p.S207L in order to elucidate its role
in OC.

Methods: A clinical panel screening was used to identify the RAD51D
variant c.620C>T;p.S207L in two French Canadian (FC) kindred affected
with familial High Grade Serous Cancer (HGSC) of the ovary or
endometrium. High resolution melting, TaqMan genotyping and Sanger
sequencing were used to genotype the p.S207L variant in a series of
unselected cases of HGSC of the ovary and endometrium, breast, pancreas
and colorectal cancer and healthy controls, all of a FC origin. Whole
exome sequencing (WES) was performed to study the genetic signature
characterizing RAD51D associated tumors. RAD51 foci formation and
CRISPR-Cas9-stimulated and HR-mediated gene targeting assays were used to
assess HR activity of RAD51D-S207L mutated CHO cells. HR activity in
RAD51D-S207L mutated human cells was tested by a DR-GFP assay. The effect
of RAD51D p.S207L on RAD51D-XRCC2 interactions was analyzed by
co-immunoprecipitation and quantified in-vivo in a single cell
colocalization assay. Sensitivity to PARP inhibitors (PARPi) was
evaluated in a cell survival assay.

Results: Using deep sequencing and case-control genotyping studies, we
showed that the missense RAD51D variant c.620C>T;p.S207L is
over-represented in the French Canadian population affected by HGSC of
the ovary (3.8% cases vs 0.002% controls; p T;p.S207L mutation. WES
analysis of RAD51D tumor profiles revealed the presence of signature 3
which is known to be associated with HR defects. Functionally, we show
that this mutation impairs HR by disrupting the RAD51D-XRCC2 interaction
and confers PARP-inhibitor sensitivity to CHO cells.

Conclusions: This work identifies RAD51D p.S207L as the first bona fide
pathogenic missense susceptibility allele for HGSC of the ovary and
supports the use of targeted PARPi therapies in OC patients carrying
missense RAD51D mutations.


