Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SYD985, a novel duocarmycin-based HER2-targeting antibody-drug
conjugate, shows antitumor activity in uterine and ovarian carcinosarcoma
with HER2/neu expression.


Introduction: Carcinosarcoma (CS) is a rare and highly aggressive
gynecologic malignancy. The amplification of HER2/neu has been reported
to occur in 25%-56% of uterine and ovarian CSs with significant
heterogeneity of the expression within epithelial and in-between
epithelial and mesenchymal components. The reported high incidence makes
HER2/neu an attractive target for new molecularly targeted therapies. We
investigated the efficacy of SYD985, (Synthon-Biopharmaceuticals), a
novel HER2-targeting antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) composed of a
monoclonal antibody (mAb) similar to trastuzumab linked to a highly
potent DNA-alkylating agent (i.e., duocarmycin) in uterine and ovarian
carcinosarcoma. We also compared the anti-tumor activity of SYD985 to
trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1), a FDA-approved ADC, against multiple
primary CS cell lines expressing different levels of HER2/neu in in vitro
and in vivo experiments.

Methods: Eight primary CS cell lines were evaluated for HER2/neu surface
expression by IHC and gene amplification using FISH assays. The
cytotoxicity of SYD985 and T-DM1 was evaluated using these eight CS
primary cell lines with differential HER2/neu expression (i.e., 0, 1+,
and 3+). Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), proliferation,
viability and bystander killing experiments were performed using
Cr51-release assays, propidium iodide-based and flow cytometry assays,
respectively. SYD985 and T-DM1 in vivo activity was also studied in mouse
xenograft models.

Results: Similar ADCC were induced by SYD985 and T-DM1 when effector
cells were present against CS cell lines with different HER2/neu
expression. In contrast, SYD985 was significantly more cytotoxic compared
to T-DM1 in the absence of the effector cells. SYD985 is 7 to 54 fold
more potent than T-DM1 in comparative experiments and unlike T-DM1, it is
active against CS demonstrating moderate/low or heterogeneous HER2/neu
expression. Specifically, in HER2/neu 0/1+ cell lines the mean IC50’s
were 0.060 µg/mL and 3.221 µg/mL for SYD985 vs T-DM1 (pResults: Similar
ADCC were induced by SYD985 and T-DM1 when effector cells were present
against CS cell lines with different HER2/neu expression. In contrast,
SYD985 was significantly more cytotoxic compared to T-DM1 in the absence
of the effector cells. SYD985 is 7 to 54 fold more potent than T-DM1 in
comparative experiments and unlike T-DM1, it is active against CS
demonstrating moderate/low or heterogeneous HER2/neu expression.
Specifically, in HER2/neu 0/1+ cell lines the mean IC50’s were 0.060
µg/mL and 3.221 µg/mL for SYD985 vs T-DM1 (p<0.0001) and in HER2/neu 3+
cell lines 0.013 µg/mL and 0.096 µg/mL, (pResults: Similar ADCC were
induced by SYD985 and T-DM1 when effector cells were present against CS
cell lines with different HER2/neu expression. In contrast, SYD985 was
significantly more cytotoxic compared to T-DM1 in the absence of the
effector cells. SYD985 is 7 to 54 fold more potent than T-DM1 in
comparative experiments and unlike T-DM1, it is active against CS
demonstrating moderate/low or heterogeneous HER2/neu expression.
Specifically, in HER2/neu 0/1+ cell lines the mean IC50’s were 0.060
µg/mL and 3.221 µg/mL for SYD985 vs T-DM1 (p<0.0001) and in HER2/neu 3+
cell lines 0.013 µg/mL and 0.096 µg/mL, (p<0.0001), respectively,
(pResults: Similar ADCC were induced by SYD985 and T-DM1 when effector
cells were present against CS cell lines with different HER2/neu
expression. In contrast, SYD985 was significantly more cytotoxic compared
to T-DM1 in the absence of the effector cells. SYD985 is 7 to 54 fold
more potent than T-DM1 in comparative experiments and unlike T-DM1, it is
active against CS demonstrating moderate/low or heterogeneous HER2/neu
expression. Specifically, in HER2/neu 0/1+ cell lines the mean IC50’s
were 0.060 µg/mL and 3.221 µg/mL for SYD985 vs T-DM1 (p<0.0001) and in
HER2/neu 3+ cell lines 0.013 µg/mL and 0.096 µg/mL, (p<0.0001),
respectively, (p<0.0001). Unlike T-DM1,

SYD985 induced efficient bystander killing of HER2/neu 0/1+ EOC cells
admixed with HER2/neu 3+ cells. In vivo studies confirmed that SYD985 is
more active than T-DM1 in CS and effective against HER2/neu 3+ xenografts.

Conclusions: We demonstrate for the first time that SYD985 is a novel ADC
with remarkable activity against CS not only with strong (3+) but also
with low (0/1+) HER2/neu expression . Clinical studies with SYD985 in
patients harboring chemotherapy-resistant uterine and ovarian CS with
low, moderate and high HER2 expression are warranted.


