Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessing the role of CREB in fibrolamellar hepatocellular
carcinoma with PRKACA-DNAJB1 fusion protein.


Introduction: Fibrolamellar Hepatocellular Carcinoma (FLHCC) is a rare
form of liver cancer that occurs predominantly in adolescents or young
adults. Curing or prolonging the lives of patients with FLHCC is
extremely challenging. Despite aggressive surgical resections of primary
tumors as well as metastatic lesions, outcomes tend to be poor due to
lack of effective chemotherapy. Previous studies have demonstrated the
presence of PRKACA-DNAJB1 fusion protein in the majority of FLHCC
patients. DNAJB1 is a heat shock protein and PKA is a kinase that
phosphorylates numerous substrates including cAMP-regulatory
element-binding protein (CREB), a proto-oncogenic transcription factor.
Therefore, we sought to examine whether the presence of the fusion
protein in FLHCC is associated with increased CREB phosphorylation.

Methods: We analyzed tumor and matched non-neoplastic liver tissue from 7
pediatric patients with a pathologic diagnosis of FLHCC. We assessed the
presence of the PRKACA-DNAJB1 fusion protein using PKA antibody, as well
as total CREB and phosphorylated (p-CREB) using immunoblot analyses with
specific antibodies.

Results: Immunoblot analysis using anti-PKA antibody confirmed the
occurrence of PRKACA-DNAJB1 fusion transcripts in 6/7 (86%) FLHCC tumor
samples. Immunoblot analyses of the 6 patients with the fusion protein
revealed a trend towards a decrease in p-CREB expression in tumor samples
compared to non-neoplastic tissue controls (p=0.15).

Conclusions: The pattern of p-CREB in FLHCC with PRKACA-DNAJB1 fusion
protein suggests that the fusion protein does not exert its
proto-oncogenic effects through the transcriptional activity of CREB.


