Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of second primary cancers in women diagnosed with endometrial
cancer in German and Swedish cancer registries.


Background: Along with the increasing incidence and favorable prognosis,
more women diagnosed with endometrial cancer may develop second primary
cancers (SPCs). Nevertheless, most of previous studies have limitations
such as small study samples or investigations for selected SPC only.
Additionally, to our knowledge, investigations on the risk of a specific
SPC after endometrial cancer in two different populations have not been
reported. We aimed at investigating risk of second primary cancers (SPCs)
in women diagnosed with endometrial cancer in Germany and Sweden to
provide insight into etiology and prevention strategies for SPCs.

Methods: Endometrial cancer patients diagnosed at age â‰¥15 years in
Germany during 1997-2011 and in Sweden nationwide during 1997-2012 were
selected. For both German and Swedish datasets, standardized incidence
ratios (SIRs), calculated as the ratio of observed to expected numbers of
cases, were used to assess the risk of a specific SPC in women diagnosed
with endometrial cancer. The expected number of a SPC after endometrial
cancer was calculated from the strata-specific first same cancer
incidence rates in the Swedish and German general population,
respectively, multiplied by the corresponding person-years in women with
endometrial cancer. Person-years at risk were accumulated for each
patient, starting at the date of diagnosis of the first endometrial
cancer, and terminating on the diagnosis date of a SPC, date of death,
date of emigration, or end of follow-up (end of 2011 for Germany and of
2012 for Sweden), whichever came first.

Results: Among 46,929 endometrial cancer survivors in Germany and 18,646
in Sweden, overall 2,897 and 1,706 SPCs were recorded, respectively.
Significantly elevated SIRs were observed in Germany for ovarian
(SIR=1.3; 95%CI:1.1-1.5) and kidney cancers [1.6 (1.3-1.8)], while in
Sweden the SIRs were 5.4 (4.6-6.3) and1.4 (1.0-1.9), respectively.
Elevated risk for second ovarian endometrioid carcinoma was pronounced
after early (Results: Among 46,929 endometrial cancer survivors in
Germany and 18,646 in Sweden, overall 2,897 and 1,706 SPCs were recorded,
respectively. Significantly elevated SIRs were observed in Germany for
ovarian (SIR=1.3; 95%CI:1.1-1.5) and kidney cancers [1.6 (1.3-1.8)],
while in Sweden the SIRs were 5.4 (4.6-6.3) and1.4 (1.0-1.9),
respectively. Elevated risk for second ovarian endometrioid carcinoma was
pronounced after early (<55 years) onset endometrial cancer in Germany
[9.0 (4.8-15)] and Sweden [7.7 (5.1-11)].In Germany elevated risks were
found for second ovarian endometrioid carcinoma after endometrioid
histology of first endometrial cancer [6.3 (4.0-9.4)] and for second
kidney cancer after clear cell histology of endometrial cancer [4.9
(1.6-11)].

Conclusions: We found exceptionally elevated risk of second ovarian
endometrioid carcinoma after endometrial cancer of the same histology or
of early onset. Kidney cancer was also increased, particularly after
endometrial cancer of clear cell histology. Cancer prevention strategies
should focus on these cancers after endometrial cancer diagnosis.


