Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-occurrence of alterations in the DNA damage repair genes
synergize with uncontrolled proliferation and associate with very-poor
prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia patients.


Partner and localizer of BRCA2 (PALB2) plays a key role in the DNA damage
repair (DDR) by recruiting BRCA1, BRCA2 and RAD51. Alterations in PALB2
were described in hereditary breast cancer and Fanconi Anemia (FA).
Little is known in Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML).

Aim of the study is to define the frequency and interplay of PALB2
alterations with patterns of somatic mutations and copy number variants
(CNVs) in AML.

We genotyped 233 AML samples by Single Nucleotide Polymorphism array (SNP
6.0 and Cytoscan HD, Affymetrix) to detect CNVs. We also performed Whole
Exome Sequencing (WES, Illumina) of 56 cases to detect single nucleotide
variants and small indels (MuTect and Varscan 2.0). Differences in
survival were assessed by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Breslow test.

We detected PALB2 loss in 12/233 patients (5%), with a minimal common
region of deletion of 6.6 Kb including exon 12, which encodes for the
domain of interaction with RAD51, BRCA2 and POLH. PALB2 deletion were
correlated with CN loss of MYH11, CREBBP, PLK1 and FANCA on chromosome
(chr) 16 (p≤.005), deletions of TP53, NF1 and BRCA1 on chr 17
(p≤.004), 5q deletions (p≤.001) and loss of XPO1 on chr 2 (p≤.006).
PALB2-loss patients were enriched for alterations in genes involved in
the protein kinase pathway (p=5×10-4), JUN kinase activity (p=.0006)
and, notably, in genes belonging to the chromosome breakage pathway
(p=.001; TP53, BRCA1 and BRCA2). To identify mutations that co-operates
with CN alterations, we integrated WES data of 56 AML patients. No
mutations in PALB2 were detected. However, we identified mutations in
other DDR genes, including FANCE, BRCA2, TP53 and BRCA1. Of note,
alterations in the DDR genes frequently co-occurred with both mutations
and CN loss of TP53, leading to homozygous loss of function of TP53. In
addition, KRAS, IDH1, TET2 and BCOR mutations were mutually exclusive
with PALB2 loss.

Preliminary gene expression profiling data revealed a 2-fold upregulation
of FANCA in samples with DDR genes alterations compared with patients
with no alterations (p=.04), while the other genes of the pathway were
not affected. Finally, patients harboring PALB2 loss had a poorer
prognosis compared complex karyotype cases (p=.021).

We here define a new subset of AML patients, characterized by the
synergistic loss of key DDR genes, which may in turn result in FANCA
over-expression as a mechanism to overcome the DDR deficit. Our data
suggest that the leukemogenic process associated PALB2 loss integrates
defects in the DDR together with enforced proliferative stimuli leading
to uncontrolled proliferation of cells, which potentially

accumulate genetic lesions. These results may help improve patient
stratification and define ad hoc therapeutic strategies for this
aggressive leukemia type.

Supported by: ELN, AIL, AIRC, progetto Regione-Università 2010-12 (L.
Bolondi), FP7 NGS-PTL project.


