Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lymphatic endothelium protects breast cancer cells from death by
inducing metabolic adaptations.


The lymphatic vasculature is an important pathway for breast cancer
dissemination, yet it is not understood whether and how the lymphatic
vessel microenvironment influences cancer metastasis. We demonstrate that
lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) promote survival of triple-negative
breast cancer cells (TNBCs) under stress by improving mitochondrial
function and inducing metabolic shift to promote cellular energy
production. LECs protected TNBCs from death in vitro induced by the loss
of attachment and nutrient deprivation. Cell death was preceded with a
sharp increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS), strong up-regulation of
Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response genes and a rapid decline of
mitochondrial activity. LECs lowered ROS levels, decreased mitochondrial
superoxide formation and enhanced mitochondrial activity in TNBCs. RNAseq
transcriptome analysis identified key regulator of mitochondrial
metabolism and cellular bioenergetics, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator (PPARGC1A/PGC-1Î±, to be specifically
up-regulated in breast cancer cells by LEC-derived factors. Inhibition
studies demonstrated that the TNBC survival was dependent on pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP) activity. Notably, LECs induced a metabolic shift
from glycolysis to fatty-acid oxidation (FAO) and oxidative
phosphorylation to maintain ATP and sustain cell viability. These data
demonstrate that lymphatic endothelium promotes survival of breast cancer
cells by regulating energy production and maintaining redox homeostasis.
Our findings suggest that lymphatic endothelium may facilitate metastasis
by promoting survival of breast cancer cells within the lymphatic
vasculature.


