Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of p21-activated kinase 4, PAK4, inhibits cellular
proliferation, motility and clonogenicity in oral squamous cell carcinoma.


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) accounts for 90% of all malignancies
in the oral cavity, and is often associated with low survival and poor
prognosis. While considerable progress in OSCC treatment has been made,
options for targeted therapy remain limited. Thus, it is imperative that
new druggable targets are identified and characterized. p21-activated
kinase 4 (PAK4) is a member of the PAK family of serine/threonine
kinases, which are known modulators of a diverse range of oncogenic
pathways including cell proliferation, escape from apoptosis, and
anchorage-independent growth. Previous reports have indicated that PAK4
is overexpressed in a subset of invasive OSCC, and is highly associated
with poor prognosis. However, the specific role of PAK4 in OSCC has yet
to be elucidated. Here, we show that RNAi-mediated depletion of PAK4
conferred reduced clonogenicity, cell motility, and cell proliferation in
OSCC cell lines in a cell line-dependent manner. Global proteomic
profiling of PAK4-depleted H103 and H357 cells was conducted to identify
the molecules and signaling pathways responsive to PAK4 depletion. In
addition to reported targets of PAK4 such as CFL1, ACTB, and TUBB6, we
observed that p16INK4a, pre-mRNA splicing factors (SRSF2, SRSF5, SRSF6,
SLU7), and proteasome activator subunits (PSME1-4) were dysregulated as a
result of PAK4 depletion. These results indicate that PAK4 plays a role
in promoting OSCC progression by regulating multiple signaling pathways.
Of note, there have yet to be any reports describing interactions between
PAK4 signaling and mRNA splicing or proteasome activation. Further
investigation is thus warranted to further delineate the potential role
of PAK4 in regulating these targets.


