Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-155 positively regulates glucose metabolism via PI3K
p85-FOXO3a-cMYC axis in breast cancer.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer for women worldwide. Although the
oncogenic roles of miR-155 in cancer have been reported, the metabolic
function of miR-155 in breast cancer has not been fully elucidated. In
this study, we have investigated how the energy metabolic shift occurs
after a genetic inactivation or knockdown of miR-155. To this end, we
performed metabolic profiling of the miR-155ko/ko or miR-155+/ko primary
cancer cells, obtained from mouse breast cancer model. We found, in the
absence of miR-155, less glucose uptake and glycolysis in tumor cells.
Mechanistically, we revealed PIK3R1(Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase, Regulatory
Subunit1, p85) and FOXO3a (Forkhead transcription factor of the O class
3a) are major targets that trigger the metabolic shift. Furthermore, we
showed cMYC level was consequently decreased in the absence of miR-155
that results in the down-regulation of proteins playing in glucose uptake
and Glycolysis. This finding is further confirmed in mouse allograft
model. Finally, we show the miR-155 expression is positively correlates
with either energy metabolite levels or standardized uptake values (SUV)
of fluoro-deoxy glucose (FDG)-PET Images in triple negative breast
tumors. Taken together, our study demonstrates a novel mechanism by which
the miR-155 controls energy metabolism in breast cancer, through PI3K
p85-FOXO3a-cMYC axis.


