Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Entinostat in combination with Cladribine synergistically induces
apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells.


Cladribine (2-CDA) is a well-known purine nucleoside analog against
lymphoproliferative disorders. Entinostat, a selective class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, exerts anti-tumor activity in various
cancers, including multiple myeloma (MM). We sought to determine whether
cladribine and entinostat may exhibit synergistic
anti-proliferative/anti-survival effects on MM cells. Here we showed
that, in cell growth MTS assays, either cladribine or entinostat alone
inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. The combinations
of cladribine and entinostat significantly induced growth inhibition in
MM cells tested. The combination index (CI) curves showed a synergistic
effect between cladribine and entinostat. An apoptotic-ELISA and western
blot analyses of caspase-3 and PARP revealed that entinostat in
combination with cladribine exhibited a much more potent activity than
either agent alone to promote the MM cells undergoing apoptosis in a dose
and time-dependent manner. Collectively, our data suggest that
combinations of entinostat and cladribine possess synergistic
anti-proliferative/anti-survival activity in MM cells. Regimens
consisting of entinostat and cladribine may represent novel therapeutic
strategies against MM.


