Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor Treating Fields (TTFields) affect human glioma cell
migration, invasion and adherence properties in vitro.


TTFields, an approved treatment modality for glioblastoma, are delivered
via continuous, noninvasive application of low intensity, intermediate
frequency alternating electric fields. The antimitotic effects of
TTFields have been extensively investigated. We investigated other
processes that may be affected by TTFields such as human glioma cell
migration and cellular invasion properties. Four human glioma cell lines
were treated with TTFields using the inovitro system. Cell migration
rates were measured using wound healing assays. Invasion assays were
performed using a modified Matrigel coated Boyden chamber. Cell adhesion
assays were performed during TTFields treatment and compared to untreated
controls. At the end of TTFieldsâ€™ treatment, adhered cells were
trypsinized and counted. A cells de-adhesion assay was performed
following 24 and 72 hours of TTFields application with the outcome being
the number of cells removed after varying times of trypsinization.
Application of TTFields in-vitro led to a significant reduction in cell
migration velocity compared with untreated control cells. Furthermore,
comparison of the anti-migratory efficacy of TTFields applied from 2
directions vs. a single direction revealed that the single direction
approach applied perpendicularly to the course of migration was more
effective than TTFields applied in 2 directions or in a single parallel
direction. Glioma cells invasion was significantly reduced compared to
untreated cells in all tested cell lines. Cell adhesion to the substrate
(fibronectin) was significantly reduced when exposed to TTFields. On the
other hand, cell de-adherence following TTFields treatment took
significantly longer time of trypsinization. Our results suggest that
human glioma cell motility is impaired by exposure to TTFields. Both
alterations in cells adherence and de-adherence during exposure to
TTFields may contribute to reduction in cell motility. Further studies
are needed to elucidate the mechanism by which TTFields disrupts cellular
motility in glioma cancer cells.


