Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ceramide-rubusoside nano-micelles restores p53-mediated tumor
suppression in p53R248W mutant ovarian cancer cells.


Ceramide (Cer), a sphingolipid metabolite, has crucial functions in
anti-proliferation, cell differentiation and apoptosis. Cellular Cer
levels highly correlates to therapeutic efficacy of anticancer drugs,
however, the hydrophobicity Cer has limits to develop it as a therapeutic
agent. Here, we report that Cer-rubusoside (Cer-RUB) nanomicelles
enhanced Cer bioavailability and restored p53-mediated tumor suppression.
These nanomicelles significantly increased the levels of NBD-C6-Cer by
more than 50-fold in serum, 40-fold in tumor and 70-fold in lung of
tumor-bearing mice (1 mg/kg, i.p., 24 hr), respectively. Cer-RUB (3 ÂµM)
significantly increased OVCAR-3 (p53 R248W) cell sensitivity to
cisplatin, and the IC50 values decreased by 3-fold, even though these
values were no significant changes in A2780 (wt p53) cells. Furthermore,
Cer-RUB treatments (1 mg/kg, i.p. every 3 days for 24 days) significantly
increased cisplatin efficacy in tumor growth-arrest in OVCAR-3
tumor-mice, and the tumor volumes reduced by 52% (1653 vs. 805 mm3) in
combination with cisplatin, compared to cisplatin alone. We found that
ovarian cancer stem cells (CD44+/CD133+) decreased by 10-fold (0.85 vs.
0.08% of total cells) in OVCAR-3 tumors treated with Cer-RUB combined
with cisplatin, as compared to cisplatin alone, respectively. Western
blotting showed that Cer-RUB treatments selectively increased the
expression levels of phosphorylated p53 (Ser15), BAX and p21 in OVCAR-3
cancer cells and tumors, respectively. These studies indicates that the
gain-of-function (GOF) of p53 R248W leads OVCAR-3 cell resistance to
cisplatin and tumor growth. Cer-RUB can restore p53 and eliminates the
GOF of p53 R248W in cancers.


