Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High intrinsic DPD activity matters too.


Introduction: Fluoropyrimidines (FP) are of major use in treating cancer.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) is the main enzyme responsible for
FP catabolism. Low DPD activity screening has proven its predictive
clinical value in identifying patients at risk for toxicity. However,
high DPD activity may translate to decreased FP activation and efficacy.

Patients and methods: One hundred and forty-three patients (monocentric
retrospective study) underwent a pretreatment assessment of DPD activity
in lymphocytes between 01/01/2004 and 20/04/2016. Included patients were
male or female, >18 years, FP-treatment-based. Cut-off for DPD activity
was assessed using smoothing spline curves.

Results: Median patient follow-up was 30 months [CI95%: 27.3-36.2], mean
age 63+/-3 years, females accounted for 53%, 90% of patients had a good
performance status (0 or 1). Fifty-eight percent of FP indications (65%
5-FU and 35% capecitabine) were adjuvant or neoadjuvant and 42% were
prescribed for local or metastatic recurrences. Tolerance was poor for
43% of patients and 49% needed dose reduction. Objective response
(complete and partial) was observed in 50% of patients, stable disease in
38% and progression in 12%. No significant correlation was observed
between DPD activity and response to treatment. Mean DPD activity (pmol
min−1 mg−1 protein) was 0.21+/-0.1 (quartile:
[0.001-0.14-0.20-0.28-0.48]). DPD activity analyzed as a continuous
variable was significantly linked to overall survival (OS) (p=0.042) but
not with progression-free survival (PFS). The higher the DPD activity,
the lower the OS. DPD activity analyzed as a binary variable (cut-off at
0.30) was significantly linked to overall survival (p=0.012) but also
with PFS (p=0.016). A Cox regression model for OS and PFS adjusted for
age, sex, type of cancer, type of administered FP, and associated
surgical or radiotherapy treatment was performed. After adjustment, DPD
activity remained significantly linked to OS (p=0.03) and PFS (p=0.021).

Conclusions: DPD activity screening could lead to a two-pronged approach:
FP dose reduction in the event of low DPD and dose increase for high DPD.
Such a strategy needs to be prospectively validated under personalized
DPD-based treatment.


