Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of miR-601 in prostate cancer progression.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cancer among men
worldwide. In order to advance treatment options for these men, it is
crucial to understand the molecular underpinnings behind this cancer.
Previously, our group identified miR-601 as a biomarker of significance
in PCa. Few studies to date have functionally validated molecular
biomarkers and currently little is known about the function of miR-601 in
PCa. Based on our previous publication, we hypothesized that miR-601
plays a role in PCa progression and radiation response. To test this
hypothesis, miR-601 was over-expressed and knocked down in DU145 and PC3
cell lines and assays were performed evaluating cell proliferation,
colony formation, apoptosis, and cell cycle progression. Additionally, to
provide more information regarding miR-601-associated pathways, we
identified putative gene targets of miR-601 using in silico prediction
programs, microrna.org and TargetScan.org and evaluated top gene targets
in vitro. To date, our data suggest that miR-601 may be playing a role as
a tumor suppressor. Over-expression of miR-601 in cell lines resulted in
a significant reduction in cell viability. This was confirmed both by MTS
as well as colony formation assays. We looked into the mechanism behind
the reduction in cell viability by testing the effect of miR-601 on
apoptosis and cell cycle progression. We found that cells over-expressing
miR-601 had slightly higher levels of apoptosis, however miR-601 did not
induce a substantial effect on cell cycle progression. Additionally, we
found that miR-601 enhances radiosensitization in DU145 and PC-3 cell
lines. Similar results have been observed in breast cancer 1 as well as
in a large miRNA screen performed in the LNCaP cell line2. Two putative
gene targets of miR-601 were identified and investigated in vitro, SIRT1,
a histone deacetylase known to be both an oncogene and tumor suppressor,
and BCL2L2, an anti-apoptotic gene known to be an oncogene. SIRT1 and
BCL2L2 had strong scores on both online prediction programs as likely
targets of miR-601. Our in vitro results confirmed this. We saw reduced
mRNA and protein expression of these targets in cells over-expressing
miR-601. Our data thus far suggest that miR-601 is acting as a tumor
suppressor in PCa. Targeted therapies for miR-601 and/or its targets may
be promising in the treatment of PCa, however additional work is needed
to validate this. Future work will focus on the role of miR-601 in cell
migration and invasion as well on identifying the direct molecular
mechanism(s) by which miR-601 is reducing cell viability and conveying
radiation sensitivity.

Funding: R01CA108633 (To AC), 1RC2CA148190 (To AC) U10CA180850-01 (To
AC), 1R01CA169368 (To AC) from the NCI, Brain Tumor Funders Collaborative
Grant (To AC), OSUCCC Award (To AC).

1. Hu JY et al. (2016) Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy. 79: 247-53

2. Hatano K. et al. (2015) Nucleic Acids Research. 43: 4075-86


