Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epitope-minigenes for optimal induction of the immune response
against tumor associated antigens and neoantigens.


We have recently established a workflow that allows the identification of
T cell epitopes within Tumor Associated Antigens (TAAs) and the
construction of genetic cancer vaccine based on the use of minigenes. The
T-cell epitope in silico prediction approach is based on three criteria:
1) binding to MHC Class I alleles; 2) uniqueness to the antigen of
interest; 3) increased likelihood of natural processing. The combination
of in silico prediction and a biochemical binding/stability assay
resulted in an accurate identification of novel TAA-derived epitopes.
Predicted T cell epitopes were connected by furin sensitive linkers and
linked to human tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) signal and E. Coli
enterotoxin B subunit, to construct an optimal minigene scaffold used as
vaccine candidate. The present study was aimed at evaluating HER2/neu and
hTERT (telomerase) minigenes with the same technology platform. First of
all, minigenes delivered via Electro Gene Transfer (DNA-EGT) were more
immunogenic than genetic vectors encoding the full-length protein or
peptides injected subcutaneously and they were able to break immune
tolerance in wild type and HLA-A0201 transgenic mice. Moreover, this
technology applied to epitopes selected within Mutated Tumor Antigens
results in strong immunogenicity and significant antitumor effects in
mouse models. In conclusion, we show that minigenes delivered via DNA-EGT
and based on predicted and/or experimentally identified epitopes are
powerful tools to induce immune responses and combat cancer. Combination
studies of minigenes with peptide vaccination, chemotherapy and immune
checkpoint blockade may define new therapeutic opportunities for cancer
patients.


