Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of DLL4 in uveal melanoma vascular mimicry.


Uveal melanoma is the most common malignancy of the eye. Thanks to gene
array analysis it is possible to classify uveal melanoma in Class 1 (low
metastasis risk) and Class 2 (high metastasis risk) tumor. This
classification will ultimately determine the tumor treatment, risk of
metastasis and patient surveillance. Progression to metastasis remains by
far the greatest problem in uveal melanoma and is associated with loss of
BAP1 tumor suppressor. Bioinformatic analyses of RNA-Seq indicated that
pro-angiogenic genes such as DLL4, VEGFA, VEGFC and HIF1a are
overexpressed in Class 2 compared to Class 1 uveal melanoma while
angiogenic inhibitors such as ZFP36L1, HIF1AN, VEGFB, VHL and HIF3A are
downregulated. Further, we found that DLL4 is among the 5 most highly
overexpressed genes associated with BAP1 loss in clinical specimens and
in uveal melanoma cell lines induced to deplete BAP1. DLL4 is a Notch
ligand known to regulate endothelial cells, bone marrow endothelial cell
progenitors and angiogenesis. We hypothesize that DLL4 contributes to
vascular mimicry in uveal melanoma. To test this hypothesis, we will test
uveal melanoma cell lines induced to deplete BAP1 using shRNA in cell
culture-based and in vivo models. The results of this research have the
potential to elucidate the mechanism by which vascular mimicry occurs in
uveal melanoma.


