Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) use and breast cancer risk by
receptor subtypes: results from the New South Wales Cancer Lifestyle and
EvAluation of Risk (CLEAR) study.


Background: Prior observational studies have identified an elevated
breast cancer risk associated with current MHT use for ER+ (Estrogen
Receptor positive), and for ER+ / PR+ (Estrogen and Progesterone Receptor
positive) breast cancers than for ER- and ER-/PR- subtypes respectively.
We have previously reported, from a large case-control study for all
cancer types (the NSW CLEAR study) that current MHT use was associated
with a doubling of the odds of breast cancer. Here, we describe further
analyses investigating the MHT-breast cancer association for the breast
cancer tumor receptor subtypes defined by ER expression, by ER and PR
expression and by the joint expression of ER, PR, and HER-2 (Human
Epidermal growth factor Receptor-2).

Methods: Analyses were carried out for a subset of registry-verified
CLEAR breast cancer cases with hormone receptor status data (n=410) and
CLEAR (cancer-free) controls recruited over the same period (n=324). We
used a multinomial logistic regression model to estimate Odds Ratios
(ORs) adjusted for other breast cancer risk factors and 95% Confidence
Intervals (CI) for current and past MHT use in subgroups defined by tumor
receptor subtypes. Never users comprised the reference group.

Findings: In a multinomial model, current MHT use was associated with an
elevated risk of ER+ breast cancer (aOR= 2.04, 95%CI: 1.28 -3.24). When
breast cancers were categorised by ER and PR status, current use was
associated with an elevated risk of developing ER+PR+ breast cancer (aOR=
2.29, 1.41-3.72). Current MHT use was associated with the surrogate
luminal A breast cancer characterized by ER+/PR+/HER2- phenotype (aOR=
2.30, 1.42-3.73). None of the other subtypes of breast cancer
(ER+/PR+/HER2+, ER-/PR-/HER2+, and ER-/PR-/HER2-) were significantly
associated with current MHT use. A significant difference in the odds of
developing breast cancer for current MHT users was detected between the
surrogate luminal A and luminal B (ER+/PR+/HER2+) subtypes only (aOR=
0.28, 0.09-0.88, p=0.029). None of the other groups were significantly
differently associated with MHT use, although this may be due to lack of
power. Past MHT use was not associated with an increased risk of breast
cancer for any breast cancer subtype.

Conclusion: The findings from this contemporary Australian study are
consistent with findings from other studies that current, but not past,
use of MHT is associated with increased risk of breast cancer, with
higher risks reported for ER+, ER+ and PR+ and ER+/PR+/HER2- (surrogate
luminal A) subtypes. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that
breast cancers induced by MHT may occur through receptor-mediated
mechanisms.


