Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHTM1, a novel protein linked to cellular metabolism and human
malignancy.


Several lines of emerging evidence indicate that alterations in
metabolism are linked to pathogenesis of human malignancies. However,
more studies are needed to completely understand the link between
tumorigenesis and metabolism. In this context, we have characterized a
novel protein named CHTM1 (Coiled-coil Helix Tumor and Metabolism 1) that
appears to be associated with cancer and cellular metabolism. Per our
findings, CHTM1 was present in cytosol as well as mitochondria. CHTM1
knockdown in human cancer cell lines caused oxidative stress, and
decrease in cellular oxygen consumption and mitochondrial ATP levels,
suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction. In view of the importance of
mitochondria to nutrient stress, the effect of CHTM1 deficiency on human
cancer cells in glucose-deprived conditions was also analyzed. The
results indicated that CHTM1-deficient cells became more sensitive to
glucose deprivation and exhibited altered cellular metabolism involving
down regulation of PKC-CREB-PGC1 alpha signaling events. CHTM1 expression
was also found to be increased in patient samples representing breast,
colon and lung cancers when compared to their respective matching normal
tissues. Based on our findings, we propose CHTM1 to be a valuable tumor
marker that can also be developed as a target for novel therapeutics
particularly those that exploit cellular metabolism to mediate their
effects.


