Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of tumor suppression in vivo by systemic delivery of
PTEN mRNA nanoparticles.


PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog on chromosome ten) is one of the
most common lost or mutated tumor suppressor genes in human cancers,
including ~50% of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer
(mCRPC). By catalyzing PIP3 dephosphorylation, PTEN negatively regulates
the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway, which is frequently altered in mCRPC.
Reintroduction of functional PTEN for mCRPC treatment has proven
difficult. By employing self-assembled lipid-polymer hybrid nanoparticle
platforms, we successfully reintroduced PTEN mRNA to PTEN-null prostate
cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. These mRNA-loaded nanoparticles
demonstrate high protein expression efficiency, low toxicity and good
stability in serum and tumor accumulation. We confirmed that restoration
of PTEN in PTEN-null prostate cancer cells inhibits the PI3k-AKT pathway,
reduces cell viability and enhances apoptosis in vitro. Systemic delivery
of PTEN mRNA-loaded nanoparticles in prostate xenograft tumors results in
~85% inhibition of tumor growth and leads to tumor cell death without
toxic side effects in vivo. In summary, this work provides proof of
concept of mRNA-based gene therapy for systemic restoration of functional
PTEN for tumor suppression in vivo. It represents a novel approach to
PI3K-AKT pathway inhibition, with the potential to specifically target
cancers with loss of PTEN function.


