Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Harnessing epigenetic reprogramming by histone deacetylase
inhibitor MS275 for pancreatic cancer therapy.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) accounts for more than 85% of
pancreatic cancer and is one of the most lethal malignancies with limited
therapeutic options. Chromatin-modulating small molecules, or epigenetic
drugs, have the ability to reprogram cell fate and alter disease
phenotypes. The potential of these drugs for PDAC therapy remains to be
fully investigated. Screening a panel of epigenetic drugs identified
MS275 (MS, also called entinostat), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, as
capable of suppressing PDAC cell proliferation and inhibiting stromal
fibrosis. Genome-wide expression analysis revealed that MS extensively
reprograms the transcriptomes of tumor cells and cancer-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs). In tumor cells, MS downregulates genes important for
cell cycle progression inducing cytostasis. In CAFs, MS specifically
represses the profibrotic transcription program responsive to TGF-beta,
effectively inhibiting the fibrotic response. Consistent with this, MS
blocks the activation of pancreatic stellate cells, the primary source
for CAFs in PDAC, to repress the fibroblast-like phenotypes in these
cells. Using an orthotopic transplantation model, we confirmed that MS
treatment reduces tumor cell proliferation and decreases intratumoral
fibrotic content. Importantly, we showed that MS substantially enhances
chemocytotoxicity, synergizing with gemcitabine to reduce tumor burden in
PDAC mouse models. Our study establishes a novel therapeutic strategy for
PDAC based on epigenetic reprogramming induced by HDAC inhibition.


