Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APCWT/RASWT/BRAFWT tumors represent an under recognized poor
prognostic group of right sided colorectal cancer.


Background: Side of primary tumor has prognostic and predictive
significance in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). RAS/BRAF wild type
(WT) left (L) sided tumors have improved outcomes with anti-EGFR therapy
while right (R) sided tumors do worse. We aimed to identify mutations
(MTS) in RAS/BRAF WT patients (pts) which may explain the differing
response.

Methods: Using a 46 gene panel, we compared MT frequencies by side in
1880 mCRC pts. Overall survival (OS) was summarized with Kaplan-Meier
curves, the log rank test, and Cox models. Microsatellite unstable pts
were excluded from univariate OS analysis.

Results: RAS mutant (MT) pts were more likely to be APC MT (OR 1.64,
PResults: RAS mutant (MT) pts were more likely to be APC MT (OR 1.64,
P<0.0001) than RAS WT pts. Presence of APC MTS was associated with
improved OS in WT RAS/BRAF (HR 0.58, P=0.0003) and MT RAS/BRAF pts (HR
0.69, P=0.0004). Multivariate analysis confirmed APC MTS were associated
with improved OS (HR 0.67, P=0.001) after controlling for RAS/BRAF, side,
and MSI.

Given the association of tumor location and OS, we stratified pts by side
and compared APC MT/WT pts. Improved OS with APC MTS was independent of
side (L-HR 0.70, P=0.0011; R-HR 0.62, P=0.0012), but pts with R APC WT
tumors stood out as an extreme risk group with the worst OS of all L/R
and APC MT/WT combinations even in RAS/BRAF WT pts (PGiven the
association of tumor location and OS, we stratified pts by side and
compared APC MT/WT pts. Improved OS with APC MTS was independent of side
(L-HR 0.70, P=0.0011; R-HR 0.62, P=0.0012), but pts with R APC WT tumors
stood out as an extreme risk group with the worst OS of all L/R and APC
MT/WT combinations even in RAS/BRAF WT pts (P<0.0001). This group of R
sided RAS/BRAF/APC WT pts represents a novel poor prognostic group and
its baseline characteristics are summarized below.

When stratifying APC MT by genomic location, only MTS in the mutation
cluster region (n=686) that contains axin and β-catenin binding sites
remained prognostic in multivariate models (HR 0.63, PWhen stratifying
APC MT by genomic location, only MTS in the mutation cluster region
(n=686) that contains axin and β-catenin binding sites remained
prognostic in multivariate models (HR 0.63, P<0.0001), while other APC
MTS (n=163) were no longer significant (HR 0.82, P=0.27).

Conclusion: APC WT R sided pts represents a group with poor prognosis
regardless of RAS/BRAF MT status. Given the difference in CTNNB1 MT rate
and importance of MTS in axin/ β-catenin binding sites, WNT signaling
differences between L and R sided tumors may be important to explore
further.

Baseline Characteristics of Patients with APC/RAS/BRAF Wild Type Right
Sided Tumors



Baseline Characteristic

Right Sided APC/RAS/BRAF WT (N=88, 15.2%)

Other Right Sided Tumors (N=492, 84.8%)

P-Value



Median Age (IQR)

56 (47-61)

56 (48-64)

0.23



Gender





Female

46 (52.3%)

241 (49.0%)

0.56



Male

42 (47.7%)

251 (51.0%)





MSI-H

8 (10.5%)

25 (6.5%)

0.22



Histology





Adenocarcinoma

50 (56.8%)

366 (74.4%)

0.0018



Mucinous / Signet

38 (43.2%)

123 (25.0%)





Other

0

3 (0.6%)





Average # of Mutations Per Patient (+/- SD)

1.38+/- 2.01

3.10 +/- 1.79

<0.0001



Synchronous Metastasis

76 (86.4%)

401 (81.5%)

0.36



TP53 MT

47 (53.4%)

275 (55.9%)

0.67



PIK3CA MT

6 (6.8%)

111 (22.6%)

0.001



CTNNB1 MT

7 (8.0%)

11 (2.2%)

0.004


