Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The peptide transporter K16ApoE increases drug delivery across the
blood brain barrier in an experimental animal model of melanoma brain
metastases.


Introduction: Patients with brain metastases await a dismal prognosis.
Regardless of the continuous progress in drug development, a major
problem is the delivery of drugs across the blood brain barrier (BBB) and
into the metastatic neoplasms. The BBB excludes almost all compounds, in
particular highly charged, hydrophilic or large compounds, and most of
the current chemotherapeutic agents are thus unable to penetrate the BBB.
Varying strategies to transiently open the BBB have been studied
previously. Here, we describe a peptide transporter comprising 16 lysine
residues and 20 amino acid residues corresponding to the low density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) binding domain of apolipoprotein E (ApoE). We
show that the peptide (K16ApoE) is able to transiently open the BBB for
drug-delivery into experimental brain metastases.

Experimental procedures: A systemic study of the ability of the peptide
to open the BBB was conducted by dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (DCE MRI) in nonobese diabetic/severe combined
(nod/scid) mice. The BBB permeability was studied after administering 200
Î¼g of the peptide intravenously. Further, cellular effects after
treatment with the peptide was investigated in vitro using confocal
microscopy, flow cytometry and impedance experiments. The biodistribution
of the peptide was studied in blood plasma and several organs using 125I
labeled K16ApoE. Finally, a treatment study was initiated, treating the
animals with the peptide in combination with the B-RAF inhibitor
Dabrafenib, only Dabrafenib or vehicle.

Summary: After injecting the K16ApoE peptide into the mice, a transient
opening of the BBB for up to 4 hours was clearly demonstrated by DCE-MRI.
Microscopy showed that the peptide disrupted brain endothelial cell
monolayers, reducing the barrier properties of the cells. The impedance
experiments displayed that the permeability through endothelial cell
barriers was increased after treatment with K16ApoE, and a dose-dependent
cell death pattern was observed at higher concentrations of K16ApoE.The
peptide did not affect endothelial cell tight junctions. The
biodistribution study showed that the peptide was eliminated from blood
plasma in less than five minutes through the kidneys. The treatment study
displayed that the group of animals receiving K16ApoE followed by
Dabrafenib had smaller tumor volumes than the other two animal groups.

Conclusions: We have shown that the peptide opens the BBB and facilitates
a therapeutic window of 4 hours. The peptide did in combination with
Dabrafenib decrease the number of experimental brain metastases in our
studies. Thus, the current strategy could also have the potential to
improve the treatment of patients with brain metastatic disease.


