Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ATR inhibitors synergize with PARP inhibitors in killing
glioblastoma stem cells and treating glioblastoma.


PARP inhibitors (PARPi) have been used alone or in combination with other
agents for the treatment of tumors with homologous repair (HR)
deficiencies. However, challenges remain for the treatment of tumors that
are PARPi-resistant or HR-proficient. Glioblastoma (GBM) is an invariably
lethal tumor that is not associated with HR deficiencies. GBM stem cells
(GSCs), thought to be critical for tumor growth and resistance to
therapy, can be isolated from GBM specimens and are representative of the
patient's tumors. GSCs exhibit variable PARPi sensitivity, with at least
half being resistant. In order to enhance the antitumor efficacy of PARPi
for GBM, we examined the combination of PARPi with inhibitors of
oncogenic or DNA damage pathways, including inhibitors of PTEN, PI3K,
ATM, ATR, and temozolomide, some of which have been reported to sensitize
cancer cells to PARPi. Only inhibitors of ATR (VE821, VE822, AZ20)
synergized with PARPi in killing GSCs in vitro. VE822 inhibited ATR
activity both in vitro and in vivo, and modestly, but significantly,
extended survival in mice bearing GSC-derived tumors. However, ATR
inhibitor (ATRi) in combination with PARPi further prolonged survival,
compared to each drug alone, even in mice bearing PARPi-resistant
GSC-derived tumors. This is the first report that ATRi alone or in
combination with PARPi is effective in treating GBM and provides a
rationale for clinical trials for GBM.


