Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia signaling pathway plays a role in ovarian cancer
chemoresistance.


Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor that when induced regulates the expression of many
genes involved in cytoprotective stimuli, which attenuates apoptosis and
improves survival.. Increased expression of HIF-1α gene (HIF1A) has been
found in several carcinomas, including ovarian cancer. Ovarian cancers
are generally refractory to platinum-based chemotherapy. Despite the
large number of studies, molecular events that govern the emergence of
aggressive therapy-resistant cells after chemotherapy are poorly defined.
Genomic instabilities, such as copy number variation(CNV), may play an
important role in chemoresistance and have been implicated in many
complex diseases, like cancer.. We analyzed CNV data that is publically
available through the Cancer Genome Atlas and others. Of particular
interest was the transcription factor HIF1A which plays an integral role
in oxidative stress response such as those induced by chemotherapy
reagents. The present study provides evidence for the rare escape of
tumor cells from drug-induced cell death by entering a non-cycling
senescent state. We report the adaptive response of human ovarian surface
epithelium cells to CoCl2, a chemical hypoxia-mimicking agent resulting
in a senescent-like state of chemoresistant cells. The effect of the
treatment was evaluated on CNV of HIF-1α gene expression, cell
proliferation, survival, and tumor invasiveness. We show here that CNV
duplication events of HIF1α results in an oxidative stress response in
cells leading to chemoresistance through the induction of cellular
senescence. Understanding the molecular events associated with
chemoresistance will ultimately lead to better patient treatment and
outcomes.


