Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical optimization of a low cost PiggyBac transposase (PB)
generated CD19-specific chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CART19) product
for a first in man trial using local hospital cell manufacture.


BACKGROUND: CAR19 T cells show remarkable efficacy against
relapsed/refractory B cell malignancies. PiggyBac offers a less complex
and more cost effective means for generating CAR19 T cells compared to
viral vectors typically used, so we aimed to use PiggyBac to generate a
product suitable for translation to the clinic.

METHODS: CAR19 T cells utilizing the CAR1928z construct have been found
to perform well in vitro but had poor in vivo efficacy and persistence,
most likely due to deleterious FcγR interactions via the IgG1
Fc-containing CAR spacer domain. We designed two new CARs and replaced
the IgG1 Fc component of the spacer with a (G4S)3 linker. We used either
CD28 or 4.1BB co-stimulatory domains (CAR19h28z and CAR19h41BBz,
respectively), and generated CAR19 T cells using electroporation of
PiggyBac transposon and transposase plasmids. Cells were expanded over 22
days through CD19 stimulation with IL-15 support. The two new CARs were
compared to CAR1928z in vitro and their in vivo activity was assessed
over 12 weeks in NSG mice xenografted with B-ALL.

RESULTS: CAR19 T cell products generated using PiggyBac showed vigorous
expansion (minimum 120-fold) and robust CAR expression (>80% T cells in
final product). T cells generated using CAR19h28z displayed CD4
predominance (mean 85%) while CAR19h41BBz showed greater CD8 predominance
(mean 62%). Naïve and central memory T cells constituted 30 to 45% of
CAR19 T cells in all products. IFN-γ production was specific to CD19+
targets and was demonstrated in both CD4+ and CD8+ CAR19 T cells. CD19
specific dose-dependent cytotoxicity was seen with all products, although
to a significantly lower degree with CAR19h28z. In vivo, a single dose of
either CAR19h28z or CAR19h41BBz T cells 1 week after B-ALL injection
significantly delayed leukemia progression compared to untreated mice
(median OS: 42 days for untreated vs >82 days [median not reached] for
each CAR19 T cell product, P RESULTS: CAR19 T cell products generated
using PiggyBac showed vigorous expansion (minimum 120-fold) and robust
CAR expression (>80% T cells in final product). T cells generated using
CAR19h28z displayed CD4 predominance (mean 85%) while CAR19h41BBz showed
greater CD8 predominance (mean 62%). Naïve and central memory T cells
constituted 30 to 45% of CAR19 T cells in all products. IFN-γ production
was specific to CD19+ targets and was demonstrated in both CD4+ and CD8+
CAR19 T cells. CD19 specific dose-dependent cytotoxicity was seen with
all products, although to a significantly lower degree with CAR19h28z. In
vivo, a single dose of either CAR19h28z or CAR19h41BBz T cells 1 week
after B-ALL injection significantly delayed leukemia progression compared
to untreated mice (median OS: 42 days for untreated vs >82 days [median
not reached] for each CAR19 T cell product, P <0.05). CAR19 T cells could
be detected in peripheral blood, bone marrow and/or spleen of treated
mice.

CONCLUSIONS: CAR19 T cells generated with PiggyBac, utilizing optimized
CAR constructs without IgG1 Fc-containing spacers and with either CD28 or
4.1BB co-stimulatory domains, had potent activity against B-ALL in
preclinical studies. We selected CAR19h41BBz to proceed to a first in man
clinical trial of PiggyBac generated CAR19 T cells. The low cost and
simplicity of our manufacturing process utilizing electroporation with
PiggyBac elements and patient-derived materials means that decentralized,
local hospital production is feasible. We predict that CAR T cell
production with PiggyBac will greatly improve accessibility to CAR19 T
cell therapy.


