Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Taxane resistance in prostate cancer: A role for miRNA 181a.


Introduction: Docetaxel (DTX) is one of the primary drugs used for
treating castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Unfortunately, over
time patients invariably develop resistance to DTX therapy and their
disease will continue to progress. The mechanisms by which resistance
develops are still incompletely understood. This study seeks to determine
the involvement of miRNAs, specifically miR-181a, in DTX resistance in
CRPC.

Methods: Total RNA from parental C4-2B prostate cancer cells and DTX
resistant C4-2B cells (C4-2B TaxR) was submitted for small RNA deep
sequencing. Data was analyzed to ascertain which miRNAs expressions were
most altered in C4-2B TaxR cells compared to parental cells. Having
identified an increase in miR-181a in resistant cells, its expression was
modulated in C4-2B and C4-2B TaxR cells by transfecting them with
miR-181a mimics or antisense, respectively. Following transfection, cell
number was determined after 48 h with or without DTX. Cross resistance to
cabazitaxel induced by miR-181a was also determined. Western blots were
used to determine ABCB1 protein expression and rhodamine assays used to
assess activity. Phospho-p53 expression was assessed by western blot and
apoptosis was measured by ELISA in C4-2B TaxR cells with inhibited
miR-181a expression with or without DTX.

Results: miR-181a is significantly upregulated in C4-2B TaxR cells
compared to parental C4-2B cells as analyzed by small RNA sequencing.
Overexpression of miR-181a in C4-2B cells confers DTX and cabazitaxel
resistance. Knockdown of miR-181a in C4-2B TaxR cells re-sensitizes them
to treatment with both DTX and cabazitaxel. miR-181a knockdown alone
induced apoptosis in C4-2B TaxR cells which is further enhanced by DTX.
We next assessed if miR-181a altered expression or activity of ABCB1,
which is overexpressed/active in C4-2B TaxR cells and promotes resistance
to DTX by pumping the drug out of cells. We found that miR-181a does not
impact ABCB1 expression or activity. Since we previously demonstrated
that phospho-p53 can modulate DTX sensitivity, we determined if miR-181a
can alter p53 expression in C4-2B TaxR cells. Knockdown of miR-181a in
C4-2B TaxR cells induced phospho-p53 expression, suggesting that miR-181a
induced resistance to DTX is mediated by inhibition of phospho-p53
expression.

Conclusions: Overexpression of miR-181a in C4-2B TaxR cells contributes
to their resistance to DTX and inhibition of miR-181a expression can
restore treatment response. This is due, in part, to modulation of p53
phosphorylation and induction of apoptosis.


