Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between body mass index and prostate cancer among
African American men.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is a leading cause of cancer death in US men. Yet,
the etiology of prostate cancer remains poorly understood, with only
older age, African ancestry, family history of the disease, and multiple
germline genetic variations being established disease risk factors.
Prostate cancer occurs more often in African-American (AA) men and
Caribbean men of African descent than in men of other race/ethnicities.
While it has been previously suggested that obesity (measured using body
mass index [BMI, kg/m2]) may worsen disease-related outcomes among
prostate cancer patients, the relationship of obesity and prostate cancer
risk, using race as a predictor, has not been fully explored. Using
multivariable logistic regression, we estimated the risk of total PCa for
976 cases and 1,032 age-matched controls, with equal proportions of
European-American (EA) and AA men. Among men in the NCI Maryland Prostate
Cancer Case-Control Study, BMI was inversely associated with disease
outcomes in AA men, but not among EA men. Consistent with previous
literature, BMI in EA men was shown to be positively associated with
overall prostate cancer risk. Our findings suggest an obesity paradox,
where obesity may protect against incidence of PCa among AA men. Studies
are needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms responsible for the
differential effects of obesity in AA and EA men with prostate cancer.


