Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between insulin resistance and breast cancer risk: A
Mendelian randomization analysis of data from 228,000 women of European
descent.


Background: Epidemiologic studies suggest that insulin resistance may be
associated with breast cancer risk. We conducted Mendelian randomization
(MR) analyses to reduce the biases associated with previous studies and
provide evidence for causal inference.

Materials and Methods: We used genetic variants identified in genome-wide
association studies for circulating fasting insulin (15 variants), early
insulin secretion (16 variants), fasting proinsulin (8 variants), fasting
glucose (35 variants), and 2-hour glucose (8 variants) as instruments in
MR analyses. To reduce possible pleiotropic effects, variants associated
with obesity were removed from the instruments. We first evaluated the
association of these instruments with type 2 diabetes risk in 110,452
subjects to assess instrument validity. We then investigated the
association of these instruments with breast cancer risk using data
obtained from 122,977 cases and 105,974 controls of European descent
included in the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC). Odds ratios
(OR) were calculated to measure the associations of instrumental
variables with risk of overall breast cancer and its subtypes defined by
estrogen-receptor [ER] status.

Results: All instrumental variables constructed for this study were
strongly associated with type 2 diabetes risk with ORs of 3.01
(p=7.86x10-5), 0.22 (p=3.54x10-14), 1.90 (p=8.28x10-4), 6.11
(p=3.59x10-19), and 1.91 (p=6.8x10-16) for per unit increase of fasting
insulin, early insulin secretion, fasting proinsulin, fasting glucose,
and 2-hour glucose levels, respectively. Statistically significant
associations with overall breast cancer risk were found for fasting
insulin (OR=1.36 for per unit increase, 95% CI=1.09-1.70, p=0.011) and
fasting proinsulin (OR=1.21, 95% CI=1.06-

1.38, p=0.011). These associations were observed only for ER-positive
breast cancer. No statistically significant association at p1.38,
p=0.011). These associations were observed only for ER-positive breast
cancer. No statistically significant association at p<0.05 was found for
early insulin secretion, fasting glucose, or 2-hour glucose levels.

Conclusions: Our study provides strong support that certain insulin
resistance traits may be causally associated with risk of breast cancer,
particularly ER-positive breast cancer.


