Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting microRNAs in brain tumors with oligonucleotide
nanoparticle conjugates.


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the deadliest type of primary brain
tumor being responsible for more than 14,000 deaths annually. The
survival rate of GBM patients from time of diagnosis is 5 months if left
untreated and 15 months with standard care of treatment. Despite great
research efforts in the last 30 years, GBM survival rate has only
increased by 2%. This is mostly due to high recurrence, treatment
resistance, and the existence of the blood brain barrier (BBB) which
restricts drug delivery to the tumor tissue. Therefore, the development
of novel therapeutic modalities able to cross the BBB is urgently needed.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (18-22 nt.) non-coding RNAs that regulate
gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by binding to the
3â€™UTR of target mRNAs. Several dysregulated miRNAs have been reported
in all tumor types, including GBM. Targeting oncogenic miRNAs with
oligonucleotide miRNA inhibitors (OMIs) in vitro has shown therapeutic
potential. However, in vivo administration requires the development of
nanocariers capable of increasing the stability of OMIs in circulation
and improving their delivery to target tissues. In addition, nanocarriers
that can overcome the BBB are needed. The most studied and promising
nanocarriers are gold nanoparticles (AuNP) and liposomes. While AuNPs
have bioimaging and microscopy advantages, liposomes are clinically
preferred. Therefore, we propose encapsulating OMIs-AuNPs to BBB targeted
liposomes. In this study we present the characterization of miRNA
inhibitors conjugated to AuNP. Briefly, 15 nm AuNP were functionalized to
OMIs by two different techniques: Salt aging functionalization method and
PEG and surfactant assisted conjugation method. Afterwards, both
nanoconjugates were analyzed for particle size, zeta potential and
loading capacity. The PEG and surfactant assisted functionalization
proved to be superior in all of the analysis, resulting in 30 nm
OMIs-AuNPs with a zeta potential of -8 mV and a loading capacity ratio of
64 oligonucleotides per AuNP. Further characterization studies such as
cell internalization and cytotoxicity are under evaluation.


