Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical characterization of a novel fully human IgG1
anti-PD-L1 mAb CK-301.


Antibodies targeting Programmed Death-1 (PD-1), or its ligand, PD-L1,
have demonstrated remarkable efficacy in subsets of cancer patients, with
inhibition of the interaction between PD-1 on T-cells and PD-L1 on tumor
cells leading to the recovery of anti-tumor immune response and
immune-mediated eradication of tumors. However, not all patients respond
to existing PD-1 and PD-L1 targeting agents and relapses to therapy still
occur. Therefore, there exists a need to identify additional therapeutics
and approaches to engage the immune system to enhance the efficacy of
current anticancer therapies. Using phage and yeast display approaches,
we have discovered and optimized a novel, fully human, PD-L1 specific
IgG1 antibody, CK-301, which exhibits subnanomolar binding affinity for
PD-L1. CK-301 blocks binding of PD-L1 to both PD-1 and B7-1 in
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) and cell-based competition
assays. Using an assay measuring inhibition of a nuclear factor of
activated T-cells (NFAT) reporter caused by PD-L1 binding to PD-1, we
demonstrate that CK-301 completely reverses reporter inhibition at
concentration of less than 1 Âµg/ml, IC50 of the dose response curve is
80ng/ml. CK-301 enhances IFN-gamma secretion in allogeneic mixed
lymphocyte reaction (MLR) using primary human T-cells and immature
dendritic cells. CK-301 can also trigger antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (ADCC) and complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) mediated
killing of PD-L1+ cell lines, including lymphoma cells. CK-301 has
similar subnanomolar affinity for cynomolgus monkey PD-L1 as for human
PD-L1, hence we chose Macaca fascicularis for pre-clinical toxicology and
safety pharmacology studies. Single-dose administration of CK-301 to
monkeys up to the highest tested dose of 100 mg/kg was shown to be safe
and demonstrated linear dose-dependent pharmacokinetic (PK) properties
over the dose range from 1 to 100 mg/kg with a half-life of 15 days at
100 mg/kg. A first-in-human Phase 1 study of CK-301 is planned to
commence in mid-2017.


