Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Scavenging for lethal prostate cancer biomarkers in FFPE tissue.


The aim of this study was to identify protein biomarkers that can be used
to stratify indolent and aggressive prostate cancer using formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPE) from radical prostatectomy specimens. The
protein expression profiles of benign and malign samples from 23
patients, who had either died of prostate cancer or were alive 10 years
after diagnosis, were determined using an Easy nLC1000 Nano-LC system
connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap (Q Exactive) mass spectrometer
equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The generated MS raw files
were submitted to MaxQuant software for protein identification.
Differential expression of LFQ-normalized intensities was tested by Cox
proportional hazards modeling and LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator) regression analysis within the R software
environment. The label free Orbitrap analysis identified 3523 unique
proteins from the FFPE tissue samples. LASSO of protein expression
profiles of indolent and aggressive prostate cancer tissue samples
identified ten proteins which could stratify the groups. Seven of the
proteins were significantly correlated with time to prostate cancer
specific mortality in Cox proportional hazards modeling (p-value The aim
of this study was to identify protein biomarkers that can be used to
stratify indolent and aggressive prostate cancer using formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPE) from radical prostatectomy specimens. The
protein expression profiles of benign and malign samples from 23
patients, who had either died of prostate cancer or were alive 10 years
after diagnosis, were determined using an Easy nLC1000 Nano-LC system
connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap (Q Exactive) mass spectrometer
equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The generated MS raw files
were submitted to MaxQuant software for protein identification.
Differential expression of LFQ-normalized intensities was tested by Cox
proportional hazards modeling and LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator) regression analysis within the R software
environment. The label free Orbitrap analysis identified 3523 unique
proteins from the FFPE tissue samples. LASSO of protein expression
profiles of indolent and aggressive prostate cancer tissue samples
identified ten proteins which could stratify the groups. Seven of the
proteins were significantly correlated with time to prostate cancer
specific mortality in Cox proportional hazards modeling (p-value < 0.05).
The selected proteins were found to be linked to NFkappaB signaling, cell
structure, translation and metabolic pathways. Finally, proteins capable
of distinguishing benign from malignant prostate tissue were identified
by LASSO, and 22 of these were significantly different between the groups
(Bonferroni-adjusted p-value The aim of this study was to identify
protein biomarkers that can be used to stratify indolent and aggressive
prostate cancer using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPE) from
radical prostatectomy specimens. The protein expression profiles of
benign and malign samples from 23 patients, who had either died of
prostate cancer or were alive 10 years after diagnosis, were determined
using an Easy nLC1000 Nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap
(Q Exactive) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion
source. The generated MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software
for protein identification. Differential expression of LFQ-normalized
intensities was tested by Cox proportional hazards modeling and LASSO
(least absolute shrinkage and selection operator) regression analysis
within the R software environment. The label free Orbitrap analysis
identified 3523 unique proteins from the FFPE tissue samples. LASSO of
protein expression profiles of indolent and aggressive prostate cancer
tissue samples identified ten proteins which could stratify the groups.
Seven of the proteins were significantly correlated with time to prostate
cancer specific mortality in Cox proportional hazards modeling (p-value <
0.05). The selected proteins were found to be linked to NFkappaB
signaling, cell structure, translation and metabolic pathways. Finally,
proteins capable of distinguishing benign from malignant prostate tissue
were identified by LASSO, and 22 of these were significantly different
between the groups (Bonferroni-adjusted p-value < 0.05). Selected
candidate biomarkers are currently being validated by immunohistochemical
analyses of 535 radical prostatectomy specimens from two independent
Norwegian cohorts with long follow-up time.


