Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation of hsa-miR-3663 in colon cancer.


Colon Cancer is the third most common cancer in the world and a major
cause of morbidity and mortality. Molecular mechanisms of colon carcinoma
have been deeply studied and current evidences indicate that microRNAs
play a pivotal role in its tumorigenesis and progression. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small 19 to 22 nucleotides of RNA classified as non-coding
RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression at the post-translational
level controlling numerous biological processes including development,
cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and cell migration.
Aberrant expression of miRNAs due to epigenetic alterations has been
associated with carcinogenesis. Aimed to identify epigenetically
regulated miRNAs involved in colon cancer, we analyzed DNA methylation
profiles available in The Cancer Genome Atlas. One of the main hits
identified was hsa-miR-3663, hypermethylated in 26% of colon cancer
patients (n=286, pColon Cancer is the third most common cancer in the
world and a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Molecular mechanisms
of colon carcinoma have been deeply studied and current evidences
indicate that microRNAs play a pivotal role in its tumorigenesis and
progression. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small 19 to 22 nucleotides of RNA
classified as non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression at
the post-translational level controlling numerous biological processes
including development, cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and
cell migration. Aberrant expression of miRNAs due to epigenetic
alterations has been associated with carcinogenesis. Aimed to identify
epigenetically regulated miRNAs involved in colon cancer, we analyzed DNA
methylation profiles available in The Cancer Genome Atlas. One of the
main hits identified was hsa-miR-3663, hypermethylated in 26% of colon
cancer patients (n=286, p< 0.001) in comparison with complete lack of
methylation in normal tissues (n=38), suggesting its potential function
as a putative tumor suppressor. In order to study the role of DNA
methylation controlling hsa-miR-3663, HumanMethylation450K methylation
profiles were generated for a panel of colon cancer cell lines (n=10),
including the HCT116-DNA methyltransferase knock-out model (DKO, double
knockout of DNMT1 and DNMT3B). We found a significant correlation between
methylation status of hsa-miR-3663 and expression in colon cancer cell
lines. Furthermore, epigenetic regulation of hsa-miR-3663 was confirmed
in HCT116 methylated cell line by restored expression upon treatment with
DNA demethylating agent 5-aza-2â€²-deoxycytidine and in the HCT116-DKO
model. In order to elucidate the function of hsa-miR-3663, we stably
expressed hsa-miR-3663 in a panel of five methylated colorectal cancer
cell lines (HCT116, RKO, DLD1, SW48 and SW480). Our initial functional
assays revealed that hsa-miR-3663 is not involved in cell proliferation
or migration. We are now performing additional assays to further study
hsa-miR-3663 and its potential role in colon cancer.


