Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative EMT expression score for predicting survival outcome.


Tumor aggressiveness and subsequent metastasis still remain as major
limitations to curative treatments for cancer patients. The epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process that occurs naturally during
embryogenesis and has been linked to metastasis in many cancer types. EMT
is characterized by phenotypic changes that allow for tissue
extravasation and migration of cancer cells into the bloodstream. These
changes may be linked to specific patterns in the gene expression
signature of cells undergoing EMT. Recent theoretical efforts have
predicted the existence of a stable, hybrid (E/M) phenotype which has
also been observed experimentally in single cells. However, the effects
of this hybrid phenotype on cancer patient survival have not been well
characterized. The ability to quantify a patientâ€™s EMT status via a
simple test involving a small collection of prognostic genes would
provide an important tool for clinical risk stratification and treatment
in the context of many cancer types. Here, we apply iterative statistical
methods to generate an EMT score based on gene expression samples. We use
this score to characterize the degree of the hybrid phenotype signature
present in test samples. Predictions from our model are verified against
cell lines with known EMT status. Lastly, we apply our model to clinical
samples in order to assess survival differences in various EMT groups. We
demonstrate that in many cases, EMT status successfully classifies
patients into groups with statistically significant differences in
survival, which is of immediate clinical relevance.


