Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 inhibitor has a possibility to overcome imatinib resistance
in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.


[Background] Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are the most common
mesenchymal tumors of the digestive tract and are reported to harbor
gain-of-function mutations in the KIT gene, which contribute to the
development of sporadic GISTs. This knowledge has facilitated the
development of targeted therapies with tyrosine kinase inhibitors and the
revolutionary chemotherapeutic drug imatinib mesylate (IM). In clinical
trials, the disease control rate was nearly 85%, and corresponding 2-year
overall survival rates ranged from 70-80%, indicating markedly improved
patient outcomes compared with anecdotal data in the pre-IM era. Despite
its effectiveness, half of GISTs treated with IM develop resistance
within 2 years, largely due to the accumulation of additional kinase
domain mutations accompanied by concomitant re-activation of the KIT
tyrosine kinase, even in the presence of IM. Heat shock protein 90
(HSP90) is one of chaperon molecules required for the proper folding,
function, and stability of various client proteins such as KIT. The aim
of this study is to clarify the efficacy of HSP90 inhibitor against IM
resistant GIST.

[Material and Method] We used the established human GIST cell line
GIST-T1, and two IM-resistant cell lines (GIST-T1R8, GIST-T1R9), which
had additional kinase domain mutations accompanied by concomitant
re-activation of the KIT tyrosine kinase same as clinical samples, by
exposure to IM. These resistant cell lines exhibited imatinib IC50 values
(>10 Î¼M) that were >1000-fold higher than the parental cell line. We
investigated the cytotoxicity and signaling inhibition by HSP90 inhibitor
using by the WST-8 assay, caspase3/7 apoptosis assay and western
blotting. Immunobolts for KIT and for KIT-depending signaling pathways
were observed at 12 hours of treatment. Caspase 3/7 apoptosis assay was
measured after 24h.

[Result] HSP90 inhibitor showed growth inhibition not only for GIST T1
but also GIST-T1R8 and GIST-T1R9. Apoptosis induction of these cell lines
were also confirmed by the exposure to HSP90 inhibitor in a
dose-dependent manner. To find the mechanism of apoptosis induced by
HSP90 inhibitor, we investigated the signaling pathway depending on KIT.
HSP90 inhibitor showed inhibition of phosphorylated-KIT, a client for
HSP90, in both IM sensitive and resistant GIST cell lines. And, it also
inhibited downstream of KIT signaling, e.g. p-ERK and p-AKT.

[Conclusions]HSP90 inhibitor showed the anti-tumor efficacy for imatinib
resistant GIST in vitro. It might have a possibility to apply for
clinical use.


