Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A synthesized RNA aptamer targeting and inhibiting non-small cell
lung cancer.


A specific RNA aptamer (RA16) targeting non-small cell lung cancer
(NCI-H460 cells) was previously reported by in vivo SELEX. The aptamer
RA16 was identified specifically targeting and inhibiting human NCI-H460
cell proliferation in vitro, as well as xenograft tumor tissues in vivo.
In this study, we synthesized RNA aptamer (syn-RA16) and make comparison
studies with transcribed RNA aptamer (trans-RA16) in vitro in respect of
the specific targeting and direct inhibitory activity towards NCI-H460
cells.To characterize the targeting specificity in vitro, biotin-labeled
syn-RA16 and trans-RA16 were incubated with NCI-H460 cells, other tumor
cell lines or normal control cells. Specific fluorescent binding was
observed only for NCI-H460 cells, but not for HEK293T, Hela, and Jurkat
cells or buffer control. Moreover, binding affinity of Kd values to the
NCI-H460 cells for syn-RA16 and trans-RA16 were determined at 24.75±2.28
nM and 12.14±1.46 nM(n=3), respectively, by flow cytometry using
streptavidin-PE labelling, indicating that the specific targeting binding
affinity for syn-RA16 was highly retained, as trans-RA16. On the other
hand, syn-RA16 aptamer, like trans-RA16 aptamer, was also capable of
inhibiting non-small cell lung cancer cell (H460) proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner. At 300 nM, syn-RA16 aptamer suppressed cell
proliferation by 84.5%, comparing by 86.8% with trans-RA16. The IC50 for
syn-RA16 was determined at 118.4±1.1 nM, while trans-RA16 was at
105.7±1.2 nM (n=4). Intestinally, both syn-RA16 and trans-RA16 exhibited
no any inhibitory effect on HeLa and Jurkat cell lines even at
concentration of 600 nM. In conclusion, a specific entire RA16 RNA
aptamer was synthesized. The synthesized RA16, like transcribed RA16
aptamer, demonstrated the specific targeting ability and inhibitory
activity to human NCI-H460 cells. The syn-RA16 could be potential to
develop a diagnostic kit or treatment for NCI-H460 cell-related non-small
cell lung cancer in the clinic.


