Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel indolizino[8,7-b]indole hybrids with potent activity against
small cell lung cancer.


Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive type of lung cancer and
accounts for 10% to 15% of all lung cancer cases. The malignancy has a
greater tendency to be widely disseminated by the time of diagnosis as
well as to develop early resistance to conventional treatments, a cure is
difficult to achieve. The current standard therapy for SCLC treatment,
either with monotherapy (platinum based drugs) or combination therapy
(e.g., cisplatin with irinotecan or topotecan), was shown to cause
serious side effects and inevitably evoke drug resistance in a short time
period. We have recently synthesized a series of novel
bis(hydroxymethyl)indolizino[8,7-b]indole hybrids by fusing Î²-carboline
and bis(hydroxymethyl)pyrrole moieties for antitumor evaluation. These
hybrid molecules displayed diverse mechanisms of action involving
topoisomerase II (Topo II) inhibition and induction of DNA cross-linking.
Our results also showed that they significantly inhibited the cell growth
of various human tumor cell lines. Of the tested tumor cell lines, the
SCLC cells (H526 and H211) were the most susceptible to compounds BO-2239
and BO-2329. These hybrids induced cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase
and triggered tumor cell apoptotic death. Intriguingly, the substituent
at N11 (H or Me) played a critical role in modulating Topo II inhibition
and DNA cross-linking. Compared to the compounds with N11-Me group,
derivatives having N11-H group profoundly increased Topo II inhibition
activity but reduced DNA cross-linking activity. Among these hybrids,
BO-2239 (with N11-H) was as potent as irinotecan, but more effective than
cisplatin, in nude mice bearing SCLC H526 xenografts. Accordingly, hybrid
BO-2239 may be further developed as a potential agent for the treatment
of SCLC.


