Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation induced p53-dependent cytoprotective autophagy fails to
reduce radiation sensitivity in H460 non-small cell lung cancer cells.


Our previous studies showed that radiation-induced autophagy could be
either cytoprotective or nonprotective in A549 non-small cell lung cancer
cells, HN30 and HN6 head and neck cancer cells and 4T1 breast tumor
cells, and that this functional difference was related to the status of
p53 in the cells (i.e. cytoprotective autophagy in p53 wild type (wt)
cells and nonprotective autophagy in cells with mutant or null p53) [1].
Despite the fact that inhibition of autophagy has been proposed as a
strategy to overcome resistance to radiation and chemotherapy, there is
little direct information in support of the premise that the induction of
autophagy confers resistance. As an example, studies in HCT-116 cells
that are either wt or null in p53 demonstrate essentially identical
radiation sensitivity [2], although the nature of radiation induced
autophagy was not determined in these cell lines. To address this
question, p53 wt and p53 null H460 cell lines were utilized to evaluate
whether cytoprotective autophagy actually suppressed radiation
sensitivity. Acridine orange staining, flow cytometric analysis and
western blotting (LC3B, p62, Atg5) showed that following exposure to 6 Gy
of radiation wtp53 and p53-null H460 cells exhibited a significant
induction of autophagy. p53 wt H460 cells showed sensitization to
radiation upon pharmacological autophagy inhibition and Atg5 knock down.
However, pharmacological inhibition of autophagy and knock down of Atg5
genes failed to influence sensitivity to radiation in p53-null H460
cells. Furthermore, clonogenic survival assays showed that while exposure
to radiation induced a dose-dependent (2, 4, 6, 8 Gy) decrease in
clonogenicity in both p53wt and p53-null H460 cells, radiation
sensitivity was not decreased in the p53 wt cells. Taken together, these
findings indicate that cytoprotective autophagy may not actually alter
the nature of radiation (and possibly chemotherapeutic) sensitivity in
tumor cells. [1] Chakradeo, S, et al. Mol Pharm (2015): [2] Lindgren, T,
et al. Int J Rad Biol (2015). Acknowledgments We would like to thank Dr.
Santiago Lima (Virginia Commonwealth University) for the H460 p53-null
cells.


