Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The long tail of significantly mutated genes in prostate cancer.


Background: The mutational landscapes of primary and metastatic prostate
cancer (PCa) have been robustly analyzed in multiple whole exome
sequencing (WES) studies. We hypothesized that an aggregate, uniform
analysis of all data generated to date would enable discovery of new
significantly mutated genes and pathways not previously associated with
PCa, and shed more light onto the genetic differences between primary and
metastatic PCa.

Methods: We uniformly analyzed WES data of 1,021 tumor and matched
germline primary and metastatic PCa (686 primary, 335 metastatic). We
performed mutational significance analysis using statistical and
biological approaches to determine recurrently altered genes and pathways.

Results: We identified 117 significantly mutated genes (Mutsig qResults:
We identified 117 significantly mutated genes (Mutsig q<0.1) in PCa.
These include epigenetic modifiers [KMT2C (6%), KMT2D (6%), and KDM6A
(2.7%)] and regulators of the SWI/SNF complex [SMARCA1 (1.1%), ARID1A
(1.5%), ARID1B (1.3%), ARID2 (1.3%), and PBRM1 (0.7%)]. Interestingly,
genomic alterations in chromatin remodelers (MLL, SWI/SNF) appear to be
significantly mutually exclusive with ETS fusions and SPOP mutations
(pResults: We identified 117 significantly mutated genes (Mutsig q<0.1)
in PCa. These include epigenetic modifiers [KMT2C (6%), KMT2D (6%), and
KDM6A (2.7%)] and regulators of the SWI/SNF complex [SMARCA1 (1.1%),
ARID1A (1.5%), ARID1B (1.3%), ARID2 (1.3%), and PBRM1 (0.7%)].
Interestingly, genomic alterations in chromatin remodelers (MLL, SWI/SNF)
appear to be significantly mutually exclusive with ETS fusions and SPOP
mutations (p<0.001, Fisher’s test), indicating that these mutations may
represent a novel distinct oncogenic driver in prostate cancer. Among the
novel PCa related pathways, the splicing pathway was found to have
oncogenic mutations in key drivers such as SF3B1 (1.1%), U2AF1 (0.5%),
and FUBP1 (0.4%), a novel splicing regulator involved in the regulation
of MDM2 splicing. We also found truncating mutations in SPEN, a hormone
inducible transcriptional repressor, in 2.8% of samples, similar to the
frequency observed in breast tumors, and these mutations appear to be
significantly associated with AR mutations (p=0.01, Fisher’s test).

Our analysis also uncovered mutations in CUL3 (1.3%) and KLHL20,
components of an E3-ubiquitin ligase complex that interacts with SPOP to
promote the degradation of critical PCa genes (AR, SRC). KLHL20, CUL3,
and SPOP mutations are mutually exclusive. Finally, a comparison of
primary and metastatic samples identified alterations that are associated
with metastatic disease, including AR amplifications and mutations, and
loss of TP53, PTEN, and RB1. At lower frequency, metastatic tumors showed
enrichment in mutations in MLLs (KMT2C/D), APC, CDK12, BRCA2, CTNNB1, and
amplifications of MYC and CCND1.

Conclusions: Through aggregation and uniform genomic analysis, we refined
the map of somatic mutations in PCa and identified cancer genes and
pathways not previously associated with this disease. Our findings may
inform patient stratification and translational investigation.


