Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer cell membrane coated biomimetic nanoparticles: Synthesis,
characterization, and functionality.


Introduction: Biomimetic nanoparticles (NPs) combining synthetic and
biological materials have flexibility and functionality for drug delivery
and immunomodulation.1 Red blood cell (RBC) membranes coated
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) NPs that mimic RBCs and act as
nanosponges for toxins were recently described.2-3 Here, we coated cancer
cell membranes onto PLGA NPs in a “right-side” out manner, to
translocate membrane anchored proteins onto NPs. Cancer cell membrane
coated PLGA NPs hold promise for disrupting cancer cell-stromal cell
interactions, and for priming the immune system in cancer immunotherapy.

Method: Plasma membrane fractions (MFs) of U87 (low CXCR4) and U87-CXCR4
(high CXCR4) cells were isolated upon homogenization, and sucrose density
gradient centrifugation. MFs and PLGA NPs were mixed and physically
extruded through a porous membrane to obtain MF-coated PLGA NPs. MFs were
probed with antibodies against cell fraction markers, and CXCR4.
MFs-coated NPs, MFs and PLGA NPs were characterized on size, morphology,
and zeta-potential. The orientation of MFs and MF-coated NPs was
investigated by confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. Transwell
migration assays were performed to investigate the migration of cancer
cells towards human mammary fibroblasts (HMFs). Immune-competent Balb/c
mice were immunized with IR700-labeled MFs or MF-coated NPs via
subcutaneous injection through hock and imaged in vivo and ex vivo by
near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence. Immune responses to MFs or MF-coated
NPs were examined on activating CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes in lymph
nodes and spleens by flow cytometry.

Results: Plasma membrane purity was confirmed from western blot analysis
that showed the significant enrichment of Na+/K+-ATPase, negligible
amount of GPR78 or GAPDH in MFs. PLGA NPs, U87-CXCR4 MFs and U87-CXCR4
MFs-coated NPs had average diameters of 50 nm, 200 nm, and 70 nm,
respectively. Z-average diameters and zeta-potential of PLGA NPs,
U87-CXCR4 MFs, and U87-CXCR4 MFs-coated NPs were 79.8 nm, 336 nm and 168
nm, and -34.3 mV, -24.9 mV and -25.0 mV, respectively. Confocal
fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry detected intense PE
fluorescence and higher CXCR4 in U87-CXCR4 MFs and U87-CXCR4 MFs-coated
NPs than U87 counterparts, confirming a “right-side” out orientation.
When U87 or U87-CXCR4 MFs were added to HMFs in the transwell assay,
fewer cancer cells migrated towards HMFs, identifying the unique ability
of MFs in disrupting HMF-cancer cell interactions. U87-CXCR4 MFs and
MF-coated NPs were observed in the popliteal lymph nodes, and triggered
the induction of CD8+ T lymphocytes, identifying a role for MF-coated NPs
in providing cancer cell membranes to antigen presenting cells to induce
a tumor-specific immune response.

References: 1. Fang, R. et al. Small 2015; 2. Hu, C. et al. PNAS 2011; 3.
Hu, C. et al. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013. Supported by NIH R21 CA198243 and
P50 CA103175.


