Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of cytochrome P450 in head and neck cancer cell lines.


Background: The high expression of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes
including isoforms CYP1A1, 1B1 and 2W1 in some tumor types compared to
normal tissue make these potential targets for targeted drug discovery.
Our efforts in this space have resulted in the discovery of duocarmycin
bioprecursors that are bioactivated by CYP1A1 and CYP2W1 expressed in
malignant tissues1-2. Epidemiological studies have shown that head and
neck cancer (HNC) is a complex multistage process that in part involves
exposure to a combination of carcinogens and the capacity of certain
drug-metabolising enzymes including CYPs to detoxify or activate such
carcinogens. Here, we report on the expression of CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and
CYP2W1 in HNC cell lines and human primary tissues.

Materials and methods: A panel of HNC cell lines (FaDu, Detroit-562,
A253, OSC19) was characterized for CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and CYP2W1 gene
expression using real time PCR. Furthermore, immunofluorescence (IF) was
used to detect protein expression in HNC cell lines and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in xenografts, paraffin-embedded and
snap-frozen human HNC tissue. Anti-proliferative activity was measured
using the MTT assay and DNA damage was measured using the comet assay.

Results: In the HNC cell lines significant expression (5-10 fold) was
shown at the gene level for CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 whereas CYP2W1 was hardly
detected. However, CYP2W1 was expressed in FaDu and Detroit xenografts
and in a small cohort of 10 human HNC samples as measured by IF and IHC,
respectively. In agreement with CYP1 expression, the cytotoxicity results
of ICT2700 and ICT2706 revealed FaDu and Detroit-562 as the most
sensitive HNC cell lines suggesting bioactivation of these two lead
duocarmycin bioprecursors.

Conclusion: Accordingly, from these data we can conclude that CYP1A1,
CYP1B1 and CYP2W1 are expressed in selected HNC cell lines and tumor
tissue. In addition, early evidence suggests that CYP2W1 expression is
stimulated by the presence of an in vivo microenvironment. However a
larger cohort (â‰¥ 60) of clinical HNC samples will be used to confirm
this observation and will be reported at the annual AACR meeting. [1]
Sheldrake et al.Reengineering of the duocarmycin structural architecture
enables bioprecursors development targeting CYP1A1 and CYP2W1 for
biological activity. J Med Chem. 2013, 56, 62737. [2] Travica et al.
Colon cancer-specific cytochrome P450 2W1 converts duocarmycin analogues
into potent tumor cytotoxins. Clin Cancer Res. 2013, 19, 295261.


