Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic chemotherapy prevents therapy-induced stromal
activation and induction of cancer stem cells.


Whilst traditional chemotherapy kills a fraction of tumor cells, it also
activates the stroma and can promote the growth and survival of residual
cancer cells to foster tumor recurrence and metastasis. Accordingly,
overcoming the host response induced by chemotherapy could substantially
improve therapeutic outcome and patient survival. Treatment resistance
and metastasis have been attributed to expansion of cancer stem-like
cells (CSCs). Molecular analysis of the tumor stroma in neoadjuvant
chemotherapy-treated human desmoplastic cancers and orthotopic tumor
xenografts revealed that traditional maximal tolerated dose chemotherapy,
regardless of the agents used, induces persistent STAT-1 and NF-ÎºB
activity in carcinoma-associated fibroblasts that induces the expression
and secretion of ELR-motif-positive (ELR+) chemokines, which signal
through CXCR-2 on carcinoma cells to trigger their phenotypic conversion
into CSCs and promote their invasive behaviors, leading to paradoxical
tumor aggression following the therapy. By contrast, the same total
accumulated dose administered as a low-dose-metronomic chemotherapy
regimen largely prevented the therapy-induced stromal ELR+-chemokine
paracrine signaling for CSCs, thereby substantially enhancing treatment
response and extending survival of mice carrying desmoplastic cancers
(Chan et al, J. Exp. Med. 2016). These studies illustrate the importance
of stroma in cancer therapy and how its impact on treatment resistance
could be tempered by altering the dosing schedule of systemic
chemotherapy.


