Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unveiling the therapeutic potential of Tanshinone I on telomerase
activity and shelterin complex in myeloma.


Background and Objectives: Multiple myeloma (MM) defines as monoclonal
antibody producing abnormal plasma cells inhabiting bone marrow (BM). It
involves multiple genetic mutations where different signaling pathways
get deregulated hence showing malignant features of myeloma. Increased
relative telomerase activity (RTA) and altered levels of shelterin
complex molecules (TRF1, TRF2, POT1, RAP1, TIN2, TPP1) along with its
associated molecules (TANK-1 & PINX1) are underlying principle behind
several malignancies. This maiden attempt aims to study expression levels
of these molecules in myeloma and revealing therapeutic potential of
TanshinoneI (TanI) alone or in combination with lenalidomide by targeting
telomerase activity and shelterin molecules.

Methodology:Newly diagnosed 50 MM patients & 20 controls were recruited
for BM aspiration with their consent. RTA, mean telomere length, relative
mRNA and protein levels were studied in study subjects. Clinical
parameters were recorded; correlation was studied between all the studied
genes at mRNA levels and between genes and patientsâ€™ clinical
parameters; ROC curves were plotted of all genes. Anti cancer potential
of TanI and lenalidomide or their combination were studied with different
assays on myeloma cells (RPMI8226 & U266).

Results:Significantly (pResults:Significantly (p<0.05) high relative mRNA
expression were found of all molecules except PINX1 which was
significantly lowered in patients compared to controls and was
correlating with disease severity and progression. Similarly, higher RTA
and lowered mean telomere length was observed in patients. Statistically
significant correlation was observed between genes, telomerase activity
and with clinical parameters. ROC curves analysis showed very high
sensitivity and specificity for TRF2 genes and Telomerase activity. Thus,
RTA and shelterin complex along with associated factors does play role in
causing myeloma and its progression. TanI caused significant toxicity at
low doses in myeloma cells while lenalidomide did not have any toxicity.
Cell death was enhanced when combination of both (TanI + lenalidomide)
drugs were used as observed in Annexin-V/PI and Tunel assay. TanI and its
combination with lenalidomide significantly down regulated protein
expression of TANK1, TPP1, and RAP1 in myeloma cells compared to
untreated cells.

Conclusions:In nutshell, study implies that increased RTA along with
altered mRNA and protein expression of shelterin complex molecules with
its associated partners might play role in pathogenesis and progression
of MM. Stage-wise significant increased expression and correlation of
these molecules with each other and with clinical parameters showed their
role as potential bio-marker in MM. Significant down-regulation of RTA
and apoptosis by TanI alone or combination with lenalidomide suggests
that TanI might have synergizing effect with lenalidomide in causing
cytotoxicity in Myeloma.


