Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of sulfatinib, a novel angio-immuno kinase
inhibitor targeting VEGFR, FGFR1 and CSF1R kinases.


Both vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and fibroblast
growth factor receptor (FGFR) singling pathways can mediate tumor
angiogenesis. Colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) plays an
important role on functions of macrophages. Recently the roles of the
VEGFR, FGFR and CSF1R in regulation of T cells, tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells, thereby
increasing tumor immune evasion, have been demonstrated[1-3]. Therefore,
blockade of tumor angiogenesis and tumor immune evasion by simultaneously
targeting VEGFR, FGFR and CSF1R kinases may represent a promising
approach for anti-cancer therapy. We report here the preclinical studies
for sulfatinib (HMPL-012), a potent and highly selective small molecule
tyrosine kinase inhibitor against VEGFR, FGFR1 and CSF1R. Sulfatinib
inhibited VEGFR1, 2, and 3, FGFR1 and CSF1R kinases with IC50s in a range
of 1~24 nM, and it strongly blocked VEGF induced VEGFR2 phosphorylation
in HEK293KDR cells and CSF1 stimulated CSF1R phosphorylation in RAW264.7
cells with IC50 of 2 and 79 nM, respectively. Sulfatinib also attenuated
VEGF or FGF stimulated HUVEC cells proliferation with IC50 Both vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) and fibroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR) singling pathways can mediate tumor angiogenesis. Colony
stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) plays an important role on
functions of macrophages. Recently the roles of the VEGFR, FGFR and CSF1R
in regulation of T cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and
myeloid-derived suppressor cells, thereby increasing tumor immune
evasion, have been demonstrated[1-3]. Therefore, blockade of tumor
angiogenesis and tumor immune evasion by simultaneously targeting VEGFR,
FGFR and CSF1R kinases may represent a promising approach for anti-cancer
therapy. We report here the preclinical studies for sulfatinib
(HMPL-012), a potent and highly selective small molecule tyrosine kinase
inhibitor against VEGFR, FGFR1 and CSF1R. Sulfatinib inhibited VEGFR1, 2,
and 3, FGFR1 and CSF1R kinases with IC50s in a range of 1~24 nM, and it
strongly blocked VEGF induced VEGFR2 phosphorylation in HEK293KDR cells
and CSF1 stimulated CSF1R phosphorylation in RAW264.7 cells with IC50 of
2 and 79 nM, respectively. Sulfatinib also attenuated VEGF or FGF
stimulated HUVEC cells proliferation with IC50 < 50 nM. In animal
studies, a single oral dosing of sulfatinib inhibited VEGF stimulated
VEGFR2 phosphorylation in lung tissues of nude mice in an
exposure-dependent manner. Furthermore, elevation of FGF23 levels in
plasma 24 hours post dosing suggested suppression of FGFR signaling.
Sulfatinib demonstrated potent tumor growth inhibition in multiple human
xenograft models and decreased CD31 expression remarkably, suggesting
strong inhibition on angiogenesis through VEGFR and FGFR signaling. In a
syngeneic murine colon cancer model CT-26, sulfatinib demonstrated
moderate tumor growth inhibition after single agent treatment. Flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry analysis revealed an increase of CD8+
T cells and a significant reduction in TAMs, (CD163+ or
F4/80+CD11b+CD45+) and CSF1R+ TAMs in tumor tissue indicating strong
effect on CSF1R. Interestingly, combination of sulfatinib with a PD-L1
antibody resulted in enhanced anti-tumor effect. These results suggested
that sulfatinib has a strong effect in modulating angiogenesis and cancer
immunity. In summary, sulfatinib is a novel angio-immuno kinase inhibitor
targeting VEGFR, FGFR1 and CSF1R kinases that could simultaneously block
tumor angiogenesis and immune evasion. This unique feature seems to
support sulfatinib as an attractive candidate for exploration of possible
combinations with checkpoint inhibitors against various cancers.
Sulfatinib is currently in multiple clinical trials including two Phase
III trials against neuroendocrine tumors. Reference: 1. Voron T, et al. J
Exp Med. 2015; 212(2):139-48. 2. Ries CH, et al. Cancer Cell. 2014;
25(6):846-59. 3. Katoh M, et al. Int. J. of Mol Med. 2016; 38: 3-15.


