Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of low-carbohydrate diet and macronutrient intake with
colorectal cancer survival.


Background: Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of cancer characterized
by the switch from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis.
Accumulating evidence suggests that reducing dietary carbohydrate intake
may ameliorate metabolic reprogramming and suppress proliferation of
tumor cells. However, the clinical benefit of carbohydrate restriction
remains unknown.

Objective: To examine the low-carbohydrate diet and macronutrient intake
after colorectal cancer diagnosis in relation to mortality among stage
I-III patients.

Methods: We evaluated data on 1,303 colorectal cancer patients in the
Nursesâ€™ Health Study (1980-2012) and Health Professionals Follow-up
Study (1986-2012) who completed a validated food frequency questionnaire
at least one year after diagnosis. An overall low-carbohydrate-diet score
was created based on the percentage of energy as carbohydrate, fat, and
protein (a higher score reflects a higher intake of fat and protein and a
lower intake of carbohydrate). We also created an animal- and
vegetable-based low-carbohydrate-diet score on the basis of the intake
from animal and vegetable food sources, respectively. We prospectively
assessed the association of the low-carbohydrate-diet score and
macronutrient intake with CRC-specific and overall mortality using Cox
proportional hazards regression. Multivariable hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated after adjusting for a
variety of potential confounding factors, including age, sex, cancer
stage, grade of differentiation, subsite, alcohol use, smoking status,
physical activity, body mass index, regular use of aspirin, total
calorie, and intake of folate, calcium, fiber, processed red meat, and
vitamin D.

Results: We observed 584 deaths, of which 132 were classified as
colorectal cancer-specific deaths over a median of 10 years of follow-up.
No association was found for overall and animal-based
low-carbohydrate-diet score with colorectal cancer-specific mortality,
with the HR comparing the highest to the lowest quartiles of 0.92 (95%
CI, 0.77-1.09, P for trend=0.33) for the overall score and 0.99 (95% CI,
0.84-1.17, P for trend=0.94) for the animal-based score. In contrast,
vegetable-based low-carbohydrate-diet score was associated with lower
colorectal cancer-specific mortality (HR, 0.67, 95% CI, 0.53-0.85, P for
trendResults: We observed 584 deaths, of which 132 were classified as
colorectal cancer-specific deaths over a median of 10 years of follow-up.
No association was found for overall and animal-based
low-carbohydrate-diet score with colorectal cancer-specific mortality,
with the HR comparing the highest to the lowest quartiles of 0.92 (95%
CI, 0.77-1.09, P for trend=0.33) for the overall score and 0.99 (95% CI,
0.84-1.17, P for trend=0.94) for the animal-based score. In contrast,
vegetable-based low-carbohydrate-diet score was associated with lower
colorectal cancer-specific mortality (HR, 0.67, 95% CI, 0.53-0.85, P for
trend<0.001). Replacement of carbohydrate with fat, particularly
vegetable fat, was associated with lower mortality of colorectal cancer
(HR per 10%-energy substitution, 0.49, 95% CI, 0.29-0.85, P for
trend=0.01). Similar results were found for all-cause mortality.

Conclusion: Among patients with colorectal cancer, replacing
carbohydrates with vegetable fat may reduce the risk of all-cause and
colorectal cancer-specific mortality.


