Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility study of a fractionation method in the treatment of
tumor treating fields.


Tumor treating fields (TTFs) treatment has been reported to have great
potential to treat various cancers. Inspired by a similarity between TTFs
and radiotherapy in electromagnetic property, TTFs using a fractionated
treatment scheme originally designed for radiotherapy were applied to
cancer (Human glioblastoma, U373) and normal cells (intestinal
epithelial, IEC-6) for three days with durations of 3, 6, 9, or 24
hours/day. As the treatment time of TTFs increases from 3 to 24
hours/day, the relative cancer cell growth rates in both cell lines were
reduced. While the difference in cancer cell growth rate compared to
control was ~25% (decreased from 100% to ~75%) for the treatment time of
6 hours/day, the growth rates of cells treated for additional 6 hours
(i.e., 12 hours/day) and additional 18 hours (i.e., 24 hours/day)
differed only ~5% and ~8% from that of cells treated for 6 hours/day,
respectively. Our results suggested that the dependence on treatment time
in cancer cell inhibition is weakened distinctly at treatment times over
6 hours/day. For normal cells, the relative growth rates corresponding to
the treatment time of TTFs was not decreased much for the treatment time
of 3, 6, 12 hours/day revealing 93.3%, 90.0%, 89.3% of cell growth rates
compared to control, respectively, but it suddenly reduced to ~73% for 24
hours/day of treatment. The experimental results indicated that the
effects of TTFs on growth rates of cancer cells are higher than the
effects of TTFs on growth rates of normal cells for treatment times of
3-12 hours/day, but the difference became minimal for treatment times of
24 hours/day. Our results suggest that the fractionated scheme in the
treatment of tumor treating fields may reduce treatment time while
maintaining efficacy, suggesting that this method can increase
patientsâ€™ quality of life.


