Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of WIP1/PPM1D phosphatase by GSK2830371 potentiates the
growth inhibitory and cytotoxic activity of MDM2 antagonists (nutlin-3,
RG7388 and HDM201) in cutaneous melanoma cells.


Cutaneous melanoma is the most serious skin malignancy. The current study
aimed to investigate the WIP1 inhibitor GSK2830371 and MDM2-p53
antagonists (nutlin-3, RG7388 and HDM201) alone and in combination
treatment in cutaneous melanoma cell lines and explored the mechanistic
basis of these responses in relation to the genotype and induced gene
expression profile of the cells. A panel of three p53WT (A375, WM35,
C8161) and three p53MUT (WM164, WM35-R5R1, CHL-1) melanoma cell lines
were used. GSK2830371 (≤10 μM) alone had no growth-inhibitory or
cytotoxic effects on the cells, measured by sulforhodamine B (SRB) and
clonogenic assays. In combination treatment GSK2830371 significantly
potentiated the growth-inhibitory and clonogenic cell killing effects of
MDM2 inhibitors in p53WT but not p53MUT melanoma cells, indicating the
potentiation worked in a p53-dependent manner (Table). Western blotting
demonstrated GSK2830371 increased p53 stabilization through Ser15
phosphorylation and consequent Lys382 acetylation when it was combined
with MDM2 inhibitors. These changes were ATM-mediated, shown by reversal
with the ATM inhibitor (KU55933). Furthermore, GSK2830371 was
demonstrated to slow down p53 degradation when de-novo protein synthesis
was inhibited by cycloheximide. In qRT-PCR, nutlin-3 or RG7388 induced
p53 transcriptional target genes (CDKN1A, MDM2, BAX, FAS, PUMA,
TNFBSF10B, TP53INP1) and GSK2830371 enhanced the induction in p53WT but
not p53MUT cells. In conclusion, GSK2830371, a WIP1 inhibitor, at doses
with no growth-inhibitory activity alone, potentiated the
growth-inhibitory and cytotoxic activity of MDM2 inhibitors, by
increasing phosphorylation, acetylation, and stabilization of p53 in
cutaneous melanoma cells in a functional p53-dependent manner. Further
studies in vivo are warranted to investigate the efficacy of this
combination treatment.

GI50 by sulforhodamine B (SRB) and LC50 by clonogenic assays in p53WT
melanoma cells





Cell lines



GI50 (Mean + SEM)

A375

WM35

C8161



GSK2830371

-

+

-

+

-

+



Nutlin-3 (µM)

5.1 + 0.6

1.5 + 0.4

8.3 + 1.5

5.3 + 1.4

1.7 + 0.3

1.0 + 0.5



p value

0.012

0.010

0.049



RG7388 (nM)

228 + 39

62 + 2

377 + 58

169 + 57

46 + 0

15 + 5



p value

0.025

0.028

0.009



HDM201 (nM)

167 + 25

41 + 9

165 + 98

77 + 59

81 + 11

49 + 10



p value

0.0046

0.1048

< 0.001



LC50 (Mean + SEM)

A375

WM35

C8161



GSK2830371

-

+

-

+

-

+



Nutlin-3 (µM)

2.0 + 0.9

0.8 + 0.5

0.5 + 0.1

0.4 + 0.1

0.9 + 0.2

0.4 + 0.1



p value

0.040

0.0714

0.003



RG7388 (nM)

166 + 95

54 + 37

186 + 78

68 + 23

50 + 22

21 + 10



p value

0.006

0.070

0.026



HDM201 (nM)

198 + 70

15 + 4

11 + 3

8 + 3

139 + 85

19 + 5



p value

<0.001

0.1062

0.010


