Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of BCL-2, BCL-xL and MCL-1 in bone marrow biopsy
samples using VENTANA BenchMark XT automated slide stainer.


Immunophenotyping is essential for diagnosis and classification of most
hematopoietic malignancies, and often followed by ancillary studies to
understand the predictive and prognostic value of biomarkers.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) provides in-situ coupling of antigen
expression with morphology of precursor B- from precursor T-lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma. The number of different IHC antibodies that can be
applied to bone marrow (BM) biopsies is increasing concurrently with
development of flow cytometry and molecular diagnostic methods.

IHC detects scattered tumor cells in Hodgkin’s Lymphoma, Multiple
Myeloma (MM) and Acute Myelogenous Leukemia (AML), where key biomarkers
may not be detectable by current flow cytometry methods. The goal of this
study was to detect BCL-2, Bcl-xL and MCL-1 that are able to predict
pre-clinical sensitivity to the drug Venetoclax. We examined the
expression of these biomarkers in MM bone samples decalcified using
commercially available reagents to determine whether decalcification
methods impact BCL-2 family IHC Staining.

Results: MM bone samples (n=59) decalcified in Decal STAT® for 20 min,
stained for BCL-2 (124) and Bcl-xL (54H6). MM bone samples (n=7)
decalcified in Decal STAT® for 60 min stained for BCL-2 and Bcl-xL.
Finally, eleven MM bone samples decalcified in Richard Allan Decal
Solution® stained for BCL-2 and Bcl-xL. MCL-1 stained poorly with
commercially available decalcification solutions. For MCL-1 to be used,
additional staining optimization is required. Conclusion: BCL-2 and
BCL-xL proteins can be detected in MM bone samples decalcified with
commercially available solutions. With these preliminary results, future
studies will pursue the potential for sensitivity to "Venetoclax
(ABT-199/GDC-0199)".


