Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of metformin and clotam combination for medulloblastoma.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in
children. Standard treatment, which includes surgery, chemotherapy, and
radiation, is successful for most patients, but survivors often suffer
from significant long-term side effects affecting their neurocognitive
and growth potential. Therefore, there is a critical need to understand
the molecular processes that regulate MB growth and find less toxic
therapies. Survivin (BIRC5) was identified as a protein belonging to the
Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein family that inhibits apoptosis by
inhibiting caspase activation. Survivin expression is also associated
with increased resistance of tumor cells to radiation and chemotherapy.
In MB, several studies suggest that increased expression of survivin
serves as a marker of tumor morphology and is associated with poor
prognosis. Specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is one of the transcription
factors that regulates the expression of survivin gene. Sp1 is also shown
to be overexpressed in some cancer cells and is associated with poor
prognosis. In this study, we are testing a strategy of targeting survivin
in MB using anti-diabetic drug Metformin, which targets Sp1, and the
NSAID Clotam (Tolfenamic acid, TA), which targets Sp1 and survivin. Dose
response curves were established by treating MB cell lines DAOY and D283
with increasing concentrations of metformin or TA and measuring cell
viability at 24 and 48h post-treatment using the CellTiter-Glo Cell
Viability Assay. A time and dose dependent inhibition of cell
proliferation was observed for both the drugs. Metformin dose response
was then repeated in the presence of 25 or 50 ÂµM TA. Our results
indicate that TA significantly increased the growth inhibitory response
of metformin. To further characterize this response, we determined the
combination index (CI) using the Chou-Talalay method. We found that the
CI values were between 0.85 to 0.61 for various combinations of metformin
and TA, strongly suggesting a synergistic effect of the two drugs on cell
proliferation. Combination of metformin and TA was also accompanied by a
3-4 fold increase in apoptotic cells at 48h post-treatment, as determined
by AnnexinV staining of DAOY cells. Western blot analysis of DAOY cells
treated with the two drugs also revealed a decrease in survivin and Bcl-2
protein levels, and an increase in cleaved-PARP. In conclusion, the
anticancer activity of metformin in MB cells is enhanced in the presence
of TA. Both drugs synergistically combine to inhibit MB cell
proliferation and increase apoptosis, which in part may be the result of
a decrease in survivin levels. This combination strategy may therefore
represent a novel targeted therapy for MB. Studies are underway to
determine whether this drug combination can enhance the response of
chemotherapy in MB cells, since both TA and metformin are known to
sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy.


