Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accelerating pediatric brain tumor research through team science
solutions.


Introduction: The Childrenâ€™s Brain Tumor Tissue Consortium (CBTTC), an
international repository of genomic and phenotypic data, has partnered
with Blackfynn, Inc., to create a cloud-based data management platform to
facilitate team-science across disciplines.

Background: The CBTTC through the CHOP Department of Biomedical and
Health Informatics (DBHi) has developed a network of informatics and data
applications for researchers across the globe to work together and
perform real-time analyses on existing clinical, phenotypic, and genomic
data. Historically, rare disease datasets are siloed, locked in
proprietary formats, segregated by data types, and hidden from the view
of experts in the field. This has been a significant barrier to finding
effective therapeutics for children with pediatric brain tumors.
Blackfynn was founded by a group of multidisciplinary experts in
neuroscience, neurology, medicine, software development, engineering,
computer science and business with the goal to empower researchers to
cure neurologic disease and provide solutions to these challenges.

Description of Methods: The CBTTC and Blackfynn teamed up to provide a
cloud-based, team-focused data management and analytics platform. The
platform provides a commercial grade, scalable approach to upload, view,
and integrate digital pathology images with relevant subject data such as
MRIs, pathology reports and genomic information. Stakeholders can search
integrated data without requiring users to change their current workflow
or conform to imposed data standards. This platform is a simple,
intuitive, end-to-end software platform for teams of scientists and
pathologists to review, annotate and discuss cases, enabling rapid
diagnostic consensus, quality control, and empowered discovery.

Summary of Unpublished Results: The CBTTC/Blackfynn data platform enabled
CBTTC members to engage in a cross-institutional collaboration to reach
consensus on digital pathology data in ways that were previously not
possible. We demonstrated that this solution removes existing barriers to
collaborative efforts and provides a rich analytic and discovery platform
bridging imaging with genomics and other data formats. The platform
provides a new model for the scientific community to facilitate
translation towards improved treatments for children diagnosed with brain
tumors.

Discussion and Future Direction: This pilot project will be scaled to
other CBTTC sites for centralized review of pathology images to enable
the research community to collaborative on specific projects. The next
phase of platform development will include further integration CBTTC
platforms fully integrating genomics data, and side-by-side viewing and
analyses of MRI, pathology and clincal data to facilitate specific
project work around large and complex research data types in a cloud
environment.


