Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Conformational activation and allosteric inhibition of SHP2 in
RTK-driven cancers.


The non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) SHP2 is an important
component of RTK signaling in response to growth factor stimulus and sits
just upstream of the RAS-MAPK signaling cascade. The first oncogenic
phosphatase to be identified, SHP2 is dysregulated in multiple human
diseases including the developmental disorders Noonan and Leopard
syndromes, as well as leukemia, lung cancer and neuroblastoma where
aberrant activity of SHP2 leads to uncontrolled MAPK signaling.
Cancer-associated activating mutations in SHP2 impart an “auto-on”
state of the enzyme, boosting basal activity by shifting the equilibrium
away from the auto-inhibited state. Reduction of SHP2 activity through
genetic knockdown suppresses tumor growth, validating SHP2 as a target
for cancer therapy. SHP099, a recently reported potent and selective
allosteric inhibitor of SHP2, stabilizes the auto-inhibited form of SHP2
through interactions with the N-terminal SH2 and C-terminal PTP domains
of the protein. SHP099 suppresses MAPK signaling in RTK amplified cancers
resulting in suppressed proliferation in vitro and inhibition of tumor
growth in mouse tumor xenograft models. Together, these data demonstrate
the therapeutic potential of SHP2 inhibition in the treatment of cancer
and other RAS/MAPK-linked diseases.


