Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of 3D- cultured prostate cancer and stromal cells on
drug response.


Background: Response to chemotherapeutic drugs presents a significant
challenge to effective treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Exploration
of therapeutic response has focused largely on the tumor cell. However,
evidence suggests mechanisms that involve the tumor microenvironment
mediate response to therapeutics. Therefore, it is imperative to mimic
the in vivo tumor microenvironment, to bridge the gap between in vitro
studies and the development of therapeutics. The concept of
three-dimensional (3D) cell culture and co-culture of multiple cell types
is critical to predict therapeutic efficacy and outcome. Thus, these
studies sought to determine the distinct responses to anti-cancer drugs
in 3D cell spheroids.

Methods: In this study, we utilized metastatic prostate cancer cells
(PC3) and fluorescently labeled prostate bone stromal cell line (HS27a)
to generate tumor spheroids. Tumor spheroid viability was measured at 72
and 120 h using the CellTiter-Glo 3D assay after treatment with three
common anti-cancer drugs, Docetaxel (4ηM), Enzalutamide (30μM), and
Bicalutamide (30μM).Treatments were compared with spheroids originated
from HS27a and PC3 cells alone and in co-culture. The cell viability
percentage was normalized using the untreated cells as 100% cell survival.

Results: Spheroid formation increased resistance to Docetaxel,
Enzalutamide, and Bicalutamide. However, PC3 spheroid cells was
significantly higher compared to HS27a and co-culture spheroids. For all
three spheroids, as the size of the spheroids increase, cellular
resistance to anti-cancer and hormone drugs increased.

Conclusion: The findings in this study demonstrated that the use for
3D-cell cultures influence many aspects of PCa behavior including,
proliferation rates, and response to chemotherapeutics.


