Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of PRAME in promoting uveal melanoma metastasis.


Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary eye cancer and has a
predisposition for fatal metastasis. Our group has shown that UMs can be
categorized by gene expression profiling (GEP) into two molecular classes
associated with metastatic risk: Class 1 (low metastatic risk) and Class
2 (high metastatic risk). While the majority of Class 2 UMs (71%)
metastasize, only 38% of Class 1 UMs metastasize. Our group was the first
to identify the cancer-testis antigen PRAME as a biomarker for increased
metastatic risk in Class 1 UMs, and sub-categorized these tumors into
Class1 PRAME+ (intermediate metastatic risk) and Class1 PRAME- (low
metastatic risk) subgroups. Further we identified PRAME+ was associated
with shorter time to metastasis and worse prognosis in class 2 patients.
We have now shown that this PRAME expression is correlated with
hypomethylation in the promoter region of the gene, suggesting a
mechanism for its expression. Since we have previously shown that PRAME
is associated with early metastasis in Class 1 and Class 2 UMs, we
hypothesized that PRAME plays a direct role in UM metastasis. To better
understand the role of PRAME in UM, we used Class1PRAME+ (F41) and
Class1PRAMEâ€“ (Mel290) UM cell lines to develop in vitro models to study
the role of PRAME. Since F41 cells are PRAME+ and highly metastatic, we
constitutively silenced PRAME with a V5 tag (F41 shPRAME-V5). For Mel290
cells, we overexpressed PRAME to see whether this cell line, which does
not induce metastatic death, became more malignant. We confirmed the
silencing and overexpression of PRAME in our transformed cells with
western blot. For cell proliferation, we found a slight increase in the
Mel290 PRAME+ cells compared to non-transformed Mel290. Strikingly, in
F41 cells, knockdown of PRAME led to complete cell death. In a xenograft
animal model, NSG male mice were injected with either Mel290 PRAME-V5,
Mel290, F41 shPRAME-V5 or F41 TET-empty vector cells. We found that PRAME
overexpressing cell lines (Mel290 PRAME-V5 and F41 TET-empty vector)
induced rapid, multiple and aggressive liver metastases that led to
death, whereas the non-expressing PRAME cells (Mel290 and F41 shPRAME-V5)
did not present macro or micrometastasis in any cases. This data highly
suggests that PRAME overexpression is involved in UM metastasis. Thus,
PRAME mRNA expression is not only a prognostic biomarker but also could
be an important target for treatment.


