Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetic relaxometry detection of stealth, antibody-targeted
micellar iron oxide nanoparticles in-vivo.


Magnetic relaxometry (MRX) has the potential to provide unprecedented
sensitivity in early detection of cancer by sensing changes in magnetic
relaxation of iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles targeted to cancer
biomarkers and is expected to exceed the detection limits of established
clinical modalities. MRX uses superconducting quantum interference device
(SQUID) sensors to measure Neél relaxation of bound particles. Our
strategy was to develop molecular specific Fe3O4 nanoparticles using
amphiphilic functionalized phospholipids that allow for clinical
translation of the MRX technology. To accomplish this, we used automated,
controlled rate, direct infusion of an organic phase mixture of
phospholipids and nanoparticles into water to produce monodisperse
micellar nanoparticles with a mean diameter of 75±12 nm and surface
charge of -10mV. The particles were determined to be stable in various
biological media, including human plasma, for more than 24 hours with no
detectable formation of a protein corona. Furthermore, in-vivo studies in
healthy mice showed blood circulation times of more than 2 hours, as well
as minimal MRX signals during this time. Additionally, we developed
maleimide conjugation chemistry for epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) antibody attachment to micellar nanoparticles. We have achieved
molecular specific labeling of cancer cells over-expressing EGFR. In the
future, we will evaluate the MRX signal impact from injecting
EGFR-conjugated nanoparticles into tumor-bearing mice.


