Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatitis B virus gene pre-S2 mutant as a high risk serum marker
for hepatoma recurrence after a hepatic resection.


Background: Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the major cause
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The pre-S2 mutant large HBV surface
antigen (LHBS) is highly associated with HCC. This study aimed to
evaluate the serum pre-S2 mutant LHBS as a high-risk recurrence marker in
HCC patients after a hepatic resection.

Methods: The pre-S gene chip was used to analyze 175 patients with
HBV-related HCC who underwent a hepatic resection between 2008 and 2012.
Thirty independent pre-S clones in every patient were analyzed for a
semi-quantitative detection.

Results: Multivariate regression analysis showed that the serum pre-S2
mutant level (â‰¥ 5%) and the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)
tumor stage were two independent high-risk factors for HCC recurrence. A
Cox proportional hazards analysis also showed that the combined
evaluations of the AJCC stage and serum pre-S2 mutant level provided a
reliable predictive marker for HCC recurrence after primary surgery. We
developed a Cox prediction model, which indicated the recurrence-free
survival rates along with the time after surgery. This model was
validated in an independent HCC cohort. Receiver operating characteristic
curve analysis revealed that the model showed close sensitivities in the
main and validation cohorts (AUC values: 0.741 and 0.704, respectively).

Conclusions: The relative level of pre-S2 mutant in serum is,
independently of tumor stage, an important predictive high-risk marker
for HCC recurrence after a primary hepatic resection. The combined
evaluations of the AJCC tumor stage and serum pre-S2 mutant level
potentially serve as a convenient high-risk predictive marker for HCC
prognosis.


