Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of BCL6 and ZEB family transcription factors and
their correlation in breast cancers.


The proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an evolutionarily
conserved zinc finger protein and a potent transcriptional repressor. It
is also the master regulator of B-lymphocyte development. Emerging
evidence indicates that BCL6 may play an important role in breast cancer
progression. In this study, we investigated the expression of BCL6 and
tis correlation with the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-associated transcription factors zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox
1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The mRNA and protein
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast
cancer patients and 80 patients with breast benign diseases. The
association of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival were analyzed. We found that the
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in breast cancer tissues than in breast benign disease tissues
(PThe proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an evolutionarily
conserved zinc finger protein and a potent transcriptional repressor. It
is also the master regulator of B-lymphocyte development. Emerging
evidence indicates that BCL6 may play an important role in breast cancer
progression. In this study, we investigated the expression of BCL6 and
tis correlation with the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-associated transcription factors zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox
1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The mRNA and protein
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast
cancer patients and 80 patients with breast benign diseases. The
association of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival were analyzed. We found that the
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in breast cancer tissues than in breast benign disease tissues
(P<0.05). The expression levels of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were all
positively correlated with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis and
higher tumor stages (PThe proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an
evolutionarily conserved zinc finger protein and a potent transcriptional
repressor. It is also the master regulator of B-lymphocyte development.
Emerging evidence indicates that BCL6 may play an important role in
breast cancer progression. In this study, we investigated the expression
of BCL6 and tis correlation with the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-associated transcription factors zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The
mRNA and protein expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast
cancer patients and 80 patients with breast benign diseases. The
association of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival were analyzed. We found that the
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in breast cancer tissues than in breast benign disease tissues
(P<0.05). The expression levels of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were all
positively correlated with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis and
higher tumor stages (P<0.05). Furthermore, patients with BCL6, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 protein-positive primary tumors were associated with a significant
lower overall survival (OS) rate (P=0.001, 0.002 and 0.001, respectively)
and post-operative relapse-free survival (RFS) rate (P=0.002, 0.001 and
0.003 for the expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2, respectively). The mRNA
expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were positively correlated with BCL6 mRNA
expression (rs=0.326, PThe proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an
evolutionarily conserved zinc finger protein and a potent transcriptional
repressor. It is also the master regulator of B-lymphocyte development.
Emerging evidence indicates that BCL6 may play an important role in
breast cancer progression. In this study, we investigated the expression
of BCL6 and tis correlation with the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-associated transcription factors zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The
mRNA and protein expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast
cancer patients and 80 patients with breast benign diseases. The
association of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival were analyzed. We found that the
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in breast cancer tissues than in breast benign disease tissues
(P<0.05). The expression levels of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were all
positively correlated with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis and
higher tumor stages (P<0.05). Furthermore, patients with BCL6, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 protein-positive primary tumors were associated with a significant
lower overall survival (OS) rate (P=0.001, 0.002 and 0.001, respectively)
and post-operative relapse-free survival (RFS) rate (P=0.002, 0.001 and
0.003 for the expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2, respectively). The mRNA
expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were positively correlated with BCL6 mRNA
expression (rs=0.326, P<0.001; and rs=0.382, PThe proto-oncogene B-cell
lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an evolutionarily conserved zinc finger protein and
a potent transcriptional repressor. It is also the master regulator of
B-lymphocyte development. Emerging evidence indicates that BCL6 may play
an important role in breast cancer progression. In this study, we
investigated the expression of BCL6 and tis correlation with the
expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-associated
transcription factors zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) and
ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The mRNA and protein expression of BCL6,
ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast cancer patients and 80
patients with breast benign diseases. The association of BCL6, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological parameters and patient survival
were analyzed. We found that the expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2
protein and mRNA were significantly higher in breast cancer tissues than
in breast benign disease tissues (P<0.05). The expression levels of BCL6,
ZEB1 and ZEB2 were all positively correlated with the tumor size, lymph
node metastasis and higher tumor stages (P<0.05). Furthermore, patients
with BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein-positive primary tumors were associated
with a significant lower overall survival (OS) rate (P=0.001, 0.002 and
0.001, respectively) and post-operative relapse-free survival (RFS) rate
(P=0.002, 0.001 and 0.003 for the expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2,
respectively). The mRNA expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were positively
correlated with BCL6 mRNA expression (rs=0.326, P<0.001; and rs=0.382,
P<0.001, respectively); the protein expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were also
positively correlated with BCL6 protein expression (rs=0.449, PThe
proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an evolutionarily conserved
zinc finger protein and a potent transcriptional repressor. It is also
the master regulator of B-lymphocyte development. Emerging evidence
indicates that BCL6 may play an important role in breast cancer
progression. In this study, we investigated the expression of BCL6 and
tis correlation with the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-associated transcription factors zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox
1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The mRNA and protein
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast
cancer patients and 80 patients with breast benign diseases. The
association of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival were analyzed. We found that the
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in breast cancer tissues than in breast benign disease tissues
(P<0.05). The expression levels of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were all
positively correlated with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis and
higher tumor stages (P<0.05). Furthermore, patients with BCL6, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 protein-positive primary tumors were associated with a significant
lower overall survival (OS) rate (P=0.001, 0.002 and 0.001, respectively)
and post-operative relapse-free survival (RFS) rate (P=0.002, 0.001 and
0.003 for the expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2, respectively). The mRNA
expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were positively correlated with BCL6 mRNA
expression (rs=0.326, P<0.001; and rs=0.382, P<0.001, respectively); the
protein expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were also positively correlated with
BCL6 protein expression (rs=0.449, P<0.001; and rs=0.669, PThe
proto-oncogene B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) is an evolutionarily conserved
zinc finger protein and a potent transcriptional repressor. It is also
the master regulator of B-lymphocyte development. Emerging evidence
indicates that BCL6 may play an important role in breast cancer
progression. In this study, we investigated the expression of BCL6 and
tis correlation with the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-associated transcription factors zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox
1 (ZEB1) and ZEB2 in invasive breast cancers. The mRNA and protein
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were examined using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry, respectively, in 228 breast
cancer patients and 80 patients with breast benign diseases. The
association of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression with clinicopathological
parameters and patient survival were analyzed. We found that the
expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in breast cancer tissues than in breast benign disease tissues
(P<0.05). The expression levels of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 were all
positively correlated with the tumor size, lymph node metastasis and
higher tumor stages (P<0.05). Furthermore, patients with BCL6, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 protein-positive primary tumors were associated with a significant
lower overall survival (OS) rate (P=0.001, 0.002 and 0.001, respectively)
and post-operative relapse-free survival (RFS) rate (P=0.002, 0.001 and
0.003 for the expression of BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2, respectively). The mRNA
expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were positively correlated with BCL6 mRNA
expression (rs=0.326, P<0.001; and rs=0.382, P<0.001, respectively); the
protein expression of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were also positively correlated with
BCL6 protein expression (rs=0.449, P<0.001; and rs=0.669, P<0.001,
respectively). These results indicate that BCL6, ZEB1 and ZEB2 may be as
potential biomarkers for predicting invasion, metastasis and prognosis of
breast cancer and that BCL6 may be a regulator of ZEB family
transcription factors (ZEB1 and ZEB2).


