Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MUC13 to overcome the survival mechanisms for improved
response to chemotherapy.


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PanCa) is a third leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the US due to late diagnosis and development of
chemoresistance. Therefore, understanding molecular mechanisms that
confer survival benefit to PanCa cells may offer new therapeutic
strategies for PanCa treatment.Mucin, MUC13 aberrantly expressed in
PanCa,promoting cancer growth and progression and these effects are
abrogated by microRNA-145 (miR-145) restoration. Unlike other cancer
types, PanCa is highly resistant to Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) that emerges as one of the most
promising experimental cancer therapeutic drugs.Herein, we demonstrate
the integration of novel approach to overcome chemoresistance and offer
TRAIL-based therapeutic strategies.

Methods: MUC13 expressing and null stable PanCa cells were generated to
investigate the role of MUC13 in cell survival.miR-145 mimics were used
to investigate the effect of MUC13 silencing in promoting survival and
inhibiting apoptosis in presence of TRAIL using Western blotting, cell
proliferation (MTT), Acridine orange staining and flow cytometry
apoptosis assays(cell cycle, Annexin V/7AAD staining). Various distinct
domain specific constructs of MUC13 were constructed such as the mucin
(α), Beta (β) sea urchin sperm protein enterokinase arginine (SEA)
domain and cytoplasmic (CD) domains and transfected into MUC13 null
Panc-1 cells to identify the role of different domains in eliciting
survival benefit to PanCa cells.

Results: Results demonstrate that MUC13 expression blocks activation of
caspase-8 and death receptor-mediated apoptosis in PanCa cells in
response toTRAIL treatment as observed through Western blotting and flow
cytometer. Inhibition of MUC13 using shRNA knockdown or miR-145
restoration resulted in the TRAIL-mediated increase in apoptotic cell
death as evidenced by AnnexinV/ 7AAD and sub G0 population, as well as
rendered PanCa cells sensitive to treatment with drugs, such as
paclitaxel. Additionally, cells treated with TRAIL in combination with
paclitaxel or Abraxane showed enhanced apoptosis on inhibition of MUC13
expression using miR-145 restoration. Further investigation showed that
cytoplasmic domain of MUC13 (MUC13-CD) is indispensable for
blockingcaspase-8 activation and PARP cleavage, indicating that the
MUC13-CD blocks TRAIL-induced signaling upstream to Bid by inhibiting
caspase-8 activation.

Conclusion: These observations suggest that MUC13 contributes to the
survival advantage in PanCa cells in response to treatment with drugs or
death inducing ligands such as, Tumor necrosis factor related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) which can be strategically overcome by
miR-145 replenishment. These findings indicate that MUC13 silencing
sensitizes PanCa cells towards TRAIL therapy and counteracts
chemoresistance mechanisms in PanCa that may lead to novel combination
therapies for PanCa treatment.


