Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Moxetumomab pasudotox spares CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in multiply
relapsed hairy cell leukemia patients, while prospective trials of first,
second, and later lines of purine analogs show increasing toxicity.


The purine nucleoside analogs cladribine and pentostatin damage DNA and
cause long-term suppression of CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in patients with
hairy cell leukemia (HCL). There is increasing concern that these
reductions, particularly in CD4+ T-cells, may be associated with
opportunistic infections and secondary malignancies. The anti-CD22
recombinant immunotoxin moxetumomab pasudotox targets HCL without
damaging DNA, and spares T-cells. In a phase 1 trial, 20 patients treated
with 50 ug/Kg every other day for 3 doses for 2-8 (median 4) cycles were
evaluated for T-cell subsets. CD4 cells increased -56% to 152% (median
46%) after end of treatment, decreasing in only 1 of the 20 patients.
Because there is very little prospective data on the effect of purine
analogs on T-cells, we analyzed data from 80 consecutively enrolled
patients receiving cladribine in first line, 40 receiving cladribine in
second line, and 52 receiving either pentostatin or bendamustine in third
or later lines. The latter group was most appropriate to compare with
moxetumomab pasudotox, which was also used in third or later-line
treatment of HCL. CD4 counts after moxetumomab pasudotox were 85-600
(median 424), compared to 22-618 (median 73) after third or later line
purine analog (pThe purine nucleoside analogs cladribine and pentostatin
damage DNA and cause long-term suppression of CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in
patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL). There is increasing concern that
these reductions, particularly in CD4+ T-cells, may be associated with
opportunistic infections and secondary malignancies. The anti-CD22
recombinant immunotoxin moxetumomab pasudotox targets HCL without
damaging DNA, and spares T-cells. In a phase 1 trial, 20 patients treated
with 50 ug/Kg every other day for 3 doses for 2-8 (median 4) cycles were
evaluated for T-cell subsets. CD4 cells increased -56% to 152% (median
46%) after end of treatment, decreasing in only 1 of the 20 patients.
Because there is very little prospective data on the effect of purine
analogs on T-cells, we analyzed data from 80 consecutively enrolled
patients receiving cladribine in first line, 40 receiving cladribine in
second line, and 52 receiving either pentostatin or bendamustine in third
or later lines. The latter group was most appropriate to compare with
moxetumomab pasudotox, which was also used in third or later-line
treatment of HCL. CD4 counts after moxetumomab pasudotox were 85-600
(median 424), compared to 22-618 (median 73) after third or later line
purine analog (p<0.0001). These CD4 counts after moxetumomab pasudotox
were even higher than those after first line (86-954, median 259,
p=0.0037) or second line (53-724, median 185, pThe purine nucleoside
analogs cladribine and pentostatin damage DNA and cause long-term
suppression of CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in patients with hairy cell
leukemia (HCL). There is increasing concern that these reductions,
particularly in CD4+ T-cells, may be associated with opportunistic
infections and secondary malignancies. The anti-CD22 recombinant
immunotoxin moxetumomab pasudotox targets HCL without damaging DNA, and
spares T-cells. In a phase 1 trial, 20 patients treated with 50 ug/Kg
every other day for 3 doses for 2-8 (median 4) cycles were evaluated for
T-cell subsets. CD4 cells increased -56% to 152% (median 46%) after end
of treatment, decreasing in only 1 of the 20 patients. Because there is
very little prospective data on the effect of purine analogs on T-cells,
we analyzed data from 80 consecutively enrolled patients receiving
cladribine in first line, 40 receiving cladribine in second line, and 52
receiving either pentostatin or bendamustine in third or later lines. The
latter group was most appropriate to compare with moxetumomab pasudotox,
which was also used in third or later-line treatment of HCL. CD4 counts
after moxetumomab pasudotox were 85-600 (median 424), compared to 22-618
(median 73) after third or later line purine analog (p<0.0001). These CD4
counts after moxetumomab pasudotox were even higher than those after
first line (86-954, median 259, p=0.0037) or second line (53-724, median
185, p<0.0001) cladribine. CD4 counts after first line cladribine were
higher than those after second line cladribine (p=0004), which in turn
were higher than those after third or later line purine analogs (pThe
purine nucleoside analogs cladribine and pentostatin damage DNA and cause
long-term suppression of CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in patients with hairy
cell leukemia (HCL). There is increasing concern that these reductions,
particularly in CD4+ T-cells, may be associated with opportunistic
infections and secondary malignancies. The anti-CD22 recombinant
immunotoxin moxetumomab pasudotox targets HCL without damaging DNA, and
spares T-cells. In a phase 1 trial, 20 patients treated with 50 ug/Kg
every other day for 3 doses for 2-8 (median 4) cycles were evaluated for
T-cell subsets. CD4 cells increased -56% to 152% (median 46%) after end
of treatment, decreasing in only 1 of the 20 patients. Because there is
very little prospective data on the effect of purine analogs on T-cells,
we analyzed data from 80 consecutively enrolled patients receiving
cladribine in first line, 40 receiving cladribine in second line, and 52
receiving either pentostatin or bendamustine in third or later lines. The
latter group was most appropriate to compare with moxetumomab pasudotox,
which was also used in third or later-line treatment of HCL. CD4 counts
after moxetumomab pasudotox were 85-600 (median 424), compared to 22-618
(median 73) after third or later line purine analog (p<0.0001). These CD4
counts after moxetumomab pasudotox were even higher than those after
first line (86-954, median 259, p=0.0037) or second line (53-724, median
185, p<0.0001) cladribine. CD4 counts after first line cladribine were
higher than those after second line cladribine (p=0004), which in turn
were higher than those after third or later line purine analogs
(p<0.0001). Even after 2 years, CD4 counts after third or later line
purine analogs, 41-1004 (median 264), n=43, remained suppressed compared
to 1st line cladribine, 191-1044 (median 392, n=68, p=0.0013). The
percent decreases in CD4 counts after first line cladribine were
significantly greater compared to those after moxetumomab pasudotox
(median 63% decrease vs 46% increase, pThe purine nucleoside analogs
cladribine and pentostatin damage DNA and cause long-term suppression of
CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL). There
is increasing concern that these reductions, particularly in CD4+
T-cells, may be associated with opportunistic infections and secondary
malignancies. The anti-CD22 recombinant immunotoxin moxetumomab pasudotox
targets HCL without damaging DNA, and spares T-cells. In a phase 1 trial,
20 patients treated with 50 ug/Kg every other day for 3 doses for 2-8
(median 4) cycles were evaluated for T-cell subsets. CD4 cells increased
-56% to 152% (median 46%) after end of treatment, decreasing in only 1 of
the 20 patients. Because there is very little prospective data on the
effect of purine analogs on T-cells, we analyzed data from 80
consecutively enrolled patients receiving cladribine in first line, 40
receiving cladribine in second line, and 52 receiving either pentostatin
or bendamustine in third or later lines. The latter group was most
appropriate to compare with moxetumomab pasudotox, which was also used in
third or later-line treatment of HCL. CD4 counts after moxetumomab
pasudotox were 85-600 (median 424), compared to 22-618 (median 73) after
third or later line purine analog (p<0.0001). These CD4 counts after
moxetumomab pasudotox were even higher than those after first line
(86-954, median 259, p=0.0037) or second line (53-724, median 185,
p<0.0001) cladribine. CD4 counts after first line cladribine were higher
than those after second line cladribine (p=0004), which in turn were
higher than those after third or later line purine analogs (p<0.0001).
Even after 2 years, CD4 counts after third or later line purine analogs,
41-1004 (median 264), n=43, remained suppressed compared to 1st line
cladribine, 191-1044 (median 392, n=68, p=0.0013). The percent decreases
in CD4 counts after first line cladribine were significantly greater
compared to those after moxetumomab pasudotox (median 63% decrease vs 46%
increase, p<0.0001). CD8 counts were also preserved after moxetumomab
pasudotox, increasing by -32% to 198% (median 46%). Similar differences
between moxetumomab pasudotox and purine analog groups were observed with
respect to CD8-cell suppression. Opportunistic infections, neutropenic
fevers, and other infectious complications were much more common after
purine analogs than after moxetumomab pasudotox, particularly in later
lines of therapy. These data provide a rationale for avoiding repeated
cycles of purine analog for relapsed HCL, and support the use of
non-chemotherapy approaches like moxetumomab pasudotox before repeated
courses of purine analog are tried. (Supported in part by MedImmune and
NCI, Intramural Program).


