Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bystander activity and in vivo efficacy of a folate receptor α
(FRα)-targeting antibody-drug conjugate with a novel peptide linker.


Folate receptor α (FRα) is an antigen that is overexpressed on the cell
surface of solid tumors including ovarian cancer. The differential
expression on cancer cells makes FRα an attractive target for
antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs), and an ADC targeting FRα, Mirvetuximab
soravtansine, has demonstrated promising activity and safety profiles in
the clinic. Here, we employed a new linker (NL) to enhance the bystander
activity of ADCs, which is the ability of ADCs to generate cell-permeable
catabolites that can diffuse into and kill proximal cancer cells with
little or no target expression. With the goal of improving the potency of
anti-FRα ADC in solid tumors with heterogeneous FRα expression, we
constructed the M9346A-NL-DM. M9346A-NL-DM is a conjugate of the
tubulin-disrupting maytansinoid (DM), linked via a novel linker to
M9346A, a humanized antibody that binds FRα with high affinity. After
cellular uptake and catabolism of the ADC, the new linker undergoes
lysosomal cleavage followed by self-immolation to generate free DM that
can readily penetrate neighboring cancer cells. Correspondingly,
M9346A-NL-DM showed enhanced bystander cytotoxic activity against
proximal antigen-negative cells in vitro. In the xenograft tumor models
in vivo, M9346A-NL-DM demonstrated enhanced efficacy against tumors with
heterogeneous expression of FRα. Interestingly, M9346A-NL-DM also showed
improved antitumor activity against a tumor model with homogeneous
expression of FRα, possibly due to better tumor penetration of the
cell-permeable catabolite. In summary, M9346A-NL-DM is a novel ADC with
enhanced bystander activity and antitumor activity that can target tumors
with heterogeneous expression of FRα.


