Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the novel antibody drug conjugate MEN1309 and
its target antigen Ly75.


Ly75 (CD205, DEC-205) is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein and a C-type
lectin receptor involved in antigen uptake and processing, mainly
expressed by antigen presenting cells (APC). The short cytoplasmic tail
contains motifs for amino acid-based endocytosis, making this receptor an
ideal target antigen for an antibody drug conjugate (ADC)-based
antitumoral therapy. MEN1309 is a novel fully humanized ADC which binds
to Ly75 with high affinity as shown by ELISA and FACS analysis. The
antibody is conjugated to a maytansinoid DM4, a potent tubulin inhibitor,
through a cleavable linker.The ability of Ly75 to internalize the
antibody after binding was determined using an immunoflourescence assay
that showed a rapid, efficient, and near complete internalization over a
one hour time course.The expression of Ly75 mRNA and protein was
investigated in human cancer cell lines derived from different histotypes
and revealed high expression in pancreas, bladder, triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) cells and in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Indeed,
MEN1309 shows a powerful (pM range) in vitro cytotoxic activity on
different cancer cell lines expressing Ly75, whereas it exerts a weaker
effect on antigen-negative cells. Besides the mechanism of action (MoA)
of MEN1309 as an ADC, the putative efficacy of the antibody to drive an
ADCC response was investigated through in vitro binding and functional
assays. In spite of a high binding affinity of MEN1309 to FcÎ³RIIIa, no
ADCC response was observed, suggesting that the high internalization rate
of the antigen could hamper the triggering of NK responses.Moreover, in
order to characterize the functional role of Ly75 in cancer cell lines,
its expression was downregulated by siRNA demonstrating an inhibition of
the proliferation rate in cells from different histotypes.Finally, we
investigated if some cancer cell lines could show a higher expression of
two intergenically spliced forms derived from Ly75 and DCL-1 genes
recently reported in literature. We found that the intergenically spliced
forms were expressed on average 30 fold less than CD205 mRNA in all the
cancer cell lines analyzed, suggesting that these variants derive just
from an intergenic readthrough without a specific transcriptional
regulation.


