Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-existence of SRSF2 and EZH2 gene mutations in myeloid
malignancies.


SRSF2 is recurrently mutated in a variety of myeloid malignancies,
including chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN), and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML); and most alterations involve the codon proline-95 (P95).
In vitro studies have shown that the SRSF2-P95H mutation affects splicing
of EZH2 and functionally reduces its protein expression. Inactivating
mutations of EZH2, located at 7q36.1, have also been reported in a
variety of myeloid malignancies. Studies have shown that SRSF2 and EZH2
gene mutations are mutually exclusive events. In this study, we
retrospectively analyzed next-generation sequencing results of 16,767
patient cases with a clinical indication of a possible myeloid
malignancy. All exons of the EZH2 gene and exon 1 of SRSF2 gene were
sequenced. A total of 33 cases (0.2%) had mutations in both SRSF2 and
EZH2 genes; 70% were male (age: 58->89 years) and 30% were female (age:
64->89 years). Of the 20 cases with sufficient material for rendering a
pathologic diagnosis, 40% were CMML; 10% were MDS/MPN, unclassifiable;
10% were AML with MDS-related changes and monocytic differentiation; 10%
were AML with MDS-related changes and no monocytic differentiation; 10%
were MDS; 10% were AML, not otherwise specified, with monocytic
differentiation; 5% were AML, not otherwise specified, without monocytic
differentiation; and 5% were primary myelofibrosis. In total, 60% (12/20)
of the cases with co-existing SRSF2 and EZH2 mutations displayed
monocytic differentiation. In 97% (32/33) of the cases, SRSF2 mutations
occurred in the hot spot codon, proline-95 [P95H (13 cases), P95R (8),
P95L (6), P95T (3), P95V (1), and P95 deletion (1)]. In regards to EZH2,
a single mutation was detected in 88% (29/33) of the cases. Double
mutations were found in four cases with both mutations detected
simultaneously in three cases and, acquisition of a second frameshift
mutation noted in one case. EZH2 loss-of-function mutations including
frameshift, nonsense, and splice-site mutations were detected in 40%
(13/33) of the cases. Missense mutations were detected in 48% (16/33) of
the cases, and 56% of these mutations were located in the conserved
catalytic SET domain of the EZH2 protein. The other mutations included an
in-frame insertion involving the SET domain and splice-region mutations.
Cytogenetic information was available for 16 cases with 56% showing a
normal karyotype. Trisomy 8 was the predominant chromosomal abnormality
observed, especially in cases of AML. One case with AML with MDS-related
changes showed monosomy 7 and an EZH2-R690H mutation. In conclusion, our
data demonstrate that mutations in SRSF2 and EZH2 can infrequently
co-exist in different subtypes of myeloid malignancies, and are
associated with monocytic differentiation in most cases.


