Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of microRNA inhibition in medulloblastoma.


Medulloblastoma is the most common pediatric malignant brain tumor. The
current treatment plan consists of a combination of surgery, radiation,
and chemotherapy which results in an 80% five year survival rate.
However, the survival rate does not take into account the developmental
delays and learning disabilities inherited as a result of the aggressive
treatment plan on a developing brain. As such the development of new
treatment options is needed. While many protein targets are currently
being explored for therapeutic intervention, the role of non-coding RNAs
is of increasing interest. Specifically microRNA profiling in
medulloblastoma has been performed by others to highlight expression
profiles which can be mapped to the disease state and also to potentially
identify associated protein targets. Moreover, it is particularly
intriguing that microRNAs themselves may be directly targeted as
therapeutic points of intervention. With this in mind, our lab is
currently investigating methods for directly targeting microRNAs in
medulloblastoma and we have recently validated several upregulated miRNAs
for further investigation. Specifically, we evaluated the expression
profile eighteen selected miRNAs in DAOY and D341 cell lines. Our results
indicate that four miRNAs (miR-196a, miR-183, miR-96, and miR-182) are
statistically overexpressed in both cell lines. Results of these findings
and our initial efforts to target these selected miRNAs will be described.


