Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased FGFRL1 expression is associated with prostate cancer
progression.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most diagnosed cancer in men in developed
countries. Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) have been
demonstrated to play an important role in PCa initiation and progression.
Fibroblast growth factor receptor like 1 (FGFRL1) is the most recently
identified member of the FGFR family. Its extracellular domain shares
high similarity to FGFR1-4 but it lacks the cytoplasmic domain with
tyrosine kinase activity. Thus, FGFRL1 is able to bind FGF ligands but
the subsequent intracellular signaling cascade is defective. We observed
up-regulation of FGFRL1 mRNA expression in PCa in a public genome-wide
cancer transcriptome data base (cBioPortal). To validate the expression
data and to investigate the putative role of upregulated FGFRL1 protein
in normal prostate and PCa, tissue microarrays containing different types
of benign and malignant prostate tissue were used. Altered FGFRL1 protein
expression was correlated with clinical parameters; and both in vitro and
in vivo experiments were applied to study the biological functions FGFRL1
in PCa cell lines. Our results confirmed that FGFRL1 expression is
upregulated in PCa compared to normal prostate. More specifically,
increased cytoplasmic and nuclear FGFRL1 expression was associated with
high Gleason score and Ki67 expression, while membrane-associated FGFRL1
showed the opposite correlation. To investigate the effects of androgens
on FGFRL1 in vitro, PCa cells were treated with dihydrotestosterone
and/or MDV3100, an androgen receptor inhibitor. Dihydrotestosterone
increased FGFRL1 expression and MDV3100 inhibited endogenous FGFRL1
expression, but not when stimulated by dihydrotestosterone, suggesting
indirect androgen-mediated regulation. The in vitro studies also showed
that FGFRL1 is able to attenuate the phosphorylation of FRS2Î± and ERK1/2
by FGF ligands, providing evidence for the assumed decoy function of
membranous FGFRL1. However, knock-down of FGFRL1 in PC3M cells resulted
in reduced cell growth in tumor xenografts. Additionally, mRNA sequencing
on PC3M cells with FGFRL1 knock-down revealed differential expression of
about 250 molecules, including several metalloproteinases and FGFR1,
compared to control cells (FDRlogFC>1). In conclusion, we suggest that
upregulation and altered subcellular localization of FGFRL1, in PCa,
directly or indirectly, promotes tumor growth and progression. The
results suggest that FGFRL1 is a potent regulator of gene expression and
may be involved in diverse functions depending on its cellular
localization.


