Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor stimulation with 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
decreases PD-L1 expression in androgen-responsive thyroid cancer cells.


Thyroid cancer is the most rapidly increasing cancer in the US with
64,300 new cases expected in 2016. However, there is a disparity in the
incidence of thyroid cancer between females and males, with women (49,350
expected cases) developing thyroid cancer three times more often than men
(14,950 expected cases). Immune elimination of nascent tumor cells may
explain the difference in disease incidence between men and women. To
address this hypothesis, the effect of androgen on the expression of
immune checkpoint molecules in an androgen responsive-thyroid cancer cell
line was examined. The undifferentiated thyroid cancer cell line, 8505C,
does not express a functional androgen receptor (AR). 84E7 is a clone of
8505C that was transfected with an AR containing plasmid resulting in
constitutively expressed AR. Transcriptome analysis via RNASeq was
performed on 8505C and 84E7, with and without 5α-dihydrotestosterone
(DHT) treatment. Raw sequencing reads were aligned to the UCSC hg19 human
reference genome with Tophat, and Cufflinks was used to measure
transcript abundances in Reads Per Kilobase of exon model per Million
mapped reads (RPKM) as well as to find genes with statistically
significant changes in expression. DHT treatment of 84E7 resulted in >2
fold expression changes in 1,552 genes. We examined the immune checkpoint
ligands expressed on 84E7 such as CD80, CD86, PD-L1, PD-L2, ICOSL, B7-H3,
B7-H4, HVEM, 4-1BBL, OX40L, CD70, CD40, and GAL9. PD-L1 was the sole
immune checkpoint molecule that exhibited a significant expression change
in DHT-treated 84E7 cells with a 1.8 log2 fold decrease (p=0, q=0), or
72% reduction in mRNA content. Additional studies confirmed the RNASeq
results and provide evidence of both qualitative (immunofluorescence) and
quantitative (flow cytometry and western blotting) decreases in PD-L1
expression with DHT treatment. These results are significant in that
PD-L1 is produced by tumor cells as a strategy for subverting and evading
the immune response, specifically T cells, allowing for continued tumor
growth and metastases. In the thyroid, the presence of activated androgen
receptors could lead to an environment that is more favorable for immune
system activation and may help eliminate nascent thyroid cancer cells.
Thus, men may experience a decreased incidence of thyroid cancer due to
an enhanced and less inhibited anti-tumor environment.


