Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of Bcl-2 family members and protein-protein interactions
using novel multiplex immunoassays.


Bcl-2 family members play a very important role in intrinsic apoptotic
pathways. The family consists of more than 17 members that can be
functionally separated into pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic subfamilies.
Interactions between these family members determine cell fate, and
dysregulation can lead to tumor growth and tumor cell survival. There are
several investigational drugs for cancer treatment targeting Bcl-2 family
members in clinical trials, driving the need for robust assays to measure
Bcl-2 family members and their interactions. Though existing assays
measure Bcl-2 family members, there is a lack of reliable assays to
evaluate total proteins and protein-protein interactions simultaneously.
To address this issue, we have developed two LuminexÂ®-based multiplex
immunoassay panels that allow for the simultaneous detection of multiple
components of the Bcl-2 family in a single well, including Total Bcl-2,
Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, BAD, BIM, and BAX as well as protein interactions like
NOXA/Mcl-1, Mcl-1/BIM, and Bcl-xL/BAD. Using these panels, we analyzed
changes in the expression and interactions of Bcl-2 family members in
response to known apoptotic drugs, including Camptothecin (topoisomerase
inhibitor), Anisomycin (protein translation inhibitor), and AT101 (BH3
mimetic drug). Camptothecin and Anisomycin each elicited a significant
decrease in the levels of Mcl-1. Additionally, the Mcl-1/BIM interaction
was disrupted by both Camptothecin and Anisomycin, perhaps a consequence
of the reduced Mcl-1 levels. However, expression of the other
anti-apoptotic proteins was unaffected by any of the three drugs.
Interestingly, all three treatments had different effects on the
Mcl-1/NOXA interaction. Mcl-1/NOXA signal was increased by AT101,
decreased by Anisomycin, and showed a dose dependent effect with
Camptothecin. In contrast to their disparate effects on the Mcl-1/NOXA
interaction, all three drugs acted in a similar manner in blocking the
Bcl-xL/BAD interaction without affecting the total levels of either
protein. Overall, these results illustrate the dynamic responses of the
Bcl-2 family to apoptosis-inducing drugs. The novel multiplex
immunoassays described here provide a powerful tool for studying the
underlying mechanisms regulating the Bcl-2 family of proteins.


