Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eicosapentaenoic acid reduces effects of some adipocyte derived
factors on breast cancer cell inflammation and glucose metabolism.


Breast cancer is still the leading cause of death in women among all
cancer types. Obesity, a chronic low grade inflammatory disease, is a key
contributor to the progression of breast cancer especially in women,
post-menopause. Given the current understanding of cancer-related
inflammation and associated microvesicles in restructuring the
microenvironment, we hypothesized that adipocyte-derived cytokines and
exosomes negatively impact breast cancer progression. By contrast,
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), a dietary omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid
and a well-established anti-inflammatory compound will reduce
adipocyte-secreted pro-inflammatory factors, thereby reducing breast
cancer progression. To test these hypotheses, we investigated the effects
of conditioned media or exosomes from 3T3-L1 adipocytes or human
mesenchymal stem cells (HMSC), treated +/- 100uM EPA on MCF7 and
MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells for 24 â€“ 72 h. Following treatment,
changes in breast cancer cell gene expression were measured using RT-qPCR
and glycolytic rate was measured using XFe24 Seahorse extracellular flux
analyze. We observed that conditioned medium from HMSC significantly
increased the mRNA expression levels of oncogenic genes such as signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), baculoviral IAP
repeat-containing protein3 (BIRC3) known as cIAP2, and the lipogenic
fatty acids synthase (FASN). In contrast, conditioned media from
EPA-treated human adipocytes reduced the expression levels of these
genes. Similarly, exosomes isolated from EPA-treated adipocytes showed a
significant reduction in mRNA expression levels of STAT3 and cIAP2 in
both cancer cell lines. Furthermore, glycolysis was significantly reduced
in MCF7 but not MDA-MB231 cells incubated with 3T3-L1
adipocyte-conditioned medium pretreated with EPA for 24 hrs. Taken
together, our data suggest that adipocytes play a significant role in
promoting breast cancer progression by providing a microenvironment that
increases survival and inflammation. EPA is a promising anti-inflammatory
nutrient that may help reduce breast cancer cell inflammation and
survival, possibly by modulating adipocyte-derived cytokines and exosomes
in obesity and thus warrants further investigations.


