Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potent and highly selective PTEFb inhibitor BAY
1251152 for the treatment of cancer: from p.o. to i.v. application via
scaffold hops.


PTEFb/CDK9 mediated transcription of short-lived anti-apoptotic survival
proteins like Mcl-1 and Myc plays a critical role in cancer cell growth
and survival in various tumor entities including AML. In addition, these
survival proteins play important roles in the development of resistance
to chemotherapy. We previously disclosed the preclinical profile of BAY
1143572, the first selective, orally available PTEFb/CDK9 inhibitor that
entered clinical development [1-3]. BAY 1143572 had low nanomolar
activity against PTEFb/CDK9, an at least 50-fold selectivity against
other CDKs in enzymatic assays and broad anti-proliferative activity
against a panel of tumour cell lines with sub-micromolar IC50 values. BAY
1143572 also showed single agent in vivo efficacy at tolerated doses in
various xenograft tumour models in mice and rats upon once daily oral
administration. To fully explore future treatment options using selective
PTEFb/CDK9 inhibitors we initiated a follow-up program to identify novel
PTEFb/CDK9 inhibitors for treatment of cancer with increased potency
enabling i.v. treatment of patients. Extensive lead optimisation efforts,
including various scaffold hops, led to the identification of BAY
1251152. In comparison to oral BAY 1143572, BAY 1251152 shows
significantly increased biochemical (IC50 CDK9 = 3 nM) and cellular
potency (IC50 MOLM13 = 29 nM), increased selectivity against CDK2 as well
as high permeability and no efflux. The significantly reduced therapeutic
dose and high solubility of BAY 1251152 enable the desired i.v.
application. BAY 1251152 demonstrated excellent efficacy upon i.v.
treatment in xenograft models (e.g. MOLM13) in mice and rats. BAY 1251152
is currently being evaluated in Phase I studies (NCT02635672;
NCT02745743) to determine the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and
initial pharmacodynamic biomarker response in patients with advanced
cancer. This presentation will highlight the key learnings from our
PTEFb/CDK9 i.v. lead optimization program and disclose the structure of
BAY 1251152 for the first time. [1]: Proceedings of the 107th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research; 2016 Apr 16-20;
New Orleans, LA. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2016;76(14
Suppl):Abstract nr 3022. [2]: Proceedings of the 106th Annual Meeting of
the American Association for Cancer Research; 2015 Apr 18-22;
Philadelphia, PA. Philadelphia (PA): AACR; Cancer Res 2015;75(15
Suppl):Abstract nr DDT02-02. doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2015-DDT02-02. [3]:
Proceedings of the 106th Annual Meeting of the American Association for
Cancer Research; 2015 Apr 18-22; Philadelphia, PA. Philadelphia (PA):
AACR; Cancer Res 2015;75(15 Suppl):Abstract nr 2828.
doi:10.1158/1538-7445.AM2015-2828


