Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanized mouse models for immune-oncology biotherapeutics:
Development, validation and applications.


With clinical success and FDA approval of Ipilimumab, Nivolumab,
Pembrolizumab and Atezolizumab, developing biotherapeutics against immune
checkpoint targets, like CTLA-4, PD-1/PDL-1 and others, becomes hot
pursuits for big pharma and biotech. However, traditional syngeneic
models with surrogate murine reagents or human immune cell
re-constitution in immune deficient mice are useful but not reliable and
robust due to the species specificity and highly variable responses. It
is crucial to establish additional preclinical models for efficacy
assessment of investigational immune-oncology antibodies before entering
clinic. Establishing human therapeutic target engineered mouse models by
replacing mouse gene with human counterpart while maintaining intact
mouse immunity is a practical approach for in vivo studies.

Applying CRISPR-Cas9 and other gene editing techniques, we have
engineered genetically a series of single and double human
immune-checkpoint genes, like PD-1/PDL-1, CTLA-4, TIM3, CD137 and others,
knock-in model expressing chimeric human/mouse targets composed of human
extracellular domains, with intact mouse signal peptide and intracellular
domain. FACS analysis of immune cells derived from homozygous knock-in
mice showed that activated cells only express chimeric targets reactive
to anti human target antibodies, but not mouse gene specific antibodies.
We have been testing the efficacy of reference antibodies by treating
these homozygous knock-in mice inoculated with syngeneic murine tumor
cells. Other applications, like target validation, combination therapy
and biomarker discovery, are also explored.


