Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modelling clinical issues by using patient-derived xenografts:
Evaluation of partial hepatectomy on hepatoblastoma intrahepatic and
distant growth.


Hepatoblastoma (HB) is a rare disease that represents the most frequent
liver malignancy during childhood. HB incidence is approximately 1.5
cases per million children less than 15-years old in Western countries.

HB is histologically classified as epithelial or mixed depending on the
presence of mesenchymal component. The most common epithelial components
are the embryonal and fetal phenotype, reminiscent of at early or late
stages of liver development. The improvement of the clinical management
in the last 30 years has allowed 5-year survival rate to pass from 35 to
80%,due to the introduction of cisplatin-based chemotherapy. More than
50% of tumors are either inoperable or are metastatic at diagnosis.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy allows tumor size reduction and sometimes leads
to complete regression of pulmonary metastasis.

In Europe, the SIOPEL (International Childhood Liver Tumors Strategy
Group) protocols recommend the use of cisplatinum-based neoadjuvant
chemotherapy followed by surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. All
international studies recommend resecting all the metastases remaining
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy, however, to date no indication is
provided that defines whether metatases removal must take place before or
after primary tumor resection by partial or total hepatectomy.

As liver regeneration is a complex process that involves the expression
and release of numerous factors that induce cell hypertrophy and
proliferation, the risk that hepatectomy-induced release of regenerating
factors might help the survival and proliferation of microscopic
intrahepatic or distant tumor cells leads several clinicians to perform
hepatectomy only after the removal of all detectable metastases.

To challenge this paradigm, we used a panel of HB patient-derived
xenograft and evaluated the impact of partial hepatectomy on intrahepatic
and extrahepatic tumor growth. Partial hepatectomy performed either
concomitantly with interscapular implantation of HB-217 xenograft, a
model established from a patient with intrahepatic recurrence, or at the
time of tumor appearance in mice failed to increase tumor growth. When
hepatectomy was realized on several HB models concomitantly with either
intrahepatic injection of bioluminescent HB cells derived from HB PDXs or
by tumor fragmentsâ€™ direct implantation, one of these models, HB-243,
also a model established from a patient with intrahepatic recurrence,
showed increased tumor growth in mice concomitantly subjected to partial
hepatectomy.

These results suggest that increased tumor growth induced by hepatectomy
can occur in HB, albeit heterogeneously. We are now evaluating the
molecular features of this hepatectomy-sensitive model and the impact of
different cytokines on HB-243 PDX-derived tumor cells. The aim of this
study will be to identify molecular markers and drivers of tumor
sensitivity to hepatectomy.


