Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer knowledge and screening among Asian Americans
aged 50-75 years old.


Background: Chinese, Vietnamese, and Korean Americans, three of the
largest Asian American (AA) subgroups, have particularly high rates of
colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence and mortality. However, CRC screening
rates among these Asian Americans remain very low. Increased knowledge of
CRC has been shown to be positively correlated with a personâ€™s
inclination to undergo screening.

Purpose: This study estimated the prevalence of up to date CRC screening
and examined the predictors of CRC knowledge and screening compliance
among Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese Americans living in the
Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area.

Methods: A cross-sectional sample was employed in this study and included
274 Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese Americans between ages 50-75 years
old. A questionnaire was given to participants in either their preferred
native language or in English. Data was collected in person.

Results: Data from the 2009 California Health Interview Survey (CHIS)
indicates that Chinese Americans had higher rates of FOBT at 32.2% than
Vietnamese Americans (27.3%) and Korean Americans (24.8%). Compared to
these rates from CHIS, we had significantly lower rates of up to date
FOBT: less than 10% (9.1%) reported having FOBT in the past year.
Vietnamese had the highest rate (13.8%) followed by Korean (7.5%) and
Chinese (6.9%). For the prevalence of up to date colonoscopy (Results:
Data from the 2009 California Health Interview Survey (CHIS) indicates
that Chinese Americans had higher rates of FOBT at 32.2% than Vietnamese
Americans (27.3%) and Korean Americans (24.8%). Compared to these rates
from CHIS, we had significantly lower rates of up to date FOBT: less than
10% (9.1%) reported having FOBT in the past year. Vietnamese had the
highest rate (13.8%) followed by Korean (7.5%) and Chinese (6.9%). For
the prevalence of up to date colonoscopy (<10 years), CHIS data
disaggregated by ethnicity among AA shows that Vietnamese Americans
(63.7%) had highest rates of having colonoscopy followed by Korean
Americans (51.1%) and Chinese Americans (48.7%). In our study, Chinese
had higher rates of up to date colonoscopy (63.3%) than Vietnamese
(47.5%) and Korean (43.0%). The average CRC Knowledge Score was 6.10 out
of 9 (SD=2.91). In bivariate analysis, education, marital status, and
self-rated health were highly correlated with CRC knowledge. Those with
higher education levels, those married, and those rated with good
physical health had increased CRC knowledge. In multivariate analysis,
education, health insurance, and CRC knowledge were significantly related
to having colonoscopy. Those with high CRC knowledge were more likely to
have colonoscopy than those low knowledge (aOR=2.74, 95% CI, 1.13, 6.64).
Those who had health insurance had higher likelihood of having
colonoscopy than those without health insurance (aOR=4.40, 95% CI, 2.33,
8.32). Those more than high school education were less likely to have
colonoscopy than those with less than high school education (aOR=0.37,
95% CI, 0.16, 0.84). Conclusions: The findings of this study suggest that
CRC knowledge is a strong predictor of CRC screening behavior in Asian
Americans. Lack of CRC screening knowledge still remains an important
barrier to screening, and future strategies to increase public awareness
on CRC is necessary to achieve greater screening compliance amongst AA
populations.


