Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulating tumor microenvironments through inflammasome and IL-1
pathways.


Chronic Inflammation has been shown to play important roles at all stages
of tumor development including initiation, growth, invasion and
metastasis. The inflammasome is an important innate immune pathway
critical for the production of active IL-1β, a potent inflammatory
cytokine. While extensive evidence indicates that inflammasomes are
involved in infections and autoimmune diseases, the role of inflammasomes
in tumor development remains controversial. To dissect the roles of the
inflammasome and IL-1 pathway in tumor development, we utilized the
MMTV-PyMT transgenic model, which develops mammary gland tumors with a
high incidence of lung metastasis. Our results have demonstrated that
inflammasome and IL-1β play a critical role in promoting tumor growth
and metastasis. We found that tumor growth was associated with
inflammasome activation and elevated levels of IL-1β in tumor
microenvironments in mouse mammary tumor models and in human breast
cancer tissues. Mice deficient for inflammasome components or IL-1R
signaling exhibit significantly reduced lung metastasis. Our data also
show that inflammasome activation led to the accumulation of myeloid
cells, such as such as myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) in tumor microenvironments.
Furthermore, blocking IL-1R signaling with IL-1R antagonist (IL-Ra) or
anti-IL-1R antibody inhibited tumor growth and metastasis. Our results
suggest that targeting the tumor microenvironment through inflammasome
and IL-1 blockade may provide a novel approach for the treatment of
breast cancer.


