Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Do co-morbid conditions correlate with cancer screening awareness
and behaviour among older women? Findings from the fifth Indonesian
Family Life Survey.


Background: Cancer screening awareness may vary in low- and middle-income
countries lacking established national screening programmes.
Additionally, breast self-examination (BSE) to screen for breast cancer
is common in these countries, despite evidence suggesting its lack of
benefit. We evaluated co-morbidities as a potential determinant of
awareness to breast and cervical cancer screening and BSE practice in
older women in Indonesia.

Methods: From the fifth Indonesian Family Life Survey (2014-2015), 6,320
women aged 40 and older who responded to questionnaires on pap smear,
mammography, and BSE were included. To assess co-morbidities, an
age-weighted score similar to the Charlson co-morbidity index was created
based on self-reported history of chronic disease diagnoses. Weighted
regression analyses were performed to assess their correlations with
awareness to pap smear or mammography and BSE practice.

Results: Only 22% women were aware of pap smears, and 32% among them had
undergone at least one pap smear in their lifetime. Six percent of
participants were aware of mammography, among which 4% had a mammogram in
the previous year. Twelve percent of women reported they performed BSE at
least once a year. With increasing co-morbidities, participants were more
likely to be aware of pap smear (e.g. age-adjusted OR=3.27, 95% CI:
1.18-9.01 for co-morbidity score of >2 compared to 0). No association
with awareness to mammography was seen. Higher frequency of BSE per year
was seen with higher co-morbidity (Î²=1.96, P=0.01 for co-morbidity score
of >2 compared to 0). Associations remained, albeit weaker, after
exclusion of women with history of cancer.

Conclusion: Higher co-morbidities weakly correlated with being more aware
to cervical cancer screening and practicing BSE more frequently among
older women. Our findings may imply the need for targeted health
promotion and screening for cancer in presence of limited infrastructure.


