Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the carcinogenic potential of various types of
mineral fibers in the development of mesothelioma.


Malignant mesothelioma is a very aggressive tumor and has been linked to
occupational and environmental exposure to carcinogenic mineral fibers
such as asbestos. It was discovered recently that individuals carrying
germline BAP1 mutations are predisposed to mesothelioma in presence of
even minimal exposure to carcinogenic mineral fibers. Mesothelioma causes
about 3,200 deaths per year in the U.S. and over 40,000 deaths per year
worldwide. Most malignant mesothelioma studies have focused on
carcinogenesis due to occupational exposure to the six regulated
industrial mineral fibers collectively called ‘asbestos’. Besides
this family of six regulated asbestos minerals, there are other
non-regulated fibers that possess physical and chemical structures that
are similar to industrial asbestos, and may also be carcinogenic.
However, many of those mineral fibers are unknown for their
carcinogenesis. We conducted serious studies on this topic and
established in vitro and in vivo assays to help determine the
carcinogenesis of various types of mineral fibers. We found that high
mobility box 1 protein (HMGB1) is a key initiator of asbestos-induced
inflammation, which plays critical roles in the development and growth of
mesothelioma, and that HMGB1 may be a good indicator for fiber
carcinogenesis and a biomarker for fibers exposure. Moreover, we found
that specific immune system changes that occur after exposure to
carcinogenic fibers, which may be a useful tool to help interrogate the
carcinogenic potential of mineral fibers. In particular, the ability to
induce an M2 macrophage response appears related to the potent
tumor-inducing capacity of carcinogenic mineral fibers.


