Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TSC1/2 mutations define a molecular subset of HCC with aggressive
behavior and treatment implication.


We investigated the mutational landscape of mTOR signaling cascade in
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) with chronic hepatitis B (HBV)
background, aiming to evaluate and delineate mutation-dependent mechanism
of mTOR hyper-activation in hepatocarcinogenesis. We performed
next-generation sequencing on human HCC samples and cell line panel.
Systematic mutational screening of mTOR pathway-related genes was
undertaken and mutant genes were evaluated based on their recurrence.
Protein expressions of TSC1, TSC2 and pRPS6 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry in human HCC samples. Rapamycin sensitivity was
estimated by colony formation assay in HCC cell lines and the treatment
was further tested using our patient derived tumor xenograft (PDTX)
models. Results: We identified and confirmed multiple mTOR components as
recurrently mutated in HBV-associated HCCs. Of significance, we detected
frequent (16.2%, n = 18/111) mutations of TSC1 and TSC2 genes in the HCC
samples. The spectrum of TSC1/2 mutations likely disrupts the endogenous
gene functions in suppressing the downstream mTOR activity through
different mechanisms and leading to more aggressive tumor behavior.
Mutational disruption of TSC1 and TSC2 was also observed in HCC cell
lines and our PDTX models. TSC-mutant cells exhibited reduced colony
forming ability upon Rapamycin treatment. With the use of the
biologically relevant TSC2-mutant PDTXs, we demonstrated the therapeutic
benefits of the hyper-sensitivity towards Rapamycin treatment. Taken
together, our findings suggest the significance of previously
undocumented mutation-dependent mTOR hyper-activation and frequent TSC1/2
mutations in HBV-associated HCCs. They define a molecular subset of HCC
having genetic aberrations in mTOR signaling, with potential significance
of effective specific drug therapy.


