Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orlistat as a novel targeted therapy for obesity-driven
endometrial cancer.


Introduction: Obesity is associated with increased risk for and worse
outcomes from endometrial cancer (EC). Orlistat is a weight loss
medication that has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of fatty acid
synthase (FAS), and FAS is known to be upregulated in ECs. Thus, we
sought to investigate the anti-tumorigenic potential of orlistat in EC
cell lines and a genetically engineered mouse model of endometrioid EC
(LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mouse model).

Methods: Two endometrial cell lines, ECC-1 and KLE, were used. Cell
proliferation was assessed by MTT assay after exposure to orlistat.
Western immunoblotting was performed to evaluate the effect of orlistat
on downstream targets of fatty acid metabolism. LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice
were fed a control low fat diet (LFD; 10% calories from fat, lean group)
versus a high fat diet (HFD; 60% calories derived from fat, obese group)
to mimic diet-induced obesity, starting at 3 wks of age. AdCre was
injected at 6 wks of age to induce invasive EC. Mice were treated with
placebo or orlistat (200 mg/kg/day, IM) following tumor onset for 4 weeks
(N=10 mice/group). Immunohistochemistry was performed to assess for the
effect of orlistat on expression of Ki-67 (marker of cell proliferation),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and phosphorylated
(p)-acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC).

Results: Orlistat inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner for both
endometrial cell lines with a mean IC50 for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and 145.4 uM
for KLE (pResults: Orlistat inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner
for both endometrial cell lines with a mean IC50 for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and
145.4 uM for KLE (p<0.05). In addition, orlistat decreased expression of
FAS, ACC and carnitine palmitolytransferase 1A, consistent with an
inhibitory effect on fatty acid metabolism. In both the obese and lean
LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice, treatment with orlistat resulted in decreased
tumor weight/size as well as Ki-67 expression (pResults: Orlistat
inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner for both endometrial cell
lines with a mean IC50 for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and 145.4 uM for KLE
(p<0.05). In addition, orlistat decreased expression of FAS, ACC and
carnitine palmitolytransferase 1A, consistent with an inhibitory effect
on fatty acid metabolism. In both the obese and lean LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl
mice, treatment with orlistat resulted in decreased tumor weight/size as
well as Ki-67 expression (p<0.05), but the difference was more pronounced
in obese mice. Orlistat decreased tumor weight/size by 66% in the obese
mice and 23% in the lean mice (pResults: Orlistat inhibited growth in a
dose-dependent manner for both endometrial cell lines with a mean IC50
for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and 145.4 uM for KLE (p<0.05). In addition, orlistat
decreased expression of FAS, ACC and carnitine palmitolytransferase 1A,
consistent with an inhibitory effect on fatty acid metabolism. In both
the obese and lean LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice, treatment with orlistat
resulted in decreased tumor weight/size as well as Ki-67 expression
(p<0.05), but the difference was more pronounced in obese mice. Orlistat
decreased tumor weight/size by 66% in the obese mice and 23% in the lean
mice (p<0.05). Immunohistochemistry revealed that p-ACC and VEGF
expression was higher in the obese versus lean mice at baseline
(pResults: Orlistat inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner for both
endometrial cell lines with a mean IC50 for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and 145.4 uM
for KLE (p<0.05). In addition, orlistat decreased expression of FAS, ACC
and carnitine palmitolytransferase 1A, consistent with an inhibitory
effect on fatty acid metabolism. In both the obese and lean
LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice, treatment with orlistat resulted in decreased
tumor weight/size as well as Ki-67 expression (p<0.05), but the
difference was more pronounced in obese mice. Orlistat decreased tumor
weight/size by 66% in the obese mice and 23% in the lean mice (p<0.05).
Immunohistochemistry revealed that p-ACC and VEGF expression was higher
in the obese versus lean mice at baseline (p<0.05). Orlistat reduced VEGF
in the endometrial tumors of both the obese and lean mice (pResults:
Orlistat inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner for both endometrial
cell lines with a mean IC50 for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and 145.4 uM for KLE
(p<0.05). In addition, orlistat decreased expression of FAS, ACC and
carnitine palmitolytransferase 1A, consistent with an inhibitory effect
on fatty acid metabolism. In both the obese and lean LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl
mice, treatment with orlistat resulted in decreased tumor weight/size as
well as Ki-67 expression (p<0.05), but the difference was more pronounced
in obese mice. Orlistat decreased tumor weight/size by 66% in the obese
mice and 23% in the lean mice (p<0.05). Immunohistochemistry revealed
that p-ACC and VEGF expression was higher in the obese versus lean mice
at baseline (p<0.05). Orlistat reduced VEGF in the endometrial tumors of
both the obese and lean mice (p<0.05) but only decreased expression of
p-ACC in the tumors of obese mice (55%, pResults: Orlistat inhibited
growth in a dose-dependent manner for both endometrial cell lines with a
mean IC50 for ECC-1 of 88.7 uM and 145.4 uM for KLE (p<0.05). In
addition, orlistat decreased expression of FAS, ACC and carnitine
palmitolytransferase 1A, consistent with an inhibitory effect on fatty
acid metabolism. In both the obese and lean LKB1fl/flp53fl/fl mice,
treatment with orlistat resulted in decreased tumor weight/size as well
as Ki-67 expression (p<0.05), but the difference was more pronounced in
obese mice. Orlistat decreased tumor weight/size by 66% in the obese mice
and 23% in the lean mice (p<0.05). Immunohistochemistry revealed that
p-ACC and VEGF expression was higher in the obese versus lean mice at
baseline (p<0.05). Orlistat reduced VEGF in the endometrial tumors of
both the obese and lean mice (p<0.05) but only decreased expression of
p-ACC in the tumors of obese mice (55%, p<0.05).

Conclusions: Orlistat inhibited EC cell proliferation and endometrial
tumor growth in an endometrioid EC mouse model, with increased efficacy
in obese versus lean mice. Therefore, orlistat may be worthy of drug
repurposing as an anti-tumorigenic agent in EC, with the potential added
benefit of weight loss in this obesity-linked disease.


