Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retinoic acid as a therapeutic adjuvant in low-grade gliomas.


Introduction: Malignant gliomas are incurable brain tumors and the most
common primary brain tumors in adults. Mutations in isocitrate
dehydrogenase (IDH) are enriched in a subset of malignant low-grade
gliomas (MLGGs) that arise as lower grade neoplasms and steadily progress
to more aggressive and universally fatal glioblastomas (GBMs) usually
within 5-10 years after initial diagnosis. Gliomas with IDH1/2 mutations
are characterized by hypermethylation of multiple genes, including immune
genes, thereby rendering them highly immune evasive. Retinol binding
protein 1 (RBP1) gene, that encodes a protein involved in retinoic acid
(RA) generation, is significantly hyper-methylated in IDH mutant cells.
Since RA is instrumental in the induction of multiple immune genes
including immune-activating ligands such as NKG2D ligands (NKG2D-L), we
hypothesized that treatment of IDH mutant cells with RA will increase the
expression of NKG2D-L on the tumor cells, leading to increased
recognition and lysis by immune cells. In addition, we hypothesized that
RBP1 methylation was crucial to development of the IDH mutant
immune-evasive phenotype.

Methods: Primary glioma cells (IDH WT and mutant) were treated with 1Î¼M
RA for 48 hours. The cells were assessed for changes in expression of
NKG2D-L and other type-1 immune response genes. Effect of RA treatment on
NK killing and immune cell chemotaxis were evaluated. We also assessed
the impact of RBP1 knock-down in IDH WT cells. Finally, we evaluated the
efficacy of RA as a therapeutic modality for low-grade gliomas in a
murine model.

Results: RA-treated IDH mutant gliomas had a higher expression of NKG2D-L
and a higher sensitivity to killing by NK cells, when compared with
untreated IDH mutant cells. RA treatment of IDH mutant cells also induced
increased chemotaxis of NKs and CD8+ T cells in a CCL2-dependant manner.
In addition, RA demonstrated superior anti-tumor efficacy in vivo,
compared with controls. Finally, we demonstrated that RBP1 knock-down in
IDH WT cells was sufficient to replicate the immune evasive phenotype
observed in IDH mutant cells.

Conclusions: RA treatment reverses the immune evasion in IDH mutant cells
primarily by inducing the upregulation of NKG2D-L and by mediating
increased NK and CD8+ T cell chemotaxis via CCL2 induction. Additionally,
we established that RBP1 gene silencing is crucial for the development of
the immune evasive IDH mutant phenotype.


