Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cystathionine-beta-synthase (CBS)-derived hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
supports proliferation, migration and bioenergetics in colon
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs).


Introduction: Our group has recently demonstrated that CBS, one of the
H2S-producing enzymes, is abundantly overexpressed in human colorectal
cancer (CRC) tissue specimens resulting in an increased H2S production.
In order to extend our observations, we have now compared, using
immunohistochemistry, CBS expression in carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) compared to normal colonic fibroblasts (NCFs) in human colon
adenocarcinoma samples. The overall goal of our studies is to
characterize how the CBS/H2S axis contributes to the malignant phenotype
of the CAFs in the tumor microenvironment.

Methods: Human CAFs and NCFs were collected from CRC under an IRB
approved protocol and cultured in vitro. Western blot analysis of both
NCF and CAF was performed to determine CBS protein expression levels.
SiRNA/shRNA-mediated silencing of CBS in CAFs was performed. A
pharmacological inhibitor of CBS, aminooxyacetic acid (AOAA), in both CAF
and NCF cultures was also utilized. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) levels were
measured using the fluorogenic probe 7-Azido-4-methylcoumarin. We also
performed proliferation assays using a coulter counter in CAFs, NCFs, and
CAFs subjected to siRNA/shRNA-mediated CBS silencing or AOAA. Control
cells were transduced with shNT vectors. Cells were also treated with the
slow-releasing H2S donor GYY4137. We also conducted cell migration assays
in transwell chambers (migration of CAFs toward conditioned media (CM)
collected either from HCT116 cells or normal colon mucosal cells
(NCM356). Finally, the XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse) was
used to measure bioenergetic function in CAFs subjected to
siRNA/shRNA-mediated silencing of CBS or treated with AOAA.

Results: CBS protein expression and H2S production in CAFs was increased
compared to NCFs. The H2S donor, GYY 4137, increased the proliferation
rate of CAFs but not of NCFs. CBS silencing or AOAA treatment reduced CAF
migration toward conditioned media from HCT116 cells. Genetic or
pharmacological inhibition of CBS in CAF cells suppressed key
bioenergetic parameters including basal respiration, ATP production,
maximal respiratory capacity, and spare respiratory capacity compared to
NCF cells or CAF shNT cells.

Conclusions: Thus, CBS/H2S axis serves as a mechanism to support CAFsâ€™
function. In these cells, H2S contributes to maintaining their
bioenergetic functions, which, in turn, promotes their proliferation and
migration toward colon cancer cells. We hypothesize that these processes
may contribute CRC progression.


