Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High expression of MiR-432-3p is associated with the
chemoresistance by NRF2 stabilization via directly targeting KEAP1.


NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2) is a master transcriptional regulator that
integrates cellular stress responses and is negatively regulated by
Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1) at the post-translational
level. In human cancers, aberrantly stabilized NRF2, either by mutation
of NRF2 or KEAP1, plays a vital role in chemoresistance through the
activation of target genes, suggesting that targeted inhibition of NRF2
is a potential therapy for NRF2-stabilized tumors. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are
endogenous small noncoding RNAs that can negatively regulate gene
expression by interfering with the translation or stability of target
transcripts. Previously, we identified miRNAs negatively regulating NRF2
pathway via directly targeting NRF2 itself by a reporter-coupled miRNA
library screening and demonstrated the potential of miRNA-based therapy
against NRF2-stabilized tumors in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) (Mol. Cancer Res 2014, Cancer Res 2015).

In the present study, we further identified miR-432-3p as a miRNA
positively regulating NRF2 pathway. MiR-432-3p could directly targeted
KEAP1 via binding to its seed sequence within the cording region.
Overexpression of miR-432-3p resulted in enhanced resistance to cisplatin
via activation of NRF2 in ESCC cell lines. Furthermore, miR-432-3p was
overexpressed in 55 of 84 primary ESCC tumors, compared with that of
corresponding non-cancerous esophageal mucosa (65.5%). Importantly, we
showed the negative correlation between the expression level of KEAP1 and
miR-432-3p in primary ESCC tumors. Taken together, these findings suggest
that the high expression of miR-432-3p may contribute to the
chemoresistance by NRF2 stabilization via down-regulation of KEAP1
expression in ESCC.


