Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urinary microRNA as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for
prostate cancer.


Widespread use of Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) testing for prostate
cancer (PC) detection has led to extensive overdiagnosis and
overtreatment. Thus, we aimed to train and validate urine-based microRNA
(miRNA) biomarkers that may assist in the diagnosis and prognosis of PC.
To this end, we profiled the expression levels of 92 miRNAs by RT-qPCR in
exosome-enriched cell-free urine samples from 20 patients with benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and 188 patients with clinically localized PC
(cohort 1). The diagnostic potential of individual miRNAs and multi-miRNA
ratio models were assessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve analysis. Prognostic potential was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier, uni-
and multivariate Cox regression analyses using biochemical recurrence
(BCR) after radical prostatectomy (RP) as endpoint. Our findings were
validated in an independent cohort of 20 BPH patients and 197 patients
with clinically localized PC (cohort 2). We identified and validated
several deregulated miRNAs in urine samples from PC patients. In
addition, we trained a novel diagnostic 3-miRNA model that distinguished
BPH and PC patients with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.95 in cohort
1, and which was successfully validated in cohort 2 (AUC=0.89).
Furthermore, we trained a novel prognostic 3-miRNA model that predicted
time to BCR after RP independently of routine clinicopathological
parameters in cohort 1, and was successfully validated in cohort 2.


