Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-invasive monitoring of the efficacy of anticancer therapeutic
agent in lung orthotopic xenograft models of NSCLC using Bio-Luminescence
Imaging (BLI).


Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) patients have a poor rate of survival
owing to diagnosis at a later stage. This necessitates development of
novel therapeutic strategies that limit rapid progression of NSCLC and
imaging techniques that monitor such changes in vivo. There has been a
significant growth of bioluminescence imaging applications in small
laboratory animal models in recent years, owing to its high sensitivity,
efficiency, and non-invasive nature.

Our lab has previously demonstrated that a therapeutic agent that
disrupts mitochondrial respiration effectively hampers proliferation of
NSCLC cell lines in vitro. With an effort to investigate the potential of
this therapeutic agent in clinical settings, we used a lung orthotopic
xenograft mouse model along with bioluminescence imaging (BLI) to
continuously monitor the efficacy of the drug in vivo. Briefly, we
implanted NSCLC cell line transduced with lentiviral particles carrying
luciferase sequence, in the left lung of 6-8 weeks old female NOD/SCID
mice to generate lung orthotopic xenografts. The therapeutic agent was
administered intravenously over several weeks. Tumor growth was then
compared between the untreated versus the treated mice, non-invasively
through bioluminescence imaging (Perkin Elmerâ€™s IVIS Lumina III
Imager). On sacrificing the mice, the lungs were harvested, formalin
fixed and paraffin embedded for Immunohistochemistry.

Our BLI data show that in the mice treated with the therapeutic agent,
tumors are localized to the left lung (site of implantation) as opposed
to the control mice where the tumors metastasized to the right lung. The
BLI data indicates significant decrease in radiance (total flux in
photons per second) in mice subjected to treatment when compared to
control mice.

We show that the therapeutic agent significantly inhibits progression and
metastasis of human NSCLC cell line orthotopically injected in the lungs
of NOD/SCID mice. The results suggest that it might be potent anti-cancer
drug as it is effective in a model that recapitulates the natural
environment of lung tumorigenesis. Immunohistochemical studies are
underway to discern the mechanistic details.


