Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IODNE: an integrated optimization method for identifying the
deregulated sub-network for precision medicine in cancer.


Background and Purpose: Sub-network analysis can explore complex patterns
of the entire molecular pathways and networks for the drug target
identification, and therefore drug selection. Computational algorithms
are needed to optimize the sub-network search for molecular pathways and
networks under certain conditions.

Materials and Methods: In the paper, the gene expression profile of a
cohort breast cancer patients and protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network are integrated with edge score and node score simultaneously. A
novel optimization algorithm, IODNE, is developed to search for the
optimal de-regulated subnetwork of merging gene and protein network. The
application of IODNE is demonstrated for a sub-network of drug target
selection in breast cancer subtypes Luminal-A/Luminal-B data from Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA). Where, the PPI networks data selected from Pathway
Commons.

Results: IODNE selects sub-networks, which contain ER1/PR and HER2, the
well-known targets in clinic Luminal-A/Luminal-B breast cancer subtypes.
This validates the utility of IODNE. When applying IODNE to the
triple-negative breast cancer subtype data, we identify sub-networks that
contain genes such as ERBB2, HRAS, PGR, CAD, POLE and SLC2A1.

Conclusion: Using the known drug targets in breast cancer subtypes, we
demonstrate that IODNE is a robust and powerful algorithm to identify
sub-networks for drug target identification. Based on the gene expression
profiles and protein interaction networks, it detects the optimum
deregulated subnetwork for the candidate drug target selection. The IODNE
is promising tool for the precision medicine.


