Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The alteration in key regulator genes of autophagy is mainstream
mechanism of therapy resistance and impact prognosis of acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML): results from diagnosis genomic analysis on 148
consecutive patients treated with intensive chemotherapy and long-term
survival follow-up.


Introduction There are no clear evidences if autophagy can lead to
therapy resistance or favor apoptosis in cancer; it can function as a
pro-apoptotic mechanism, or it can improve stresses survival clearing
damaged mitochondria and proteins accumulation. Levels and activity of
pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic proteins, particularly bcl-2 and p53,
high levels of cAMP, and a complex made by pink/park could play as
fulcrum of this yin and yang effect of autophagy. Our study aims to
define the role of autophagy in AML, and to establish if gain or loss in
autophagy could reduce the patients’ chance to respond to induction,
and to worsen OS.

Methods We analyzed 148 consecutive newly diagnosed non M3 AML patients
treated with induction chemotherapy regimens containing at least one dose
of anthracycline. We screened all patients for TP53, FLT3, NMP1
mutations; we performed Affymetrix SNP array 6.0 or Cytoscan HD. Survival
data were collected prospectively, with a median follow-up of 18 months.

Results Autophagy alteration (gene group 1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1 CHR17;
BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B; PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were related
to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after induction in univariate
(pResults Autophagy alteration (gene group 1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1 CHR17;
BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B; PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were related
to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after induction in univariate
(p<.001) and multivariable regression with age, karyotype, secondary AML,
TP53 mutation (p=.014); autophagy alteration shown to confer worst OS
(pResults Autophagy alteration (gene group 1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1 CHR17;
BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B; PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were related
to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after induction in univariate
(p<.001) and multivariable regression with age, karyotype, secondary AML,
TP53 mutation (p=.014); autophagy alteration shown to confer worst OS
(p<.001) and was significantly associated with complex karyotype and TP53
mutation (pResults Autophagy alteration (gene group 1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1
CHR17; BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B; PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were
related to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after induction in
univariate (p<.001) and multivariable regression with age, karyotype,
secondary AML, TP53 mutation (p=.014); autophagy alteration shown to
confer worst OS (p<.001) and was significantly associated with complex
karyotype and TP53 mutation (p<.001). We detected significant differences
in term of survival independently both in gain and loss in group 1
genes(pResults Autophagy alteration (gene group 1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1
CHR17; BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B; PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were
related to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after induction in
univariate (p<.001) and multivariable regression with age, karyotype,
secondary AML, TP53 mutation (p=.014); autophagy alteration shown to
confer worst OS (p<.001) and was significantly associated with complex
karyotype and TP53 mutation (p<.001). We detected significant differences
in term of survival independently both in gain and loss in group 1
genes(p<.001). Furthermore, we investigated genes in AMPK pathway (group
2: SESN1; PRKAA1 CHR 3; PRKAB1: PRKAA1 CHR 1: PRKAG1 CHR11; PRKAG1 CHR 7;
PRKAG3; PRKAB1) and other genes that could be related to a switch from a
physiological role of autophagy to a resiliency mechanism (group 3:
CCND1; BCL2; PINK1; PARK2; TP53; MDM1; MDM4): alterations in those genes
were shown to confer worst OS (pResults Autophagy alteration (gene group
1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1 CHR17; BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B;
PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were related to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after
induction in univariate (p<.001) and multivariable regression with age,
karyotype, secondary AML, TP53 mutation (p=.014); autophagy alteration
shown to confer worst OS (p<.001) and was significantly associated with
complex karyotype and TP53 mutation (p<.001). We detected significant
differences in term of survival independently both in gain and loss in
group 1 genes(p<.001). Furthermore, we investigated genes in AMPK pathway
(group 2: SESN1; PRKAA1 CHR 3; PRKAB1: PRKAA1 CHR 1: PRKAG1 CHR11; PRKAG1
CHR 7; PRKAG3; PRKAB1) and other genes that could be related to a switch
from a physiological role of autophagy to a resiliency mechanism (group
3: CCND1; BCL2; PINK1; PARK2; TP53; MDM1; MDM4): alterations in those
genes were shown to confer worst OS (p<.001 in both groups); Alteration
in group 2 and group 3 were related to lower CR% after induction
(pResults Autophagy alteration (gene group 1: ULK1 CHR11; ULK1 CHR17;
BECN1; ATG14; AMBRA1; UVRAG; ATG9A; ATG9B; PIK3C3; PIK3R4) were related
to lower Complete Remission rate (CR%) after induction in univariate
(p<.001) and multivariable regression with age, karyotype, secondary AML,
TP53 mutation (p=.014); autophagy alteration shown to confer worst OS
(p<.001) and was significantly associated with complex karyotype and TP53
mutation (p<.001). We detected significant differences in term of
survival independently both in gain and loss in group 1 genes(p<.001).
Furthermore, we investigated genes in AMPK pathway (group 2: SESN1;
PRKAA1 CHR 3; PRKAB1: PRKAA1 CHR 1: PRKAG1 CHR11; PRKAG1 CHR 7; PRKAG3;
PRKAB1) and other genes that could be related to a switch from a
physiological role of autophagy to a resiliency mechanism (group 3:
CCND1; BCL2; PINK1; PARK2; TP53; MDM1; MDM4): alterations in those genes
were shown to confer worst OS (p<.001 in both groups); Alteration in
group 2 and group 3 were related to lower CR% after induction (p<.001 in
both groups). Whole Exome Sequencing on 56 patients in our set did not
found any significant mutation in genes we analyzed with the exception of
TP53.

Conclusions Our work investigates for the first time with a genomic
approach the role of autophagy in AML. We found that both gain and loss
in autophagy key regulator genes are associated with poor prognosis and
therapy resistance. A loss in autophagy could enhance proliferation and
block apoptosis; a gain could give cell resiliency, favoring cytoplasm
turnover, damaged mitochondria elimination, and neutralizing oxidative
damages. Acknowledgements: ELN, AIL, AIRC, PRIN, Progetto
Regione-Università 2010-12, FP7 NGS-PTL project.


