Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased migration ability of osimertinib-resistant EGFR-T790M
mutant non-small-cell lung cancer cells.


Background: A third generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) osimertinib is effective against
gefitinib/erlotinib-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring EGFR T790M mutation. Although the majority of these patients
initially responds to osimertinib, they eventually develop resistance.
Acquired mutations such as EGFR C797S mutation have been reported to
confer resistance to osimertinib, but mechanisms of resistance to
osimertinib or biological behaviors of osimertinib-resistant NSCLC have
not been fully elucidated.

Materials and methods: Osimertinib-resistant PC-9/ZD/OR1 and PC-9/ZD/OR3
cells were generated after continuous exposure of gefitinib-resistant
PC-9/ZD cells harboring both EGFR exon 19 deletion and T790M mutations to
increasing concentrations of osimertinib. Growth-inhibitory effect of
inhibitors gefitinib and osimertinib was evaluated by MTT assay. Common
EGFR mutational status was examined by RainDrop Digital PCR System
(RainDance Technologies). Immunoblot analysis was performed to
investigate the modulation of molecules relevant to EGFR signaling
pathways. Cell-adhesion assay, wound closure assay and transwell assay
were performed to evaluate the ability of cell adhesion and migration.

Results: Both PC-9/ZD/OR1 and PC-9/ZD/OR3 cells showed 50- to 120-fold
more resistant to osimertinib than parental PC-9/ZD cells, and maintained
resistance to gefitinib as well. PC-9/ZD/OR cells maintain EGFR exon 19
deletion and T790M mutations and C797S mutation was not detected.
Although phosphorylation of EGFR and ERK1/2 were inhibited by osimertinib
treatment in PC-9/ZD/OR cells, phosphorylation of Akt was not inhibited.
PC-9/ZD/OR cells express the elevated level of c-MET and its
phosphorylated form, suggesting that bypass signaling is activated to
evade EGFR pathway blockade. PC-9/ZD/OR cells also express marked level
of E-cadherin which parental PC-9/ZD cells do not express. PC-9/ZD/OR
cells exhibited enhanced adherent activity, cell motility and migration
ability compared to PC-9/ZD cells. Notably, osimertinib treatment
significantly reduced the number of migrated cells not only in PC-9/ZD
cells but also in PC-9/ZD/OR cells. These results suggest that
osimertinib-resistant PC-9/ZD/OR cells acquired enhanced migration
ability through c-MET pathway activation and/or induction of E-cadherin.
Osimertinib treatment may be still effective to inhibit cell migration,
suggesting that cell migration and cell growth are driven by different
signaling pathways in PC-9/ZD/OR cells.

Conclusion: c-MET overexpression was suggested to confer resistance to
osimertinib and the resistant cells exhibited enhanced cell migration.
Continuative osimertinib treatment may be beneficial in preventing
metastasis even after the failure and involvement of c-MET and E-cadherin
in osimertinib resistance should be further investigated.


