Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of fluorescent-cell based high throughput assay to
identify novel therapeutics of bladder cancer cells through upregulation
of SPARC expression.


Bladder cancer is the most common malignancy affecting the urinary system
with an estimated 76,960 new cases and projected 16,390 deaths in 2016 in
the United States. The role of SPARC in various cancers is contextual and
differs based on the tumor classification, malignancy and progression. We
have recently reported the tumor suppressor effect of SPARC in urinary
bladder cancer. We have shown that the loss of SPARC in bladder cancer
resulted accelerated bladder carcinogenesis and metastasis multiple
pathways involving cell cycle deregulation, inflammation and
angiogenesis. We have also reported that SPARC protein expression
significantly decreased in the cancerous compartment in advanced human
bladder cancer as well as in carcinogen-induced murine urothelial cancer.
However, the mechanism of the downregulation of SPARC expression in
cancer in general and in bladder cancer in particular is still unraveled.
The purpose of our study is to develop a robust, high throughput assay to
identify therapeutic candidates as regulators of SPARC expression in
bladder cancer. We cloned SPARC promoter in a third generation lentiviral
vector coupled with fluorescent GFP or mCherry fluorescent protein to
quantitatively measure SPARC expression. We generated stable bladder
cancer cell lines expressing SPARC expression in bladder cancer cell
lines. UMUC3 bladder cancer cells were transduced with lentiviral vector
to generate SPARC-promoter reporter system to screen regulators of SPARC
expression. Reporter cells were plated in 96 well plates and treated with
10uM of FDA-approved and natural product drug libraries. Real time
monitoring of changes in SPARC expression was done by measuring GFP
fluorescence intensity using IncuCyteÂ® ZOOM Live Imaging Analysis
System. We identified drugs that consistently exhibited dosage-dependent
augmentation or down-regulation of SPARC expression in UMUC3 cells. Our
screens identified novel up-regulators of SPARC expression that are both
standard of care and novel bladder cancer therapeutics. Our efforts
produced an efficient robust assay to identify novel therapeutics and
regulators of the tumor suppressor SPARC in the bladder cancer ecosystem
that can be used in the adjuvant and neoadjuvant settings.


