Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding molecular mechanisms underlying heme function in
non-small cell lung cancer cells.


Heme is a central molecule for mitochondrial respiration and for all
processes involved in oxygen utilization. Heme serves as a prosthetic
group or as a cofactor for a number of oxidative phosphorylation enzymes
and other oxygen-utilizing hemoproteins. Heme directly regulates the
synthesis, translocation and assembly of these enzyme complexes. Most, if
not all, human cells can synthesize and uptake heme from the circulation.
A number of epidemiological studies have shown that high heme intake is
associated with increased risk of cancer, including lung cancer. To
assess the status of heme metabolism in lung cancer cells, we performed a
series of experiments in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines
such as HCC4017, H1299, A549, H2009, H1395, H460 and Calu-3. We then
compared results with an immortalized normal lung cell line, HBEC30KT and
observed significant increase in rates of heme synthesis and heme uptake
in NSCLC cells compared to HBEC30KT. Previous studies carried out in our
lab showed intensified mitochondrial respiration and increased levels of
heme and hemoproteins in NSCLCs. We examined the effect of heme depletion
on mitochondrial biogenesis and function. We observed that mitochondrial
functions such as ATP production, NAD/NADH ratios and ROS production are
also affected by heme depletion. Proteins involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis are significantly affected when cells are grown in heme
depleted medium. Studies are currently underway to check how heme
depletion affects the interactions of various transcription factors
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and function.


