Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of mesothelin-targeted immune-activating fusion
protein and anti-PD-L1 augments antitumor immunity and prolongs survival
in murine model of ovarian cancer.


Background and Purpose: Although immunotherapy as an adjuvant to surgery
and chemotherapy has been investigated in ovarian cancer (OC) as a means
of reducing tumor recurrence and improving survival, there remains a
significant unmet need for combinatorial strategies to enhance the
antitumor immune response. The purpose of this study was to develop a
novel combination immunotherapy for OC, utilizing our novel fusion
protein to target and generate a cellular immune response to mesothelin
(MSLN) in conjunction with blockade of the PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint to
restore the function of cytotoxic T cells in order to enhance cancer
control and prolong survival.

Experimental Procedures: Luciferase-expressing ID8 cells were employed to
establish an intraperitoneal ovarian tumor model in immunocompetent
C57BL/6 mice. The efficacies of the MSLN-targeted immune-activating
fusion protein (VIC-008), αPD-L1, and the combination were evaluated.
Mice received 4 intraperitoneal (i.p.) treatments of VIC-008 from day 7
post tumor inoculation weekly, and 6 treatments of αPD-L1 i.p. every
other day from 4 weeks post inoculation. Tumor growth was monitored by in
vivo imaging of luciferase activity. Survival time was calculated as life
span from the day of tumor inoculation. In immunological studies, mice
were sacrificed 7 weeks after tumor cell inoculation. Immune cells from
lymph nodes, ascites and tumors were stained with antibodies against
multiple immune cell markers and profiled by flow cytometry.

Results: VIC-008, αPD-L1 or combination treatment delayed tumor growth.
The combination treatment resulted in the greatest prolongation in
survival, followed by αPD-L1 treatment and then VIC-008 treatment.
Improved survival was associated with increased levels of intratumoral
CD3+CD8+ T cells (PResults: VIC-008, αPD-L1 or combination treatment
delayed tumor growth. The combination treatment resulted in the greatest
prolongation in survival, followed by αPD-L1 treatment and then VIC-008
treatment. Improved survival was associated with increased levels of
intratumoral CD3+CD8+ T cells (P<0.0001). The combination treatment also
reduced the proportion of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells (PResults: VIC-008,
αPD-L1 or combination treatment delayed tumor growth. The combination
treatment resulted in the greatest prolongation in survival, followed by
αPD-L1 treatment and then VIC-008 treatment. Improved survival was
associated with increased levels of intratumoral CD3+CD8+ T cells
(P<0.0001). The combination treatment also reduced the proportion of
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells (P<0.0001) in the lymph nodes. An increased
number of CD8+CD27+CD44+ memory T cells (P=0.0134) were observed in
ascites in the combination treatment group. CD11b+CD11c+ dendritic cells
were enriched in ascites in VIC-008 treatment (P=0.0019) and combination
treatment groups (P=0.0010). More CD11c+CD38+ (M1) (P=0.0361) and fewer
CD206+CD106+ (M2) (P=0.0285) macrophages were found in the tumors of the
combination treatment group.

Conclusion: Our results suggest that, through activating dendritic cells
and enhancing antigen presentation and cross-presentation, VIC-008
augments antitumor CD8+ T cell responses and facilitates generation of
memory T cells when combined with PD-1/PD-L1 blockade, providing
long-term antitumor effects. Our findings demonstrate for the first time
a mechanistic rationale for combining VIC-008 and αPD-L1 in treatment of
OC in mice, positioning this combination therapy as a potential promising
new immunotherapeutic approach for OC.


