Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of potent and selective inhibitors for ATR: An
adjuvant for DNA damage based chemotherapeutics.


Inhibition of DNA damage checkpoint and repair function has been a
challenging as well a promising approach in cancer therapy. ATR kinase is
one of the key mediator of DNA damage response which induces cell cycle
arrest and DNA repair via its downstream proteins. Blocking ATR has
proved to prevent the Chk1 pathway from stalled replication fork and
enhances the replication stress and premature mitotic entry. In addition
inhibition of ATR can selectively sensitize the cancer cell to radio and
chemotherapy, due to defective DNA damage signaling through the loss of
ATM or p53 mutation in cancer cell. Due to its inherent role in DDR, ATR
has been explored as a potential target in enhancing the effect of
radiation and chemo-therapy in addition enables highly selective
targeting the cancer cell through synthetic lethality.

Despite the attractiveness of ATR inhibition in the cancer therapy,
specific ATR inhibitors have remained indefinable. Further, there is a
limited proof of concept data for ATR inhibition. Considering these facts
and challenges we will be presenting some preliminary results with
respect to In-silico design, synthesis and evolution of potential and
selective inhibitors for ATR.

References

Llona-Minguez, S., Hoglund, A., Jacques, S. A., Koolmeister, T. &
Helleday, T. Chemical strategies for development of ATR inhibitors.
Expert Rev Mol Med 9, 10 (2014).

Wagner, J. M. & Kaufmann, S. H. Prospects for the Use of ATR Inhibitors
to Treat Cancer. Pharmaceuticals 3, 1311-1334 (2010).

Liu, Q. et al. Characterization of Torin2, an ATP-competitive inhibitor
of mTOR, ATM, and ATR. Cancer Res 73, 2574-2586 (2013).


