Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Magnetic resonance imaging shrinkage patterns after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast carcinomas: Correlation with molecular subtypes.


Background: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) is widely performed for
patients with locally advanced breast carcinomas. It is important to
obtain precise information using imaging modalities about the
distribution of residual carcinomas after NAC to predict the success of
breast conserving surgery. However, the relationship between magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) shrinkage patterns and molecular subtypes of
breast carcinomas has not yet been investigated.

Methods: We analyzed the MRI shrinkage and pathological patterns of
residual carcinomas after NAC in 54 consecutive breast carcinomas. The
shrinkage patterns were classified into five categories: Type I and II
(concentric shrinkage with or without any surrounding lesion), type III
(shrinkage with residual multinodular lesions), type IV (diffuse contrast
enhancement in the entire quadrant), and non-visualization.

Results: The most common MRI shrinkage pattern was type I (39%) followed
by non-visualization (26%). The most common pathological shrinkage
pattern was type III (33%), followed by type II (28%) and
non-visualization (22%). The concordance rates of the MRI patterns of
non-visualization and type I were significantly lower than those of the
MRI patterns of type II, III, and IV (p = 0.018). Moreover, in the
luminal subtypes, the concordance rates of the MRI patterns of
non-visualization and type I were significantly lower than those of the
MRI patterns of type II, III, and IV (p = 0.026); however, in the
non-luminal subtypes, this correlation was not significant. Conclusions:
The results of the present study suggest that the cases with MRI
shrinkage patterns of non-visualization and type I require caution
regarding the surgical margins compared with the other types, especially
the luminal subtypes.


