Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitivity of oncogenic KRAS to adenosine triphosphate
suppression.


KRAS proteins regulate many cellular processes including initiation of
cell division in response to mitogens. Gain of function KRAS mutations
appear in approximately 30% of all human cancers and activate effector
signal transduction pathways independent of mitogenic stimuli. KRAS
driven cancers also frequently have high metabolic rates and may have
increased sensitivity to metabolic inhibitors but the underlying
mechanism is not fully understood. In this study, we characterized the
cellular mechanism of a small molecule inhibitor identified using a
transgenic Drosophila melanogaster model that expresses human KRAS-G12V
in the fly wing. The compound partially restored wing development in the
KRAS-G12V flies and inhibited growth and signal transduction in multiple
KRAS driven cancer cells and KRAS-G12V dependent MEF cells but not in MEF
cells expressing BRAF-V600E. The compound also had a profound impact on
mitochondrial function by inhibiting electron transport (ETC) complex I.
Multiple other ETC or ATP synthase inhibitors similarly impaired
oncogenic KRAS signal transduction. ATP production through glucose
metabolism was sufficient to rescue KRAS function and cellular growth
after ETC inhibition, suggesting that inhibition of MAPK signaling is due
to low ATP levels rather than a direct consequence of ETC or complex I
inhibition. These data indicate that oncogenic KRAS signal transduction
requires high cellular ATP levels and suggests a synthetic lethal
interaction between KRAS and multiple metabolic targets that could be
exploited to target KRAS driven cancers.


