Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT1 is involved in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and
self-renewal ability of ESCC-cancer stem cells.


DNA methylation mediated by DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) plays an
important role in carcinogenesis and self-renewal ability of cancer stem
cells (CSCs). However, the function of DNMT1 in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) carcinogenesis, especially self-renewal ability of
ESCC-CSCs remains unclear. In this study, we found a high expression of
DNMT1 in both side population (SP) cells and sphere formation cells that
represented as substitutes for CSCs in KYSE150 and EC109 ESCC cell lines.
In addition, the expression of DNMT1 was decreased during the
differentiation from SP to None-SP (NSP) in these ESCC cells. These
results suggested that DNMT1 might have a role in regulating self-renewal
and/or differentiation of ESCC-CSCs. To further investigate DNMT1 in ESCC
carcinogenesis and self-renewal ability of ESCC-CSCs, we silenced the
expression of DNMT1 in KYSE150 and EC109 ESCC cells using
lentivirus-mediated RNA interference (RNAi). Our results showed that
ablation of DNMT1 expression in KYSE150 and EC109 ESCC cells resulted in
decreased their CSCs by SP analysis and sphere formation assay.
Meanwhile, ablation of DNMT1 expression inhibited malignant phenotypes in
KYSE150 and EC109 cells, including cell proliferation, colony formation,
migration and drug resistance abilities. Treatment of
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), a DNMT inhibitor that led to the
degradation of DNMT1 protein by proteasome, revealed that numbers of CSCs
and the malignant phenotypes of KYSE150 and EC109 ESCC cells were
refrained significantly, including a dramatic inhibition of self-renewal
ability of these ESCC-CSCs. Thus, our results indicated that DNMT1 was
involved in ESCC carcinogenesis, especially in the maintenance of
ESCC-CSCs, suggesting that DNMT1 could be a potential target for ESCC,
especially ESCC-CSCs, therapy.


