Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adult calorie restriction reduces weight gain and mammary tumor
incidence in obesity prone MMTV-TFG α mice -.


Obesity is associated with increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer
resulting in recommendations for weight gain prevention and/or weight
loss. However, there is little experimental data indicating if calorie
restriction (CR) initiated in adulthood impacts mammary tumorigenesis. We
have used female MMTV-TGF-α mice which develop mammary tumors in the 2nd
yr of life as a model of postmenopausal breast cancer. From 10-30 weeks
of age (woa) mice were fed a diet with 33% fat calories. At 30 woa based
on body weight mice were classified as Obesity-Prone (Ob-Pr), Overweight
(Ow) or Obesity-Resistant (Ob-R). Half in each weight category were then
fed a 25% CR diet with reduced carbohydrate content (43% fat calories).
The remaining mice continued on ad libitum (AL) feeding of the 33% fat
diet. This resulted in six experimental groups (n = 26-31/group). Food
intakes were monitored and body weights and mammary tumor status were
determined weekly. Mice were sacrificed either at 90 woa or earlier if
tumor size dictated. Mice in the CR-Ob-Pr group lost an average of 1.12
grams while mice in the AL-Ob-Pr group gained 16.03 grams from 30 woa
until euthanasia. CR-Ob-Pr mice had a reduced palpable tumor incidence as
compared to AL-Ob-Pr mice prior to euthanasia (12.90% versus 61.54% P =
0.0002). Indolent tumors were discovered at euthanasia with the CR-Ob-Pr
mice having a larger number than AL-Ob-Pr mice resulting in final tumor
positive mice in these groups of 54.84% vs 65.38%, respectively.
Interestingly, the Ob-R mice had final tumor incidence of 38.71% and
73.08% for the CR-Ob-R vs the AL-Ob-R (PObesity is associated with
increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer resulting in
recommendations for weight gain prevention and/or weight loss. However,
there is little experimental data indicating if calorie restriction (CR)
initiated in adulthood impacts mammary tumorigenesis. We have used female
MMTV-TGF-α mice which develop mammary tumors in the 2nd yr of life as a
model of postmenopausal breast cancer. From 10-30 weeks of age (woa) mice
were fed a diet with 33% fat calories. At 30 woa based on body weight
mice were classified as Obesity-Prone (Ob-Pr), Overweight (Ow) or
Obesity-Resistant (Ob-R). Half in each weight category were then fed a
25% CR diet with reduced carbohydrate content (43% fat calories). The
remaining mice continued on ad libitum (AL) feeding of the 33% fat diet.
This resulted in six experimental groups (n = 26-31/group). Food intakes
were monitored and body weights and mammary tumor status were determined
weekly. Mice were sacrificed either at 90 woa or earlier if tumor size
dictated. Mice in the CR-Ob-Pr group lost an average of 1.12 grams while
mice in the AL-Ob-Pr group gained 16.03 grams from 30 woa until
euthanasia. CR-Ob-Pr mice had a reduced palpable tumor incidence as
compared to AL-Ob-Pr mice prior to euthanasia (12.90% versus 61.54% P =
0.0002). Indolent tumors were discovered at euthanasia with the CR-Ob-Pr
mice having a larger number than AL-Ob-Pr mice resulting in final tumor
positive mice in these groups of 54.84% vs 65.38%, respectively.
Interestingly, the Ob-R mice had final tumor incidence of 38.71% and
73.08% for the CR-Ob-R vs the AL-Ob-R (P<0.01). Average tumor weight was
highest in the AL-Ob-Pr group with CR resulting in a significantly lower
tumor weight (PObesity is associated with increased risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer resulting in recommendations for weight gain
prevention and/or weight loss. However, there is little experimental data
indicating if calorie restriction (CR) initiated in adulthood impacts
mammary tumorigenesis. We have used female MMTV-TGF-α mice which develop
mammary tumors in the 2nd yr of life as a model of postmenopausal breast
cancer. From 10-30 weeks of age (woa) mice were fed a diet with 33% fat
calories. At 30 woa based on body weight mice were classified as
Obesity-Prone (Ob-Pr), Overweight (Ow) or Obesity-Resistant (Ob-R). Half
in each weight category were then fed a 25% CR diet with reduced
carbohydrate content (43% fat calories). The remaining mice continued on
ad libitum (AL) feeding of the 33% fat diet. This resulted in six
experimental groups (n = 26-31/group). Food intakes were monitored and
body weights and mammary tumor status were determined weekly. Mice were
sacrificed either at 90 woa or earlier if tumor size dictated. Mice in
the CR-Ob-Pr group lost an average of 1.12 grams while mice in the
AL-Ob-Pr group gained 16.03 grams from 30 woa until euthanasia. CR-Ob-Pr
mice had a reduced palpable tumor incidence as compared to AL-Ob-Pr mice
prior to euthanasia (12.90% versus 61.54% P = 0.0002). Indolent tumors
were discovered at euthanasia with the CR-Ob-Pr mice having a larger
number than AL-Ob-Pr mice resulting in final tumor positive mice in these
groups of 54.84% vs 65.38%, respectively. Interestingly, the Ob-R mice
had final tumor incidence of 38.71% and 73.08% for the CR-Ob-R vs the
AL-Ob-R (P<0.01). Average tumor weight was highest in the AL-Ob-Pr group
with CR resulting in a significantly lower tumor weight (P< 0.01). The
AL-Ob-Pr group had the shortest average survival time of 82.96 woa while
CR of the Ob-Pr mice resulted in increased survival to 89.77 woa (P
Obesity is associated with increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer
resulting in recommendations for weight gain prevention and/or weight
loss. However, there is little experimental data indicating if calorie
restriction (CR) initiated in adulthood impacts mammary tumorigenesis. We
have used female MMTV-TGF-α mice which develop mammary tumors in the 2nd
yr of life as a model of postmenopausal breast cancer. From 10-30 weeks
of age (woa) mice were fed a diet with 33% fat calories. At 30 woa based
on body weight mice were classified as Obesity-Prone (Ob-Pr), Overweight
(Ow) or Obesity-Resistant (Ob-R). Half in each weight category were then
fed a 25% CR diet with reduced carbohydrate content (43% fat calories).
The remaining mice continued on ad libitum (AL) feeding of the 33% fat
diet. This resulted in six experimental groups (n = 26-31/group). Food
intakes were monitored and body weights and mammary tumor status were
determined weekly. Mice were sacrificed either at 90 woa or earlier if
tumor size dictated. Mice in the CR-Ob-Pr group lost an average of 1.12
grams while mice in the AL-Ob-Pr group gained 16.03 grams from 30 woa
until euthanasia. CR-Ob-Pr mice had a reduced palpable tumor incidence as
compared to AL-Ob-Pr mice prior to euthanasia (12.90% versus 61.54% P =
0.0002). Indolent tumors were discovered at euthanasia with the CR-Ob-Pr
mice having a larger number than AL-Ob-Pr mice resulting in final tumor
positive mice in these groups of 54.84% vs 65.38%, respectively.
Interestingly, the Ob-R mice had final tumor incidence of 38.71% and
73.08% for the CR-Ob-R vs the AL-Ob-R (P<0.01). Average tumor weight was
highest in the AL-Ob-Pr group with CR resulting in a significantly lower
tumor weight (P< 0.01). The AL-Ob-Pr group had the shortest average
survival time of 82.96 woa while CR of the Ob-Pr mice resulted in
increased survival to 89.77 woa (P < 0.001). A comparison of the survival
curves of these two groups showed that CR resulted in significantly
increased survival (P Obesity is associated with increased risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer resulting in recommendations for weight gain
prevention and/or weight loss. However, there is little experimental data
indicating if calorie restriction (CR) initiated in adulthood impacts
mammary tumorigenesis. We have used female MMTV-TGF-α mice which develop
mammary tumors in the 2nd yr of life as a model of postmenopausal breast
cancer. From 10-30 weeks of age (woa) mice were fed a diet with 33% fat
calories. At 30 woa based on body weight mice were classified as
Obesity-Prone (Ob-Pr), Overweight (Ow) or Obesity-Resistant (Ob-R). Half
in each weight category were then fed a 25% CR diet with reduced
carbohydrate content (43% fat calories). The remaining mice continued on
ad libitum (AL) feeding of the 33% fat diet. This resulted in six
experimental groups (n = 26-31/group). Food intakes were monitored and
body weights and mammary tumor status were determined weekly. Mice were
sacrificed either at 90 woa or earlier if tumor size dictated. Mice in
the CR-Ob-Pr group lost an average of 1.12 grams while mice in the
AL-Ob-Pr group gained 16.03 grams from 30 woa until euthanasia. CR-Ob-Pr
mice had a reduced palpable tumor incidence as compared to AL-Ob-Pr mice
prior to euthanasia (12.90% versus 61.54% P = 0.0002). Indolent tumors
were discovered at euthanasia with the CR-Ob-Pr mice having a larger
number than AL-Ob-Pr mice resulting in final tumor positive mice in these
groups of 54.84% vs 65.38%, respectively. Interestingly, the Ob-R mice
had final tumor incidence of 38.71% and 73.08% for the CR-Ob-R vs the
AL-Ob-R (P<0.01). Average tumor weight was highest in the AL-Ob-Pr group
with CR resulting in a significantly lower tumor weight (P< 0.01). The
AL-Ob-Pr group had the shortest average survival time of 82.96 woa while
CR of the Ob-Pr mice resulted in increased survival to 89.77 woa (P <
0.001). A comparison of the survival curves of these two groups showed
that CR resulted in significantly increased survival (P < 0.0001).
Results of this study indicate that initiation of moderate 25% CR during
adulthood reduces weight gain, mammary tumor incidence, and tumor weight
as well as increases lifespan even when a moderately high fat diet was
consumed. This information supports further efforts to be made to prevent
weight gain as women approach menopause to delay or prevent breast cancer
development. Support: NIH-CA157012, The Hormel Foundation and Paint the
Town Pink.


