Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obesity-induced destabilization of p16INK4A promotes the
procarcinogenic effects of breast stromal adipocytes through
miR-141/miR-146b-5p-dependent inhibition of leptin.


Obesity, a disease linked to increased number of adipocytes in various
tissues, is increasingly recognized as a risk factor for the development
of breast cancer. However, the molecular basis of adipocyte-related
breast carcinogenesis remains elusive. In this study, we established and
characterized normal stromal adipocytes from post-plastic surgery of
breast tissues from obese and lean women. We have shown that adipocytes
from obese women express low level of the tumor suppressor p16 protein,
have higher secretion of various adipokines and higher invasion and
migration capabilities as compared to adipocytes from lean women. In
addition, down-regulation of p16INK4A by shRNA in adipocytes from lean
women increased the expression/secretion levels of various adipokines
including leptin, activated breast adipocytes and enhanced their
migration/invasion abilities. Consequently, media conditioned with
p16-deficient adipocytes or adipocytes from obese women promote
epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition in normal breast luminal cells in a
leptin-dependent manner and induced tumor growth in vivo. Indeed,
p16INK4A suppresses Leptin at the mRNA level through miR-141 and
miR-146b-5p, which inhibits Leptin expression through a specific sequence
at the Leptin 3â€™UTR. These results show the existence of active
adipocytes in the mammary gland of obese women in absence of breast
cancer cells and provide the first indication that p16INK4A through
targeting miR-141 and miR-146b-5p suppresses Leptin and its
procarcinogenic effects. This indicates that p16 pathway has
non-cell-autonomous tumor suppressor function in breast stromal
adipocytes.


