Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and biological evaluation of PQR530, a highly potent
dual pan-PI3K/mTORC1/2 inhibitor.


The PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway plays a fundamental role in cell
proliferation, growth and survival and aberrant activation of this
signaling pathway has been shown to drive the progression of malignant
tumors.[1] Drugs targeting the pathway at multiple points, such as dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors appear to have the broadest activity profile to
address cancer therapeutic strategies and are currently being explored in
numerous clinical studies. Recently, we presented PQR309, a novel,
brain-penetrant pan-PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, which entered phase II clinical
trials in 2016.[2] Here, we report the lead optimization of PQR530, a
potent and brain-penetrant follow-up compound as pan-PI3K/mTORC1/2
inhibitor.

The development of a follow-up compound concentrated on the improvement
of both, the potency and the selectivity for all targeted kinases, namely
the class IA PI3K isoforms as well as mTOR. We present a detailed
ligand-based structure-activity relationship study which was obtained by
systematic modifications of the hinge region as well as the affinity
binding substituents. This study led to the identification of PQR530, a
dual pan-PI3K/mTORC1/2 inhibitor showing excellent activities in cellular
assays as well as in PI3Kα and mTOR enzymatic binding assays.

In A2058 melanoma cells PQR530 inhibited protein kinase B (PKB, pSer473)
and ribosomal protein S6 (pS6, pSer235/236) phosphorylation with IC50
values of 0.07 µM. PQR530 showed excellent selectivity over a wide panel
of kinases, as well as excellent selectivity versus unrelated receptor
enzymes and ion channels. Moreover, PQR530 displayed potency in a panel
of 44 cancer cell lines (NTRC OncolinesTM) to prevent cancer cell growth
(mean value for GI50 of 426 nM). Oral application of PQR530 to mice
resulted in a dose-proportional PK and demonstrated good oral
bioavailability and excellent brain penetration.[3]

An optimized, robust synthetic route allowed rapid access to multi-gram
quantities of PQR530 for pre-clinical development in only 4 steps. In
conclusion, PQR530 inhibits all PI3K isoforms and the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) complexes C1/2 potently and selectively, and shows
anti-tumor effects in vitro and in vivo.

[1] M. P. Wymann, M. Zvelebil, M. Laffargue (2003). Phosphoinositide
3-kinase signalling – which way to target? Trends Pharmacol Sci.; 24,
366-376.

[2] V. Cmiljanovic et. al. “PQR309: Structure-Based Design, Synthesis
and Biological Evaluation of a Novel, Selective, Dual Pan-PI3K/mTOR
Inhibitor” presented at AACR Annual Meeting 2015, April 18-22,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

[3] P. Hillmann et al. “Pharmacological Characterization of the
Selective, Orally Bioavailable, Potent Dual PI3K/mTORC1/2 Inhibitor
PQR530” abstract submitted for AACR Annual Meeting 2017, April 1-5,
Washington, D. C., USA.


