Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A cell-line based TP53 expression pattern control panel with
interobserver variability and next-generation sequencing analysis.


Introduction: TP53 gene mutation status is known to be manifested through
distinct p53 immunohistochemical staining patterns; diffuse, wild-type
and null. This stratified staining pattern is routinely utilized in
subtyping ovarian and endometrial cancer subtypes and distinguishing low-
and high-grade serous carcinoma.

Experimental Procedure: Three ovarian cancer cell lines were used in the
construction of an immunohistochemical control panel slide that
highlights each respective TP53 expression pattern. Cell lines were
expanded, harvested and resuspended in agarose gel and subsequently
sectioned onto a microscope slide. Procured tissue specimens were
submitted along with either standard control tissue or the TP53 cell line
control panel to pathologists of varying experience. Next-generation
sequencing analysis was performed on cases in which there was discordance
in expression pattern interpretation.

Results: Interobserver variability was assessed on 44 samples between
five raters of varying experience. The results were similar with the use
of the TP53 expression panel (Fleiss kappa= 0.6 vs 0.53). Next-generation
sequencing analysis demonstrated low-frequency variant mutations in cases
in which there was reviewer discordance.

Conclusion: This study suggests the addition of a TP53 cell line
expression pattern control panel could potentially increase diagnostic
accuracy for ovarian and endometrial cancer subtypes and distinguishing
ovarian low-grade and high-grade serous carcinoma. The cell line control
has refined quality assurance potential for antibody optimization.This
cell line control panel has the potential to be utilized in routine
immunohistochemical staining with difficult to interpret p53 expression
patterns directed to submission for next-generation sequencing.


