Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational modeling and characterization of Diedel proteins
that regulate highly-conserved immune signaling.


The NF-kB and JAK/STAT pathways are well-established signal transduction
pathways, conserved from insects to mammals. They regulate several key
biological processes such as cellular proliferation, stem cell
maintenance, hematopoiesis and innate immunity responses. Consequently,
their dysregulation results in aberrant conditions, often with
deleterious consequences. It is well documented that a variety of human
diseases, especially cancer and immune-related conditions are associated
with various components of these pathways. The focus of this study is the
protein Diedel, which was identified as one of the novel genes involved
in the regulation of the JAK/STAT pathway in a genome-wide RNA
interference screen in Drosophila cells. Drosophila Diedel and its viral
homolog also suppress the conserved Imd-mediated NF-kB pathway in flies.
Diedel is a small cysteine-rich protein: It is comprised of only 115
amino acids out of which 10 are cysteines. A recent crystal structure has
revealed that Diedel is composed of two sub-domains and incorporates two
special structural features, i.e. a hydrophobic surface patch suggesting
a putative interaction site, and a cis/trans conformation for a proline
residue that may be relevant to its physiological mechanism. However, its
precise molecular function and mechanism of action still remains unclear.
Based on current sequence information in the databases, Diedel seems to
be conserved in drosophilids, the aphid Acyrtosiphon pisum, and insect
DNA viruses of the Baculoviridae and Ascoviridae families. While
investigating the mechanism of infection of Drosophila melanogaster
larvae by the parasitic wasp, Leptopilina heterotoma, we have uncovered
two wasp venom sequences that are putative Diedel homologs. This study
explores the detailed characterization of various Diedel homologs with an
end to establishing structure-function correlations in this family of
novel proteins, using a combined tool-kit of template based modeling,
sequence and structure analyses algorithms. Our results confirm a
conserved structural fold but there are significant sequence differences
among the homologs. We present a comparative analysis of the theoretical
models of Diedel homologs and their biophysical characterization. This
study will help elucidate the molecular function of the parasite Diedel
proteins in suppressing the flyâ€™s immune response. Our findings will
also point to new ways by which dysregulated immune signaling can be
turned down and these findings will potentially have implications in
treating inflammation and cancer in humans.


