Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heparan sulfate proteoglycans mediate tumor cell invasion and
metastasis.


The surface proteoglycan/glycoprotein layer (glycocalyx) on tumor cells
has been associated with cellular functions that can potentially enable
invasion and metastasis. In addition, aggressive tumor cells with high
metastatic potential have enhanced invasion rates in response to
interstitial flow stimuli in vitro. Our previous studies suggest that
heparan sulfate (HS) in the glycocalyx plays an important role in this
flow mediated mechanostransduction and upregulation of invasive and
metastatic potential. In this study, highly metastatic renal cell
carcinoma cells were genetically modified to suppress HS production by
knocking down its synthetic enzyme NDST1. Using modified Boyden chamber
and microfluidic assays, we show that flow-enhanced invasion is
suppressed in HS deficient cells. To assess the ability of these cells to
metastasize in vivo, parental or knockdown cells expressing fluorescence
reporters were injected into kidney capsules in SCID mice. Histological
analysis confirmed that there was a large reduction (95%) in metastasis
to distant organs by tumors formed from the NDST1 knockdown cells
compared to control cells with intact HS. The ability of these cells to
invade surrounding tissue was also impaired. The substantial inhibition
of metastasis and invasion upon reduction of HS suggests an active role
for the tumor cell glycocalyx in tumor progression.


