Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cells treated with mitochondria targeted redox
active agents induce mitophagy.


Triphenylphosphonium (TPP) conjugated agents induce mitochondrial
dysfunction in cancer cells. However, the onset of mitophagy to remove
the dysfunctional mitochondria is unknown. Here, a series of mitochondria
targeted redox active agents (MTA) that contain TPP were used to
investigate mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy in MDA-MB-231 cells
as compared to MCF-12A cells. Three different MTAs were identified to
induced mitochondrial depolarization and enhanced autophagic flux
selectively in MDA-MB-231 cells. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species
generation and respiration indicated that MDA-MB-231 cells had a heighten
sensitivity to MTA treatments. Using stably expressing mt-mKeima
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-12A cell lines, a non-cell type selective decline in
mitochondrial alkalinity and altered mitochondrial morphology was
detected. Furthermore, FACS analysis of mt-mKeima revealed MTAs induced
lysosomal dependent mitochondrial degradation in the presence of
Bafilomycin, a lysosomal inhibitor. To confirm MTAs induced mitochondrial
autophagy in MDA-MB-231 cells, MitoTracker Red preloaded GFP-LC3
expressing MDA-MB-231 cells were used to identify autophagosomes
containing mitochondria using confocal microscopy, in addition to
coimmunoprecipitation for the detection of an endogenous
autophagy-related protein complex, and immunoblot to for mitochondrial
PINK1 accumulation. To translate these in vitro studies to an in vivo rat
SST-2 xenograph breast cancer model, tumor mitochondrial extracts from
rats treated with MitoQ demonstrated an accumulation of mitochondrial
PINK1. Collectively, these data suggest that mitochondrial agents
selectively caused mitochondrial depolarization, PINK1 accumulation and
mitophagy in MDA-MB-231 cancer cells as compared to MCF-12A healthy cells.


