Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of catechol estrogen metabolism on the proliferation
rate and Docetaxel (DOC) resistance in hormone-responsive cancers.


Estrogen-responsive cancers such as breast cancer (BC) and prostate
cancer (PC) are on the top of the most commonly diagnosed cancers in USA.
Docetaxel (DOC) is considered the first-line of therapy for both
metastatic BC and castration-resistant PC. However, its use in
therapeutically effective doses is associated with significant toxic
reactions and tumor resistance. Estrogens (E2) play an important role in
the development and progression of both malignancies. Of special
importance is that the catechol E2 metabolite, 4-hydroxyestradiol
(4-OHE2) enhances the proliferation of both breast and prostate normal
epithelial cells. The goal of this work is to investigate the
relationship between catechol-E2 metabolism and cancer cells
proliferation and response to DOC. Methods: The cells were exposed to
serial concentrations of E2 and 4OHE2 (0.001-10 µM) to assess their
effect on cells’ growth rate over 24-92 h. Cell proliferation assays
were utilized to assess the density of viable cells at different time
points. Cytotoxicity assays were performed to evaluate the median
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of DOC alone or in the presence of 4OHE2.
Results: Exposure of the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive BC cell line
MCF-7 to 0.1 µM of 17-β-hydroxyestradiol (E2) for 3 days significantly
boosted the cell proliferation rate compared to control group by about
27% (PEstrogen-responsive cancers such as breast cancer (BC) and prostate
cancer (PC) are on the top of the most commonly diagnosed cancers in USA.
Docetaxel (DOC) is considered the first-line of therapy for both
metastatic BC and castration-resistant PC. However, its use in
therapeutically effective doses is associated with significant toxic
reactions and tumor resistance. Estrogens (E2) play an important role in
the development and progression of both malignancies. Of special
importance is that the catechol E2 metabolite, 4-hydroxyestradiol
(4-OHE2) enhances the proliferation of both breast and prostate normal
epithelial cells. The goal of this work is to investigate the
relationship between catechol-E2 metabolism and cancer cells
proliferation and response to DOC. Methods: The cells were exposed to
serial concentrations of E2 and 4OHE2 (0.001-10 µM) to assess their
effect on cells’ growth rate over 24-92 h. Cell proliferation assays
were utilized to assess the density of viable cells at different time
points. Cytotoxicity assays were performed to evaluate the median
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of DOC alone or in the presence of 4OHE2.
Results: Exposure of the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive BC cell line
MCF-7 to 0.1 µM of 17-β-hydroxyestradiol (E2) for 3 days significantly
boosted the cell proliferation rate compared to control group by about
27% (P<0.05). Exposure of MCF-7 cells to the catechol estrogen metabolite
4-hydroxyestradiol (4OHE2) at 0.1µM for 3 days significally enhanced
cell growth by about 31% (PEstrogen-responsive cancers such as breast
cancer (BC) and prostate cancer (PC) are on the top of the most commonly
diagnosed cancers in USA. Docetaxel (DOC) is considered the first-line of
therapy for both metastatic BC and castration-resistant PC. However, its
use in therapeutically effective doses is associated with significant
toxic reactions and tumor resistance. Estrogens (E2) play an important
role in the development and progression of both malignancies. Of special
importance is that the catechol E2 metabolite, 4-hydroxyestradiol
(4-OHE2) enhances the proliferation of both breast and prostate normal
epithelial cells. The goal of this work is to investigate the
relationship between catechol-E2 metabolism and cancer cells
proliferation and response to DOC. Methods: The cells were exposed to
serial concentrations of E2 and 4OHE2 (0.001-10 µM) to assess their
effect on cells’ growth rate over 24-92 h. Cell proliferation assays
were utilized to assess the density of viable cells at different time
points. Cytotoxicity assays were performed to evaluate the median
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of DOC alone or in the presence of 4OHE2.
Results: Exposure of the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive BC cell line
MCF-7 to 0.1 µM of 17-β-hydroxyestradiol (E2) for 3 days significantly
boosted the cell proliferation rate compared to control group by about
27% (P<0.05). Exposure of MCF-7 cells to the catechol estrogen metabolite
4-hydroxyestradiol (4OHE2) at 0.1µM for 3 days significally enhanced
cell growth by about 31% (P<0.001). Similarly, exposure of the androgen
independent, ER-positive- advanced stage PC cells PC-3 to E2 (1 µM, 3
days) significantly enhanced the growth rate by 37% (PEstrogen-responsive
cancers such as breast cancer (BC) and prostate cancer (PC) are on the
top of the most commonly diagnosed cancers in USA. Docetaxel (DOC) is
considered the first-line of therapy for both metastatic BC and
castration-resistant PC. However, its use in therapeutically effective
doses is associated with significant toxic reactions and tumor
resistance. Estrogens (E2) play an important role in the development and
progression of both malignancies. Of special importance is that the
catechol E2 metabolite, 4-hydroxyestradiol (4-OHE2) enhances the
proliferation of both breast and prostate normal epithelial cells. The
goal of this work is to investigate the relationship between catechol-E2
metabolism and cancer cells proliferation and response to DOC. Methods:
The cells were exposed to serial concentrations of E2 and 4OHE2 (0.001-10
µM) to assess their effect on cells’ growth rate over 24-92 h. Cell
proliferation assays were utilized to assess the density of viable cells
at different time points. Cytotoxicity assays were performed to evaluate
the median inhibitory concentration (IC50) of DOC alone or in the
presence of 4OHE2. Results: Exposure of the estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive BC cell line MCF-7 to 0.1 µM of 17-β-hydroxyestradiol
(E2) for 3 days significantly boosted the cell proliferation rate
compared to control group by about 27% (P<0.05). Exposure of MCF-7 cells
to the catechol estrogen metabolite 4-hydroxyestradiol (4OHE2) at 0.1µM
for 3 days significally enhanced cell growth by about 31% (P<0.001).
Similarly, exposure of the androgen independent, ER-positive- advanced
stage PC cells PC-3 to E2 (1 µM, 3 days) significantly enhanced the
growth rate by 37% (P<0.05). Moreover, our data showed that simultaneous
exposure to 4OHE2 significantly antagonized the cytotoxic activity of DOC
with subsequent increase in the IC50 of DOC by 18 folds
(PEstrogen-responsive cancers such as breast cancer (BC) and prostate
cancer (PC) are on the top of the most commonly diagnosed cancers in USA.
Docetaxel (DOC) is considered the first-line of therapy for both
metastatic BC and castration-resistant PC. However, its use in
therapeutically effective doses is associated with significant toxic
reactions and tumor resistance. Estrogens (E2) play an important role in
the development and progression of both malignancies. Of special
importance is that the catechol E2 metabolite, 4-hydroxyestradiol
(4-OHE2) enhances the proliferation of both breast and prostate normal
epithelial cells. The goal of this work is to investigate the
relationship between catechol-E2 metabolism and cancer cells
proliferation and response to DOC. Methods: The cells were exposed to
serial concentrations of E2 and 4OHE2 (0.001-10 µM) to assess their
effect on cells’ growth rate over 24-92 h. Cell proliferation assays
were utilized to assess the density of viable cells at different time
points. Cytotoxicity assays were performed to evaluate the median
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of DOC alone or in the presence of 4OHE2.
Results: Exposure of the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive BC cell line
MCF-7 to 0.1 µM of 17-β-hydroxyestradiol (E2) for 3 days significantly
boosted the cell proliferation rate compared to control group by about
27% (P<0.05). Exposure of MCF-7 cells to the catechol estrogen metabolite
4-hydroxyestradiol (4OHE2) at 0.1µM for 3 days significally enhanced
cell growth by about 31% (P<0.001). Similarly, exposure of the androgen
independent, ER-positive- advanced stage PC cells PC-3 to E2 (1 µM, 3
days) significantly enhanced the growth rate by 37% (P<0.05). Moreover,
our data showed that simultaneous exposure to 4OHE2 significantly
antagonized the cytotoxic activity of DOC with subsequent increase in the
IC50 of DOC by 18 folds (P<0.006). Conclusion: these results indicate
that altered E2 metabolism with subsequent accumulation of 4-OHE2 can
enhance the proliferation rate of E2-responsive cancers in addition to
hindering the cytotoxic activity of DOC with subsequent reduction in DOC
potency. Further research is in progress to assess the potential merit of
modulating the clearance of catechol E2 as a strategy to improve the
cancer response to DOC. (This project is supported by Fulbright Scholar
grant FY15/16 and L’Oreal-UNESCO for Women in Science-Levant and Egypt
award for MFT).


