Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of early dissemination and metastasis in Her2+ mammary
cancer.


Metastasis is the leading cause of cancer related deaths and these
lesions develop from disseminated cancer cells (DCC) that can remain
dormant. Metastasis initiating cells are thought to originate from a
subpopulation present in progressed invasive tumors. However, DCCs
detected in patients before the manifestation of breast cancer metastasis
contain fewer genetic abnormalities than primary tumors or than DCCs from
patients with metastases. These findings and those in pancreatic cancer
and melanoma models argued that dissemination might occur during early
stages of tumor evolution. Yet, the mechanisms that might allow
early-disseminated cancer cells (eDCC) to complete all steps of
metastasis were unknown. Here we show that in early lesions (EL), before
any overt primary tumor (PT) masses are detected, there is a
sub-population of Her2+/P-p38lo/P-ATF2lo/TWISThi/E-cadherinlo early
cancer cells that are invasive and disseminate to target organs.
Intra-vital imaging and organoid studies of early lesions revealed that
Her2+ eDCC precursors locally invaded, intravasated and lodged in target
organs. Her2+ eDCCs activated a Wnt-dependent EMT-like dissemination
program but without complete loss of epithelial phenotype that was
reversed by Her2 or Wnt inhibition. Surprisingly, while the majority of
eDCCs are TWISThi/E-cadherinlo and dormant, they eventually initiate
metastasis. Our work identifies a mechanism for early dissemination
whereby Her2 aberrantly activates a program similar to mammary ductal
branching that spawns eDCCs capable of forming metastasis after a
dormancy phase.


