Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olfactomedin 4 downregulation is associated with enhancing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human benign prostate cells and
prostate cancer cells.


We have previously reported that lost or reduced olfactomedin 4 (OLFM4)
expression is caused by deletions within the OLFM4 gene in 10-25% of all
human prostate-cancer samples, and that its expression is lost in more
than 58% of advanced prostate-cancer samples. Therefore, we sought to
study the role of epigenetic factors in the regulation of OLFM4 gene
expression in normal prostate, as well as prostate-cancer, cell lines.
Pyrosequencing of genomic DNA extracted from normal prostate or
prostate-cancer tissue cells demonstrated that three of the eight CpG
sites in the OLFM4 gene promoter were significantly hypermethylated in
prostate cancer compared with normal tissue. Exposure to the methylation
inhibitor 5-azadeoxycytidine (5-Aza 5 Î¼M) significantly increased OLFM4
expression in RWPE1 benign prostate cells. Knockdown of OLFM4 expression
in RWPE benign prostate cells reduced autophagy and enhanced the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Restoration of OLFM4 expression
in metastatic prostate-cancer cells lacking OLFM4 inhibited cell growth
in both in vitro culture models and an in vivo xenograft tumor model, and
also inhibited EMT marker gene expression in these cells. 5-Aza induced
OLFM4 expression in PC-3 prostate cancer cells and OLFM4 shRNA
transfected PC-3 cells affects 5-Aza mediated cell proliferation compared
to control-shRNA transfected PC-3 cells. Taken together, our results
suggest that OLFM4 inhibits the EMT program in both normal prostate and
prostate-cancer cells, and may play a critical role in regulating the EMT
program during the progression of cancer. They also suggest that
modulation of OLFM4 expression might be a novel molecular target for
advancing prostate-cancer therapies.


