Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of lncRNAs involved in regulation of androgen
receptor splice variants in prostate cancer through CRISPR-Cas9-based
screen.


Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of death in men in the USA.
Despite the high initial response rates to androgen deprivation therapy
(ADT), these tumors ultimately develop the resistance, i.e.,
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). One of the contributing
factors is constitutive expression of androgen receptor (AR) splice
variants such as AR3, a major splice variant identified in clinical
specimens. However, little is known about long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)
on regulation of AR splicing. In this study, we generate
CRISPR/Cas9-based libraries against a focus group of lncRNAs and an AR3
mini-gene reporter to identify lncRNAs involved in regulation of AR
splicing. The principles of this screening system is that only sgRNAs
capable of promoting AR3 expression will be enriched in SAM (Synergistic
Activation Mediator) library, whereas these clones are lost from the
knockout gRNA library after selection. This screen identifies several
candidate lncRNA sgRNAs and dual gRNAs (targeting Lnc-DC/ Har1B/
LINC00568/ DHRS4-AS1/ SNHG5). Further characterization confirms the
regulation of their corresponding endogenous genes and AR3 expression.
Importantly, overexpression of Lnc-DC increases AR3 level and enhances
tumor cell growth in response to androgen deprivation. Moreover, while
ectopic expression of DHRS4-AS1 increases, DHRS4-AS1 knockout suppresses
AR3. Finally, rescue experiments restore the ability of DHRS4-AS1 to
induce AR3, further supporting a role for Lnc-DC and DHRS4-AS1 in AR3
regulation. Together, we demonstrate that the CRISPR/Cas9-based screening
system provides a powerful tool for lncRNA research. As a result, these
lncRNAs may serve as biomarkers to predict the response to ADT or
therapeutic targets for treatment of CRPC.


