Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxicity of selenium trastuzumab and bevacizumab
immunoconjugates against triple negative breast cancer cells.


Breast cancer (BC) is the second leading cause of death among women with
an estimated 246,660 new cases of invasive breast cancer expected to be
diagnosed this year. Of the different subtypes, 15-20% are classified as
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) because they lack three key
receptors; progesterone, estrogen and HER2. These receptors are
considered essential for “targeted therapies”. Thus, systemic
chemotherapy is the only TNBC drug treatment option. In this study, two
clinical monoclonal antibodies; Herceptin® and Avastin® were covalently
labeled with redox selenium and used to treat two TNBC cell lines
(MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468) in culture. TNBC cell lines were treated with
vehicle control, increasing concentrations of selenium as Selenite
(ranging from 2 to 20 µg); Se-Herceptin® or Se-Avastin® and compared
to native antibodies with equal concentrations of protein. Cell counts
and viability were analyzed using Beckman ViCell Counter and Trypan Blue
exclusion over a seven day period. Selenite, Se-Avastin® and
Se-Herceptin® were observed to be more cytotoxic over dose and time to
both TNBC cell lines in comparison to control cells and cells treated
with native antibodies alone. Morphological changes were observed under
phase contrast microscopy in all selenium treated cell lines. In
contrast, visible alterations in morphology were absent in native
Herceptin® and Avastin® treated cells compared to control cells. We
believe this is the first report of selenium Antibody-Drug Conjugates
(ADCs) being demonstrated as cytotoxic to these TNBC cell lines,
suggesting a potential strategy to design more effective treatments of
TNBC resistant to chemotherapy.


