Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming growth factor-beta 2 (TGF-β2) antisense
oligonucleotide (ASO) OT-101 synergizes with chemotherapy in preclinical
tumor models.


Background: Overexpression of TGF-β2 has been implicated in the
malignant progression of tumors by inducing immunosuppression,
proliferation, angiogenesis and metastasis. Clinical failures of TGF-β
inhibitors in targeting the tumor promoting arm of TGF-β signaling is
attributed to multiple isoforms and receptor functions. OT-101
(Trabedersen) is a phosphorothioate ASO designed to specifically target
human TGF-β2 mRNA with superior clinical activity in patients with
TGF-β2-overexpressing tumors. Herein, we report the synergizing effect
of OT-101 with chemotherapy in multiple human tumor xenograft models for
further exploration of clinical combinations.

Methods: The in vivo efficacy studies of intraperitoneal (IP, 16 or 50
mg/kg) or subcutanous (SC, 1-64 mg/kg) repeated administration (qdx3/wk
or qdx21) of OT-101 as single agent and in combination with Gemcitabine
(15 mg/kg, qdx2/wk, IP), Dacarbazine (1-10 mg/kg, qdx4/wk, IP) or
Paclitaxel (10 mg/kg, qdx5, IV) were evaluated in nude mice (10/subgroup)
bearing either (i) orthotopic human L3.6pl pancreatic cancer (PAC), (ii)
human metastatic C8161 melanoma, (iii) subcutaneous glioblastoma (U87-MG)
or (iv) subcutaneous ovarian (SK-OV-3) tumors. Mice were monitored thrice
a week for adverse effects, body weight loss, tumor size and survival
outcome. The incidence of lymph node and liver surface and
micro-metastases as well as size and weight of the pancreatic tumors were
determined. Tumor sections were stained with
anti-5-bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine antibody to determine tumor cell
proliferation and with anti-CD31/PECAM-1 antibody to determine
vascularization.

Results: OT-101 significantly reduced tumor growth (p = 0.0084), lymph
node metastasis (p = 0.023), and tumor angiogenesis (p Results: OT-101
significantly reduced tumor growth (p = 0.0084), lymph node metastasis (p
= 0.023), and tumor angiogenesis (p <0.0001) in the orthotopic PAC model.
Mean tumor vessel density was significantly reduced (p Results: OT-101
significantly reduced tumor growth (p = 0.0084), lymph node metastasis (p
= 0.023), and tumor angiogenesis (p <0.0001) in the orthotopic PAC model.
Mean tumor vessel density was significantly reduced (p <0.0001) in all
groups in comparison to untreated control. OT-101 demonstrated synergy in
tumor growth inhibition and increased survival in human malignant
melanoma (C8161, p = 0.038, vs. Dacarbazine alone), glioblastoma (U87-MG,
p = 0.001 vs. Paclitaxel) and ovarian (SKOV-3, p Results: OT-101
significantly reduced tumor growth (p = 0.0084), lymph node metastasis (p
= 0.023), and tumor angiogenesis (p <0.0001) in the orthotopic PAC model.
Mean tumor vessel density was significantly reduced (p <0.0001) in all
groups in comparison to untreated control. OT-101 demonstrated synergy in
tumor growth inhibition and increased survival in human malignant
melanoma (C8161, p = 0.038, vs. Dacarbazine alone), glioblastoma (U87-MG,
p = 0.001 vs. Paclitaxel) and ovarian (SKOV-3, p <0.05 vs. Paclitaxel)
cancer models when combined with either Dacarbazine (C8161) or Paclitaxel
(U87-MG and SK-OV-3). No syngergy was observed with Gemcitabine (PAC).
The combination regimen tested was effective and tolerable. Significant
antitumor activity was achieved at human dose equivalent of 80 mg/m2/day
which is well below the optimized clinical dose used for IV infusion of
patients at 140 mg/m2/day.

Conclusions: The preclinical data lay the groundwork for further
exploration of combination therapy in the clinic as well as demonstrating
that TGF-β2 is a druggable target. Of interest is the preferential
synergy between OT-101 and Paclitaxel or Dacarbazine, but not with
Gemcitabine.


