Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Search for a combination of risk stratification markers for
recurrence after curative resection of gastric cancer.


Objective: Adjuvant chemotherapy after curative resection is standard
treatment for stage II/III gastric cancer. Personalized therapy based on
biomarker analysis is expected to further improve outcomes. We analyzed
frozen specimens of gastric cancer to investigate markers for
stratification of recurrence risk and report our findings.

Methods: We studied 778 patients with stage II/III gastric cancer in whom
≥5 years had elapsed since curative resection. We first measured the
expression levels of 127 genes in gastric cancer tissue by quantitative
polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) assay in 255 patients (training set, 145;
validation set, 110) to identify poor prognostic factors. Next, we
studied patients who received 1 year of adjuvant chemotherapy after
curative resection of T4a, Nx, M0, stage III gastric cancer and performed
an exploratory proteomic analysis to compare the expressions of 1756
proteins between 12 patients who died of recurrence within 3 years and 12
patients who survived with no recurrence for at least 5 years. Proteins
with a max fold change of >2 and significant differences (PMethods: We
studied 778 patients with stage II/III gastric cancer in whom ≥5 years
had elapsed since curative resection. We first measured the expression
levels of 127 genes in gastric cancer tissue by quantitative
polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) assay in 255 patients (training set, 145;
validation set, 110) to identify poor prognostic factors. Next, we
studied patients who received 1 year of adjuvant chemotherapy after
curative resection of T4a, Nx, M0, stage III gastric cancer and performed
an exploratory proteomic analysis to compare the expressions of 1756
proteins between 12 patients who died of recurrence within 3 years and 12
patients who survived with no recurrence for at least 5 years. Proteins
with a max fold change of >2 and significant differences (P<0.001) were
identified. Immunostaining of tissue microarray sections from another
cohort of 499 patients was performed to confirm our results and to
identify combinations of markers for risk stratification.

Results: On quantitative PCR assay, SPARC, HER2, CXCR4, INHBA, VSNL1,
MMP11, CCR7, MRP1, CEACAM7, p53, EZH2, PDGFRB, and VCAM1 were identified
as candidate markers. On exploratory proteomic analysis, SPARC, CLC,
PRG2, and PRG3 were identified. A tissue microarray was constructed for
the 16 candidate markers to evaluate combinations of markers. The
combination of SPARC, EZH2, HER2, and p53 could be used for risk
stratification (5-year survival rate, 68% vs. 33%; P=0.0111).

Conclusions: The combination of SPARC, EZH2, HER2, and p53 can be used as
a marker to stratify the risk of recurrence after curative resection of
stage II/III gastric cancer.


