Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Two in one: nanotechnology based strategies for the treatment of
ER+ breast cancer.


Understanding endocrine resistance mechanisms is key to develop new
therapeutic strategies. We focus on the role the tumor microenvironment
plays as a modulator of endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer, in
particular associated to Tamoxifen. Studies show that the use of
nanoparticles (NPs) as antitumor drug delivery systems is a good strategy
to improve the efficacy and decrease secondary effects of conventional
chemotherapies. In this context we hypothesize that a therapeutic
strategy based on the use of Tamoxifen carried in NPs coated with the
tumor penetrating peptide iRGD, would be more effective than conventional
Tamoxifen. Neuropilin-1, that mediates iRGD induced endocytosis, has been
shown to be associated to breast cancer stem cells. Thus, we postulate
that our multifunctional NPs would be effective in reducing this cell
population, contrary to what is observed with free Tamoxifen. Moreover,
iRGD blocks the interaction between integrin β1 and fibronectin, a
mechanism we have previously shown induces Tamoxifen resistance
(Pontiggia et al. 2012). NPs were synthesized with polyethyleneglycol and
polycaprolactone and coated with the iRGD peptide. This peptide was
constructed with a FAM fluorophore in order to track the NPs. To evaluate
the cell uptake, MCF-7 cells were incubated for 5 h with iRGD-NP or
FAM-NP as a control. NP entry was higher when the NPs were coated with
iRGD, both in 2D and in 3D cultures. Cell viability experiments revealed
that Tamoxifen encapsulated in NPs was more effective than the free drug
(pUnderstanding endocrine resistance mechanisms is key to develop new
therapeutic strategies. We focus on the role the tumor microenvironment
plays as a modulator of endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer, in
particular associated to Tamoxifen. Studies show that the use of
nanoparticles (NPs) as antitumor drug delivery systems is a good strategy
to improve the efficacy and decrease secondary effects of conventional
chemotherapies. In this context we hypothesize that a therapeutic
strategy based on the use of Tamoxifen carried in NPs coated with the
tumor penetrating peptide iRGD, would be more effective than conventional
Tamoxifen. Neuropilin-1, that mediates iRGD induced endocytosis, has been
shown to be associated to breast cancer stem cells. Thus, we postulate
that our multifunctional NPs would be effective in reducing this cell
population, contrary to what is observed with free Tamoxifen. Moreover,
iRGD blocks the interaction between integrin β1 and fibronectin, a
mechanism we have previously shown induces Tamoxifen resistance
(Pontiggia et al. 2012). NPs were synthesized with polyethyleneglycol and
polycaprolactone and coated with the iRGD peptide. This peptide was
constructed with a FAM fluorophore in order to track the NPs. To evaluate
the cell uptake, MCF-7 cells were incubated for 5 h with iRGD-NP or
FAM-NP as a control. NP entry was higher when the NPs were coated with
iRGD, both in 2D and in 3D cultures. Cell viability experiments revealed
that Tamoxifen encapsulated in NPs was more effective than the free drug
(p<0,05), and NPs coated with iRGD had an even stronger effect
(pUnderstanding endocrine resistance mechanisms is key to develop new
therapeutic strategies. We focus on the role the tumor microenvironment
plays as a modulator of endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer, in
particular associated to Tamoxifen. Studies show that the use of
nanoparticles (NPs) as antitumor drug delivery systems is a good strategy
to improve the efficacy and decrease secondary effects of conventional
chemotherapies. In this context we hypothesize that a therapeutic
strategy based on the use of Tamoxifen carried in NPs coated with the
tumor penetrating peptide iRGD, would be more effective than conventional
Tamoxifen. Neuropilin-1, that mediates iRGD induced endocytosis, has been
shown to be associated to breast cancer stem cells. Thus, we postulate
that our multifunctional NPs would be effective in reducing this cell
population, contrary to what is observed with free Tamoxifen. Moreover,
iRGD blocks the interaction between integrin β1 and fibronectin, a
mechanism we have previously shown induces Tamoxifen resistance
(Pontiggia et al. 2012). NPs were synthesized with polyethyleneglycol and
polycaprolactone and coated with the iRGD peptide. This peptide was
constructed with a FAM fluorophore in order to track the NPs. To evaluate
the cell uptake, MCF-7 cells were incubated for 5 h with iRGD-NP or
FAM-NP as a control. NP entry was higher when the NPs were coated with
iRGD, both in 2D and in 3D cultures. Cell viability experiments revealed
that Tamoxifen encapsulated in NPs was more effective than the free drug
(p<0,05), and NPs coated with iRGD had an even stronger effect (p<0,01).
Moreover, resistance to Tamoxifen induced by fibronectin was reversed
with the iRGD-coated NPs, contrary to what is observed with the free
drug. Previously, we demonstrated that treatment with Tamoxifen enhances
the stem cell population in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cell
lines (Raffo et al. 2013). In this context iRGD coated NPs lead to a
decrease in breast cancer stem cells as evaluated by mammosphere assays
(pUnderstanding endocrine resistance mechanisms is key to develop new
therapeutic strategies. We focus on the role the tumor microenvironment
plays as a modulator of endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer, in
particular associated to Tamoxifen. Studies show that the use of
nanoparticles (NPs) as antitumor drug delivery systems is a good strategy
to improve the efficacy and decrease secondary effects of conventional
chemotherapies. In this context we hypothesize that a therapeutic
strategy based on the use of Tamoxifen carried in NPs coated with the
tumor penetrating peptide iRGD, would be more effective than conventional
Tamoxifen. Neuropilin-1, that mediates iRGD induced endocytosis, has been
shown to be associated to breast cancer stem cells. Thus, we postulate
that our multifunctional NPs would be effective in reducing this cell
population, contrary to what is observed with free Tamoxifen. Moreover,
iRGD blocks the interaction between integrin β1 and fibronectin, a
mechanism we have previously shown induces Tamoxifen resistance
(Pontiggia et al. 2012). NPs were synthesized with polyethyleneglycol and
polycaprolactone and coated with the iRGD peptide. This peptide was
constructed with a FAM fluorophore in order to track the NPs. To evaluate
the cell uptake, MCF-7 cells were incubated for 5 h with iRGD-NP or
FAM-NP as a control. NP entry was higher when the NPs were coated with
iRGD, both in 2D and in 3D cultures. Cell viability experiments revealed
that Tamoxifen encapsulated in NPs was more effective than the free drug
(p<0,05), and NPs coated with iRGD had an even stronger effect (p<0,01).
Moreover, resistance to Tamoxifen induced by fibronectin was reversed
with the iRGD-coated NPs, contrary to what is observed with the free
drug. Previously, we demonstrated that treatment with Tamoxifen enhances
the stem cell population in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cell
lines (Raffo et al. 2013). In this context iRGD coated NPs lead to a
decrease in breast cancer stem cells as evaluated by mammosphere assays
(p<0,01). Finally, in vivo tumor homing was evaluated to test whether the
iRGD peptide affected the biodistribution of the NPs. Nude mice carrying
MCF-7 breast tumors were treated with iRGD-NP and control NPs. Tumors
were collected at 4 and 24 hrs post inoculation. Frozen sections were
analyzed by confocal microscopy revealing that only the mice treated with
the iRGD-NPs had high levels of NPs in the tumor, compared to the control
group. Moreover, frozen sections of kidneys, livers, lungs and spleen
showed very low levels of iRGD-NPs, confirming that the targeting was
effective. In vivo experiments of the impact of iRGD-NPs on tumor growth,
metastasis and the stem cell population are ongoing. These results
suggest that iRGD-NPs carrying Tamoxifen could be an effective strategy
to avoid the development of endocrine resistance in breast cancer.


