Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reversibility of therapy-induced senescence in non-small cell lung
cancer as a model of cancer recurrence.


Disease recurrence at either primary or metastatic tumor sites arising
from dormant tumors is largely responsible for the morbidity and
mortality of many cancers. Although cellular quiescence has been proposed
as a mechanism of dormancy, the nature of the growth arrest that allows
tumor cells to re-emerge months or years after treatment has never been
directly determined. The current work was designed to examine the
hypothesis that the senescence induced by cancer chemotherapeutic drugs
could be reversible, with implications for tumor dormancy and disease
recurrence. Studies were performed using etoposide in models of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Exposure to etoposide at sublethal
concentrations resulted in growth arrest accompanied by the induction of
senescence and autophagy. Growth arrest was transient in that
proliferative recovery was evident by day 7 post-etoposide exposure.
Analysis of senescence based on Î²-galactosidase activity demonstrated
that the restoration of proliferative capacity coincided with a decline
in the extent of senescence. Real-time live microscopy demonstrated
heterogeneous fates of senescent cells, where the bulk of the cell
population remaining in a state of stasis, a subset of cells undergoing
apoptosis, and a fraction of the large, flattened, and polyploid cells
spontaneously entering into mitosis. Neither genetic nor pharmacological
inhibition of autophagy influenced the senescence response to etoposide,
the eventual proliferative recovery, or sensitivity to etoposide. These
findings indicate that the induction and resolution of senescence is
independent of the accompanying autophagy, and that the autophagy induced
by etoposide is non-cytoprotective in function. These observations
suggest that therapy-induced senescence may ultimately be a transient
process in that at least a subpopulation of tumor cells can and will
regain proliferative capacity. Consequently, therapy-induced senescence
could potentially be studied as a model of tumor dormancy, and the
reversibility of senescence as a model of disease recurrence.


