Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Under-reporting of research biopsies in clinical trials in
oncology.


Purpose: Research biopsies are frequently incorporated into clinical
trials in oncology, and are often a mandatory requirement for trial
enrollment. However, limited information is available regarding the
extent and completeness of research biopsy reporting.

Methods: We identified a cohort of therapeutic clinical trials wherein at
least one image-guided non-diagnostic research biopsy was performed
between 1/2005 and 10/2010 from a large interventional radiology database
at MD Anderson Cancer Center. Study protocols were compared with the
highest level of corresponding publication as a manuscript, registry
report, or abstract.

Results: A total of 866 research biopsies were performed across 46
clinical trials (median 19 biopsies/trial). After a median follow-up time
of 5.8yrs from study completion, 35 trials (76%) had published
manuscripts (18 reported biopsy results), 8 (17%) had either a registry
or abstract report (1 reported biopsy results), and 3 (7%) were not
reported. In total, 19 trials (41%) reported biopsy results. Of these 19
trials, 6 (32%) trials under-reported the number of biopsies performed.
Only 14 of 32 (42%) trials with mandatory research biopsies reported on
these biopsies. Comments regarding biopsy quality/adequacy were reported
in only 5 trials. Complications from these biopsies occurred in 39 pts
(grade 3 in 6 pts) in 8 trials, but only 1 (13%) trial reported biopsy
complications. Factors associated with better reporting of research
biopsies are shown in the Table. When limited to only published
manuscripts, results were unchanged. Academic sponsorship and a larger
number of biopsies, especially serial biopsies, were associated with
increased reporting of research biopsies.

Conclusion: Despite ethical obligations to report research biopsies, 59%
of trials do not report on these biopsies. Although complications occur,
they are rarely reported. Clinical trial design efforts to ensure that an
adequate number of research biopsies are obtained may lead to improved
reporting of research biopsy biomarker results.

Variable

N

Trials reporting biopsies (%)

P-value



Mandatory or optional biopsy





1



Mandatory (+/- optional)

33

14 (42)





Optional

13

5 (38)





Total number of biopsies per trial





0.002



<10

19

3 (16)





10-30

22

11 (50)





>30

5

5 (100)





Trials with serial biopsies (No. of pts.)





0.0001



1-5

11

0 (0)





>=5

18

13 (72)





Study sponsorship





0.03



Industry

24

6 (25)





Academic

22

13 (59)





Clinical trial





0.77



Multicenter

21

8 (38)





Single center

25

11 (44)





Phase of clinical trial





0.51



I or I/II

33

15 (45)





II or III

13

4 (31)


