Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical pharmacodynamics and antitumor activity of AZD4635, a
novel adenosine 2A receptor inhibitor that reverses adenosine mediated T
cell suppression.


Accumulation of extracellular adenosine within the microenvironment is a
strategy exploited by tumors to escape immunosurveillance. Adenosine
signaling through the high affinity adenosine 2A receptor (A2AR) on
immune cells elicits a range of immunosuppressive effects which can
promote tumor growth and limit the efficacy of immune checkpoint
inhibitors such as anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 Abs. AZD4635 (HTL-1071), an
oral A2AR antagonist, binds to human A2AR with a Ki of 1.7 nM and with >
30-fold selectivity over other adenosine receptors. Accumulation of
intratumoral adenosine, measured by desorption electrospray ionisation -
mass spectroscopy (DESI-MS), demonstrated that adenosine levels are
spatially heterogeneous in mouse syngeneic tumors, with levels varying up
to 50 fold among regions of a single tumor. To assess whether AZD4635 can
reverse the inhibitory effects of different concentrations of adenosine,
CHO cells stably expressing human A2AR were incubated with concentrations
of adenosine ranging from 0.1 to 10 μM. In the presence of 0.1, 1 and 10
μM adenosine, the IC50 of AZD4635 for inhibition of cAMP production was
0.79, 10.0 and 142.9 nM, respectively. In an ex vivo CD8+ T cell assay,
AZD4635 reversed suppression and restored IFNγ secretion in cells
incubated with 5’-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA), a stable analog
of adenosine. The therapeutic benefit of A2aR blockade was evaluated in
syngeneic mouse tumor models. Inhibition of A2aR signaling led to a
reduction in tumor growth alone and in combination with checkpoint
inhibitors. Tumors harvested from the treated mice exhibited changes in
infiltrating lymphocyte populations and increases in the functional
activity of T cells. These results demonstrate that AZD4635 is a potent
and selective A2aR inhibitor, and that blockade of A2aR signaling with an
inhibitor such as AZD4635 can reduce tumor burden and enhance antitumor
immunity. AZD4635 is currently in a Phase 1 clinical trial as a single
agent and in combination with durvalumab (anti-PD-L1 Ab) in patients with
solid malignancies.


