Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY-299, a novel chemical probe for in-depth analysis of the
function of the bromodomain proteins BRPF2 and TAF1.


With the exception of the bromodomain and extra-terminal domain BET
subgroup, little is known about the role of bromodomain (BD) containing
proteins in cancer so that there is a dire need for chemical probes
addressing other family members. The bromodomain and PHD-finger (BRPF)
family encompasses three paralogs, BRPF1, BRPF2 and BRPF3, which are all
found in histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes. BRPF2 is a scaffold
protein and its knock-out leads to embryonic lethality at E15.5,
potentially due to its role in embryonic stem cell differentiation. Here
we present the structure-activity relationship (SAR) and characterization
of the first selective BRPF2 chemical probe BAY-299, with additionnal
strong activity at TAF1, a major component of the basal transcription
initiation complex TFIID. BAY-299 shows in vitro activity for BRPF2 (IC50
= 67 nM) and TAF1 second bromodomain (BD2; IC50 = 8 nM) in the TR-FRET
assay, as well as in the cellular NanoBRET assay [IC50 (BRPF2) = 575 nM;
IC50 (TAF1 BD2) = 825 nM]. To the best of our knowledge BAY-299 is the
only disclosed inhibitor showing BRPF2 selectivity over its two
paralogues BRPF1 and BRPF3. It belongs to the 1,3-benzimidazolone
scaffold and bears a novel substitution which is responsible for its high
BRPF2 selectivity and also for its inactivity on BET BDs. The dual
inhibitory properties of BAY-299 against BRPF2 and TAF1 make it an ideal
research tool for further investigation of these two proteins in
physiological and pathological processes.


