Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral nitroxoline in combination with intravesical bacille
calmette-guerin (BCG) shows synergistic antitumor efficacy in mouse
bladder cancer orthotopic xenograft.


Nitroxoline, an antibiotic used to treat urinary tract infection, had
previously been identified as a MetAP2 inhibitor and found to show
antitumor efficacy in mouse models of human breast cancer xenograft and
bladder cancer orthotopic xenograft [1]. Our purpose in this study was to
evaluate the feasibility of combining oral nitroxoline with intravesical
BCG, the first-line therapy for intermediate- and high-risk non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC), in mouse bladder cancer orthotopic
xenograft. The luciferase-expressing murine bladder cancer cell line
MBT-2-Luc cells was transurethrally implanted in the bladder of syngeneic
female C3H/He mice. The animals were randomly divided into groups and
treated with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), oral nitroxoline,
intravesical BCG alone, and a combination as described in methods. The
IVIS spectrum images analyses of luciferin-stained tumor at 21 days after
inoculation revealed that combining oral nitroxoline with intravesical
BCG showed synergistically enhanced antitumor efficacy and prolonged
long-term survival, implicating the potential of combining bladder cancer
treatment using oral nitroxoline with intravesical BCG in the clinical
setting. The mechanism behind this observation is currently under
investigated.


