Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased 15-lipoxygenase-1 activity limits tumor development in
the azoxymethane mouse model of colon cancer: impact of omega-3-acid
ethyl esters.


Pro-inflammatory signaling has been shown to promote colorectal
tumorigenesis and is a target for the development of effective
chemopreventive approaches. The specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators
(SPMs, e.g. resolvins), bioactive metabolites of eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), actively terminate inflammation and
have been proposed to possibly contribute to the anti-tumorigenic effects
of DHA and EPA. The enzyme 15-lipoxygenase-1 (ALOX15) is a key
biosynthetic enzyme in generation of resolvins. However, 15-LOX-1
expression is commonly lost during human CRC tumorigenesis starting in
premalignant stages via transcriptional mechanisms independent of
substrate availability. The impact of ALOX15 on DHA and EPA’s effects
on tumorigenesis remain unknown. Mice with intestinal epithelium-specific
expression of human ALOX15 (15-LOX-1-gut mice) and wild-type FVB controls
were injected with azoxymethane (AOM, 7.5mg/kg) once weekly for 6w and
followed for 20w. Mice were fed diet with 1% omega-3-acid ethyl esters
(O3AEE, a pharmaceutical grade fish oil preparation of EPA and DHA ethyl
esters) or control diet starting 3w before initiation with AOM. Colonic
tumors developed in 10 of the 13 (77%) wild type (WT) mice fed control
diet, 5 of the 10 (50%) WT mice fed O3AEE diet, 5 of the 12 (42%)
15-LOX-1-gut mice fed control diet, and 3 of the 10 (30%) 15-LOX-1-gut
mice fed control diet. Lipid mediator levels were measured by liquid
chromatography/ tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The SPMs resolvin E1
and D2 (RvE1, RvD2) as well as the pathway intermediates 18-HEPE and
17-HDHE were increased in ALOX15-gut mice on O3AEE (see Table; data are
shown as ng/mg protein; mean ± SEM). Our results demonstrate that ALOX15
activity is important to DHA and EPA formation of resolvins and
inhibition of colonic tumorigenesis. Supported by grants CPRIT RP150195
and NIH RO1 R01CA195686

SPMs in O3AEE or control diet fed mice





WT

Control diet

WT

O3AEE diet

15-LOX-1-gut

Control diet

15-LOX-1-gut

O3AEE diet



18-HEPE

0

0.46 + 0.5

0

0.82 + 0.31



17-HDHE

0.21 + 0.09

0.2 + 0.7

4.2 + 0.41

13.35 + 3.1



RvE1

0

0

0

1.98 + 0.77



RvD2

0

0.024 + 0.024

0.17 + 0.022

0.3 + 0.077


