Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of P62/IMP2 promotes metastasis in hepatocellular
carcinoma via inhibition of E-cadherin expression.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common type of cancer
and the third leading cause of cancer related death in worldwide.
Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2 (p62/IMP2/IGF2BP2)
was originally reported as an autoantigen in HCC which belongs to IMPs
family. The IMPs family contains three members: IMP1, IMP2 and IMP3,
which share similar protein structure. IMPs are oncofetal proteins, which
are expressed during embryogenesis and lost in most tissues in adults.
Therefore, p62/IMP2 can be used as a potential biomarker for early
diagnosis of HCC. We have evaluated the expression of p62/IMP2 protein
both in human tissues and HCC cell lines by immunohistochemistry and
western blotting analysis, and found that p62/IMP2 protein is
overexpressed in human HCC tissues compared with normal human liver
tissues (score= 10.30, n=40 vs. score =5.23, n=30, pHepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common type of cancer and the third
leading cause of cancer related death in worldwide. Insulin-like growth
factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2 (p62/IMP2/IGF2BP2) was originally
reported as an autoantigen in HCC which belongs to IMPs family. The IMPs
family contains three members: IMP1, IMP2 and IMP3, which share similar
protein structure. IMPs are oncofetal proteins, which are expressed
during embryogenesis and lost in most tissues in adults. Therefore,
p62/IMP2 can be used as a potential biomarker for early diagnosis of HCC.
We have evaluated the expression of p62/IMP2 protein both in human
tissues and HCC cell lines by immunohistochemistry and western blotting
analysis, and found that p62/IMP2 protein is overexpressed in human HCC
tissues compared with normal human liver tissues (score= 10.30, n=40 vs.
score =5.23, n=30, p<0.05). The expression of p62/IMP2 was scored by
immune-staining intensity and positively immune-staining cell numbers. At
the same time, we found that p62/IMP2 was also overexpressed in several
HCC cell lines. Stable p62/IMP2 overexpression and depletion SNU449 human
HCC cell line was made by using p62/IMP2 cDNA transfection and lentivirus
mediated knockdown approaches, and it was further confirmed by western
blotting analysis. Wound healing assay has shown that overexpression of
p62/IMP2 can significantly enhance the cell migration ability in SNU449
cells. On the contrary, the depletion of p62/IMP2 can reduce the
migration ability in SNU449 cells (pHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one
of the most common type of cancer and the third leading cause of cancer
related death in worldwide. Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA binding
protein 2 (p62/IMP2/IGF2BP2) was originally reported as an autoantigen in
HCC which belongs to IMPs family. The IMPs family contains three members:
IMP1, IMP2 and IMP3, which share similar protein structure. IMPs are
oncofetal proteins, which are expressed during embryogenesis and lost in
most tissues in adults. Therefore, p62/IMP2 can be used as a potential
biomarker for early diagnosis of HCC. We have evaluated the expression of
p62/IMP2 protein both in human tissues and HCC cell lines by
immunohistochemistry and western blotting analysis, and found that
p62/IMP2 protein is overexpressed in human HCC tissues compared with
normal human liver tissues (score= 10.30, n=40 vs. score =5.23, n=30,
p<0.05). The expression of p62/IMP2 was scored by immune-staining
intensity and positively immune-staining cell numbers. At the same time,
we found that p62/IMP2 was also overexpressed in several HCC cell lines.
Stable p62/IMP2 overexpression and depletion SNU449 human HCC cell line
was made by using p62/IMP2 cDNA transfection and lentivirus mediated
knockdown approaches, and it was further confirmed by western blotting
analysis. Wound healing assay has shown that overexpression of p62/IMP2
can significantly enhance the cell migration ability in SNU449 cells. On
the contrary, the depletion of p62/IMP2 can reduce the migration ability
in SNU449 cells (p<0.05). Moreover,MTT assay has also shown p62/IMP2
overexpressed cells may have a higher rate of proliferation at
72h(pHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common type of
cancer and the third leading cause of cancer related death in worldwide.
Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA binding protein 2 (p62/IMP2/IGF2BP2)
was originally reported as an autoantigen in HCC which belongs to IMPs
family. The IMPs family contains three members: IMP1, IMP2 and IMP3,
which share similar protein structure. IMPs are oncofetal proteins, which
are expressed during embryogenesis and lost in most tissues in adults.
Therefore, p62/IMP2 can be used as a potential biomarker for early
diagnosis of HCC. We have evaluated the expression of p62/IMP2 protein
both in human tissues and HCC cell lines by immunohistochemistry and
western blotting analysis, and found that p62/IMP2 protein is
overexpressed in human HCC tissues compared with normal human liver
tissues (score= 10.30, n=40 vs. score =5.23, n=30, p<0.05). The
expression of p62/IMP2 was scored by immune-staining intensity and
positively immune-staining cell numbers. At the same time, we found that
p62/IMP2 was also overexpressed in several HCC cell lines. Stable
p62/IMP2 overexpression and depletion SNU449 human HCC cell line was made
by using p62/IMP2 cDNA transfection and lentivirus mediated knockdown
approaches, and it was further confirmed by western blotting analysis.
Wound healing assay has shown that overexpression of p62/IMP2 can
significantly enhance the cell migration ability in SNU449 cells. On the
contrary, the depletion of p62/IMP2 can reduce the migration ability in
SNU449 cells (p<0.05). Moreover,MTT assay has also shown p62/IMP2
overexpressed cells may have a higher rate of proliferation at
72h(p<0.05). In addition, we have observed that overexpression of
p62/IMP2 can significant inhibit the expression of E-cadherin in western
blotting analysis. In summary, our data would suggest that overexpression
p62/IMP2 may promote metastasis via inhibition of E-cadherin expression
in HCC.


