Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) with
the receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor ponatinib in small cell carcinoma
of the ovary, hypercalcemic type.


Subunits of the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex are tumor
suppressors that are inactivated in ~20% of all cancers, yet few targeted
treatments have shown selective activity in SWI/SNF-mutant cancers. Small
cell carcinoma of the ovary, hypercalcemic type (SCCOHT) is a rare,
aggressive ovarian cancer in young women that is universally driven by
SWI/SNF dysregulation. Given that two-year survival following standard
high-dose chemotherapy and radiation in SCCOHT is less than 35%, a great
need exists for effective targeted therapies to improve outcomes for
these women. We previously demonstrated that SCCOHT tumors are driven by
inactivating mutations in SMARCA4, one of two mutually exclusive SWI/SNF
ATPases. In addition, we have shown that SCCOHT lacks expression of the
alternative SWI/SNF ATPase, SMARCA2. We have now found through integrated
genomic and functional analyses in SCCOHT tumors and cell lines that
SMARCA4 loss correlates with increased expression of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) including the platelet derived growth factor receptors
(PDGFRs). Through integration of high-throughput RNA interference and
drug screens in SCCOHT cells we have identified sensitivity to RTK
knockdown and RTK inhibitors including the FDA-approved oncology drug,
ponatinib. These data corroborate prior studies showing RTK dependence in
rhabdoid tumors, rare cancers that are also driven by mutations in the
SWI/SNF complex. Of the known ponatinib targets, PDGFR-alpha and FGFR1
were highly expressed in SCCOHT tumors, as confirmed in RNA-Seq data
(four tumors) and a SCCOHT tissue microarray (TMA; ten tumors).
Furthermore, PDGFR-alpha and -beta phosphorylation and downstream
signaling are inhibited by ponatinib in SCCOHT cells, suggesting that
these tumors are sensitive to ponatinib due to dependence on signaling
through these RTKs. Finally, given ponatinibâ€™s potency in vitro and the
proposed mechanism of action, we tested this agent in xenograft models of
SCCOHT. In addition to confirming efficacy in a SCCOHT cell line
xenograft model, superior efficacy was demonstrated in two
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models of SCCOHT with ponatinib. Thus,
ponatinib effectively targets SWI/SNF-mutant SCCOHT tumors through
inhibition of PDGFR signaling and may have clinical utility for the
treatment of these cancers.


