Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant IDH1 and tissue factor in gliomas.


Background: IDH1 mutations (IDH1mut) occur in 20-30% of gliomas, induce
DNA hypermethylation, and are associated with a better prognosis than
IDH1 wild-type (IDH1wt) gliomas, yet the basis for this remains unclear.
Furthermore, venous thromboemboli (VTE) are a serious complication in
glioma patients, and the mechanism for this is also unclear. We recently
discovered that IDH1mut gliomas are much less likely to develop VTE
compared to IDH1wt gliomas. Our data suggests that suppression of Tissue
Factor (TF), the primary initiator of coagulation, is a key reason for
this. TF also directly enhances tumor malignancy via protease-activated
receptor 2 (PAR2). In this study, we further explored the significance of
TF on malignancy and thrombosis in IDH1wt and IDH1mut gliomas.

Methods: Assays were performed using 6 patient derived glioma cells, 3
IDH1wt (GBM6, GBM12, GBM43) and 3 IDH1mut (TB09, BT142, GBM164). DNA
methylation was analyzed by Illumina Human 850K. TF procoagulant activity
(PCA) was determined by FXa generation, using preoperative glioma patient
arterial plasma, conditioned medium, or cells. In vivo models of cancer
induced thrombosis were created via surgical stenosis of the inferior
vena cava of mice engrafted with IDH1wt or IDH1mut gliomas. In vitro
markers of malignancy were measured by BrdU incorporation for cell
proliferation, serum gradient Matrigel-coated transwell inserts for
invasion, soft agar colony formation for clonogenicity. Nude mice
(N≥6/group) were orthotopically transplanted with IDH1wt glioma cells
and monitored for growth using bioluminescence imaging.

Results: The TF gene, F3, was significantly hypermethylated in IDH1mut
cells compared to IDH1wt cells, and IDH1mut glioma cells had lower levels
of TF protein and TF PCA compared to IDH1wt cells. Exogenous treatment
with the product of IDH1mut enzyme, D-2-hydroxyglutarate, directly
suppressed TF PCA by 38% in IDH1wt cells (P=0.03), as did transgene
IDH1mut expression. Mice with IDH1mut glioma xenografts produced fewer
and smaller IVC thrombi than mice with IDH1wt xenografts (0.9±0.9 vs
10.3±3.6 mg, P=0.02). Patients whose gliomas contained IDH1mut had lower
TF PCA compared to IDH1wt (0.5±0.2 vs 1.2±0.2 pg/mL, P=0.04), and there
was a strong link between levels of TF PCA and subsequent development of
VTE (P=0.03). TF knockdown greatly reduced cell proliferation, invasion,
and colony formation of IDH1wt cells. Likewise, the PAR2 antagonist,
GB83, inhibited IDH1wt cell proliferation by 54% (PResults: The TF gene,
F3, was significantly hypermethylated in IDH1mut cells compared to IDH1wt
cells, and IDH1mut glioma cells had lower levels of TF protein and TF PCA
compared to IDH1wt cells. Exogenous treatment with the product of IDH1mut
enzyme, D-2-hydroxyglutarate, directly suppressed TF PCA by 38% in IDH1wt
cells (P=0.03), as did transgene IDH1mut expression. Mice with IDH1mut
glioma xenografts produced fewer and smaller IVC thrombi than mice with
IDH1wt xenografts (0.9±0.9 vs 10.3±3.6 mg, P=0.02). Patients whose
gliomas contained IDH1mut had lower TF PCA compared to IDH1wt (0.5±0.2
vs 1.2±0.2 pg/mL, P=0.04), and there was a strong link between levels of
TF PCA and subsequent development of VTE (P=0.03). TF knockdown greatly
reduced cell proliferation, invasion, and colony formation of IDH1wt
cells. Likewise, the PAR2 antagonist, GB83, inhibited IDH1wt cell
proliferation by 54% (P<0.001) and reduced cell invasion by 25%
(PResults: The TF gene, F3, was significantly hypermethylated in IDH1mut
cells compared to IDH1wt cells, and IDH1mut glioma cells had lower levels
of TF protein and TF PCA compared to IDH1wt cells. Exogenous treatment
with the product of IDH1mut enzyme, D-2-hydroxyglutarate, directly
suppressed TF PCA by 38% in IDH1wt cells (P=0.03), as did transgene
IDH1mut expression. Mice with IDH1mut glioma xenografts produced fewer
and smaller IVC thrombi than mice with IDH1wt xenografts (0.9±0.9 vs
10.3±3.6 mg, P=0.02). Patients whose gliomas contained IDH1mut had lower
TF PCA compared to IDH1wt (0.5±0.2 vs 1.2±0.2 pg/mL, P=0.04), and there
was a strong link between levels of TF PCA and subsequent development of
VTE (P=0.03). TF knockdown greatly reduced cell proliferation, invasion,
and colony formation of IDH1wt cells. Likewise, the PAR2 antagonist,
GB83, inhibited IDH1wt cell proliferation by 54% (P<0.001) and reduced
cell invasion by 25% (P<0.05). TF knockdown also reduced in vivo growth
of IDH1wt gliomas by 96% at 28 days post engraftment (P=0.03), and
extended median survival of engrafted mice by 86% (P=0.001).

Conclusions: IDH1mut mediated suppression of TF expression and PCA may be
a critical component of the less thrombogenic, and less malignant,
IDH1mut phenotype. Targeting TF-PAR2 signaling may therefore represent a
novel therapeutic strategy to reduce IDH1wt glioma malignancy.


