Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing tumor blood perfusion using orally active heparin to
increase the distribution of anticancer therapeutics inside the tumor
tissue.


Here, we suggest in the first time that the cancer associated
thrombosis(CAT) might be one of the major factor which limit the tumor
blood perfusion and drug distribution inside the tumor tissue by reducing
the effective radius of blood vessels. In order to prevent CAT and
achieve enhanced drug distribution, we developed orally active heparin to
be combined with other anti-cancer therapies. We injected dye conjugated
fibrinogen and chitosan nanoparticles to mice which were bearing highly
thrombotic tumor to visualize CAT and nanoparticle distribution inside
the tumor tissue. When CAT is prevented by heparin, we found that
nanoparticle distribution and accumulation were significantly enhanced
compared to the group not treated with heparin. This results signify that
the CAT can limit the tumor perfusion and prevention of CAT can enhance
the drug accumulation and distribution. We used highly thrombotic cancer
models such as melanoma and pancreatic cancer to evaluate the therapeutic
efficacy of the doxorubicin containing nanoparticle and the combination
of oxaliplatin and gemcitabine when they are combined with heparin. We
have found that when heparin is combined with each therapy, their tumor
inhibition efficacy increased about 25% and also confirmed that this
synergistic effect comes from enhanced drug distribution inside the tumor
tissue by preventing the CAT using anticoagulant. These results were also
supported by histological analysis.

We have validated our hypothesis by showing that CAT can limit the tumor
perfusion, which in turn brings reduced drug distribution inside the
tumor tissue. We also confirmed that our oral heparin could enhance the
tumor perfusion and the efficacy of anti-cancer therapeutics by
preventing the CAT in the tumor tissue.


