Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic predictors of gene expression associated with risk of
colorectal cancer.


To date, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have reported common
variants in over 50 loci

with weak to moderate effects on CRC risk. These genetic factors in
aggregate explain only a small

fraction of familial risk of CRC. To aid in the discovery of novel CRC
loci, we integrated large

transcriptome data, including those generated in the Genotype-Tissue
Expression (GTEx) Project in

genetic association analyses of CRC. The computational method, PrediXcan,
was used to predict

transcript levels in relevant tissues and perform gene-level association
tests with CRC. Prediction

models were developed using whole blood transcriptomes (n=922) from the
depression genes and

networks (DGN), as well as colon transcriptomes (transverse n=169 and
sigmoid n=124) from

GTEx datasets, along with high-density genotyping data from the same
subjects. Genetically

determined expression levels were tested for association with CRC in
12,186 cases and 14,718

controls from GECCO-CCFR and suggestive associations (false discovery
rate = 0.2) were evaluated

in 7,481 cases and 17,796 controls from the Asia Colorectal Cancer
Consortium (ACCC) and 22,974

cases and 14,392 controls from the Colorectal Transdisciplinary (CORECT)
study. We attempted to

replicate novel associations for eight genes and found statistically
significant associations with

CXCR1 (OR=1.21 (1.10-1.33), p-value=7.8x10-5) and CXCR2 (OR=1.24
(1.11-1.38), p-value=9.9x10-

5). We also recovered previous associations at six known GWAS loci,
thereby providing additional

support for putative target genes. CXCR1 and CXCR2 are therapeutic
targets for the anticancer agent

Reparixin, which is currently being investigated in a stage II clinical
trial for triple negative breast

cancer. As such, these findings provide preliminary support for new
molecular targets that could

potentially repurpose a putative cancer therapeutic. These findings
highlight the utility integrating

transcriptome data for novel discovery and biological insight of risk
loci.


