Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial similarities in the effects of depression on hospital cost
of breast cancer.


Objective: Breast cancer (BC) incidence is reported to have declined in
the nation. However, the role of depression on hospital costs for BC by
race remains unknown. In this presentation, we examine two issues: (i)
prevalence of BC with comorbid depression among discharged hospital
patients; (ii) racial variation in the effect of co-morbid depression on
hospital costs of BC patients.

Methods: We extracted data on depression and breast cancer from the 2008
Tennessee Hospital Discharge Data System (HDDS). The BC sample (n=2,523)
patients were mostly white (86%) with an average age of 63 years. We
computed age-adjusted BC prevalence rates per CDC methodology, and
compared the hospital costs for BC patients with vs. without depression.

Results: Age adjusted BC rates (per 100,000) were higher among white than
black patients (92.2 vs. 43.3, pResults: Age adjusted BC rates (per
100,000) were higher among white than black patients (92.2 vs. 43.3,
p<.000). Nearly one-fourth (23%) of BC patients had depression (no racial
differences: (25% white vs. 24% black BC patients). Hospital costs for BC
patients were 17% higher compared to non-BC patients, and cost was 55%
higher among BC patients with co-morbid depression compared to
non-depressed BC patients ($64,439 vs. $41,344). The higher cost for
depressed BC patients was similar across both white and black BC females.

Conclusion: BC is higher among white females compared to black females.
BC patients cost with depression tended to be significantly higher
compared to non-depressed patients regardless of race. Since nearly
one-fourth of BC patients were depressed with higher hospital cost, these
results point to possible significant costs savings by treating
depression before the need for hospitalization among BC patients.


