Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of different cancers among first-degree relatives of
pancreatic cancer patients and impact of probandsâ€™ germline mutation on
sibling cancer risk.


Background: There have been varying reports on risk of different cancers,
other than pancreatic cancer (PC), among first-degree relatives (FDRs) of
PC patients. Because the pattern and scope of aggregation of PC with
other malignancies in families of PC patients are not entirely clear, we
investigated risk of 15 common malignancies among FDRs of unselected PC
probands.

Methods: The study included 17,181 FDRs with more than 336,000
person-years at risk. The FDRs were identified through sequentially
enrolled PC probands (n=2,305) in the Mayo Clinic prospective pancreatic
cancer patient registry from 2000-2016. Data on family history of cancer
were provided by the probands at the time of enrollment in structured
risk factor questionnaires. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated by comparing cases of each
cancer type observed among the FDRs with those expected using data from
the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results Program (SEER). Stratified
analyses were performed among siblings of the probands based on whether
the related proband tested positive for a mutation in ATM, BARD1, BRCA1,
BRCA2, CDKN2A, CHEK2, MUTYH, NBN, PALB2, or PMS2; or tested negative for
mutation in a total of 25 sequenced cancer susceptibility genes.

Results: Compared to the SEER reference population, risk of PC was
two-fold higher than expected among the FDRs (SIR=2.04, 95% CI:
1.78-2.31) and 12-fold higher than expected among FDRs with history of PC
in at least two blood relatives (SIR=11.99, 95% CI: 10.48-13.64).
Siblings of mutation-positive probands had higher risk of PC (SIR=13.57,
95% CI: 6.19-25.76) than siblings of mutation-negative probands
(SIR=8.91, 95% CI=6.73-11.57). For other cancer types, primary liver
cancer was elevated among female FDRs (SIR=2.10, 95% CI: 1.34-3.12),
whereas breast (SIR=3.16, 95% CI: 1.63-5.52) and ovarian (SIR =6.61, 95%
CI: 1.33-19.31) cancers were elevated only among siblings of the
mutation-positive probands. There also were suggestions of lower than
expected risk of other malignancies, such as bladder, colorectal and
prostate cancers, among the FDRs as compared with the SEER population.

Conclusions: These findings confirm familial aggregation of PC with
breast and ovarian cancers, and further suggest a potential aggregation
of PC and primary liver cancer among female FDRs of PC probands. The
elevated risks of breast cancer and ovarian cancer among siblings of the
mutation-positive probands suggests a strong influence of genetic
susceptibility shared with the related proband, possibly due to an
inherited mutation in BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2. These findings lend support
to genetic counseling and targeted screening of certain cancers in
high-risk families.


