Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatitis B virus X protein regulates hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha (HIF-1 alpha) and lysyl oxidase like 2 (LOXL2) pathway in
hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most common form of primary liver
cancer, is a fatal malignancy and is prevalent in HBV-endemic
geographical areas. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major
etiologic factor of HCC. HBV is a double-stranded DNA virus and encodes
for a viral onco-protein called transactivator protein X (HBx) which
interacts with the host proteins to enhance proliferative potential of
the host cells. Here, using Tet-ON and Tet-OFF HBx inducible systems in
HBV-negative HCC cell lines, we showed that induced expression of HBx
stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) protein under hypoxia.
Reversely, knockdown of HBx in HBV-positive HCC cell lines reduced
HIF-1α protein stabilization under hypoxia. More intriguingly, we found
that induced HBx expression up-regulated the mRNA and protein expression
a known HIF-1α transcriptional target, lysyl oxidase like 2 (LOXL2) in
HCC. Our previous study showed that LOXL2 cross-linked collagen in the
extracellular matrix to promote HCC metastasis. Scanning electron
microscopy demonstrated that knockdown of HBx in HCC cell lines markedly
reduced formation of collagen fibers in vitro. Transwell invasion assay
showed that knockdown of HBx reduced HCC invasive ability. Picrosirius
red staining further showed that knockdown of HBx reduced collagen
cross-linking in vivo and repressed HCC growth and metastasis. Taken
together, our study unprecedentedly show the HBx remodels the ECM through
HIF-1α/LOXL2 pathway to promote HCC metastasis.


