Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Decrypting the transcriptome profile of Pak4 using next generation
sequencing.


The PAK4 (p-21 Activated Kinase 4) protein kinase has long been
associated with cancer because of its key roles in regulating cell
proliferation, cell cycle progression and cell morphology. The PAK4 gene
is amplified in different types of cancers, including breast cancer. PAK4
overexpression is associated with oncogenic transformation in several
breast cancer cell lines, while PAK4 inhibition has been shown to
significantly reduce their tumorigenic potential. However, there is
limited information available on PAK4â€™s mechanism of action in
promoting tumorigenesis. To gain an insight into PAK4 downstream
signaling pathways, we performed Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) on RNA
samples collected from non-transformed immortalized mouse mammary
epithelial cells (WT iMMECs) and iMMECs overexpressing PAK4. Research
from our lab has shown that unlike WT iMMECs, iMMECs overexpressing PAK4
formed tumors when injected into mammary fat pads of mice, suggesting a
central role for PAK4 in tumor formation. Previous studies to delineate
PAK4 signaling pathways have mostly focused on substrates phosphorylated
by PAK4. This study, however, takes into account genes which may act
downstream of PAK4 and play an important role in mediating long term PAK4
function. RNA-seq analysis offers the ability to discover new genes and
splice variants and measure transcript expression. mRNA was isolated in
triplicates from WT iMMECs and iMMECs overexpressing PAK4; mRNA from each
condition was then sequenced using Illumina NextSeq platform. The RNA-seq
data generated was analyzed using Top Hat and Cufflinks software, which
created a list of genes whose expression was significantly different in
these two cell types, and previously unknown to be regulated by PAK4 (26
genes were up regulated and 51 genes were down regulated by more than a
log2 fold change of 3). A qPCR analysis of 8 of these genes validated the
sequencing data. Among the different genes we identified, we chose to
focus on ParvB, which is consistently down regulated by almost seven fold
in the iMMECs overexpressing PAK4. Previous studies have suggested a
tumor suppressor role for ParvB in regulating breast tumorigenicity. We
hypothesize that PAK4 mediates mammary tumor formation through ParvB
downregulation. Additional studies investigating the role of ParvB in the
PAK4 signaling pathway are under investigation. Future studies will also
involve studying the other genes we found to be regulated by PAK4
overexpression and determining their role in tumorigenesis.


