Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distribution analysis of S-222611 in brain metastases of
HER2-positive breast cancer by quantitative imaging mass spectrometry:
prospect for antitumor activity of EGFR/HER2/HER4 kinase inhibitor
S-222611 against brain metastases.


S-222611 is a potent and selective reversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), human EGFR2 (HER2), and human
EGFR4 developed in Shionogi. Greater potency of anti-tumor activity than
lapatinib was demonstrated in vitro and in animal models. In the
intracranial implantation mice model implanted the HER2-positive cell
line (MDA-MB-361-luc-2), S-222611 showed more potent anti-tumor activity
than lapatinib. On the basis of higher penetration in brain of S-222611
than lapatinib indicated by the preclinical pharmacokinetic studies, we
demonstrated the application of S-222611 to brain metastases with breast
cancer. In order to enhance the clinical predictability of S-222611 to
the treatment of brain metastases, we have developed the experimental
brain metastases models in mice of HER2-positive breast cancer
(MDA-MB-361-luc-2-BR2/BR3) or T790M-EGFR expressing lung cancer
(NCI-H1975-luc). After a single oral administration of S-222611 or
lapatinib, the concentrations of S-222611 and lapatinib in the brain
metastatic regions of these mice models were analyzed by quantitative
imaging mass spectrometry (IMS). In the NCI-H1975 lung cancer model
(intraventricular injection model), the concentrations of S-222611 in
brain metastases quantified by IMS were comparable to those of lapatinib.
In contrast, in the MDA-MB-361 breast cancer model (intraventricular
injection model), the concentrations of S-222611 in brain metastases were
over 10 times higher than those of lapatinib, and the tumor-to-normal
brain ratio of S-222611 was approximately 4 times higher than that of
lapatinib. IMS revealed that the concentrations in brain metastases and
tumor-to-normal brain ratio of S-222611 were significantly higher than
those of lapatinib in the breast cancer mice model. In addition, the
blood-tumor barrier (BTB) permeability in each brain metastatic region
using these mice models was assessed simultaneously. In the lung cancer
model, fluorescently labeled dextran was highly detected in the brain
metastatic regions than brain parenchyma. However, in the breast cancer
models, fluorescence intensities for dextran in the brain metastatic
regions and brain parenchyma were comparable, indicating that the BTB was
remained to be largely intact in brain metastases of the breast cancer
model but disrupted in the lung cancer model. These results show that
S-222611 is expected to be useful for the prevention and the prompt
treatment of patients with HER2-positive breast cancer having brain
metastases.


