Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association study between iron and cholesterol for the treatment
of drug resistant neuroblastoma.


Neuroblastoma is the most common childhood extracranial solid malignancy.
Although cancer cells need more iron and lipids for their active cell
metabolism, possible links between iron, mutations in genes involved in
iron metabolism (e.g., HFE) and lipid metabolism have not been studied
well. We determined the HFE genotype in human neuroblastoma cells as well
as patients. Neuroblastoma cells and patients have C282Y HFE mutation
rates (~12%) that are similar to those of the general Caucasian
population. While cultured cells derived from drug resistant
neuroblastomas had less cholesterol, they expressed more ferritin, and
contained more iron, than cells derived from drug susceptible tumors. In
drug resistant neuroblastoma CHLA-171 cells, siRNA induced alteration of
HFE expression had no effect on their iron levels but decreased their
cholesterol. Results of in vitro experiments indicated that simvastatin,
an inhibitor of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
(HMG-CoAR), was cytotoxic to drug resistant cells as was the iron
chelator di-2-pyridylketone-4-cyclohexyl-4-methyl-3-thiosemicarbazone
(DpC). In vivo, the anti-tumor effect of simvastatin administered orally
was minimal. In summary, we found i) an inverse association between
ferritin and HMG-CoAR expression in neuroblastoma cells that was
reflected in their iron and cholesterol levels, and ii) that the most
cytotoxic cholesterol inhibitor of neuroblastoma cells was simvastatin,
while the most cytotoxic iron chelation agent was DpC. Our results
indicate that it may be possible to use HFE genotype to develop a
precision medicine approach to use certain iron chelators and/or
cholesterol decreasing agents in the treatment of drug resistant
neuroblastomas. Our results also indicate that alterations in iron and
cholesterol metabolism are part of the cellâ€™s drug resistance mechanism
in neuroblastomas.


