Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of tumor locations on survival of the patients with
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


In contrast to western population with majority of adenocarcinoma at
lower third segment, esophageal cancer in China occurs predominantly in
the middle third segment of the esophagus and squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) remains the major histopathological type. The mechanism for the
dramatic difference in terms of tumor location and histological type is
not clear. Obviously, the different tumor locations will have impact on
optimal choice of treatment, and may have different lymph drainage which
will then influence the lymph node metastasis. The present study was thus
undertaken to characterize the impact of different tumor locations
(cervical, the upper, middle, lower thoracic portion) on survival of the
ESCC patients from Henan in Northern China. All the patients in this
study were from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal
Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University.
Of the 62,311 ESCC patients enrolled in this study, there were 37,263
males (59.8%) with a mean age of 59.61±9.62 and 25070 females (40.23%)
with a mean age of 60.45±9.68. The ratio of male to female was 1.49:1 (P
In contrast to western population with majority of adenocarcinoma at
lower third segment, esophageal cancer in China occurs predominantly in
the middle third segment of the esophagus and squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) remains the major histopathological type. The mechanism for the
dramatic difference in terms of tumor location and histological type is
not clear. Obviously, the different tumor locations will have impact on
optimal choice of treatment, and may have different lymph drainage which
will then influence the lymph node metastasis. The present study was thus
undertaken to characterize the impact of different tumor locations
(cervical, the upper, middle, lower thoracic portion) on survival of the
ESCC patients from Henan in Northern China. All the patients in this
study were from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal
Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University.
Of the 62,311 ESCC patients enrolled in this study, there were 37,263
males (59.8%) with a mean age of 59.61±9.62 and 25070 females (40.23%)
with a mean age of 60.45±9.68. The ratio of male to female was 1.49:1 (P
< 0.01). These patients were classified into four groups with different
periods based on diagnosed time, group I (1975 to 1984, 6.51%), group II
(1985 to 1994, 21.91%), group III (1995 to 2004, 30.98%) and group IV
(2005 to 2016, 40.59%). Based on the 6th version of UICC criteria, the
tumor locations were recorded as cervical, upon, middle and lower third
segments. The followed–up was undertaken until 2016. The SPSS21.0
software and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis and Log Rank test were used
to evaluate the survival of different locations. The results demonstrated
that the most common location for ESCC was in the middle third segment
(64.5%), followed by upon third segment (19.00%), lower third segment
(15.10%) and cervical segment (1.40%) (PIn contrast to western population
with majority of adenocarcinoma at lower third segment, esophageal cancer
in China occurs predominantly in the middle third segment of the
esophagus and squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains the major
histopathological type. The mechanism for the dramatic difference in
terms of tumor location and histological type is not clear. Obviously,
the different tumor locations will have impact on optimal choice of
treatment, and may have different lymph drainage which will then
influence the lymph node metastasis. The present study was thus
undertaken to characterize the impact of different tumor locations
(cervical, the upper, middle, lower thoracic portion) on survival of the
ESCC patients from Henan in Northern China. All the patients in this
study were from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal
Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University.
Of the 62,311 ESCC patients enrolled in this study, there were 37,263
males (59.8%) with a mean age of 59.61±9.62 and 25070 females (40.23%)
with a mean age of 60.45±9.68. The ratio of male to female was 1.49:1 (P
< 0.01). These patients were classified into four groups with different
periods based on diagnosed time, group I (1975 to 1984, 6.51%), group II
(1985 to 1994, 21.91%), group III (1995 to 2004, 30.98%) and group IV
(2005 to 2016, 40.59%). Based on the 6th version of UICC criteria, the
tumor locations were recorded as cervical, upon, middle and lower third
segments. The followed–up was undertaken until 2016. The SPSS21.0
software and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis and Log Rank test were used
to evaluate the survival of different locations. The results demonstrated
that the most common location for ESCC was in the middle third segment
(64.5%), followed by upon third segment (19.00%), lower third segment
(15.10%) and cervical segment (1.40%) (P<0.001). Log Rank test showed
that the ESCC at lower segment had the best survival, followed by middle
and upon segments. The cervical segment had worsen survival (PIn contrast
to western population with majority of adenocarcinoma at lower third
segment, esophageal cancer in China occurs predominantly in the middle
third segment of the esophagus and squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains
the major histopathological type. The mechanism for the dramatic
difference in terms of tumor location and histological type is not clear.
Obviously, the different tumor locations will have impact on optimal
choice of treatment, and may have different lymph drainage which will
then influence the lymph node metastasis. The present study was thus
undertaken to characterize the impact of different tumor locations
(cervical, the upper, middle, lower thoracic portion) on survival of the
ESCC patients from Henan in Northern China. All the patients in this
study were from the ESCC database in Henan Key Laboratory for Esophageal
Cancer Research of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University.
Of the 62,311 ESCC patients enrolled in this study, there were 37,263
males (59.8%) with a mean age of 59.61±9.62 and 25070 females (40.23%)
with a mean age of 60.45±9.68. The ratio of male to female was 1.49:1 (P
< 0.01). These patients were classified into four groups with different
periods based on diagnosed time, group I (1975 to 1984, 6.51%), group II
(1985 to 1994, 21.91%), group III (1995 to 2004, 30.98%) and group IV
(2005 to 2016, 40.59%). Based on the 6th version of UICC criteria, the
tumor locations were recorded as cervical, upon, middle and lower third
segments. The followed–up was undertaken until 2016. The SPSS21.0
software and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis and Log Rank test were used
to evaluate the survival of different locations. The results demonstrated
that the most common location for ESCC was in the middle third segment
(64.5%), followed by upon third segment (19.00%), lower third segment
(15.10%) and cervical segment (1.40%) (P<0.001). Log Rank test showed
that the ESCC at lower segment had the best survival, followed by middle
and upon segments. The cervical segment had worsen survival (P<0.01). The
present results indicate that the tumor location has obvious impact on
ESCC survival, further studies need to elucidate the mechanism.
[Supported by Doctoral Team Foundation of the First Affiliated Hospital
of Zhengzhou University (2016–BSTDJJ–03), Natural Science Foundation
of Henan Province (20161110) and Correspondence to: Li Dong Wang, Email:

ldwang2007@126.com].


