Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational landscape and timing of resistant clone emergence in
104 Chinese pediatric patients with relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


Relapsed pediatric acute lympoblastic leukemia (ALL), occurring in 15-20%
of cases, is one of the leading causes of cancer-related death in
children, conferring a dismal survival rate of less than 40% primarily
due to drug resistance. We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and
RNA-seq of matched diagnosis and relapse tumors as well as WGS of
remission DNA from 104 pediatric ALL patients treated at Shanghai
Childrenâ€™s Medical Center (n=89), Institute of Hematology & Blood
Disease Hospital in Tianjin (n=14) and the Second Hospital of Anhui
Medical University (n=1) between 2003 and 2014. The median age at
diagnosis was 6.29 (range, 0.23-16.05) years. Relapse occurred during
chemotherapy in 85 patients and after completion of therapy in 19
patients.

Somatic mutation rate in ALL increased significantly from an average of
0.23 per Mb at diagnosis to 0.65 per Mb at relapse. We identified 34
potential driver genes at diagnosis and 45 at relapse based on
significance of mutation recurrence and pathogenicity. The four most
significant relapse-specific driver genes harbor known point mutations on
purine metabolism genes NT5C2 (n=13) and PRPS1/PRPS2 (n=7), novel
alterations affecting glucocorticoids receptor NR3C1 (n=13) and
folylpolyglutamate synthetase FPGS (n=8). Functional characterization
showed that all NR3C1 mutations resulted in significant loss of
transcription activator function and subcellular mislocalization. Ectopic
expression of mutant NR3C1 in ALL cell lines consistently led to
prednisone resistance. Five driver genes (TP53, CREBBP, SMARCA4, WHSC1
and NIPBL) showed the highest increase (2-5 fold) of mutation frequency
from diagnosis to relapse with mutations collectively present in 28% of
relapsed ALL. Truncation mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes MLH1,
MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 occurred exclusively at relapse in four ALL with the
highest mutation burden.

Targeted ultra-deep sequencing at 5,000X of 268 somatic alterations was
performed on 214 serial bone-marrow samples collected during ALL therapy
for 17 cases. The resulting mutant allele fraction (MAF) values showed
high concordance with minimum residual disease (MRD) measured by flow
cytometry, indicating suitability for quantifying leukemia burden.
Temporal change of MAF in the serial samples also allows us to track
clonal identity and emergence of drug-resistant clones during and after
therapy. For example, one case had deep sequencing performed on 11
somatic lesions from 10 bone barrow samples collected during the 15
months between diagnosis and relapse. We found that a minor clone present
in 0.5-1% of ALL blasts at diagnosis emerged five months prior to
relapse, from which two new subclones arose harboring NT5C2 mutations
L406>SSF and D407>DRD. Preliminary data generated from serial bone marrow
samples provides the first insight into the use of somatic alterations
for monitoring leukemia progress during relapse.


