Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Diet and exercise-induced weight maintenance may be preventing
mammary tumor growth and metastatic burden by enhancing antitumor
immunity and/or reducing protumorigenic factors.


Two lifestyle factors that increase cancer risk and progression are
weight gain and sedentary behavior. Possible mechanisms underlying this
relation include changes in metabolic, inflammatory, and immune
mediators. Few studies have examined the effect of body weight and
exercise on the efficacy of immunotherapeutic strategies. An emerging
immunotherapeutic strategy is PD-1 checkpoint blockade, which selectively
targets the membrane protein programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) on T cells to
promote a sustained, antitumor effector response. Thus, the goal of the
current study was to determine if preventing weight gain through diet
(10% reduction in calories) and exercise (voluntary running wheel
activity) will improve the response to the dual administration of a whole
tumor cell vaccine and PD-1 checkpoint blockade. Female BALB/c mice were
randomized to sedentary, weight gain (WG) or exercising, weight
maintenance (WM) groups (n=32/group). After 8 weeks, all mice were
orthotopically injected with 5x104 luciferase-transfected 4T1.2 cells
into the fourth mammary fat pad and continued on their intervention for
35 days. After injection, WG and WM mice were randomized into vaccination
(VAX) or vehicle (VEH) groups, and 1x106 irradiated 4T1.2 cells or HBSS
vehicle control, respectively, was administered at day 7 post-tumor
injection. Mice were further randomized (n=8/group) to receive anti-PD-1
(10 mg/kg/mouse) or isotype control at day 9 and 12 post-tumor injection.
All WM groups, regardless of immunotherapy intervention, weighed
significantly less than WG groups over the course of the study (pTwo
lifestyle factors that increase cancer risk and progression are weight
gain and sedentary behavior. Possible mechanisms underlying this relation
include changes in metabolic, inflammatory, and immune mediators. Few
studies have examined the effect of body weight and exercise on the
efficacy of immunotherapeutic strategies. An emerging immunotherapeutic
strategy is PD-1 checkpoint blockade, which selectively targets the
membrane protein programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) on T cells to promote a
sustained, antitumor effector response. Thus, the goal of the current
study was to determine if preventing weight gain through diet (10%
reduction in calories) and exercise (voluntary running wheel activity)
will improve the response to the dual administration of a whole tumor
cell vaccine and PD-1 checkpoint blockade. Female BALB/c mice were
randomized to sedentary, weight gain (WG) or exercising, weight
maintenance (WM) groups (n=32/group). After 8 weeks, all mice were
orthotopically injected with 5x104 luciferase-transfected 4T1.2 cells
into the fourth mammary fat pad and continued on their intervention for
35 days. After injection, WG and WM mice were randomized into vaccination
(VAX) or vehicle (VEH) groups, and 1x106 irradiated 4T1.2 cells or HBSS
vehicle control, respectively, was administered at day 7 post-tumor
injection. Mice were further randomized (n=8/group) to receive anti-PD-1
(10 mg/kg/mouse) or isotype control at day 9 and 12 post-tumor injection.
All WM groups, regardless of immunotherapy intervention, weighed
significantly less than WG groups over the course of the study (p<0.001).
Mean tumor volume (pTwo lifestyle factors that increase cancer risk and
progression are weight gain and sedentary behavior. Possible mechanisms
underlying this relation include changes in metabolic, inflammatory, and
immune mediators. Few studies have examined the effect of body weight and
exercise on the efficacy of immunotherapeutic strategies. An emerging
immunotherapeutic strategy is PD-1 checkpoint blockade, which selectively
targets the membrane protein programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) on T cells to
promote a sustained, antitumor effector response. Thus, the goal of the
current study was to determine if preventing weight gain through diet
(10% reduction in calories) and exercise (voluntary running wheel
activity) will improve the response to the dual administration of a whole
tumor cell vaccine and PD-1 checkpoint blockade. Female BALB/c mice were
randomized to sedentary, weight gain (WG) or exercising, weight
maintenance (WM) groups (n=32/group). After 8 weeks, all mice were
orthotopically injected with 5x104 luciferase-transfected 4T1.2 cells
into the fourth mammary fat pad and continued on their intervention for
35 days. After injection, WG and WM mice were randomized into vaccination
(VAX) or vehicle (VEH) groups, and 1x106 irradiated 4T1.2 cells or HBSS
vehicle control, respectively, was administered at day 7 post-tumor
injection. Mice were further randomized (n=8/group) to receive anti-PD-1
(10 mg/kg/mouse) or isotype control at day 9 and 12 post-tumor injection.
All WM groups, regardless of immunotherapy intervention, weighed
significantly less than WG groups over the course of the study (p<0.001).
Mean tumor volume (p<0.001) and tumor weight at sacrifice (p=0.076) were
significantly lower with PD-1 treatment in the WG but not WM groups.
Furthermore, metastatic burden in the lung (p=0.032) and the number of
splenic myeloid-derived suppressor cells (p=0.058) was reduced with
VAX+PD-1 treatment in the WG but not WM groups. Thus, the combination of
VAX+PD1 was effective at reducing primary tumor growth and metastatic
burden and improving immune outcomes only in mice that gained weight over
the course of the study. However, diet and exercise alone was effective
in reducing tumor growth and metastatic burden. The lack of
responsiveness to vaccination + anti-PD-1 treatment in WM mice suggests
that WM achieved through diet and exercise may be enhancing antitumor
immunity and/or reducing protumorigenic factors (i.e. similar mechanisms
mediated by vaccination + anti-PD-1 therapy). These data demonstrate that
preventing weight gain through diet and exercise may be an important
recommendation to maintain prolonged antitumor effector responses and
improve clinical outcomes.


