Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel microRNA signature score to predict bone metastasis and
prognosis of breast cancer.


Backgrounds: 40,000 US women still die with breast cancer every year.
Vast majority of death occur after they develop metastasis, where bone is
the most frequent site for breast cancer. New measures to identify the
patients who develop metastasis allow us to intervene early, which is
expected to prolong survival. The aim of this study is to establish a
microRNA (miRNA) signature scoring system that can predict bone
metastasis and survival utilizing integrated transcriptomics analyses in
breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: Both clinical and RNA expression data, including
microRNA and mRNA, of 1051 patients were retrieved from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). 1) Multivariate Cox proportional hazard model and
Kaplan-Meier for overall survival were performed to construct and
identify novel models of miRNAs signature for predicting patient
survival. 2) Competing risk analysis using the miRNAs signature was
conducted to clarify its association with metastatic distributions. 3)
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed to identify the
genome-epigenome significance of the miRNAs signature.

Results: 1) Utilizing Cox model on TCGA cohort, we established a novel
risk scoring system with three miRNAs signatures (miR-19a, miR-93, and
miR-106a) that identified the patients population with extremely poor
overall survival (p = 0.0004; 5-y survival rate, 49.2%). This result was
reproduced in two other completely independent cohorts with microarray
datasets (GSE19536, p = 0.0009; GSE22220, p = 0.0003, respectively). 2)
Utilizing competing risk analysis for each metastatic sites of breast
cancer, we found that the patients with bone metastasis demonstrated
significantly high scores (p = 0.0052). The evaluation also showed a
statistical tendency of association with lung metastasis (p = 0.0854). 3)
We found that high score is associated with several critical gene sets
such as angiogenesis (p Results: 1) Utilizing Cox model on TCGA cohort,
we established a novel risk scoring system with three miRNAs signatures
(miR-19a, miR-93, and miR-106a) that identified the patients population
with extremely poor overall survival (p = 0.0004; 5-y survival rate,
49.2%). This result was reproduced in two other completely independent
cohorts with microarray datasets (GSE19536, p = 0.0009; GSE22220, p =
0.0003, respectively). 2) Utilizing competing risk analysis for each
metastatic sites of breast cancer, we found that the patients with bone
metastasis demonstrated significantly high scores (p = 0.0052). The
evaluation also showed a statistical tendency of association with lung
metastasis (p = 0.0854). 3) We found that high score is associated with
several critical gene sets such as angiogenesis (p < 0.0001) or
epithelial mesenchymal transition (p = 0.0155) by GSEA that suggests that
high signature score is associated with enhanced metastasis in breast
cancer patients.

Conclusions: We established a miRNAs signature scoring system to predict
bone metastasis and poor overall survival in breast cancer using novel
integrated transcriptomics concept.


