Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating immunotherapy effects using preclinical molecular
imaging tools for quantitative immune cell tracking.


Immunotherapies are a promising class of cancer therapeutics, but
clinical translation is often hampered by a lack of understanding
regarding optimal therapy administration, combination, and reliable
biomarkers of success. Traditional metrics such as RECIST, and modern
metrics like irRC and PERCIST used for monitoring cancer therapy outcome,
have limitations for immunotherapy evaluation and are not always
reflective of the underlying immune mechanisms. We aim to better
characterize and monitor these immunotherapies, with focus on combination
therapy optimization, by tracking immune cell migration in response to
these therapies using preclinical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI
is used to obtain anatomical tumor changes, detect and quantify
superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO)-labeled cells in vivo.

Goal: To link immune cell migration to early prognostic biomarkers for
immunotherapy success.

Methods: C57/BL6 mice (n=40) received an implant of 5x105 C3 cancer cells
in the left flank. Mice (n=10/group) were i) untreated or treated with
ii) 200Âµg of anti-PD1/day on days 7, 9, 11, 21 and 25, iii) the
peptide-based vaccine DepoVaxTM (DPX) on day 15, or iv) with anti-PD1 and
DPX. CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (CD8) and suppressive regulatory T cells
(Tregs) were isolated from diseased-matched & treated donor mice for
expansion in culture before labeling with SPIO for adoptive cell transfer
into mice receiving scans. PET/MRI Data: Anatomical and qualitative SPIO
data is collected using a balanced steady-state free precession (bSSFP)
sequence. Iron quantification is done using R2* maps from a multi-echo
single point imaging sequence (TurboSPI). Tumor metabolism was assessed
by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake during simultaneous acquisition of
positron emission tomography (PET) with MRI. Imaging was done 21 and 28
days post-implant.

Results: CD8 and Treg cells are consistently recruited to both the tumor
and vaccine draining inguinal lymph nodes. CD8 T cells are primarily
recruited to the tumor periphery and do not always penetrate the tumor
core. Positive therapy outcomes are correlated with an increasing
CD8/Treg ratio in the tumor, particularly at earlier time points (21 vs
28 days). In certain cases, CD8 T cells were found within the fat pad
between the tumor and lymph node. As expected, DPX & anti-PD1 combination
therapy resulted in the best prognosis. Simultaneous acquisition of
PET/MRI demonstrated large areas of necrosis in tumor cores. Using
TurboSPI, we have begun quantifying CD8 and Tregs cells, evaluating if
volumetric tumor changes due to pseudoprogression correlate with Treg or
CD8 T cell migration and comparing results to pre-existing biomarkers.

Conclusions: Using MRI/PET with quantitative immune cell tracking results
in more in-depth, longitudinal, characterization of immunotherapies at
the preclinical level, which can be used to optimize therapy combinations.


