Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MAPK-mediated immunomodulation in disseminated murine Emu-TCL1
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.


Work in melanoma and other solid tumors shows mutations activating MAPK
pathway not only promote malignancy by promoting survival and
proliferation but also are immunosuppressive than wild-type (WT)
counterparts. However, relevance of MAPK-activating mutations to immune
modulation in disseminated cancers such as leukemia is uncertain, and the
mechanisms by which this occurs are likely to differ. BRAF activating
mutation is found in nearly all hairy cell leukemia cases, 4% of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and 9% CLL cases when including other
MAPK-activating mutations such as KRAS and NRAS. To assess
immunomodulatory effects of BRAF-mutant CLL cells, we co-cultured
dox-inducible OSU-CLL cells transfected with WT or BRAFV600E constructs
with healthy donor T cells incubated with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies,
and T cell proliferation, cytokine production and expression of surface
proteins were assessed by flow cytometry. We also employed a transgenic
mouse model of BRAF B cell leukemia. CD19-Cre x BRAFV600E or CD19-Cre
only mice were crossed with the well-characterized Emu-TCL1 model of CLL
to obtain mice with spontaneous B cell leukemia expressing either WT BRAF
(CD19-Cre xTCL1) or mutant BRAF (BRAFV600E xCD19-Cre xTCL1) under the
native BRAF promoter. For adoptive transfer (AT) experiments, leukemia
cells (2e7) from transgenic mice were engrafted intravenously into
syngeneic healthy adult animals. Blood and spleen cells were examined by
flow cytometry. OSU-CLL cells expressing BRAFV600E more strongly
inhibited anti-CD3/CD28-induced proliferation of normal donor T cells.
Transwell assays showed this effect was due both to soluble and
contact-dependent factors. TNF levels were higher in BRAFV600E-expressing
cells and reduced by vemurafenib, but a TNF neutralizing antibody did not
alter the inhibitory effect of BRAFV600E-expressing cells on T cell
proliferation. Proliferation was rescued by the BRAFV600E inhibitor
dabrafenib, further supporting the contribution of mutant BRAF to this
effect. Impact of BRAFV600E mutation on myeloid compartment was also
evaluated using AT model. Mice were engrafted with BRAFWT or BRAFV600E
leukemia cells, and upon achieving similar disease loads, BRAFV600E
leukemic B cells caused 2.2-fold increase in PD-L1 expressing-peripheral
myeloid cells (pWork in melanoma and other solid tumors shows mutations
activating MAPK pathway not only promote malignancy by promoting survival
and proliferation but also are immunosuppressive than wild-type (WT)
counterparts. However, relevance of MAPK-activating mutations to immune
modulation in disseminated cancers such as leukemia is uncertain, and the
mechanisms by which this occurs are likely to differ. BRAF activating
mutation is found in nearly all hairy cell leukemia cases, 4% of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and 9% CLL cases when including other
MAPK-activating mutations such as KRAS and NRAS. To assess
immunomodulatory effects of BRAF-mutant CLL cells, we co-cultured
dox-inducible OSU-CLL cells transfected with WT or BRAFV600E constructs
with healthy donor T cells incubated with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies,
and T cell proliferation, cytokine production and expression of surface
proteins were assessed by flow cytometry. We also employed a transgenic
mouse model of BRAF B cell leukemia. CD19-Cre x BRAFV600E or CD19-Cre
only mice were crossed with the well-characterized Emu-TCL1 model of CLL
to obtain mice with spontaneous B cell leukemia expressing either WT BRAF
(CD19-Cre xTCL1) or mutant BRAF (BRAFV600E xCD19-Cre xTCL1) under the
native BRAF promoter. For adoptive transfer (AT) experiments, leukemia
cells (2e7) from transgenic mice were engrafted intravenously into
syngeneic healthy adult animals. Blood and spleen cells were examined by
flow cytometry. OSU-CLL cells expressing BRAFV600E more strongly
inhibited anti-CD3/CD28-induced proliferation of normal donor T cells.
Transwell assays showed this effect was due both to soluble and
contact-dependent factors. TNF levels were higher in BRAFV600E-expressing
cells and reduced by vemurafenib, but a TNF neutralizing antibody did not
alter the inhibitory effect of BRAFV600E-expressing cells on T cell
proliferation. Proliferation was rescued by the BRAFV600E inhibitor
dabrafenib, further supporting the contribution of mutant BRAF to this
effect. Impact of BRAFV600E mutation on myeloid compartment was also
evaluated using AT model. Mice were engrafted with BRAFWT or BRAFV600E
leukemia cells, and upon achieving similar disease loads, BRAFV600E
leukemic B cells caused 2.2-fold increase in PD-L1 expressing-peripheral
myeloid cells (p<0.001; n=25 WT; 11 mutant). Additionally, there was an
increase in F4/80+ macrophages (11%; p=0.002), CD11b+Ly6CintLy6Ghi MDSCs
(8.5%, p=0.014) and decrease in CD11b+Ly6CloLy6Glo patrolling monocytes
(11%; p=0.031; n=33 WT; 40 mutant) in spleens of mice with BRAFV600E
leukemia, indicating that this mutation influences the myeloid cell
compartment as well. Ongoing studies are investigating the mechanism of
these effects and the potential for pharmacologic reversal. Together,
these results demonstrate immunosuppressive impact of BRAF in B-cell
leukemia.


