Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-148a-3p regulation of OTX2 and PRC2 in group 3 and 4
medulloblastoma.


Four different molecular subgroups are recognized in medulloblastoma
(MB). Among these subgroups, Group 3 and 4 tumors are the most aggressive
malignancies with few effective therapies. New therapies are likely to be
most effective if they target molecular alterations that mediate the
formation and growth of these malignancies.

We searched the public cancer microarray database Oncomine and found that
the expression of OTX2, c-Myc, polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2)
subunits EZH2 and SuZ12 are significantly higher in Groups 3 and 4 as
compared to the SHH subgroups. Moreover, Immunohistochemical staining of
a medulloblastoma tissue array showed that H3k27me3 expression is higher
in Group 3 and 4 compared with the SHH groups. These findings suggest
that these distinct molecular alterations could represent promising
therapeutic targets. In this study, we identify miRNAs with the potential
to serve as therapeutic agents for Groups 3 and 4 by targeting oncogene
pathway OTX2 and c-Myc as well as targeting PRC2 and modulating
H3k27me3-targeted tumor suppressors.

Using TargetScan, Pictar and miRanda prediction algorithms, miR-148a-3p
is predicted to target OTX2. We show that enforced miR-148a-3p potently
inhibits protein expression of OTX2 and c-Myc in medulloblastoma cells.
Luciferase reporter analysis shows that miR-148a-3p expression
downregulates OTX2 luciferase activities, and overexpressing OTX2 cDNA
that lack the respective 3â€™-UTR region recognized by miR-148a-3p
significantly rescues OTX2 downregulation by miR-148a-3p. Furthermore, we
show for the first time that enforced miR-148a-3p expression can
down-regulate the expression of the PRC2 methylase EZH2 and the PRC2
regulatory subunit SUZ12 in multiple MB cell lines. Conversely, silencing
endogenous miR-148a-3p expression up-regulates the expression of EZH2 and
SUZ12. Furthermore, enforced OTX2 expression attenuates the expression of
miR-148a-3p-downregulated PRC2 subunit EZh2 and Suz12. Consistent with
the effects of miR-148a-3p on EZH2 and SUZ12, miR-148a-3p was found to
modulate H3k27me3 levels and restore the expression of H3k27me3-targeted
tumor suppressors. We also show that enforced miR-148a-3p increases the
sensitivity of Group 3 and 4 medulloblastoma cells to radiation and
chemotherapy. Together, our findings show that miR-148a-3p has the
potential to modulate Group 3 and 4 medulluloblastoma malignancy and
chemo/radiation sensitivity by (1) reversing H3k27me3 modifications and
thereby potentially restoring tumor suppressor expression; and (2)
down-regulating OTX2 and leading to the inhibition of c-Myc-dependent
oncogenes.


