Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzyl isothiocyanate prevents breast cancer-induced bone erosion
in vivo.


Bone is one of the metastatic sites for advanced breast cancer. Nearly
70% of breast cancer patients experience metastasis to bone due to
enhanced osteoclastogenesis and formation of osteoclasts leading to bone
resorption. We have shown previously that benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC), a
constituent of edible cruciferous vegetables such as garden cress, is a
potent inhibitor of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. The present
study was designed to determine the effect of BITC on breast
cancer-induced osteoclastogenesis. Co-culture of murine RAW 264.7
macrophages with human breast cancer cells resulted in genesis of
osteoclasts in vitro that was suppressed significantly in the presence of
BITC. Runx2, a transcription factor, is abnormally expressed in breast
cancer and contributes to osteoclastogenesis by regulating receptor
activator of NF-ÎºB ligand (RANKL). BITC treatment downregulated
expression of Runx2 in breast cancer cells at the mRNA and protein
levels. Osteoclastogenesis was increased in Runx2 overexpressing
MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas conditional knockdown of Runx2 in T47D cells
attenuated this process. To determine the in vivo efficacy of BITC,
MDA-MB-231-Luc cells were injected into the left ventricle of nude mice.
BITC was administrated orally at 10 mg per kg body weight. Micro-CT X-ray
analysis showed that bone metastases and erosion was decreased by about
50% upon BITC treatment when compared with vehicle control. Cathepsin K
and total RANKL levels were lower in the plasma of BITC-treated mice when
compared to the control group. Altogether, this study demonstrates, for
the first time, that BITC is a potent inhibitor of breast cancer-induced
osteoclastogenesis in vivo. This study was supported by the grant RO1
CA129347-09 awarded by the national Cancer Institute.


