Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of WNT/b-catenin signaling results in resistance to
PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor in co-existing KRAS and PIK3CA mutant colorectal
cancer cells.


KRAS is a frequently mutated gene in colorectal cancer. In addition,
PIK3CA mutations commonly co-exist with KRAS mutations and lead to
additive activation of the PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway. Here, we
investigated preclinical activity of gedatolisib, a PI3K/mTOR dual
inhibitor, to identify mechanism of inhibition of PI3K/mTOR in 28
colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Cells specifically with PIK3CA mutation
were sensitive while those with KRAS mutation were resistant to
gedatolisib. 9 out of 28 CRC cells harbor PIK3CA & KRAS co-mutation and 7
out them were shown to be sensitive to gedatolisib. However, HCT15 and
LS174T cells were resistant. We identified that resistant cell lines have
high activity of GSK3B and TCF7 frameshift mutation
(465insertC466;H155fs*), which functions as positive regulator of
WNT/b-catenin pathway. The effects of GSK3B-knockdown showed decreased
activity of mTOR downstream molecules in gedatolisib-treated resistant
cells. Interestingly, these effects also caused a decrease in activity of
WNT/b-catenin pathway. In addition, combination treatment of gedatolisib
and CHIR-99021, GSK3B inhibitor, resulted in significantly enhanced
cytotoxicity against gedatolisib-resistant TCF7 frameshift mutant cells.
Taken together, these show that aberrant regulation of WNT/b-catenin
pathway and high activity of GSK3B by TCF7 frameshift mutation cause
resistance to PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor. Inhibition of GSK3B activity in
colorectal cancer cells with KRAS and PIK3CA co-mutations increases
sensitivity to PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor.


