Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The binding mode of the bispecific anti-HER2xHER3 antibody
MCLA-128 is responsible for its potent inhibition of HRG-driven
tumorigenesis.


Introduction: MCLA-128 is as an ADCC-enhanced IgG1 bispecific antibody
that targets the HER2:HER3 dimer and is currently being tested in Phase
I/II clinical trials. MCLA-128 demonstrates an in vitro potency superior
to other anti-HER2 and anti-HER3 antibodies in cells stimulated with high
concentrations of heregulin (HRG) thereby overcoming one of the
resistance mechanisms of current HER2 therapies. This study investigates
the binding mode of MCLA-128 and proof of concept studies in HRG-driven
tumor models. Methods: Alanine scanning shotgun mutagenesis was used to
map the epitopes of MCLA-128 to HER2 and HER3. Fab fragments of MCLA-128
were crystallized with the soluble extracellular domains of HER2 and
HER3. SAXS analysis on the HER2-HER3-MCLA-128 complex was performed to
investigate the binding mode of the bispecific antibody in solution.
Ligand-induced dimer specificity was investigated with PathHunterÂ®
heterodimerization assays. Bispecific anti-HER2xHER3 antibody and its
parental anti-HER3 monoclonal antibody were labelled with 64Cu to compare
their biodistribution profiles. The efficacy of MCLA-128 in HRG-driven
systems was shown in vitro in MDA-MB-175 cells and in vivo in an
orthotopic intracranial patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model originating
from a breast cancer brain metastasis Results: The shotgun mutagenesis
study identified that the bispecific antibody MCLA-128 binds amino acids
T144, R166, R181 in HER2 domain I and R426 in HER3 domain III.
Crystallographic studies confirmed the involvement of these critical
residues and suggested that MCLA-128 locks the HER3 receptor in its
ligand-unbound inactive confirmation. SAXS analysis suggests that the
bispecific antibody MCLA-128 forms inter-dimer rather than intra-dimer
interactions. In vitro, MCLA-128 specifically blocked HRG-induced
signaling of HER2:HER3 but not HER2:HER4 heterodimers. Biodistribution of
MCLA-128 in a xenograft model of breast cancer showed that the
penetration of MCLA-128 in JIMT-1 HER2-amplified tumors is HER2-dependent
despite the high affinity of the HER3 Fab arm for its receptor. MCLA-128
efficiently blocked tumor growth of the HRG-driven HER2 (1+) breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-175 in 3D in vitro. Treatment of orthotopically
transplanted HER2-amplified breast cancer brain tumors in mice led to
100% survival with MCLA-128, in contrast to 38% and 0% survival in T-DM1
and vehicle treated mice respectively. Conclusion: MCLA-128 targets
HER2-positive tumors via its HER2 arm and locks HER3 in an inactive
confirmation. The potent anti-proliferative activity of MCLA-128 in vitro
and in vivo supports the clinical development of this bispecific
HER2xHER3 antibody in HRG-driven tumors.


