Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of cell cycle genes in HNSCC by erufosine.


Head and neck cancer ranks amongst the sixth most prevalent cancers
worldwide and oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) constitute 90%
thereof. Erufosine is an ether-lipid-derived synthetic compound belonging
to alkylphosphocholines (APCs), which has been shown to inhibit the
proliferation of OSCC cells. It simultaneously induces apoptosis and
autophagy by modulating the Akt-mTOR signaling pathway, however, its
exact mechanism of action is not fully understood. Here, we describe the
activity of erufosine on the expression of cell cycle related genes in
OSCC cells.

The anti-proliferative effect of erufosine in cells of two human OSCC
cell lines, HN-5 and SCC-61, was determined by MTT assay after 24h, 48h
and 72h exposure. Based on these results, HN-5 cells were exposed to
erufosine at concentrations corresponding to IC25, IC50 and IC75
concentrations, and then their mRNA was isolated and analyzed by Illumina
Chip array. Gene expression modulation was confirmed qRT-PCR and Western
blot. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed to identify core KEGG
(Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways and GO (Gene Ontology)
terms. In addition, erufosineâ€™s effect on cell cycle distribution and
colony formation was determined as well as its antineoplastic effect on
respective xenografts in nude mice.

As shown from TCGA data, cell cycle deregulation in HNSCC ranks amongst
the top three out of 24 different types of cancers. In line with this,
the median expression of cell cycle genes was higher than that of other
genes within HNSCC. We also looked at the median gene expression of all
CDKs and cyclins in 519 HNSCC patient samples from TCGA and found that
the expression levels were higher than the global gene expression. This
was in agreement with IHC staining of CCND1 in tumors from 30 South East
Asian HNSCC patients. Furthermore, increased CCND1 and CDK6 expression
levels from TCGA data had negative implication on patient survival. In
our experimental results erufosine caused a dose dependent growth
inhibition of OSCC cell lines and negative enrichment of genes related to

the cell cycle process. Our microarray findings revealed that cyclins and
CDKs were downregulated in a dose dependent manner in response to
erufosine exposure. These findings were verified at both, mRNA and
protein levels. Erufosine not only caused a massive G2M block but also
inhibition of colony formation thus preparing the OSCC cells to undergo
apoptosis. We are the first to show that erufosine inhibited tumor growth
in vivo in a HNSCC xenograft model and caused downregulation of cyclinD1,
CDK4 and CDK6 in lesions of the animals.

These findings collectively show the potential of erufosine to be used as
a cell cycle inhibitor in HNSCC progression and support the future
evaluation of erufosine as a therapeutic approach in cancer treatment
alone, or in combination.


