Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Src signaling mediates acquired resistance to ALK
inhibition in lung cancer.


Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion oncogenes occur in around 3%-5%
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cases. Various ALK inhibitors are in
clinical use for the treatment of ALK-NSCLC, including the first
generation ALK inhibitor, Crizotinib, and recently the more highly potent
Alectinib and Ceritinib. However, most tumors eventually become resistant
to ALK specific inhibitors. To address the mechanisms underlying the
development of ALK inhibitor resistance, we used iTRAQ quantitative mass
spectrometry and phosphor-receptor tyrosine kinase arrays to investigate
intracellular signaling alterations in ALK inhibitor resistant NSCLC cell
lines. Src signaling was identified as an Alectinib resistance mechanism,
and combination treatment with ALK and Src inhibitors was highly
effective for inhibiting the growth of ALK inhibitor resistant cells in
vitro and in mouse xenograft models. Furthermore, phospho-receptor
tyrosine kinase activation and downstream PI3K/AKT signaling was
effectively blocked by inhibiting Src in Alectinib resistant cells.
Finally, we showed that the combined use of ALK and Src inhibitors
inhibited the growth of other ALK-NSCLC cell lines, including those that
were Ceritinib or Lorlatinib resistant. Our data suggest that targeting
Src signaling may be an effective approach to the treatment of
ALKâ€“NSCLC with acquired resistance to ALK inhibitors.


