Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumors with class 3 BRAF mutants are sensitive to the inhibition
of activated RAS.


Approximately two hundred mutant BRAF alleles have been identified in
human tumors. Physiologic activation of RAF isoforms requires
RAS-dependent induction of their dimerization. Activating BRAF mutants
cause ERK dependent feedback inhibition of RAS.GTP and are RAS
independent. As we have shown previously, they signal either as active
monomers or RAS-independent constitutively active dimers. Here, we
characterized a third class of BRAF mutantsâ€”those that have impaired
kinase activity or are kinase dead. These class 3 BRAF mutants are
sensitive to ERK-mediated feedback and they function in a RAS-dependent
manner. In tumors, they bind more tightly to active RAS, thus enhancing
their heterodimerization with CRAF. This is associated with the
amplification of RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling.

Since these mutants are sensitive to ERK-dependent feedback inhibition of
RAS, their enhancement of ERK signaling in tumors requires concurrent
dysregulation of RAS activation. Thus, melanomas with Class 3 mutations
usually harbor coexistent RAS mutation or NF1 mutants/deletion, whereas
receptor tyrosine kinase signaling is activated in lung and colorectal
cancers with these mutants. Our model suggests that these tumors will be
sensitive to the inhibition of RAS activation. Currently, no direct
inhibitors of RAS activation are available. However, in support of this
idea, inhibitors of activated RTK signaling in carcinomas with Class 3
BRAF mutants and wild type RAS is sufficient to markedly inhibit ERK
signaling and their growth in in vivo murine models and in patients. We
have thus defined a third subset of BRAF mutants, which is RAS-dependent.
Tumors harboring such mutants are sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
in tumors expressing wild type RAS and NF1.


