Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary flavonoids, CYP1A1 genetic variants, and the risk of
colorectal cancer.


The role of dietary flavonoid intake in colorectal carcinogenesis might
differ according to flavonoid subclasses and individual genetic variants
related to carcinogen metabolism. Therefore, we examined whether greater
habitual dietary intake of flavonoid subclasses was associated with a
lower risk of colorectal cancer and whether CYP1A1 genetic variants
altered this association. A semi-quantitative food frequency
questionnaire was used to assess the dietary intake of six flavonoid
subclasses (flavonols, flavonones, flavanones, flavan-3-ols,
anthocyanidins, and isoflavones) in 923 patients with colorectal cancer
and 1,846 controls; furthermore, CYP1A1 genetic variants (rs4646903 and
rs1048943) were genotyped. A logistic regression was used to investigate
dietary flavonoid intake, CYP1A1 genetic variants, and their interaction
in relation to colorectal cancer risk. Among the subclasses of
flavonoids, flavonols (OR [95% CI] = 0.10 [0.06, 0.16], highest vs.
lowest quartile) and flavan-3-ols (OR [95% CI] = 0.54 [0.41, 0.71],
highest vs. lowest quartile) were significantly associated with
colorectal cancer risk after adjusting for confounders. Homozygous
variants of CYP1A1 rs4646903 showed a protective effect on the risk of
rectal cancer (OR [95% CI] = 0.60 [0.37, 0.96], CC vs. TT/TC). Carriers
of the CC homozygous variant with high flavonol intake showed a greater
decrease in colorectal cancer risk compared with T allele carriers with
low flavonol intake (P for interaction = 0.02), particularly regarding
rectal cancer (P for interaction = 0.005). In conclusion, the effect of
dietary flavonoid intake on colorectal cancer risk differs by flavonoid
subclasses and CYP1A1 genetic variants.


