Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tbata induces G2/M cell cycle arrest and sensitizes osteosarcoma
cells to etoposide in a p53-independent manner.


Thymus, brain, and testes-associated (Tbata) is a negative control
cell-cycle gene highly expressed in murine thymic epithelial cells
(TECs). Tbata protein binds to Uba3, inhibiting formation of Nedd8 E1 and
subsequent target degradation via neddylation of several cell cycle
control proteins needed for G2/M transition, which may be a major
mechanism of TEC growth arrest during thymic involution. Etoposide is a
cytotoxic drug which targets the enzyme toposimerase II â€” increased 2-3
fold during the G2 phase. To further characterize effect of Tbata on the
cell cycle, we modified p53 wild-type U2OS cells derived from human
osteosarcoma to express a Tbata/mCherry fusion protein when mifepristone
is added to culture media. Tbata-expressing cells identified on flow
cytometry did exhibit growth arrest, with quantitative assessment of DNA
content in U2OS cells by flow cytometry establishing that 32% of
Tbata/mCherry-expressing cells were in the G2 phase when exposed to
mifepristone for 24 hours, compared to 11% of mCherry-expressing cells.
Gene expression studies were consistent with these results. Cells
expressing Tbata/mCherry were also more sensitive to etoposide at 0.5, 1,
and 5 times the IC50 dose. To test whether p53 function was required, we
further modified the cells to overexpress a dominant negative p53 mutant
along with Tbata/mCherry. Similar G2 arrest and increased sensitivity to
etoposide were observed, indicating that the effects of Tbata did not
require normal p53 function. Potential Tbata analogues or mimetics may
therefore be used as an adjunct to G2-targeted chemotherapy.


