Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intestinal microbiota may dynamically facilitate the anti-PD-L1
immunotherapy.


Cancer immunotherapies, e.g. the antibody against programmed death ligand
1 (PD-L1), a checkpoint inhibitor, have witnessed great successes in
treating certain cancers in recent years. Recent data have also
demonstrated that gut microbiota are important modulators on anticancer
immunotherapy1,2. Heterogeneity in patient outcome seems to suggest
complex communications between microbiota and host antitumor immunity. To
this end, we tested an engineered chimeric MC38 mouse cell line,
hPDL1-MC38-HuCELL™ via human PD-L1 knock-in procedure, where MC38 CRC
syngeneic cell is derived from C57BL/6. After treatment of PD-L1
antibodies (cD7A8 and BMS PD-L1 of different dose regimens), we observed
significantly different drug responses among the mice from three
different Chinese rodent suppliers: the mice from Vendor 1 showed no
tumor progression after treatment with a variety of doses while no
favorable response was observed in mice from Vendor 2 and Vendor 3. To
deeply study the gut microbiota of these mice, we performed 16S ribosomal
RNA sequencing on untreated mice from three groups (5 replicates for
each). Global diversity analysis by Quantitative Insights Into Microbial
Ecology (QIIME) tool revealed a clear separation in the three sources of
mice: the microbiota composition of Vendor 2 and Vendor 1 are relatively
closer to each other whereas the Vendor 3 mice are different, suggesting
that the main difference seen between Vendor 1/2 and 3 in the original
composition of gut microbiota is not the key impact for the observed
anti-PD-L1 efficacy, and there should be other complex dynamics impacted
anti-PD-L1 treatment, which remains unknown. Moreover, a group of 27 taxa
were identified with significant difference in abundance (Kruskal-Wallis
test, p-value Cancer immunotherapies, e.g. the antibody against
programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), a checkpoint inhibitor, have witnessed
great successes in treating certain cancers in recent years. Recent data
have also demonstrated that gut microbiota are important modulators on
anticancer immunotherapy1,2. Heterogeneity in patient outcome seems to
suggest complex communications between microbiota and host antitumor
immunity. To this end, we tested an engineered chimeric MC38 mouse cell
line, hPDL1-MC38-HuCELL™ via human PD-L1 knock-in procedure, where MC38
CRC syngeneic cell is derived from C57BL/6. After treatment of PD-L1
antibodies (cD7A8 and BMS PD-L1 of different dose regimens), we observed
significantly different drug responses among the mice from three
different Chinese rodent suppliers: the mice from Vendor 1 showed no
tumor progression after treatment with a variety of doses while no
favorable response was observed in mice from Vendor 2 and Vendor 3. To
deeply study the gut microbiota of these mice, we performed 16S ribosomal
RNA sequencing on untreated mice from three groups (5 replicates for
each). Global diversity analysis by Quantitative Insights Into Microbial
Ecology (QIIME) tool revealed a clear separation in the three sources of
mice: the microbiota composition of Vendor 2 and Vendor 1 are relatively
closer to each other whereas the Vendor 3 mice are different, suggesting
that the main difference seen between Vendor 1/2 and 3 in the original
composition of gut microbiota is not the key impact for the observed
anti-PD-L1 efficacy, and there should be other complex dynamics impacted
anti-PD-L1 treatment, which remains unknown. Moreover, a group of 27 taxa
were identified with significant difference in abundance (Kruskal-Wallis
test, p-value < 0.05) across the groups, such as Bacteroidaceae,
Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae, which confirmed the previous data1.
In conclusion, intestinal microbiota dynamically facilitate anti-PD-L1
efficacy and reversely anti-PD-L1 treatment could influence
reconstruction of gut microbiota.

References 1. Sivan A, et al. Commensal Bifidobacterium promotes
antitumor immunity and facilitates anti-PD-L1 efficacy. Science
2015;350(6264):1084-9. 2. Vétizou M, et al., Anticancer immunotherapy by
CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota. Science
2015;350(6264):1079-84. 3. Caporaso JG, et al., QIIME allows analysis of
high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat Methods. 2010;7(5):335-6.


