Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the selective FGFR 1, 2 and 3 inhibitor INCB054828 in
genetically-defined models of triple-negative breast cancer.


Activation of the Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF)-FGF Receptor (FGFR)
signaling axis occurs in many human cancers. In preclinical models, cell
lines with genetic aberrations in FGF/FGFR genes are preferentially
inhibited by compounds that selectively target the FGFR kinase. INCB54828
is a potent, selective, and reversible inhibitor of FGFR1, 2 and 3 that
is currently in Phase 2 clinical trials for advanced malignancies
characterized by FGF-FGFR alterations. In this study, we investigated the
efficacy of INCB054828 in models of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).

FGFR1 and FGFR2 are amplified in approximately 4% and 5% of TNBC,
respectively, and oncogenic fusion proteins including FGFR3-TACC3 have
also been identified in some TNBC specimens. To profile the activity of
INCB054828, we screened a panel of diverse TNBC cell lines that are
representative of each of the four subtypes of TNBC. Three human TNBC
lines MFM223, SUM185 and SUM52PE were highly sensitive to INCB054828 in
viability assays. Each of these responsive cell lines has a known
alteration in FGFR, whereas TNBC lines lacking any aberrations in
FGF/FGFR genes were refractory to growth inhibition. Inhibition of cell
viability was associated with suppression of growth promoting pathways
including Ras-MAPK. To confirm this association in vivo, four PDX models
of TNBC were tested: two chemo-refractory models with FGFR1 amplification
(CNV = 4 and 6) and two without any known FGF/FGFR alterations. Both of
the models with FGFR1 copy number gain showed a response to INCB054828 as
monotherapy with 36 and 78% tumor growth inhibition that was
statistically significant vs vehicle control (PFGFR1 and FGFR2 are
amplified in approximately 4% and 5% of TNBC, respectively, and oncogenic
fusion proteins including FGFR3-TACC3 have also been identified in some
TNBC specimens. To profile the activity of INCB054828, we screened a
panel of diverse TNBC cell lines that are representative of each of the
four subtypes of TNBC. Three human TNBC lines MFM223, SUM185 and SUM52PE
were highly sensitive to INCB054828 in viability assays. Each of these
responsive cell lines has a known alteration in FGFR, whereas TNBC lines
lacking any aberrations in FGF/FGFR genes were refractory to growth
inhibition. Inhibition of cell viability was associated with suppression
of growth promoting pathways including Ras-MAPK. To confirm this
association in vivo, four PDX models of TNBC were tested: two
chemo-refractory models with FGFR1 amplification (CNV = 4 and 6) and two
without any known FGF/FGFR alterations. Both of the models with FGFR1
copy number gain showed a response to INCB054828 as monotherapy with 36
and 78% tumor growth inhibition that was statistically significant vs
vehicle control (P<0.05 and pFGFR1 and FGFR2 are amplified in
approximately 4% and 5% of TNBC, respectively, and oncogenic fusion
proteins including FGFR3-TACC3 have also been identified in some TNBC
specimens. To profile the activity of INCB054828, we screened a panel of
diverse TNBC cell lines that are representative of each of the four
subtypes of TNBC. Three human TNBC lines MFM223, SUM185 and SUM52PE were
highly sensitive to INCB054828 in viability assays. Each of these
responsive cell lines has a known alteration in FGFR, whereas TNBC lines
lacking any aberrations in FGF/FGFR genes were refractory to growth
inhibition. Inhibition of cell viability was associated with suppression
of growth promoting pathways including Ras-MAPK. To confirm this
association in vivo, four PDX models of TNBC were tested: two
chemo-refractory models with FGFR1 amplification (CNV = 4 and 6) and two
without any known FGF/FGFR alterations. Both of the models with FGFR1
copy number gain showed a response to INCB054828 as monotherapy with 36
and 78% tumor growth inhibition that was statistically significant vs
vehicle control (P<0.05 and p<0.001, respectively). At the maximally
efficacious dose of 1 mg/kg daily, neither PDX model lacking FGF/FGFR
alteration responded to the treatment. Finally to assess the effect of
the microenvironment on drug sensitivity, mouse 4T1 breast cancer cells
were orthotopically implanted into the mammary fat pad; under these
conditions, 4T1 tumors retained sensitivity to a standard dose of
INCB054828. In summary these results demonstrate that the FGFR1/2/3
inhibitor INCB054828 is highly active against models of TNBC with genetic
alterations in FGFR genes, and confirms the importance of patient
stratification strategies for clinical trials with FGFR targeted
therapies.


