Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paradigm to ensure curation transparency and consistency of a
cancer genomic database - the JAX Clinical Knowledgebase (CKB).


In the era of personalized medicine, comprehensive cancer genomic
databases represent critical tools for interpreting gene variants and
their relevant therapies. As the number of cancer genomic databases grow,
it is challenging for users to compare and assess the data integrity and
validity of such databases. The lack of disclosure of curation processes
makes it difficult to cross reference different databases. The JAX
Clinical Knowledgebase (CKB) is a comprehensive relational database
providing evidence-based information on gene variants, targeted
therapies, efficacy evidence, and clinical trials. At the Jackson
Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, we have developed a curation paradigm to
ensure curation transparency and consistency of the JAX-CKB. First, to
ensure standardization of nomenclature, we have integrated standard
nomenclature and ontologies, including HGNC approved nomenclatures for
genes, HGVS guidelines for variants, and the Disease Ontology for
indications/tumor types. Second, we implemented decision matrices to
maintain uniformity of our evaluation of scientific and clinical data.
For example, evaluation of the effect of gene variants on protein
function is solely based on changes in the intrinsic activity of the
protein instead of downstream pathway activation or the effects on
pathogenesis; the response type of gene variants to therapies are
classified based on the evidence of targeting specificity; and the
efficacy evidence are further classified as actionable, diagnostic,
prognostic, risk factor, emerging, or not active centered on the response
type and the strength of the evidence. Third, to provide convenient
evaluation of the clinical relevance of efficacy data, we further
developed a tier ranking system based on emerging consensus guidelines,
which takes response type, evidence type, and approval status into
consideration. Finally, all decision matrices are clearly outlined on the
JAX-CKB open access website for usersâ€™ reference. In summary, we have
curated a highly structured and semantically consistent cancer genomic
database following a set of specific curation guidelines. As a result,
JAX-CKB open access has become a valuable resource for both the clinical
and research communities, and is utilized by numerous independent groups
for variant interpretation.


