Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of the different treatments on the survival of advanced
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains one of the leading
cause of cancer-related death in China. Moreover, more than 90% of the
ESCC patients have been in the advanced stage when diagnosed, the 5-year
survival is very poor even though the medical techniques have been
improved in the past decades. Although the accumulated evidences have
suggested the crucial role of genetic changes in esophageal
carcinogenesis, the target therapy based on these genetic changes is
largely in the very beginning, and radical esophagectomy and
radiochemotherapy remain the chief choice for ESCC treatment at present.
The present study was thus designed to evaluate the efficacy of the
present treatment methods in China to provide more information for
optimal choice in advanced ESCC treatment. The enrolled 20,712 ESCC
patients in this study were from the ESCC database in Henan Key
Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer Research of the First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhengzhou University. Of the patients, there were 12,818 males
with a mean age of 59.59±8.2 and 7,894 females with a mean age of
60.34±8.3. All the 20,712 patients were confirmed by histopathology as
ESCC at II to IV stage (advanced stage) and classified into three groups
based on the treatment methods: radical esophagectomy (R0) alone (17,577,
84.8%), R0 plus radiochemotherapy (2,510, 12.1%) and radiochemotherapy
alone (625, 3.1%). The followed-up was undertaken until 2016. The
SPSS21.0 software and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Log Rank test
were used to evaluate the efficiency of different treatments. The results
demonstrated that the overall median survival time for the three groups
was 5.81 years, 4.82 years and 2.85 years, respectively (PEsophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remains one of the leading cause of
cancer-related death in China. Moreover, more than 90% of the ESCC
patients have been in the advanced stage when diagnosed, the 5-year
survival is very poor even though the medical techniques have been
improved in the past decades. Although the accumulated evidences have
suggested the crucial role of genetic changes in esophageal
carcinogenesis, the target therapy based on these genetic changes is
largely in the very beginning, and radical esophagectomy and
radiochemotherapy remain the chief choice for ESCC treatment at present.
The present study was thus designed to evaluate the efficacy of the
present treatment methods in China to provide more information for
optimal choice in advanced ESCC treatment. The enrolled 20,712 ESCC
patients in this study were from the ESCC database in Henan Key
Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer Research of the First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhengzhou University. Of the patients, there were 12,818 males
with a mean age of 59.59±8.2 and 7,894 females with a mean age of
60.34±8.3. All the 20,712 patients were confirmed by histopathology as
ESCC at II to IV stage (advanced stage) and classified into three groups
based on the treatment methods: radical esophagectomy (R0) alone (17,577,
84.8%), R0 plus radiochemotherapy (2,510, 12.1%) and radiochemotherapy
alone (625, 3.1%). The followed-up was undertaken until 2016. The
SPSS21.0 software and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Log Rank test
were used to evaluate the efficiency of different treatments. The results
demonstrated that the overall median survival time for the three groups
was 5.81 years, 4.82 years and 2.85 years, respectively (P<0.001).
Moreover, compared with surgery alone, R0 plus radiochemotherapy did not
prolong survival of the advanced patients. Obviously, much efforts,
especially combined with genetic application are much desirable to
improve the survival for the advanced ESCC patients. [Supported by
National High-Tech Research and Development Program of China
(SQ2015AA0202183), Project for Characteristic and Advantage Discipline of
Henan Province (20151208) and Correspondence to: Li Dong Wang, Email:
ldwang2007@126.com]


