Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PID1, a candidate tumor suppressor in pediatric and adult brain
tumors, is a novel interacting partner for a cell surface receptor.


BACKGROUND: PID1 is higher in fat from obese patients and is an inhibitor
of insulin receptor signaling. We reported that PID1 is a novel inhibitor
of medulloblastoma and glioma cell growth, and its mRNA level is highly
correlated with survival across multiple independent datasets of these
tumors. PID1 harbors a phosphotyrosine binding domain and is predicted to
interact with proteins harboring NPXY motifs. We therefore hypothesized
that PID1 will interact with phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domain
containing protein(s) that may be important in brain tumors, and will
modulate its/their signaling. Here we report PID1 interactions with one
of these proteins and determine its biological consequences.

METHODS: Experiments consisted of immunoprecipitations, transient
transfections, and western blotting. Functionally, assays included cell
culture, flow cytometry for proliferation using BrdU/7AAD and apoptosis
using AnnexinV/7AAD. Plasmids were pCMV-AN-HA-PID1(2) or control or the
protein of interest in pcDNA3.1. Cell lines used were glioblastoma,
medulloblastoma, atypical teratoid rhabdoid (ATRT), HEK293, and cells
deficient or intact in PID1.

RESULTS: We demonstrate co-immunoprecipitation of PID1 with a receptor
that is considered important in cancer. Immunoprecipitation was both in
HEK293T cells overexpressing both proteins and in native brain tumor cell
lines with/without overexpression. While tyrosine in the NPXY motifs was
not required for the interaction, mutating the kinase domain of the
receptor or overall inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation impaired the
interaction with PID1. Different domains in PID1 differentially
co-immunoprecipitated with the receptor. Interestingly, mouse embryo
fibroblasts without PID1 showed increased growth factor-dependent
tyrosine phosphorylation of this protein and increased growth
factor-induced proliferation. Identity of the receptor will be disclosed
at the meeting.

CONCLUSIONS: These data point to PID1 as a novel interacting partner and
regulator of this receptorâ€™s biological effects and signaling in brain
tumors.


