Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma inhibitory activity (PIA) is a possible pharmacodynamic
marker for clinical development of a next generation pan-TRK inhibitor,
ONO-5390556.


Background: Colorectal cancer and Mammary analogue secretory carcinoma
harboring Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK/TRK) gene
rearrangements developed resistance to Entrectinib, ALK/ROS/TRK
inhibitor. We previously demonstrated that the next generation pan-TRK
inhibitor,ONO-5390556 may potently overcome Entrectinib-resistance
mutations. Furthermore, inhibition of Trk phosphorylation in tumors has
excellent correlation with the in vivo anti-tumor effect by ONO-5390556
(AACR2016, Kozaki et al). Purpose: Accurate measurement of target
inhibition in a phase 1 clinical trial is critical to informing selection
of appropriate doses for ONO-5390556 in more advanced clinical trials.
Plasma inhibitory activity (PIA) assay has recently been performed as a
surrogate assay in clinical trials of FLT3, MET and ALK kinase
inhibitors. The assay employs the incubation of Tyrosine Kinase
expressing cell lines in aliquots of plasma collected at various time
points from patients treated with TKI. Herein, we report the preclinical
evaluation of PIA assay in accordance with an inhibition of TRK
phosphorylation in tumors. Methods: KM12 cells, human colorectal cancer
cell lines expressing TPM3-TRKA, were implanted subcutaneously into nude
mice. Mice were randomized when the mean tumor volume was 150-600 mm3.
Tumors and blood were collected from mice, 2, 4, 7 and 24 hours after the
single treatment of ONO-5390556 with the doses of 0.06 and 0.6 mg/kg. The
collected tumors were disrupted and phosphorylated TrkA in tumors was
detected by Electrochemiluminescence (ECL). In a PIA assay, KM12 was
incubated in plasma from the collected blood for 4 hours and
phosphorylated TrkA in the cells was detected by ECL.. Results: Treatment
with ONO-5390556 at doses of 0.06, 0.6 mg/kg resulted in a significant
inhibition of Trk phosphorylation in tumors up to 24 hours. Compared to
inhibition of P-TRK in tumors, the inhibition of P-TRK in PIA sustained
until 7 hours but rapidly decreased at 24 hours after administration. The
levels of both tumors and PIA showed in a dose-dependent inhibition and
an excellent correlation until 7 hours. Inhibition of TRK phosphorylation
(PIA/Tumor, %)0.06 mg/kg (2,4,7,24h) : 56.3/41.4 (PIA/Tumor, %),
51.9/53.5, 43.0/66.5, -5.5/51.30.6 mg/kg (2,4,7,24h) : 90.2/84.3,
88.4/93.0, 87.4/95.7, 8.3/83.3Conclusion: We have validated the PIA assay
that correlates with the inhibition of P-TRK in tumors. Our results
demonstrated that the potential utility of PIA as a PD marker may
contribute to determining the effective dose of ONO-5390556 in the
clinical development.


