Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A flow-based immunoprofiling strategy for interrogating
system-wide leukocyte composition in response to glioblastoma.


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a deadly brain cancer that suppresses cellular
immunity through the production of anti-inflammatory
cytokines/catabolites, expression of immune checkpoint molecules, and
induction of tolerogenic immune cell subsets. While preclinical models
have shown each of these mechanisms to negatively impact survival
outcome, it remains unclear how these distinct processes manifest
themselves within the context of a coordinated immune system and whether
additional immunosuppressive mechanisms exist. To address these
questions, we have developed an extensible in vivo screening platform to
holistically determine how GBM affects cellular immune organization. The
method allows for temporal assessment of leukocyte population dynamics in
response to tumor progression. Leukocytes derived from lymphoid tissues
of tumor-bearing mice are isolated and immunolabeled with a 12-color
optimized immunofluorescence panel (OMIP) targeting several major
leukocyte lineages. Single-cell data is acquired by flow cytometry and is
clustered in an unsupervised manner based on cell-surface protein
expression. A vector-based classification system is then used to map
phenotypically distinct clusters onto known immune cell lineages. The
platform allows for the extraction of immune signatures whose divergence
from tumor-na√Øve standards may be quantified and statistically analyzed;
such signatures may also be correlated with response/resistance to
therapy. The approach has been validated on orthotopic GL261 glioma in
syngeneic C57BL6/J mice, yet it is readily amenable to the study of
diverse model systems, including de novo tumors driven by
clinically-relevant oncogenes. Alternative flow cytometry antibody panels
may easily be substituted to probe more specific immune cell subsets of
interest. Systems biology approaches applied to the field of
tumor-induced immunosuppression hold promise in identifying novel
network-level immune signatures, facilitating a better understanding of
immunotherapeutic drug action, and driving next generation
high-dimensional biomarker discovery.


