Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants related to longer telomere length are associated
with increased risk of renal cell carcinoma.


Telomere length in peripheral blood leukocytes has been evaluated as a
potential biomarker for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) risk in numerous
observational studies, but association results have been inconsistent.
These findings may have been affected by several limitations, including
bias from reverse causation, reliance on a single blood specimen,
residual confounding or measurement outside of the etiologically relevant
time period. Germline genetic variations associated with leukocyte
telomere length are not affected by an individual’s exposure to
confounders and may act as unconfounded markers of the relationship
between telomere length and RCC risk. We performed an analysis of genetic
variants associated with leukocyte telomere length to assess the
relationship between telomere length and RCC risk. Genotypes from nine
telomere length associated variants were aggregated for 10,785 RCC cases
and 21,579 cancer-free controls. We found that the number of telomere
length variants associated with RCC risk (P-valueTelomere length in
peripheral blood leukocytes has been evaluated as a potential biomarker
for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) risk in numerous observational studies,
but association results have been inconsistent. These findings may have
been affected by several limitations, including bias from reverse
causation, reliance on a single blood specimen, residual confounding or
measurement outside of the etiologically relevant time period. Germline
genetic variations associated with leukocyte telomere length are not
affected by an individual’s exposure to confounders and may act as
unconfounded markers of the relationship between telomere length and RCC
risk. We performed an analysis of genetic variants associated with
leukocyte telomere length to assess the relationship between telomere
length and RCC risk. Genotypes from nine telomere length associated
variants were aggregated for 10,785 RCC cases and 21,579 cancer-free
controls. We found that the number of telomere length variants associated
with RCC risk (P-value<0.05) was significantly higher than what would be
expected by chance (5/9 variants, binomial P-value=3.32×10−5). We
aggregated the telomere length associated variants into a weighted
genetic risk score (GRS), where one GRS unit equals to an inferred one Kb
change in telomere length. Genetically inferred telomere length was
associated with an increased risk of RCC (OR=2.07, 95% CI=1.70-2.52,
P-value=7.14×10−13). This association was consistent across increasing
deciles of telomere length GRS (Trend P-value=5.58×10−12). As a
sensitivity analysis, we removed two telomere length variants in linkage
disequilibrium with RCC genome-wide associated regions (rs10936599 and
rs9420907) from the telomere length GRS, the association with RCC risk
remained statistically significant (OR=1.73, 95% CI=1.35-2.20,
P-value=1.07×10−5). When performing analyses by RCC subtype (clear
cell=5,574 cases, papillary=573 cases and chromophobe=203 cases), all
subtypes investigated showed positive GRS effect estimates, suggesting
higher risk for longer telomeres, however, due to limited sample sizes
the estimates were only significant for clear cell (OR=1.93, 95%
CI=1.50-2.49, P-value=3.79×10−7) and papillary subtypes (OR=1.96, 95%
CI=1.01-3.81, P-value=0.046). In conclusion, our results suggest a
genetic background that favors longer telomeres is associated with
increased RCC risk.


