Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening and identification of new generation glucose transporter
inhibitors as anticancer therapeutics.


Cancer is a top killer second only to cardiovascular diseases. Cellular
metabolic reprogramming and altered energetics are key features of
cancer. Opportunistic uptake of extracellular nutrients has recently been
named as an emerging hallmark of cancer metabolism. Glucose is a key
nutrient taken in by cancer cells for satisfying their high energy and
biosynthesis needs. Drastic upregulation of glucose uptake and glycolytic
activity, a phenomenon called the Warburg effect, is prevalent in
cancers. Cancer cells overexpress specific glucose transporters (Gluts),
particularly Glut1, on cell membranes for taking in glucose via
facilitated diffusion. Considering the addiction of cancer cells for
glucose and their sensitivity and vulnerability to changes in glucose
supply, Gluts, especially Glut1, have been recognized as an attractive
anticancer target. We previously reported the identification of first
generation lead Glut1 inhibitor WZB117 (1). WZB117 treatment of human
nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) A549 cells resulted in inhibition of
glucose uptake, glycolysis and induction of apoptosis and necrosis. In
addition, WZB-117 reduced tumor growth by ~70% in an A549 tumor mouse
model. WZB117 inhibit cell growth of 7 cancer cell lines in 4 cancer
types with IC50 values lower than 10 Î¼M. Through a structure activity
relationship (SAR) study of WZB117, a second generation lead, DRB18, has
been identified. DRB-18 is much more stable and 5 to 10 times more potent
than WZB117 in inhibiting growth and proliferation in about 90% of the 60
different cancer cell lines in 9 major cancer types as revealed in NCI-60
screenings. And its IC50s in many cancer cell lines are in the high nM
range. In this study, we also report new compounds screening results for
the objective of identifying novel compounds with higher glucose
transport-inhibitory and cancer cell growth-inhibitory activities using
nonsmall cell lung cancer cell lines as models. References: 1. Liu, Y.,
Cao, Y., Zhang, W., Bergmeier, S., Qian, Y., Akbar, H., Colvin, R., Ding,
J., Tong, L., Wu, S. and Hines, J., 2012. A small-molecule inhibitor of
glucose transporter 1 downregulates glycolysis, induces cell-cycle
arrest, and inhibits cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Molecular
cancer therapeutics, 11(8):1672-1682.


