Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potentials of some serum proteins and urinary molecular biomarkers
for early diagnosis of prostate cancer in Nigeria patients.


Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) an adenocarcinoma is the most common
cancer diagnosed in African men today. At present, the only widely
accepted screening tools for prostate cancer are prostate specific
antigen (PSA) and digital rectal examination. There is controversy
regarding the appropriate level of serum PSA that should trigger a
biopsy. This study is aimed at finding a better marker/panel of markers
for prostate cancer.

Methods: 150 consented patients requiring a prostate biopsy and 100 age
matched controls were recruited for this study. Genetic materials were
found in 132 (88%) of the samples. Serum Total PSA (TPSA) , and free PSA
were assayed using ELISA method, % free/total PSA(%f/tpsa) was obtained
statistically, prostatic volume was determined using TRUS. In addition,
selected urinary RNAâ€™s were assayed; transmembrane serine protease
(TMPRSS2:ERG and TMPRSS2:ETS) fusion genes, PSA gene and PCA3 (prostate
cancer antigen 3) , using standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
protocols.

Results: TMPRSS2:ERG was detected in 9 (7 %) of the samples and limited
to biopsy positive for PCa. Similarly, TMPRSS2:ETS was found in only 4
(3%) of the samples and also restricted to biopsy positive for PCa. PCA3
score had the best discriminatory accuracy in diagnosing PCa amongst
patients with serum Total PSA in the range of 4 - 10 ng/ml with AUC of
0.705 compared to Total PSA, f/t PSA ratio, and PSA Density which were
0.365, 0.695, and 0.541 respectively. At the cut off value of 24.6, PCA3
score yielded its best sensitivity of 0.615 and specificity of 0.630. At
the cutoff of 18, free/total PSA ratio (0.615, 0.77), at the cutoff of
0.14 PSAD yielded its best (0.538, 0.704.) respectively. Direct logistic
regression was performed to access the predictability of PCa using
different models comprising of three (3) covariates, the model comprising
PCA3 Score, f/t PSA ratio and PSAD had the best discriminating accuracy
in the subgroup with TPSA range of 4 - 10ng/ml, with the sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive values of
0.59, 0.93, 71.4% and 75.8% respectively, over models comprising PCA3
Score ,TPSA and %f/t PSA, and PCA3 Score, TPSA and PSAD with these values
(0.23, 0.85, 42.9 % and 70.1%), (0.39, 0.89, 62.5%, and 75 %) and ( 0.15,
0.85,66.7% and 67.6%) respectively.

Conclusions: In predicting PCa amongst patients with serum total PSA in
the grey area of 4 - 10 ng/ml, the model comprising PCA3 Score, f/t PSA
ratio and PSAD had the best discriminating accuracy.


