Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cofactor Paragon: a novel tool to analyze the tumor
microenvironment using RNAseq.


The impact of cancer immunotherapy on clinical cancer care is growing
rapidly. However, there are several mechanisms by which a tumor can avoid
recognition and/or elimination by the immune system. Immune recognition,
activation, and infiltration are each required for effective clearance of
a tumor by the immune system. Impairment of any one of these mechanisms
requires a different therapeutic strategy or combination of strategies to
significantly address. The development of new multi-modal biomarker
technologies that have the ability to provide insight into each of these
factors in a cost-effective manner is essential to effectively guide
treatment choice for patients and to discover new therapeutic targets.

We have developed Paragon, which is an RNA sequencing based panel that
utilizes novel informatics technologies to provide a comprehensive
picture of a tumorâ€™s transcriptomic and immune micro-environment. There
are three distinct outputs of Paragon: measurement of the expression
levels of ten immune checkpoint genes, quantification of the total
mutational burden of the tumor, and the levels of infiltration of 24
different immune cell subtypes within the tumor microenvironment. These
outputs collectively inform the various mechanisms that tumors use to
evade recognition and clearance by the immune system.

We show that Cofactor Paragon accurately reports on gene expression,
mutational burden and infiltrating leukocytes compared to gold standard
methods from just 20 ng of FFPE tumor RNA. We further analyze the data to
show the correlation between mutational burden and infiltrating CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cell levels. Finally, we show how Paragon can identify expression
of genes involved in inhibitory tumor metabolism that correlate with
resistance to PD-1 blockade therapy. These results position Cofactor
Paragon as a novel tool that can help identify ideal therapeutic
strategies in immuno-oncology.


