Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aberrant methylation of ANK1, the host gene for miR-486,
distinguishes lung tumors by histology and smoking status.


MicroRNAs (miRs) regulate many fundamental biological processes primarily
through inhibiting the transcription and/or translation of their target
genes. MiR-486 is an intragenic miR located within ANK1, a gene that
encodes for the adapter protein ankyrin-1. Although the tumor suppressor
role of miR-486-5p and its down-regulation in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is well established, the mechanism(s) leading to its repression
is unclear. In this study, we investigated epigenetic regulation of ANK1
and its impact on miR-486-5p expression in lung cancer. DNA methylation
and expression levels of ANK1 and miR-486-5p in lung tumor-normal pairs,
NSCLC cell lines, as well as various normal blood and lung epithelial
cell controls were evaluated using qualitative and quantitative assays.
The genome-wide impact of epigenetic repression of ANK1 was evaluated
using siRNA. The results show that miR-486-5p expression in lung tumors
and NSCLC cell lines was significantly reduced compared to distant normal
lung tissue pairs (p = 0.0006) and strongly correlated with ANK1
expression. In NSCLC cell lines with strongly reduced expression of
miR-486-5p and ANK1, treatment with the DNA methylation inhibitor
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine significantly increased the expression of both the
miR and its host gene. Human ANK1 is a large (~230kb) gene with three
promoter regions regulating tissue specific expression of three (ANK1B,
ANK1E, and ANK1A) transcript variants. ANK1B (the longest of the three
variants) is the primary transcript expressed in lung tissue, while ANK1E
and ANK1A are weakly and rarely expressed in lung epithelial cells. ANK1B
promoter contains a large CpG island that is methylated in 45% (118/262)
of lung tumors but not in normal lung or blood samples. The prevalence
for ANK1B methylation was significantly higher (p MicroRNAs (miRs)
regulate many fundamental biological processes primarily through
inhibiting the transcription and/or translation of their target genes.
MiR-486 is an intragenic miR located within ANK1, a gene that encodes for
the adapter protein ankyrin-1. Although the tumor suppressor role of
miR-486-5p and its down-regulation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
is well established, the mechanism(s) leading to its repression is
unclear. In this study, we investigated epigenetic regulation of ANK1 and
its impact on miR-486-5p expression in lung cancer. DNA methylation and
expression levels of ANK1 and miR-486-5p in lung tumor-normal pairs,
NSCLC cell lines, as well as various normal blood and lung epithelial
cell controls were evaluated using qualitative and quantitative assays.
The genome-wide impact of epigenetic repression of ANK1 was evaluated
using siRNA. The results show that miR-486-5p expression in lung tumors
and NSCLC cell lines was significantly reduced compared to distant normal
lung tissue pairs (p = 0.0006) and strongly correlated with ANK1
expression. In NSCLC cell lines with strongly reduced expression of
miR-486-5p and ANK1, treatment with the DNA methylation inhibitor
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine significantly increased the expression of both the
miR and its host gene. Human ANK1 is a large (~230kb) gene with three
promoter regions regulating tissue specific expression of three (ANK1B,
ANK1E, and ANK1A) transcript variants. ANK1B (the longest of the three
variants) is the primary transcript expressed in lung tissue, while ANK1E
and ANK1A are weakly and rarely expressed in lung epithelial cells. ANK1B
promoter contains a large CpG island that is methylated in 45% (118/262)
of lung tumors but not in normal lung or blood samples. The prevalence
for ANK1B methylation was significantly higher (p < 0.001) in lung
adenocarcinoma (101/200, 51%) compared to lung squamous cell carcinomas
(17/62, 27%) after adjustment for smoking. Comparison of methylation by
patientsâ€™ smoking history also revealed that ANK1B methylation in lung
adenocarcinoma was significantly more prevalent in smokers (57%, 73/128)
than in never smokers (39%, 28/72), p = 0.014; HR = 2.086 (CI: 1.157 -
3.759). These findings were confirmed by quantitative methylation assays
and independently validated using publicly available methylation data for
large (n = 809) NSCLC cases from the Cancer Genome Atlas database.
Finally, siRNA mediated knockdown of ANK1 in lung cancer cell lines
followed by transcriptome-wide expression and pathway analysis revealed
that ANK1 repression primarily alters cancer development and progression
pathways. Taken together, our data indicates that aberrant methylation of
ANK1B promoter is highly prevalent in lung cancer, discriminates lung
tumors by histology and smoking history, and represses the expression of
ANK1 along with the tumor-suppressor miR-486-5p it hosts within its last
intron.


