Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 3D tissue engineering bladder model for cancer invasion study.


INTRODUCTION: Our understanding of the biological processes involved in
bladder cancer (BCa) is greatly limited by the models currently
available. In fact, the combination of in vitro and in vivo models of BCa
has failed to elucidate all the fundamental aspects of the disease. The
eighth most commonly diagnosed cancer in Western societies, BCa has
become a growing public health concern, and more realistic models are
needed to reveal the mechanisms involved in tumor initiation and
progression. METHODS: Bladder substitutes have been constructed by tissue
engineering with healthy human fibroblasts and urothelial cells, using
the self-assembly method. Meanwhile, spheroids have been produced from
non-invasive (RT4) and invasive (T24) BCa cell lines expressing DsRed
fluorescent protein. The invasive potential of these spheroids was
characterized in a type-I collagen gel (2.5mg/mL). Then, the spheroids
were implanted on the surface of bladder substitutes, after which their
development was followed by fluorescence microscopy. RESULTS: Both of the
cancer cell lines used were able to form compact spheroids and grow on
bladder equivalents. The invasive behaviour of spheroids varied depending
on the nature of the cells used. The non-invasive RT4 cell line was
unable to cross the basal lamina whereas the invasive T24 cell line was
able to do so. CONCLUSION: The establishment of such a model for studying
cancer biology in a physiological environment will help bridge the gap
between overly simple cell culture models and more complex transgenic
mice models. This new model offers a unique opportunity to study
separately the players involved in the development of BCa and thus
represents a powerful tool for the mechanistic analysis of this complex
pathology.


