Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Technical limitations of capture-based, targeted deep sequencing
for the detection of somatic variations in cell-free DNA.


Despite widespread applications of capture-based targeted deep
sequencing, its limitations on detecting circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA)
have not been systematically elucidated. Here, we analyze and
characterize parameters critically determining its detection limits;
depth of coverage and background errors. The depth increase by using more
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) was saturated at around ~3000x with ~50 ng of cfDNA
primarily due to a deduplication artifact, which limited the detection
sensitivity of the method. Next, characterizing background errors, we
uncovered that a majority of errors were not derived from biological
origins but technical artifacts, especially during sample preparation and
library construction rather than sequencing. Thus, it is important to use
an appropriate protocol for those steps minimizing background errors.
Considering the depth of coverage and the background error rate, we
estimated the detection limit of the method approximately to be 0.4%
variant allele frequency at 95% confidence level. Applying the method to
pancreatic cancer patients, we found that the levels of ctDNAs measured
by cfDNA sequencing well correlated with clinical responses to therapy
and/or disease progression, but biopsy-free profiling of somatic variants
was limited by the moderate sensitivity of 72% and PPV of 74% at the
variant level. Our results clarify technical limitations of targeted deep
sequencing and provide a guideline for applying the technique to analyze
cfDNA.


