Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TPX-0005, an ALK/ROS1/TRK inhibitor, overcomes multiple resistance
mechanisms by targeting SRC/FAK signaling.


ALK, ROS1, and TRK inhibitors have achieved marked efficacy in treating
cancer patients expressing abnormal ALK, ROS1 or NTRK genes. However, the
initial success of these therapies is rapidly overshadowed with the
development of acquired resistance. In addition, approximately 30-40% of
ALK + or ROS1+ NSCLC patients fail to respond to initial crizotinib
treatment, representing intrinsic resistance. Target gene amplification,
acquired resistance mutations, bypass signaling, epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and metastasis are the common resistance mechanisms.
None of the current ALK, ROS1 or TRK inhibitors can overcome bypass or
EMT-based resistance when applied as a single agent therapy. TPX-0005 is
a potent kinase inhibitor against WT and mutated ALK, ROS1 and TRK family
kinases, especially the clinically significant solvent front mutations.
At clinically relevant concentrations, TPX-0005 also inhibits JAK2, SRC
and FAK that are important targets in modulating multiple resistance
mechanisms. H2228 lung cancer cell line endogenously expresses EML4-ALK
v3 and was reported to be resistant to ALK inhibitor TAE684. Upregulation
of the bypass signaling kinase EGFR, EMT marker vimentin, and cancer
stem-like marker CD44 was reported in H2228 cells, likely leading to
intrinsic resistance to ALK inhibitors. In the anti-proliferation assay,
both crizotinib and ceritinib were resistant in H2228 cells with IC50
values around 1000 nM, however, TPX-0005 was able to overcome the
intrinsic resistance with an IC50 of 100 nM. In H2228 cells, TPX-0005
suppressed the phosphorylation of SRC, FAK and paxillin with IC50 values
in a range of 80-100 nM, and downregulated the expression of EGFR, CD44,
and vimentin with IC50 values around 100 nM. In addition, TPX-0005
inhibited the phosphorylation of the oncogenic transcription/translation
factor YB-1 with an IC50 value around 100 nM in H2228 cells. YB-1 is
involved in many aspects of gene expression control that lead to tumor
cell growth and drug resistance, including modulation of EGFR
upregulation, EMT, and cancer stemness. Therefore, it was postulated that
inhibition of SRC/FAK by TPX-0005 suppressed the phosphorylation of YB-1,
leading to the downregulation of EGFR, CD44 and vimentin, and eventually
to anti-proliferation effect on H2228 cells. TPX-0005 demonstrated an in
vitro anti-metastatic activity by inhibiting cell migration in both H2228
cells and HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cells. Taken together, the potent
kinase inhibitory activities against SRC/FAK signaling provide a unique
polypharmacology profile to TPX-0005 for combatting multiple resistance
mechanisms simultaneously, including a broad spectrum of acquired
mutations, bypass signaling, EMT, cancer stemness, and metastasis.


