Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AXL inhibition in ovarian cancer stem-like cells increases
chemo-sensitivity.


Cancer stem-like cells (CSCs), a small population of cancer cells with
regenerative potential, may lead to the initiation and progression of
secondary tumors. Long-term chemotherapeutic drug treatment can also
result in the generation of a drug resistant population of cancer stem
cells. In this study we have isolated CD44+ and CD117+ enriched ovarian
cancer stem-like cells from primary cultured ascites cells removed from
ascites fluid of na√Øve ovarian cancer patients. AXL, a type I receptor
tyrosine kinase family member, is found to be over-expressed in ovarian
cancer stem-like cells. Cell viability assays showed that ovarian CSCs
are chemo-resistant to concentration dependent paclitaxel treatment. AXL
was inhibited using a R428 and cell viability assays and apoptotic assays
in the presence of paclitaxel were performed, which made the CSCs chemo
sensitive. Si-RNA based inhibition of AXL also displayed a similar
pattern of improving the sensitivity of the stem-like cells to the
chemotherapeutic drug. PI3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway has also been
shown to be involved in decreasing the cell viability during the
inhibition of AXL. In conclusion, this study establishes the role of AXL,
a receptor tyrosine kinase, as one of the key proteins influencing the
chemo resistance in ovarian cancer stem-like cells.


