Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pan-inflammatory and precancerous disease analysis reveals key
biological characteristics in chronic inflammatory diseases with high
oncogenic risk.


It has long been observed that cancer development tends to be associated
with chronic inflammation. Recent epidemiology studies have suggested
chronic inflammation may be causally linked to a larger number of
sporadic cancers. In this work, we have conducted a Pan-inflammatory and
precancerous diseases analysis by comparing the 173 transcriptomics data
sets consisting 4073 disease and 2669 normal human tissue samples of 10
cancer prone and 8 cancer independent inflammatory diseases, 11
precancerous diseases or benign tumors and 20 cancer types, aiming to
identify fundamental differences between cancer-prone chronic
inflammations and cancer-independent chronic inflammations and what
biological characteristics cause cancer initiation or increased oncogenic
risk. By applying differential gene expression, co-expression network,
our in-house immune cell deconvolution and machine learning based
hypoxia/oxidative stress prediction methods on the collected data, we
have discovered the cancer prone chronic inflammatory diseases
consistently have: (1) elevated relative proportion of CD4+ T,
Macrophage, and Neutrophil cells, (2) decreased CD8 + T, adipocyte,
monocyte and B cells, (3) highly disorder tissue repair phase I - IV
related pathways, (4) increased oxidative stress level associated with
Macrophage and Neutrophil proportions, (5) elevated iron ion metabolism,
(6) over expressed extracellular glycosaminoglycan metabolism and (6)
suppressed mitochondrial activity. These analyses results strongly
suggest that there is a necessary pathway for the majority or all chronic

inflammatory diseases to become cancerous, namely consecutively
dysregulated tissue repair process, increased reactive oxygen species
producing immune cells, damage of extracellular matrix, Fenton reaction
and production of hydroxyl radical and dysregulated mitochondrial
activity. We believe these new insights could provide highly useful
information in guiding future studies of inflammation associated cancers.


