Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel cell-penetrating ATF5 antagonist peptide CP-d/n-ATF5
exerts in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor effects in a broad spectrum of
pediatric cancers.


Purpose: Activating transcription factor 5 (ATF5), a member of the
ATF/CREB family transcription factor, has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of glioblastoma and other adult tumors. Recently, a novel
cell penetrating (CP-d/n-ATF5) peptide has been developed to antagonize
ATF5 function. The goal of the current study is to test the efficacy of
CP-d/n-ATF5 in several children tumors including neuroblastoma,
hepatoblastoma, Ewing sarcoma, and rhabdoid tumor, in vitro and in vivo.

Methods: A panel of neuroblastoma cell lines: SK-N-Be(2)C, SK-N-DZ, NGP,
IMR-32, NGP, SHEP-21N, KELLY, CHP-212, CHLA-20, CHLA-15 and SK-N-SH;
hepatoblastoma cell lines HUH 6 and Hep-G2; Ewing sarcoma cell lines
A673, SKNMC, SKNEP1, and TC32; and the rhabdoid cell G401, were treated
with vehicle or 50, 100 and 200 μM of CP-d/n-ATF5. Cell viability and
apoptosis were assessed after 72 hr by WST-8 and TUNEL assays,
respectively. To test in vivo efficacy, SK-N-Be(2)C kidney xenograft
tumors were treated with the peptide at dose 50mg/kg, IP injection once
per day for first three days and then twice per week. Tumor growth was
monitored by bioluminescence imaging and mice were sacked when flux
reached a threshold value. Organ metastases were determined by ex vivo
imaging. A patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model of rhabdoid tumors was
employed where PDX tumors, at 150-200 mm3 size, were enrolled in the
penetratin (control) and CP-d/n-ATF5 treatment (same dose as above).
Tumors were measured biweekly with a calipers and mice were sacrificed
when tumor volume reached a threshold (1500 mm3).

Results: CP-d/n-ATF5 exerted cytotoxicity or apoptosis, in a dose
dependent manner, across a wide panel of pediatric tumor cell lines. In
vitro, tumor cell viabilities were reduced 40-70% (PResults: CP-d/n-ATF5
exerted cytotoxicity or apoptosis, in a dose dependent manner, across a
wide panel of pediatric tumor cell lines. In vitro, tumor cell
viabilities were reduced 40-70% (P<0.05) and apoptosis was increased
50-80% at 200 μM of CP-d/n-ATF5. In vivo, CP-d/n-ATF5 significantly
inhibited SK-N-Be(2)C xenograft growth in nude mice, with a median
survival of 35 days for control against 21 days for CP-d/n-ATF5,
P=0.0013. CP-d/n-ATF5 also reduced SK-N-Be(2)C metastatic burden in the
liver (PResults: CP-d/n-ATF5 exerted cytotoxicity or apoptosis, in a dose
dependent manner, across a wide panel of pediatric tumor cell lines. In
vitro, tumor cell viabilities were reduced 40-70% (P<0.05) and apoptosis
was increased 50-80% at 200 μM of CP-d/n-ATF5. In vivo, CP-d/n-ATF5
significantly inhibited SK-N-Be(2)C xenograft growth in nude mice, with a
median survival of 35 days for control against 21 days for CP-d/n-ATF5,
P=0.0013. CP-d/n-ATF5 also reduced SK-N-Be(2)C metastatic burden in the
liver (P<0.05) and bone marrow (PResults: CP-d/n-ATF5 exerted
cytotoxicity or apoptosis, in a dose dependent manner, across a wide
panel of pediatric tumor cell lines. In vitro, tumor cell viabilities
were reduced 40-70% (P<0.05) and apoptosis was increased 50-80% at 200
μM of CP-d/n-ATF5. In vivo, CP-d/n-ATF5 significantly inhibited
SK-N-Be(2)C xenograft growth in nude mice, with a median survival of 35
days for control against 21 days for CP-d/n-ATF5, P=0.0013. CP-d/n-ATF5
also reduced SK-N-Be(2)C metastatic burden in the liver (P<0.05) and bone
marrow (P<0.01). In the rhabdoid PDX model, there was a significant
inhibition of tumors treated with CP-d/n-ATF5 as compared to Penetratin
treatment, with a mean tumor volume of control 1283 ± 266.6 mm3 (n=5) vs
CP-d/n-ATF5 234.2 ± 50.66 mm3 (n=6), at day 10 post treatment.
Penetratin treated tumors showed a median post-treatment time of 13 days
to reach threshold volume. None of the CP-d/n-ATF5 treated tumors reached
the threshold after 28 days of treatment with some tumors demonstrating
regression, indicating a profound anti-tumor effect of the peptide.

Conclusion: Our study shows that a novel ATF5-targeting peptide
CP-d/n-ATF5 has broad and profound cytotoxic and apoptotic effects in
several pediatric tumors in vitro and in vivo. Our study also indicates
that CP-d/n-ATF5 has the potential to act as an anti-metastatic agent.


