Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exome sequencing in dedifferentiated ovarian mucinous carcinoma.


Mucinous ovarian tumor represent a distinct histotype of epithelial
ovarian cancer and is thought to begin as a mucinous adenoma that
progresses in a slow stepwise fashion. Dedifferentiated mucinous ovarian
carcinoma is a rare type of carcinoma with a few reports and a
progressive and poor prognosis. While the molecular genetic features of
ovarian mucinous carcinoma is now well known, the pathogenesis of
dedifferentiated mucinous carcinoma is largely unknown. In order to
comprehensively analyse somatic mutations in dedifferentiated mucinous
carcinoma, we applied exome sequencing to the DNA of a sample of
affinity-purified, dedifferentiated mucinous carcinoma. Through
comparative analyses of normal cells from the same patient, we identified
several genes that were mutated in this tumor. P53, which encodes a
well-known tumor suppressor protein, and KRAS, which encodes a well-known
oncoprotein, had previously been implicated in ovarian mucinous
carcinoma. The other mutated genes were previously unknown to be involved
in mucinous carcinoma. CEP170 encodes a microtubule-binding protein that
controls the targeting of the kinesin-13 depolymerase protein to the
mitotic spindle, and kinesin-13 family influence the dynamics of
microtubule growth and shrinkage. CEP170 gene mutation may be related to
inability of a cell division properly. CEP170 mutations were identified
with a prevalence of 33.3% in dedifferentiated mucinous ovarian
carcinoma. Currently, CEP170 gene knock down assay and engineered
expression of CEP170 assay in ovarian mucinous carcinoma is being
performed whether morphologic change is observed. In summary, CEP170 may
be one of the responsible gene in carcinogenesis of differentiated
mucinous carcinoma.


