Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LOX and ZFPM2 as novel diagnostic biomarkers for malignant pleural
mesothelioma.


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare, aggressive cancer being
developed on outlayer of lung tissues and caused by mostly occupational
exposure to asbestos. Poor prognosis needs to develop therapeutic drug as
well as early diagnostic biomarker. Currently, mesothelin (MSLN),
osteopontin (OPN), and fibulin 3 (FBLN3) have been reported as potential
diagnostic biomarkers for MPM. In this study, we first performed
bioinformatics analysis for public database to find diagnostic biomarkers
for MPM. From the analysis using Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) and
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases, included were 7 genes involving
LOX, LOXL1, LOXL2, ZFPM2, THBS2, SULF1, CDH11 identified as potential
diagnostic biomarkers. These genes showed a similar diagnostic ability to
FBLN3 or MSLN as MPM biomarker candidates. Further molecular approach
using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) confirmed
the higher mRNA expression of these candidates in MPM cell lines and
patient samples. Moreover, two particular genes, LOX and ZFPM, showed MPM
specific patterns of mRNA expression that were further confirmed in
protein level by western blot assay. Together with biological approach,
biostatistical analysis of receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
analysis using the GEO database revealed significantly higher diagnostic
potential of LOX and ZFPM2 genes compared to the FBLN3, one of the best
diagnostic biomarkers currently reported. From this study, we believe
these genes together with FBLN3 and MSLN would become novel potential
biomarker candidates for MPM diagnosis.


