Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of the response of the NCI60 NSCLC panel with the
response of patient-derived NSCLC lines to approved and investigational
agents.


An 800 compound screen with the NCI60 cell lines and 5 patient-derived
NSCLC lines (PD NSCLC), was conducted at 9 concentrations and included
the FDA approved oncology agents and an investigational agents library.
The screen was conducted using 384-well monolayer cultures, an exposure
time of 72 hrs and compound concentrations from 1 nM to 10 uM.
CellTiter-Glo was used to measure viability as an endpoint. The NCI60
NSCLC panel consists of 9 cell lines: A549, EKVX, HOP-62, HOP-92,
NCI-H226, NCI-H23, NCI-H322M, NCI-H460 and NCI-H522. The response of
these lines was compared with the response of 5 PD NSCLC lines and 60
SCLC lines. While both sets of NSCLC lines had similar responses to the
majority of compounds, there were some marked differences. Differences in
response of the NCI60 NSCLC lines and the PD NSCLC lines were notable
upon exposure to tubulin fragmenters, KSP/EG5 inhibitors, GAR
transformylase inhibitors, Polo-like kinase-1 inhibitors (PLK1), MEK
inhibitors, and IAP inhibitors. The NCI60 NSCLC lines were more sensitive
to the tubulin fragmenters than were the PD NSCLC and the SCLC lines.
Verubulin had a mean GI50 in NCI60 NSCLC of 0.0037 uM and 0.0042 uM in
SCLC versus 0.047uM in the PD NSCLC lines. The NCI60 NSCLC lines were
more sensitive to the KSP inhibitor, ARRY-520 (mean GI50 0.0049 uM) than
the SCLC lines (0.028 uM) and the PD NSCLC lines (0.26 uM). The NCI60
NSCLC lines (mean GI50 0.019 uM) and the SCLC lines (mean GI50 0.04 uM)
were more sensitive to PLK1 inhibitors such as BI-2536 than the PD NSCLC
lines (0.13 uM). However, the NCI60 NSCLC lines (mean GI50 0.8 uM) and
the SCLC lines (mean GI50 0.134 uM) were less sensitive than the PD NSCLC
lines (mean GI50 0.025uM) to GAR transformylase inhibitors such as
pelitrexol. The NCI60 NSCLC lines (mean GI50 6.3 uM) and SCLC lines (mean
GI50 10 uM) were also less responsive to IAP inhibitors, than were PD
NSCLC lines (mean GI50 1.6 uM). A heterogeneous response to the MEK
inhibitors such as cobimetinib (GDC-0973) was observed with the SCLC
lines (mean GI50 8.9 uM) versus 1.15 uM in the NCI60 NSCLC lines and 0.56
uM in the PD NSCLC lines. PD NSCLC lines exhibit some interesting
differences in response from established lung cancer lines upon in vitro
exposure to anticancer agents and thus add to our knowledge and
understanding of NSCLC and help inform discovery efforts and/or clinical
development of therapeutics in this disease. This project was funded in
part with federal funds from the NCI, NIH, under contract no.
HHSN261200800001E.


