Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived tumor microenvironment models uncover
nonautonomous TKI resistance mechanisms in NSCLC.


Background: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have yielded great responses
in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR mutations and ALK
translocations, however these and other targeted therapies are limited by
intrinsic and acquired drug resistance. Previous study from our group was
looking into tumor autonomous resistance mechanisms by developing
patient-derived cancer models (PDCs). In this study, we aimed to decipher
the non-autonomous resistance mechanisms via tumor microenvironment by
developing patient-derived fibroblast (PDF) cell lines.

Method: Cancer-associated fibroblast cells are isolated directly from
EGFR mutant and ALK translocated NSCLC biopsies. Over 30 PDFs models have
been established, which represent different clinical features and
response profiles.

Result: By co-culturing the PDCs with PDFs, we found that there is
considerable variability in both models for their magnitude and mechanism
by which the TKI treatment is desensitized. Both HGF dependent and HGF
independent resistance mechanisms can be overcome by specific therapeutic
combinations.

Conclusion: Together, our results indicate that PDFs are clinically
relevant models for deciphering non-autonomous resistance mechanisms,
that they are heterogeneous in protecting cancer cells from TKI
treatment, and that the resistance mediated by PDFs can be overcome by
specific therapeutic combinations.


