Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rare BRCA2 K3326X increases susceptibility to sporadic pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma: a PANDoRA study.


Background: The incredibly poor outlook of pancreatic cancer patients
underscores an urgent need for early diagnostic markers. Pancreatic
cancer ranks third most-frequent among BRCA1/2-deficient cancers with
germline mutations detected in T) which introduces a premature stop codon
thus truncating the protein, has previously been implicated in familial
PDAC, but not in sporadic cases. A frameshift pathogenic mutation
c.6503delTT (rs11571658, p.Leu2092Profs) reported to occur in tandem with
K3326X in breast and ovarian cancer

families, has also been speculated to influence risk associations due to
linkage disequilibrium between both variants.

Method and results: K3326X was genotyped in 2,969 sporadic cases and
4,700 controls using Taqman chemistry and fidelity of genotypes assessed
based on concordance of internal replicates and negative controls. K3326X
was observed in 1.2% of cases and 0.8% of controls. Odds ratios (ORs) and
associated 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated by multivariate
unconditional logistic regression with adjustment for age, sex and region
of origin. We also performed a stratified analysis based on age at
diagnosis to estimate the risk association between K3326X and early-onset
pancreatic cancer. To rule out the likely shared effect of the
c.6503delTT mutation on sporadic PDAC risk, we also sequenced DNA from
carriers of K3326X in this study. We found K3326X to be associated with
increased risk of developing sporadic PDAC ((OR = 1.71, 95% CI = 1.18 -
2.49), P = 0.005). This risk was considerably higher among cases aged 50
years and younger (OR = 2.13, 95% CI = 1.10 - 4.11, P = 0.03).
Furthermore, carriers of K3326X did not bear the c.6503delTT mutation
thus confirming that the observed risk effect was not influenced by the
latter.

Conclusion: These robust associations implicate K3326X in the etiology of
sporadic and early-onset PDAC, and therefore warrant replication as well
as functional studies to elucidate the role of K3326X in DNA repair
mechanisms.


