Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression signature of patients with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors failure: miR-10a-5p inhibits cancer cell aggressiveness in
renal cell carcinoma.


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a disease in which cells undergo oncogenic
transformation in the kidney tubules. The five-year survival rate of
advanced stage RCC is poor (5-10%) due to recurrence or distant
metastasis. Recently, anti-angiogenic multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have been developed and have been used as first and second line
treatments for RCC. However, these treatments extend progression-free
survival only slightly, and relapse and metastasis eventually develop in
most patients. The molecular mechanisms of RCC recurrence, metastasis and
drug resistance are not yet fully understood. Therefore, analysis of the
molecular mechanisms underlying RCC development and progression and
studies of novel oncogenic pathways based on current genome-based
approaches could significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and prevention
of the disease. miRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that function to
fine tune the expression of protein coding/noncoding RNAs by repressing
translation or cleaving RNA transcripts in a sequence-depending manner.
The unique characteristic function of miRNAs is to regulate RNA
transcripts in human cells. Therefore, dysregulated expression of miRNAs
can disrupt tightly regulated RNA networks in cancer cells. In this
study, we constructed a miRNA expression signature to identify pathways
activated by TKI treatment using autopsy specimens from patients with
RCC. We have sequentially identified tumor-suppressive miRNA and its
regulated RCC pathways based on the signature. The aim of this study was
to investigate the functional significance of miR-10a-5p and to identify
the molecular targets and pathways mediated by miR-10a-5p in RCC cells.
The expression levels of miR-10a-5p were significantly reduced in RCC
clinical specimens and RCC cell lines compared with non-cancerous kidney
tissues (P Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a disease in which cells undergo
oncogenic transformation in the kidney tubules. The five-year survival
rate of advanced stage RCC is poor (5-10%) due to recurrence or distant
metastasis. Recently, anti-angiogenic multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have been developed and have been used as first and second line
treatments for RCC. However, these treatments extend progression-free
survival only slightly, and relapse and metastasis eventually develop in
most patients. The molecular mechanisms of RCC recurrence, metastasis and
drug resistance are not yet fully understood. Therefore, analysis of the
molecular mechanisms underlying RCC development and progression and
studies of novel oncogenic pathways based on current genome-based
approaches could significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and prevention
of the disease. miRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that function to
fine tune the expression of protein coding/noncoding RNAs by repressing
translation or cleaving RNA transcripts in a sequence-depending manner.
The unique characteristic function of miRNAs is to regulate RNA
transcripts in human cells. Therefore, dysregulated expression of miRNAs
can disrupt tightly regulated RNA networks in cancer cells. In this
study, we constructed a miRNA expression signature to identify pathways
activated by TKI treatment using autopsy specimens from patients with
RCC. We have sequentially identified tumor-suppressive miRNA and its
regulated RCC pathways based on the signature. The aim of this study was
to investigate the functional significance of miR-10a-5p and to identify
the molecular targets and pathways mediated by miR-10a-5p in RCC cells.
The expression levels of miR-10a-5p were significantly reduced in RCC
clinical specimens and RCC cell lines compared with non-cancerous kidney
tissues (P < 0.001). TCGA data showed that the overall survival of low
miR-10a-5p expression group was significantly shorter than that of high
expression group (P = 0.00408). Restoration of miR-10a-5p significantly
inhibited cancer cell migration and invasion in RCC cell lines (P Renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) is a disease in which cells undergo oncogenic
transformation in the kidney tubules. The five-year survival rate of
advanced stage RCC is poor (5-10%) due to recurrence or distant
metastasis. Recently, anti-angiogenic multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) have been developed and have been used as first and second line
treatments for RCC. However, these treatments extend progression-free
survival only slightly, and relapse and metastasis eventually develop in
most patients. The molecular mechanisms of RCC recurrence, metastasis and
drug resistance are not yet fully understood. Therefore, analysis of the
molecular mechanisms underlying RCC development and progression and
studies of novel oncogenic pathways based on current genome-based
approaches could significantly improve diagnosis, therapy, and prevention
of the disease. miRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that function to
fine tune the expression of protein coding/noncoding RNAs by repressing
translation or cleaving RNA transcripts in a sequence-depending manner.
The unique characteristic function of miRNAs is to regulate RNA
transcripts in human cells. Therefore, dysregulated expression of miRNAs
can disrupt tightly regulated RNA networks in cancer cells. In this
study, we constructed a miRNA expression signature to identify pathways
activated by TKI treatment using autopsy specimens from patients with
RCC. We have sequentially identified tumor-suppressive miRNA and its
regulated RCC pathways based on the signature. The aim of this study was
to investigate the functional significance of miR-10a-5p and to identify
the molecular targets and pathways mediated by miR-10a-5p in RCC cells.
The expression levels of miR-10a-5p were significantly reduced in RCC
clinical specimens and RCC cell lines compared with non-cancerous kidney
tissues (P < 0.001). TCGA data showed that the overall survival of low
miR-10a-5p expression group was significantly shorter than that of high
expression group (P = 0.00408). Restoration of miR-10a-5p significantly
inhibited cancer cell migration and invasion in RCC cell lines (P <
0.0001). Spindle and kinetochore associated complex subunit 1 (SKA1) was
identified as a direct target gene of miR-10a-5p by genome-wide gene
expression analysis and in silico analysis. Overexpression of SKA1 was
observed in RCC clinical specimens. Moreover, the overall survival of
high SKA1 expression group was significantly shorter than that of low
expression group by TCGA analysis (P = 1.44E-07). Tumor-suppressive
miR-10a-5p was identified by using miRNA signature of patients with TKI
failure. Overexpression of SKA1 might be involved in RCC aggressiveness,
metastasis and drug resistance. Elucidation of tumor-suppressive miRNAs
regulated molecular pathways and targets could provide new information on
potential therapeutic strategies in the disease.


