Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DFP-10825 IP delivery provides a new effective treatment option to
peritoneal-disseminated cancers.


Objective: Peritoneal disseminated ovarian and pancreatic cancers are the
most difficult to be treated with conventional cytotoxic or molecular
targeted drugs. The treatment option is very limited although an
intraperitoneal (IP) paclitaxel has been available and shown to improve a
prognosis in patients. Therefore, it is urgent to develop a new IP
chemotherapeutic drug regulating the fast DNA synthesis in peritoneal
disseminated tumors originated commonly from the ovary, pancreas and
stomach. We have developed a unique RNAi molecule consisting of shRNA
(55-mer) against TS and a cationic liposome (DFP-10825) and tested its
anti-tumor activity and PK profile in peritoneal disseminated ascetic
tumor models.

Methods: We developed luciferase gene-transfected ovarian cancer
(SKOV3-luc) and pancreatic cancer (PANC-1-luc) models in mice. After IP
injection of 5x106 cells, DFP-10825 containing 20 Âµg TS shRNA (20
mg/mouse) was administered in an IP route (q3d x 4) to the tumor-bearing
mice. In combination therapy, paclitaxel (10 mg/kg) was also IP
administered to SKOV3-luc model to which the treatment was performed in
the same schedule. The anti-tumor effect was assessed by measuring
luciferase activity and tumor volume. Furthermore, the TS expression
level in both ascetic tumor cells and solid tumors was measured by
conventional RT-PCR. For PK study with DFP-10825 (especially TS shRNA),
total RNAs were isolated at various time points from ascetic tumor cells
and disseminated SKOV3-luc solid tumor models treated with DFP-10825 and
TS shRNA levels were determined by Stem-loop RT-PCR.

Results: IP DFP-10825 delivery significantly suppressed the growth of
ascetic SKOV3-luc and PANC-1-luc tumor cells and extended the survival
time of these tumor-bearing mice compared with that of control group.
Combination with the IP paclitaxel augmented the efficacy of DFP-10825.
After the IP administration, TS shRNA levels derived from DFP-10825 in
ascetic fluid were maintained at nM range (0.7 - 4.3-nM) across 24 hours
but not detected (below 5 pM) in the plasma, suggesting that TS shRNA be
relatively stable in the peritoneal cavity to be able to exert its
anti-tumor activity but not in blood. Also, TS expression (TS mRNA) in
ascetic tumor cells was significantly suppressed, supporting the notion
that the anti-tumor activity and host survival benefit by DFP-10825 in
tumor-bearing mice are through MOA to knock down the TS level in tumors
specifically.

Conclusion: IP administration of newly developed DFP-10825, the TS shRNA
conjugated with cationic liposome is localized stably in the peritoneal
cavity and provides a new effective treatment option to the intractable
peritoneal disseminated ovarian and pancreatic cancers without any
systemic adverse events.


