Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-environment interaction relevant to estrogen and risk of
breast cancer.


Introduction:

Many established reproductive risk factors for breast cancer are mediated
by hormonal mechanisms, and most parts are involved in estrogens. In
addition, the estrogen level controlled by genetic factors might be a
sort of determinants to breast cancer risk involving estrogen metabolism.
This study aims to examine gene and environment interaction (GxE) between
candidate genes which are involved in estrogen metabolism and
environmental factors which are related to estrogen exposure.

Methods:

GxE analyses were conducted in the Korean 1,970 breast cancer cases and
2,052 controls which were recruited in the Seoul Breast Cancer Study
(SEBCS), a multicenter case control study. 137 candidate genes involved
in estrogen metabolism were searched from couple of databases and 11,555
SNPs (2,472 typed SNPs and 9,083 imputed SNPs) from the range of
candidate genes were included in GxE analyses with 8 established
environmental factors. Statistical analyses were performed by using
GxEScan (ver. Beta 0.4.0; http://biostats.usc.edu/software) for GxE test.

Results:

There were three significant interaction between 11,555 SNPs and 8
environmental factors. Firstly, interaction rs851998 nearby ESR1 with
height was shown in the GE|2df model (p-2df = 1.1x10-4) This SNP had
protective effect marginally (ORG = 0.82, 95% CI: 0.75-0.90) and further
protective effect for women whose height is smaller than 160cm (OR G |
height ≥ 160cm = 0.78, 95% CI: 0.70-0.87, p = 1.09x10-5). Second
interaction was shown between rs13035764 of NCOA1 and age at menarche in
the GE|2df model (p-2df = 1.2x10-3). This SNP also had protective effect
marginally (ORG = 0.85, 95% CI: 0.77-0.97) and more protective effect
when age at menarche is 14 years and over (OR G | age at menarche ≥
14years = 0.82, 95% CI: 0.73-0.97, p=3.6x10-4). Lastly, there was
marginally significant interaction between rs4140979 of FSHR and age at
first full term pregnancy (FFTP) in the EDGxE model. Although this SNP
had no marginal effect, qualitative interaction was shown with FFTP (OR G
| FFTP There were three significant interaction between 11,555 SNPs and 8
environmental factors. Firstly, interaction rs851998 nearby ESR1 with
height was shown in the GE|2df model (p-2df = 1.1x10-4) This SNP had
protective effect marginally (ORG = 0.82, 95% CI: 0.75-0.90) and further
protective effect for women whose height is smaller than 160cm (OR G |
height ≥ 160cm = 0.78, 95% CI: 0.70-0.87, p = 1.09x10-5). Second
interaction was shown between rs13035764 of NCOA1 and age at menarche in
the GE|2df model (p-2df = 1.2x10-3). This SNP also had protective effect
marginally (ORG = 0.85, 95% CI: 0.77-0.97) and more protective effect
when age at menarche is 14 years and over (OR G | age at menarche ≥
14years = 0.82, 95% CI: 0.73-0.97, p=3.6x10-4). Lastly, there was
marginally significant interaction between rs4140979 of FSHR and age at
first full term pregnancy (FFTP) in the EDGxE model. Although this SNP
had no marginal effect, qualitative interaction was shown with FFTP (OR G
| FFTP < 27years = 0.88, 95% CI: 0.78-1.00, p=0.0482; OR G | Nulliparity
or FFTP ≥ 27 years = 1.30, 95% CI: 1.10-1.53, p=0.002).

Conclusion:

Three significant interactions were identified by focusing two step
methods. Replication should be performed in the independent and larger
population due to statistical limitation.


