Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating phenotypic plasticity in breast cancer with
high-throughput nanogrid single-nucleus RNA sequencing.


Single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) is a powerful tool for investigating
rare tumor subpopulations and resolving intra-tumor heterogeneity, but is
low throughput, expensive, and requires fresh tissue samples. To address
these limitations, we developed a 5â€™ high-throughput single-nucleus RNA
sequencing (SNRS) approach that uses nanogrid technology to perform
single-cell imaging and sequencing of 500-2500 nuclei in parallel. The
automated image scanning procedure allowed us to exclude doublets and
select live cells with DAPI/PI staining. This approach allows the
transcriptomic profiling of frozen tissue samples, in which the
cytoplasmic membrane is ruptured in cells, but leaves the nuclear
membrane intact. We validated SNRS in a breast cancer cell line (SK-BR-3)
and compared the transcriptomes of 500 nuclei to 500 whole cells, which
revealed a high concordance in the number of genes expressed as well as
their expression levels. We also performed bulk RNA-seq of isolated
nuclear and cellular fractions from 5 breast cancer cell lines, which
showed a high concordance in genes and expression levels. Differentially
expressed genes in the nucleus mainly included lincRNAs, pseudogenes and
mitochondria genes, but did not affect most cancer genes and pathway
analysis. We further applied SNRS to sequence 500 nuclei from a
triple-negative breast cancer patient and identified diverse phenotypes
in tumor cells, including variation in cell proliferation, migration,
invasion, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. These studies
demonstrated the technical feasibility of using a nanogrid platform to
perform high-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing and showed that nuclei
from cell lines and tumors can be used to study signaling pathways and
gene networks that play an important role in tumor progression.


