Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel small molecule inhibitors of p300/CBP down-regulate AR and
c-Myc for the treatment of castrate resistant prostate cancer.


Background: E1A binding protein (p300) and CREB binding protein (CBP) are
two closely related, paralogue histone acetyl transferase proteins that
act as transcriptional co-activators of a variety of cancer related
genes. We have developed potent, selective and orally active small
molecule inhibitors of the bromodomain of p300/CBP and investigated their
role in regulating androgen receptor expression and function. We have
also examined their role in driving synthetic lethality in tumours. Loss
of function mutations in either p300 or CBP (including in significant
proportions of lung and bladder tumours), can lead to a dependency on the
corresponding paralogue protein.

Methods: Binding affinity to p300, CBP and BRD4 was measured in a surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) assay. Potency and functional activity was
demonstrated in a panel of prostate cells lines representing hormone
responsive (LNCaP), hormone independent (DU145, PC3) and castrate
resistant disease (22Rv1, C4-2, VCaP, LNCaP-AR) as well as wildtype
(A549) and CBP deficient (H520, H1703, LK2) lung cancer cells.
Combination effects of p300/CBP inhibitors with a PARP or CDK4/6
inhibitor were determined in LNCaP and C4-2 cells. Effects of p300/CBP
inhibitors (and by comparison, the BET inhibitor, JQ1), on AR, AR-V7
splice variant and c-Myc protein, as well as c-Myc, KLK3 and TMPRSS2 gene
expression, were assessed in 22Rv1 cells in vitro. In vivo effects on
biomarkers were measured in a 22Rv1 xenograft model.

Results: CCS1357, an in vitro probe compound, binds to p300 and CBP with
high affinity (Kd=4nM) and selectivity (Kd=245nM; BRD4). It is a potent
inhibitor of cell proliferation in castrate resistant cell lines
(IC50=100nM in LnCaP-AR; 350nM in 22Rv1) with minimal effects in hormone
independent lines. CCS1357 combined with palbociclib (CDK4/6) or olaparib
(PARP) in LNCaP or C4-2 cells, showed reduced cell viability compared
with any of these drugs given alone. In 22RV1 cells, CCS1357
significantly down-regulated AR-FL, AR-V7 and c-Myc protein by Western,
an effect not seen with JQ1 at equivalent proliferation IC50s. CCS1357
effects were reversed by the proteasome inhibitor, MG132. CCS1357 also
caused a profound inhibition of c-Myc, KLK3 and TMPRSS2 genes measured by
qPCR in 22Rv1 cells in vitro. A preclinical candidate (CCS1477) given as
a single oral dose (30mg/kg) inhibited plasma PSA and tumour AR, AR-V7
and c-Myc in a 22Rv1 xenograft model. In the lung cancer cell lines, we
observed differential sensitivity to CCS1357; CBP deficient lines were
more sensitive (cell proliferation) compared with normal.

Conclusions: Taken together these data support the clinical testing of
p300/CBP inhibition in patients in two settings; firstly, castrate
resistant prostate cancer by down-regulating of AR, AR-SV and c-MYC
expression and function; and secondly in patients with loss of function
mutations in p300 or CBP by driving synthetic lethality.


