Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular Tumor Board treatment predictions on rare EGFR exon 20
mutations.


Purpose:

To evaluate treatment response following the Multidisciplinary Molecular
Tumor Board (MTB) decisions which focused on EGFR exon 20 mutations in
lung adenocarcinoma.

Methods:

Molecular studies were routinely performed using the Ion Torrent
sequencing platform for histologically or cytologically diagnosed lung
adenocarcinoma. Since October 2014 patients with rare (prevalence
Molecular studies were routinely performed using the Ion Torrent
sequencing platform for histologically or cytologically diagnosed lung
adenocarcinoma. Since October 2014 patients with rare (prevalence <1%) or
combinations of rare mutations were discussed at the MTB of the
University Medical Center Groningen. More common, known sensitive EGFR,
BRAF V600E, as well as KRAS, and PIK3CA mutations were excluded. To
predict the best therapy for a subset of patients with EGFR exon 20
insertion mutations the literature is reviewed and molecular models were
built using SWISS-MODEL, is used to predict protein tertiary structure
(https://swissmodel.expasy.org/interactive/wcurbt/models/).

Summary of data:

Over a period of 2 years 1389 samples were tested. A total of 170 (12.2%)
rare mutations were detected in lung cancer. Among these rare mutations
we observed 16 EGFR exon 20 insertions and other mutations like e.g:
p.T790M, p.D761N, p.D770delinsGY, p.S768_D770dup, p.V769_D770insSFL,
p.N771_H773dup, p.T790S. Using an in silico modeling of protein responses
with TKI were predicted to be likely in EGFR T790M mutations and
p.S768_V769delinsIL, but not in p. D770delinsGY, p.S768_D770dup,
p.V769_D770insSFL, and p.N771_H773dup mutations. Eight patients with an
exon 20 mutation were treated with an EGFR TKI. One patient (p.D761N) had
a partial response on erlotinib 300mg daily. On afatinib monotherapy 2
out of 3 pts had stable disease (PFS 3-11 months). On afatinib/cetuximab
treatment 1 out of 2 pts (p.D770delinsGY) had a partial response and the
other patient had stable disease (p.S768_D770dup) (PFS 11 and 4 months,
resp.). Two evaluable patients were treated with osimertinib: the first
patient initially progressed on afatinib (p.V769_D770insSFL). The protein
model predicted no response, since we predicted hindrance of osimertinib.
The model predicted no response on osimertinib in the second patient as
well, and during treatment a stable disease for 4 months was observed
(p.N771_H773dup).

This molecular information from the weekly MTB meeting was delivered
within 2 weeks to the treating physician. Feedback on treatment outcome
helped to further improve treatment predictions.

Conclusion:

The Molecular Tumor Board is an effective multidisciplinary team to
discuss rare mutations. Our pilot data show that the evaluation of the
use and effectiveness of a theoretical model concerning protein
structures is not possible yet, however, did provide a clear insight in
protein structures in a mutated EGFR receptor supporting decision making
of treatment options.


