Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrating diverse transcriptomic alterations to identify
cancer-relevant genes.


Introduction:

We present a novel method to identify cancer driver genes that jointly
examines any number of diverse transcriptomic alterations with the goal
to uncover highly recurrent and heterogeneous patterns in 1190 samples
across 26 cancer types as part of the PanCancer Analysis of Whole Genomes
(PCAWG) of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC).

Motivation:

Previous pan-cancer genomic studies have focused on the analysis of
somatic mutations as the driver of phenotypic changes. Here, we propose a
method to integrate a wide variety of RNA and DNA changes to redefine the
concept of driver events and account for the transcriptomeâ€™s role in
tumorigenesis. PTK2 provides a motivating example, since it has many RNA
alterations that correlate with patient survival, such as overexpression,
exon-skips, and alternative promoter usage.

In our analysis, we integrate an unprecedented amount of various
alterations including gene fusions, RNA editing, alternative splicing,
expression outliers, alternative promoters, allele specific expression,
and somatic mutations. This enables us to also identify mutually
exclusive (MutE) and co-occurring (CoO) patterns between different types
of alterations within a gene.

Methods:

Our method has 3 main strengths: flexibility to handle any number or type
of alteration, sensitivity to different frequencies of alterations so
rare events are not lost in the recurrence analysis, and diversity of
ranking such that genes with multiple alterations are prioritized. Our
method is summarized in two steps:

1) Identify genes that are both recurrently and heterogeneously altered
across many samples by calculating a rank-based score for each gene.

2) Identify MutE and CoO patterns between alteration types for the genes
identified in the previous step.

To ensure that alterations were comparable, we applied a thresholding
model to binarize all alterations for gene-sample pairs, allowing us to
account for the properties of the different modalities involved.

Step 1 of our method calculates a score for each gene that takes into
account: 1) the number of alterations to a gene across all samples, 2)
the rarity of each alteration, and 3) how many types of alterations are
observed per gene. The score is then used to rank the genes and top genes
are considered for MutE and CoO analyses.

Results:

Our top 100 ranked genes were highly enriched for cancer census genes
(adjusted p-value: 2.06e-9), indicating that we identify cancer relevant
genes. Our top five ranked cancer census genes were IGF2, ERBB2, RARA,
CREBBP, and ARID1A; all of which had at least 4 of 7 possible
alterations, showing our scoring method prioritizes genes with diverse
alterations. We also found that alternative promoter usage and
alternative splicing were highly co-occurring alterations, with PTK2
having the highest co-occurrence between them. In summary, we propose a
new method to analyze various RNA disruptions and show it can yield new
insights beyond genomic variation.


