Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A miRNA signature linked to human environmental risk defined from
carcinogen-induced and genetically-driven colon carcinogenesis models.


Heterocyclic amines (HCAs) produced during high-temperature cooking have
been studied extensively in terms of their genetic effects, but recent
work has implicated epigenetic mechanisms involving non-coding RNAs. We
reported that colon tumors induced in the rat by
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) have altered
microRNA (miRNA) signatures linked to dysregulated pluripotency factors,
such as c-Myc and Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4). The corresponding miRNAs
prioritized from PhIP-induced colon tumors were examined in other target
organs from a one-year carcinogenicity bioassay, and compared with miRNAs
dysregulated in the Apc-mutant polyposis in rat colon (Pirc) genetic
model. Multiple let-7 family members were downregulated in colon, skin,
lung, small intestine, and Zymbal’s gland tumors, and were associated
with Myc and Hmga2 upregulation. A “PhIP miRNA signature” with the
profile mir-21high | mir-126low | mir-29low | mir-215low | mir-145low was
linked to reduced expression of Klf4 in multiple target organs of the
rat, and was predictive of poor prognosis in human pan-cancer and
colorectal cancer datasets (https://cancergenome.nih.gov/). Findings from
The Cancer Genome Atlas suggested that PhIP signature miRNAs might serve
as an arbiter of HCA exposure, defining a subset of human tumors linked
to environmental carcinogen exposure. We conclude that future studies
should examine the miRNA signatures of other HCAs, and determine their
possible predictive value for human risk assessment. This work was
supported in part by NIH grants CA090890, CA122959, ES00210, and
ES023512, the John S. Dunn Foundation, and a Chancellor’s Research
Initiative. We are most thankful to Robert Hawk for providing a graduate
student fellowship in aid of Y-S Chen.


