Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetra-arsenic hexoxide induces G2/M cell cycle arrest, apoptosis,
and autophagy via p38 MAPK- and AKT-mediated pathways in SW620 human
colon cancer cells.


Tetraarsenic hexoxide (As4O6) has been used in Korean folk remedy for the
treatment of cancer since the late 1980â€™s. Evidence suggests that As4O6
show anti-cancer effects, whose mechanisms are different from those for
As2O3. However, the detailed anticancer mechanism is still unclear. Here,
we investigated the anticancer effects of As4O6 on SW620 human colon
cancer cells. As4O6 induced cell death in a dose-dependent manner. Flow
cytometry analysis revealed that As4O6 increased the sub-G1 (apoptotic
cell population) and G2/M phase population in a dose-dependent manner.
Further, nuclear condensation and cleaved nuclei were also observed upon
staining with Hoechst 33342 in As4O6-treated SW620 cells. Western blot
revealed that As4O6 significantly down-regulated the cyclin B1, cdc 2,
pro-caspases -3, -8 and -9, and up-regulated p21 and cleavage of PARP in
SW620 cells. In addition, As4O6 increased the expression of death
receptor 5 (DR5), suppressed Bcl-2 and XIAP family proteins, and promoted
the conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II in a Beclin-1 independent manner.
Interestingly, As4O6 dephosphorylated Akt and JNK and phosphorylated p38
MAPK, and the cell death was inhibited by p38 MAPK inhibitor; whereas Akt
inhibitor augmented the As4O6 induced cell death, suggesting p38 MAPK and
AKT were associated with As4O6-induced cell death. Taken together, these
findings suggest that As4O6 induced G2/M arrest, apoptosis and autophagic
cell death at least in part through p38 MAPK and AKT pathways in SW620
human colon cancer cells. This study may explain the anecdotal anticancer
effects showing central necrosis with dormant status of cancers when
treated by As4O6 as folk remedy.


