Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the ATR kinase enhances therapeutic efficacy of
cisplatin in ATM low uterine carcinosarcoma cells.


Objective: Uterine carcinosarcoma (UCS) is an aggressive malignancy,
making up less than 5% of uterine cancers. Pharmacologic inhibition of
ATR kinase synergistically enhances the ability of cisplatin to kill
carcinoma cells of many solid tumor types and is further enhanced in ATM
low carcinoma cells. It is unknown whether ATR inhibition (ATRi) offers a
therapeutic opportunity in UCS. The goal of this study was to evaluate
ATM expression in UCS tumors and determine the response of an ATM low UCS
model to ATRi + cisplatin combination.

Methods: ATM expression was evaluated in full tissue sections from 74 UCS
tumors by immunohistochemistry (IHC) with an ATM specific monoclonal
antibody (clone Y170, Abcam), and was categorized as negative vs any
positive staining in the carcinomatous (C) vs sarcomatous (S) components.
In vitro models of UCS: SK-UT-1, SK-UT-1B, KLE, and RL95-2 cell lines
were treated with an ATRi (AZD6738), cisplatin, and ATRi + cisplatin. ATM
low models were generated in RL95-2 cells using short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
lentivirus targeting ATM and a non-target control. Cells were subjected
to cisplatin and ATRi dose response analyses.

Results: Negative IHC expression of ATM protein was observed in 24% of
the C vs 31% of the S components of the 74 UCS cases (Table 1). ATRi
increased the sensitivity of uterine carcinosarcoma cell line models to
cisplatin. Western blot confirmed a 57% knockdown in ATM in RL95-2 cells
infected with shRNA for ATM and treatment with ATRi +cisplatin therapy
showed ~20% increase in cell death in ATM low vs control cells lines,
p=0.02.

Conclusions: IHC analyses of UCS tumors showed an average of ~27% of
tumors have loss of ATM in C and S components. Preliminary evidence shows
that ATRi increases the sensitivity of UCS cell models to cisplatin
therapy, which is further increased in ATM low uterine carcinoma cells.
These findings suggest a novel therapeutic opportunity for ATRi +
cisplatin therapy in UCS patients with low ATM expressing tumors.

Immunohistochemistry-based quantification of ATM expression in uterine
carcinosarcoma tumors



ATM



Uterine Carcinosarcoma



Intensity

Carcinomatous Component

Sarcomatous component



0-1

31 (41.9%)

33 (44.6%)





0

18 (24.3%)

23 (31.1%)





1

13 (17.6%)

10 (13.5%)



2-3

43 (58.1%)

41 (55.4%)





2

11 (14.9%)

10 (13.5%)





3

32 (43.2%)

31 (41.9%)



TOTAL

74

74


