Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evolution of neuroblastoma patient-derived orthotopic xenografts
through space and time.


Background Recently, we established orthotopic neuroblastoma
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) which maintain the phenotypic, genomic,
and stromal hallmarks of patient tumors. Here we examined how PDXs evolve
following years of in vivo growth.

Materials and Methods We established up to eight in vivo generations of
neuroblastoma orthotopic PDXs through serial passaging in NSG mice. RNA
sequencing, exome sequencing and SNP array analysis were used to analyze
patient tumors and PDXs from different in vivo generations.

Results Using SNP analysis, we found mostly a remarkable genomic
stability at chromosomal level between patient tumors, early and late PDX
generations. RNA-seq revealed that patient tumors expressed higher levels
of genes involved in immune responses and ECM metabolism compared to
PDXs. Different PDX samples clustered correctly into their respective
tumor type. PDXs from all early generations did not separate from PDXs
from late generations. Thus, gene expression levels are surprisingly
often quite stable despite years of in vivo growth. To shed light on
neuroblastoma intratumor heterogeneity, we implanted 10 different tumor
fragments from a single patient tumor into mice. We classified the 10
mice into three groups based on the time periods required for tumor
growth. RNA-seq showed that each of these groups had a distinct gene
expression profile and pathways involved in neuroblastoma progression
have been identified.

Conclusions Neuroblastoma orthotopic PDXs are often very stable at
chromosomal and gene expression levels despite years of in vivo growth.
We utilized multiple PDXs to show functional intratumor heterogeneity
coupled to distinct gene expression profile.


