Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY3039579, a novel Notch inhibit, potentiates the anti-tumoral
effects of sorafenib in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).


Introduction: Notch pathway has been involved in cell fate determination,
cell differentiation, proliferation and death. Notch promotes cell
survival, angiogenesis and treatment resistance in numerous cancers,
making it a promising target for cancer therapy. The role of the Notch
pathways in HCC tumorigenesis has shown some controversies over time and
across studies, being endowed with both oncogenic and tumor suppressive
properties. Our study aimed at investigating the anti-tumoral effects of
combining LY3039478, a novel Notch inhibitor, to sorafenib in an in vivo
transgenic model of HCC.

Methods: Transgenic mice developing stage-defined HCC were treated for 8
weeks (W) from W8 to W16 with either vehicle, LY3039478 (8mg/kg, thrice
weekly, oral gavage), sorafenib (30mg/kg, daily, oral gavage) or
LY3039478 plus sorafenib. Tumor growth was evaluated by ultrasound (liver
size), by the number of macronodules, and the number of micronodules on
HPS sections at sacrifice. Angiogenesis was evaluated by doppler (blood
flow in the coeliac trunk) and by CD31 staining.

Results: Liver size and the number of liver tumor macronodules were
significantly lower in all treatment arms compared to control placebo at
both the W12 intermediary sacrifice and W16 final sacrifice; the
combination of LY3039478 and sorafenib showing increased tumor control at
W16 (4,39±0,82 in mean liver volumes (in mm3) in the combination arm vs
5,41±1,0, 5,84±0,47, 7,09±1,5 in the sorafenib, LY3039478 and placebo
arms respectively). Angiogenesis assessed by measuring the mean blood
flow in the coeliac trunk (TCm), decreased in all treatment arms,
compared to placebo. At W16, LY3039478 potentiated the effect of
sorafenib, with a TCm decrease of 36% compared to 23% and18% the
sorafenib and LY3039478 arms, respectively. These results will be
confirmed by the assessment of micronodules number on HPS section for
tumor growth and CD31 staining for angiogenesis analysis (number of
vessels and the vessel lumen area). The effects of the combination versus
monotherapies will be evaluated on the immune landscape.

Conclusion: The combination of LY3039478 and sorafenib showed promising
anti-tumor activities that were associated with decreased angiogenesis.


