Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of single agent merestinib (LY2801653) or emibetuzumab
(LY2875358) and the combination in a xenograft tumor model bearing MET
exon 14 skipping.


Background: MET ex14 skipping, present in ~3% of lung cancer, is a strong
oncogenic driver which is further evidenced by case reports of patients
response to MET TKI treatment. ~15% of tumors in patients that harbor MET
ex14 skipping also have MET amplification (amp). Merestinib is a type II
MET kinase inhibitor1. Emibetuzumab, a bivalent MET Ab, internalizes MET
receptor. Each single agent and the combination were evaluated in the
Hs746t gastric cancer line bearing MET ex14 skipping and MET amp.
Methods: Each agent was evaluated in vitro for inhibition of Hs746t cell
proliferation and pMET levels. In vivo study in Hs746t-derived xenograft
mouse model (n=7 mice/ arm, 28 day dosing) initiated when tumors were
150-350mm3: merestinib at 6 mg/kg (suboptimal dose - insufficient target
coverage for 24 hrs) or 12 mg/kg (optimal dose) qd orally, emibetuzumab
at 10 mg/kg qw by IP. Results: Merestinib inhibited Hs746t cell
proliferation with IC50=34 nM and totally eliminated pMET at 65-100 nM.
Emibetuzumab slightly inhibited Hs746t cell proliferation (IC50>100 nM),
reduced 10-20% cell surface MET, and no effect on pMET expression (at
130-650 nM). In the Hs746t xenograft model, merestinib (12 mg/kg)
treatment resulted in 91.8% tumor regression after 21 day dosing, while 6
mg/kg merestinib provided transient tumor regression followed by
re-growth while on treatment with T/C=18.3% after 21 day dosing. No tumor
re-growth was observed in 6/7 mice in the 12 mg/kg merestinib cohort
during the 5 weeks post-treatment. Emibetuzumab treatment provided
transient tumor regression (37.7%) after 3 doses, but tumors re-grew
while on treatment. Combination of 6 mg/kg merestinib and 10 mg/kg
emibetuzumab resulted in 85% tumor regression for the duration of the 28
day dosing period and the treatment was well tolerated. Tumors in animals
re-grew upon termination of this combination treatment. Conclusion:
Merestinib (12 mg/kg) treatment resulted in durable and complete response
in 6/7 mice bearing Hs746t tumors with MET ex14 skipping and MET amp.
When used singly, merestinib (6 mg/kg) or emibetuzumab (10 mg/kg)
resulted in only transient tumor regression in this model, while the
combination resulted in substantial tumor regression while on treatment.
This combination treatment was however, not as durable as was observed
with single agent 12 mg/kg merestinib. Single agents and the combinations
were well tolerated. As a type II MET inhibitor, merestinib may provide a
therapeutic option to treatment na√Øve patients or those who have
progressed on type I MET inhibitor treatment, whose tumors have MET exon
14 skipping and/or MET amplification 2,3. Data in this study support a
clinical evaluation of merestinib in patients with MET exon 14 skipping
(NCT02920996). 1 - Yan et al. Invest New Drugs 2013;31:833-844 2 - Ou et
al. J Thorac Oncol. 2016; PMID:27666659 3 - Heist et al. J Thorac Oncol.
2016;11:1242-1245


