Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Creating a review process of a digital photo database collected on
NRG NSABP B39/RTOG 0413 phase III clinical trial for evaluation of
cosmetic results from breast conserving therapy (BCT).


Introduction:

After local control and overall survival, acceptable cosmesis is the next
most important goal of BCT. Digital photos (DP) are commonly used for
assessing cosmesis on clinical trials. On NRG NSABP B39/RTOG 0413, DP at
baseline, 1, and 3 years post-radiation were submitted for review by a
panel of breast cancer specialists. Given no current standards for
central DP review, this project seeks to develop a standard for
subjective DP evaluation. The initial standardization of the photo
database and reliability of the panel review is described.

Methods:

De-identified DP submitted and stored at NRG SDMC were downloaded to a
secure FTP site. Cases with only 1 time point, no baseline, or photos
from different patients were excluded. A minimum photo quality was set,
including pre-specified criteria for contrast/light, breast/torso size,
and cropping to exclude anatomy above the clavicle and below the
umbilicus. DP were edited with MATLABâ„¢ and saved in a Reformatted
Digital Photo Database (RDPD). A training set was created defining 4
global cosmetic scores, and each individually assessed criteria of breast
symmetry, shape, skin color, nipple, and scar appearance. A 14 case
calibration set followed the training set. The process for panel review
was adapted from the methods reported in the START and RAPID trials. The
review panel consisted of 6 breast-specific radiation oncologists, who
reviewed in groups of 3. For each session, the training set was reviewed
and calibration set scored. A separate 30 case test set randomly selected
from the RDPD was reviewed by 2 groups of 3. The calibration and test
sets were evaluated for agreement of categorized scores (excellent/good
vs. fair/poor).

Results:

There were 2064 DP from 892 patients on NRG NSABP B39/RTOG 0413
documenting the anterior view of both breasts. After exclusions, 1,717
reformatted DP were saved in the RDPD. Five 1-3 hour review sessions
resulted in scoring of 777 DP (~ 155 per session). Only 2/777 (0.1%) DP
were deemed poor quality and not able to be scored. There was full
agreement in categorized scores for 12/14 cases (86%; kappa=0.82) across
the 5 calibration sets; and 27/30 (90%; kappa=0.71) for the 2 test set
reviews.

Conclusions:

Cosmesis DP prospectively collected on a large phase III clinical trial
can be digitally formatted in a systematic fashion for consistent photo
quality, allowing for cosmesis consensus panel review without photo
quality bias. High agreement in categorized scores allowed reviews to be
completed by multiple 3-person review groups. Future work will focus on
creating an updated, semi-automatic analysis tool of these photos for
objective evaluation of cosmesis using the same scoring guidelines that
can then be compared to physician reported outcomes.

Grant Support: FUJIFILM Medical Systems/RSNA Research Resident, NCI
U10CA180868, U10CA180822


