Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamics of KIT exon 11 mutations in cell free plasma DNA of
patients treated for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors: Results
from the Dutch GIST bio-databank.


Introduction

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are rare malignancies of the
gastrointestinal tract. In the Netherlands, most patients with GIST are
treated in five sarcoma expertise centers.

GIST is known to have driver mutations in the tyrosine kinase receptors
KIT and PDGFRÎ± in respectively 80% and 10% of the patients. Mutations
(single nucleotide variations, insertions and deletions) are mostly found
in KIT exon 9 and 11. GIST patients with a primary KIT exon 11 mutation
respond generally well to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).

The aim of this study was to evaluate treatment response by the detection
of KIT exon 11 mutations in cell free DNA (cfDNA) of patients with GIST
at multiple time points.

Materials and methods

Since Dec 2014, plasma samples of patients have been collected at every
hospital visit and were put in a bio-databank for analysis of mutation
detection in cfDNA. Eligibility criteria were histological diagnosis of
GIST and treatment with a TKI. Patients with a known KIT exon 11
mutation, of which a baseline (before start of any TKI) sample or a
recurrence/progression sample was available, were analyzed. A custom
single-tube digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) drop-off assay, designed at the
UMCG, was used. This assay detects 80% of the known KIT exon 11 mutations.

Results

Until Nov 2016, >620 samples of 175 patients have been collected. From 43
patients with a KIT exon 11 mutations in the pretreatment tumor biopsy, a
baseline/progression sample was available. Mutations in exon 11 were
detected in cfDNA from baseline plasma of 22/43 patients, 20 with
metastasized and 2 with localized disease. Of the 21 patients without
detectable mutations, 11 had localized and 10 metastatic disease. Three
of these patients with metastatic disease had mutations that could not be
detected by our probe.

Two weeks after start of TKI, an increase in mutant allelic frequency was
seen in 5 (of 9 available 2 week samples) patients, while 4 weeks later
the mutant allelic frequency had decreased, in parallel

with decrease in tumor load on radiological imaging. Eight patients
developed radiological disease recurrence (2 patients, after 4 and 20
months) or progression (6 patients, median 10 (6-24) months). This was
paralleled by an increase in mutant allelic frequency in cfDNA in 6 of
them (baseline median 0% (0-0.9%); at progression median 3.5% (0-30%); p=
0.028; related samples Wilcoxon signed rank test).

Summary and conclusion

KIT exon 11 mutations in cfDNA could be detected in 74% of the patients
with metastatic disease. Disease progression or recurrence, coincides
with a rise of mutant alleles detected in the plasma.

In conclusion, mutation detection in cfDNA of GIST patients with
metastatic disease is feasible. Our study will be extended to include the
monitoring of early progression based on cfDNA, which may guide early
treatment adaptations.


