Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HH-002, a derivative of Homoharringtonine, show promsing in
diverse cancer models in preclinical characterization.


Homoharringtonine (HHT) is an anti-cancer drug used to treat imatinib
resistant CML, and a reversible inhibitor of translation acting upon the
early steps in polypeptide chain elongation. BS-HH-002.SA is a derivative
of HHT. BS-HH-002.SA was shown to decrease the phosphorylation of Janus
protein tyrosine kinase 2 (JAK2) as well as downstream targets, such as
signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 and 5 (STAT3 and
STAT 5), it also reduced Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) protein level
significantly and resulted in apoptosis. Evaluation of BS-HH-002.SA
efficacy. was test in HEL, an erthroleukemia cell line carrying a
JAK2V617F mutation which is seen in 90% of patients with polycythemia
vera (PCV) and half of those with essential thrombocythemia or primary
myelofibrosis. HH-002.SA showed was highly potent (at low nM
concentration) to HEL. Efficacy of BS-HH-002 was tested in a recombinant
human erythropoietin injection (rhEpo)-induced murine model of
polycythemia Vera, Treatment with BS-HH-002.SA BID for 4 days showed a
significant inhibitory effect on rhEpo induced increase in reticulocytes,
hematocrit and splenomegaly, as well as in red blood cell, white blood
cell and platelet counts. Furthermore, histology evaluations revealed
that BS-HH-002.SA exerted an inhibitory effect on rhEpo induced
extramedullary hematopoiesis in spleen, and decreased cellularity in bone
marrow with more predominant effect on erythroid cells than on myeloid
cells. Also, BS-HH-002.SA also show potent in vitro and in vivo efficacy
in pancreatic cancer cell line KP-4 and non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) NCI-H1975, BS-HH-002.S inhibited STAT3 Tyrosine 705
phosphorylation and reduced anti-apoptotic proteins expression Mcl-1
protein levels in both two cancer cell lines.


