Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modification of dietary sugar on the chemotherapeutic potential in
breast cancer.


Background: The estimated cost of breast cancer (BCa) care in the U.S. is
over 16 billion dollars yearly, more than any other cancer. Thus,
identifying contributors to BCa development and barriers in BCa treatment
is a continuing focus of BCa research. The per capita consumption of
sugar in Americans has surged to 70 lb per year, and an increase in the
consumption of added sugars is identified as a pivotal contributor to
worldwide epidemics of non-communicable diseases including cancer.
However, whether dietary sugar affects the efficacy of the chemotherapy
in BCa is questionable. In current study, we investigated the impact of
glucose or sucrose on the chemotherapeutic effect of chemo-agents,
especially doxorubicin, in the growth of BCa cells or tumors.

Methods: BCa cell (human MDA-MB-231, SUM159, T47D, BT474, MDA-MB-468 and
MCF-7) proliferation was assessed in 3-D culture system. BALB/C nu/nu
mice were used to investigate tumor growth with/without doxorubicin
treatment upon feeding sucrose enriched diet. Apoptotic gene array and
microarray analysis were used to determine gene expression profile.

Results: Among six human BCa cells tested, glucose treatment (30 mM)
promoted the growth of MDA-MB-231 and SUM159 cells after 10 days by 2.5
to 3 fold, respectively. In contrast, T47D, BT474, MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7
cells did not respond to glucose stimulation. Glucose treatment abrogated
doxorubicin-induced cell apoptosis in triple negative BCa cells including
MDA-MB-231 and SUM159 cells, and 4T1 (mouse) cells. Additionally, the
apoptotic effect of chemotherapeutic agents, such as epirubicin, 5-FU and
cyclophosphamide in MDA-MB-231 cells were also blocked by glucose
treatment. Furthermore, gene expression analysis demonstrated that
glucose significantly altered apoptotic genes in doxorubicin treated
MDA-MB-231 cells. Compared to doxorubicin alone, glucose/doxorubicin
co-treatment decreased a number of pro-apoptotic gene expression of
including PEA15, BAX, and BcL2L11; while increased anti-apoptotic gene
NFÎºB family. Finally, in mice bearing MDA-MB-231 cell derived tumors,
doxorubicin (4 mg/kg body weight weekly for 4 weeks) inhibited the growth
primary tumors by 50% compared to that in control mice. In the same
study, for the mice fed with sucrose diet, treatment of doxorubicin only
reduced the tumor growth by less than 20% compared to control diet fed
mice without doxorubicin treatment, suggesting that dietary sugar might
negatively impact the chemotherapeutic agent in BCa.

Conclusion: The results of our study indicated that glucose (sucrose)
altered BCa responses to doxorubicin in vitro and in vivo. Therefore,
dietary sugar may potentially interfere with the efficacy of
chemotherapeutic agents in BCa patients which warrants further
investigation. This study was support by a generous donation of Leighton
and Lynda Steward, The William A. and Madeline Welder Smith Foundation
and the University of Texas Startup Fund.


