Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific elimination of invasive and multidrug-resistant cancer
cells by an antibody-drug conjugate targeting AXL.


Upon therapeutic pressure, cancers commonly select for drug-resistant,
invasive subpopulations with elevated expression of the receptor tyrosine
kinase AXL. Besides the correlation between high AXL expression and
induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, a process known to
support metastasis, ample evidence also links AXL to resistance against a
variety of targeted therapies, including inhibitors of the MAPK pathway
in malignant melanoma and the EGFR pathway in lung cancer.

AXL-107-MMAE (HuMax-AXL-ADC) is a therapeutic antibody-drug conjugate
specific for AXL, containing the microtubule disrupting agent monomethyl
auristatin E as the cytotoxic payload. AXL-107-MMAE was previously shown
to induce potent cytotoxicity in vitro and in vivo, which was dependent
expression of AXL on the cell surface.

We evaluated the capacity of AXL-107-MMAE to target AXL-positive MAPK
pathway inhibitor resistant tumor cells, using malignant melanoma as a
clinically relevant example. First, AXL-107-MMAE was shown to induce
cytotoxicity in BRAF-mutant tumor cell lines that showed AXL expression
upon acquired resistance to BRAF-inhibitors. In contrast, no cytotoxicity
was observed in the BRAF-inhibitor-sensitive, AXL-negative parental cell
lines. In heterogeneous tumor cell cultures, treatment with a
BRAF-inhibitor selected for AXL-high, MAPK pathway inhibitor-insensitive
melanoma cells, which was prevented by combined BRAF-inhibitor and
AXL-107-MMAE treatment. Interestingly, we observed marked AXL
upregulation in biopsies obtained from patients after they developed
resistance to MAPK pathway inhibitors compared to paired pre-treatment
biopsies.

The in vivo potential of AXL-107-MMAE in malignant melanoma was
demonstrated using BRAFV600E-mutated xenograft model derived from a
patient who developed resistance to the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib in the
clinic. This indicates that AXL expression levels in treatment-resistant
malignant melanoma are sufficient to induce tumor regression with
AXL-107-MMAE, at least in this model system.

These findings merit clinical validation of the targeting of both
treatment-na√Øve and drug-resistant cancers with AXL-107-MMAE, either
alone or in combination with other targeted therapies.


