Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel PI3K inhibitor suppresses tumor progression by immune
modulation.


Phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) inhibitors have shown anti-tumor
efficacy in leukemia in the clinic and one such compound, idelalisib, was
approved by the FDA for the treatment of relapsed chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL) in 2014. A novel PI3Kδ inhibitor, YY-20394, was developed
with specific selectivity against PI3Kδ and inhibited PI3Kδ expressing
human tumor cells growth both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, our
previous data have shown YY-20394 significantly inhibited primary tumor
growth in immune-competent mice with 4T1 and CT26 tumors, as well as 4T1
lung metastasis with dose dependency. The anti-tumor efficacy of YY-20394
was largely mediated by T cells. More importantly, YY-20394
synergistically enhanced the anti-tumor efficacy of anti-PD-L1 antibody
in CT26 model and achieved long-term immune memory which is specific for
CT26 tumors, but not for unrelated A20 tumors. In vitro mechanistic
studies showed YY-20394 significantly inhibited T cell differentiation
into Treg both in mouse splenocyte and in human primary CD4+ T cells, and
was especially potent inhibiting their IL-10 secretion in vitro. Analyses
of tumors treated with YY-20394 reviewed that YY-20394 decreased the
percentage of Treg in the tumor infiltrating leukocytes, as well as IL-10
secretion. It also showed some effects on the myeloid populations in the
tumors. These data suggest the YY-20394, a novel PI3Kδ inhibitor,
represents a promising and safe immune modulator and shows great
potential as a cancer immuno-therapeutics.


