Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel uracil-DNA glycosylase, UdgX, as a new biochemical tool to
directly detect uracils in DNA.


The enzyme activation-induced deaminase (AID) is essential to the B
lymphocyte development and antibody maturation. It converts cytosines in
DNA to uracil. The unregulated expression of AID in many B cell cancers
is correlated with an increased load of mutations. AID also promotes DNA
strand breaks and is required for chromosomal translocations such as
IgH/Myc in these tumors. We have previously showed that B cell cancer
cell lines and patient tumors which express AID at high levels also have
high levels of uracil in their genomic DNA. We accomplished this by
excising the uracils using a uracil-DNA glycosylase (Ung) and labeled the
resulting in an abasic site with an aldehyde reactive chemical (ARP). ARP
contains a biotin tag and it was detected using a fluorescently labeled
streptavidin. The results from this assay showed B cell tumors have as
much as 100-fold higher levels of genomic uracils. Further development of
this assay has allowed the detection of uracils in the blood plasma and
buffy coat of B cell cancer patients. This “liquid biopsy” assay
technique has the potential to work as a simple surveillance tool for B
cell cancer patients who are in remission. In addition, we are exploring
the possibility of a direct detection of uracil in DNA, which would
provide greater sensitivity to this assay and simplify it. A unique
uracil-DNA glycosylase was recently isolated from M. smegmatis, UdgX,
that binds covalently to uracils in DNA. We are developing multiple ways
to detect uracil-DNA-UdgX complexes and amplifying the resulting signal.
We expect that this will allow us to directly visualize uracils in B-NHL
tumors and detect uracils in circulating B-NHL tumor DNA from a drop of
patient plasma.


