Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between total T-lymphocytes and colorectal cancer
survival in a prospective cohort study of older women.


Background: The increased number of T-lymphocytes residing in the tumors
of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients is consistently shown to predict
better survival of CRC patients independent of stage. In addition to
tumor itself, T-lymphocytes also infiltrate normal tissues adjacent to
tumors; however, little is known about how the inter-individual T-cell
variability in tumor-adjacent tissues affects CRC prognosis. Our goal was
to characterize total T-cells in colorectal tumor and tumor-adjacent
tissues and study their associations with all-cause and CRC-specific
survival in the Iowa Women’s Health Study.

Methods: We constructed tissue microarrays and quantified CD3 antibody
staining (Clone F.7.238; Dako), an established marker for total T-cells,
in paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 463 women diagnosed with
incident CRC from 1986-2002 (mean age at diagnosis was 74 years). Up to 3
tumor and 3 tumor-adjacent cores were immunostained for each person. An
experienced pathologist quantified CD3+ T cells in each area using 4
categories: non-detected, mild (1-10 cells per 0.28 mm2); moderate (11-29
cells per 0.28 mm2); and strong infiltration (≥30 cells per 0.28 mm2).
The obtained scores were averaged over all quantified cores for each
person. Cox regression was used to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) and 95%
CI for all-cause and CRC mortality in relation to (1) tumor score; (2)
tumor-adjacent score; and (3) the ratio of tumor to tumor-adjacent score,
hereafter called Score ratio. All scores were categorized in quartiles.
The final model adjusted for age at diagnosis, SEER stage, tumor grade,
body mass and smoking history.

Results: During follow-up for a maximum of 25 years, 67% of participants
diagnosed with CRC died (~30% died from CRC). There was a weak but
significant correlation between CD3 tumor and tumor-adjacent scores
(Spearman coefficient: r=0.15, p=0.02). CD3 tumor score was inversely
associated with stage and was higher in those with proximal colon cancer,
and for MSI-high, CIMP-high and BRAF-mutated tumors. The HRs (95%CI) for
the highest versus lowest category of CD3 tumor score were 0.61
(0.44-0.84) (p-trend=0.003) for all-cause mortality and 0.27 (0.15-0.48)
(p-trend Results: During follow-up for a maximum of 25 years, 67% of
participants diagnosed with CRC died (~30% died from CRC). There was a
weak but significant correlation between CD3 tumor and tumor-adjacent
scores (Spearman coefficient: r=0.15, p=0.02). CD3 tumor score was
inversely associated with stage and was higher in those with proximal
colon cancer, and for MSI-high, CIMP-high and BRAF-mutated tumors. The
HRs (95%CI) for the highest versus lowest category of CD3 tumor score
were 0.61 (0.44-0.84) (p-trend=0.003) for all-cause mortality and 0.27
(0.15-0.48) (p-trend <0.0001) for CRC-specific mortality. The
tumor-adjacent score was not associated with any characteristics or
death. The associations between the Score ratio and all-cause and CRC
survival mirrored those for the tumor score but were weaker. The HRs
(95%CI) for the highest versus lowest quartile of the Score ratio were
0.70 (0.45-1.09) (p-trend=0.09) for all-cause and 0.45 (0.23-0.87)
(p-trend=0.003) for CRC-specific mortality.

Conclusions. Based on data from prospectively identified CRC cases in the
IWHS cohort, colorectal tumor T-cell infiltration is associated with
improved survival. Further investigation is needed to determine the
T-cell subtypes that are most predictive of CRC survival outcomes.


