Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Single-cell protein-mRNA co-detection to reveals
subpopulation-specific correlation patterns.


We have developed a streamlined workflow for multiplexed co-detection of
proteins and mRNAs in single reactions at single-cell resolution. This
workflow couples OER for protein detection with reverse transcription
(RT) for mRNA detection. In this study, we examined 31 overlapping
targets, from a panel of 84 protein and 40 mRNA assays, across three
different cell lines (A549, SKBR3 and K562). Unsupervised gene expression
profiling analysis, including principal component analysis and
hierarchical clustering revealed different aspects of the protein-mRNA
relationship. The top 10 genes contributing to cell differentiation were
identified for both proteins and mRNAs, and eight of them overlap. This
result implies an overall concordance of certain protein and mRNA
expression in different cell lines. Our results also demonstrate that
cells can be classified into subpopulations based on protein-mRNA
expression profiles, and different subpopulations have distinct
correlation coefficient values. The correlation between CCNB1 protein and
mRNA was low (R = 0.2884) in the whole population. However, there was a
subpopulation in which CCNB1 protein correlated strongly with its mRNA.
When this subpopulation was analyzed, the R value was 0.8350, while
therest of the cells had an R value of 0.0233. More interestingly, in
subpopulation I CCNB1 protein level correlated positively with CCNA2
protein (R = 0.9102) but negatively with CCNE1 protein(R = - 0.5249). The
observed correlation patterns of these genes match their known expression
profiling at cell-cycle phases of S, G2 and M, suggesting that this
subpopulation may represent actively dividing cells. This study further
indicated that systematic comparisons of protein and mRNA expression data
in single cells can reveal additional layers of complexity which are not
attainable at bulk levels.


