Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A proteomic landscape of diffuse-type gastric cancer.


Gastric cancer is a heterogeneous disease characterized by poor clinical
outcomes and limited targeted treatment options. Among them, diffuse-type
gastric cancer (DGC) is the subtype with worst prognosis. Here we
describe the first proteomic landscape of DGC. We carried out proteome
profiling and targeted exome DNA sequencing of 84 DGC samples. We
analyzed the 1,008 (168 x 6) raw files together for uniformed quality
control and protein identification with 1% global protein false discovery
rate (FDR), which resulted in the identification of 11,340 gene products
(GPs). A SAM (significance analysis of microarray) analysis identified
1,641 proteins as differentially expressed between T (tumor) and N
(nearby) with statistical significance (FDR q value0.5/ 0.5/ < -0.5),
including 1,211 up-regulated and 430 down-regulated GPs. Gene Ontology
annotation indicated that tumor proteomes were significantly enriched in
cell cycle, DNA replication, checkpoint, E2F, WNT, p53 signaling,
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), and
inflammation/cytokine-receptor interaction pathways, and the proteomes of
the nearby tissues are enriched in metabolism pathways, such as fatty
acid metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, and amino acid metabolism.
Notably, many gastric makers (ANXA10, VSIG1, CLDN18, CTSE, TFF2, MUC5AC
and MUC6) and signature proteins for stomach functions, including
digestion, absorption, secretion, and stomach acid generation (PGC, GIF,
GAST, and ATP4A), were lost in tumors. Based on proteome profiling alone,
DGC can be subtyped into 3 major classes (PX1-3) that exhibit distinct
proteome features and correlate with distinct clinical outcomes
(Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon P = 0.024). PX1 exhibits proteome stability and
the best overall survival; PX2 exhibits dysregulation in DNA replication
and cell cycle, and is most sensitive to chemotherapy; PX3 features
hyper-activated immune response and is not responsive to chemotherapy. We
identified seven-marker proteins that can stratify DGC patients into
these three subtypes, opening a door for proteome subtyping in clinical
application and intervention. Furthermore, we nominated drug target
candidates taking into consideration both the altered DGC proteome and
association data with patientsâ€™ overall survival. This study revealed
the altered signaling pathways in DGC and demonstrated the advantage of
proteomic approach in molecular subtyping of cancer.


