Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of marin natural product derived Psammaplin A
analogs in human lung cancer cells.


Natural products are important sources for bioactive molecules, which
have been developed to treat various human health-related symptoms. In
our continuos efforts to search for anticancer agents from natural
sources, Psammaplin A (PsA), isolated from marine natural products, was
found to be a potential candidate in the growth inhibition of cancer
cells. PsA, a unique symmetrical bromotyrosine contained in a number of
marine sponges of the order Verongida, has exhibited a variety of
bioactivities including antimicrobial activity, cytotoxicity against the
leukemia cell line, and inhibitory activity of DNA gyrase and DNA
topoisomerase. PsA is also known to be a potent inhibitor of DNA
methyltransferase and histone deacetylase with growth-inhibitory activity
of cancer cells. However, its underlying mechanism of action and the
structure-activity relationship (SAR) with PsA analogs have not been
elucidated yet. In the present study, twenty-eight synthetic analogs of
PsA were newly synthesized and examined the potential of cytotoxicities
against cancer cells. A SAR study revealed that the presence of free
oxime and disulfide functional groups was responsible for high
cytotoxicity. Furthermore, the bromotyrosine component in PsA was
relatively tolerable and hydrophobic aromatic groups preserved the
cytotoxicity. The aromatic groups were dependent on their size and
spatial geometry. Among them, a Î²-naphthyl derivative of PsA showed a
potential cytotoxicity and was comparable to that of PsA. The compound
also exhibited a potential antitumor activity in a nude mouse xenograft
model. These findings indicated that free oxime and disulfide linker in
the chemical structure play an important role for cytotoxicity and PsA
analogs might be provided as potential antitumor agents. This work was
supported by the National Reseach Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded
by the Korean Government (MEST) (NRF-2016M3A9B6903499) and also supported
by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korean Government (MEST) (No.2009-0083533).


