Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evidence of APOBEC3 editing in the HPV16 genome.


Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a very common sexually transmitted
infection, however only a small proportion of women progress to cervical
precancer or cancer. HPV16 is the most carcinogenic type, causing more
than half of the cervical cancer globally. The HPV16 genome is
7,906base-pairs coding for 8 genes (E6, E7, E1, E2, E4, E5, L2, L1) and
one upstream regulatory region (URR). Within HPV16 there are 4 main
lineages (A, B, C, D) that are strongly associated with disease risk.

Human APOBEC3A (hA3A) cytidine deaminases have been shown to have
antiviral effects. The APOBEC mutational process results in a C to T base
change at specific motifs (5’ [C/T]•C>T•W 3’). Previous studies
established that there was evidence of APOBEC3 editing on a small number
of HPV16 samples. It’s unknown how these mutations are related to
infection clearance or the long-term accumulation of genomic mutations
that contribute to HPV-associated cancers.

We conducted detailed analyses to comprehensively evaluate APOBEC3
editing on HPV16 genomes using HPV16 whole-genome sequencing data from
3,215 HPV16-infected women in the NCI-HPV Persistence and Progression
(PaP) cohort. Cases were defined as women with cervical precancer (CIN3,
N = 1,093) or cancer (N = 109) and controls were women with no histologic
evidence of precancer or cancer (We conducted detailed analyses to
comprehensively evaluate APOBEC3 editing on HPV16 genomes using HPV16
whole-genome sequencing data from 3,215 HPV16-infected women in the
NCI-HPV Persistence and Progression (PaP) cohort. Cases were defined as
women with cervical precancer (CIN3, N = 1,093) or cancer (N = 109) and
controls were women with no histologic evidence of precancer or cancer
(<CIN2, N = 1,107). HPV16 DNA was extracted from banked specimens and
whole-genome sequenced using a high-throughput assay. We evaluated all
rare variants, defined as having a minor allele frequency of T•W 3’)
out of 96 potential motifs of 3 base-pairs. Using logistic regression, we
compared the number of APOBEC3-associated variants in cases and controls,
among HPV16 variant lineages, and among genome regions of the virus.

We discovered that there is evidence of APOBEC3 editing throughout the
HPV16 genome. Specifically, we observed that women with precancer or
cancer had less APOBEC3-associated variants compared to the controls (OR
= 0.84, p-value = 0.06). We further showed that women with an HPV16 A
lineage infection have more APOBEC3-associated variants compared to those
with a non-A lineage infection (OR = 1.35, p-value = 0.02). After
controlling for the number of APOBEC3 vulnerable loci, we observed that
the L1 (OR = 0.23, p-value = 0.04) and E7 (OR = 0.29, p-value = 0.07)
genes have less APOBEC3 footprints overall, and particularly in the cases
compared to the controls in these regions, compared to the viral
non-coding upstream regulatory region (URR).

Overall, we found that APOBEC3 is not affecting the HPV16 genome in a
uniform way, and instead, it appears to be targeting specific regions
which could suggest antiviral activity. Importantly, we determined that
APOBEC3-associated variants are less prevalent in cases which could be
related to disease progression in these individuals. Further evaluation
is underway.


