Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary patterns and risk of colorectal neoplasia in Puerto Rican
Hispanics: A case control study.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading cause of cancer death in Puerto
Rico and second cause of death in the US. It is well accepted that
modifiable lifestyle habits such as diet, contribute to CRC development.
Diet could reduce up to 70% of CRC cases. Dietary patterns vary according
to race/ethnicity. Puerto Rican Hispanics (PRH) have been shown to have a
distinct diet compared to US non-Hispanic Whites (NHW). According to the
BRFSS, only 17.7% of PRH and 23.4% of NHW consume fruit and vegetables
five times per day. The objective of this study was to describe the
association of specific food groups consumption with the risk of
colorectal neoplasia (CRN: polyps and/or CRC) in PRH. The validated Colon
Cancer Family Registry food frequency questionnaire was administered to
healthy individuals (controls) and individuals with CRN (cases) recruited
through the Puerto Rico Colorectal Cancer Registry (PURIFICAR). Models
adjusted by age, gender, educational attainment and family history of CRC
were fitted to estimate the odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence
intervals (CI) through a polytomous logistic regression models comparing
cases and controls. A total of 577 subjects were included in the study
(controls=254; polyps=50; and CRC=273). The frequency of consumption of
fruits, low fat dairy products, eggs, pasta/rice, non-fried chicken, and
seafood were significantly different between controls and CRN cases
(pColorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading cause of cancer death in Puerto
Rico and second cause of death in the US. It is well accepted that
modifiable lifestyle habits such as diet, contribute to CRC development.
Diet could reduce up to 70% of CRC cases. Dietary patterns vary according
to race/ethnicity. Puerto Rican Hispanics (PRH) have been shown to have a
distinct diet compared to US non-Hispanic Whites (NHW). According to the
BRFSS, only 17.7% of PRH and 23.4% of NHW consume fruit and vegetables
five times per day. The objective of this study was to describe the
association of specific food groups consumption with the risk of
colorectal neoplasia (CRN: polyps and/or CRC) in PRH. The validated Colon
Cancer Family Registry food frequency questionnaire was administered to
healthy individuals (controls) and individuals with CRN (cases) recruited
through the Puerto Rico Colorectal Cancer Registry (PURIFICAR). Models
adjusted by age, gender, educational attainment and family history of CRC
were fitted to estimate the odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence
intervals (CI) through a polytomous logistic regression models comparing
cases and controls. A total of 577 subjects were included in the study
(controls=254; polyps=50; and CRC=273). The frequency of consumption of
fruits, low fat dairy products, eggs, pasta/rice, non-fried chicken, and
seafood were significantly different between controls and CRN cases
(p<0.05). Adjusted models showed that a higher consumption of fruits
(OR≥once per day=0.29) and full-fat dairy products (OR≥once per
day=0.22) were associated with decreased risk of polyps (pColorectal
cancer (CRC) is the leading cause of cancer death in Puerto Rico and
second cause of death in the US. It is well accepted that modifiable
lifestyle habits such as diet, contribute to CRC development. Diet could
reduce up to 70% of CRC cases. Dietary patterns vary according to
race/ethnicity. Puerto Rican Hispanics (PRH) have been shown to have a
distinct diet compared to US non-Hispanic Whites (NHW). According to the
BRFSS, only 17.7% of PRH and 23.4% of NHW consume fruit and vegetables
five times per day. The objective of this study was to describe the
association of specific food groups consumption with the risk of
colorectal neoplasia (CRN: polyps and/or CRC) in PRH. The validated Colon
Cancer Family Registry food frequency questionnaire was administered to
healthy individuals (controls) and individuals with CRN (cases) recruited
through the Puerto Rico Colorectal Cancer Registry (PURIFICAR). Models
adjusted by age, gender, educational attainment and family history of CRC
were fitted to estimate the odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence
intervals (CI) through a polytomous logistic regression models comparing
cases and controls. A total of 577 subjects were included in the study
(controls=254; polyps=50; and CRC=273). The frequency of consumption of
fruits, low fat dairy products, eggs, pasta/rice, non-fried chicken, and
seafood were significantly different between controls and CRN cases
(p<0.05). Adjusted models showed that a higher consumption of fruits
(OR≥once per day=0.29) and full-fat dairy products (OR≥once per
day=0.22) were associated with decreased risk of polyps (p<0.05). A
frequency of consumption of 2-4 times per week, when compared to ≤ 1
per week, of full-fat dairy products (OR2-4 times per week=0.51), seafood
(OR2-4 times per week=0.49), and red meats (OR2-4 times per week=0.56)
was associated with a decreased risk of CRC (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is
the leading cause of cancer death in Puerto Rico and second cause of
death in the US. It is well accepted that modifiable lifestyle habits
such as diet, contribute to CRC development. Diet could reduce up to 70%
of CRC cases. Dietary patterns vary according to race/ethnicity. Puerto
Rican Hispanics (PRH) have been shown to have a distinct diet compared to
US non-Hispanic Whites (NHW). According to the BRFSS, only 17.7% of PRH
and 23.4% of NHW consume fruit and vegetables five times per day. The
objective of this study was to describe the association of specific food
groups consumption with the risk of colorectal neoplasia (CRN: polyps
and/or CRC) in PRH. The validated Colon Cancer Family Registry food
frequency questionnaire was administered to healthy individuals
(controls) and individuals with CRN (cases) recruited through the Puerto
Rico Colorectal Cancer Registry (PURIFICAR). Models adjusted by age,
gender, educational attainment and family history of CRC were fitted to
estimate the odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) through
a polytomous logistic regression models comparing cases and controls. A
total of 577 subjects were included in the study (controls=254;
polyps=50; and CRC=273). The frequency of consumption of fruits, low fat
dairy products, eggs, pasta/rice, non-fried chicken, and seafood were
significantly different between controls and CRN cases (p<0.05). Adjusted
models showed that a higher consumption of fruits (OR≥once per
day=0.29) and full-fat dairy products (OR≥once per day=0.22) were
associated with decreased risk of polyps (p<0.05). A frequency of
consumption of 2-4 times per week, when compared to ≤ 1 per week, of
full-fat dairy products (OR2-4 times per week=0.51), seafood (OR2-4 times
per week=0.49), and red meats (OR2-4 times per week=0.56) was associated
with a decreased risk of CRC (p<0.05). Our results showed that a higher
consumption of fruits and full-fat dairy products significantly reduce
the risk of polyps in PRH. In addition, consumption of seafood, full-fat
dairy, and red meats up to 4 times per week may reduce the risk of CRC in
PRH. Educational interventions for cancer prevention in PRH should
incorporate nutritional information tailor to our community.


