Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The leukocyte chemoattractant chemerin modulates PTEN via CMKLR1
in human tumors.


Background: Recent data in preclinical models has shown that phosphatase
and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss correlated with decreased tumor immune
cell infiltration as well as decreased response to T cell-based
immunotherapy. Chemerin (RARRES2) is a recently identified endogenous
leukocyte chemoattractant shown to recruit innate immune cells through
its G-protein coupled receptor CMKLR1. Chemerin/RARRES2 is commonly
downregulated in prostate and other cancers (e.g. sarcoma) compared to
their normal tissue counterparts. Methylome-wide studies in multiple
tumor types have identified RARRES2 as being one of the most
hypermethylated genes, potentially leading to decreased chemerin
expression. Our previous preclinical studies showed that forced
overexpression of chemerin in tumors was capable of recruiting immune
effector cells, including T cells, into the tumor microenvironment and
suppressing tumor growth.

Methods: In order to study the effects of chemerin overexpression on
tumor cell intrinsic processes we exposed prostate and sarcoma tumor
lines to exogenous recombinant chemerin in vitro. Evaluation of PTEN was
performed at both the mRNA and protein levels, using both quantitative
PCR and Western blotting, in comparison with normal prostate epithelia
RWPE-1 as well as PTEN-null PC3 cells as controls. in vitro invasion
assays were performed to investigate the functional impact of chemerin
exposure on tumor intrinsic activity. Knockdown of CMKLR1 using siRNA was
performed to determine its role in tumor response.

Results: Using both prostate and sarcoma tumor lines, we found exogenous
chemerin was able to significantly upregulate PTEN expression at both the
mRNA and protein levels in a dose-response manner. Exposure to chemerin
did not result in increased apoptosis or altered in vitro proliferation.
Importantly, chemerin treatment significantly decreased in vitro tumor
invasion. Knockdown studies showed CMKLR1 abrogation resulted in restored
tumor migration, suggesting a link between this GPCR and PTEN expression
and activity.

Conclusions: For the first time, to our knowledge, we have shown a link
between chemerin and PTEN expression and activity in both prostate and
sarcoma tumor lines. Our collective study shows chemerinâ€™s ability to
upregulate PTEN activity and to mitigate tumor cell migration via CMKLR1.
This work has functional implications on both tumor cell intrinsic and
extrinsic responses to chemerin-based immunotherapeutic strategies.
Further studies are needed to investigate the interaction between
chemerin and PTEN signaling, and its connection to oncogenic signaling
pathways manipulated in malignant tumors. Additionally, future in vivo
studies using these tumor lines will help further elucidate the
chemerin-PTEN axis and its role in tumor immunosurveillance. We
hypothesize that increased chemerin-driven PTEN activity may help
facilitate an improved immunotherapy response and functional ability to
attack cancer cells.


