Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomics of regulatory crosstalk between PPAR gamma & 14-3-3 genes
in breast cancer cells.


PPARγ, a ligand-stimulated transcription factor with differentiation
promoting activity is overexpressed in a variety of cancers. Perturbation
of PPAR-γ signaling is now believed to be a strategy for treatment of
several cancers, including breast cancer. A set of genes regulated by
PPAR-γ ligands is expected to mediate the antiproliferative and
prodifferentiation effects in cancer cells. Because 14-3-3 family of
proteins shows a debatable activity and varying expression levels in
different tumors, in the studies presented here we explored the
transcriptional regulatory role of Pioglitazone on the seven 14-3-3
isoforms presenting in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. This study demonstrated
that the potent PPAR-γ agonist, Pioglitazone exerted a regulatory role
on expression of 14-3-3 genes where it upregulated 14-3-3 gamma, epsilon,
zeta and tau by 3.8, 5.2, 2.7 and 739 folds, respectively. However, it
had a negative regulatory effect on 14-3-3 beta, sigma and Eta by 16.94,
4.58 and 2.12 folds, respectively compared with control cells. These
results correlated with growth arrest and a great increase in BRCA1 gene
expression by 1076 folds. In summary, these findings are the first time
showing that PPAR-γ regulates 14-3-3 genes and raises question whether
PPAR-γ ligands mediate their anticancer effects via regulation of 14-3-3
proteins.

Selected References: 1. Bridges, D. and G.B. Moorhead. 2005. 14-3-3
proteins: a number of functions for a numbered protein. Sci. STKE
2005(296):re10. 2. Chearwae, W. and J. Bright. 2008. PPARγ agonists
inhibit growth and expansion of CD133+; brain tumour stem cells. Brit. J.
Cancer 99(12): 2044-2053


