Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GNA13 is a theranostic target that drives drug resistance and
cancer stem-like phenotypes in solid tumors.


Treatment failure in solid tumors occurs due to the survival of specific
subpopulations of cells that possess stem cell-like (CSC) phenotypes.
Studies have implicated G protein-coupled-receptors (GPCRs) in cancer
progression and the acquisition of aggressive phenotypes. Many of the
implicated GPCRs signal through the G12 subfamily, comprised of GNA12 and
GNA13. In this study, we demonstrate that GNA13 is upregulated in many
solid tumors and impacts survival and metastases in these patients.
Consistent with this, we show that GNA13 expression modulates drug
resistance through its effect on the CSC sub-population in a panel of
patient-derived head and neck (HNSCC) and breast cancer cells. These data
were validated in vivo, where GNA13 over-expression in patient-derived
xenografts increased tumor initiating capacity, tumorigenicity and drug
resistance, with no effect on growth or proliferation. Signaling through
NFKB and MAPK pathways appear to be critical to the observed phenotype.
Importantly, blockade of GNA13 expression, or select downstream pathways
using small-molecule inhibitors, abrogates GNA13-induced CSCs, rendering
cells vulnerable to standard-of-care cytotoxic therapy for these cancers.
Taken together, these data indicate that GNA13 expression is a potential
prognostic biomarker, and interfering with GNA13-induced signaling
provides a novel strategy to block CSCs and drug resistance in solid
tumors.


