Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Src leads to a novel mechanism of resistance to PI3K inhibitors
through regulation of PI3K/p85 activation.


Activation of the PI3K pathway is commonly observed and is correlated
with tumor development, progression, poor prognosis, and resistance to
cancer therapies, such as radiotherapy, in most cancers. As a central
node of this pathway, PI3K is an attractive target for PI3K-addicted
cancer therapy and PI3K inhibitors may thus restore sensitivity to other
treatments when administered as part of combination regimens. Here, we
found that PI3K/p85 was expressed predominantly in the radioresistant
head and neck cancer cell line (HN31 cell line). And then, we
investigated whether PI3K modulation was crucial for the development of
novel treatment strategies for radioresistant cancer cell line.
Interestingly, we found that head and neck cancer cell lines with
PI3K/p85 activation showed the resistance to PI3K inhibitors and the
resistance mechanism was associated with Src activation which is a member
of a superfamily of membrane-associated nonreceptor protein tyrosine
kinases. Src inhibitor improves the efficacy of PI3K inhibitor treatment
through suppression of Src and PI3K/p85 activation in HN31 cell line.
Collectively, our study highlights the role of p85 and Src activation in
the resistance for PI3K inhibition and the potential clinical application
of combination regimens of Src and PI3K inhibitors in head and neck
cancers. This is the first investigation to analyze the role of Src in
resistance to the PI3K inhibitors of head and neck cancer. As a
consequence, a greater understanding of resistance mechanisms through our
results will enable the rational design of combination regimens and
sequential treatment algorithms to improve clinical outcomes.


