Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD8+ tumor-infiltrating T cells before and after neoadjuvant
therapy correlates with the pathological response in rectal cancer.


Background: Recently, neoadjuvant therapy (ie. neoadjuvant chemotherapy,
neoadjuvant chemoradiationtherapy) for locally advanced rectal cancer has
been generally performed. Although in unresponsive cases it may have
disadvantages such as tumor progression or delaying surgery, factors
predicting the clinical response to neoadjuvant therapy have not been
adequately defined. Meanwhile CD8+ Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
have been reported to have a crucial effect in tumor progression and
outcome as primary host immune response in various types of cancer, and
antitumor immune effect has been reported to contribute to the response
to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The aim of this study was to elucidate
the correlation between the local immune status and the effectiveness of
the neoadjuvant therapy for locally advanced rectal cancer.

Patients and methods: A total of 51 patients who underwent curative
operation for locally advanced rectal cancer after neoadjuvant therapy
were enrolled. We retrospectively examined the number of CD8+
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) using immunohistochemical staining
of pretreatment biopsy samples and resected specimens, and assessed the
correlation with pathological response. The grade of tumor response was
evaluated according to the definitions in the Japanese Classification of
Colorectal Carcinoma. Grade0-1a were defined as “poor response” and
Grade1b-3 were defined as “good response”. We set each median value
of the number of CD8+ TILs as the cut-off value.

Results: For the 26 patients with pretreatment biopsy samples, we
classified the the patients into the poor response group (n=14) and the
good response group (n=12). Then we set 6.0 as the cut-off value and
classified the patients into the high pretreatment CD8+ TILs group (n=14)
and the low pretreatment CD8+ TILs group(n=12). Low pretreatment CD8+
TILs were associated with poor response to neoadjuvant therapy (p=0.036).
For resected samples (n=51), we classified the patients into the poor
response group (n=25) and the good response group (n=26). Then we set
10.8 as the cut-off value and classified the patients into the high
posttreatment CD8+ TILs group (n=28) and the low posttreatment CD8+ TILs
group(n=23). Low posttreatment CD8+ TILs were also associated with poor
response to neoadjuvant therapy (pResults: For the 26 patients with
pretreatment biopsy samples, we classified the the patients into the poor
response group (n=14) and the good response group (n=12). Then we set 6.0
as the cut-off value and classified the patients into the high
pretreatment CD8+ TILs group (n=14) and the low pretreatment CD8+ TILs
group(n=12). Low pretreatment CD8+ TILs were associated with poor
response to neoadjuvant therapy (p=0.036). For resected samples (n=51),
we classified the patients into the poor response group (n=25) and the
good response group (n=26). Then we set 10.8 as the cut-off value and
classified the patients into the high posttreatment CD8+ TILs group
(n=28) and the low posttreatment CD8+ TILs group(n=23). Low posttreatment
CD8+ TILs were also associated with poor response to neoadjuvant therapy
(p<0.001). Additionally, the number of pretreatment CD8+ TILs tend to be
related to the number of posttreatment CD8+ TILs.

Conclusion: In locally advanced rectal cancer patients, T
lymphocyte-mediated immune reactions play an important role in tumor
response to neoadjuvant therapy, and the quantitative measurement of CD8+
TILs in pretreatment biopsy samples may be a predictor of the clinical
effectiveness of neoadjuvant therapy for locally advanced rectal cancer.
Moreover, low posttreatment CD8+ TILs were associated with poor response
to neoadjuvant therapy.


