Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: δ-Tocopherol inhibits the development of prostate adenocarcinoma
in prostate specific Pten-/- mice.


PTEN/PI3K/AKT axis plays a critical role in regulating cell growth,
metabolism, migration, differentiation, and survival. Activation of this
signal pathway is frequently found in human cancers. Data from our
previous studies demonstrated that δ-tocopherol (δ-T) attenuates the
activation of AKT by growth factor in prostate cancer cell lines, leading
to inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis. Herein, we
investigated whether δ-T is able to inhibit the development of prostate
adenocarcinoma in prostate-specific Pten-/- (Ptenp-/-) mice, in which the
activation of AKT resulted from loss of Pten is the driver. By feeding
Ptenp-/- mice with the AIN93M or 0.2% δ-T supplemented diet starting at
the age of 6 or 12 weeks, we found that, at the age of 40 weeks, δ-T
treatment reduced the number of invasive prostate adenocarcinoma by 53.3%
(pPTEN/PI3K/AKT axis plays a critical role in regulating cell growth,
metabolism, migration, differentiation, and survival. Activation of this
signal pathway is frequently found in human cancers. Data from our
previous studies demonstrated that δ-tocopherol (δ-T) attenuates the
activation of AKT by growth factor in prostate cancer cell lines, leading
to inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis. Herein, we
investigated whether δ-T is able to inhibit the development of prostate
adenocarcinoma in prostate-specific Pten-/- (Ptenp-/-) mice, in which the
activation of AKT resulted from loss of Pten is the driver. By feeding
Ptenp-/- mice with the AIN93M or 0.2% δ-T supplemented diet starting at
the age of 6 or 12 weeks, we found that, at the age of 40 weeks, δ-T
treatment reduced the number of invasive prostate adenocarcinoma by 53.3%
(p<0.005) and 42.7% (pPTEN/PI3K/AKT axis plays a critical role in
regulating cell growth, metabolism, migration, differentiation, and
survival. Activation of this signal pathway is frequently found in human
cancers. Data from our previous studies demonstrated that δ-tocopherol
(δ-T) attenuates the activation of AKT by growth factor in prostate
cancer cell lines, leading to inhibiting proliferation and inducing
apoptosis. Herein, we investigated whether δ-T is able to inhibit the
development of prostate adenocarcinoma in prostate-specific Pten-/-
(Ptenp-/-) mice, in which the activation of AKT resulted from loss of
Pten is the driver. By feeding Ptenp-/- mice with the AIN93M or 0.2% δ-T
supplemented diet starting at the age of 6 or 12 weeks, we found that, at
the age of 40 weeks, δ-T treatment reduced the number of invasive
prostate adenocarcinoma by 53.3% (p<0.005) and 42.7% (p<0.001),
respectively. By immunohistochemical analysis, the activation of AKT via
phosphorylation of AKT(T308) was found reduced in the prostate of the
mice on δ-T diet. Consistently, proliferation was reduced and apoptosis
was increased in prostate of the mice on δ-T diet. We also determined
oxidative stress by immunohistochemical staining of 8-OH-dG and
nitro-tyrosine, and found that these markers were not altered during
prostate tumorigenesis, nor they were affected by δ-T. A 0.2%
α-tocopherol diet was also used to feed Ptenp-/- mice, but did not
inhibit the development of prostate adenocarcinoma, consistent with
previous data demonstrating that α-tocopherol did not inhibit the
activation of AKT. Together, these results support that δ-T is effective
in supressing the development of prostate adenocarcinoma in Ptenp-/- mice
through inhibition of AKT activation.


