Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A highly sensitive method for noninvasive cancer profiling through
targeted methylation sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA.


Liquid biopsies, by analyzing circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA), have
emerged as a promising tool for noninvasive cancer diagnostics and
monitoring. Compared to the limited number of scattered DNA mutations in
cancer patients, the genome-wide distribution of numerous densely
clustered DNA methylation alterations may enable more robust cancer
signal detection and higher sensitivity in cancer diagnostics.
Furthermore, the cancer type specific methylation signatures potentially
can be used for the identification of cancer tissue origin. To enable
multivariate analysis of genome-wide methylation markers, we have
developed a targeted methylation sequencing assay that can measure the
methylation status of thousands of affected CpG (5'-C-phosphate-G-3')
sites simultaneously. This assay allows low cfDNA input as little as 3ng
while retaining good efficiency. The targeted sites were particularly
selected for hypermethylated markers in more than 20 major cancer types
based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Following bisulfite
sequencing of cfDNA, methylation signals from targeted CpG sites were
aggregated into a single score that measures deviation of a sampleâ€™s
methylation profile from a reference baseline. Cancer/normal
classification was performed by comparing the methylation score of a test
sample to a cutoff established by a group of plasma samples from healthy
individuals. Subsequently, methylation signals from cancer type specific
markers were used to perform cancer type classification. In a study to
evaluate the potential clinical applications of this method, we processed
25 blood samples collected from healthy individuals and 70 blood samples
collected from 63 advanced cancer patients. The assay demonstrated a
specificity of 100% (n=25), and a sensitivity of 94.3% in colorectal
cancer (n=36), 72.7% in breast cancer (n=11), and 52.6% in lung cancer
(n=19) detection, respectively. We further performed cancer type
classification on the samples that were correctly classified as true
positives in the cancer/normal classification. Our results showed a
classification accuracy of 82.4% for colorectal cancer (n=34), 87.5% for
breast cancer (n=8), and 70% for lung cancer (n=10). In summary, we have
developed a comprehensive method that allows us to perform noninvasive
cancer profiling through targeted methylation sequencing assay and novel
analysis algorithms. This method can potentially be used in multiple
validated clinical applications, such as early cancer detection, cancer
diagnostics, and monitoring of minimal residual disease.


