Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein with
health-related quality of life among breast cancer survivors.


Backgrounds/Aims Decline in health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is
associated with worse prognosis among patients with breast cancer.
Increased risk of inflammation with cancer-related symptoms such as low
physical function, depression and pain could be a potential mechanism. We
aimed to examine whether high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP)
were related to HRQoL among breast cancer survivors.

Methods This cross-sectional study of Korean breast cancer survivors
included a total of 165 women aged 29 to 63 years who had been diagnosed
with stage I to III breast cancer and survived six months or more after
surgery. Post-diagnostic HRQoL levels were measured using the 36-Item
Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) containing eight components: physical
functioning, role-physical, body pain, general health, vitality, social
functioning, role-emotional, and mental health. The higher scores
indicated better HRQoL. Circulating levels of hs-CRP were measured using
particle-enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay. We categorized hs-CRP levels
to four groups; Methods This cross-sectional study of Korean breast
cancer survivors included a total of 165 women aged 29 to 63 years who
had been diagnosed with stage I to III breast cancer and survived six
months or more after surgery. Post-diagnostic HRQoL levels were measured
using the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) containing eight
components: physical functioning, role-physical, body pain, general
health, vitality, social functioning, role-emotional, and mental health.
The higher scores indicated better HRQoL. Circulating levels of hs-CRP
were measured using particle-enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay. We
categorized hs-CRP levels to four groups; <0.4, 0.4-Methods This
cross-sectional study of Korean breast cancer survivors included a total
of 165 women aged 29 to 63 years who had been diagnosed with stage I to
III breast cancer and survived six months or more after surgery.
Post-diagnostic HRQoL levels were measured using the 36-Item Short Form
Health Survey (SF-36) containing eight components: physical functioning,
role-physical, body pain, general health, vitality, social functioning,
role-emotional, and mental health. The higher scores indicated better
HRQoL. Circulating levels of hs-CRP were measured using particle-enhanced
immunoturbidimetric assay. We categorized hs-CRP levels to four groups;
<0.4, 0.4-<0.6, 0.6-Methods This cross-sectional study of Korean breast
cancer survivors included a total of 165 women aged 29 to 63 years who
had been diagnosed with stage I to III breast cancer and survived six
months or more after surgery. Post-diagnostic HRQoL levels were measured
using the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) containing eight
components: physical functioning, role-physical, body pain, general
health, vitality, social functioning, role-emotional, and mental health.
The higher scores indicated better HRQoL. Circulating levels of hs-CRP
were measured using particle-enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay. We
categorized hs-CRP levels to four groups; <0.4, 0.4-<0.6, 0.6-<1.0 mg/L
(low risk), and ≥1.0 mg/L (average or high risk) on the basis of the
Centers for Disease Control/American Heart Association criteria (low
risk; 3.0 mg/L). We calculated the least square means (LS-means) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) using generalized linear models (GLM) to
examine the associations of each component with categories of hs-CRP
according to HRQoL levels. We adjusted for age at diagnosis, body mass
index at diagnosis, weight change, income level, stage at diagnosis, time
since surgery, tumor size and plasma vitamin D levels.

Results We found that increasing levels of physical functioning and
role-physical components were associated with decreasing levels of
hs-CRP; according to Results We found that increasing levels of physical
functioning and role-physical components were associated with decreasing
levels of hs-CRP; according to <0.4, 0.4-Results We found that increasing
levels of physical functioning and role-physical components were
associated with decreasing levels of hs-CRP; according to <0.4, 0.4-<0.6,
0.6-Results We found that increasing levels of physical functioning and
role-physical components were associated with decreasing levels of
hs-CRP; according to <0.4, 0.4-<0.6, 0.6-<1.0, and ≥1.0 mg/L of hs-CRP,
LS-means (95% CIs) were 78.1 (73.2-83.0), 75.2 (69.6-80.8), 76.1
(69.5-82.7), 70.1 (64.5-75.7), respectively (p for trend = 0.05) for
physical functioning and 77.5 (70.6-84.4), 81.0(73.2-88.8),
79.4(70.2-88.7), 66.6(58.7-74.4), respectively (p for trend = 0.05) for
role-physical. Higher scores of mental components were also associated
with lower levels of hs-CRP; LS-means (95% CIs) of Results We found that
increasing levels of physical functioning and role-physical components
were associated with decreasing levels of hs-CRP; according to <0.4,
0.4-<0.6, 0.6-<1.0, and ≥1.0 mg/L of hs-CRP, LS-means (95% CIs) were
78.1 (73.2-83.0), 75.2 (69.6-80.8), 76.1 (69.5-82.7), 70.1 (64.5-75.7),
respectively (p for trend = 0.05) for physical functioning and 77.5
(70.6-84.4), 81.0(73.2-88.8), 79.4(70.2-88.7), 66.6(58.7-74.4),
respectively (p for trend = 0.05) for role-physical. Higher scores of
mental components were also associated with lower levels of hs-CRP;
LS-means (95% CIs) of <0.4 and ≥1.0 mg/L of hs-CRP levels were 84.6
(77.8-91.4) and 67.1 (59.4-74.9; p for trend = 0.002) for role-emotional,
87.4 (82.3-92.6) and 77.4 (71.5-83.4; p for trend = 0.03) for social
functioning, 62.4 (56.4-68.4) and 53.3 (46.5-60.2; p for trend = 0.05)
for vitality.

Conclusions High circulating levels of hs-CRP, an inflammation biomarker,
were associated with lower levels of HRQoL among Korean breast cancer
survivors. Funding information This research was supported by the Basic
Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning
(NRF-2014R1A2A2A01007794)


