Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD47 antibody-induced engulfment of human T-cell leukemia cells by
bone marrow-derived macrophages.


CD47 is a trans-membrane “don’t-eat-me” signaling protein that
enables tumor cells to evade clearance by neighboring phagocytes.
Blocking CD47 allows phagocytes to identify and clear tumor cells and is
a promising new approach for cancer immunotherapy. In this study, we
characterized anti-CD47 antibody-mediated engulfment of living tumor
cells (CCRF-CEM) by mouse bone-marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) or
immortalized mouse macrophages (J774A.1). Phagocytosis was quantified
using a pH-sensitive cell-labeling fluorescent probe, pHrodo, and
automated kinetic live-cell analysis (IncuCyte). CCRF-CEM cells were
first labeled using pHrodo (250ng ml-1 for 1h), washed and then treated
with antibody for 1 h. Target cells were then added to BMDMs or J774A.1
that had been seeded overnight on 96-well plates. Phase- and fluorescence
images were captured and quantified every 15min. Anti-CD47 antibody
(B6H12.2, 0.04-5μg ml-1), but not IgG-control, produced time- and
concentration-dependent engulfment of CCRF-CEMs by BMDMs (30’-4h), as
evidenced by an increase in intracellular fluorescence as the label
accumulates in the acidic phagosome. After 4h the red fluorescence area
was increased by 25-fold (1975 ± 391 μm2 vs 80 ± 41 μm2). From close
inspection of the time-lapse images cellular engulfment could be clearly
observed, coincident with the appearance of the fluorescent signal.
Similar observations were made with J774A.1 as the effector cell.
Interestingly, the rate and degree of engulfment appeared effector
cell-dependent. The mechanism of engulfment was not via induction of
target cell apoptosis since anti-CD47 did not induce PS externalization
(Annexin V) or activate caspase 3/7. Anti-CD47 had no direct effect on
CCRF-CEM proliferation for the first 4 h but upon longer exposures (>8 h)
cell growth was attenuated. Our experimental findings substantiate the
known pro-phagocytic effects of anti-CD47 antibodies, and provide a model
system and method for quantitative functional analysis and mechanistic
insight of CD47 modulators as cancer therapeutics.


