Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined targeting of MEK and MCL-1 induces apoptosis and tumor
regression of KRAS mutant NSCLC.


There are currently no effective targeted therapeutic strategies for KRAS
mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Single agent MEK inhibitors
have demonstrated showed disappointing clinical activity, partly due to
inability to induce a robust apoptotic response. Combining MEK inhibitors
with BCL-XL/BCL-2 inhibitors may be effective for a subset of KRAS mutant
cancers that are dependent on BCL-XL for survival, however this
combination is unlikely to be an effective strategy for cancers dependent
on MCL-1. We investigated the effect of combining the MEK inhibitor
trametinib with a novel MCL-1 inhibitor (compound A), which possesses
potent and selective anti-MCL-1 activity in vitro and in vivo, on KRAS
mutant cancers. In contrast to colorectal cancer models, which are
largely sensitive to combined MEK + BCL-XL inhibition, a subset of cell
line and patient-derived mouse xenograft (PDX) KRAS mutant NSCLC models
were significantly more sensitive to MEK + MCL-1 inhibition compared to
MEK + BCL-XL. To model potential clinical strategies, we tested
intermittent dosing regimens and unexpectedly discovered a method
strategy for dramatically sensitizing KRAS mutant NSCLC cells to the MEK
+ MCL-1 combination. These studies provide rationale for the clinical
evaluation of combined MEK + MCL-1 inhibitors for KRAS mutant NSCLC.


