Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The first circulating tumor cell detection technique from frozen
PBMCs.


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) enter the vasculature or lymphatic system
after shedding from the primary tumor. CTCs may serve as “seed” cells
for tumor metastasis. The utility of CTCs in clinical application is not
fully investigated, partly due to the necessity for fresh blood samples
and the lack of CTC specific antibody. Of note, there is no CTC detection
tool for pediatric tumors. To overcome these drawbacks, we developed a
protocol for CTC capture from frozen peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) based on the cell-surface vimentin (CSV) antibody 84-1. CSV is a
unique marker compared to others such as EpCAM because it is only
specific to tumor cells and has been demonstrated to be a viable target
for isolation and enumeration of CTCs across tumor types. In this study,
we report the first CTC isolation technology from frozen PBMCs of
osteosarcoma patients using the CSV antibody 84-1. The CTCs captured
using this new protocol were validated by single cell gene sequencing
analysis and mesenchymal marker α-SMA staining. Moreover, spiking
analysis was also performed to ensure the specificity and sensitivity of
this unique CTC capture analysis. Linear regression analysis yielded a
positive correlation between the number of detected sarcoma cells and the
number of sarcoma cells spiked in both fresh and frozen PBMCs. In
summary, our results demonstrate for the first time, a technology to
specifically detect and isolate mesenchymal origin CTCs from frozen
PBMCs. This technology can be easily expanded to other types of cancers
including pediatric tumors because the antibody used is universal and CTC
specific. Such a technology will boost the feasibility and utility of
CTC-based diagnosis and therapeutic treatment monitoring in a centralized
laboratory.


