Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic lethality screening reveals ATR as responsible for
oxaliplatin resistance in colorectal cancer cells.


Despite the recent advances achieved in the treatment of colon cancer,
tumor resistance is a frequent cause of chemotherapy failure. Our work
was aimed to determine the molecular mechanisms involved in the
resistance to oxaliplatin, an anticancer agent widely used in colorectal
cancer treatment. To this end, we establish an oxaliplatin-resistant
cellular model from the colon adenocarcinoma cell line HCT-116. Among
cellular clones obtained, we used one displaying mild resistance (10 fold
called HCT116-R1) to perform short hairpin RNA-based loss of function
genetic screen in order to identify genes that can modulate the cellular
response to oxaliplatin by revealing genes the silencing of which causes
drug sensitivity (synthetic lethal interactions with the drug). Using
this screen, we have identified ATR (Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated and
rad3 related), a protein that plays a key role in the repair of DNA
double-strand breaks induced by various DNA damaging agents, including
platinum derivatives. We further validated ATR implication in oxaliplatin
resistance by showing that (i) shRNA-mediated repression of ATR in
HCT116-R1 oxaliplatin-resistant CRC cells sensitizes such cells to the
drug; (ii) co-incubation with the ATR inhibitor VE-822 (or VX-970) and
oxaliplatin led to a dramatic synergistic effect in six different CRC
cell lines (two oxaliplatin-sensitives: HCT116 and SW48; and four
oxaliplatin-resistant: HCT116-R1, HCT116-R2, SW48-R1 and SW48-R2) using
2D and 3D cell growth inhibition assays and in vivo. The synergistic
effect was evaluated using dose matrix data (an algorithm that was
implemented in our group); (iii) the synergistic effect of oxaliplatin
and VE-822 was accompanied by an increase of ssDNA, DNA double-strand
breaks, growth arrest and apoptosis induction. In conclusion, our
preliminary data confirm the results of our screen by demonstrating for
the first time the functional role of ATR in the sensitivity to
oxaliplatin.


