Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-SSTR2 × anti-CD3 bispecific antibody induces potent killing
of human tumor cells in vitro and in mice, and stimulates
target-dependent T cell activation in monkeys: A potential immunotherapy
for neuroendocrine tumors.


Somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) is highly expressed in neuroendocrine
tumors (NETs) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Treatment options for
NETs include somatostatin analogs and radionuclides; however, such
therapies suffer from short half-life, modest efficacy, and toxicities
due to inhibition of other SSTRs. Reasoning that a targeted immunotherapy
against SSTR2 would provide a new therapeutic modality for NETs, we
designed XmAb18087, a humanized and affinity-optimized bispecific
antibody that engages T cells to stimulate redirected T cell-mediated
cytotoxicity (RTCC) of SSTR2+ tumor cells. XmAb18087 possesses an Fc
domain that maintains long half-life, yet lacks binding to Fcγ receptors
to reduce Fc-mediated effector functions. XmAb18087 stimulated robust
RTCC of SSTR2+ cell lines including medullary thyroid carcinoma (TT),
lung carcinoma (A549), and CHO cells overexpressing SSTR2, with EC50s of
~1 to 100 ng/ml. XmAb18087 also upregulated CD69 and CD25 activation
markers on CD4 and CD8 T cells. T cell responses were target-specific,
because SSTR2¯ cell lines were not depleted, and because a control
bispecific (anti-RSV x CD3) was ineffective. In addition, XmAb18087 (3
mg/kg weekly) reduced tumor burden of an established A549 xenograft in
NSG mice engrafted with 107 human PBMC. We next assessed XmAb18087
activity in cynomolgus monkeys. As SSTR2 is not expressed in peripheral
blood, target cell depletion cannot be monitored in vivo. However, CD3
bispecifics induce effects such as lymphocyte extravasation, cytokine
induction, and T cell activation, which can serve as pharmacologic
markers for activity in target organs. XmAb18087 dosed once at 30 or 60
μg/kg rapidly activated peripheral T cells, as quantified by CD69 and
CD25 induction (peaking at ~8-12 hr). T cells rapidly extravasated from
blood, with a nadir by 8 hr. Cytokines IL6 and TNF were rapidly induced,
peaking at ~1-8 hr and returning to baseline by 48 hr. To explore repeat
dosing, XmAb18087 was dosed at 1 or 10 μg/kg on Days 0 and 7 in a second
study. The first dose of both 1 and 10 μg/kg again stimulated peripheral
T cell activation, extravasation, and cytokine induction. These responses
decreased markedly after the second dose, suggesting that SSTR2+ target
cells remained depleted for at least 7 days. In summary, these results on
human cells, in mice, and in monkeys support clinical assessment of
XmAb18087 in SSTR2+ cancers including NETs and SCLC. In monkeys, T cell
activation, extravasation, and cytokine induction were readily measured
in peripheral blood and are indicative of T cell-mediated depletion of
SSTR2+ target cells. Importantly, these responses may also serve as
useful surrogate markers of NET depletion in clinical trials of XmAb18087.


