Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C-Reactive protein and radiotherapy-induced skin toxicity in
breast cancer.


Background: Post-surgery adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) for breast cancer
significantly reduced the local recurrence rate. However, many patients
develop early adverse skin reactions (EASRs) that impact quality of life.

Methods: In a large prospective study of 1,000 breast cancer patients
undergoing RT, we evaluated an inflammatory biomarker, C-reactive protein
(CRP) in predicting RT-induced EASRs. In each patient, we measured pre-
and post-RT plasma CRP levels using a highly-sensitive ELISA CRP assay.
RT-induced EASRs were assessed using the Oncology Nursing Society Skin
Toxicity Criteria. Association between EASRs and CRP were assessed using
logistic regression models after adjusting for potential confounders.

Results: The study population includes 405 non-Hispanic White, 280
African Americans, 218 Hispanic Whites, 52 Asians, and 45 others.
RT-induced grade 3+ and 4+ skin toxicity at the end of RT were observed
in 42% and 15% patients, respectively. CRP levels differ significantly by
race/ethnicity at baseline and at the end of RT. RT-induced grade 4+ skin
toxicity was significantly associated with: obesity and pre-RT CRP >
2mg/L (OR=3.27; 95%CI=1.88, 5.68), obesity and post-RT CRP > 2mg/L
(OR=4.42; 95%CI=2.38, 8.23), or obesity and change of CRP > 1mg/L
(OR=3.58; 95%CI=2.00, 6.39).

Conclusion: The current data validate our previous findings that the
inflammatory biomarker CRP is associated with RT-induced EASRs,
particularly combined with obesity.

Impact: Our current findings support the discovery and development of
anti-inflammatory agents to protect normal tissue from RT-induced EASRs
and improve quality of life in breast cancer patients undergoing RT.


