Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Class I histone deacetylase inhibitors impair tumor growth and
metastatic programs.


(a) introductory sentence indicating the purposes of the study

Metastasis formation is associated with poor patient prognosis.
Epithelial-mesenchymal and mesenchymal-epithelial (EMT/MET) transition
cycles are key for the formation, survival, and homing of metastatic
cells. Inhibitors against epigenetic modulators of the histone
deacetylase family (HDACi) are promising, clinically tested epigenetic
drugs that may combat cancer proliferation and spread.

(b) brief description of pertinent experimental procedures

We chose a systems toxicology approach to analyze the relevance of HDACs
and their inhibitors for metastatic cell growth. We combined in vivo
tests with morphological, cellular, functional, and global proteomic
analyses. This strategy follows the 3R principle by Russel and Burch. Of
the four classes of HDACs (I-IV), the class I subgroup is most important
for tumorigenesis. We therefore analyzed how the pharmacological
inhibition of class I HDACs affects the growth and spreading of syngeneic
kidney cancer cells into the lungs of BALB/c mice and how such drugs
affect tumor cell growth, apoptosis, migration, and gene expression
patterns controlling EMT/MET in transformed kidney and breast cells.
Furthermore, we investigated how the genetic elimination of HDACs affects
cancer cell growth and EMT/MET. We used flow cytometry, immunoblot,
immunofluorescence, qPCR, proteomics on a global scale, RNAi against the
class I HDACs HDAC1/HDAC2, and in vivo tumor analyses.

(c) summary of the new, unpublished data

Both the inhibition as well as the elimination of HDAC1/HDAC2 evokes
growth arrest, morphological alterations, and apoptosis. HDACi block
tumor cell migration, integrin-dependent cell adhesion, and EMT induced
by the cytokine TGF-Î². Global proteomics and qPCR analyses illustrate
that HDACi disrupt EMT/MET cycles and metastatic spread. Moreover, these
assays reveal pathways through which HDACi propel cancer cell apoptosis.

(d) statement of the conclusions

Class I HDACi can modulate the EMT/MET balance that is required for the
detrimental process of metastasis. Hence, HDACi should be considered
further as clinical treatment option.


