Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination use of EF2K and VPS34 inhibitors with anti-androgen
against drug-resistant castration resistant prostate cancer.


INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES:

Modulating the activity of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF2K)
has been suggested to regulate protein elongation to block autophagy in
the tumor microenvironment. Among inhibitors of eEF2K, one would also
inhibit VPS34, a class III phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, and abrogate
autophage flux to impair the survival escape mechanism. We tested the
eEF2K and VPS 34 inhibitors from Janssen alone or in combination with
anti-androgens for their effects on proliferation of prostate cancer cell
lines, especially some castration resistant PC (CRPC) lines.

MATERIALS AND METHODS:

Cell proliferation was assessed with various concentrations of the EF2K
or VPS34 inhibitor on CRPC lines using WST-1 viability assay. Effect of
combinations of EF2K or VPS34 inhibitor with anti-androgens abiraterone
(Abi) or enzalutamide (Enza) on drug-resistant CRPC cells was further
explored. Western blot analysis was performed to examine the response of
key autophagic molecules, androgen receptor (AR) and variant. Real time
RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) was used to elucidate the effect of EF2K or VPS34
inhibitor alone or together with anti-androgens on AR, AR variant and
their downstream molecules.

RESULTS:

EF2K and VPS34 inhibitors suppressed CRPC cell growth in a dose-response
manner with IC50 ranging from 1 to 5 ÂµM. These inhibitors displayed
synergy with Abi and Enza against drug-resistant CRPC cells; especially
on the pair of enza + EF2K inhibitor with p = 0.02 for significant
difference when compared to enza or EF2K inhibitor alone. To our
surprise, no significant autophagy was induced by these two inhibitors
according to the autophagy markers detected by Western blots. VPS34
inhibitor alone and when combined with Abi and Enza showed AR/variant
degrading ability. This downregulation was at the expression level with
significant change of AR and V7, together with their transactivation
markers PSA, TMPRS2, NKx3.1 and FKBP5 detected by RT-qPCR.

CONCLUSION:

EF2K and VPS34 inhibitors when combined with anti-androgens may solicit
profound inhibitory effect on drug-resistant CRPC cells. Molecular
delineation demonstrated the direct target might be AR and its variants.
These combinations offered a new therapeutic option for advanced PC
treatments.


