Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of ecto-domain vimentin to target brain cancers.


Pritumumab is a natural human IgG1 kappa antibody derived from a regional
draining lymph node of a patient with cervical carcinoma. The recognized
antigen is an altered form of vimentin, called ecto-domain vimentin
(EDV), that is expressed on the cell surface of epithelial tumor cells.
For brain cancers, immunohistological analysis showed the binding of
pritumumab to EDV to be restricted to tumor cells and not normal cells
and tissues suggesting EDV may be a useful biomarker. A recombinant
version of the mAb was made using the GPExÂ® system in CHO cells that
showed comparable binding activity by flow cytometry, immunohistochemical
analysis, Western blot analysis, and Antibody-Dependent Cell-Mediated
Cytotoxicity (ADCC; EC50 of 39.6ng/ml) activity. Further studies include
establishing xenograft models with both SCID and athymic nude mice in
which pritumumab was effective in preventing tumor growth of both brain
cancer stem cells as well as pancreatic cancer in nude mice but not in
SCID mice suggesting an active immune response is necessary for optimal
treatment. Analysis of a blood brain barrier model suggests pritumumab
shows minimal distribution in normal brain tissues and significant
binding in tumor areas of brain tissues indicating the mAb crosses the
tumor brain barrier. Overall, these data together suggest that EDV is a
suitable target and biomarker for brain cancers.


