Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-resolution MRS characterization of malignant ascites in two
models of ovarian cancer.


Build-up of malignant ascites occurs in more than one third of ovarian
cancer patients and significantly contributes to poor quality of life and
mortality. Advances in understanding malignant ascites formation and
finding new therapeutic options are urgently needed. High-resolution 1H
MRS has been described as extremely useful in detecting endogenous
metabolites to diagnose cancer, by providing a detailed overview of
metabolic pathways in a single measurement. In the present study, we are
using two ovarian cancer cell lines, the murine ID8-VEGF-Defb29 cell line
and the human OVCAR3 cell line. Implanted orthotopically, these two
ovarian cancer models are characterized by different profile of ascites
formation. The mouse cell line ID8-VEGF-Defb29 induces large volumes of
ascites, often more than 10 mL, while the human OVCAR3 cell line induces
ascites less frequently and at smaller volumes, usually less than 0.2 mL.
We applied high-resolution 1H MRS to compare the metabolic composition of
both ascitic fluids. To better understand the differences observed, we
characterized the metabolism of these ovarian cancer cells in culture by
analyzing cell lysates and conditioned culture media with 1H MRS to
advance our understanding of cancer cell metabolic reprogramming in
malignant ascites formation and the role of the tumor microenvironment in
ascites formation and composition. The two tumor models used in this
study induced different ascitic profiles. While OVCAR3 tumor bearing mice
developed small viscous volume of ascites, ID8-VEGF-Defb29 induced higher
volumes. ID8-VEGF-Defb29 ascitic fluids were characterized by higher
levels of glutamine, glucose, poly-unsaturated fatty acids and pyruvate
compared to the OVCAR3 fluids, while all the other metabolites, including
glutamate, lactate, myo-inositol, choline and acetate, were lower. To
determine if the differences observed in the ascitic fluids were only due
to a different metabolism of the cancer cells, we investigated their
metabolism in vitro. We analyzed the metabolites present in the
conditioned cell culture media, and in the cells, and observed
differences in OVCAR3 and ID8-VEGF-Defb29 cells metabolism in vitro,
without replicating the differences observed in vitro. A Venn diagram of
the different metabolites present in the cells, media and ascites showed
differences in the metabolites present in those 3 compartments, and
highlighted the ones in common. Beta-hydroxybutyrate, lipids, maleic and
citrate were found in both ascites, and not in the cells or media.
Ascites MRS derived biomarkers could help in ovarian cancer diagnosis,
and enhance our understanding of the biochemical and metabolic changes
associated with ovarian cancer, and with ascites formation.

Supported by Tinaâ€™s Wish Foundation, NIH P50CA013175 and P30CA06973.


