Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum insulin and glucose, indices of insulin resistance, and risk
of lung cancer.


Background: Although insulin is crucial in human growth and development,
it also harbors antiapoptotic properties and acts as a growth factor by
stimulating mitosis through the Akt pathway, which could lead to tumor
growth and promotion. Insulin has been positively associated with several
cancer sites, but no studies to date have examined fasting serum insulin
concentrations and risk of lung cancer.

Methods: The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC)
Study was a randomized, double-blind intervention trial conducted among
29,133 male smokers in southwest Finland. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of four groups in a 2x2 factorial design (α-tocopherol
alone, β-carotene alone, both supplements, or placebo). 196 lung cancer
cases and 395 subcohort members were sampled from the larger cohort.
Fasting serum collected at enrollment (5-12 years prior to diagnosis) was
analyzed for insulin using a double-antibody immunochemiluminometric
assay, and for glucose using a hexokinase assay. Cox proportional hazards
models were used to estimate the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) of lung cancer risk by quartiles of insulin, glucose, and
surrogate indices of insulin resistance (insulin:glucose molar ratio and
homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance [HOMA-IR]).
Multivariable models adjusted for age, BMI, family history of lung
cancer, and pack-years of smoking.

Results: Insulin was positively associated with risk of lung cancer (Q4
vs. Q1 HR: 2.10, 95% CI: 1.12, 3.94). A similar association was seen with
HOMA-IR (Q4 vs. Q1 HR: 1.83, 95% CI: 0.99, 3.38). We observed no
statistically significant associations with glucose or the
insulin:glucose molar ratio (P-trend=0.55 and P-trend = 0.27,
respectively). Insulin and HOMA-IR were associated with lung cancer risk
regardless of stage, although the findings were stronger for the lower
stage cancers (Q4 vs. Q1 insulin, stage I-II HR=2.85, 95% CI: 1.14, 7.15,
P-trend=0.01; stage III-IV HR=0.94, 95% CI: 0.93 - 4.06, P-trend=0.23;
HOMA-IR stage I-II HR=2.25, 95% CI 0.89-5.69, P-trend=0.02, stage III-IV
HR=1.78, 95% CI=0.87 - 3.61, P-trend=0.34). Findings were similar across
histologic subtypes of lung cancer.

Conclusion: Higher fasting serum insulin and insulin resistance appear to
be associated with an increased risk of lung cancer. In addition,
elevated insulin concentrations may be more strongly associated with
lower stage lung malignancies, suggesting a role for insulin in
stimulating the growth of early pulmonary cancers.


