Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatory approaches targeting EGFR, HER2 and c-MET in recurrent
SCCHN.


Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) cells that escape
cetuximab inhibition exhibit HER2, HER3, and/or c-Met activation.
Simultaneous inhibition of EGFR, HER2, HER3 and c-Met presents an
attractive clinical strategy for treating SCCHN that has progresses
despite EGFR-targeted therapy. In an effort to develop new combination
drug therapy options for recurrent SCCHN, we evaluated three different
c-Met inhibitors in combination with a pan-HER inhibitor
(afatinib/crizotinib, afatinib/tivantinib, afatinib/cabozantinib) and
investigated their anti-tumoral effects. SCCHN cell lines (JHU022 highly
expresses c-Met, and SCC1-C is cetuximab resistant) as well as patient
derived xenograft (PDX) animal models from patients with recurrent SCCHN
were investigated. In our cell line study, western-blot assay indicated
that activation of EGFR, HER2, and c-Met was blocked in all three
combinations. In addition the downstream PI3K/AKT and ERK signaling
pathways were inhibited. Sulforhodamin B colorimetric assay (SRB)
revealed SCCHN cell growth was more effectively inhibited by the
combinations compared to any of the single inhibitors in vitro.
Furthermore, the combination was more potent in inducing apoptosis when
compared to each of the single treatments. Finally in the PDX study, all
treatment groups had significantly greater efficacy compared to the
non-treated control group (pSquamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
(SCCHN) cells that escape cetuximab inhibition exhibit HER2, HER3, and/or
c-Met activation. Simultaneous inhibition of EGFR, HER2, HER3 and c-Met
presents an attractive clinical strategy for treating SCCHN that has
progresses despite EGFR-targeted therapy. In an effort to develop new
combination drug therapy options for recurrent SCCHN, we evaluated three
different c-Met inhibitors in combination with a pan-HER inhibitor
(afatinib/crizotinib, afatinib/tivantinib, afatinib/cabozantinib) and
investigated their anti-tumoral effects. SCCHN cell lines (JHU022 highly
expresses c-Met, and SCC1-C is cetuximab resistant) as well as patient
derived xenograft (PDX) animal models from patients with recurrent SCCHN
were investigated. In our cell line study, western-blot assay indicated
that activation of EGFR, HER2, and c-Met was blocked in all three
combinations. In addition the downstream PI3K/AKT and ERK signaling
pathways were inhibited. Sulforhodamin B colorimetric assay (SRB)
revealed SCCHN cell growth was more effectively inhibited by the
combinations compared to any of the single inhibitors in vitro.
Furthermore, the combination was more potent in inducing apoptosis when
compared to each of the single treatments. Finally in the PDX study, all
treatment groups had significantly greater efficacy compared to the
non-treated control group (p<0.005) and all combination treatments
exhibited better efficacy in tumor growth inhibition than their
respective single inhibitors (pSquamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck (SCCHN) cells that escape cetuximab inhibition exhibit HER2, HER3,
and/or c-Met activation. Simultaneous inhibition of EGFR, HER2, HER3 and
c-Met presents an attractive clinical strategy for treating SCCHN that
has progresses despite EGFR-targeted therapy. In an effort to develop new
combination drug therapy options for recurrent SCCHN, we evaluated three
different c-Met inhibitors in combination with a pan-HER inhibitor
(afatinib/crizotinib, afatinib/tivantinib, afatinib/cabozantinib) and
investigated their anti-tumoral effects. SCCHN cell lines (JHU022 highly
expresses c-Met, and SCC1-C is cetuximab resistant) as well as patient
derived xenograft (PDX) animal models from patients with recurrent SCCHN
were investigated. In our cell line study, western-blot assay indicated
that activation of EGFR, HER2, and c-Met was blocked in all three
combinations. In addition the downstream PI3K/AKT and ERK signaling
pathways were inhibited. Sulforhodamin B colorimetric assay (SRB)
revealed SCCHN cell growth was more effectively inhibited by the
combinations compared to any of the single inhibitors in vitro.
Furthermore, the combination was more potent in inducing apoptosis when
compared to each of the single treatments. Finally in the PDX study, all
treatment groups had significantly greater efficacy compared to the
non-treated control group (p<0.005) and all combination treatments
exhibited better efficacy in tumor growth inhibition than their
respective single inhibitors (p<0.0l). In conclusion, our study
demonstrates that targeting EGFR, HER2, and c-Met with combination of
their inhibitors is more effective than each of the single inhibitors
alone both in vitro and in SCCHN PDX models. This study paves the way for
further clinical investigation of this combination in patients with SCCHN
who have progressed after cetuximab-based therapy. (This study is
supported by NIH/NCI R21 CA182662-01A1 to NFS and ZGC)


