Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Standardized prediction estimates for cancerous and noncancerous
gynecological lesions: a preliminary study in an oil city of Niger Delta
region.


The objective of this pilot study was to determine the epidemiology of
gynecologic cancer and non-cancerous lesions and to develop standardized
prediction estimates for the diseases in thirty-five years time. The
impact of cancerous and non-cancerous lesions on women's health cannot be
underestimated, especially where there is constant emission of
hydrocarbons and contaminated water level through oil spillage. Data used
for this retrospective study comprised of 679 records and covering the
period 2010-2014 were retrieved from the archive of Braithwaite Memorial
Specialist Hospital (BMSH) Histopathology laboratory in Port Harcourt,
Nigeria. Total of 32 (4.6%) cancerous and 665 (95.4%) non-cancerous
lesions were diagnosed with the distribution pattern differing
significantly (pThe objective of this pilot study was to determine the
epidemiology of gynecologic cancer and non-cancerous lesions and to
develop standardized prediction estimates for the diseases in thirty-five
years time. The impact of cancerous and non-cancerous lesions on women's
health cannot be underestimated, especially where there is constant
emission of hydrocarbons and contaminated water level through oil
spillage. Data used for this retrospective study comprised of 679 records
and covering the period 2010-2014 were retrieved from the archive of
Braithwaite Memorial Specialist Hospital (BMSH) Histopathology laboratory
in Port Harcourt, Nigeria. Total of 32 (4.6%) cancerous and 665 (95.4%)
non-cancerous lesions were diagnosed with the distribution pattern
differing significantly (p<0.001) by year of diagnosis, developmental
stage and age category. Leiomyoma recorded the highest 5-year
standardized prevalence rate of 0.508, and without intervention, it is
estimated that the number of cases diagnosed will rise from 235 in 2015
to 1883 by the year 2050. This was followed by ovarian cyst with a
prevalence rate of 0.124 and projected increase from 57 in 2015 to 461 by
the year 2050. Similarly, the product of conception is also predicted to
increase from 34 to 277 by the year 2050. The 700% increase prediction of
cancerous and non-cancerous lesions by 2050 calls for urgent attention
for both governmental and private agencies to fund awareness campaigns
and screening for women, especially for those residing in oil and gas
producing areas where oil and gas pollution are common. This may help
reduce morbidity and mortality associated with these conditions.


