Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted intracellular disruption of oncogenic p53/HDM2 and
p53/HDMX complexes underlies the therapeutic activity of a stapled
peptide drug.


The first anti-cancer stapled peptide drug has now been advanced to
clinical testing in relapsed human cancers that retain the expression of
wild-type p53. A common mechanism for cancer cell suppression of
wild-type p53 is overexpression of the negative regulators HDM2 and HDMX,
which neutralize p53 through protein interaction. Selective HDM2
inhibitor molecules can effectively reactivate p53 in certain cancers,
but the co-expression of HDMX can cause resistance, highlighting the need
for dual HDM2/HDMX targeting. We previously developed stapled peptides
modeled after the p53 transactivation domain to harness the natural
propensity of this alpha-helical motif to engage both targets with high
affinity and selectivity. Here, we demonstrate that ALRN-7041, a
next-generation, clinical-grade stapled peptide, achieves time-dependent
cellular uptake and nuclear localization without membrane perturbation,
dose-dependently dissociates p53/HDM2 and p53/HDMX complexes as assessed
by real-time protein interaction monitoring in live cells, and impairs
the viability of cancer cells bearing wild-type p53 by inducing a surge
in p53 protein level. Applying an unbiased statistical approach to
determine which biophysical parameters dictate the cellular uptake of
stapled peptides, we elucidated the design features of ALRN-7041 that
confer intracellular access, providing a roadmap for generating
cell-permeable stapled peptides with on mechanism cellular activity for
clinical translation. We find that cancer cells exhibiting a signature of
HDM2, HDMX, and wild-type p53 co-expression are strikingly susceptible to
ALRN-7041, highlighting the therapeutic potential of dual HDM2/HDMX
inhibition by a cell-penetrant stapled peptide in human cancer.


