Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Precision medicine for patients with advanced small cell lung
cancer treated with novel therapeutic agents in a phase I clinical trials
unit.


Introduction Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is aggressive and relapse is
inevitable. Novel therapies in the context of phase I (Ph1) clinical
trials should be considered in this setting. Next generation sequencing
(NGS) identifying putative driver mutations may aid therapy allocation in
such trial settings.

Methods Retrospective analysis of characteristics and clinical outcomes
of patients (pts) with advanced SCLC referred to the Phase I Clinical
Trials Drug Development Unit at the Royal Marsden Hospital between 1992
and 2016, using electronic patient records

Results 85 pts with advanced SCLC were included, of which 45 pts were
allocated to ≥1 trial each (48 allocations). Of these, 21 (46.7%) pts
started ≥1 trial, with a total of 24 trials commenced. Of the 64 pts
who were unable to commence trials, 43 (67.2%) had rapid disease
progression, 11 (17.2%) sought other therapies, 5 (7.8%) declined Ph1
trials, and 5 pts did not enrol for other reasons. Pts had a median of 2
previous lines of treatment (range:1-3). 13 pts had tumor molecular
profiling with high coverage targeted NGS, yielding 22 distinct
mutations; Aberrations in DNA damage repair (DDR) pathway were most
common: TP53 (53.8%), FANC (30.8%), ATM (15.4%), ATR, BARD1 and CHEK2
(7.7% each). All pts found to have ≥1 DDR pathway mutation had platinum
sensitive disease (disease progression ≥90 days from last platinum
dose) in first line setting. Other mutations found include ALK, APC, AR,
AXIN1, DDB2, ERBB2, mTOR, PI3K, NOTCH, NTRK17, PDGFR, RB1, RET, STK11,
FKT3 and VGFR2. Pts were most commonly treated with novel inhibitors
against PARP (n=9), PI3K/AKT (n=3), PD-1 (n=2) and BCL (n=2). Therapies
were generally well tolerated with no dose limiting toxicities observed.
Of 9 pts who received PARP inhibitors, 1 achieved a RECIST partial
response (PR) and remained on trial for 16 weeks; 4 achieved RECIST
stable disease (SD) for a median of 17 weeks (range:10.9-31.1 weeks). 1
exceptional responder whose tumor harbored multiple somatic aberrations
(TP53, FANCF, AR, ERBB2, NOTCH2) was enrolled on 3 sequential phase I
trials - she achieved durable RECIST SD on a PARP inhibitor (31.1 weeks),
RECIST PR with a PD-1 inhibitor (38.7 weeks), and durable RECIST SD with
carboplatin/ATR inhibitor (27.9 weeks). Platinum sensitivity in the first
line setting predicted for improved disease control (RECIST PR/SD 73.3%
vs 0%, pResults 85 pts with advanced SCLC were included, of which 45 pts
were allocated to ≥1 trial each (48 allocations). Of these, 21 (46.7%)
pts started ≥1 trial, with a total of 24 trials commenced. Of the 64
pts who were unable to commence trials, 43 (67.2%) had rapid disease
progression, 11 (17.2%) sought other therapies, 5 (7.8%) declined Ph1
trials, and 5 pts did not enrol for other reasons. Pts had a median of 2
previous lines of treatment (range:1-3). 13 pts had tumor molecular
profiling with high coverage targeted NGS, yielding 22 distinct
mutations; Aberrations in DNA damage repair (DDR) pathway were most
common: TP53 (53.8%), FANC (30.8%), ATM (15.4%), ATR, BARD1 and CHEK2
(7.7% each). All pts found to have ≥1 DDR pathway mutation had platinum
sensitive disease (disease progression ≥90 days from last platinum
dose) in first line setting. Other mutations found include ALK, APC, AR,
AXIN1, DDB2, ERBB2, mTOR, PI3K, NOTCH, NTRK17, PDGFR, RB1, RET, STK11,
FKT3 and VGFR2. Pts were most commonly treated with novel inhibitors
against PARP (n=9), PI3K/AKT (n=3), PD-1 (n=2) and BCL (n=2). Therapies
were generally well tolerated with no dose limiting toxicities observed.
Of 9 pts who received PARP inhibitors, 1 achieved a RECIST partial
response (PR) and remained on trial for 16 weeks; 4 achieved RECIST
stable disease (SD) for a median of 17 weeks (range:10.9-31.1 weeks). 1
exceptional responder whose tumor harbored multiple somatic aberrations
(TP53, FANCF, AR, ERBB2, NOTCH2) was enrolled on 3 sequential phase I
trials - she achieved durable RECIST SD on a PARP inhibitor (31.1 weeks),
RECIST PR with a PD-1 inhibitor (38.7 weeks), and durable RECIST SD with
carboplatin/ATR inhibitor (27.9 weeks). Platinum sensitivity in the first
line setting predicted for improved disease control (RECIST PR/SD 73.3%
vs 0%, p<0.05) and longer duration on trial (14 vs 4 weeks, pResults 85
pts with advanced SCLC were included, of which 45 pts were allocated to
≥1 trial each (48 allocations). Of these, 21 (46.7%) pts started ≥1
trial, with a total of 24 trials commenced. Of the 64 pts who were unable
to commence trials, 43 (67.2%) had rapid disease progression, 11 (17.2%)
sought other therapies, 5 (7.8%) declined Ph1 trials, and 5 pts did not
enrol for other reasons. Pts had a median of 2 previous lines of
treatment (range:1-3). 13 pts had tumor molecular profiling with high
coverage targeted NGS, yielding 22 distinct mutations; Aberrations in DNA
damage repair (DDR) pathway were most common: TP53 (53.8%), FANC (30.8%),
ATM (15.4%), ATR, BARD1 and CHEK2 (7.7% each). All pts found to have ≥1
DDR pathway mutation had platinum sensitive disease (disease progression
≥90 days from last platinum dose) in first line setting. Other
mutations found include ALK, APC, AR, AXIN1, DDB2, ERBB2, mTOR, PI3K,
NOTCH, NTRK17, PDGFR, RB1, RET, STK11, FKT3 and VGFR2. Pts were most
commonly treated with novel inhibitors against PARP (n=9), PI3K/AKT
(n=3), PD-1 (n=2) and BCL (n=2). Therapies were generally well tolerated
with no dose limiting toxicities observed. Of 9 pts who received PARP
inhibitors, 1 achieved a RECIST partial response (PR) and remained on
trial for 16 weeks; 4 achieved RECIST stable disease (SD) for a median of
17 weeks (range:10.9-31.1 weeks). 1 exceptional responder whose tumor
harbored multiple somatic aberrations (TP53, FANCF, AR, ERBB2, NOTCH2)
was enrolled on 3 sequential phase I trials - she achieved durable RECIST
SD on a PARP inhibitor (31.1 weeks), RECIST PR with a PD-1 inhibitor
(38.7 weeks), and durable RECIST SD with carboplatin/ATR inhibitor (27.9
weeks). Platinum sensitivity in the first line setting predicted for
improved disease control (RECIST PR/SD 73.3% vs 0%, p<0.05) and longer
duration on trial (14 vs 4 weeks, p<0.05).

Discussion Novel therapeutic agents within the context of a dedicated Ph1
trials unit were well tolerated and led to preliminary signals of
antitumor activity. Targeted NGS may aid in the identification of pts
with putative gene aberrations, potentially predicting for response to
novel therapies. Ph1 trials should be considered earlier in the pt's
disease course to maximize their prospects of trial enrolment.


