Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative phosphorylation as a target in triple negative breast
cancer therapy.


Altered cellular metabolism is a hallmark of cancer. It is increasingly
recognized that selected tumors are dependent on oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS). However, the role of OXPHOS in TNBC is not well
understood. We performed RNA sequencing in pre-treatment biopsies from 43
patients with operable triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) who received
sequential taxane- and anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. At a
median follow-up of 63 months, 14 patients recurred and 12 patients died.
At a false discovery rate of 0.05, 33 genes were differentially expressed
between the patients who did and did not have a subsequent recurrence.
Ingenuity pathway analysis demonstrated that one of the top canonical
pathways that differed was higher expression of oxidative phosphorylation
signature (p=5.89E-0.7). The patients who recurred had significantly
higher levels of mitochondrial genes: MT-ND1 (adjusted p or FDR-BH;
q=0.007); MT-ND5 (q=0.03) and MT-ND4 (q=0.04). Further, 21 genes were
differentially expressed between patients based on survival, including
MT-ND5 (q=0.001); MT-ND4 (q=0.005), MT-ND4L (q=0.015), MT-ND6 (q=0.018),
and MT-ATP6 (P=0.03). Top canonical pathway that was differentially
expressed based on survival was oxidative phosphorylation (p=9.98E-10).
We therefore sought to determine the efficacy of IACS-10759, a novel
inhibitor of OXPHOS, in 10 different TNBC patient-derived xenografts
representing different gene expression based Lehmann TNBC subtypes.
Growth inhibition was observed in multiple subtypes, with regression in
one basal-like 1(BL1) 1 model, and stabilization of growth in multiple
BL1 and immunomodulatory expression subtypes. Taken together, our data
suggests that high OXPHOS is associated with higher recurrence and lower
survival. OXPHOS is a promising target in several TNBC subtypes. A Phase
I trial of IACS-10759, a potent inhibitor of complex I of oxidative
phosphorylation, in leukemia is ongoing and planned in TNBC and other
solid tumors.


