Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring the role of copper-dependent lysyl oxidase (LOX) in
metastatic growth.


Copper is an enzymatic cofactor required for cellular respiration, iron
homeostasis, melanogenesis, neurotransmitter biosynthesis, and connective
tissue formation. Copper deficiency in humans is evidenced by Menkes
disease, a lethal pediatric disorder caused by mutations in the ATP7A
copper transporter. ATP7A, a ubiquitously expressed copper transporting
P-type ATPase, transports copper from the cytoplasm into the Golgi
complex to supply copper to secreted copper-dependent enzymes.
Additionally, ATP7A functions to export copper from cells to avoid copper
toxicity. Aberrant copper metabolism is characteristic of many cancers.
Copper-chelating drugs such as tetrathiomolybdate or penicillamine have
been shown to have anti-angiogenic and anti-neoplastic activity. Copper
also appears to be rate limiting for mitogenic signaling pathways
necessary for tumor growth such as RAS/RAF/MAPK signaling. The
requirement for lysyl oxidase (LOX) proteins in tumor metastasis is
further illustrative of copperâ€™s role in cancer biology.
Copper-dependent LOX proteins catalyze the oxidation of lysine residues
within collagen and/or elastin, stabilizing crosslinks between these
fibrous proteins during the formation or remodeling of the extracellular
matrix. While research implicates a direct role for LOX proteins in many
types of cancer, the use of copper chelators or other strategies to
starve LOX enzymes of copper as a therapeutic strategy has been largely
overlooked. LOX family members acquire copper in the secretory pathway
via the ATP7A protein. Consistent with this requirement, LOX activity is
reduced in cultured fibroblasts derived from patients with Menkes disease
that lack functional ATP7A protein. As the cancer promoting properties of
LOX enzymes have been shown to require catalytic activity, we hypothesize
that blocking the ATP7A protein could be a powerful approach to inhibit
LOX-dependent pro-tumorigenic and pro-metastatic pathways. In this study,
we have found that genetic ablation of ATP7A using CRISPR/Cas9 inhibits
the tumorigenic and metastatic potential of a multiple cancer cell lines
in vivo. These findings could be attributed to a variety of copper
functions or those of copper-dependent enzymes, such as LOX. In this
study, we investigate the role of copper-dependent enzymes, such as LOX,
using in vitro and in vivo methods. While others have implicated lysyl
oxidase secreted by cancer cells in tumorigenesis and metastasis, the
contributions of lysyl oxidase at the metastatic site have not been
evaluated. Here, I describe a novel conditional mouse model that we use
to explore this question.


