Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of resistance to FGFR-targeted therapy in bladder
cancer.


Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) overexpression, point
mutations or gene fusions are found in ~80% of non muscle-invasive and
~15% of muscle-invasive bladder cancer. FGFR inhibitors have entered
clinical trials in advanced bladder cancer however, as with other
targeted therapies, intrinsic and acquired resistance are expected to
limit treatment efficacy. We have used an in vitro model to explore
possible mechanisms of resistance.

The urothelial cancer cell line RT112 expresses an FGFR3-TACC3 fusion
protein and is sensitive to FGFR inhibition. Isogenic resistant cell
lines, termed R1, R2 and R3, were derived by long-term culture of RT112
in the presence of the FGFR inhibitor PD173074. Compared to parental
RT112, R1 and R2 show reduced proliferation and have a more mesenchymal
morphology, decreased expression of FGFR3 and increased expression of
N-cadherin. R3 has a faster growth rate, more epithelial morphology and
lower N-cadherin expression than R1 and R2.

The changes in morphology and gene expression between parental and
resistant derivatives R1 and R2 were reversed when the resistant cells
were cultured without PD173074 for 4 passages. Despite this, the cells
retained their resistance when re-exposed to PD173074.

Exome sequencing, RNA microarray analysis and phospho-receptor tyrosine
kinase array data on the parental cells and resistant derivatives and
will be presented. Our data suggests that diverse mechanisms of
resistance occur following prolonged FGFR inhibition.


