Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDXs) recapitulate the antitumor
activity of novel therapies in metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients
(pts).


PDXs are preferred laboratory models that recapitulate the biology of
pts’ tumors. We aimed to assess if the antitumor activity of novel
therapies in PDXs correlates with the observed activity in the
corresponding MBC patient, which would support cross-analysis of
drug/genotype vulnerabilities.

MBC pts eligible for clinical trials were offered a research biopsy and
establishment of PDX, under an IRB-approved protocol. Biopsies were
implanted in nude mice subcutaneously. Upon successful engraftment,
models were expanded for drug testing, specifically with the same
drug/combination given to the patient. This is a retrospective analysis
of our MBC patient/PDX (Pt/PDX) co-clinical trial cohort. Pts’ outcomes
were measured as: RECIST response, clinical benefit [CB: partial response
(PR) or stable disease (SD) >4 months], and time to progression [TTP:
time until RECIST progressive disease (PD), in months). PDX endpoints
were measured as: TTP (time until 25% increase in tumor volume, in days),
response (WHO criteria, at week 3), and relative area under the curve
(rAUC) of treated versus vehicle. A concordant Pt/PDX response was
defined as CB in pts whose paired PDX showed PR/SD, or no-CB in pts whose
paired PDX showed PD. Pts outcomes and PDX endpoints were correlated
using Spearman ́s test.

We identified 10 MBC pts (7 TNBC, 3 HR+; all biopsies from
skin/subcutaneous lesions) with corresponding PDX, treated with paired
therapies (7 molecularly matched): 3 lurbinectedin (BRCA1-mut), 3
olaparib (BRCA1-mut), 1 AZD5363 + fulvestrant (AKT1-mut), 1 AZD5363 +
paclitaxel, 1 buparlisib, 1 eribulin. In 9/10 cases we found concordant
Pt/PDX responses (6 cases with no-CB in patient/PD in PDX, 3 with CB/SD;
and 1 lurbinectedin case with no-CB/PR). Two pts had biopsy for PDX
implantation at progression of paired therapy and were excluded from TTP
analyses. In cases with concordant Pt/PDX response, we found a
significant correlation between RECIST response in pts and rAUC in PDX
(ρ=0.82, p=0.03), a trend for comparable TTP in pts and TTP in PDX
(ρ=0.67, p=0.10), but no correlation between RECIST response in pts and
response at week 3 in PDX (ρ=0.46, p=0.30).

In this cohort of MBC pts, we found high concordance in Pt/PDX response.
Our results suggest that rAUC in PDX may be the best read-out to identify
relevant drug/genotype associations that can potentially be translated to
patient benefit. Data will be updated with additional ongoing PDX
experiments.


