Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromatin remodeling genes are frequently somatically altered in
cervical carcinomas.


Introduction: Cervical cancer is responsible for 15% of all deaths due to
cancer in women worldwide. There is a need to identify somatic mutations
driving this cancer in order to facilitate development of novel
therapeutic strategies.

Experimental procedures: We analyzed whole exome sequencing data from 430
cervical carcinomas. The data were derived from a combination of our
previously published work (Ojesina et al. Nature 2014; Chung et al, Int J
Cancer 2015), and publicly available data generated by the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). The Mutect2.0 and MutSig2CV algorithms were used to
identify somatic mutations and significantly mutated genes (SMGs)
respectively. Copy number alterations were analyzed using the GISTIC
algorithm.

Findings: Based on MutSig2CV false discovery rate threshold of 0.1, we
identified MLL3 (19%) and MLL2 (13%) as novel significantly mutated genes
(SMGs) in cervical cancer. In addition, other chromatin modifying genes
including EP300 (12%) and ARID1A (7%) were confirmed as SMGs. Further
investigation of genes that did not meet the threshold revealed that 228
of 430 (53%) of cervical tumors harbored at least one somatic mutation in
a chromatin modifying gene. These include genes in the myeloid/lymphoid
or mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) family (28%), lysine (K)-specific
demethylase (KDM) family (23%), AT rich interactive domain (ARID) family
(13%), SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of
chromatin (SMARC) family (8%) and histone cluster 1 (HIST1) family (4%).

Conclusions: We have demonstrated that a majority of cervical cancers
harbor somatic mutations in chromatin remodeling genes. This novel
finding was facilitated by the larger sample size derived from combining
multiple datasets, and may have diagnostic and therapeutic implications
in cervical cancer.


