Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel molecule target for the detection,
prediction, and treatment of peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer.


Background: Advanced gastric cancer (GC) frequently recurs because of
undetected micrometastases even when disease is localized and patients
undergo curative resection. Moreover, peritoneal metastasis is fatal. We
aimed to develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets specific for
peritoneal metastasis of GC to improve management.

Methods: We conducted a metastatic pathway-specific transcriptome
analysis to identify candidate biomarkers comprising 340 patients
allocated to discovery and validation sets (1:2) to evaluate the
diagnostic and predictive value. The mRNA and protein levels in primary
GC tissues were compared with patientsâ€™ clinical characteristics and
survival. The effects of siRNA-mediated knockdown on phenotype and
fluorouracil sensitivity of GC cells were evaluated in vitro, and the
therapeutic effects of siRNAs were evaluated using a mouse xenograft
model.

Results: Synaptotagmin VIII (SYT8) was identified as a candidate
biomarker specific to peritoneal metastasis. SYT8 levels were elevated in
the validation set comprising patients with peritoneal recurrence or
metastasis. High SYT8 levels were significantly and specifically
associated with peritoneal metastasis, and served as an independent
prognostic marker for peritoneal recurrence-free survival of patients
with stage II/III GC. The survival difference between high and low SYT8
levels was associated with patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy.
Inhibition of SYT8 expression by GC cells correlated with decreased
invasion, migration, and fluorouracil resistance. Intraperitoneal
administration of SYT8-siRNA inhibited the growth of peritoneal nodules
and prolonged survival of mice engrafted with GC cells.

Conclusions: SYT8 expression represents a promising diagnostic and
predictive biomarker for peritoneal metastasis of GC.


