Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CASC-578, a novel Chk1 inhibitor, is active as a single agent in
solid tumors and displays synergistic anti-tumor activity in combination
with Wee1 inhibition.


Background: Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) is a serine/threonine protein
kinase that regulates cell division in response to genotoxic stress by
arresting cell cycle progression in the S & G2 phases. Pharmacological
inhibition of Chk1 is proposed to target tumor cells with increased DNA
replication stress, resulting in the uncoupling of DNA replication
checkpoint function and the induction of DNA damage and cell death. These
properties make Chk1 inhibition a novel therapeutic approach as a single
agent in cancers with high replication stress that is driven by oncogenic
signaling and loss of parallel DNA damage response pathway function.

Methods and Results: This report highlights the activity of the orally
bioavailable, selective small molecule Chk1 inhibitor, CASC-578, in solid
tumor derived cell lines. CASC-578 is a sub-nanomolar enzymatic inhibitor
of Chk1 with limited off-target activity against a panel of protein
kinases. When evaluated in a large cell line panel in vitro, CASC-578
demonstrated a broad potency range as a single agent in solid tumor
derived cells lines, with IC50s ranging from 30 nM to greater than 50
Î¼M. Several solid tumor types demonstrated enriched sensitivity to
CASC-578 in vitro, including gastric, non-small cell lung and ovarian
cancers. Treatment of sensitive cell lines with CASC-578 resulted in the
induction of DNA damage, as measured by phosphorylated histone H2AX, and
the induction of cell death. CASC-578 was active as a single agent in
SK-MES-1 and NCI-H727 NSCLC tumor xenograft models in vivo with minimal
effects on body weight in treated mice. In addition to the potent single
agent activity of CASC-578, combination with the Wee1 inhibitor AZD-1775
was highly synergistic in vitro in multiple solid tumor cell lines and
the combination was more efficacious than either agent alone in NSCLC
tumor xenograft models. These data support the advancement of CASC-578
into clinical development as a potential therapeutic agent for the
treatment of solid tumor diseases. Experiments are ongoing to identify
biomarkers associated with sensitivity to CASC-578 as a single agent in
solid tumor cell lines to prospectively identify tumor genotypes that are
more responsive to the drug.


