Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel intraperitoneal metastatic xenograft mouse model for
survival outcome assessment of esophageal adenocarcinoma.


Introduction: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) has become the dominant
type of esophageal cancer in United States. EAC is the fastest growing
cancer in the western world and the overall 5 year survival rate of EAC
is below 20 percent. Most patients present with locally advanced or
widespread metastatic disease, where current treatment is largely
ineffective. Prognosis for EAC patients remains poor even with
combination therapies due to high resistance to chemotherapy. Therefore,
new therapeutic approaches are urgently needed. Improvement of esophageal
adenocarcinoma outcome requires well-characterized animal models in which
to evaluate novel therapeutics. In this study we aimed to establish a
peritoneal dissemination xenograft mouse model of esophageal
adenocarcinoma that would support survival outcome analyses.

Methods: To find the best candidate cell line from 7 esophageal
adenocarcinoma cell lines of various origin, we injected them
intraperitoneally and subcutaneously into severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice and examined the tumor progression and
survival outcomes. Human esophageal adenocarcinoma cell lines of
Caucasian/Hispanic origin ESO26, OE33, ESO51, SK-GT-2, OE19, OACM5.1C and
Flo-1 originating from gastroesophageal junction, distal esophagus and
gastric cardia/fundus were injected intraperitoneally/subcutaneously into
SCID mice. The peritoneal/xenograft tumor formation and mouse survival
were compared among different groups.

Results: All cell lines injected subcutaneously formed tumors within 3
months at variable rates. All cell lines except OACM5.1C formed
intraperitoneal tumors within 3 months at variable rates. Median animal
survival with peritoneal dissemination was 108 days for ESO26 cells
(5X106), 65 days for OE33 cells (5X106), 88 days for ESO51 cells (5X106),
76 days for SK-GT-2 cells (5X106), 55 days for OE19 cells (5X106), 45
days for OE19 cells (10X106) and 82 days for Flo-1 cells (5X106).
Interestingly, only in the OE19 model all mice (7/7 for 5X106 and 5/5
for10X106) developed bloody ascites with liver metastasis after
intraperitoneal injection. The median survival time of these animals was
the shortest (45 days for 10X106 cells). In addition, median survival was
significantly increased after paclitaxel treatment compared with the
control group (57 days versus 45 days, p=0.0034) along with a significant
decrease of the relative subcutaneous tumor volume (p=0.023).

Conclusion: Peritoneal esophageal adenocarcinoma xenografts were
successfully established after intraperitoneal injection of OE19 cells.
This animal model of peritoneal dissemination for survival outcome will
provide a useful survival outcome assessment model for the preclinical
evaluation of cancer therapeutics in esophageal adenocarcinoma.


