Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAIL resistance of glioblastoma cells is associated with DNA
damage signalling network.


To reduce the risk of ageing associated dysfunctions and maintain the
genomic stability, cells need a complex DNA repair mechanisms. Defects in
this pathway or accumulation of DNA damage lead to genome instability,
tumorigenesis, and ageing. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are designed to
kill cancer cells by inducing DNA damage and triggering cellular ageing.
Surgery followed by combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy is currently
the standard therapy for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) which is the most
common primary brain tumor. TNF related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
is promising anti-cancer agent for GBM therapy, as it induces apoptotic
death in only cancerous cells, but not in normal cells. However, the
mechanisms underlying TRAIL resistance in GBM have remained elusive. To
understand the role of DNA damage response (DDR) mechanism and develop
more effective therapeutic approaches, TRAIL resistant and sensitive T98G
cells were generated. The effect of DDR proteins (H2AX (Ser319), ATM
total, ATR total, CHK1 total, CHK2 total, ATM (Ser1981), ATR (Ser428),
CHK1 (Ser345), CHK2 (Ser19) and 53BP1) on TRAIL resistance was detected
in TRAIL resistant and sensitive T98G cells. These proteins showed
different level of protein expressions in TRAIL resistance and sensitive
T98G cells. Most remarkable difference was found in the level of
phosphorylated kinase CHK2 (Ser19) with higher expression level in TRAIL
resistant T98G cells than TRAIL sensitive T98G cells. Therapies that
inhibit CHK2 (Ser19) levels in glioma may enhance the efficacy of TRAIL
treatment. In immunofluorescence analysis, increased number of Î³H2AX
foci was noted upon TRAIL treatment. These findings demonstrate that DNA
damage signalling pathways contribute to TRAIL resistance and targeted
inhibition of DNA repair factors can provide the most effective
therapeutic strategies to overcome TRAIL resistance of GBMs. Moreover,
the information from this study may hold answers for cancer research in
future and serve as a potential suppressor for the treatment of cancer.


