Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of pleiotropic cancer susceptibility variants from
genome-wide association studies reveals functional characteristics.


Background: There exists compelling evidence that some genetic variants
are associated with the risk of multiple cancers (i.e., pleiotropy).
However, the biological mechanisms of the pleiotropic effects are
unclear. Thus, we investigated the functional effects for genetic
variants associated with the risk of multiple cancers.

Methods: The National Human Genome Research Institute-European
Bioinformatics Institute (NHGRI-EBI) GWAS Catalog contains 28,643
variant-trait associations with p Methods: The National Human Genome
Research Institute-European Bioinformatics Institute (NHGRI-EBI) GWAS
Catalog contains 28,643 variant-trait associations with p < 10-5. We
utilized the Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO) to classify cancer traits
and obtained all associations between variants and cancer risk. Based on
pairwise linkage disequilibrium (LD) determined from the European (EUR)
population of Phase 3 of the 1000 Genomes Project in LDlink, correlated
variants (R-squared â‰¥ 0.8) were clustered into groups. Variant groups
associated with the risk of multiple cancers were annotated using the
Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP), and tested for functional
enrichment using the DAVID Functional Annotation Tool.

Results: We identified 1,456 variant-cancer risk associations. The
majority (57.1%) of the associations were discovered in European ancestry
populations, 19.0% in East Asians, 7.9% in an African Americans or
Afro-Caribbeans, and 7.1% in Hispanics or Latin Americans. Removing
duplicates, we found 1,034 unique variant-cancer risk associations for
1,005 unique variants and 27 unique cancer sites. After clustering
correlated variants, we identified 29 pleiotropic variant groups, of
which 2 were associated with risk of five different cancer sites. Variant
group rs10936599 and rs12696304 within the MYNN gene (7.8 kb from the
TERC gene) was associated with leukemia, multiple myeloma, and
colorectal, skin, and bladder cancer. Variant group rs31489, rs31490,
rs401681, and rs4975616 within the CLPTM1L gene (22.8 kb from the TERT
gene) was associated with leukemia, and lung, pancreatic, skin, and
bladder cancer. Among the 42 unique variants that composed the 29
pleiotropic variant groups, 41 variants were within a known gene, and
only 1 variant was in an intergenic region. The 41 variants mapped to 26
genes, which were enriched in cellular response to hypoxia (p= 0.0071),
establishment of protein localization to telomere (p= 0.0071), and ubl
conjugation (p= 0.0072).

Conclusion: This study identified and functionally characterized genetic
variants showing pleiotropic effects on cancer risk. Our findings improve
the understanding of shared biological mechanisms common to different
cancers. Clinical implications could include the classification of
cancers based on etiology, genetic testing for multiple cancers, and
repurposing cancer treatments.


