Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying intrinsic regulators of PD-L1 expression in cancer
cells: A genome-scale CRISPR knock-out approach.


Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer in the United States and affects 600,000 people each year
worldwide. With a five-year survival rate of only 50% and a recent rise
in HPV-associated HNSCCs, improved treatment protocols are urgently
needed. Evidence of immunosuppression is often reported in HNSCC, making
immunotherapy an attractive strategy for the management of this disease.
The immune checkpoint inhibitor Pembrolizumab was recently approved for
the treatment of metastatic and recurrent HNSCC, but only 18% of initial
participants in a trial of Pembrolizumab responded, and it remains
difficult to predict patients likely to experience benefit. To increase
the number of patients that respond to immune checkpoint inhibition, we
sought to identify targetable genetic factors modulating PD-L1, a
molecule that serves to dampen the anti-tumor immune response. We show
that several HNSCC models exhibit mild (2-4 fold) induction of PD-L1
expression following treatment with interferon-Î³ (adaptive expression),
and recent reports suggest that common oncogenic pathways, including the
EGFR and PI3K pathways, may provide a novel strategy to regulate PD-L1
expression. To this end, we developed a high throughput screen to
identify targetable pathways that may be used to regulate PD-L1
expression in patients with specific genetic lesions. We have employed a
Genome-scale CRISPR Knock-Out (GeCKO) screening technique in HNSCC cell
lines and selected for genetic knockouts exhibiting altered PD-L1
expression. Stable knockout pools with representation of approximately
300 gRNAs per target gene (>20,000 target genes in the library) were
expanded and serially sorted to create stable sub-populations with
enhanced PD-L1 expression. These sub-populations were sequenced to
identify gRNAs whose knockout causes a change in PD-L1 expression (e.g.
genes that repress or enhance PD-L1 expression). We expect that these
large-scale screens, when performed over multiple HNSCC cell lines with
diverse genetic lesions, will identify patterns of targetable regulators
that may ultimately be manipulated in combination with PD-1/PD-L1
inhibitors.


