Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LEF1 negatively regulates differentiation of HCC by activation of
Notch signaling pathway.


Lymphoid enhancer binding factor-1 (LEF1), an essential regulatory
protein, plays a crucial role on self-renewal and differentiation
properties of several cancers, contributing to tumor malignancy degree
and prognosis. However, its molecular mechanisms to promote tumor
differentiation still keep unknown, especially in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). In this study, by analyzing the transcriptome datasets
and our qPCR result of clinical HCC samples, we found that LEF is
frequently overexpressed in HCCs and significantly associated with HCC
differentiation (p=0.015). In addition, functional study showed that LEF1
could enhance the cell proliferation, matrigel invasion, transwell
migration, as well as self-renewal abilities both in vivo and in vitro
experiments. We also demonstrated LEF1 is closely related to Notch
intracellular domain (NICD), and revealed several putative sites as the
targets for LEF1 activating Notch signaling pathway. LEF1 could induce
the Notch signaling via transcriptionally up-regulate Notch expression
through direct DNA binding. The expressions of several downstream members
in Notch signaling pathway including Notch1 and Notch2 were subsequently
increased. Moreover, LEF1 could down-regulate various differentiation
markers and over-express tumor stemness related genes. Together, LEF1 is
a novel oncogene that show a crucial role in the tumorigenesis and
progression of HCC via activating Notch signaling pathway and inhibiting
the differentiation and stemness of HCC, resulting in poor pathologic
differentiation and leads to high degree of malignant. All the findings
suggest a novel treatment possibility and a new target for liver stem
cell eradication. LEF1 could be investigated for clinical early diagnosis
and prognosis prediction of HCC patients and improving the development of
new therapy against HCC.


