Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Neratinib/fulvestrant but not fulvestrant alone maintain complete
responses after treatment with trastuzumab/paclitaxel of mice bearing
ER+/HER2+ xenografts.


Background: Neratinib is a potent, irreversible pan-HER tyrosine kinase
inhibitor. The phase III trial ExteNET showed improved disease-free
survival of neratinib vs placebo in early-stage HER2+ breast cancer
patients (pts) after trastuzumab-based adjuvant therapy. This benefit
from neratinib was greater in pts with hormone receptor (HR)+ tumors.
Based on these findings, we sought to establish a human-in-mouse model
that would simulate this clinical trial and outcome, thus providing a
platform for mechanistic investigation.

Methods: ER+/HER2-amplified MDA-361 cells were injected subcutaneously
(SC) into 5-week-old female athymic mice without estradiol
supplementation. Mice with tumors ≥250 mm3 were treated with
trastuzumab (tz) 20 mg/kg + paclitaxel (pac) 15 mg/kg IP twice weekly for
4 weeks, and then randomized to fulvestrant (fulv) SC 5 mg/week ±
neratinib 20 mg/kg/day by orogastric gavage for 4 weeks.

Results: Xenografts in all 20 mice showed a prompt and marked reduction
in volume after tz/pac treatment; 10 mice achieved a complete response
(CR) before receiving ‘extended adjuvant’ therapy with fulv (n=5) or
neratinib/fulv (n=5). A CR was maintained with neratinib/fulv following
tz/pac, whereas tumors rapidly recurred in mice treated with fulv alone
(pResults: Xenografts in all 20 mice showed a prompt and marked reduction
in volume after tz/pac treatment; 10 mice achieved a complete response
(CR) before receiving ‘extended adjuvant’ therapy with fulv (n=5) or
neratinib/fulv (n=5). A CR was maintained with neratinib/fulv following
tz/pac, whereas tumors rapidly recurred in mice treated with fulv alone
(p<0.05 at week 8; Table). Immunoblot analysis of MDA-361 tumors
recurring on fulv showed almost complete downregulation of ER levels.





Timepoint

Treatment

Mean (± SD) tumor volume, mm3 (% change from baseline)





Trastuzumab + paclitaxel →fulvestrant

(n=5)

Trastuzumab + paclitaxel →fulvestrant + neratinib

(n=5)



Baseline

Treatment start

163.4 ± 52.9 (‒)

187.1 ± 73.1 (‒)



Week 4

Trastuzumab + paclitaxel

8.6 ± 12.0 (‒96.1)

9.8 ± 10.5 (‒93.9)



Week 8

Fulvestrant ± neratinib

814.0 ± 435.1 (+401.5)

2.0 ± 4.5 (‒98.8)*



*p*p<0.05 between groups (Student’s t-test). SD, standard deviation.





Conclusions: Neratinib/fulvestrant but not fulvestrant alone maintained
complete tumor responses following initial treatment with tz/pac;
recapitulating the design and outcomes observed in the HR+ subgroup of
the ExteNET trial. The experimental model used herein provides a platform
for investigation of the underlying mechanisms for the findings in
ExteNET. Experiments evaluating ER gene signatures and expression levels,
as well as the effects of neratinib ± fulvestrant following initial
adjuvant pertuzumab/trastuzumab/paclitaxel are underway.


