Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase inhibitor imetelstat in combination with the BCL-2
inhibitor venetoclax enhances apoptosis in vitro and increases survival
in vivo in acute myeloid leukemia.


Background/Aims: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive cancer
with limited treatment options outside of chemotherapy. Improved
therapies with novel mechanisms of action are desperately needed to fill
this need. Both hTERT, the catalytic subunit of telomerase, and BCL-2, an
apoptotic regulator, are overexpressed in AML, correlating with disease
severity and poor prognosis respectively. Imetelstat is a novel,
first-in-class competitive inhibitor of telomerase with clinical activity
in hematologic malignancies. Venetoclax, an approved BCL-2 inhibitor for
CLL, has shown a promising clinical benefit in AML patients. Preclinical
evidence shows that downregulation of hTERT induces apoptosis via
disruptions of hTERT and BCL-2 interaction; we hypothesize that
inhibiting both targets would yield greater anti-tumor activity in AML
compared to treatment with either agent alone.

Methods: AML cell lines and AML patientâ€™s PBMC samples were treated
with imetelstat or venetoclax alone, or in combination, and viable and
apoptotic populations of cells were evaluated by flow cytometry.
Telomerase activity, hTERT expression and mitochondrial dysfunction were
investigated for mechanism of action. Furthermore, an in vivo study in
the MOLM-13 AML disseminated model was conducted to assess efficacy and
survival.

Results: A dose-dependent synergistic activity in inducing apoptosis was
observed in multiple AML cell lines when combining imetelstat with
venetoclax. In the MOLM-13 cell line, single-agent imetelstat and
venetoclax had modest apoptotic activity after 48 hours (22% and 30%
respectively), but the combination achieved 88% at 48 hours and nearly
100% at 96 hours. Similarly enhanced apoptotic activity was also observed
in PBMCs purified from 4 AML patient whole blood samples. Molecular
analyses showed combining imetelstat with venetoclax reduced hTERT
expression and telomerase activity much more strongly than either agent
alone. Furthermore, in vivo studies showed all mice tolerated the
combination of imetelstat with ABT-199 well, with increased life span as
compared to the vehicle control (68.1%, p=0.0001), to imetelstat (39.6%,
p=0.0011) alone, or to venetoclax (23.3%, p=0.0001) alone. In the
combination group, 40% of treated mice were alive 77-days after treatment
discontinued whereas all mice of the other single agent arms died within
two weeks, demonstrating a significant survival benefit.

Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first investigation combining
imetelstat with venetoclax in AML, and the results demonstrated a
synergistic effect on induction of apoptosis in cell lines and patient
samples in vitro, which translated into prolonged survival in xenograft
models, thus providing a strong rationale for clinical exploration of
this combination.


