Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adhesion- and stress-related adaptation mechanisms eliciting
glioblastoma radiochemoresistance can be effectively circumvented by
beta1 integrin/JNK co-targeting.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common brain tumor in adults
and characterized by poor clinical outcome due to genetic and epigenetic
alterations in resistance-mediating genes and destructive infiltration
into the normal brain. Upon therapy, malignant tumors show adaptation to
maintain their homeostasis. Two critical determinants of this adaptation
process are cell adhesion by beta1 integrins and stress signaling via
c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK). Here, we evaluated the potential of
simultaneous beta1 integrin/JNK targeting to overcome GBM adaptation
controlling radiochemoresistance and invasion.

Comparative Oncomine data base analysis was performed on the expression
of JNK1/2/3 isoforms, beta1 integrin and its ligands in GBM with normal
brain. Different human GBM cell populations (patient-derived, stem-like,
established) were analyzed for sphere formation, clonogenicity, 3D
collagen type-1 invasion, cell cycling, chromatin organization, DNA
double strand break (DSB) repair (Î³H2AX foci assay), broad-spectrum
phosphoproteome analysis, FACS analysis and protein
expression/phosphorylation upon irradiation (0-6 Gy X-rays) and
chemotherapy (Temozolomide) with and without single and simultaneous
inhibition of beta1 integrin (AIIB2) and JNK (SP600125, JNKi). The
radiochemosensitizing potential of AIIB2/JNKi was also investigated in an
orthotopic GBM mouse model using stem-like cells.

In contrast to JNK isoforms, beta1 integrin and col1 showed significant
overexpression in GBM compared with normal brain. While single inhibition
of beta1 integrin and JNK mediated cytotoxicity, only combined targeting
resulted in radiochemosensitization. Intriguingly, double AIIB2/JNKi
treatment abrogated GBM cell invasion. Importantly, dual beta1
integrin/JNK inhibition elicited a significant reduction in tumor growth
and longer survival of mice concomitantly treated with
radiotherapy/Temozolomide. Mechanistically, JNK blocking induced beta1
integrin expression for stimulating diverse signaling pathways
controlling cell cycling, invasion and radiochemosensitivity.
Radiosensitization by AIIB2/JNKi is caused by enhanced ATM
phosphorylation and prolonged G2/M cell cycle arrest as well as impaired
DNA double strand break repair in the context of elevated levels of
euchromatin.

In summary, our data reveal that dual beta1 integrin/JNK targeting
efficiently impairs adhesion and stress-related adaptation mechanisms
involved in radiochemoresistance and invasion. More in-depth evaluation
is warranted to clarify the potential of this kind of beta1 integrin/JNK
multi-targeting strategy administrated concomitantly to standard
radiochemotherapy in patients suffering from GBM.


