Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA damage response to dianhydrogalactitol (VAL-083) in
p53-deficient non-small cell lung cancer cells.


Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment usually involves surgery and
chemotherapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in patients with EGFR
mutations (10-15% in Western population, 40% in Asian populations) or
with platinum-based regimens. Response to TKI treatment is short lived,
and tumors recur with new mutations, primarily T790M. Recurrent NSCLC
with T790M is sensitive to third generation TKIs, but resistance usually
emerges through new mutations, including KRAS. Resistance to cisplatin
and carboplatin, partly due to p53 mutation, is also a major clinical
limitation and long-term prognosis in NSCLC is poor. Dianhydrogalactitol
(VAL-083) is a bi-functional alkylating agent with demonstrated clinical
activity against NSCLC in historical NCI-sponsored trials and VAL-083 is
approved for lung cancer treatment in China. However, the
mechanism-of-action of how DNA damage signals are propagated and their
effects on NSCLC cells are not fully understood. Therefore, we examined
VAL-083 in a panel of 11 human NSCLC cell lines harboring wild-type p53
(H460, A549, H226), mutant p53 (H1975, SkLU1, H2122, H157, H1792, H23) or
null p53 (H838, H1299). Importantly, as determined by the 5-day MTT
assay, VAL-083 was cytotoxic against all 11 cell lines at low μM
concentrations and cytotoxicity was independent of p53 status. We chose 3
TKI-resistant cell lines with different mutation profiles for cell cycle
kinetics studies: i) H1975 (p53 mut, EGFR-T790M mut, KRAS wt) with IC50
0.9μM, ii) A549 (p53 wt, EGFR wt, KRAS mut) with IC50 1.8μM, and iii)
H157 (p53 mut, EGFR wt, KRAS mut) with IC50 4.5μM. In all 3 cell lines,
early response at 18 hr showed dose-dependent increase in cells in
S-phase, with continued slow cell cycle progression resulting in
accumulation of cells in G2/M phase by 36 hr, suggesting persistent cell
cycle arrest. DNA damage signaling was examined by immunoblot analysis in
A549 and H1975 cells. In p53-wt A549, VAL-083 induced the phospho-Ser15
form of p53, total p53 and total p21, thus indicating that VAL-083
treatment activated p53 function. On the other hand, in p53-mutant H1975,
VAL-083 treatment did not result in consistent p53 or p21 increases, but
did readily induce phospho-Ser15 p53. This is consistent with a lack of
p53 function, as anticipated for mutant p53 cells. Interestingly, H1975
was 2-fold more sensitive to VAL-083 than A549, suggesting, that in
p53-mutant cells, VAL-083 acts through a p53-independent mechanism.
Examination of ATR, ATM, Chk1 and Chk2 indicated that DNA damage by
VAL-083 prompted phosphorylation of these kinases. Notably, the total
anti-apoptotic Chk1 was more prominently reduced in H1975 than A549,
which may partly explain the stronger cytotoxicity of VAL-083 in
p53-mutant H1975. These preclinical data strongly support VAL-083 as a
potential treatment of mutant p53 and TKI-resistant NSCLC, and indicate
DNA damage signaling is mediated via ATM, ATR, Chk1 and Chk2.


