Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of SLC22A23 gene in laryngeal carcinoma.


Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) accounts for approximately
30-40% of head and neck cancers. Although tobacco and alcohol consumption
are considered the major risk factors for LSCC, various genetic and
epigenetic factors have also been associated with LSCC development and
progression. Since early detection and diagnosis of LSCC can greatly
increase the chance of a successful treatment and survival, several
studies have addressed the identification of target genes involved in
LSCC pathogenesis. In this study we aimed to identify differentially
expressed genes involved in the pathogenesis of LSCC using the
Genefishing technique. As a result of this investigation we identified
the SLC22A23 gene as one of the differentially expressed gene.

Solute carriers (SLC) comprise the largest family of membrane transport
proteins with more than 300 members which have been divided into 52
families. The main functions of these proteins is to transfer a wide
range of substrates such as amino acids, lipids, inorganic ions,
peptides, saccharides, metal ions, proteins, xenobiotics and drugs. It is
well known that cancer cells need extra metabolic requirements during
rapid cell cycles. One of the known functions of the SLC proteins is to
facilitate the uptake of nutrients and removal of metabolites. SLC22A23
(solute carrier family 22, member 23) belongs to the SLC family of
organic ion transporters that are responsible for the uptake or excretion
of many compounds including drugs, toxins and endogenous metabolites in a
variety of tissues. SLC22A23 is expressed in various tissues but no
substrates or functions have yet been identified for SLC22A23. Altough
the exact function is unknown, single-nucleotide polymorphisms which are
located in the SLC22A23 gene have been associated with inflammatory bowel
disease, endometriosis-related infertility and the clearance of
antipsychotic drugs. On the other hand, SLC22A23 was identified as a
prognostic gene to predict the recurrence of triple-negative breast
cancer.

In this study, to confirm the GeneFishing assay data, we investigated
expression of the SLC22A23 gene in laryngeal tissue samples obtained from
83 patients by quantitative RT-PCR. We detected statistically significant
upregulation of the SLC22A23 mRNA in laryngeal tumor tissues (55.4%)
(p0.05).

To understand the association between the SNPs in SLC22A23 and LSCC we
also investigated the frequency of different genetic variants (rs4959235,
rs6923667, rs9503518). 77.2% of patients were homozygote for the
rs9503518-AA genotype and %52.2 of these patients had increased SLC22A23
expression (p=0.046).

Our results indicate that there is a clear need for further studies
investigating the SLC22A23 gene to identify its exact function and way of
action in LSCC.


