Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of sessile serrated adenomas/polyps in African Americans.


Introduction: The majority of colorectal cancers (CRCs) develop through
the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, while 15-20% develop via the serrated
pathway. Sessile Serrated Adenoma/Polyps (SSA/P) are more difficult to
detect during colonoscopy and generally require a shorter time follow-up
than other lesions (3 vs. 5 years). These polyps lead to cancer faster
than conventional adenomas. In order to better define patients at risk
for these lesions, we performed a retrospective study to evaluate
clinicopathological features of patients diagnosed with SSA/P.

Methods: We reviewed pathology reports of patients at Howard University
Hospital from 2010-2015. We identified 5,900 patients with colorectal
lesions, of whom 312 (5.3%) were diagnosed with SSA/P. We analyzed the
specific clinical, pathological and demographic features of patients with
SSA/P lesions.

Results: We identified 312 cases with SSA/P. The incidence of SSA/P over
the 5 years period was 5.3%: 198/312 (63.4%) patients had 2 or more
polyps, 54.5% of the SSA/P patients were females, 70.5% of patients were
50-64 years of age and 18% were older than 65. SSA/P lesionsâ€™ locations
were as follows: rectal: 32.1%; rectosigmoid: 18.6%; sigmoid: 16.8%;
Ascending Colon: 13.2 % and Descending Colon: 7.1%. Reasons for
colonoscopy were as follows: Screening: 43.6 %; GI bleeding: 15.1%;
Abdominal Pain: 13.1%and Change in Bowel Habits: 10.2%.

Conclusion: Our results show that there is a slightly increased
predominance of SSA/P occurrence in females. Most SSA/P occurred in
patients 50 to 64 years old. This age range is younger in comparison to
patients with conventional adenomas. SSA/Ps were predominantly distal
(rectal, rectosigmoid, sigmoid) whereas previous literature reports a
proximal location. Most patients in our study were diagnosed in screening
colonoscopies; however, other patients presented with symptoms such as GI
bleeding, abdominal pain, or change in bowel habits.


