Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Celseeâ„¢ SingleCell Chip can retrieve rare single cells with 100%
efficiency for genetic analysis.


Tumors are comprised of heterogeneous cells. Only a specific or rare
population of tumor cells is capable of metastasizing through blood.
While mapping out the genome of cancer cells, gene expression variations
indicative of more aggressive cancer cells might be missed among the
noise. Therefore, single cell gene expression and mutation analysis
provide a more comprehensive and most precise information about the
heterogeneity of cancer progression and metastasis. Although there has
been a surge in technologies used for selection and analysis of single
cells, single cell analysis of rare cells such as circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) is fraught with technical challenges. Among many used techniques
to isolate single cells, the most common cell separation method is cell
sorting by flow cytometry, which requires cell labeling. The numerous
steps involved in cell labelling and centrifugation result in significant
cell loss and changes in gene expression. In addition, centrifugation may
also cause shear-induced gene expression changes in viable cells. For
other single cell analysis platforms, there is a minimum input of cells
ranging from 200 - 1000 cells. Rare cells like CTCs are found in the
range of 1-10 per mL of blood. Another challenge is that the input volume
required for these systems is very low usually in microliters. Here, we
introduce a novel microfluidic chip with 250,000 microwells which
captures cells at 100% efficiency down to one cell with a dynamic range
over 5 logs. The underlying principle of this technology is that the
geometric pattern of the microfluidic chip captures a single cell from an
initial volume of up to 1 mL of fluid due to cell settling. The unique
microwell structure promotes easy fluid exchange without perturbing the
cells from their captured locations, thereby eliminating cell loss during
multistep downstream processing. Preliminary tests have shown that single
or cluster of spiked cancer cells in blood can be immunostained, both
live or fixed and can also be retrieved very efficiently from this chip
using a micro capillary. The retrieved single cells can further be used
for several single cell genetic analysis. We will present data describing
cancer gene expression and gene mutation analysis in isolated single
cells.


