Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effusions of mesothelioma patients: What's in it for immunotherapy.


Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an aggressive cancer with a poor
prognosis for which new therapeutic strategies are available. Data
derived from a small number of mesothelioma patients suggest that
blocking immune checkpoints could offer new treatment opportunities.
Gaining more insight in the immunological aspect of the tumor
microenvironment (TME) in MPM is essential to develop an effective
immunotherapy. In this context, we investigated expression of the immune
checkpoint molecules TIM-3, LAG-3, PD-1 and its ligand PD-L1 on cells in
human pleural (collected via thoracocentesis, n=6) and ascites (collected
via paracentesis, n=5) MPM fluids and identified different subsets of
immune cells in the TME using multicolor flow cytometry.

Different types of immune cells in the fluids could be detected, with
predominant occurrence of CD3+CD4+ T cells, CD64+ macrophages and
CD11c+CD303+ dendritic cells (DCs). CD3+CD8+ T cells, CD3-CD56+ natural
killer (NK) cells and CD19+ B cells were also present to a lesser extent.
While CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD64+ macrophages could be detected in
all samples, this was not the case for the other cell types. Ascites
fluids contained more podoplanin+ (PDPN) tumor cells compared to pleural
fluids (average 3.0% vs 0.3%). PD-1+ T cells and NK cells could be
detected in all pleural and 80% of the ascites samples. 64% of all
samples contained LAG-3-expressing cells, most frequently in pleural
fluids. In all samples CD4+ T-cells and NK cells showed TIM-3 expression
and in 82% of the samples TIM-3 was also expressed on CD8+ T-cells. In
all ascites samples PD-L1 was expressed on DCs, B cells, macrophages and
PDPN+ MPM tumor cells. PD-L1 was also expressed on DCs in all pleural
samples while in 67%, 83% and 83% of those samples CD19+, CD64+ and PDPN+
cells were PD-L1+, respectively. Based on the mean fluorescence intensity
PDPN+ tumor cells showed the highest PD-L1 expression in both fluids.

In conclusion, we provide a detailed analysis of a diversity of immune
cells present in MPM fluid samples. We are the first to demonstrate TIM-3
and LAG-3 expression in mesothelioma effusions. Statistical analysis is
ongoing to investigate whether there are differences between both fluid
types and whether there are associations between the cellular composition
of the fluids and survival of the patients. The finding of expression of
PD-1, PD-L1, TIM-3 and LAG-3 on immune cells in MPM fluids warrants
further investigation of the effect of immune checkpoint blockade in MPM,
with TIM-3 and LAG-3 as interesting new targets.


