Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disparities in cervical cancer screening participation: a
comparison of Russian, Somali and Kurdish immigrants with the Finnish
general population.


Background: Cervical cancer screening through Pap test has been shown as
an effective preventive measure for early detection of precancerous in
the cervix. Finland offers mass Pap test screening to all eligible women.
Knowledge about disparities in the screening participation among
immigrants compared with the Finnish general population is limited.

Objectives: (1) To compare Pap test screening participation in the past
five years among Russian, Somali and Kurdish immigrants living in Finland
with the Finnish general female population; (2) to examine if the
observed disparities remain similar when adjusted for socio- demographic
and health-related confounding factors.

Methods: Data from the Finnish Migrant Health and Well-being Study and
Finnish Health 2011 Survey were used. Random samples of persons living in
six cities in Finland were drawn from the national population registry.
Data of self-reported cervical screening participation (Pap test) among
women aged 29-60 were available from the women of Russian (n=257), Somali
(n=113), Kurdish (n=167) origin and the general population (n= 436).
Logistic regression was used for statistical analysis.

Results: The age-adjusted Pap test participation rates were 79% among the
Russian, 41% among the Kurdish, and 64% among the Somali, compared to 94%
among the Finnish general population. After adjusting for age, socio -
demographic, and health-related confounders, the immigrants had
significantly lower likelihood for screening compared with the Finnish
reference group (Russian Odds Ratio[OR] 0.33, 95% confidence interval
[CI] 0.19-0.58; Somali [OR]0.08, [CI] 0.03-0.19; Kurdish [OR] 0.17
[CI]0.08-0.34).

Conclusions: Initial results demonstrate significantly lower likelihood
for Pap test screening among the immigrant groups compared with the
Finnish general population.


