Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A nanomolar potency small-molecule compound against
castration-resistant and bone metastatic prostate cancer.


A standard treatment for prostate cancer (PCa) is androgen deprivation
therapy (ADT) that suppresses androgen receptor (AR) signaling axis.
Although initially responsive, most patients receiving ADT eventually
develop metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), with more
than 90% of them exhibiting bone metastases. A mechanism by which CRPC
cells evade ADT is the expression of constitutively active AR variants
(AR-Vs), such as the well-characterized AR-V7. Recently we developed
GH501, a flurbiprofen-modified small-molecule compound, and investigated
its anti-cancer activity and mechanism of action in pre-clinical models
of CRPC. At nanomolar range, GH501 effectively induces cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in CRPC cells regardless of their resistance status to
enzalutamide treatment. RNA-seq analysis of GH501 combined with Western
blotting analysis identified key targets implicated in CRPC progression,
including the full-length AR, AR-V7 variant, and other important genes
implicated in CRPC progression. Importantly, low doses of GH501
effectively inhibit the skeletal growth of CRPC in a xenograft model
without obvious in vivo toxicities. These preclinical results indicate
that GH501 is a promising small-molecule compound that can be further
developed for the treatment of lethal prostate cancer.


