Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of TERT C228T and C250T promoter mutations in melanoma
tumor and plasma samples using novel mutation-specific droplet digital
PCR assays.


Purpose: Detecting mutations in the plasma of patients with solid tumors
is becoming a valuable method of diagnosing and monitoring cancer.
Mutations in 1 of 2 hot spots in the TERT promoter sequence are found in
several cancers, including up to 85% of melanomas and the majority of
cases that lack BRAF or NRAS mutations (about one-third of melanomas).
Due to the high G-C content of the TERT promoter sequence these mutations
can be difficult to detect using NGS approaches. We developed novel
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) assays to detect these 2 mutations with high
sensitivity and specificity, and demonstrate the application of these
assays in melanoma clinical samples.

Methods: Assays were optimized using cell lines with Sanger
sequencing-confirmed mutations: glioblastoma A172 (C228T), and melanoma
NYU12-126 (C250T). We varied assay designs and amplification conditions
to optimize probe-based detection using the Bio-Rad QX-200 ddPCR system.
Assay sensitivities and specificities at various DNA input levels were
determined using serial dilutions with 3 replicate wells for each
condition. Sensitivity is defined as the lowest mutant allele dilution
for which the confidence interval did not overlap with that of the 0%
mutant wells. We used normal and cancer-derived DNA sources of different
quality (e.g. normal human DNA (Promega), cancer cell lines, plasma and
FFPE-derived DNAs) with and without the mutations, and compared the
efficiency of detection of amplicons of 88, 113 and 163 base-pairs. We
compared efficiencies to assays of similar size for RPP30, a housekeeping
gene. Patient-matched metastatic melanoma tumors and plasma samples were
analyzed to explore the clinical utility of these assays.

Results: The assays showed greater sensitivity when higher amounts of DNA
were analyzed. For C228T the limit of detection (LOD) of the mutant
allele was 1%, 0.25% and 0.1% for 6.6ng/well, 33ng/well and 66ng/well
respectively; for C250T the LODs were 0.25%, 0.05% and 0.05%
respectively. Using normal human DNA, the efficiency of the TERT assays
averaged approximately 90% of that for RPP30 across assays of similar
size, and no decrease in assay efficiency was observed as amplicon length
increased. In contrast, whereas amplicon size had only a modest effect on
assay efficiency in plasma cfDNA, it gave a more pronounced effect on
FFPE DNAâ€™s, decreasing to 38% for the 163bp amplicon. We observed 100%
concordance between TERT mutation detection by SNaPshot and ddPCR in 10
FFPE tumor samples, and in plasma samples from 4 metastatic melanoma
patients with matching tumor samples.

Conclusion: We developed robust ddPCR assays to detect TERT promoter
mutations with high sensitivity and specificity. Mutated TERT DNA can be
detected and quantitated in the plasma of patients with metastatic
melanoma, and is likely to be present in the plasma of other cancer
patients in whom TERT mutations occur.


