Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic and inherited riboSnitches in TPT1 and LCP1 mRNA secondary
structures.


RiboSnitches are single nucleotide variants that change the secondary
structures of RNA. These structural changes can have a regulatory or
functional impact on the RNA. Many inherited single nucleotide variants
function as riboSNitches. We wanted to investigate the potential of
somatic mutations to act as riboSNitches. We determined the secondary
structure of two cancer-associated mRNAs, TPT1 and LCP1, using the
chemical probing SHAPE-Map technique. Both of these mRNAs are highly
structured and have similar folds in vivo and in vitro. We analyzed the
structural impact of all the synonymous somatic mutations identified in
the COSMIC cancer sequencing database for both TPT1 and LCP1 mRNAs. In
TPT1 we also tested several inherited variants. We found that both
somatic and inherited variants can be riboSNitches, at approximately the
same ratio. Our results are in accord with previous work indicating that
~15% of SNVs are capable of acting as riboSNitches. Although the impact
of non-coding and synonymous somatic mutations are difficult to measure,
it is becoming clear that these mutations can contribute to cancer
progression and phenotype. The majority of our identified riboSNitches
are detrimental according to FATHMM-MKL functional impact prediction. Our
experiments indicate that a substantial fraction of somatic mutations can
cause a measurable change to RNA structure, potentially changing the
regulatory or functional behavior of that mRNA.


