Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leptin-Notch crosstalk axis: A novel target for pancreatic cancer.


Background: Pancreatic cancer (PC) has consistently been the fourth
cancer-related cause of death in United States for more than 10 years.
Its dismal prognosis is due to the aggressive behavior, late detection,
lack of reliable biomarkers and low response to chemotherapy. Obesity,
characterized by high levels of leptin, correlates to low PC survival.
Notch and leptin signaling have been associated with increased tumor
growth and chemoresistance. We have previously shown that leptin induces
proliferation of PC cell lines, increases Notch expression, PC stem cells
(PCSC) and tumorsphere formation. Hypothesis: Leptin increases PC
chemoresistance through its crosstalk to Notch signaling pathway that is
essential for the expansion of PCSC.

Methods: To test whether a leptin-Notch crosstalk axis is involved in
PC-chemoresistance, human PC (MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1 and BxPC-3) cells were
cultured in serum-free medium containing leptin, Gemcitabine and
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) in combination with DAPT (Î³-secretase inhibitor)
and leptin signaling inhibitor bound to iron-oxide nanoparticles
(IONP-LPrA2). PC cells were cultured with leptin and allow to form
primary and secondary tumorspheres, enriched in PCSC. Tumorspheres were
treated with the compounds described for 7-14 days. Number and size of
tumorspheres were recorded, and expression of leptin receptor, OB-R and
secretion of leptin were determined by Western blot (WB) and ELISA,
respectively. Additionally, the levels of Notch, PCSC and EMT markers,
pluripotency associated genes (Oct-4, Sox-2 and Nanog) and ATP-binding
cassette transporters (ABCB1, ABCG2 and ABCC5) were determined using flow
cytometry and WB.

Results: PC cells expressed Leptin/OB-R system, suggesting an autocrine
role in PC progression and chemoresistance. Leptin induced the formation
of primary and secondary tumorspheres and increased their expression of
Notch, EMT and pluripotency markers. Additionally, chemotherapeutics
induced PC survival and the expression of ATP-binding cassette
transporters in tumorspheres that was reinforced by leptin actions.
Blockade of leptin signaling via IONP-LPrA2 and Notch activation via DAPT
reduced leptin-induced molecular effects, PCSC and tumorsphere growth.

Conclusion: Present data suggest that obesity, through leptin-induced
Notch signaling, could increase chemoresistance in PC patients.
Inhibition of leptin-Notch axis may be novel therapeutic strategy for PC,
which may improve chemotherapeutic efficacy and increase survival in PC
patients, particularly in obese contexts. Acknowledgements: this work has
been supported by a Pilot Project Award from MSM/Tuskegee University/UAB
Cancer Center partnership grant 5U54CA118638; PC SPORE Grant from UAB to
RRGP, and facilities and support services at Morehouse School of Medicine
(1G12RR026250-03; NIH RR 03034 and 1C06 RR18386).


