Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer-immune interactions in luminal breast cancers: PI3KCA
mutations, PI3K/AKT/mTOR activation and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.


Introduction: Therapy resistance to adjuvant tamoxifen in estrogen
receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer (BC) is related to activation of
downstream proteins in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. However, clinical
efficacy of mTOR inhibitors has so far been modest. Growing evidence
shows that genomic make-up of cancer cells plays a crucial role in an
anti-cancer immune response and this is reflected in the presence of
tumor infiltrating immune cells. This begs the need for understanding the
relationship between tumor-related immune activity, PIK3CA hot-spot
mutations (PIK3CAm) and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway activation in ER+BC.

Material and methods: The IKA trial recruited stage I to III
postmenopausal BC patients (1982 till 1994), who were randomized to
tamoxifen or no adjuvant therapy. Sequenom mass spectrometry-based
genotyping was used for PIK3CAm assessment. Immune markers and
phosphorylation status of proteins in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway [p-AKT
(Thr308 and 473), p-mTOR, p-ERK1/2, p-p-70S6K and p-4EBP1] were assessed
by immunohistochemistry and scored by two pathologists. Expression of
CD4, CD8 and FOXP3 was evaluated using automatic scoring by
image-analysis software (SlidePath® or AxioVision®) and compared with
manual scoring by two pathologists. Associations were assessed using
multivariable logistic regression models, including as co-variables: age,
tumor grade, lymph node status, tumor size, and progesterone receptor and
HER2 status.

Results: We included 563 ER+BC cases. PIK3CAm were found in 159 (32%) of
the 486 tumors genotyped. On average, PI3K/AKT/mTOR downstream proteins
and immune markers were scored in 409 tumors (range: 366 to 438). Stromal
CD8 expression, but not CD4 or FOXP3, was significantly higher in PIK3CA
mutated tumors (OR=1.11; 95%CI: 1.02-1.22). Stromal FOXP3 expression, but
not CD4 or CD8, was significantly increased in tumors with activated
proteins from the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway (except p-mTOR). The largest
association was with p-4EBP1 (OR=1.34; 95%CI: 1.21-1.48) and smallest
with p-70S6K (OR=1.15; 95%CI: 1.08-1.22).

Conclusion: In our dataset of ER+BC, PIK3CAm are associated with higher
level of CD8+ T cells. Tumors with activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway tend to have more FOXP3+ T cells. Together, our results suggest
that PIK3CA mutation/activation harbor an immune-related tumor
microenvironment.


