Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predicting DNA accessibility in the pan-cancer tumor genome using
RNA-Seq, WGS, and deep learning.


DNA accessibility, chromatin regulation, and genome methylation are key
drivers of cancer transcription. However, there is much left to be
understood about the functional implications of sequence-level data to
the regulation of gene expression, especially when it comes to the
noncoding genome. Recently [Kelley, D., Snoek, J., and Rinn, J., Genome
Res. 2016] trained neural networks to effectively predict DNA
accessibility in multiple cell types. These models make it possible to
explore the impact of mutations on the predicted accessibility and thus
directly link one aspect of the gene regulation puzzle all the way down
to the sequence level. We present a model with improved performance on
the original dataset of 164 ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium
sample types, and then extend the method to provide predictions on any
sample with RNA-Seq data without need of DNase-seq for the sample.

We first demonstrate that with several model and algorithmic changes we
improve performance across 164 cell types from a mean AUC of 0.895 to a
mean AUC of 0.910.

Unfortunately current accessibility models require DNase-seq for each new
cell type. Models for detecting transcription factor binding sites, which
rely on ChIP-seq for training data, also share this issue. In order to
generalize sequence-based predictive models to apply to unseen cell types
without requiring re-training we investigate using RNA-Seq as a proxy
signature of cell type. The model aims to capture the interdependence of
gene expression levels that characterize a cell with the regulatory logic
in which sequence-level signatures are combined to determine
accessibility without restriction to cell type. We explore the modelâ€™s
performance when applied to held-out cell types in the ENCODE and Roadmap
Epigenomics Consortium data as well as data from the TCGA Pan-Cancer
initiative. We look for the impact of non-coding changes in whole-genome
sequencing data in TCGA samples, and report on predicted differences in
DNA accessibility across cancer subtypes.


