Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Benzyl isothiocyanate potentiates p53 signaling and antitumor
effects against breast cancer through activation of p53-LKB1 and p73-LKB1
axes.


Functional reactivation of p53 pathway, although arduous, can potentially
provide a broad-based strategy for cancer therapy owing to frequent p53
inactivation in human cancer. Using a phosphoprotein-screening array, we
found that Benzyl Isothiocynate, (BITC) increases p53 phosphorylation in
breast cancer cells and reveal an important role of ERK and PRAS40/MDM2
in BITC-mediated p53 activation. We show that BITC rescues and activates
p53-signaling network and inhibits growth of p53-mutant cells.
Mechanistically, BITC induces p73 expression in p53-mutant cells,
disrupts the interaction of p73 and mutant-p53, thereby releasing p73
from sequestration and allowing it to be transcriptionally active.
Furthermore, BITC-induced p53 and p73 axes converge on tumor-suppressor
LKB1 which is transcriptionally upregulated by p53 and p73 in
p53-wild-type and p53-mutant cells respectively; and in a feed-forward
mechanism, LKB1 tethers with p53 and p73 to get recruited to
p53-responsive promoters. Analyses of BITC-treated xenografts using
LKB1-null cells corroborate in vitro mechanistic findings and establish
LKB1 as the key node whereby BITC potentiates as well as rescues
p53-pathway in p53-wild-type as well as p53-mutant cells. These data
provide first in vitro and in vivo evidence of the integral role of
previously unrecognized crosstalk between BITC, p53/LKB1 and p73/LKB1
axes in breast tumor growth-inhibition.


