Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea polyphenols suppress tumor growth and invasion by
targeting matrix metalloproteinases, RECK and TIMP-3, in a mouse model
implanted with prostate tumors.


Green tea polyphenols (GTP) and its major constituent,
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) reactivate epigenetically silenced
genes in cancer cells that reduces invasiveness and migration
capabilities; however, the mechanisms whereby these effects occur are not
well understood. RECK, a novel tumor suppressor and the tissue inhibitor
of matrix metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) genes negatively regulates matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and inhibits tumor invasion, angiogenesis and
metastasis. In the present study, we demonstrate that GTP mediate
epigenetic induction of RECK and TIMP-3 thereby playing a key role in
suppressing invasiveness and gelatinolytic activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in
vivo in an orthotopic implantation model of human prostate cancer.
Athymic nude mice were implanted with human prostate cancer LNCaP tumor
in the ventral prostate for 2 weeks and later treated DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA), histone
deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) and histone methyltransferase
inhibitor, 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) individually at 0.1 mg/kg body
weight intraperitoneally at alternate days/week; and combination of
AZA+TSA and DZNep+TSA at similar doses and times; whereas GTP was
provided peroral by gavage at 7.5 and 15.0 mg/kg body weight freshly
prepared in 100Âµl PBS. Treatment of mice with GTP resulted in marked
decrease in tumor growth and its local invasion in dose dependent manner,
compared to treatment with epigenetic inhibitors and their combination
after 8 weeks of intervention. GTP treatment significantly reduced serum
levels of MMP-2, MMP-9 and VEGF, compared to treatment with epigenetic
inhibitors alone. Combination of AZA+TSA exhibited similar effect which
was equivalent to the lower dose of GTP treatment. Furthermore, GTP
treatment significantly reduced EZH2 and H3K27me3 and class I HDAC
protein levels in tumors. GTP partially reversed the hypermethylation
status of RECK and TIMP3 gene and significantly enhanced their protein
expression in the tumor tissue. Inhibition of VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9
levels were also noted after GTP treatment in tumor tissue in
dose-dependent manner. Our findings suggest that induction of RECK and
TIMP-3 are key epigenetic events modulated by GTP that results in
suppression of matrix degradation and angiogenesis to delay prostate
cancer invasion and its subsequent progression.


