Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the prognostic value of ATG4B expression in
different breast cancer subtypes.


Introduction: Autophagy, a lysosome-mediated degradation and recycling
process, functions as an adaptive survival response during various
stressful conditions including hypoxia and chemotherapy. The cysteine
protease ATG4B, an important component of the autophagy pathway, is
becoming a promising therapeutic target, but its value as a prognostic
marker in breast cancer has not been investigated yet. Our recent studies
established a novel association between ATG4B and HER2 positive breast
cancer.

Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate the prognostic value
of ATG4B in different breast cancer subtypes using a large
population-based cohort.

Methods/Experimental Design: We evaluated ATG4B cytoplasmic expression by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays constructed from a cohort of
2003 breast cancer patients seen at the British Columbia Cancer Agency.
For this large, well-characterized cohort detailed clinical information
was available, including age, histology, tumor grade, tumor size, lymph
node status, type of local and adjuvant systemic therapy, and dates of
first recurrence and death. Median follow-up time was 12.4 years. ATG4B
expression was scored by two independent observers using a categorized
H-score system. Survival analyses were performed using the Kaplan-Meier
function and Cox proportional hazards regression models to evaluate the
association of ATG4B expression with breast cancer-specific survival,
stratified by intrinsic subtype. Results: ATG4B expression was
significantly lower in basal-like vs. non-basal (pMethods/Experimental
Design: We evaluated ATG4B cytoplasmic expression by immunohistochemistry
on tissue microarrays constructed from a cohort of 2003 breast cancer
patients seen at the British Columbia Cancer Agency. For this large,
well-characterized cohort detailed clinical information was available,
including age, histology, tumor grade, tumor size, lymph node status,
type of local and adjuvant systemic therapy, and dates of first
recurrence and death. Median follow-up time was 12.4 years. ATG4B
expression was scored by two independent observers using a categorized
H-score system. Survival analyses were performed using the Kaplan-Meier
function and Cox proportional hazards regression models to evaluate the
association of ATG4B expression with breast cancer-specific survival,
stratified by intrinsic subtype. Results: ATG4B expression was
significantly lower in basal-like vs. non-basal (p<0.001), basal vs. HER2
overexpressed (p=0.0029), and triple-negative vs. non-triple-negative
(p200) ATG4B expression was significantly associated with poor overall
survival (hazard ratio (HR) =1.90, 95% confidence interval (CI) =1.10 to
3.27, p=0.033), disease specific survival (HR=2.23, CI =1.23 to 4.04,
p=0.016), and relapse-free survival (HR=1.92, CI=1.09 to 3.39, p=0.037).
However, in Luminal A breast cancers, high (H-score>150) ATG4B expression
was strongly associated with improved overall survival (HR=0.71, CI=0.55
to 0.93, p=0.012) and disease-specific survival (HR=0.43, CI=0.26 to
0.67, p=0.00009).

Conclusion: High ATG4B expression is a poor prognostic marker in HER2
positive breast cancer, but a favorable prognostic factor in the Luminal
A subtype. Validation analyses are planned on a further set of 1989 cases.


