Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCN1/Cyr61 regulation of gemcitabine-resistant phenotype in
pancreatic cancer: involvement of CTGF and dCK.


With an estimated half a million new cases and similar mortality rates
for 2016, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains a
life-threatening and challenging disease to diagnose and treat. As per
American Cancer Society (ACS), varying efficacy in different patients has
led to an increase in the mortality rate of PDAC. Gemcitabine (GEM)
remains the drug of choice either alone or in combination, but is
unsuccessful in reducing or curing PDAC in most patients. The limited
efficacies of these drugs are due to the acquisition of chemo-resistant
characteristics of PDAC. Although several molecular and physiological
factors have been shown to correlate with the GEM-resistance, defined
molecular mechanism(s) of GEM-resistance remains a mystery. Previous
studies have shown that CCN1, which is overexpressed in PDAC and known to
associate with PDAC progression, is critical for drug resistance. Here,
we found that while the pancreatic cancer cell lines (i.e., Panc-1 and
AsPC-1) in which CCN1 is overexpressed are typically GEM-resistant, the
knocking down of CCN1 makes them sensitive to GEM. Mechanistic studies
revealed that CCN1 regulates two important genes that are directly
involved in regulation GEM-sensitivity in PDAC. These include cancer
cell-secreted connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), a regulator of
desmoplasia, and Deoxycytidine kinase (dCK), an enzyme that enhances
gemcitabine sensitivity and efficacy in cancer cells. The deletion of
CCN1 in PDAC cells blocks CTGF expression and under co-cultured
conditions prevent the growth of alpha-smooth muscle actin
(Î±-SMA)-positive stellate cells, which are required for desmoplastic
growth in pancreatic cancers. CCN1 ablation upregulates dCK expression in
PDAC cell lines as compared to CCN1 expressed PDAC cells. These two
events enhance the anti-proliferative effect of GEM and can be rescued by
CTGF-treatment or blocking dCK. In conclusion, CCN1 promotes
GEM-resistance in PDAC cell through the regulation of CTGF and dCK and
the mechanistic insights provided by these studies may help in designing
future therapeutic strategies to combat PDAC.


