Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The evaluation of INCB059872, an FAD-directed covalent inhibitor
of LSD1, in preclinical models of Ewing sarcoma.


Ewing sarcoma is a rare bone cancer affecting predominantly children. The
chromosomal translocation of chromosomes 11 and 22 results in the EWS/FLI
gene fusion oncoprotein that is associated with ~85% of Ewing sarcoma
cases. The EWS/FLI fusion protein is involved in deregulating gene
expression and consequently causing cellular transformation. It was
previously reported that lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) regulates
EWS/FLI transcriptional activity via its functional interaction through
the NuRD co-repressor complex. We therefore evaluated whether inhibition
of LSD1 could have anti-tumor effects in Ewing sarcomas that express the
EWS/FLI fusion oncoprotein. INCB059872 is a potent, selective, and orally
available FAD-directed covalent inhibitor of LSD1. To investigate the
potential utility of INCB059872 in Ewing sarcoma, the A673 cell line
having the characteristic chromosomal translocation was chosen as the
experimental model system. INCB059872 inhibition of LSD1 did not
significantly alter A673 proliferation in vitro. However, INCB059872
inhibited oncogenic transformation as determined by colony formation
clonogenicity assays. NKX.2.2 was previously identified as a critical
downstream target molecule of the EWS-FLI fusion oncoprotein that is
required for transformation. A significant downregulation of NKX2.2 was
observed in A673 cells treated with INCB059872, suggesting that
INCB059872 mediates its effects through modulation of the EWS/FLI -NKX2.2
axis. Oral administration of INCB059872 significantly suppressed the
growth of both A673 and SK-ES Ewing sarcoma xenografts in vivo. In
addition, in vivo efficacy was evaluated in patient derived xenograft
(PDX) models that were developed from relapsed tumor tissues of Ewing
sarcoma patients. Notably, a subset of PDX models having EWS/FLI
translocations (3/6) exhibited significant tumor growth inhibition at
well-tolerated doses of INCB059872. Molecular signatures obtained from
RNA-Seq data with these PDX models exhibited intrinsic differences
between responders and non-responders, suggesting additional molecular or
genetic variations may contribute to their sensitivity to INCB059872.
Studies identifying potential candidate molecular mechanisms are
underway. Together, these data suggest that INCB059872 may be
therapeutically efficacious in a subset of Ewing sarcoma patients.


