Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDGF induces cell growth and changes in glucose metabolism in
colon cancer in the absence of PDGF receptors.


Background: The Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) and its receptors
play a major role in inducing proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis
by activating intracellular PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling events in different
solid tumors and therefore represent attractive targets in tumor therapy.
Recently we showed a PDGF-induced activation of metabolism and
proliferation in HT29 colon cancer cells in the absence of specific PDGF
receptors. The aim of this study was to analyze PDGFR and VEGFR
expression and possible alternative PDGF binding partners in colorectal
cancer (CRC).

Methods: Human HT29 colon cancer cells were cultured and stimulated with
PDGF in a time-dependent manner. Additionally, VEGFR2 and EGFR inhibition
was performed to analyze alternative PDGF signaling events. Whole cell or
RNA extracts were analyzed by Western Blot and RT-q-PCR for receptors and
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling. To investigate the effects of specific receptor
inhibition on proliferation, MTS proliferation assays were performed.
Moreover, mRNA levels of PDGFR and VEGFR in tumors from patients with CRC
were analyzed by RT-qPCR.

Results: Human UICC stage I-IV tumors exhibited a significantly increased
PDGFRÎ² and VEGFR1,2 gene expression. As observed previously, HT29 colon
cancer cells showed only positivity for VEGFR1,2, but no PDGFR protein
expression. Despite that, stimulation with PDGF resulted in increased
proliferation and metabolic changes. In contrast, Caco-2 and SW480 colon
cancer cells showed PDGFR and VEGFR expression on protein level.
Interestingly, PDGF stimulation increased VEGFR1 and 2 gene expression in
HT29 colon cancer cells and secondly inhibition of VEGFR2 and EGFR showed
alterations in proliferation and Akt signaling in PDGF stimulated cancer
cells.

Conclusion: Despite the absence of PDGF receptors in HT29 colon cancer
cells, PDGF induced proliferating and metabolic effects in the tumor
cells, suggesting an alternative binding partner on the tumor cell
surface. Further investigation of the alternative PDGF binding partners
could be of clinical relevance in CRC.


