Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of unpaired cysteine-mediated gain and loss of
function CSF3R extracellular mutations.


Mutations in the CSF3R extracellular domain have been reported so far
only in neutropenia patients. These extracellular mutations are loss of
function mutations, which interrupt ligand binding. Here we screened
CSF3R extracellular domain variants in a variety of hematological
malignances and described for the first time the identification of an
activating CSF3R extracellular mutation W341C in a leukemia patient.
Functional assays revealed that this mutation conferred Ba/F3 cell
cytokine-independent growth and induced constitutive JAK-STAT activation.

We further characterized that cysteine substitutions at other amino acid
positions (342, 356 and 477) and other amino acid substitutes of W341
(A/G/K/R/S) did not transform cells, indicating that both the amino acid
position and cysteine substitution are essential for the transforming
capacity. In agreement, increased dimer formation of W341C was observed
in the co-immunoprecipitation assay and non-reducing condition
immunoblot, which could be abrogated in an immunoblot run under reducing
conditions, highly suggesting that dimerization is mediated by the
formation of intermolecular disulfide bonds. Surprisingly, W356C
demonstrated loss of function properties, however, showed increased dimer
formation similar to W341C, indicating that only the increased
dimerization is not sufficient for transforming capacity. Computational
modeling based on IL6ST showed opposite directions of W341 and W356,
which may orientate the cytoplasmic domain towards or away from one
another.

Interestingly, a CSF3R cytoplasmic truncation mutation at amino acid W791
was found to be on the same allele as W341C in this patient. The
W341C/W791X compound mutation transformed Ba/F3 with faster kinetics
comparing to the W341C single mutation. Furthermore, the compound
mutation, but not W341C alone demonstrated delayed receptor degradation,
indicating enhanced oncogenic potential. Notably, the primary patient
sample and the Ba/F3 cells transformed by W341C or the compound mutation
were all sensitive to JAK inhibitors. The patient harboring these CSF3R
mutations displayed myelodysplastic morphology with BCOR mutation at
disease diagnosis, and showed good response to Azacytidine treatment.
However her white blood count (mature neutrophils in particular)
increased after 15-18 monthsâ€™ treatment, which was concomitant with the
acquisition and expansion of CSF3R W341C and W791X and disease
progression. We further investigated the oncogenic potential of
disrupting original cysteine pairs in the CSF3R extracellular domain.
Increased dimers are observed in these mutations, whereas two functional
consequences were observed: loss of function and constitutive activity.
This, therefore, represents the first characterization of unpaired
cysteines that mediate both loss and gain of function phenotypes. This
paradigm may apply to other cytokine receptors.


