Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined AXL/FN14 inhibition sensitize drug-resistant NSCLC in
vitro and in vivo.


Lung cancer is the number one cause of cancer-related deaths in both men
and women with a median survival time of 8-10 monthsâ€™ post treatment.
Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 80% of the lung cancers
and the treatment plan is determined based on the active mutations (EGFR,
ALK/ROS, and KRAS) present in the tumor. Patients bearing EGFR mutation
initially respond to targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy and
after 10-14 months of treatment acquire TKI resistance. Consequently, the
median PFS for NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation is only 9.5 months. The
reason for this acquired drug resistance is not yet fully understood.
Recent studies have reported oncogenes such as AXL could be responsible
for TKI resistance. Therefore, understanding the mechanism of drug
resistance is key in developing a solution to overcome the problem. For
this study, we first examined the resistance mechanism and developed a
biodegradable targeted nanoparticle based solution to systematically
investigate the role of AXL in resistant NSCLC cell lines. In this study
we (1) downregulated AXL using siRNA and separately (2) knocked out the
AXL gene using crRNA (CRISPR) and treated with TKI. Our results show that
AXL is responsible for activation of several EMT related proteins and
upregulation of mTOR pathway. We believe the upregulation of these
proteins is essential for cancer cells to switch pathways for
proliferation and regulating miRNAs linked to mutations. Our results
further confirm that AXL is responsible for regulating MMP-2 that is
associated with cell invasion. Based on data from multiple cell lines
such as H820 and A549, we demonstrate that AXL upregulation is
responsible for resistance independent of EGFR activating mutations. The
elucidated pathway for drug resistance was further confirmed in cell
lines generated by knocking-out the AXL gene. Interpretation for AXL
signaling and drug resensitization was confirmed by Western blotting,
Zymography, Invasion & Migration assay, Apoptosis assay and MTT toxicity
assay. We performed mRNA and miRNA analysis using qRT-PCR to understand
gene expression post treatment. During the process of our investigation,
we found that NSCLC cells undergo further survival cross talk with other
biomarkers. Indeed, we report the first experimental evidence of a
survival cross talk between AXL and FN14, a wound healing gene, that
enhance cell survival post treatment. Down regulation of both AXL and
FN14 dramatically reduced the IC50 of TKI. Based on the mechanism, we
designed a gelatin nanoparticle that can carry both AXL and FN14 to
deliver it in the tumor cell. The nanoparticle is targeted to tumor using
EGFR-antibody and releases the silencing RNA within cytoplasm. We further
demonstrated that dual-inhibition of AXL and FN14 in A549 mice xenografts
showed tumor reduction compared to controls. In conclusion, inhibition of
AXL and FN14 can maximize therapeutic response of TKI, wherein AXL is
upregulated before or during drug treatment.


