Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CLIC4 is incorporated into extracellular vesicles of murine breast
cancer cells and may influence metastatic burden.


Chloride intracellular channel 4 (CLIC4) is an evolutionarily conserved,
29kD, dimorphic protein that contributes to TGF-Î² signaling by
preventing the de-phosphorylation of phospho-SMAD2/3 upon nuclear
translocation. In several cancer types, CLIC4 is excluded from the
nucleus and downregulated in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells as the
tumor progresses, suggesting that CLIC4 acts as tumor suppressor. In a
parallel sequence, CLIC4 becomes upregulated in the stromal compartment,
where it enhances tumor growth and invasion. Recent reports have
suggested that CLIC4 is detectable in the serum of cancer patients and
incorporated into extracellular vesicles, and has potential as a
biomarker. We hope to gain a better understanding of the role that CLIC4
plays in the tumor stromal and epithelial compartments as well as their
respective release of extracellular vesicles. Using in-vitro and in-vivo
assays, we have conducted experiments using the FVB mouse MMTV-c-MYC 6DT1
breast cancer model. By CRISPR/ Cas9 system, CLIC4 was deleted from wild
type 6DT1 cells. Following clonal selection, the loss of the CLIC4
protein at both the cellular and released vesicle level was validated.
Both functional assays on CLIC4 deleted clones and evaluation of their
extra-cellular vesicles were undertaken in order to further understand
their tumorigenic and metastatic capabilities. In-vitro, CLIC4 was not
necessary for vesicle biogenesis and its deletion did not have a
significant effect on cellular proliferation. In vivo, selected clones
were orthotopically injected into the 4th mammary fat pad of wild type
FVB mice. Compared to wild type 6DT1 clones, CLIC4 deleted clones formed
primary tumors that had greater mass but a fewer number of lung
metastasis. Future studies are designed to isolate vesicles circulating
in tumor bearing hosts to determine their stromal or epithelial origin
and to provide a better understanding of the role that CLIC4 may play in
tumor growth, creating a metastatic niche and as a potential serological
biomarker.


