Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Network-based systematic inference of lncRNA activity in breast
cancer.


The production of lncRNA is widespread across the human genome, yet the
functions of lncRNAs and the phenotypes resulting from their activation
have remained largely unstudied. In cancer, several lncRNAs have been
found to associate with disease development and poor patient prognosis
including HOTAIR and MALAT1. Recent studies have been performed using
lncRNA microarrays or re-annotated probes from coding gene microarrays to
systematically investigate their roles in cancer. However, datasets from
lncRNA microarrays are typically not accompanied by comprehensive
clinical information that can be used to draw associations between lncRNA
expression and clinical phenotypes. Furthermore, lncRNA stability and
cellular localization is highly variable suggesting that expression-based
inference of lncRNA activity may not always be an accurate measure of its
activity. To address this issue, we introduce an activity-based approach
whereby we analyze the expression of lncRNA target genes to infer lncRNA
activity. Specifically, we construct a breast cancer specific
lncRNA-target gene network from RNA-seq data using a network
reconstruction algorithm. We then apply this network to several breast
cancer microarray datasets to systematically investigate lncRNA activity
and their association with clinical phenotypes. Notably, we find that
certain lncRNAs are active in specific molecular subtypes of breast
cancer even though their expression levels do not reveal significant
differences. Lastly, we performed survival analysis to systematically
screen for novel lncRNAs whose activity associate with patient prognosis.
Our results suggest that activity-based inference of lncRNAs can identify
novel lncRNAs that may serve as therapeutic targets or biomarkers in
breast cancer.


