Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of CCAR1, a coactivator of β-catenin, suppresses the
proliferation and migration of gastric cancer cells.


Given a current hypothesis that cancer arises from cancer stem cells
(CSCs), targeting key signaling pathways that support CSC self-renewal
appears to be a useful approach to cancer therapy. Derranged expression
of Wnt signaling is among the major pathways implicated in regulating the
stenmess properties of a variety of human cancers, including gastric
cancer. Cell cycle and apoptosis regulator 1 (CCAR1) is a transcriptional
coactivator which has been shown to be a component of Wnt/β-catenin
signaling, and plays an important role in transcriptional regulation by
β-catenin. However, the function and clinical significance of CCAR1 in
gastric cancer have not been elucidated. Here we show the elevated CCAR1
nuclear expression correlates with the occurrence of gastric cancer. In
addition, RNAi-mediated CCAR1 reduction not only suppressed the cell
growth and increased apoptosis in gastric cell lines AGS and MKN28, but
also reduced the migration and invasion ability of these cells.
Furthermore, In vivo xenograft assay revealed that the expression level
of CCAR1 was critical for tumorigenesis. Our data demonstrates that CCAR1
contributes to carcinogenesis in gastric cancer and is required for the
survival of gastric cancer cells. Moreover, CCAR1 may serve as a
diagnostic marker and a potential therapeutic target.


