Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Whole exome sequencing identifies recurrent alterations of genes
in malignant phyllodes tumors in nine Korean individuals.


Phyllodes tumors of the breast are rare fibroepithelial neoplasms with
variable clinical behavior accounting for about 1% of all breast
neoplasms. Phyllodes tumors are classified into benign, borderline, and
malignant grades on the basis of histological features. Among those
categories, Malignant phyllodes tumor has a higher propensity for local
recurrence and distant metastasis, however the malignant potential of
phyllodes tumors is difficult to assess on initial pathologic
examination. In previous studies, an important role of mediator complex
subunit 12 (MED12) in phyllodes tumors has been frequently revealed.
However, except that, genetic abnormalities that drive tumor initiation
and progress in malignant phyllodes tumor remain still unclear. Here, by
performing whole exome sequencing of 9 malignant phyllodes tumors with
matching normal cases, we frequently observed mutations in MED12 (3/9,
33.34%). Additionally, non-silent mutations in p53(TP53) and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) were recurrently identified. Whole-gene
amplifications of EGFR were also found in six cases (6/9, 66.67%). We
suggest that EGFR has an underlying role in malignant phyllodes tumors.
This study identifies potential therapeutic targets in malignant
phyllodes tumors, including EGFR.


