Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of Vincristine and Clotam induces antiproliferative
response in medulloblastoma cells.


Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common pediatric malignant brain tumor
and usually originates in the cerebellum. These tumors have the
propensity to disseminate throughout the central nervous system and are
often difficult to treat. Chemotherapy is widely accepted as part of the
multimodality treatment approach for MB. However, it is associated with
debilitating toxicity and potential long term disabilities. Vincristine
is a commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for MB treatment. This drug is
known to induce some toxic effects including peripheral neuropathy. The
aim of this study was to test a combination treatment involving
Vincristine and an anti-cancer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug,
Clotam (Tolfenamic acid) against MB cell lines. Previously, we showed
that Clotam inhibited MB cell proliferation and tumor growth in mice by
targeting the transcription factor, Specificity protein1 (Sp1) and an
inhibitor of apoptosis protein, BIRC5 (baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis
repeat-containing 5). The overexpression of BIRC5 is associated with
aggressiveness and poor prognosis in several cancers. MB cells, DAOY and
D283 cells were treated with vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide) or low dose of
Vincristine (DAOY: 2ng/ml; D283: 1ng/ml) or Clotam (DAOY & D283: 10
Âµg/ml) or combination of Vincristine + Clotam and the cell viability was
measured at 1 and 2 days post-treatment using Cell-TiterGlo kit. Flow
cytometry was employed to analyze apoptotic cells using Annexin-V
staining and cell cycle phase distribution using propidium iodide
staining. The activation of apoptotic pathways was further investigated
by assessing the levels of effector caspases with CaspaseGlo kit and the
expression of apoptotic markers [cleaved Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(c-PARP), B-cell lymphoma 2, and BIRC5] by Western blot analysis. The
expression of key proteins associated with cell cycle (Cyclin A, B, D,
CDK4/6, and p21) was also determined by Western blot analysis. When
compared to individual agents, the combination of Clotam and Vincristine
increased MB cell growth inhibition which is accompanied by an induction
of apoptotic markers and the modulation of (Cyclin A, B, D and CDK4/6:
down-regulation; p21: up-regulation) proteins associated with cell cycle
phase distribution. These results suggest that Vincristine and Clotam
combination treatment is effective for inducing anti-proliferative effect
in MB cells. The experiments to evaluate the effect of this combination
in animal model for MB are currently under study.


