Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glucose transporter 1 is associated with proliferation and
prognosis on esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.


Purpose: Cancer cells exhibit altered glucose metabolism, termed
glycolysis which is described by the increased uptake of glucose and the
conversion of glucose to lactate in cancer cells under adequate oxygen
tension. Alternating glucose transporters (GLUTs) expression was detected
in the cancer specific metabolism to adapt to the rapid growth and tumor
microenvironment in diverse malignant tumors. In this study, GLUTs
profiling of ESCC patients, the relation between proliferation and GLUT1
expression using siRNA for GLUT1 were analyzed. Furthermore, the
prognostic features according to GLUT1 expression was evaluated on
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) patients.

Methods: The ratio of the 11 GLUTs (GLUT1- GLUT14) expression between
tumor and normal tissue (T/N) were analyzed in silico (GDS3838). GLUT1
expression was down-regulated using 3 siRNAs in vitro.
Immunohistochemical staining of GLUT1 was performed using paraffin
sections of tissues obtained from 145 resectable ESCC patients without
preoperative treatment.

Results: Expression of GLUT1 (T/N 2.44; 95% confidence interval (CI):
1.78-3.34, PResults: Expression of GLUT1 (T/N 2.44; 95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.78-3.34, P<0.001), GLUT3 (T/N 1.96; 95%CI: 1.23-3.13,
P=0.01) and GLUT6 (T/N 1.31; 95%CI: 1.12-1.54, PResults: Expression of
GLUT1 (T/N 2.44; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.78-3.34, P<0.001), GLUT3
(T/N 1.96; 95%CI: 1.23-3.13, P=0.01) and GLUT6 (T/N 1.31; 95%CI:
1.12-1.54, P<0.001) increased in tumor tissue compared with normal
tissue. TE-1 and TE-8 cells were treated with 3 siRNAs for GLUT1 and
control siRNA for 72 hours in vitro. The proliferation of TE-1 and TE-8
cells after siRNAs for GLUT1 compared with control siRNA decreased
72.9-84.5% and 44.8-53.3%, respectively. GLUT1 expression was evaluated
with 145 ESCC patients. Glut1 positivity was observed in 41 patients
(28.2%) and associated with depth of invasion (odds ratio (OR)=2.984;
95%CI: 1.208-7.371, P=0.018) and vascular invasion (OR=2.771; 95% CI:
1.118-6.871, P=0.028) in multivariate analysis. GLUT1 positivity was a
significant disadvantage to both relapse-free survival (hazard ratio
(HR)=2.021; 95%CI: 1.100-3.712; P=0.023) and esophageal cancer-specific
survival (HR=2.223; 95%CI: 1.121-4.411; P=0.022) in univariate Cox hazard
analysis.

Conclusions: GLUTs expression was altered in ESCC patients and GLUT1
expression was most up-regulated among the 11 GLUTs. Growth assay with
siRNAs for GLUT1 revealed that GLUT1 played a curial role of ESCC cells
proliferation. High expression of GLUT1 was associated with depth of
invasion and poor prognosis of ESCC patients. These findings provide
evidence of the significance of GLUT1 expression as a biomarker and GLUT1
may be therapeutic target in ESCC patient.


