Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cytosolic domain of a disintergrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)
15 promotes non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) anti-apoptosis ability.


Emerging evidence has indicated that proteins of a disintergrin and
metalloprotease (ADAM) family contribute to cancer progression and
metastasis. One member of this family, ADAM15, has been shown to be
upregulated in multiple cancers, including gastric, lung, breast, and
prostate cancers, and the enzymatic activities of its extracellular
metalloprotrease domain promote breast cancer proliferation and migration
through mediating ErbB signaling pathway. The patients with ADAM15
high-expressing lung tumors have shorter survival time and ADAM15 has
been proved to enhance synovial fibroblasts anti-apoptosis ability via
focal adhesion kinase signaling pathway. We firstly demonstrated other
than extracellular enzymetic activity, the longest isoform of ADAM15
(ADAM15 i6), which contains the most cytoplasmic Src homology 3 (SH3)
binding motifs, significantly upregulated in primary lung cancer tissues
and promoted NSCLC proliferation via growth factor receptor-bound protein
2 (Grb2) and Src homolog 2 domain containing (Shc) association. In this
study, we further explore the roles of ADAM15 cytosolic domain in NSCLC
apoptosis resistance. Overexpression of ADAM15 i6 promoted CL1-0 cell
anti-apoptosis ability according to the trypan blue inclusion assay.
Ablation of nephrocystin (NPHP1) attenuated the ADAM15 i6-promoted
anti-apoptosis ability. Thus, we identified a novel mechanism of the
ADAM15 cytoplasmic domain in NSCLC tumor progression, which will shed
light on the molecular mechanisms of ADAM proteins, and facilitate
development of novel therapy in NSCLC.


