Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOTCH - HEY1 pathway induces EMT in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.


Background

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is noted to have a NOTCH
mutation rate of 20% within the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset
consistent with tumor suppressor gene status. However, NOTCH genes are
also upregulated in wild type HNSCC and show signs of downstream
activation in a substantial proportion of HNSCC. In this study, we aimed
to further explore the potential for NOTCH pathways to be activated in
HNSCC.

Material and Methods

mRNA sequence of TCGA data includes 520 HNSCC tumors and 46 normal
tissues. We used 447 HNSCC excluding 73 tumors with NOTCH mutations. The
activated groups of NOTCH downstream genes were defined as tumors with
expression 1 standard deviation above the mean of normal tissue. We used
four HNSCC cell lines (SKN3, Cal27, SCC61, SCC090) to ascertain the
results of the TCGA analysis in vitro.

Result

In TCGA analysis, HEY1 activated HNSCC had significant more expression of
NOTCH pathway genes. In particular NOTCH4 had the most significant
correlation with HEY1 activation among NOTCH receptors. To confirm this
result in vitro, HEY1 expression was compared between si-control and
si-NOTCH4 of SKN3, Cal27, SCC61 and SCC090. As expected, HEY1 expression
in all si-NOTCH4 treated cell lines were significant decreased. Next, we
examined the relationship about NOTCH4 and an epithelial mesenchymal
transition phenotype (EMT). Using TCGA data, we found that mesenchymal
marker genes were significantly increased in high NOTCH4 group. In vitro
experiments, si-NOTCH4 cells decreased mesenchymal marker gene expression
such as Fibronectin and TWIST1. We also examined HEY1 function. Similar
to NOTCH4, it was found that HEY1 is significantly related to EMT in
silico and in vitro.

Conclusion

The NOTCH4-HEY1 pathway is significantly upregulated in HNSCC and induces
EMT.


