Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HPV16 serostatus and risk of oropharyngeal carcinoma.


Background: The current epidemic of human papillomavirus (HPV)-related
oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) urgently demands a screening strategy for this
disease. Antibodies to HPV type 16 (HPV16) early (E) antigens have been
detected in patients with HPV16-related OPC, and are potential biomarkers
of HPV-related malignancies. The goal of this study was to evaluate the
diagnostic accuracy of a panel of antibodies to HPV16 E antigens.

Methods: This was a case-control study that included 378 patients with
OPC, 153 patients with non-oropharyngeal head and neck cancer, and 782
healthy control subjects. All patients had newly diagnosed, previously
untreated disease and were matched with controls by age and sex. Tumor
HPV status was determined by p16 immunohistochemistry. IgG antibodies to
the HPV16 antigens E1, E4, E5, E6, E7, and the N-terminal and C-terminal
fragments of E2 (NE2, CE2) were quantified using a custom multiplexed
bead array assay. A binary logistic regression classifier based on the
combined relative light units of all E antigens on ELISA was pre-defined
and applied to the dataset. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were calculated using logistic regression analysis.

Results: Of the 378 patients with OPC, 348 had p16-positive OPC. Using
the single cutoff values, the frequency of seropositivity for the
individual antigens vs. controls was E1 (74% vs 7%); CE2 (68% vs 1%); E6
(42% vs 1%); and E7 (64% vs 1%)(Table 1). Positivity for the binary
classifier was associated with an OR of 453 (95% CI, 199-1030) for
p16-positive OPC, with a sensitivity of 83% and a specificity of 99%
(Table 1).

Conclusions: HPV-specific IgG antibodies to multiple early antigens are
detected at the time of diagnosis of HPV-related OPC. A multiparametric
algorithm improves the specificity of detection of cases over single
antibodies and are potential biomarkers for HPV-associated malignancies
that may be advantageous for risk stratification in future screening
trials.

Table 1. A blinded study of HPV16 serology of patients with p16-positive
OPC (n=348) and controls (n=782).





Controls

p16+ OPC





N+ (%)

N+ (%)

OR (95% CI)a

Sensitivity

Specificity

PPV

NPV

AUC



E1

52 (6.7)

256 (73.6)

43 (28-67)

74

93

83

89

.84



NE2

14 (1.8)

128 (36.8)

43 (20-90)

37

98

90

78

.68



CE2

7 (0.9)

235 (67.5)

290 (114-741)

68

99

97

87

.83



E4

14 (1.8)

110 (31.6)

27 (13-54)

32

98

89

76

.65



E5

48 (6.1)

37 (10.6)

2 (1-4)

11

94

44

70

.52



E6

9 (1.2)

146 (42.0)

80 (34-187)

42

99

94

79

.70



E7

11 (1.4)

224 (64.4)

106 (54-208)

64

99

95

86

.82



Classifier

8 (1.0)

288 (82.8)

453 (199-1030)

83

99

97

93

.91



aAdjusted for sex, smoking, and alcohol status (never vs. former vs.
current)

OR: odds ratio; CI: confidence interval; PPV: Positive Predictive Value;
NPV: Negative Predictive Value; AUC: Area Under the Curve


