Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening the druggable genome for synthetic lethal interactions
with the CHK1 inhibitor PNT737.


Check point kinase 1 (CHK1) is a key regulator of the cell cycle, DNA
damage repair and DNA replication. CHK1 inhibition sensitises cancer
cells to genotoxic agents and recent studies have indicated that CHK1
inhibitors could be used as single agents to treat cancers with high
levels of replication stress. We have recently described the discovery of
a highly selective and orally bioavailable CHK1 inhibitor, PNT737, that
not only has potent antitumour activity in combination with
standard-of-care genotoxic agents but also as a single agent in defined
tumour types. Here we sought to identify gene products whose loss would
be synthetically lethal with CHK1 inhibition, with the aim of identifying
patient populations likely to be sensitive to single agent CHK1
inhibition or to novel combinations utilising CHK1 inhibitors. To do
this, we performed a large siRNA screen of the druggable genome (~6500
genes) in A549 (NSCLC) and SW620 (colon cancer) cell lines, with and
without PNT737 treatment, and determined effects on cell viability by
SRB. POLA1, POLE and POLE2 (B-family DNA polymerases) were identified as
significant hits causing synthetic lethality with PNT737 in both cancer
cell lines. Treatment with additional siRNA sequences subsequently
validated these genes in both the original two cell lines and extra NSCLC
and colon cancer cell lines. Interestingly, a number of biomarkers for
replication stress, pRPA2 and pCHK1, were increased in cells treated with
POLA1, POLE and POLE2 siRNA in combination with PNT737, in comparison to
cells treated with the siRNA or drug alone. Further studies conducted
with PNT737 and the B-family DNA polymerase inhibitor aphidicolin showed
that these agents had a synergistic effect on inhibiting cell viability
on 8 out of 9 NSCLC and colon cancer cell lines tested. In addition,
immunofluorescence analysis revealed that there was an increase in the
level of Î³H2AX, a marker of DNA damage, in 4 out of 5 cell lines that
exhibited synergy when treated with a combination of aphidicolin and
PNT737, as compared to cells treated with either agent alone. Our data
indicate that the combination of a reduction in POLA1, POLE or POLE2
activity (by siRNA transfection or aphidicolin treatment) and CHK1
activity (PNT737 treatment) increases replication stress and DNA damage
in NSCLC and colon cancer cells. Encouragingly, our data support the case
for the use of the clinically relevant combination of PNT737 and
gemcitabine, as gemcitabine is metabolised it is incorporated into DNA,
inhibiting the B-family DNA polymerases. Furthermore, it will now be
important to establish if subsets of colon and endometrial cancers with
mutations in their POLE proofreading domain are sensitive to CHK1
inhibitors.


