Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of mammary hyperplasia, dysplasia, and invasive ductal
carcinoma in transgenic mice expressing the 8p11 amplicon oncogene NSD3
(WHSC1L1).


Amplification within the 8p11-12 locus occurs in approximately 15% of
breast cancer (BC) and is associated with poor survival and distant
recurrence. Overexpression of many of the genes within the 8p11-12 region
can confer a pathological gain of function to breast cells. We and others
have previously demonstrated that NSD3 (WHSC1L1), a lysine
methyltransferase, can act as a potent transforming oncogene. Predictions
by the GISTIC algorithm of the Human Cancer Genome Atlas data suggest
that NSD3 is a driving gene within 8p11-12 in multiple tumor types,
including BC. We previously showed that NSD3 can regulate the expression
of influential genes, such as estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1/ERÎ±). To
further explore the role of NSD3 in promoting BC, we generated FVB/N
transgenic mice with targeted overexpression of NSD3 in the mammary gland
and compared them to matched non-transgenic wild-type (WT) females. We
observed that pups nursed by transgenic females were underdeveloped,
regardless of genotype. Underdeveloped pups displayed delayed hair growth
and eye opening, and were half the weight of pups nursed by WT females.
To investigate this phenotype, we characterized thoracic and inguinal
mammary glands from virgin, mid-pregnancy, lactating, and post-lactating
mice by whole mount and histological analysis. Mammary glands from virgin
transgenic females displayed increased branching and terminal bud
formation. Alveolar buds from mid-pregnant transgenic glands were more
numerous and densely packed. Glands from lactating transgenic females
showed large areas in which the alveoli failed to undergo functional
differentiation, resulting in a lactation defect. Mammary glands taken
post-lactation exhibited areas of ductal and alveolar hyperplasia. At 40
weeks of age, multiple transgenic mice had palpable tumors which were
excised at 1 cm3 size. Whole mount and histological analysis of glands
from tumor bearing mice commonly demonstrated hyperplasia, dysplasia, and
carcinoma in situ, contrary to age-matched WT glands. The areas of ductal
dysplasia and carcinoma in situ closely resembled several patterns
commonly observed in human breast cancer, including micropapillary,
cribriform, and high grade areas of ductal carcinoma in situ. Mammary
tumors were analogous to infiltrating ductal carcinomas, many of which
were high grade tumors. In summary, overexpression of NSD3 in the mouse
mammary gland elicited drastic deformation, inhibited functional
differentiation, and caused tumor formation. Continued characterization
of this mouse model, the oncogenic role of NSD3, and other mechanistic
studies are essential to improve patient outcome in 8p11-12 altered
cancers.


