Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superior SN-38 pharmacodynamic and tumor-accretion profiles of
labetuzumab govitecan (IMMU-130) versus irinotecan in experimental human
colonic cancer models.


BACKGROUND: IMMU-130 is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) undergoing
clinical investigation in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
(ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01605318). It is composed of a humanized
anti-CEACAM5 IgG conjugated via a cleavable linker to SN-38, a
topoisomerase-I inhibitor and active form of irinotecan. We investigated
the potential advantage of IMMU-130 versus irinotecan for SN-38 delivery
in nude mice bearing CEA-expressing human colonic tumor xenografts
(LS174T or GW-39).

METHODS: Mice were injected with irinotecan (~ 900 µg; SN-38 equivalents
= ~500 µg) or 1.0 mg of IMMU-130 (16 µg SN-38 equivalents).
Irinotecan-treated animals were necropsied 5 min, 1, 2, 6-8 h
post-injection, while IMMU-130-treated animals were evaluated at 1, 6,
24, 48-72 h. Serum and homogenates of tumors, liver, and small intestinal
contents were extracted, and SN-38, SN-38G, and irinotecan concentrations
were determined by reversed-phase HPLC. For IMMU-130-treated specimens,
SN-38 concentrations were assessed in the extracted samples (Free SN-38),
as well as in acid-hydrolyzed samples to determine Total SN-38 (Free +
bound). IgG was measured by ELISA.

RESULTS: Irinotecan cleared quickly from serum, with [SN-38]averaging
~900 ng/mL to 200 ng/mL from 5 min to 6 h. SN-38G and SN-38 levels were
similar. With IMMU-130, Free SN-38 was detected in serum over the entire
monitoring period, but levels were only a small fraction of the Total
SN-38 (~10%). Importantly, Free SN-38G was very low, being detected only
within the first 6 h. Total SN-38 levels dropped more quickly than the
IgG, confirming in vitro studies showing gradual SN-38 release from the
ADC. In tumors, for irinotecan-treated animals, SN-38 peaked at 5 min,
representing ≤0.2%/g of the SN-38 equivalent given. In IMMU-130-treated
animals, no Free SN-38 was detected in tumors, but levels of Total SN-38
peaked at 6 h, with ~5%/g of the injected SN-38 dose present at that
time, and were sustained longer than SN-38 delivered by irinotecan. Area
under the curve analysis found SN-38 levels were ~10- and 17-fold higher
in LS174T and GW-39 tumors, respectively, from IMMU-130-dosed versus
irinotecan-dosed animals. This delivery advantage is amplified > 30-fold
when normalized to SN-38 equivalents injected for each product,
illustrating the improved bioavailability with IMMU-130-targeted SN-38.
Levels of SN-38 and SN-38G were appreciably lower in the liver and small
intestinal contents, which likely explains the lower incidence of severe
diarrhea reported in patients given IMMU-130.

CONCLUSION: IMMU-130 delivers >300-fold more SN-38 to CEA-producing
tumors compared to irinotecan, while also reducing levels of potentially
harmful SN-38 and SN-38G in normal tissues. These observations are
consistent with preclinical data showing improved efficacy and safety.


