Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential macrophage programming is associated with the
aggressiveness of gliomas.


Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), a major component of immune cells in
the tumor microenvironment, have been shown to be associated with
enhanced malignancy of gliomas. The polarization of macrophages toward a
pro-inflammatory phenotype M1 or an anti-inflammatory phenotype M2
governed by niche factors in the tumor microenvironment may dictate the
malignant outcome of gliomas. In this study, we examined the effects of
differential programming of TAMs on the development of C6 gliomas in
different host microenvironment using SD and Wistar rats. Using
multi-parametric MRI measurements, we show that C6 cells implanted into
SD rats developed larger tumors as compared to those in Wistar rats (p =
0.0199), which was accompanied with a shorter survival of SD rats (p =
1.06×10-9). The increased tumor growth in SD rats was associated with
increased angiogenesis and higher levels of VEGF and VEGFR2 expression.
We also observed a significantly increased ratio of M2/M1 in the tumors
of SD rats while a decreased ratio of M2/M1 in those of Wistar rats,
suggesting that the milieu of C6 gliomas in SD rats favors for the
polarization of macrophages toward the pro-tumorigenic M2 phenotype. Most
importantly, Induction of M1 polarization by IFNγ treatment greatly
reduced tumor burden in SD rats, and induction of M2 polarization by
IL-4/IL-10 treatment or blockade of M1 polarization by anti-IL12
treatment significantly promoted tumor growth in Wistar rats. These
results demonstrate an important role of TAMs in glioma pathogenesis and
the crucial role of microenvironment in dictating the polarization of
TAMs into M1 or M2 phenotypes. We conclude that macrophage programming
plays an important role in glioma development and that targeting
glioma-associated macrophages may serve as a promising therapeutic
approach.


