Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSC59984 induces mutant p53 degradation via activating ERK2
pathway-MDM2 axis.


Mutant p53 protein is highly expressed in most cancer cells due to its
protein stabilization. Mutant p53 loses wild-type p53 function but gains
new oncogenic functions in driving tumor growth and drug resistance.
Depletion of mutant p53 is an attractive strategy for cancer therapy. We
reported a small-molecule NSC59984 destabilizes mutant p53 protein via
protein degradation (Zhang et al., Cancer Research, 2015). In this study,
we demonstrate that the ERK2 pathway plays a specific role in
NSC59984-induced mutant p53 degradation via MDM2-mediated ubiquitination.
We observe a sustained-phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in cancer cells treated
with NSC59984. ERK1/2 pathway is negatively regulated by MKP-1. We find
that MKP-1 activity is partially inhibited by NSC59984 in a dose
dependent manner in vitro. These results suggest that NSC5998 sustains
ERK1/2 phosphorylation partially via disruption of the feedback-loop
between MKP-1 and ERK2 pathway. Knockdown of ERK2 rescues mutant p53 from
NSC59984-mediated degradation, and inhibits NSC59984-restoration of p53
signaling in mutant p53-expressing cells. On the contrary, the effect of
NSC59984 on the mutant p53 is not inhibited by the blockage of JNK and
P38, two pathways negatively regulated by MKP-1. These results suggest
that the ERK2 phosphorylation is specifically required for
NSC59984-mediated mutant p53 degradation. We further find that NSC59984
induces ERK2-dependent MDM2 phosphorylation. The effect of NSC59984 on
MDM2 phosphoryation is partially inhibited by the blockage of ERK2
signaling (via U0126 treatment or Knockdown of ERK2), not by the
attenuation of the JNK pathway. Furthermore, NSC59984-mediated mutant p53
protein degradation is inhibited by MDM2 knockdown, and enhanced by MDM2
overexpression in cancer cells. NSC59984-increased ubiquitination of
mutant p53 is attenuated by U0126. Our results suggest that the ERK2
signaling pathway-MDM2 axis is a major determinant of NSC59984-mediated
mutant p53 degradation. We further demonstrate that NSC59984 induces cell
death via apoptosis, and NSC59984-induced cell death is mainly rescued by
inhibition of the ERK2 pathway in p53 mutant cancer cells. Taken
together, our results suggest that phosphorylated-ERK2 is an important
factor required for NSC59984-mediated mutant p53 degradation which may
further contribute to NSC59984-induced cell death in cancer cells.


