Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fucoidan adminstration attenuates radiation pneumonitis and
fibrosis through reducing inflammatory cytokine expression in lung tissue.


Purpose: There is no well-known compound to prevent radiation pneumonitis
(RP) or prophylactically use to attenuate the toxicity of RP. RP is one
of major complications in chest part irradiation and limitations of
radiation dose. Fucoidan is a sulfated polysaccharide found mainly in
various species of brown algae and brown seaweed. Recent studies have
demonstrated its anti-inflammation effect. Since RP is an radiation
induced inflammatory and fibrosis related complication, we investigated
the effect of fucoidan adminstration on radiation pneumonitis and
fibrosis.

Materials and Methods: In this study, we compared the pneumonitis and
fibrosis in lung tissue specimen between the lungs irradiated (10Gy/one
shot) C57BL/6 mice with or without Fucoidan adminstration (200mg/kg /day,
oral gavage for 14 days).

Results: The results demonstrated that fucoidan adminstration attenuates
pneumonitis and fibrosis in lung tissue. We found the accumulation of
neutrophils in irradiated lung tissue was decreased, and the radiation
induced Masson trichrome staining fibrosis was decreased. We also
investigate the inflammatory -cytokine profiles in the irradiated lung
tissue by protein array. The results revealed that fucoidan adminstration
changes the inflammatory -cytokine expression pattern in in the
irradiated lung tissue.

Conclusions: This study demonstrated that inflammatory -cytokine
expression after whole lung irradiation is correlated with neutrophil
accumulation and radiation induced fibrosis. Interestingly, Fucoidan
adminstration changes the inflammatory -cytokine expression pattern which
may lead to attenuates radiation pneumonitis and fibrosis. It is
potential to be a therapeutic molecular to attenuate or prevent radiation
pneumonitis.


