Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structure-activity relationship study of pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines
as microtubule targeting antitumor agents.


Microtubules are cytoskeleton protein polymers composed of αß-tubulin
heterodimers which play pivotal roles in cell division, cellular
transport and cell signaling. Interfering with microtubule dynamics is a
well-established strategy for the treatment of cancer. However, clinical
utility of microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) in cancer chemotherapy is
often limited by the emergence of drug resistance. Expression of
P-glycoprotein (Pgp) or the βIII isotype of tubulin, are two clinically
established drug resistance mechanisms. We previously reported that
compound AG346 binds to the colchicine site of tubulin and has
microtubule depolymerization activity in A-10 cells (EC50 = 365 nM).
Molecular modeling and docking studies of this compound in the X-ray
crystal structure of tubulin (PDB: 402B) suggested that the pyrrole NH
can be substituted with alkyl chains of optimal length to obtain an
altered binding conformation which can facilitate interaction with the
hydrophobic pocket formed by amino acid Val181 of side chain A, and
Lys352 and Thr314 of side chain B. We designed and synthesized a variety
of pyrrole NH-alkyl substituted compounds and determined that the
compound AG473 shows a 43-fold improved microtubule depolymerization
potency (EC50 = 8.4 nM) in A-10 cells, compared to the lead compound. In
addition, this compound inhibited the growth of human melanoma cancer
cell line MDA-MB-435 in culture with an IC50 of 7.2 nM, which is a 5-fold
improvement in potency over the parent compound. These analogs also
circumvented resistance mediated by Pgp and βIII-tubulin. These
attributes provide the impetus for further preclinical development of
these compounds as microtubule targeted antitumor agents in vivo and
these studies are currently underway.


