Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atopic allergic conditions and risk of pancreatic cancer: the
Multiethnic Cohort.


Background: Previous studies, mostly case-control studies, have suggested
that atopic allergic conditions (AACs) are associated with a decreased
risk of pancreatic cancer. Scarce data, however, are available from
prospective, US multiethnic populations. In this largest prospective
study to date, we investigated the association between AACs (asthma, hay
fever, or allergy) and risk of developing pancreatic cancer in the US
Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC).

Methods: AACs were assessed via a baseline questionnaire when
participants joined the MEC in 1993-1996. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for pancreatic cancer incidence by AACs status
were calculated using Cox regression, adjusting for age, sex,
race/ethnicity, education, smoking status, family history of pancreatic
cancer, body mass index, diabetes, and alcohol intake.

Results: During an average of 16.2-year follow-up, 1,455 incident cases
of pancreatic cancer were identified among 187,226 white,
African-American, Native Hawaiian, Japanese-American, and Latino men and
women. AACs were not associated with pancreatic cancer incidence
(HR=1.00; 95% CI: 0.88, 1.12). The null association was observed in men
and women and across racial/ethnic groups, smoking status, BMI groups,
diabetes status, and family history of pancreatic cancer.

Conclusions: Based on these results, AACs is unlikely to be associated
with risk of pancreatic cancer.


