Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of epigenetic reader and alternative mRNA splicing variant
MBD2 variant 2 in triple-negative breast cancer.


Background: Among all breast cancer patients, those diagnosed with the
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype have the worst prognosis, in
part attributable to the fact that TNBC lacks targets for effective
molecularly-targeted therapies. The concept that EGFR inhibitor drugs
could be used as a targeted treatment against TNBC has been put forth
because roughly 50% of TNBC express high levels of EGFR. However clinical
trials targeting EGFR did not significantly improve patient outcomes. Our
recent work offers a potential explanation as to why EGFR inhibitors
failed and supports an innovative therapeutic approach combining an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor with the novel antioxidant biologic, CAT-SKL.
Our data indicate that inhibition of cancer stem cell-like cells depends
on antioxidant-induced downregulation of an alternative mRNA splice
variant of the methyl-CpG binding domain 2 gene, MBD2_v2.

Objective and Methods: The purpose of the present study was to evaluate
the importance of MBD2_v2 in TNBC and better understand how CAT-SKL
regulates its expression. Using TNBC cell lines we investigated the
effects of MBD2_v2 expression on tumor initiation capacity. Furthermore
we studied MBD2_v2 mRNA levels in an in vivo tumor xenograph mouse model
of TNBC and in human TNBC samples using an existing database. Then by
RNA-seq analysis we assessed how CAT-SKL regulates MBD2_v2 expression in
TNBC cells through differential gene expression.

Results: The results support that MBD2_v2 expression is regulated by
redox signaling in TNBC cells, which is tightly linked to TNBC cell tumor
initiation capacity. Furthermore, MBD2_v2 was upregulated in tumors
harvested from overweight mice, which also displayed increased tumor take
rate, suggesting that a pro-inflammatory tumor microenvironment could
play a role in promoting MBD2_v2 expression. In addition, RNA-seq
analysis identified an overrepresentation of mRNA splicing factors with
expression downregulated by CAT-SKL treatment of TNBC cells. From this
gene set two splicing co-factors are highlighted: SRRM1 and CPSF3. These
co-factors are critical for splicing factor function, 3â€™ end formation
and polyadenylation; and both have been linked via protein-protein
interaction to a relevant exonic splicing enhancer site in exon 3 of the
MBD2 _v2 transcript. Finally, according to the Kaplan Meier Plotter
database high MBD2_v2 levels in BC were associated with shorter relapse
free survival.

Conclusion: Our investigation sheds light on the relevance of MBD2_v2
expression in TNBC, and how a select antioxidant regulates its
expression. The application of which holds promise of a novel, targeted
therapeutic modality for TNBC, the subtype with the worst prognosis and
highest need for treatment options.


