Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of small RNA-seq data for differential expression of
small noncoding RNAs in human colorectal cancer.


Background: Cancer is a major cause of deaths worldwide, despite improved
healthcare and technologies. Recent advancements in genome sequencing
have led to the rapid study of the whole transcriptome and small RNAs
with their biological functions. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) play an
important role in biological processes that greatly impact biomarker
development for diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy. Non-coding RNAs such
as microRNAs (miRNA), Piwi-interacting-RNAs (piRNAs), small
nuclear/nucleolar RNAs (sn/snoRNAs) have recently been studied to
understand their biology and pathology.

Results: In the present study, we used eight matched colorectal patient
tissue samples (benign, tumor, and metastasis) small RNA sequencing data
remapped for various small RNA annotation. We identified aberrant
expression of 13 miRs in tumor and metastasis specimens [tumor vs benign
group (19 miRs) and metastasis vs benign group (38 miRs)] of which five
were upregulated, and eight were downregulated, during disease
progression. We also investigated pathway analysis on abbarent expression
of miRNAs, which showed majority of miRs involved in the colon other
types of cancers. Further analysis of piRNAs revealed that six piRNAs in
tumor vs benign and 24 in metastasis vs benign samples (commonly in both
groups, only two piRNAs). Additionally, we examined other types of small
RNAs [sn/snoRNAs, mt_rRNA, misc_RNA, nonsense mediated decay (NMD) and
rRNA], we identified 15 in tumor vs benign and 104 metastasis vs benign
and only four in commonly expressed.

Conclusion: In summary, our results identified multiple sncRNAs during
colorectal cancer progression which needs to be further validated and can
be used for prognosis, diagnosis, and therapeutic potentials.


