Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) alter the epigenetic landscape
in MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast carcinoma (TNBC).


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in US
women; 10-20% of which are triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtypes
and have the poorest short-term prognosis. This is probably due to an
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) that tumors undergo,
de-differentiating into cancer stem cells. Epigenetic reprogramming is
proposed to be required for malignant transformation and invasion,
particularly in cells undergoing EMT transitions such as TNBC. Therefore,
altering the epigenetic landscape in metastatic TNBC lines would provide
researchers with a unique opportunity to sensitize tumors to treatment
and induce apoptosis.

Epigenetic research chiefly focuses on inhibitors of co-repressors
histone deacetylase (HDACi) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTi). Short
chain fatty acids, have proven to be effective HDACiâ€™s, suggesting a
possible role for other fats in epigenetic regulation. Research has shown
that several omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), specifically
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; C22:6, n-3) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA;
C20:5, n-3), inhibit tumorigenesis whereas the omega-6 PUFA linoleic acid
(LA; 1C8:2, n-6) promotes neoplastic growth; supporting the association
of elevated cancer incidence with n-6 PUFA dietary intake. We initiated
studies to evaluate the impact of omega-3 fatty acids on tumor epigenetic
pathways. Therefore we monitored epigenetic alterations in MDA-MB-231
TNBC cells in response to both omega-3 and omega-6 PUFAs in a time and
dose-dependent manner. DHA, EPA, and arachidonic acid (AA; 20:5, n-6) all
elicit apoptosis in a similar manner, indicating that initiating
apoptosis is not omega-6 or omega-3 specific. We now show that PUFA
incorporation and the resulting attenuated metabolism are not sufficient
to induce apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 TNBC at 3 and 12 hour timepoints.
Additionally, plasma membrane integrity was not appreciably altered at 3
or 12 hour time points. These data, combined with a lack apoptosis at 12
hours, indicate that the level of intact PUFA in cell membranes does not
initiate apoptosis. Moreover, mitochondrial membrane potential was
universally diminished early and throughout the time course and, although
not limiting, decreased ATP levels were observed at 12 hours (relative to
vehicle control). Furthermore, activity of HDAC classes (I, IIa and IIb)
were altered early at 3 and 48 hours, but typically punctuated with a
recovery to basal levels noted at the 12 hour time point. Chromatin
condensation was observable primarily in 12 and 48 hour time points,
although it was noted in DHA and EPA treatments at 3 hours. Collectively,
these data demonstrate that PUFA-mediated epigenetic changes occur on a
time scale proceeding apoptotic induction, indicating that PUFAs may be
useful as an epigenetically-targeted cancer therapeutic agent or adjuvant
therapy.


