Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CAR-T cell harboring a camelid single domain antibody as a
targeting agent to kill tumors expressing VEGFR2.


Modulation of the immune system is showing tremendous promise in the
treatment of malignancies. In addition to checkpoint inhibitors that
re-activate T cells present in the tumor microenvironment, exogenously
transduced chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells are providing
excellent responses in clinical trials for the treatment of leukemias. In
this study, we describe CAR-T cells that target VEGFR2-expressing tumors.

Angiogenesis is the process of new blood vessel formation and is
essential for a tumor to grow beyond a certain size. Tumors secrete the
pro-angiogenic factor vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which
acts upon local endothelial cells by binding to vascular endothelial
growth factor receptors (VEGFR). As VEGFR2 is also expressed by a variety
of tumors, we investigated the utility of anti-VEGFR2 CAR-T cells as a
method to treat VEGFR2-expressing tumors.

Camelid antibodies are small (14 kD) single chain antibodies. To generate
a camelid antibody targeting the extracellular domain of VEGFR2, a llama
was immunized with recombinant VEGFR2/Fc. A phage display library was
generated and screened to identify an antibody with high binding affinity
to VEGFR2. The selected antibody was expressed in the E. coli. BL21 (DE3)
pT7 system. The purified antibody was characterized by SEC, LC-MS peptide
mapping and ELISA.

CAR-T cells were engineered to express the camelid anti-VEGFR2 antibody
in combination with the CD28 and 4-1BB costimulatory molecules and the
CD3 zeta chain. Tumor cells were screened for expression of VEGFR2, and
the HL-60 acute promyelocytic leukemia, ZR-75-30 breast ductal carcinoma
and NCI-H23 non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma were identified.
Co-incubation of anti-VEGFR2 CAR-T cells with the VEGFR-2-expressing cell
lines resulted in dose-dependent target cell toxicity as measured by LDH
release. In addition, T cell activity was confirmed, as high levels of
IL-2 and IFN-Î³ were detected in the cell culture media. These results
suggest that anti-VEGFR2 CAR-T may be useful in directly targeting
VEGFR2-expressing tumors.

We previously showed the utility of camelid antibodies in CAR-T
constructs as anti-CEACAM6 CAR-T cells show both in vitro and in vitro
efficacy against the pancreatic tumor Bx-PC3. The use of the a camelid
V21 antibody to target VEGFR2-expressing tumors provides hope that
camelid single domain antibodies can be developed for CAR-T therapies.


