Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The metastasis suppressor NME1 regulates stemness in melanoma.


Melanoma is a lethal skin cancer that is highly resistant to therapy and
prone to metastasize to distant organs. The quiescence melanoma stem
cells are believed to account for the resistance to therapies.
Traditional chemotherapies designed to target fast-proliferative tumor
cells tend to miss quiescent stem cells. The escaped quiescent stem cells
may accumulate oncogenic mutation from common mutagenic sources and
finally lead to tumor relapse. NME1 is a metastasis suppressor gene that
inhibits the metastatic potential in melanoma and other cancers. In this
study, we focus on the role of NME1 in the regulation of stemness and
quiescence of melanoma stem cells. We find that the genesis and growth of
stem cell spheroids derived from melanoma cell lines are abrogated after
knockdown of NME1. We also find that the mRNA level of several melanoma
stem cell markers are elevated when we knockdown NME1. These results
suggest that NME1 regulates the survival and stemness of melanoma stem
cells. In addition, we demonstrate that melanoma stem cells are
heterogeneous in NME1 expression. Specifically, the NME1 expression is
markedly elevated in a highly proliferative subpopulation in the
spheroids that express the stem cell markers OCT4, SOX2 and SOX10.
Conversely, we observe another subpopulation of these spheroids that
exhibits low NME1 expression and is non-proliferative. We hypothesize
that this subpopulation consists quiescent melanoma stem cells that are
more resistance to therapies, and that their quiescent status is
controlled by the level of NME1. We are now employing CRISPR technology
to separately study potentials in tumorigenesis, metastasis, and
therapy-resistance of the stem cell subpopulations.


