Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: LY3207447, a tetravalent bispecific antibody targeting VEGFR2 and
angiopoietin-2, provides a more efficient anti-angiogenic therapy and an
alternative for combination.


Angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2) is released from endothelial cells only in
response to stimulus (e.g. wound healing, tumor growth) and facilitates
blood vessel sprouting and inhibits pericyte-endothelial cell interaction
via Tie2 signaling. In tumors, Ang-2 is up-regulated and acts together
with the VEGF/VEGFR2 pathway to stimulate tumor angiogenesis and
metastasis. While therapeutic intervention using antagonists to the
VEGF/VEGFR2 pathway has proven to be successful in limiting disease
progression in a number of different clinical settings, there is an
obvious need for an improved response. In various preclinical mouse
angiogenesis or xenograft models, the combination treatment with
anti-Ang2 antibody and the VEGF/VEGFR blocker provided additional benefit
over inhibiting the individual pathway. Here as an alternative to combo
therapy, we have engineered a tetravalent IgG-scFv bispecific antibody,
LY3207447. LY3207447 is an immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) antibody, comprising
of VEGFR2 antibody derived from ramucirumab and a C-terminally fused
single-chain variable fragment (scFv) targeting Ang2. LY3207447 binds to
both the extracellular domain of VEGFR2 and soluble Ang2 with high
affinity and blocks binding of Ang2 to Tie2 and VEGF to VEGFR2, and
therefore inhibits signaling. We have shown that LY3207447 blocks binding
of human Ang-2 to human Tie2-Fc by an ELISA assay and neutralizes Ang-2
induced phospho-Tie-2, but not Ang-1 induced phospho-Tie-2 in CHO cells
overexpressing Tie-2 receptor. Moreover, LY3207447 neutralizes human
VEGF165-induced phospho-VEGFR2 stimulation, cord formation and cell
proliferation in human endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) and human
dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-d). LY3207447 blocks human
and cyno VEGFR2, but not rodent VEGFR2. For anti-Ang2 arm, LY3207447
blocks human, cyno and mouse Ang2. Pre-clinical evaluation of LY3207447
in mouse retinal angiogenesis model resulted in an abrogation of
angiogenesis. Combination studies using a rodent-specific surrogate
VEGFR2 blocking antibody, DC101, with parental Ang2 antibody from which
the scFv was derived from, inhibited both tumor growth and metastasis,
resulting in increased survival compared to monotherapies in mouse
xenograft model. These data establish VEGFR2/Ang2 bispecific antibodies
as a promising anti-angiogenic, anti-metastatic and anti-tumor agent for
the treatment of cancer in combination with other therapies.


