Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiosensitization with the c-MET inhibitor crizotinib in KRAS
mutant colorectal cancer.


Background: KRAS mutant colorectal cancers (CRC) are resistant to many
targeted therapies including cetuximab. Novel molecular targets for KRAS
mutant tumors may enhance the efficacy of chemoradiation. C-MET plays
important roles in treatment resistance, tumor invasion, and metastasis.
In this study, we used a small molecule inhibitor of c-MET, crizotinib in
cetuximab resistant mutant KRAS driven CRC cell lines and assessed
radiosensitization.

Methods: To test the effect of c-MET inhibition on CRC cells we used the
KRAS mutant cell lines HCT116, DLD1, and LoVo. Colony formation assays
were performed to assess the effects of crizotinib and cetuximab.
Immunoblot analysis was used to determine the effect of crizotinib on
c-MET and downstream pathways including ERK and AKT phosphorylation. We
then selected doses of crizotinib below the IC50 and assessed clonogenic
survival with radiation. To study potential mechanisms of
radiosensitization cell cycle analysis was performed using flow
cytometry. The effect of c-MET inhibition on cellular function was
assessed using cell migration assays.

Results: We first performed a series of clonogenic survival assays with
crizotinib and cetuximab to determine the IC50 for each cell line. As
expected, the KRAS mutant cell lines LoVo, HCT116, and DLD1 were
resistant to cetuximab (surviving fraction greater than 95% at 100
Î¼g/ml). These cell lines were sensitive to the c-MET inhibitor
crizotinib with IC50 values of 14.4 nM for LoVo, 316 nM for HCT166, and
217 nM for DLD1. Immunoblot analysis showed that crizotinib at
concentrations near the IC50 for each cell line attenuated c-MET
phosphorylation and downstream signaling pathways including ERK and AKT.
Crizotinib further blocked radiation induced c-MET phosphorylation and
attenuated activation of downstream signaling pathways. We then performed
a series of clonogenic survival assays to study the radiosensitizing
potential of crizotinib. Pretreatment with crizotinib for 24 hours
radiosensitized LoVo and DLD1 cell lines with enhancement ratios of 1.66
and 1.25, respectively. Interestingly, treatment with crizotinib for 1
hour prior to radiation had only modest dose enhancement, suggesting that
prolonged exposure to crizotinib is required for optimal
radiosensitization. Cell cycle analysis revealed minimal G1 arrest with
crizotinib. Additionally, crizotinib completely blocked HGF and EGF
induced cell migration.

Conclusions: Inhibition of c-MET with crizotinib effectively sensitizes
cetuximab resistant KRAS mutant CRC cell lines to radiation. Given the
important role c-MET plays in treatment resistance, crizotinib has the
potential to improve the outcome of patients with locally advanced rectal
cancer undergoing radiation therapy.


