Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated genome-wide methylation analysis with gene
expression in normal breast tissues identifies differentially methylated
CpG loci associated with obesity.


Introduction: Obesity is a risk factor for breast cancer, but the
underlying mechanisms for this are only partially understood, and there
has been only limited study of breast tissues molecularly before cancer
develops.

Methods: Breast tissues from healthy women undergoing reduction
mammoplasty and epidemiologic interviews (n=121) were profiled for the
whole genome transcriptome (Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Arrays) and
genome-wide DNA methylation (Infinium HumanMethylation 450 BeadChip
array).

Results: After adjusting for confounding by age and race, 12,210 CpG
dinucleotides with altered methylation levels correlated with body mass
index (BMI) (10,808 positive correlations and1,402 negative correlations,
FDRResults: After adjusting for confounding by age and race, 12,210 CpG
dinucleotides with altered methylation levels correlated with body mass
index (BMI) (10,808 positive correlations and1,402 negative correlations,
FDR<0.05). Among them 4,170 BMI-associated hypermethylated CpG
dinucleotides (-1.5 kb from transcription start site, 1st Exon, and
5’UTR) and 443 BMI-associated hypomethylated CpG dinucleotides were
located in promoter regions. By integrating DNA methylation and mRNA
expression data, we identified 310 methylated genes that correlated with
gene expression (FDRResults: After adjusting for confounding by age and
race, 12,210 CpG dinucleotides with altered methylation levels correlated
with body mass index (BMI) (10,808 positive correlations and1,402
negative correlations, FDR<0.05). Among them 4,170 BMI-associated
hypermethylated CpG dinucleotides (-1.5 kb from transcription start site,
1st Exon, and 5’UTR) and 443 BMI-associated hypomethylated CpG
dinucleotides were located in promoter regions. By integrating DNA
methylation and mRNA expression data, we identified 310 methylated genes
that correlated with gene expression (FDR<0.05). Of these, 242 genes had
higher methylation status showing concurrent down-regulation in obese
women, and 68 genes had lower methylation status showing concurrent
up-regulation in obese women. Among the affected genes involved in
diseases and disorders for inflammatory response, hereditary disorder,
and immunological disease.

Conclusions: This study provides evidence that obesity epigenetically
deregulates genes potentially involved in breast cancer that have
functional relationships to gene expression.


