Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The radioenhancer NBTXR3 brings anticancer efficacy to the
cisplatin-based chemoradiation in vitro and in vivo.


NBTXR3 is a radioenhancer composed of functionalized hafnium oxide
nanoparticles, designed to enhance the radiation dose deposit within the
cancer cells when activated by ionizing radiations. NBTXR3 is intended
for single intratumor administration and is currently evaluated in cancer
clinical trials including soft tissue sarcoma, head and neck (H&N),
prostate, liver and rectum.

Cisplatin (CDDP) is a cytotoxic agent considered to be a radiosensitizer
and inhibits the repair of sublethal damage from irradiation. Concurrent
chemoradiation using CDDP is the mainstream treatment for high risk H&N,
cervix and non-small cell lung cancer patients. We hypothesized that
adding NBTXR3 to radiation treatment (RT) may improve significantly
anticancer effect of the chemoradiation combination

In vitro, no specific clonogenic toxicity was observed for the cells
exposed only to NBTXR3. For the combined treatment CDDP was used at its
IC50 concentrations. A marked and enhanced cell destruction (DEF) was
observed with the CDDP combined treatment (added 6h or 16h prior to RT)
and NBTXR3 (800µM, added 16h prior to RT) at ≥2Gy when compared to the
single agent.

Treatment

Cell line (DEF*)



CDDP

NBTXR3

Irradiation

FaDu

NCI-H460-Luc2



6h

-

2 Gy

1.0±0.06

1.2±0.06



-

16h

1.4±0.15

1.3±0.25



6h

16h

1.4±0.14

1.6±0.12



16h

-

1.0±0.12

1.9±0.32



-

16h

1.2±0.13

1.5±0.17



16h

16h

1.8±0.23

2.6±0.45



6h

-

4 Gy

1.3±0.08

2.2±0.16



-

16h

2.2±0.24

1.9±0.41



6h

16h

3.1±0.64

3.8±0.48



16h

-

1.2±0.19

2.9±0.52



-

16h

2.1±0.31

2.8±0.39



16h

16h

5.3±0.97

7.6±2.76





*For a given radiation dose, the DEF value was obtained by taking the
ratio of the survival fraction in the control (radiotherapy alone) and
the survival fraction of the treatment.

In vivo, NBTXR3 enhanced the fractionated radiation treatment (5x2Gy)
when injected intratumorally at 25% of tumor volume. NBTXR3 activated
with ionizing radiation in combination with low dose of CDDP (1mg/kg
administered 5 consecutive days, 2 hours prior to RT) delayed tumor
growth when compared to single agent CDDP in combination with RT.

These results strongly support the concurrent chemoradiotherapy regimen
with NBTXR3 nanoparticles as an effective radioenhancer to increase the
anticancer effect. A new phase I/II trial with H&N cancers patient
receiving radiotherapy plus CDDP has been started evaluating the optimal
dose, safety and preliminary efficacy of NBTXR3.


