Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined immune checkpoint targeting with anti-PD-1 plus anti-CD40
antibodies as the most effective approach to eradicate head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) in mouse models.


Introduction:

Immunotherapy with single agent anti-PD-1 antibody confers modest overall
survival benefits in patients with recurrent/metastatic HNSCCs. Combined
immune checkpoint targeting has shown promising results for melanomas and
other solid tumors. Thus, evaluation of combination immunotherapy in
animal models specific to HNSCCs could inform prioritization and design
of human clinical trials for this disease. We conducted this pre-clinical
study to test the hypothesis that combining anti-PD-1 with either
anti-CTLA-4 or co-stimulatory immune checkpoint agonist antibodies would
be more effective than anti-PD-1 monotherapy in a mouse model of oral
carcinoma. We also aimed at identifying the combination regimen with
highest anti-tumor activity.

Methods:

C57BL/6 mice were subcutaneously grafted with 2x106 mouse oral cancer 1
(MOC1) cells derived from a carcinogen-induced tumor molecularly similar
to human HNSCC. After 25 days, mice were randomized into one of 12
treatment groups (IgG, or antibodies targeting PD-1, CTLA-4, CD40, OX-40,
GITR, 4-1BB, PD-1+CTLA-4, PD1+CD40, PD-1+OX-40, PD-1+GITR, or
PD-1+4-1BB), N=8-9 mice/group. Antibodies were administered every 4 days
for 3 doses. Tumors were measured twice per week. The primary endpoint
was overall survival. Mice were sacrificed when tumor diameter was >2 cm
or tumor ulceration was >5 mm. Survival curves were computed using the
Kaplan-Meier method and compared using the log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test.

Results:

In analogy to human clinical trials, anti-PD-1 therapy led to a modest
improvement in survival compared to IgG [HR=0.41; 95%CI 0.06-0.53;
P=0.015], indicating that this model recapitulates, in part, the effects
of immunotherapy in HNSCC patients; none of the animals survived long
term. Monotherapy with anti-CTLA-4, anti-CD40, anti-OX-40, or anti-4-1BB
also improved survival compared to IgG (P=0.0001, 0.003, 0.02, and 0.003,
respectively), but were not more effective than anti-PD-1 alone (P=0.09,
0.12, 0.72, and 0.77, respectively). Combination therapy did not prolong
survival compared to anti-PD-1 alone, with the exception of anti-PD-1+
anti-CTLA4 [HR=0.36; 95% CI 0.07-0.6; P=0.016], and anti-PD-1+ anti-CD40
[HR=0.125, 95% CI 0.02-0.24; P=0.0003]. Notably, 50% of mice receiving
anti-PD-1+ anti-CD40 antibodies had complete tumor eradication and are
alive and disease-free 120 days after tumor grafting.

Conclusions:

Single agent immunotherapy targeting PD-1, CTLA-4, CD40, OX-40 and 4-1BB
modestly improved survival in a mouse model of oral cancer. Combination
with anti-PD-1+ anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-1+ anti-CD40 antibodies
outperformed anti-PD-1 monotherapy. Complete responses were exclusively
seen with PD-1+CD40 dual targeting. This regimen should be prioritized
for evaluation in HNSCC clinical trials.


