Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Computational analysis of clinically actionable genomic features:
precision heuristics for interpreting the alteration landscape (PHIAL).


Background: PHIAL (Precision Heuristics for Interpreting the Alteration
Landscape) was developed as a heuristic clinical interpretation algorithm
for cancer genomic data to inform treatment decisions at the point of
care and provide researchers with rapid assessment of tumor
actionability. This approach used somatic whole exome sequencing data and
a database of tumor alterations relevant for genomics driven therapy
(TARGET). However, PHIAL was limited to first order genomic
relationships, could not distinguish relative actionability given
multiple actionable variants, did not maximize the richness of
somatic-germline interactions, and could not leverage both exome and
transcriptome data to move towards feature-based actionability. Towards
that end, we developed a new interpretation methodology to address these
areas and improve clinical actionability algorithms.

Methods: We revised PHIAL to predict actionable alterations based on the
presence of SNVs (in the context of allele specific expression from
RNA-seq), indels, SCNAs, fusions, and global features (e.g.,
context-specific mutational burden) that imply actionability.
Additionally, we refined and expanded the TARGET database to enable PHIAL
to produce scores on multiple dimensions and reflect newly discovered
relationships between genomics and clinical actions. Predictive
implication values were assigned to reflect the validities of TARGETâ€™s
drug sensitivity, drug resistance, and prognostic claims.

Results: We applied both the original (PHIAL1) and an updated version of
PHIAL (PHIAL2) to a 255 patient cohort with whole exome/transcriptome
sequencing data (146 castration-resistant prostate cancer and 109
metastatic melanoma samples). PHIAL1 identified 1,342 clinically
actionable/biologically relevant events across the cohort with a median
of 3 events per patient and 95% of patients having at least one event.
PHIAL2 identified 2,508 events, with a median of 6 events per patient and
98.5% of patients harboring at least one event. Of these events, 8.12%
were associated with an FDA-approved therapy and 2.09% with a clinical
trial. PHIAL2 identified events in 9 patient samples that PHIAL1
associated with no events.

Conclusion: PHIAL2 was able to identify and rank more putatively
actionable alterations than PHIAL1, and effectively transitioned from a
variant-based to a feature-based approach. This strategy may inform the
utility of point-of-care whole-exome/transcriptome sequencing in larger
contexts as these data emerge in clinical settings, and may bridge
towards machine learning based approaches as patient outcomes are linked
to genomic and transcriptomic features. Finally, PHIAL2 may ultimately
provide a deeper understanding of, and suggest clinical actions for,
cases in which there is no clear single genomic alteration associated
with oncogenesis.


