Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of genetic intratumor heterogeneity of colorectal
cancer and matching organoids.


Background: In the recent years it has become evident that intratumor
heterogeneity of solid tumors, such as colorectal cancer (CRC),
complicates development of efficient therapy strategies. A minor clone of
the tumor might have the ability for treatment resistance and hence the
ability for re-establishing the tumor. Organoid cultures derived from the
patientsâ€™ tumors can be used for ex vivo drug screening prior to
treatment of the patient. However this approach is only efficient if the
organoids represent the heterogeneity of the tumor. In this study we aim
to characterize the genetic intratumor heterogeneity of CRC by performing
whole exome sequencing (WES) on multiple biopsies per tumor, and to see
how well the heterogeneity is reflected in matching organoid cultures.

Methods: From five CRC patients, three biopsies were collected from
separate areas of each tumor. Each biopsy was divided in two: one half
was fresh frozen for DNA purification, and the other half was grown in
vitro as organoid culture. When available, lymph node metastases (LNMs)
were included. WES was performed using SeqCap EZ Exome v3.0, and Illumina
NextSeq500. Matched germline DNA was used as reference to identify
somatic mutations and copy number variations (CNVs) using Mutect2 and
FACETS, respectively.

Results: Each tumor contained multiple mutations that were present in all
biopsies and in the organoids as well, representing a common ancestral
branch. However all tumor biopsies and organoids also contained private
mutations. These constituted on average 10% of the mutations (range
3-18%) indicating spatial genetic heterogeneity in all tumors. Each
organoid had private mutations not seen in the tumor area of origin and
vice versa, indicating that each area contained multiple clones and only
a subset was represented in the organoids. The extent of mutational
differences between organoids and their area of origin was similar to the
mutational differences between tumor areas. Implying that organoids do
not reflect their local origin better than a single biopsy reflects the
whole tumor. In one patient with LNMs it was observed that the mutational
profile of the metastases resembled only one of the examined tumor areas.
Surprisingly, not all the ancestral mutations found in the tumor biopsies
were observed in the LNMs, suggesting that at least two clones co-existed
in the area of origin and just one of these formed the metastases.

Conclusion: In the five patients studied; spatial genetic heterogeneity
was observed, meaning that multiple biopsies are needed to picture the
whole tumor. Genetic heterogeneity was also observed between primary
tumor and metastases and our data support that the metastases were formed
from a single cancer clone that did not dominate the primary tumor. From
a genetic point of view, organoids do not seem to fully reflect the tumor
area of origin and less so the whole tumor, indicating that care should
be taken when using organoids as models of the primary tumor.


