Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of lung carcinogenesis by dietary nicotinamide and
inhaled budesonide.


Nicotinamide, the amide form of vitamin B3, and budesonide, a synthetic
glucocorticoid used in the treatment of asthma, were evaluated for
efficacy of chemoprevention of lung adenoma formation in a benzo(a)pyrene
murine carcinogenesis model. Female A/J mice were given three doses of 3
mg benzo[a]pyrene three days apart and started on experimental diets
either 1 week (early stage intervention) or 8 weeks (late stage) after
last carcinogen dose. Aerosol treatments were delivered 5 days per week
starting 1 or 8 weeks post carcinogen. Nicotinamide, fed at a dietary
concentration of 0.75% starting 1 week after last carcinogen
administration, inhibited adenoma formation by 54%, and by 39% when begun
8 weeks post final carcinogen. Nicotinamide fed at 0.25% of the diet was
not found to effect adenoma formation . Dietary nicotinamide under the
same conditions with budesonide administered via aerosol administration
at 25Î¼g/kg, reduced lung adenoma formation by 90% at early stage
intervention and 49% at late stage intervention. Budesonide alone
administered at the same dose level gave 77% inhibition at early stage
and 41% inhibition at late stage. Decreases in adenoma formation were
statistically significant via ANOVA analysis at both early and late
interventions. Combination therapy decreased adenoma formation
significantly over either individual therapy at the early stage and
significantly compared to nicotinamide alone at the late stage. However,
administration of nicotinamide by aerosol inhalation at doses up to 15
mg/kg/day did not result in a statistically significant reduction in
tumor multiplicity at 1 or 8 weeks post last carcinogen administration .
There is a high level of clinical interest in minimal toxicity lung
cancer chemoprevention strategies. We feel administration of a safe
dietary agent such as nicotinamide when combined with direct epithelial
delivery of a glucocorticoid such as budesonide, commonly used for asthma
therapy, is a promising approach for aerodigestive chemoprevention.


