Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The emergence of ESR1 mutations is associated with aromatase
inhibitor and fulvestrant therapy.


Introduction: In recent studies, constitutively active recurrent ESR1
ligand binding mutations (LBD) were found in about 20% of metastatic
(met) HR+ breast cancers ( BRCAs) and rarely in primary HR+ cancers. In
our previous work, we analyzed clinical tissue samples and detected an
association between the number of prior endocrine treatments and the
prevalence of these mutations, suggesting the emergence of the ESR1
mutations under the selective pressure of endocrine treatment. More
recently, the LBD ESR1 mutations were successfully detected in plasma
cell free (cf)DNA in patients with met HR+ disease. The presence of
mutant ESR1 cfDNA was found to be prognostic. Here we sought to study the
association between endocrine treatments in the adjuvant (adj) and met
settings and the prevalence of cfDNA ESR1 and PIK3CA mutations in
patients with met HR+ BRCA.

Methods: Plasma samples and detailed clinical data were collected from
patients with met BRCA through the Collection of Specimens and Clinical
Data program of the Breast Oncology Center at the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute. Droplet Digital PCR was used for the detection of the most
common ESR1 LBD mutations (E380Q, Y537C, Y537N, Y537S and D538G) and the
3 most common PIK3CA mutations (E542K, E545K and H1047R) in cfDNA.
Fisherâ€™s Exact Test was used for statistical analysis.

Results: Plasma samples were collected from 155 patients with met BRCA.
ESR1 mutations were found in 30.1% of the patients with HR+/HER2-
negative disease (34/113). PIK3CA mutations were detected in 31.8% of
patients with HR+/HER2- disease. The majority of the patients had either
newly diagnosed met disease or progressive met disease at the time of the
blood draw. 14 patients had stable met disease and among these patients,
only 1 of these patients was found to have an ESR1 mutation and no PIK3CA
mutations were detected. The majority of patients with ESR1 mutations
(88%) and PIK3CA mutations (75%) had progressive disease. Patients that
received an aromatase inhibitor (AI) either in the adj or met setting had
a higher prevalence of ESR1 mutations compared to patients that had no AI
treatment, regardless of whether or not they received tamoxifen (TAM)
(prevalence was 32% for adj AI only, 40.4% AI in met only, No AI and no
TAM 7.1% and TAM but no AI 6.7%). In addition fulvestrant treatment in
the met setting was significantly associated with ESR1 mutations (odds
ratio 3.38, p-valueResults: Plasma samples were collected from 155
patients with met BRCA. ESR1 mutations were found in 30.1% of the
patients with HR+/HER2- negative disease (34/113). PIK3CA mutations were
detected in 31.8% of patients with HR+/HER2- disease. The majority of the
patients had either newly diagnosed met disease or progressive met
disease at the time of the blood draw. 14 patients had stable met disease
and among these patients, only 1 of these patients was found to have an
ESR1 mutation and no PIK3CA mutations were detected. The majority of
patients with ESR1 mutations (88%) and PIK3CA mutations (75%) had
progressive disease. Patients that received an aromatase inhibitor (AI)
either in the adj or met setting had a higher prevalence of ESR1
mutations compared to patients that had no AI treatment, regardless of
whether or not they received tamoxifen (TAM) (prevalence was 32% for adj
AI only, 40.4% AI in met only, No AI and no TAM 7.1% and TAM but no AI
6.7%). In addition fulvestrant treatment in the met setting was
significantly associated with ESR1 mutations (odds ratio 3.38,
p-value<0.01). Conversely, we did not detect any significant associations
between endocrine treatments in the adj or met settings and PIK3CA
mutations.

Conclusions: Analysis of cfDNA can successfully detect ESR1 and PIK3CA
mutations in newly diagnosed or progressive met BRCA patients and the
emergence of the ESR1 mutations is associated with AI and fulvestrant
treatment. These results support the serial monitoring of ESR1 mutations
in cfDNA in met disease and highlight the need to study new agents to
target these mutations.


