Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multitarget fecal miRNA test combined with fecal occult blood test
and fecal miRNA test for colorectal cancer screening.


Background & Aims: The fecal immunochemical test (FIT) is used for
colorectal cancer (CRC) screening worldwide. However, there are several
issues of the false-positive and the false-negative. To overcome these
problems, various molecular biological tests have been combined to FIT.
In this context, multitarget fecal DNA test was approved by FDA in August
2014. In addition, multitarget fecal microbiota has been recently
reported. We have reported the usefulness of fecal miRNA analysis to
detect CRC. Here, we investigated the applicability of multitarget fecal
miRNA test combined with FIT and fecal miRNA test using fecal RNA
extracted from FIT residua.

Methods: In this study, 57 patients with invasive CRC, 33 patients with
advanced adenoma, and 60 healthy individuals were enrolled. Each
participant collected 10 mg fecal samples using the FIT sampling
container for 2 days. After FIT was performed, total RNA was extracted
from the residuum and miRNA expression was analyzed by using real-time
RT-PCR. The sensitivity and specificity of the multitarget fecal miRNA
test combined with FIT and fecal miRNA test was analyzed by using the
decision tree analysis.

Results: Approximately 1μg RNA was extracted from 10 mg fecal sample.
The expressions of miR-16, miR-92a, miR-106a, miR-142-3p, miR-223, and
miR-451 in fecal samples were significantly higher in the patients with
advanced neoplasm (including invasive CRC and advanced adenoma) than in
the healthy individuals (PResults: Approximately 1μg RNA was extracted
from 10 mg fecal sample. The expressions of miR-16, miR-92a, miR-106a,
miR-142-3p, miR-223, and miR-451 in fecal samples were significantly
higher in the patients with advanced neoplasm (including invasive CRC and
advanced adenoma) than in the healthy individuals (P<0.05). The
sensitivity and the specificity of the FIT alone were 74.4% (67/90) and
93.3% (56/60), whereas those of the multitarget fecal miRNA test were
93.3% (83/90) and 91.7% (55/60). Moreover the multitarget fecal miRNA
test could detect 81.8% of patients with advanced adenoma (27/33).

Conclusions: Multitarget fecal miRNA test combined with FIT and fecal
miRNA test may be a useful new CRC screening method.


