Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of a TAM kinase-targeting compound in CT-26
syngeneic mouse model.


Aberrant expression of TAM family receptor tyrosine kinases, comprising
Tyro3, Axl and Mer, is found in virtually every type of human cancer. The
expression levels correlate positively with disease staging and
prognostic outcome, attributing to metastasis and drug resistance. The
TAM kinases have recently emerged as a dual oncological therapeutic
target, owing to their immunosuppressive activity. Apart from targeting
tumor-survival/growth pathways their inhibition also unleash the
anti-tumor immunity in the tumor microenvironment. In our efforts to
develop small-molecule inhibitors targeting the TAM kinases, we
identified SLC-391 as one of the most promising preclinical candidates
with potent activity towards both Axl and Mer, which play roles in
maintaining tumor survival and immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment,
respectively. Pharmacodynamic studies of SLC-391 in CT26 syngeneic mouse
model revealed increase in the number of NK cells and the ratio of
M1/M2-polarized macrophages in the treatment group relative to the
vehicle control, followed by the rise of CD8+ T/Treg ratio and reduction
in immunosuppressive myeloid cells. This is indicative of sequential
engagement and stimulation of pro-inflammatory innate immune response and
adaptive immune response. In addition, a synergistic anti-tumor effect
was observed when the anti-PD-1 insensitive CT-26 model was treated with
a combination of SLC-391 and an anti-PD-1 antibody, suggesting that
blocking the Axl/Mer-mediated immunosuppressive pathway may significantly
enhance the therapeutic efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors. In
summary, the anti-tumor activity of SLC-391 is mediated by directly
inhibiting tumor cell growth as well as reversing the immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment.


