Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genital use of talc and risk of ovarian cancer: A meta-analysis.


Some epidemiological studies suggest an association between genital use
of talc powders and increased risk of ovarian cancer, but the evidence is
not consistent. We performed a meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies to
formally evaluate this suspected association. A systematic search was
conducted in Medline, Embase and Scopus, leading to the identification of
24 case-control studies and 3 cohort studies, including 302,705 women
with ovarian cancer. In the meta-analysis, we used a random-effect model
to calculate summary estimates of the association between genital use of
talc and occurrence of ovarian cancer. We assessed potential sources of
between-study heterogeneity and presence of publication bias. The summary
relative risk (RR) for ever use of genital talc and ovarian cancer was
1.22 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.13-1.30). The RR for case-control
studies was 1.26 (95% CI 1.17-1.35) and for cohort studies was 1.02 (95%
CI 0.85-1.20, p heterogeneity=0.007). Serous carcinoma was the only
histologic type for which an association was detected (RR 1.24; 95% CI
1.15-1.34). There was no trend in RR with either duration or frequency of
genital talc use. This meta-analysis resulted in a weak but statistically
significant association between genital use of talc and ovarian cancer,
which appears to be limited to serous carcinoma. The heterogeneity of
results by study design and the lack of a trend for duration and
frequency of use, however, detract from a causal interpretation of this
association.


