Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastric cancer in Alaska Native people: A cancer health disparity.


Gastric cancer in the Alaska Native (AN) people occurs at a 3-fold higher
incidence and 4-fold higher mortality rate compared to Non-Hispanic
Whites (NHW), representing one of the largest cancer disparities in the
AN population. We aimed to review the AN gastric cancer burden and
identify clinicopathological factors that are associated with cancer
outcomes. Patient information was collected from 132 AN gastric cancer
patients diagnosed between 2006-2015 at the Alaska Native Medical Center.
The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Result database 18 was used to
collect comparison United States NHW gastric cancer patient data.
Compared to NHW patients, AN gastric cancer patients have a higher
incidence rate, are significantly younger, 60 versus 69 years, and have a
poorer 5-year overall survival rate of 10% compared to 22%. AN patients
differ from NHW patients in gastric cancer anatomic location, subtype,
and higher presence of signet ring cell carcinomas. Forty-one percent of
AN patients were positive at the time of diagnosis for Helicobacter
pylori, 77% had chronic gastritis, 30% had a family history of a
first-degree relative with gastrointestinal cancers, and 82% were current
or former tobacco users. Using univariate analysis, diminished overall
survival was observed with anatomic site, increasing stage, no treatment,
the number of lymph nodes examined during resection, blood type, and
chronic gastritis. Multivariable analysis revealed stage and treatment
type were independently associated with improved overall survival. AN
gastric cancer cases vary in their clinical and epidemiologic features,
relative to NHW.


