Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomewide gene-diabetes and gene-obesity interaction scan in 7095
cases and 10710 controls from Pancreatic Cancer Cohort Consortium and
Pancreatic Cancer Case Control Consortium.


Introduction: Obesity and diabetes are two major modifiable risk factors
for pancreatic cancer. Genetic variation affecting the risk of obesity-
and diabetes-related pancreatic cancer have yet to be comprehensively
investigated at the genome-wide level.

Aims: To identify novel gene-environment interactions (GxE) of
obesity/diabetes on pancreatic cancer risk.

Methods: We conducted a multi-stage genome-wide gene-diabetes and
gene-obesity interaction study using GWAS data of 7095 cases and 10710
controls from Pancreatic Cancer Consortium (PanScan I, PanScan II and
PanScan III) and Pancreatic Cancer Case Control Consortium (PanC4). About
870,000 SNPs, having MAF ≥ 0.005 and having been genotyped in at least
one study, were analyzed. Missing genotypes were imputed using IMPUTE2
and the Haplotype Reference Consortium (HRC) reference panel.
Case-control (CC) and case-only (CO) methods were used for SNP-level GxE
analysis. Fixed-, random- and joint-effect models built in “rareGE” R
package were used for gene-based GxE analysis. About 20,000 genes that
have at least one SNP genotyped were included in the analysis. Age,
gender and principal components accounting for subpopulation structure
were adjusted in both SNP-level and gene-level analyses. Obesity was
defined as body mass index ≥30 mg/m2. Diabetics with Methods: We
conducted a multi-stage genome-wide gene-diabetes and gene-obesity
interaction study using GWAS data of 7095 cases and 10710 controls from
Pancreatic Cancer Consortium (PanScan I, PanScan II and PanScan III) and
Pancreatic Cancer Case Control Consortium (PanC4). About 870,000 SNPs,
having MAF ≥ 0.005 and having been genotyped in at least one study,
were analyzed. Missing genotypes were imputed using IMPUTE2 and the
Haplotype Reference Consortium (HRC) reference panel. Case-control (CC)
and case-only (CO) methods were used for SNP-level GxE analysis. Fixed-,
random- and joint-effect models built in “rareGE” R package were used
for gene-based GxE analysis. About 20,000 genes that have at least one
SNP genotyped were included in the analysis. Age, gender and principal
components accounting for subpopulation structure were adjusted in both
SNP-level and gene-level analyses. Obesity was defined as body mass index
≥30 mg/m2. Diabetics with <3-year duration were excluded for
gene-diabetes interaction analysis. The PanScan I, II, III and PanC4
datasets were analyzed separately followed by meta-analysis of the
summary statistics. Fixed-effect and Fisher’s p-value based
meta-analysis was applied for SNP-level and gene-level GxE analysis,
respectively.

Results: No genome-wide significant (PResults: No genome-wide significant
(P<5 x 10-8 ) interaction at the SNP level was detected in any of the
PanScan or PanC4 datasets or in the meta-analysis. A significant
interaction of diabetes and FAM63A (family with sequence similarity 63
member A) gene (PResults: No genome-wide significant (P<5 x 10-8 )
interaction at the SNP level was detected in any of the PanScan or PanC4
datasets or in the meta-analysis. A significant interaction of diabetes
and FAM63A (family with sequence similarity 63 member A) gene (P<2.5 x
10-6) was observed in the meta-analysis (PFixed= 3.4 x 10-5, PRandom= 1.9
x 10-6, PJoint= 6.8 x 10-7) . This interaction showed nominal
significance in all individual dataset analyses. The corresponding P
values for this interaction were 4.2 x 10-2, 3.8 x 10-2 and 6.8 x 10-2 in
PanScan I, 2.8 x 10-2, 3.9 x 10-2 and 6.5 x 10-2 9.1 x 10-3, 2.2 x 10-4
and 8.8 x 10-6 in PanScan III, and 3.1 x 10-3, 3.4 x 10-3 and 8.8 x 10-3
in PanC4, respectively.

Conclusions: In the largest genome-wide GxE analysis for pancreatic
cancer to date, we identified a significant diabetes interacting gene in
pancreatic cancer, which was consistently replicated in 4 individual GWAS
studies. This observation identifies FAM63A as a candidate for future
functional studies to understand its role in pancreatic cancer etiology.
Further increasing the sample size may unveil additional genetic loci
that contribute to the susceptibility to pancreatic cancer via G x E.


