Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel combination therapy of DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
guadecitabine (SGI-110) and PARP inhibitor talazoparib (BMN-673) for
BRCA-proficient high-grade serous ovarian cancer.


Ovarian cancer recurrence has been shown to be associated with increased
DNA damage response (DDR) mediated by poly-(ADP)-ribose polymerase 1/2
(PARP1/2), which can be therapeutically targeted by PARP inhibitors
(PARPi). PARPi are indicated for platinum-responsive, BRCA-mutated
high-grade serous ovarian cancer, but most ovarian cancer patients have
BRCA-proficient disease. Our previous studies support a role for DNA
methylation in chemoresistant ovarian cancer mediated by the enzyme DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), and report on a functional role for DNMT1 in
DNA damage repair. We therefore hypothesized that combining a DNMTi and
PARPi will impair BRCA-mediated DDR, resulting in cytotoxicity in ovarian
cancer cells. A panel of ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780, platinum
sensitive, BRCA1/2-wild type; A2780-cp and HeyC2, platinum resistant,
BRCA1/2-wild type; high-grade serous Kuramochi, platinum resistant, BRCA2
mutant) was examined for cell growth using colony formation assays after
treatment with DNMTi guadecitabine (low dose, 20-100nm) and PARPi
talazoparib (1-10nm), alone or in combination. While talazoparib alone
only marginally reduced colony formation in all cell lines
(dose-dependent effect), combining guadecitabine with talazoparib further
decreased (POvarian cancer recurrence has been shown to be associated
with increased DNA damage response (DDR) mediated by poly-(ADP)-ribose
polymerase 1/2 (PARP1/2), which can be therapeutically targeted by PARP
inhibitors (PARPi). PARPi are indicated for platinum-responsive,
BRCA-mutated high-grade serous ovarian cancer, but most ovarian cancer
patients have BRCA-proficient disease. Our previous studies support a
role for DNA methylation in chemoresistant ovarian cancer mediated by the
enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), and report on a functional role
for DNMT1 in DNA damage repair. We therefore hypothesized that combining
a DNMTi and PARPi will impair BRCA-mediated DDR, resulting in
cytotoxicity in ovarian cancer cells. A panel of ovarian cancer cell
lines (A2780, platinum sensitive, BRCA1/2-wild type; A2780-cp and HeyC2,
platinum resistant, BRCA1/2-wild type; high-grade serous Kuramochi,
platinum resistant, BRCA2 mutant) was examined for cell growth using
colony formation assays after treatment with DNMTi guadecitabine (low
dose, 20-100nm) and PARPi talazoparib (1-10nm), alone or in combination.
While talazoparib alone only marginally reduced colony formation in all
cell lines (dose-dependent effect), combining guadecitabine with
talazoparib further decreased (P<0.05) survival at all doses examined. To
focus more specifically on BRCA status, we utilized two high-grade serous
ovarian cancer cell lines (“PEO”) derived from the same patient but
harboring a mutant (PEO1) or wild type (PEO4) BRCA2 gene (Langdon et al,
1988; Sakai et al, 2009). Treatment with low-dose guadecitabine (20 nm, 3
days) increased (POvarian cancer recurrence has been shown to be
associated with increased DNA damage response (DDR) mediated by
poly-(ADP)-ribose polymerase 1/2 (PARP1/2), which can be therapeutically
targeted by PARP inhibitors (PARPi). PARPi are indicated for
platinum-responsive, BRCA-mutated high-grade serous ovarian cancer, but
most ovarian cancer patients have BRCA-proficient disease. Our previous
studies support a role for DNA methylation in chemoresistant ovarian
cancer mediated by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), and report
on a functional role for DNMT1 in DNA damage repair. We therefore
hypothesized that combining a DNMTi and PARPi will impair BRCA-mediated
DDR, resulting in cytotoxicity in ovarian cancer cells. A panel of
ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780, platinum sensitive, BRCA1/2-wild type;
A2780-cp and HeyC2, platinum resistant, BRCA1/2-wild type; high-grade
serous Kuramochi, platinum resistant, BRCA2 mutant) was examined for cell
growth using colony formation assays after treatment with DNMTi
guadecitabine (low dose, 20-100nm) and PARPi talazoparib (1-10nm), alone
or in combination. While talazoparib alone only marginally reduced colony
formation in all cell lines (dose-dependent effect), combining
guadecitabine with talazoparib further decreased (P<0.05) survival at all
doses examined. To focus more specifically on BRCA status, we utilized
two high-grade serous ovarian cancer cell lines (“PEO”) derived from
the same patient but harboring a mutant (PEO1) or wild type (PEO4) BRCA2
gene (Langdon et al, 1988; Sakai et al, 2009). Treatment with low-dose
guadecitabine (20 nm, 3 days) increased (P<0.05) PARP levels (western
blot analysis) as well as enzymatic activity (POvarian cancer recurrence
has been shown to be associated with increased DNA damage response (DDR)
mediated by poly-(ADP)-ribose polymerase 1/2 (PARP1/2), which can be
therapeutically targeted by PARP inhibitors (PARPi). PARPi are indicated
for platinum-responsive, BRCA-mutated high-grade serous ovarian cancer,
but most ovarian cancer patients have BRCA-proficient disease. Our
previous studies support a role for DNA methylation in chemoresistant
ovarian cancer mediated by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1),
and report on a functional role for DNMT1 in DNA damage repair. We
therefore hypothesized that combining a DNMTi and PARPi will impair
BRCA-mediated DDR, resulting in cytotoxicity in ovarian cancer cells. A
panel of ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780, platinum sensitive,
BRCA1/2-wild type; A2780-cp and HeyC2, platinum resistant, BRCA1/2-wild
type; high-grade serous Kuramochi, platinum resistant, BRCA2 mutant) was
examined for cell growth using colony formation assays after treatment
with DNMTi guadecitabine (low dose, 20-100nm) and PARPi talazoparib
(1-10nm), alone or in combination. While talazoparib alone only
marginally reduced colony formation in all cell lines (dose-dependent
effect), combining guadecitabine with talazoparib further decreased
(P<0.05) survival at all doses examined. To focus more specifically on
BRCA status, we utilized two high-grade serous ovarian cancer cell lines
(“PEO”) derived from the same patient but harboring a mutant (PEO1)
or wild type (PEO4) BRCA2 gene (Langdon et al, 1988; Sakai et al, 2009).
Treatment with low-dose guadecitabine (20 nm, 3 days) increased (P<0.05)
PARP levels (western blot analysis) as well as enzymatic activity
(P<0.05; ELISA analysis), while talazoparib treatment alone increased
(POvarian cancer recurrence has been shown to be associated with
increased DNA damage response (DDR) mediated by poly-(ADP)-ribose
polymerase 1/2 (PARP1/2), which can be therapeutically targeted by PARP
inhibitors (PARPi). PARPi are indicated for platinum-responsive,
BRCA-mutated high-grade serous ovarian cancer, but most ovarian cancer
patients have BRCA-proficient disease. Our previous studies support a
role for DNA methylation in chemoresistant ovarian cancer mediated by the
enzyme DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), and report on a functional role
for DNMT1 in DNA damage repair. We therefore hypothesized that combining
a DNMTi and PARPi will impair BRCA-mediated DDR, resulting in
cytotoxicity in ovarian cancer cells. A panel of ovarian cancer cell
lines (A2780, platinum sensitive, BRCA1/2-wild type; A2780-cp and HeyC2,
platinum resistant, BRCA1/2-wild type; high-grade serous Kuramochi,
platinum resistant, BRCA2 mutant) was examined for cell growth using
colony formation assays after treatment with DNMTi guadecitabine (low
dose, 20-100nm) and PARPi talazoparib (1-10nm), alone or in combination.
While talazoparib alone only marginally reduced colony formation in all
cell lines (dose-dependent effect), combining guadecitabine with
talazoparib further decreased (P<0.05) survival at all doses examined. To
focus more specifically on BRCA status, we utilized two high-grade serous
ovarian cancer cell lines (“PEO”) derived from the same patient but
harboring a mutant (PEO1) or wild type (PEO4) BRCA2 gene (Langdon et al,
1988; Sakai et al, 2009). Treatment with low-dose guadecitabine (20 nm, 3
days) increased (P<0.05) PARP levels (western blot analysis) as well as
enzymatic activity (P<0.05; ELISA analysis), while talazoparib treatment
alone increased (P<0.05) DNMT1 levels and decreased (P80%; P80%; P<0.05)
PEO1 and PEO4 proliferation and increased (3-fold; P80%; P<0.05) PEO1 and
PEO4 proliferation and increased (3-fold; P<0.05) apoptosis (caspase 3
cleavage) in both cell lines. Furthermore, co-administration
guadecitabine (0.5mg/kg) and talazoparib (0.25mg/kg) to mice harboring
BRCA2-wild type ovarian tumor xenografts decreased (p60%) and tumor
weight (~70%) compared to control, respectively. In summary, combining a
hypomethylating agent with a PARP inhibitor results in enhanced
cytotoxicity in high-grade serous ovarian cancer cell lines harboring
either wild type- or mutant-BRCA, indicating that the
talazoparib-guadecitabine drug combination is effective regardless of
BRCA-mediated DDR and may represent an effective treatment regimen for
BRCA-related cancers.


