Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endostatin inhibits androgen-independent prostate cancer growth by
suppressing nuclear receptor-mediated oxidative stress.


Androgen-deprivation therapy has been identified to induce oxidative
stress in prostate cancer (PCa), leading to re-activation of androgen
receptor (AR) signaling in a hormone-refractory manner. Thus, antioxidant
therapies have gained attention as adjuvants for castration-resistant PCa
(CRPC). Here, we report for the first time that human endostatin (ES)
prevents androgen-independent growth phenotype in PCa cells through its
molecular targeting of AR and glucocorticoid receptor (GR), and
downstream pro-oxidant signaling. This reversal following ES treatment
significantly decreased PCa cell proliferation through downregulation of
GR, and upregulation of manganese superoxide dismutase and reduced
glutathione levels. Proteome and biochemical analyses of ES-treated PCa
cells further indicated a significant upregulation of enzymes in major
ROS scavenging machinery, including catalase, glutathione synthetase,
glutathione reductase, NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase, biliverdin
reductase and thioredoxin reductase, resulting in a concomitant reduction
of intracellular ROS. ES further augmented antioxidant system through
upregulation of glucose influx, pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and NAD
salvaging pathway. This shift in cancer cell redox homeostasis by ES
significantly decreased the effect of protumorigenic oxidative machinery
on androgen-independent PCa growth, suggesting that ES can suppress
GR-induced CRPC phenotype upon AR antagonism, and dual targeting action
of ES on AR and GR can be further translated to PCa therapy.


