Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Understanding metabolic dysfunction in retinoblastoma development.


Metabolic dysfunction or reprogramming is the underlying cause of many
diseases including cancer. In this study, we looked into the
transcriptomic and metabolomic profile of retinoblastoma (Rb), a
pediatric eye cancer, from tumor and normal tissue, aqueous humor,
vitreous humor and tear. The samples were collected from enucleated eyes
of 9 subjects and 2 deceased controls, whose cause of death is not due to
any eye related disease. The study was corroborated with cell line models
of retinoblastoma, used for metabolic phenotyping. Combined pathway
analysis of transcriptomics data from subject tissue samples and
retinoblastoma cell line WERI-Rb-1 revealed a significant overlap in the
differentially regulated genes belonging to both glycolysis and OXPHOS
pathways. The results were correlated with Rb1 overexpressed and its
respective control also. To better understand the implications of these
two major pathways in the progression of retinoblastoma, metabolic study
using Seahorse analyzer enables measurement of extracellular flux (oxygen
consumption rate and extracellular acidification rate) to provide insight
into mitochondrial function and glycolytic activity. Using a
pharmacological approach, the contribution of glucose, glutamine and
fatty acid oxidation pathways can be assessed. Overall the study
demonstrates the value of using a multi-omics approach with functional
metabolic profiling to understand the extent of metabolic dysfunction in
retinoblastoma and also to identify implications of various biological
pathways in Rb.


