Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of IL1α signaling by HER2 overexpression promotes
breast cancer stem cells.


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and only a small proportion of
cells known as cancer stem cells (CSCs) have ability to generate tumor.
Recently, it has been reported that HER2 overexpression increase breast
cancer stem cells (BCSCs). However, the underlying mechanism is not
clearly known. In this study, we explored the molecular mechanism how
HER2 increase BCSCs. Our data has demonstrated HER2 induces BCSCs by
indirectly activating NF-kB and STAT3 signaling. To figure out the direct
target of HER2, we did the microarray and found that HER2 upregulates the
expressions of IL1a and IL6, two major cytokines which directly activates
NFkB and STAT3, respectively. Interestingly, we found that IL1a also
indirectly activates STAT3. IL1α induced STAT3 was blocked when IL6 was
knock out from cells. We found that HER2 enhances IL1α transcription by
activating PU.1 which is known transcription factor of IL1a. Finally, we
studied effect of IL1a on tumorigenesis, and found that IL1α KO
dramatically attenuates the tumor growth in NOD/SCID mice. Taken
together, we found that HER2 induces BCSCs by upregulating IL1a and IL6
expression. We for first time demonstrating that IL1α plays a critical
role in HER2-induced expansion of BCSC population and may be a potential
therapeutic target for HER2 positive breast cancer.


