Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic induction of apoptosis of combined mesupron and
auranofin treatment in human breast cancer cells.


Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) system may play a crucial role
in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. uPA has been validated as a
predictive or prognostic biomarker protein and considered as a
therapeutic target in human breast cancer. Mesupron is a uPA inhibitor
blocking uPA enzymatic activity to reduce tumor cell invasion, migration
and cell growth. Auranofin has been known as an antirheumatic drug and a
thioredoxin reductase inhibitor and recently its anticancer activity in
ovarian and breast cancers has also been identified. To study whether
cotreatment with mesupron and auranofin shows a significant anticancer
activity, the synergistic induction of apoptosis of mesupron with
auranofin was determined. Auranofin or mesupron alone inhibited cancer
cell growth in MCF-7 cells with IC50 of 0.25 μM or 25 μM, respectively.
Flow cytometric analysis also showed an increased apoptosis. When cells
were treated with mesupron (0.125 μM) in combination with auranofin (10
μM), we found a significant induction of apoptosis although the
cytotoxic effects of mesupron or auranofin alone at those concentrations
were not quite strong. Interestingly, combined mesupron and auranofin
treatment significantly suppressed mitochondrial antiapoptotic proteins
including Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. We also found the increase of caspase-3 and
PARP cleavages. The combination index (CI) also indicated the synergistic
induction of apoptosis by auranofin and mesupron. Taken together, these
data suggest that the use of mesupron and auranofin in combination can be
valuable to achieve higher anticancer activity.


