Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of Epstein Barr virus miRNAs in
triple-negative breast cancer.


Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) accounts for up to 20% of breast
cancer cases. These tumors are negative for estrogen, progesterone, and
HER2 receptors, which are markers used for diagnosis and treatment of
other types of breast cancer. Clinically, TNBCs are notoriously
aggressive, respond poorly to targeted therapies, have high rates of
relapse, as well as poor prognosis. The molecular basis of TNBC
oncogenesis is currently unknown, but it is possible that viral factors,
such as Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) miRNAs, play a role. EBV miRNAs have
been implicated in the oncogenesis of several forms of cancer, including
Burkittâ€™s lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. The objective of this
study, therefore, was to determine the differential expression of EBV
miRNAs in TNBC tumors as compared to normal breast tissue. We conducted a
comprehensive profiling of viral miRNAs in 48 TNBC tumors as compared to
15 control normal breast tissues, utilizing deep sequencing analysis
software and publically available deep sequencing data. Four EBV miRNAs
(BART18-3p, BART 8-5p, BART15, BART22) were significantly expressed in
11-17% of the TNBC tumors, and not in control normal breast tissue. Four
novel putative EBV miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed in
TNBC tumors as compared to control normal cells. Two of the novel
putative EBV miRNAs were differentially expressed above 125 reads per
million (RPM) in 20% and 27% of the TNBC tumors as compared to 0% and
6.6% of normal breast tissues, respectively. One novel putative EBV miRNA
was expressed above 125 RPM in 83% of TNBC tumors as compared to 13% of
normal breast tissue. One novel putative EBV miRNA was expressed above
125 RPM in 66% of the normal breast tissue as compared to 2% of the
TNBCs. These putative EBV miRNAs localize within genomic regions of EBV,
including the LMP-2 region. Ongoing work has so far computationally
validated one of these miRNAs as a novel EBV miRNA; in vitro validation
studies are in progress. This is the first report on the differential
expression of EBV miRNAs in TNBC tumors. Since TNBC tumors are extremely
heterogeneous, it is intriguing that 20% of TNBC tumors specifically
express the same EBV miRNA. Our findings suggest that these
differentially expressed EBV miRNAs may potentially play a role in the
pathogenesis of TNBC.


