Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers of immune infiltration for multiplex immunofluorescence
in breast cancer.


Introduction: Only a subset of patients have a clinical response to
cancer immunotherapy. The molecular mechanisms that mediate the
immunological response or tolerance to treatment are just beginning to be
understood. Several tumor signaling pathways are involved in those
mechanisms: Wnt/β-catenin, STAT3, NFkB, PI3K/PTEN/AKT, and TP53. To
characterize the tumor, its immune infiltrate, and its microenvironment,
we examined expression of several biomarkers and determined the
relationships among them in various breast cancer subtypes.

Methods: 148 breast cancer (BCa) cases from the University of Chicago
Breast Cancer SPORE tissue bank under IRB approved protocols were
classified into four biological subtypes based on immunohistochemical
(IHC) staining: luminal A, luminal B, Her2 and basal-like. IHC staining
for PD-L1, CD8, FoxP3, CD68, CD163, and β-catenin was performed on
tissue microarrays. CD8+ and FoxP3+ cells were counted manually and
recalculated for 1 mm2. Macrophage phenotype was determined using single
and double staining with CD68 for total population and CD68/CD163 for M2.
CD68+ and CD163+ cells were counted manually, confirmed by Image
Analysis, and recalculated for 1 mm2. PD-L1 and β-catenin
(membrane-associated, cytosolic and nuclear) were scored as negative,
weak positive, moderate, and strong.

Results: The study cohort subtypes were 20.9% basal-like, 10.4% Her2,
58.3% luminal A, and 10.4% luminal B. The ratio of M2 to M1 cells
increased with disease progression (pResults: The study cohort subtypes
were 20.9% basal-like, 10.4% Her2, 58.3% luminal A, and 10.4% luminal B.
The ratio of M2 to M1 cells increased with disease progression (p<0.001).
Her2 and basal-like subtypes had a significantly higher percentage of M2
cells as compared to the luminal A subtype (pResults: The study cohort
subtypes were 20.9% basal-like, 10.4% Her2, 58.3% luminal A, and 10.4%
luminal B. The ratio of M2 to M1 cells increased with disease progression
(p<0.001). Her2 and basal-like subtypes had a significantly higher
percentage of M2 cells as compared to the luminal A subtype (p<0.001).
The cases with M2 macrophage phenotype had a higher ratio of FoxP3
regulatory T cells (Tregs) to cytotoxic CD8+ cells. PD-L1 expression was
present in 23% of specimens. However, the intensity of expression was
markedly different across the BCa subtypes. PD-L1 high expressing tumors
had, on average, greater FoxP3+ cell infiltrate and low or absent CD8+ T
cells. The ratio of FoxP3 Tregs to CD8+ cells in basal-like tumors were
1.7, 2.5, and 4 -fold higher than in Her2, luminal A, and luminal B
tumors, respectively (pResults: The study cohort subtypes were 20.9%
basal-like, 10.4% Her2, 58.3% luminal A, and 10.4% luminal B. The ratio
of M2 to M1 cells increased with disease progression (p<0.001). Her2 and
basal-like subtypes had a significantly higher percentage of M2 cells as
compared to the luminal A subtype (p<0.001). The cases with M2 macrophage
phenotype had a higher ratio of FoxP3 regulatory T cells (Tregs) to
cytotoxic CD8+ cells. PD-L1 expression was present in 23% of specimens.
However, the intensity of expression was markedly different across the
BCa subtypes. PD-L1 high expressing tumors had, on average, greater
FoxP3+ cell infiltrate and low or absent CD8+ T cells. The ratio of FoxP3
Tregs to CD8+ cells in basal-like tumors were 1.7, 2.5, and 4 -fold
higher than in Her2, luminal A, and luminal B tumors, respectively
(p<0.05 for all correlations). There was a statistically significant
decrease in membrane-associated β-catenin in tumor compared to normal
tissue (pResults: The study cohort subtypes were 20.9% basal-like, 10.4%
Her2, 58.3% luminal A, and 10.4% luminal B. The ratio of M2 to M1 cells
increased with disease progression (p<0.001). Her2 and basal-like
subtypes had a significantly higher percentage of M2 cells as compared to
the luminal A subtype (p<0.001). The cases with M2 macrophage phenotype
had a higher ratio of FoxP3 regulatory T cells (Tregs) to cytotoxic CD8+
cells. PD-L1 expression was present in 23% of specimens. However, the
intensity of expression was markedly different across the BCa subtypes.
PD-L1 high expressing tumors had, on average, greater FoxP3+ cell
infiltrate and low or absent CD8+ T cells. The ratio of FoxP3 Tregs to
CD8+ cells in basal-like tumors were 1.7, 2.5, and 4 -fold higher than in
Her2, luminal A, and luminal B tumors, respectively (p<0.05 for all
correlations). There was a statistically significant decrease in
membrane-associated β-catenin in tumor compared to normal tissue
(p<0.0001). The proportion of tumors positive for cytosolic or nuclear
β-catenin in basal-like tumors was statistically higher than all other
tumor subtypes. High β-catenin nuclear protein expression was
predominantly observed in tumors that lacked CD8+ T cells. Ongoing
analysis will evaluate the association of these biomarkers with clinical
outcomes.

Conclusions and Future Directions: Our data suggests that IHC using a
panel of antibodies may be a robust and suitable method for evaluating
level of immune infiltration. Future studies will evaluate multiplex
immunofluorescence of multiple biomarkers in breast tissue.


