Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic impact of Philadelphia chromosome in elderly acute
lymphoblastic leukemia patients ineligible for hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.


Elderly acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients are often unfit for
neither dose-intensive chemotherapy nor stem cell transplantation, thus
their clinical outcomes have been dismal. The increased incidence of
BCR-ABL translocation with increasing age also contributed to poor
prognosis but, it was our conjecture that the introduction of potent
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) targeting ABL, BCR-ABL translocation
might not deliver negative prognostic impact in elderly ALL. Considering
that many elderly Ph- ALL patients do not tolerate cytotoxic chemotherapy
required for effective tumor control, we supposed that efficacy of ABL
TKIs and their combination strategy with low dose cytotoxic chemotherapy
would result in better survival for elderly Ph+ ALL compared to their Ph-
counterparts.

This study was a multicenter longitudinal cohort study of elderly de novo
ALL (â‰¥ 60 years) recruited from 11 hospitals in Korea from January 2005
to December 2015. We considered Ph+ if it was positive in at least one of
three techniques: conventional cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ
hybridization, or quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR).

Among the 96 patients enrolled, there were 50 Ph- ALL patients (52.1%)
and 46 Ph+ ALL patients (47.9%). There were no differences between the 2
groups regarding age, sex distribution, performance status, and induction
regimens. For treatment outcomes evaluation, the 5 Ph+ ALL patients not
receiving TKI were eliminated and 41 Ph+ ALL patients treated with TKI
were compared with 50 Ph- ALL patients (Table). Complete remission (CR)
was attained in 27 (54.0%) of patients in the Ph- group versus 35 (85.4%)
in the Ph+ group (P=0.001). The median RFS was significantly longer in
the Ph+ group (3.1 months for Ph- vs. 8.9 months for Ph+, P=0.017).
Induction death and induction failure occurred significantly more often
in the Ph- group. The median OS was 6.3 months for Ph- group versus 10.3
months for Ph+ group (P=0.033).

In conclusion, using real world data, this study reports the possible
favorable impact of Ph+ in TKI-era for elderly patients.


