Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Family history in first degree relatives and risk of gastric
cancer in the alpha-tocopherol, beta-carotene cancer prevention study.


Background: Studies of the familial associations of gastric cancer risk
have largely been limited to case-control approaches which are
susceptible to recall bias and cannot distinguish temporality.
Furthermore, associations with family history could be explained by
shared exposure to Helicobacter pylori infection, the most important
environmental risk factor for gastric cancer. Notably, the risks of early
onset disease and diffuse-type tumors are thought to have a greater
genetic component. We therefore examined in a prospective study the
associations of gastric cancer risk with history of gastric cancer in
first degree relatives, controlling for H. pylori infection.

Methods: We selected 405 incident gastric cancer cases and 4,129 controls
with known H. pylori serology status from the Finnish Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC) Study among male smokers aged
50-69 at baseline. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95%
CIs) were calculated using logistic regression with adjustment for H.
pylori and other potential confounders. All statistical tests were
two-sided.

Results: Family history of gastric cancer was associated with increased
risk (OR=1.84, 95% CI=1.32-2.58). The association appeared stronger with
gastric cancer in siblings (OR=2.87, 95% CI=1.64-5.03) than with gastric
cancer in parents (OR=1.53, 95% CI=1.05-2.24). Distinguishing cases by
anatomic subsite, the family history association was significant for
noncardia gastric cancer (n=305; OR=2.15, 95% CI=1.50-3.07), but not for
cardia cancer (n=100; OR=1.25, 95% CI=0.63-2.49). With regard to
histological subtype, family history was significantly associated with
both diffuse-type (n=90; OR=2.12, 95% CI=1.10-4.12) and intestinal-type
(n=153; OR=1.70, 95% CI=1.02-2.83) gastric cancer. In age-specific
analyses, the association with family history was strongest in the
youngest age-group at baseline 50-54 years (OR=3.42, 95% CI=1.85-6.30)
and absent in the oldest age group 65-69 years (OR=0.85, 95%
CI=0.28-2.58).

Conclusion: The results suggest that certain subtypes of sporadic gastric
cancer are strongly associated with family history of gastric cancer.
These associations do not appear to be explained by the associations with
H. pylori infection.


