Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate identification of somatic mutations in cancer patient
specimens in the lack of normal tissue by targeted high-throughput
sequencing.


Tumor molecular profiling is rapidly becoming the standard clinical test
for selecting targeted therapies in refractory cancer patients. DNA
extracted from patient samples is enriched for cancer genes and sequenced
to identify actionable somatic mutations therein. A major challenge
arises when tumor-derived data is analyzed in the absence of normal
tissue data, as it is common in clinical scenarios. The distinction
between somatic and germline variants become difficult, leaving
clinicians to resort to crude heuristic filtering. We present here a
variant calling software, developed under quality system regulation
protocols, capable of accurately identifying somatic mutations from
targeted next-generation sequencing data. A novel Bayesian Network
approach models the distribution of reads harboring germline and somatic
mutations, estimates the contamination from normal tissue in the sample,
scores somatic mutations, and imputes germline variants, without matching
normal tissue data. This approach also allows joint analysis of multiple
specimens from the same patient (e.g. FFPE and ctDNA), when available,
improving the limit of detection. To improve specificity, our caller can
also utilize prior information from different databases including somatic
mutations, germline variation, and healthy controls data, in a principled
fashion. We validated our method by analyzing data from the TOMA OS-Seq
131 cancer gene panel using the Illumina platform. Sample inputs ranging
from 2-600ng of DNA were sequenced to a depth of >1000X, achieving on
target rates ≤73% and uniformity ≥ 3.2 fold 80 penalty. Through
adaptors with molecular barcodes we measured a median duplicate rate
Tumor molecular profiling is rapidly becoming the standard clinical test
for selecting targeted therapies in refractory cancer patients. DNA
extracted from patient samples is enriched for cancer genes and sequenced
to identify actionable somatic mutations therein. A major challenge
arises when tumor-derived data is analyzed in the absence of normal
tissue data, as it is common in clinical scenarios. The distinction
between somatic and germline variants become difficult, leaving
clinicians to resort to crude heuristic filtering. We present here a
variant calling software, developed under quality system regulation
protocols, capable of accurately identifying somatic mutations from
targeted next-generation sequencing data. A novel Bayesian Network
approach models the distribution of reads harboring germline and somatic
mutations, estimates the contamination from normal tissue in the sample,
scores somatic mutations, and imputes germline variants, without matching
normal tissue data. This approach also allows joint analysis of multiple
specimens from the same patient (e.g. FFPE and ctDNA), when available,
improving the limit of detection. To improve specificity, our caller can
also utilize prior information from different databases including somatic
mutations, germline variation, and healthy controls data, in a principled
fashion. We validated our method by analyzing data from the TOMA OS-Seq
131 cancer gene panel using the Illumina platform. Sample inputs ranging
from 2-600ng of DNA were sequenced to a depth of >1000X, achieving on
target rates ≤73% and uniformity ≥ 3.2 fold 80 penalty. Through
adaptors with molecular barcodes we measured a median duplicate rate <2.
We analyzed somatic mutations simulated at various variant allele
fractions on a background of data from reference samples from the
Genome-in-a-Bottle consortium, data on a dilution series from two
reference samples, and several commercial control and clinical samples,
including matched FFPE, PBMC, and ctDNA specimens. In the absence of
normal tissue, our method scores each variant with respect to their
likelihood of being somatic or germline. We show that, as compared to
other commonly used methods, our algorithm can achieve a higher true
positive rate whilst controlling a false discovery rate of 1%. We also
show that jointly analyzing serial samples (e.g. ctDNA), we can improve
sensitivity of shared variants. In conclusion, in contrast to currently
used academic software developed for research projects, we observe that
our caller outperforms these software and is particularly well suited for
the clinical use cases.


