Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunophenotypes in young-onset colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer accounts for ten percent of new cancer cases and is the
fourth most frequent cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. In recent
years, mainly due to screening programs, more patients are diagnosed in
early stages of tumor progression, leading to a higher survival rate.
However, the incidence of young (Colorectal cancer accounts for ten
percent of new cancer cases and is the fourth most frequent cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. In recent years, mainly due to screening
programs, more patients are diagnosed in early stages of tumor
progression, leading to a higher survival rate. However, the incidence of
young (<50) patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer has been on the
rise. These patients often have a poor prognosis due to the fact that
tumors are diagnosed at advanced stages of tumor progression.

To our knowledge, no study has yet characterized immunophenotypes and
immune evasive mechanisms specifically in young-onset colorectal cancers.
To that end we have investigated the expression of HLA class I and PD-L1
in over 200 colorectal cancers derived from young-onset (To our
knowledge, no study has yet characterized immunophenotypes and immune
evasive mechanisms specifically in young-onset colorectal cancers. To
that end we have investigated the expression of HLA class I and PD-L1 in
over 200 colorectal cancers derived from young-onset (< 50 years-old)
patients. Furthermore, we applied a novel multispectral
immunofluorescence technology to perform multiparameter immunophenotyping
with CD3, CD8, PD-1, PD-L1, CD163, and Ki-67 in the same cohort.

We describe that HLA class I expression is maintained in the large
majority of tumors allowing thus the development of neo-antigen targeted
therapies. Interestingly, reduced expression of HLA class I but not total
loss was associated with liver metastases, which suggests a specific
selective pressure at this organ that might warrant tailored immune
therapeutic interventions. As previous studies on colorectal cancer
demonstrated, PD-L1 expression is limited and often restricted to immune
cell compartments. The presence of immune cell infiltrates was related to
the mutation background of tumors but also to their HLA class I
phenotype: tumors with altered HLA class I expression were more likely to
present traces of lymphocyte-mediated anti-tumor immunity.

Retained HLA class I expression in the majority of colorectal cancers
associated with low infiltration by effector immune cells suggests the
therapeutic induction of anti-tumor immune responses in young-onset
colorectal cancers, for instance, by means of neo-antigen-targeted
therapies. We are currently assessing the frequency of natural
recognition of neo-antigens in an autologous setting in young-onset,
late-stage colorectal cancers.

This work was supported by the Fight Colorectal Cancer-Michaelâ€™s
Mission-AACR Fellowship in Young-Onset, Late-Stage Colorectal Cancer
Research awarded to N.F.C.C. de Miranda (15-40-1645-DEMI)


