Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of imipridone ONC201 in triple negative
breast cancer identifies predictive biomarkers and combinatorial
opportunities.


Background: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) lacks effective targeted
therapy, leaving chemotherapy as the only therapeutic option. Metastatic
TNBCs eventually develop resistance to chemotherapy via several
mechanisms including apoptosis evasion, hence representing an urgent
unmet need for novel therapies. ONC201 is a first-in-class imipridone
that induces caspase-mediated apoptosis in multiple cancers including
TNBC, selectively antagonizing dopamine D2-like receptors (DRD2)
resulting in inhibition of Ras signaling and cell death. Selective
antagonism of D2-like receptors has been shown to induce cell death in
cancer cells via the same signaling pathways engaged by ONC201. To
translate these early findings for breast cancers patients, more studies
to prove ONC201’s activity and mechanism of action in breast cancers
are needed. In this study, we tested the efficacy of ONC201 in TNBC cell
lines, and further confirmed the mechanism of action of ONC201 by
studying the association between DRD2/DRD5 and ONC201 efficacy.
Additionally, we performed siRNA kinome screening to identify
combinatorial opportunities to further enhance ONC201 efficacy in TNBC.

Method: We determined the efficacy of ONC201 in 20 TNBC cell lines by
determining the IC50. We then selected one cell line with low IC50
(CAL51) and high IC50 (HCC70) for siRNA synthetic lethality screening via
2D and 3D culture systems. Additionally, we correlated the IC50 with the
mRNA expression of DRD2 measured by Affymetrix microarray on each TNBC
cell lines with IC50 of the ONC201. Result: IC50 ranged from 2.09 to
40μM, with median IC50 of 10μM. No correlation between Vanderbilt TNBC
molecular subtype and IC50. 2D/3D siRNA kinome screening and Ingenuity
pathway analysis showed PIK3, MAPK, and Ephrin receptor pathways as top
three target candidates correlating with tumor growth inhibition efficacy
of ONC201. The long variant of DRD2 mRNA expression and ONC201 IC50
showed a correlation. There was a negative correlation between mRNA
expression of DRD5 and IC50 (R2=0.3601, P=0.018).

Conclusion: Our preclinical results suggest that ONC201 is active is TNBC
cells within previously proven safe therapeutic dose and provides
potential combinatorial opportunities with PI3K/MAPK targeted drugs.
These results highlight the importance of targeting the dopamine receptor
pathway for ONC201 efficacy and supports DRD5 as a potential predictive
marker. Targeting DRD2 and apoptosis induction could be one of
therapeutic strategy in triple negative breast cancers. Ongoing work
involves further in vitro and in vivo studies to determine the best
synergistic therapeutic partner and conducting a phase II single agent
trial to study the pharmacodynamics changes induced by ONC201 in TNBC.


