Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer stem cells in serous ovarian carcinoma using
RP6530, a dual PI3k δ/γ inhibitor.


Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal gynecological malignancies as
most patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage and have a poor
prognosis. Several studies have prospectively isolated cancer stem cells
(CSCs) from samples of tumor from patients with serous adenocarcinoma of
the ovary (SOC). This has been achieved by using cell surface antigens or
functional assays. Targeting this subpopulation could be critical to
overcome drug resistance, recurrence, and hence improve the survival of
patients. The PI3K pathway is deregulated in 37% of SOC with PI3Kδ and
γ amplified in 16% of tumors (TCGA data). We have used a novel and
selective PI3K γ/δ inhibitor (RP6530) with high potency against PI3Kγ
(IC50=25 nM) and δ (IC50=33 nM) enzymes and selectivity over α
(>300-fold) and β (>100-fold) isoforms. RP6530, an orally active and
sensitive small molecule inhibitor, is currently being tested in Phase-1
trials in US and Europe to evaluate its safety and efficacy in patients
with hematological malignancies. The objective of this study was to test
the efficacy of RP6530 against CSCs of EOC. Spheroids, enriched for CSCs
were employed as an approach to evaluate the specific potency of the
drug. In the experiments, Salinomycin was used as a control drug that
targets CSCs. Initially, we have analyzed 3 cell lines (PEO4, OVCAR-5 and
CAOV-2) with and without addition of 5µM RP6530. RP6530 significantly
inhibited spheroid formation in PEO4 (0.001) and OVCAR-5 (pOvarian cancer
is one of the most lethal gynecological malignancies as most patients are
diagnosed at an advanced stage and have a poor prognosis. Several studies
have prospectively isolated cancer stem cells (CSCs) from samples of
tumor from patients with serous adenocarcinoma of the ovary (SOC). This
has been achieved by using cell surface antigens or functional assays.
Targeting this subpopulation could be critical to overcome drug
resistance, recurrence, and hence improve the survival of patients. The
PI3K pathway is deregulated in 37% of SOC with PI3Kδ and γ amplified in
16% of tumors (TCGA data). We have used a novel and selective PI3K γ/δ
inhibitor (RP6530) with high potency against PI3Kγ (IC50=25 nM) and δ
(IC50=33 nM) enzymes and selectivity over α (>300-fold) and β
(>100-fold) isoforms. RP6530, an orally active and sensitive small
molecule inhibitor, is currently being tested in Phase-1 trials in US and
Europe to evaluate its safety and efficacy in patients with hematological
malignancies. The objective of this study was to test the efficacy of
RP6530 against CSCs of EOC. Spheroids, enriched for CSCs were employed as
an approach to evaluate the specific potency of the drug. In the
experiments, Salinomycin was used as a control drug that targets CSCs.
Initially, we have analyzed 3 cell lines (PEO4, OVCAR-5 and CAOV-2) with
and without addition of 5µM RP6530. RP6530 significantly inhibited
spheroid formation in PEO4 (0.001) and OVCAR-5 (p<0.05) and CAOV-2 (p50%)
in the fraction of SP cells (PEO4 and CAOV-2) or was neutral (OVCAR-5)
indicating that the compound preferentially targets CSC in ovarian cancer
cell lines. Colony assay revealed significantly lesser number of colonies
in RP6530 treated cells. Phosphorylation of Akt that is downstream of PI3
kinase was inhibited in a dose dependent manner in all three cell lines.
Evaluation of drugs that are intended to target CSCs is different from
that of conventional cytotoxic drugs. Taken together, the results
indicate that RP6530 shows potent inhibitory effect on CSCs in ovarian
cancer cell lines.


