Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced antitumor efficacy by recruiting macrophages as effector
cells via bispecific antibodies mediated by CD89.


Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) is one of key
mechanisms through which antibody therapeutics can lyse tumor target
cells. ADCC is usually mediated by IgG through recruiting effector cells,
mostly NK cells, via IgG Fc receptor. In order to enhance specific tumor
lysis by ADCC, a common strategy is to design a bispecific antibody that
binds a tumor cell surface antigen and T cell marker CD3, thus to recruit
T cells as effector cells. An example of this type of design is the
FDA-approved bispecific antibody blinatumomab. We are interested in
designing novel bispecific strategies to achieve improved ADCC effect.
Since tumors are often infiltrated by macrophages and neutrophils, it
would be advantageous to turn these types of cells into effector cells
for ADCC. We have designed several bispecific strategies that can target
a tumor associated antigen (TAA) and CD89 (FcÎ±RI). The aim is to lyse
tumors through connecting tumor cells to CD89-expressing immune effector
cells, such as macrophages and neutrophils. The CD89 bispecific
antibodies were produced by HEK293 cells and showed binding activities to
both CD89 and TAA. The CD89 bispecific antibodies can recruit
CD89-expressing immune cells and induced enhanced tumor cells-killing in
human whole blood ADCC assays. Since mouse does not express human CD89
homologue, we generated a transgenic mouse strain with specific
expression of CD89 on macrophages and monocytes. In this transgenic mouse
model, the CD89 bispecific antibodies showed significant anti-tumor
activities, demonstrating that the bispecific antibodies can redirect
macrophages, including M2 macrophages, to mediate additional effector
function in tumor microenvironment.


