Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation/loss of PTPRS promotes ERK activation that sensitizes
colorectal cancer cells to ERK inhibitors.


The RAS pathway is a driver of many cancers, and has been targeted for
the development of a variety of therapeutic inhibitors of BRAF, MEK, and
more recently ERK. One of challenging issues is to predict response to
targeted therapies. Here we report identification of PTPRS, a
receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatase, as a regulator/biomarker of
ERK activation and inhibitor response in colorectal cancer. To identify
the genes with high frequency mutations that might be predictive of RAS
pathway dependence (“addiction”), we used a gene expression signature
score to stratify 468 colorectal cancer tumors that also underwent
targeted exome sequencing for 1321 cancer-associated genes. We found
that, when the masking effects caused by mutant KRAS, BRAF and NRAS was
iteratively removed, mutant PTPRS was strongly correlated with RAS
pathway activation, with a mutation rate of 10.4% (22 out of 211
remaining tumors). This led us to inactivate PTPRS in vitro using a
specific peptide inhibitor, siRNA or CRISPR approaches in various
colorectal cancer cell lines. Inhibition/loss of PTPRS significantly
elevated phosphorylation of ERK and AKT and substantially sensitized
cancer cells to the treatment of ERK inhibitors, which was enhanced by an
AKT inhibitor. Surprisingly, PTPRS did not modulate the activity of EGFR
and the ERK kinase, MEK. Our data indicate that PTPRS negatively
regulates ERK signaling downstream of the EGFR/RAS/RAF/MEK pathway in a
mechanism independent of AKT and DUSP6. As a result, inactivation/loss of
PTPRS promotes ERK activation and “addiction”, thereby contributing
to increased sensitivity to ERK inhibitors.


