Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The apoptotic mechanism of MT-6, a mitotic inducer, in human
ovarian cancer cells.


Patients with ovarian cancer are typically diagnosed at an advanced
stage, resulting in poor prognosis since there are currently no effective
early-detection screening tests for women at average-risk for ovarian
cancer. Here, we investigated the effects of MT-6, a derivative of
moscatilin, in ovarian cancer cells. Our investigation showed that MT-6
inhibited the proliferation and viability of SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells
with submicromolar IC50 values. MT-6-treated SKOV3 cells showed
significant cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase, followed by an increase in
the proportion of cells in a sub-G1 phase. In addition, MT-6 induced a
concentration-dependent increase in mitotic markers, mitotic kinases,
cell cycle regulators of G2/M transition, and apoptosis-related markers
in SKOV3 cells. MT-6 treatment also induced mitochondrial membrane
potential loss, JNK activation, and DR5 expression. Cotreatment of cells
with the JNK inhibitor SP600125 considerably attenuated MT-6-induced
apoptosis, mitochondria membrane potential loss, DR5 upregulation, and
suppression of cell viability. MT-6 also inhibited tumor growth in an
SKOV3 xenograft model without significant body weight loss. Together, our
findings suggest that MT-6 is a potent anticancer agent with
tumor-suppressive activity in vitro and in vivo that could be further
investigated for ovarian cancer therapy in the future.


