Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer-specific amplitude modulated radiofrequency
electromagnetic fields (AM RF EMF) inhibits brain metastasis of breast
cancer.


Brain metastasis is evident in approximately 30% of patients with breast
cancer and one-year survival of these patients remains less than 20%. The
treatment of brain metastasis mainly involves surgical resection in
combination with whole brain radiation therapy (WRBT), or stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS). However, patients often suffer from the treatmentâ€™s
adverse effects and experience recurrent disease. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for a less invasive therapy with minimal side effects, and
improved therapeutic efficacy. Our current work has established a novel
treatment approach for breast cancer brain metastasis at a preclinical
level by using amplitude modulated radiofrequency electromagnetic fields
(AM RF EMF). We have previously demonstrated that AM RF EMF can be safely
administered to patients for prolonged period of time with virtually no
toxicity and side effects. The treatment of metastatic breast cancer
patients with AM RF EMF significantly impaired the growth of both
metastatic and primary tumor (1).

In this study, we specifically observed the effect of AM RF EMF in brain
metastatic variants of breast cancer cells (231-BrM and SKBr-BrM). We
found that AM RF EMF significantly inhibited the growth, stemness and
colony forming ability of brain metastatic variants of breast cancer
cells. In addition, AM RF EMF inhibited the stemness of radiation
resistant variants derived from 231-BrM and SKBr-BrM cells, which
indicate the potential of AM RF EMF in treatment of treatment-refractory
recurrent disease. Furthermore, AM RF EMF also significantly suppressed
the growth of orthopically and systemically implanted 231-BrM and
SKBr-BrM cells in our NOD/SCID animal model. We then performed RNAseq
expression profile analysis and found that expression of
stemness-associated gene, HMGA2, was significantly decreased in 231-BrM
and SKBr-BrM cells that were treated with AM EMF RF. Interestingly, brain
metastatic variants and radiation resistant lines of 231-BrM and SKBr-BrM
showed elevated expression of HMGA2 when compared to their parental
cells. Importantly, the treatment of brain metastatic cells with AM RF
EMF also sensitized the cells to radiation in a HMGA2 dependent manner.
Furthermore, to isolate the AM RF EMF responsive biomarker, we isolated
exosomes from the SKBr-BrM cells that were treated with AM RF EMF, and
performed microRNA array. Differentially expressed miRNAs in SKBr-BrM and
231-BrM cells derived exosomes were identified and verified by Taqman
PCR. These exosomal microRNAs can serve as excellent biomarkers for
examining the effect of AM RF EMF in brain tumors. Therefore, our study
has demonstrated that this new approach of treating brain metastasis has
a high translational potential considering significant efficacy and
minimal side effect shown in pre-clinical and clinical setting.


