Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FDA approved drug Bazedoxifene as a novel inhibitor of IL 6 and IL
11/GP130 signaling for osteosarcoma therapy.


IL-6 and L-11 signaling pathways play an important role in cancer cell
survival and progression, including osteosarcoma. IL-6/IL-11 binds to
IL-6/IL-11 Rα to form a binary complex, then recruits GP130 to form the
IL-6/IL-6 Rα/GP130 or IL-11/IL-11 Rα/GP130 heterotrimer and triggers a
signaling cascade downstream. One of the major downstream effectors of
IL-6 is STAT3. STAT3 is persistently activated in many human osteosarcoma
specimens and cell lines and STAT3 is required for osteosarcoma cells
survival. So IL-6 and IL-11 present a viable novel target for
osteosarcoma therapy. To date, however, no small molecules that target
both IL-6/GP130 and IL-11/GP130 signaling pathways are available for
cancer therapy. To overcome this critical problem, we have utilized a
novel drug discovery approach combining Multiple Ligand Simultaneous
Docking and drug repositioning to target GP130. Drug repositioning refers
to reuse fragments from the existing FDA-approved drugs for new
applications and could potentially reposition the existing drugs as
novel, off-target inhibitors of the GP130 as their new target. Using this
novel method, we have identified a FDA-approved drug Bazedoxifene with a
novel function to inhibit IL-6 and GP130 proteinprotein interactions.
Furthmore, because IL-11 binds to the same domain of GP130 as IL-6,
Bazedoxifene should also inhibit IL-11/GP130 signaling. Accordingly,
Bazedoxifene can indeed inhibit the induction of P-STAT3 by both IL-6 and
IL-11. Bazedoxifene appeared specific to IL-6 and IL-11 as
phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT3 by IFN-γ and LIF respectively were
not affected by the compound. Bazedoxifene inhibited P-STAT3 and induced
apoptosis in human osteosarcoma cell lines expressing IL-6 and IL-11. In
addition, Bazedoxifene can inhibit colony formation after the drug
treatments in cancer cells.IL-6 but not IFN-γ could rescue the
Bazedoxifene-mediated inhibition of cell viability in osteosarcoma cells.
These results further support that IL-6/GP130 signaling pathway is one of
the main targets of Bazedoxifene-mediated inhibition in osteosarcoma
cells. To determine the in vivo activity of Bazedoxifene, we further
tested the efficacy of Bazedoxifene in tumor xenografts generated from
the SJSA osteosarcoma cells that show persistent IL-6/STAT3 activation.
Bazedoxifene via oral gavage inhibited P-STAT3 and the growth of SJSA
tumor xenografts. These data demonstrated that Bazedoxifene is potent in
suppressing tumor growth and is orally bioavailable in inhibiting
P-STAT3. It further indicates that Bazedoxifene is a promising
IL-6/GP130-targeting drug, which likely to have in vivo anti-tumor
activity in osteosarcoma. In summary, Bazedoxifene already approved for
safety by the FDA as a novel inhibitor of IL-6/GP130 and IL-11/GP130
signaling should provide an easier path to clinical trials and have a
potential to improve the outcome of osteosarcoma.


