Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the utilization of blood collection tubes for
cell-free DNA research.


Many studies have been conducted investigating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) for
disease diagnosis. To prevent cellular DNA release into the plasma,
plasma separation within 2 hours of blood collection is required, when
utilizing the most commonly used type of tube (BD Vacutainer® CPTTM;
CPT). These temporal restrictions render operations requiring plasma
separation a laborious task. It has been demonstrated that Cell-Free DNA
BCT® tubes (Streck Inc; BCTs) prevented nucleated cell disruption. The
use of BCTs may enable us to separate plasma without temporal
restrictions. The aim of this study was to evaluate changes in DNA levels
in plasma after preservation using two types of collection tubes. Samples
were drawn from 7 healthy donors into CPTs and BCTs, and stored at room
temperature. Plasma was separated immediately (d0), and on days 3, 6, 9,
12, and 14 after blood collection. The concentrations of DNA in the
extracted plasma samples were measured. Blood stored in CPTs showed
increases in plasma DNA concentrations over time. The mean DNA
concentrations at each time-point were 0.39 (d0), 2.96 (d3), 40.4 (d6),
84.9 (d9), 91.4 (d12), and 94.9 ng/μl (d14). However, plasma DNA levels
remained stable in BCTs from 6 days. There were significant differences
between the DNA concentrations in BCTs on d0 (0.74 [0.43-1.44] ng/µl)
and d14 (1.78 [0.63-4.20] ng/µl) (p = 0.0378). Although significant
differences were only observed between d0 and d14 in BCTs, the amount of
plasma DNA gradually increased after d6. Furthermore, obvious color
changes in the plasma were observed, and the boundary between plasma and
PBMCs became unclear over time. These results indicate that BCTs may
yield stable cfDNA samples for up to 6 days after blood collection. BCTs
may be a novel collection tube for cfDNA research, including liquid
biopsies in cancer patients.


