Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacodynamic biomarkers in metronomic chemotherapy: Multiplex
cytokine measurements in gastrointestinal cancer patients.


Metronomic chemotherapy has shown promising antitumor activity in a
number of malignancies. For example, we previously reported (Allegrini et
al., Angiogenesis (2012) 15(2):275-86) a phase II clinical trial of
metronomic UFT (a 5-fluorouracil prodrug; 100 mg/twice per day p.o.) and
cyclophosphamide (CTX; 500 mg/mq2 i.v. bolus on day 1 and then 50 mg/day
p.o.) plus celecoxib (200 mg/twice a day p.o.) in 38 patients with
advanced refractory gastrointestinal tumors. The mechanisms of action of
metronomic chemotherapy include upregulation of the angiogenesis
inhibitor Thrombospondin-1, the suppression of bone marrow derived
endothelial progenitor cells and, at least for drugs such as CTX,
activation of the immune system. To further evaluate the latter, we
carried out an immune system multiplex 14-cytokine profiling of plasma
samples that were available (for day 0, day 28, and day 56) from 31 of
the 38 patients in the above noted (Allegrini et al) clinical trial. Our
results show that pre-treatment plasma level cut-offs of interferon-gamma
(>12.84pg/ml), sCD40L (55.11pg/ml), and IL-17a (55.11pg/ml), and IL-17a
(<15.1pg/ml) were predictive markers for those patients with better
progression-free survival (p55.11pg/ml), and IL-17a (<15.1pg/ml) were
predictive markers for those patients with better progression-free
survival (p<.05 for each cytokine). After 28 days of metronomic therapy,
the plasma levels of sCD40L, IL-17a, and of IL-6 (55.11pg/ml), and IL-17a
(<15.1pg/ml) were predictive markers for those patients with better
progression-free survival (p<.05 for each cytokine). After 28 days of
metronomic therapy, the plasma levels of sCD40L, IL-17a, and of IL-6
(<130pg/ml) could serve as predictors of improved progression-free
survival, as could levels interferon-gamma and sCD40L after 56 days of
therapy. We observed minimal changes in cytokine profiles, from baseline,
as a consequence of the metronomic therapy, with the exception of an
elevation of IL-6 and IL-8 levels 28 days (and 56 days) after treatment
started (p55.11pg/ml), and IL-17a (<15.1pg/ml) were predictive markers
for those patients with better progression-free survival (p<.05 for each
cytokine). After 28 days of metronomic therapy, the plasma levels of
sCD40L, IL-17a, and of IL-6 (<130pg/ml) could serve as predictors of
improved progression-free survival, as could levels interferon-gamma and
sCD40L after 56 days of therapy. We observed minimal changes in cytokine
profiles, from baseline, as a consequence of the metronomic therapy, with
the exception of an elevation of IL-6 and IL-8 levels 28 days (and 56
days) after treatment started (p<0.05). Our results indicate that a
selective cytokine elevation, involving IL-6 and IL-8, following
metronomic chemotherapy administration. In addition, interferon-gamma and
sCD40L may be potential biomarkers for gastrointestinal cancer patients
that are likely to benefit from metronomic chemotherapy. Our study
contributes to our understanding of the mechanisms of action of
metronomic chemotherapy, and may guide future patient selection criteria
for metronomic chemotherapy for gastrointestinal cancers.


