Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt signaling induces anti-apoptotic effect in colorectal cancer
cells through the suppression of IFITs.


Impaired Wnt signaling pathway plays a crucial role in the development of
colorectal cancer through the activation of β-catenin/TCF complex.
Although genes up-regulated by Wnt/β-catenin signaling has been well
studied, the down-regulated genes are poorly understood. To clarify the
comprehensive changes regulated by the signaling in colorectal cancer
cells, we explored a global gene expression of CRC cells transfected with
β-catenin siRNAs or dominant negative form of TCF7L2 (dnTCF7L2).
Consequently, a set of genes that were negatively regulated by
β-catenin/TCF were identified. Among the genes, three members of
interferon-induced proteins with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFIT) family
(IFIT1, IFIT2, and IFIT3) expression were significantly increased by the
inhibition of β-catenin/TCF. Comparison of gene expression data from
normal colonic mucosa and the tumor tissues showed that the expression of
IFIT1 and IFIT2 in the tumors was significantly lower than that in normal
tissues. To elucidate the mechanism of IFITs expression regulated by
β-catenin/TCF, we performed a reporter assay using plasmid containing
1.2-kb of 5’-flanking region of the IFIT2 gene. As a result, the
reporter activity was significantly enhanced by either transduction of
β-catenin or dnTCF7L2, suggesting that blockage of β-catenin/TCF
stimulated IFITs through the promoter. In addition, we found that
overexpression of IFIT2 increased apoptosis and decreased cell
proliferation in SW480 and HCT116 cells. These results imply that Wnt
signaling may promote anti-apoptotic effect in cancer cells through the
suppression of IFIT2. Our findings suggest that analysis of
down-regulated genes in response to activated Wnt/β-catenin signaling
provides a better understanding of human colorectal carcinogenesis.


