Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Weight loss over 10 years of adulthood and subsequent risk of
breast cancer: a pooled analysis of 11 cohort studies.


Body fatness is an established risk factor for postmenopausal breast
cancer, but it is unknown if this risk associated with excess body weight
is reversible. We conducted a pooled analysis of 11 prospective studies
in the Pooling Project of Prospective Studies of Diet and Cancer. Each
study had adult body weight data at three time points, as well as
follow-up for subsequent risk of breast cancer after the third weight
measure. Weight change was assessed using reported or measured weight at
baseline and two follow-up time points, each generally four to six years
apart (over a total of ~10 years). Stable weight for each interval was
defined as weight within 2kg of the previous weight. The referent group
was women with stable weight (within 2kg) at all three time points across
the 10-year period. Among 340,055 women, 10,427 breast cancers were
diagnosed during follow-up. Multivariable hazard ratios (HR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) controlling for baseline body mass index (BMI),
baseline physical activity, and postmenopausal hormone (PMH) use at the
start of breast cancer follow-up, were estimated using proportional
hazards regression on an aggregated dataset from all studies. Women who
lost weight and kept the weight off, were at a lower risk of breast
cancer than women with stable weight over the 10 years: >2.-4.5kg lost
between baseline and the first follow-up body weight measure (n=482
cases): HR=0.92, 95% CI: 0.83-1.03; >4.5-9kg lost (n=283 cases): HR=0.86,
95% CI: 0.76-0.98; >9kg lost (n=95 cases): HR =0.81, 95%CI: 0.65-1.00).
Women who initially lost weight (>2kg), but then re-gained it had a
similar risk of breast cancer to those with stable weight over the same
time period. When results were stratified by baseline age and BMI, there
was no association between sustained weight loss and breast cancer among
women younger than 50 years, nor those with a normal BMI (18.5-25 kg/m2)
before weight loss. Among women who were aged 50 or more years and
overweight or obese before the weight loss period, we observed a 21%
lower risk of breast cancer for sustained weight loss of ≥4.5kg
compared to women with stable weight over the same time period (n=245
cases, HR=0.79, 95% CI: 0.68-0.93). This observed association was driven
by women who were not taking PMH (n=156, HR=0.71, 95% CI: 0.58-0.86). In
this large, pooled prospective analysis of weight loss and breast cancer
risk we found that losing 4.5 kg—and keeping it off—may lower breast
cancer risk, particularly for women older than 50 who are overweight or
obese. The results may provide motivation for women with elevated BMI to
lose weight and potentially reduce their risk of breast cancer.


