Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bisulfite DNA sequencing analyses to detect methylation patterns
in the p73 gene promoter in prostate cancer cell lines.


Transcription is regulated through a variety of different mechanisms. One
facet of transcriptional regulation is epigenetics, which is the
regulation of gene expression without altering the nucleotide sequence of
the genome, but rather reversible modifications, e.g. CpG methylation.
The CpG islands in tumor suppressor gene promoters are often
hypermethylated, thus down regulating their expression. The p73 gene is a
member of the p53 tumor suppressor family of proteins, and like p53, has
a bifurcated promoter. The p73 P1 promoter transcribes a full-length
mRNA, which then translates into the transcriptionally active p73. The
p73 P2 promoter transcribes a truncated mRNA, which translated into
transcriptionally inactive ΔNp73. The ΔNp73 product lacks the
N-terminal trans-activation domain that TAp73 possesses. This study
sought to analyze the extent of DNA methylation in the CpG islands in the
p73 P1 promoter of three prostate cancer (PCa) cell lines (LNCaP, PC-3,
and DU145), and primary prostate cells. We hypothesized that the p73 P1
promoter would be hypermethylated in prostate cancer cell lines and
hypomethylated in primary prostate cells. The methylation status of the
p73 P1 promoter in all four prostate cell lines was analyzed by using
bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP). Our analyses revealed that a CpG island
in the p73 P1 was hypermethylated in LNCaP, PC-3, and DU145 cells
compared to primary prostate cells. Furthermore, among the three PCa cell
lines evaluated, the p73 P1 promoter was the most methylated in DU145
cells, and the least methylated in LNCaP cells. The P1 region sequenced
contained 28 CpG islands, and among them, only five were methylated in
the primary prostate cells (18% methylated), 23 were methylated in LNCaP
cells (82% methylated), 26 in PC-3 cells (93% methylated), and 28 in
DU145 cells (100% methylated). Furthermore, of the 28 CpG sites, 14 of
them were differentially methylated in the primary prostate cell line
versus the three PCa cell lines evaluated in this study. These data are
consistent with the PCa tumor-derived cell lines (LNCaP, PC-3, and DU145)
having hypermethylated CpG sites in the p73 P1 promoter compared to the
primary prostate cell line.


