Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chondroitin sulfatases regulate Wnt signaling through effects on
Shp2, phospho-Erk1,2, c-Myc, and histone methylation of DKK3 in prostate
cancer and prostate stem cells.


The chondroitin sulfatases N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfatase
(arylsulfatase B; ARSB) and N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulfatase (galactose
6-sulfatase, GALNS) remove the 4-sulfate and 6-sulfate groups of
chondroitin sulfates. ARSB acts to remove 4-sulfate groups of chondroitin
4-sulfate (C4S) or dermatan sulfate, and GALNS acts to remove 6-sulfate
groups of chondroitin 6-sulfate (C6S) or chondroitin 4,6-disulfate, as
well as keratan sulfate. In human prostate cancer tissues, ARSB activity
was markedly reduced and GALNS activity increased. By
immunohistochemistry of malignant prostate tissue captured by laser
microdissection and by assay of human prostate stromal and epithelial
cell lines, ARSB was predominant in stromal cells of the extracellular
matrix, whereas GALNS predominated in prostate epithelial cells. When
ARSB was reduced by silencing in human prostate stem cells or GALNS was
increased by overexpression in the stem cells, SHP2 binding to
chondroitin 4-sulfate increased, leading to inhibition of phosphatase
action and sustained phosphorylation of Erk1,2. Erk activation enabled
increase in c-Myc binding to nuclear DNA and increased expression of DNMT
1a, 3a, and 3b. DNMT activation increased following ARSB silencing or
GALNS overexpression, and was blocked by ERK inhibition. Increased DNMT
activity led to the increased promoter methylation of DKK3, and the
subsequent inhibition of nuclear Î²-catenin nuclear translocation and Wnt
signaling. Decline in Wnt signaling was manifested by reduced TCF-LEF
nuclear binding, and decline in the mRNA expression of c-Myc and GATA.
Since c-Myc activation can lead to increased expression of cell cycle
regulators, the changes in chondroitin sulfation mediated by sulfatases
can lead to profound effects in cell proliferation. Hence, the
modification of sulfatase activity, manifested as increased chondroitin
4-sulfate, provides the platform for an extensive
extracellular-intracellular signaling network that can regulate
phosphorylation, DNA promoter methylation, and proliferation, and affect
development and malignant transformation.


