Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optogenetic immunoengineering to develop improved anti-cancer
immunotherapy.


The application of current channelrhodopsin-based optogenetic tools is
limited by the lack of strict ion selectivity and the inability to extend
the spectra sensitivity into the near-infrared (NIR) tissue transmissible
range. Here we present an NIR-stimulable optogenetic platform (termed
“Opto-CRAC”) that selectively and remotely controls Ca2+ oscillations
and Ca2+-responsive gene expression to regulate the function of model
cellular systems, as well as cells of the immune system. When coupled to
upconversion nanoparticles, the optogenetic operation window is shifted
from the visible range to NIR wavelengths to enable wireless and remote
photoactivation of Ca2+-dependent signaling and optogenetic modulation of
immunoinflammatory responses. In a mouse model of melanoma by using
ovalbumin as surrogate tumor antigen, Opto-CRAC has been shown to act as
a genetically-encoded “photoactivatable adjuvant” to improve
antigen-specific immune responses to specifically destruct tumor cells.
In addition, we have extended similar engineering approaches to
photomanipulate membrane contact sites that play critical roles in
controlling lipid metabolism and calcium signaling in cancer cells. Our
study represents a solid step forward towards the goal of improving
spatial and temporal control of anti-cancer therapy through optogenetic
immunoengineering.


