Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PBRM1 inactivation in renal cell cancer alters master
transcription factor hub composition to repress instead of activate
epithelial-differentiation.


Clear cell renal cell cancers (RCC) universally inactivate PBRM1 (single
allele deletion 100%, bi-allelic deletion/mutation ~40%), however, the
mechanisms by which PBRM1 loss contributes to RCC-genesis are unknown. Of
~4000 genes consistently less expressed in RCC than normal renal cortex,
>30% were kidney differentiation genes by gene ontology analysis, e.g.,
394 (~10%) suppressed genes had specialized renal epithelial functions of
cation transport, cell adhesion and excretion (TCGA). Suppression of
hundreds of epithelial-differentiation genes suggested disruption to the
core transcription factor circuit (protein network hub) activating this
program. This master transcription factor hub contains PAX2, PAX8, GATA3
and LHX1, shown by murine knock-outs and human pedigrees with renal
defects, and confirmed by our protein interactome studies. Of these
master transcription factors, PAX2 and PAX8 expression was preserved in
RCC compared to normal kidney, but downstream GATA3 and LHX1 expression
was markedly decreased (2 to 4-fold) even though PAX8 localized at these
target genes by chromatin immunoprecipitation - this suggested
compromised PAX8 transcription activating function. PAX8 protein
interactome in RCC cells indicated that PBRM1 is a PAX8 coactivator, and
introduction of PBRM1 into PBRM1-haploinsufficient RCC cells (ACHN) by
transfection increased activation of GATA3, WT1 and HNF4A, decreased MYC
protein, increased p27/CDKN1B protein that mediates cell cycle exits by
terminal differentiation, produced morphological changes of epithelial
differentiation, and decreased proliferation. Coactivator versus
corepressor recruitment by master transcription factors is a dynamic
interchange, and the protein interactome studies indicated PBRM1 loss
unbalanced stoichiometry of the PAX8-associated protein hub towards
corepressors including DNMT1. Depletion of DNMT1 by non-cytotoxic
concentrations of decitabine (0.5 ÂµM) produced a remarkable shift from
corepressors to coactivators in the PAX8 protein interactome, accompanied
by terminal epithelial-differentiation as observed with PBRM1
reintroduction. Cell cycle exits by differentiation do not require
p53/p16, and this effect was also produced in vivo in a subcutaneous
xenograft model of TP53-mutated refractory/relapsed RCC, especially when
decitabine in vivo pharmacology was optimized for non-cytotoxic
DNMT1-depletion by avoiding a high Cmax and increasing its half-life and
distribution into solid tissue, by administration of low dose in
combination with an inhibitor of the enzyme cytidine deaminase that
degrades decitabine. PBRM1 loss in RCC thus alters composition of a
master transcription factor hub to repress instead of activate terminal
epithelial-differentiation, an effect that can be reversed
pharmacologically for novel, p53/p16-independent
differentiation-restoring therapy.


