Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bronchial airway gene expression signatures in mouse lung squamous
cell carcinoma and their modulation by cancer chemopreventive agents.


Due to exposure to environmental toxicants, a “field cancerization”
effect occurs in the lung resulting in the development of a field of
initiated but morphologically normal appearing cells in the damaged
epithelium of bronchial airways with dysregulated gene expression
patterns. Using a mouse model of lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), we
performed transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) to profile bronchial airway
gene expression and found activation of the PI3k and Myc signaling
networks in cytologically normal bronchial airway epithelial cells of
mice with preneopastic lung SCC lesions, which was reversed by treatment
with the PI3K Inhibitor XL-147 and pioglitazone, respectively. Activated
MYC signaling was also present in premalignant and tumor tissues from
human lung SCC patients. In addition, we identified a key microRNA,
mmu-miR-449c-5p, whose suppression significantly up-regulated Myc
expression in the normal bronchial airway epithelial cells of mice with
early stage SCC lesions. We developed a novel bronchial genomic
classifier in mice and validated it in humans. In the classifier, Ppbp
(pro-platelet basic protein) was overexpressed 115 fold in the bronchial
airways of mice with preneoplastic lung SCC lesions. This is the first
report that demonstrates Ppbp as a novel biomarker in the bronchial
airway for lung cancer diagnosis.


