Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and characterization of an extensive panel of
patient-derived tumor xenograft models of prostate and bladder cancers.


We have recently published data obtained on the development and the
characterization of 30 patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) of kidney
cancer by xenografting 336 tumor tissues (Lang et al. Oncotarget, 2016).
Here we focused on bladder and prostate cancers. Taken together prostate
and bladder cancers represent around 1 700 000 cases and 450 000 deaths
per year worldwide. Their incidence is increasing each year by 1-10%. At
early stages, surgery is generally curative, but no therapies are
efficient at advanced and metastatic stages. PDX faithfully reproduce the
heterogeneity of patient tumors and thus became over the last decade
essential preclinical tools for drug testing and identification of
predictive biomarkers. We obtained bladder and prostate primary tumors
tissues from patients at surgery. Fragments were subcutaneously
xenografted in nude mice. After the first growth in mice, they were
serially passaged up to passage (P) 10. We also harvested normal
corresponding tissues. Informed consent and clinical history are
available for all patients. We analyzed the stability of the PDX by
comparing primary tumors and tumors grown in mice at different passages.
Analysis included growth characteristics, histopathology, molecular
profiling, genetic stability (short tandem repeat fingerprinting), and
response to therapies. In addition, specific features were also explored
for each cancer type including the expression of the androgen receptor,
PSA and pan-cytokeratin for prostate PDXs and hotspot mutations of FGFR3,
PIK3CA, HRAS, KRAS, NRAS for bladder PDXs. We have collected 230 prostate
tumors and 130 bladder tumors at all stages and grade since 7 years, and
developed 5 and 25 models (> P3 in mice), i.e. 1 and 20 % success rate,
respectively. The take rate was not correlated to any tumor features
(stage, Gleason scoreâ‹¯). Tumor growth was stable from passage to
passage. All histologic, molecular and genetic analysis confirmed the
stability of the PDX models compared to the original tumors. Molecular
profiling revealed that less than 5% of genes were differentially
expressed between the primary tumors and tumors grown in mice at various
passages. Interestingly, in bladder PDX, we were able to define several
molecular subtypes, including PDX models of the basal subtype as well as
PDX with mutated-FGFR3. Responses to current therapies recapitulated the
clinical state. The establishment of prostate and bladder PDX, together
with our kidney cancer PDX panel, constitute one of the largest
collection of urological PDX. Since no active therapies are yet available
for these cancers at advanced stages, this collection should be useful to
develop efficient therapies and for translational research to reach
personalized medicine.


