Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NSABP FC-7 correlative study: HER2 amplification (amp) in
circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC)
resistant to anti-EGFR therapy (tx).


Background: FC-7 is a phase Ib study hypothesizing that dual ERBB
blockade (neratinib and cetuximab) could overcome an acquired resistance
mechanism to anti-EGFR tx in KRAS/NRAS/BRAF/PI3KCA wild type (wt) mCRC
patients (pts). Previously we demonstrated a 36% rate of HER2 amp in
post- anti-EGFR biopsies (bxs). Assay of plasma cfDNA is minimally
invasive and may provide comprehensive genomic profiling. We tested the
accuracy of a cfDNA assay for HER2 amp, comparing results from matched
bxs to evaluate molecular changes in HER2 copy number. Methods: 23 pts
with mCRC resistant to anti-EGFR tx were enrolled and treated with
cetuximab and neratinib. 17 paired bxs (6 post-tx bxs had insufficient
tumor) were assessed for HER2 amp using chromogenic in situ hybridization
(CISH) (Dako PharmDxTM). HER2 was considered amplified when HER2/CEP17
ratio was â‰¥2. cfDNA was extracted from plasma of 11 pts after 1st line
anti-EGFR tx but before addition of cetuximab and neratinib. 5-30 ng of
DNA was sequenced across 512 exons in 54 genes with HiSeq (Illumina).
Copy number variants (CNV) were quantified using a customized pipeline
(Guardant 360). One plasma sample failed to yield sufficient cfDNA. 10
pts had comparison of cfDNA with pre- or post- anti-EGFR bx. Results: 4
of 9 plasma samples (1 non evaluable) had HER2 amp, all concordant with
pre- or post- anti-EGFR tx tissue. 3 pts converted to HER2 amp after
anti-EGFR tx (pts 3, 5, 7), and for 2 of these conversions (pts 5, 7),
the amplification was evident in cfDNA.

Pt

Pre- anti-EGFR

CISH

Ratio

Post- anti-EGFR CISH

Ratio

Post- anti-EGFR cfDNA

CNV

Concordance of cfDNA

with pre- or post-

anti-EGFR Tissue

Samples



1

Neg (1.0)

Neg (1.3)

Non evaluable

NA



2

Pos (2.5)

Neg (1.5)

Pos (2.66)

Pre-Tx



3

Neg (1.0)

Pos (3.7)

Neg

Pre-Tx



4

Neg (1.0)

Neg (1.8)

Neg

Both



5

Neg (1.2)

Pos (2.7)

Pos (2.48)

Post-Tx



6

Pos (>10)

QNS

Pos (21.86)

Pre-Tx



7

Neg (1.1)

Pos (2.0)

Pos (2.20)

Post-Tx



8

Neg (1.3)

Neg (1.1)

Neg

Both



9

Neg (1.0)

Neg (1.3)

Neg

Both



10

Neg (1.0)

Neg (1.5)

Neg

Both





Conclusion: In this sample set, HER2 amp detected in plasma-derived cfDNA
from mCRC pts resistant to anti-EGFR tx is comparable to amp assessed in
primary or metastatic tissue. Given advantages of liquid bx relative to
repeated tissue bxs, measurement of HER2 amp in cfDNA may be of utility
in monitoring pts for resistance to anti-EGFR tx. This will need to be
confirmed in a trial incorporating both plasma and tissue samples.
Support: Puma Biotechnology, Inc.


