Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Blockade of Aurora kinase A synergizes with platinum and radiation
in non-small cell lung cancer cells.


Background: Most patients with advanced lung cancer will receive
platinum-based therapy during their treatment course despite limited
clinical benefits. Thus, strategies to improve platinum-based therapy
continue to be needed. Through a functional genetic screen, we have
identified Aurora kinase A as a potentially actionable candidate that can
modulate the activity of platinum compounds. Aurora A is a
serine/threonine kinase and a key regulator of the mitotic process.
Through its mitotic and non-mitotic roles, the aberrant activation of
Aurora A can lead to oncogenic transformation and has emerged as a
promising therapeutic target in cancer.

METHODS: High-throughput RNAi screen was used to identify potential
candidates for cisplatin resistance. Cell proliferation/viability was
determined by MTS assays and colony formation assays.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to determine the overexpression of
Aurora A in specimens from lung cancer patients. Western blot was used to
explore the cell signaling mechanisms in cisplatin, radiation, and/or
MLN8237 (alisertib) treated NSCLC cell lines. Î²-Galactosidase staining
was performed to determine the senescence following cisplatin and/or
MLN8237 treatment in NSCLC cell lines.

RESULTS: Aurora Kinase A is widely expressed in lung cancer specimens.
The expression of Aurora A is upregulated following treatment with
Cisplatin in NSCLC cells, such as PC9, A549, H1703, and H460. Inhibition
of Aurora A activity with either siRNA-mediated knockdown or
pharmacological blockade (MLN8237) significantly improved sensitivities
to cisplatin and ionizing radiation, both of which cause DNA damage and
cell death. On the other hand, inhibition of Aurora A activity by itself
was associated with reduced cell proliferation and survival of NSCLC cell
lines. Moreover, co-administration with Cisplatin and AURKA siRNA
resulted in sustained DNA double strand breaks and more pronounced
apoptosis. The combination of AURKA inhibitor (MLN8237) with Cisplatin
similarly led to enhanced DNA damage. Similar effects were observed with
radiation concomitant with inhibition of Aurora A. Furthermore, MLN8237
induced marked apoptosis in the p53 mutant cell line, PC9, whereas more
senescence was noted in p53 wild type A549 cells.

CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates a significant role for Aurora Kinase A
as a common modulator of p53-dependent resistance in the context of
DNA-damaging platinum and radiation therapy. Aurora A inhibition can
potentially improve the efficacy of these common treatment modalities in
lung cancer management.


