Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A prospective study of dietary polyunsaturated fatty acid intakes
and lung cancer risk.


Background. Animal studies have shown that polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) have antineoplastic and anti-inflammatory properties. Results
from epidemiologic studies, however, have been inconclusive. We
prospectively evaluated the association of dietary PUFA intakes and lung
cancer risk in two population-based cohort studies, the Shanghai Men’s
Health Study (SMHS) and Shanghai Women’s Health Study (SWHS).

Methods. A total of 130,823 study participants (i.e., 60,427 men and
70,396 women) were included in the current analysis. Dietary fatty acid
intakes were derived from data collected at the baseline by validated
food frequency questionnaires. Cox proportional hazards model was applied
to assess the association between PUFAs intake and lung cancer risk with
adjustment for age, smoking status, smoking packs-year (men only),
drinking status, BMI, physical activity status, total energy, red meat
intake, vegetable intake, vitamin supplemental use, menopausal status and
hormone replacement therapy (women only).

Results. We found an inverse association between total PUFA intakes and
lung cancer risk [hazard ratios (HRs) and respective 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for quintiles 2, 3, 4, and 5 versus quintile 1 were 0.73
(0.56-0.95), 0.78 (0.59-1.03), 0.64 (0.47-0.87) and 0.55 (0.37-0.82) in
SMHS and 0.69 (0.53-0.90), 0.76 (0.58-0.99), 0.60 (0.44-0.81), and 0.53
(0.36-0.79) in SWHS)]. A similar pattern was observed for consumption of
linoleic acid, total n-6 PUFAs and the ratio n-6 PUFAs/n-3 PUFAs in
adenocarcinoma patients. This inverse association was more likely in male
ever-smokers for total PUFAs, linoleic acid and total n-6 PUFAs. On the
other hand, EPA intake was positively associated with lung cancer risk in
female never-smokers [HRs and 95% CIs: 1.10 (0.85-1.42), 1.36
(1.05-1.77), 1.28 (0.97-1.88) and 1.30 (0.97-1.74), for quintiles 2-5
versus quintile 1]. A similar positive association between DHA intake and
lung cancer risk in female never-smokers was also observed.

Conclusions. Total polyunsaturated fatty acid, linoleic and total n-6
PUFA intakes were associated with decreased risk of lung cancer. EPA and
DHA intakes were associated with an increased risk of lung cancer among
female never-smokers.

Financial Support: This work was supported by grants from the US National
Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute (R37 CA070867 and UM1
CA182910 - to Wei Zheng; R01 CA082729, UM1 CA173640 and R25 CA160056 - to
Xiao-Ou Shu)


