Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adiposity, change in adiposity during adulthood and mammographic
density in premenopausal women.


Background: Body mass index (BMI) is inversely associated with
mammographic density among postmenopausal women, but few studies have
evaluated this in premenopausal women. Further, there is limited data on
the associations of weight change during adulthood with mammographic
density. To address these, we investigated the associations of current
adiposity measures, BMI at ages 18, 30, and changes in BMI at these age
periods with volumetric mammographic density measures in 314
premenopausal women who underwent screening mammogram at the Breast
Health Center, Washington University in St. Louis, MO.

Methods: Study participants completed a questionnaire with information on
breast cancer risk factors. Weight at ages 18 and 30 were self-reported.
Current weight, height, waist, and body fat percent (%), were assessed by
trained research personnel. BMIs were calculated as weight at each
age/current height squared (kg/m2). We calculated weight change from; (i)
age 18 to 30, (ii) age 18 to current age, (iii) age 30 to current age.
Volpara was used to determine volumetric mammographic density measures.
We investigated age-adjusted correlations between adiposity measures and
mammographic density measures using Pearson correlation coefficients. We
used multivariable linear regression models (adjusted for age, age at
menarche, parity, age at each birth, family history of breast cancer,
race, and education) to evaluate the associations of adiposity measures
with mammographic density measures.

Results: All adiposity and weight change measures were significantly
inversely associated with percent density (PD), and positively associated
with breast volume (BV). The strongest inverse correlations with PD were
observed for body fat % (r= -0.68, PResults: All adiposity and weight
change measures were significantly inversely associated with percent
density (PD), and positively associated with breast volume (BV). The
strongest inverse correlations with PD were observed for body fat % (r=
-0.68, P<0.001), and waist (r= -62, PResults: All adiposity and weight
change measures were significantly inversely associated with percent
density (PD), and positively associated with breast volume (BV). The
strongest inverse correlations with PD were observed for body fat % (r=
-0.68, P<0.001), and waist (r= -62, P<0.001). For BV, the strongest
positive correlations were observed for waist r=0.75, PResults: All
adiposity and weight change measures were significantly inversely
associated with percent density (PD), and positively associated with
breast volume (BV). The strongest inverse correlations with PD were
observed for body fat % (r= -0.68, P<0.001), and waist (r= -62, P<0.001).
For BV, the strongest positive correlations were observed for waist
r=0.75, P<0.001) and current BMI (r=0.76, PResults: All adiposity and
weight change measures were significantly inversely associated with
percent density (PD), and positively associated with breast volume (BV).
The strongest inverse correlations with PD were observed for body fat %
(r= -0.68, P<0.001), and waist (r= -62, P<0.001). For BV, the strongest
positive correlations were observed for waist r=0.75, P<0.001) and
current BMI (r=0.76, P<0.001). In multivariable regression models, body
fat % had the strongest association with PD (beta coefficient (ß)=
-0.50, PResults: All adiposity and weight change measures were
significantly inversely associated with percent density (PD), and
positively associated with breast volume (BV). The strongest inverse
correlations with PD were observed for body fat % (r= -0.68, P<0.001),
and waist (r= -62, P<0.001). For BV, the strongest positive correlations
were observed for waist r=0.75, P<0.001) and current BMI (r=0.76,
P<0.001). In multivariable regression models, body fat % had the
strongest association with PD (beta coefficient (ß)= -0.50, P<0.001).
BMI during the three time points were each inversely associated with PD,
with BMI at age 18 having the largest beta coefficient (ß= - 0.50,
PResults: All adiposity and weight change measures were significantly
inversely associated with percent density (PD), and positively associated
with breast volume (BV). The strongest inverse correlations with PD were
observed for body fat % (r= -0.68, P<0.001), and waist (r= -62, P<0.001).
For BV, the strongest positive correlations were observed for waist
r=0.75, P<0.001) and current BMI (r=0.76, P<0.001). In multivariable
regression models, body fat % had the strongest association with PD (beta
coefficient (ß)= -0.50, P<0.001). BMI during the three time points were
each inversely associated with PD, with BMI at age 18 having the largest
beta coefficient (ß= - 0.50, P<0.001) compared with current BMI (ß=
-0.45, PResults: All adiposity and weight change measures were
significantly inversely associated with percent density (PD), and
positively associated with breast volume (BV). The strongest inverse
correlations with PD were observed for body fat % (r= -0.68, P<0.001),
and waist (r= -62, P<0.001). For BV, the strongest positive correlations
were observed for waist r=0.75, P<0.001) and current BMI (r=0.76,
P<0.001). In multivariable regression models, body fat % had the
strongest association with PD (beta coefficient (ß)= -0.50, P<0.001).
BMI during the three time points were each inversely associated with PD,
with BMI at age 18 having the largest beta coefficient (ß= - 0.50,
P<0.001) compared with current BMI (ß= -0.45, P<0.001) and BMI at age 30
(ß= - 40, PResults: All adiposity and weight change measures were
significantly inversely associated with percent density (PD), and
positively associated with breast volume (BV). The strongest inverse
correlations with PD were observed for body fat % (r= -0.68, P<0.001),
and waist (r= -62, P<0.001). For BV, the strongest positive correlations
were observed for waist r=0.75, P<0.001) and current BMI (r=0.76,
P<0.001). In multivariable regression models, body fat % had the
strongest association with PD (beta coefficient (ß)= -0.50, P<0.001).
BMI during the three time points were each inversely associated with PD,
with BMI at age 18 having the largest beta coefficient (ß= - 0.50,
P<0.001) compared with current BMI (ß= -0.45, P<0.001) and BMI at age 30
(ß= - 40, P<0.001). After controlling for BMI at age 18, weight gain at
all time periods was associated with a decrease in PD and an increase in
BV. The largest decrease in PD was observed for weight gain from age 18
to current age (ß= - 8.5, P25kg to those who had stable weight (gained
between 0-5kg) during this period.

Conclusions: Weight gain in early adulthood is associated with reductions
in PD and increases in BV in premenopausal women. Our findings highlight
the need for mechanistic studies focusing on early adulthood to provide a
better understanding of how adiposity relates to mammographic density,
and possibly breast cancer development in premenopausal women.


