Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation and expression of androgen receptor in Papillary
Thyroid Cancer.


Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC) accounts for the vast majority of thyroid
cancers and comprises more than 90% of neoplasms in the endocrine system.
In the last 30 years, the incidence and prevalence of PTC has
dramatically risen in developed countries, with a three-fold higher
incidence in women than in men. With an overall five-year survival rate
of 98.1%, early stage PTC has a favorable prognosis. However, PTC
exhibits increased aggressiveness with poor prognosis in men diagnosed
with the disease. These striking observations led us to explore the role
of androgen and androgen receptor (AR) in this disease. We found an
approximately 70% decrease in median AR RNA expression (pPapillary
Thyroid Cancer (PTC) accounts for the vast majority of thyroid cancers
and comprises more than 90% of neoplasms in the endocrine system. In the
last 30 years, the incidence and prevalence of PTC has dramatically risen
in developed countries, with a three-fold higher incidence in women than
in men. With an overall five-year survival rate of 98.1%, early stage PTC
has a favorable prognosis. However, PTC exhibits increased aggressiveness
with poor prognosis in men diagnosed with the disease. These striking
observations led us to explore the role of androgen and androgen receptor
(AR) in this disease. We found an approximately 70% decrease in median AR
RNA expression (p<0.0001) in 24 PTC patient tissue samples (from New York
Eye and Ear Infirmary), compared to matched, normal thyroid tissue. A
similar trend was also observed in about 500 PTC samples in the TCGA
database, compared with 60 normal thyroid samples. Methylation was
explored as a cause for the down-regulation of the AR mRNA in disease
pathogenesis, using in-silico methods such as Wanderer, a Maplab tool for
TCGA RNA data visualization, and MethylPlotter. A methylation pattern of
the AR gene, spanning 7 exons, was generated with 30 methylation sites
and, AR in PTC was found to be predominantly methylated at ten sites,
compared to matched normal thyroid tissue samples, in the TCGA. Patients
with ten or more hypermethylated sites on the AR gene in tumor tissue
exhibited a significant decrease in the AR RNA expression in the tumor,
versus matched normal thyroid tissue. Methylation of AR (10 or more
sites) was accompanied by a nine-fold reduction in AR expression in male
PTC, and a five-fold decrease in female PTC. This reduction was not
observed in hyper- or equally-methylated normal thyroid tissue. We
selected eleven methylation sites in the CpG islands that we predict are
essential for AR silencing, with four sites in the AR promoter region.
Additionally, we found AR gene-specific and global transcription
activators to be downregulated, and repressors up-regulated in the PTC
samples. The data adds importance to our previous studies showing
induction of senescence in AR-transfected PTC cells in culture, when AR
is stimulated with 5Î±-dihydrotestosterone. In conclusion, our study
demonstrates a fine regulation and differential expression of AR
associated with methylation, and highlights the significance of
epigenetic modifications in thyroid cancer progression.


