Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TRAF2 is required for the survival of ErbB2-transfored mammary
tumor cells.


TRAF2 regulates signaling pathways downstream of many members of the TNF
receptor superfamily, such as TNFR1 and CD40. Recently, we found that
TRAF2 also plays an important role in breast cancer cell survival under
conditions of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. It is known that TRAF2
knockout (KO) mice die within a week of birth and this lethality can be
rescued by KO of TNFα or TNFR1. In order to determine the role of TRAF2
in mammary tumor development and progression, we crossed MMTV-ErbB2 mice
(FVB) with TNF-/-/TRAF2-/+ mice (B6), and generated MMTV-ErbB2 (ErbB2),
MMTV-ErbB2-TNF-/- (ErbB2/T-KO) and MMTV-ErbB2-TNF-/-/TRAF2-/-
(ErbB2/T/T2-DKO) mice all in FVB/B6 mixed background. In 43 weeks, only 1
of 10 ErbB2/T/T2-DKO mice developed a mammary tumor, while 50% of ErbB2
and ErbB2/T-KO mice developed multiple and larger tumors in 30-32 weeks.
Interestingly, the tumor derived from the ErbB2/T/T2-DKO mice did not
show decreased cyclin D1 expression, nor the tumor cells cultured in
vitro show decreased NF-κB activation in response to RANKL. In addition,
ErbB2/T/T2-DKO cells formed mammospheres of similar appearance with that
of ErbB2 cells in HEMA-coated plates. However, after dispersion of the
mammospheres into single cells, ErbB2/T/T2-DKO cells formed dead cell
aggregates, while ErbB2 and ErbB2/T-KO cells formed secondary
mammospheres, suggesting that the self-renewal capacity of ErbB2/T/T2-DKO
cells is impaired. Mechanistic studies reveal that ErbB2/T/T2-DKO cells
are sensitive to death caused by ER stress but not by TRAIL or DNA
damage, and that this sensitivity is significantly inhibited by knockdown
of RIP1. Collectively, these findings suggest that TRAF2 plays a critical
role in mammary tumor development and progression by suppressing the
pro-death activity of RIP1, and that TRAF2 and RIP1 interaction could be
an attractive target for development of new anti-breast cancer drugs.


