Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic analogs of curcumin as modulators of multidrug
resistance-linked ABC transporters.


Cancer patients often develop resistance to anticancer drugs. ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporter-mediated drug efflux is one of the mechanisms
responsible for development of resistance to anticancer drugs. The
present study investigates the use of curcumin, a natural product and a
dietary constituent of turmeric, which inhibits the function of three ABC
drug transporters including ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2. However, limited
bioavailability of curcumin prevents its use for modulation of the
function of these transporters in the clinic. We focused on curcumin
analogs that were synthesized at Tohoku University and have been shown to
exhibit higher bioavailability than natural curcumin to test whether the
synthetic analogs also inhibit the function of ABC drug transporters. To
investigate this, KB-V1 and K562/BCRP cell lines overexpressing ABCB1 and
ABCG2 were used for the experiments. For these studies, we screened
nineteen synthetic analogs of curcumin for their effect on the transport
function of ABCB1 and ABCG2 by flow cytometry. Four curcumin analogs,
GO-Y030, GO-Y078, GO-Y168 and GO-Y172 inhibited efflux of mitoxantrone
mediated by ABCG2 and sensitized ABCG2-expressing K562 leukemic cells to
the anticancer drug, SN-38 in cell toxicity assays. Some of the curcumin
analogs (GO-Y030, GO-Y078, GO-Y172) stimulated ATPase activity of ABCG2
at nanomolar concentrations (EC50 = 480 ± 0.06, 790 ± 0.10, 930 ± 0.12
nM). In addition, GO-Y030, GO-Y078, GO-Y168, GO-Y172 analogs also
inhibited photolabeling of ABCG2 in MCF-7-FL plasma membranes with
iodoarylazidoprazosin, which is transported by this transporter. These
data demonstrate that similar to curcumin, synthetic curcumin analogs
also interact at the drug-binding pocket of ABCG2. In aggregate, these
results suggest that non-toxic synthetic curcumin analogs with increased
bioavailability may be useful to reverse ABCG2-mediated resistance to
anticancer agents.


