Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resveratrol and piceatannol synergistically induce PDL1 expression.


The interaction of programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) and its ligand
programed cell death-1 ligand (PD-L1) is a major focus of recent immune
oncology therapy efforts. The expression of PD-1 on T lymphocytes and its
subsequent interaction with PD-L1, either from antigen presenting or
tumor cells, will result in apoptosis-dependent inactivation of the T
lymphocytes. This interaction plays an integral role in tumor immunology,
specifically augmenting immune evasion. Relatively little is known about
the regulation of PD-L1 in either the tumor or normal environment. We
investigated the ability of natural dietary compounds to induce PD-L1
expression on normal epithelial cells and various cancer cell lines.
These molecules have been evolutionary selected to control inflammation
and cancer cell transformation and progression, understanding their
mechanism of action could be important to understanding how this system
works. Using flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry, we focused our
studies on resveratrol and its metabolite piceatannol, key phytochemicals
extracted from grapes, after an initial screen of various natural
products. Experimental data showed that both compounds can individually
up-regulate the expression of PD-L1 on tumor cell lines and normal
epithelial cells, by an IFN-Î³-independent mechanism. PD-L1 induction by
both of these compounds was higher in tumor than in normal epithelium,
suggesting greater significance in tumor regulation than inflammation.
Additionally, the combination of resveratrol and piceatannol acted
synergistically, leading to a significantly greater induction of PD-L1
expression across multiple tumor indications. Understanding whether
resveratrol and piceatannol use a common signaling pathway to induce
PD-L1 expression in tumor cells, was critical to understand the
synergistic induction observed. Studies utilizing specific inhibition of
IKK phosphorylation were accompanied by a significant reduction in the
ability to induce PD-L1 expression on tumor cells, either as single
agents or in combination. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that induction of PD-L1 by resveratrol or piceatannol, or
their combination involves molecular determinants down-stream of NF-kB
signaling.


