Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The lung microenvironment promotes stem-like phenotype and
behavior of breast cancer cells.


Ninety percent of breast cancer-related mortalities result from
metastasis, a process whereby the primary tumour disseminates and targets
distant secondary organs. We have previously demonstrated that stem-like
breast cancer cells expressing high levels of aldehyde dehydrogenase
(ALDH) and CD44 are critical for metastasis. These ALDHhiCD44+ cells
preferentially migrate and/or metastasize to the lung and bone
microenvironments, where secondary tumours can severely impede organ
function. However, the specific role of the lung and bone marrow (BM)
microenvironments in supporting and/or promoting metastasis of
ALDHhiCD44+ cells remains poorly understood, and this is the purpose of
the current study. Using a 2D ex vivo model, lung and bone marrow (BM)
conditioned media (CM) enriched in tissue-specific soluble proteins were
generated from murine tissues and utilized in cell culture to assess
their ability to influence the stem-like phenotype and behavior of
MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cells. Exposure to lung-CM promoted the
generation of a viable, non-adherent (“floating”) breast cancer cell
subpopulation that was not observed in response to BM-CM or basal media
(pNinety percent of breast cancer-related mortalities result from
metastasis, a process whereby the primary tumour disseminates and targets
distant secondary organs. We have previously demonstrated that stem-like
breast cancer cells expressing high levels of aldehyde dehydrogenase
(ALDH) and CD44 are critical for metastasis. These ALDHhiCD44+ cells
preferentially migrate and/or metastasize to the lung and bone
microenvironments, where secondary tumours can severely impede organ
function. However, the specific role of the lung and bone marrow (BM)
microenvironments in supporting and/or promoting metastasis of
ALDHhiCD44+ cells remains poorly understood, and this is the purpose of
the current study. Using a 2D ex vivo model, lung and bone marrow (BM)
conditioned media (CM) enriched in tissue-specific soluble proteins were
generated from murine tissues and utilized in cell culture to assess
their ability to influence the stem-like phenotype and behavior of
MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cells. Exposure to lung-CM promoted the
generation of a viable, non-adherent (“floating”) breast cancer cell
subpopulation that was not observed in response to BM-CM or basal media
(p<0.05). Phenotypic analysis by flow cytometry and gene expression
analysis by RT-qPCR revealed notable differences in ALDH/CD44 phenotype
in whole cell populations, adherent subpopulations, and/or non-adherent
subpopulations in response to 72 hour exposure to lung-CM relative to
basal media. In particular, the non-adherent breast cancer cell
subpopulation generated in response to lung-CM demonstrated increased
CD44 and ALDH1A3 gene expression and decreased ALDH1A1 gene expression
relative to the adherent subpopulation (pNinety percent of breast
cancer-related mortalities result from metastasis, a process whereby the
primary tumour disseminates and targets distant secondary organs. We have
previously demonstrated that stem-like breast cancer cells expressing
high levels of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and CD44 are critical for
metastasis. These ALDHhiCD44+ cells preferentially migrate and/or
metastasize to the lung and bone microenvironments, where secondary
tumours can severely impede organ function. However, the specific role of
the lung and bone marrow (BM) microenvironments in supporting and/or
promoting metastasis of ALDHhiCD44+ cells remains poorly understood, and
this is the purpose of the current study. Using a 2D ex vivo model, lung
and bone marrow (BM) conditioned media (CM) enriched in tissue-specific
soluble proteins were generated from murine tissues and utilized in cell
culture to assess their ability to influence the stem-like phenotype and
behavior of MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cells. Exposure to lung-CM
promoted the generation of a viable, non-adherent (“floating”) breast
cancer cell subpopulation that was not observed in response to BM-CM or
basal media (p<0.05). Phenotypic analysis by flow cytometry and gene
expression analysis by RT-qPCR revealed notable differences in ALDH/CD44
phenotype in whole cell populations, adherent subpopulations, and/or
non-adherent subpopulations in response to 72 hour exposure to lung-CM
relative to basal media. In particular, the non-adherent breast cancer
cell subpopulation generated in response to lung-CM demonstrated
increased CD44 and ALDH1A3 gene expression and decreased ALDH1A1 gene
expression relative to the adherent subpopulation (p<0.05). No
significant phenotypic or gene expression differences were observed in
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells in response to BM-CM. Taken together with
our previous studies, these findings suggest that while both the lung and
bone microenvironments support breast cancer cells with a pre-existing
ALDHhiCD44+ phenotype, the lung microenvironment may additionally help to
even further promote stem-like phenotype and behavior in the secondary
metastatic site. Ongoing studies are aimed at elucidating the mechanisms
by which aggressive ALDHhiCD44+ breast cancer cells interact with and/or
are influenced by the lung microenvironment during metastatic progression.


