Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylation changes in DNA of CD8 T cells following CD137
costimulation.


Introduction: CD137 ligation imprints long term changes in the behavior
of costimulated T-cells (1). There is not a satisfactory mechanistic
explanation yet.

Experimental procedures: to determine the specific DNA methylation
changes occurring upon CD137 costimulation, purified human CD8+ T cells
from three healthy donors were activated in vitro for 5 days with
anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody and either with an anti-CD137 monoclonal
antibody or its corresponding isotype (huIgG4). Activated lymphocytes
were left 5 days in culture with huIL-7 without further stimulation. Such
back-to-resting CD8+ lymphocytes were reestimulated with anti-CD3 for 12,
24 and 36h to validate the expression of the genes differentially
methylated upon primary stimulation at mRNA and protein levels.

DNA methylation profiles of both activated and resting cell subsets were
characterized with Infinium 450K DNA methylation array (Illumina). To
further confirm our observations, identical experimental procedure was
performed with a different anti-CD137 agonist antibody (mIgG1 isotype) in
a CD8+ T-cell donor.

Differentially methylated genes between anti-CD3+anti-CD137 versus their
corresponding control counterparts were validated by pyrosequencing on
activated and resting CD8+ from independent group of healthy donors (n=8
for hIgG anti-CD137 and n= 11 for mIgG anti-CD137). Expression changes
were confirmed by qRT-PCR and flow cytometry in activated, rested and
reestimulated CD8+ lymphocytes.

Results: 853 genes were differentially methylated in hIgG4
anti-CD137-treated CD8+ T cells as compared with their controls, 52 of
which were shared with mIgG1 anti-CD137-costimulated CD8+ T lymphocytes.
A number of differentially methylated genes are involved in i) T cell
migration, ii) T cell activation, survival and homeostasis and iii)
regulation of gene expression including key T-cell transcription factors.

Conclusions: CD137 costimulation induces CD8+ T lymphocytes that are
poised to respond more effectively to a second antigen exposure. These
acquired functions are imprinted in the genomic DNA of the CD8+ T cells
by DNA methylation changes upon CD137 co-stimulation, and involve key
genes for CD8+ T cells.

References: 1.

Hendriks, J., Y. Xiao, J.W. Rossen, K.F. van der Sluijs, K. Sugamura, N.
Ishii, and J. Borst, During viral infection of the respiratory tract,
CD27, 4-1BB, and OX40 collectively determine formation of CD8+ memory T
cells and their capacity for secondary expansion. J Immunol 2005, 175: p.
1665-76.


