Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced dependence on lipid metabolism is a cellular adaptation
to acidic microenvironment.


Malignant tumors exhibit altered metabolism and consume higher levels of
glucose compared to surrounding normal tissue, resulting in highly acidic
microenvironment. Adaptation to acidic conditions is a pre-requisite for
tumor cells to survive and thrive and to out-compete the stroma into
which they invade. Acid adaptation is associated with chronic activation
of autophagy as well as redistribution of the lysosomal proteins to the
plasma membrane. These processes are major survival mechanisms adopted by
tumor cells under acidic conditions. We have also observed that under
acidic conditions, there is a rapid, reversible and robust increase in
the accumulation of cytoplasmic lipid droplets (adiposomes) in a panel of
breast cancer cells. Adiposomes are dynamic organelles that store neutral
lipids surrounded by a shell of proteins and a phospholipid monolayer.
Breast cancer cells when grown in acidic media accumulated adiposomes as
revealed by nile red and perilipin-2 staining followed by confocal
microscopy. The acid-induced lipogenic phenotype persists even when the
cells are grown in de-lipidated serum, indicating that the source of
lipids is de-novo and endogenous. When cells were treated with inhibitors
of fatty acid synthesis such as TOFA, an inhibitor of Acetyl CoA
Carboxylase or FAS inhibitor C75, adiposome formation at low pH was
attenuated. Inhibition of either lipid anabolic or catabolic pathways was
specifically cytotoxic in acid-adapted cells, but not in control cells
where the FAS inhibitor, C75, is selectively toxic under acidic
conditions. Additionally, when treated with etomoxir, an inhibitor of
carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1, the rate limiting step in
Î²eta-oxidation, acid adapted cells showed increased sensitivity. To
investigate the role of de novo fatty acid synthesis further, we employed
high resolution NMR spectroscopy to measure 13C enriched lactate
isotopomers following metabolism of D-[1,2-13C] glucose. These analyses
showed that glucose flux through the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) was
significantly (>2.5 fold) higher in low pH exposed cells, compared to
controls, representing a major shift in glucose metabolism from Embden
Meyerhof to PPP, which results in increased production of NADPH,
necessary for de novo lipid synthesis. Additional metabolic profiling
using the Seahorse XF revealed that cells at low pH had higher rates of
oxygen consumption (OCR) and that this was reversible. Further, we
investigated the role of various acid sensing G-protein coupled receptors
such as OGR1, TDAG8 and GPR4 in transducing the acid signal that results
in the accumulation of lipid droplets. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated depletion of
these receptors indicates that they might play a major role in inducing
adiposome accumulation under acidic conditions. Taken together, increased
dependence on lipid metabolism by cancer cells under acidic conditions
reveals novel therapeutic vulnerabilities.


