Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MTAP insufficiency promotes metastasis in lung cancer via
diminishing protein dimethylation.


Genome instability, metabolic switch, and activating metastasis are three
of the cancer hallmarks, which always collectively contribute to cancer
malignancy. We identified methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) as a
metastasis suppressor in a series isogenic lung cell lines with different
invasion ability by array CGH. Using siRNA silencing and ectopic
expression of MTAP, we found that MTAP not only inhibited invasion and
colony forming in vitro, but also reduced metastasis and tumorigenesis in
vivo. Clinically, patients with low MTAP expression associated with poor
overall survival and progression-free survival. Furthermore, the
metabolite analysis of clinical specimens showed that low MTAP expression
leads to MTA substrate accumulation and product decrease. MTA
accumulation in MTAP knockout cells reduced the level of symmetric
arginine dimethylation of proteins. By using LC/MS, we identified a novel
methyl-protein, whose level is elevated in MTAP knockout cells with the
depletion of symmetric arginine dimethylation. Functionally, the
unmethylated protein would be protected from proteolysis via caspase 3
cleavage. Moreover, the unmethylated mutant protein promoted migration
and invasion in vitro strongly than the wild-type one did. In conclusion,
we identify a novel marker in low MTAP expression or MTAP knockout cells,
providing a potential therapeutic candidate in lung adenocarcinoma.


