Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of the invasion and growth of human head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas via regulating STAT3 signaling and
miR-21/β-catenin axis with HJC0152.


Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is involved in
the tumor growth and metastasis of human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) and is therefore a target with therapeutic potential.
In this study, we show that HJC0152, a recently developed anticancer
agent and a STAT3 signaling inhibitor, exhibits promising antitumor
effects against HNSCC both in vitro and in vivo via inactivating STAT3
and downstream microRNA-21/β-catenin axis. HJC0152 treatment efficiently
suppressed HNSCC cell proliferation, arrested the cell cycle at the G0/G1
phase, induced apoptosis, and reduced cell invasion in both SCC25 and
CAL27 cell lines. Moreover, HJC0152 inhibited nuclear translocation of
phosphorylated STAT3 at Tyr705 and decreased VHL/β-catenin signaling
activity via regulation of microRNA-21. Loss-of-function of VHL
remarkably compromised the antitumor effect of HJC0152 in both cell
lines. In our SCC25-derived orthotopic mouse models, HJC0152 treatment
significantly abrogated STAT3/β-catenin expression in vivo, which
leading to a global decrease of tumor growth and invasion. With its
favorable aqueous solubility and oral bioavailability, HJC0152 holds the
potential to be translated into the clinic as a promising therapeutic
strategy for patients with HNSCC.


