Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elucidating the roles of antibody pharmacokinetics and maleimide
stability in the toxicology of antibody-drug conjugates.


Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) continue to emerge as effective
therapeutics in a variety of oncology indications, with two agents
currently approved and many more in late-stage clinical trials. These
ADCs employ drug-linkers that were developed many years ago, and are now
recognized to have properties that may adversely impact the activity and
toxicology of the ADCs prepared with them. Two such properties that are
now well appreciated are the reversibility of maleimide-based drug
conjugation, and the impact of drug conjugation on the pharmacokinetics
of the ADC. We recently reported advances in drug-linker design that
independently address both of these properties, resulting in the
irreversible conjugation of drugs which have minimal impact on antibody
pharmacokinetics, even at high levels of drug loading (Nature
Biotechnology 32, 1059-1062 (2014), Nature Biotechnology 33, 733-735
(2015)). We have now prepared drug-linkers of monomethylauristatin E
(MMAE) that orthogonally employ these features to enable a systematic
evaluation of the relative contributions of maleimide instability and
accelerated plasma clearance on the in vivo behavior of MMAE ADCs.
Biodistribution studies with these molecules have revealed that the
concentration of released MMAE in normal tissues is greatly impacted by
the rate of ADC clearance (fast clearance results in greater Cmax of free
drug), while stabilization of the maleimide has a relatively small
effect. These differences in observed free drug concentrations were
paralleled in tolerability studies, with ADC clearance rates exerting a
greater impact on hematology parameters than maleimide stability.
Collectively, these results suggest that ADC pharmacokinetics dominate
the biodistribution and toxicology profiles for a given drug payload,
with conjugate stability playing a relatively minor role.


