Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased CCR4-positive regulatory T cells in biopsy specimen of
poor prognosis prostate cancer.


Introduction & Objective:

Regulatory T cells (Treg) play important roles in suppression of the
immune response, including anti-tumor immunity. C-C chemokine receptor 4
(CCR4) is highly expressed on effector Tregs, and the anti-CCR4 antibody
is attracting attention as a novel immunotherapeutic agent for solid
tumors. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the expression of
CCR4-positive Tregs in biopsy specimens of men with prostate cancer with
a poor prognosis and to estimate the clinical potential of CCR4-targeting
therapy for prostate cancer.

Material & Methods:

Data for 60 men diagnosed with prostate cancer based on transrectal
12-core systemic biopsy were retrospectively analyzed. They were divided
into two groups, a good prognosis group comprising men with no disease
progression during the observation period and a poor prognosis group
comprising men with progression to castration resistant prostate cancer.
In the biopsy cores, the core with the highest tumor volume was selected
for immunohistochemical evaluation. Tregs were evaluated using
immunohistochemistry with double staining using anti-forkhead box protein
3 (FOXP3) antibodies and anti-CCR4 antibodies. The number of CCR4+/-
FOXP3+ cells in the biopsy specimens were compared between the two
groups. Furthermore, the correlation between the number of CCR4+ FOXP3+
cells and clinical stage, PSA at diagnosis, and Gleason score were
evaluated.

Results:

The good prognosis group included 29 men and the poor prognosis group
included 31 men. Approximately 70-80% of FOXP3+ cells were positive for
CCR4. There was no significant difference in the ratio of number of CCR4+
FOXP3+ cells to the number of total FOXP3+ cells between the poor and
good prognosis groups. However, the total number of FOXP3+ cells
significantly increased in the poor prognosis group than in the good
prognosis group (200.1 ± 174.8 vs. 38.1 ± 38.1, p The good prognosis
group included 29 men and the poor prognosis group included 31 men.
Approximately 70-80% of FOXP3+ cells were positive for CCR4. There was no
significant difference in the ratio of number of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells to
the number of total FOXP3+ cells between the poor and good prognosis
groups. However, the total number of FOXP3+ cells significantly increased
in the poor prognosis group than in the good prognosis group (200.1 ±
174.8 vs. 38.1 ± 38.1, p < 0.01). Furthermore, the number of CCR4+
FOXP3+ cells significantly increased in the poor prognosis group than in
the good prognosis group (123.6 ± 99.1 vs. 58.88 ± 26.4, p The good
prognosis group included 29 men and the poor prognosis group included 31
men. Approximately 70-80% of FOXP3+ cells were positive for CCR4. There
was no significant difference in the ratio of number of CCR4+ FOXP3+
cells to the number of total FOXP3+ cells between the poor and good
prognosis groups. However, the total number of FOXP3+ cells significantly
increased in the poor prognosis group than in the good prognosis group
(200.1 ± 174.8 vs. 38.1 ± 38.1, p < 0.01). Furthermore, the number of
CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells significantly increased in the poor prognosis group
than in the good prognosis group (123.6 ± 99.1 vs. 58.88 ± 26.4, p <
0.01). The number of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells positively correlated with
clinical stage (ρ = 0.558, p The good prognosis group included 29 men
and the poor prognosis group included 31 men. Approximately 70-80% of
FOXP3+ cells were positive for CCR4. There was no significant difference
in the ratio of number of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells to the number of total
FOXP3+ cells between the poor and good prognosis groups. However, the
total number of FOXP3+ cells significantly increased in the poor
prognosis group than in the good prognosis group (200.1 ± 174.8 vs. 38.1
± 38.1, p < 0.01). Furthermore, the number of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells
significantly increased in the poor prognosis group than in the good
prognosis group (123.6 ± 99.1 vs. 58.88 ± 26.4, p < 0.01). The number
of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells positively correlated with clinical stage (ρ =
0.558, p < 0.001) and Gleason score (ρ = 0.458, p = 0.006) in prostate
cancer. However, there was no significant correlation between the number
of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells and PSA at diagnosis. The men with a lower number
of CCR4+ FOXP3+ cells had a significantly longer median survival time
than those with high expression (not reached vs. 69.0 months; p = 0.040).

Conclusions:

Our results suggest the clinical potential of CCR4-targeted therapy for
poor prognosis prostate cancer.


