Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of an in vitro model for the study of vasculogenic
mimicry in ovarian and gastrointestinal cancer cells.


Introduction: A key step in cancer progression is tumor irrigation. The
process of angiogenesis can be complemented in sub-sets of highly
aggressive cancers by the process of vasculogenic mimicry, which is the
formation of tubular structures by tumor cells. Herein, we sought to
establish an in vitro assay of vasculogenic mimicry and determine the
percentage of ovarian and gastrointestinal primary cultures capable of
undergoing this process.

Materials & Methods: Gastric cancer cell lines, AGS and Hs746T, and the
ovarian cancer cell lines SKOV-3 and HEY were used in conjunction with
gastrointestinal and ovarian primary cultured cancer cells extracted from
peritoneal fluid. Cells were seeded on matrigel and monitored for a week.
Hollow channels formation was evaluated by fluorescent dye
microinyection, periodic acid Schiff staining, confocal microscopy and
X-Ray microtomography (Micro-CT).

Results: SKOV-3, HEY and AGS cell lines underwent the process of
vasculogenic mimicry. Both confocal microscopy and Micro-CT
reconstruction were able to show the presence of a lumen of the
structures in 3D. In 22 primary cancer cultures (Ovarian, Colon and
Gastric) only 38% could underwent vasculogenic mimicry.

Discussion: We have standardized an in vitro assay to assay and quantify
vasculogenic mimicry. Regardless of origin, only a low percentage of
cultures have the ability to undergo vasculogenic mimicry. An
understanding of this process could shed light on new therapies for this
sub-set of highly aggressive cancers.

Funding: FONDECYT 1120292, 3150028 & 1140970. CORFO L2 13IDL2-18608, BMRC
13CTI 21526-P6, IMII P09/016-F, CONICYT-FONDAP #1513001


