Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel MIF signaling pathway drives the malignant character of
pancreatic cancer by targeting NR3C2.


Pancreatic cancers with aberrant expression of macrophage migration
inhibitory factor (MIF) are particularly aggressive. To identify key
signaling pathways that drive disease aggressiveness in tumors with high
MIF expression, we analyzed the expression of coding and noncoding genes
in high and low MIF-expressing tumors in multiple cohorts of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients. The key genes and pathways
identified were linked to patient survival and were mechanistically,
functionally, and clinically characterized using cell lines, a
genetically engineered mouse model, and PDAC patient cohorts. Here, we
report evidence of a novel MIF-driven signaling pathway that inhibits the
orphan nuclear receptor NR3C2, a previously undescribed tumor suppressor
that impacts aggressiveness and survival in PDAC. Mechanistically, MIF
upregulated miR-301b that targeted NR3C2 and suppressed its expression.
PDAC tumors expressing high levels of MIF displayed elevated levels of
miR-301b and reduced levels of NR3C2. In addition, reduced levels of
NR3C2 expression correlated with poorer survival in multiple independent
cohorts of PDAC patients. Functional analysis showed that NR3C2 inhibited
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and enhanced sensitivity to the
gemcitabine, a chemotherapeutic drug used in PDAC standard of care.
Furthermore, genetic deletion of MIF disrupted a MIF-mir-301b-NR3C2
signaling axis, reducing metastasis and prolonging survival in a
genetically engineered mouse model of PDAC. Taken together, our results
offer a preclinical proof of principle for candidate therapies to target
a newly described MIF-miR-301b-NR3C2 signaling axis for PDAC management.


