Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fractionated whole brain radiation-induced behavioral changes in
athymic nude mice is associated with sustained neuroinflammation and
microglial M1-phenotype.


The objective of this study is to study the late-chronic effects of
fractionated whole brain irradiation (fWBI) on cognitive impairment and
associated cellular and molecular neuro-inflammatory mechanisms using
clinically relevant and reliable mouse models. Microglia are recognized
as the primary innate immune component of neuroinflammation. However,
microglial contributions to radiation-induced cognitive impairment are
poorly understood. Here, an athymic nude (Nu/Nu) mouse model was employed
to address this issue. Mice were divided into two groups: radiation
treatment (XRT) and no-treatment control (CTL). The whole brain of each
XRT mouse received 30 Gy (3 Gy/fraction) of radiation over two weeks. XRT
and CTL mice were assessed for cognitive and behavioral changes at 1, 4,
and 6 months posttreatment using the novel object recognition test (for
long-term, non-spatial memory), the free running Y-Maze (for short-term,
spatial memory) and Barnes Maze (for spatial learning and memory). A
significant decline in novel object recognition in the XRT group (PThe
objective of this study is to study the late-chronic effects of
fractionated whole brain irradiation (fWBI) on cognitive impairment and
associated cellular and molecular neuro-inflammatory mechanisms using
clinically relevant and reliable mouse models. Microglia are recognized
as the primary innate immune component of neuroinflammation. However,
microglial contributions to radiation-induced cognitive impairment are
poorly understood. Here, an athymic nude (Nu/Nu) mouse model was employed
to address this issue. Mice were divided into two groups: radiation
treatment (XRT) and no-treatment control (CTL). The whole brain of each
XRT mouse received 30 Gy (3 Gy/fraction) of radiation over two weeks. XRT
and CTL mice were assessed for cognitive and behavioral changes at 1, 4,
and 6 months posttreatment using the novel object recognition test (for
long-term, non-spatial memory), the free running Y-Maze (for short-term,
spatial memory) and Barnes Maze (for spatial learning and memory). A
significant decline in novel object recognition in the XRT group (P<0.05)
was seen at the 4 month time point and continued to persist at 6 months
(PThe objective of this study is to study the late-chronic effects of
fractionated whole brain irradiation (fWBI) on cognitive impairment and
associated cellular and molecular neuro-inflammatory mechanisms using
clinically relevant and reliable mouse models. Microglia are recognized
as the primary innate immune component of neuroinflammation. However,
microglial contributions to radiation-induced cognitive impairment are
poorly understood. Here, an athymic nude (Nu/Nu) mouse model was employed
to address this issue. Mice were divided into two groups: radiation
treatment (XRT) and no-treatment control (CTL). The whole brain of each
XRT mouse received 30 Gy (3 Gy/fraction) of radiation over two weeks. XRT
and CTL mice were assessed for cognitive and behavioral changes at 1, 4,
and 6 months posttreatment using the novel object recognition test (for
long-term, non-spatial memory), the free running Y-Maze (for short-term,
spatial memory) and Barnes Maze (for spatial learning and memory). A
significant decline in novel object recognition in the XRT group (P<0.05)
was seen at the 4 month time point and continued to persist at 6 months
(P<0.05). No significant changes in the Barnes maze or Y-maze were seen
at these time points. Expression of neuroinflammatory mediator genes,
from both whole brain and isolated microglia, were measured by RT-PCR. We
found that markers of the M1-phenotype, which include TNF-α, and MHC II,
were significantly upregulated (PThe objective of this study is to study
the late-chronic effects of fractionated whole brain irradiation (fWBI)
on cognitive impairment and associated cellular and molecular
neuro-inflammatory mechanisms using clinically relevant and reliable
mouse models. Microglia are recognized as the primary innate immune
component of neuroinflammation. However, microglial contributions to
radiation-induced cognitive impairment are poorly understood. Here, an
athymic nude (Nu/Nu) mouse model was employed to address this issue. Mice
were divided into two groups: radiation treatment (XRT) and no-treatment
control (CTL). The whole brain of each XRT mouse received 30 Gy (3
Gy/fraction) of radiation over two weeks. XRT and CTL mice were assessed
for cognitive and behavioral changes at 1, 4, and 6 months posttreatment
using the novel object recognition test (for long-term, non-spatial
memory), the free running Y-Maze (for short-term, spatial memory) and
Barnes Maze (for spatial learning and memory). A significant decline in
novel object recognition in the XRT group (P<0.05) was seen at the 4
month time point and continued to persist at 6 months (P<0.05). No
significant changes in the Barnes maze or Y-maze were seen at these time
points. Expression of neuroinflammatory mediator genes, from both whole
brain and isolated microglia, were measured by RT-PCR. We found that
markers of the M1-phenotype, which include TNF-α, and MHC II, were
significantly upregulated (P<0.05) and markers of the general M2
Phenotype, which include IL-4ra, IL-10ra, and TGF-β, were downregulated
(PThe objective of this study is to study the late-chronic effects of
fractionated whole brain irradiation (fWBI) on cognitive impairment and
associated cellular and molecular neuro-inflammatory mechanisms using
clinically relevant and reliable mouse models. Microglia are recognized
as the primary innate immune component of neuroinflammation. However,
microglial contributions to radiation-induced cognitive impairment are
poorly understood. Here, an athymic nude (Nu/Nu) mouse model was employed
to address this issue. Mice were divided into two groups: radiation
treatment (XRT) and no-treatment control (CTL). The whole brain of each
XRT mouse received 30 Gy (3 Gy/fraction) of radiation over two weeks. XRT
and CTL mice were assessed for cognitive and behavioral changes at 1, 4,
and 6 months posttreatment using the novel object recognition test (for
long-term, non-spatial memory), the free running Y-Maze (for short-term,
spatial memory) and Barnes Maze (for spatial learning and memory). A
significant decline in novel object recognition in the XRT group (P<0.05)
was seen at the 4 month time point and continued to persist at 6 months
(P<0.05). No significant changes in the Barnes maze or Y-maze were seen
at these time points. Expression of neuroinflammatory mediator genes,
from both whole brain and isolated microglia, were measured by RT-PCR. We
found that markers of the M1-phenotype, which include TNF-α, and MHC II,
were significantly upregulated (P<0.05) and markers of the general M2
Phenotype, which include IL-4ra, IL-10ra, and TGF-β, were downregulated
(P<0.05) at 1 and 6 month time points. These results indicate that
sustained neuroinflammation and microglial M1-polarization are associated
with long-term cognitive impairment induced by fWBI. Radiotherapy is the
most prevalent treatment for primary and metastatic brain tumors. Whereas
previous studies that identified important mechanisms underlying
XRT-induced cognitive decline had used treatment regimens that were not
clinically relevant ones, we have employed a clinically relevant
fractionation scheme to address the cellular and molecular deregulations
in association with cognitive impairment.


