Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasion
in breast cancer cells by controlling miR-34a expression.


Breast cancer in advanced stages tends to develop metastases and / or
chemoresistance, in both cases therapeutic options are limited and have
low probability of success, which represents the biggest obstacle in
reducing mortality from this disease. There is a close connection between
the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) process of cancer cells and
the acquisition of invasive and metastatic ability. Numerous EMT
mediators have been described in cancer and among them miRNAs play a
fundamental role in regulating such process, suggesting that it could be
a therapeutic target to address this phenotype. Curcumin
(diferuloylmethane) is a derivative compound of Curcuma longa that has
therapeutic properties in various cancers as blocking initiation and
tumor progression through its anti-inflammatory, antioxidant,
proapoptotic, antiangiogenic and antimetastatic effects. The role of
curcumin on EMT in non-cancerous breast cells MCF-10F and in breast
cancer cell lines MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 was evaluated. This work shows
that in all these cell lines curcumin induced the expression of tumor
suppressor microRNA miR-34a and repressed the expression of several genes
involved in EMT and metastasis as Axl, Slug, Twist, N-cadherin, vimentin,
fibronectin, among others. Consequently, curcumin inhibited the migration
and invasiveness in these cells, irrespective of the expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors and p53 mutational status. Blockade
of miR-34a by transfection with antagomiR-34a inhibited the effect of
curcumin on EMT genes and on the migratory/invasive potential of cells
indicating that miR-34a plays a central role in the Curcumin-mediated
suppression of EMT and invasion. Therefore, results confirm the
suppressive effect of curcumin on EMT and invasion in breast cancer
cells, showing that such substance exerts this effect by inducing
expression of miRNA miR-34a and consequently the repression of several of
its target genes. Supported by Tarapac√° University, Arica, Chile (GMC).


