Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations of the lim protein ajuba mediate sensitivity of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma to treatment with cell cycle inhibitors.


The genomic alterations identified in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors have not resulted in any changes in clinical
care, making the development of biomarker-driven targeted therapy for
HNSCC a major translational gap in knowledge. To fill this gap, we used
59 molecularly characterized HNSCC cell lines and found that mutations of
AJUBA,SMAD4 and RAS predicted sensitivity and resistance to treatment
with inhibitors of polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), checkpoint kinases 1 and 2,
and WEE1. Inhibition or knockdown of PLK1 led to cell-cycle arrest at the
G2/M transition and apoptosis in sensitive cell lines and decreased tumor
growth in an orthotopic AJUBA-mutant HNSCC mouse model. AJUBA protein
expression was undetectable in most AJUBA-mutant HNSCC cell lines, and
total PLK1 protein expression was increased in cell lines wild-type for
AJUBA. Exogenous expression of wild-type AJUBA in an AJUBA-mutant cell
line partially rescued the phenotype of PLK1 inhibitor-induced apoptosis
and decreased PLK1 substrate inhibition, suggesting a threshold effect in
which higher drug doses are required to affect PLK1 substrate inhibition.
PLK1 inhibition was an effective therapy for HNSCC in vitro and in vivo.
However, biomarkers to guide such therapy are lacking. We identified
AJUBA, SMAD4 and RAS mutations as potential candidate biomarkers of
response of HNSCC to treatment with these mitotic inhibitors.


