Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Musashi-2 (MSI2) regulation of ERBB family proteins in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).


The purpose of this study is to establish whether a new signaling axis we
recently described can be targeted to improve patient survival in lung
cancer, one of the leading causes of death worldwide, with over 1.6
million deaths annually. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most
common form of lung cancer. A small number of targeted therapies have
been shown to be useful in lung cancer, including inhibitors of EGFR, but
these are typically only active in a subset of tumors that maintain
epithelial characteristics. Musashi-2 (MSI2), an RNA-binding protein that
regulates mRNA translation, has been linked to maintenance of a stem cell
state in multiple hematologic and solid tumor malignancies. We recently
established (Kudinov et al, PNAS 2016, PMID:27274057) that MSI2 is
elevated in a subset of NSCLC tumor upon progression and drives NSCLC
metastasis, in part based on activity supporting a TGF-beta/SMAD3/claudin
signaling cascade that enhances epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Using reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis of MSI2-depleted versus
control KrasLA1/+;P53R172HÎ”G/+ murine NSCLC cell line models identified
a significant 2.7-fold upregulation of HER3 upon MSI2 depletion. Negative
MSI2-dependent regulation of ERBB3 protein expression was confirmed in
multiple additional murine and human KRAS-dependent NSCLC models, based
on analysis of MSI2 depletion or overexpression. In contrast, MSI2
positively regulated expression of the EGFR/ERBB1 protein in the same
models. In detailed analysis, we have addressed the mechanism by which
MSI2 regulates expression of the ERBB group of receptor tyrosine kinases.
In addition, these data suggested the hypothesis that MSI2 expression
might predict response to EGFR-targeted inhibitors, and that dual
targeting of MSI2 and EGFR might be therapeutically valuable. We will
present data on the activity of EGFR inhibitors in the context of
depleted or elevated MSI2 expression, and the effect of combining
inhibition of EGFR with recently developed MSI2 inhibitors. In summary,
these results for the first time indicate a role of MSI2 in supporting
EGFR expression in NSCLC and suggest that MSI2 may drive NSCLC
development and progression in part via EGFR, and may modulate response
to EGFR-targeted agents.


