Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KRAS-mediated therapeutic resistance abrogates immunogenic cell
death in colorectal cancer cells.


A hallmark of cancer is compromised immune surveillance, which is
characterized by failure of the immune system to recognize
tumor-associated antigens and specifically eliminate malignant cells. A
number of studies showed the tumor microenvironment in colorectal cancer
(CRC) patients is highly immunosuppressive. Conventional chemotherapy and
recent targeted therapy can restore anti-tumor immune response through
induction of immunogenic cell death (ICD) in tumor cells. However, the
mechanism and functional role of ICD in CRC treatment remains vague. In
this study, we found FOLFIRI (Leucovorin/5-Fluorouracil/Irinotecan)
combined with the anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab, a commonly used regimen
for CRC treatment, induces death of CRC cells with characteristics of
necroptosis, including ATP depletion, release of HMGB1, and
phosphorylation of RIP3 and MLKL. Cells subjected to the combination
treatment exhibited features of ICD including plasma membrane exposure of
calreticulin and phagocytosis by dendritic cells. We identified the
BH3-only Bcl-2 family protein PUMA as a key mediator of necroptosis
induced by the combination treatment in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore,
we found that CRC cells with acquired cetuximab resistance due to KRAS
mutation or amplification are deficient in ICD. Collectively, our results
suggest that oncogenic mutations cause resistance of CRC cells to
anticancer therapies in part by suppressing ICD.


