Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100A11 is a prominent therapeutic target in malignant pleural
mesothelioma.


[Background & Purpose] Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an
aggressive tumor arising from the mesothelial cells that show a serious
malignancy in thoracic cavity with a median survival time of 9-12 months.
The therapeutic approaches in clinical standard are limited to surgery
and chemotherapy for early and advanced stages, respectively. The
strategies unfortunately provide only palliation, thus further advanced
approach is required. S100A11, a Ca2+-binding small protein with two
EF-hands, is frequently upregulated in various human cancer tissues. It
has been reported that S100A11 plays an important role in progression of
many cancers derived from thyroid, ovarian and lung tissues, but its
roles and signature in MPM are poorly understood. In this study, we
investigated the impact of S100A11 in MPM cell lines and resected tumors.

[Material & Methods] We explored the expression of S100A11 in 7 MPM cell
lines (HP-1, H28, MSTO-211H, H2052, H290, H2452, and YUMC44) and 2 normal
mesothelial cell lines (Met-5A and LP-9). We analyzed the effect of
S100A11 on cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, invasion and
downstream signaling. The efficacy of anti-S100A11 antibody on cell
proliferation and downstream signaling was also determined.

[Results] We found that S100A11 protein was consistently upregulated in 7
MPM cell lines at a significant level in comparison to 2 normal
mesothelial cells. The same phenomenon was also confirmed in MPM tissue
sections by immunohistochemistry, i.e., S100A11 was strongly stained at
MPM cells, but not at surrounding normal lung cells. Specific knockdown
of S100A11 by small interfering RNA turned the aggressive cells into the
attenuated phenotypes for proliferation, invasion and migration. Those
were notably observed in both 2 MPM cell lines (H2052 and H2452).
Interestingly, we found that MPM cell lines but not normal cells actively
secreted the S100A11 protein. To pursue this, we next tried to inhibit
the function of the secreted S100A11. Administration of S100A11
neutralizing antibody significantly inhibited the proliferation of 4 MPM
cell lines (H2052, H2452, H28, and H290). The antibody had no effect on
the proliferation of only one MPM cell line, MSTO-211H, which showed no
secretion of S100A11. Taken together, these results suggest that S100A11
secreted from MPM cells can be a prominent target for effective MPM
therapy.

[Conclusion] Our results suggest that S100A11 is a possible therapeutic
target in MPM.


