Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TG02 induces cell cycle arrest in glioblastoma.


Dysregulated cell cycle contributes to the limitless replicative
potential of cancer cells. The cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and
cyclins, the CDK-regulatory proteins are the key cell cycle machinery and
can be targets for cancer therapy. TG02, a pyrimidine-based multi-kinase
inhibitor has an anti-glioma effect which was demonstrated by our
previous studies. An in vitro kinase spectrum assay of TG02 demonstrated
inhibitory effects in several CDKs at the nanomolar level. To further
investigate the molecular mechanisms of TG02-induced cell cycle
regulation in glioma, a cell cycle analysis was performed by flow
cytometry using the Click-It Edu Flow Cytometric Assay Kit in GSC923 and
U251 cell lines, a human stem-like cell and patient derived cell line,
respectively. Protein expression of CDKs and cyclins was tested by
Western blotting. RNAseq analysis using Next Generation Sequencing was
performed (only GSC923) and followed by a supervised hierarchical
clustering analysis of cell cycle pathways that were derived from
Qiangenâ€™s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Our results showed that
TG02 treatment results in G2/M-phase arrest in glioma cell lines. The
protein expression of CDK1, CDK2, cyclin A2 and cyclinB1 are
downregulated in both TG02 treated cell lines. Additionally, RNAseq
analysis revealed downregulation of cyclins A2, B1 and B2 and significant
irregulation in mRNA expression of G2/M checkpoint and spindle formation
proteins, indicating G2 checkpoint and mitosis progression are also
affected by TG02. Taken together, we demonstrated that TG02 induced cell
cycle G2/M arrest through downregulating CDK and cyclin expression
signaling in the preclinical models of glioblastoma. These findings
strongly support the further investigation of TG02 as a potential therapy
for malignant gliomas.


