Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protein disulfide isomerase inhibitor XCE853 inhibits in
vitro, ex-vivo and in vivo growth of human tumors.


Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a chaperone protein that regulates
oxidative protein folding as well as cell viability. Increased PDI levels
have been documented in a variety of human cancers associated with a poor
overall survival, including ovarian, prostate, brain and lung cancers.
Inhibition of PDI activity leads to apoptosis in cancer, suggesting that
PDI is a promising druggable target. XCE853 is a synthetic small molecule
displaying an excellent docking with the catalytic domain of the human
PDI. XCE853 inhibits in vitro recombinant PDI enzymatic activity. In
addition, the proliferation of a large panel of human tumor cells is
blocked by XCE853 with IC50s in the nanomolar range through an
irreversible cytolysis leading to a tumor cell death by autophagy and
particles release (vesicles or protein aggregates). XCE853 is also active
on a large panel of drug resistant human cancer cells. XCE853 induced an
irreversible cytolysis of human tumor cells after a short in vitro
exposure independently of efflux pumps. In addition, the ex-vivo approach
using fresh human tumor explants cultivated in 3 dimensions with low
concentrations of XCE853 has shown a strong decrease of the proliferation
(KI-67 labeling) in several tumor types. Finally, XCE853 displayed
excellent oral bioavailability in mice and was able to block the growth
of several human cancers using in vivo xenograft models leading to a
complete tumor growth arrest even after the cessation of the treatment.
Altogether, these data strongly support further efforts to move this drug
candidate to the preclinical studies to access advanced cancer patients.


