Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin reduces colon cancer risk in patients with type 2
diabetes: a retrospective cohort analysis.


Background: The effect of metformin on colon cancer is rarely
investigated in Asian populations.

Methods: This is a retrospective cohort study. Patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes during 1999-2005 were recruited from Taiwanâ€™s
National Health Insurance. A 1:1 propensity score matched-pair sample of
16314 ever users and 16314 never users of metformin were followed until
December 31, 2011. Cox regression incorporated with the inverse
probability of treatment weighting using propensity score was used to
estimate hazard ratios.

Results: The incidence of colon cancer was 272.04 and 392.44 per 100,000
person-years, respectively, in ever and never users. The overall hazard
ratio (0.691, 95% confidence interval: 0.578-0.826) suggested a
significantly lower risk in metformin users. While compared to never
users, the hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) for the first (45.20
months) tertile of cumulative duration of metformin therapy was 1.455
(1.165-1.816), 0.683 (0.526-0.885) and 0.224 (0.152-0.331), respectively.
The protective effect of metformin on colon cancer was not affected by
the use of aspirin and statin or the infection of Helicobacter pylori in
additional analyses.

Conclusions: Metformin reduces colon cancer risk in patients with type 2
diabetes. The protective effect is more remarkable when the cumulative
duration is more than 20 months.


