Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibromodulin expression in human prostate cancer tissue:
Implications for prostate cancer progression.


Background: Fibromodulin is a small leucine-rich proteoglycan important
for extracellular matrix organization and essential for tissue repair in
multiple organs. Recently, differential expression of fibromodulin has
been shown in human prostate cancer cell lines with different cancer
phenotypes and in human prostate cancer tissue compared to normal/benign
tissue.

Methods: The protein expression level of fibromodulin was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry using a prostate tissue microarray (TMA),
constructed from archival radical prostatectomy and trans-urethral
prostatectomy tissue specimens, from patients with localized prostate
cancer (PCa). Stained sections from the donor blocks were evaluated, and
a representative area from PCa, high grade prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (HGPIN), proliferative inflammatory atrophy (PIA), and benign
prostate tissue (BPT) was included into the TMA. Staining for each lesion
was scored, using H-score, by microscopic assessment of the percentage of
epithelial cells with positive staining. H-score values were compared
between groups by ANOVA test, and p Methods: The protein expression level
of fibromodulin was analyzed by immunohistochemistry using a prostate
tissue microarray (TMA), constructed from archival radical prostatectomy
and trans-urethral prostatectomy tissue specimens, from patients with
localized prostate cancer (PCa). Stained sections from the donor blocks
were evaluated, and a representative area from PCa, high grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN), proliferative inflammatory atrophy
(PIA), and benign prostate tissue (BPT) was included into the TMA.
Staining for each lesion was scored, using H-score, by microscopic
assessment of the percentage of epithelial cells with positive staining.
H-score values were compared between groups by ANOVA test, and p < 0.05
was considered statistically significant. The Ethical Review Board of the
academic institution approved this study.

Results: Fibromodulin expression at protein level was evaluated in 378
cores representing PCa (143 cores), HGPIN (58), PIA (102), and BPT (78).
Mean fibromodulin expression in cores with PCa, HGPIN, and PIA was
significantly higher than mean of fibromodulin expression in normal
glands (pResults: Fibromodulin expression at protein level was evaluated
in 378 cores representing PCa (143 cores), HGPIN (58), PIA (102), and BPT
(78). Mean fibromodulin expression in cores with PCa, HGPIN, and PIA was
significantly higher than mean of fibromodulin expression in normal
glands (p<0.0001). There was a higher mean staining score in PCa (156,
95% CI:144â€“167), compared to HGPIN (131.4, 95% CI:109-153), PIA (128,
95% CI:117-138), and BPT (33.3, 95% CI:27-38). Thus, fibromodulin
expression increased across the PCa progression model.

Conclusions: The expression pattern of fibromodulin showed a significant
increase from benign prostate tissue through pre-cancerous lesions to
PCa. These findings suggest that this proteoglycan may be involved in the
process of prostate cancer progression, with low levels in pre-cancerous
lesions and higher levels in cancer tissue. Additional studies are
required to determine the biological role and potential clinical
implications of fibromodulin in prostate cancer.


