Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tonggyu-tang, a traditional Korean medicine, suppresses
inflammation, potential implications in tumor microenvironment.


The critical roles of inflammation in the development of cancer have long
been appreciated. A growing body of evidence supports the notion that
infiltrates of inflammatory cells into tumor microenvironment influence
the tumor progression by providing bioactive molecules including
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Importantly, the increased number of mast
cells within tumor microenvironment has been associated with a poor
survival in cancer patients. Moreover, keratinocyte inflammation is known
to be crucial for skin tumor development. The use of natural products to
reduce inflammation in tumor microenvironment is gaining an interest,
because of their reduced toxicity toward normal cells. In this study, we
tested the effects of Tonggyu-tang (TGT) which is composed of 14
different herbal extracts on the activity of mast cells. We found that
TGT significantly reduced the expression and production of inflammatory
cytokines such as IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α in PMA and ionomycin-
stimulated HMC-1 (human mast cell line-1). In an attempt to determine
molecular mechanism underlying the inhibitory effects of TGT on cytokine
expression, we revealed that TGT suppressed MAPK signaling pathway
including ERK, p38, and JNK as well as NF-κB pathway, which are known to
regulate inflammatory cytokine expression. Similar results were obtained
from the LPS-stimulated HaCaT cells, immortalized human keratinocytes.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that TGT suppresses inflammation
by inhibiting the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine in both mast
cells and keratinocytes, thereby potentially leading to inhibition of
tumor progression.


