Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Germline genetic signals across multiple aggressive prostate
cancer phenotypes.


Prostate cancer (PrCa) is documented to be highly heritable. But many
known prostate cancer loci are not associated with aggressive prostate
cancer phenotypes such as high-grade cancer or biochemical failure.
Previous efforts have been largely underpowered or not replicated.

We conducted a study of 6,321 men with PrCa and 5,663 controls of
European ancestry recruited from Kaiser Permanente (KP) matched by age
and self-reported race. Phenotype data combined patient-level
demographic, clinical, and tumor data from KP databases with data from
1994 to 2016. High-grade PrCa was defined using Gleason score: low-grade
defined as ≤ 7 (3+4), high-grade defined as ≥ 7 (4+3). Biochemical
failure was defined for cases using post-treatment prostate specific
antigen (PSA) values: post-surgery failure if PSA ≥ 0.4 ng/mL;
post-radiation failure if PSA value ≥ 2 ng/mL + nadir; and no failure
if PSA did not reach specified threshold. Early-onset disease was defined
as age We conducted a study of 6,321 men with PrCa and 5,663 controls of
European ancestry recruited from Kaiser Permanente (KP) matched by age
and self-reported race. Phenotype data combined patient-level
demographic, clinical, and tumor data from KP databases with data from
1994 to 2016. High-grade PrCa was defined using Gleason score: low-grade
defined as ≤ 7 (3+4), high-grade defined as ≥ 7 (4+3). Biochemical
failure was defined for cases using post-treatment prostate specific
antigen (PSA) values: post-surgery failure if PSA ≥ 0.4 ng/mL;
post-radiation failure if PSA value ≥ 2 ng/mL + nadir; and no failure
if PSA did not reach specified threshold. Early-onset disease was defined
as age < 55 years at diagnosis. Men were genotyped for over 650,000 SNPs
using an ethnic-specific Affymetrix Axiom array and imputed to 1000
Genomes. We tested genetic associations for multiple aggressive
phenotypes (410 early-onset cases, 1324 biochemical failure cases, and
886 high grade cases) in both a case-only (e.g., high vs. low grade) and
case-control (e.g., high grade vs. no prostate cancer controls) analysis
using logistic regression adjusting for ancestry principal components,
age, BMI, and kit for batch effects. PrCa specific mortality was too rare
to be evaluated.

We identified several known and novel loci. Case-control analyses
highlighted known prostate cancer loci at 8q24, 10q11, 11q13, 16q22, and
19q13. Previous reports of case-only analyses also identified 8q24, 20p13
and the gene, KLK3 in 19q13, to be associated with high-grade PrCa; we
confirmed these signals in our study. Previous family-based studies
identified 15q11 as a familial or early-onset prostate cancer locus.

These aggressive-specific variants could perform better in predicting
clinically actionable prostate cancers than variants for overall prostate
cancer and can improve the predictive ability of pre-diagnostic PSA.


