Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of matched pre and post cisplatin-treated muscle-invasive
bladder cancer reveals a candidate cisplatin mutational signature.


Background: Mutational signatures of exposure to DNA damaging agents such
as UV irradiation, tobacco, and temozolomide have been described; however
a cisplatin mutational signature has not been identified. We analyzed
mutational changes in matched pre- and post-cisplatin based neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NAC)-treated muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) samples
to identify a cisplatin mutational signature.

Methods: Whole exome sequencing and mutation calling was performed on
matched germline and pre- and post-cisplatin based NAC (MVAC and GC)
tumor samples from 46 MIBC patients with gross residual disease (â‰¥ pT2)
at cystectomy. After quality control, samples from 30 patients were
analyzed. For each tumor, we characterized single nucleotide mutations
(C>A, C>T, C>G, T>A, T>C, T>G) within a tri-nucleotide context, and used
an optimized non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to discover
signatures of mutational processes in pre-NAC tumors, post-NAC tumors,
and among mutations unique to the post-NAC samples.

We compared our discovered signatures to previously described human
mutational signatures and to a signature of cisplatin exposure in a DT40
(chicken lymphoblast) cell line (normalized for a human exome context).
We also performed strand asymmetry analysis to search for evidence of
transcription-coupled repair.

Results: In both pre and post-NAC tumors we identified mutational
signatures matching those attributed to APOBEC activity and nucleotide
excision repair pathway defects, consistent with past studies in MIBC. In
post-NAC tumors we identified an additional novel mutational signature,
with modest overall cosine similarity (0.61) to the DT40 cisplatin
signature, but similar C>A and T>A motifs. There was a strong correlation
in inferred mutational activity (Pearson R = 0.98) when we replaced the
novel signature with the DT40 signature in the post-NAC tumors, which was
highly unlikely to be due to chance (p A (p = 0.00025) and T>A (p =
4.2e-06) motifs with depletion of coding strand mutations, consistent
with transcription coupled repair of platinum crosslinks at GpG and ApG
motifs in the non-coding strand. Finally, we were able to rediscover the
novel signature when limiting analyses to mutations unique to post-NAC
tumors, consistent with mutational activity during chemotherapy.

Conclusions: Analysis of matched pre- and post- cisplatin treated MIBC
identified a novel signature in post-cisplatin treated samples that (1)
has mutational activity similar to a preclinical cisplatin mutational
signature; (2) has a transcription strand bias consistent with known
repair characteristics of platinum-induced DNA damage; and (3) arises in
tumors following cisplatin chemotherapy. This may represent a
cisplatin-induced mutational signature in human tumors.


