Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bexarotene activates type 1 antigen presenting cells, increases
tumor infiltrating CD8 T-cells, and augments the anti-tumor activity of
chemotherapy in breast cancer.


Bexarotene is an oral rexinoic receptor (RXR) agonist that has
anti-proliferative activity in breast cancer. RXRs are nuclear receptors
that heterodimerize, including with the retinoic acid receptor (RAR), to
activate transcription for processes including cellular differentiation,
embryonic development, proliferation, and metabolism. We have
demonstrated that bexarotene can enhance cancer vaccine efficacy by
synergizing with a multi-antigen vaccine to prevent breast cancer in the
TgMMTV-neu model. Bexarotene as a single agent increased CD8 T-cell tumor
infiltration. We therefore questioned the mechanism by which bexarotene
acted as an immunomodulatory drug.

Evaluating RXR expression in human peripheral blood monocytes (PBMC)
(n=10), we found that RXR is not expressed in NK T-cells or B-cells and
in only a minority of CD4+ (5.1 ± 4%) and CD8+ T-cells (3.6 ± 3%). RXR,
however, is expressed in 24.9±13% of macrophages, 38.6 ± 14% of
plasmacytic dendritic cells (pDC), and 33.1 ± 16% of monocytic dendritic
cells (mDC). PMBC treated with increasing doses of bexarotene for 48
hours had increased co-stimulatory CD40 expression on mDC (p=0.0011
between 0 and 20 uM bexarotene) and increased type 1 cytokine release
including IL-1β (p=0.03 between 0 and 20 uM bexarotene) and TNFα
(p=0.02 between 0 and 20 uM bexarotene) but not type 2 cytokine release
of IL-10 (p=0.21) and IL-4 (p=0.5). These data demonstrate that
bexarotene can activate type 1 dendritic cells

Since activated type 1 dendritic cells are effective at presenting tumor
antigens from dying tumor cells, we wanted to determine if bexarotene
could increase type 1 immunity in the tumor and thereby enhance the
efficacy of paclitaxel chemotherapy. In TgMMTV-neu mice with 100 mm3
established spontaneous tumors (n=5), 50 mg/kg bexarotene inhibited tumor
growth by 49% and increased the influx of intratumoral CD8+ T-cells by
61% as compared to PBS treated mice (p=0.01). 10 mg/kg paclitaxel
inhibited tumor growth by 57% and increased intratumoral CD8+ T-cells by
45% as compared to PBS treated mice (p=0.003). Paclitaxel and bexarotene
together inhibited tumor growth by 83% (p=0.02 compared to bexarotene or
paclitaxel alone) and increased intratumoral CD8+ T-cell infiltrate by
58% as compared to PBS treated mice (p=0.01). Bexarotene could both
activate type 1 APC and increase the CD8 T-cell infiltrate in the tumor
and enhance the efficacy of paclitaxel. These data suggest concurrent
adminstration of immunomodulatory bexarotene with paclitaxel may result
in augmentation of the anti-tumor activity of chemotherapy in breast
cancer.


