Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deficient NOXA in HER2-amplified breast cancer drives kinase
inhibitor resistance.


The purpose of this study is the development of a novel combination
therapy that targets HER2-amplified breast cancer. About one quarter of
breast cancers harbor amplification of HER2. HER2 is a transmembrane
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) belonging to the ERBB family of receptors
(ERBB1-4). Upon hetero- and homo-dimerization, HER2 activates several key
intracellular pathways, regulating many cellular functions including
proliferation and survival. HER2 inhibitors (HER2i) (e.g. the receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibitor, lapatinib) are now part of standard care
for treating HER2-amplified breast cancers. However, despite their
anti-cancer benefit, these drugs have limited efficacy as monotherapies,
which contrasts to other RTK inhibitors in other RTK-driven cancers. To
better understand this apparent dichotomy, in the present study, we
evaluated potential modifiers of HER2i therapy. Here, we found that the
pro-apoptotic NOXA, a member of the B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL2) family
which acts mainly via inhibitory binding of the pro-survival MCL-1, was
markedly down-regulated in breast cancers compared to other cancers, and
this was largely attributed to the HER2-amplified subset. Experimentally,
overexpressing NOXA or silencing MCL-1 dramatically sensitizes HER2
amplified breast cancer cell lines to lapatinib via apoptosis.
Consistently, pharmaceutical inhibition of MCL-1 sensitizes
HER2-amplified breast cancers to lapatinib in vitro and in vivo.
Mechanistically, disruption of MCL-1:BIM complexes and MCL-1:BAK underlie
dual HER2i/MCL-1i therapy. Therefore, deficient NOXA expression
constitutes a bonafide apoptotic block in HER2 amplified breast cancers,
contributes to mitigated HER2i responses, and presents a rational
combination therapy that may improve HER2i responses.


