Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF-ß insensitive PSMA-specific CD8+ T cells derived from
metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (MCRPC) patients enhance
the tumor killing ability.


Introduction: Manufacturing tumor specific CD8+ T cells has been an
obstacle for developing prostate cancer (PCa) immunotherapies for men
with MCRPC. We report a highly efficient method to expand human TGF-ß
insensitivity PSMA-specific CD8+ T cells from MCRPC patients using a FDA
approved Cell Processing Work Station (CPWS, Panasonic). Methods:
Peripheral blood CD8+ T cells were collected from men with MCRPC by
leukapheresis, and cultured in CPWS in TexMACSTM medium with CD-3
Biotin/CD28/Anti-Biotin Beads, 5% human serum, and IL-2. We developed a
TβRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ1 chimeric T cell receptor retroviral construct using
an anti-PSMA IgTCR(ζ) gene (PZ1) and a dominant negative TGF-ß type II
receptor (TßRIIDN), that could induce CD8+ T cells to be PSMA reactive
and insensitive to TGF-ß. PC-3 cells (PSMA negative) or PSMA positive
PC-3-PSMA cells (PSMA positive) were exposed to TGF-ß and used as target
cells. Cytotoxicity assays were performed by LDH/NADH analysis (target
cells: CD8+ T cells at 1:20, 1:50 and 1:100 respectively). Live
interactions between CD8+ T cells and PCa cells was recorded by Nikon
BiostationIMQ. Apoptosis of PCa was evaluated by immunofluorescence
staining for Annexin V and 7-Amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD) respectively.
Results: On Day 0, 2x106 CD8 T cells were placed in culture, infected
with TßRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 on Day 8, and expanded 96 fold (1.92x108) by
Day 36. The cellular expansion plateaued by Day 40 (1.95x108), when the
ratios of CD8+ (95.2%), CD45+ (96.6%) and CD3+ (97.2%) were maintained.
The cells strongly expressed PZ1 and TK gene (71.1%), and p-SMAD2 was
inhibited 95%. Under TGF-ß treatment for 7 days, the growth of infected
CD8+ T cells was not significantly changed, while the naïve CD8+ T
control cells were suppressed by 44.8%. PC3-PSMA cells released 25.64 and
4.19 nmol/50ul/105 NADH when co-cultured with infected CD8+ T cells or
with naïve CD8+ T cells respectively (pIntroduction: Manufacturing tumor
specific CD8+ T cells has been an obstacle for developing prostate cancer
(PCa) immunotherapies for men with MCRPC. We report a highly efficient
method to expand human TGF-ß insensitivity PSMA-specific CD8+ T cells
from MCRPC patients using a FDA approved Cell Processing Work Station
(CPWS, Panasonic). Methods: Peripheral blood CD8+ T cells were collected
from men with MCRPC by leukapheresis, and cultured in CPWS in TexMACSTM
medium with CD-3 Biotin/CD28/Anti-Biotin Beads, 5% human serum, and IL-2.
We developed a TβRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ1 chimeric T cell receptor retroviral
construct using an anti-PSMA IgTCR(ζ) gene (PZ1) and a dominant negative
TGF-ß type II receptor (TßRIIDN), that could induce CD8+ T cells to be
PSMA reactive and insensitive to TGF-ß. PC-3 cells (PSMA negative) or
PSMA positive PC-3-PSMA cells (PSMA positive) were exposed to TGF-ß and
used as target cells. Cytotoxicity assays were performed by LDH/NADH
analysis (target cells: CD8+ T cells at 1:20, 1:50 and 1:100
respectively). Live interactions between CD8+ T cells and PCa cells was
recorded by Nikon BiostationIMQ. Apoptosis of PCa was evaluated by
immunofluorescence staining for Annexin V and 7-Amino-actinomycin D
(7-AAD) respectively. Results: On Day 0, 2x106 CD8 T cells were placed in
culture, infected with TßRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 on Day 8, and expanded 96
fold (1.92x108) by Day 36. The cellular expansion plateaued by Day 40
(1.95x108), when the ratios of CD8+ (95.2%), CD45+ (96.6%) and CD3+
(97.2%) were maintained. The cells strongly expressed PZ1 and TK gene
(71.1%), and p-SMAD2 was inhibited 95%. Under TGF-ß treatment for 7
days, the growth of infected CD8+ T cells was not significantly changed,
while the naïve CD8+ T control cells were suppressed by 44.8%. PC3-PSMA
cells released 25.64 and 4.19 nmol/50ul/105 NADH when co-cultured with
infected CD8+ T cells or with naïve CD8+ T cells respectively (p<0.05).
There was no significant difference when PC3 cells were co-cultured with
infected CD8+ T cells (7.35) or naïve CD8+ T cells (7.59). Infected CD8+
T cells induced 32.0% and 13.7% expression of Annexin V in PC3-PSMA and
PC3 cells respectively, while naïve CD8+ T cells induced only 6.9% in
both groups (pIntroduction: Manufacturing tumor specific CD8+ T cells has
been an obstacle for developing prostate cancer (PCa) immunotherapies for
men with MCRPC. We report a highly efficient method to expand human
TGF-ß insensitivity PSMA-specific CD8+ T cells from MCRPC patients using
a FDA approved Cell Processing Work Station (CPWS, Panasonic). Methods:
Peripheral blood CD8+ T cells were collected from men with MCRPC by
leukapheresis, and cultured in CPWS in TexMACSTM medium with CD-3
Biotin/CD28/Anti-Biotin Beads, 5% human serum, and IL-2. We developed a
TβRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ1 chimeric T cell receptor retroviral construct using
an anti-PSMA IgTCR(ζ) gene (PZ1) and a dominant negative TGF-ß type II
receptor (TßRIIDN), that could induce CD8+ T cells to be PSMA reactive
and insensitive to TGF-ß. PC-3 cells (PSMA negative) or PSMA positive
PC-3-PSMA cells (PSMA positive) were exposed to TGF-ß and used as target
cells. Cytotoxicity assays were performed by LDH/NADH analysis (target
cells: CD8+ T cells at 1:20, 1:50 and 1:100 respectively). Live
interactions between CD8+ T cells and PCa cells was recorded by Nikon
BiostationIMQ. Apoptosis of PCa was evaluated by immunofluorescence
staining for Annexin V and 7-Amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD) respectively.
Results: On Day 0, 2x106 CD8 T cells were placed in culture, infected
with TßRIIDN-TK-IRES-PZ-1 on Day 8, and expanded 96 fold (1.92x108) by
Day 36. The cellular expansion plateaued by Day 40 (1.95x108), when the
ratios of CD8+ (95.2%), CD45+ (96.6%) and CD3+ (97.2%) were maintained.
The cells strongly expressed PZ1 and TK gene (71.1%), and p-SMAD2 was
inhibited 95%. Under TGF-ß treatment for 7 days, the growth of infected
CD8+ T cells was not significantly changed, while the naïve CD8+ T
control cells were suppressed by 44.8%. PC3-PSMA cells released 25.64 and
4.19 nmol/50ul/105 NADH when co-cultured with infected CD8+ T cells or
with naïve CD8+ T cells respectively (p<0.05). There was no significant
difference when PC3 cells were co-cultured with infected CD8+ T cells
(7.35) or naïve CD8+ T cells (7.59). Infected CD8+ T cells induced 32.0%
and 13.7% expression of Annexin V in PC3-PSMA and PC3 cells respectively,
while naïve CD8+ T cells induced only 6.9% in both groups (p<0.05).
Furthermore, Infected CD8+ T cells induced significant higher expression
of 7-AAD in PC3-PSMA (0.688%) compared to naïve CD8+ T cells treatment
(0.03%). There were close interactions between infected CD8+ T cells and
PC3-PSMA, which was not observed in other groups. Conclusion: Our study
supports expansion and retroviral infection generating TGF-ß insensitive
PSMA-specific CD8+ T cells ex-vivo within 4 weeks in CPWS without any
exogenous specific stimulation signal. These cells can enhance the PSMA
expressed PCa killing ability and escape the inhibition by tumor secreted
TGF-ß, which have a potential to overcome many of the current barriers
of immunotherapies for men with MCRPC.


