Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oral microbiome and prospective risk for esophageal cancer: A
population-based nested case-control study.


Background: The two most common types of esophageal cancer, esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC) and squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), are highly
fatal. The human microbiota have been suggested to play a role in
esophageal cancer etiology, although the evidence is limited to small,
cross-sectional studies. We hypothesized that the oral microbiota, which
shape the esophageal microbiota, may be causative agents in esophageal
carcinogenesis.

Methods: We conducted a prospective study nested in two large U.S.
cohorts: ACS CPS-II and NCI-PLCO. Oral bacteria were assessed in
pre-diagnostic mouth-wash samples collected from cases and controls
(n=81/160 EAC and n=25/50 ESCC cases/matched controls), using 16S rRNA
gene sequencing. We compared overall microbial composition between cases
and controls using permutational multivariate analysis of variance
(PERMANOVA) of UniFrac distances, and we examined associations between
centered log-ratio transformed taxon abundances and cancer risk using
conditional logistic regression. Metagenome functional content was
predicted from taxonomic composition using PiCRUST.

Results: Overall microbial composition did not differ between EAC cases
and matched controls or ESCC cases and matched controls, adjusting for
matching factors (age, sex, race, cohort, time to diagnosis/selection),
BMI, smoking, and alcohol intake (all p>0.40). The periodontal pathogens
Tannerella forsythia and Porphyromonas gingivalis were nominally
associated with increased risk for EAC (OR [95% CI] = 1.21 [1.01, 1.46],
p=0.04) and ESCC (OR [95% CI] = 1.3 [0.96, 1.77], p=0.09), respectively.
Conversely, genus Neisseria, previously shown to be depleted by cigarette
smoking, was associated with protection against EAC (OR [95% CI] = 0.88
[0.8, 0.97], p=0.01). Other species associated with EAC risk (pResults:
Overall microbial composition did not differ between EAC cases and
matched controls or ESCC cases and matched controls, adjusting for
matching factors (age, sex, race, cohort, time to diagnosis/selection),
BMI, smoking, and alcohol intake (all p>0.40). The periodontal pathogens
Tannerella forsythia and Porphyromonas gingivalis were nominally
associated with increased risk for EAC (OR [95% CI] = 1.21 [1.01, 1.46],
p=0.04) and ESCC (OR [95% CI] = 1.3 [0.96, 1.77], p=0.09), respectively.
Conversely, genus Neisseria, previously shown to be depleted by cigarette
smoking, was associated with protection against EAC (OR [95% CI] = 0.88
[0.8, 0.97], p=0.01). Other species associated with EAC risk (p<0.05)
included Corynebacterium durum, Prevotella nanceiensis, and Streptococcus
pneumoniae (inversely associated with EAC), and Actinomyces cardiffensis,
Selenomonas oral taxon 134, and Veillonella oral taxon 917 (positively
associated with EAC). Other species associated with ESCC risk (pResults:
Overall microbial composition did not differ between EAC cases and
matched controls or ESCC cases and matched controls, adjusting for
matching factors (age, sex, race, cohort, time to diagnosis/selection),
BMI, smoking, and alcohol intake (all p>0.40). The periodontal pathogens
Tannerella forsythia and Porphyromonas gingivalis were nominally
associated with increased risk for EAC (OR [95% CI] = 1.21 [1.01, 1.46],
p=0.04) and ESCC (OR [95% CI] = 1.3 [0.96, 1.77], p=0.09), respectively.
Conversely, genus Neisseria, previously shown to be depleted by cigarette
smoking, was associated with protection against EAC (OR [95% CI] = 0.88
[0.8, 0.97], p=0.01). Other species associated with EAC risk (p<0.05)
included Corynebacterium durum, Prevotella nanceiensis, and Streptococcus
pneumoniae (inversely associated with EAC), and Actinomyces cardiffensis,
Selenomonas oral taxon 134, and Veillonella oral taxon 917 (positively
associated with EAC). Other species associated with ESCC risk (p<0.05)
included Aggregatibacter paraphrophilus (inversely associated with ESCC)
and Prevotella nanceiensis, Bergeyella oral taxon 322, and Neisseria
weaveri (positively associated with ESCC). Analysis of inferred
metagenomes revealed that bacterial carotenoid biosynthesis was
associated with protection against EAC (OR [95% CI] = 0.84 [0.7, 1.0],
p=0.05).

Conclusions: Our findings from this prospective study suggest that
specific bacterial pathogens may play a causal role in esophageal cancer,
while members of the healthy oral microbiota may protect against
carcinogenesis. Unique microbial profiles may contribute to each of the
distinct esophageal cancer types, EAC and ESCC. Oral microbiota
manipulation may be a future strategy for preventing this highly fatal
disease.


