Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptide-cleavable maytansinoid (ADCs) induce high bystander
killing leading to improved anti-tumor activity in vivo.


Antibodies targeting surface antigens on cancer cells typically have
progressively lower access to tumor cells that are further removed from
blood vessels. Also, the antibody will not bind to cells in the tumor
mass that do not express antigen, including stromal cells of the tumor,
many of which reportedly aid in the survival or metastasis of cancer
cells.

ADCs can bind to antigen positive cancer cells, after which they are
internalized and catabolized to release one or more cytotoxic
metabolite(s) that can kill the targeted cell. Metabolites that are
membrane permeable may also diffuse into and kill neighboring cells,
often called bystander cells, that would normally be less accessible.

The goal of this work was to design ADCs that would have increased
bystander activity, which could result in greater killing of cancer cells
and stromal cells in the tumor environment. We have prepared a new type
of peptide-cleavable immolative ADC (PCI-ADC) that efficiently releases
membrane permeable cytotoxic maytansinoid metabolites upon cleavage of
the peptide linker, followed by immolation. Several PCI-ADCs were
prepared that release metabolites having different degrees of
hydrophobicity. As the hydrophobicity of the metabolite increased, the
PCI-ADCsâ€™ bystander activity also increased. The lead PCI-ADC generally
displayed a similar degree of in vitro cytotoxicity as maytansinoid ADCs
that utilize disulfide linkers, however the PCI-ADC induced significantly
more bystander killing. In mice bearing large tumor xenografts (250 mm3)
or tumor xenografts that express the target antigen heterogeneously,
PCI-ADCs were found to be more efficacious than maytansinoid ADCs that
use disulfide linkers, as well as our recently reported
peptide-para-anilino maytansinoid ADCs. The nature of the amino acid
residues in the peptide linker of the PCI-ADC was also altered so that
the tolerability of the ADCs in mice could be increased without impeding
efficacy.

In conclusion, we have developed a promising new type of maytansinoid
ADC, one that provides a high degree of bystander killing, improved
activity in homogeneous and heterogeneous tumor models in vivo, and has a
different mechanism of metabolite release than current maytansinoid based
ADCs.


