Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectins in glioblastoma: opportunities for combined therapy.


Background: Despite aggressive treatment, including surgical resection,
radiation and chemotherapy, over 90% of glioblastoma (GB) patients
experience tumor recurrence. This may be due to high migratory potential,
angiogenesis, molecular heterogeneity and a strong immunosuppressive
environment. GB expresses high levels of carbohydrate-binding galectin
proteins and histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity. The aim of this study
was: 1) identify the differential expressions of galectin 1-15 protein
levels in human GB patient samples as compared to normal tissue (obtained
from Institutional Tissue Bank) and (2) modulate the galectin functions
with and without a HDAC inhibitor (DATS: Dially Triisulfide and SAHA:
Suberoylanilide Hydroxamic Acid ) or bevacizumab in in vitro GB models.

Methods: The effects of TMZ, ionizing radiation, or combined
chemoradiation on galectin protein secretion and expression were assessed
in human GB cells and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).

Results: We found increased galectin-1 protein expression in human GB
tissue. We also observed that HUVEC co-culture with GB cells increased
galectin-1 protein expression by 14 - 20% following bevacizumab, and
conferred a bevacizumab protective benefit to GB cells. Our in vitro
models promisingly demonstrated that 72 hr treatments with 25 ÂµM of
galectin 1 inhibitor + HDAC inhibitor induce antitumor activity in GB
cells. Western blot and activities assay results also demonstrated that
combination blockade of HDAC activity and galectin-1 augmented apoptosis
in GB cells, which mechanistically involves activation of caspase-3 and
inhibition of anti-apoptotic protein (survivin, p-Akt, and Mcl-1
expression).

Conclusion: Our in vitro culture results suggest possible benefit in
combining a galectin inhibitor with an HDAC inhibitor in GB. Further
studies in different animal models are warranted.


