Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNAi-mediated β-catenin inhibition promotes T-cell infiltration
and anti-tumor activity in combination with immune checkpoint blockade.


Recent research strongly suggests an important role for Wnt/β-catenin
signaling in mediating cancer immune evasion and resistance to immune
checkpoint therapy, including anti-PD-1, anti-PD-L1, and anti CTLA-4
antibodies. The mechanism by which Wnt/β-catenin signaling causes
checkpoint resistance is believed to involve blocking of specific
cytokines which trigger immune cell recruitment to the tumor, resulting
in the phenomenon of T-cell exclusion and rendering the tumor to a
non-inflamed state. Inhibition of β-catenin may be an effective strategy
for increasing the low response rate to these effective medicines in
numerous cancer populations. DCR-BCAT is a potent and specific
chemically-optimized RNA interference (RNAi) trigger targeting CTNNB1,
the gene which encodes β-catenin, formulated in a tumor-selective EnCore
lipid nanoparticle. In syngeneic mouse tumor models, β-catenin
inhibition promoted T-cell infiltration and significantly improved the
sensitivity of the tumors to checkpoint inhibition. The combination of
DCR-BCAT and IO therapy yielded significant tumor growth inhibition
compared to monotherapy in B16F10 melanoma, 4T1 mammary carcinoma,
Neuro2A neuroblastoma and Renca renal adenocarcinoma. Importantly, a
significant increase in CD8+ T-cells after DCR-BCAT monotherapy was
observed in all models evaluated, including genetically-driven
spontaneous MMTV-Wnt1 tumors. These data support clinical development of
these combination approaches for this first-in-class RNAi therapeutic.


