Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased internalization and processing of the CD37-targeting
antibody-drug conjugate, naratuximab emtansine (IMGN529), in the presence
of rituximab leads to enhanced potency in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
models.


Naratuximab emtansine (IMGN529) is an investigational CD37-targeting
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) that has shown both preclinical and
clinical activity in DLBCL . We have shown that rituximab, an anti-CD20
monoclonal antibody, enhances the preclinical activity of IMGN529. The
combination of IMGN529 and rituximab is more active than either agent
alone, and this benefit is associated with an increase in apoptosis and
cell death, resulting in enhanced potency in DLBCL models. Efficacy of
ADCs, such as IMGN529, relies on the internalization, intracellular
trafficking and degradation of the ADC leading to the release of the
cytotoxic catabolite. To explore the mechanism underlying the enhanced
activity of the combination, we investigated the effect of rituximab
treatment on the binding, internalization and processing of IMGN529 in
vitro. To evaluate the effect on the internalization of IMGN529, DLBCL
cell lines were incubated with fluorescently-labeled K7153A antibody (the
CD37 targeting moiety of IMGN529) alone or in combination with rituximab
or a non-targeting control antibody. K7153A internalization was similar
whether incubated alone or with the non-targeting control. However, when
cells were co-incubated with K7153A and rituximab, the internalization of
K7153A significantly increased. This increase was also observed with
other anti-CD20 antibodies suggesting an anti-CD20 class effect.

Radiolabeled processing studies were performed to determine if the
observed increase in internalization led to a corresponding increase in
antibody degradation, which is required for the release of the cytotoxic
agent in IMGN529. By trace-labeling the K7153A antibody with tritiated
propionate (3H-K7153A), we were able to follow binding, uptake, and
degradation of the antibody component of IMGN529 in DLBCL cell lines.
Following pulse exposure, the amount of 3H-K7153A degraded after 24 hours
remained the same whether treated alone or in combination with other
B-cell targeting antibodies. However, when combined with rituximab the
percentage of degraded 3H-K7153A increased as much as 3-fold and a
similar increase of 3H catabolite was generated. When compared, the
combination of K7153A and rituximab produced considerably more catabolite
(~6-fold, p-value Radiolabeled processing studies were performed to
determine if the observed increase in internalization led to a
corresponding increase in antibody degradation, which is required for the
release of the cytotoxic agent in IMGN529. By trace-labeling the K7153A
antibody with tritiated propionate (3H-K7153A), we were able to follow
binding, uptake, and degradation of the antibody component of IMGN529 in
DLBCL cell lines. Following pulse exposure, the amount of 3H-K7153A
degraded after 24 hours remained the same whether treated alone or in
combination with other B-cell targeting antibodies. However, when
combined with rituximab the percentage of degraded 3H-K7153A increased as
much as 3-fold and a similar increase of 3H catabolite was generated.
When compared, the combination of K7153A and rituximab produced
considerably more catabolite (~6-fold, p-value <0.0001) than the
combination of rituximab and a CD19-targeting antibody.

These findings suggest a novel mechanism where the increased potency of
IMGN529 and rituximab can be explained by CD20 binding resulting in an
increase in internalization and degradation of IMGN529, leading to
generation of greater amounts of cytotoxic agent. Overall, these data
provide a biological rationale for the enhanced activity of the rituximab
plus IMGN529 combination, further supporting the clinical development
strategy of this combination in DLBCL.


