Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tamoxifen differentially regulates miR-29b-1 and miR-29a depending
on endocrine sensitivity in breast cancer.


Acquired endocrine-resistance occurs in ~ 40% of estrogen receptor α
(ERα)+ breast cancer patients after tamoxifen (TAM) or aromatase
inhibitor therapy. MicroRNAs (miRs) are dysregulated in breast cancer,
but their contribution to endocrine-resistance is not yet completely
understood. Microarray analysis of miRNAs in TAM-sensitive MCF-7 versus
TAM-resistant LY2 breast cancer cells (derived from MCF-7 cells)
identified differential regulation of miR-29b-1 and miR-29a. miR-29a and
miR-29b-1, which are co-transcribed as a single primary-miR, were
repressed by TAM in MCF-7 and stimulated by TAM in LY2 cells. We
confirmed these observations by real time qPCR in MCF-7 and LY2 cells and
observed that 4-OH-TAM (4-OHT) also downregulated miR-29b-1/a in LCC2 and
LCC9 endocrine-resistant cells. These changes were at the primary
transcriptional level. The role of these two miRs in endocrine-resistant
breast cancer is unknown. We tested the hypothesis that the
TAM-stimulated increase in miR-29b-1/a promotes endocrine-resistance by
downregulating targets that contribute to TAM’s
antiproliferative/pro-apoptotic activity. Our goals were to: 1) Determine
if ERα was responsible for TAM regulation of miR-29b-1/a expression; 2)
Determine the functional role(s) of miR-29b-1/a; 3) Identify specific
miR-29b-1/a target genes that are differentially regulated by 4-OHT in
MCF-7 versus LCC9 and LY2 cells. Knockdown of ERα blocked 4-OHT
inhibition of miR-29b-1/a in MCF-7 and 4-OHT simulation of miR-29-b-1/a
transcription in LCC9 and LY2 cells. Transient over-expression of
miR-29b-1/a inhibited proliferation of MCF-7, LCC9, and LY2 cells and
decreased migration and colony formation of LY2 cells. Repression of
miR-29b-1/a has no significant effect on MCF-7, LCC9, or LY2 cell
proliferation. Repression of miR-29-b-1/a did not sensitize the
TAM-resistant cells to growth inhibition by 4-OHT. We observed that the
bona fide miR-29 target gene, DICER1, was inhibited by 4-OHT in LY2 cells
and anti-miR29b-1 or anti-miR-29a decreased the suppression of DICER1 by
4-OHT. These data suggest that 4-OHT-ERα increases miR-29b-1/a which
target and downregulate DICER 1 in endocrine resistant breast cancer
cells. Future studies will identify other targets of miR-29b-1/a to
better understand the pathways leading to acquired endocrine resistance.


