Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of NSUN2 by DNA hypomethylation is associated with
metastatic progression in human breast cancer.


NSUN2 is a RNA methyltransferase that has been shown to be implicated in
development of human cancer. However, the functional role of NSUN2,
mechanism of NSUN2 overexpression and its association with
clinicopathologic features in breast cancer remain unclear. To
investigate alterations in the expression and functional role of NSUN2 in
breast cancer, NSUN2 expression was assessed in breast cancer cells and
tissues obtained from cancers at different American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC) stages, and its functions were investigated using breast
cancer cells. NSUN2 expression was shown to be significantly higher in
breast cancer cells and tissues than in normal breast epithelial cells
and tissues, at both mRNA and protein levels. Overexpression of NSUN2 was
shown to promote cell proliferation, migration, and invasion while NSUN2
knockdown inhibited these processes in vitro and in vivo. NSUN2
expression level was associated with the methylation level of its
promoter. Our results demonstrated that the overall expression of NSUN2
significantly correlated with clinical stage (P=0.027), tumor
classification (P=0.012), pathological differentiation (P=0.023), as well
as with the expression levels of estrogen receptor (PNSUN2 is a RNA
methyltransferase that has been shown to be implicated in development of
human cancer. However, the functional role of NSUN2, mechanism of NSUN2
overexpression and its association with clinicopathologic features in
breast cancer remain unclear. To investigate alterations in the
expression and functional role of NSUN2 in breast cancer, NSUN2
expression was assessed in breast cancer cells and tissues obtained from
cancers at different American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stages,
and its functions were investigated using breast cancer cells. NSUN2
expression was shown to be significantly higher in breast cancer cells
and tissues than in normal breast epithelial cells and tissues, at both
mRNA and protein levels. Overexpression of NSUN2 was shown to promote
cell proliferation, migration, and invasion while NSUN2 knockdown
inhibited these processes in vitro and in vivo. NSUN2 expression level
was associated with the methylation level of its promoter. Our results
demonstrated that the overall expression of NSUN2 significantly
correlated with clinical stage (P=0.027), tumor classification (P=0.012),
pathological differentiation (P=0.023), as well as with the expression
levels of estrogen receptor (P<0.001), progesterone receptor (P=0.001),
and Ki-67 (PNSUN2 is a RNA methyltransferase that has been shown to be
implicated in development of human cancer. However, the functional role
of NSUN2, mechanism of NSUN2 overexpression and its association with
clinicopathologic features in breast cancer remain unclear. To
investigate alterations in the expression and functional role of NSUN2 in
breast cancer, NSUN2 expression was assessed in breast cancer cells and
tissues obtained from cancers at different American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC) stages, and its functions were investigated using breast
cancer cells. NSUN2 expression was shown to be significantly higher in
breast cancer cells and tissues than in normal breast epithelial cells
and tissues, at both mRNA and protein levels. Overexpression of NSUN2 was
shown to promote cell proliferation, migration, and invasion while NSUN2
knockdown inhibited these processes in vitro and in vivo. NSUN2
expression level was associated with the methylation level of its
promoter. Our results demonstrated that the overall expression of NSUN2
significantly correlated with clinical stage (P=0.027), tumor
classification (P=0.012), pathological differentiation (P=0.023), as well
as with the expression levels of estrogen receptor (P<0.001),
progesterone receptor (P=0.001), and Ki-67 (P<0.001). Our findings
provide a unique insight into the roles and effects of NSUN2
overexpression in breast cancer cells, and highlight the necessity of the
investigation of novel therapeutic targets, such as NSUN2, for the
improvement of breast cancer treatments.


