Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor activity of the PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibitors alpelisib
(BYL719) and everolimus (RAD001) in xenograft models of acquired
resistance to CDK-4/6 targeted therapy.


The selective cyclin dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK-4/6) inhibitor,
palbociclib, has recently been approved in combination with
endocrine-based therapies for the treatment of advanced ER+/HER2- breast
cancer (BC). Despite the improvements in progression-free and overall
survivals, a significant number of patients on CDK-4/6 therapy will go on
to develop progressive disease. As such, it is critical to identify the
mechanisms by which tumor cells evade CDK-4/6 targeted therapy and to
develop therapeutic strategies to overcome resistance. In this study, we
evaluated the efficacy of a p110α-selective PI3K inhibitor, alpelisib
(BYL719) and the mTORC1 specific inhibitor, everolimus (RAD001), in
ER+/HER2- xenograft tumors conditioned in vitro and in vivo to acquire
resistance to combined palbociclib + endocrine-based therapy. The EFM19
(ER+/HER2-, PIK3CA mt), MDA134 (ER+/HER2-, PIK3CA wt), and MDA361
(ER+/HER2+, PIK3CA mt) BC cell lines were conditioned to acquire
palbociclib resistance through long-term culture in the presence of
increasing concentrations of drug. Baseline total/phosphoprotein levels
of over 280 cancer-associated analytes were measured in the parental and
resistant cell lines by Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA). In vivo
resistant models were developed from xenografts of the MCF7 and HCC1500
ER+ BC cell lines, treated until progression with palbociclib (75 mg/kg)
+ fulvestrant (5 mg/mse). EFM19-PR cells maintained palbociclib
resistance in vivo and were included in the xenograft studies. Resistance
to palbociclib was confirmed in vitro by a shift in growth inhibitory
IC50 from an average of less 50nM to over 1 µM. Significantly reduced Rb
and ER protein levels were detected in each of these palbociclib
resistant cell lines by RPPA. Cross-resistance to an alternative CDK-4/6
inhibitor (ribociclib) was found in in vitro studies. In addition,
switching treatment of the xenografts progressing on palbociclib +
fulvestrant to ribociclib (75mg/kg) + fulvestrant did not impact tumor
progression. However, when progressing tumors were switched to BYL719
(30mg/kg) + fulvestrant or RAD001 (10mg/kg) + fulvestrant, sustained
tumor regression was observed for over 45 days of treatment in every
model tested. The triplet combination of ribociclib + fulvestrant +
BYL719 or RAD001 provided marginal additional benefit over the doublet
combination of BYL719 or RAD001 + fulvestrant. RPPA analysis of xenograft
tissue collected from these studies will help to identify additional
molecular alterations involved in resistance to CDK-4/6 targeted therapy.
These preclinical data indicate that acquired resistance to CDK-4/6
inhibition occurs through a loss of dependence on Rb-signaling. However,
targeting an alternative pathway like PI3K/mTOR with molecules such as
BYL719 or RAD001 may be a viable strategy for further clinical
investigation.


