Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interrogation of small RNA-seq data for small noncoding RNA in
human colon cancer.


Genomic analysis of the human transcriptome has been made possible only
in last decade by next generation sequencing (NGS). Recent advancements
in NGS has further allowed us to look into small non-coding RNAs
(sncRNAs) such as microRNAs (miRNAs), Piwi-interacting-RNAs (piRNAs),
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) & small nuclear/nucleolar RNAs
(sn/snoRNAs). Recently, the roles of sncRNAs in biological processes have
been implicated in biomarker development for diagnosis, prognosis
&therapy. In the present study, 50 colon cancer patientâ€™s small RNA
sequencing raw data was downloaded from NIH bioproject (PRJNA266667; 7
TNM stage II & 43 TNM stage III) which contained 27 female & 23 male
samples. 24 samples had metachronous metastasis (MM) & 26
non-metachronous metastasis (NMM). The small RNA-seq data was analyzed
using PartekFlow. In depth analysis showed aberrant expression of 48
miRNAs (all upregulated) in TNM-III vs TNM-II specimens & 20 miRNAs (17
upregulated & 3 downregulated) in MM vs NMM. Further investigation of
dysregulated miRNA through pathway analysis confirmed that the majority
of the miRNAs were involved in cancer signaling pathways. Analysis of
piRNA found unusual expression of 60 piRNAs (57 upregulated & 3
downregulated) in TNM-III vs TNM-II & 31 piRNAs (28 upregulated & 3
downregulated) in MM vs NMM. Further analysis of long non-coding RNAs, we
found 77 lncRNAs were significantly expressed in TNM-III vs TNM-II &18
lncRNAs in MM vs NMM. We also, investigated small nuclear/nucleolar RNAs
(sn/snoRNAs), miscRNAs & mtRNAs, we identified 37 snRNAs, 105 snoRNAs, 28
miscRNAs & 5 mtRNAs in TNM-III vs TNM-II whereas 2 snRNAs, 11 snoRNAs, 57
miscRNAs & 8 mtRNAs in MM vs NMM were identified. In summary, our
comprehensive analysis on publicly available small RNA-seq data
identified multiple small non-coding RNAs that need to be further
explored for their use in the prognosis, diagnosis & therapy of colon
cancer.


