Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trans-ethnic HLA fine-mapping of the MHC region identified several
independent variants influencing susceptibility to lung cancer.


Background: Genetic variants within the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) are associated with lung cancer. However, debate persists about the
identity of the true causal variants, in part due to the broad linkage
disequilibrium (LD) characteristic of the MHC and to the complexity and
cost of complete HLA genotyping. Here, we assessed the role of the MHC in
modulating lung cancer risk in Asians and Europeans using a broad set of
HLA variants to detect the main alleles and the presence of independent
effects elsewhere in this genomic region.

Material and methods: Association between the HLA variants and risk of
lung cancer was examined in two collections of samples of different
ethnicity (18,686 cases / 15,190 controls and 2,324 cases / 1,646
controls of European and Asian ancestry, respectively). Using existing
genome-wide SNP data from the lung cancer OncoArray study, we imputed and
tested classical alleles and amino acid polymorphisms in HLA-A, HLA-B,
HLA-C, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DPA1 and HLA-DPB1, as well as
7,258 SNPs across the MHC. All the analyses were performed assuming an
additive genetic model adjusted for sex and principal components as
covariates. The study-wide significant threshold was p=6.03 x 10-6.

Results: Conditional, haplotype and stratified analyses identified two
independent HLA allele effects associated with lung cancer squamous cell
carcinoma in Europeans. One is HLA-DQB1*06 that showed a significant
protective effect (OR=0.85, 95%CI 0.80-0.90, p=3.05 x10-8). The other
effect is attributed to the long ancestral 8.1 haplotype (OR=1.30, 95%CI
1.18-1.42, p=4.78 x10-8), which contains class I and class II HLA alleles
(A*0101 - B*0801 - C*0701 - DRB1*0301 - DQB1*0201 - DQA1*0501). In
addition, single-amino-acid polymorphisms in HLA-B (at positions 9, 156,
163 and 178) and HLA-DRB1 (at positions 26, 71 and 74) located in
peptide-binding grooves, suggest these proteins as possible functional
contributors within the haplotype. In Asians, we observed two independent
HLA allele effects associated with lung adenocarcinoma : HLA-DQB1*0401
(OR=1.67, 95% CI 1.35-2.05, p=1.59 x10-6), and HLA-DRB1*0701(OR=1.62, 95%
CI 1.31-2.01, p=5.48 x10-6) as well as an intronic SNP in HLA-A
(rs2256919) (OR=0.75, 95% CI 0.67-0.83, p=1.75 x10-7).

Conclusions: We established an association between HLA haplotype 8.1 and
squamous lung cancer risk in Europeans. In contrast, in Asians we
observed associations only with class II HLA alleles and risk of lung
adenocarcinoma. We did not observed shared HLA alleles effects between
populations. This ethnic heterogeneity in classical HLA allelic
associations with lung cancer may be explained by allele frequency
differences between populations and also different exposures that
interact with HLA. Furthermore, our study illustrates the value of
high-resolution imputation for fine-mapping causal variants in the MHC.


