Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression and therapeutic implications of cyclin dependent kinase
4 (CDK4) in osteosarcoma.


Overexpression and/or hyperactivation of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4)
has been found in many types of human cancers, and a CDK4 specific
inhibitor, palbociclib, has been recently approved by the FDA for the
treatment of breast cancer. However, the expression and the therapeutic
potential of CDK4 in osteosarcoma remain unclear. In the present study,
CDK4 was found to be highly expressed in human osteosarcoma tissues and
cell lines as compared with normal human osteoblasts. Elevated CDK4
expression correlated with metastasis potential and poor prognosis in
osteosarcoma patients as determined by immunohistochemical analysis in a
human osteosarcoma tissue microarray (TMA). CDK4 inhibition by either
palbociclib or specific small interference RNA (siRNA) exhibited
dose-dependent inhibition of osteosarcoma cell proliferation and growth,
accompanied by suppression of the CDK4/6-cyclinD-Rb signaling pathway.
Flow cytometry analysis showed that CDK4 knockdown arrested osteosarcoma
cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle and induced cell apoptosis.
Furthermore, inhibition of CDK4 significantly decreased osteosarcoma cell
migration in vitro determined by the wound healing assay. These data
highlight that CDK4 may be a potential promising therapeutic target in
the treatment of human osteosarcoma.


