Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a novel cancer predisposition variant associated
with risk of CMM and other cancers.


Introduction: In a search for the responsible CMM predisposition
gene/variant, whole exome sequencing was performed on a pair of related
CMM cases (cousins) from an extended high-risk Utah CMM pedigree showing
evidence of linkage to chromosome band 1q41.

Methods: Standard bioinformatics tools were used to identify rare or
novel variants shared in the 2 related CMM cases in a CMM pedigree
showing 1q41 linkage. Sanger sequencing and a Taqman assay were used to
confirm the original variants, and to confirm segregation of the variant
in other cancer-affected relatives. Taqman assay of the variant in
independent Utah CMM cases (n=491) and controls (n=207) was performed.

Results: A novel variant in SLC30A10 (rs 550245711, Chr1q41:220091798 C-T
(G-A -strand) SLC30A10: NM_018713: exon3:c.G757A:p.V253M) was shared by
the 2 related CMM cases (cousins) in the 1q41 linked pedigree. A
combination of Sanger sequencing and Taqman assay in 5 additional related
CMM cases in the pedigree identified 4 who carried the variant. Two
untested pedigree-member parents of variant carriers (obligate carriers)
were diagnosed with cancer of another site. A combination of Sanger
sequencing and Taqman assay in 12 additional relatives diagnosed with
cancers of other sites (small intestine, thyroid, breast, bladder, and
endometrial) who ranged from closely (first degree), to distantly
(fifth-degree), related to a carrier CMM case identified 4 additional
cancer-affected carriers (small intestine, breast, and endometrial
cancers). None of 491 independent CMM cases or 207 controls was observed
to carry the variant. ExAc frequency for the variant in Non-Finnish
Europeans = 5/66,062. The Cosmic ID is COSM3710592 and the variant has
been confirmed as a somatic mutation in an oral squamous cell carcinoma.
The variant is predicted to be damaging in 7 out of 8 algorithms
considered, and has a GERP score of 6.08.

Conclusions: A novel variant in SLC30A10, an important and evolutionarily
conserved manganese and zinc transporter, was identified in a region of
linkage in an extended CMM high-risk pedigree. The variant is shared by 6
CMM cases, 2 stomach cancer cases, 1 small intestine cancer case, 2
breast cancer cases and 1 endometrial cancer case within a 5 generation
pedigree originally studied for a significant excess of CMM. Functional
validation studies are underway.


