Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prognostic significance of EGFR, HER-2, HER-4, EGFRvIII,
c-MET, Ki67 and CD44 in patients with FIGO stages III and IV ovarian
cancer.


Overexpression and activation of HER (human epidermal growth factor
receptor) family members have been reported in a wide range of epithelial
tumours. Although several monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and small molecule
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) specific for the HER members have been
approved for the treatment of patients with a wide range of tumours, none
has yet been approved for the treatment of patients with ovarian cancer.
In some studies, the co-expression of other growth factor receptors (e.g.
c-MET), the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been associated
with resistance to therapy with the HER inhibitors. The aim of the
present study was to determine the expression level and prognostic
significance of the EGFR, HER-2, HER-4 and EGFRvIII, as well as c-MET,
CD44 and cell proliferation marker Ki67 in 60 patients with FIGO stage
III and IV ovarian cancer. The expression levels of these markers were
determined, at different cut off values, using immunohistochemistry
(IHC), and their associations with the overall survival and disease free
survival were evaluated using Chi-squared and Kaplan-Meier survival
curves and log-rank test as well as the univariate Cox-regression
analysis. At cut off values of >5% of tumour cells with positive
immunostaining, 62%, 93%, 45%, 3%, 21%, 48%, and 95%, of the cases were
positive for EGFR, HER-2, HER-4, EGFRvIII, c-MET, CD44, Ki67 respectively
and 28% were positive for the co-expression of EGFR/HER-2/HER-4. The
cellular location of immunostaining was membranous for EGFR, HER-2, c-MET
and CD44 and was present in 33%, 10%, 3% and 50% of the cases examined
respectively. In univariate analysis, the expression of EGFR at cut-off
values of >50% (HR, 3.57; 95% CI, 1.07 to 11.85; P= 5 % (HR, 8.20; 95%
CI, 2.02 to 33.2; P= 5% of tumour cells, was associated with better
overall survival (HR, 0.13; 95% CI, 0.02 to 0.73; P= 0.021 respectively).
In addition, at cut-off value of >5% of tumour cells with positive
immunostaining, EGFR expression (HR, 2.83; 95% CI 1.18 to 6.77; P =
0.019) and >10% (HR, 2.40; 95% CI 1.07 to 5.37; P= 0.032 ), as well as
the co-expression of EGFR/HER-2 (HR, 2.83; 95% CI 1.18 to 6.77; P=
0.019), EGFR/c-MET (HR, 3.05; 95% CI 1.2 to 7.75; P= 0.019) and EGFR/Ki67
(HR, 2.83; 95% CI 1.18 to 6.77; P= 0.019) were all associated with poorer
disease free survival in these patients. Our results suggest that
co-expression of EGFR\HER-2\HER4 is common in patients with Stages III
and IV ovarian cancers and support the need for investigations on the
therapeutic potential of various forms of pan-HER inhibitors in such
patients.


