Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel long non-coding RNA PANCR is an intracellular p53
activator.


Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors
in development and progression of cancer. Chromosome 16q22.1 region is
frequently deleted in breast cancer, which may contribute to breast
carcinogenesis by inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. This study
characterized a new LncRNA tumor suppressor, named p53 activating
non-coding RNA (PANCR), located in this Chromosome 16q22.1 region. This
PANCR LncRNA consists of 1.5kb in length.Our data showed that PANCR was
downregulated in breast cancer cell lines and tissues. In the breast
cancer cell lines, PANCR expression appeared reversely correlated with
cell malignancy, and in breast cancer tissues, PANCR was downregulated
over 2 times in 31(62.0%) of 50 cases when compared to adjacent normal
breast tissues. In breast cancer cells MCF7 and immortalized human
mammary epithelial cells MCF10A, ectopic expression of PANCR induced
marked apoptosis, suppressing cell proliferation in culture and tumor
growth in xenografts, but in contrast, shRNA-mediated silencing of PANCR
promoted cell growth and proliferation. Mechanistic approaches revealed
that in both MCF7 and MCF10A cell, PANCR activated p53 and upregulated
pro-apoptotic proteins bid and bim and cell cycle inhibitors p21waf/cip1
and p27Kip1. We further explored the mechanism of action that PANCR
activates p53, and our results from RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), RNA
pulldown and immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) demonstrated that the PANCR can
bind to p53, dissociate p53-MDM2 complex and thus activate p53.Together
our data suggest that the novel LncRNA PANCR located in the deleted
Chromosome 16q22.1 region is an intracellular p53activator, functioning
as a tumor suppressor by activating p53-mediated apoptosis.


