Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of a personalized medicine research program (PMRP), using
targeted tumor profiling and a cloud based clinical trials matching
platform, on clinical decision-making.


Background: Cancer care is evolving to a model of precision medicine
where genomic changes in a patient's tumor are used to inform
individualized management (mgmt). The optimal approach and impact of
tumor profiling on cancer care remain important research questions. We
report the impact on clinical decision-making by results from a PMRP in a
research practice.

Methods: A custom designed next generation sequencing (NGS) 68 gene
alteration (GA) panel, covering clinically relevant genes and regions was
developed in 2014. The NGS results were used to: 1) prioritize standard
therapies; 2) match patients (pts) with clinical trials (CT); and 3)
serve as a data mining resource. NGS testing was offered early in the
course of mgmt. An Institutional Review Board approved prospective
registration protocol (PMRP) was activated in 2014, with the objective of
establishing a centralized longitudinal, molecular phenotypic, and
research data repository. Primary endpoints include proportion of pts
where NGS impacted mgmt, to include enrollment onto CT. A cloud-based
informatics platform was developed to: manage PMRP; facilitate CT
matching; perform quality assurance/quality improvement; pursue research
initiatives.

Results: As of 11/15/2016, 869 pts gave informed consent, with 844 pts
enrolled. The top primary sites included: breast (115); colorectal (111);
central nervous system (103); lung (91); ovary (49); hematologic
malignancies (46); pancreas (37); uterus (28); esophagus (25); skin (21).
Of solid tumor pts with documented clinical stage, 130 (40%) pts had
early stage cancer (I, II and III), and 193 (60%) pts had advanced stage
(IV) cancer. NGS results: 739 (88%) pts with GA found; 27 (3%) pts
without GA. Of pts with GA, 178 (24%) pts had actionable (on-label drugs)
GA and 476 (64%) pts had applicable (off-label or CT) GA, for a total of
546 (74%) pts with actionable and/or applicable GA. The top actionable GA
were: KRAS (125); PIK3CA (17); BRAF (13); EGFR (12); NRAS (11); AKT1 (3);
TET2 (2); ERBB2 (2); HRAS (2). The top applicable GA, included: TP53
(225); TPMT (78); TYMS (78); PIK3CA (77); APC (56); PTEN (52); IDH1 (34);
CDNK2A (22); CTNNB1 (18); TET2 (16). Care mgmt impact was reported by
physicians for 508 pts with actionable/applicable GA. Physicians reported
mgmt impact, at time of reporting, for 105 (21%) pts, to include: new
treatment (Tx) in 30 (6%) pts; no Tx given in 18 (4%) pts; Tx changed in
12 (2%) pts; Tx stopped in 1 (Results: As of 11/15/2016, 869 pts gave
informed consent, with 844 pts enrolled. The top primary sites included:
breast (115); colorectal (111); central nervous system (103); lung (91);
ovary (49); hematologic malignancies (46); pancreas (37); uterus (28);
esophagus (25); skin (21). Of solid tumor pts with documented clinical
stage, 130 (40%) pts had early stage cancer (I, II and III), and 193
(60%) pts had advanced stage (IV) cancer. NGS results: 739 (88%) pts with
GA found; 27 (3%) pts without GA. Of pts with GA, 178 (24%) pts had
actionable (on-label drugs) GA and 476 (64%) pts had applicable
(off-label or CT) GA, for a total of 546 (74%) pts with actionable and/or
applicable GA. The top actionable GA were: KRAS (125); PIK3CA (17); BRAF
(13); EGFR (12); NRAS (11); AKT1 (3); TET2 (2); ERBB2 (2); HRAS (2). The
top applicable GA, included: TP53 (225); TPMT (78); TYMS (78); PIK3CA
(77); APC (56); PTEN (52); IDH1 (34); CDNK2A (22); CTNNB1 (18); TET2
(16). Care mgmt impact was reported by physicians for 508 pts with
actionable/applicable GA. Physicians reported mgmt impact, at time of
reporting, for 105 (21%) pts, to include: new treatment (Tx) in 30 (6%)
pts; no Tx given in 18 (4%) pts; Tx changed in 12 (2%) pts; Tx stopped in
1 (<1%) pt; 6 (1%) pts enrolled onto CT. In 403 (79%) pts, physicians
reported no mgmt impact, to include: insufficient evidence in 294 (58%)
pts; drugs/CT access in 91 (18%) pts; refused Tx in 17 (3%) pts.

Conclusions: NGS profiling of tumors with this 68 GA panel has an impact
on clinical decision- making in a minority, though substantial number, of
pts. Impact on CT participation remains modest. Access to drugs and CT
remains an important barrier.


