Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD4635 A2A receptor occupancy in cynomolgus monkey using PET and
its application to an oncology clinical development program.


Introduction

AZD4635 is an A2A receptor antagonist currently being tested as
monotherapy and in combination with durvalumab in patients with advanced
solid cancers. High adenosine levels found in tumors are immune
suppressive and therefore AZD4635 could potentiate immune checkpoint
inhibitors such as durvalumab (anti-PDL1). Predictions of A2A receptor
engagement in patients at different doses and at different time points
may enable better interpretation of clinical biomarker data measuring
effects on immune modulation. A quantitative assessment of the receptor
occupancy in the brain of non-human primates was conducted for AZD4635
with PET imaging and the resulting PK/PD model was applied to predict
occupancy in humans in tumors.

Methods

PET measurements of A2AR occupancy in brain was performed using the
radioligand [18F]MNI-444 in three anesthetized cynomologus monkeys. PET
data acquisition was performed for 120 min following IV-administration of
[18F]MNI-444 at baseline and following pretreatment of AZD4635. Sampling
for AZD4635 plasma exposure determination was performed. As part of PK/PD
analysis of the occupancy data, a novel modification of the non
Invasive-LOGAN data analysis of the PET data was performed to obtain a
time course of occupancy for each dose. A bio-phase PK/PD mathematical
model was then used to describe the relationship of occupancy with
circulating concentrations of AZD4635. In parallel, a PK model for
AZD4635 in humans was developed using data from cohort 1 (Clinical trial
NCT02740985) after 125 mg and used for PK predictions for alternative
doses of AZD4635 in the clinic.

Results

A clear Exposure-Effect relationship was observed for AZD4635-driven A2AR
occupancy in cyno brain when dosed 30 min prior to PET measurement. The
PK/PD analysis of cyno PET-determined receptor occupancy provided an
Occ50 that is in line with the in vitro potency for the compound under
physiological concentrations of adenosine in the brain. The resulting
PK/PD model has then been applied to predict the level of occupancy in
human tumours at other clinically relevant doses. Different simulations
were done varying the amount of endogenous adenosine levels.

Conclusions

AZD4635 was shown to occupy A2AR in cyno brain in an exposure dependent
manner. The resulting PK/PD model built using this dataset was used to
run simulations of expected tumor receptor occupancy in man and aid
clinical dose selection for AZD4635. Sensitivity analysis has shown that
prediction of human occupancy in the tumour is highly dependent on
adenosine concentrations in the tumour. Simulations with tumor adenosine
concentrations of 1 Î¼M indicate that AZD4635 is predicted to provide
~90% receptor occupancy over the whole dosing interval at a clinically
relevant dose.


