Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A different spatiotemporal distribution of TIL subtypes is
associated with response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced
breast cancer patients.


Background: Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) are described as an
important immune modulator in the tumor microenvironment in cancer and
were shown to be associated with breast cancer (BC) outcome. Besides the
analysis of total TILs, the discrimination into TIL subtypes is essential
as they exhibit pro- or anti-tumorigenic potential. The spatiotemporal
TIL distribution at the invasive tumor front (ITF) and the tumor center
(TC) might provide insights into tumor progression. Here we analyzed TIL
infiltration in core biopsies of BC patients (pts) prior to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NACT) and correlated these findings with clinical
parameters and tumor cell spread.

Material and Methods: Core biopsies from 87 pre-NACT BC pts were cut,
deparaffinized and antigen retrieval and automated immunohistochemistry
were performed using the following primary antibodies: CD3 (clone: SP7;
1:400, DCS Innovative Diagnostik Systeme, Hamburg, Germany), CD4 (clone:
1F6; 1:40, Zytomed Systems, Berlin, Germany), CD8 (clone: C8/144B;
1:150), CD20 (clone: L26; rtu), CD68 (clone: PG-M1; 1:500, all
DAKOCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark). Binding of primary antibody was
visualized using the OptiView DAB kit (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson,
USA). The densities of total TILs (H&E staining) and TIL subtypes were
evaluated microscopically at the TC and ITF and classified into three
categories: Low = 0-10%, Moderate = 11-30%, High â‰¥ 31% infiltration.
TIL results were correlated with clinical parameters and disseminated
tumor cells (DTCs) in the bone marrow, determined by immunocytochemistry
applying the pan cytokeratin antibody A45-B/B3.

Results: TILs were differentially distributed at both tumor areas. The
ITF was mainly infiltrated by CD3+ T- and CD20+ B cells, while low
amounts of CD68+ macrophages, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subtypes were present.
Only CD3+ T cells were present in a higher level at the TC. A high total
TIL amount and a high CD3+ infiltration at the ITF was associated with
poorly differentiated tumors. Pre-NACT tumors Results: TILs were
differentially distributed at both tumor areas. The ITF was mainly
infiltrated by CD3+ T- and CD20+ B cells, while low amounts of CD68+
macrophages, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subtypes were present. Only CD3+ T
cells were present in a higher level at the TC. A high total TIL amount
and a high CD3+ infiltration at the ITF was associated with poorly
differentiated tumors. Pre-NACT tumors < T2 had a high CD4+ T cell
infiltration at the TC, whereas in small post-NACT tumors a high
infiltration of total TILs and all TIL subtypes at the ITF, except CD68+
cells, was observed. BC pts responding to NACT exhibited significantly
more total TILs (p=0.02) and CD3+ T cells (p=0.02) at the TC. A high CD4+
T cell infiltration at the TC was significantly associated with the
presence of DTCs post-NACT (p=0.029). CD68+ macrophages located at TC or
ITF were not related to any clinical parameter.

Conclusion: The differential association of TIL subtypes with clinical
parameters and NACT response underlines the necessity of detailed TIL
analysis for gaining insights into immune modulatory processes in the
tumor microenvironment. In this regard, BC patients not responding to
standard NACT might be identified for application of additional
immunotherapy.


