Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cell surface vimentin targeted mAb 86C increases sensitivity to
temozolomide mediated cell death in glioma stem cells.


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most aggressive brain tumor
in pediatric patients. The current standard of care including radiation
and chemotherapy is not effective in most patients due to multiple
factors such as resistance and poor blood-brain barrier (BBB)
penetration. The development of strategies to reduce resistance and to
increase sensitivity to chemotherapy may ameliorate the problems. Glioma
stem cells (GSCs) are considered the source of relapse and
chemoresistance. Sensitization of temozolomide TMZ resistance in GSC is
therefore integral for therapeutic efficacy. Our lab has discovered that
cell surface vimentin (CSV) is presented on patient-derived GSCs. In this
study, we demonstrate that the treatment of GSCs with anti-CSV antibody
(86C) sensitizes them to TMZ. We found that the combination of 86C and
TMZ induced additional antitumor effects in 8 out of 12 GSCs. Mechanistic
study of the four resistance GSCs revealed slow re-surface rate of CSV
from CSV- GSCs and low CSV expression on GSCs as possible contributing
factors. GSCs with rapid CSV resurfacing from CSV- GSCs was more
sensitive to combination treatment compared to GSCs with a slow
recovering from CSV- GSCs. Furthermore, the metabolism study shows these
four resistance cells have high intrinsic mitochondria activity compared
to sensitive cells. The combination of TMZ with 86C may represent a
valuable strategy to reverse GSC chemoresistance.


