Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High microsomal PGE2synthase-1 levels associate with low CD8 T
cells and poorer melanoma patient survival.


COX-2 and its product PGE2 are reported to enhance carcinogenesis and
tumor progression and to support immunosuppression, as reported by others
in melanoma and other cancers. As most COX-2 inhibitors result in
cardiotoxicity, the downstream microsomal PGE2 synthase-1 (mPGES1) is now
also an alternative consideration for therapeutic targeting. Our
previously published results (Kim, et al., 2016) showed that mPGES1
protein increased with melanoma patient clinical stage and that its
intense expression was associated with reduced patient survival. We also
reported that mPGES1 inhibition attenuated cell survival and increased
apoptosis in human melanoma cells and significantly suppressed tumor
growth in melanoma xenografts. This current study was designed to
evaluate whether expression of mPGES1 contributes to immune evasion.
Tumors in a Stage III melanoma TMA analysis demonstrated that high mPGES1
expression (intensity 3) was significantly associated with low CD8 levels
(lower than median CD8 percent value) (r=-0.2722, p=0.0128). Importantly,
stage III melanoma patients with this high mPGES1 and low CD8 signature
had significantly increased risk of death as determined by Kaplan-Meier
method and Univariate Cox proportional hazards regression models, and
compared with patients with low mPGES1/low CD8 and low mPGES1/high CD8.
Furthermore, the differential levels of several chemokines including
CXCL1 and CXCL2 to regulate T cell migration were correlated the mPGES1
expression in the TCGA melanoma data set. Collectively, our study
continues to resolve the potential role of mPGES1 in regulation of immune
evasion and is designed as a preclinical approach to develop a rational
therapeutic strategy targeting PGE2-driven inflammatory mediators as
useful adjuvants for immune-based therapy.


