Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulated miR-23a contributes to invasion and metastasis of
cutaneous melanoma by promoting autophagy.


Background: The occurrence of invasion and metastasis is the major cause
of mortality in melanoma. Recent studies suggest that dysregulated miRNAs
play critical roles in this procedure, but the underlying mechanism
remains elusive. Here, we show that down-regulated miR-23a can promote
invasion-metastasis cascade through autophagy in melanoma.Methods: The
role of miR-23a in prognosis was assessed in a cohort of melanoma
patients (n = 192) with Kaplan-Meier analysis. The effects of miR-23a
overexpression were investigated using assays of invasion, migration and
in a xenograft model (n = 10 mice per group). Autophagy-related target of
miR-23a was confirmed by bioinformatics analysis, luciferase assays and
immunoblotting. Molecular studies were performed to determine the
downstream cellular and molecular mechanisms. All statistical tests were
two-sided.Results: Serum miR-23a level was significantly down-regulated
in melanoma patients (PBackground: The occurrence of invasion and
metastasis is the major cause of mortality in melanoma. Recent studies
suggest that dysregulated miRNAs play critical roles in this procedure,
but the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, we show that
down-regulated miR-23a can promote invasion-metastasis cascade through
autophagy in melanoma.Methods: The role of miR-23a in prognosis was
assessed in a cohort of melanoma patients (n = 192) with Kaplan-Meier
analysis. The effects of miR-23a overexpression were investigated using
assays of invasion, migration and in a xenograft model (n = 10 mice per
group). Autophagy-related target of miR-23a was confirmed by
bioinformatics analysis, luciferase assays and immunoblotting. Molecular
studies were performed to determine the downstream cellular and molecular
mechanisms. All statistical tests were two-sided.Results: Serum miR-23a
level was significantly down-regulated in melanoma patients (P< .001) and
was highly correlated with poor clinical outcomes (P = .027, log-rank
test). In addition, miR-23a level was remarkably decreased in metastatic
melanoma tissues and cell lines (PBackground: The occurrence of invasion
and metastasis is the major cause of mortality in melanoma. Recent
studies suggest that dysregulated miRNAs play critical roles in this
procedure, but the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, we show
that down-regulated miR-23a can promote invasion-metastasis cascade
through autophagy in melanoma.Methods: The role of miR-23a in prognosis
was assessed in a cohort of melanoma patients (n = 192) with Kaplan-Meier
analysis. The effects of miR-23a overexpression were investigated using
assays of invasion, migration and in a xenograft model (n = 10 mice per
group). Autophagy-related target of miR-23a was confirmed by
bioinformatics analysis, luciferase assays and immunoblotting. Molecular
studies were performed to determine the downstream cellular and molecular
mechanisms. All statistical tests were two-sided.Results: Serum miR-23a
level was significantly down-regulated in melanoma patients (P< .001) and
was highly correlated with poor clinical outcomes (P = .027, log-rank
test). In addition, miR-23a level was remarkably decreased in metastatic
melanoma tissues and cell lines (P<.05, PBackground: The occurrence of
invasion and metastasis is the major cause of mortality in melanoma.
Recent studies suggest that dysregulated miRNAs play critical roles in
this procedure, but the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, we
show that down-regulated miR-23a can promote invasion-metastasis cascade
through autophagy in melanoma.Methods: The role of miR-23a in prognosis
was assessed in a cohort of melanoma patients (n = 192) with Kaplan-Meier
analysis. The effects of miR-23a overexpression were investigated using
assays of invasion, migration and in a xenograft model (n = 10 mice per
group). Autophagy-related target of miR-23a was confirmed by
bioinformatics analysis, luciferase assays and immunoblotting. Molecular
studies were performed to determine the downstream cellular and molecular
mechanisms. All statistical tests were two-sided.Results: Serum miR-23a
level was significantly down-regulated in melanoma patients (P< .001) and
was highly correlated with poor clinical outcomes (P = .027, log-rank
test). In addition, miR-23a level was remarkably decreased in metastatic
melanoma tissues and cell lines (P<.05, P<.01). Moreover, miR-23a
overexpression prevented the invasion and migration in vitro and lung and
liver metastasis in vivo (both PBackground: The occurrence of invasion
and metastasis is the major cause of mortality in melanoma. Recent
studies suggest that dysregulated miRNAs play critical roles in this
procedure, but the underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here, we show
that down-regulated miR-23a can promote invasion-metastasis cascade
through autophagy in melanoma.Methods: The role of miR-23a in prognosis
was assessed in a cohort of melanoma patients (n = 192) with Kaplan-Meier
analysis. The effects of miR-23a overexpression were investigated using
assays of invasion, migration and in a xenograft model (n = 10 mice per
group). Autophagy-related target of miR-23a was confirmed by
bioinformatics analysis, luciferase assays and immunoblotting. Molecular
studies were performed to determine the downstream cellular and molecular
mechanisms. All statistical tests were two-sided.Results: Serum miR-23a
level was significantly down-regulated in melanoma patients (P< .001) and
was highly correlated with poor clinical outcomes (P = .027, log-rank
test). In addition, miR-23a level was remarkably decreased in metastatic
melanoma tissues and cell lines (P<.05, P<.01). Moreover, miR-23a
overexpression prevented the invasion and migration in vitro and lung and
liver metastasis in vivo (both P< .05), by targeting ATG12 and inhibiting
autophagy. Mechanically, miR-23a-ATG12 axis attenuated invasion and
migration through autophagy-mediated AMPK-RhoA pathway. Finally, the
down-regulation of miR-23a in metastatic melanoma was caused by RUNX2 in
a transcriptional repression-manner. Conclusion: MiR-23a can act as a
crucial epigenetic repressor of melanoma invasion and metastasis in an
autophagy-dependent way, which indicates that miR-23a-mediated autophagy
inhibition can be exploited to restrain invasion-metastasis cascade in
melanoma treatment.


