Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Urolithin A prevents pancreatic tumor growth and increases
survival by inhibiting PI3K/PDK1 and STAT3 signaling.


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the 3rd leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in the United States. Most patients present with
an advanced disease and the majority die within five years, many
surviving less than six months. Cytotoxic chemotherapy including
Gemcitabine (Gem), FOLFIRINOX, nab-paclitaxel offer modest improvement in
survival, albeit at the cost of increased side effects and unwanted
toxicities. Therefore, developing novel chemotherapeutic agents for PDAC
treatment is critical to improve survival. Ellagic acid/ellatitannins are
abundantly present in the pomegranate and berries, are actively
metabolized by the intestinal microflora to Urolithin A (UA). Oral
administration of UA has shown to be highly bioavailable and non-toxic.
UA inhibits multiple kinases that are known to be involved in PDAC
progression and metastasis. Therefore, we hypothesized that UA would
elicit potent anti-cancer therapeutic potential in PDAC. The effect of UA
on kinase activity was assessed . Inhibition of AKT (downstream of
PI3K/PDK1), p70 S6 Kinase (PS6K) and STAT3 activation was quantified in
PDAC cells treated with UA in dose-dependent manner. The mechanism of
action was validated for UAâ€™s activity on PI3K/PDK1, PS6K and STAT3
activation using immunoblot analysis. MiaPaCa2 cells were treated with
specific inhibitors for either AKT (MK2206) or STAT3 (AZD1480) and
analyzed for tumorigenicity. UA treated PDAC cells were analyzed for cell
proliferation, cell invasion and colony formation. Cell cycle analysis
and cell apoptosis were measured by flow cytometry. To test the efficacy
of UA in vivo, cells were implanted subcutaneously in athymic nude mice.
The animals received UA daily and tumor volume was measured for 5 weeks.
Next, we assessed tumor growth and overall survival (OS) in PKT
(Ptf1acre/+;LSL-KrasG12D;Tgfbr2fl/fl) mice, an aggressive genetically
engineered PDAC mouse model, in response to UA and/or Gem treatment.
Tissues from the xenografts and PKT mice treated with vehicle or UA were
analyzed for cell proliferation (Ki67) and apoptosis (cleaved Caspase 3)
by immunohistochemistry. High expression levels of activated STAT3 or AKT
correlate with decreased survival in PDAC. UA treated MiaPaCa2 cells
showed significant dose-dependent increase in apoptosis and decrease in
anchorage-independent growth. UA inhibited AKT, PS6K and STAT3 signaling.
As a single agent, UA effectively reduced in vivo PDAC tumor growth.
Immunohistochemistry of UA treated tissues from tumor xenografts and PKT
mice showed inhibition of Ki67 positive tumor cells and increased cleaved
caspase 3 staining. PKT mice treated with UA showed a decrease in tumor
size and an increased OS when compared to vehicle or Gem treated mice
alone. These findings show that UA is a novel
inhibitor/modulator/regulator for multiple signaling pathways in PDAC.
These results suggest UA has potential for pre-clinical development in
pancreatic cancer.


