Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Location matters: unique functional and transcriptional, but not
flow cytometric, characteristics of intratumoral FOXP3+ Tregs vs. Tregs
from other sites of patients with lung tumors.


FOXP3+ Tregs are considered important to limiting antitumor immunity but
are rarely characterized clinically. We studied 227 samples from 66 lung
cancer patients using blood, lymph node (LN), tumor and distant lung
samples, with a mean age of 67.8±1.1 years, 67% males, 62%
adenocarcinoma, 31% squamous cell carcinoma, 7% miscellaneous tumors,
mean tumor size of 3.4±0.3 cm, and 21% rate of metastases. In addition
to quantitating FOXP3+CD4+ Tregs, we evaluated their expression of 35
markers by flow cytometry: CD15s, CD25, CD26, CD27, CD39, CD40L,
CD45RA/RO, CD62L, CD69, CD101, CD120b, CD161, CCR4, CTLA4, GARP, GITR,
Helios, HLA-DR, ICOS, LAP, neuropilin, PD-1, TIGIT, Tim3, CCR4, CCR5,
CCR7, CXCR3, CXCR4 and CCR8, and tested Treg suppressive function. We
used PrimeFlow to evaluate mRNA expression of target genes in 100% pure
human Treg cells, gated on CD4+FOXP3+ cells. FOXP3+ Tregs (%) in the CD4
cels of tumors and LN were significantly increased (pFOXP3+ Tregs are
considered important to limiting antitumor immunity but are rarely
characterized clinically. We studied 227 samples from 66 lung cancer
patients using blood, lymph node (LN), tumor and distant lung samples,
with a mean age of 67.8±1.1 years, 67% males, 62% adenocarcinoma, 31%
squamous cell carcinoma, 7% miscellaneous tumors, mean tumor size of
3.4±0.3 cm, and 21% rate of metastases. In addition to quantitating
FOXP3+CD4+ Tregs, we evaluated their expression of 35 markers by flow
cytometry: CD15s, CD25, CD26, CD27, CD39, CD40L, CD45RA/RO, CD62L, CD69,
CD101, CD120b, CD161, CCR4, CTLA4, GARP, GITR, Helios, HLA-DR, ICOS, LAP,
neuropilin, PD-1, TIGIT, Tim3, CCR4, CCR5, CCR7, CXCR3, CXCR4 and CCR8,
and tested Treg suppressive function. We used PrimeFlow to evaluate mRNA
expression of target genes in 100% pure human Treg cells, gated on
CD4+FOXP3+ cells. FOXP3+ Tregs (%) in the CD4 cels of tumors and LN were
significantly increased (p<0.0001 Kruskal-Wallis) compared to other
sites; tumors 19.2±8.5%, LN 14.7±8.5%, healthy PBMC donors 7.2±2.5%,
PBMC lung cancer 7.2±2.7%, and lungs 6.6±3.2%. Tregs of lung tumors
were remarkably suppressive vs. all other sites (pFOXP3+ Tregs are
considered important to limiting antitumor immunity but are rarely
characterized clinically. We studied 227 samples from 66 lung cancer
patients using blood, lymph node (LN), tumor and distant lung samples,
with a mean age of 67.8±1.1 years, 67% males, 62% adenocarcinoma, 31%
squamous cell carcinoma, 7% miscellaneous tumors, mean tumor size of
3.4±0.3 cm, and 21% rate of metastases. In addition to quantitating
FOXP3+CD4+ Tregs, we evaluated their expression of 35 markers by flow
cytometry: CD15s, CD25, CD26, CD27, CD39, CD40L, CD45RA/RO, CD62L, CD69,
CD101, CD120b, CD161, CCR4, CTLA4, GARP, GITR, Helios, HLA-DR, ICOS, LAP,
neuropilin, PD-1, TIGIT, Tim3, CCR4, CCR5, CCR7, CXCR3, CXCR4 and CCR8,
and tested Treg suppressive function. We used PrimeFlow to evaluate mRNA
expression of target genes in 100% pure human Treg cells, gated on
CD4+FOXP3+ cells. FOXP3+ Tregs (%) in the CD4 cels of tumors and LN were
significantly increased (p<0.0001 Kruskal-Wallis) compared to other
sites; tumors 19.2±8.5%, LN 14.7±8.5%, healthy PBMC donors 7.2±2.5%,
PBMC lung cancer 7.2±2.7%, and lungs 6.6±3.2%. Tregs of lung tumors
were remarkably suppressive vs. all other sites (p<0.0001 vs. PBMC & LN,
p=0.0106 vs. lung Tregs). None of the 35 markers evaluated by flow
cytometry were statistically significantly different for tumor Tregs vs.
other sites. However, PrimeFlow showed tumor Tregs, but not FOXP3- T
cells or Tregs from other sites, had upregulated mRNA expression of 4
transcription factors (TF): Eos, Irf4, Satb1 and Gata1. These 4 TFs plus
LEF1 were recently described as a quintet of Treg self-locking signature
TF; expression of any 2 TF plus FOXP3 promoted full Treg gene expression
and function. Tumor Tregs also showed significant upregulation of FOXP3
mRNA and protein. Tumor and lung Tregs expressed more Eos, Irf4, Satb1
and Gata1 mRNA, and much higher levels of FOXP3 protein per cell, while
in PBMC, LNs and healthy donor Tregs upregulation of TFs did not
correspond with increase of FOXP3 protein, indicating the “Treg
self-locking signature” is subject to regulation by local factors.
Indeed, cultured tumor Tregs downregulated FOXP3 protein, mRNA and TF
expression, while PBMC and LN Treg incubated in tumor-conditioned media
upregulated FOXP3 mRNA and protein, and Treg TF expression, moving toward
the tumor Treg-like phenotype. We found significantly increased numbers
and suppressive function of FOXP3+ Tregs within lung tumors vs. other
sites in the same patients. In addition, while large-scale flow
cytometric studies were not useful in identifying key features of tumor
Tregs vs. Tregs at other sites, PrimeFlow showed that tumor Treg have a
unique phenotype with upregulated expression of FOXP3 mRNA and protein,
as well as Eos, Irf4, Satb1 and Gata1 mRNAs. These features appear to be
malleable and associated with features of the local tumor
microenvironment.


