Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNAs in the 14q32 cluster are involved in lapatinib resistance.


HER2 is over-expressed in around 20-25% of breast cancers. Due to
increased cell growth and differentiation signaling resulting from HER2
over-expression, this sub-type of the disease is associated with
aggressive tumor progression and poor prognosis. HER2 targeted therapy
has improved patient prognosis, however, only a subgroup of patients
derives the optimal benefit, while other patients have refractory disease
or develop resistance. miRNAs are small non coding RNAs involved in the
RNAi machinery. They are often aberrantly expressed in tumors and miRNA
profiles have been seen to evolve over the course of treatment
implicating them in therapeutic resistance.

Methods: miRNA array completed on the Human TaqMan miRNA card. Gene
expression profiling performed by Illumina Human HT12 v4.0 array.
Differential gene expression used LIMMA1 empirical Bayes statistics
module. Adjusted p-values calculated by Benjamini and Hochberg procedure.
In silico target prediction used miRWalk. Lapatinib resistant cells
generated by culturing cells in increasing doses of lapatinib up to 2ÂµM.
IC50 obtained from drug cytotoxicity measured by MTT analyzed by
nonlinear regression.

Results: A panel of miRNAs differentially expressed in paired lapatinib
sensitive/resistant BT-474 HER2 positive breast cancer cells were
identified by miRNA array. Three miRNAs, located in the 14q32 region,
were selected for further investigation of their role in resistance to
HER2-targeted therapy: miR-127-3p, miR-409-3p, and miR-495-3p. RT-qPCR
also confirmed upregulation of these miRNAs in HCC1954 and SKBR-3 HER2
positive cells with acquired resistance to lapatinib, linking increased
miRNA expression with acquired resistance. To understand the mechanism
behind the miRNA expression in resistant cells we explored epigenetic
changes between the sensitive and resistant lines. Global methylation
reversal revealed upregulation of all miRNAs in the sensitive cells with
a further increase upon addition of an HDAC inhibitor. De-methylation had
less effect in resistant cells, indicating loss of methylation as a key
component in miRNA upregulation in the process of lapatinib resistance.
Using differential gene expression analysis in paired
lapatinib-sensitive/resistant BT-474 cells combined with in silico
analysis we identified putative targets of these miRNAs. BASP1, a c-MYC
transcriptional inhibitor, was down-regulated in the BT-474/L resistant
cells. Knock-down altered sensitivity to lapatinib, with an 8 fold shift
in IC50 towards resistance, indicating reduced expression of the protein
could be involved in the resistance machinery.

Conclusions: miR-127, miR-409, and miR-495, clustered to the 14q32 region
are subject to epigenetic control, which is altered in lapatinib
resistant cells. Resulting upregulation of the miRNAs appears to
post-transcriptionally regulate genes, such as BASP1, involved in an
acquired resistance mechanism to lapatinib in HER2 positive breast cancer
cell lines.


