Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: APA isoform diversity in triple negative breast cancers.


Alternative polyadenylation (APA) plays a role in gene expression
regulation generally by shortening of 3'UTRs and relieving
microRNA-mediated repression. Therefore, APA is gaining increased
attention as a potential mechanism to activate oncogenes. Owing to high
proliferative indices of triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs), we
hypothesized APA to cause 3'UTR length changes in this aggressive
subgroup of breast cancers. Our probe-based meta-analysis approach
identified 3'UTR length alterations where the significant majority was
shortening events (70%, 113 of 165) of mostly proliferation-related
transcripts in over 500 TNBC patients compared with normal breast tissue.
Representative shortening events correlated with increased protein levels
and relapse free survival of patients, suggesting functional significance
of isoform variability. To begin addressing the underlying mechanisms of
3’UTR shortening, we turned to APA machinery proteins. We detected
variable expression of APA machinery proteins in different breast cancer
subtypes but CSTF2 (cleavage stimulation factor 2) has the most prominent
overexpression in breast cancer cells. Therefore, among potential
regulators of 3’UTR shortening, we further investigated the role of
CSTF2 in proximal polyA signal selection. Because some of the TNBC
patients are EGFR positive, we found EGF treatment to cause increased
CSTF2 levels. Higher CSTF2 levels indeed correlated with further
shortening of the 3'UTRs. Accordingly, RNAi-induced silencing of CSTF2
decreased the proliferative rate of cancer cells. Therefore, our
integrated approach revealed a pattern of 3'UTR length changes in TNBC
patients and a potential link between APA and EGF signaling. Further
studies are underway to investigate the mechanistic link between EGF
signaling and regulation of 3’UTR lengths. (This work is funded by
TUBITAK 112S478 and 114Z884)


