Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eradication of cancer cells by T-cell receptor-engineered T cells
targeting neoantigens/oncoantigens.


Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) play critical roles in cancer-immune
responses, and functional characterization of CTLs and their
cancer-specific antigens will facilitate cancer immunotherapies.
Immunogenic peptides, which can be derived from oncogenic proteins
specifically expressed in cancer cells but not expressed in normal organs
except testis (oncoantigens), or from peptides with somatic nonsynonymous
mutations (neoantigens), are known as good targets for CTLs to eradicate
cancer cells. In this study, we aimed to establish a method to
efficiently identify oncoantigen/neoantigen-specific CTLs. Firstly, we
screened candidate HLA-A2402-restricted oncoantigen/neoantigen peptides
by in silico prediction of their binding affinity to MHC class I
molecules. We conducted an in-vitro stimulation of CD8 lymphocytes
carrying HLA-A24:02 allele by each peptide, and then confirmed clonal
expansion of the peptide-specific CTLs by TCR repertoire sequencing
analysis, interferon-Î³ enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) and/or
peptide-HLA multimer assays. After identification of TCR alpha-beta
pairs, we conducted retroviral transduction and prepared the
TCR-engineered T cells to evaluate their cytotoxic activities against
cancer cells. As oncoantigens, we isolated the CTLs for FOXM1 and UBE2T
from healthy donors, and found these CTLs showed strong cytotoxicity
against HLA-A2402-positive cancer cells expressing target proteins, but
not against HLA-unmatched cancer cells. Similarly, the TCR-engineered T
cells for FOXM1 and UBE2T showed killing effects for only
HLA-A2402-positive cancer cells. Neoantigen-specific TCR-engineered CTLs
also exhibited the mutated peptide-specific response, but did not
cross-react to the nonmutated peptide. In addition, neoantigen-specific
cytotoxicity was observed against HLA-A2402-positive cancer cells
expressing the proteins with target somatic mutations. In conclusion, we
developed the pipeline to screen possible onconatigens/neoantigens and
establish antigen-specific TCR-engineered CTLs from peripheral blood
lymphocytes. Our approach provides a promising strategy to develop
personalized immunotherapies using onconatigen/neoantigen-reactive
TCR-engineered T cells to treat cancer.


