Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacogenomic profiling to identify novel therapeutic strategies
in colorectal cancer.


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is amongst the most frequent cancers worldwide
and the fourth most common cause of cancer mortality. Surgery is the
standard treatment of care, while chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy are
offered to subgroups of patients according to disease stage. Current
guidelines do not have sufficient accuracy to identify chemotherapy
responders, resulting in under- or overtreatment of many patients.To
discover novel therapeutic strategies for CRC we performed a
high-throughput drug screen containing 461 approved and preclinical drugs
on a representative panel of 42 CRC cell lines. Integrative
pharmacogenomic profiles were explored by matching data from gene
expression, exome sequencing, copy number and reverse-phase protein
arrays. These analyses identified defined molecular subgroups sensitive
to targeted drugs like Inhibitors of EGFR, IGF-1R and downstream
signaling mediators like B-Raf, MEK, PI3K/AKT, as well as inhibitors of
aurora mitotic kinases, heat shock protein 90 and p53. Additionally, a
correlation between microsatellite instability and sensitivity against
topoisomerase-I inhibitors was found. Comparison of the most sensitive
and the most resistant cell models against HSP90 inhibitors indicated
that drug sensitivity does not depend on target expression but is likely
attributed to the cell line-specific expression of client proteins.
Real-time cell analyses measured with the xCELLigence system demonstrated
a strong impact on cell proliferation but not on the migration of
HSP90-sensitive cells treated with HSP90 inhibitors as compared to
resistant cells. These integrative analyses have unraveled
pharmacogenomic relationships that if validated in in vivo model systems,
might be used to stratify patients for therapeutic intervention in
biomarker guided clinical trials.


