Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Screening platform for development of antibody-drug conjugates
against novel targets at the National Research Council of Canada.


One of the most promising of the next generation of biologic-based cancer
therapeutics builds on the molecular targeting abilities of antibodies by
combining them with drugs to generate highly specific antibody-drug
conjugates (ADCs). However, the development of ADCs requires
time-consuming selection of the antibody for every target and cancer
type. High-throughput screening technologies based on the use of
conjugated secondary antibodies provide a fast and efficient surrogate
assay from which to identify which antibodies are best internalized and
suitable for immunoconjugate development into ADCs.

As part of its integrated antibody development initiative, NRC has
isolated and characterized anti- mouse Fc and anti-human Fc monoclonal
antibodies to serve as very selective detective reagents for various IgG
isotypes. We have shown that these secondary antibodies are species
specific, selective and of high affinity. When conjugated to pH sensitive
fluorophores, we have used them to specifically identify internalizing
antibodies against tumor targets, which were later validated as ADCs.
Furthermore, these secondary conjugates exhibit high specific potency and
low background toxicity once conjugated to linkered drugs. This approach
allow us to optimize the selection of an antibody for a particular
target, tumor type, linker and drug for ADC development. NRC will present
results of a screen of 285 mouse antibodies against 20 different targets
in 7 different cancer cell lines, using either MCC-DM1 or
vc-MMAE-conjugated secondary antibodies. The NRC ADC discovery platform
is combining this methodology with our proprietary mRNA and DNA
expression database for the selection of appropriate ADC targets. NRC
Biologics and Biomanufacturing program is in the process of screening
thousands of NRC antibodies generated against a variety of
cancer-associated cell surface targets to deliver a steady pipeline of
ADCS as part of its drug discovery efforts.

This functional screening platform further promotes the integration and
advancement of NRCâ€™s capabilities and strengths in the area of
biologic-based therapeutics lead candidate selection, including quality
attributes and characterization and biomanufacturing. The combined
expertise in cell biology, high throughput screening, antibody generation
and selection, bioinformatics and expression analysis forms the
foundation by which NRC can establish strategic collaborations with other
Canadian or international partners to develop antibodies into novel ADC
biologics.


