Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying biomarkers to predict cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin in
individual patients.


Doxorubicin is a highly effective anticancer agent but causes
cardiotoxicity in many patients. This study aims to identify biomarkers
to predict potential cardiotoxicity before the onset of cardiac tissue
damage and dysfunction in individual cancer patients. First, we
established a human cellular system to model the cardiac toxicity of
oncology drugs using human induced pluripotent stem cells-derived
cardiomyocytes (iPS-CMs). We tested a panel of clinically used drugs
including anthracyclines (doxorubicin, daunorubicin, epirubicin and
idarubicin), 5-FU, Taxol, Trastuzumab, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(sunitinb, imatinib, and sorafinib). These drugs displayed varying
degrees of cytotoxicity in iPS-CMs which are generally consistent with
their known cardiotoxicity patterns. Second, we found that doxorubicin
selectively upregulated the expression of death receptors in iPS-CMs. As
a result, the treated iPS-CMs underwent spontaneous apoptosis that was
further enhanced in the presence of specific cytokines. Based on these
findings, we hypothesize that the baseline levels of the predefined
cytokines in blood could be predictive of cardiotoxicity associated with
doxorubicin treatment in individual patients. We are currently
investigating the relationships between the levels of the predefined
cytokine signature in blood and cardiac events in patients who received
doxorubicin or related anthracycline therapy.


