Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-638 promotes autophagy and malignant phenotypes of cancer
cells via directly suppressing DACT3.


Dyregulation of autophagy is implicated in human cancers and the
mechanism details remains largely unclear. Herein we report the
regulatory role of miR-638 in autophagy of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) and breast cancer cells. We found that miR-638
overexpression promotes starvation- and rapamycin-induced autophagy. In
ESCC and breast cancer cells, miR-638 acts as an oncogene and promote
cell proliferation, migration, as well as invasion in vitro and in vivo.
In accordance with this, we observed significantly higher miR-638
expression in ESCC and breast cancer tissues compared to normal tissues.
To further elucidate regulatory mechanisms of miR-638 in autophagy, we
performed a computational nomination of its target genes through
intersecting the results of multiple prediction algorithms. DACT3, a key
regulator of Wnt/Î²-catenin signaling, was predicted to be regulated by
miR-638 by all programs and confirmed by experimental results. Depletion
of DACT3 phenocopied effects of miR-638 overexpression, demonstrating its
importance in autophagy. These results elucidate that the miR-638-DACT3
axis might be an important molecular pathway in controlling and autophagy
and tumorigenesis. Our data in clinical tissue samples highlight miR-638
and DACT3 with histological marker for cancer detection and potentially
therapeutic implications.


