Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: STAT5 inhibition induces apoptosis in peripheral T cell lymphoma.


Peripheral T cell lymphoma (PTCL) is a heterogeneous malignancy with
extremely poor prognosis. Five-year overall survival is Peripheral T cell
lymphoma (PTCL) is a heterogeneous malignancy with extremely poor
prognosis. Five-year overall survival is <40% and can be as low as 12%
for specific subtypes. There is, therefore, an urgent need to identify
and develop novel therapeutic targets and approaches. A number of recent
sequencing studies, including a whole exome sequencing analysis of
primary PTCL patients conducted by our laboratory, have revealed
recurrent oncogenic driver mutations in the common gamma chain/JAK/STAT
signaling pathway, resulting in the aberrant activation of the
transcriptional regulator STAT5. STAT5 has additionally been found to be
upregulated or contain activating mutations in 30-40% of PTCL cases of
specific subtypes. These findings highlight STAT5 as an oncogenic driver
of PTCL and suggest a role for it in novel therapeutic approaches. Based
on these data, we aimed to evaluate STAT5 mechanistically as a
therapeutic target in PTCL.

The drug, pimozide, which is an FDA approved neuroleptic agent, was
recently identified by drug screen to be a STAT5 inhibitor. We assessed
the efficacy of pimozide in PTCL using resazurin dye assay, Fluorescence
Activated Cell Sorting (FACS), and immunoblot analysis. Our data
demonstrate a concentration dependent reduction in STAT5 activity and the
number of viable cells in PTCL cell lines after culture with pimozide.
This is shown to be due to an increase in cell death by apoptosis. To
verify that pimozideâ€™s efficacy is due to its inhibition of STAT5
activity, we transduced PTCL cell lines with anti-STAT5 shRNA to knock
down STAT5 and assessed PTCL cell survival and proliferation. We show
that STAT5 knockdown results in a three-fold reduction in PTCL cell
viability, which occurs due to an increase in apoptosis. Furthermore, our
data supports a TRAIL dependent mechanism for induction of apoptosis
shown by an upregulation of TRAIL by PTCL cells after STAT5 knockdown or
culture with pimozide. Mitochondrial membrane potential is also
disrupted. These findings have potential clinical implications, as we
further demonstrate that pimozide inhibits STAT5 phosphorylation, reduces
cell viability, and induces apoptosis in primary PTCL patient samples ex
vivo.

This research supports further exploration of STAT5 as a therapeutic
target in PTCL and the development of STAT5 inhibition in the treatment
of PTCL. To facilitate the development of non-chemotherapeutic dependent
therapeutic approaches for PTCL, we are now assessing STAT5 inhibition in
combination with small molecule inducers of apoptosis including TRAIL
pathway and PARP inhibitors. PARP inhibitors have shown efficacy in
malignancies with DNA damage response pathway mutations, which have been
identified in up to half of cases of certain subtypes of PTCL. We also
aim to further investigate the use of JAK inhibitors, kinases responsible
for STAT5 activation, in combination in PTCL, as several have
demonstrated clinical efficacy in other hematologic malignancies.


