Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Local treatment with novel TLR9 agonist IMO-2125 demonstrates
antitumor activity in preclinical models of pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer remains a serious unmet medical need. The majority of
pancreatic tumors are composed of stromal cells that make tumors
resistant to conventional therapies. We are developing an approach in
which a TLR9 agonist, IMO-2125, is administered intratumorally, which
induces local Th1 responses and modulates the tumor microenvironment.
This approach has shown promising antitumor activity in preclinical
models of multiple tumor types in combination with checkpoint inhibitors.
We are employing a similar approach to the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

We evaluated the local therapeutic effect of IMO-2125 in a murine
syngeneic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (Panc02) cancer models. In the
first study, C57BL/6 mice were intraperitoneally (i.p.) implanted with
Panc02 cells to generate peritoneal metastatic cancer. Tumor-bearing mice
(n=10 per group) were then treated with 2.5 mg/kg IMO-2125 either by i.p.
or subcutaneous (s.c.) injections for six times in two weeks. In the
second study, to establish dual solid tumors in C57BL/6 mice, Panc02
cells were subcutaneously implanted in both the right and left flanks of
the animals. When tumors reached to 50-150 mm3, we started the
intratumoral (i.t.) administration of IMO-2125 in right tumors at doses
of either 0.25 mg/kg, 1 mg/kg or 2.5 mg/kg, or PBS (n=10 per group),
3x/week for three weeks.

In the peritoneal metastatic pancreatic tumor model, 80% of IMO-2125
intraperitoneally treated mice survived for more than 88 days, while 90%
of the control group died within 29 days. Compared to i.p. treatment, the
s.c. treated group survived for only 36 days. Tumor-free mice from the
IMO-2125 i.p treatment group (n=7) rejected the same tumor rechallenge,
suggesting establishment of durable tumor-specific immune response. In
the dual solid pancreatic tumor model, intratumoral IMO-2125 treatment
led to a dose dependent antitumor activity in both injected and distant
tumors. Tumors treated with 0.25, 1 and 2.5 mg/kg doses of IMO-2125
showed reductions in tumor volume by 66% (p = 0.004), 74% (p = 0.002) and
95% (p = 0.003), respectively. Moreover, the distant tumors exhibited a
reduction of 0% (p = 0.65), 64% (p = 0.006) and 69% (p = 0.001),
respectively. Antitumor activity was associated with increased T-cell
infiltration and upregulation of the gene expression of various
checkpoints in both treated and distant tumors. In an independent study,
treatment with a control IMO showed minimal antitumor activity. All
treatments were well tolerated.

In summary, local treatment with IMO-2125 exerts antitumor activity in
preclinical pancreatic cancer models, associated with an increase in
T-cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment, providing a novel
approach to the treatment of pancreatic cancer. The clinical trial of
intratumoral IMO-2125 is in progress in patients with melanoma.


