Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel CD19 targeting antibody-drug conjugate, huB4-DGN462, shows
promising in vitro and in vivo activity in CD19-positive lymphoma models.


Background. CD19 is a cell surface membrane protein expressed in most
mature and immature B cell neoplasms, making it a promising target for
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) therapy for B cell malignancies. Here we
describe the preclinical activity of a novel CD19-targeting ADC, based on
the potent indolinobenzodiazepine DNA-alkylating payload DGN462.

Methods. The humanized anti-CD19 antibody, huB4, was conjugated to DGN462
via a cleavable disulfide linker, sulfo-SPDB. In vitro activity of the
huB4-DGN462 ADC or the unconjugated DGN462 toxin was evaluated in 54
lymphoma cell lines [27 diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL); 10 mantle
cell lymphomas; 6 marginal zone lymphomas; 5 anaplastic large T-cell
lymphomas; 6 others]. Cell proliferation/viability after 72h of exposure
was measured using a MTT assay. Apoptosis activation was defined by at
least 1.5-fold increase in caspase 3/7 signal activation in respect to
controls using the Promega ApoTox-Glo Triplex Assay. Gene expression
profiling (GEP) was performed with the Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression
BeadChips on untreated cell lines followed by GSEA (NES > |2|, PMethods.
The humanized anti-CD19 antibody, huB4, was conjugated to DGN462 via a
cleavable disulfide linker, sulfo-SPDB. In vitro activity of the
huB4-DGN462 ADC or the unconjugated DGN462 toxin was evaluated in 54
lymphoma cell lines [27 diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL); 10 mantle
cell lymphomas; 6 marginal zone lymphomas; 5 anaplastic large T-cell
lymphomas; 6 others]. Cell proliferation/viability after 72h of exposure
was measured using a MTT assay. Apoptosis activation was defined by at
least 1.5-fold increase in caspase 3/7 signal activation in respect to
controls using the Promega ApoTox-Glo Triplex Assay. Gene expression
profiling (GEP) was performed with the Illumina HumanHT-12 Expression
BeadChips on untreated cell lines followed by GSEA (NES > |2|, P<0.05,
FDR |1.2|; P |1.2|; P< 0.05; top 200 up and top 200 down). In vivo
efficacy of huB4-DGN462 was evaluated in CD19-expressing xenograft tumor
models.

Results. huB4-DGN462 was cytotoxic against a broad panel of 48 B cell
lymphoma cell lines (median IC50 100 pM; 95%CI, 38-214). The cytotoxic
activity was not limited by P53, BCL2, MYC or CDKN2A status, or
associated with DLBCL cell of origin. Consistent with overall lower CD19
expression, huB4-DGN462 was significantly (p-value=0.007) less active in
eight T cell-derived lymphomas (median IC50 of 1.75 nM (95%CI, 0.5-5.75))
than in B cell lymphomas. huB4-DGN462 induced caspase 3/7 activation in
48/54 cell lines (89%) consistent with an apoptotic mechanism of action.
huB4-DGN462 demonstrated compelling anti-tumor activity after a single
intravenous dose in two diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell line xenograft
models: DoHH2 (a subcutaneous model) and Farage (a disseminated model).
In the DoHH2 model, huB4-DGN462 resulted in a significant, dose-dependent
tumor growth delay and survival benefit at 1.7 mg Ab/kg compared to a
non-targeted control DGN462 ADC. In the disseminated Farage model, a
significant dose-dependent increase in survival was observed in mice
treated with as low as 0.17 mg Ab/kg of huB4-DGN462. At 1.7 mg Ab/kg, the
life span was increased >400% compared to untreated mice.

Conclusions. The novel ADC huB4-DGN462 presented strong preclinical
anti-lymphoma activity, which provides evidence for further study.


