Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Further evidence that the DNA-interactive Pyrrolobenzodiazepine
(PBD) Dimer SJG-136 works through a transcription factor inhibition
mechanism.


The pyrrolo[2,1-c][1,4]benzodiazepines (PBDs) are sequence-selective DNA
minor-groove interacting agents. The PBD dimer SJG-136 has currently been
investigated in Phase II clinical trials in ovarian cancer and leukaemia
in the UK and the USA. More recently, PBD dimer analogues are being
attached to tumour-targeting antibodies to create Antibody-Drug
Conjugates (ADCs), some which are now in Phase 3 clinical trials with
many others in pre-clinical and clinical development. Transcription
factors (TFs) are sequence-specific DNA-interacting proteins that bind to
consensus DNA sequences, thereby controlling transcription. TFs regulate
processes such as cell differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. The
interaction of a small-molecule with the consensus DNA recognition
sequences of TFs can prevent a TF from interacting with its cognate
sequence, thereby inhibiting the expression of genes critical for the
survival and proliferation of cancer cells. There is growing evidence
that PBDs may exert, at least in part, their pharmacological effect
through TF inhibition in addition to the arrest of the replication fork,
DNA strand breakage, and inhibition of enzymes including endonucleases
and RNA polymerases. For this reason, there is now interest in using PBDs
as the basis for a small-molecule strategy to target specific DNA
sequences for TF inhibition as a novel anticancer therapy. We have
developed a reversed-phase HPLC/MS method as a tool to evaluate the
interaction of DNA-binding PBD molecules with oligonucleotides of varying
lengths and sequences. Using this methodology, we have demonstrated that
the PBD dimer SJG-136 binds to the cognate sequences of the oncogenic
transcription factors NF-ÎºB, EGR-1, AP-1 and STAT3. Surprisingly,
significant differences in the rate and extent of adduct formation
between the different cognate sequences were observed which may explain,
at least in part, the differences in potency of SJG-136 in various tumour
cell lines. Furthermore, an RT PCR study has been carried out using the
human tumour cell lines MDA-MB-231 (breast) and HT-29 (colon) to see
whether these transcription factors are affected in vitro. The results
were consistent with the HPLC-MS studies in that SJG-136 was shown to
significantly down-regulate a number of AP-1- and STAT3-dependent genes
such as Bcl-2, VEGF, p53 and survivin. These findings add significantly
to knowledge of the mechanism of action of SJG-136 and related PBD
compounds, and could be relevant for the correct interpretation of
clinical activity of molecules of this type both as standalone agents and
as ADC payloads.


