Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Involvement of CXCL12-CXCR7 axis in adipocyte-induced TNBC
metastasis.


Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequent tumor in women worldwide.
Although its mortality has significantly decreased owing to advanced
therapies, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is still difficult to
treat because of lack of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and
HER-2. TNBC accounts for 12-24% of total BC and contributes to the
aggressiveness and poorer outcomes. The risk of BC increases
significantly in obese women. Obesity is also associated with the worse
clinical prognosis of BC. But the underlying mechanisms between obesity
and BC, particularly TNBC, remain unclear. Therefore, we compare the
molecular mechanisms by which human adipocyte conditioned media (CM)
affect TNBC cells (BT549) and non-TNBC cells (MCF7A). Adipocyte CM had no
effect on the proliferation of both TNBC and non-TNBC cells. However,
adipocyte CM enhanced significantly migration in TNBC cells compared to
non-TNBC cells. Next, we examined the signaling pathway by which
adipocyte CM promote migration of TNBC cell. AKT and ERK were activated
in both TNBC cells and non-TNBC cells. However, phospho-STAT3 was
significantly increased in TNBC cells. Also, N-cadherin, a marker for
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), was increased at the late
time point in TNBC cells. Furthermore, CXCR7 was specifically increased
in TNBC cells after treatment with adipocyte CM using a PCR array. CXCR7
is chemoattractive to CXCL12 which is highly expressed in the lung, the
bone marrow, and the liver, common sites of BC metastasis. Taken
together, the results indicate that adipocyte CM may promote metastasis
of TNBC cells through the CXCL12-CXCR7 axis by activating STAT3.


