Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-depth profiling of the energy depletion-mediated cancer
cytotoxicity by passively delivered zinc complexes via PARP1 activation.


Dysfunctional apoptotic function from impaired p53 tumor suppressor
activity leads to poorer prognosis in cancer patients by compromising
drug sensitivity and promoting drug resistance development. Programmed
necrosis following energy crisis is a theoretically proposed cytotoxic
mechanism for circumventing this problem. Herein we demonstrate that a
biodegradable zinc complex is capable of triggering the programmed
necrosis via activation of PARP1/PARG/MPTP, which consistently resulted
in p53-independent broad spectrum cytotoxicity in vitro across all 20
cancer cell lines tested including many with reported drug resistance
phenotypes. Additionally, we investigated its possible interaction with
agents that influence p53 for possible antagonism/synergism. Supporting
in vivo evidence in both animal models and clinical case studies
involving terminal chemo-resistant gastric cancer patients upon oral
administration (30 mg Zn/day) are presented. These results implicate
macromolecular biodegradable zinc complexes as promising antitumor agents
of simple compositions for overcoming the current hurdles in clinics, and
warrant further clinical investigations. We plan to advance the studies
through non-invasive smart devices reporting real-time blood glucose,
blood pressure, microperfusion, and other hemodynamic parameters.


