Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Yeast Bax Inhibitor (BXI1) is involved in redox and calcium
homeostasis of the ER in S. cerevisiae.


In mammals, the Bax inhibitor (TMBIM) family of proteins has
cytoprotective properties that are most evident in paradigms of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The canonical gene of the family
called BI-1 has been linked to several human cancers. The crystal
structure of a prokaryotic member of the family, BsYetJ, has revealed
that the Bax inhibitor proteins are pH sensitive calcium leaks. Our
published studies have shown that the yeast Bax Inhibitor, Bxi1p, is
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum and is involved in the unfolded
protein response (UPR) that is triggered by endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress. We now show that cells lacking BXI1 have an altered redox
microenvironment in the ER: The ER of âˆ†bxi1 cells exposed to
dithiothreitol (DTT) and tunicamycin, two drugs known to induce the
unfolded protein response (UPR), become more reduced than their wildtype
counterparts. Moreover, we also report that cells lacking BXI1 accumulate
more calcium in the ER than wildtype cells. Together, our data suggests
that Bxi1p is involved in regulating the ER microenvironment. Other
members of the TMBIM family may have the same role in normal and cancer
cells. [Our laboratory is supported by grant NIGMS R15 GM110578, awarded
to N. Austriaco.]


