Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutive overexpression of nrf2 in esophageal adenocarcinoma
protects cancer cells from bile salts-induced DNA damage and favors
cancer cell survival.


Background: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is the major type of
malignant cancer of esophagus in the USA. The incidence rate has
increased 4-10% per year among men since 1976 in the USA, more rapidly
than for any other type of cancer. EAC is known to originate from
premalignant Barrett’s esophagus (BE) through BE-dysplasia-EAC process.
Normal cells have intact anti-oxidative mechanisms, among which
NFE2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) plays a pivotal role in regulating cellular
response to various stimuli. Cancer cells have high levels of reactive
oxygen species and oxidative stress due to activation of oncogenes,
inflammatory microenvironment, and dysfunction of anti-oxidative
mechanisms. However, the role of NRF2 in Barrett’s related esophageal
carcinogenesis is barely known.

Methods and Results: We have found that Nrf2 protein expression is
significantly upregulated in EAC cell lines as compared to BE cell lines
(CPA, BAR10T) and normal esophageal squamous cell lines. We detected a
similar overexpression of NRF2 in primary EAC tissue samples. Using
luciferase reporter assay, we demonstrated significant induction of NRF2
transcription activity in EAC cells in response to exposure to acidic
bile acids, as compared to controls (PMethods and Results: We have found
that Nrf2 protein expression is significantly upregulated in EAC cell
lines as compared to BE cell lines (CPA, BAR10T) and normal esophageal
squamous cell lines. We detected a similar overexpression of NRF2 in
primary EAC tissue samples. Using luciferase reporter assay, we
demonstrated significant induction of NRF2 transcription activity in EAC
cells in response to exposure to acidic bile acids, as compared to
controls (P<.01). We detected significant increase in the expression of
Heme Oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and Glutathione Reductase (GR) in these cells
(PMethods and Results: We have found that Nrf2 protein expression is
significantly upregulated in EAC cell lines as compared to BE cell lines
(CPA, BAR10T) and normal esophageal squamous cell lines. We detected a
similar overexpression of NRF2 in primary EAC tissue samples. Using
luciferase reporter assay, we demonstrated significant induction of NRF2
transcription activity in EAC cells in response to exposure to acidic
bile acids, as compared to controls (P<.01). We detected significant
increase in the expression of Heme Oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and Glutathione
Reductase (GR) in these cells (P<.01). Knockdown of NRF2 by siRNA or
crisp/cas9, significantly increased cellular ROS level, oxidative DNA
damage (8-oxoguanine), and double strand DNA breaks (p-H2AX). Knockdown
of NRF2 sensitized cells to apoptosis following exposure to bile acids
and CDDP. Concordant with these results, the use of NRF2 inhibitor,
Brusatol, sensitized EAC cells to CDDP treatment with a significant
increase in cell death, as compared to single agent treatment (PMethods
and Results: We have found that Nrf2 protein expression is significantly
upregulated in EAC cell lines as compared to BE cell lines (CPA, BAR10T)
and normal esophageal squamous cell lines. We detected a similar
overexpression of NRF2 in primary EAC tissue samples. Using luciferase
reporter assay, we demonstrated significant induction of NRF2
transcription activity in EAC cells in response to exposure to acidic
bile acids, as compared to controls (P<.01). We detected significant
increase in the expression of Heme Oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and Glutathione
Reductase (GR) in these cells (P<.01). Knockdown of NRF2 by siRNA or
crisp/cas9, significantly increased cellular ROS level, oxidative DNA
damage (8-oxoguanine), and double strand DNA breaks (p-H2AX). Knockdown
of NRF2 sensitized cells to apoptosis following exposure to bile acids
and CDDP. Concordant with these results, the use of NRF2 inhibitor,
Brusatol, sensitized EAC cells to CDDP treatment with a significant
increase in cell death, as compared to single agent treatment (P<.01).
Conclusion: These results indicate that constitutive overexpression of
NRF2 in EAC cells protects cancer cells from high level of ROS and
promotes cancer cell survival. Inhibition of NRF2 through its specific
inhibitor may have therapeutic value in EAC.


