Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI upregulates the expression of
PD-L1 and promotes immune escape in lung cancer.


Background and purpose: Acquired resistance is a severe problem of EGFR
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) therapy in lung cancer patients. Immune checkpoint
therapy is a new revolution in cancer treatment with dramatic outcomes in
a subset of patients. In this study, we explored the possibility of
immune checkpoint therapy in lung cancers with three well-known resistant
mechanisms to EGFR-TKIs, T790M, MET amplification and hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF), and investigated internal regulation mechanisms.

Experimental Design: PD-L1 expression and immune escape ability were
evaluated in EGFR-TKIs resistant lung cancer cells by MET amplification,
HGF, and T790M, as well as T790M transfected-human renal derived cells
(293FT). MAPK and PI3K pathways were investigated simultaneously. PD-L1
gene deleted resistant cells were used in NOD-SCID xenograft models to
evaluate immune escape in vivo.

Results: All of three resistant mechanisms increased PD-L1 expression.
Both MAPK and PI3K pathways are involved in MET amplification or HGF
induced PD-L1 overexpression, whereas only MAPK pathway mediated it in
T790M-transfected cells. The decreased cytotoxicity of lymphocytes can be
restored by anti-PD-L1 antibodies. Moreover, xenograft tumors by
EGFR-TKIs sensitive cells but not resistant cells responded to treatment
of human lymphocytes. However, deletion of PD-L1 successfully restored
cytotoxicity of lymphocytes in EGFR-TKIs resistant tumors.

Conclusion: Acquired Resistance to EGFR-TKIs augments the expression of
PD-L1 and promotes immune escape in EGFR mutant lung cancer. Immune
checkpoint therapy might be a promising alternative therapeutic strategy
for NSCLC that acquired resistant to EGFR-TKIs.


