Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A significant differential sensitivity to AKT inhibitors GSK690693
and MK-2206 2HI was identified in primary cells established from a
low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma.


The AKT pathway is frequently activated in cancer cells and is a defined
target for therapeutic intervention.

Methods: RNA expression levels of candidate AKT pathway genes (AREG,
EGFR, AKT, mTOR, GSK3α/β) were defined following RNAseq of replicate
primary cell cultures (GUMC220 and GUMC221), which were established
independently from two areas of the same low-grade salivary
mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC). Protein expression and phosphorylation
levels of the corresponding gene products were characterized using
immunohistochemistry on FFPE sections from the original patient tumor,
cell pellets, and cell line generated patient-derived xenografts and
through western blotting of proteins extracted from cells grown under
different culture conditions before and after treatment with AKT
inhibitors GSK690693 (ATP-competitive) and MK-2206 2HCl (allosteric
inhibitor). The effects of GSK690693 and MK-2206 2HCl on cell viability
were tested at different concentrations ranging from 1.2-40μM in 2D and
3D conditions with three different culture media (Conditional media+ ROCK
kinase inhibitor Y27632, conditional media without Y27632, and EpiCult-C
BasalTM) using CellTiter-GloTM. Doxorubicin was used as a comparative
control for evaluating the impact of a chemotherapeutic on cell viability
and DMSO as a negative vehicle control. MDA-MB-453 cells were tested as a
positive control for MK-2206 2HCl and GSK690693 sensitivity.

Results: Replicate primary cell cultures showed the same chemosensitivity
results. MK-2206 2HCl induced a significantly greater reduction in cell
viability as compared to GSK690693 in the MEC primary cells. This
differential response was replicated in all three 2D culture medias
tested (GUMC220_CMY p= 0.0017, GUMC220_CM p=0.0004, GUMC220_EpiC
pResults: Replicate primary cell cultures showed the same
chemosensitivity results. MK-2206 2HCl induced a significantly greater
reduction in cell viability as compared to GSK690693 in the MEC primary
cells. This differential response was replicated in all three 2D culture
medias tested (GUMC220_CMY p= 0.0017, GUMC220_CM p=0.0004, GUMC220_EpiC
p<0.0001, GUMC221_CMY p=0.0010, GUMC221_CM pResults: Replicate primary
cell cultures showed the same chemosensitivity results. MK-2206 2HCl
induced a significantly greater reduction in cell viability as compared
to GSK690693 in the MEC primary cells. This differential response was
replicated in all three 2D culture medias tested (GUMC220_CMY p= 0.0017,
GUMC220_CM p=0.0004, GUMC220_EpiC p<0.0001, GUMC221_CMY p=0.0010,
GUMC221_CM p<0.0001, and GUMC221_EpiC p=0.0041, One-way ANOVA) with the
same pattern reproduced in 3D cultures. Expected changes in levels of
p-AKT(Ser473), GSK3α/β, p-GSK3α/β, and p-mTOR were found following
treatment with both drugs as compared to vehicle controls. In MK-2206
2HCl treated cells, expression levels were all reduced whereas in
GSK690693 treated cells, p-AKT(Ser473), p-AKT(Thr308) were increased and
GSK3α/β, p-GSK3α/β, p-mTOR reduced.

Conclusion: Characterization of primary cell cultures using RNAseq led to
the identification of a potentially druggable pathway. Direct testing
revealed a differential response to the two AKT inhibitors evaluated.
Although the two primary cell cultures were established from two
geographically distinct areas of the same tumor, response to drug testing
was the same and reproducible across different culture modalities.
Studies establish the feasibility of deriving primary cells for drug
testing and personalized therapy, even from small tumors.


