Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis invalidates a genetic target of clinical
trials in cancer.


The Maternal Embryonic Leucine Zipper Kinase MELK has been described as a
genetic dependency in several cancer types, most notably in the
highly-aggressive basal subtype of breast cancer; MELK inhibition through
the use of both RNAi and small-molecule approaches appears to block the
growth of cancer types with such dependency. Based on these results, the
MELK inhibitor OTS167 is currently being tested as a novel chemotherapy
agent in multiple clinical trials. Here, however, we report that
mutagenizing MELK with CRISPR/Cas9 has no effect on the fitness of basal
breast cancer cell lines or cell lines from other cancer types. Through
seven guide RNAs targeting the kinase and kinase-associated domains of
MELK, we demonstrate that mutagenesis of MELK causes no defect in
proliferative ability or anchorage independent growth in these cancer
types. Additionally, cells with mutagenized MELK remain sensitive to
OTS167, suggesting that this drug blocks proliferation through an
off-target mechanism. Finally, the patient tumor gene expression data
that initially identified MELK as being significantly upregulated in
patients with poor survival was reexamined. As MELK is thought to play a
role in mitosis, we compared MELK expression to a set of well-known cell
proliferation markers and show significant correlations of MELK with the
proliferation genes; this suggests a role of MELK in representing the
mitotic activity of a tumor, rather than possessing a transformative role
in itself. In total, our results undermine the rationale for a series of
current clinical trials based on MELK inhibition and provide an
experimental approach for the use of CRISPR/Cas9 in preclinical target
validation that can be broadly applied.


