Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of stable and brain-penetrating disulfiram
nanoparticles, characterization and efficacy in glioma cell culture and
xenograft models.


Blood brain-barrier entry, tumor heterogeneity, need to eliminate the
tumorigenic stem cells and inhibit the DNA repair protein MGMT are all
essential considerations in glioma treatment. Previously, we showed that
alcohol aversion drug disulfiram (DSF) shares all these properties
[Carcinogenesis 35, 692, 2014; Oncotarget 4,502, 2013]. DSF was shown to
inhibit the MGMT activity in the same way as ALDH by conjugating with the
active-site cysteine 145 and sensitize brain tumors to alkylating agents.
Although DSF exerts significant anticancer effects in vitro, the drug
undergoes rapid decomposition and metabolism. To overcome this problem,
we engineered DSF nanoparticles by encapsulating the drug in PEG: PLGA
polymer by solvent evaporation method. The formulation was optimized for
various process formulation variables. The optimized nano-formulation
(NP) ranged from 70-80 nm in particle size as confirmed using dynamic
light scattering and transition electron microscopy. Drug loading,
encapsulation efficiency, in vitro release were also optimal and the
particles showed excellent BBB permeability in vitro. The time course of
internalization of particles using a cyanine dye (HITC-1) showed a
lysosomal accumulation followed by mitochondria. Live animal imaging
after IV injections of HITC-labeled DSF-NPs revealed a selective
accumulation in the brain and subcutaneous tumors. Further, the
cytotoxicity elicited by DSFNPs against SF188, DAOY, UW18, UW28 and T98G
brain tumor cells was extended and greater than obtained with the free
drug. When combined with DSF-NPs, temozolomide showed an 8-10-fold
increased cytotoxicity against glioma cell lines. The DSFNPs also induced
significant degradation of MGMT and other redox-sensitive proteins such
as the NF-ÎºB, MDR1 and GSTP1 in a concentration-dependent manner in
glioma cells. ROS induction by the encapsulated drug was confirmed
through DCF-DA and DHE staining of live cells; co-staining these cells
with the mitochondrial membrane potential markers DiOC6 and DHE confirmed
the altered integrity. GSTP1 inhibition and ROS induction by DSFNPs led
to an activation of JNK/MAPK pathway, culminating in autophagy and
apoptosis as verified by western blotting, FACS and immunofluorescence of
appropriate markers. Finally, the antitumor efficacy of DSFNPs was tested
in intracranial glioblastoma developed in nude mice by injecting
luciferase-expressing SF-188 GBM cells. A superior tumor regression was
evident in DSFNP-administered animals compared with the free drug after
IVIS bioluminescence and histochemical staining of brain tissue.
Collectively, our efforts provide strong evidence that DSF nanoparticles
can cross the BBB and offer a sustained drug supply to eliminate CNS
cancers. Further refinement of DSFNPs by incorporating brain targeting
strategies is underway (supported by CPRIT grants RP130266 & RP170207 to
KSS).


