Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SPINK1, a soluble factor released by the therapy-damaged tumor
microenvironment, promotes prostate cancer resistance.


Cancer evolution is driven by not only the genetic and/or epigenetic
alterations of cancer cells, but also diverse factors that are derived
from the surrounding tumor microenvironment (TME). Upon chemotherapy or
radiation, stromal cells in the TME become senescent and develop a
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) that is characterized by
secretion of a large number of cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and
proteases. In most cases, the SASP is functionally regulated by the DNA
damage secretory program (DDSP) and pathophysiologically responsible in
vivo for disease exacerbation. We recently disclosed significant
upregulation of the serine protease inhibitor Kazal type I (SPINK1) in
primary normal human prostate fibroblasts after exposure to DNA damaging
agents. SPINK1 plays critical roles in cancer cell proliferation,
survival and motility in multiple human malignancies, but its influence
as a soluble TME-associated factor on cancer progression remains unknown.
In this study, we performed a series of molecular and cellular studies to
define the biological roles of SPINK1 in an activated TME. Promoter
analysis indicated that SPINK1 expression in the fibroblasts is regulated
by multiple transcriptional factors including the NF-ÎºB complex in
response to genotoxic stress. Fibroblast-derived SPINK1 can significantly
enhance the aggressiveness of prostate cancer cells including accelerated
proliferation, increased migration, elevated invasion and more
importantly, enhanced chemoresistance. SPINK1 triggers a typical
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cells, a process
mediated by EGFR/PI3K/Akt and MAPK/Erk signaling pathways. Consistent
with the in vitro data, our in vivo studies suggested that SPINK1
expression in the prostate TME substantially promoted cancer survival and
disease progression. Clinical investigation revealed increased expression
of SPINK1 in the stroma of multiple organ types including the prostate,
lung and breast of cancer patients after chemotherapy, implying the
systemic induction of SPINK1 by anticancer agents. Overall, our study
demonstrates that SPINK1 is a soluble biomarker of therapeutically
damaged TME and represents a potentially exploitable molecular target in
human prostate cancer clinics.


