Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subpopulation of infiltrating lymphocyte and MGMT methylation in
brain tumor prognosis.


Background: Clinicopathological features including MGMT methylation have
been correlated to prognosis in Glioblastoma (GBM). Tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) are predictive of clinical outcome in different
malignancies. We evaluated association between clinicopathological
features including MGMT methylation and IHC infiltrating immune cell
subpopulations in 43 resected GBM cases who came from 2008 to 2013.

Methods: A prospective evaluation of TIL (CD3, CD4, CD8 and CD20) and
macrophages (CD68 and CD163) through H&E was performed by a pathologist
and evaluated Immune cell subpopulations was evaluated through scanning,
and software analysis (BX63 Olympus and TissueMorph-Visionpharm) with
pathologist support. MGMT evaluation was prospectively performed by
bisulphyte PCR test in paraffin samples.

Results: Median age was 47.9 y, men (51.2%), Karnofsky scale 90% (62.8%),
median tumor size of 5.1 cm, and partial/ complete tumor resection
(22/21). Methylation MGMT test was performed in 31 cases and 17 showed
un- methylated, 4 partial methylated and 10 methylated. TILs evaluation
by HE showed low- intensity (29 cases), middle- intensity (1) and high-
intensity level (9). Pattern of distribution was focal (9 cases), multi-
focal (13) and diffuse (17). Median CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, CD68 and CD163
were 1.6%, 0.032%, 1.6%, 0.03%, 9.1% and 2.2% (regarding total cells),
respectively. Higher CD163 level was associated to male (p=0.03) and
larger size (p=0.05). Higher levels of CD8 was associated to larger size
(p=0.05). Higher CD8 and CD20 was associated to unmethylated MGMT
(p=0.041 and 0.013). Median follow- up was 14 months. Only total
resection (pResults: Median age was 47.9 y, men (51.2%), Karnofsky scale
90% (62.8%), median tumor size of 5.1 cm, and partial/ complete tumor
resection (22/21). Methylation MGMT test was performed in 31 cases and 17
showed un- methylated, 4 partial methylated and 10 methylated. TILs
evaluation by HE showed low- intensity (29 cases), middle- intensity (1)
and high- intensity level (9). Pattern of distribution was focal (9
cases), multi- focal (13) and diffuse (17). Median CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20,
CD68 and CD163 were 1.6%, 0.032%, 1.6%, 0.03%, 9.1% and 2.2% (regarding
total cells), respectively. Higher CD163 level was associated to male
(p=0.03) and larger size (p=0.05). Higher levels of CD8 was associated to
larger size (p=0.05). Higher CD8 and CD20 was associated to unmethylated
MGMT (p=0.041 and 0.013). Median follow- up was 14 months. Only total
resection (p<0.05) and MGMT methylation (pResults: Median age was 47.9 y,
men (51.2%), Karnofsky scale 90% (62.8%), median tumor size of 5.1 cm,
and partial/ complete tumor resection (22/21). Methylation MGMT test was
performed in 31 cases and 17 showed un- methylated, 4 partial methylated
and 10 methylated. TILs evaluation by HE showed low- intensity (29
cases), middle- intensity (1) and high- intensity level (9). Pattern of
distribution was focal (9 cases), multi- focal (13) and diffuse (17).
Median CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, CD68 and CD163 were 1.6%, 0.032%, 1.6%,
0.03%, 9.1% and 2.2% (regarding total cells), respectively. Higher CD163
level was associated to male (p=0.03) and larger size (p=0.05). Higher
levels of CD8 was associated to larger size (p=0.05). Higher CD8 and CD20
was associated to unmethylated MGMT (p=0.041 and 0.013). Median follow-
up was 14 months. Only total resection (p<0.05) and MGMT methylation
(p<0.05) was associated to outcome. Lymphocyte infiltration (H&E) was not
associated to outcome: Lymphocyte intensity (p=0.703), distribution
(p=0.61). Longer OS was associated to lower CD4 levels (p=0.01).

Conclusion: Tumor Infiltrating immune cell are not common in GBM, CD8 and
CD20 was associated to unmethylation, and CD4 and MGMT methylation were
associated to prognosis.


