Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PRKRA/PACT expression promotes chemoresistance in mucinous ovarian
cancer.


Purpose: To investigate the mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance and
developing strategies to enhance therapeutic responses in mucinous
ovarian cancer (MOC).

Experimental design: We carried out a kinome-based siRNA screen using
human MOC to identify novel targets to enhance the efficacy of
chemotherapy in MOC cell lines. In vitro and in vivo validation studies
were carried out using MOC models. We specifically interrogated the role
of PRKRA in MOC based on our screen results.

Results: Among the 939 genes in the screen, we focused on PRKRA/PACT
because it was one of the top 5 target genes that exhibited the greatest
extent of synthetic lethality in the target gene-siRNA plus oxaliplatin
group relative to the target gene-siRNA group. The combination of
oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA treatment resulted in significantly reduced cell
viability compared with oxaliplatin plus control siRNA in RMUG-L-ip1 or
RMUG-S-ip1 MOC cells (pResults: Among the 939 genes in the screen, we
focused on PRKRA/PACT because it was one of the top 5 target genes that
exhibited the greatest extent of synthetic lethality in the target
gene-siRNA plus oxaliplatin group relative to the target gene-siRNA
group. The combination of oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA treatment resulted in
significantly reduced cell viability compared with oxaliplatin plus
control siRNA in RMUG-L-ip1 or RMUG-S-ip1 MOC cells (p<0.001), while
knockdown of PRKRA did not result in a significant change in cell
viability compared with the control. We also observed a 2.1-fold increase
in cell apoptosis in vitro after treatment with oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA
in both MOC cells (pResults: Among the 939 genes in the screen, we
focused on PRKRA/PACT because it was one of the top 5 target genes that
exhibited the greatest extent of synthetic lethality in the target
gene-siRNA plus oxaliplatin group relative to the target gene-siRNA
group. The combination of oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA treatment resulted in
significantly reduced cell viability compared with oxaliplatin plus
control siRNA in RMUG-L-ip1 or RMUG-S-ip1 MOC cells (p<0.001), while
knockdown of PRKRA did not result in a significant change in cell
viability compared with the control. We also observed a 2.1-fold increase
in cell apoptosis in vitro after treatment with oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA
in both MOC cells (p<0.05). Using orthotopic mouse models of MOC, we
observed an 88% reduction (pResults: Among the 939 genes in the screen,
we focused on PRKRA/PACT because it was one of the top 5 target genes
that exhibited the greatest extent of synthetic lethality in the target
gene-siRNA plus oxaliplatin group relative to the target gene-siRNA
group. The combination of oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA treatment resulted in
significantly reduced cell viability compared with oxaliplatin plus
control siRNA in RMUG-L-ip1 or RMUG-S-ip1 MOC cells (p<0.001), while
knockdown of PRKRA did not result in a significant change in cell
viability compared with the control. We also observed a 2.1-fold increase
in cell apoptosis in vitro after treatment with oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA
in both MOC cells (p<0.05). Using orthotopic mouse models of MOC, we
observed an 88% reduction (p<0.01) in tumor weight and 75% reduction in
the number of tumor nodules (pResults: Among the 939 genes in the screen,
we focused on PRKRA/PACT because it was one of the top 5 target genes
that exhibited the greatest extent of synthetic lethality in the target
gene-siRNA plus oxaliplatin group relative to the target gene-siRNA
group. The combination of oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA treatment resulted in
significantly reduced cell viability compared with oxaliplatin plus
control siRNA in RMUG-L-ip1 or RMUG-S-ip1 MOC cells (p<0.001), while
knockdown of PRKRA did not result in a significant change in cell
viability compared with the control. We also observed a 2.1-fold increase
in cell apoptosis in vitro after treatment with oxaliplatin plus siPRKRA
in both MOC cells (p<0.05). Using orthotopic mouse models of MOC, we
observed an 88% reduction (p<0.01) in tumor weight and 75% reduction in
the number of tumor nodules (p<0.01) in the siPRKRA plus oxaliplatin
group compared with the control siRNA plus oxaliplatin group. PRKRA
expression in human MOC was significantly higher relative to high-grade
serous ovarian tumors as evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore,
we found that the interaction between PACT and Dicer can regulate
maturation of microRNA. In particular, mature-miR-515-3p was found to be
inhibited by the interaction between PACT and Dicer. Expression of
miR-515-3p promotes chemosensitivity in MOC by targeting the mRNA of the
anti-apoptotic gene AXL.

Conclusion: The PRKRA/PACT axis represents an important therapeutic
opportunity in MOC for enhancing oxaliplatin efficacy.


