Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanization of patient derived xenograft (PDX) cancer model mice
with peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).


Immunocompetent transgenic mouse models have for decades served as
valuable tools to address the effect of oncogenes and tumor suppressors.
Immunodeficient mice have been used to establish patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models harboring human tumors. These types of models have
been used to study cancer initiation and progression as well as
preclinical evaluation of anticancer drugs. One major limiting factor for
both these model systems is the immune system; the PDX models lack an
immune system and the immune system in immunocompetent mouse models
display differences compared to the human immune system. Thus, in cancer
research there is a need for preclinical models to study the influence of
human immune cells on tumor progression and response to cancer therapies.
We have established and optimized protocols for intravenous (IV) or
intraperitoneal (IP) injections of isolated human PBMCs, to generate
humanized mice harboring human immune cells. Our protocols do not require
irradiation or busulfan pretreatment of the animals. Flow cytometry
analyses showed that mainly T helper cells, CD4+, and cytotoxic T cells,
CD8+, were present in the humanized mice. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
analyses of humanized PDX cancer model mice showed that human lymphocytes
were present in the tumor periphery and some very few cells within the
tumor, in addition to the human leukocytes in the liver and spleen. The
growth rates of the PDX tumors were not affected by the humanization. Our
protocols require minimal preparations of the animals and generate
humanized PDX mice harboring human lymphocytes locating in close
proximity of, as well as inside the PDX tumors. The model systems are
suitable for preclinical studies of human, adaptive immune responses in
tumor progression and cancer therapies.


