Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Emergence of RAS or EGFR mutant clones affects duration of
response to EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers.


Cetuximab and panitumumab are monoclonal anti-EGFR antibodies (moAbs)
currently used for the treatment of advanced RAS wild type colorectal
cancers (CRC). Emergence of acquired resistance invariably limits the
efficacy of these agents, and the dynamics of clonal evolution during
anti-EGFR blockade are poorly understood. At progression, RAS mutations
represent the most common genetic alterations, while EGFR extracellular
domain (ECD) mutations are acquired by a smaller cohort of patients. We
found that the mutation profile correlates with the clinical outcome of
patients; in particular those who develop RAS mutations upon EGFR
blockade achieve reduced tumor shrinkage and shorter duration of response
respect to patients in which EGFR ECD mutations emerge during therapy. We
investigated in preclinical models the potential role of RAS and EGFR ECD
mutations during the emergence of acquired resistance, by tracking the
evolution of clones in a genetically barcoded population of CRC cells
chronically treated with cetuximab. We observed that therapeutic (target
therapy, chemotherapy) and environmental (reduced nutrient condition)
pressures differentially shape the clonal composition of CRC cell
populations, leading to the emergence of clones with the highest fitness
in presence of the external pressure. In conclusion, a multistep clonal
evolution process characterizes the development of drug resistance and is
associated with the clinical outcome of CRC patients treated with
anti-EGFR antibodies.


