Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Override the doxorubicin-induced G2/M checkpoint using cell-cycle
checkpoint inhibitors on acute lymphoblastic leukemia.


The topoisomerase 2 inhibitor, doxorubicin, has been showed by different
groups to induce cell cycle arrest in various kind of tumor cells.
Specifically doxorubicin-treated cells activate the G2/M cell cycle
checkpoint as a consequence of the induction of DNA damages. During the
last years many studies have been showed the efficacy of different cell
cycle checkpoint inhibitors in single agent or in combination with
various DNA damaging agents. These studies showed that the inhibition of
key proteins of the cell cycle, like Chk1 and Wee1, deeply sensitize
tumor cells to the treatment with genotoxic agent. On these bases, the
aim of the study was to evaluate the efficacy of a selective Chk1/Chk2
inhibitor and a Wee1 inhibitor in combination with doxorubicin for the
treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Firstly we evaluate the effect
of doxorubicin treatment on a panel of human B and T ALL cell lines in
term of reduction of the cell viability, modification of cell cycle
profile and activation of the DNA damage response. For this reason the
cells were treated with doxorubicin (0.25, 0.5 and 1uM) for 24 and 48
hours and the reduction of the cell viability was quantified using WST-1
reagents. In all the cell lines treated the cytotoxic effect of
doxorubicin was time and dose dependent. Then the induction of the
apoptosis (Pi/Annexin V) and the effect on cell cycle profile (Pi
staining) was evaluated in all the cell lines. In line with the
literature the treatment with doxorubicin arrested the cells in G2/M
phase. Then the effect of the combinations between doxorubicin and the
two checkpoint kinase inhibitor was assessed in all the cell lines.
Different cell lines were treated with doxorubicin (5, 10, 25 and 50 nM
for the more sensitive cell lines; 50, 100, 250 and 500 nM for the less
sensitive cell lines) in combination with the Chk1/Chk2 inhibitor (2, 5
and 10 nM) for 24 and 48 hours. The combination showed a additively
effect in term of reduction of the cell viability and induction of
apoptosis. Different cell lines were pre-treated for 18 hours with
doxorubicin and then with Chk1/Chk2 inhibitor for different time points.
Interestingly the inhibition of both Chk1/Chk2 proteins removed the G2/M
arrest induced by the pre-treatment with doxorubicin, progressively
reducing the number of cells in G2/M phase, increasing the percentage of
cells in sub-G1 phase. Similar results were seen combining a Wee1
inhibitor with doxorubicin on several ALL cell lines. In our opinion the
combination between the cell cycle checkpoint inhibitors and doxorubicin
could be a promising strategy for the treatment of B/T-ALL. Supported by
ELN, AIL, AIRC, progetto Regione-Universit√† 2010-12 (L. Bolondi), FP7
NGS-PTL project.


