Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cholesterol inhibition reduces Hh mediated chondrosarcoma.


Constitutive activation of Hh signaling is a common occurrence in
chondrosarcoma(CSA). Gene profiling analysis showed that Gli
transcription regulates genes that govern cholesterol homeostasis, which
alters cholesterol accumulation in chondrocytes; a higher level of
Gli-mediated transcription results in accumulation of intracellular
cholesterol. Here we determined if targeting cholesterol-processing genes
downstream of Hh signalling could be used as a novel treatment approach.
With institutional review board approval, human CSA samples were obtained
fresh from surgery. For in vitro studies, CSA explants of 2mmx2mm x2 mm
cubic in size establihed as organ cultures. For in vivo studies, one
million CSA cells were subcutanously injected into NSG mice. Cells from
five CSAs were treated both in vitro and in vivo with a hedgehog
inhibitor, Cur61414, a cholesterol inhibitor, Lovastatin, or both. In
vitro, CSA explants were treated for 48 hrs at concentration of 20 Î¼M of
each drug. In vivo, mice were treated with 4.5mg/kg/day of Cur61414,
Lovastatin, or both by intraperitoneal injection for 4 wks. At the end of
treatment, the explants or xenografts were harvested and processed for
further analysis. RT-PCR was used to meausre the expression of Hh and
cholesterol target genes. Tumor size was meausred from the xenografts.
Blockade of Hh signaling significantly decreased Gli1 gene expression by
30%, increased 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR)
expression for more than 300% indicating decreased intracellular
cholesterol. Treatment with the cholesterol inhibitor Lovastatin
increased expression of HMGCR for more than 500%. The combination of Hh
and cholesterol blockage resulted in increased expression of HMGCR for
more than 3400%. Analysis of chondrosarcoma xenografts in vivo showed a
significnat decrease in tumor size with Lovastatin (32% decline), 3 folds
reducation of Brdu(+) cells, and 2.4 fold increase of Caspase-3 + cells,
treatment with Cur 61414 reduced the tumor growth by 5% with no
significant reduction of Brdu(+) cells but 2.6 fold increase of Caspase-3
(+) cells . The combination treatment of lovastatin and Cur61414 on
xenografts resulted in a significnat decrease in tumor size (32%
decline), 3 fold reduction of Brdu (+) cells, but no significant changes
of Caspase-3 (+) cells . These data suggest that cholesterol functions
downstream of Hh signaling pathway in CSA. The more effective reduction
in tumor growth with cholesterol inhibition compared to Hh blockade
suggests cholesterol blockade is an effective therapeutic approach.


