Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salternamide A, a marine natural product, suppresses
hypoxia-induced accumulation of HIF-1α and induces apoptosis in human
colorectal cancer cells.


Hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) is an essential regulator of the
cellular response to low oxygen concentrations, activating a broad range
of genes that provide adaptive responses to oxygen deprivation. HIF-1α
is overexpressed in various cancers and therefore represents a
considerable chemotherapeutic target. Salternamide A (SA), a novel small
molecule that is isolated from a halophilic Streptomyces sp., is a potent
cytotoxic agent against a variety of human cancer cell lines. However,
the mechanisms by which SA inhibits tumor growth remain to be elucidated.
In the present study, we demonstrate that SA efficiently inhibits the
hypoxia-induced accumulation of HIF-1α in a time- and
concentration-dependent manner in various human cancer cells. In
addition, SA suppresses the upstream signaling of HIF-1α, such as
PI3K/Akt/mTOR, p42/p44 MAPK, and STAT3 signaling under hypoxic
conditions. Furthermore, we found that SA induces cell death by
stimulating G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human colorectal
cancer cells. Taken together, SA was identified as a novel small molecule
HIF-1α inhibitor from marine natural products and is potentially a
leading candidate in the development of anticancer agents.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
grant funded by the Korean Government (MEST) (MRC No. 2009-0083533)


