Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subcutaneous fat predict outcome in head and neck cancer.


Background: Previous studies have shown that body mass index (BMI) is
linked to survival in cancer patients. Our objective was to analyze
whether body composition before treatment can predict outcomes in
patients with head-and neck cancer.

Methods: All 881 patients with loco-regional head-and -neck cancer
treated with curative-intent RT during 2005 to 2012 were retrospectively
studied. Body composition analyses by using pre-RT CT images acquired for
RT simulation. We compared subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) index and
muscle index by measuring cross-sectional area of tissues at level of the
third thoracic vertebrae (T3) in both genders. Overall survival (OS),
loco-regional control (LRC), and distant metastasis-free survival (DFS)
were analyzed by body composition index that divided into two groups
based on values higher and lower than the median. The median follow-up
was 4.68 years.

Results: SAT index in female patients was significantly higher than that
in male (p Results: SAT index in female patients was significantly higher
than that in male (p <0.001). The median SAT index and muscle index for
female were 15.25 cm2/m2 (range, 0.93-88.09 cm2/m2) and 34.3 cm2/m2
(range, 14.78-73.05 cm2/m2), and for male were 6.19 cm2/m2 (range,
0.21-40.48 cm2/m2) and 51.74 cm2/m2 (range, 8.03-89.06 cm2/m2). The
5-year and 10-year OS, LRC and DFS were 66.3%, 57.6%, 73.4%, 71.4%, 83%,
and 82.1%. Higher pre-treatment SAT index was associated with longer OS
(HR = 0.616; P = 0.001) and DFS (HR = 0.649; P = 0.015) and a trend
towards longer LRC (HR = 0.772; P = 0.066). Pre-treatment muscle index
was also a significant predictor of OS (HR = 0.662; P = 0.006) and LRC
(HR = 0.684; P = 0.029).

Conclusion: SAT index and muscle index of T3 level obtained from CT
images appear to predict outcomes in patients with curative head-and-neck
cancers.


