Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Supporting precision cancer treatment decision with functional
evaluation of cancer gene mutations and variants.


Precision oncology requires identifying and understanding of cancer
genome changes in a patient tumor tissue and finding the best cancer
therapy targeting the changes. Although many cancer gene targets have
been validated so far, next-generation genomic profile analyses have
uncovered much more cancer gene variants with unconfirmed functions.
Developing methods to functionally evaluate mutations/variants and
understand their roles in cancer development and drug responses, such as
drug resistance or synthetic lethality, will be critical in cancer
treatment decision support. In addition, in some clinical cases, multiple
treatment choices such as multiple drug combinations exist. Developing
cancer models which can test multiple treatments will provide direct
comparison of those therapies and select the best options. At
GenenDesign, we have performed drug tests on mouse “avatars”, which
are also known as Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) models. They are
personalized cancer models derived from patient tumor samples with cancer
mutation profiles and drug responses very similar to the corresponding
cancer patients. Drug screenings were carried out in avatars by testing
chemotherapies or targeted drugs against specific cancer gene mutations
and variants. Selected drugs or drug combinations from avatar studies
have been applied to corresponding patients with highly consistent
treatment outcome. From genomic profile analysis of our near 1500 PDX
tumor models in cancer types such as lung, colorectal, gastric, liver,
and esophageal, we are able to identify a large number of cancer gene
mutations/variants, gene fusions, as well as gene copy number and RNA
expression changes in major cancer signal pathways such as EGFR, Her2,
c-Met/ALK, Ras/Raf, FGFRs, PI3K/Akt, Wnt, Notch, DNA repair, cell cycle
regulation, angiogenesis. Many of these gene aberrations are potential
drug targets and have been functionally tested in PDX models with
approved drugs or clinical drug candidates. The mutation/variant
information and drug response information generated from PDX models have
been organized into our Precision Cancer Information Lab database.
Patient tumor DNA test results have been used for searching genetically
matched PDX models in our database. Once matched PDX models are
identified, the available drug response information can be used as
evidence for clinical treatment decision. In addition, the matched PDX
models can also been used to test more treatment options such as
different combinations and new clinical drug candidates.


