Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer survival: A retrospective
analysis based on national data.


Introduction: With the increasing incidence of breast cancer in young
women and the delaying first term pregnancy age, the incidence of
pregnancy-associated breast cancer is expected to increase. The aim of
the current study was to examine the impact of pregnancy on breast cancer
survival using national registry data.

Material and Methods: The breast cancer cases were identified from the
Taiwan Cancer Registry. All first primary invasive breast cancer cases
diagnosed between 2002 and 2014 were identified. The study was restricted
to cases who were 20-50 years old and were stage I to III diseases.
Pregnancy and delivery outcomes up to 5 years before the cancer diagnoses
were abstracted from the National Health Insurance database. Those who
were not pregnant during this time were defined as non-pregnant cases.
The data were then linked to the Taiwan national death certificate
database for vital status, the causes, and the dates of death. Years of
follow-up was calculated from the date of breast cancer diagnosis to the
date of death or December 31, 2014. The hazard ratios (HR) and the 95%
confidence intervals (CI) of the association between pregnancy and breast
cancer survival were estimated using cox proportional hazard models.

Results: Among the 30,479 breast cancer cases, 90 were diagnosed during
pregnancy (0.3%), 347 were diagnosed within a year after delivery (1.1%),
410 (1.3%) within 1-2 years after delivery, 1583 (5.2%) within 2-5 years
after delivery, and 249 (0.8%) were pregnant after breast cancer
diagnosis. By the end of 2014, 2932 cases were dead (17 cases diagnosed
during pregnancy (18.9%) and 69 cases diagnosed within a year after
delivery (19.9%)). The major cause of death was breast cancer (89%).
Compared to non-pregnant cases (9.3% dead), the HRs were 1.91 (95%
CI=1.17-3.12) for those who were diagnosed during pregnancy and 1.92 (95%
CI=1.48-2.48) for those who were diagnosed within a year after delivery,
adjusted for age and year of breast cancer diagnosis. After adjustment
for tumor characteristics and treatment, the HR were 1.84 (HR=1.04-3.28)
and 1.29 (HR=0.92-1.80) for breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy and
within a year after delivery, respectively. For those who received
systemic therapy, >80% of them started within 90 days. However, for
subjects diagnosed during pregnancy, only 63% of them started systemic
treatment within 90 days.

Conclusion: Pregnancy-associated breast cancer is associated with higher
mortality compared to non-pregnant breast cancer. Adjusted for tumor
characteristics and treatment attenuated the association.


