Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A LAG-3/PD-L1 bispecific antibody inhibits tumor growth in two
syngeneic colon carcinoma models.


Combining immunotherapeutic antibodies in cancer treatment has shown
benefits over single agents. An alternative to combining two antibodies
is the development of bispecific antibodies that not only bring two
biologies together but may result in novel mechanisms of action that are
impossible to attain with combinations. Lymphocyte Activation Gene-3
(LAG-3) is a member of the Ig superfamily expressed on activated T cells,
NK cells, pDCs, B cells, γδ T cells and participates in immune
suppression. Programmed Cell Death receptor (PD-1) binds to its ligand
PD-L1, expressed not only on activated immune cells to inhibit cellular
immune responses but also on tumor cells. Expression of both these
surface molecules therefore leads to T cell exhaustion allowing the tumor
to escape immune surveillance. A mAb² TM (bispecific antibody) was
engineered which binds murine LAG-3 and PD-L1 simultaneously and with
nanomolar affinities. The anti-LAG-3/PD-L1 mAb² inhibits LAG-3 binding
to MHCII and PD-L1 binding to PD-1 and CD80, resulting in T cell
activation in vitro. This translates into in vivo efficacy, where the
mAb² decreased tumor burden in the MC38 colon carcinoma tumor model. At
the end of the study tumor-free animals were more numerous in the
LAG-3/PD-L1 bispecific group than in the group given a combination of
individual anti-LAG-3 and PD-L1 antibodies. The results were
recapitulated in the CT26 murine colon cancer model, where the mAb²
showed an increase of antitumor activity as compared to the antibodies
given in combination. Thus, the preclinical data supports developing an
anti-human LAG-3/PD-L1 mAb² for the treatment of cancer patients.


