Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Using CRISPR/Cas9 to generate primary soft tissue sarcoma in
genetically engineered and wild-type mice.


Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) that employ site-specific
recombinase (SSR) technology are important tools for pre-clinical
studies, but this approach is costly and time-consuming. Here, we show
that the CRISPR/Cas9 system can be used to efficiently complement
existing GEMMs of sarcoma and generate primary sarcomas in wild type
mice. Mice with the genotype KrasLSL-G12D/+; Rosa26LSL-Cas9-EGFP/+
received intramuscular delivery of an adenovirus expressing Cre
recombinase and a single guide RNA (sgRNA) targeting Trp53. Cre-mediated
expression of oncogenic Kras and Cas9, in combination with
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of Trp53, was sufficient to generate
primary soft tissue sarcomas. These tumors arose with kinetics similar to
those generated using the Cre-loxP system to activate oncogenic Kras and
delete Trp53 alleles. Additionally, we injected an adenovirus containing
Cas9 and sgRNAs targeting Nf1 and Trp53 into the sciatic nerve of wild
type mice. These mice formed malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNSTs) in the same timeframe as MPNSTs generated using the Cre-loxP
system to delete Nf1 and Ink4a/Arf alleles in GEMMs. These data
demonstrate that CRISPR/Cas9 can be used to generate soft tissue sarcomas
in wild type mice. Moreover, these results suggest that this technology
can complement existing GEMMs for rapid assessment of tumor-modifying
genes. These tools should decrease the time and expense associated with
employing autochthonous mouse models of sarcoma for preclinical research.


