Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human CRL4DDB2 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates post-repair chromatin
restoration of epigenetic marker H3K56Ac through recruitment of histone
chaperon CAF-1.


Epigenetic marker acetylated histone H3 lysine 56 (H3K56Ac) diminishes as
an early DNA damage response but is restored in chromatin after DNA
repair. Here, we report that human CRL4DDB2 ubiquitin ligase regulates
the DNA repair-driven chromatin restoration of H3K56Ac by monitoring the
recruitment of histone chaperon CAF-1. We show that the H3K56Ac
accumulates at DNA damage sites. The post-repair H3K56Ac restoration
depends on CAF-1 and CBP/p300 function. The CRL4DDB2 components DDB1,
DDB2 and CUL4A are required not only for maintaining the H3K56Ac level in
chromatin, but also for restoring H3K56Ac following the repair of DNA
photolesions and strand breaks. Depletion of CUL4A decreases the
recruitment of CAF-1 p60 and p150 to ultraviolet radiation (UVR)- and
phleomycin-induced DNA damage. Inhibition of neddylation renders CRL4DDB2
inactive and concomitantly diminishes the recruitment of CAF-1 and
prevents post-repair H3K56Ac restoration. Additionally, a
PCNA-interacting protein (PIP) motif is shown to exist within DDB2. The
mutation in the PIP box of DDB2 compromises its capability to maintain
the H3K56Ac level but does not affect CRL4DDB2-mediated XPC
ubiquitination. These results suggest a novel role of CRL4DDB2 in
regulating post-repair chromatin restoration, which differs from its
canonical role in the process of nucleotide excision repair.


