Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FATE-NK100: A novel NK cell-mediated cancer therapy.


Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphoid cells that mediate immune
responses against pathogens and cancer. Human NK cells are distinguished
by the surface phenotype CD3-CD56+, and maturation of CD56dim NK cells is
associated with acquisition of CD57. Rather than being an
immunosenescence marker, CD57 acquisition represents a shift toward
greater effector function, including increased CD16 signaling (Fc
receptor responsible for triggering antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity), more potent cytotoxicity and enhanced inflammatory
cytokine production after target cell engagement.

The main challenge in enriching for CD57+ NK cells using current ex vivo
expansion protocols is that interleukin (IL)-15, the cytokine that drives
NK cell proliferation and is critical for NK cell survival,
preferentially expands less mature NK subsets that fail to terminally
differentiate in culture. Our group has developed a novel NK cell
expansion method that overcomes this barrier. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from are depleted of CD3+ T cells and CD19+ B cells and
cultured for 7 days with IL-15 and a small molecule inhibitor of glycogen
synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3β), a multifunctional kinase downstream of
the PI(3)K pathway. Compared to vehicle control, addition of the GSK3β
inhibitor led to a substantial increase (2.2-fold ± 0.19, n=23, pThe
main challenge in enriching for CD57+ NK cells using current ex vivo
expansion protocols is that interleukin (IL)-15, the cytokine that drives
NK cell proliferation and is critical for NK cell survival,
preferentially expands less mature NK subsets that fail to terminally
differentiate in culture. Our group has developed a novel NK cell
expansion method that overcomes this barrier. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from are depleted of CD3+ T cells and CD19+ B cells and
cultured for 7 days with IL-15 and a small molecule inhibitor of glycogen
synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3β), a multifunctional kinase downstream of
the PI(3)K pathway. Compared to vehicle control, addition of the GSK3β
inhibitor led to a substantial increase (2.2-fold ± 0.19, n=23,
p<0.0001) in the CD57+ NK cell population, and total CD3-CD56+ NK cells
were highly enriched (90.9% ± 2.2) relative to pre-culture CD3/CD19
depletion (23.3% ± 2.5) (pThe main challenge in enriching for CD57+ NK
cells using current ex vivo expansion protocols is that interleukin
(IL)-15, the cytokine that drives NK cell proliferation and is critical
for NK cell survival, preferentially expands less mature NK subsets that
fail to terminally differentiate in culture. Our group has developed a
novel NK cell expansion method that overcomes this barrier. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from are depleted of CD3+ T cells and CD19+ B
cells and cultured for 7 days with IL-15 and a small molecule inhibitor
of glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3β), a multifunctional kinase
downstream of the PI(3)K pathway. Compared to vehicle control, addition
of the GSK3β inhibitor led to a substantial increase (2.2-fold ± 0.19,
n=23, p<0.0001) in the CD57+ NK cell population, and total CD3-CD56+ NK
cells were highly enriched (90.9% ± 2.2) relative to pre-culture
CD3/CD19 depletion (23.3% ± 2.5) (p<0.0001). We used a high-resolution
imaging approach to analyze in vitro NK cell-mediated killing of the
ovarian tumor cell line SKOV-3 and the lung carcinoma line A549. We
demonstrate that NK cells from CD3/CD19-depleted peripheral blood
products cultured for 7 days with the GSK3β inhibitor exhibit
significantly more rapid killing kinetics and overall tumor killing
relative to NK cells cultured for 7 days with IL-15 and the vehicle
control. Superior tumor control of NK cells cultured with IL-15 and the
GSK3β inhibitor was also observed against SKOV-3 tumor cells in a murine
xenogeneic adoptive transfer model that included IL-2 injections.

We have scaled our process to manufacture a GMP product (referred to as
FATE-NK100) for clinical use. Using an apheresis product from a donor
containing 21.5 x 108 CD57+ NK cells, we achieved 6.4-fold NK cell
expansion resulting in a final GMP-grade product containing 158 x 108
CD57+ NK cells. The cytotoxicity of these ex vivo expanded NK cells in
response to SKOV-3 cells is superior to that of CD3/CD19-depleted
haploidentical NK cells activated overnight with either IL-2 or IL-15
(representing the NK products used in current clinical trials). These
data have been presented to the FDA in preparation for a clinical trial
of FATE-NK100 in lymphodepleted patients with advanced AML anticipated
for Q1 2017.


