Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atg7 overexpression promotes bladder cancer invasion via
autophagic removal of AUF1 protein and subsequently increased RhoGDI2
mRNA stability in vitro and in vivo.


Autophagy is the basic catabolic mechanism regulating degradation of
unnecessary or dysfunctional cellular components and is regulated by the
autophagy-related gene 7 (Atg7). Since invasive bladder cancer (BC) can
progress to life threatening metastases, understanding the molecular
mechanisms underlying BC invasion is of tremendous importance for
potentially reducing the mortality of this disease. In the present study,
we for the first time found that the Atg7 was remarkably upregulated in
human BC cell lines and the BBN-induced mouse invasive BCs, which is
consistent with our most recent finding in human BCs. The knockdown of
Atg7 in human BC cells dramatically inhibited cancer cell invasion,
suggesting that Atg7 is a key player in regulation of BC invasion.
Mechanistic studies revealed that Atg7 overexpression was mediated by
miR-190, which was highly upregulated at transcriptional level in BC
tissues and cell lines, and was able to bind to 3â€™-UTR of atg7 mRNA for
its stabilization. Moreover, Atg7-mediated autophagic mechanism could
remove AUF1 protein and in turn reduced AUF1 interaction with rhogdi2
mRNA, resulting in elevation of rhogdi2 mRNA stability, and subsequently
leading to BC cell invasion. Remarkably, inhibition of Atg7-mediated
autophagy led to AUF1 protein accumulation, RhoGDI2 downregulation and BC
cell invasion attenuation. Collectively, our results demonstrate that
overexpressed Atg7 mediates BC cell autophagy, which removes AUF1
protein, thereby reducing its binding with rhogdi2 mRNA and subsequently
leading to elevation of rhogdi2 mRNA stability and protein expression,
further promoting BC invasion. The identification of miR-190/Atg7
autophagic mechanism regulating AUF1/RhoGDI2 expression provides a
significant insight into understanding the nature of BC invasion, and is
also highly potential for developing autophagy-based-specific therapeutic
strategy for treatment of human BC patients.


