Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal support of pancreatic tumor metabolism.


Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive disease
characterized by a prominent desmoplastic stromal reaction and
deregulated metabolism. The role of stroma in PDAC biology is complex and
has been shown to play critical roles that may differ depending on the
biological context. The intense stromal reaction also impacts the
vasculature, leading to a highly hypoxic and nutrient poor environment.
As such, these tumors must adapt how nutrients are captured and utilized
to support their metabolic needs. In this talk, I will describe how
stromal-associated pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs) are critical for PDAC
metabolism through the secretion of non-essential amino acids (NEAA).
Specifically, we uncovered an undescribed role for alanine, which
outcompetes glucose and glutamine-derived carbon in PDAC to fuel the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, and thus NEAA and lipid biosynthesis.
This shift in fuel sources decreases the dependence on glucose and
serum-derived nutrients, which are limiting in the pancreatic tumor
microenvironment. Moreover, we demonstrated that PSC alanine secretion is
dependent on PSC autophagy, a process stimulated by the cancer cells.
Thus, our results demonstrate a novel metabolic crosstalk between PSCs
and cancer cells, with PSC-derived alanine as an alternative carbon
source, and highlight a previously unappreciated metabolic network within
pancreatic tumors where diverse fuel sources are utilized to promote
growth in an austere tumor microenvironment.


