Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CtBP1 expression depletion on primary tumor deregulates miRNA
expression and impairs development of spontaneous metastases on a
prostate cancer and metabolic syndrome model.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second cancer in incidence in men worldwide.
Approximately 20 % of cases continue with advanced or metastatic disease,
and at this stage, it turns out incurable due to the lack of effective
therapies. Hence, the need to identify new actionable targets is crucial.
Metabolic syndrome (MeS) is a physiopathological disorder that increases
PCa risk and aggressiveness. C-terminal Binding Protein (CtBP1) is a
transcriptional corepressor that is activated by NADH binding. Previously
our group established a MeS and PCa mice model that identified to CtBP1
as a novel link associating both diseases. Moreover, cell adhesion
molecules play a significant role in cancer progression and metastasis.
Thus, we found that CtBP1 diminished the capability of PCa cell lines to
adhere to a collagen matrix, directly modulating expression of several
cell adhesion genes, including repression of the epithelial marker CDH1
and induction of the mesenchymal marker VIM. The aim of this work was to
investigate MeS/CtBP1 impact over PCa progression from in situ prostate
carcinoma to metastatic disease. RNA was isolated from xenografts
generated on MeS mice from CtBP1 depleted PC3 cells (PC3.shCtBP1) or
control (PC3.PGIPZ); and hybridized to a miRNA expression microarray
(Affymetrix GeneChipÂ® miRNA 4.0). After data normalization and analysis
we identified and validated a list of 11 miRNAs regulated by CtBP1
relevant to cell adhesion and PCa progression. To investigate CtBP1 role
in spontaneous PCa metastasis, NOD SCID gamma (NSG) mice were fed with
control or high fat diets during 12 weeks to induce MeS. Then PC3.shCtBP1
or PC3.PGIPZ cells were injected s.c. on MeS and control animals. Body
weight and tumor size were measured 1 and 3 times a week, respectively.
Thirty days after cell inoculation, tumors were around 1 cm, with no
significant differences between treatments; however mice showed around
20% weight loss. Mice were sacrificed and tumors, lungs and livers were
collected for RNA isolation and histopathological analysis. Using human
GAPDH specific primers and RT-qPCR from lungs, we found that CtBP1
depletion led to a significant decrease of lung metastases, especially in
the MeS group. In addition, Hematoxylin & Eosin stains from lung sections
detected the lowest number and size of metastatic foci in the CtBP1
depleted xenografts generated in MeS animals. Gene expression comparison
between primary tumors and metastases showed that epithelial markers,
such as E-cadherin, were induced in xenografts and almost undetected in
metastasis. Accordingly, mesenchymal markers expression, such as
Vimentin, was low in xenografts and triggered on metastases. Our study
uncovers for the first time the role of CtBP1 in PCa progression and its
molecular targets in MeS mice.


