Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MCL-1 inhibition ameliorates the expansion of human leukemia in a
dose dependent fashion.


Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (MCL-1) is a prosurvival BCL-2 family member
protein commonly overexpressed in cancer, including hematologic
malignancies. The successful use of BH3 mimetics against other
anti-apoptotic proteins has validated the potential of this line of
therapy in hematologic malignancies. However, targeting BCL-2 family
members, like MCL-1, with a small molecule inhibitor is challenging
because these inhibitors mediate their effects through protein-protein
interactions. Recently, we discovered potent (sub nM), selective small
molecule MCL-1 inhibitors that exhibit cell-based activity and slow the
growth of tumors in multiple mouse models.

To determine tumor cell dependence on specific BCL2-family members, we
employed BH3 profiling on a panel of myeloid tumor cells to reveal
mitochondrial outer membrane permeablization (MOMP) in a cytochrome C
release assay. Additionally, we determined growth inhibition of these
cell lines in the presence of the potent MCL-1 inhibitor. These assays
indicated MV-411 cells were dependent on MCL-1 and sensitive to MCL-1
inhibition with a GI50 To determine tumor cell dependence on specific
BCL2-family members, we employed BH3 profiling on a panel of myeloid
tumor cells to reveal mitochondrial outer membrane permeablization (MOMP)
in a cytochrome C release assay. Additionally, we determined growth
inhibition of these cell lines in the presence of the potent MCL-1
inhibitor. These assays indicated MV-411 cells were dependent on MCL-1
and sensitive to MCL-1 inhibition with a GI50 <100nM. After cell line
profiling, we began in vivo studies with the MCL-1 inhibitor in a
systemic AML xenograft model. NSGS mice were sublethally irradiated and
administered MV-411 cells intravenously. Engrafted mice received the
MCL-1 inhibitor in 3 different doses (vehicle vs 10, 25 and 75mg/kg)
daily via intraperitoneal injection. During treatment, the kinetics of
MV-411 expansion was monitored via flow cytometry for the detection of
human AML in the blood. At approximately 4 weeks after transplant, the
vehicle mice became moribund, and all experimental groups were sacrificed
for analysis of chimerism. Significant decreases in leukemic expansion
were evident in the bone marrow (25 and 75mg/kg vs vehicle, P= .01, P To
determine tumor cell dependence on specific BCL2-family members, we
employed BH3 profiling on a panel of myeloid tumor cells to reveal
mitochondrial outer membrane permeablization (MOMP) in a cytochrome C
release assay. Additionally, we determined growth inhibition of these
cell lines in the presence of the potent MCL-1 inhibitor. These assays
indicated MV-411 cells were dependent on MCL-1 and sensitive to MCL-1
inhibition with a GI50 <100nM. After cell line profiling, we began in
vivo studies with the MCL-1 inhibitor in a systemic AML xenograft model.
NSGS mice were sublethally irradiated and administered MV-411 cells
intravenously. Engrafted mice received the MCL-1 inhibitor in 3 different
doses (vehicle vs 10, 25 and 75mg/kg) daily via intraperitoneal
injection. During treatment, the kinetics of MV-411 expansion was
monitored via flow cytometry for the detection of human AML in the blood.
At approximately 4 weeks after transplant, the vehicle mice became
moribund, and all experimental groups were sacrificed for analysis of
chimerism. Significant decreases in leukemic expansion were evident in
the bone marrow (25 and 75mg/kg vs vehicle, P= .01, P <.001) and spleen
(vehicle vs. 75mg/kg, PTo determine tumor cell dependence on specific
BCL2-family members, we employed BH3 profiling on a panel of myeloid
tumor cells to reveal mitochondrial outer membrane permeablization (MOMP)
in a cytochrome C release assay. Additionally, we determined growth
inhibition of these cell lines in the presence of the potent MCL-1
inhibitor. These assays indicated MV-411 cells were dependent on MCL-1
and sensitive to MCL-1 inhibition with a GI50 <100nM. After cell line
profiling, we began in vivo studies with the MCL-1 inhibitor in a
systemic AML xenograft model. NSGS mice were sublethally irradiated and
administered MV-411 cells intravenously. Engrafted mice received the
MCL-1 inhibitor in 3 different doses (vehicle vs 10, 25 and 75mg/kg)
daily via intraperitoneal injection. During treatment, the kinetics of
MV-411 expansion was monitored via flow cytometry for the detection of
human AML in the blood. At approximately 4 weeks after transplant, the
vehicle mice became moribund, and all experimental groups were sacrificed
for analysis of chimerism. Significant decreases in leukemic expansion
were evident in the bone marrow (25 and 75mg/kg vs vehicle, P= .01, P
<.001) and spleen (vehicle vs. 75mg/kg, P<.001) of treated mice in a
dose-dependent fashion. MCL-1 blockade also eliminated splenomegaly in
MCL-1 inhibitor treated mice.

Successful use of the BCL-2 inhibitor, venetoclax, as a single agent and
in combination with DNA methyltransferase inhibitors or low dose ara-C
has proven the powerful role BH3 mimetics may play in AML therapy.
However, mediation of resistance via alternative BCL-2 family
antiapoptotic proteins remains a concern, and development of suitable
inhibitors of MCL-1 and BCL-XL is important. These data show that we have
developed a potent MCL-1 inhibitor, with in vivo efficacy in an AML mouse
model. Further studies can determine the potential use of this drug to
overcome resistance in the clinic. In addition, we will employ dynamic
BH3 profiling of patient samples to determine the combination and
sequencing of therapeutically applied BH3 mimetics.


