Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacokinetics of sacituzumab govitecan (IMMU-132), an
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) targeting Trop-2, in patients with diverse
advanced solid tumors.


BACKGROUND: Sacituzumab govitecan (IMMU-132), an ADC targeting Trop-2, an
antigen present in many solid tumors, uses SN-38, a topoisomerase I
inhibitor that has nanomolar potency derived from irinotecan (IRI), and a
pH sensitive linker that releases SN-38 gradually (in vitro, 50% released
per 1 day in serum). Clinical studies in patients (pts) with diverse
solid tumors have shown manageable toxicity (dose-limiting neutropenia,
diarrhea but lower incidence than IRI) and encouraging efficacy.

METHODS: Conjugate and IgG were monitored in pts given 8 (N = 24) or 10
mg/kg (N = 29) by ELISA. SN-38 and glucuronidated SN-38 (SN-38G) were
measured by reversed-phase HPLC. SN-38 and SN-38G levels are expressed as
the amount of drug dissociated from the conjugate (i.e., Free SN-38) and
the amount bound to the IgG (Total SN-38). UGT1A1 status was determined
in baseline blood sample from 146 pts.

RESULTS: IMMU-132 cleared with a half-life of 11.7-18.9 h, depending on
the assay, while the IgG half-life was 4-5 days, which agrees with in
vitro drug-release data. Levels of Free SN-38 at 30 min or 1 d after
injection were RESULTS: IMMU-132 cleared with a half-life of 11.7-18.9 h,
depending on the assay, while the IgG half-life was 4-5 days, which
agrees with in vitro drug-release data. Levels of Free SN-38 at 30 min or
1 d after injection were <2% and ~ 5% of Total SN-38, respectively,
indicating most SN-38 in serum is bound to the conjugate. Free SN-38
clears with a half-life of ~20 h, which is consistent with SN-38
clearance in IRI therapy. No correlation was found between Free SN-38 in
serum at 30 min and the incidence of severe neutropenia. Total and Free
levels of SN-38G were similar, supporting in vitro results indicating
that SN-38 is not glucuronidated while bound to the IgG. Free SN-38G
levels were lower than Free SN-38 (SN-38G/SN-38 AUC ratio = 0.52),
explaining the lower incidence of severe diarrhea. PK parameters for 8
and 10 mg/kg group were similar; no major differences in toxicity. UGT1A1
status showed 43% and 44% with *1*1 and *1*28 haplotype, respectively,
and 13% with *28*28 haplotype, which is associated with higher risk of
severe neutropenia and diarrhea for IRI therapy. With IMMU-132, 58% of
the *28*28 pts had severe neutropenia compared to ~40% of the *1*1 and
*1*28 pts, and 16% of the *28*28 pts had grade 3 diarrhea compared to
5-8% of the *1*1 and *1*28. In 3 of 4 cancer indications, objective
response rate and clinical benefit ratio favored the 10 mg/kg group.

CONCLUSION: IMMU-132 cleared as predicted from in vitro serum stability
data, with no difference between the 8 and 10 mg/kg groups. Current data
show neutropenia did not correlate with Free SN-38 levels in serum at 30
min, and low SN-38G levels support the lower incidence of severe
diarrhea. While pts with the *28*28 haplotype had a somewhat higher
incidence of severe neutropenia or diarrhea than *1*1 and *1*28 pts, the
overall incidence of each is small, suggesting toxicity management rather
than screening is appropriate. With no major difference in safety and PK,
but improved responses with 10 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg is selected for future
clinical studies.


