Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of the mechanisms of emetine dihydrochloride on inhibiting
NSCLC tumor progression and attenuating EGFR signaling pathway.


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a transmembrane receptor
protein and can mediate the cellular biological responses including
regulation of cellular proliferation, differentiation, migration and
survival. More than 60 % of non-small cell Lung cancers (NSCLCs) express
relatively high level of EGFR. Therefore, EGFR has become an important
therapeutic target for the treatment of NSCLC. However, almost all NSCLC
patients ultimately develop drug resistance to targeted therapy agents.
The most common secondary mutation is found to harbor EGFR mutation in
T790M, which is acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs. In order to overcome
the resistance of T790M mutation in lung cancer, we used EGFR pY1068
ELISA as drug-screening platform to screen the candidate compounds with
the capacity to suppress EGFR activity from the compound library of more
than 300 plant active ingredients. Among the compounds identified, the
emetine could most significantly restrain EGFR pY1068 activity and reduce
cancer cell viability. Moreover, the Western blotting results showed that
emetine treatment can repress EGFR phosphorylation and expression in a
dose-dependent manner as well as inhibit its downstream substrates
including PI3K, STAT3 and Src in three different Iressa-resistant cell
lines. In addition, emetine also could inhibit cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, and clonogenicity in vitro and xenograft tumor
growth in vivo. Taken together, our data suggest that emetine might be a
novel inhibitory modulator of EGFR activity and might be through
suppressing the phosphorylation and expression of PI3K, STAT3, and Src to
inhibit lung cancer progression. These findings will help us to develop
the anti-cancer drugs for lung cancer in the future.


