Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-treatment with fenretinide and safingol induced p38 MAPK and/or
FOXO3a activated pro-survival autophagy in glioblastoma multiforme cells.


Cytotoxicity of the synthetic retinoid, fenretinide (4-HPR), is
associated with increased reactive oxygen species and/or de novo
synthesized D-erythro-dihydroceramides. Co-treatment with
L-threo-sphinganine (safingol, S), synergistically increased fenretinide
cytotoxicity in cell lines of many cancer types coincident with increase
of safingol-derived, L-threo-dihydroceramides. Previously, we showed that
4-HPR+S induced ER stress, unfolded protein response (UPR), pro-survival
autophagy, and mixed non-apoptotic and apoptotic cell death in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cells in vitro. However, the mechanisms
regulating such activity remained unclear, including the role of
ceramide-activated signal transducers, such as ASK1. We now report that
4-HPR+S activated stress kinase ASK1 via phosphorylation at Thr845 (+1-6
hrs), an event known to induce p38 MAPK phosphorylation. Furthermore,
4-HPR+S induced an increase in the nuclear localization of transcription
factor FOXO3a coincident with decreased Akt signaling and increased
phosphorylated levels of JNK1/2, p38 MAPK, ERK1/2, and autophagy
regulator, AMPK (+1-6 hrs). 4-HPR+S caused a time-dependent (+6-24 hrs)
increase of GRP78 protein levels, a key regulator of ER stress response
and UPR, and increased levels of pro-apoptotic transcription factor,
CHOP. GRP78 increase was p38 MAPK-dependent, as p38 MAPK inhibitor,
SB203580, greatly reduced GRP78 increase. Interestingly, 4-HPR+S induced
cytotoxicity was unchanged in the presence of an inhibitor of ERK 1/2
(PD98059) but significantly decreased when cells were concurrently
treated with p38 MAPK inhibitor, SB203580, or JNK1/2 inhibitor, SP600125
(+24-72 hrs, p ≤ 0.05). Significantly, co-treatment with dorsomorphin,
an AMPK inhibitor, increased and accelerated 4-HPR+S cytotoxicity (+24-72
hrs, p ≤ 0.05). Moreover, 4-HPR+S treatment induced FOXO3a Ser7
phosphorylation (+1-6 hrs) and a corresponding decrease in levels of
nuclear E3-Ub protein ligase, Skp2. The decrease of SKp2 protein was
coincident with increased levels of CARM1 protein, a known
transcriptional activator of autophagy-related genes. Activation of ASK1,
JNK1/2, p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 by 4-HPR+S occurred earlier, and to a greater
extent, than single agent 4-HPR and S exposures at all time points (+1-24
hrs). Together, these results support that 4-HPR+S induced both
pro-survival autophagy and cell death at least partly through activation
of FOXO3a and ASK1-dependent activation of p38 MAPK, possibly in response
to the known progressive increase of de novo synthesized D-erythro and
L-threo dihydroceramides. A Phase I trial of intravenous 4-HPR+S in adult
solid tumors (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:NCT0155307) is currently open
in the Texas State-supported, South Plains Oncology Consortium
(SPONC.org).


