Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NTRC 1501-0, a TTK kinase inhibitor selected for its long target
residence time, completely inhibits tumor growth in the MDA-MB-231
xenograft model for triple-negative breast cancer.


The protein kinase TTK is a critical component of the spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC), which regulates the proper attachment of sister
chromatids during mitosis. TTK is essential for normal progression of the
cell cycle and is upregulated in various aggressive cancers such as
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). Inhibition of TTK leads to an
overriding of the SAC, premature progression of the cell cycle and
mitotic catastrophe. TTK inhibition therefore contrasts with e.g. Aurora
and PLK1 inhibition, which block the cell cycle [1]. Various studies have
shown the clinical utility of TTK inhibition, particularly in combination
therapy with paclitaxel [1,2]. In vivo, TTK inhibitor monotherapy has
shown partial tumor growth inhibition without weight loss [1,2].

We have developed a novel class of TTK inhibitors based on a
pyrimido-indolizine scaffold. These bind selectively and with high
affinity to the ATP pocket of TTK and potently inhibit the proliferation
of a variety of cell lines [1]. Previously we published a representative
of this class, NTRC 0066-0, which has an IC50 of 0.6 nM in a biochemical
assay for TTK activity and which is more than 200 times selective over a
panel of 276 kinases [1]. NTRC 0066-0 has an average IC50 of 98 nM in
proliferation assays in 66 different cell lines (Oncolinesâ„¢ panel) [3].

To further improve the potency of the pyrimido-indolizine series, we
determined the X-ray structures of a dozen of class representatives in
complex with TTK. The results were compared to 3D complexes of other
chemical scaffolds such as BAY-1161909, Mps-Bay2b, MPI-0479605, NMS-P715
and Mps1-IN1. The pyrimido-indolizine series uses an aromatic moiety to
trap the catalytic lysine in the active site, enforcing a catalytically
incompetent conformation of TTK. Thermal melting and surface plasmon
resonance experiments demonstrate that this leads to a strong
stabilization of the kinase domain and a slow dissociation rate for the
compounds, which is one of the key determinants for potent cellular
activity.

We took advantage of these structure-activity relationships to develop
analogs of NTRC 0066-0 with increased residence time and cellular
potency. One such analog, NTRC 1501-0, inhibits the proliferation of 66
cancer cell lines with an average IC50 of 18 nM, while retaining
selectivity over the kinome. It has good pharmacokinetic properties and
shows no cross-reactivity with drug safety targets in vitro. In a
xenograft model of the human TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231, it completely
inhibited tumor growth at a low oral dose, without effect on body weight,
indicating good tolerability. These data show, for the first time, that
TTK inhibition as monotherapy can achieve complete inhibition of tumor
growth.

[1] Maia et al. (2015) Annals of Oncology 26, 2180-2192; [2] Wengner et
al (2016) Mol. Canc. Therap. 15, 583-592; [3] Uitdehaag et al. (2016)
Mol. Canc. Therap., in the press.


