Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterize and identify secreted high molecular weight
heparanase from PC3M conditioned medium.


Introduction: Neutrophils, platelets, lymphocytes are typical sources of
NAP-2 which is associated with heparanase activity. Heparanase degrades
polymeric heparan sulfate molecules into shorter oligosaccharides,
participating in extracellular matrix degradation. It is active under
acidic conditions during tumor invasion and inflammatory processes. Our
lab previously found that some cell lines like androgen independent
prostate cancer cells (PC3M) can secrete a protein that reacts with
anti-NAP-2 antibody, but has a much higher molecular weight(>50KD) than
NAP-2 (MW~6-14 KD), and has heparanase activity. The purpose of this
study is to characterize and identify this protein.

Procedures: Immunoprecipitation was performed using Pierce DirectIP kit
according the manufacturer’s instructions. Heparin binding affinity
column used HiTrap™ Heparin HP column from GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences.
The binding buffer was 10mM NaAcetate pH 5.0, the eluting buffers were
0.5M-2M NaCl in 10mM NaAcetate pH 5.0. The mass spectrometry was done by
KCI Proteomics Core facility.

Data: The immunoprecipitation method confirmed that this higher molecular
weight protein indeed can be pulled down by the NAP-2 antibody, and after
using heparin binding affinity column to purify, we can still get the >
50KD band on the western blot for NAP-2, meaning it is a heparin binding
protein.

Conclusions: A protein identified with NAP-2 antibody, but with higher
molecular weight than native NAP-2 is found in the conditioned medium of
PC3M cells that binds heparin, further confirming a potential role in
tumor progression for prostate cancer.


