Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic immunostimulatory effects and therapeutic benefit of
combined histone deacetylase and bromodomain inhibition in non-small cell
lung cancer.


Effective therapies for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain
challenging despite an increasingly comprehensive understanding of
somatically altered oncogenic pathways. It is now clear that therapeutic
agents with potential to impact the tumor immune microenvironment
potentiate immune-orchestrated therapeutic benefit. This study evaluated
the immunoregulatory properties of two classes of drugs that modulate the
epigenome, histone deacetylase (HDAC) and bromodomain inhibitors with a
focus on key cell subsets that are engaged in an immune response. By
evaluating human peripheral blood and NSCLC tumors, we show that the
selective HDAC6 inhibitor ricolinostat promotes phenotypic changes
associated with enhanced T-cell priming and function of antigen
presenting cells. The bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 attenuated CD4+Foxp3+ T
regulatory cell suppressive function and synergized with ricolinostat to
facilitate immune-mediated tumor growth arrest, leading to prolonged
survival of mice with lung adenocarcinomas. Collectively, our findings
highlight immunomodulatory effects of two epigenetic modifiers that
together promote T-cell-mediated anti-tumor immunity and demonstrate
their therapeutic potential for NSCLC treatment.


