Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting novel mucin synthesis pathway for pancreatic cancer
treatment.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is most fatal and is the fourth leading cause of
cancer related deaths in USA with a least five year survival of
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is most fatal and is the fourth leading cause of
cancer related deaths in USA with a least five year survival of <7%.
Although several overexpressed mucin subtypes (MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC, and
MUC16) that impede drug delivery to PC have been targeted with limited
results, core enzymes involved in mucin biosynthesis have yet to be
evaluated as potential targets. The core 2 β 1,6
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GCNT3/C2GNT) plays a significant role in
mucin glycan biosynthesis. We analyzed GCNT3 expression on 180 specimens
from individuals with PC (90) or matched controls (90). Patients with low
GCNT3 expression survived longer than patients with high GCNT3 expression
(median survival: 17.5 vs. 10.5 months, p=0.036). We observed a
significant increase in GCNT3 mRNA expression (103.16 folds; pPancreatic
cancer (PC) is most fatal and is the fourth leading cause of cancer
related deaths in USA with a least five year survival of <7%. Although
several overexpressed mucin subtypes (MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC, and MUC16) that
impede drug delivery to PC have been targeted with limited results, core
enzymes involved in mucin biosynthesis have yet to be evaluated as
potential targets. The core 2 β 1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
(GCNT3/C2GNT) plays a significant role in mucin glycan biosynthesis. We
analyzed GCNT3 expression on 180 specimens from individuals with PC (90)
or matched controls (90). Patients with low GCNT3 expression survived
longer than patients with high GCNT3 expression (median survival: 17.5
vs. 10.5 months, p=0.036). We observed a significant increase in GCNT3
mRNA expression (103.16 folds; p<0.0001) in correlation with increased
mucins subtypes (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is most fatal and is the fourth
leading cause of cancer related deaths in USA with a least five year
survival of <7%. Although several overexpressed mucin subtypes (MUC1,
MUC4, MUC5AC, and MUC16) that impede drug delivery to PC have been
targeted with limited results, core enzymes involved in mucin
biosynthesis have yet to be evaluated as potential targets. The core 2 β
1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GCNT3/C2GNT) plays a significant
role in mucin glycan biosynthesis. We analyzed GCNT3 expression on 180
specimens from individuals with PC (90) or matched controls (90).
Patients with low GCNT3 expression survived longer than patients with
high GCNT3 expression (median survival: 17.5 vs. 10.5 months, p=0.036).
We observed a significant increase in GCNT3 mRNA expression (103.16
folds; p<0.0001) in correlation with increased mucins subtypes (p<0.05)
in the pancreatic tumors from genetically engineered mouse (GEM) compared
with pancreata from wild-type mice, as determined by Next-generation
Sequencing/RNAseq analysis. In in silico studies, blind docking
simulations revealed that a novel drug talniflumate binds to GCNT3 with a
better docking affinity of -8.3 kcal/mol. We synthesized talniflumate and
determined quality/purity using NMR, HRMS, and HPLC for in vitro and in
vivo studies. Pancreata from 6-week-old Kras GEM (N=6/group) treated with
talniflumate showed a significant decrease in GCNT3 and mucin expression
in PanIN lesions. In human PC MiaPaCa cell line, talniflumate reduced
GCNT3 expression and the number of mucin-positive cells (38% pPancreatic
cancer (PC) is most fatal and is the fourth leading cause of cancer
related deaths in USA with a least five year survival of <7%. Although
several overexpressed mucin subtypes (MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC, and MUC16) that
impede drug delivery to PC have been targeted with limited results, core
enzymes involved in mucin biosynthesis have yet to be evaluated as
potential targets. The core 2 β 1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
(GCNT3/C2GNT) plays a significant role in mucin glycan biosynthesis. We
analyzed GCNT3 expression on 180 specimens from individuals with PC (90)
or matched controls (90). Patients with low GCNT3 expression survived
longer than patients with high GCNT3 expression (median survival: 17.5
vs. 10.5 months, p=0.036). We observed a significant increase in GCNT3
mRNA expression (103.16 folds; p<0.0001) in correlation with increased
mucins subtypes (p<0.05) in the pancreatic tumors from genetically
engineered mouse (GEM) compared with pancreata from wild-type mice, as
determined by Next-generation Sequencing/RNAseq analysis. In in silico
studies, blind docking simulations revealed that a novel drug
talniflumate binds to GCNT3 with a better docking affinity of -8.3
kcal/mol. We synthesized talniflumate and determined quality/purity using
NMR, HRMS, and HPLC for in vitro and in vivo studies. Pancreata from
6-week-old Kras GEM (N=6/group) treated with talniflumate showed a
significant decrease in GCNT3 and mucin expression in PanIN lesions. In
human PC MiaPaCa cell line, talniflumate reduced GCNT3 expression and the
number of mucin-positive cells (38% p<0.0001). Further, PC cells (BxPc3
and Panc1) were treated with talniflumate for 24 hrs for mucin disruption
followed by radioactive 3H gemcitabine treatment for 2 hrs. The cells
treated with talniflumate showed 40% (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is most
fatal and is the fourth leading cause of cancer related deaths in USA
with a least five year survival of <7%. Although several overexpressed
mucin subtypes (MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC, and MUC16) that impede drug delivery
to PC have been targeted with limited results, core enzymes involved in
mucin biosynthesis have yet to be evaluated as potential targets. The
core 2 β 1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GCNT3/C2GNT) plays a
significant role in mucin glycan biosynthesis. We analyzed GCNT3
expression on 180 specimens from individuals with PC (90) or matched
controls (90). Patients with low GCNT3 expression survived longer than
patients with high GCNT3 expression (median survival: 17.5 vs. 10.5
months, p=0.036). We observed a significant increase in GCNT3 mRNA
expression (103.16 folds; p<0.0001) in correlation with increased mucins
subtypes (p<0.05) in the pancreatic tumors from genetically engineered
mouse (GEM) compared with pancreata from wild-type mice, as determined by
Next-generation Sequencing/RNAseq analysis. In in silico studies, blind
docking simulations revealed that a novel drug talniflumate binds to
GCNT3 with a better docking affinity of -8.3 kcal/mol. We synthesized
talniflumate and determined quality/purity using NMR, HRMS, and HPLC for
in vitro and in vivo studies. Pancreata from 6-week-old Kras GEM
(N=6/group) treated with talniflumate showed a significant decrease in
GCNT3 and mucin expression in PanIN lesions. In human PC MiaPaCa cell
line, talniflumate reduced GCNT3 expression and the number of
mucin-positive cells (38% p<0.0001). Further, PC cells (BxPc3 and Panc1)
were treated with talniflumate for 24 hrs for mucin disruption followed
by radioactive 3H gemcitabine treatment for 2 hrs. The cells treated with
talniflumate showed 40% (p<0.03) and 50% (pPancreatic cancer (PC) is most
fatal and is the fourth leading cause of cancer related deaths in USA
with a least five year survival of <7%. Although several overexpressed
mucin subtypes (MUC1, MUC4, MUC5AC, and MUC16) that impede drug delivery
to PC have been targeted with limited results, core enzymes involved in
mucin biosynthesis have yet to be evaluated as potential targets. The
core 2 β 1,6 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GCNT3/C2GNT) plays a
significant role in mucin glycan biosynthesis. We analyzed GCNT3
expression on 180 specimens from individuals with PC (90) or matched
controls (90). Patients with low GCNT3 expression survived longer than
patients with high GCNT3 expression (median survival: 17.5 vs. 10.5
months, p=0.036). We observed a significant increase in GCNT3 mRNA
expression (103.16 folds; p<0.0001) in correlation with increased mucins
subtypes (p<0.05) in the pancreatic tumors from genetically engineered
mouse (GEM) compared with pancreata from wild-type mice, as determined by
Next-generation Sequencing/RNAseq analysis. In in silico studies, blind
docking simulations revealed that a novel drug talniflumate binds to
GCNT3 with a better docking affinity of -8.3 kcal/mol. We synthesized
talniflumate and determined quality/purity using NMR, HRMS, and HPLC for
in vitro and in vivo studies. Pancreata from 6-week-old Kras GEM
(N=6/group) treated with talniflumate showed a significant decrease in
GCNT3 and mucin expression in PanIN lesions. In human PC MiaPaCa cell
line, talniflumate reduced GCNT3 expression and the number of
mucin-positive cells (38% p<0.0001). Further, PC cells (BxPc3 and Panc1)
were treated with talniflumate for 24 hrs for mucin disruption followed
by radioactive 3H gemcitabine treatment for 2 hrs. The cells treated with
talniflumate showed 40% (p<0.03) and 50% (p<0.025) increased 3H
gemcitabine uptake in BxPc3 and Panc1 cells compared to respective
controls.

GCNT3 CRISPR knock out PC cells and talniflumate treated PC cells showed
a reduction in cell proliferation and significantly reduced spheroid
formation (pGCNT3 CRISPR knock out PC cells and talniflumate treated PC
cells showed a reduction in cell proliferation and significantly reduced
spheroid formation (p<0.05). In in vivo, we did not observe any overt
toxicity upon talniflumate treatment as determined by liver enzyme
toxicity and body weight gain (N=5 mice/group). BxPC3 cells implanted
nude mice (N=5 mice/group) treated with talniflumate or GCNT3 siRNA
showed a marked reduction in xenograft tumors compared with untreated
controls. Both talniflumate and GCNT3 siRNA significantly inhibited
xenograft tumor weight (48% pGCNT3 CRISPR knock out PC cells and
talniflumate treated PC cells showed a reduction in cell proliferation
and significantly reduced spheroid formation (p<0.05). In in vivo, we did
not observe any overt toxicity upon talniflumate treatment as determined
by liver enzyme toxicity and body weight gain (N=5 mice/group). BxPC3
cells implanted nude mice (N=5 mice/group) treated with talniflumate or
GCNT3 siRNA showed a marked reduction in xenograft tumors compared with
untreated controls. Both talniflumate and GCNT3 siRNA significantly
inhibited xenograft tumor weight (48% p<0.002 with siRNA, 63% pGCNT3
CRISPR knock out PC cells and talniflumate treated PC cells showed a
reduction in cell proliferation and significantly reduced spheroid
formation (p<0.05). In in vivo, we did not observe any overt toxicity
upon talniflumate treatment as determined by liver enzyme toxicity and
body weight gain (N=5 mice/group). BxPC3 cells implanted nude mice (N=5
mice/group) treated with talniflumate or GCNT3 siRNA showed a marked
reduction in xenograft tumors compared with untreated controls. Both
talniflumate and GCNT3 siRNA significantly inhibited xenograft tumor
weight (48% p<0.002 with siRNA, 63% p<0.0001 with talniflumate) and tumor
volume (75% pGCNT3 CRISPR knock out PC cells and talniflumate treated PC
cells showed a reduction in cell proliferation and significantly reduced
spheroid formation (p<0.05). In in vivo, we did not observe any overt
toxicity upon talniflumate treatment as determined by liver enzyme
toxicity and body weight gain (N=5 mice/group). BxPC3 cells implanted
nude mice (N=5 mice/group) treated with talniflumate or GCNT3 siRNA
showed a marked reduction in xenograft tumors compared with untreated
controls. Both talniflumate and GCNT3 siRNA significantly inhibited
xenograft tumor weight (48% p<0.002 with siRNA, 63% p<0.0001 with
talniflumate) and tumor volume (75% p<0.0001 with both siRNA and
talniflumate) and GCNT3 enzyme activity (28% pGCNT3 CRISPR knock out PC
cells and talniflumate treated PC cells showed a reduction in cell
proliferation and significantly reduced spheroid formation (p<0.05). In
in vivo, we did not observe any overt toxicity upon talniflumate
treatment as determined by liver enzyme toxicity and body weight gain
(N=5 mice/group). BxPC3 cells implanted nude mice (N=5 mice/group)
treated with talniflumate or GCNT3 siRNA showed a marked reduction in
xenograft tumors compared with untreated controls. Both talniflumate and
GCNT3 siRNA significantly inhibited xenograft tumor weight (48% p<0.002
with siRNA, 63% p<0.0001 with talniflumate) and tumor volume (75%
p<0.0001 with both siRNA and talniflumate) and GCNT3 enzyme activity (28%
p<0.03). Transcriptome analysis of xenograft tumors (N=3/group) treated
with GCNT3 SiRNA or talniflumate showed reduced GCNT3 and top hits
related to mucin expression. These results justify the use of
talniflumate for mucin synthesis disruption, thereby enhancing the uptake
of gemcitabine and thereby efficacy for PC treatment.


