Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nrf2 confers radioresistance by regulating cancer stem trait in
lung cancer cells .


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death accounting for
more than 1.3 million deaths worldwide annually. Despite advances in
treatment, the five-year survival rate is 2% if the cancer has
metastasized to other organs. The major cause of poor prognosis of
advanced lung cancer is multi-resistance to chemo/radio therapy.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand the underlying mechanisms of
chemo/radio resistance and develop therapeutic strategies to overcome the
resistance. Transcription factor Nrf2 is a key regulator of
cytoprotective genes which facilitate cellular defense against harmful
insults. We found that Nrf2 and its downstream target NQO1 are highly
upregulated in lung cancer patient tumor tissues as well as in lung
cancer cell lines compared to adjacent normal tissues or normal cell
lines. We hypothesized that the upregulated Nrf2 may be responsible for
radio/chemo resistance and malignancy in lung cancer. RNA interference
studies showed that knockdown of Nrf2 substantially increased the
sensitivity of human lung cancer H460 and A549 cells to radiation-induced
cell death. Knockdown of Nrf2 also decreased tumor sphere formation,
suggesting its role in cancer stem cell (CSC) regulation which may be
responsible for the radioresistance. Analyses of CSC markers including
ALDH and Oct4 in control and Nrf2-knockdown H460 and A549 cells support
this finding. Together, our results indicate an essential role of Nrf2 in
the control and regulation of CSCs and radioresistance. Since CSCs are
widely believed to be responsible for cancer chemoresistance and relapse,
our novel finding on the role of Nrf2 in radiation resistance may aid in
the design of novel therapeutic strategies for resistant cancers.


