Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DS-8201a, a novel HER2-targeting ADC with a novel DNA
topoisomerase I inhibitor, abrogates the resistance to T-DM1 in
HER2-positive gastric cancer: a preclinical study.


Background Anti-HER2 therapies are beneficial for patients with
HER2-positive breast and gastric cancer. T-DM1 is an HER2-targeting
antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), which is structurally composed of the
anti-HER2 antibody trastuzumab and the tubulin inhibitor DM1. T-DM1 has
shown efficacy in patients with advanced breast cancer, but all patients
eventually develop resistance to T-DM1. DS-8201a is a novel ADC composed
of an anti-HER2 antibody and a novel potent topoisomerase I inhibitor
DX-8951 derivative. DS-8201a achieved a high drug-to-antibody-ratio (DAR:
7-8) and homogeneous drug conjugation. The aim of this study was to
elucidate the mechanisms of T-DM1 resistance, and evaluate the efficacy
of DS-8201a in a T-DM1-resistant HER2-positive gastric cancer cell line.

Materials and methods The T-DM1-resistant NCI-N87 cell line (N87-TDMR)
was established by a step-wise method—the parent HER2-positive N87 cell
line was exposed to up to 4 µg/ml of T-DM1. The profile of N87-TDMR was
assessed by immunoblotting, DNA microarray, and quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). The sensitivity of parent N87 and N87-TDMR
cells to T-DM1 or DS8201a was assessed by an in vitro growth inhibition
assay as well as through the mouse xenograft model study.

Results N87-TDMR cells were found to be resistant to T-DM1 in the in
vitro growth inhibition assay (50% growth inhibitory concentration; >10
µg/ml in N87-TDMR, 0.055 µg/ml in N87) as well as in the in vivo
xenograft model study, but HER2 expression was maintained in the N87-TDMR
cells. A comprehensive expression analysis revealed that N87-TDMR cells
showed increased ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter expression such
as ABCC2 and ABCG2 compared with N87 cells (50.2 times; 8.0 times higher
than that measured by qRT-PCR relatively). Inhibition of ABCC2 and ABCG2
by MK571 recovered the sensitivity to T-DM1 in N87-TDMR cells. Since
DS-8201a has higher DAR than T-DM1 and the unique topoisomerase I
inhibitor, this resistance was expected to be abrogated. DS-8201a showed
anti-tumor efficacy against N87-TDMR xenograft cells in the mouse model
(relative tumor growth rate: 244.2% with T-DM1, -39.2% with DS-8201a;
n=10 for each treatment).

Conclusions The HER2-positive gastric cancer cell line used in this
preclinical study acquired resistance to T-DM1 depending on the
up-regulation of ABCC2 and ABCG2 expression. However, DS-8201a could
abrogate this T-DM1 resistance. These results provide a rationale for
DS-8201a to be investigated for its efficacy in patients with
T-DM1-resistant breast or gastric cancer.


