Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mesenchymal stem cells promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition
of colon cancer cells via direct cell-to-cell contact.


We previously reported that in an orthotopic nude mouse model of human
colon cancer, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) migrated
to tumor stroma and promoted tumor growth and metastasis. We evaluated
the proliferation and migration ability in directly and indirectly
co-culture assay to clarify the mechanism of interaction between cancer
cells and MSCs. Proliferation and migration ability of cancer cells were
increased by direct co-culture with MSCs but not by indirect co-culture
of MSCs. Thus, we thought that direct contact between cancer cells and
MSCs is important to their interaction. We performed microarray analysis
of gene expression in KM12SM colon cancer cells directly co-cultured with
MSCs. Expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) related genes
such as fibronectin (FN), SPARC and Galectin 1 was increased by direct
co-culture with MSCs. We also confirmed the upregulation of these genes
with real time PCR, and these genes were not increased in cancer cells
indirectly co-cultured with MSCs. Among these EMT related genes
upregulated by direct co-culture with MSCs, we examined immune
localization of FN, well-known EMT marker. In co-culture assay in chamber
slides, expression of FN in cancer cluster was seen only at the edge
where cancer cells directly contacted with MSCs. FN expression by cancer
cells was increased at the tumor periphery and invasive edge in
orthotopic nude mice tumors and human colon cancer tissues, respectively.
These results suggest that mesenchymal stem cells induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of colon cancer cells via direct
cell-to-cell contact and may play an important role of colon cancer
metastasis.


