Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetylated secretory APE1/Ref-1 induces apoptotic cell death in
orthotopic xenografts of triple-negative breast cancer.


The anticancer properties of acetylated secretory apurinic/apyrimidinic
endonuclease-1 (Ape1/Ref-1) was suggested in triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) cells; Posttranslational modification, hyperacetylation in
MDA-MB-231 cells caused extracellular secretion of acetylated-APE1/Ref-1
(Ac-APE1/Ref-1) and initiated apoptotic cell death by auto-, paracrine
binding to the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). In
the present study, we observed potential therapeutic efficacy of
Ac-APE1/Ref-1 in preclinical orthotopic models of TNBC in response to
hyperacetylation. The extracellular Ac-APE1/Ref-1 was confirmed by
proximity ligation assay in hyperacetylated tumor tissue, showing direct
binding of Ac-APE1/Ref-1 and RAGE. Treatment of orthotopic TNBC
xenografts with acetylating agents induced a strong growth inhibition in
the tumor development as observed in computed tomography: it caused an
increase of RAGE expression and activation of caspase-3 and PARP. The
tumors also exhibited markedly higher count of apoptotic bodies and
reduced proliferation index and neovascularization compared with control
tumors. However, the Ac-APE1/Ref-1-stimulated apoptotic cell death was
remarkably retarded in RAGE-knockout tumor even in hyperacetylation
compared with RAGE-overexpressed one. The functional role of secreted
Ac-APE1/Ref-1 in hyperacetylated TNBC was confirmed in vivo,
demonstrating its relevance to the anticancer agent. Our findings suggest
that Ac-APE1/Ref-1 protein possesses potent chemotherapeutic efficacy
against TNBC, resistant to standard chemotherapeutic agents, warranting
further evaluation as an anticancer agent


