Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BCL2 induced by LAMTOR3-MAPK is a druggable target of
chemoradioresistance in mesenchymal lung cancer.


Metastasis and chemoresistance, which are main causes of lung cancer
related death, have been major interest in cancer research. Recently,
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) a foremost process for acquiring
metastatic properties has been demonstrated to be strongly link to
chemoresistance. Due to limited understanding of mechanism for EMT
mediated chemoresistance, druggable targets for chemoresistance remained
unidentified yet. In this study, we established the mesenchymal like
cancer cells (MLCCs) from A549 lung cancer cells with chronic exposure of
TGFÎ². With clinicogenomics database analysis and following validation
with MLCC model, we determined that BCL2, of which expression was clearly
induced and indicated a poor prognosis in the mesenchymal cancer
patients, was responsible for high chemoresistance in MLCCs. Therefore
combined treatment of chemotherapeutic drug and BH3 mimetic such as
ABT-263 or ABT-737, remarkably sensitized MLCCs to chemo and radio
therapy. Furthermore, BCL2 expression was governed by sustained ERK1
activity in MLCCs, which resulted from high level of MEK partner-1 (MP1)
protein expression. Therefore, combined chemotherapy with small molecules
(approved by FDA or clinically tested) targeting for MEK1 or BCL2 would
be a clinically feasible approach to overcome EMT related chemoresistance.


