Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of MDM2 inhibition on cell cycle regulation through Aurora
Kinase B - CDK1 axis in prostate cancer cells.


Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are critical regulators of cell cycle
progression and therefore overexpression of CDKs contributes to the
proliferation of cancer cells. A variety of genetic and epigenetic events
cause over activity of the CDKs in human cancers, and their inhibition
can lead to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. In malignant cells, both
elevated expression of CDKs and their modulators including cyclins, and
loss of expression of CDK inhibitors result in deregulated CDK activity,
providing a selective growth advantage for cancer progression. In this
respect, the multifunctional mouse double minute 2 homolog (MDM2)
oncoprotein has been gaining a significant amount of attention towards
better understanding the cell cycle regulatory mechanisms. It is well
established that MDM2 gene amplification can occur in diverse human
malignancies including prostate cancer. Also, MDM2 oncoprotein has been
shown to exert both p53-dependent and p53-independent roles in
oncogenesis. It has been well established in several laboratories,
including ours, that overexpression of MDM2, can eventually lead to the
inactivation of cell cycle control and loss of apoptotic ability in many
tumors. However, the mechanisms underlying the regulation of CDK1 by MDM2
in cancer cells have not been fully identified. Therefore, the main
objective of our study was to understand the impact of MDM2
overexpression on CDK1 that regulates cell cycle progression and
apoptosis. Our preliminary data from human cell cycle PCR array
experiments revealed the expression profile of genes that are involved in
different phases of cell cycle regulation in LNCaP-MST cells with and
without nutlin-3 treatment. Our study clearly demonstrated a significant
increase in the expression level of Aurora Kinase B (AURKB), CDC25C and
CDK1 in MDM2 transfected LNCaP-MST cells as compared with non-transfected
LNCaP cells. However, after treating the cells with 20 ÂµM of MDM2
specific inhibitor nutlin-3, for 24 h, the expression levels of the above
mentioned proteins were significantly altered when compared to untreated
controls. In addition, inhibition of MDM2 with nutlin-3 leads to
increased expression of pro-apoptotic proteins p53, p21, and Bax. Our
results offer significant evidence towards the effectiveness of MDM2
inhibition in causing cell cycle arrest via blocking the transmission of
signals through AURKB-CDK1 axis and inducing apoptosis in cancer cells.
It is clearly evident from our data that MDM2 overexpression probably is
the primary cause for CDK1 up-regulation in the LNCaP-MST cells, which
might have occurred possibly through activation of AURKB. However,
further studies in this direction should shed more light on the
intracellular mechanisms involved in the regulation of CDK1 in MDM2
positive cancers. (This project was supported by The Royal Dames of
Cancer Research Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Florida).


