Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of EGFR in c-fos-dependent osteosarcoma formation.


The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed or mutated
in human carcinomas and glioblastomas, which are tumors of epithelial and
glial origin, respectively. Some publications indicated that EGFR
overexpression could occur in human osteosarcomas (OS). Using EGFR
knockout mice (Egfr-/-), we have recently shown that EGFR plays a role in
bone development and osteoblast function, raising the possibility that
EGFR is also involved in OS formation. Here we show that Egfrf/f
Runx2-Cre mice (EgfrΔOb), lacking the EGFR in osteo-chondroprogenitor
cells, develop an increased zone of hypertrophic chondrocytes in long
bones and decreased bone formation. When bred to c-fos transgenic mice
(H2-c-fosLTR) that develop osteosarcomas with 100% penetrance, EgfrΔOb
mice show reduced tumor incidence and burden. At the molecular level,
tumors from EgfrΔOb mice exhibit decreased expression levels of c-Fos
and Cyclin D1. In vitro experiments in primary bone tumor cells further
show that EGFR inhibition leads to reduced proliferation and increased
apoptosis. Importantly, Egfr and c-Fos also play an important role in
human OS, as co-expression of both proteins in tumor sections correlated
with significantly reduced survival in patients suffering from primary
OS. Taken together our data suggest an essential role of EGFR signaling
during both development and progression of c-Fos-dependent OS and newly
identified molecular targets currently under investigation will be
presented.


