Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dexamethasone inhibits T-cell proliferation through a CTLA-4
mediated pathway.


BACKGROUND: The use of corticosteroids for therapeutic benefit has to be
weighed against the risks of adverse consequences associated with these
drugs. Brain tumor patients in particular, are routinely prescribed
dexamethasone (a glucocorticoid) to reduce edema associated with their
lesion. Checkpoint blockade, a type of immune therapy, is currently being
investigated as a potential treatment for brain tumors. However,
glucocorticoid signaling has been shown to attenuate the immune response
through several mechanisms including the repression of transcription of
genes controlling pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines.

HYPOTHESIS: Here, we propose that dexamethasoneâ€™s ability to upregulate
inhibitory T-cell molecules such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 might be an
additional immunosuppressive mechanism.

METHODS: Healthy donor T cells were tested for response to dexamethasone.
T cell proliferation, cell cycle analysis, apoptosis, and protein
expression were assessed with flow cytometry. Protein expression was also
measured with Western blots. Transcriptional changes were assessed with
qPCR. A monoclonal antibody, ipilimumab, was used to block CTLA-4 binding.

RESULTS: Unexpectedly, dexamethasone did not elicit a direct lymphotoxic
effect on T cells as measured by absolute cell number. However, we found
that dexamethasone significantly reduced T cell entry into the cell
cycle, but did not impact cells already undergoing mitosis. Checkpoint
molecules CTLA-4 and PD-1 were increased with dexamethasone treatment
when cells are stimulated. Blockade of CTLA-4 with Ipilimumab resulted in
a substantial reversal of cell cycle entry inhibition that was induced by
dexamethasone.

CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that dexamethasone impairs T cell
expansion by inhibiting cell cycle entry. Upregulated CTLA-4 expression
contributes to cell cycle entry blockade which is reversed by inhibiting
CTLA-4 with ipilimumab. These findings indicate that administration of
ipilimumab before dexamethasone diminishes the negative proliferative
effect on anti-tumor T cells suggesting that when needed, corticosteroids
can be used after immune checkpoint blockade has been established.


