Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical impact of modified telomerase-specific adenovirus-based
identification of viable-peritoneal tumor cells in peritoneal lavage
fluid in patients with potentially resectable pancreatic cancer.


Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a highly aggressive disease with dismal
prognosis. Although only a surgical resection can offer the chance of a
cure, the 5-year survival rate after a potentially curative resection
have been reported to be a low as 10-30 %. In PC, the presence of
peritoneal carcinomatosis preclude the possibility of surgical cure,
irrespective of the resectability of the primary tumor. Peritoneal lavage
cytology (CY) is used widely in the diagnosis and staging of gastric and
pancreatic cancer. Positive CY findings (CY+) in PC is defined as stage
IV disease, however, the true value of CY+ for the patientâ€™s prognosis
remains controversial. We rise the question of whether CY+ status has
predictive value for survival and early intraperitoneal recurrence. The
aim of this study was to evaluate use of a new genetically modified
telomerase-specific replication-selective adenovirus, expressing GFP
(TelomeScan F35) in rapid detection of viable peritoneal tumor cell
(v-PTC) dissemination of PC. This human clinical trial sought to
determine if the presence of virally-detected, rare v-PTC predict
peritoneal recurrence and patient outcome. This study was approved by the
Osaka Police Hospital IRB. Patients with resectable cytologically or
histologically proven ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were
enrolled. Peritoneal lavage fluid was harvested just after a laparotomy
in 27 patients with PC. Half of the fluid was examined by cytology with
papanicolau staining and MOC-31 immunostaining and the remaining half was
used to detect v-PTC with TelomeScan F35. To distinguish between
leucocyte and cells with epithelial origin, cells were stained with
anti-CD45 Ab. To further distinguish cells with primary tumor origin,
cells were labeled with anti-CEA and anti-CA19-9 Abs. GFP-positive and
CD45-negative, and either CEA- or CA19-9-positive cells were counted as
v-PTC. Patients were followed after surgery to evaluate its clinical
significance. Among 27 patients aged 57-91 years (16 males and 11
females), 3 were cytologically positive (CY+), other 3 were virally
positive by TelomeScan F35 (v-PTC+). All 27 patients underwent a surgical
resection (PD/DP/TP/H-PD=13/7/6/1). One patient was double positive
(CY+/v-PTC+), and postoperative peritoneal recurrence early occurred at 5
month after resection despite adjvant chemotherapy. 2 were CY+, but
v-PTC-, and no recurrence in the abdominal cavity were observed (0%). On
the other hand, other 2 were CY-, but v-PTC+, and one of these 2 patients
occurred local recurrence in the abdominal cavity (50%). Remaining 22
patients (CY-/v-PTC-) were observed with neither local recurrence nor
distant metastasis. In conclusion, the TelomeScan F35-based v-PTC
detection may be an independent prognostic factor in patients with
resectable PC and had close association with local or peritoneal
recurrence.


