Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between CLDN18-ARHGAP fusion gene and
clinicopathological features of gastric cancer in young adult.


Introduction: Gastric cancer (GC) in young adults comprises a small part
of this disease population having the distinctive clinicopathological
features, such as diffusive tumor growth and peritoneal dissemination.
Genetic alterations underlying these features and the development of
cancer in early ages remain unclear. Comprehensive molecular analyses by
TCGA have suggested 4 molecular subtyping of GC and revealed enrichment
of CLDN18-ARHGAP fusion gene in Genomically stable (GS) type which mainly
included diffuse type. In this study, we examined the relationship
between CLDN18-ARHGAP and clinicopathological features of GC affecting
young adults.

Method: Patients (pts) diagnosed at the age younger than 40 years-old
were defined as the GC in young adults, and underwent surgery at our
institute between Jan 2006 and Dec 2015 were enrolled to this study.
Tissue microarrays were prepared from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded surgical specimen. DNA probes for CLDN18, ARHGAP-26 and
-6 were created using bacterial artificial chromosomes and fusion genes
were detected by a FISH method.

Results: Out of 155 surgical specimens available for analysis, we found
CLDN18-ARHGAP fusion gene in 21 pts (13.5%). Among these, 19 cases were
CLDN18-ARHGAP26 fusion and the others were CLDN18-ARHGAP6. Cancers with
CLDN18-ARHGAP fusion genes were all diagnosed as diffuse type and
included more large-sized, multiple lymph node metastases and advanced
stages tumors (table 1). The proportion of detected fusion genes in this
study was almost equivalent to that of GS type in TCGA cohort. Analysis
of variations of breakpoint is planned to confirm by RT-PCR and
sequencing. Additionally, we are going to study the association of
CLDN18-ARHGAP with RHOA or CDH-1.

Conclusion: CLDN18-ARHGAP fusion gene might account for the
characteristic of a part of diffuse type GC. Further comprehensive
molecular analysis comparing to general GC population is warranted.

Patient demographics





positive (n=21)

negative (n=134)

p-value



Age





0.646



<30 / 30-39

2 / 19

9 / 125





Sex





0.482



man / woman

8 / 13

65 / 69





Tumor location





0.507



Upper /Middle /Lower

4 / 10 / 7

43/ 53 / 38





Tumor size (mm)

75.6

64.7

0.117



≤80 / 80≤80 / 80<

9 / 12

34 / 100





Borrmann





0.648



Type2 / 3 / 4 / others

0 / 8 / 3 / 10

10 / 38 / 20 / 62





Lauren





NS



intestinal / diffuse / mixed

0 / 21 / 0

5 / 124 / 5





T (TNM)





0.479



T1 / T2 / T3 / T4

6 / 1 / 4 / 10

50 / 18 / 18 / 48





N (TNM)





0.044



N1 / N2 / N3

6 / 2 / 2 / 11

71 / 12 / 20 / 31





Stage (TNM)





0.032



I / 2 / 3 / 4

7 / 1 / 5 / 8

57 / 28 / 31 / 18


