Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ROCK dependent signalling pathways contribution to collective
invasion of colorectal carcinoma.


Metastatic progression of cancer, which is responsible for 90% of
patients death, results from tumor cells dissemination out of the primary
tumor throughout the body. During the first step of this process -that
consists in invasion of the peritumoral stroma- cancer cells can adopt 1)
a single cell mode of invasion, in which cell have lost cell-cell
junctions to move individually, 2) or a collective mode of invasion where
cells maintain their cell-cell junctions to move as a cohort in which
Leader cells at the front drag the follower cells at the rear. Although
tumour histology data from cancer patients show that invasion occurs
predominantly in a collective manner, this mode of cell invasion remains
underinvestigated. My work aims at identifying the molecular and cellular
mechanisms underlying colorectal carcinoma (CRC) collective invasion. I
use 3D organotypic models of CRC: Caco-2 cell lines or organoids
generated from CRC patients derived xenografts (PDX) and assess invasion
in collagen-I based gels using microscopy approaches on fixed or live
samples. Knowing its central role in the cytoskeleton dynamics which is
the motor of cell motility, we hypothesize that RhoGTPases signaling
pathways could control the collective mode of invasion. We therefore
performed a siRNA based screen targeting the 98 effectors of the pathway
and found ROCK to be an anti-invasive protein. Although it had been
described as a proinvasive protein in the single cell mode of invasion,
we confirmed using pharmacological inhibitors (Y27632 and H1152), that
ROCK activity inhibition triggered collective invasion. Using a ROCK2
dominant negative mutant specifically targeting ROCK2 isoform but not
ROCK1, I demonstrated that ROCK2 inhibition was sufficient to induce
leader cell formation leading to collective invasion. In contrast,
depletion of MyosinII -ROCKâ€™s most common effector- was not sufficient
to induce efficient protusive leader cells. However I found RAC1 to be
necessary and in a 2nd siRNA based screen targeting GEFs, we identified
FARP2, a GEF for Rac1, as the mediator of ROCK-RAC1 crosstalk in
collective invasion. Even though the activation of FARP2 alone or RAC1
alone were not sufficient to induce leader cell formation, the
concomitant inhibition of MyosinII recapitulated the collective invasion
induced by ROCK inhibition. Altogether these results show a new
anti-invasive role of ROCK2 kinase in collective invasion as it controls
the formation of leader cells, through 1) the negative regulation of RAC1
and its GEF FARP2, and 2) the positive regulation of MyosinII.


