Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic targeting of PGBD5-induced DNA repair dependence in
pediatric solid tumors.


Despite intense efforts, the cure rates of childhood solid tumors are not
satisfactory. Resistance to intensive chemotherapy is common, and targets
for molecular therapies are largely undefined, particularly for tumors
caused by aberrant developmental and epigenetic factors. We have now
found that the majority of childhood solid tumors, rhabdoid tumors,
neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma and Ewing sarcoma, express an active DNA
transposase PGBD5. Using functional genetic approaches, we observed that
mouse and human cells deficient in non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) DNA
repair cannot tolerate the expression of PGBD5. In a chemical screen of
DNA repair inhibitors, we identified the ATR/ATM inhibitor AZD6738 as a
specific sensitizer of PGBD5-dependent DNA damage and apoptosis. Ectopic
expression of PGBD5 was sufficient to induce hypersensitivity to AZD6738,
and endogenous PGBD5 was necessary for its anti-tumor effects. We found
that PGBD5-expressing tumor cells accumulate unrepaired DNA damage in
response to AZD6738 treatment, and undergo apoptosis in both dividing and
G1 phase cells in the absence of measureable DNA replication stress.
Accordingly, AZD6738 exhibits nanomolar potency against the majority of
neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma, Ewing sarcoma and rhabdoid tumor cells
tested, while sparing non-transformed human and mouse embryonic
fibroblasts in vitro. Finally, AZD6738 exhibits excellent single-agent
activity against high-risk neuroblastoma and medulloblastoma xenografts,
with induction of apoptosis and tumor regression in vivo. These findings
delineate a therapeutically actionable synthetic lethality for the
majority of childhood solid tumors.


