Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting integrin αvβ3-expressing cancer stem cells to
manipulate tumor-associated macrophages.


Tumor associated macrophages are involved in regulation of cancer growth
and aggressiveness. Whereas M1 macrophages trigger an inflammatory
response and inhibit tumor growth, M2 macrophages secrete pro-tumor
cytokines into the microenvironment to support tumor progression. A
macrophage switch from M1 to M2 has been associated with lung cancer
progression, and cancer stem cells have been implicated as a driver of
this reprogramming.

We recently reported that integrin αvβ3 expression is induced on lung
adenocarcinoma cells during drug resistance and is both necessary and
sufficient to reprogram these tumors to a stem-like state. Given the role
that cancer stem cells play in switching M1 to M2 macrophages, we asked
whether αvβ3 expression on lung adenocarcinoma cells account for this
macrophage conversion. The M1/M2 macrophage ratio in αvβ3-positive
tumors was markedly decreased relative to tumors lacking αvβ3. We next
treated mice bearing αvβ3-positive tumors with a monoclonal antibody
(LM609) targeting this receptor to assess its ability to alter the
macrophage phenotype within these tumors. LM609 was able to selectively
eliminate the αvβ3-positive cancer stem cells via antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), and this not only increased the M1
macrophage population, but also markedly enhanced the sensitivity of
these tumors to the effects of therapy.

These findings reveal that αvβ3-expressing cancer stem cells favor the
pro-tumor M2 macrophage phenotype. Eliminating αvβ3-positive cancer
stem cells via ADCC serves to both increase pro-inflammatory macrophages
within the tumor microenvironment and prolong tumor sensitivity to
therapy.


