Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome analysis of hypoxic head and neck cancer cells
uncovers intron retention in EIF2B5 as a mechanism to reduce protein
synthesis.


Hypoxia is a key feature of solid tumors that contributes to resistance
to therapy and reduced overall survival. Cellular adaptation to the
hypoxic tumor microenvironment involves attenuation of energy-consuming
processes such as macromolecular synthesis. We have identified RNA
processing as another major process which is globally downregulated under
hypoxic stress. By sequencing RNA of normoxic and hypoxic head and neck
cancer cells, we observed widespread repression of genes that regulate
RNA splicing and processing. As a result, we observed over 1,000 changes
in relative mRNA isoform expression, including a significant increase in
hypoxia-induced intron retention in nearly 100 genes. Genes observed to
undergo intron retention in hypoxia included major regulators of RNA
processing and protein synthesis, such as the translation initiation
factor EIF2B5.

Surprisingly, hypoxia-induced intron retention in EIF2B5 creates a
premature termination codon, which results in a truncated protein isoform
of eIF2BÎµ. We provide evidence that this isoform acts in opposition to
the full-length protein to inhibit translation under stringent hypoxic
conditions. Moreover, this intron is expressed in solid cancers known to
contain hypoxic fractions and is overexpressed in head and neck cancer in
a stage-dependent manner compared to normal tissue.

To investigate how this intron is retained, we are examining the role of
hypoxia-mediated changes in phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain
(CTD) of RNA polymerase II. Our data suggest that increased
phosphorylation of the CTD may lead to transcriptional pausing and
subsequent retention of intron 12 in EIF2B5. Furthermore, distinct
sequence features at this locus, such as a weak splice site at the
intron12:exon13 junction, may explain how this intron is selectively
retained in hypoxic cells. These results implicate mRNA splicing as a key
mechanism to induce alternate transcripts and subsequent protein isoforms
under hypoxia that influence cellular adaptation to stress.


