Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low-input transcript profiling with enhanced sensitivity using a
highly efficient, low-bias and strand-specific RNA-Seq library
preparation method.


RNA-seq has become the most popular method for transcriptome analysis and
is widely used to study gene expression, detect mutations, fusion
transcripts, alternative splicing, and post-transcriptional
modifications. It is becoming the method of choice to detect alterations
in diseases, especially cancer, to provide insights on the various
molecular pathways perturbed by changes in the transcriptome and study
their implications. As RNA-seq is being adopted in molecular diagnostics
and biomarker identifications, the need for good quality, reproducible
library preparation methods using very low amounts of RNA input, or
precious clinical samples, is increasing. To address these challenges, we
have developed a strand-specific RNA-seq library preparation method that
retains information about which strand of DNA is transcribed, from as low
as 5 ng total RNA input. Strand specificity is important for correct
annotation of genes, identification of antisense transcripts with
potential regulatory roles, and accurate determination of gene expression
levels in the presence of antisense transcripts. Enhanced sensitivity to
detect transcripts with even coverage across their length offers a
non-biased approach for accurate quantification of transcript levels.

Methods: Enriched poly-A mRNA or ribo-depleted RNA (Universal Human
Reference RNA) was used to make libraries with our strand specific
library preparation method. Library quality and quantity were analyzed on
an Agilent Bioanalyzer, pooled at equimolar ratio and sequenced on
Illuminaâ€™s Nextseq 500. Paired end reads were mapped to a human
reference genome (hg19) using Hisat2 and sequencing metrics were
calculated using Picard's RNA-seq Metrics and RSeqC tools. Transcript
abundance was measured using Salmon and the Ensembl GRCh38 CDS sequences.

Results: Libraries prepared with our streamlined method using inputs that
range from 5ng to 1ug show greater than 98% directionality at all input
levels. GC content analysis, gene body coverage and gene expression
correlation are similar for all inputs tested (5ng to 1ug), even though
input amounts vary by over three orders of magnitude. These consistent
results are recapitulated with the spiked-in ERCC controls at all inputs.

Conclusions: Our library preparation method is streamlined and can be
used for a wide range of input RNA without any major modifications to the
protocol, making it an easy to follow, convenient method for RNA-seq
library preparation. In addition, our method has increased sensitivity
and specificity, especially for low-abundance transcripts, reduced PCR
duplicates and sequence bias, delivering high quality strand-specific
data even for low input RNA. Finally, our method is compatible with both
poly A-tail enriched and ribosomal RNA depleted samples, and is amenable
to large-scale library construction and automation.


