Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liposomal gemcitabine, FF-10832, improves gemcitabine (GEM)
pharmacokinetics (PK) and increases anti-tumor efficacy.


Introduction: FF-10832 is a liposome suspension optimized by Fujifilm
nanotechnology containing 0.5 mg/mL GEM, cholesterol, HSPC, N-MPEG-DSPE.
FF-10832 is expected to improve GEM PK and have strong anti-tumor
effects. The PK and anti-tumor effects of FF-10832 were studied in mice
and human pancreatic cancer xenograft models.

Methods: Single-dose murine plasma PK of FF-10832 1 mg/kg was compared to
GEM 240mg/kg. In vivo activity of GEM 240 mg/kg and FF-10832 1-5 mg/kg IV
once weekly were compared in human pancreatic cancer murine xenograft
models; 2 subcutaneous (Capan-1 [GEM-sensitive] and BxPC-3
[GEM-resistant]), and 1 orthotopic (SUIT-2) model. The active form of GEM
(GEM triphosphate [dFdCTP]) inhibits DNA synthesis. dFdCTP tissue
concentrations following FF-10832 4mg/kg and GEM 240mg/kg were compared
in these models.

Results: An extended plasma t½ (10.6 vs. 2.9 hours), lower clearance,
and smaller volume of distribution were observed with FF-10832 vs. GEM,
which correlated with greater dose exposure achieved with FF-10832
compared to GEM (AUClast 186000 vs. 73000 hr·ng/mL). FF-10832
demonstrated increased in vivo activity in SUIT-2, Capan-1, and BxPC-3
models at significantly lower doses compared to GEM. In the Capan-1 and
BxPC3 models, FF-10832 showed dose-dependent tumor growth suppression
with FF-10832 4 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg superior to that of GEM (pResults: An
extended plasma t½ (10.6 vs. 2.9 hours), lower clearance, and smaller
volume of distribution were observed with FF-10832 vs. GEM, which
correlated with greater dose exposure achieved with FF-10832 compared to
GEM (AUClast 186000 vs. 73000 hr·ng/mL). FF-10832 demonstrated increased
in vivo activity in SUIT-2, Capan-1, and BxPC-3 models at significantly
lower doses compared to GEM. In the Capan-1 and BxPC3 models, FF-10832
showed dose-dependent tumor growth suppression with FF-10832 4 mg/kg and
5 mg/kg superior to that of GEM (p<0.001), respectively. Following 11
weekly doses in the SUIT-2 model, the survival rate was 0% and 20% for
vehicle and GEM 240 mg/kg vs. 13% and 60% for 2 and 4 mg/kg FF-10832,
respectively. Median survival time was 60 (FF-10832 2 mg/kg) and 73 (GEM
240 mg/kg) vs. 26 days (vehicle) (p Results: An extended plasma t½ (10.6
vs. 2.9 hours), lower clearance, and smaller volume of distribution were
observed with FF-10832 vs. GEM, which correlated with greater dose
exposure achieved with FF-10832 compared to GEM (AUClast 186000 vs. 73000
hr·ng/mL). FF-10832 demonstrated increased in vivo activity in SUIT-2,
Capan-1, and BxPC-3 models at significantly lower doses compared to GEM.
In the Capan-1 and BxPC3 models, FF-10832 showed dose-dependent tumor
growth suppression with FF-10832 4 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg superior to that of
GEM (p<0.001), respectively. Following 11 weekly doses in the SUIT-2
model, the survival rate was 0% and 20% for vehicle and GEM 240 mg/kg vs.
13% and 60% for 2 and 4 mg/kg FF-10832, respectively. Median survival
time was 60 (FF-10832 2 mg/kg) and 73 (GEM 240 mg/kg) vs. 26 days
(vehicle) (p <0.001). Median survival was not reached at FF-10832 4
mg/kg. In all models, FF-10832 2 mg/kg (equivalent efficacy to GEM 240
mg/kg) showed no body weight gain suppression. The dFdCTP tumor/bone
marrow AUC ratio was significantly higher following FF-10832 (dFdCTP AUC
ratio = 7) compared with non-liposomal GEM (0.8).

Conclusions: FF-10832 is a stable liposomal GEM formulation demonstrating
potent anti-tumor efficacy in solid tumor models with a favorable
pharmacokinetic profile compared to non-liposomal GEM. Increased exposure
achieved at lower GEM doses may potentially result in superior efficacy
and a more tolerable safety profile for FF-10832 compared to
non-liposomal GEM.


