Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of tricyclic
thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidines as microtubule targeting antitumor agents.


Microtubules are dynamic structures that, together with actin
microfilaments and intermediate filaments, constitute the cellular
cytoskeleton. Besides their well-known roles in cell division, their
functions involve maintenance of cell shape and morphology, cellular
motility, and trafficking of organelles and vesicles. Recently, we
reported a compound AG 370 as a microtubule targeting agent, that
circumvented the Pgp and βIII-tubulin mediated drug resistance
mechanisms that limit the efficacy of paclitaxel, docetaxel, and the
vinca alkaloids. Molecular modeling and docking studies of the parent
compound (AG 370) in the colchicine binding site (PDB: 402B) suggest that
the C-5 and C-6 of parent compound are oriented towards the hydrophobic
pockets with the side chain of Ala316, Val315, Leu255 and Met259.
However, this binding pocket in tubulin is relatively large. To further
explore the hydrophobic pocket, an additional cyclohexene ring was
introduced at C-5 and C-6 of AG370. In the molecular modeling study, the
resulting tricyclic scaffold showed hydrophobic interactions with the
amino acids of the colchicine binding site. The 2-Me substituent of the
tricyclic scaffold was replaced with a 2-H and a 2-NH2 group and
4-position of the scaffold was replaced with appropriate anilines. The
2-amino- N4-methoxyphenyl moiety (AG61) was found to be the most potent
analog in the tricyclic series in both antiproliferative assay in human
melanoma cancer cell line (MDA-MB-435 cell line, IC50 = 9.0 ± 0.2 nM)
and in microtubule depolymerization assay in A-10 cells (EC50= 19 nM).
Thus, we identified tricyclic thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidines as a novel
structural scaffold with potent antiproliferative activity as well as
microtubule depolymerizing activity. These analogs are selected for
preclinical development.


