Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and validation of a PD-L1 specific peptide for
determination of PD-L1 expression in tumors.


In recent years, immunotherapy has seen a resurgence as a promising
method of treating cancers. The interaction between Programmed Death
Ligand 1 (PD-L1) and its receptor, Programmed Death 1 receptor (PD-1) has
been of particular interest. Many different types of tumors have been
shown to overexpress PD-L1, which causes host immune cells that express
the PD-1 receptor and bind PD-L1 to cease killing the tumor. Patients who
have tumors exhibiting high levels of PD-L1 show poor prognosis compared
to those who do not. Inhibition of the PD-L1 PD-1 binding axis has been
shown to restore host immunity to the tumor, and recently many new drugs
such as atezolizumab and pembrolizumab have been developed to target this
interaction. Current methods of PD-L1 diagnosis have shown to vary based
on the antibody, detection kit brand, antigen retrieval method, and
clinically strict defined methods for use by the FDA for assessment. To
refine detection of PD-L1, we have identified a PD-L1 specific peptide
which can be used to detect PD-L1 expressing tumors using either
conventional immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry. Immunohistochemistry
using this peptide was tested against the FDA-approved PD-L1 (SP263)
Rabbit monoclonal primary antibody on biopsied patient tissues. Flow
cytometry was performed on both cultured cell lines and patient tissues.
We have shown that our PD-L1 peptide shows specific staining in the tumor
regions of FFPE tissues where the SP263 kit does not stain, and we can
also detect PD-L1 expression in both cell samples and patient tissues
using flow cytometry.


