Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Co-targeting the stress survival proteins LEDGF/p75 and clusterin
to resensitize chemoresistant prostate cancer cells to docetaxel.


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed male cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer deaths in U.S. men. Late-stage PCa is
characterized by metastasis followed by castration resistant PCa (mCRPC),
for which there is no cure. Docetaxel (DTX) is the first-line
chemotherapeutic drug for late-stage PCa, and resistance to this drug is
inevitable. Our group has previously reported the elevated expression of
the stress oncoprotein lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF/p75)
in PCa cells and tissues, and this upregulation promotes resistance to
DTX-induced non-apoptotic lysosomal cell death. Another stress
oncoprotein, clusterin (CLU), is also upregulated in DTX-resistant PCa,
and protects cells from DTX-induced mitochondrial-triggered apoptosis. In
this study we observed that targeting LEDGF/75 with siRNAs partially
resensitized DTX-resistant (DR) mCRPC cell lines to DTX treatment in
clonogenic assays. Similarly, other groups have shown that knockdown of
CLU in mCRPC-DR cells resensitizes them to treatment with taxanes.
However, recent clinical trials targeting CLU have not been effective,
suggesting that blocking this protein alone is insufficient to overcome
DTX resistance. We hypothesized that simultaneous knockdown or inhibition
of both LEDGF/p75 and CLU could be more effective in resensitizing
chemoresisant PCa cells to taxane therapy than targeting each protein
alone. Because of LEDGF/p75â€™s role as a stress transcription
co-activator, we first sought to determine if this protein contributes to
CLU expression by performing siRNA-mediated knockdown of LEDGF/p75 on the
taxane-sensitive and -resistant mCRPC cell lines PC3 and DU145. Western
blotting revealed that CLU protein expression was not downregulated by
LEDGF/p75 knockdown, compared to treatment with scrambled siRNA control.
Similarly, CLU knockdown in these cell lines did not downregulate
LEDGF/p75. These results indicated that CLU expression is independent of
LEDGF/p75, consistent with previous observations that these two proteins
promote chemoresistance via distinct, possibly redundant, mechanisms. We
then performed siRNA-mediated knockdown of LEDGF/p75 and CLU, separately
or together, in PC3 DR and DU145 DR cells, in the presence and absence of
varying concentrations of DTX. MTT and clonogenic assays were used to
determine cell death viability and clonogenicity, respectively.
Simultaneous knockdown of LEDGF/p75 and CLU, in combination with DTX
treatment, resulted in increased sensitization to DTX than single
knockdown of each protein. These findings suggest that co-targeting
LEDGF/p75 and CLU could be an effective strategy for ameliorating
chemoresistance in mCRPC, and set the foundation for combinatorial
therapies targeting multiple stress pathways linked to taxane resistance
together with taxane chemotherapy for treatment of late-stage PCa.


