Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An FKBP5-based immunophenotype for assessment of the
immunosuppression status and possible prediction of immunotherapy
response in melanoma patients.


Background and aim: FKBP51 is an immunophilin encoded by FKBP5 gene on
chromosome 6. It is a protein resident in lymphocytes and involved in
immune response. Recently, our group demonstrated that the inhibitory
checkpoint PD-L1/PD1 promoted the alternative splicing of FKBP5 gene,
resulting in increased expression of its variant 4, in PBMC of melanoma
patients. The aim of this study was to address whether such a molecular
signature could help in identifying an immune profile associated with
increased probability of immunotherapy response.

Experimental Design: The splicing FKBP51 isoform or FKBP51s was measured
in peripheral blood T lymphocytes subsets (CD3/CD4, CD3/CD8, CD25 and
PD-L1) and CD14 monocytes from a cohort of 118 patients and 77 age- and
sex-matched healthy controls, by flow cytometry. Blood samples were
collected before patients underwent ipilimumab treatment. Furthermore, in
64 out of 118 patients, expression of FKBP51s was also assessed in
regulatory T cells.

Results: Physiologically, each PBMC subset analyzed contained a fraction
of an FKBP51spos component, which resulted expanded in melanoma patients.
We also measured an increase in CD3/CD8 and PD-L1 lymphocytes in
patients. CD4 T lymphocytes showed the FKBP51sneg fraction significantly
impaired, which might reflect the condition of impaired T cell help. Treg
count was increased, in accordance with previous studies. The count of
FKBP51sposTregs defined a subgroup of nonresponder patients to
ipilimumab, by 92.6%. A 2D hierarchical partitioning of data from
FKBP51s-immunophenotype (heatmap) revealed 3 main clusters: C1 (33 pts,
51,5%), C2 (14 pts, 22%) and C3 (17 pts, 26,5%). FKBP51spos Treg subset
appeared globally increased in all clusters. In C1, values of effector T
cells and monocytes were not different from normal donors. C2 showed a
significant increase of FKBP51spos PD-L1 monocytes and a significant
probability of not responding (Chi-square=5.46; p=0.019). This finding is
consistent with the hypothesis that response to ipilimumab is prevented
by accessory cells exerting a negative immune regulatory control. C3
showed a significant increase of FKBP51s in overall lymphocyte subsets
analyzed. Patients in this cluster showed reduced overall survival. This
finding suggests that a prevalence of activation (CD25) and co-inhibitory
(PD-L1) markers together with the expansion of FKBP51spos effector T
cells might reflect a condition of chronic lymphocyte stimulation in some
advanced melanoma patients, contributing to T cell-exhaustion.

Conclusions: FKBP51s-based immunophenotype of melanoma patients revealed
several profiles virtually related to a negative immune regulatory
control and highlights an impairment of a Treg subset endowed with
increased suppressive potential. Such FKBP51sTreg subset is likely to be
associated with immunotherapy response (Chi-square=9.916, p=0.002) .


