Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of super-enhancer-associated cancer genes provides
novel therapeutic targets in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.


Super-enhancers are often enriched at cancer genes in various
malignancies. Identification of such enhancers would pinpoint critical
factors that directly contribute to pathogenesis. Adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) is a highly aggressive lymphoproliferative
disorder that arises from CD4+ mature T-lymphocytes. A recent genome-wide
sequencing study revealed a large number of genetic and chromosomal
abnormalities. However, there is still a lack of functional evidence for
these genetic abnormalities in ATL pathogenesis due to the large
mutational burden and the considerable genetic heterogeneity. Here, we
performed super-enhancer profiling combined with gene expression analysis
in primary ATL samples and cell lines. Super-enhancers are frequently
enriched at genes involved in T-cell activation and T-cell receptor
signaling pathway in both ATL and normal CD4+ T-cells, reflecting the
origin of leukemia cells. Super-enhancers at the CCR4 gene, a known
therapeutic target in ATL, were observed in all ATL cases. Additionally,
we identified previously-uncharacterized genes that were highly activated
in ATL cells and required for cell growth. A small-molecule inhibitor of
CDK7 efficiently downregulated the expression of these genes and
inhibited cell growth. Our study provides a novel strategy to identify
critical cancer genes in cancer.


