Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reproductive hormones modulate cardioprotection from
doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy in female spontaneously hypertensive
rats.


Doxorubicin (Dox) causes cardiomyopathy, partially driven by the excess
generation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS). The incidence
of Dox-induced cardiac stress is greater in prepubescent and
postmenopausal females compared to reproductively mature women,
suggesting that reproductive hormones may mediate cardioprotection. We
investigated the role of exogenous hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and
naturally cycling reproductive hormones in providing cardioprotection
from Dox chemotherapy. Mammary adenocarcinoma SST-2 cells were implanted
in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) that were either ovariectomized
and received HRT, or left reproductively normal and maintained natural
hormone cycling. HRT animals received time-release pellets containing
17-Î²-estradiol (E2), progesterone (P4), Tamoxifen (Tam) or combinations
thereof, and were subsequently treated with Dox. Naturally cycling
animals were treated with Dox, the iron chelator Dexrazoxane (Drz), or
Dox+Drz. Tumor size was used to evaluate anticancer activity. Vaginal
cytologies and circulating E2 and P4 levels were obtained. Serum cardiac
troponin I (cTnI), histopathology and echocardiograms were used to assess
cardiac health. Dox treated animals supplemented with E2 and P4 (alone)
showed cardioprotection relative to the Dox treated animals. Dox+/-Drz
exhibited sustained anti-tumor activity independent of endocrine status.
After 13 days with Dox, all naturally cycling animals arrested in
diestrus (lowest hormone levels). These results demonstrate that E2 and
P4 have a role in providing cardioprotection from Dox therapy in SHRs,
and that estrous cycle stage may provide a safety treatment window,
potentially reducing the risk of cardiomyopathy in reproductively normal
females. We are also currently analyzing RNA sequencing data obtained
from heart tissues to achieve a better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of cardioprotection.


