Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIR142 loss-of-function mutations promote leukemogenesis through
derepression of ASH1L resulting in increased HOX gene expression.


MIR142 mutations have been identified in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
non-Hodgkins lymphoma. In AML, all MIR142 mutations localize to the
miR-142-3p seed sequence. We show that mutated MIR142 is unable to
suppress several well-known targets of miR-142-3p. Interestingly, the
mutations of miR-142-3p result in their preferential loading into the
RNA-induced silencing complex, leading to the degradation of miR-142-5p.
Accordingly, miR-142-5p expression is decreased in MIR142 mutated AML.
Hence, MIR142 mutations in AML disrupt both miR-142-3p/5p functions.
Thus, we modeled the effect of MIR142 mutations on hematopoiesis using
Mir142-/- mice. We show that loss of miR142 results in significant
increases in myeloid hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs),
including granulocyte-macrophage progenitors, myeloid-biased multipotent
progenitors (CD150- CD48+ Flk2- Kit+ Sca+ lineage-) and CD229-
myeloid-biased HSCs (CD150+ CD48- Kit+ Sca+ lineage-). In contrast, there
are significant decreases of megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors and
erythroid precursors. Although the number of HSCs is normal in Mir142-/-
mice, HSC transplantation suggest that they are myeloid-biased. In AML,
MIR142 mutations are commonly found in conjunction with mutations of
IDH1/2. To assess the importance of this association, we transduced
wildtype or Mir142-/- HSPCs with retrovirus expressing IDH2 R172K and
then transplanted into lethally irradiated recipients. Expression of IDH2
R172K alone was sufficient to induce a lethal myeloproliferative neoplasm
(MPN). In contrast, Mir142-/- alone did not result in MPN. However, loss
of Mir142 cooperates with IDH2 R172K to produce a more severe MPN, with
increased CD34+ blasts and more severe anemia. Moreover, secondary
transplantation shows that Mir142-/- x IDH2 R172K cells but not IDH2
R172K cells efficiently engraft and induce MPN, suggesting that loss of
miR142 increases leukemia-initiating activity. We identify the histone
methyltransferase ASH1L as a target gene of miR142 that contributes to
altered hematopoiesis in Mir142-/- mice. The 3â€™-untranslated region of
ASH1L has four miR-142-3p binding sites, and luciferase reporter assay
shows that miR142 suppresses its translation by 80%. Consistent with this
observation, Ashl1 protein expression is 3-fold higher in Mir142-/- bone
marrow. ASH1L is a key positive regulator of HOX gene expression.
Accordingly, we observed markedly (5-10 fold) increased HoxA9/A10
expression in myeloid progenitors in Mir142-/- mice. Likewise, HoxA9/A10
expression is increased in CD34+ blasts from Mir142-/- x IDH2 R172K
transplanted mice. Of note, increased HoxA9 expression has been shown to
cooperate with mutant IDH1 to induce AML in mice. Together, these
findings support a model in which loss-of-function mutations of MIR142
contribute to hematopoietic malignancies by derepressing ASH1L and
inducing HOXA9/10 gene expression.


