Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent inhibition of HCMV by modulating the cellular SNARE
syntaxin 5.


Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), also referred to as human herpesvirus-5
(HHV-5), can cause serious and even fatal disease in immunocompromised
individuals and newborns, namely individuals with AIDS, solid organ
transplant recipients, chemotherapy patients and recipients of bone
marrow and stem cell transplants. HCMV is a ubiquitous virus found
throughout all geographic regions and socioeconomic groups, infecting
greater than 50% of adults in industrialized countries and as many as
100% in developing countries. Although current therapeutics improves
clinical outcomes, they are limited by toxicity, intravenous infusion and
the development of resistance by the virus. Thus, there is a pressing
need to develop novel therapeutics to prevent HCMV infections with
concomitant organ toxicity. Formation of the cytoplasmic viral assembly
compartment (cVAC) is an important step for efficient HCMV assembly. To
do this, the virus must alter and repurpose the normal cellular balance
of membrane and protein flux, a process that is not well understood. We
have identified a compound Retro94, which potently inhibits production of
infectious HCMV virions in cells by operating against a host cell
process, rather than directly targeting the virus. The presence of
Retro94 results in the severely impaired production of infectious
virions, as great as 5 logs (99-99.99%). Here we discuss in vitro, in
vivo, stability, and binding study of Retro94. Overall, our findings have
identified Retro94, as novel agent that affects key cellular trafficking
factors important for supporting HCMV infection.


