Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Actn4, a novel therapeutic target of dietary ellagic acid,
promotes breast cancer metastasis via mediating cancer stem cells.


Purpose: Pharmacology-based target identification has become a novel
stratey leading to the discovery of novel pathological biomarkers.
Ellagic acid (EA), a dietary polyphenol compound, exhibits potent
anticancer activities, whereas the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
This study sought to determine the role and regulation of ACTN4
expression in human breast cancer metastasis and EA-based therapy.

Experimental Design: The anti-metastasis ability of EA was validated by
MMTV-PyMT mice and in vitro cell models. Drug affiity responsive target
stability (DARTS) was utilized to identify ACTN4 as the direct target of
EA in breast breast cancer stem cells (CSCs). The metastatic regulated
mechanisms of ACTN4 were assessed by CSC-related assays including
mammosphere formation, tumorigenic ability, reattachment differentiation
and signaling pathway analysis. The clinical significance of ACTN4 was
based on human tissue microarray analysis and TCGA database exploration.

Results: EA inhibited breast cancer growth and metastasis via directly
targeting ACTN4 in vitro and in vivo, accompanied with limited CSCs
population. ACTN4 knockdown resulted in blockage of malignant cell
proliferation, colony formation and ameliorated metastasis potency. ACTN4
positive CSCs exhibited higher ESA+ proportion, increased
mammosphere-formation ability, as well as enhanced in vivo tumorigenesis
ability. Increased ACTN4 expression was directly associated with later
cancer stage, increased incidence of metastasis, and poor overall
survival period.

Conclusions: ACTN4 plays an important role in breast CSCs-related
metastasis and is a novel therapeutic target of EA treatment.


