Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The phenotypic characterization of Lrig null mouse embryonic
fibroblasts.


The LRIG gene family consists of LRIG1, LRIG2 and LRIG3. The most studied
of these is LRIG1, which is a tumor suppressor gene. The LRIG1 protein is
downregulated in various types of cancer and it negatively regulates
receptor tyrosine kinases including the EGF- and PDGF-receptors. Lrig1
also regulates stem cell homeostasis in mouse skin and intestine. The
functions of LRIG2 and LRIG3 are less known, but some findings imply that
they might antagonize LRIG1. Intriguingly, the sole LRIG homolog in C.
elegans, Sma-10, positively regulates BMP signaling. Thus, it is not
known to what degree the LRIG proteins have the same, overlapping, or
opposing functions, and the molecular mechanisms involved are poorly
characterized. To elucidate the functions of the three LRIG proteins we
generated a series of wildtype and LRIG-null (Lrig1-/-;Lrig2-/-;Lrig3-/-)
mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) lines. These cell lines were created
from homozygous Lrig1flox/flox;Lrig2flox/flox;Lrig3flox/flox mouse
embryos. The FLOXed Lrig genes were then deleted with CRE-recombinase,
thereby creating Lrig-null MEFs. ddPCR analysis showed that the Lrig-null
MEF lines were contaminated with less than 1% of cells carrying wildtype
Lrig3 alleles. Lrig-null MEFs showed a higher proliferation rate and
migrated more in trans-well chambers than the wildtype cells. These cell
lines will also be useful to investigate the importance of Lrig proteins
for other cellular functions such as, signal transduction, lipidomics,
transcriptomics, secretomics, metabolomics, and oxidative stress
sensitivity. We also transduced the Lrig-null cells with individual
inducible Lrig-genes thus creating a powerful system for the examination
of the biology of the specific Lrig proteins.


