Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary supplementation with methylseleninic acid reduces male
mammary tumorigenesis in MMTV-PyMT mice.


Male breast cancer makes up approximately 1% of all breast cancers and
less than 1% of all cancers in men in the United States. However, it is
an aggressive disease with poor prognosis and the incidence of male
breast cancer is on the rise. The present study investigated the effects
of dietary supplementation of selenium on male breast carcinogenesis in
MMTV-PyMT mice (FVB/N background). Three-week-old male mice were weaned
onto the AIN93G diet with or without supplementation of selenium in the
form of methylseleninic acid (2.5 mg Se/kg). Mice were euthanized 10
weeks after the first palpable mammary tumor was detected. There were no
differences in food intake and body weight between the groups. The median
latency (the age at which the first palpable tumor was detected) was 14.1
and 13.9 weeks and the incidence of palpable mammary tumor was 71% and
70% for the control and the selenium group, respectively. Selenium
supplementation compared to the control diet reduced mammary tumor
progression by 258% and tumor weight by 84%, respectively. Tumor
progression was defined as the change in tumor volume from detection of
the first palpable mammary tumor to termination 10 weeks later. Incidence
of lung metastasis was 74% and 50% in control and selenium group,
respectively. In mice bearing lung metastases, selenium supplementation
significantly reduced the number of metastases by 83% compared to the
control group. In conclusion, dietary supplementation with selenium in
the form of methylseleninic acid reduces male breast carcinogenesis and
its metastasis in mice. It indicates that selenium may be useful in male
breast cancer prevention.


