Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paraendocrine interactions between bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells and prostate cancer cells: impact on tumor cell invasive and
proliferative capacity.


Introduction: The primary site of prostate cancer metastasis is to the
bone. Bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) are
multipotent stem cells resident in the bone with the potential to
differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes and adipocytes. They have
been shown to home to sites of inflammation, including prostate cancer,
contributing to tumor growth and progression. This study aims to explore
the impact of metastatic prostate cancer patient derived BM-MSCs on
prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasive capacity.

Methodologies: BM-MSCs were isolated from bone marrow aspirates from
patients diagnosed with metastatic prostate cancer (both androgen
deprivation treatment na√Øve and commenced). Co-culture models were used
to examine the impact on patient BM-MSCs versus healthy donor BM-MSCs on
prostate cancer cell proliferation, PSA and cytokine secretion, and
induction of cell migration and invasion. The impact of metastatic
prostate cancer cells on healthy donor BM-MSCs was also examined.

Results: Here we show that metastatic prostate cancer cells (PC-3 and
DU145), reprogram normal donor BM-MSCs to a pro-inflammatory secretory
phenotype that in turn induces prostate cancer cell invasion using a 3D
spheroid model of invasion into a matrigel-collagen gel, while
restricting BM-MSCs with the 3D spheroid. Additionally we isolated a
series of BM-MSCs from metastatic prostate cancer patients (n=10).
Results show that a proportion of prostate cancer patient derived BM-MSCs
patients have a reduced differentiation capacity to osteocytes while
maintaining normal adipocyte capacity. Additionally patient derived
BM-MSCs increase prostate cancer cell (MDA-PCa-2b) secretion of PSA and
display increased expression of inflammation associated enzymes including
the immunosuppressive enzyme indoleamine- 2,3-dioxygenase and its
metabolite kynurenine.

Conclusions: Ultimately, we seek to decipher the role of BM-MSCs in
metastatic prostate cancer, in the context of impact on androgen receptor
signaling, chemotherapeutic drug response, and the maintenance and
promotion of metastatic lesions. Future directions will use 3D co-culture
models to identify the key regulatory networks co-activated in prostate
cancer and BM-MSCs that facilitate chemotherapeutic drug resistance and
metastatic progression.


