Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced Epstein-Barr virus replication in human
papillomavirus-immortalized keratinocyte organotypic raft culture.


An epidemic rise in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) infected
with human papillomavirus has been observed over the past decade. The
majority of HPV+OSCC arise from the tonsils and base of tongue (BOT),
which are lymphoid-rich regions that are known to harbor Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV). Indeed, we previously reported HPV/EBV co-infection in 25%
of tonsillar and 70% of BOT tumors. HPV is a DNA tumor virus that
specifically infects proliferating basal cells in stratified squamous
epithelia. HPV replication is facilitated by viral oncoproteins E6 and
E7, which create an S-phase-like environment via degradation of cell
cycle regulators p53 and Rb, respectively. EBV is also an established DNA
tumor virus that replicates in differentiated epithelia in its normal
lifecycle. However, EBV exhibits a latent infection characterized by
oncogene expression and lack of viral replication in EBV-associated
carcinomas. E6/E7-mediated alteration of the cell cycle results in an
interruption in epithelial differentiation, which is required for EBV
replication in epithelial cells. Thus, we hypothesize that HPV
immortalization of keratinocytes shifts the EBV life cycle from
replication to latency.

To test our hypothesis, we developed an EBV/HPV co-infection model
utilizing organotypic raft culture to produce stratified epithelia in
vitro. Tonsillar keratinocytes immortalized by HPV were EBV-infected by
co-culture with IgG-induced EBV-positive Akata Burkittâ€™s lymphoma cells
four days after differentiation induction. Raft tissues were harvested 6
days post-EBV infection for analysis of viral life cycles. EBV infection
did not alter HPV replication or gene expression. In HPV-negative
tonsillar keratinocytes, robust EBV replication was observed that was
blocked by treatment with acyclovir, a nucleoside analog that inhibits
EBV lytic replication. In contrast, a dramatic decrease in EBV DNA levels
was observed in HPV-positive keratinocytes, which was not further reduced
by acyclovir. Human telomerase-immortalized normal oral keratinocytes
supported robust EBV replication in organotypic raft culture suggesting a
specific effect of HPV rather than immortalization on EBV replication.
Expression of E7 alone was sufficient to decrease EBV DNA levels.
Preliminary data suggest no change in EBV infectivity between
HPV-negative and HPV-positive rafts, and an increase in EBV
latency-associated gene expression in HPV-positive cells. The ability of
EBV to establish persistent latent infection in HPV-infected epithelial
cells would contribute additional viral oncogene expression to explain
the rapid development and progression of HPV+OSCC.


