Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NR2F1 limits dissemination and stemness of early breast cancer
cells.


Tumor cells derived from MMTV-Neu mouse models or human ErBb2+ primary
tumors are known to be able to complete all steps of the metastatic
cascade. However, new evidence show that Neu+ early cancer cells derived
from early stages of tumor progression (before detection of palpable
tumors), can disseminate and, as disseminated cancer cells (early DCCs),
enter a non-proliferative state for prolonged periods of time at
secondary organs. We recently showed that early DCCs contributed to
metastasis formation together with late-arriving DCCs (those coming from
overt tumors). However, the mechanisms that would allow these early
cancer cells, considered sessile and with few genetic alterations, to
complete all steps of metastasis are unknown. Here we report that
downregulation of the orphan nuclear receptor NR2F1 in Neu+ early cancer
mammary epithelial cells (MECs) further activated a motile phenotype and
this was coincident with previously described detection of circulating
cancer cells (CCCs) and lung and bone marrow DCCs in MMTV-Neu mouse
model. Knock down of basal NR2F1 levels in Neu+ early cancer cells
induced cell motility, loss of laminin-V deposition, Î²-catenin
delocalization from the membrane, dramatic loss of E-cadherin junctions
and increased percentage of leader cells positive for CK14 and PRRX1
staining. Interestingly, TWIST and PRRX1 levels became upregulated upon
NR2F1 depletion in 3D structures. These results suggest that NR2F1
expression maintains epithelial identity and suppresses
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Knock down of NR2F1 in Neu+
early cancer cells enhanced mammosphere formation efficiency and this was
accompanied by upregulation of the pluripotency transcription factor
NANOG and EMT master regulator TWIST. Interestingly, early dormant DCCs
(negative for proliferation markers) showed re-expression of NR2F1 levels
while micrometastases (cycling cells) had reduced levels of NR2F1. This
result suggests that downregulation of NR2F1 in early DCCs may contribute
to the dormancy escape of early DCCs and consequently metastatic relapse.
Our findings provide for the first time evidence that NR2F1 functions as
a suppressor of stemness and dissemination during early stages of tumor
progression. We propose that therapies that restore expression of NR2F1
might limit early dissemination and the progression of early and
late-arriving DCCs toward metastatic outgrowth.


