Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the HSP40/HSP70 chaperone axis as a novel strategy to
treat castration-resistant prostate cancer.


Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is frequently characterized
by elevated expression of nuclear receptors able to at least partially
maintain the androgen receptor (AR) transcriptional program. Elevated
expression of a number of constitutively active AR splice variants
lacking the ligand binding domain (LBD) (e.g., ARv7, which is
ligand-independent and correlates with poor prognosis, reduced survival,
and resistance to existing LBD-targeted standard of care therapy) is a
frequent occurrence in CRPC. Thus, alternative approaches to disrupt AR
signaling in CRPC are of great clinical importance, and a single strategy
able to target AR and ARv7 remains a critical unmet need. As a steroid
hormone nuclear receptor, the AR exists in an interactive and dynamic
cycle with the molecular chaperones (heat shock proteins, HSPs)
HSP40/HSP70/HSP90 for proper folding and remodeling of the AR LBD to bind
ligand. Notably, HSP90 inhibitors promote AR degradation and display
efficacy in prostate cancer xenograft models. Although it has been shown
that ARv7 functions independently of HSP90, additional chaperone
requirements of LBD-deficient ARv7 are not known. Thus, we tested the
hypothesis that both AR and ARv7 are dependent on HSP40/HSP70 and that
targeting these chaperones with specific inhibitors (C86 and JG98,
respectively) will lead to AR/ARv7 destabilization and loss of
transcriptional activity in models of CRPC. To determine if AR proteins
associate with HSP40/HSP70, 22Rv1 CRPC cells (expressing endogenous AR
and ARv7) were first transfected with FLAG-HSP40 or FLAG-HSP70.
Immunoprecipitation with FLAG beads revealed AR and ARv7 associated with
both chaperones, indicating potential functional dependence of these
nuclear receptors on HSP40/HSP70. To further characterize these
interactions, 22Rv1 lysate was probed with biotinylated-C86 and subjected
to IP with streptavidin beads. C86 bound a significant fraction of HSP40
complexed with HSP70, AR, and ARv7. Excess unlabeled C86 or JG98
effectively competed away binding of HSP40/HSP70 to biotinylated-C86 with
concomitant loss of associated AR and ARv7. Treatment of 22Rv1 cells with
C86 or JG98 led to a time and dose-dependent decrease in AR and ARv7
protein, concomitant with a significant loss of viability. We also
observed that HSP40/HSP70 inhibition markedly reduced AR and ARv7
transcriptional activity, as indicated by decreased AR (KLK3, TMPRSS2)
and ARv7 (UBE2C) target gene expression. Finally, treatment of mice
bearing 22Rv1 xenografts with JG231 (an analog of JG98 with enhanced PK
properties) led to significantly smaller tumors relative to vehicle
treated mice. Together, these data confirm the continued dependence of AR
and ARv7 on HSP40/HSP70 molecular chaperones and they demonstrate the
feasibility of targeting the HSP40/HSP70 axis to abrogate sustained
AR-mediated signaling in CRPC.


