Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of CDK1 as an aspirin and salicylic acid binding
protein: a potential role in chemoprevention.


Data emerging from the past 10 years have consolidated the rationale for
investigating the use of aspirin for chemoprevention; however, the
mechanisms leading to its anti-cancer effects are still being elucidated.
We hypothesized that aspirin’s ability to exert chemopreventive effects
may involve altering the levels and activity of cell cycle regulatory
proteins. In the present study, using HT-29 colon cancer cells and other
cancer cells, we demonstrated that both aspirin and its primary
metabolite, salicylic acid, downregulated the protein and mRNA levels of
cyclin B1 and cyclin dependent kinase-1 (CDK1). Lactacystin, a 26S
proteosomal inhibitor, prevented aspirin and salicylic acid mediated
degradation of cyclin B1, but not CDK1. Decrease in protein levels of
cyclin B1/CDK1 was correlated with a corresponding decrease in CDK1
kinase activity. Molecular docking studies showed that aspirin and
salicylic acid independently can dock on CDK1 through interactions with
Leucine 83. Incubation of recombinant CDK1 with aspirin resulted in
acetylation at lysine residues, this was also observed in cell culture
experiments. Pre-incubation of CDK1 with salicylic acid dose dependently
prevented aspirin’s ability to acetylate CDK1 in purified preparations
confirming the data obtained from molecular docking studies. Our results
show that CDK1 is a salicylic acid binding protein (SABP) and the
chemopreventive actions of aspirin may involve modulation of levels and
activity of cyclin B1 and CDK1.


