Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Strategic inhibition of adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) by CPI-444
improves CD8+:Treg ratios and enhances T-cell killing of a HER-2/neu
expressing murine tumor.


It has been demonstrated that a higher CD8+ to CD4+FoxP3+ T regulatory
cells (Tregs) ratio coincides with improved therapeutic outcomes for
patients receiving immunotherapies in the clinic. The last several years
of research have drawn attention to many such therapeutics and
strategies. Adenosine is an abundant extracellular signaling molecule in
the tumor microenvironment (TME) of many cancers. Signal transduction
through the GPCR A2AR enhances the immunosuppressive activity of Tregs
while simultaneously attenuating tumor-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cells. We
have evaluated the appropriate coordination and dosing for a
small-molecule inhibitor of A2AR in a Her-2/neu expressing murine model
of breast cancer. We have demonstrated its capacity to augment existing
therapeutic strategies in this tolerant model. To test our hypotheses on
the ability of the small molecule to work in concert with existing
therapeutics, we tested the role of CPI-444 when given with a T
cell-inducing vaccine. Neu-expressing mammary tumor bearing HER-2/neu
transgenic (Neu-N) mice were administered combinations of low-dose
cyclophosphamide (Cy) to deplete Tregs, followed one day later with a
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and
neu-expressing whole cell vaccine (GVAX). The day following
administration of GVAX, mice received adoptively transferred high-avidity
naïve neu-specific CD8+ T cells intravenously one day after vaccination.
Administration of specific components in this strategy (i.e. Cy, GVAX,
adoptive transfer) were altered to gain insight into the mechanistic
effects of CPI-444 in vivo through analysis of tumor progression, tumor
clearance, and flow cytometric analysis of the TIL. Mice treated with the
A2AR inhibitor or the vehicle control were administered each by oral
gavage daily for 14 days (survival) or until 4 days post-adoptive
transfer (TIL) at the peak infiltrate time. Of the strategies tested, Cy,
followed by concomitant administration of GVAX with 100mg/kg of CPI-444
for 14 days, and a single adoptive therapy treatment provided a 55%
overall survival (OS) compared with 0%-20% OS in vehicle controls (PIt
has been demonstrated that a higher CD8+ to CD4+FoxP3+ T regulatory cells
(Tregs) ratio coincides with improved therapeutic outcomes for patients
receiving immunotherapies in the clinic. The last several years of
research have drawn attention to many such therapeutics and strategies.
Adenosine is an abundant extracellular signaling molecule in the tumor
microenvironment (TME) of many cancers. Signal transduction through the
GPCR A2AR enhances the immunosuppressive activity of Tregs while
simultaneously attenuating tumor-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cells. We have
evaluated the appropriate coordination and dosing for a small-molecule
inhibitor of A2AR in a Her-2/neu expressing murine model of breast
cancer. We have demonstrated its capacity to augment existing therapeutic
strategies in this tolerant model. To test our hypotheses on the ability
of the small molecule to work in concert with existing therapeutics, we
tested the role of CPI-444 when given with a T cell-inducing vaccine.
Neu-expressing mammary tumor bearing HER-2/neu transgenic (Neu-N) mice
were administered combinations of low-dose cyclophosphamide (Cy) to
deplete Tregs, followed one day later with a granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and neu-expressing whole cell vaccine
(GVAX). The day following administration of GVAX, mice received
adoptively transferred high-avidity naïve neu-specific CD8+ T cells
intravenously one day after vaccination. Administration of specific
components in this strategy (i.e. Cy, GVAX, adoptive transfer) were
altered to gain insight into the mechanistic effects of CPI-444 in vivo
through analysis of tumor progression, tumor clearance, and flow
cytometric analysis of the TIL. Mice treated with the A2AR inhibitor or
the vehicle control were administered each by oral gavage daily for 14
days (survival) or until 4 days post-adoptive transfer (TIL) at the peak
infiltrate time. Of the strategies tested, Cy, followed by concomitant
administration of GVAX with 100mg/kg of CPI-444 for 14 days, and a single
adoptive therapy treatment provided a 55% overall survival (OS) compared
with 0%-20% OS in vehicle controls (P<0.005). Further, we have observed
both broad and specific changes in the T cell compartment of the
tumor-infiltrating leukocyte (TIL) population. Broadly we have observed a
refinement in the T cell portion of the TIL with decreased numbers of T
cells overall, but an increase in specific prognostic ratios, namely a
relative increase in favorability of the CD8+:Treg ratio when compared to
controls (PIt has been demonstrated that a higher CD8+ to CD4+FoxP3+ T
regulatory cells (Tregs) ratio coincides with improved therapeutic
outcomes for patients receiving immunotherapies in the clinic. The last
several years of research have drawn attention to many such therapeutics
and strategies. Adenosine is an abundant extracellular signaling molecule
in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of many cancers. Signal transduction
through the GPCR A2AR enhances the immunosuppressive activity of Tregs
while simultaneously attenuating tumor-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cells. We
have evaluated the appropriate coordination and dosing for a
small-molecule inhibitor of A2AR in a Her-2/neu expressing murine model
of breast cancer. We have demonstrated its capacity to augment existing
therapeutic strategies in this tolerant model. To test our hypotheses on
the ability of the small molecule to work in concert with existing
therapeutics, we tested the role of CPI-444 when given with a T
cell-inducing vaccine. Neu-expressing mammary tumor bearing HER-2/neu
transgenic (Neu-N) mice were administered combinations of low-dose
cyclophosphamide (Cy) to deplete Tregs, followed one day later with a
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and
neu-expressing whole cell vaccine (GVAX). The day following
administration of GVAX, mice received adoptively transferred high-avidity
naïve neu-specific CD8+ T cells intravenously one day after vaccination.
Administration of specific components in this strategy (i.e. Cy, GVAX,
adoptive transfer) were altered to gain insight into the mechanistic
effects of CPI-444 in vivo through analysis of tumor progression, tumor
clearance, and flow cytometric analysis of the TIL. Mice treated with the
A2AR inhibitor or the vehicle control were administered each by oral
gavage daily for 14 days (survival) or until 4 days post-adoptive
transfer (TIL) at the peak infiltrate time. Of the strategies tested, Cy,
followed by concomitant administration of GVAX with 100mg/kg of CPI-444
for 14 days, and a single adoptive therapy treatment provided a 55%
overall survival (OS) compared with 0%-20% OS in vehicle controls
(P<0.005). Further, we have observed both broad and specific changes in
the T cell compartment of the tumor-infiltrating leukocyte (TIL)
population. Broadly we have observed a refinement in the T cell portion
of the TIL with decreased numbers of T cells overall, but an increase in
specific prognostic ratios, namely a relative increase in favorability of
the CD8+:Treg ratio when compared to controls (P<0.05). We hypothesize
that strategic combination therapy of CPI-444 with existing therapeutics
can refine the local immune profile to enhance favorable outcomes in
vivo. CPI-444 is currently involved in numerous clinical trials; this
work may provide rationale for the expansion of these trials into new
cancer types.


