Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABO blood type and cancer risk: preliminary findings from a
phenome analysis.


Introduction: ABO blood type has long been implicated in disease
susceptibility, including cancer. However, evidence for associations with
many malignancies is mixed. We applied a novel phenome approach to test
to cancer codes from electronic medical records (EMR) in relation to ABO
blood type in a large predominantly Caucasian study population.

Approach: Among adults aged 18-100, cancer case and control status were
assigned using 58 general neoplasm related phenome codes to de-identified
EMR at the Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Blood type from
serologic assays was ascertained from EMR-linked laboratory reports.
Associations between blood type and cancer phenomes were quantified with
Odds Ratios (OR) and corresponding 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) from
logistic regression in models adjusted for sex and stratified by
race/ethnicity. Only analyses with at least 100 cases per strata were
conducted.

Results: Among 221,015 Non-Hispanic Caucasians, 37,841 Blacks, 7,714
Hispanic Caucasians, and 3,616 Asian subjects with ABO blood type
available in linked EMR, we evaluated 56, 37, 4, and 3 general cancer
phenome codes, respectively. After employing Bonferroni corrections, ABO
blood type was significantly associated with cancers of the pancreas,
ovary, cervix, skin, and hematopoietic system. Caucasians with blood type
O were less likely to have ovarian cancer (OR: 0.82, 95% CI 0.73-0.91)
and pancreatic cancer (OR: 0.83, 95% CI: 0.74-0.92), and more likely to
have squamous cell or other skin cancer (OR: 1.08, 95% CI: 1.04-1.13) and
myeloid leukemia (OR: 1.15, 95% CI: 1.06-1.25) than those with other
blood types (A, B, or AB). Hispanic Caucasians with blood type O were
less likely to have cervical cancer (OR: 0.56, 95% CI: 0.38-0.82) than
those with other blood types. No associations surpassed correction for
multiple comparisons among Blacks or Asians.

Conclusions: Our phenome approach confirmed known associations between
blood type and risk of pancreatic and ovarian cancer, and adds to
accumulating evidence supporting associations with skin cancer and
leukemia. Our novel cervical cancer association among Hispanic Caucasians
and other nominally significant findings, especially in understudied
non-Caucasians, should be further evaluated in large and diverse
populations. In addition, research to determine how ABO blood type may
influence cancer development and progression, and if such associations
can be exploited for risk prediction or cancer prevention is warranted.


