Meeting: 2017 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for the Ewing’s sarcoma breakpoint protein EWS in
ERG-induced prostate tumorigenesis.


The TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion occurs in one-half of prostate tumors and
results in expression of ERG, an ETS family transcription factor that
promotes prostate tumorigenesis. Another 5-10% of prostate tumors have
similar rearrangements that result in over-expression of other ETS family
members such as ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5. However, not all ETS family members
are oncogenic, and normal prostate cells express at least 15 of these
other ETS factors. Therefore, it is important to understand mechanisms
that differentiate oncogenic ETS factors from non-oncogenic ETS factors.
We have recently discovered that ERG, ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5, and no other
ETS factor can directly bind the protein EWS. This is striking, as EWS is
fused to various ETS factors in the chromosomal rearrangements that cause
Ewing’s sarcoma. We demonstrate that fusion of EWS to any ETS protein
is sufficient for that protein to function like ERG in prostate cells.
Furthermore, the EWS-ERG interaction is required for ERG to activate an
oncogenic gene expression program and for ERG-mediated tumorigenesis.
Therefore, these findings reveal a conserved oncogenic mechanism for
prostate cancer and Ewing’s sarcoma. In prostate cancer, aberrant
over-expression of an ETS factor that naturally interacts with EWS,
brings EWS to ETS-bound regions. In Ewing’s sarcoma this interaction is
forced by the presence of an EWS/ETS fusion protein. Therefore, this
model predicts that treatments that target EWS function would be
effective in both types of cancer.


