Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential role of reactive oxygen species in mediating
glioblastoma stem cell differentiation


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary
brain tumor with poor prognosis due in part to drug resistance and high
incidence of tumor recurrence. The drug resistant and cancer recurrence
phenotype may be ascribed to the presence of cancer stem cells, which
seem to reside in special stem-cell niches in vivo and require special
culture conditions including certain growth factors and serum-free medium
to maintain their stemness in vitro. In this study, we used several
stem-like glioblastoma cell lines (GSC11, GSC23 and GBM3752) derived from
patients tissues by typical neurosphere culture system, and showed that
addition of fetal bovine serum (FBS) to the medium induced an increase of
ROS, leading to aberrant differentiation and decreases of stem cell
markers such as CD133. We found that exposure of glioblastoma stem cells
(GSCs) to serum induces their differentiation through activation of
mitochondrial respiration, leading to an increase in superoxide (O2)
generation and a profound reactive oxygen species (ROS) stress response
manifested by upregulation of oxidative stress response pathway. This
increase in mitochondrial ROS leads to a down-regulation of molecules
including SOX2, and Olig2, and Notch1 that are important for stem cell
function and an upregulation of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase SOD2
that converts O2 to H2O2. Neutralization of ROS by antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine in the serum-treated GSCs suppresses the increase of
superoxide and largely rescues the expression of SOX2, Olig2, and Notch1,
and prevents the serum-induced differentiation phenotype. Upregulation of
ROS by chemical disruption of mitochondrial electron respiration chain
induced further decrease of CD133. Our study suggests that mitochondrial
function and cellular redox status may profoundly affect the fates of
glioblastoma stem cells, and that modulation of ROS generation may be an
effective way to impact CSCs, which may provide a new basis for
developing novel therapeutic approaches.

