Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of tumor-infiltrating gammadelta T lymphocytes in breast
cancer


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
women worldwide. Increasing evidence suggests that immunotherapy is a
promising strategy for treating breast cancer, and understanding of the
roles of different subtypes of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in
the tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment may be essential to cancer
treatment and elimination. We recently discovered that enriched
gammadelta1 T cell populations in the breast cancer TILs can suppress
nave and effector T cell responses and block the maturation and
activities of dendritic cells (DC). In order to investigate the
functional role of tumor-infiltrating gammadelta T cells in the immune
pathogenesis of breast cancer, we further performed immunohistochemical
staining to analyze gammadelta T cells, as well as CD4+, CD8+,
IL-17-producing and FoxP3+ T cells in 50 freshly frozen tumor tissues
from different stages of identified primary breast cancer and paired
normal breast tissues. We found that the numbers of gammadelta T cells
among tumor tissues were significantly increased compared with those in
normal breast tissues in breast cancer patients. High numbers of
gammadelta T cells were present in the patients with high tumor grades
and lymph node metastases. Importantly, the patients with a high
proportion of gammadelta T cells showed poorer survival rates in
comparison to those with a low proportion of gammadelta T cells in breast
cancer. These results indicate that gammadelta T cells constitute a
dominant population existing in the breast tumor suppressive
microenvironment that is negatively associated with clinical outcome,
which may be an important cancer immunotherapeutic target for breast
cancer.

