Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of antibody and T-cell responses against XAGE-1b in
NSCLC patients


BACKGROUND: XAGE-1b is a cancer/testis antigen identified in lung cancer
using autologous patient serum by SEREX. The expression of XAGE-1b is
observed frequently in lung adenocarcinoma and rarely in some other
tumors. Recently, we showed spontaneous T-cell response against XAGE-1b
in XAGE-1b-antibody positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
In this study, we analyzed the frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive CD4 and CD8
T-cells in NSCLC patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody
responses. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sera and PBMCs were obtained from NSCLC
patients who visited Kawasaki Medical School Hospital between 2009 and
2011. Antibody response was determined for XAGE-1b protein by ELISA using
O.D. values at 1:900 serum dilution and classified as high 3.0, 3.0 >
intermediate 1.0 and 1.0 > low. CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses against
XAGE-1b were examined by IFN- ELISA using 12- or 16-mer
XAGE-1b-overlapping peptides (OLPs) spanning the entire XAGE-1b protein
in antibody-positive patients. Cytotoxicity was analyzed determining
GAPDH release by aCellaTox kit. RESULTS: The number of XAGE-1b-antibody
positives was 29 (9.0%) of 323 NSCLC patients. Within those, the patients
showing high, intermediate and low antibody response was 6, 11 and 12,
respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive CD4 T-cells in patients
showing high, intermediate and low antibody response was 5.5 2.1 x 10-5,
1.5 0.7 x 10-5 and BACKGROUND: XAGE-1b is a cancer/testis antigen
identified in lung cancer using autologous patient serum by SEREX. The
expression of XAGE-1b is observed frequently in lung adenocarcinoma and
rarely in some other tumors. Recently, we showed spontaneous T-cell
response against XAGE-1b in XAGE-1b-antibody positive non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients. In this study, we analyzed the frequency of
XAGE-1b-reactive CD4 and CD8 T-cells in NSCLC patients showing high,
intermediate and low antibody responses. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sera and
PBMCs were obtained from NSCLC patients who visited Kawasaki Medical
School Hospital between 2009 and 2011. Antibody response was determined
for XAGE-1b protein by ELISA using O.D. values at 1:900 serum dilution
and classified as high 3.0, 3.0 > intermediate 1.0 and 1.0 > low. CD4 and
CD8 T-cell responses against XAGE-1b were examined by IFN- ELISA using
12- or 16-mer XAGE-1b-overlapping peptides (OLPs) spanning the entire
XAGE-1b protein in antibody-positive patients. Cytotoxicity was analyzed
determining GAPDH release by aCellaTox kit. RESULTS: The number of
XAGE-1b-antibody positives was 29 (9.0%) of 323 NSCLC patients. Within
those, the patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody response
was 6, 11 and 12, respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive CD4
T-cells in patients showing high, intermediate and low antibody response
was 5.5 2.1 x 10-5, 1.5 0.7 x 10-5 and < 1.1 x 10-5, respectively. The
frequency of XAGE-1b reactive CD8 T-cells was 6.9 1.6 x 10-6, 4.6 1.6 x
10-6 and BACKGROUND: XAGE-1b is a cancer/testis antigen identified in
lung cancer using autologous patient serum by SEREX. The expression of
XAGE-1b is observed frequently in lung adenocarcinoma and rarely in some
other tumors. Recently, we showed spontaneous T-cell response against
XAGE-1b in XAGE-1b-antibody positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. In this study, we analyzed the frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive
CD4 and CD8 T-cells in NSCLC patients showing high, intermediate and low
antibody responses. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sera and PBMCs were obtained
from NSCLC patients who visited Kawasaki Medical School Hospital between
2009 and 2011. Antibody response was determined for XAGE-1b protein by
ELISA using O.D. values at 1:900 serum dilution and classified as high
3.0, 3.0 > intermediate 1.0 and 1.0 > low. CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses
against XAGE-1b were examined by IFN- ELISA using 12- or 16-mer
XAGE-1b-overlapping peptides (OLPs) spanning the entire XAGE-1b protein
in antibody-positive patients. Cytotoxicity was analyzed determining
GAPDH release by aCellaTox kit. RESULTS: The number of XAGE-1b-antibody
positives was 29 (9.0%) of 323 NSCLC patients. Within those, the patients
showing high, intermediate and low antibody response was 6, 11 and 12,
respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b-reactive CD4 T-cells in patients
showing high, intermediate and low antibody response was 5.5 2.1 x 10-5,
1.5 0.7 x 10-5 and < 1.1 x 10-5, respectively. The frequency of XAGE-1b
reactive CD8 T-cells was 6.9 1.6 x 10-6, 4.6 1.6 x 10-6 and < 1.1 x 10-6,
respectively. The ratio of the CD8 T-cells recognizing XAGE-1b-expressing
tumor to the XAGE-1b-peptide reactive CD8 T-cells in patients showing
high and intermediate antibody responses was 60.0% and 14.3%,
respectively. CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate correlation of antibody
response to CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses against XAGE-1b in NSCLC
patients.

