Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-CHK1 as a prognostic biomarker in ovarian cancer and a
potential target in platinum-resistant disease


Purpose: Ovarian cancer frequently relapses due to inherent or acquired
resistance to platinum-based therapy. To increase therapeutic response,
the checkpoint kinases 1 and 2 (CHK1, CHK2) are being targeted in early
clinical trials in combination with DNA damaging agents due to their
roles in sensing DNA damage and inducing cell cycle arrest. Due to the
limited studies on the use of biomarkers to overcome platinum resistance,
we set out to characterize potential targets in a cohort of ovarian
tumors and paired platinum sensitivity ovarian cancer cell lines.
Methods: Total and phospho-protein expression were measured in a panel of
12 ovarian cancer cell lines using antibody arrays in order to
characterize signaling pathways. Differentially expressed proteins were
measured in a cohort of 128 pre-treatment malignant ovarian tumour
lysates using reverse phase protein arrays. Sulforhodamine B cytotoxicity
assays were used to assess the DNA damage response relevance of potential
targets in paired platinum-sensitive and -resistant ovarian cancer cell
lines. Results: Cell line expression clustering identified two groups
that differed in patient history: predominantly platinum-based
chemotherapy or chemotherapy-nave background. The overexpressed proteins
in the former cluster comprised mainly DNA damage response proteins
including p-CHK1 (Ser317) and p-CHK2 (Ser516) implicating these proteins
as potential mediators of platinum resistance. Though p-CHK2 had no
prognostic value, high p-CHK1 levels were associated with poor overall
survival in univariate analysis (medians 21 vs 38 months; corrected
P=0.03). In multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional hazard model
with other significant factors from univariate analysis (platinum
sensitivity, stage, grade, residual disease, and histology), high p-CHK1
tumors had a relative risk of 3.0 (95% CI 1.1 - 8.0, P=0.03), 5.6 for
platinum sensitivity (95% CI 2.8-11.1, PPurpose: Ovarian cancer
frequently relapses due to inherent or acquired resistance to
platinum-based therapy. To increase therapeutic response, the checkpoint
kinases 1 and 2 (CHK1, CHK2) are being targeted in early clinical trials
in combination with DNA damaging agents due to their roles in sensing DNA
damage and inducing cell cycle arrest. Due to the limited studies on the
use of biomarkers to overcome platinum resistance, we set out to
characterize potential targets in a cohort of ovarian tumors and paired
platinum sensitivity ovarian cancer cell lines. Methods: Total and
phospho-protein expression were measured in a panel of 12 ovarian cancer
cell lines using antibody arrays in order to characterize signaling
pathways. Differentially expressed proteins were measured in a cohort of
128 pre-treatment malignant ovarian tumour lysates using reverse phase
protein arrays. Sulforhodamine B cytotoxicity assays were used to assess
the DNA damage response relevance of potential targets in paired
platinum-sensitive and -resistant ovarian cancer cell lines. Results:
Cell line expression clustering identified two groups that differed in
patient history: predominantly platinum-based chemotherapy or
chemotherapy-nave background. The overexpressed proteins in the former
cluster comprised mainly DNA damage response proteins including p-CHK1
(Ser317) and p-CHK2 (Ser516) implicating these proteins as potential
mediators of platinum resistance. Though p-CHK2 had no prognostic value,
high p-CHK1 levels were associated with poor overall survival in
univariate analysis (medians 21 vs 38 months; corrected P=0.03). In
multivariate analysis using a Cox proportional hazard model with other
significant factors from univariate analysis (platinum sensitivity,
stage, grade, residual disease, and histology), high p-CHK1 tumors had a
relative risk of 3.0 (95% CI 1.1 - 8.0, P=0.03), 5.6 for platinum
sensitivity (95% CI 2.8-11.1, P<0.001), 1.9 for tumor stage (95% CI
1.2-3.1, P=0.005), and 1.5 for histology (95% CI 1.1-1.9, P=0.004). CHK1
is phosphorylated at Ser317 during DNA damage and accordingly the DNA
damage marker p-H2AX (Ser139) was highly expressed in the high p-CHK1
tumor group (P=0.008). The CHK1/2 inhibitor AZD7762 addition had variable
effects on the cisplatin dose response when comparing the
platinum-sensitive to the paired platinum-resistant cell lines. 50 nM
AZD7762 (5.7% growth inhibition) and cisplatin treatment of the platinum
resistant PEO4 cells induced a cisplatin concentration response
(combination IC50=1.7M vs cisplatin IC50=9.8M) similar to that of its
paired platinum sensitive PEO1 cell line (cisplatin IC50=2.7M).
Conclusion: This is the first study to identify p-CHK1 as an independent
prognostic ovarian cancer biomarker and supports CHK1 as a therapeutic
target in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer.

