Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Capecitabine pharmacokinetics and efficacy in spontaneous tumors
occurring in a genetically engineered mouse model (GEMM) of pancreatic
cancer


Capecitabine (CAP) is an oral fluoropyrimidine, converted sequentially
and selectively to 5-FU at the tumour site. It is used in the treatment
of a number of cancers as a single agent and in patients with pancreatic
cancer, in combination with gemcitabine. However, pre-clinical data in
pancreatic cancer models are limited. In this study, we investigated the
pharmacokinetics (PK) and efficacy of CAP in a GEMM of spontaneous
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA) occurring in KrasG12D; p53R172H; Pdx1-Cre
(KPC) mice, compared to an allograft model of a cell line isolated from a
PDA arising in the KPC mice. In the PK study, tumour was collected 2
hours after CAP treatment (755 mg/kg by oral gavage), homogenates were
analysed using an LC-MS/MS assay developed to simultaneously detect
capecitabine and its 3 metabolites DFCR, DFUR and 5-FU (modified from
S.M.Guichard, et al., J. Chrom. B. 2005). Data were compared to our
previously reported studies in an allograft model (Proc. AACR 2011 a
5446). After a QDx7 treatment, 5-FU concentrations of 27 13 M were
achieved (compared to 23.0 8.1 M and 22.7 7.7 M in allograft tumours
after 1 and 5 consecutive doses respectively), confirming adequate drug
delivery to the in situ tumour following oral administration of CAP.
Therefore we proceeded to efficacy studies in this model. In the
allograft model we had identified a significant reduction of the tumour
doubling time with 755 mg/kg CAP (5 days/week, 3 weeks), compared to
control (7.5 3.0 vs 3.5 0.5 days; PCapecitabine (CAP) is an oral
fluoropyrimidine, converted sequentially and selectively to 5-FU at the
tumour site. It is used in the treatment of a number of cancers as a
single agent and in patients with pancreatic cancer, in combination with
gemcitabine. However, pre-clinical data in pancreatic cancer models are
limited. In this study, we investigated the pharmacokinetics (PK) and
efficacy of CAP in a GEMM of spontaneous pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA)
occurring in KrasG12D; p53R172H; Pdx1-Cre (KPC) mice, compared to an
allograft model of a cell line isolated from a PDA arising in the KPC
mice. In the PK study, tumour was collected 2 hours after CAP treatment
(755 mg/kg by oral gavage), homogenates were analysed using an LC-MS/MS
assay developed to simultaneously detect capecitabine and its 3
metabolites DFCR, DFUR and 5-FU (modified from S.M.Guichard, et al., J.
Chrom. B. 2005). Data were compared to our previously reported studies in
an allograft model (Proc. AACR 2011 a 5446). After a QDx7 treatment, 5-FU
concentrations of 27 13 M were achieved (compared to 23.0 8.1 M and 22.7
7.7 M in allograft tumours after 1 and 5 consecutive doses respectively),
confirming adequate drug delivery to the in situ tumour following oral
administration of CAP. Therefore we proceeded to efficacy studies in this
model. In the allograft model we had identified a significant reduction
of the tumour doubling time with 755 mg/kg CAP (5 days/week, 3 weeks),
compared to control (7.5 3.0 vs 3.5 0.5 days; P<0.001). In in situ
tumours, a short term study over 7 days showed a reduction in tumour
growth in CAP-treated KPC PDA tumours compared to control (199% 22% vs
121% 10%; PCapecitabine (CAP) is an oral fluoropyrimidine, converted
sequentially and selectively to 5-FU at the tumour site. It is used in
the treatment of a number of cancers as a single agent and in patients
with pancreatic cancer, in combination with gemcitabine. However,
pre-clinical data in pancreatic cancer models are limited. In this study,
we investigated the pharmacokinetics (PK) and efficacy of CAP in a GEMM
of spontaneous pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDA) occurring in KrasG12D;
p53R172H; Pdx1-Cre (KPC) mice, compared to an allograft model of a cell
line isolated from a PDA arising in the KPC mice. In the PK study, tumour
was collected 2 hours after CAP treatment (755 mg/kg by oral gavage),
homogenates were analysed using an LC-MS/MS assay developed to
simultaneously detect capecitabine and its 3 metabolites DFCR, DFUR and
5-FU (modified from S.M.Guichard, et al., J. Chrom. B. 2005). Data were
compared to our previously reported studies in an allograft model (Proc.
AACR 2011 a 5446). After a QDx7 treatment, 5-FU concentrations of 27 13 M
were achieved (compared to 23.0 8.1 M and 22.7 7.7 M in allograft tumours
after 1 and 5 consecutive doses respectively), confirming adequate drug
delivery to the in situ tumour following oral administration of CAP.
Therefore we proceeded to efficacy studies in this model. In the
allograft model we had identified a significant reduction of the tumour
doubling time with 755 mg/kg CAP (5 days/week, 3 weeks), compared to
control (7.5 3.0 vs 3.5 0.5 days; P<0.001). In in situ tumours, a short
term study over 7 days showed a reduction in tumour growth in CAP-treated
KPC PDA tumours compared to control (199% 22% vs 121% 10%; P<0.01). In a
survival study in KPC mice, CAP (755 mg/kg, 5 days/week) was compared to
the standard treatment for advanced pancreatic cancer, gemcitabine (GEM,
100 mg/kg, Q3D), and there was no difference in the median survival of
mice with spontaneous PDA tumours (P=0.61) suggesting a similar efficacy
of CAP to GEM. There is conflicting evidence regarding the utility of the
combination of GEM and CAP in this disease, so we also investigated the
combination in mice bearing allograft PDA tumours. Full doses of both
drugs were not tolerated, but the combination of GEM (75 mg/kg Q3D, 2
weeks) plus CAP (539 mg/kg, 5 days/week, 2 weeks) was feasible. This
regimen was associated with significant growth inhibition, but this was
not superior to GEM alone (75 mg/kg) at the same dose (tumour doubling
time: 8.6 10.8 vs 7.2 2.8 days respectively). In summary, orally
administered CAP achieves active concentrations of 5-FU in PDA tumours.
Similar effects on survival compared to GEM are seen in PDA tumours.
Growth inhibition data in allograft tumours did not show any additional
benefit for the GEMCAP combination, when compared to GEM alone. CAP could
be considered as an alternative to GEM in future, rationally designed,
combination treatment strategies.

