Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Falcarindiol induces colorectal cancer cell death through
activation of ER stress


Colorectal cancer is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
the United States. Current treatment of this cancer generally employs
surgical resection combined with chemotherapy using cytotoxic drugs and
radiation therapy. Because this therapy is only moderately successful for
late stage cancers, novel approaches to the treatment of colorectal
cancer are required. Falcarindiol is a natural polyyne from medicinal
plant Oplopanax horridus that has been widely used by indigenous people
for a variety of diseases. We show that Falcarindiol can selectively kill
colon cancer cells but not the normal colon cells. We further show that
the observed cell death is mediated through the induction of Endoplasmic
Reticulum (ER) stress. We further show that inhibition of ER stress
significantly block Falcarindiol-induced colon cancer cell death while
knockdown of GRP78, which sensitizes cells to ER stress induced cell
death, significantly enhances Falcarindiol-induced cell killing.
Interestingly, we find that Falcarindiol exhibits synergistic anticancer
activity with 5-FU, a chemotherapeutic drug for colon cancer. These
results suggest that Falcarindiol is potentially a valuable candidate
that can be used to in the treatment of colon cancer either alone or in
combination with current anti-colon cancer agent such as 5-FU. Key words:
Falcarindiol; Colon cancer; ER Stress; Cell death.

