Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-PEA-15 sensitizes ovarian cancer cells to paclitaxel by
impairing the microtubule-destabilizing effect of SCLIP


Paclitaxel is a standard chemotherapeutic agent for ovarian cancer.
Resistance of ovarian cancer cells to the drug has been a major obstacle
in clinical practice. Thus, alternative approaches are needed to conquer
the resistance. PEA-15 (phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes-15 kDa)
regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis. It is phosphorylated at S104
and S116 by Akt, PKC and CaMKII. PEA-15's functions are phosphorylation
dependent. Although PEA-15 is known to mediate chemoresistance in breast
cancer, the effect of PEA-15 phosphorylation status on chemosensitivity
remains unknown. We hypothesized that phospho-PEA-15 (pPEA-15) enhances
sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to paclitaxel. To test our
hypothesis, we silenced PEA-15 expression in HEY and OVTOKO cells using
siRNA and observed a 14% reduction in apoptosis after paclitaxel
exposure. To further determine if PEA-15 phosphorylation contributes to
chemosensitivity, we generated SKOV3.ip1-vector (control), SKOV3.ip1-AA
(AA, phosphoinhibitory at S104 and S116) and SKOV3.ip1-DD (DD,
phosphomimetic at S104 and S116) stable ovarian cancer cells. Compared to
the control, DD cells showed a 15% reduction in cell viability
(PPaclitaxel is a standard chemotherapeutic agent for ovarian cancer.
Resistance of ovarian cancer cells to the drug has been a major obstacle
in clinical practice. Thus, alternative approaches are needed to conquer
the resistance. PEA-15 (phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes-15 kDa)
regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis. It is phosphorylated at S104
and S116 by Akt, PKC and CaMKII. PEA-15's functions are phosphorylation
dependent. Although PEA-15 is known to mediate chemoresistance in breast
cancer, the effect of PEA-15 phosphorylation status on chemosensitivity
remains unknown. We hypothesized that phospho-PEA-15 (pPEA-15) enhances
sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to paclitaxel. To test our
hypothesis, we silenced PEA-15 expression in HEY and OVTOKO cells using
siRNA and observed a 14% reduction in apoptosis after paclitaxel
exposure. To further determine if PEA-15 phosphorylation contributes to
chemosensitivity, we generated SKOV3.ip1-vector (control), SKOV3.ip1-AA
(AA, phosphoinhibitory at S104 and S116) and SKOV3.ip1-DD (DD,
phosphomimetic at S104 and S116) stable ovarian cancer cells. Compared to
the control, DD cells showed a 15% reduction in cell viability (P<0.01),
a 92% inhibition in anchorage-independent growth (PPaclitaxel is a
standard chemotherapeutic agent for ovarian cancer. Resistance of ovarian
cancer cells to the drug has been a major obstacle in clinical practice.
Thus, alternative approaches are needed to conquer the resistance. PEA-15
(phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes-15 kDa) regulates cell
proliferation and apoptosis. It is phosphorylated at S104 and S116 by
Akt, PKC and CaMKII. PEA-15's functions are phosphorylation dependent.
Although PEA-15 is known to mediate chemoresistance in breast cancer, the
effect of PEA-15 phosphorylation status on chemosensitivity remains
unknown. We hypothesized that phospho-PEA-15 (pPEA-15) enhances
sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to paclitaxel. To test our
hypothesis, we silenced PEA-15 expression in HEY and OVTOKO cells using
siRNA and observed a 14% reduction in apoptosis after paclitaxel
exposure. To further determine if PEA-15 phosphorylation contributes to
chemosensitivity, we generated SKOV3.ip1-vector (control), SKOV3.ip1-AA
(AA, phosphoinhibitory at S104 and S116) and SKOV3.ip1-DD (DD,
phosphomimetic at S104 and S116) stable ovarian cancer cells. Compared to
the control, DD cells showed a 15% reduction in cell viability (P<0.01),
a 92% inhibition in anchorage-independent growth (P<0.001), and a 15%
increase in apoptosis after paclitaxel treatment. In contrast, AA cells
had a 10% increase in cell viability (PPaclitaxel is a standard
chemotherapeutic agent for ovarian cancer. Resistance of ovarian cancer
cells to the drug has been a major obstacle in clinical practice. Thus,
alternative approaches are needed to conquer the resistance. PEA-15
(phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes-15 kDa) regulates cell
proliferation and apoptosis. It is phosphorylated at S104 and S116 by
Akt, PKC and CaMKII. PEA-15's functions are phosphorylation dependent.
Although PEA-15 is known to mediate chemoresistance in breast cancer, the
effect of PEA-15 phosphorylation status on chemosensitivity remains
unknown. We hypothesized that phospho-PEA-15 (pPEA-15) enhances
sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to paclitaxel. To test our
hypothesis, we silenced PEA-15 expression in HEY and OVTOKO cells using
siRNA and observed a 14% reduction in apoptosis after paclitaxel
exposure. To further determine if PEA-15 phosphorylation contributes to
chemosensitivity, we generated SKOV3.ip1-vector (control), SKOV3.ip1-AA
(AA, phosphoinhibitory at S104 and S116) and SKOV3.ip1-DD (DD,
phosphomimetic at S104 and S116) stable ovarian cancer cells. Compared to
the control, DD cells showed a 15% reduction in cell viability (P<0.01),
a 92% inhibition in anchorage-independent growth (P<0.001), and a 15%
increase in apoptosis after paclitaxel treatment. In contrast, AA cells
had a 10% increase in cell viability (P<0.01) and a 20% decrease in
apoptosis. These results indicate that pPEA-15 sensitizes ovarian cancer
cells to paclitaxel. cDNA microarray analysis revealed that SCLIP, a
microtubule (MT)-destabilizing phosphoprotein, was involved in
pPEA-15-mediated chemosensitization. The level of SCLIP was 8.5-fold
higher at mRNA and 1.6-fold higher at protein in untreated DD cells than
in the control and AA cells. Interestingly, exposure to paclitaxel
resulted in a 2-fold reduction in SCLIP's protein level and a dramatic
increase in its phosphorylation level in DD cells. No similar changes
were observed in the control and AA cells. Further, compared to the
control and AA cells, higher levels of acetylated and detyrosinated
-tubulin were detected in DD cells exposed to paclitaxel, indicating that
MTs are highly stabilized in treated DD cells. These results suggest that
reduced expression and increased phosphorylation of SCLIP impair its
MT-destabilizing effect, thereby enhancing paclitaxel sensitivity in DD
cells. We demonstrate that pPEA-15 mediates chemosensitization in ovarian
cancer cells by impairing the MT-destabilizing effect of SCLIP. Our
findings highlight the importance of pPEA-15 as a promising target for
improving the efficacy of paclitaxel-based chemotherapy in ovarian
cancer. Further studies will be conducted to determine: 1) the
association between pPEA-15 and SCLIP, and 2) the in vivo effectiveness
of pPEA-15 in improving the therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel in an
ovarian xenograft mouse model.

