Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UBCH10 overexpression in human colorectal cancers


Background: Colorectal cancer is the result of the accumulation of
different genetic modifications including critical genes involved in the
control of cell proliferation. In a large number of carcinomas with worst
prognosis, lesions are not diagnosed until the disease is at an advanced
stage. To diagnose cancer at an early stage and to establish more
effective therapies featuring of key molecules in carcinogenesis is a
critical steps. UBCH10 (also known as E2C or UBE2C) is a cell
cycle-related protein involved in mitosis completion. UbcH10 participates
in proper metaphase to anaphase transition, and abrogation of UbcH10
results in the premature separation of sister chromatids. Thus, UbcH10 is
essential for cell cycle progression, and his expression is cell-cycle
dependent and related to proliferation Aims: The aim of this study is to
investigate the association of UbcH10 gene expression with
clinicopathological features and tumor progression of colorectal cancer.
Materials and methods: We investigated the expression of the UBCH10 genes
in a tissue microarray platform consisting of normal and neoplastic
colorectal cancers (CRC) tissues by immunohistochemistry. UBCH10 was
detectable in 889 patients. Immunoreactivity was scored
semi-quantitatively by evaluating the number of positive tumor cells over
the total number of tumor cells. Scores were assigned using 5% intervals
and ranged from 0% to 100%. Median protein expression levels were used as
cut-off scores to define protein marker positivity and the findings were
associated with clinical-pathological parameters. Results: Our results
demonstrated that UBCH10 is over-expressed in CRCs tissues compared to
normal colon (pBackground: Colorectal cancer is the result of the
accumulation of different genetic modifications including critical genes
involved in the control of cell proliferation. In a large number of
carcinomas with worst prognosis, lesions are not diagnosed until the
disease is at an advanced stage. To diagnose cancer at an early stage and
to establish more effective therapies featuring of key molecules in
carcinogenesis is a critical steps. UBCH10 (also known as E2C or UBE2C)
is a cell cycle-related protein involved in mitosis completion. UbcH10
participates in proper metaphase to anaphase transition, and abrogation
of UbcH10 results in the premature separation of sister chromatids. Thus,
UbcH10 is essential for cell cycle progression, and his expression is
cell-cycle dependent and related to proliferation Aims: The aim of this
study is to investigate the association of UbcH10 gene expression with
clinicopathological features and tumor progression of colorectal cancer.
Materials and methods: We investigated the expression of the UBCH10 genes
in a tissue microarray platform consisting of normal and neoplastic
colorectal cancers (CRC) tissues by immunohistochemistry. UBCH10 was
detectable in 889 patients. Immunoreactivity was scored
semi-quantitatively by evaluating the number of positive tumor cells over
the total number of tumor cells. Scores were assigned using 5% intervals
and ranged from 0% to 100%. Median protein expression levels were used as
cut-off scores to define protein marker positivity and the findings were
associated with clinical-pathological parameters. Results: Our results
demonstrated that UBCH10 is over-expressed in CRCs tissues compared to
normal colon (p<0,001), and more specifically the UBCH10 expression is
significant higher in tumor location: left VS. right sided (p=0,005).
Moreover we found a significant relationship between overexpression of
UBCH10 with T stage (pBackground: Colorectal cancer is the result of the
accumulation of different genetic modifications including critical genes
involved in the control of cell proliferation. In a large number of
carcinomas with worst prognosis, lesions are not diagnosed until the
disease is at an advanced stage. To diagnose cancer at an early stage and
to establish more effective therapies featuring of key molecules in
carcinogenesis is a critical steps. UBCH10 (also known as E2C or UBE2C)
is a cell cycle-related protein involved in mitosis completion. UbcH10
participates in proper metaphase to anaphase transition, and abrogation
of UbcH10 results in the premature separation of sister chromatids. Thus,
UbcH10 is essential for cell cycle progression, and his expression is
cell-cycle dependent and related to proliferation Aims: The aim of this
study is to investigate the association of UbcH10 gene expression with
clinicopathological features and tumor progression of colorectal cancer.
Materials and methods: We investigated the expression of the UBCH10 genes
in a tissue microarray platform consisting of normal and neoplastic
colorectal cancers (CRC) tissues by immunohistochemistry. UBCH10 was
detectable in 889 patients. Immunoreactivity was scored
semi-quantitatively by evaluating the number of positive tumor cells over
the total number of tumor cells. Scores were assigned using 5% intervals
and ranged from 0% to 100%. Median protein expression levels were used as
cut-off scores to define protein marker positivity and the findings were
associated with clinical-pathological parameters. Results: Our results
demonstrated that UBCH10 is over-expressed in CRCs tissues compared to
normal colon (p<0,001), and more specifically the UBCH10 expression is
significant higher in tumor location: left VS. right sided (p=0,005).
Moreover we found a significant relationship between overexpression of
UBCH10 with T stage (p<0,001), N stage (p=0.022), tumor border
configuration: pushing VS. infiltrating (p=0.035) and also UBCH10
over-expression was significantly correlated with shorter patient
survival. Conclusion: Our study suggests that the overexpression of
UbcH10 gene plays a critical role in the carcinogenesis and tumor
progression of colorectal cancer. Also our findings indicate, that in
colorectal carcinomas, low expression of UBCH10 may be linked to a more
aggressive tumor phenotype.

