Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transient telomere dysfunction induces chromosomal instability and
promotes carcinogenesis in telomerase-proficient mice


Introduction: A current concept of carcinogenesis indicates that telomere
dysfunction can increase tumor initiation by induction of chromosomal
instability, but initiated tumor cells need to reactivate telomerase for
genome stabilization and tumor progression. So far, this concept has not
been proven in vivo since appropriate mouse models were lacking. Methods:
Here, we analyzed hepatocarcinogenesis (i) in a novel mouse model of
inducible telomere dysfunction on a telomerase-proficient background,
(ii) in telomerase knockout mice with chronic telomere dysfunction (G3
mTerc-/-), and (iii) in wild-type mice with functional telomeres and
telomerase. Results: Transient or chronic telomere dysfunction enhanced
the rates of chromosomal aberrations during hepatocarcinogenesis, but
only telomerase-proficient mice exhibited significantly increased rates
of macroscopic tumor formation and cancer cell proliferation in response
to telomere dysfunction. In contrast, telomere dysfunction resulted in
pronounced accumulation of DNA damage, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
telomerase-deficient liver tumors. Conclusion: Together, these data
provide the first in vivo evidence that telomere dysfunction can promote
chromosomal instability and carcinogenesis in telomerase-proficient mice
in the absence of additional, genetic checkpoint defects at germline
level.

