Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR203 induces mesenchymal to epithelial transition via repressing
SNAI2 and activating P-cadherin in prostate cells


MicroRNAs play critical roles in tumorigenesis and metastasis. Here we
report the functions of miR203 in prostate cancer based upon an
experimental cell culture model. While highly expressed in prostate
epithelial cells, miR203 became completely repressed following their
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Forced re-expression of
miR203 in the mesenchymal cells induced many epithelial features,
including morphological change in 2D and 3D culture, decreased abilities
of invasion and migration, as well as increased epithelial markers and
decreased mesenchymal markers. By computer prediction combined with
microarray profiling and luciferase reporter target assays, we identified
SNAI2 as target of miR203. Knock-down of SNAI2 can mimic the epithelial
phenotypes induced by miR203. Most of the affected genes by miR203 were
also found to be changed with the same pattern by knock-down of SNAI2.
Furthermore, P-cadherin (CDH3), an important epithelial adhesion
component, was identified as the downstream target of SNAI2.
CDH3-promoter-Luc reporter assay demonstrated that 3 E-boxes in the CDH3
promoter mediated direct targeting by SNAI2. Decreased and increased
expression of CDH3 were found in culture cells with overexpression and
knock-down of SNAI2, respectively. We concluded that miR203 represses
SNAI2, thus activating P-cadherin in induction of epithelial features.

