Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) in liver
metastasis of colorectal cancer


Liver metastasis is one of the main cause of death among patients with
colorectal cancer (CRC). However, accurate prediction of liver metastasis
of CRC is difficult at the inception of diagnosis. Activated receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are the main mediators of the signaling pathway
related to cell survival, proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. To
determine if any of these RTKs are involved in liver metastasis from CRC,
we performed phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase array with matched 20 colon
normal mucosa, primary tumor, metastatic liver tumor, and liver normal
tissue proteins using Human Phospho-RTK Array (2009 AACR, #4951). In RTK
activation profiling, FGFR1 activation was increased in a high proportion
of metastatic liver tumor (p Liver metastasis is one of the main cause of
death among patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). However, accurate
prediction of liver metastasis of CRC is difficult at the inception of
diagnosis. Activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are the main
mediators of the signaling pathway related to cell survival,
proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. To determine if any of these
RTKs are involved in liver metastasis from CRC, we performed
phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase array with matched 20 colon normal
mucosa, primary tumor, metastatic liver tumor, and liver normal tissue
proteins using Human Phospho-RTK Array (2009 AACR, #4951). In RTK
activation profiling, FGFR1 activation was increased in a high proportion
of metastatic liver tumor (p < 0.05). To evaluate the functional roles of
FGFR1, DLD-1 and LoVo colon cancer cells were treated with FGFR1 specific
siRNA or RTK inhibitor. Inhibition of FGFR1 inhibited phosphorylation of
PI3K/AKT and ERK, a downstream cellular signaling molecule of FGFR;
whereas, mTOR, p70S6K, JNK and Src activities were not affected. Also, we
compared the cell migration and invasion ability by wound healing assay
and invasion assay. The invasion capacity and wound closing were
significantly delayed by FGFR1 inhibition (p Liver metastasis is one of
the main cause of death among patients with colorectal cancer (CRC).
However, accurate prediction of liver metastasis of CRC is difficult at
the inception of diagnosis. Activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
are the main mediators of the signaling pathway related to cell survival,
proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. To determine if any of these
RTKs are involved in liver metastasis from CRC, we performed
phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase array with matched 20 colon normal
mucosa, primary tumor, metastatic liver tumor, and liver normal tissue
proteins using Human Phospho-RTK Array (2009 AACR, #4951). In RTK
activation profiling, FGFR1 activation was increased in a high proportion
of metastatic liver tumor (p < 0.05). To evaluate the functional roles of
FGFR1, DLD-1 and LoVo colon cancer cells were treated with FGFR1 specific
siRNA or RTK inhibitor. Inhibition of FGFR1 inhibited phosphorylation of
PI3K/AKT and ERK, a downstream cellular signaling molecule of FGFR;
whereas, mTOR, p70S6K, JNK and Src activities were not affected. Also, we
compared the cell migration and invasion ability by wound healing assay
and invasion assay. The invasion capacity and wound closing were
significantly delayed by FGFR1 inhibition (p <0.05). To evaluate in vivo
anti-metastatic effect of FGFR1, we used an orthotropic liver metastasis
model, generated by injecting LoVo colon cancer cells into spleen of
BALB/c nu/nu mice. In control group, multiple large metastatic foci were
evident, whereas the extent of liver metastasis was dramatically reduced
in TKI-258 (50mg/kg/d) treated group (48.9%, pLiver metastasis is one of
the main cause of death among patients with colorectal cancer (CRC).
However, accurate prediction of liver metastasis of CRC is difficult at
the inception of diagnosis. Activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
are the main mediators of the signaling pathway related to cell survival,
proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis. To determine if any of these
RTKs are involved in liver metastasis from CRC, we performed
phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase array with matched 20 colon normal
mucosa, primary tumor, metastatic liver tumor, and liver normal tissue
proteins using Human Phospho-RTK Array (2009 AACR, #4951). In RTK
activation profiling, FGFR1 activation was increased in a high proportion
of metastatic liver tumor (p < 0.05). To evaluate the functional roles of
FGFR1, DLD-1 and LoVo colon cancer cells were treated with FGFR1 specific
siRNA or RTK inhibitor. Inhibition of FGFR1 inhibited phosphorylation of
PI3K/AKT and ERK, a downstream cellular signaling molecule of FGFR;
whereas, mTOR, p70S6K, JNK and Src activities were not affected. Also, we
compared the cell migration and invasion ability by wound healing assay
and invasion assay. The invasion capacity and wound closing were
significantly delayed by FGFR1 inhibition (p <0.05). To evaluate in vivo
anti-metastatic effect of FGFR1, we used an orthotropic liver metastasis
model, generated by injecting LoVo colon cancer cells into spleen of
BALB/c nu/nu mice. In control group, multiple large metastatic foci were
evident, whereas the extent of liver metastasis was dramatically reduced
in TKI-258 (50mg/kg/d) treated group (48.9%, p<0.05). Immunoexpression of
the p-FGFR1 was much more intense in control than TKI-258 treated tumor
tissues. Biological effects were also confirmed that FGFR1 inhibition
resulted in a significant reduction of ERK activation and Ki-67 positive
cells in tumor tissues. In conclusion, FGFR1 might be a good target for
liver metastasis of CRC.

