Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent antitumor BO-1922, derivative of indolizino[6,7-b]indole,
against human colon, lung, and pancreatic cancers in xenograft model


Our previously studies demonstrated that
bis(hydroxymethyl)cyclopenta[a]indenes, which bear a
bis(hydroxymethyl)pyrrolidine pharmacophore, exhibited potent antitumor
activity in inhibiting various human tumor xenografts. We also
demonstrated that these agents showed strong synergistic therapeutic
efficacy in combination with arsenic trioxide (ATO) against acquire or
inherited MDR human tumors in xenograft model (human lung H460 or bladder
cancer resistant to cisplatin NTUB1/P). Based on these findings, we have
recently synthesized a series of
1,2-bis(hydroxymethyl)indolizino[6,7-b]indols and their
bis(alkylcarbomate) derivatives for antitumor evaluation. These new
agents were easily prepared starting from L-tryptophane in 5 steps. The
in vitro cytotoxicity studies showed that the newly synthesized
derivatives possessed a broad spectrum of anticancer activity against
human lymphoblastic leukemia and various solid tumor cell growth in
vitro. Of these analogues,
1,2-bis(hydroxymethyl)-3,6-dimethylindolizino[6,7-b]indole (BO-1922) was
selected for further antitumor studies. We found that this agent
displayed potent therapeutic efficacy against human colon cancer HT-29,
lung adenocarcinoma lung A549, and primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma
BX-PC3 xenografts. The antitumor activity of BO-1922 was compared with
Irinotecan (CPT-11) in animal xenograft model. It revealed that BO-1922
is more potent than CPT-11 against human colon cancer HT-29 xenograft;
complete tumor suppression on day 20 after mice treated with BO-1922 (25
mg/kg, QD4, intravenous injection), while, tumor relapsed on day 9 after
mice treated with CPT-11 (60 mg/kg, Q2D3, iv. inj.). Under the same drug
administration conditions (dosage and schedule), BO-1922 is as potent as
CPT-11 against lung cancer A549 and pancreatic cancer BX-PC3 xenografts.
Although the bodyweight of all drug treated mice recovered after ceasing
of treatment, it was found that BO-1922 is less toxic to the host based
on the average body-weight loss. The alkaline agarose gel shifting assay
showed that this agent is able to induce DNA double strand cross-linking.
Flow cytomeric assay revealed that BO-1922 induced cell cycle arrest at
G1/S phase in non-small cell lung carcinomas H1299. These results suggest
that BO-1922 is a promising candidate for clinical application and is
currently undergoing preclinical studies.

