Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput microRNA (miRNAs) arrays unravel the prognostic
role of miR211 in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the most lethal among solid
tumors. Only a subset of patients benefit from chemotherapy, and
identification of novel prognostic factors is warranted. Recently, miRNAs
emerged as a pivotal class of regulators for multiple genes involved in
cancer, including PDAC (Giovannetti et al, Cancer Res 2010), and miRNA
expression pattern classified tumors better than mRNA data (Lu et al,
Nature 2005), suggesting their use for diagnostic purposes. However,
high-throughput arrays detecting more than 1000 miRNAs are opening new
opportunities to evaluate whether their profiles can also predict
clinical outcome. Therefore, the present study evaluated whether
comprehensive miRNA expression profiling by microarray technology can
predict overall survival (OS) in resected PDAC patients. High-resolution
miRNA profiles were obtained with the Toray's 3D-GeneTM miRNA chip,
detecting 1200 types of human miRNA. RNA was isolated from formaldehyde
fixed paraffin embedded primary tumors of 26 stage-pT3N1Mx homogeneously
treated patients (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2/day on days 1/8/15, every 28
days), selected according to their outcome (OS 30 months). Microarray
slides of the 19 samples that passed RNA quality check were scanned using
3D-GeneTM Scanner 3000 with appropriate photomultiplier settings for red
channel. Each microarray was scanned three times, and then merged into
one dataset analyzed. Highly stringent statistics included t-test,
Spearman ranked correlation to generate a distance matrix, and iterative
approaches. Unsupervised hierarchical analysis revealed that the PDAC
specimens clustered according to their long/short OS classification,
while the feature selection algorithm RELIEF identified the top 10
discriminating miRNAs between the two groups. MiR211 emerged as the best
discriminating miRNA, with significantly higher expression in long vs.
short OS patients. The expression of this miRNA was subsequently assessed
by quantitative RT-PCR in an independent cohort of laser microdissected
tumors from 60 resected stage-pT3N1Mx PDAC patients treated with the same
gemcitabine regimen. Patients with low miR211 expression, according to
median value (12.8 a.u. calculated as Ct vs. RNU6), had a significantly
shorter median OS (14.8, 95%CI=13.1-16.5, vs. 25.7 months,
95%CI=16.2-35.1, log-rank P=0.004). Multivariate analysis demonstrated
that low miR211 expression was an independent factor of poor prognosis
for OS (hazard ratio 2.3, P=0.03) after adjusting for all the factors
influencing clinical outcome. In conclusion, through comprehensive
microarray analysis and PCR validation we identified miR211 as prognostic
factor in resected PDAC. This miRNA was already associated with melanoma
invasiveness, but our results prompt further prospective studies as well
as research on miR211 biological role in PDAC.

