Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting the TNF network in human ovarian cancer - A systems
biology approach


In a recent publication (Kulbe et al Cancer Res 2011 epub ahead of
print), we have shown how key pathways in cancer-related inflammation and
Notch signaling are part of an autocrine malignant cell network in
high-grade serous ovarian cancer, HGSOC. This network, that we have named
the TNF network, has paracrine actions on angiogenesis, the stromal
signature and the immune cell infiltrate in HGSOC. We have now used a
systems biology approach, combining data from phospho-proteomic mass
spectrometry and gene expression array analysis, to define the best
therapeutic targets within the network and to identify drugs that may
synergise with cytokine and chemokine inhibitors. First, we established a
hierarchy of kinases involved in the TNF network and analyzed the
constitutively active kinases in one of the high TNF network cell lines.
Of 45 constitutively active kinases, 33 of these kinases showed direct
interactions with each other. Next, we mapped gene expression microarray
data onto the Connectivity Map of drugs in order to identify compounds
having an effect on transcription similar to that of the TNF network.
Among the identified candidate drugs were luteolin, apigenin and
resveratrol. One of the known targets of this class of drugs is the
protein kinase Casein kinase II (CSNK2A1), a kinase activated in
association with the TNF network. In conclusion, we have identified
kinases, particularly CK2, associated with the TNF network that may play
a central role in sustaining the cytokine network and/or mediating its
effects in ovarian cancer. We believe our findings have implications for
our understanding of ovarian cancer biology and the development of new
and more effective treatments for this disease.

