Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of a metagene representing SRC activation which is
predictive of response to Dasatinib


Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the leading cause of death from
gynecological malignancies in the Western World. The aim of this study
was to identify ovarian cancer subtypes related to biological pathways
which are currently being targeted by novel therapeutics. SRC (sarcoma)
is a tyrosine kinase which plays critical roles in mediating many
cellular pathways such as proliferation, adhesion, survival,
differentiation and cell motility. SRC activity is increased in many
human cancers including EOC. Furthermore, up-regulation of the SRC
pathway has been shown to be associated with cisplatin resistance and
patient overall survival in EOC. We therefore hypothesised that
up-regulation of the SRC pathway may represent a subtype of EOC which
could be therapeutically exploited. We used a semi-supervised analysis
approach to perform hierarchical clustering analysis of 198 serous, stage
III and IV EOC using a 917 public gene list generated by the
differentially expressed genes, after DNA microarray profiling, in MCF10A
cells with normal expression and over-expression of the SRC gene. A
number of gene clusters were identified upon hierarchical clustering
which segregated the patient samples. To examine which of the genes from
these clusters represented SRC activation we used a series of in vitro
assays including phospho-SRC expression, sensitivity to SRC siRNA, and
sensitivity to the SRC inhibitors Saracatinib and Dasatinib in 16 ovarian
cancer cell lines. The ovarian cell lines were scored individually with
the probesets representing the genes of interest from each of the
individual gene clusters and the cell line in vitro data. Two gene
clusters were selected for further investigation. A panel of 15 breast
cancer cell lines were next investigated for SRC activation using the
same in vitro assays described above. Correlation of SRC activation, by
the scoring of the in vitro assays and the scoring of probesets from the
individual gene clusters, demonstrated one gene cluster which showed good
correlation and which potentially represented a metagene of SRC
activation. The gene cluster consists of 16 genes, some of which are
already known components of the SRC pathway. Furthermore, using the
probesets representing the genes from this gene cluster to score public
DNA microarray profiling data we were able to predict response to
Dasatinib in two independent datasets of prostate and breast cancer cell
lines (p=Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the leading cause of death
from gynecological malignancies in the Western World. The aim of this
study was to identify ovarian cancer subtypes related to biological
pathways which are currently being targeted by novel therapeutics. SRC
(sarcoma) is a tyrosine kinase which plays critical roles in mediating
many cellular pathways such as proliferation, adhesion, survival,
differentiation and cell motility. SRC activity is increased in many
human cancers including EOC. Furthermore, up-regulation of the SRC
pathway has been shown to be associated with cisplatin resistance and
patient overall survival in EOC. We therefore hypothesised that
up-regulation of the SRC pathway may represent a subtype of EOC which
could be therapeutically exploited. We used a semi-supervised analysis
approach to perform hierarchical clustering analysis of 198 serous, stage
III and IV EOC using a 917 public gene list generated by the
differentially expressed genes, after DNA microarray profiling, in MCF10A
cells with normal expression and over-expression of the SRC gene. A
number of gene clusters were identified upon hierarchical clustering
which segregated the patient samples. To examine which of the genes from
these clusters represented SRC activation we used a series of in vitro
assays including phospho-SRC expression, sensitivity to SRC siRNA, and
sensitivity to the SRC inhibitors Saracatinib and Dasatinib in 16 ovarian
cancer cell lines. The ovarian cell lines were scored individually with
the probesets representing the genes of interest from each of the
individual gene clusters and the cell line in vitro data. Two gene
clusters were selected for further investigation. A panel of 15 breast
cancer cell lines were next investigated for SRC activation using the
same in vitro assays described above. Correlation of SRC activation, by
the scoring of the in vitro assays and the scoring of probesets from the
individual gene clusters, demonstrated one gene cluster which showed good
correlation and which potentially represented a metagene of SRC
activation. The gene cluster consists of 16 genes, some of which are
already known components of the SRC pathway. Furthermore, using the
probesets representing the genes from this gene cluster to score public
DNA microarray profiling data we were able to predict response to
Dasatinib in two independent datasets of prostate and breast cancer cell
lines (p=<0.05). In summary we have used a SRC activation transcriptional
profile to cluster ovarian cancer samples and selected a metagene
comprised of 16 genes which correlates to SRC activation in vitro using a
panel of assays in ovarian and breast cancer cell lines. This has been
shown to be predictive of response to Dasatinib in 2 independent datasets.

