Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposing effects of NF-B inhibition during chemical lung
carcinogenesis


Since recent evidence indicates a requirement for epithelial NF-B
signaling in lung tumorigenesis, we investigated the impact of the NF-B
inhibitor bortezomib on lung tumor promotion and growth. We used an
experimental model in which wild-type mice or mice expressing an NF-B
reporter received intraperitoneal urethane (1 g/kg) followed by
twice-weekly bortezomib (1 mg/kg) during distinct periods of tumor
initiation/progression. Mice were serially assessed for lung NF-B
activation, inflammation, and carcinogenesis. Short-term proteasome
inhibition with bortezomib did not impact tumor formation, but retarded
the growth of established lung tumors in mice via effects on cell
proliferation. In contrast, long-term treatment with bortezomib resulted
in significantly increased lung tumor number and size. This
tumor-promoting effect of prolonged bortezomib treatment was associated
with perpetuation of urethane-induced inflammation and chronic
up-regulation of interleukin-1 and proinflammatory C-X-C motif chemokine
ligands (CXCL) 1 and 2 in the lungs. In addition to airway epithelium,
bortezomib inhibited NF-B in pulmonary macrophages in vivo, presenting a
possible mechanism of tumor amplification. In this regard, RAW264.7
macrophages exposed to bortezomib showed increased expression of
interleukin-1, CXCL1, and CXCL2. In conclusion, although short-term
bortezomib may exert some beneficial effects, prolonged NF-B inhibition
accelerates chemical lung carcinogenesis by perpetuating
carcinogen-induced inflammation. Inhibition of NF-B in pulmonary
macrophages appears to play an important role in this adverse process.

