Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genome-wide RNAi screen implicates histone deacetylases as a
therapeutic target for osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma, the most common primary malignancy of bone, is an
aggressive cancer occurring predominantly in children and adolescents.
Studies of familial cancer syndromes and sporadic cases have strongly
implicated both p53 and pRb in osteosarcoma tumorigenesis. Thus, our lab
created a fully penetrant mouse model of osteosarcoma based on the
osteoblast-specific deletion of p53 and pRb. This model faithfully
recapitulates the defining features of human OS, including pathology,
metastatic behavior, and cytogenetic complexity and shares a
transcriptional profile with the human disease. Using a genome-wide shRNA
screen, we have identified gene products whose inhibition synergizes with
p53 and pRb deletion to kill osteosarcoma cells. This screen identified
genes that are required for proliferation and survival of osteosarcoma
cell lines in an unbiased fashion. The screen identified a number of
druggable gene products and pathways, including members of the HDAC
family of histone deacetylases. Follow-up studies with selective chemical
HDAC inhibitors and shRNAs against individual HDACs demonstrate that
osteosarcoma cells are vulnerable to HDAC1, 2, 3, 5 and 7 inhibition.
Selective inhibition of HDACs has emerged as a promising avenue toward
cancer therapy, therefore we look to understand if and how HDAC
inhibition can be used as a therapeutic approach to treating osteosarcoma.

