Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-365 regulates lung cancer and developmental gene TTF-1


Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1 or NKX2-1) is an essential fetal
lung developmental factor which can be recurrently activated by gene
amplification in adult lung cancer. We have discovered the first microRNA
(i.e., miR-365) that directly regulates TTF-1 by interacting with its
3-untranslated region. The finding that miR-365 is expressed in tissues
beyond TTF-1 expression suggests the existence of other targets, which
was substantiated by a subsequent gene expression profiling assay. In
line with the microRNA/target relationship, the expression patterns of
miR-365 and TTF-1 were in an inverse relationship in human lung cancer.
Exploration of human lung cancer genomics data uncovered that TTF-1 gene
amplification was significantly associated with DNA copy number loss at
one of the two genomic loci encoding the precursor RNA of mature miR-365
(i.e., mir-365-1). This implies the existence of genetic selection
pressure to lose the repressive miR-365 that would otherwise suppress
amplified TTF-1. In studying how this microRNA/target relationship
affects TTF-1 function in transforming growth factor beta-induced
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), we detected a signaling loop
between TGFbeta and miR-365 and this loop reinforced suppression of TTF-1
via miR-365. Surprisingly, mir-365 also targeted an EMT-promoting gene
HMGA2, which may at least in part explain the difficulty for detection of
EMT related phenotypes associated with miR-365. In summary, these data
connect the lung transcriptional program to the microRNA network.

