Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational analysis of DNMT3A gene in acute leukemias and common
solid cancers


DNMT3A, a DNA methyltransferase that functions for de novo methylation,
is important in development and many cellular processes related to
tumorigenesis. Somatic mutations of DNMT3A gene, including recurrent
mutations in its Arg-882, were recently reported in acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML), strongly suggesting its role in development of AML. To
see whether DNMT3A mutation occurs in other malignancies as well, we
analyzed DNMT3A in 916 cancer tissues from 401 hematlogoic malignancies
(AML, acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL), multiple myelomas and
lymphomas) and 515 carcinomas (lung, breast, prostate, colorectal and
gastric carcinomas) by a single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
assay. We identified DNMT3A mutations, especially the Arg-882 mutations,
in adulthood AML (9.4%). In addition, we found DNMT3A mutations in a
pre-B-ALL and three lung cancers at lower frequencies. Allelic loss of
DNMT3A was frequently observed in most cancer types analyzed, including
lymphomas (48.1%), gastric cancers (23.5%) and lung cancers (18.3%)
irrespective of DNMT3A mutation. Also, loss of DNMT3A expression was
common in lung cancers (46.4%) and was associated with the allelic loss.
Our data indicate that DNMT3A gene is mutated mainly in AML but it occurs
in other cancers such as ALL and lung cancer despite the lower
incidences. Also, the data suggest that DNMT3A is altered in many cancers
types by various ways, including somatic mutations, allelic loss and loss
of expression that might play roles in tumorigenesis.

