Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bufalin inhibited cell proliferation and expression of
insulin-like growth factor 2 and type 1 receptor in human colorectal
cancer cells


Objective: To investigate the inhibitory effect of bufalin on the
proliferation of human colorectal cancer cell, HCT116, and its
relationship with expression of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) and
type 1 receptor (IGF1R). Methods: HCT116 cells were cultured with bufalin
and cell proliferation was measured by MTT assay. The inhibitory rate of
cell proliferation and the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50)
were calculated. Cell cycle was determined by use of flow cytometry. mRNA
and protein expressions of IGF-2 and IGF1R were analyzed by real time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western Blot, respectively. The
distribution of IGF-2 and IGF1R in cells was also observed by
immunocytochemical staining. Results: The IC50 of bufalin at 24, 36, 48,
60, and 72 hours were 0.790.10, 0.370.10, 0.250.03, 0.170.02, and
0.100.03 uM, respectively. We selected 0.3 uM and 48 hours as the
concentration of bufalin and culture time in following experiments. When
cultured with bufalin, the ratio of cells in G2 phase to cells in M phase
was increased in a dose dependent manner, indicating a delay from G2 to M
caused by bufalin. For IGF-2, the mRNA and protein expressions were
increased when cells were cultured with bufalin; For IGF1R, the mRNA
increased but protein decreased. Both IGF-2 and IGF1R were seen in
cytoplasm. Conclusion: Bufalin can significantly inhibit the
proliferation of HCT116 cells, its underlying mechanism may relate with
the up-regulation of IGF-2 expression and down-regulation of IGF1R
protein expression.

