Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional factor ZBP-89 interacts with DNMT1 and HDAC3 to
regulate Bak expression


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent malignancies
worldwide with a very high mortality. Because the success of the
conventional therapies is limited, epigenetic therapy may represent an
alternative for HCC management. The present study was designed to
investigate whether DNA methyltransferases and histone acetylases were
involved in regulation of ZBP-89-induced Bak expression. After adenovirus
Ad-ZBP-89 transfection, bisulfate modificated DNA sequencing,
immunofluorence staining, siRNA interference, western blotting, and
enzymatic activity assays were used to analyze DNA methylation, histone
modifications and the enzyme activity in human HCC cell. Based on our
previous report that ZBP-89 up-regulated Bak expression, the current
study revealed that ZBP-89 regulated Bak expression through interacting
with HDAC3 and DNMT1. ZBP-89 could also demethylate the CpG island in Bak
promoter to facilitate Bak expression and apoptosis. Additionally, ZBP-89
contributed to maintain histone H3 and H4 acetylation by inhibiting HDACs
activity. ZBP-89 was found to suppress DNMT1 activity and HDAC3 activity.
Conclusively, our study demonstrates a novel mechanism how the
transcription factor ZBP-89 mediates epigenetic modification to promote
Bak expression. The new pathway discovered may help to develop certain
epigenetic therapy against HCC.

