Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sox2 remodels the tumor microenvironment via recruitment of Tregs


Recent study showed that Sox2 gene, a key stem cell gene that maintains
the pluripotency properties of embryonic stem cell (ESC) and cancer stem
cell (CSC) plays an important role in the tumorigenesis and metastasis
process of various types of tumor, however its regulatory effect on tumor
microenvironment (TME) is still elusive. In this study, we established a
BALB/c mice model xenografted with a mice breast cancer cell line-4T1
with down-regulation of Sox2 gene (4T1-shRNA-Sox2). We found that
down-regulation of Sox2 inhibits the growth of tumors with a modulated
immunomicroenvironment, which was reflected by the increased number of
CD3+CD8+ T cells and expression level of Th1 cytokines, such as TFN- and
decreased number of Foxp3+ Tregs and expression level of Th2 cytokines
such as IL4, IL6 and IL10. In addition, the reduced expression level of
vascular endothelial cell marker CD31 and lymphatic vessel marker Lyve-1
was also revealed in the 4T1-shRNA-Sox2 xenografted tumors. We further
demonstrated that Sox2 modulates the TME by recruiting Tregs. By using
real-time RT-PCR, we found the cytokines contributing to recruitment of
Tregs, such as CCL1, CCL22, CCL28 and Cxcl12 reduced after Sox2
downregulation. In addition, the mRNA expression level of transcriptional
factor NF-B and its co-transcriptional factor RelA which controlled the
expression of CCL1, CCL22 and CCL28 were also reduced. Consequently, our
study revealed the functional interaction between tumor cells and the
immunocytes in TME by demonstrated that Sox2 gene in tumor cells
recruited Tregs to influence the tumor microenvironment thus promotes the
growth of tumor.

