Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sunitinib-induced metastasis is tumor dependent and is mediated by
c-Met/HGF pathway


Recent studies in several tumor models indicated that treatment with
angiogenic inhibitors may trigger induction of metastasis to other
organs. Here we investigated modes of resistance and invasion in several
tumors including 4T1 (breast), H460 (lung) and Colo205 (colorectal) using
sunitinib at doses comparable to clinically utilized regimen. In
comparison with vehicle-treated tumors, sunitinib increased metastasis to
lung in 4T1 tumors and to peritoneal lymph node in Colo205 tumors.
However, the same treatment did not induce invasiveness in H460 tumors,
further suggesting that accelerating metastasis during treatment with
angiogenic inhibitors is tumor dependent. Interestingly, Crizotinib (a
dual inhibitor of c-Met and ALK pathways) as single agent or in
combination with sunitinib reduced metastasis in all models tested
suggesting a role for c-Met/HGF pathway in intrinsic- or
sunitinib-induced -metastasis. Moreover, ELISA data showed that while
c-Met is highly enriched in tumor cells, HGF is secreted mainly by the
stroma (mouse HGF) suggesting a paracrine fashion for c-Met pathway
activation in the tumors. In conclusion, our findings indicate that
sunitinib-induced metastasis is tumor dependent and further supports a
rationale for combination of anti-angiogenesis and c-Met inhibition in
the clinic.

