Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase as a novel mechanism of
resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy


Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mediated cell signaling is
aberrantly regulated in many types of human cancers. Targeting EGFR with
receptor-blocking antibodies or small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors
has shown clinical activity against several types of cancers; however,
most patients have had only moderate or no response. Our laboratory
recently found that one of the antitumor mechanisms of cetuximab, which
is an FDA-approved EGFR-blocking antibody, is to disrupt the biosynthetic
and biogenetic metabolisms in cancer cells through inhibition of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1)-regulated glycolysis. In current
study, we tested a novel hypothesis that AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) functions as a metabolic checkpoint activated in response to the
decline in ATP levels by EGFR-targeted therapy. We selected three human
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines, HN5 and FaDu
(cetuximab-sensitive) and UMSCC1 (cetuximab-insensitive at low range
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mediated cell signaling is
aberrantly regulated in many types of human cancers. Targeting EGFR with
receptor-blocking antibodies or small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors
has shown clinical activity against several types of cancers; however,
most patients have had only moderate or no response. Our laboratory
recently found that one of the antitumor mechanisms of cetuximab, which
is an FDA-approved EGFR-blocking antibody, is to disrupt the biosynthetic
and biogenetic metabolisms in cancer cells through inhibition of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1)-regulated glycolysis. In current
study, we tested a novel hypothesis that AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) functions as a metabolic checkpoint activated in response to the
decline in ATP levels by EGFR-targeted therapy. We selected three human
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines, HN5 and FaDu
(cetuximab-sensitive) and UMSCC1 (cetuximab-insensitive at low range
<20nM) in this study. We found cetuximab significantly reduced cellular
ATP levels and glucose consumptions in cultured cells through inhibition
of HIF-1 activity in the cetuximab-sensitive HN5 and FaDu cells, but
moderately reduced cellular ATP level and glucose consumption in UMSCC1
cells. By measuring the level of T-172 activation-specific
phosphorylation of AMPK and the level of phosphorylation of acetyl CoA
carboxylase (ACC) at S-79 (the site known to be phosphorylated by AMPK),
we found that AMPK was strongly activated after cetuximab treatment in
HN5 and FaDu cells, compared to untreated cells, but AMPK was only
moderately elevated in UMSCC1 cells that contain a higher basal level of
activated AMPK. Knockdown of LKB1 expression by specific siRNA prevented
cetuximab-induced activation of AMPK, indicating that cetuximab activates
AMPK through the canonical ATP-LKB1-AMPK signaling pathway. Inhibition of
AMPK by AMPK siRNA or an AMPK small molecule inhibitor compound C (C.C.)
markedly potentiated cetuximab-induced inhibition of cellular ATP level
and cell proliferation in HN5 and UMSCC1 cells. Furthermore, we found
that inhibition of AMPK by C.C. markedly improved response of HN5-R and
DiFi5 cells, both of which are cetuximab-resistant sublines derived from
their parental cetuximab-sensitive cells. These findings indicate that
activation of AMPK is an important mechanism of resistance to cetuximab,
attempting to restore cellular energy level after cetuximab treatment.
Taken together, our findings suggest a novel mechanism in which AMPK is
activated in response to the decline in ATP level by cetuximab-induced
downregulation of HIF-1. Novel strategies to block this AMPK-mediated
cell energy restoring mechanism may sensitize cancer cells to
cetuximab-mediated EGFR inhibition.

