Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of microRNA-143/145 disturbs cell growth of cancers by
impairing the MDM2-p53 feedback loop


BACKGROUND: Dysregulated microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in
many malignant tumors, including epithelial cancers, but little is known
about the molecular mechanisms and clinical significances of miRNAs
dysregulation. The aim is to identify and determine the miR-143 and
miR-145 how to specifically be involved in controlling MDM2 expression in
a tumor tissue-specific manner. METHODS: Using real-time PCR, the
expression of miR-143, miR-145 and MDM2 were evaluated and analyzed in
epithelial cancer cell lines and oral cancer specimens. The different
PCR-derived fragments and mutagenesis from the MDM2 mRNA 3 UTR were
inserted into the pGL3 vector to generate the luciferase reporters and
the reporter activities were assayed by luciferase assay kits. The
effects of overexpression of miR-143 and miR-145 on MDM2 and p53 levels
were analyzed by western blot. The effects of miR-143 and miR-145 on cell
proliferation and cell cycle were determined by the EdU assay and flow
cytometry analysis. The effects of miR-143 and miR-145 on tumorigenicity
in vivo were investigated with HNSCC cell xenograft models and the cell
apoptotic rate as well as mechanism were tested by TUNEL and
apoptosis-protein expression in the tumor tissues. RESULTS: The results
showed that both miR-143 and miR-145, which belong to the same miRNA
cluster, can negatively modulate expression of their target gene, MDM2.
The miR-143 and miR-145 is post-transcriptionally activated by
up-regulated p53, thereby generating a short miRNAs-MDM2-p53 feedback
loop. Re-expression of these miRNAs suppresses cellular growth and
triggers the apoptosis of epithelial cancer, in vitro and in vivo, by
enhancing p53 activity via MDM2 turnover. Moreover, the miRNA-dependent
MDM2 turnover contributes to the equilibrium of repeated p53 pulses in
response to DNA damage stress. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that
MDM2 dysregulation caused by down-regulation of miR-143 and miR-145
contributes to epithelial cancer development and palys a key role in
regulating cellular proliferation and apoptosis. Recruitment of miR-143
and miR-145 may be a reasonable strategy for treatment of epithelial
cancers. KEYWORDS: miRNA-143, miRNA-145, MDM2, p53, epithelial cancers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: This study was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 30973343 and 81101515), Projects of the
Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (Grant No. 08JC1414400 and
10XD1402500), the Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project (S30206).
*The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

