Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silence of SOX2 induces apoptosis through both mitochondria and
death receptor signal pathway by activating the RAS/MAPK signals in human
lung cancer cells


Previous study showed that the stem cell gene-SOX2 plays an important
role in the anti-apoptotic property of tumor cells, but the regulatory
mechanism of SOX2 in the apoptosis signals is still elusive. In this
study we used lentivirus system to deliver the shRNA to human lung cancer
cell line- A549 and H460 and found that silencing of SOX2 gene can
effectively induce apoptosis. Proteomic array assay and western blotting
showed that down-regulation of SOX2 activates both the mitochondria and
death receptor signal pathway, which were marked by the overexpression
and phosphorylation of p53, overexpression of Bax and Bad, and activation
of caspase 3 and 8 in A549 cells with SOX2 silencing. Real-time RT-PCR
showed that down-regulation of SOX2 leads to the activation of Ras/MAPK
signal pathway, which activated the transcription of two key inducers for
apoptosis signals-TNF- and p53 and also down-regulates the expression of
survivin. In vitro and in vivo experiment further showed that this
apoptotic effect of SOX2 silencing was compromised by overexpression of
survivin. Immunohistochemistry study of human lung tissues showed that
the protein expression level of SOX2 is closely correlated with that of
survivin. In addition, SOX2 and survivin double positive patients showed
worse prognosis, suggesting these two proteins can be used as
dual-diagnosis factors to evaluate the clinical progression and prognosis
of lung cancer patient. These findings revealed the important mechanism
for SOX2 to regulate the apoptosis signals and demonstrated that survivin
is one of vital downstream molecules that contribute to the
anti-apoptosis property of SOX2.

