Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proprotein convertases as target for therapy of pediatric sarcomas


One of the biggest challenges of treating children with cancer is
achieving complete remission, while ensuring that they will be able to
lead normal, productive life in adulthood. To improve therapies for
embryonal pediatric tumors such as rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) the most common
soft tissue sarcoma in children, we have selected by in vivo phage
display for peptides that bind to RMS with high specificity. We have
shown that coupling of Doxorubicin to RMS-P3, a RMS targeting peptide,
considerably increases its therapeutic impact in a mouse model for RMS.
We have identified proprotein convertases (PC), a family of ten serine
proteases which convert inactive proprotein into their active form, as
targets RMS binding peptides. Now we aimed at elucidating the
contribution to RMS growth in vivo of the two proprotein convertases,
furin and PC7, which are highly expressed in RMS tumors. To this end, we
have generated a panel of RMS cell lines overexpressing furin,
overexpressing a specific intrinsic PC inhibitor called 1-PDX, as well as
cell lines were expression of furin or PC7 has been stably blocked by
shRNA. These cells have been tested for their growth, migration and
invasion potential in vitro as well as for their growth in vivo as
subcutaneous xenografts. Histological analysis of tumor sections, in
particular of microvessel density and angiogenesis has been performed to
reveal if PC activity correlates with RMS progression. Our results
confirm a strong correlation between PCs activity and RMS growth in vivo
and suggest furin and PC7 as viable targets for therapeutic intervention
and warrant further studies in the development of novel therapeutic
approaches based both on specific inhibition of PCs protease activity and
on targeted drug delivery by PCs targeting peptides.

