Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Addition of ER and PTEN, but not cytokeratins, aids identification
for BRCA1 carriers in Malaysian breast cancer patients


Background: Given that BRCA1 carriers are more likely to develop triple
negative breast cancers (TNBC) and that current risk assessment models
underestimate BRCA carriers in Asian populations, we have sought to
determine the prevalence of BRCA mutations amongst TNBC patients and
whether addition of pathological features improves the sensitivity of the
Manchester scoring method of BRCA risk assessment. Methods: A total of
399 patients from the Malaysian Breast Cancer Genetic Study were fully
analysed for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, including 101 patients with TNBC.
Pathological features, including estrogen receptor (ER) and PTEN status
were assessed and included in a modified Manchester scoring method.
Results: Our study in an Asian series of triple negative breast cancer
patients has demonstrated that 22% [22/101] of patients have germline
mutations in BRCA1 [18/101] and BRCA2 [4/101]. We find that amongst
patients who were diagnosed with breast cancer aged 36-50 but with no
family history of breast or ovarian cancer, the prevalence of BRCA
mutations was similar amongst those who developed triple negative breast
cancer (7%) and non-TNBC (7%). By contrast, in two other groups of
patients (a) those who were diagnosed with breast cancer 35 years old
with no family history of these cancers, and (b) those with family
history of breast cancer, the prevalence of mutations was higher in those
with TNBC compared to those with non-TNBC [29% and 11%; p=0.07; and 40%
and 14%; p=0.001 respectively]. Furthermore, we find that incorporation
of estrogen-receptor status improves the sensitivity of the Manchester
Scoring method [38% to 62%] and in particular, incorporation of the
status of PTEN, further improves sensitivity [43% to 100%]. Conclusion:
We find that TNBC is an important criteria for highlighting patients who
may benefit from genetic testing, but that this may be most useful for
individuals with early onset breast cancer (35 years old) or with family
history of cancers. Furthermore, addition of ER and PTEN status improves
the sensitivity of the Manchester scoring method and may be particularly
important in the Asian context when family history is often inaccurately
reported.

