Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterisation of CCT251455, a novel, selective and highly
potent Mps1 kinase inhibitor


Monopolar spindle 1 (Mps1, also known as TTK) is a dual-specificity, cell
cycle-regulated kinase required for the establishment and maintenance of
the spindle assembly checkpoint during mitosis. Aneuploid tumour cells
possess a weak spindle checkpoint to allow onset of anaphase and cell
division. Our hypothesis is that a complete inhibition of an already
weakened mitotic checkpoint of cancer cells will cause gross chromosomal
abnormalities leading to aneuploid cell death. We have shown that
depletion of Mps1 by siRNA induces cell death selectively in aneuploid
and PTEN-deficient cancer cell lines. We have demonstrated that Mps1
depletion inhibits MAD2 localisation to the kinetochores. We have
developed biochemical and cellular assays for Mps1 activity and a high
throughput screening of our Institute's compound library delivered
multiple hit series. Medicinal chemistry in combination with X-ray
crystallography led to the development of CCT251455, a small molecule
inhibitor of Mps1 kinase activity. CCT251455 selectively inhibits Mps1
kinase with an IC50 of 0.003 M, inhibits growth of a panel of human
tumour cell lines with GI50 between 0.06 - 1 M and is particularly potent
in PTEN-deficient cell lines. Cells treated with CCT251455 abrogate
nocodazole-induced mitotic arrest and reduce the time spent in mitosis.
Mps1-inhibited cells contain aberrant numbers of chromosomes and the
majority of cells divide their chromosomes without proper alignment.
CCT251455 is orally bioavailable (F = 82%) and shows modulation of
biomarkers in vivo.

