Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extended phase II study of maintenance immunotherapy in advanced
cancer


Purpose: Chemotherapy can induce prolonged remissions in patients with
stage IV cancer (AC), yet nearly the majority of them, will ultimately
relapse. In vitro studies suggest that natural killer cells (NK) mediate
lytic activity against cancer cell lines and that high expression of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) promotes tumor progression
through neoangiogenesis. We have shown that a combination of low-dose
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 13-cis retinoic acid (RA) increased NK cells and
decreased VEGF, in patients with AC with a clinical benefit from
chemotherapy (Clin Cancer Res 7: 1251, 2001). Therefore, IL-2 and RA may
improve long-term disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)
when administered in a post-chemotherapy minimal residual disease
setting. Primary endpoint of the study was to evaluate if IL-2 and RA
increased NK cells and decreased VEGF of patients with AC that had a
clinical benefit from chemotherapy. Secondary endpoint was the evaluation
of DFS, OS and toxicity of this regimen in various tumor types. Patients
and methods: 500 patients with a wide range of AC that had a clinical
benefit from chemotherapy were treated with self-administered
subcutaneous IL-2, 1.8 X 106 IU and oral RA, 0.5 mg/Kg for 5 days/week
for 2 consecutive cycles of 3 weeks, with a 1-week rest, for 1 year.
Therapy was continued, with intermittent schedules for five years or
until progression. NK cells, serum VEGF, tumor response and toxicity were
assessed every 4 months. Results: Median age was 61 years (range 21-80),
all patients had a good performance status and there were 248 females.
After a median follow-up of 60 months (range 24-180), 4400 courses of
chemotherapy and 2634 courses of immunotherapy were administered. A
statistically significant improvement of NK cells [from a mean of 309
76/mm3 to a mean of 579 74 (pPurpose: Chemotherapy can induce prolonged
remissions in patients with stage IV cancer (AC), yet nearly the majority
of them, will ultimately relapse. In vitro studies suggest that natural
killer cells (NK) mediate lytic activity against cancer cell lines and
that high expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
promotes tumor progression through neoangiogenesis. We have shown that a
combination of low-dose interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 13-cis retinoic acid
(RA) increased NK cells and decreased VEGF, in patients with AC with a
clinical benefit from chemotherapy (Clin Cancer Res 7: 1251, 2001).
Therefore, IL-2 and RA may improve long-term disease-free survival (DFS)
and overall survival (OS) when administered in a post-chemotherapy
minimal residual disease setting. Primary endpoint of the study was to
evaluate if IL-2 and RA increased NK cells and decreased VEGF of patients
with AC that had a clinical benefit from chemotherapy. Secondary endpoint
was the evaluation of DFS, OS and toxicity of this regimen in various
tumor types. Patients and methods: 500 patients with a wide range of AC
that had a clinical benefit from chemotherapy were treated with
self-administered subcutaneous IL-2, 1.8 X 106 IU and oral RA, 0.5 mg/Kg
for 5 days/week for 2 consecutive cycles of 3 weeks, with a 1-week rest,
for 1 year. Therapy was continued, with intermittent schedules for five
years or until progression. NK cells, serum VEGF, tumor response and
toxicity were assessed every 4 months. Results: Median age was 61 years
(range 21-80), all patients had a good performance status and there were
248 females. After a median follow-up of 60 months (range 24-180), 4400
courses of chemotherapy and 2634 courses of immunotherapy were
administered. A statistically significant improvement of NK cells [from a
mean of 309 76/mm3 to a mean of 579 74 (p<0.001)] and a decrease of VEGF
[from a mean of 520 75 pg/mm3 to a mean of 150 12 pg/mm3, (pPurpose:
Chemotherapy can induce prolonged remissions in patients with stage IV
cancer (AC), yet nearly the majority of them, will ultimately relapse. In
vitro studies suggest that natural killer cells (NK) mediate lytic
activity against cancer cell lines and that high expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) promotes tumor progression through
neoangiogenesis. We have shown that a combination of low-dose
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 13-cis retinoic acid (RA) increased NK cells and
decreased VEGF, in patients with AC with a clinical benefit from
chemotherapy (Clin Cancer Res 7: 1251, 2001). Therefore, IL-2 and RA may
improve long-term disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)
when administered in a post-chemotherapy minimal residual disease
setting. Primary endpoint of the study was to evaluate if IL-2 and RA
increased NK cells and decreased VEGF of patients with AC that had a
clinical benefit from chemotherapy. Secondary endpoint was the evaluation
of DFS, OS and toxicity of this regimen in various tumor types. Patients
and methods: 500 patients with a wide range of AC that had a clinical
benefit from chemotherapy were treated with self-administered
subcutaneous IL-2, 1.8 X 106 IU and oral RA, 0.5 mg/Kg for 5 days/week
for 2 consecutive cycles of 3 weeks, with a 1-week rest, for 1 year.
Therapy was continued, with intermittent schedules for five years or
until progression. NK cells, serum VEGF, tumor response and toxicity were
assessed every 4 months. Results: Median age was 61 years (range 21-80),
all patients had a good performance status and there were 248 females.
After a median follow-up of 60 months (range 24-180), 4400 courses of
chemotherapy and 2634 courses of immunotherapy were administered. A
statistically significant improvement of NK cells [from a mean of 309
76/mm3 to a mean of 579 74 (p<0.001)] and a decrease of VEGF [from a mean
of 520 75 pg/mm3 to a mean of 150 12 pg/mm3, (p<0.001)], with respect to
baseline, post-chemotherapy values, were observed. 15 years DFS and OS
were 32.6 and 36.8, respectively. Even with all the limitations of
different patient populations, a significant improvement, with respect to
NCI SEER data (*), could be observed in the 5-year OS rate for the most
common treated metastatic cancers: Breast cancer 42.7% vs. 23.3% *, lung
cancer 26.4% vs. 3.6% *, colorectal cancer 43.6% vs. 11.7%*, renal cancer
23% vs. 11% *. No WHO grade 3 or 4 toxicity was observed, while grade 2
cutaneous toxicity and fever occurred in 20% and 13% of patients,
respectively. Mild hypothyroidism and grade 2 triglyceride elevation was
observed in 5% and 15% of patients, respectively. 1 patient had to stop
treatment for grade 2 urticaria. Conclusions: These data show that the
administration of IL-2/RA, determines, with a modest toxicity profile, a
sustained improvement of NK cells, a decrease of VEGF, and unexpected
5-year survival rates. Phase III randomized studies have been started, in
Europe, for several tumor types.

