Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinicopathological significance of CXCL12/CXCR4 expression in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Chemokines are known to be small weight cytokines which
regulate variety of immune responses. It is also known that they and
their receptors express in several cancers and correlate to progression
of primary and metastatic cancer. The chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor
CXCR4 especially have been reported to play prominent role in
proliferation, metastasis, and prognosis of several cancers, including
breast, ovarian, kidney, prostate, brain, and lung cancers. However,
reports about the relationship between CXCL12/CXCR4 expression and
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) are rare. This retrospective
study is to investigate the expression of CXCL12/CXCR4 and explore its
correlation to prognosis and clinicopathological factors of ESCC.
Methods: The relationship between CXCL12 and CXCR4 expression and
clinicopathological factors including prognosis in surgical specimens of
primary tumors in 77 patients with ESCC was investigated
immunohistochemically. All patients had R0 or R1 resection without any
preoperative treatment from 1997 to 2007. We evaluated the intensity of
the stain in 3 grades (0: negative, 1: weak, 2: strong), and the
proportion of stained cancer cells in 4 high power fields in 4 grades (0:
010%, 1: 1040%, 2: 4070%, 3: 70100%). The CXCL12/CXCR4 expression score
was defined as the product of the intensity score by proportion score,
and the positive expression was defined as ESCC of which expression score
is 1 or over. Results: The positive expression rate of CXCL12 was 77% and
that of CXCR4 was 57%. The expression of CXCL12 and CXCR4 had no
correlation. The disease free survival rate was significantly lower in
patients with positive CXCL12 expression (p=0.037), and the overall
survival rate was lower in Stage I/II patients with positive CXCL12
expression (p=0.50). The expression of CXCR4 had no correlation with
clinicopathological variables and prognosis. Multivariable analysis
showed that CXCL12 expression score was the independent risk factor for
the recurrence of ESCC (p=0.013), as same as pathological N factor and
venous invasion. Conclusion: This study indicated that positive CXCL12
expression was more related to the recurrence of ESCC, compared with
CXCR4 expression. Evaluation of CXCL12 expression is useful for
predicting prognosis in patients with ESCC.

