Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of S100A14 in proliferation and invasion of oral
cancer-derived cells


Members of multifunctional S100 protein family have been reported to be
differentially expressed in a variety of human cancers and are
functionally linked with various aspects of carcinogenesis. S100A14 is a
recently identified member of the S100 protein family. Despite reports of
altered expression in different cancer types, functional significance of
S100A14 in carcinogenesis is largely unknown. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the functional role of S100A14 proliferation and invasion of
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)-derived cell. S100A14 mRNA and
protein levels were found to be down-regulated in OSCCs and OSCC-derived
cells compared to the corresponding normal controls. In addition,
membranous S100A14 immunoexpression was found to be gradually lost in the
invasive fronts/islands compared to the central/superficial part of
OSCCs. Over-expression of S100A14, by using retroviral expression
construct, was found to be associated with the inhibition of cell
proliferation, induction of G1-arrest and up-regulation of p21 in
OSCC-derived cell lines (CaLH3 and OSCC1) with wild type p53. Similarly,
over-expression of S100A14 was associated with inhibition of invasive
potential of OSCC-derived cells in the in vitro Matrigel invasion assay.
S100A14 mediated inhibition of cellular invasion was found to be
associated with modulation of mRNA signature of genes involved in tumor
invasion and metastasis, in particular MMP1, MMP9. Taken together, these
data suggest that similar to other multifunctional S100 protein members,
S100A14 might be involved in OSCC progression by regulating cell
proliferation and invasion. Hence, further characterization of the
molecular pathways/targets of S100A14 might lead to the better
understanding of proliferation and invasion of OSCC and this process, in
future, might be useful as a diagnostic or therapeutic approach in
cancers.

