Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHC promotes tumor growth and angiogenesis through regulation of
HIF-1 and VEGF signaling


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is an aggressive disease with a high mortality
rate. Currently, treatment options are limited. In an effort to improve
the efficacy of treatments for pancreatic adenocarcinoma, we have newly
generated a monoclonal antibody (mAb), Pa65-2, which specifically binds
to various cancer cells and tumor blood vessels but not to normal cells.
According to immunoaffinity chromatography, LC-MS/MS analysis,
co-immunoprecipitation and RNA interference studies, the target protein
of Pa65-2 is human clathrin heavy chain (CHC). Knocking down CHC with
shRNA reduced tumor cell growth, colony formation and invasion in vitro,
and inhibited tumor angiogenesis and growth. One of the key functions of
CHC was to bind with the transcription factor subunit HIF-1, increasing
the stability of this protein and facilitating its nuclear translocation,
thereby regulating the expression of VEGF. In animal studies using
NOD/SCID mice bearing pancreatic cancer xenografts, Pa65-2 and CHC shRNA
could each inhibit tumor growth and angiogenesis by regulating HIF-1 and
VEGF. Furthermore, the expression of CHC, HIF-1 and VEGF was
significantly correlated with tumor stage, suggesting that CHC might be a
useful prognostic indicator for cancer. Considered together, our results
indicate that CHC interacts with and stabilizes HIF-1, and plays a role
in HIF-1 nuclear localization and HRE promoter binding, leading to an
increased production of VEGF. These results suggest that the CHC mAb,
Pa65-2, can potentially be used to inhibit tumor angiogenesis and growth.

