Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A multi-domain fusion molecule inhibits tumor growth affecting
in-vivo angiogenesis


Growth of solid tumors beyond their benign size largely depends on the
availability of oxygen and food supply which is accomplished through
induced tumor angiogenesis. Inhibition of such de novo angiogenesis
should aid in arresting the growth of solid tumors. Besides availability
of several monoclonal antibodies and synthetic inhibitors for target
molecules that induce tumor angiogenesis, endogenous antiangiogenic
molecules are effective candidates with no drug resistance. Several
endogenous angioinhibitors have been identified and were proven to
inhibit tumor angiogenesis both in-vitro and in-vivo. However, many of
them exhibited varied effects in inhibiting tumor growth with multiple
mechanism(s) of action. Thus in our present study we developed a fusion
antiangiogenic molecule Combostatin using the functional domains from two
of the known antiangiogenic molecules reported by us. Here we show that
Combostatin is an effective inhibitor of angiogenesis and inhibits tumor
growth in-vitro and in-vivo. We also show that Combostatin affects
several of the antiangiogenic pathways such as endothelial cell
proliferation, migration and tube formation which are mediated by its
binding to several integrin receptors on the endothelial cell surface.
Our studies conclude that Combostatin is a more potent inhibitor of tumor
angiogenesis than its parent molecules generated form type IV and Type
XVIII collagen.

