Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mad1 Serine-214 phosphorylation is essential for the spindle
assembly checkpoint


The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), which blocks anaphase onset until
all chromosomes have bioriented, is one of the key self-monitoring
systems of the eukaryotic cell cycle. The mitotic arrest-deficient
protein 1 (Mad1), a critical component of the SAC, is hyperphosphorylated
in mitosis. However, the kinases responsible for Mad1 phosphorylation and
its functional significance are not fully understood. Here we report that
Mad1 is phosphorylated on Serine-214 in vivo and in vitro by the ATM
kinase, a critical DNA damage response protein also activated in mitosis
and required for the SAC. This phosphorylation facilitates the
homodimerization of Mad1 and heterodimerzation with Mad2. Cells
expressing the mutation of Serine-214 to Alanine show a defective SAC and
shorter mitotic timing. Introduction of the Serine-214 to glutamic acid
mutant Mad1 partially complements the SAC defect in ATM-deficient cells.
Immunofluorescence experiments show that Mad1-Ser214 phosphorylation has
a similar localization pattern to ATM Serine-1403 phosphorylation during
mitosis. In clinical samples, we find that Mad1 Serine-214
phosphorylation is highly expressed in malignant breast cancer tissues
and is significantly correlated with the mitotic index (pThe spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC), which blocks anaphase onset until all
chromosomes have bioriented, is one of the key self-monitoring systems of
the eukaryotic cell cycle. The mitotic arrest-deficient protein 1 (Mad1),
a critical component of the SAC, is hyperphosphorylated in mitosis.
However, the kinases responsible for Mad1 phosphorylation and its
functional significance are not fully understood. Here we report that
Mad1 is phosphorylated on Serine-214 in vivo and in vitro by the ATM
kinase, a critical DNA damage response protein also activated in mitosis
and required for the SAC. This phosphorylation facilitates the
homodimerization of Mad1 and heterodimerzation with Mad2. Cells
expressing the mutation of Serine-214 to Alanine show a defective SAC and
shorter mitotic timing. Introduction of the Serine-214 to glutamic acid
mutant Mad1 partially complements the SAC defect in ATM-deficient cells.
Immunofluorescence experiments show that Mad1-Ser214 phosphorylation has
a similar localization pattern to ATM Serine-1403 phosphorylation during
mitosis. In clinical samples, we find that Mad1 Serine-214
phosphorylation is highly expressed in malignant breast cancer tissues
and is significantly correlated with the mitotic index (p<0.001, Pearson
Correlation Test), indicating the physiological significance of Mad1
Serine-214 phosphorylation. Together, these findings reveal an important
role of ATM-mediated Mad1 phosphorylation in mitosis.

