Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemokine 25 and chemokine receptor 9 axis suppresses colon
cancer invasion and metastasis


Chemokines help regulate tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Here, we
show that the Chemokine 25/Chemokine Receptor 9 (CCL25/CCR9) axis
suppresses colon cancer (CRC) invasion and metastasis. CCR9 protein
expression levels are highest in colon adenomas, and progressively
decrease in invasive and metastatic CRCs. CCR9 is expressed in both
primary tumor cell cultures and colon cancer initiating cell lines (CCIC)
derived from early stage (I/II) CRCs. CCL25 stimulates cell proliferation
through a network of transcription factors downstream of AKT signaling.
In vivo, systemically injected CCR9+ early stage CCIC spontaneously form
orthotopic gastrointestinal xenograft tumors. Blocking CCR9 signaling
prevents CRC tumor formation in the native gastrointestinal CCL25+
microenvironment, while increasing extra-intestinal tumor multiplicity.
NOTCH signaling, which promotes CRC metastasis, increases
extra-intestinal tumor multiplicity by stimulating CCR proteosomal
degradation. These data provide insights into the mechanisms that
regulate CRC progression, invasion and metastasis and describe a novel in
vivo experimental system to study these processes. Our findings also
raise a safety concern for ongoing Inflammatory Bowel Disease clinical
trials using CCR9 antagonists.

