Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination treatment with epigallocatechin-3-gallate and
sulforaphane sensitize ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin


Objective: A number of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), responsible for
drug resistance in high stages of ovarian cancers, were silenced due to
epigenetic mechanisms. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), which is a
major component of green tea, is known for its role as a DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor. Sulforaphane (SFN), which is derived
from broccoli, is known for its role as a histone deacetylation
inhibitor. Both of these compounds have anti-cancer effects in a number
of cancers including ovarian. The objective of the study is to test
whether EGCG and SFN combination treatment can sensitize ovarian cancer
cells to cisplatin treatment. Methods: EGCG, SFN and cisplatin
combination treatments were applied to A2780/CP20 (cisplatin-resistant)
and A2780 (cisplatin-sensitive) cells to determine their effects on
sensitization. Cell viability was measured via MTT assay. Flow cytometry
analysis was adopted to reveal cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Real time
quantitative PCR was employed to analyze changes in gene expression in
response to the combination treatment. Results: For A2780/CP20 cells, 50%
inhibiting concentrations (IC50) to cisplatin was lowered from 13 M to
less than 1 M with combination treatment. For A2780 cells, IC50 was
decreased from 3 M to 1.5 with combination treatment. Apoptosis analyses
revealed that SFN can induce apoptosis in A2780/CP20 and A2780 cells,
EGCG or cisplatin can potentiate the effect in both cell types. Cell
cycle analyses revealed that 28.58% of A2780/CP20 cells were arrested in
G2/M phase with SFN treatment alone compared with 14.3% of vehicle
treated cells. Additionally, combination treatment leads to an increase
to 52.14% of cells in G2/M phase arrest. Furthermore, we found that
20.45% of A2780 cells were arrested in G2/M phase with SFN treatment
compared with 8.02% of vehicle-treated cells, while, combination
treatment led to a slight increase to 29.33% of cells in the G2/M phase.
There is also a synergistic effect on G2/M phase arrest when EGCG, SFN or
cisplatin were used together compared with alone in both cell types. On
the molecular level, mRNAs of p21 and hMLH1 were upregulated (18.5 and
28.4 fold respectively, PObjective: A number of tumor suppressor genes
(TSGs), responsible for drug resistance in high stages of ovarian
cancers, were silenced due to epigenetic mechanisms.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), which is a major component of green
tea, is known for its role as a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor.
Sulforaphane (SFN), which is derived from broccoli, is known for its role
as a histone deacetylation inhibitor. Both of these compounds have
anti-cancer effects in a number of cancers including ovarian. The
objective of the study is to test whether EGCG and SFN combination
treatment can sensitize ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin treatment.
Methods: EGCG, SFN and cisplatin combination treatments were applied to
A2780/CP20 (cisplatin-resistant) and A2780 (cisplatin-sensitive) cells to
determine their effects on sensitization. Cell viability was measured via
MTT assay. Flow cytometry analysis was adopted to reveal cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Real time quantitative PCR was employed to analyze
changes in gene expression in response to the combination treatment.
Results: For A2780/CP20 cells, 50% inhibiting concentrations (IC50) to
cisplatin was lowered from 13 M to less than 1 M with combination
treatment. For A2780 cells, IC50 was decreased from 3 M to 1.5 with
combination treatment. Apoptosis analyses revealed that SFN can induce
apoptosis in A2780/CP20 and A2780 cells, EGCG or cisplatin can potentiate
the effect in both cell types. Cell cycle analyses revealed that 28.58%
of A2780/CP20 cells were arrested in G2/M phase with SFN treatment alone
compared with 14.3% of vehicle treated cells. Additionally, combination
treatment leads to an increase to 52.14% of cells in G2/M phase arrest.
Furthermore, we found that 20.45% of A2780 cells were arrested in G2/M
phase with SFN treatment compared with 8.02% of vehicle-treated cells,
while, combination treatment led to a slight increase to 29.33% of cells
in the G2/M phase. There is also a synergistic effect on G2/M phase
arrest when EGCG, SFN or cisplatin were used together compared with alone
in both cell types. On the molecular level, mRNAs of p21 and hMLH1 were
upregulated (18.5 and 28.4 fold respectively, P<0.01) in response to SFN
treatment in A2780/CP20. Combination treatment leads to an increase to 35
and 76 fold on their expression (PObjective: A number of tumor suppressor
genes (TSGs), responsible for drug resistance in high stages of ovarian
cancers, were silenced due to epigenetic mechanisms.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), which is a major component of green
tea, is known for its role as a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor.
Sulforaphane (SFN), which is derived from broccoli, is known for its role
as a histone deacetylation inhibitor. Both of these compounds have
anti-cancer effects in a number of cancers including ovarian. The
objective of the study is to test whether EGCG and SFN combination
treatment can sensitize ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin treatment.
Methods: EGCG, SFN and cisplatin combination treatments were applied to
A2780/CP20 (cisplatin-resistant) and A2780 (cisplatin-sensitive) cells to
determine their effects on sensitization. Cell viability was measured via
MTT assay. Flow cytometry analysis was adopted to reveal cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Real time quantitative PCR was employed to analyze
changes in gene expression in response to the combination treatment.
Results: For A2780/CP20 cells, 50% inhibiting concentrations (IC50) to
cisplatin was lowered from 13 M to less than 1 M with combination
treatment. For A2780 cells, IC50 was decreased from 3 M to 1.5 with
combination treatment. Apoptosis analyses revealed that SFN can induce
apoptosis in A2780/CP20 and A2780 cells, EGCG or cisplatin can potentiate
the effect in both cell types. Cell cycle analyses revealed that 28.58%
of A2780/CP20 cells were arrested in G2/M phase with SFN treatment alone
compared with 14.3% of vehicle treated cells. Additionally, combination
treatment leads to an increase to 52.14% of cells in G2/M phase arrest.
Furthermore, we found that 20.45% of A2780 cells were arrested in G2/M
phase with SFN treatment compared with 8.02% of vehicle-treated cells,
while, combination treatment led to a slight increase to 29.33% of cells
in the G2/M phase. There is also a synergistic effect on G2/M phase
arrest when EGCG, SFN or cisplatin were used together compared with alone
in both cell types. On the molecular level, mRNAs of p21 and hMLH1 were
upregulated (18.5 and 28.4 fold respectively, P<0.01) in response to SFN
treatment in A2780/CP20. Combination treatment leads to an increase to 35
and 76 fold on their expression (P<0.01). In A2780 cells, mRNA of p21 was
upregulated (463 fold, PObjective: A number of tumor suppressor genes
(TSGs), responsible for drug resistance in high stages of ovarian
cancers, were silenced due to epigenetic mechanisms.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), which is a major component of green
tea, is known for its role as a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor.
Sulforaphane (SFN), which is derived from broccoli, is known for its role
as a histone deacetylation inhibitor. Both of these compounds have
anti-cancer effects in a number of cancers including ovarian. The
objective of the study is to test whether EGCG and SFN combination
treatment can sensitize ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin treatment.
Methods: EGCG, SFN and cisplatin combination treatments were applied to
A2780/CP20 (cisplatin-resistant) and A2780 (cisplatin-sensitive) cells to
determine their effects on sensitization. Cell viability was measured via
MTT assay. Flow cytometry analysis was adopted to reveal cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. Real time quantitative PCR was employed to analyze
changes in gene expression in response to the combination treatment.
Results: For A2780/CP20 cells, 50% inhibiting concentrations (IC50) to
cisplatin was lowered from 13 M to less than 1 M with combination
treatment. For A2780 cells, IC50 was decreased from 3 M to 1.5 with
combination treatment. Apoptosis analyses revealed that SFN can induce
apoptosis in A2780/CP20 and A2780 cells, EGCG or cisplatin can potentiate
the effect in both cell types. Cell cycle analyses revealed that 28.58%
of A2780/CP20 cells were arrested in G2/M phase with SFN treatment alone
compared with 14.3% of vehicle treated cells. Additionally, combination
treatment leads to an increase to 52.14% of cells in G2/M phase arrest.
Furthermore, we found that 20.45% of A2780 cells were arrested in G2/M
phase with SFN treatment compared with 8.02% of vehicle-treated cells,
while, combination treatment led to a slight increase to 29.33% of cells
in the G2/M phase. There is also a synergistic effect on G2/M phase
arrest when EGCG, SFN or cisplatin were used together compared with alone
in both cell types. On the molecular level, mRNAs of p21 and hMLH1 were
upregulated (18.5 and 28.4 fold respectively, P<0.01) in response to SFN
treatment in A2780/CP20. Combination treatment leads to an increase to 35
and 76 fold on their expression (P<0.01). In A2780 cells, mRNA of p21 was
upregulated (463 fold, P<0.01) in response to SFN treatment compared with
vehicle treatment and combination treatment leads to an increase to 888
fold (PObjective: A number of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), responsible
for drug resistance in high stages of ovarian cancers, were silenced due
to epigenetic mechanisms. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), which is a
major component of green tea, is known for its role as a DNA
methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor. Sulforaphane (SFN), which is derived
from broccoli, is known for its role as a histone deacetylation
inhibitor. Both of these compounds have anti-cancer effects in a number
of cancers including ovarian. The objective of the study is to test
whether EGCG and SFN combination treatment can sensitize ovarian cancer
cells to cisplatin treatment. Methods: EGCG, SFN and cisplatin
combination treatments were applied to A2780/CP20 (cisplatin-resistant)
and A2780 (cisplatin-sensitive) cells to determine their effects on
sensitization. Cell viability was measured via MTT assay. Flow cytometry
analysis was adopted to reveal cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Real time
quantitative PCR was employed to analyze changes in gene expression in
response to the combination treatment. Results: For A2780/CP20 cells, 50%
inhibiting concentrations (IC50) to cisplatin was lowered from 13 M to
less than 1 M with combination treatment. For A2780 cells, IC50 was
decreased from 3 M to 1.5 with combination treatment. Apoptosis analyses
revealed that SFN can induce apoptosis in A2780/CP20 and A2780 cells,
EGCG or cisplatin can potentiate the effect in both cell types. Cell
cycle analyses revealed that 28.58% of A2780/CP20 cells were arrested in
G2/M phase with SFN treatment alone compared with 14.3% of vehicle
treated cells. Additionally, combination treatment leads to an increase
to 52.14% of cells in G2/M phase arrest. Furthermore, we found that
20.45% of A2780 cells were arrested in G2/M phase with SFN treatment
compared with 8.02% of vehicle-treated cells, while, combination
treatment led to a slight increase to 29.33% of cells in the G2/M phase.
There is also a synergistic effect on G2/M phase arrest when EGCG, SFN or
cisplatin were used together compared with alone in both cell types. On
the molecular level, mRNAs of p21 and hMLH1 were upregulated (18.5 and
28.4 fold respectively, P<0.01) in response to SFN treatment in
A2780/CP20. Combination treatment leads to an increase to 35 and 76 fold
on their expression (P<0.01). In A2780 cells, mRNA of p21 was upregulated
(463 fold, P<0.01) in response to SFN treatment compared with vehicle
treatment and combination treatment leads to an increase to 888 fold
(P<0.01). No significant change in hMLH1 gene expression was detected in
A2780 cells. Conclusion: EGCG and SFN can sensitize ovarian cancer cells
to cisplatin treatment through enhanced G2/M cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis which may occur via upregulation of p21. Upregulation of hMLH1
in A2780/CP20 cells may be responsible for the added sensitivity to
cisplatin.

