Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The SWI/SNF nucleosome-remodeling gene PBRM1 - Another tumor
suppressor gene in renal cell carcinomas


The polybromodomain containing gene PBRM1 was recently discovered to
harbor 41% truncating somatic mutations in clear cell renal cell
carinomas (ccRCC). Next to the VHL tumor suppressor gene this gene is
thought to be the second major cancer gene in ccRCCs. PBRM1 (also called
BAF180) belongs to the SWI/SNF-B or PBAF complex and provides functional
specificity to this class of chromatin remodelers by binding to
acetylated histones via its six bromodomains, two BAH domains, and one
HMG domain (the latter binding to nucleosomal DNA). PBRM1 is located on
chromosome 3p21 in close vicinity to VHL and SETD2 genes arguing for a
putative gatekeeper function in cases where VHL loss alone is
insufficient for ccRCCs tumorigenesis. PBRM1 codes for at least three
major transcripts of about 7500nt in length whose expression was measured
by Q-PCR in 49 cases of paired normal and tumor tissue samples of RCC
patients who underwent radical tumor nephrectomy at our clinic between
06/2009 and 10/2010. 20/49 cases showed a marked upregulation of PBRM1
expression whereas in 29/49 cases PBRM1 was clearly downregulated. To
assess the contribution of somatic mutations for PBRM1 downregulation we
resequenced 29 PBRM1 exons of 48 tumor tissues. Specific truncating
mutations were detected in 6 (15.4%) of 39 ccRCCs. These mutations
include 5 deletions in exons 1, 10, 16, 23, and 24, as well as one
insertion in exon 16. All these heterozygous mutations lead to a decrease
of PBRM1 mRNA expression, that was verified by Q-PCR measurements. In
addition, 6 coding SNPs (cSNPs) were revealed as well as 5 SNPs in
intronic regions, one of the latter is in close vicinity to the splice
acceptor site of exon 9. Concurrent expression of three major transcripts
(var. 1,2, and 4) is seen in all 46 matched normal and tumor samples
analyzed so far. In 22 (47.8%) samples we detected a dominance of var.1
(NM_018165) in normal tissue when compared to the corresponding tumor
sample, that preferentially expresses var.4 (NM_181042). So far our data
set of 15.4% truncating mutations in 39 cases of ccRCC could not match
the exceptional high number of 41% reported in the initial report by the
Sanger Institute. Truncating mutations of PBRM1 have been described in
breast cancers but were absent in lung carcinomas, despite the fact that
LOH at 3p21 is frequently seen in these cancers. Understanding the
contribution of PBRM1 expression changes, be it on the genomic level
(mutation) and/or mRNA (differential splicing), to clinical disease
progression and outcome in kidney cancer needs further investigation.

