Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix protein expression is associated with
chemotherapy resistance in breast cancer


Extracellular matrix protein expression is associated with chemotherapy
resistance in breast cancer Purpose: Biomarkers to predict sensitivity
and resistance to chemotherapy are still lacking. A recent study reported
that stromal gene signatures in breast cancer may predict
chemoresistance. We aim to determine the changes of 5 extracellular
matrix (ECM) proteins in response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast
cancer. Experimental design: 100 female patients with locally advanced or
metastatic breast cancer were treated with 6 cycles of pre-operative
alternating sequential doxorubicin and docetaxel. Immunohistochemistry
staining for thrombospondin 1 (THBS1), tenascin C (TNC), fibronectin
(FN), smooth muscle actin- (-SMA) and secreted protein acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC) was performed on pre- and post-treatment core biopsies,
and correlated with estrogen receptor status, intrinsic chemotherapy
response, pathological lymph node involvement and survival. Changes in
THBS1 and TNC in relation to chemoresponse was additionally evaluated
with mass spectrometry, and further validated with immunohistochemistry
in an independent cohort of 31 breast cancer patients. Results: High
baseline THBS1 and SPARC and high post-treatment -SMA expression were
associated with poor overall survival (pExtracellular matrix protein
expression is associated with chemotherapy resistance in breast cancer
Purpose: Biomarkers to predict sensitivity and resistance to chemotherapy
are still lacking. A recent study reported that stromal gene signatures
in breast cancer may predict chemoresistance. We aim to determine the
changes of 5 extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Experimental design: 100
female patients with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer were
treated with 6 cycles of pre-operative alternating sequential doxorubicin
and docetaxel. Immunohistochemistry staining for thrombospondin 1
(THBS1), tenascin C (TNC), fibronectin (FN), smooth muscle actin- (-SMA)
and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) was performed on
pre- and post-treatment core biopsies, and correlated with estrogen
receptor status, intrinsic chemotherapy response, pathological lymph node
involvement and survival. Changes in THBS1 and TNC in relation to
chemoresponse was additionally evaluated with mass spectrometry, and
further validated with immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort of
31 breast cancer patients. Results: High baseline THBS1 and SPARC and
high post-treatment -SMA expression were associated with poor overall
survival (p<0.05 for each marker). High expression of combined baseline
ECM proteins was an independent predictor for poor progression-free
survival (HR 2.22, 95% CI 1.06-4.64, p=0.034) and overall survival (HR
5.94, 95% CI 2.25-15.71, pExtracellular matrix protein expression is
associated with chemotherapy resistance in breast cancer Purpose:
Biomarkers to predict sensitivity and resistance to chemotherapy are
still lacking. A recent study reported that stromal gene signatures in
breast cancer may predict chemoresistance. We aim to determine the
changes of 5 extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Experimental design: 100
female patients with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer were
treated with 6 cycles of pre-operative alternating sequential doxorubicin
and docetaxel. Immunohistochemistry staining for thrombospondin 1
(THBS1), tenascin C (TNC), fibronectin (FN), smooth muscle actin- (-SMA)
and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) was performed on
pre- and post-treatment core biopsies, and correlated with estrogen
receptor status, intrinsic chemotherapy response, pathological lymph node
involvement and survival. Changes in THBS1 and TNC in relation to
chemoresponse was additionally evaluated with mass spectrometry, and
further validated with immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort of
31 breast cancer patients. Results: High baseline THBS1 and SPARC and
high post-treatment -SMA expression were associated with poor overall
survival (p<0.05 for each marker). High expression of combined baseline
ECM proteins was an independent predictor for poor progression-free
survival (HR 2.22, 95% CI 1.06-4.64, p=0.034) and overall survival (HR
5.94, 95% CI 2.25-15.71, p<0.001). After 1-2 cycles of chemotherapy,
increased expression of THBS1 and TNC compared to baseline was seen in
intrinsically resistant tumors (pExtracellular matrix protein expression
is associated with chemotherapy resistance in breast cancer Purpose:
Biomarkers to predict sensitivity and resistance to chemotherapy are
still lacking. A recent study reported that stromal gene signatures in
breast cancer may predict chemoresistance. We aim to determine the
changes of 5 extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins in response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Experimental design: 100
female patients with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer were
treated with 6 cycles of pre-operative alternating sequential doxorubicin
and docetaxel. Immunohistochemistry staining for thrombospondin 1
(THBS1), tenascin C (TNC), fibronectin (FN), smooth muscle actin- (-SMA)
and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) was performed on
pre- and post-treatment core biopsies, and correlated with estrogen
receptor status, intrinsic chemotherapy response, pathological lymph node
involvement and survival. Changes in THBS1 and TNC in relation to
chemoresponse was additionally evaluated with mass spectrometry, and
further validated with immunohistochemistry in an independent cohort of
31 breast cancer patients. Results: High baseline THBS1 and SPARC and
high post-treatment -SMA expression were associated with poor overall
survival (p<0.05 for each marker). High expression of combined baseline
ECM proteins was an independent predictor for poor progression-free
survival (HR 2.22, 95% CI 1.06-4.64, p=0.034) and overall survival (HR
5.94, 95% CI 2.25-15.71, p<0.001). After 1-2 cycles of chemotherapy,
increased expression of THBS1 and TNC compared to baseline was seen in
intrinsically resistant tumors (p<0.05 for both), and in patients with
pathological lymph node involvement (p2 fold increase in THBS1 and TNC
expression compared to baseline in tumors that were intrinsically
resistant to doxorubicin relative to sensitive ones. The association
between THBS1 and TNC immunohistochemistry changes and chemotherapy
resistance was confirmed in the validation cohort. Conclusions:
Up-regulation in ECM proteins after chemotherapy was associated with
clinical and pathological response to doxorubicin- and docetaxel-based
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Assessment of these proteins
may uncover strategies to overcome drug resistance. Key words: ECM
proteins, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, breast cancer, drug resistance

