Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment differences are associated with black-white disparities
in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer


Background: Racial differences in survival for ovarian cancer are well
documented. Previous research suggests that black-white mortality
disparities are partially explained by more advanced disease among black
women. Whether differences in receipt of guideline recommended care
(including both surgery and chemotherapy) also explain mortality
differences between black and white women with advanced epithelial
ovarian cancer is not known. Methods: Using the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) linked to Medicare claims for
1997-2007, we identified a cohort of 4363 women age 65 and older with
histologically confirmed stage III or IV epithelial ovarian cancer. We
evaluated long-term survival for black and white women in the entire
fee-for-service Medicare population, and then in patients matched by
propensity score to create two similar cohorts for comparison with
Kaplan-Meier analysis. We investigated the association between race,
stage, and survival among women who received guideline recommended care
and those who received incomplete care. Adjusted analyses were conducted
using Cox modeling. Results: Overall, black women with advanced
epithelial ovarian cancer were more likely to die than white women;
unadjusted hazard ratio (HR):1.29 (95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.12-1.48). Black women were more likely than white women to present with
stage 4 disease (40% vs. 32%, p=0.02) and comorbid conditions (55% vs.
36%, pBackground: Racial differences in survival for ovarian cancer are
well documented. Previous research suggests that black-white mortality
disparities are partially explained by more advanced disease among black
women. Whether differences in receipt of guideline recommended care
(including both surgery and chemotherapy) also explain mortality
differences between black and white women with advanced epithelial
ovarian cancer is not known. Methods: Using the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) linked to Medicare claims for
1997-2007, we identified a cohort of 4363 women age 65 and older with
histologically confirmed stage III or IV epithelial ovarian cancer. We
evaluated long-term survival for black and white women in the entire
fee-for-service Medicare population, and then in patients matched by
propensity score to create two similar cohorts for comparison with
Kaplan-Meier analysis. We investigated the association between race,
stage, and survival among women who received guideline recommended care
and those who received incomplete care. Adjusted analyses were conducted
using Cox modeling. Results: Overall, black women with advanced
epithelial ovarian cancer were more likely to die than white women;
unadjusted hazard ratio (HR):1.29 (95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.12-1.48). Black women were more likely than white women to present with
stage 4 disease (40% vs. 32%, p=0.02) and comorbid conditions (55% vs.
36%, p<0.0001). Black women were less likely than white women to receive
guideline recommended care (61% vs. 73%, p=0.0001) and women who received
incomplete care had lower survival than women who received recommended
care, unadjusted HR of 0.27 (95% CI: 0.25-0.29). In multivariable models
including demographic factors, stage of disease, comorbidity, and extent
of surgery, there was no racial difference in mortality among women who
received guideline recommended care, HR for mortality for black women at
1.09 (95% CI: 0.90-1.13) or among women who received incomplete care, HR
for black women at 1.15 (0.89-1.39). The survival analysis of patients
matched by propensity score showed no difference between white and black
women with recommended care (p=0.68) and no racial difference with
incomplete care (p=0.87). Conclusions: Differences in receipt of
guideline recommended care partially explain black-white mortality
disparities among women with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. Patients
who receive incomplete treatment have worse prognosis. Our findings
suggest a need to identify and rectify the cause for disparate treatment
rates.

