Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Has k-Ras predictive influence on the kind of metastasis in
patients with colon carcinoma


Background: The k-Ras-protein shows in regard to its mutations status a
predicitvity of the response after Cetuximab in patients with colon
carcinoma. To our knowledge, not much is known, if k-RAS has also a
predictivity in regard to different ways of metastasis. The goal of our
investigations was the evaluation of k-Ras on primary non-metastatic
colon cancer compared to lymphatic, hepatic and peritoneal metastasis.
Methods: 98 patients with adenocarcinom of the colon and a postoperative
pT2/3-status, who underwent surgical resection between 2006 and 2008 at
the University of Tbingen had been included within the study collective.
53 patients had no metastasis (control group), while 45 patients revealed
primary metastasis: lymphatic metastasis (n=20), hepatic spread (n=20)
and multiple metastasize (n=5). After DNA-extraction, an amplification by
ARMS-PCR was performed and the analysis of the mutation status was done
by melting point analysis by Light-Cycler. Additionally sequencing of
Exons 12 and 13 was performed in individual cases. Results: 29/98 (=30%)
revealed a k-Ras-mutation. Out of these, 12 (=41%) had metastasis: 9
hepatic (=75%), 2 lymphatic (=17%) and 1 (=8%) multiple metastasis.
Patients with k-Ras-mutation (n=29) showed a significant lower rate of
lymphatic metastasis. (90% vs. 10%, p=0.031). The survival in accordance
to the k-Ras mutation was not statistically significant (p=0.415).
Conclusion: Patients with mutated k-Ras-gene in out patient population
revealed no significant higher rate of metastasis (p=0.558), nor in
regard to hepatic (p=0.090) or multiple locations (p=0.629). Our
preliminary data assume, that the k-Ras mutation status has a predictive
function on the rate of lymphatic metastasis in patients suffering from
colon carcinoma (p=0.031). Follow-up-studies are demanded, if single
mutations status might have an additional influence.

