Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IKK links inflammation and tumorigenesis in a mouse model of lung
squamous cell carcinoma


NF-kB plays critical roles in linking inflammation and carcinogenesis.
The activation of NF-kB is regulated by the IkB Kinase Complex (IKK),
composed of IKK, IKK, and NF-B essential modulator (NEMO). We have
established a mouse model of lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) by
inactivating IKK in vivo. However, IKK's attributes relating to linkage
between inflammation and lung SCC have not yet been well-defined. We now
show that inactivation of IKK in mice causes systemic chronic
inflammation, which consequently promotes lung SCC initiation and
progression. In mice with mutated IKK, CD4 T cells, dendritic cells, and
macrophages are all significantly increased in the spleen and lung.
Proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines are also remarkably elevated in
the lungs of these mice. An M2 macrophage phenotype is observed only in
the lungs of old IKK mutant mice, not in younger mice, suggesting the
M1/M2 polarization may be driven by the proinflammatory microenvironment
in these mice. Production of Th2 cytokines and IL-10 are elevated in CD4
T cells from the lungs of mice with mutated IKK, and may contribute to M2
polarization during the chronic inflammation. In addition, depletion of
macrophages in these mice can significantly reduce Th2 cytokine
production, oxidative DNA damage, and shut down SCC development in the
lungs, suggesting their important roles in inflammation-associated lung
carcinogenesis. Together, our data suggest that IKK may play important
roles in linking inflammation and lung SCC tumorigenesis.

