Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the inhibitory capacity of EMD1214063, a novel
small molecule inhibitor of the MET hepatocyte growth factor receptor on
a panel of MET mutated variants


The receptor tyrosine kinase MET is a prime target in clinical oncology
because of its aberrant activation in a broad spectrum of malignancies.
Here, we tested the anti tumor activity of a novel MET inhibitor,
EMD1214063, on cancer cells overexpressing MET and in eight transfected
NIH3T3 cell lines expressing different activating mutants of the MET
kinase. Our results demonstrate a dose-dependent decrease in MET
autophosphorylation in both MET overexpressing cell lines (IC50 of 20nM
and 30nM for GTL-16 and H1993, respectively) and in six of the eight cell
lines transfected with MET activating mutants (IC50 5-18nM). Blockade of
MET by EMD1214063 resulted in reduced downstream activation of AKT, ERK
and PLC. In contrast, lack of MET inhibition by EMD1214063 in the
resistant Y1248H and L1213V MET mutants was associated with high levels
of AKT, ERK and PLC activation. In all sensitive mutants, EMD1214063
attenuated MET-dependent cellular proliferation and significantly altered
cell cycle distribution profiles (increase in G1 and concomitant decrease
of S phase). Furthermore, EMD1214063 strongly affected MET-driven
biological functions, such as cellular morphology, motility and
anchorage-independent growth. To assess the in vivo efficacy of
EMD1214063, we established tumor transplantation models exploiting NIH3T3
cells expressing the H1112L or L1213V MET mutants, respectively sensitive
and resistant, to in vitro treatment with EMD1214063. Animals bearing
H1112L or L1213V tumors were randomized for the treatment with EMD1214063
(50mg/kg/day) or vehicle only. Remarkably, 5 days of treatment with
EMD1214063 induced complete regression of sensitive H1112L tumors, while
tumor growth remained unaffected in mice injected with resistant L1213V
tumor cells and in vehicle-treated mice. Taken together, these results
underscore the concordance between in vitro and in vivo effects of
EMD1214063 and strongly support its efficacy in inhibiting MET-driven
tumor cell growth.

