Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: KPT-SINE (Selective Inhibitors of Nuclear Export) induce apoptosis
in colon cancer cells in-vitro and in-vivo through nuclear localization
of Tumor Suppressor Proteins (TSPs)


Chromosome Region Maintenance 1/Exportin-1 (CRM1) is a key nuclear export
protein whose inhibition leads to the nuclear accumulation of TSPs and
negative regulators of cell proliferation. Through CRM1 inhibition,
nuclear localization of these proteins restores cell cycle checkpoints
and genome surveying functions culminating in apoptosis of tumor cells.
Conversely, CRM1 inhibition of normal cells induces reversible cell cycle
arrest. We are developing novel small molecules, KPT-SINE, which
irreversibly bind and inhibit CRM1 nuclear export killing a broad range
of tumor cell lines and xenografts. We used human colon cancer cells
HCT116 to track the molecular and cellular events that follow KPT-SINE
treatment and ultimately lead to cancer cell death. Methods: Using our
proprietary in silico hierarchical structure-based discovery platform, we
designed and tested novel SINE in a cell-based microscopy assay to
confirm CRM1-mediated nuclear export inhibition. Cytotoxic IC50s of
KPT-SINE were determined on a panel of cancer cell lines. KPT-SINE
KPT-185, -251 and -276 were selected for additional testing based on
their potency and pharmacokinetics. These include; 1. Nuclear
localization of TSPs, 2. Effects on cell cycle and viability, 3. Effects
on TSP mRNA and protein expression. Additionally, we transiently
transfected mutant CRM1-C528S into cells and treated with KPT-SINE to
show binding to Cysteine 528. We tested the effects of KPT-276 in an in
vivo HCT116 xenograft model. Results: KPT-276, a potent inhibitor in the
cell-based microscopy assay (EC50 = 130 nM), was a robust inhibitor of
HCT116 proliferation (IC50 = 400 nM). KPT-SINE inhibition of CRM1 started
within 30 minutes and reached a maximum in 8 hrs. Additionally, KPT-SINE
effects were blocked by transient transfection of CRM1-C528S, confirming
KPT-SINE - Cysteine 528 interaction. Washout experiments demonstrated
that 4 hrs of KPT-SINE incubation sustained 24 hrs of CRM1 inhibition. We
also identified nuclear accumulation of p53, FOXO3a, pRb, APC, IB, p27,
PTEN, and p21, which was followed by cell cycle arrest and cell death.
Although KPT-276 treatment had less effect on cell cycle and cytotoxicity
assays of p53null HCT116 cells, the p53 wildtype and null HCT116 cells
showed similar kill curves after 8 days of treatment. Mouse xenografts
treated with 75 mg/kg QDX5 of KPT-276 each week for 4 weeks inhibited
tumor growth by more than 70%. Further analysis of the tumor molecular
markers from KPT-276 treated animals will be reported. Conclusions: In
this study we described the correlative effects of KPT-SINE from the
accumulation of nuclear TSPs through to cancer cell death in mouse
models. These results suggest that KPT-SINE display potent in vivo
efficacy in the xenograft model of human colon cancer.

