Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD20 as a target for therapy in solid tumors


Using the K14-HPV16 mouse model of squamous carcinogenesis (SCC), we
previously reported that B cells foster neoplastic progression through
deposition of immunoglobulin complexes in premalignant tissue via Fc
receptor-dependent activation of recruited myeloid cells. Here we
evaluated therapeutic interventions targeting these pathways in
preclinical trials through administration of depleting CD20 antibody and
small molecule inhibitor of Syk kinase. Both approaches harbored efficacy
in preventing premalignant progression to the dysplastic/carcinoma in
situ state. Screening a diverse spectrum of human solid tumors revealed
SCCs of the vulva, head and neck, as well as pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDAC) as scoring positively for signatures of B cell or
plasma cell infiltration, i.e. Ig or CD20 mRNA expression, thereby
identifying carcinomas potentially amenable to anti-B cell therapies.
Accordingly, B cell-deficient mice failed to support growth of either
transplantable orthotopic SCC or PDAC. While administration of CD20 mAB
as a single agent was inefficient in impeding growth of preexisting SCCs,
when delivered in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy, e.g.,
paclitaxel, carboplatin or cisplatin, CD20 mAb significantly improved
chemotherapeutic response and improved survival by a mechanism dependent
on CD8+ T cells. These data reveal that blocking protumorigenic programs
regulating by humoral immunity, in combination with chemotherapy,
effectively reprograms the tumor immune microenvironment and improves
outcome. The authors acknowledge generous support from the NIH/NCI
(R01CA130980, R01CA13256, R01CA140943, R01CA15531), the Department of
Defense (W81XWH-09-1-0342, W81XWH-10-BCRP-EOHS-EXP) and the Susan G Komen
Foundation (KG111084)

