Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SAR302503: A Jak2 inhibitor with antitumor activity in solid tumor
models


Numerous studies have recognized the critical role of STAT3 in malignant
transformation and tumor progression. Constitutive STAT3 activation is
frequently found in cancer cell lines and tumor samples and it is usually
linked to the presence of IL-6. Autocrine or paracrine IL-6 loops have
been described to provide tumor cells with the ability to proliferate,
survive, migrate and metastasize. At the molecular level, IL-6 binding to
its receptor results in activation of Jak/STAT3 signaling and other
signaling cascades, namely PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK1-2, with a well established
role in cancer. We have evaluated the ability of SAR302503, a selective
Jak2 inhibitor entering a PhIII clinical trial in myelofibrosis patients,
to block these pathways in a panel of 20 tumor cell lines representing
different cancer types (prostate, breast, lung, colorectal, pancreas,
hepatocellular, etc). A 45 minutes treatment with different
concentrations of SAR302503 (0.1-10 M) was sufficient to block both basal
or IL-6 induced STAT3 phosphorylation in a dose dependent manner.
Compound concentrations equal or greater than 0.1 M were able to reduce
the phosphorylation levels of STAT3 by an extent greater than 50% in all
the cell lines included in the study. The impact of SAR302503 in tumor
cell proliferation and survival was evaluated using different assays
including clonogenic assays. Complete inhibition of colony formation was
achieved at concentrations of SAR302503 below 1 M in most of the cell
lines. The antitumor activity of SAR302503 was evaluated in mice
xenotransplanted subcutaneously with DU145 human prostate cancer cells.
Oral administration of SAR302503 for 10 days resulted in significant dose
dependent tumor growth inhibition, near to stasis at the highest dose
(T/C=19% at 100 mg/kg, bid). In summary, we demonstrate that SAR302503
negatively impacts the proliferation and survival of different solid
tumor cells and our data supports a role for a selective Jak2 inhibition
in treating solid tumors with activated Jak/STAT signaling.

