Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preventive effects of EGCG on diethylnitrosamine-induced liver
tumorigenesis in obese and diabetic C57BL/KsJ-db/db mice


Background and aims: Obesity and related metabolic abnormalities,
including insulin resistance and a state of chronic inflammation,
increase the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Abnormal activation
of the IGF/IGF-1R axis is also involved in obesity-related liver
tumorigenesis. In the present study, we examined the effects of
(-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a major biologically active
component of green tea, on the development of diethylnitrosamine
(DEN)-induced liver tumorigenesis in C57BL/KsJ-db/db (db/db) obese mice.
Methods: Male db/db mice were given tap water containing 40 ppm DEN for 2
weeks and then they received drinking water containing 0.1% EGCG for 34
weeks. Results: At sacrifice, drinking water with EGCG significantly
inhibited the development of liver cell adenomas in comparison to the
control EGCG-untreated group. EGCG inhibited the phosphorylation of the
IGF-1R, ERK, Akt, GSK-3, Stat3, and JNK proteins in the livers of
experimental mice. The serum levels of insulin, IGF-1, IGF-2, free fatty
acid, and TNF- were all decreased by drinking EGCG. EGCG also decreased
the expression of TNF-, IL-6, IL-1, and IL-18 mRNAs in the livers. In
addition, EGCG improved liver steatosis and activated the AMPK protein in
the liver. Conclusion: EGCG prevents obesity-related liver tumorigenesis
by inhibiting the IGF/IGF-1R axis, improving hyperinsulinemia, and
attenuating chronic inflammation. EGCG, therefore, may be useful in the
chemoprevention of liver tumorigenesis in obese individuals.

