Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational inactivation of STAG2 causes aneuploidy in human cancer


One of the hallmarks of cancer is chromosomal instability, which leads to
aneuploidy, translocations, loss of heterozygosity, and other chromosomal
aberrations. Chromosomal instability is an early event in cancer
pathogenesis and is thought to help generate the large number of genetic
lesions required for a cell to undergo malignant transformation. It has
been hypothesized that this instability is due to inactivating mutations
in genes that control the mitotic checkpoint and chromosome segregation.
However, in the vast majority of human tumors the molecular basis of
chromosomal instability and the aneuploidy it produces remains unknown.
We have recently identified a clue to the mechanistic origins of
aneuploidy through integrative genomic analyses of human tumors (Science
333:1039, 2011). A diverse range of tumor types were found to harbor
deletions or inactivating mutations of STAG2, a gene encoding a subunit
of the cohesin complex, which regulates the separation of sister
chromatids during cell division. Because STAG2 is on the X chromosome,
its inactivation requires only a single mutational event. Studying a
near-diploid human cell line with a stable karyotype, we found that
targeted inactivation of STAG2 led to chromatid cohesion defects and
aneuploidy, whereas in two aneuploid human glioblastoma cell lines,
targeted correction of the endogenous mutant alleles of STAG2 led to
enhanced chromosomal stability. Thus, genetic disruption of cohesin is a
cause of aneuploidy in human cancer. These findings and additional
unpublished observations regarding the role of STAG2 inactivation in
aneuploidy will be presented.

