Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGFR and K-Ras mutations and resistance of lung cancers to IGF-1R
TKI


Background: Most patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have
responded poorly to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We investigated the involvement of insulin-like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) signaling in primary resistance to EGFR
TKIs and the molecular determinants of resistance to IGF-1R TKIs.
Methods: Phosphorylated IGF-1R/insulin receptor (pIGF-1R/IR) was
immunohistochemically evaluated in a NSCLC tissue microarray. We analyzed
the antitumor effects of an IGF-1R TKI (PQIP or OSI-906), either alone or
in combination with a small-molecular inhibitor (PD98059 or U0126) or
with siRNA targeting K-Ras or MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
kinase (MEK), in vitro and in vivo in NSCLC cells with variable
histologic features and EGFR or K-Ras mutations. Results: pIGF-1R/IR
expression in NSCLC specimens was associated with a history of tobacco
smoking, squamous cell carcinoma histology, mutant (mut) K-Ras, and
wild-type (wt) EGFR, all of which have been strongly associated with poor
response to EGFR TKIs. IGF-1R TKIs exhibited significant antitumor
activity in NSCLC cells with wt EGFR and wt K-Ras but not in those with
mutations in these genes. Introduction of mut K-Ras attenuated the
effects of IGF-1R TKIs on NSCLC cells expressing wt K-Ras. Conversely,
inactivation of MEK restored sensitivity to IGF-TKIs in cells carrying
mut K-Ras. Conclusions: The mutation status of both EGFR and K-Ras could
be predictive markers of response to IGF-1R TKIs. Also, MEK antagonism
can abrogate primary resistance of NSCLC cells to IGF-1R TKIs.

