Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Three-gene diagnostic classifier for ALK negative ALCL


Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphomas (ALCL) comprise approximately 12% of all
T-cell Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (T-NHL), representing a heterogeneous
group whose definition, origin and relationship with other T-NHL remains
controversial. The notion that ALCL strongly express CD30, and display
recurrent chromosomal translocations involving the Anaplastic Lymphoma
Kinase (ALK) gene, led to recognition of two subsets, according to ALK
expression. Although ALK positive ALCL can be readily diagnosed, ALK
negative ALCL still lack unique genetic features and their distinction
from other CD30 positive Peripheral T-Cell Lymphomas (PTCL) is not
trivial. To unravel the regulatory network underlying lymphomagenesis of
ALCL, and to discover new genomic classifiers for the recognition of
ALK-positive and ALK-negative ALCL patients, we undertook a systematic
approach of pathway discovery through a gene expression profiling
meta-analysis of 309 cases, using data generated by five sets of
experiments. In agreement with previous studies, unsupervised analyses
were not able to distinguish ALCL from the other T-NHL categories.
However, pathway discovery and prediction analyses defined a minimum set
of genes useful for the stratification of ALK negative ALCL and
strengthened the hypothesis that ALCL correspond to a distinctive
pathological subgroup within T-NHL. Application of RT-qPCR in independent
data sets of cryo-preserved and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples
confirmed the gene expression profiling predictions and validated a
simple model based on the measurement of three genes. These data suggest
the possibility to translate RT-qPCR protocols to routine clinical
settings as a new approach to precisely define T-NHL and to select more
appropriate therapeutic protocols.

