Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-utero, but not pubertal, soy exposure suppresses
estrogen-regulated gene expression in non-human primate breast


Background: Cynomolgus macaques (nonhuman primates, NHP) are highly
similar to humans in their genetics, reproductive physiology, and
anatomy. More importantly, they undergo a similar mammary gland
development process and develop spontaneous breast cancers.
Epidemiological studies of humans show that high soy intake is associated
with lower breast cancer risk. Since nutrition and/or environmental
exposure during youth are critical factors to disease risk in adulthood,
timing of intervention may determine soy protective effect to breast
cancer. Studies in NHP allow interrogation of developmental effects on
the primate breast to a degree not possible in human subjects. We report
here novel in-utero developmental effects of soy isoflavones (IF) on the
NHP breast. Method: Soy IF were detected in amniotic fluid (255.5 + 93.3
nM) and milk (266.3 nM), which confirmed that soy exposure occurred
in-utero and via nursing. We assessed the effects of in-utero and
pre-pubertal soy exposure on the breast of NHP during puberty with a
focus on changes related to estrogen exposure. We utilized mammary
tissues from animals that were exposed to soy beginning in-utero (n=5 for
soy and casein/control groups) or before puberty (n=12-17 for soy and
casein groups). Animals were fed a diet modeled on a typical North
American diet (35% calories from fat) with soy dose approximated at
120-180 mg IF/person/day. We assessed nipple length, mammary gland
morphology, markers of mammary gland differentiation, proliferation, and
estrogen receptor activity, and concentrations of serum estradiol and
progesterone. Results: Regardless of dietary treatment, gene expression
of estrogen-responsive markers in the breast was highest during
pre-puberty and decreased across the pubertal transition (PBackground:
Cynomolgus macaques (nonhuman primates, NHP) are highly similar to humans
in their genetics, reproductive physiology, and anatomy. More
importantly, they undergo a similar mammary gland development process and
develop spontaneous breast cancers. Epidemiological studies of humans
show that high soy intake is associated with lower breast cancer risk.
Since nutrition and/or environmental exposure during youth are critical
factors to disease risk in adulthood, timing of intervention may
determine soy protective effect to breast cancer. Studies in NHP allow
interrogation of developmental effects on the primate breast to a degree
not possible in human subjects. We report here novel in-utero
developmental effects of soy isoflavones (IF) on the NHP breast. Method:
Soy IF were detected in amniotic fluid (255.5 + 93.3 nM) and milk (266.3
nM), which confirmed that soy exposure occurred in-utero and via nursing.
We assessed the effects of in-utero and pre-pubertal soy exposure on the
breast of NHP during puberty with a focus on changes related to estrogen
exposure. We utilized mammary tissues from animals that were exposed to
soy beginning in-utero (n=5 for soy and casein/control groups) or before
puberty (n=12-17 for soy and casein groups). Animals were fed a diet
modeled on a typical North American diet (35% calories from fat) with soy
dose approximated at 120-180 mg IF/person/day. We assessed nipple length,
mammary gland morphology, markers of mammary gland differentiation,
proliferation, and estrogen receptor activity, and concentrations of
serum estradiol and progesterone. Results: Regardless of dietary
treatment, gene expression of estrogen-responsive markers in the breast
was highest during pre-puberty and decreased across the pubertal
transition (P<0.0001 for time effect on ESR1, PGR, GREB1, and TFF1). This
pattern coincided with a decrease of terminal end bud structures and an
increase of lobular differentiation and glandular area. Although an
effect of dietary soy was not observed in pre-pubertally exposed animals,
in-utero exposed animals showed lower expression of TFF1 (0.03-fold;
PBackground: Cynomolgus macaques (nonhuman primates, NHP) are highly
similar to humans in their genetics, reproductive physiology, and
anatomy. More importantly, they undergo a similar mammary gland
development process and develop spontaneous breast cancers.
Epidemiological studies of humans show that high soy intake is associated
with lower breast cancer risk. Since nutrition and/or environmental
exposure during youth are critical factors to disease risk in adulthood,
timing of intervention may determine soy protective effect to breast
cancer. Studies in NHP allow interrogation of developmental effects on
the primate breast to a degree not possible in human subjects. We report
here novel in-utero developmental effects of soy isoflavones (IF) on the
NHP breast. Method: Soy IF were detected in amniotic fluid (255.5 + 93.3
nM) and milk (266.3 nM), which confirmed that soy exposure occurred
in-utero and via nursing. We assessed the effects of in-utero and
pre-pubertal soy exposure on the breast of NHP during puberty with a
focus on changes related to estrogen exposure. We utilized mammary
tissues from animals that were exposed to soy beginning in-utero (n=5 for
soy and casein/control groups) or before puberty (n=12-17 for soy and
casein groups). Animals were fed a diet modeled on a typical North
American diet (35% calories from fat) with soy dose approximated at
120-180 mg IF/person/day. We assessed nipple length, mammary gland
morphology, markers of mammary gland differentiation, proliferation, and
estrogen receptor activity, and concentrations of serum estradiol and
progesterone. Results: Regardless of dietary treatment, gene expression
of estrogen-responsive markers in the breast was highest during
pre-puberty and decreased across the pubertal transition (P<0.0001 for
time effect on ESR1, PGR, GREB1, and TFF1). This pattern coincided with a
decrease of terminal end bud structures and an increase of lobular
differentiation and glandular area. Although an effect of dietary soy was
not observed in pre-pubertally exposed animals, in-utero exposed animals
showed lower expression of TFF1 (0.03-fold; P<0.05), a classic marker of
estrogen receptor alpha (ER) activity. Serum estradiol level was not
different with dietary treatment, nor did IF alter mRNA expression of
estrogen-metabolizing enzymes in the breast. Conclusions and Future
Directions: Our data suggest that timing of exposure may influence the
effects of dietary soy on the breast; in-utero soy exposure resulted in
modestly lower expression of a gene marker of ER activity, while
pre-pubertal exposure had negligible effects on mammary gland outcomes. A
follow-up study is currently underway to further examine potential
effects of in-utero soy exposure on estrogen responsiveness and pubertal
development, and whether epigenetic modulation is the underlying
mechanism behind the differential expression of estrogen-related genes.

