Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Different expression of AHCYL1 affecting ovarian carcinogenesis
between chickens and women


S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase-like protein 1 (AHCYL1) is the
evolutionarily conserved and ubiquitously expressed enzyme that catalyzes
the reversible hydrolysis of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine, a byproduct of
the S-adenosyl-L-homomethionine-dependent methyltransferase reaction,
into adenosine and homocysteine. It acts like an inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R)-binding protein (termed IP3R-binding
protein released with inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, or IRBIT) by
competitively inhibiting the interaction of IP3 with IP3R. As a result,
AHCYL1 regulates IP3-induced Ca2+ signaling which plays crucial roles in
numerous cellular processes including gene expression and cell death.
However, it is still poorly understood about the expression of AHCYL1
affecting clinical outcomes in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). In the
current study, we identified AHCYL1 affecting ovarian carcinogenesis in
chickens, the most relevant model, and investigated its prognostic value
in patients with EOC. In 136 chickens, ovarian cancer was detected in 10
(7.4%). We compared the expression and localization of AHCYL1 mRNA and
protein between normal and cancerous ovaries of chickens using reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry, and AHCYL1 activation was detected in chicken and
human ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3 and PA-1) using
immunofluorescence microscopy. Thereafter, we examined the prognostic
value of AHCYL1 expression in patients with EOC by multivariate linear
logistic regression and Cox proportional hazard. As a result, AHCYL1 mRNA
was induced in cancerous, but not normal ovaries of chickens
(pS-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase-like protein 1 (AHCYL1) is the
evolutionarily conserved and ubiquitously expressed enzyme that catalyzes
the reversible hydrolysis of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine, a byproduct of
the S-adenosyl-L-homomethionine-dependent methyltransferase reaction,
into adenosine and homocysteine. It acts like an inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R)-binding protein (termed IP3R-binding
protein released with inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, or IRBIT) by
competitively inhibiting the interaction of IP3 with IP3R. As a result,
AHCYL1 regulates IP3-induced Ca2+ signaling which plays crucial roles in
numerous cellular processes including gene expression and cell death.
However, it is still poorly understood about the expression of AHCYL1
affecting clinical outcomes in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). In the
current study, we identified AHCYL1 affecting ovarian carcinogenesis in
chickens, the most relevant model, and investigated its prognostic value
in patients with EOC. In 136 chickens, ovarian cancer was detected in 10
(7.4%). We compared the expression and localization of AHCYL1 mRNA and
protein between normal and cancerous ovaries of chickens using reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry, and AHCYL1 activation was detected in chicken and
human ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3 and PA-1) using
immunofluorescence microscopy. Thereafter, we examined the prognostic
value of AHCYL1 expression in patients with EOC by multivariate linear
logistic regression and Cox proportional hazard. As a result, AHCYL1 mRNA
was induced in cancerous, but not normal ovaries of chickens (p<0.01),
and it was abundant only in the glandular epithelium of cancerous ovaries
of chickens. AHCYL1 protein was localized predominantly to the nucleus of
glandular epithelium in cancerous ovaries of chickens, and it was
abundant in the nucleus of both chicken and human ovarian cancer cell
lines. In 109 human patients with EOC, 14 (12.8%), 41 (37.6%) and 54
(49.6%) patients showed weak, moderate and strong expression of AHCYL1
protein, respectively. However, intermediate or high expression of AHCYL1
protein was a favorable factor for overall response (adjusted OR, 7.23;
95% CI, 1.36-38.39), and for progression-free survival (PFS; adjusted HR,
0.20; 95% CI, 0.07-0.55). Conclusively, AHCYL1 may be associated with
ovarian carcinogenesis in both chickens and human. In contrast to AHCYL1
expression associated with ovarian carcinogenesis in chickens, it is
expected to play a role as tumor suppressor gene in human EOC because a
higher expression of AHYCL1 was related with better OR and PFS. Finally,
the functional role of AHCYL1 showing different expression in ovarian
carcinogenesis between chickens and women should be further investigated
by more relevant studies.

