Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunosuppressive T regs and MDSCs in human melanoma


Despite the ability to elicit active immune responses, most
immunotherapies fail to eliminate tumors in human cancer patients. One
reason immunotherapy has not met expectations may be due to
immunosuppression in the local environment of the tumor. We have
previously reported that untreated advanced-stage melanoma patients have
increased numbers of peripheral T regs. In addition, exposure to melanoma
cells in vitro expands T regs from normal human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). We have shown that melanoma-conditioned media
have increased levels of TGF-beta, which may be responsible for the
expansion of these suppressive cells in culture. Here we show that the
number of peripheral T regs directly correlates with the amount of
TGF-beta in the plasma of late-stage melanoma patients. We also show that
melanoma patients have increased numbers of other suppressive cells,
known as myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). These MDSCs may
further contribute to immunosuppression in advanced-stage melanoma
patients. Finally, we show that the tumor-induced T regs and the T regs
and MDSCs from the peripheral blood of melanoma patients suppress T cell
responses in vitro, including proliferation, cytokine production, and
cytotoxic activity. We are currently investigating whether MDSCs from
melanoma patients contribute to the accumulation of T regs and whether
immunotherapies used in the treatment of advanced-stage melanoma
patients, particularly IL-2 and ipilimumab, affect their frequency or
function. An understanding of the potential interaction between melanoma,
MDSCs, and regulatory T cells will further our goal in identifying ways
of blocking the function of these suppressive cells in melanoma patients
to improve the effectiveness of future therapies.

