Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of TGF- in tumor-draining lymph nodes can enhance the
potency of dendritic cell-based vaccine immunotherapy


Transforming growth factor- (TGF-), an immunosuppressive cytokine,
produced in the tumor microenvironment will flow into tumor-draining
lymph nodes where are primary priming sites for generation of anti-tumor
immune responses, and play a critical role in suppressing anti-tumor
immune responses. We focused on TGF--mediated immunosuppression in tumor
draining lymph nodes, and examined whether local inhibition of TGF- there
could enhance the potency of dendritic cell (DC) -based vaccine
immunotherapy in tumor-bearing mice. C57BL/6 mice bearing Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC1) subcutaneously were vaccinated with DCs loaded with
LLC1-derived antigen. In order to inhibit TGF- in tumor-draining lymph
nodes, those mice were administered the plasmid DNA encoding the
extracellular domain of TGF- type II receptor fused to the human IgG
heavy chain (TGFR DNA) near the established tumor intramuscularly. As
results, the level of TGF- in tumor-draining lymph nodes was decreased by
administrations of TGFR DNA near the established tumor. In tumor-draining
lymph nodes, the proliferative activity of FoxP3+ regulatory T cells was
eliminated, whereas tumor antigen-specific CD8+ cells producing
interferon- were increased as compared with those in mice administered DC
vaccine alone. In spleen, tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic as well as
natural killer activity were augmented in mice administered DC vaccine
with TGFR DNA. Subsequently, growth of the established tumor was
suppressed effectively. In conclusion, inhibition of TGF--mediated
immunosuppression in tumor-draining lymph nodes can significantly enhance
the potency of DC vaccine. This animal model provides for a novel
rationale with DC vaccine immunotherapy.

