Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediagnostic cytokine levels and the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in a nested case-control study: The Multiethnic Cohort


Objective: Since immune dysfunction is thought to be the underlying basis
for the development of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL), obesity and a state of
chronic inflammation may increase the risk of the disease. The objective
of this analysis was to examine the association of prediagnostic
inflammatory marker and adipokine levels in serum with NHL risk. Methods:
We conducted a nested case-control analysis (272 cases and 578 controls)
within the Multiethnic Cohort Study, which consists of Caucasians,
Japanese Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Hawaiians in
California and Hawaii. Each case was matched to 2 controls by sex, year
of birth, ethnicity, location (HI or CA), date and time of blood draw,
and fasting hours before blood draw. A 10-plex panel of cytokines (TNF-,
IFN-, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10) was measured
in prediagnostic blood samples by Luminex multiplex technology. ELISA
assays were used for the adipokines, and CRP was assessed using a Cobas
MiraPlus clinical chemistry analyzer. Tertiles of analytes were created
and conditional logistic regression was applied to estimate the odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI), with adjustment for age at
blood draw, alcohol, smoking status, and body mass index (BMI). Results:
The mean ages at blood draw were 70.07.4 and 70.37.6 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The mean time from blood draw to diagnosis was
3.12.3 years with NHL cases comprised of the following lymphoma: 82
diffuse large B-cell, 51 small cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49
follicular, 15 T-cell, and 75 others. Of all cytokines, IL-10, IL-6, and
IL-8 were positively associated with risk for NHL. The respective
BMI-adjusted ORsT3v vs T1 were 3.1 (95%CI: 2.0-4.7; ptrend Objective:
Since immune dysfunction is thought to be the underlying basis for the
development of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL), obesity and a state of chronic
inflammation may increase the risk of the disease. The objective of this
analysis was to examine the association of prediagnostic inflammatory
marker and adipokine levels in serum with NHL risk. Methods: We conducted
a nested case-control analysis (272 cases and 578 controls) within the
Multiethnic Cohort Study, which consists of Caucasians, Japanese
Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Hawaiians in California
and Hawaii. Each case was matched to 2 controls by sex, year of birth,
ethnicity, location (HI or CA), date and time of blood draw, and fasting
hours before blood draw. A 10-plex panel of cytokines (TNF-, IFN-,
GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10) was measured in
prediagnostic blood samples by Luminex multiplex technology. ELISA assays
were used for the adipokines, and CRP was assessed using a Cobas MiraPlus
clinical chemistry analyzer. Tertiles of analytes were created and
conditional logistic regression was applied to estimate the odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI), with adjustment for age at blood
draw, alcohol, smoking status, and body mass index (BMI). Results: The
mean ages at blood draw were 70.07.4 and 70.37.6 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The mean time from blood draw to diagnosis was
3.12.3 years with NHL cases comprised of the following lymphoma: 82
diffuse large B-cell, 51 small cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49
follicular, 15 T-cell, and 75 others. Of all cytokines, IL-10, IL-6, and
IL-8 were positively associated with risk for NHL. The respective
BMI-adjusted ORsT3v vs T1 were 3.1 (95%CI: 2.0-4.7; ptrend <0.0001), 1.3
(95%CI: 0.9-1.9; ptrend=0.09), and 1.5 (95%CI: 1.0-2.2; ptrend=0.11). No
significant associations were observed for TNF-, IFN-, GM-CSF, IL-1,
IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and CRP. Leptin levels were inversely associated with
NHL risk, with a stronger association after adjustment for BMI (ORT3v vs
T1 = 0.3, 95%CI: 0.2-0.5; ptrendObjective: Since immune dysfunction is
thought to be the underlying basis for the development of Non-Hodgkin
Lymphoma (NHL), obesity and a state of chronic inflammation may increase
the risk of the disease. The objective of this analysis was to examine
the association of prediagnostic inflammatory marker and adipokine levels
in serum with NHL risk. Methods: We conducted a nested case-control
analysis (272 cases and 578 controls) within the Multiethnic Cohort
Study, which consists of Caucasians, Japanese Americans, Latinos, African
Americans, and Native Hawaiians in California and Hawaii. Each case was
matched to 2 controls by sex, year of birth, ethnicity, location (HI or
CA), date and time of blood draw, and fasting hours before blood draw. A
10-plex panel of cytokines (TNF-, IFN-, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5,
IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10) was measured in prediagnostic blood samples by
Luminex multiplex technology. ELISA assays were used for the adipokines,
and CRP was assessed using a Cobas MiraPlus clinical chemistry analyzer.
Tertiles of analytes were created and conditional logistic regression was
applied to estimate the odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals
(CI), with adjustment for age at blood draw, alcohol, smoking status, and
body mass index (BMI). Results: The mean ages at blood draw were 70.07.4
and 70.37.6 years for cases and controls, respectively. The mean time
from blood draw to diagnosis was 3.12.3 years with NHL cases comprised of
the following lymphoma: 82 diffuse large B-cell, 51 small cell/chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, 49 follicular, 15 T-cell, and 75 others. Of all
cytokines, IL-10, IL-6, and IL-8 were positively associated with risk for
NHL. The respective BMI-adjusted ORsT3v vs T1 were 3.1 (95%CI: 2.0-4.7;
ptrend <0.0001), 1.3 (95%CI: 0.9-1.9; ptrend=0.09), and 1.5 (95%CI:
1.0-2.2; ptrend=0.11). No significant associations were observed for
TNF-, IFN-, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and CRP. Leptin levels were
inversely associated with NHL risk, with a stronger association after
adjustment for BMI (ORT3v vs T1 = 0.3, 95%CI: 0.2-0.5; ptrend<0.001), but
adiponectin was not related to risk. The lower risk associated with
higher leptin levels was present in normal and in overweight/obese
individuals. We did not observe any heterogeneity by sex or ethnicity for
cytokines and adipokines. Conclusions: Contrary to expectation, higher
IL-10 levels were associated with a higher NHL risk, and higher leptin
levels were related to a lower NHL risk, even after adjustment for BMI.
The limited sample size and the relatively short time between blood draw
and diagnosis may have contributed to these findings.

