Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a new DNA aptamer against primary cultured tumor
endothelial cells by a cell-based SELEX method to discover a new drug
delivery system


The purpose of the present study was to develop DNA aptamers through a
spontaneous cell-based SELEX method (systemic evolution of ligands by
exponential enrichment) that specifically binding to cell surface
proteins or biomarkers produced by primary cultured tumor endothelial
cells (TECs). In solid tumors, new blood vessels are formed through an
angiogenesis process, and this plays a critical role in cancer
development as well as the development of metastasis. To combat
angiogenesis, an appropriate diagnosis and understanding at the molecular
level of different cancer types is now a high priority. Our initial study
explored the use of the cell-based SELEX method, which has been applied
in TECs to generate high affinity DNA aptamers. Our selected DNA aptamer
AraHH001 bound specifically and with a high affinity to TECs in the
nanomolar range but did not bind to normal skin endothelial cells
(skin-ECs) and tumor parenchymal OSRC-II cells. The selected DNA aptamers
also bounded to primary cultured human tumor endothelial cells (hTECs)
isolated from a clinical patient with a renal carcinoma. Therefore, the
development of specific DNA aptamers that bind to TECs is reported here
for the first time. We conclude that such new DNA aptamers promise to
hold great promise as targeted molecular probes that appear to play a
major role in angiogenesis, drug delivery, identification of biomarker as
well as in cancer therapy.

