Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The integrin-linked kinase (ILK) / Rictor complex is required for
TGF-1-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)


Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) causes fibrosis, cancer
progression and metastasis. Integrin-linked kinase is a focal adhesion
adaptor and serine/threonine protein kinase that regulates cell
proliferation, survival, and EMT. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms
necessary for the development and progression of human malignancies is
critical to predict the most appropriate targets for cancer therapy. Here
we used transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-1) to promote EMT and
migration in mammary epithelial cells. We demonstrate a requirement of
ILK activity for TGF-1 mediated EMT in mammary epithelial cells. In
addition to nuclear translocation of Snail and Slug, TGF-1 treatment also
induced expression of the mTORC2 component Rictor as well as its
phosphorylation on Thr1135. Interestingly, TGF-1 treatment also induced
an interaction between ILK and Rictor. All of these TGF-1-induced
processes were significantly suppressed by inhibiting ILK activity or by
disrupting the ILK-Rictor complex using siRNA-mediated knockdown.
Furthermore, we identified formation of the ILK/Rictor complex formation
in cancer but not normal cell types, and this was accompanied by
ILK-dependent phosphorylation of Rictor on residue Thr1135. Inhibition of
ILK partially reversed the basal mesenchymal phenotype of MDA-MB-231
cells and prevented EMT in MCF10A cells following TGF-1 treatment. These
data demonstrate a requirement for ILK function in TGF-1-induced EMT in
mammary epithelial cells and identify the ILK/Rictor complex as a
potential molecular target for preventing/reversing EMT.

