Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acidic pericellular pH increases contribution of cathepsin B to
invasiveness of a human breast carcinoma cell line


Among the non-cellular microenvironmental factors that may contribute to
malignancy of solid tumors is an acidic peritumoral pH (pHe). We have
shown that this induces secretion of the lysosomal cysteine protease,
cathepsin B. The object of the present study was to further examine the
effect of a slightly acidic pericellular pH (i.e., pHe 6.8) on
degradation of collagen IV and the activity and secretion of proteolytic
enzymes, in particular cathepsin B. For these studies, we used: 1) a
highly malignant human breast carcinoma line, MDA-MB-231-RFP; 2) a 3D
reconstituted basement membrane overlay culture model; 3) a live cell
confocal microscopy assay for imaging proteolysis and detecting active
cathepsin B via an activity based probe, GB123; 4) a protocol for
quantification of proteolysis on a per cell basis; 5) and fluorometric
real-time and plate-reader assays for measuring cathepsin B activity. The
live cell proteolysis assay confirmed that degradation of collagen IV by
the MDA-MB-231 cells was consistently higher at a slightly acidic pHe and
was decreased by a highly selective cathepsin B inhibitor, CA074. A
dramatic increase in cathepsin B secretion from MDA-MB-231 cells was
observed upon exposure to an acidic pHe, as assessed by assays of
conditioned media and analysis of secretion in real-time. Our results are
consistent with the hypothesis by Gillies and colleagues of acid-mediated
invasion in tumors and suggest a role for cathepsin B in promoting
degradation of collagen IV and thereby tumor invasiveness in the acidic
peritumoral microenvironment.

