Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Switch between Apoptosis and Autophagy induced by 4-HPR-driven
ROS: The role of DJ-1 and it's different oxidative modifications


Aims: Due to the still-unclear molecule mechanism of ROS in tumor
inhibition including apoptosis and autophagy, we chose the classical
ROS-mediated tumor suppressor 4-HPR as the molecule probe, to discover
the role of DJ-1 and its different oxidative modifications in the switch
between apoptosis and autophagy. Methods: 1) Hela cells were treated with
chosen dose 4-HPR; Flow cytometry analysis was performed to detect cell
apoptosis and autophagy; 2) Flow cytometry analysis and GSSG Assay Kit
was performed to detect ROS and GSH level; 3) Misfold-proteins level were
tested by Highly selective fluorescent turn-on probe 1 and Ellman's
reagent; 4) The expressions of ERS downstream proteins were shown by
Western blot; 5) si RNA and inhibitors were used to knock out JNK and p38
and confirm the effect of the two different proteins on the switch; 6)
siRNA and DJ-1 stabilizer were used to test the function of ASK1 and DJ-1
in inducing apoptosis; 7) Immune precipitation and Immunofluorescence
were used to test the interaction of ASK1, DJ-1, Ire1 and TRAF2 after
4-HPR treatment; 8) IEF was performed to detect the potential change
after different drug concentrations treatment. Results: 1) Results showed
a accumulation of LC3-II in a dose-dependent Manner; while only under 20M
4-HPR treatment induces the activation of PARP; 2) GSH decrement was
associated with ROS increase, however, amplitude of decrements under 10
or 20 M 4-HPR shows no significant distinction compared with the change
of ROS level; 3) Probe 1 and Ellman assay shows the lose of free
sulfhydryl; 4) Western blot results showed parts of the ERS downstream
proteins had considerable up-regulated; Indicate the activation of ERS;
5) Inhibition of p38 and p38 RNAi inhibits apoptosis, and inhibition of
JNK or JNK RNAi inhibits autophagy, while induce apoptosis under low
concentration; 6) ASK1 RNAi down regulation the expression both of p-JNK
and p-p38, while silence DJ-1 make the occurrence of apoptosis under low
concentration of 4-HPR and compound-23 inhibit the apoptosis induced by
4-HPR; 7) Immune precipitation and Immunofluorescence showed that under
10M 4-HPR treatment the interaction of ASK1 and Ire1 or DJ-1 were
increased; while 10M and 20M 4-HPR treatment make the increase of the
ubiquitination levels of TRAF2; 8)The result of IEF verification the
different oxidative modifications of DJ-1 under different drug
concentrations.Conclusions: Data demonstrated that 4-HPR contribute to
the ROS induced unfold protein accumulation, activate ERS mediated
several pathways. Ire1 recruitments ASK1 and TRAF2, induce autophagy by
keeping on activating JNK; In low concentration of 4-HPR, activated DJ-1
competitive binding to ASK1 with Ire1, partially devitalized it; and
releasing ASK1 under high concentration due to its deactivation, then
ASK1 activate p38 pathway and induce apoptosis.

