Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rhodiola rosea L. extract, SHR-5, and metformin exhibit potent
activity against bladder carcinogenesis in the UPII-mutant Ha-ras
transgenic model.


The incidence of human urinary bladder cancer increases markedly with
age, suggesting a mechanistic connection between aging and bladder
carcinogenesis and a potential use of anti-aging agents in bladder cancer
chemoprevention. Rhodiola rosea, growing in high altitude or cold regions
of the world, has been reported to have anti-aging effects in Drosophila.
Metformin, a popular anti-diabetics drug, has also shown anti-aging
effect in mice. In addition, both agents have been shown to inhibit the
mTOR pathway. Therefore, we examined the effect of SHR-5 and Metformin on
bladder carcinogenesis in the UPII-mutant Ha-ras transgenic mouse bladder
model. This model mimics human papillary transitional cell carcinoma and
exhibits enhanced mTOR activity in the bladder tumors. The homozygous
mutant Ha-ras transgenic mice were identified through genotyping using
Southern blotting analysis. 0.625% SHR-5 or 0.1% Metformin in drinking
water was given to the mice starting at 6 weeks of age and ending at 6
months of age. About 42% of homozygous mutant Ha-ras male transgenic mice
which drank normal water died of urinary tract obstruction and
hydronephrosis within 6 months of age, while more than 93% and 89% of
mice which drank SHR-5 or Metformin containing water survived. The mean
bladder weights in male mice drinking SHR-5 or Metformin decreased by 69%
and 62%, respectively, compared to control group (Bladder weights for
mice drinking normal water versus SHR-5 or Metformin are 0.3382
0.061versus 0.1278 0.02 or 0.10530.015 gram, P=0.0197 or 0.0082). The
mean bladder weights in female mice which drank SHR-5 or Metformin
containing water also decreased by about 40% or 39.8 %, respectively,
compared to those which drank normal water (Bladder weights for normal
water versus SHR-5 or Metformin: 0.07149 0.0036 versus 0.04301 0.0032 or
0.042950.0115 gram, PThe incidence of human urinary bladder cancer
increases markedly with age, suggesting a mechanistic connection between
aging and bladder carcinogenesis and a potential use of anti-aging agents
in bladder cancer chemoprevention. Rhodiola rosea, growing in high
altitude or cold regions of the world, has been reported to have
anti-aging effects in Drosophila. Metformin, a popular anti-diabetics
drug, has also shown anti-aging effect in mice. In addition, both agents
have been shown to inhibit the mTOR pathway. Therefore, we examined the
effect of SHR-5 and Metformin on bladder carcinogenesis in the
UPII-mutant Ha-ras transgenic mouse bladder model. This model mimics
human papillary transitional cell carcinoma and exhibits enhanced mTOR
activity in the bladder tumors. The homozygous mutant Ha-ras transgenic
mice were identified through genotyping using Southern blotting analysis.
0.625% SHR-5 or 0.1% Metformin in drinking water was given to the mice
starting at 6 weeks of age and ending at 6 months of age. About 42% of
homozygous mutant Ha-ras male transgenic mice which drank normal water
died of urinary tract obstruction and hydronephrosis within 6 months of
age, while more than 93% and 89% of mice which drank SHR-5 or Metformin
containing water survived. The mean bladder weights in male mice drinking
SHR-5 or Metformin decreased by 69% and 62%, respectively, compared to
control group (Bladder weights for mice drinking normal water versus
SHR-5 or Metformin are 0.3382 0.061versus 0.1278 0.02 or 0.10530.015
gram, P=0.0197 or 0.0082). The mean bladder weights in female mice which
drank SHR-5 or Metformin containing water also decreased by about 40% or
39.8 %, respectively, compared to those which drank normal water (Bladder
weights for normal water versus SHR-5 or Metformin: 0.07149 0.0036 versus
0.04301 0.0032 or 0.042950.0115 gram, P<0.0001 or =0.0007). Chemstrip
tests showed that mice which drank SHR-5 or metformin water developed
less hematurine than those which drank normal water. Histological
analysis of H&E staining bladder sections from SHR-5 and Metformin
treated mice demonstrated more differentiated tumors compared to those
from the transgenic mice which drank normal water. Immunohistochemistry
staining revealed that SHR-5 and Metformin treatments decreased cell
proliferation in the urothelium. Taken together, our results suggest a
potential new method for bladder cancer prevention by drinking SHR-5 or
Metformin.

