Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model of double heterozygosity for protein kinase A
regulatory subunits promotes osteoblastic differentiation of cAMP-induced
bone tumors


Background: Carney Complex (CNC) is a multiple neoplasia syndrome
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and causing various endocrine
and bone tumors. The PRKAR1A gene coding for the regulatory subunit type
1A of protein kinase A (PKA) is mutated in CNC patients, but
tumorogenesis mechanisms are not well understood. Regulatory subunits
suppress activity of catalytic subunits of PKA responsible for cAMP
signaling and cell differentiation and maturation. Mice with a deleted
prkar1a allele develop a variety of tumors overlapping those of CNC
patients. Deletion of a catalytic subunit allele prkaca+/ on the
prkar1a+/ background unexpectedly increased the numer and aggressiveness
of bone tumors without development of schwannomas or thyroid lesions.
Cells from prkar1a+/prkaca+/ tumors have more type II PKA complexes,
indicating that unbalanced expression of type II and type I regulatory
subunits may also dysregulates PKA catalytic activity, potentially
increasing tumorigenesis. Methods: To explore this hypothesis, single
mice with single alleles of prkar1a, prkar2a and prkar2b were crossed to
generate heterozygous mice for double heterozygotes prkar1a+//prkar2a+/
or prkar1a+//prkar2b+/ and double knockouts. The resulting mice of
3,6,9,12,18 month age were phenotyped and compared to prkar1a+/. Tumor
specimens were examined by histology, polarized microscopy and confocal
Raman micro-spectroscopy. Results: Mice with both alleles prkar1a+/+ did
not develop any tumors. Double heterozygotes developed bone tumors whose
onset age was delayed to 9 months in prkar1a+//prkar2b+/ mice compared to
3-6 months in the others. However, the mean number of tumors per animal
became similar for prkar1a+/ and double heterozygotes by 12 months.
Histology of the bone tumors showed abnormal proliferation of a
fibroblastoid-like cell with better osteogenic differentiation in the
lesions from double heterozygous mice. Polarized microscopy and Raman
micro-spectroscopy revealed that bone material growing in tumors was
immature and poorly organized in prkar1a+/ mice (disorganized collagen
and osteocytes and undermineralized matrix). Prkar2+/ deletion on the
prkar1+/ background rescued local organization and mineralization but
worsened global organization of cortical tumor bone. The
prkar1a+//prkar2b+/ deletion rescued both global and local organization
and mineralization, resulting in formation of mature bone. Conclusion:
Prkar1a haploinsufficiency requires both prkar2a and prkar2b for
tumorigenesis in most tissues except bone. In bone, however, prkar1a is
the major tumor-suppressor gene. Unexpectedly, Prkar2b or prkar2a
deficiencies in addition to prkar1a lead to better differentiation of
bone tumors, indicating a compensating role for the type II regulatory
subunits in bone tumirogenesis.

