Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significant systemic therapeutic effects of high-LET
immunoradiation by 212Pb-Trastuzumab against prostatic tumors of
androgen-independent human prostate cancer in mice


Purpose The purpose of this study was to determine therapeutic effects
and systemic toxicity of 212Pb-Trastuzumab in an orthotopic model of
human prostate cancer cells in nude mice. Experimental Design
TCMC-Trastuzumab was radiolabeled with 212Pb. The activity and integrity
of 212Pb-Trastuzumab was confirmed by a competitive binding assay and
SDS-PAGE analysis. Therapeutic effects were determined in an orthotopic
model of human prostate cancer in nude mice. Body weight, blood cell
counts, serum alanine transaminase (ALT), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and
tissue histology were examined to evaluate systemic toxicity of
212Pb-Trastuzumab therapy. Results The 212Pb-Trastuzumab generated from
the procedure was intact and had high binding affinity with a
dissociation constant (Kd) of 3.9 0.99 nM. PC-3MM2 cells, which expressed
relatively a lower level of Her2 both in culture and in tumors, were used
in the study. A single injection of 212Pb-Trastuzumab reduced tumor
growth by 60-80%, reduced aortic lymph node metastasis, and prolonged the
survival of tumor-bearing mice. Treatment with 212Pb-Trastuzumab did not
cause significant changes in body weight, serum SGPT and BUN,
hematological profiles, and histological morphology of several major
organs of tumor-bearing mice. Conclusion The data presented in this
report demonstrated that the 212Pb-Trastuzumab therapy did not cause
significant systemic toxicity and was very effective in retarding tumor
growth and prolonging survival of mice bearing tumors that express very
low levels of Her2. These findings suggest that 212Pb-Trastuzumab, used
alone or in combination with other means, could be an effective modality
for management of advanced human prostate cancer.

