Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development of SCLC specific nanoparticle-mediated p53 gene
therapy


Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly malignant and aggressive type
of lung cancer with widespread metastases and poor prognosis. SCLC is
characterized by chemoresistance and radioresistance with an average
survival period of 40%; comparable to commercially available transfection
reagents. We initiated efficacy assays by validating whether H446 cells
possess mutant p53 and are a suitable target for p53 restoration; p53
status in H446 and H460 cells (WT control) was confirmed by direct
sequencing. A plasmid encoding WT p53-GFP under the control of the CMV
promoter (CMV-p53-GFP) was used to reconstitute exogenous expression of
WT p53. An 8 h incubation with 456:CMV-p53-GFP complex induced WT p53
expression in H446 cells (p53-mutant) but not in H460 cells (p53 WT);
leading to a moderate p21 induction, subsequent G1-arrest and
anti-proliferative effects. A CMV-p53-GFP plasmid without p53 (CMV-GFP)
served as a negative control for induction and activity of exogenous p53.
Additionally, 456 and 457 exhibited in vivo tumoral transfection of
CMV-LUC DNA after an intratumoral or an intravenous injection. These
novel in vitro and in vivo effects by PBAEs in H446 cells suggested a
possible therapeutic potential for targeted p53 gene therapy in other
SCLC cells and mouse models with primary SCLC xenografts. Ongoing studies
include genetic characterization of patient-derived primary SCLC
xenografts and assessing systemic PBAE-p53 delivery in these xenografts.
In parallel, we plan to employ PBAE-p53 delivery in combination with
other target genes or with chemo-/radio-therapy in SCLC cell lines and
mouse models. We strongly believe that PBAE-based gene therapy would
provide higher efficacy and minimal adverse effects for improved SCLC
treatment.

