Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Localization of the binding site for Peloruside A and Laulimalide
on beta-tubulin by physical and biological means


Peloruside A (Pel) and laulimalide (Laul) are microtubule-stabilizing
natural products that were discovered recently compared to more
established agents such as the taxanes and the epothilones. The
activities of Pel and Laul are synergistic with taxanes or epothilones
but not with each other, indicating separate binding sites and distinct
mechanisms for Pel and Laul compared to taxanes and epothilones. Hence
the location and nature of the Pel / Laul binding site is of interest. We
have identified this site by a physical method (mass spec H-D
footprinting) and a biological one: isolating Pel-resistant mutants of
human ovarian carcinoma cells (A2780 (1A9)). Four Pel-resistant lines
were obtained with single-base mutations in class I -tubulin which
resulted in the following substitutions: R306H, Y340S, N337D, and A296S
in various combinations. The mutations localize to the peptides
identified by the mass spec method, and center on a cleft in which
modeling indicates that the Pel and Laul side chains dock. The site is
accessible from the outside of the microtubule and does not overlap the
Taxol site on -tubulin. The Pel resistant lines are cross resistant to
Laul, but not to any other microtubule stabilizing drug, and show no
cross-sensitivity to microtubule destabilizing drugs.

