Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of mouse malignant rhabdoid
tumor cell lines


Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are rare, aggressive cancers occuring in
young children primarily through inactivation of the SNF5 tumor
suppressor gene. Espetially, rhabdoid tumor arised from brain is usually
called AT/RT. We and others have demonstrated that mice heterozygous for
a Snf5 null allele develop MRTs with partial penetrance. We have also
shown that Snf5+/ mice that lacked expression of the pRb family, due to
TgT121 transgene expression, developed MRTs with increased penetrance and
decreased latency. In this current study, we observed that the genetic
background altered MRT development in Snf5+/ and TgT121;Snf5+/ mice,
resulting in increased latency and the appearance of significant
frequency of brain tumors. We also report the establishment of the first
mouse MRT cell lines that recapitulate many features of their human
counterparts including lack of genomic instability and expression of
smooth muscle and neuronal differentiation markers. The cell lines also
form aggressive tumors upon inoculation into immunocompromised mice that
resemble the tumors of origin. Our studies provide further insight into
the genetic influences on MRT development as well as provide valuable new
cell culture and genetically engineered mouse models for the study of
AT/RT etiology.

