Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Positron emission tomography (PET) of TSPO expression in
preclinical models of human cancer


There is a critical need to develop and rigorously validate molecular
imaging biomarkers to aid diagnosis and characterization of human cancer.
Elevated expression of translocator protein (TSPO) has been shown to
predict disease progression and aggressive, invasive behavior in a
variety of solid tumors. Thus, noninvasive molecular imaging of TSPO
expression could form the basis of a novel, predictive cancer imaging
biomarker. In quantitative preclinical PET studies, we have evaluated a
high-affinity pyrazolopyrimidinyl TSPO imaging ligand ([18F]DPA-714) and
an aryloxyanilide-based TSPO imaging ligand ([18F]PBR06), as
translational probes for quantification of TSPO levels in glioma, breast
cancer, and colorectal cancer. In these studies, glioma-bearing rats or
genetically engineered mice bearing spontaneously arrising breast or
colorectal cancers were imaged with TSPO PET ligands in a microPET
system. Dynamic images were acquired simultaneously upon injection of
radioactive TSPO PET ligands. Arterial blood was collected to derive the
input function (AIF), with HPLC radiometabolite analysis performed upon
select samples for AIF correction. Compartmental modeling was performed
using the corrected AIF. Immediately following imaging, tumor and healthy
surrounding tissues were harvested for validation by western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. Our results illustrate the feasibility of using
TSPO PET ligands for visualization of TSPO-expressing tumors of the
brain, breast and colon. Importantly, both [18F]DPA-714 and [18F]PBR06
appear suitable for quantitative assay of tumor TSPO levels in vivo.
Given the relationship between elevated TSPO levels and poor outcome in
oncology, these studies suggest the potential of these imaging agents to
serve as a novel predictive cancer imaging biomarkers.

