Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The burden of cancer in Japan


Objectives: The burden of cancer to society is growing significantly in
terms of human suffering and cost. The burden of cancer in Japan is
projected to grow due to the tendency of the morbidity and mortality to
increase and the technical progress in treatment. The problem of the
patients who cannot undergo required cancer care due to economic reasons
has been increasing rapidly. In our universal health insurance system,
patients are responsible for 10-30% copayments for medical services, and
there is a ceiling on copayments set most recently at $970 per month for
middle-income families. However, patients still have a considerable
economic burden and it is critical to cope with the problem adequately so
that all patients have access to appropriate and up-to-date care.
Methods: We surveyed the actual situation of the burden of patients on a
national scale. We asked patients to tabulate their concrete expenses in
connection with cancer care in a questionnaire by looking at receipts and
a household account book. We also conducted the survey for their
attending physicians. Results: The annual out-of-pocket expenses
including direct and indirect expenses were an average of $11,200, and
the refund mostly from the private insurance benefits was $7,000 (n=
6,604; 63.3 years old) on average. The balance ($4,200) is their real
expenses. The out-of-pocket expenses in molecular-targeted therapy and in
heavy ion cancer treatment were $13,400 (n=1,032) and $46,700 (n=388)
respectively. The expenses differ by the lesion and stage of cancer and
the treatment. For example, in case of colon cancer the expenses in stage
3 and stage 4 were $10,900 (n=59) and $18,300 (n=77) respectively. The
mean and median of the expenses for trastuzumab (n=199) were $10,600 and
$9,800 and those for bevacizumab (n= 144) were $14,200 and $12,500
respectively. The 34% patients with colon cancer were between $11,100 and
$ 33,300 in their household income and 39% were below $ 77,800 in their
savings (n= 223). 62% of those had to withdraw the savings to pay the fee
for medical services. 1.5 in-patients and 1.6 outpatients per month and
per doctor had to change or discontinue the most appropriate treatment
for economic reasons according to the survey for physicians. Conclusion:
The burden of cancer is growing for both society and patients. The growth
rate of the medical expenses of cancer care from 2000 to 2009 in Japan
was 42.1%, more than three times the growth of the national medical
expenditure. In order to deliver the high quality and equitable cancer
care, it is important to discuss the cost with patients and to minimize
the economic burden of patients in clinical settings through appropriate
policy making.

