Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel heat shock protein 90 inhibitor, NVP-AUY922, enhances the
antitumor effect of imatinib via autophagy on imatinib-resistant CML cells


The BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), imatinib mesylate, has
revolutionized the treatment of CML, however, the development of
TKI-resistance caused in approximately 10-25% of cases by mutation in the
BCR-ABL kinase domain. Therefore, novel therapeutic strategies are needed
to address the emerging problem of imatinib-resistant CML. Recently, the
heat shock proteins of 90 kDa (Hsp90) have emerged as targets of interest
in cancer therapy. NVP-AUY922 (Novartis) is a novel 4, 5-diaryloxazole
ATP-binding site heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitor, which has been
shown to inhibit the chaperone function of HSP90 and delete the levels of
HSP90 client protein including BCR-ABL. We have recently reported that
combined treatment of NVP-AUY922 and BCR-ABL TKI exhibits a desirable
therapeutic index that can reduce the in vivo growth of mutant form of
BCR-ABL-expressing cells (Oncogene 30, 2789-97, 2011). However, the
mechanism of programmed cell death (PCD) is not yet completely
understood. In the present study, we examined the mechanism of PCD
induction by the combined treatment of NVP-AUY922 and imatinib on
wild-type (WT) and mutant forms of BCR-ABL Baf-3 cells (E255K and T315I).
Imatinib-mediated inhibitory effect was observed on WT cells, however,
E255K and T315I cells were less sensitive to imatinib than WT cells.
BCR-ABL mutant T315I cells were the most resistant to imatinib. On the
other hands, NVP-AUY922 was synergistically sensitized tumor cells to
imatinib on both WT and imatinib-resistant Baf-3 cells. Activity of
caspase-3/7 was increased by combined treatment with imatinib and/or
NVP-AUY922 on WT cells, indicating induction of apoptosis. In contrast,
apoptosis induced by combined treatment with imatinib and/or NVP-AUY922
was significantly suppressed, although the inhibition of cell growth was
still detectable on E255K and T315I cells. May-Giemsa staining revealed
that many vacuoles were detected in the cytoplasm by combined treatment
with imatinib and NVP-AUY922 on E255K and T315I cells, indicating the
morphologic features of autophagy. We are currently conducting
autophagy-detection assay and determining autophagic signaling pathways.
Our findings indicate that NVP-AUY922 enhances the antitumor effect of
imatinib, through activation of autophagy on imatinib-resistant CML
cells. These data strongly suggest that combined treatment of imatinib
and NVP-AUY922 is a novel approach for the treatment of patients with
imatinib-resistant CML.

