Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular alterations in JAK1 and JAK2 genes in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Among the ten most common cancers are the head and neck tumors, with more
than 600,000 new cases diagnosed annually worldwide, the majority (90%)
represented by the head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).
Somatic mutations occur in the genomes of all dividing cells, both normal
and neoplastic. The JAK-STAT signaling pathway controls important cell
events such as survival, proliferation and differentiation. The presence
of mutations in the phosphorylation dominion of protein kinases as JAK
family have been linked to development of different kinds of tumors such
as hematological, breast, lung and gastric cancers. Furthermore,
inhibitors of protein kinases (Gefitinib and Erlotinib) have demonstrated
a remarkable efficacy in treatment of some cancers. To date, we do not
succeeded in finding reports linking mutations in members of the JAK-STAT
pathway and HNSCC. Therefore it is necessary to plunge into molecular
research that could identify failures in the cellular machinery with
consequent discovery of potential molecular targets and drug direct
delivered to them. The present work aims to evaluate the presence of
mutations in the JAK-STAT signaling pathway members (JAK1 and JAK2) and
verify the expression level of these genes in HNSCC samples. For the
mutation detection, primers were designed to cDNA molecules and allowed
the amplification of contiguous 700-bp fragments that cover the entire
coding region of each gene. The JAK1 and JAK2 genes were investigated in
20 HNSCC samples and no mutation was detected. Polymorphisms were found
in JAK1 at codons 193 (20%), 659 (5%), 683 (25%), 699 (10%), 733 (25%)
and 1032 (20%) and in JAK2 codons 163 (60%), 830 (85%) and 1063 (5%). In
addition we evaluated the expression level of these genes in 87 HNSCC
samples and both were found downreguted in the majority of HNSCC samples
(JAK1 in 82% and JAK2 in 81%).

