Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel colorectal cancer loci in multiplex-proficient mismatch
repair families


A substantial proportion of familial colorectal cancer (CRC) is not a
consequence of known susceptibility loci, such as mismatch repair (MMR)
genes, supporting the existence of additional loci. To identify novel CRC
loci, we conducted a genome-wide linkage scan in 356 white families with
no evidence of defective MMR (i.e., no tumors with loss of expression of
MMR proteins; no microsatellite instability (MSI)-high tumors, and no
evidence of linkage to MMR genes). This represents the largest linkage
analysis of proficient MMR (pMMR) familial CRC to date. Families were
ascertained via the NCI-supported Colon Cancer Family Registry multi-site
(Colon CFR) consortium, the City of Hope, and Memorial University of
Newfoundland. A total of 1,612 individuals (average 5.0 per family, range
2-10 with an average of 2.2 affected and 2.8 unaffected individuals) were
genotyped using genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism linkage
arrays; parametric and non-parametric linkage analysis used MERLIN in a
priori-defined family groups. Five lod scores greater than 3.0 were
observed, accounting for heterogeneity, in four chromosomal regions. The
greatest lod scores were at 4q21.1 among families with mean age of
diagnosis less than 50 years (dominant HLOD=4.51, =0.84, 145.40 cM,
rs10518142) and at 12q24.32 among all families (dominant HLOD=3.60,
=0.48, 285.15 cM, rs952093). Among families with four or more affected
individuals and among clinic-based families, a common peak was observed
at 15q22.31 (101.40 cM, rs1477798; dominant HLOD=3.07, =0.29; dominant
HLOD=3.03, =0.32, respectively). Analysis of families with only two
affected individuals yielded a peak at 8q13.2 (recessive HLOD=3.02,
=0.51, 132.52 cM, rs1319036). These linkage regions comprise previously
unreported loci, supporting the hypothesis that novel loci contribute to
CRC in familial pMMR cases. These loci are also largely distinct from
those identified in case-control GWAS. To follow up on these findings, a
custom Agilent Sure Select Target Enrichment panel has been designed for
genes in three of these regions, in order to sequence probands using an
Illumina HiSeq 2000. This study demonstrates the utility of family-based
data and provides evidence for additional alleles for familial CRC.

