Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of PTEN-induced kinase 1 in cancer
development and pathogenesis


PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) was first identified in cancer cells as a
gene up-regulated by overexpression of the central tumour suppressor,
PTEN. Loss-of-function mutations in PINK1 were subsequently discovered to
cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease (ARPD). While much research
has focused on the proposed mechanism(s) through which loss of PINKI
function causes neurodegeneration, some studies indicate a potential role
for this serine/threonine kinase in cancer cell biology. PINK1 is known
to be a pro-survival kinase, protecting cells from several stressors, and
is a key controller of mitochondrial integrity, morphology and function.
This study aimed to understand the function of PINK1 in the development
of cancer. Using SV40 immortalised PINK1 -/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs), we show that loss of PINK1 results in reduced cell proliferation
and foci formation, as well as decreased invasiveness. Overexpression of
human PINK1 in these cells rescues these phenotypes and increases
migratory capacity, indicating a tumour promoting role for PINK1.
Furthermore, PINK1 loss increases autophagy and levels of reactive oxygen
species, as well as enhancing mitochondrial fission. Notably, we identify
PINK1 as a novel controller of cell cycle progression events which are
critical to tumourigenesis. These results indicate an important function
for PINK1 in cancer cell development.

