Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vemurafenib FDG-PET preclinical imaging outcomes across BRAF V600E
mutant and resistant tumors


The BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib (marketed as zelboraf) has recently been
FDA approved for the treatment of metastatic melanoma in patients
harboring BRAF V600 mutations. PET imaging will be essential for guiding
therapy in terms of gauging initial drug response, monitoring for disease
relapse, and evaluating combination treatments in clinical trials.
Herein, we assess 18F-FDG uptake across V600E mutant and vemurafenib
resistant cells. We find that vemurafenib is equally effective at
reducing FDG uptake in cell lines harboring either heterozygous or
homozygous V600E BRAF but is ineffective in cells with acquired
resistance or BRAF WT cells. Combination treatment with MEK inhibitor
GDC-0973 results in a highly significant enhancement of efficacy across
all twenty lines tested. We show that FDG uptake is driven by Glut-1, and
that the membrane localization of the transporter paralleled with drug
efficacy. Interestingly, we find that vemurafenib induced increased FDG
uptake in cells harboring RAS mutations, as well as in tumors that have
acquired vemurafenib drug resistance. Hexokinase II, CRAF, KSR and p-MEK
protein levels in sensitive and drug resistant tumors were all associated
with decreased measurements of FDG uptake in vivo. Overall, we have
demonstrated that FDG PET imaging should be effective at monitoring the
efficacy of vemurafenib in V600E melanoma mutants and that any detected
increases in tumor uptake will likely be an indication of drug resistance.

