Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery and biological characterization of CX-8184, a potent
inhibitor of protein kinase CK2


Protein kinase CK2 regulates multiple pathways that play key roles in
carcinogenesis, including cell cycle progression, suppression of
apoptosis, hypoxia, angiogenesis, inflammation and DNA damage repair.
Overexpression of CK2 in various cancer tissues has been frequently
linked to poor prognosis. All this makes targeting of CK2 highly
attractive for both single agent and combination therapies. To date
therapeutic targeting of CK2 proved to be challenging, with only one
compound, CX-4945, entering clinical development. In phase I clinical
trials CX-4945 was well tolerated, inhibited CK2 activity in PBMC,
modulated the PI3K-AKT-mTOR oncogenic pathway, reduced tumor-related
serum IL-6 and IL-8 biomarkers, resulted in stable disease for at least
16 weeks in 20% of treated patients, and caused single agent tumor
shrinkage. Building on these successes with the first generation CK2
inhibitor, we sought to design a second generation CK2 inhibitor with
distinct pharmacologic properties. The application of a focused screening
cascade and iterative medicinal chemistry efforts generated CX-8184, a
selective single digit nanomolar inhibitor of the CK2 enzyme that
demonstrated desirable biologic properties. When evaluated against a
panel of 32 cancer cell lines, CX-8184 demonstrated broad
antiproliferative activity with median IC50 = 145 nM. CX-8184 suppressed
NF-B, Hif-1 and -catenin driven transcription at concentrations of
100-300 nM, and inhibited IL-6 expression with IC50 = 30 nM. Since CK2 is
known to potentiate AKT signaling, treatment of cancer cells with CX-8184
decreased phosphorylation of AKT, as well as its substrates. The
Hsp90/Cdc37 machinery is regulated by CK2 and plays an important role in
activation of various kinases, including members of the ErbB RTK family.
CX-8184 rapidly suppressed phosphorylation of Cdc37 by CK2, leading to
the deactivation of ErbB family members. In combination with erlotinib or
lapatinib, CX-8184 produced synergistic killing of lung cancer and breast
cancer cells, respectively. CX-8184 also inhibited the phosphorylation of
XRCC1, a scaffold protein involved in DNA strand break repair that plays
an important role in sensitivity of cancer cells to DNA damaging agents.
Consequently, the treatment of ovarian cancer cells pre-challenged with
gemcitabine and/or cisplatin with 300 nM CX-8184 led to synergistic
induction of cell death. In vivo, CX-8184 demonstrated favorable PK
properties with oral bioavailability and a half-life amenable to once
daily dosing in mice. CX-8184 exhibited potent anti-tumor activity and
was well tolerated in A431 xenograft model. The compound has also showed
an acceptable pharmacological profile as evidenced by CYP, hERG and Ames
testing. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacological properties and the
biological activity of CX-8184, both as single agent or in combination,
support its further development as a preclinical candidate.9

