Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular function of the RNA binding protein EWS in RNA processing


The Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) protein is a member of the FET family of
RNA-binding proteins and is involved in chromosomal translocations that
generate oncogenic fusion genes found in a variety of sarcomas. EWS has
been recently reported to be involved in regulating transcription,
pre-mRNA processing, translation and DNA repair. However, the precise
physiological role of EWS in RNA processing remains largely unknown.
Using cross-linking immunopercipitation coupled with high-throughput
sequencing (CLIP-Seq), we identified the full complement of RNAs bound to
EWS in Hela cells. Analysis of RNA binding by EWS revealed that the
greatest increase in binding was to mRNAs coding for A-I editing enzymes
ADAR1, ADARB1 and ADARB2. EWS also bound to non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)
NEAT1 and MALAT1. Interestingly, these lncRNAs localize to specific
subnuclear structures and have been implicated in regulating RNA editing
and RNA splicing respectively. We hypothesize that EWS could play a role
in regulating the subnuclear localization of other proteins involved in
editing and splicing by virtue of its association with NEAT1 and MALAT1.
We also found that binding of EWS to pre-mRNAs influenced alternative
splicing. Paired-end RNA-Seq of the transcriptome revealed that knock
down of EWS resulted in the over expression of 116 genes and the down
regulation of 68 genes, including EWS itself. Further analysis identified
16 alternatively spliced genes following EWS knock down across two
independent RNA seq experiments. Of these genes, 6 were also shown to
bind EWS by CLIP-seq. These genes include, CENPA, CSTF1, RBBP6, RAC1,
FANC1 and ANAPC5. These studies highlight a potential role for EWS as a
critical regulator of alternative splicing and A-I editing.

