Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of synergistic effect of autophagy inhibitors and
resveratrol on BRCA1 mutant cancer cells


Over 200,000 new breast cancer cases are diagnosed in the US each year,
with 5% of cases caused by mutations in BRCA1 (Breast cancer associated
gene 1). Mutation carries have a lifetime risk of up to 80% for
developing breast cancer. Current treatment options are limited and often
do not lead to cure. We showed previously that treatment with
resveratrol, although initially reduced more the tumor size in BRCA1
mutant (mt) tumors, with respect to BRCA1 wild-type (wt) in mice, tumors
continued to grow after prolonged treatment. To identify small molecules
that can be repurposed and synergize the killing effect of resveratrol in
BRCA1-mt tumors, we screened the NCGC Pharmaceutical Collection in which,
more than 52% are drugs approved for human or animal use by FDA, and the
rest are drugs approved in other countries or in clinical trial. Using a
high-throughput cell viability assay by measuring intracellular ATP
content, we identified the inhibitory effect of 43 compounds that
exhibited synergy with resveratrol (Res) with efficacy>50% and potency
Over 200,000 new breast cancer cases are diagnosed in the US each year,
with 5% of cases caused by mutations in BRCA1 (Breast cancer associated
gene 1). Mutation carries have a lifetime risk of up to 80% for
developing breast cancer. Current treatment options are limited and often
do not lead to cure. We showed previously that treatment with
resveratrol, although initially reduced more the tumor size in BRCA1
mutant (mt) tumors, with respect to BRCA1 wild-type (wt) in mice, tumors
continued to grow after prolonged treatment. To identify small molecules
that can be repurposed and synergize the killing effect of resveratrol in
BRCA1-mt tumors, we screened the NCGC Pharmaceutical Collection in which,
more than 52% are drugs approved for human or animal use by FDA, and the
rest are drugs approved in other countries or in clinical trial. Using a
high-throughput cell viability assay by measuring intracellular ATP
content, we identified the inhibitory effect of 43 compounds that
exhibited synergy with resveratrol (Res) with efficacy>50% and potency
<35uM. We further analyzed 4 of them, cantharidin, chloroquine,
amodiaquin and colchicine for in vivo study. Utilizing BRCA1-mt breast
tumor implant models in aythymic mice reveal that mice treated with
combination therapy (Drug + Res) exhibit significantly reduced tumor
volumes and increased survival rate compared with mice on monotreatment
and this effect was even more significant when compared to wt-BRCA1.
Also, some mammary tumors developed in the BRCA1 mammary tissue specific
mutant mice exhibited a total regression with combination therapy. In
order to identify a shared molecular and biochemical change which make
BRCA1-mt cancer cells more susceptible to the combination treatment, we
found that these compounds inhibit autophagy at different levels,
targeting the mTOR/AKT pathway at different levels and/or inhibiting the
fusion between the lysosome and the phagosome producing strong
vacuolization in the cytoplasm during treatment, increasing LC3-II in a
Beclin independent manner, followed by a faster induction of apoptosis on
the BRCA mutant cells. This approach offers the potential to combat
breast cancer cells and sensitize BRCA1 deficient cells to more effective
treatments.

