Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fibrocytes promote metastasis by recruiting Ly-6C+ myeloid cells


Background: Fibrocytes are circulating, hematopoietic cells characterized
by their expression of CD45 and procollagen I. During wound repair, these
cells migrate to areas of injury and differentiate into activated
fibroblasts. We have found fibrocytes contribute to metastasis. Here, we
show these cells promote metastasis by recruiting monocytes of the
premetastatic niche. Methods: Fibrocytes were isolated from pulmonary
mesenchymal cells using CD45+ immunomagnetic beads. 1x105 cells were
intravenously injected into selected C57BL/6 or BALB/c mice. Changes
induced by fibrocytes were studied by collecting tissue 24 hours after
injection. Modeling metastases was performed by intravenously injecting
7.5x106 B16-F10 or 2x105 CT26 cells 24 hours after fibrocyte injection.
Metastases were counted two weeks later. For wounding experiments, a 3 cm
abdominal midline incision was made and closed in two layers. CT26 cells
were injected after wounding on post-op days 3, 5, 8, and 13 in separate
cohorts. Results: Wild type (WT) CD45+ fibrocytes increased B16-F10
metastasis in CCR5-/- mice when compared to WT CD45- fibroblasts
(pBackground: Fibrocytes are circulating, hematopoietic cells
characterized by their expression of CD45 and procollagen I. During wound
repair, these cells migrate to areas of injury and differentiate into
activated fibroblasts. We have found fibrocytes contribute to metastasis.
Here, we show these cells promote metastasis by recruiting monocytes of
the premetastatic niche. Methods: Fibrocytes were isolated from pulmonary
mesenchymal cells using CD45+ immunomagnetic beads. 1x105 cells were
intravenously injected into selected C57BL/6 or BALB/c mice. Changes
induced by fibrocytes were studied by collecting tissue 24 hours after
injection. Modeling metastases was performed by intravenously injecting
7.5x106 B16-F10 or 2x105 CT26 cells 24 hours after fibrocyte injection.
Metastases were counted two weeks later. For wounding experiments, a 3 cm
abdominal midline incision was made and closed in two layers. CT26 cells
were injected after wounding on post-op days 3, 5, 8, and 13 in separate
cohorts. Results: Wild type (WT) CD45+ fibrocytes increased B16-F10
metastasis in CCR5-/- mice when compared to WT CD45- fibroblasts
(p<0.002) and CCR5-/- fibrocytes (pBackground: Fibrocytes are
circulating, hematopoietic cells characterized by their expression of
CD45 and procollagen I. During wound repair, these cells migrate to areas
of injury and differentiate into activated fibroblasts. We have found
fibrocytes contribute to metastasis. Here, we show these cells promote
metastasis by recruiting monocytes of the premetastatic niche. Methods:
Fibrocytes were isolated from pulmonary mesenchymal cells using CD45+
immunomagnetic beads. 1x105 cells were intravenously injected into
selected C57BL/6 or BALB/c mice. Changes induced by fibrocytes were
studied by collecting tissue 24 hours after injection. Modeling
metastases was performed by intravenously injecting 7.5x106 B16-F10 or
2x105 CT26 cells 24 hours after fibrocyte injection. Metastases were
counted two weeks later. For wounding experiments, a 3 cm abdominal
midline incision was made and closed in two layers. CT26 cells were
injected after wounding on post-op days 3, 5, 8, and 13 in separate
cohorts. Results: Wild type (WT) CD45+ fibrocytes increased B16-F10
metastasis in CCR5-/- mice when compared to WT CD45- fibroblasts
(p<0.002) and CCR5-/- fibrocytes (p<0.01). WT fibrocytes failed to
increase metastasis in CCR2-/- or CCL2-/- mice. Consistent with this
observation, WT fibrocytes induced the expression of CLL2 in a cell
extrinsic manner in CCR5-/- mice. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated
that WT fibrocytes generated a significant increase in Gr-1Int, CD11b+
monocytes (pBackground: Fibrocytes are circulating, hematopoietic cells
characterized by their expression of CD45 and procollagen I. During wound
repair, these cells migrate to areas of injury and differentiate into
activated fibroblasts. We have found fibrocytes contribute to metastasis.
Here, we show these cells promote metastasis by recruiting monocytes of
the premetastatic niche. Methods: Fibrocytes were isolated from pulmonary
mesenchymal cells using CD45+ immunomagnetic beads. 1x105 cells were
intravenously injected into selected C57BL/6 or BALB/c mice. Changes
induced by fibrocytes were studied by collecting tissue 24 hours after
injection. Modeling metastases was performed by intravenously injecting
7.5x106 B16-F10 or 2x105 CT26 cells 24 hours after fibrocyte injection.
Metastases were counted two weeks later. For wounding experiments, a 3 cm
abdominal midline incision was made and closed in two layers. CT26 cells
were injected after wounding on post-op days 3, 5, 8, and 13 in separate
cohorts. Results: Wild type (WT) CD45+ fibrocytes increased B16-F10
metastasis in CCR5-/- mice when compared to WT CD45- fibroblasts
(p<0.002) and CCR5-/- fibrocytes (p<0.01). WT fibrocytes failed to
increase metastasis in CCR2-/- or CCL2-/- mice. Consistent with this
observation, WT fibrocytes induced the expression of CLL2 in a cell
extrinsic manner in CCR5-/- mice. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated
that WT fibrocytes generated a significant increase in Gr-1Int, CD11b+
monocytes (p<0.05). No such increase was seen in CCR2-/- mice or
following the injection with CCR5-/- fibrocytes. Further analysis of the
recruited cells revealed expression of Ly-6C, CD117, and CD45, which
suggested the presence of premetastatic-niche monocytes. These Ly-6C++
cells were isolated after fibrocyte injection and adoptively transferred
into CCR5-/- mice. These mice developed more metastasis than mice treated
with other populations of cells including B cells, immature dendritic
cells, and alveolar macrophages. Wounding is a more physiologic means of
increasing circulating fibrocytes. For these experiments we used WT
BALB/c mice since intravenous injection of WT fibrocytes increased
metastasis of the CT26 cell line. Significant increases in metastasis
were also noted when mice were injected 8 or 13 days after a wound but
not after 3 or 5 days. This timeline correlated with the increase in
circulating fibrocytes associated with wounding.
Conclusions/Implications: These data add support to our hypothesis that
fibrocytes contribute to premetastatic conditioning by recruiting Ly-6C++
monocytes in a process dependent on CCR5 and CCL2/CCR2. This work links
conditions that mobilize fibrocytes to increased metastatic risk. Such
conditions include inflammation and surgical wound repair.
Therapeutically, these results provide a rationale for the use of drugs
that inhibit fibrocyte migration including chemokine receptor inhibitors
and mTOR inhibitors.

