Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Poly (ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1 Inhibitor, AZD2281, enhances
radiation response of breast cancer cells by inhibiting DNA repair


PARP-1 is a nuclear enzyme essential for base excision repair (BER), SSB,
and possibly other DNA repair processes and an important damage sensor.
It has been identified as a synthetic lethal target in BRCA1/2 breast
cancers. PARP-1 is activated after binding DNA strand breaks and uses
NAD+ as a substrate to form long branched polymers of poly(ADP-ribose)
(PAR). PARP-1 mediated poly(ADP-ribosylation) recruits various nuclear
acceptor proteins, such as XRCC1, histones, and PARP-1 itself, to
assemble other repair complexes to execute DNA repair. As a result, PARP
inhibitors are being developed for cancer therapy due to their ability to
sensitize cells to DNA-damaging agents. Thus, in this current study, we
hypothesized that enhanced radiosensitivity of breast cancer may be
achieved by combining ionizing radiation (IR) with the PARP inhibitor,
AZD2281. We studied the effects of combined treatment of radiation and
AZD2281 on three human breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and
Hs578t. Cells were treated either with vehicle alone or with AZD2281 (4M
for 24hrs for MCF-7; 2M for 24hrs for the MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t cells).
Clonogenic cell survival assay showed that AZD2281 enhanced tumor cell
radiosensitivity with the survival factor at 2Gy (SF2) being reduced from
26%, 52.8%, and 51.5% in vehicle treated to 18.5%, 27.8%, and 45.52% in
AZD2281-treated MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and Hs578t cells respectively. As an
initial investigation into the mechanism responsible for AZD2281-mediated
radiosensitization, we examined the effect of AZD2281 treatment on the
expression of proteins known to be involved in the repair of
radiation-induced DSBs. Western blot analysis for Ku70, Ku86, and
DNA-PKcs demonstrated a decrease in the levels of all three proteins
following AZD2281 treatment in the breast cancer cell lines tested. As an
additional test of our hypothesis that AZD2281 impairs the repair of
damaged DNA, -H2AX foci were assessed as indicators of DNA damage. PARP
inhibition markedly enhanced -H2AX persistence in the MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cell lines suggestive of the presence of persistent DSBs.
These data support the use of the PARP inhibitor, AZD2281, in combination
with radiation therapy as an innovative treatment strategy to potentially
improve outcomes in breast cancer patients.

