Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased cathepsin B expression in cultured tuberous sclerosis
skin tumor cells and patient tumor tissues


Skin hamartomas in tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) are disfiguring red
tumors that contain fibroblast-like cells, vessels, fibrous tissue, and
elongated hair follicles. Our recent studies show that TSC skin tumor
cells induce angiogenesis and hair follicle neogenesis in a xenograft
mouse model. These morphogenic changes are likely caused by altered
expression of proteins involved in tissue remodeling. To identify such
factors, we carried out 2-D gel analysis of cell extracts of TSC2-null
fibroblasts derived from a TSC periungual fibroma (PF) compared to
fibroblasts from patient normal-appearing skin (NL). PF cells had greater
levels of all three forms of cathepsin B than TSC normal fibroblasts.
Cathepsin B, a member of the lysosomal cysteine proteases family that has
been implicated in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling,
exists in pro-, single chain and double chain forms, and these were
increased in PF cells by 1.6-, 2.3- and 8.3-fold, respectively. Western
blot analysis of TSC skin tumor fibroblasts from 5 patients showed
dramatically greater levels of active cathepsin B than in paired patient
NL fibroblasts. Tumor cells from PFs showed greater intracellular
cathepsin B enzyme activity than NL controls. Western blot and ELISA
analysis showed that media conditioned by TSC skin tumor cells from 5
different patients contained 4.1- to 36-fold more procathepsin B than
media conditioned by NL fibroblasts. Immunohistochemical staining of TSC
patient angiofibromas and PFs showed greater numbers of cathepsin
B-positive cells than patient normal-appearing skin. These results
suggest that TSC skin tumor cells may induce hamartoma morphogenesis
through expressing and releasing high level of cathepsin B.

