Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF gene pathway and progression to fatal prostate cancer after
diagnosis in men of European ancestry


Background: Substantial epidemiologic and experimental evidence
implicated the role of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) pathway in
prostate carcinogenesis. Many studies have demonstrated an increased risk
of prostate cancer, especially advanced diseases among men with elevated
IGF-I blood levels. Given limited evidence on the role of genetic
variations in the IGF pathway on prostate cancer progression to fatal
outcome, we comprehensively evaluated the association between genetic
variants in 26 genes related to the insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
pathway and prostate cancer specific mortality. Methods: Within the 7
cohort studies in the NCI Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium
(BPC3), a total of 590 tagging SNPs were successfully genotyped in 5887
men of European ancestry who were diagnosed with prostate cancer. SNPs
were analyzed using Cox proportional hazards models under genotypic and
additive allele models. Follow-up was defined from the date of prostate
cancer diagnosis to the date of any death or last follow-up. Patients
died from causes other than prostate cancer were censored. All analyses
were adjusted for age at diagnosis and cohort. To account for multiple
testing, the number of effective SNPs was calculated for each gene using
a Spectral Decomposition approach. Results: In total, 704 prostate cancer
deaths occurred during a median follow up of 8.9 years. After adjusting
for age at diagnosis, cohorts and a gene-based correction for multiple
testing, 3 SNPs in IGF2AS (insulin-like growth factor 2 antisense located
in chromosome 11p15.5) were significantly associated with prostate
cancer-specific mortality. Two of these SNPs (rs1004446 and rs3741211)
were in linkage disequilibrium (r2=1) but they were not in linkage
disequilibrium with the third SNP (rs4366464, r2=0.03). For rs3741211,
each additional minor allele G was associated with 16% (HR 0.83; 95% CI
0.72-0.92; Pcorrected=0.02) lower risk of prostate cancer specific
mortality. For rs4366464, each additional minor allele G was associated
with 44% (HR 1.44; 95% CI 1.19-1.73) increased risk (Pcorrected=0.001).
The association for SNP rs4366464 remained statistically significant
after further adjusting for multiple testing on the 26 genes in the
pathway. Conclusion: Germline variation in the IGF2AS gene was
significantly positively and inversely associated with progression to
fatal prostate cancer after diagnosis in this large cohort consortium of
prostate cancer. These findings need to be confirmed by other studies.
Given the link of this region in IGF2 imprinting, methylation and Wilms
tumors, the role of IGF2AS in cancer progression deserves attention.

