Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High resolution genome profile in familial colorectal cases
without mutations on mismatch repair genes


Colorectal cancer (CRC) represents the fourth leading cause of cancer
mortality. Approximately 30% of all CRC cases have a hereditary
component, but only 5% are associated with inherited mutations in known
genes. The most common hereditary syndrome of CRC is the Lynch syndrome
(LS) and is caused by mutations in mismatch repair genes, mainly MLH1 and
MSH2. In 50% of families classified with the Amsterdam criteria not show
germline mutations in mismatch repair genes, suggesting that other
genetic factors are associated with predisposition to CRC. In this study,
it was evaluated germline copy number alterations (CNAs) in 57 LS
patients without pathogenic mutations in mismatch repair genes (MLH1,
MSH2, MSH6, PMS1 and PMS2), as well as in CHEK2 and TP53, by array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) using a platform of 4x180K
(Agilent). Genomic data were extracted with Feature Extraction software
and analyzed using Nexus 6.0 software, statistical algorithm FASST2
Segmentation and sensitivity threshold of 5.0E-6. The aCGH data showed a
total of 361 CNAs (in average, 6.33.8 CNA/individual) including 144 gains
and 217 genomic losses. After the comparison with a reference dataset
obtained from 100 healthy Brazilian individuals (Krepischi et al, 2011;
personal communication) and exclusion of the CNAs detected in more than
5% of this reference dataset, it was identified 100 rare CNAs. Most of
them were detected in only one case, however, six CNAs were common at
least in five cases: 1p11.2, 1p36.32, 7p22.3, 8q24.3, 9p11.2 and 18q11.1.
The ROCK1 gene, mapped on 18q11.1, was found as involved in nine cases
(three losses and six gains). This gene was associated with
carcinogenesis and progression of human tumors, including colon cancer
(Nakashima et al, Int J Oncol. 36:585, 2010). Amplification on 7p22.3 (5
cases), where is mapped the homeobox gene UNCX, a transcription factor
involved in somitogenesis and neurogenesis. Mutations in rare
constitutional CNAs may affect genes or major pathways associated with
cancer, offering an explanation for families with high cancer risk. In
CRC, the large scale analysis of germline CNAs in patients and their
relatives can allow the identification of new genes involved in tumor
predisposition. Financial support: FAPESP and CNPq

