Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Specific MUC1 isoforms function to regulate gene expression and
tumor growth in pancreatic cancer


Cancer cells, especially adenocarcinomas, express aberrant forms of
mucins, as compared to their normal cell counterparts. These aberrant
forms arise as a consequence of transformation-related alterations in
expression of mucin mRNAs including alternative splice forms, and
deregulation of enzymes that post-translationally modify mucin core
proteins. Previous work has established that MUC1 is overexpressed and
differentially glycosylated in adenocarcinomas and that this
overexpression is associated with aggressive forms of pancreatic cancer.
Most studies have focused on the full-length MUC1 isoform that contains
the VNTR and all seven exons, but alternative splicing of MUC1 yields a
minimum of 30 isoforms, of which several have been linked to malignancy
in ovarian, cervical, and breast cancer. We evaluated expression of MUC1
alternate splice forms in a series of isogenic clonal pancreatic cancer
cell lines that exhibit different properties of morphological
differentiation, tumor growth and metastasis. The results revealed
significant variation in splice variant expression between these isogenic
cell lines and has implicated an association between isoform expression
and metastatic potential. The knockdown of specific splice variants and
MUC1 isoform families in S2-007 pancreatic cancer cells suggested that
individual isoforms show differential capacity for regulating expression
of target genes and miRNAs, which in turn led to differences in tumor
growth rate and metastatic potential. Specifically, the stable knockdown
of all members of the MUC1 X-family significantly altered expression of
miRNAs 193b and 320 and reduced tumor growth in a pancreatic cancer
animal model. MUC1 X-family also affected expression levels of several
genes associated with Gemcitabine resistance and both pro and
anti-inflammatory pathways that are predicted to influence disease
progression and tumor associated immunosuppression.

