Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel gold derivatives of thiosugars potently inhibit p-STAT3 and
downregulate HIF-1 in ependymomas


Ependymoma is the third most common brain tumor in children, representing
5% of all CNS malignancies with an overall survival ranging from 24% to
75% at 5 years. Although auranofin (AF), a gold containing antirheumatic
compound, has been tested for a variety of human cancers, the true
potential of this compound or its related compounds as anticancer agents
has not been fully explored for human cancer. However, recent
observations identifying proteasome inhibition and alterations in the
JAK/STAT signaling pathways as primary targets for gold compounds in
several human cancers indicate that such compounds could be effective
anticancer drugs providing a unique mechanism of action. We have recently
designed several auranofin analogs (WP1527, WP1528, WP1529, WP1530,
WP1531, WP1532, WP1533, WP1534, WP1546, and WP1547) and found that
selected AF analogs (WP1529 and WP1532) markedly inhibit the
proliferation of BT-58 and 58-10F human ependymoma cell lines. We
discovered that ependymoma cell lines were more sensitive to AF than
tested glioma cell lines and furthermore selected new analogs more
potently inhibited BT-58 ependymoma cell proliferation than parental
compound AF. Further analysis demonstrated that auranofin can potently
(0.5 M 1M) block either constitutively activated or cytokine induced p-
STAT3. Anticancer activity of these synthesized analogs has also been
assessed in other tumor types including cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL)
and melanoma. Our studies led to discovery of significantly more potent
auranofin analogs and highly promising preliminary data warrant further
studies to validated clinical potential of lead compound in ependymoma
models.

