Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying novel chromosomal fusions out of RNAseq data from
oropharyngeal cancers


Chromosome rearrangements that result in gene fusions have important
roles in the initial steps of tumorigenesis especially in leukemias and
lymphomas, but the biological and clinical impact of gene fusions in the
common solid tumor has been less appreciated. We previously generated
RNAseq data from 12 oropharyngeal tumors along with matched normal tissue
from the same patients. We utilized and compared two bioinformatic
pipelines, SnowShoes-FTD and FusionHunter to identify two novel fusion
events involving of MGST3-ZMAT5 and MS4A7-DKFZp586P0123. These fusions
were validated utilizing. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and Sanger sequencing validated. In the first translocation the
5 UTR of MGST3 was fused with exon 1 of ZMAT5, and in the second
translocation the exon 2 of MS4A7 was fused with 3 UTR of DKFZp586P0123.
These precise fusions were not present in the matched normal tissue,
however, they were only found in the single tumor in which they were
identified. Given a growing and powerful set of high-throughput massively
parallel sequencing technologies, the future for genome-wide analysis of
chromosome rearrangement appears open in many directions. Ultimately, we
hope that this integrative methodology will elucidate key aspects of
tumor biology as well as generate novel targets for cancer diagnostics
and therapy.

