Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deciphering the molecular mechanisms behind Oct4(hi)
tumor-initiating breast cancer cells with global gene expression


Breast cancer continues to have one of the highest rates of incidence
despite advances in detection and treatment. One of the most troubling
aspects of the disease is its tendency to recur after apparent curative
therapy. The ability of a subset of breast cancer cells to remain
undetected for years in the patient only to recur years later is of
particular interest to our laboratory. Breast cancer is well known to
metastasize to the bone marrow where we believe a favorable niche exists
for it to remain dormant. Our lab has shown that a subset of breast
cancer cells with increased expression of octamer-binding transcription
factor 4 isoform A (Oct4A) can form gap junctions with bone marrow stroma
cells. Gap junction intercellular communication is important for
maintaining dormancy in the breast cancer cells. Further characterization
of the Oct4(hi) cells found them to be in mostly the G0/G1 phase of cell
cycle, have increased stem cell gene expression, formed tumor spheres,
could initiate breast cancer when serially passaged in nude BALB/c mice,
and showed increased resistance to carboplatin. To understand the
functional differences between the Oct4(hi) cancer cells and the
non-tumor-initiating cells, we compared the different breast cancer cell
subsets for global gene expression, using Affymetrix gene arrays. The
initial analyses confirmed the quality of samples with expression levels
grouping together in the principle component analysis. Heat map analyses
indicated distinct gene expression in which those that were expressed in
the tumor-initiating cells were decreased in the non-cancer stem cells.
The tumor-initiating cells showed novel genes that are linked to NFB,
which we have shown to be the master regulator of self-renewal in the
cancer stem cells.

