Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multifunctional bladder cancer targeting micelle nanocarriers with
both imaging and therapeutic potentials


Background: Human and dog invasive bladder cancers share similar
attributes, such as pathologic changes, response to chemotherapy, and
extremely poor prognosis. Via combinatorial chemistry approach, we
previously identified a novel bladder cancer-specific ligand, PLZ4, that
can specifically bind to both human and dog bladder cancer cells in vitro
and in vivo. We also developed a micelle nanocarrier drug delivery system
with multifunctional loading capacity. Here, we assessed whether the
targeting micelles impregnated with PLZ4 on the surface could promote
targeting efficacy against both human and dog bladder cancers for
diagnostic imaging and therapeutic purposes. Materials and Methods:
Micelle-building monomers (i.e., telodendrimers) were synthesized through
conjugation of polyethylene glycol with cholic acid cluster at one end
and PLZ4 at the other end, which then self-assembled in aqueous solution
to form micelles. Near-infrared dye DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs
(paclitaxel or daunorubicin) were co-loaded for the experiments. Cellular
uptake and distribution of nanomicelles were evaluated by fluorescence
intensity and high resolution topography, while drug delivery efficacy
was monitored by cytotoxicity assay. Using orthotopic/xenograft mouse
model generated from human clinical bladder cancer specimen or dog
bladder cancer line, in vivo and ex vivo fluorescence imaging as well as
efficacy study were performed. Results: Compared to non-targeting
micelles, targeting PLZ4-decorated-micelles loaded with an imaging agent
DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs were more efficient in dye delivery, and
caused a comparable to higher degree of cytotoxicity with free drugs in
bladder cancer cell lines. According to topography, targeting micelles
tended to localize at the membrane, perinuclear, and nucleus. In vivo and
ex vivo orthotopic xenograft studies showed that both targeting (14.3X of
free dye, pBackground: Human and dog invasive bladder cancers share
similar attributes, such as pathologic changes, response to chemotherapy,
and extremely poor prognosis. Via combinatorial chemistry approach, we
previously identified a novel bladder cancer-specific ligand, PLZ4, that
can specifically bind to both human and dog bladder cancer cells in vitro
and in vivo. We also developed a micelle nanocarrier drug delivery system
with multifunctional loading capacity. Here, we assessed whether the
targeting micelles impregnated with PLZ4 on the surface could promote
targeting efficacy against both human and dog bladder cancers for
diagnostic imaging and therapeutic purposes. Materials and Methods:
Micelle-building monomers (i.e., telodendrimers) were synthesized through
conjugation of polyethylene glycol with cholic acid cluster at one end
and PLZ4 at the other end, which then self-assembled in aqueous solution
to form micelles. Near-infrared dye DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs
(paclitaxel or daunorubicin) were co-loaded for the experiments. Cellular
uptake and distribution of nanomicelles were evaluated by fluorescence
intensity and high resolution topography, while drug delivery efficacy
was monitored by cytotoxicity assay. Using orthotopic/xenograft mouse
model generated from human clinical bladder cancer specimen or dog
bladder cancer line, in vivo and ex vivo fluorescence imaging as well as
efficacy study were performed. Results: Compared to non-targeting
micelles, targeting PLZ4-decorated-micelles loaded with an imaging agent
DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs were more efficient in dye delivery, and
caused a comparable to higher degree of cytotoxicity with free drugs in
bladder cancer cell lines. According to topography, targeting micelles
tended to localize at the membrane, perinuclear, and nucleus. In vivo and
ex vivo orthotopic xenograft studies showed that both targeting (14.3X of
free dye, p<0.01) and non-targeting micelles (9.6X, pBackground: Human
and dog invasive bladder cancers share similar attributes, such as
pathologic changes, response to chemotherapy, and extremely poor
prognosis. Via combinatorial chemistry approach, we previously identified
a novel bladder cancer-specific ligand, PLZ4, that can specifically bind
to both human and dog bladder cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. We also
developed a micelle nanocarrier drug delivery system with multifunctional
loading capacity. Here, we assessed whether the targeting micelles
impregnated with PLZ4 on the surface could promote targeting efficacy
against both human and dog bladder cancers for diagnostic imaging and
therapeutic purposes. Materials and Methods: Micelle-building monomers
(i.e., telodendrimers) were synthesized through conjugation of
polyethylene glycol with cholic acid cluster at one end and PLZ4 at the
other end, which then self-assembled in aqueous solution to form
micelles. Near-infrared dye DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs (paclitaxel or
daunorubicin) were co-loaded for the experiments. Cellular uptake and
distribution of nanomicelles were evaluated by fluorescence intensity and
high resolution topography, while drug delivery efficacy was monitored by
cytotoxicity assay. Using orthotopic/xenograft mouse model generated from
human clinical bladder cancer specimen or dog bladder cancer line, in
vivo and ex vivo fluorescence imaging as well as efficacy study were
performed. Results: Compared to non-targeting micelles, targeting
PLZ4-decorated-micelles loaded with an imaging agent DiD and
chemotherapeutic drugs were more efficient in dye delivery, and caused a
comparable to higher degree of cytotoxicity with free drugs in bladder
cancer cell lines. According to topography, targeting micelles tended to
localize at the membrane, perinuclear, and nucleus. In vivo and ex vivo
orthotopic xenograft studies showed that both targeting (14.3X of free
dye, p<0.01) and non-targeting micelles (9.6X, p<0.01) rapidly
accumulated at the tumor sites, while targeting micelles exhibited
significantly higher efficiency in homing property than non-targeting
micelles (pBackground: Human and dog invasive bladder cancers share
similar attributes, such as pathologic changes, response to chemotherapy,
and extremely poor prognosis. Via combinatorial chemistry approach, we
previously identified a novel bladder cancer-specific ligand, PLZ4, that
can specifically bind to both human and dog bladder cancer cells in vitro
and in vivo. We also developed a micelle nanocarrier drug delivery system
with multifunctional loading capacity. Here, we assessed whether the
targeting micelles impregnated with PLZ4 on the surface could promote
targeting efficacy against both human and dog bladder cancers for
diagnostic imaging and therapeutic purposes. Materials and Methods:
Micelle-building monomers (i.e., telodendrimers) were synthesized through
conjugation of polyethylene glycol with cholic acid cluster at one end
and PLZ4 at the other end, which then self-assembled in aqueous solution
to form micelles. Near-infrared dye DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs
(paclitaxel or daunorubicin) were co-loaded for the experiments. Cellular
uptake and distribution of nanomicelles were evaluated by fluorescence
intensity and high resolution topography, while drug delivery efficacy
was monitored by cytotoxicity assay. Using orthotopic/xenograft mouse
model generated from human clinical bladder cancer specimen or dog
bladder cancer line, in vivo and ex vivo fluorescence imaging as well as
efficacy study were performed. Results: Compared to non-targeting
micelles, targeting PLZ4-decorated-micelles loaded with an imaging agent
DiD and chemotherapeutic drugs were more efficient in dye delivery, and
caused a comparable to higher degree of cytotoxicity with free drugs in
bladder cancer cell lines. According to topography, targeting micelles
tended to localize at the membrane, perinuclear, and nucleus. In vivo and
ex vivo orthotopic xenograft studies showed that both targeting (14.3X of
free dye, p<0.01) and non-targeting micelles (9.6X, p<0.01) rapidly
accumulated at the tumor sites, while targeting micelles exhibited
significantly higher efficiency in homing property than non-targeting
micelles (p<0.05). Considerably higher DiD signal was microscopically
observed in targeting group than non-targeting group as well as free dye
group, but all exhibited similar blood vessel density. Our preliminary
efficacy study also supported a better drug delivery efficiency using
targeting micelle formulation than non-targeting micelles/free drug in
mouse xenografts formed from human clinical bladder tumors. Conclusions:
Targeting micelles impregnated with PLZ4 can selectively and efficiently
target both human and dog bladder cancer cells and can be potentially
developed as imaging and therapeutic agents in both human and veterinary
medicine. Preclinical studies of targeting micelles can be performed in
dogs with spontaneous bladder cancer before proceeding to human patients.

