Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor gene demethylation and reactivation in human
colon cancer cells by black raspberry anthocyanins


Our laboratory has shown that the anthocyanins (ACs) in black raspberries
(BRBs) are responsible for much of their chemopreventive effects in the
rat esophagus. The present study was undertaken to determine the effects
of BRB ACs on human colon cancer cells in vitro. Three days of AC
treatment at 5 and 25 g/ml medium significantly decreased cell
proliferation and increased apoptosis in HCT116, Caco2, and SW480 human
colon cancer cell lines. The ACs also reduced the activities and protein
expression levels of DNA methyltransferases 1 and 3 (DNMT1, DNMT3) in all
three cell lines. Promoter methylation of p16 (CDKN2A) and the Wnt
pathway inhibitors, Sfrp2, Sfrp5 and Wif1, was decreased by AC treatment
resulting in increased mRNA expression levels of all three Wnt
inhibitors. ACs did not alter global methylation LINE-1. DNMT1 and DNMT3B
knockout (KO) HCT116 cells were generated using siRNA to determine the
role of these methyltransferases in AC-induced demethylation. In DNMT1 KO
cells, the promoter methylation of Sfrp5 was reduced when compared with
wild type HCT116 cells. AC treatment further reduced promoter methylation
of Sfrp5 in DNMT1 KO cells suggesting that the ACs targeted protein(s)
other than DNMT1 to regulate methylation. Promoter methylation of Sfrp5
was decreased to almost zero by treatment of DNMT3B KO cells with ACs.
Interestingly, promoter methylation of p16 was reduced in both DNMT1 and
DNMT3B KO cells, and AC treatment further reduced p16 methylation in both
lines. In conclusion, these results suggest that ACs demethylated and
reactivated tumor suppressor genes through regulation of DNMT1 and
DNMT3B. This research was supported by NCI grant CA148818.

