Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A history of allergies is associated with reduced risk of oral
squamous cell carcinoma


History of any type of allergy is associated with a decreased risk of
multiple types of cancers, including colorectal, cervical, esophageal,
pancreatic, stomach, leukemia and glioma. It is proposed that having a
history of allergies may prevent cancer by enhancing immune surveillance
against tumor cells early in disease development and/or against
carcinogenic infectious agents. While a few prior studies suggest an
inverse relationship between history of allergies and oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC); they did not distinguish between oropharyngeal cancer
and oral cavity cancers, and did not account for HPV infection. We
compared 400 OSCC cases newly diagnosed between 1985-1995 with 613
general population controls from the Seattle-Puget Sound metropolitan
areas with respect to self-reported history of allergy to each of the
following: dust, pollen, mold, dogs, cats, bee stings, drugs and food. We
estimated odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI), adjusted
for age, education level, sex, race, pack years of cigarette smoking, and
lifetime average alcoholic drinks per week. We observed a small inverse
association between history of any allergy and OSCC (OR=0.81, 95% CI,
0.61-1.08). This inverse association was present only for dust (OR=0.70;
95% CI,0.43-1.13), pollen (OR=0.72; 95% CI,0.51-1.02) and mold (OR=0.34;
95% CI,0.14-0.83). Additional adjustment for HPV-16 seropositivity did
not materially affect the estimates. In exploratory analyses, we examined
associations with dust, pollen or mold more closely, and observed
stronger associations with oropharyngeal cancer (OR=0.56; 95% CI,
0.35-0.90) than with oral cavity cancer (OR=0.71; 95% CI, 0.49-1.05);
although a polytomous regression model did not suggest heterogeneity by
site (p=0.5). There was no effect modification by sex, cigarette smoking,
alcohol consumption, HPV-16 seropositivity (for all sites or oropharynx
alone), or herpes simplex virus 1 seropositivity. The inverse association
with dust/pollen/mold was near null for 30 cases of oncogenic HPV
DNA-positive oropharyngeal cancer (OR=0.86; 95% CI, 0.38-1.94) and
stronger for 46 cases of oncogenic HPV DNA-negative oropharyngeal cancer
(OR=0.53; 95% CI, 0.24-1.19). These results suggest that a history of
allergies to dust, pollen or mold may confer some protection against
OSCC. That the inverse association was particularly apparent for
oropharyngeal SCC would be consistent with heightened immune
surveillance, due to the substantial amount of lymphatic tissue in this
organ. Whether the inverse association involves an immune response to HPV
or other antigen, or other carcinogenic mechanism, remains to be
determined in more definitive studies.

