Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Leukemia cell-derived exosomes targeted dendritic cells can induce
more strong anti-leukemia response than exosomes alone


Exosomes are the newest family number of bioactive vesicles that play
important roles in antigen presentation. Recent clinical trials about
exosomes have shown minor clinical benefit. However, exosomes derived
from leukemia cell lines were less studied, In this study, we
investigated the biological properties and anti-leukemia immunity of
leukemia cell-derived exosomes (LEX). The results showed that like other
tumor cells, similarly, leukemia cells can release exosomes too.
Transmission electron microscopy showed that exosomes derived from NB4
cell, a promyloblastic leukemia cell line and K562 cell, a chronic
myeloid leukemia cell line were membrane vesicles with diameter about
50-100m, and loading their specific moleculars such as RAR- and ABL and
adherent moleculars such as ICAM-1. Similarly, our data also demonstrated
the presence of Hsp70 in these two leukemia cell-derived exosomes. The
data from two-dimensional electrophoresis of K562 cell-derived exosomes
showed that most of molecules expressing on leukemia cells were detected
on their exosomes, indicating that LEX load most of proteins expressed on
their original leukemia cells. Out data also demonstrated that LEX can
induce anti-leukemia CTL response and LEX-targeted DC can induce more
efficient anti-leukemia immunity compared with LEX alone. In conclusion,
exosome-based therapies could be considered as a promising strategy to
prolong disease-free survival in patients with leukemia after
consolidation or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Note: This
research work was supported by research grants from Shanghai Pujiang
Project of Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality.
Keywords: Exosome, leukemia cell, anti-leukemia immunity

