Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-resolving effects of 15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 through
activation of Nrf2-mediated CD36 expression in murine macrophages


The process of resolution of inflammation is actively controlled by a
series of endogenous mediators, which activate pro-resovling mechanisms.
15-Deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d PGJ2), one of the terminal products
of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), is an endogenous lipid mediator exerting
both anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving effects. Enhanced biosynthesis
of 15d-PGJ2 has been suggested to contribute to resolution of
inflammation. The phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils by macrophages,
called effercytosis, is the most important step for complete resolution
of inflammation. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
pro-resolving effects of 15d-PGJ2 remain not fully clarified. The
phagocytic action of macrophages is known to be mediated by scavenger
receptors present on the plasma membrane of these cells. CD36, one of the
class B scavenger receptors, is considered to recognize
phosphatidylserine on the outer membrane of apoptotic neutrophils,
thereby inducing phagocytosis. Recently, NF-E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2)
has been reported to be the essential transcription factor involved in
the induction of CD36 expression. In the present study, we found that
15d-PGJ2 (1 M) increased expression and nuclear translocation of Nrf2 in
murine macrophage-like RAW264.7 cells. The electrophoretic mobility shift
assay revealed that 15d-PGJ2 enhanced the DNA binding of Nrf2. In
addition, 15d-PGJ2 upregulated the expression of CD36, thereby
stimulating efferocytosis. siRNA knockdown of Nrf2 abolished
15d-PGJ2-induced CD36 expression, resulting in reduced efferocytosis.
embryonic fibroblasts from Nrf2-null mice failed to up-regulate CD36
expression upon 15d-PGJ2 treatment. Moreover, unlike 15d-PGJ2, its
non-electrophilic analog 9,10-ihidro-15d-PGJ2 could not induce expression
of Nrf2 and CD36, suggesting that the ,-unsaturated carbonyl group
located in the cyclopenenone ring of 15d-PGJ2 is essential for
Nrf2-induced CD36 expression. Taken together, these results suggest that
15d-PGJ2 might expedite resolution of inflammation by activating
efferocytosis which appears to be mediated through Nrf2-induced CD36
expression in macrophages.

