Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methioninase S-phase block of cancer cells imaged in real time by
cell-cycle-specific fluorescence reporters


A general feature of cancer cells is their elevated requirement for
methionine compared to normal cells, which may be due to excessive
methylation reactions in cancer cells since methionine is the global
source of cellular methyl groups. When deprived of methionine, cancer
cells undergo a cell-cycle arrest in late S-phase. The recombinant
bacterial enzyme, methionine , -lyase (methioninase or METase) degrades
methionine very efficiently and effects an S-phase block selectively in
cancer cells. In order to image the kinetics of cell cycle arrest of
cancer cells due to deprivation of methionine by METase, cancer cells
were engineered to express cell cycle-dependent fluorescent proteins
using fluorescent ubiquitination-based cell cycle indicator (FUCCI)
whereby cancer cells express Azami-green only in S-phase and
Kusabira-orange only in G1. Thus, each cancer could be followed in real
time as it becomes blocked in S-phase after METase treatment. FUCCI
imaging demonstrated that cancer cells could remain in S-phase for 5 days
before starting to die which indicates a new type of cancer cell
dormancy. The use of METase treatment and cell-cycle specific fluorescent
reporters provide a unique opportunity to image and study the cancer cell
cycle and the consequences and advantages of an S-phase block in cancer
cells.

