Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of NFB/IKK2 pathway in the pathogenesis of lung cancer


The nuclear factor [[Unable to Display Character: ?]]B (NF-[[Unable to
Display Character: ?]]B) comprises a family of transcription factors
involved in many physiological processes such as innate and adaptive
immune responses, cell proliferation, cell death, and inflammation. The
dimeric NFB transcription factors are inhibited in quiescent cells
through stable association with inhibitor IBs. Recent literature suggests
aberrant or constitutive NF-[[Unable to Display Character: ?]]B
activation in many human malignancies, including lung cancer. Hence, we
aim to decipher the role of NF-[[Unable to Display Character: ?]]B on
tumour progression and metastasis employing a non-metastatic tumour
animal model, SPC-CRaf-BXB. We generated SPC-CRaf BXB mice, where
constitutively active C-Raf is expressed in alveolar type II cells. These
mice develop tumour nodules within 3-5 months. Further, we cross breed
these mice with SPC- rtTA/Tet-O IKK2-CA (inducible constitutively active
IKK2 under SPC promoter) or SPC-rtTA/Tet-O-IKK2-DN (dominant negative
IKK2 under SPC promoter) to generate triple transgenic mice (SPC-C-Raf
BxB/SPC rtTA/Tet-O IKK2 CA or SPC-C-Raf BxB/SPC rtTA/Tet-O-IKK2-DN). At
different time intervals of induction (one month, two months and 10-12
months), these mice were sacrificed and analysed for histomorphological
changes. Immunohistochemical staining showed NFB localization within the
cell and its translocation to the nucleus, which was confirmed by protein
expression levels in cytoplasm and nucleus. Modification of NF-[[Unable
to Display Character: ?]]B levels in mice showed tumours and significant
histological changes such as alveolar enlargement and emphysema like
structures. Similarly, Lewis lung carcinoma 1 (LLC1) cells injected to
SPC-rtTA/TetO-IKK2-CA and SPC-rtTA/TetO-IKK2- DN transgenic mice showed
tumour reduction and tumour microenvironmental changes as seen with CD3,
F4/80 and CD11b staining. Screening 10 different human cancer cell lines,
for the NFB pathway members revealed variation in expression levels of
NFB in different cancer types. Based on their expression, selected cell
lines (A549, H23 and H226), were stably transfected with NF-[[Unable to
Display Character: ?]]B pathway-modifying constructs to study the
functional significance of inducible constitutively active or dominant
negative IKK2.Cells transfected with NF-[[Unable to Display Character:
?]]B pathway-modifying constructs, like pEGZ-IKK2-CA and pEGZ-IKK2-DN,
showed changes regarding their proliferation and migration abilities.
Cells with an activated NFB pathway were less apoptotic and more
proliferative, suggesting contribution of the NFB signalling pathway to
lung cancer progression.

