Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of PTPN2 promotes lung cancer cell proliferation
through ERK activation


Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer deaths in the world, and
the incidence is increasing each year. Protein tyrosine phosphatases
(PTPs) and their associated signaling pathways are crucial for the
regulation of numerous cell functions including growth, motility,
mitogenesis and metabolism. PTPN2, also known as TCPTP, is an
intracellular protein tyrosine phosphatase, which is ubiquitously
expressed. There are two splice variants of TCPTP in human cells, TC45
and TC48, which vary at their C-terminal ends. The TC48 isoform is
present in the endoplasmic reticulum and also in the nuclear membrane.
However, its role and function on human non-small cell lung cancers
remain unknown. In this study, we induced ectopic expression of PTPN2
(TC48) in CL1-0 and H1299 cells to investigate its effect on cell
migration, invasion, and colony formation. The interacting proteins of
PTPN2 are identified by yeast two-hybrid assay. The results showed that
PTPN2 inhibited lung cancer cell proliferation, anchorage-dependent and
-independent growth, but not migration and invasion. Yeast two-hybrid
assay revealed that PTPN2 interacted with CD74 (major histocompatibility
complex class II invariant chain) and PRDX6 (Peroxiredoxin 6) which could
promote cell proliferation in previous studies. We also found that
overexpression of PTPN2 increased the phosphorylation of ERK. Moreover,
activation of ERK was enhanced by co-expression of PTPN2 and CD74 or
PRDX6. Taken together, we speculated that PTPN2 might modulate ERK
activity through interaction with CD74 and PRDX6 and further promoted
lung cancer cell proliferation.

