Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engaging CD151 inhibits cell migration and metastasis through a
novel mechanism involving the cell adhesion molecule ALCAM/CD166


We recently demonstrated that actively promoting the formation of cell
surface complexes by engaging the tetraspanin CD151 with a monoclonal
antibody (mAb 1A5) inhibits metastasis by immobilizing the tumor cells.
Tetraspanins influence cellular behavior via the regulation of associated
partner molecules such as integrins, cell adhesion molecules, and members
of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Although CD151 is able to associate
with and regulate the activity of laminin-binding integrins we
demonstrate that CD151 does not associate with 31 in the presence of mAb
1A5. Using a 2-color flow cytometric approach we mapped the domains of
CD151 required for antigen recognition by mAb 1A5 and determined that 1A5
maps to the integrin 194QRD196 motif of CD151, using this information we
further performed CD151 co-immunoprecipitations and demonstrated that 1A5
recognizes CD151 not associated with 31.To determine the identity of the
protein(s) associated with the antibody-engaged CD151 and also possibly
responsible for the anti-migratory, anti-metastatic phenotype we used a
proteomic approach. Using tandem mass spectrometry on CD151-associated
proteins co-immunoprecipitated by mAb 1A5, we detected in excess of 200
proteins. This strategy identified several putative partners of CD151.
Further analysis of the CD151 associated proteins led to our discovery of
the novel CD151-associated protein ALCAM/CD166, a member of the
immunoglobulin superfamily. Using an RNAi-mediated knockdown approach we
demonstrate that ALCAM/CD166 is required for the CD151 complex to
regulate tumor cell mobility in vitro. Conversely, CD151 is required for
ALCAM to control motility. Spontaneous metastasis assays using the avian
chorioallantoic membrane and subcutaneous murine xenografts demonstrate
thatALCAM/CD166 is indeed required for the engaged tetraspanin to inhibit
tumor cell dissemination in vivo. Further mechanistic analysis of this
complex revealed that the CD151/ALCAM protein complex promotes activation
of the small GTPase Rap1 via activated protein kinase C. Collectively, we
present data, which demonstrate that, the ALCAM-containing CD151 complex
can control metastasis. This novel complex reveals how cell-cell
interactions can control migration through the regulation of cell-matrix
adhesions. These results also demonstrate mechanistically that
tetraspanins can integrate signaling between physically distinct
molecular functions and therefore behave as a molecular clutch that
controls matrix adhesion in response to cell-cell interactions.

