Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma EBV DNA concentration and clearance rate as good prognostic
factors for metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Purpose: To investigate the pretreatment copy number and the clearance
rate of plasma EBV DNA as novel prognostic outcome markers for metastatic
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) Experimental Design: Nineteen newly
diagnosed and fifty-four relapsed metastatic NPC patients were treated at
outpatient department (i.v. or i.v. plus oral chemotherapy followed by
local irradiation boost where applicable). Multiple blood samples were
collected before and during the first 6 weeks of chemotherapy. Plasma EBV
DNA concentrations and half-life values of plasma viral clearance rates,
t1/2, were determined by a real-time quantitative PCR. The association
between the copy number of plasma EBV DNA, t1/2, and clinical outcome
were analyzed. Results: Treatment response evaluated after 3-6 months of
treatment showed the best response of 18 complete responses (CR)(24.7%),
21 partial responses (PR)(28.8%) and overall response rate was 53.5%. The
pretreatment plasma EBV DNA concentrations and the t1/2 of plasma EBV DNA
clearance rates had significant effects on treatment response and overall
survival prediction. In the chemotherapy regimen, gemcitabine plus
cisplatin had better treatment outcome than cisplatin plus oral UFT and
calcium folinate based regimen. Multivariate analysis revealed both
pretreatment EBV DNA load and t1/2 of plasma EBV DNA clearance rates but
not chemotherapy regimen had significant effects on overall survival.
Conclusions: The pretreatment plasma EBV DNA copy number and their
clearance rates are significant predictors for NPC treatment outcome. In
low copy number group, the t1/2 in the first 6 weeks may provide the
physician to choose a tailored regimen for the patients.

