Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in pattern recognition genes in the innate immunity
system and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma


The pattern recognition pathway plays an important role in infection
recognition and immune responses, and previous studies have suggested an
association between genetic variation in innate immunity genes and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). We evaluated NHL risk associated with the
common genetic variation in pattern recognition genes using data from a
case-control study of NHL conducted in Connecticut women. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 27 pattern recognition genes were
genotyped in 432 Caucasian incident NHL cases and 494 frequency-matched
controls. Unconditional logistic regression was used to compute odds
ratios (ORs) for NHL and four major NHL subtypes in relation to
individual SNPs and haplotypes. A gene-based analysis that adjusted for
the number of tagSNPs genotyped in each gene showed significant
association with overall NHL for the MBP gene (p=0.028), with DLBCL
subtype for the MASP2 gene (p=0.011), and with FL subtype for the DEFB126
(p=0.041). A SNP-based analysis showed that MBP rs8094402 was associated
with decreased risks of overall NHL (allele risk OR=0.72,
p-trend=0.0018), DLBCL (allele risk OR=0.72, p-trend=0.036), and FL
(allele risk OR=0.67, p-trend=0.021). MASP2 rs12711521 was associated
with a decreased risk of DLBCL (allele risk OR=0.57, p-trend=0.0042). We
also observed an increased risk of FL for DEFB126 rs6054706 (allele risk
OR=1.39, p-trend=0.033). Our results are suggestive of a potential role
of the pattern recognition in susceptibility to NHL but require
replication in larger studies.

