Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor correlates with
high tumor grade in human breast invasive carcinomas


The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor which binds environmental poly
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and mediates their carcinogenic effects.
Recent reports, including data from our laboratory implicate AhR in
breast cancer development and progression independent of the receptor
occupancy by PAH. In this study we investigated the potential of AhR as a
stage specific marker of breast cancer. We examined the expression of AhR
by immunohistochemistry in tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 192
specimens of clinically defined three stages of invasive breast cancer:
node-negative (NN), node-positive (NP) and metastatic (Met) carcinoma.
The TMA were obtained from the National Cancer Institute Cooperative
Breast Cancer Tissue Resource [NCI-CBCTR] and were stained for AhR using
high affinity antibody. The AhR staining was then scored by three
evaluators, including two pathologists who were blinded to the study.
Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between the AhR
expression and the carcinoma case type (NN, NP or Met) (p-value of ANOVA
is The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor which binds environmental poly
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and mediates their carcinogenic effects.
Recent reports, including data from our laboratory implicate AhR in
breast cancer development and progression independent of the receptor
occupancy by PAH. In this study we investigated the potential of AhR as a
stage specific marker of breast cancer. We examined the expression of AhR
by immunohistochemistry in tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 192
specimens of clinically defined three stages of invasive breast cancer:
node-negative (NN), node-positive (NP) and metastatic (Met) carcinoma.
The TMA were obtained from the National Cancer Institute Cooperative
Breast Cancer Tissue Resource [NCI-CBCTR] and were stained for AhR using
high affinity antibody. The AhR staining was then scored by three
evaluators, including two pathologists who were blinded to the study.
Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between the AhR
expression and the carcinoma case type (NN, NP or Met) (p-value of ANOVA
is < 0.0003), and although there is a significant difference of AhR
expression among carcinoma case type of white women (pThe aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor which binds environmental poly aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAH) and mediates their carcinogenic effects. Recent reports, including
data from our laboratory implicate AhR in breast cancer development and
progression independent of the receptor occupancy by PAH. In this study
we investigated the potential of AhR as a stage specific marker of breast
cancer. We examined the expression of AhR by immunohistochemistry in
tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 192 specimens of clinically defined
three stages of invasive breast cancer: node-negative (NN), node-positive
(NP) and metastatic (Met) carcinoma. The TMA were obtained from the
National Cancer Institute Cooperative Breast Cancer Tissue Resource
[NCI-CBCTR] and were stained for AhR using high affinity antibody. The
AhR staining was then scored by three evaluators, including two
pathologists who were blinded to the study. Statistical analysis showed a
significant correlation between the AhR expression and the carcinoma case
type (NN, NP or Met) (p-value of ANOVA is < 0.0003), and although there
is a significant difference of AhR expression among carcinoma case type
of white women (p< 0.0017) there is no significant difference for black
women (pThe aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor which binds environmental poly
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and mediates their carcinogenic effects.
Recent reports, including data from our laboratory implicate AhR in
breast cancer development and progression independent of the receptor
occupancy by PAH. In this study we investigated the potential of AhR as a
stage specific marker of breast cancer. We examined the expression of AhR
by immunohistochemistry in tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 192
specimens of clinically defined three stages of invasive breast cancer:
node-negative (NN), node-positive (NP) and metastatic (Met) carcinoma.
The TMA were obtained from the National Cancer Institute Cooperative
Breast Cancer Tissue Resource [NCI-CBCTR] and were stained for AhR using
high affinity antibody. The AhR staining was then scored by three
evaluators, including two pathologists who were blinded to the study.
Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between the AhR
expression and the carcinoma case type (NN, NP or Met) (p-value of ANOVA
is < 0.0003), and although there is a significant difference of AhR
expression among carcinoma case type of white women (p< 0.0017) there is
no significant difference for black women (p<0.0968). There is also a
strong positive correlation between the receptor expression and the tumor
grade (p The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor which binds environmental poly
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and mediates their carcinogenic effects.
Recent reports, including data from our laboratory implicate AhR in
breast cancer development and progression independent of the receptor
occupancy by PAH. In this study we investigated the potential of AhR as a
stage specific marker of breast cancer. We examined the expression of AhR
by immunohistochemistry in tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 192
specimens of clinically defined three stages of invasive breast cancer:
node-negative (NN), node-positive (NP) and metastatic (Met) carcinoma.
The TMA were obtained from the National Cancer Institute Cooperative
Breast Cancer Tissue Resource [NCI-CBCTR] and were stained for AhR using
high affinity antibody. The AhR staining was then scored by three
evaluators, including two pathologists who were blinded to the study.
Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between the AhR
expression and the carcinoma case type (NN, NP or Met) (p-value of ANOVA
is < 0.0003), and although there is a significant difference of AhR
expression among carcinoma case type of white women (p< 0.0017) there is
no significant difference for black women (p<0.0968). There is also a
strong positive correlation between the receptor expression and the tumor
grade (p <0.0001). While there is no correlation with the status of
estrogen or progesterone receptors (p= 0.1643 and 0.1884, respectively),
there is strong correlation of high AhR expression and invasive breast
carcinoma in women over 50 years old (pThe aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR) is a ligand-activated basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
which binds environmental poly aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and mediates
their carcinogenic effects. Recent reports, including data from our
laboratory implicate AhR in breast cancer development and progression
independent of the receptor occupancy by PAH. In this study we
investigated the potential of AhR as a stage specific marker of breast
cancer. We examined the expression of AhR by immunohistochemistry in
tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 192 specimens of clinically defined
three stages of invasive breast cancer: node-negative (NN), node-positive
(NP) and metastatic (Met) carcinoma. The TMA were obtained from the
National Cancer Institute Cooperative Breast Cancer Tissue Resource
[NCI-CBCTR] and were stained for AhR using high affinity antibody. The
AhR staining was then scored by three evaluators, including two
pathologists who were blinded to the study. Statistical analysis showed a
significant correlation between the AhR expression and the carcinoma case
type (NN, NP or Met) (p-value of ANOVA is < 0.0003), and although there
is a significant difference of AhR expression among carcinoma case type
of white women (p< 0.0017) there is no significant difference for black
women (p<0.0968). There is also a strong positive correlation between the
receptor expression and the tumor grade (p <0.0001). While there is no
correlation with the status of estrogen or progesterone receptors (p=
0.1643 and 0.1884, respectively), there is strong correlation of high AhR
expression and invasive breast carcinoma in women over 50 years old
(p<0.0043). In conclusion, our findings identify the AhR as a new
predictive clinical marker for metastatic breast cancer and a unique
target for the design of novel selective inhibitors for therapeutic
intervention of metastatic breast cancer. More importantly, the AhR
overexpression identifies a subset of patients who could benefit from
therapy targeting this receptor.

