Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Cdc42 overexpression on the developing mammary gland


The Rho GTPase Cdc42 is overexpressed and hyperactivated in human breast
cancer; however, its precise role during normal mammary gland (MG)
development and the stochastic process of mammary tumor formation in vivo
remains unknown. We, therefore, investigated the effects of Cdc42
knockout and overexpression during mammary morphogenesis using
conditional mouse models. Previously, we demonstrated that loss of Cdc42
prevents primary mammary acinus formation in a three-dimensional (3D) in
vitro culture system. Defects in proliferation, survival, and polarity
contributed to the aberrant phenotype. Furthermore, preliminary studies
using MMTV-cre mice to conditionally delete Cdc42 in 30% of mammary
epithelial cells (MECs) in the developing MG suggest that Cdc42 knockout
MECs are outcompeted by wildtype MECs in vivo. To investigate the effects
of Cdc42 overexpression on MG development, and ultimately tumorigenesis,
we generated tetracycline-regulatable Cdc42 overexpressing mice.
Interestingly, Cdc42 overexpression results in aberrant terminal end bud
(TEB) morphogenesis, increased ductal branching, and ductal dilation,
suggesting that Cdc42 overexpression increases MEC proliferation and
invasion and may cause defects in cell adhesion and tight junctions.
Consistent with these data, Cdc42 overexpressing MECs give rise to
dysmorphic, invasive acini in 3D culture assays. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that Cdc42 is a key regulator of proliferation and
tissue architecture in the developing MG and suggest that Cdc42
overexpression may contribute to tumor formation by disrupting these
processes.

