Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of metformin on markers of insulin resistance and on
breast cancer proliferation: The putative role of IGFBP-1 as a predictive
biomarker


Use of metformin has been associated with reduced breast cancer risk in
observational studies in diabetic patients, but evidence for antitumor
activity in randomized clinical studies is lacking. In a randomized trial
in non-diabetic women with operable breast cancer who were allocated
after tumor biopsy to either metformin, 850 mg bid (n=100) or placebo
(n=100) for 4 weeks prior to surgery, we recently showed that the effect
of the drug on breast cancer proliferation (Ki-67 labeling index) varies
according to insulin resistance as assessed by HOMA index. Here we report
effects of metformin on circulating markers of insulin resistance,
including C-peptide, IGFBP-1, testosterone, SHBG and adiponectin. We
observed a non-homogenous effect of metformin on some of these
biomarkers, in a manner that is related to the dual effect of metformin
on tumor Ki-67. Overall, metformin did not affect C-peptide (p=0.74) or
IGFBP-1 levels (p=0.48), but there was a significant interaction with BMI
(p=0.02), with a 19% decrease in C-peptide (p=0.105) in women with BMI
>27 (75th percentile), and a 4% increase (p=0.367) in women with BMI 27.
In women with baseline IGFBP-1 levels Use of metformin has been
associated with reduced breast cancer risk in observational studies in
diabetic patients, but evidence for antitumor activity in randomized
clinical studies is lacking. In a randomized trial in non-diabetic women
with operable breast cancer who were allocated after tumor biopsy to
either metformin, 850 mg bid (n=100) or placebo (n=100) for 4 weeks prior
to surgery, we recently showed that the effect of the drug on breast
cancer proliferation (Ki-67 labeling index) varies according to insulin
resistance as assessed by HOMA index. Here we report effects of metformin
on circulating markers of insulin resistance, including C-peptide,
IGFBP-1, testosterone, SHBG and adiponectin. We observed a non-homogenous
effect of metformin on some of these biomarkers, in a manner that is
related to the dual effect of metformin on tumor Ki-67. Overall,
metformin did not affect C-peptide (p=0.74) or IGFBP-1 levels (p=0.48),
but there was a significant interaction with BMI (p=0.02), with a 19%
decrease in C-peptide (p=0.105) in women with BMI >27 (75th percentile),
and a 4% increase (p=0.367) in women with BMI 27. In women with baseline
IGFBP-1 levels <2.0 ng/ml (20th percentile; n=43), metformin was
associated with a 20% decrease in Ki-67 at surgery (95% CI: 36.1 to 0.01;
P=0,05), while a 10% increase was observed in women with IGFBP-1 2.0
ng/ml (95% CI: 1.7 to 22.2; p=0,099; n=153). Consistently, we observed a
strong inverse correlation between baseline IGFBP-1 levels and HOMA index
(spearman's rho = 0.455, pUse of metformin has been associated with
reduced breast cancer risk in observational studies in diabetic patients,
but evidence for antitumor activity in randomized clinical studies is
lacking. In a randomized trial in non-diabetic women with operable breast
cancer who were allocated after tumor biopsy to either metformin, 850 mg
bid (n=100) or placebo (n=100) for 4 weeks prior to surgery, we recently
showed that the effect of the drug on breast cancer proliferation (Ki-67
labeling index) varies according to insulin resistance as assessed by
HOMA index. Here we report effects of metformin on circulating markers of
insulin resistance, including C-peptide, IGFBP-1, testosterone, SHBG and
adiponectin. We observed a non-homogenous effect of metformin on some of
these biomarkers, in a manner that is related to the dual effect of
metformin on tumor Ki-67. Overall, metformin did not affect C-peptide
(p=0.74) or IGFBP-1 levels (p=0.48), but there was a significant
interaction with BMI (p=0.02), with a 19% decrease in C-peptide (p=0.105)
in women with BMI >27 (75th percentile), and a 4% increase (p=0.367) in
women with BMI 27. In women with baseline IGFBP-1 levels <2.0 ng/ml (20th
percentile; n=43), metformin was associated with a 20% decrease in Ki-67
at surgery (95% CI: 36.1 to 0.01; P=0,05), while a 10% increase was
observed in women with IGFBP-1 2.0 ng/ml (95% CI: 1.7 to 22.2; p=0,099;
n=153). Consistently, we observed a strong inverse correlation between
baseline IGFBP-1 levels and HOMA index (spearman's rho = 0.455,
p<0.0001), and BMI (spearman's rho = 0.279, pUse of metformin has been
associated with reduced breast cancer risk in observational studies in
diabetic patients, but evidence for antitumor activity in randomized
clinical studies is lacking. In a randomized trial in non-diabetic women
with operable breast cancer who were allocated after tumor biopsy to
either metformin, 850 mg bid (n=100) or placebo (n=100) for 4 weeks prior
to surgery, we recently showed that the effect of the drug on breast
cancer proliferation (Ki-67 labeling index) varies according to insulin
resistance as assessed by HOMA index. Here we report effects of metformin
on circulating markers of insulin resistance, including C-peptide,
IGFBP-1, testosterone, SHBG and adiponectin. We observed a non-homogenous
effect of metformin on some of these biomarkers, in a manner that is
related to the dual effect of metformin on tumor Ki-67. Overall,
metformin did not affect C-peptide (p=0.74) or IGFBP-1 levels (p=0.48),
but there was a significant interaction with BMI (p=0.02), with a 19%
decrease in C-peptide (p=0.105) in women with BMI >27 (75th percentile),
and a 4% increase (p=0.367) in women with BMI 27. In women with baseline
IGFBP-1 levels <2.0 ng/ml (20th percentile; n=43), metformin was
associated with a 20% decrease in Ki-67 at surgery (95% CI: 36.1 to 0.01;
P=0,05), while a 10% increase was observed in women with IGFBP-1 2.0
ng/ml (95% CI: 1.7 to 22.2; p=0,099; n=153). Consistently, we observed a
strong inverse correlation between baseline IGFBP-1 levels and HOMA index
(spearman's rho = 0.455, p<0.0001), and BMI (spearman's rho = 0.279,
p<0.0001). Interestingly, we found a significant correlation between
baseline IGFBP-1 levels and Ki-67 (p=0.032; r= 0.120), independent of
treatment. Metformin decreased testosterone levels by 20% in
postmenopausal women only (p=0.002, n=99), regardless of BMI and HOMA
index. Ki-67 at surgery was not significantly associated with
testosterone levels at baseline (p=0.737), nor did we observe any
interaction between testosterone and treatment on Ki-67. Metformin did
not affect SHBG levels (p=0.787), nor did we observe any modification of
SHBG by HOMA (p=0.9) or BMI (p=0.7). Finally, we observed a decrease by a
mean of 0.94 ug/ml (95% CI: 0.90 to 0.99) in adiponectin levels under
metformin (p=0.009) as compared with placebo, without any interaction
with Ki-67. Conclusions: Serum IGFBP-1 concentration is inversely related
to breast cancer proliferation as measured by Ki-67 labelling index, and
defines a subpopulation of breast cancer patients in which metformin
decreases tumor proliferation. These findings support the hypothesis that
insulin resistance influences breast cancer biology, and have
implications regarding both the mechanism of action of metformin at dose
used and the optimum design of future clinical trials of biguanides in
cancer prevention and treatment.

