Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo analysis of the role of Lyn tyrosine kinase in
castrate-resistant LNCaP xenograft tumor growth


Introduction: It is proposed that advanced Prostate Cancer (PCa) tumors
develop mechanisms, which re-activate the androgen receptor (AR) axis via
oncogenic pathways, in which tyrosine kinases play a crucial role.
Genetic manipulation of several tyrosine kinases in vivo revealed that
only a knockout of Lyn tyrosine Kinase, compromised prostate gland
development suggesting that Lyn plays a critical role in the regulation
of AR in normal prostate development. Our results demonstrated that Lyn
kinase enhances AR transcriptional activity and promotes prostate cancer
cell survival. Thus, we hypothesized that Lyn kinase overexpression
accelerates castrate-resistant LNCaP tumor growth and serum PSA relapse
to pre-castration levels. Method: LNCaP cells stably overexpressing Lyn
kinase (LNCaPLyn) or Empty vector (LNCapEmpty) were generated using
clonal selection. 1 106 LNCaPLyn and LNCaPEmpty were injected into the
male nude mice. Serum PSA level and tumor volumes were followed weekly
and mice were castrated when serum PSA values reached 50ng/ml. Results:
Interestingly, a higher rate of tumor growth and PSA relapse was observed
after casteration in mice bearing the LNCaPLyn compare to the
LNCapEmpty-bearing mice. Total protein was extracted from the xenograft
tumors and levels of AR, PSA, FKBP52, AKT, pAKT were analyzed. Results of
Protein analysis further confirmed the role of Lyn kinase in prostate
cancer cell survival and progression to castrate resistant stage.
Conclusion: Together, these results suggest that Lyn plays a key role in
CRPC development and that inhibiting Lyn expression could be considered
as a potential therapeutic target for CRPC.

