Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of glutamine in cancer growth, invasion and progression:
Therapeutic modulation of glutamine pathway


Glutamine, an alternative carbon source to glucose, has recently been
shown to be important for the cancer cell survival, growth and
progression. The link between glycolysis, glutaminolysis and fatty acid
oxidation is not known. Thus, there is a strong motivation to study
metabolic alternations caused by glutamine and uncover links between
various fuel sources for highly and less invasive cancer cells. Here, we
postulate that glutamine will increase glutamine uptake through
up-regulating ASCT2 expression, while decreasing the glucose uptake by
down-regulating GLUT1 expression for aggressive cancer cells. However,
for non-aggressive cancer cells, glutamine will have no effect on
glutamine and glucose uptake. Our findings indicate that NAD+/NADH ratio
regulates the glutamine's direct effect on the lactate production
irrespective of the bioenergetic substrate requirement for different
kinds of cancer cells. Our findings using quantification of metabolites
pertaining to central carbon and nitrogen metabolism provided clues as to
which pathways relevant to glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, the
TCA and urea cycles, lipid cycle, and amino acid and nucleotide
metabolisms, may be altered by glutamine in cancer cells, resulting in
identification of dominant factors which control cancer metabolism.
Through this study, we clearly demonstrate the exact of glutamine's
effect on cancer metabolism. Our results set the stage for the
development of glutaminolysis inhibitors based therapeutics for
reprogramming of cancer metabolism. We believe that development of our
oncosecretomics based metabolic strategy provides an unprecedented
opportunity for the development of nutritional supplementation that can
deregulate the adaptations and alterations induced by various nutrients
in cancer metabolism.

