Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-melanoma skin cancer and risk of second primary cancer


Objective: Previous studies suggest a positive association between
history of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) and risk of subsequent cancer
development. We prospectively investigate this association in both men
and women. Methods: In two large cohorts in the US, the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) and the Nurses Health Study (NHS),
we prospectively examined the risks of primary cancer according to
history of NMSC. In the HPFS, 876,094 person-years were followed up from
June 1986 to June 2008. In the NHS, 2,358,185 person-years were followed
up from June 1984 to June 2008. We documented 30,636 cancer cases after
ongoing NMSC diagnosis. The median time (and range) of diagnosis between
NMSC and subsequent cancer was 156 (3 - 342) months in the NHS, and 116
(3 - 259) months in the HPFS. Cox proportional hazard models were used to
calculate relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs),
adjusting for major cancer risk factors (e.g. age, smoking, body mass
index, physical activity, etc). Results: A history of NMSC was associated
with a higher risk of other primary cancers in men (RR = 1.15; 95% CI:
1.08, 1.21; P Objective: Previous studies suggest a positive association
between history of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) and risk of subsequent
cancer development. We prospectively investigate this association in both
men and women. Methods: In two large cohorts in the US, the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) and the Nurses Health Study (NHS),
we prospectively examined the risks of primary cancer according to
history of NMSC. In the HPFS, 876,094 person-years were followed up from
June 1986 to June 2008. In the NHS, 2,358,185 person-years were followed
up from June 1984 to June 2008. We documented 30,636 cancer cases after
ongoing NMSC diagnosis. The median time (and range) of diagnosis between
NMSC and subsequent cancer was 156 (3 - 342) months in the NHS, and 116
(3 - 259) months in the HPFS. Cox proportional hazard models were used to
calculate relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs),
adjusting for major cancer risk factors (e.g. age, smoking, body mass
index, physical activity, etc). Results: A history of NMSC was associated
with a higher risk of other primary cancers in men (RR = 1.15; 95% CI:
1.08, 1.21; P < 0.0001), and in women (RR = 1.25; 95% CI: 1.20, 1.31; P
Objective: Previous studies suggest a positive association between
history of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) and risk of subsequent cancer
development. We prospectively investigate this association in both men
and women. Methods: In two large cohorts in the US, the Health
Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) and the Nurses Health Study (NHS),
we prospectively examined the risks of primary cancer according to
history of NMSC. In the HPFS, 876,094 person-years were followed up from
June 1986 to June 2008. In the NHS, 2,358,185 person-years were followed
up from June 1984 to June 2008. We documented 30,636 cancer cases after
ongoing NMSC diagnosis. The median time (and range) of diagnosis between
NMSC and subsequent cancer was 156 (3 - 342) months in the NHS, and 116
(3 - 259) months in the HPFS. Cox proportional hazard models were used to
calculate relative risks (RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs),
adjusting for major cancer risk factors (e.g. age, smoking, body mass
index, physical activity, etc). Results: A history of NMSC was associated
with a higher risk of other primary cancers in men (RR = 1.15; 95% CI:
1.08, 1.21; P < 0.0001), and in women (RR = 1.25; 95% CI: 1.20, 1.31; P <
0.0001). For individual cancer sites, in men, a history of NMSC was
associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer, non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, and melanoma. In women, a history of NMSC was associated with
an increased risk of breast cancer, endometrial cancer, ovarian cancer,
lung cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, renal cancer, melanoma, and oral
cancer. Conclusions: Our prospective-cohort study provides evidence for
an association between a history of NMSC and an increased risk of
subsequent malignancies. Further studies are warranted to identify the
potential mechanism underlying this relationship.

