Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient stratification strategies for NVP-BGJ398, a selective
pan-FGFR inhibitor in phase I clinical trials


The mammalian fibroblast growth factor/fibroblast growth factor receptor
(FGF/FGFR) family comprises 22 FGF ligands, which exert their action
through 4 highly conserved transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptors
(FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4). This highly complex signaling network
regulates fundamental developmental pathways and physiological processes
in the adult organism. A growing body of evidence linking deregulation of
the FGF/FGFR system, as a consequence of genetic alterations, to the
pathogenesis of cancer makes these receptors attractive targets for
therapeutic intervention. To this purpose we have developed NVP-BGJ398,
an orally bioavailable, selective pan-FGFR kinase inhibitor which is
currently in clinical Phase I dose escalation trial. In order to
preclinically identify and validate patient stratification biomarkers
that accurately predict for response to NVP-BGJ398 in the clinic, we have
utilized the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). The CCLE is a
collection of almost 1000 cancer cell lines representing multiple tumor
types that, in a collaborative effort between The Novartis Institutes for
BioMedical Research and the Broad Institute, has been comprehensively
annotated in terms of genome-scale mRNA expression, gene copy number
alterations and gene mutations (http:/www.broadinstitute.org/ccle). In
addition, over half of these cell lines were subjected to high-throughput
cell viability assays in the presence NVP-BGJ398, with the aim of
generating cell line sensitivity data. Here we show the validation of
predictive biomarkers of response in primary human tumor xenografts,
revealed through the analysis of the CCLE, as well as the identification
of potentially new indications for NVP-BGJ398.

