Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP) regulates
the transforming growth factor-beta type I receptor expression in
osteosarcoma cells


Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-), known as a tumor suppressor, may
exert tumor promoting activity in the advanced stage of cancer.
Previously, we reported that interferon consensus sequence-binding
protein (ICSBP), also known as interferon regulatory factor-8,
up-regulates TGF-type I receptor (TGF-R I), and augments growth in HL-60
leukemic cells. In the current study, we demonstrate that ICSBP
expression up-regulates TGF-R I and increase in cell growth in U2OS human
osteosarcoma cells. To further investigate the mechanism of TGF-R I
up-regulation by ICSBP, we tested the possibility that ICSBP regulates
promoter activity of TGF-R I gene. We analyzed the promoter region of the
human TGF-R I gene in U2OS cells to find putative transcription elements
regulated by ICSBP. Luciferase reporter gene assays indicated that ICSBP
expression could enhance TGF-R I gene expression, and by promoter
deletion analysis we identified a functional ICSBP-dependent region
located at nucleotides 300 to 1 in the TGF-R I promoter. We also
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation using anti-ICSBP and found that
there are putative ICSBP binding sites in 300 to 1 region. In conclusion,
ICSBP increased TGF-R I expression by binding to TGF-R I promoter (300/1)
in U2OS cells. Exploration for the specific ICSBP binding sequences
within TGF-R I promoter (300/1) is under way, which may be helpful in
understanding the regulatory mechanism involved in TGF-R I expression by
ICSBP.

