Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paclitaxel disrupts polarized entry of membrane permeable C6
ceramide into ovarian cancer cells resulting in synchronous induction of
cell death


Exogenous cell permeable C6 ceramide is demonstrated to act
synergistically with chemotherapeutic drugs: paclitaxel, cisplatin,
doxorubicin and histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) to
induce cell death in a variety of cancer cells. We previously showed that
C6 ceramide and paclitaxel act synergistically to induce ovarian cancer
cell death via modulation of PI3/AKT cell survival pathway. This current
study is focused on the process of C6 ceramide into the cell and its
behavior during apoptosis. We investigated the entry pattern of C6
ceramide into ovarian cancer cells using fluorescent short chain C6-NBD
sphingomyelin (or C6-NBD). As imaged with confocal microscopy, we
observed that C6-NBD enters cells in a polarized pattern, characterized
by strong signals at one cellular end, a probable mitosis initiation
site. Pretreatment of the cells with filipin, an inhibitor of the
raft/caveolae endocytosis pathway, decreases C6-NBD entry into cells.
Pretreatment of water channel inhibitor CuSO4 also reduces entry of
C6-NBD. Interestingly, pretreatment of cells with paclitaxel disrupts the
polarized entry of C6-NBD into the cells, resulting in even distribution
of C6-NBD in the cytoplasm. Further studies show that pretreatment of the
cells with paclitaxel destabilizes cytoskeletal proteins, releasing
increased number of short fragments of tubulins. The data suggests that
C6 ceramide enters the cells preferably through a predetermined initial
site of mitosis. In addition to diffusion, short chain C6 ceramide enters
cells also via water channels and caveolae-mediated endocytosis.
Paclitaxel disrupts cytoskeletons and induces an even distribution of C6
ceramide in the cytoplasm resulting in synergistic ovarian cancer cell
death.

