Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-associated stromal cells increase malignancy of human
colorectal cancers through epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition


BACKGROUNDS & AIMS: Exogenously administered mesenchymal stromal cells
(MSCs) have been shown to migrate into tumor tissues and contribute to
tumor development. Still unclear is however, whether MSCs are actually a
component of the stroma associated with primary tumors. The mechanisms
underlying this interaction also remain to be characterized. Here we
investigated the phenotype and functional properties of tumor-associated
stromal cells (TASCs) isolated from human primary colorectal cancers
(CRCs) and compared them with those derived from the bone marrow of
healthy donors. METHODS: TASCs, isolated from CRC biopsies, and MSCs,
derived from the bone marrow of healthy donors, were cultured with CRC
cells from established cell lines. Proliferation, expression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related genes and surface
markers, and the release of soluble factors were evaluated.
Tumorigenicity and invasive potential of CRC cells exposed to stromal
cells were also investigated in vivo. RESULTS: TASCs expanded from
CRC-associated stroma resembled MSCs in morphology and phenotype. Similar
to MSCs, they enhanced tumor cell proliferation through the release of
soluble factors, and induced upregulation of EMT-related genes on tumor
cells in vitro through the expression of surface-bound TGF-beta.
Conditioning by stromal cells resulted in accelerated tumor growth and
increased invasiveness of CRC cells in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: The stroma
associated to primary CRCs includes MSC-like cells capable of initiating
EMT on CRC cells, thus contributing to tumor growth and spreading.

