Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCR4 inhibition sensitizes prostate cancer cells to radiotherapy
in an in vitro co-culture model


Background: Tumor microenvironment is an important factor influencing
radiosensitivity of cancer cells. Amongst multiple soluble factors
released by tumor-associated stromal cells, chemokine CXCL12 was shown to
confer pro-survival effects on cancer cells expressing chemokine receptor
4 (CXCR4). It has been recently shown that stromal microenvironment
protects prostate cancer cells from chemotherapy-induced cell death via
CXCR4 signaling, which was reversed by AMD3100, a specific CXCR4
inhibitor. In this study, AMD3100 was tested for its radiosensitizing
capacity in prostate cancer. Methods: Both short-term (72 h) and
long-term survival (17 days) of PC3 prostate cancer cells in the absence
or presence of murine stromal cells (MS5) after increasing doses of
gamma-irradiation (0-15 Gy) was assessed. To analyze the short-term
effect of stromal cells on PC3 viability after radiation, fluorescently
labeled PC3 cells were cultured with or without MS5 cells and exposed to
gamma-irradiation (0-15 Gy) in the presence or absence of 25 g/ml
AMD3100. DAPI nuclear staining was used to assess the viability of PC3
after 72 hours, Long-term survival of PC3 cells was evaluated by
clonogenic assay of PC3 cells seeded alone or on feeder layer of MS5-GFP
stromal cells and irradiated with 0-15 Gy. Results: The short-term
viability assay showed that PC3 in mono-culture show dose-dependent loss
of viability after increasing doses of irradiation, showing only 186%
(mean SD) viability when exposed to 15 Gy as compared to non-irradiated
control cells. However, in the presence of stromal cells, viability of
PC3 cells exposed to the same radiation dose remained high, reaching
levels of 692% viability (P=0.004 vs 15 Gy in monoculture). This effect
was potently reversed by AMD3100, which lowered viability of cells to
463% (P=0.001 vs 15 Gy in co-culture without AMD3100). Importantly,
addition of AMD3100 to PC3 cultured in the absence of stromal cells did
not change their viability after radiation. The long-term survival
measured in clonogenic assay showed that in presence of MS5-GFP murine
stromal cell line, 8% PC3-luc cells survived 6 Gy gamma-radiation dose,
as compared to only 3.6% of PC3 cells that were cultured without the
stromal cells (P=0.03). Conclusion: Murine stromal cells protect PC3
prostate cancer cells against irradiation-induced cell death in an in
vitro co-culture system. Treatment with AMD3100 potently inhibits the
protective effect of stromal cells on the prostate cancer cells exposed
to gamma-irradiation. These data underscore the relevance of stromal
microenvironment in tumor response to irradiation and warrant further
research on the role of CXCR4 inhibitors as a therapeutic option to
potentiate radiotherapy.

