Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential roles of caveolin-1 variants in cell death in breast
cancer


Paclitaxel, an anti-microtubule agent, is an effective chemotherapeutic
drug in breast cancer. Nonetheless, resistance to paclitaxel remains a
major clinical challenge. The need to better understand the resistant
phenotype, and to find biomarkers that could predict tumor response to
paclitaxel is urgent. In estrogen receptor (ER+) breast cancer cells,
phosphorylation of caveolin-1 (CAV1) on Y14 facilitates mitochondrial
apoptosis by increasing BCL2 phosphorylation in response to low dose
paclitaxel (10 nM). Two variants of CAV1 exist; the full-length form CAV1
(wild-type CAV1 or wtCAV1) and a truncated form CAV1. The precise
cellular functions of CAV1 variants are unknown. Only wtCAV1 has the Y14
region at the N-terminus and we now show that CAV1 variants play distinct
roles in paclitaxel-mediated cell death/survival. CAV1 is increased in
paclitaxel resistant cells compared to sensitive cells. Expression of
wtCAV1, but not CAV1, in sensitive cells significantly increased their
responsiveness to paclitaxel. These activities reflect the essential role
for Y14 phosphorylation since wtCAV1 expression, but not a
phosphorylation-deficient mutant (Y14F), inactivates BCL2 and BCLxL
through activation of c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). MCF-7 cells that
express Y14F are resistant to paclitaxel and are re-sensitized by
co-treatment with ABT-737, a BH3-mimetic small molecule inhibitor. Thus,
we highlight novel roles for CAV1 variants in cell death: wtCAV1 promotes
cell death whereas CAV1 promotes cell survival by preventing inactivation
of BCL2/BCLxL via JNK in paclitaxel-mediated apoptosis.

