Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absence of association between common genetic polymorphisms in the
TERT-CLPTM1L locus and breast cancer risk in women of African descent


Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) provided evidence that
common low-penetrance single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) contribute
to breast cancer development. Common SNPs in the TERT (telomerase reverse
transcriptase)-CLPTM1L (cleft lip and palate transmembrane 1 like) locus
have been reported to be associated with several types of cancer, such as
lung cancer/adenocarcinoma, glioma, bladder cancer, prostate cancer, and
pancreatic cancer. Researchers also hypothesized that common SNPs in the
TERT gene could play a role in breast cancer susceptibility. However,
findings are inconsistent, and most studies included Caucasians only. In
the present study, we sought to investigate whether common genetic
variants in the TERT-CLPTM1L locus could contribute to breast cancer
susceptibility in women of African ancestry. A total 2,892 women of
African ancestry were participated in the present study, consisting of
1,509 breast cancer cases and 1,383 controls collected from Nigeria,
Barbados, and the United States. Eleven SNPs in the TERT-CLPTM1L locus
that were previously shown to be associated with cancers were selected
and genotyped using the Illumina GoldenGate Genotyping platform, together
with 30 ancestry informative markers (AIMs). Test for HWE suggested that
the genotypes for all the SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg proportions and
there was no deviation from HWE. We performed unconditional multiple
logistic regression to estimate the association between the TERT-CLPTM1L
genetic variants and breast cancer risk, adjusting for age, study site,
and estimated genetic ancestry. Overall we did not observe any P value
Recent genome wide association studies (GWAS) provided evidence that
common low-penetrance single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) contribute
to breast cancer development. Common SNPs in the TERT (telomerase reverse
transcriptase)-CLPTM1L (cleft lip and palate transmembrane 1 like) locus
have been reported to be associated with several types of cancer, such as
lung cancer/adenocarcinoma, glioma, bladder cancer, prostate cancer, and
pancreatic cancer. Researchers also hypothesized that common SNPs in the
TERT gene could play a role in breast cancer susceptibility. However,
findings are inconsistent, and most studies included Caucasians only. In
the present study, we sought to investigate whether common genetic
variants in the TERT-CLPTM1L locus could contribute to breast cancer
susceptibility in women of African ancestry. A total 2,892 women of
African ancestry were participated in the present study, consisting of
1,509 breast cancer cases and 1,383 controls collected from Nigeria,
Barbados, and the United States. Eleven SNPs in the TERT-CLPTM1L locus
that were previously shown to be associated with cancers were selected
and genotyped using the Illumina GoldenGate Genotyping platform, together
with 30 ancestry informative markers (AIMs). Test for HWE suggested that
the genotypes for all the SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg proportions and
there was no deviation from HWE. We performed unconditional multiple
logistic regression to estimate the association between the TERT-CLPTM1L
genetic variants and breast cancer risk, adjusting for age, study site,
and estimated genetic ancestry. Overall we did not observe any P value <
0.05 after permutation in the analyses of allelic and genotypic models.
We also conducted haplotype analysis for a five-SNP LD block,
rs4975616-rs3816659-rs402710-rs401681-rs31489 but again failed to obtain
significant association in the present study. Our findings do not support
an effect of the tested genetic variants in the TERT-CLPTM1L locus on
breast cancer susceptibility in women of African ancestry. However, it is
worth noting that our current study did not apply a fine-mapping
strategy; other genetic variants in LD with previously reported cancer
susceptibility polymorphisms might be bona fide causal variants
contributing to the risk of breast cancer. Larger independent studies
from diverse populations are expected to evaluate the importance of the
TERT-CLPTM1L locus in breast cancer.

