Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Premorbid body weight and survival in high grade glioma


Introduction: Greater adiposity has been linked to an increased risk
and/or poorer survival in a variety of cancers. However, the relationship
of body fat mass to glioma outcome is not well studied. In the present
analysis, we examined whether premorbid body weight determined 1 to 5
years prior to diagnosis is associated with glioma patient survival.
Methods: The analysis was based on 619 patients with high grade glioma
(84% glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and16% anaplastic astrocytoma (AA))
enrolled in a US-based multicenter case-control study between December
2004 and March 2011. In a structured interview, subjects provided
information on height at age 21, weight at age 21 and weight 5 years
prior to the study interview (1 year during the pilot study phase; N=95).
Subjects were interviewed a median of 1.2 months following glioma
diagnosis (interquartile range: 3 weeks to 2.5 months). A total of 408
deaths occurred, all glioma-related, 2 months to 4.8 years following
diagnosis (median: 9.4 months). Proportional hazards regression was used
to estimate Hazard Ratios (HR) and 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs) for
glioma-related death according to categories of body mass index (BMI)
(kg/m2) defining obesity (BMI >=30; N=178), overweight (BMI 25-29.9;
N=254), normal weight (BMI 18.5-24.9; N=179) and underweight (BMI
Introduction: Greater adiposity has been linked to an increased risk
and/or poorer survival in a variety of cancers. However, the relationship
of body fat mass to glioma outcome is not well studied. In the present
analysis, we examined whether premorbid body weight determined 1 to 5
years prior to diagnosis is associated with glioma patient survival.
Methods: The analysis was based on 619 patients with high grade glioma
(84% glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and16% anaplastic astrocytoma (AA))
enrolled in a US-based multicenter case-control study between December
2004 and March 2011. In a structured interview, subjects provided
information on height at age 21, weight at age 21 and weight 5 years
prior to the study interview (1 year during the pilot study phase; N=95).
Subjects were interviewed a median of 1.2 months following glioma
diagnosis (interquartile range: 3 weeks to 2.5 months). A total of 408
deaths occurred, all glioma-related, 2 months to 4.8 years following
diagnosis (median: 9.4 months). Proportional hazards regression was used
to estimate Hazard Ratios (HR) and 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs) for
glioma-related death according to categories of body mass index (BMI)
(kg/m2) defining obesity (BMI >=30; N=178), overweight (BMI 25-29.9;
N=254), normal weight (BMI 18.5-24.9; N=179) and underweight (BMI <18.5;
N=8). All results were adjusted for age, gender and glioma subtype (GBM
versus AA). Results: Patients with a premorbid BMI of 30 or greater had
an elevated rate of glioma-related death when compared to patients with a
normal BMI (HR=1.39; 95% CI: 1.07-1.82) whereas no significant excess
mortality was observed in patients defined as overweight (HR=1.15; 95%
CI: 0.89-1.49). Patients underweight 1-5 years prior to diagnosis had
significantly poorer outcomes when compared to patients of normal weight
(HR=2.43; 95% CI: 1.06-5.57), and weight loss of 10 pounds or greater
between age 21 and 1-5 years prior to diagnosis (N=27) was significantly
associated with a worse outcome (HR=1.92; 95% CI: 1.18-3.13) when
compared to stable weight (within 10 pounds). All results were consistent
in men and women, and were unchanged in analysis restricted to patients
treated with the current standard of care including surgery, radiation
and temozolomide (not shown). Conclusions: In this large
well-characterized patient series, premorbid obesity was significantly
associated with poorer survival following glioma diagnosis. Low body
weight was also associated with a poorer outcome possibly reflecting
effects of preclinical disease-associated changes on body weight.
Findings for obesity support the hypothesis that elevated pre-diagnostic
body weight is detrimental to glioma survival and suggest a role for
insulin resistance, aberrant IGF signaling, and/or low-level chronic
inflammation in the progression of high grade tumors.

