Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer action of garcinol in vitro and in vivo is mediated
through inhibition of STAT-3 signaling


Garcinol, obtained from Garcinia indica, has exhibited some promising
anticancer activity. In particular, our earlier work has demonstrated its
ability to inhibit cell proliferation, and induce apoptosis in multiple
cancer cell lines originated from breast, prostate as well as pancreatic
cancer. However, its exact mechanism of action remains largely unclear.
Here we show that garcinol targets signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 (STAT-3) signaling pathway. STAT-3 is frequently found to
be activated in many cancer types and this is the first report on such
action of garcinol leading to its anticancer effects. Garcinol inhibited
total as well as phosphorylated STAT-3 in breast, prostate and pancreatic
cancer cell lines, and was also found to inhibit cell migration and
colony formation of all the cancer cell lines tested. STAT-3
phosphorylation was inhibited by garcinol in a dose-dependent manner. We
also observed an inhibitory effect of garcinol on IL-6-induced STAT-3
phosphorylation and production of uPA and VEGF which might explain the
reduced migration and aggressiveness in cells treated with garcinol. The
results were further verified in vivo in a MDA-MB-231 breast cancer mouse
xenograft model where administration of garcinol significantly inhibited
tumor growth, and western blot analysis of tumor lysates indicated
reduced STAT-3 expression and activation. These results indicate that
garcinol may have translational potential as chemopreventive or
therapeutic agent against multiple cancers through inhibition of STAT-3
signaling pathway.

