Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -secretase inhibitor PF-03084014 diminishes the tumor-initiating
cells and demonstrates synergy with docetaxel in breast cancer xenograft
models


Notch signaling is known to be a survival pathway for tumor-initiating
cells. In this report, we demonstrate that the -secretase inhibitor
PF-03084014 significantly enhances the antitumor activity of docetaxel in
multiple xenograft models of triple-negative breast cancer. Mechanistic
evaluation revealed that PF-03084014 perturbs the Notch signaling pathway
and suppresses the function of tumor initiating cells (TIC). In
MDA-MB-231Luc model, treatment of docetaxel led to a significant increase
of CD133+/CD44+ and ALDH+ subpopulations by FACS analysis. In combination
with PF-03084014, these two unique cell subpopulations were significantly
diminished. Correspondingly, the functional analyses by tumor re-implant
and mammosphere-forming efficiency assays revealed that docetaxel-therapy
promoted the tumor initiating capability of the remaining cells, in which
an increased stem cell property and Notch pathway activation were
observed through gene signature changes. In contrast, PF-03084014
co-treatment with docetaxel substantially hampered the self-renewal
ability of these cells. Notch target gene analysis demonstrated the
biological relevance of PF-03084014-induced activity. To characterize the
function of CD133+/CD44+ subpopulation, MDA-MB-231Luc tumors were
de-bulked by the treatment with docetaxel. Subsequently, the CD133+/CD44+
and CD133-/CD44- subpopulatons were isolated and re-implanted in SCID-bg
mice using a limiting dilution approach. The results showed that
CD133+/CD44+ cells gave rise to tumors with a 100 % take rate (10/10),
whereas CD133-/CD44- cells were not tumorgenic (0/10). In addition,
CD133+/CD44+ cells exhibited much higher tumorigenicity compared with the
respective adherent parental cell line. PF-03084014 treatment caused a
significant delay of CD133+/CD44+ tumor growth. The ability of
PF-03084014 to suppress TICs was also observed in other breast cancer
xenografts, including patient derived models. This data suggests that
anti-TIC is one of the contributing mechanisms for the synergistic
activities of PF-03084014 in combination with docetaxel. Our work
provides potential therapeutic opportunities for PF-03084014 to improve
conventional cytotoxic therapy by inhibiting Notch signaling in
tumor-initiating cells and other bulk tumor cells.

