Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZAP-70 enhances migration of malignant B lymphocytes toward
lymphoid organs in a Burkitt lymphoma xenograft model


Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is a lymphoproliferative disease
characterized by the accumulation and proliferation of mature
B-lymphocytes in the blood, bone marrow and secondary lymphoid organs.
CLL patients with adverse outcome prognosis can be identified by the
presence of a high ZAP-70 expression. ZAP-70, a protein tyrosine kinase
that plays a crucial role in cellular activation in T and NK cells, has
been related to aggressive features of the CLL cells, such as higher
migrative capacity in vitro. In order to analyze the consequences of
ZAP-70 ectopic expression in an in vivo model, we stably transfected a
Burkitt cell line (Raji) with a vector expressing a ZAP-70-GFP fusion
protein. Raji transfectants showed constitutively active ZAP-70 protein.
Subsequently, thirty-four 8-week old SCID mice were inoculated
intravenously with 5 x106 cells from each cell line (control Raji-GFP, 12
mice; Raji-ZAP-70-GFP, 9 mice). Mice were euthanized when hind legs
paralysis, dyspnea, or tumor growth was observed. Organs were obtained to
quantify the percentage of GFP-positive cells present in each organ by
flow cytometry. Median survival of mice injected with the ZAP-70 cell
line did not differ from that observed in the control mice (16 days,
p=0.658). Percentage of GFP positive cells was analyzed by flow cytometry
in different tissue compartments (Table 1). We observed a significantly
higher percentage of infiltrating GFP-positive cells in the bone marrow
from mice injected with ZAP-70 expressing cell line (58.8%6.08 vs
4.2%1.4, pChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is a lymphoproliferative
disease characterized by the accumulation and proliferation of mature
B-lymphocytes in the blood, bone marrow and secondary lymphoid organs.
CLL patients with adverse outcome prognosis can be identified by the
presence of a high ZAP-70 expression. ZAP-70, a protein tyrosine kinase
that plays a crucial role in cellular activation in T and NK cells, has
been related to aggressive features of the CLL cells, such as higher
migrative capacity in vitro. In order to analyze the consequences of
ZAP-70 ectopic expression in an in vivo model, we stably transfected a
Burkitt cell line (Raji) with a vector expressing a ZAP-70-GFP fusion
protein. Raji transfectants showed constitutively active ZAP-70 protein.
Subsequently, thirty-four 8-week old SCID mice were inoculated
intravenously with 5 x106 cells from each cell line (control Raji-GFP, 12
mice; Raji-ZAP-70-GFP, 9 mice). Mice were euthanized when hind legs
paralysis, dyspnea, or tumor growth was observed. Organs were obtained to
quantify the percentage of GFP-positive cells present in each organ by
flow cytometry. Median survival of mice injected with the ZAP-70 cell
line did not differ from that observed in the control mice (16 days,
p=0.658). Percentage of GFP positive cells was analyzed by flow cytometry
in different tissue compartments (Table 1). We observed a significantly
higher percentage of infiltrating GFP-positive cells in the bone marrow
from mice injected with ZAP-70 expressing cell line (58.8%6.08 vs
4.2%1.4, p<0.001), whereas in the rest of organs the infiltration was
comparable (Table 1). Raji-ZAP-70-GFP has a differential expression of
CCR7 and CD49d among others (Calpe et al, Blood 2011). In conclusion,
malignant B-lymphocytes with ectopic expression of activated ZAP-70
protein showed enhanced ability to migrate toward and infiltrate the bone
marrow, where soluble factors are produced to mediate homing, survival,
and proliferation of tumor cells.


