Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Passive tumor targeting with drug-loaded liposomes: Experimental
evidences that size does matter


Background Liposomes encapsulating anticancer agents are to date the only
nano-objects used in clinical oncology. Drug-loaded liposomes are
expected to exhibit a higher specificity towards malignant tissues
because they can theoritically leak out of the blood vessels in the
tumour surrounding, a phenomenon known as the Enhanced Permability
Retention (EPR) effect, a.k.a. passive targeting. Here, we have developed
a range of experiments designed to investigate how liposome size will
impact on their distribution in the body and their ability to target
tumors eventually. Methods: experiments were carried out in swiss nu/nu
female mice orthotopically xenografted with the human breast cancer
MDA-231-LUC+ model. Tumor localization and size was monitored by 3D
bioluminescence after injecting 150 mg/mg luciferine I.P. Four different
batches of LipoFufol, a stealth liposomal formulation of modulated 5-FU,
were prepared. Changes in sonication parameters (frequency, duration)
generated different sizes ranging from 10 up to 1 000 nm in diameter.
Inclusion of a fluorescent tag (ie, DIR) in the liposomes membrane
allowed their monitoring in mice over 10 days. Double
bioluminescence/fluorescence detection was finally performed to evaluate
the liposome accumulation in the tumors throughout time. Response at
10-day was evaluated through caspase-3 expression. Additionally, plasma
drug monitoring of liposomal 5-FU was performed in Wistar rats and
compared with the pharmacokinetics of the free drug. Results:
Biodistribution study using different sizes of DIR-labelled LipoFufol
confirmed that both distribution and accumulation phases depend on the
liposome size. Pegylation allowed to partly bypass the liver. Liver
uptake was observed between 3 and 6 hours. Smaller liposomes tend to
reach faster the tumor tissues and to accumulate there throughout time.
Several days (ie, one week) after a single injection, tumors were the
only tissue with detectable liposomes. A delay in reaching the tumor was
observed when LipoFufol size was ranging between 80-120 nm. When
Liposomal diameter was superior to 120 nm, a decrease in the
extravasation within the tumor led to a reduced tumoral accumulation as
compared with Background Liposomes encapsulating anticancer agents are to
date the only nano-objects used in clinical oncology. Drug-loaded
liposomes are expected to exhibit a higher specificity towards malignant
tissues because they can theoritically leak out of the blood vessels in
the tumour surrounding, a phenomenon known as the Enhanced Permability
Retention (EPR) effect, a.k.a. passive targeting. Here, we have developed
a range of experiments designed to investigate how liposome size will
impact on their distribution in the body and their ability to target
tumors eventually. Methods: experiments were carried out in swiss nu/nu
female mice orthotopically xenografted with the human breast cancer
MDA-231-LUC+ model. Tumor localization and size was monitored by 3D
bioluminescence after injecting 150 mg/mg luciferine I.P. Four different
batches of LipoFufol, a stealth liposomal formulation of modulated 5-FU,
were prepared. Changes in sonication parameters (frequency, duration)
generated different sizes ranging from 10 up to 1 000 nm in diameter.
Inclusion of a fluorescent tag (ie, DIR) in the liposomes membrane
allowed their monitoring in mice over 10 days. Double
bioluminescence/fluorescence detection was finally performed to evaluate
the liposome accumulation in the tumors throughout time. Response at
10-day was evaluated through caspase-3 expression. Additionally, plasma
drug monitoring of liposomal 5-FU was performed in Wistar rats and
compared with the pharmacokinetics of the free drug. Results:
Biodistribution study using different sizes of DIR-labelled LipoFufol
confirmed that both distribution and accumulation phases depend on the
liposome size. Pegylation allowed to partly bypass the liver. Liver
uptake was observed between 3 and 6 hours. Smaller liposomes tend to
reach faster the tumor tissues and to accumulate there throughout time.
Several days (ie, one week) after a single injection, tumors were the
only tissue with detectable liposomes. A delay in reaching the tumor was
observed when LipoFufol size was ranging between 80-120 nm. When
Liposomal diameter was superior to 120 nm, a decrease in the
extravasation within the tumor led to a reduced tumoral accumulation as
compared with <100 nm liposomes. A marked trend was observed between
tumor acculation of LipoFufol and response, thus demonstrating that
preliminary biodistribution phase is a major issue for ensuring a maximal
efficacy in tumor-bearing animals. When administered in rats, 80 nm
stealth liposomal 5-FU exhibited markedly reduced clearance (ie, 50%) and
prolonged half-life as compared with free 5-FU, thus confirming that
encapsulation does optimize the pharmacokinetics profile of the drugs.
Conclusions: Our present data suggest that size considerations are
critical when designing nano-objects in oncology, and that 80 nm objects
are required to achieve a better selectivity towards tumor tissues with
higher efficacy.

