Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COX-2 expression in human pancreatic cancer cells is associated
with an epithelial phenotype


Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is a developmental pathway that has
been shown to have a direct role in tumor progression and drug
resistance. Increasing evidence suggests that EMT (and MET) leads to
global changes in chromatin architecture that modifies expression of
numerous genes. Interestingly, reports in the literature indicate a
possible association between cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression and EMT.
COX-2 is upregulated in response to inflammation, and is known to be
overexpressed in multiple malignancies, including pancreatic cancer. As a
critical mediator of prostaglandin production, COX-2 has proangiogenic
properties associated with increased tumor growth and invasion, and is
also thought to play a role in the carcinogenic process. In this study,
we report that COX-2 expression is associated with an epithelial
phenotype among a panel of human pancreatic cancer cells. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), we demonstrate increased acetylated H3 at the
COX-2 promoter region in the epithelial cell lines versus mesenchymal
cell lines. Treatment with a Type-I selective HDAC inhibitor SNDX-275
increased levels of acetylation at the COX-2 promoter region in
mesenchymal cell lines and subsequently promoted COX-2 gene expression.
Overall, these data point to an epigenetic suppression of COX-2
expression in mesenchymal pancreatic cancer cells that can be reversed by
Type-I HDAC inhibitors. Our results suggest that COX2 inhibitors will
preferentially target epithelial pancreatic cancers and that combinations
of Cox2 and HDAC inhibitors may display increased anti-tumor activity.

