Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary heme iron and risk of colorectal cancer with specific
mutations in colorectal cancer key genes


Background: Red meat intake has been linked to increased colorectal
cancer risk but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Experimental
studies suggest a role for dietary heme, but epidemiological evidence for
its carcinogenic potential is inconclusive. Because heme may promote
specific mutations, it could be insightful to link heme exposure data to
colorectal cancer (CRC) with such mutations in key genes in an
observational, population-based study. Methods: We investigated the
association between dietary heme iron intake (tertiles) and CRC cancer
with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and Kirsten ras (KRAS) mutations,
and tumor protein 53 (TP53) overexpression, in the Netherlands Cohort
Study. After 7.3 yrs of follow-up, excluding the first 2.3 years,
adjusted rate ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
calculated, using 3,949 subcohort members (aged 55-69 years at baseline)
and 733 CRC patients. Results: Heme iron intake was associated with an
increased risk of CRC with activating G>A mutations in KRAS (RR=2.14 for
the highest compared to the lowest intake; 95% CI: 1.17, 3.92; Ptrend =
0.01). In addition, a positive association between heme intake and the
risk of overall G>A mutations in APC tumors was observed (RR=1.73 for the
highest compared to the lowest intake; 95% CI: 1.18, 2.54; Ptrend =
0.005). However, this association was not found when restricting our
analyses to CRC harboring G>A mutations leading to a truncated APC
(RR=1.35 for the highest compared to the lowest intake; 95% CI:
0.79,2.37; Ptrend = 0.29). Moreover, there was a positive association
between heme iron intake and the risk of P53 overexpressed tumors which
was not observed in tumours without P53 overexpression (Pheterogeneity =
0.08). Conclusion: These results suggest that heme iron intake is
associated with an increased risk of colorectal tumors harboring G>A
transitions in KRAS and to a lesser extend in APC, and overexpression of
P53. Taking CRC heterogeneity into account contributes to a better
molecular understanding of the established association between red meat
intake and CRC.

