Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PI3 Kinase gamma control of Arginase-1 expression promotes tumor
immunosuppression


Tumor inflammation promotes angiogenesis, immunosuppression, and tumor
growth. Tumor associated myeloid cells, which include incompletely
differentiated myeloid derived suppressor cells, macrophages and
granulocytes, establish an immunosuppressive microenvironment in tumors
through the expression of Arginase-1, which depletes the tumor
microenvironment of arginine, thereby promoting T cell death and NK cell
inhibition. Suppression of Arginase-1 expression and function could alter
the course of cancer therapy by stimulating anti-tumor immunity to work
in concert with anti-tumor vaccine or chemotherapeutic agents targeting
tumor cell proliferation and survival. We found that myeloid cells
express Arginase-1 in response to IL-6 stimulation in a Jak2/Stat3 and
PI3Kinase gamma/mTORc1 dependent manner by promoting the activation of
the transcriptional enhancer C/EBPbeta. Pharmacological or genetic
blockade of Jak2, Stat3, PI3Kgamma, mTOR or C/EBPbeta suppressed
expression of Arginase-1. Suppression of PI3Kgamma or Arginase-1
expression blocked myeloid cell induced death of T cells in vitro.
PI3Kgamma inhibition blocked Arginase-1 expression in vivo, thereby
increasing the number of CD8+ T cells in tumors, stimulating T
cell-mediated cytotoxicity of tumor cells in vivo and suppressing growth
and metastasis of implanted and spontaneous tumors. These studies reveal
that suppression of Arginase-1 expression with PI3Kgamma or Jak2/Stat3
inhibitors can serve as an effective therapeutic strategy in oncology.

