Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive proteomic analysis of cisplatin resistance in
ovarian cancer


We have conducted a comprehensive proteomic analysis of an ovarian cancer
cell line (A2780) and its cisplatin resistant daughter line (A2780-CP20)
to identify key regulators and signaling pathways that confer cisplatin
resistance. Quantitative proteomic profiling was conducted of defined
biological compartments including that from global lysates, the nuclear
fraction, the phosphoproteome and the secretome. Total cell lysates and
nuclear fractions were harvested from A2780 and A2780-CP20 cultured in
the presence or absence of cisplatin (3 M) for 72 h. The secretome
fractions were collected from A2780 and A2780-CP20 cultured in
serum-free, phenol red-free media in the presence or absence of cisplatin
(3 M) for 24 h. Phosphopeptides were enriched from peptide digests of
total lysates of A2780 and A2780-CP20 cultured in the presence or absence
of cisplatin (3 M) for 15 min using TiO2. Sample digests were analyzed by
high-resolution LC-MS/MS that resulted in the identification of 2703,
2286, 1815, and 1362 proteins from the global, nuclear, secretome, and
phosphoproteome fractions, respectively. Spectral counting was utilized
to quantify the relative abundance of proteins identified. Nuclear
proteins identified at elevated abundance in the cisplatin resistant
A2780-CP20 including an array of chromatin remodeling proteins, such as
SATB1, SATB2, coilin, AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 3A
(ARID3A), ARID3B, and ARID3Cwere validated by Western blot and qPCR in
A2780/A2780-CP20 as well as other gynecologic cancer cell lines.
Modulation of the abundance level of these candidates and the phenotypic
impact on cisplatin resistance utilizing shRNA knockdown will be
described. Differential proteins selected from the secretome analysis for
western blot validation include Fras1-related extracellular matrix
protein 2 (FREM2), stanniocalcin-1 (STC1), angio-associated migratory
cell protein (AAMP), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (SERPINE1), high
mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), and chloride intracellular channel
protein 2 (CLIC4), stromelysin-2 (MMP10), interstitial collagenase
(MMP2), and CD166 antigen. Validated candidate protein targets from the
secretome analysis will be tested by IHC on formalin fixed tissue
sections as well as ELISA and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) by mass
spectrometry in serum from recurrent and non-recurrent ovarian cancer
patients.

