Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Proteomic analysis identifies RAB1A as a novel marker of invasion
in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is a paediatric cancer arising from precursor cells of the
sympathetic nervous system. Extreme heterogeneity in clinical behavior
may be attributed to recurrent genomic abnormalities including
chromosomal losses/gains, and amplification of the MYCN oncogene. We
previously described a signature of 37 miRNAs significantly
differentially expressed in MYCN amplified tumours, and have confirmed
one such microRNA, miR-542-5p, acts as a tumour suppressor in
neuroblastoma. Our current research focuses on identifying the mechanism
of action of miR-542-5p. No enrichment for miR-542-5p 3UTR target sites
was found in a panel of mRNA differentially expressed after ectopic
over-expression of miR-542-5p. We therefore hypothesize that miR-542-5p
has a more significant impact on protein levels through translational
inhibition than mRNA degradation. To test our hypothesis, we carried out
proteomic analysis using label-free quantification of high sensitive
reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled nanospray tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total, 27,000 peptides were examined per
sample. Of these, 17 proteins changed significantly in MYCN amplified
Kelly cells (6 down-regulated and 11 up-regulated) and 14 proteins
changed significantly in MYCN single copy SKNAS cells (9 down-regulated
and 5 up-regulated). No overlap between significantly differentially
expressed mRNA and protein was observed, and none of the proteins
identified contained miR-542-5p predicted target sites. Significance was
determined based on a confidence score of greater than 40 (applies to
protein identification), number of peptides used to identify and
quantitate the proteins as 2, and a p-value Neuroblastoma is a paediatric
cancer arising from precursor cells of the sympathetic nervous system.
Extreme heterogeneity in clinical behavior may be attributed to recurrent
genomic abnormalities including chromosomal losses/gains, and
amplification of the MYCN oncogene. We previously described a signature
of 37 miRNAs significantly differentially expressed in MYCN amplified
tumours, and have confirmed one such microRNA, miR-542-5p, acts as a
tumour suppressor in neuroblastoma. Our current research focuses on
identifying the mechanism of action of miR-542-5p. No enrichment for
miR-542-5p 3UTR target sites was found in a panel of mRNA differentially
expressed after ectopic over-expression of miR-542-5p. We therefore
hypothesize that miR-542-5p has a more significant impact on protein
levels through translational inhibition than mRNA degradation. To test
our hypothesis, we carried out proteomic analysis using label-free
quantification of high sensitive reversed-phase liquid chromatography
coupled nanospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total, 27,000
peptides were examined per sample. Of these, 17 proteins changed
significantly in MYCN amplified Kelly cells (6 down-regulated and 11
up-regulated) and 14 proteins changed significantly in MYCN single copy
SKNAS cells (9 down-regulated and 5 up-regulated). No overlap between
significantly differentially expressed mRNA and protein was observed, and
none of the proteins identified contained miR-542-5p predicted target
sites. Significance was determined based on a confidence score of greater
than 40 (applies to protein identification), number of peptides used to
identify and quantitate the proteins as 2, and a p-value < 0.05. Fold
changes are based on difference in average protein abundance between the
miR-542-5p mimic and negative control cells across 3 biological repeats.
The R2 database (http://r2.amc.nl)) was used to assess the clinical
relevance of these proteins. Of the 31 differentially expressed proteins,
26% were significantly associated (p Neuroblastoma is a paediatric cancer
arising from precursor cells of the sympathetic nervous system. Extreme
heterogeneity in clinical behavior may be attributed to recurrent genomic
abnormalities including chromosomal losses/gains, and amplification of
the MYCN oncogene. We previously described a signature of 37 miRNAs
significantly differentially expressed in MYCN amplified tumours, and
have confirmed one such microRNA, miR-542-5p, acts as a tumour suppressor
in neuroblastoma. Our current research focuses on identifying the
mechanism of action of miR-542-5p. No enrichment for miR-542-5p 3UTR
target sites was found in a panel of mRNA differentially expressed after
ectopic over-expression of miR-542-5p. We therefore hypothesize that
miR-542-5p has a more significant impact on protein levels through
translational inhibition than mRNA degradation. To test our hypothesis,
we carried out proteomic analysis using label-free quantification of high
sensitive reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled nanospray tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total, 27,000 peptides were examined per
sample. Of these, 17 proteins changed significantly in MYCN amplified
Kelly cells (6 down-regulated and 11 up-regulated) and 14 proteins
changed significantly in MYCN single copy SKNAS cells (9 down-regulated
and 5 up-regulated). No overlap between significantly differentially
expressed mRNA and protein was observed, and none of the proteins
identified contained miR-542-5p predicted target sites. Significance was
determined based on a confidence score of greater than 40 (applies to
protein identification), number of peptides used to identify and
quantitate the proteins as 2, and a p-value < 0.05. Fold changes are
based on difference in average protein abundance between the miR-542-5p
mimic and negative control cells across 3 biological repeats. The R2
database (http://r2.amc.nl)) was used to assess the clinical relevance of
these proteins. Of the 31 differentially expressed proteins, 26% were
significantly associated (p < 0.05) with overall (OS), or event-free
survival (EFS) in neuroblastoma. Of particular interest was RAB1A, which
increased in abundance in both miR-542-5p over-expressing cell lines.
Increased expression of RAB1A was associated with better OS (p=0.015) and
EFS (p=0.00016), consistent with results for miR-542-5p. Depletion of
cellular RAB1A mRNA by siRNA also produced similar result to that seen
with miR-542-5p antagomer. In both SKNAS and Kelly cells, RAB1A
knock-down resulted in a significant (pNeuroblastoma is a paediatric
cancer arising from precursor cells of the sympathetic nervous system.
Extreme heterogeneity in clinical behavior may be attributed to recurrent
genomic abnormalities including chromosomal losses/gains, and
amplification of the MYCN oncogene. We previously described a signature
of 37 miRNAs significantly differentially expressed in MYCN amplified
tumours, and have confirmed one such microRNA, miR-542-5p, acts as a
tumour suppressor in neuroblastoma. Our current research focuses on
identifying the mechanism of action of miR-542-5p. No enrichment for
miR-542-5p 3UTR target sites was found in a panel of mRNA differentially
expressed after ectopic over-expression of miR-542-5p. We therefore
hypothesize that miR-542-5p has a more significant impact on protein
levels through translational inhibition than mRNA degradation. To test
our hypothesis, we carried out proteomic analysis using label-free
quantification of high sensitive reversed-phase liquid chromatography
coupled nanospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In total, 27,000
peptides were examined per sample. Of these, 17 proteins changed
significantly in MYCN amplified Kelly cells (6 down-regulated and 11
up-regulated) and 14 proteins changed significantly in MYCN single copy
SKNAS cells (9 down-regulated and 5 up-regulated). No overlap between
significantly differentially expressed mRNA and protein was observed, and
none of the proteins identified contained miR-542-5p predicted target
sites. Significance was determined based on a confidence score of greater
than 40 (applies to protein identification), number of peptides used to
identify and quantitate the proteins as 2, and a p-value < 0.05. Fold
changes are based on difference in average protein abundance between the
miR-542-5p mimic and negative control cells across 3 biological repeats.
The R2 database (http://r2.amc.nl)) was used to assess the clinical
relevance of these proteins. Of the 31 differentially expressed proteins,
26% were significantly associated (p < 0.05) with overall (OS), or
event-free survival (EFS) in neuroblastoma. Of particular interest was
RAB1A, which increased in abundance in both miR-542-5p over-expressing
cell lines. Increased expression of RAB1A was associated with better OS
(p=0.015) and EFS (p=0.00016), consistent with results for miR-542-5p.
Depletion of cellular RAB1A mRNA by siRNA also produced similar result to
that seen with miR-542-5p antagomer. In both SKNAS and Kelly cells, RAB1A
knock-down resulted in a significant (p<0.001) increase in the number on
invading cells, but no change in the rate of proliferation. We therefore
conclude that RAB1A is indirectly regulated by miR-542-5p through a yet
unknown mechanism. Reduced expression of RAB1A significantly increases in
vitro invasion, consistent with clinical data showing that lower
expression is highly associated with poor survival in neuroblastoma.

