Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of tumorigenicity by targeting anterior gradient-2
(AGR2) through multiple epitopes binding of the monoclonal antibody 18A4


Monoclonal antibody is playing an increasingly important role in the
treatment of cancer. Specifically, secreted proteins and cell surface
receptors that promote tumor growth and metastasis are emerging as
important targets for antibody-based anti-cancer therapy. Recent
discoveries reveal that Anterior Gradient-2(AGR2), a secreted signal
molecule, is over-expressed in a series of adenocarcinoma cancer types
and promotes cell growth and migration in vitro and in vivo that can be
blocked by polyclonal antibodies. Thus, AGR2 might be a promising target
for antibody-based anti-cancer therapy. Here, with a newly developed
monoclonal antibody, we report evidence supporting the feasibility of
antibody-based therapy against AGR2 as the target. Our study established
a unique AGR2-blocking monoclonal antibody 18A4 which requires the
co-existence of separate AGR2 epitopes and regions for efficient
antibody-antigen binding. This monoclonal antibody against AGR2 can
specifically inhibit the AGR2-induced growth and migration of several
lines of tumor cells in vitro. Xenograft experiments showed marked
repression of tumor growth by 18A4 treatment in nude mice. These results
further validated the anti-AGR2 strategy in cancer therapy. In addition,
our results suggest, at least in some cases, the necessity of using large
regions or whole protein, not short peptides, in developing therapeutic
antibodies against certain antigens.

