Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of tumor cell trafficking by chromogranin A


Chromogranin A (CgA) is an acidic glycoprotein present within secretory
vesicles of many normal and neoplastic endocrine and neuroendocrine
cells. CgA is abnormally released in circulation in patients with
neuroendocrine and non neuroendocrine tumors, as in a subpopulation of
patients with non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), with important
prognostic implications. We have previously demonstrated that CgA can
preserve the barrier function of the vascular endothelium. This prompted
us to investigate the role of circulating CgA on metastasis development
and tumor self-seeding, the ability of tumor cells to re-infiltrate their
tumor of origin. Using mouse mammary adenocarcinoma models we observed
that CgA inhibits both tumor self-seeding and organ colonization. Studies
of the mechanism of action showed that CgA can inhibit the shedding of
cancer cells in circulation from primary tumors, the re-infiltration of
tumors and the colonization of lungs by circulating tumor cells.
Pharmacological modulation of CgA further affected the development of
lung colonies by tumor cells. We obtained evidences to suggest that CgA
can inhibit the transendothelial migration of cancer cells, by preserving
the VE-cadherin-dependent endothelial barrier function. These findings
point to a role of circulating CgA as a regulator of tumor cell
trafficking from tumor-to-blood and from blood-to-tumor/normal tissues.
Inhibition of the multidirectional trafficking of cancer cells in normal
and neoplastic tissues may represent a novel strategy to reduce cancer
progression.

