Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low-dose gamma-irradiation inhibits IL-6 secretion from human lung
fibroblasts to suppress bronchial epithelial cell transformation by
cigarette smoke carcinogen


The relationship between low-dose (The relationship between low-dose
(<100 mSv) ionizing radiation (LDR) and human cancer risk is
controversial. While microenvironment consisting of stromal cells,
cytokines and growth factors is modulated by carcinogens to favor
carcinogenesis, how LDR impacts this oncogenic process is not well
understood. In this study, we investigated the role and mechanism of
low-dose ionizing radiation in modulating the response of human lung
fibroblasts to carcinogen stimulation and the impacts of which on
bronchial epithelial cell transformation. Using a human cytokine antibody
array, we found that secretion of proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, CXCL1
and CXCL5 from human lung fibroblasts was induced by cigarette smoke
carcinogen benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide (BPDE), which was inhibited by a
low dose of -ray irradiation. BPDE induced IL-6 secretion from lung
fibroblasts in a dose-dependent manner, which was suppressed when the
NF-B and ERK pathways were blocked. LDR effectively inhibited NF-B but
not ERK activated by BPDE, suggesting that NF-B is the target for LDR in
fibroblasts. In addition, conditioned media from BPDE-treated fibroblasts
activated STAT3 in the immortalized human bronchial epithelial cell line
Beas-2B, which was blocked with an IL-6 neutralizing antibody as well as
by pretreating fibroblasts with LDR. Furthermore, IL-6 significantly
enhanced BPDE-induced Beas-2B cell transformation in vitro. These results
suggest that LDR inhibits cigarette smoke carcinogen-induced lung
carcinogenesis through suppressing secretion of protumorigenic cytokines
such as IL-6 from fibroblasts in the tumor-prone microenvironment.

