Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of pazopanib and ixabepilone in patients with solid
tumors


Background: Pazopanib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting multiple
receptors including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, platelet
derived growth factor receptor, and C-KIT and acts by inhibiting
angiogenesis and tumor growth. Ixabepilone is a semi-synthetic analog of
epothilone B and promotes microtubule stabilization inducing tumor cell
apoptosis. The purpose of this study was to determine the optimal
tolerated regimen (OTR) of combination pazopanib and ixabepilone during
the first cycle of therapy for the treatment of advanced, previously
treated solid tumor malignancies. Methods: Treatment was given until
disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, or patient refusal.
Ixabepilone was administered intravenously on day 1 of a 21-day cycle.
Dose escalation started at 32 mg/m2 and increased to 40mg/m2. Pazopanib
was administered orally once daily beginning on day 1 at a starting dose
of 400mg and escalating at 200mg increments up to 800mg. Toxicity was
assessed by using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events
(version 3.0). Disease assessment was done every 2 cycles. Results:
Twenty-eight patients (17 male and 11 female) with ECOG PS of 0 or 1 were
enrolled from December 2009 to September 2011.The median age was 58 years
(range 30-72). Primary tumor sites included lung (8), colon (9), skin
(2), gallbladder (1), cholangiocarcinoma (1), neuroendocrine (1), head
and neck (3), esophagus (1), small cell cancer (1), and leimyosarcoma
(1). A total of 120 cycles of chemotherapy was administered with a median
number of cycles per patient of 4 (range 1-13). Two dose-limiting
toxicities (DLT) were seen including grade 4 neutropenia at dose level 2
(ixabepilone 40 mg/m2 and pazopanib 400 mg) and grade 4 thrombocytopenia
with proteinuria at dose level 4 (ixabepilone 32 mg/m2 and pazopanib 800
mg). Dose level 2a was added to the study to confirm the safety of the
proposed ixabepilone dose (32 mg/m2) before escalating the dose of
pazopanib to levels 3 and 4. Dose level 3 was determined to be the
optimal tolerated regimen (pazopanib 600 mg and ixabepilone 32 mg/m2).
Grade 3-4 hematologic toxicities included neutropenia (14), febrile
neutropenia (1), thrombocytopenia (2), and anemia (1). Grade 3-4
non-hematologic toxicities included weakness (1), dehydration (1),
transaminitis (1), and fatigue (1). One patient withdrew from the study
due to toxicity. Median time to progression during the study period was 3
months. Disease stabilization was seen in 11 patients and partial
response in 5 patients. Conclusions: We were able to establish the OTR
for combination of pazopanib and ixabepilone. Progression-free survival
seen in patients with a variety of previously treated, advanced solid
tumors warrants further investigation of this regimen.

