Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Function of cytoplasmic histone deacetylase 5 is required for
HIF-1 stability


Hypoxia is frequently associated with solid tumors and ischemic
disorders, which are the top two leading causes of mortality in the
world. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is a major regulator of angiogenesis
and cellular adaptation to hypoxia. Accordingly HIF function has been
considered a therapeutic target for multiple diseases. Histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been involved in regulating HIF function
and HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) have been documented to repress HIF
function. However, histone deacetylases encompass multiple members, each
has different cellular functions. HDACIs in clinical application or under
development generally inhibit more than one HDAC. It is unclear which
specific member of the HDAC family is involved in the regulation of HIF
function. We present data here to show that histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5)
is required for HIF-1 protein stability. Knock-down of HDAC5 impaired
hypoxic accumulation of HIF-1 and its function. In contrast, knock-down
of HDAC1, HDAC3 or HDAC6 showed little or no effect. On the other hand,
overexpression of HDAC5 enhanced HIF-1 stability. Specifically, cytosol
localized HDAC5 mutant shows stronger effects on stabilizing HIF-1
compared to wild-type HDAC5. Mutation demolishing the deacetylase
activity abolished the ability of HDAC5 to stabilize HIF-1. Taken
together, our data suggest that a cytosolic deacetylase activity of HDAC5
is required to stabilize HIF-1. These findings also suggest that HDAC5
could be biological target for therapies based on modulating HIF
function. This work is supported in part by grant R01-CA129494 (N.S.)
from NCI, NIH.

