Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of cell signaling pathway-associated miRNAs
using protein expression array data in NCI-60 cells


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are single-stranded, non-coding RNA molecules and on
average only 22 nucleotides long that regulate gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level. The current approaches with miRNA-mRNA
association were not enough to verify real functional targets at protein
level, which could affect on biological signaling pathway. In this study,
we developed a correlation based approach (sequence-independence) to
predict potential miRNA targets with genomic and proteomic data including
the expression of phosphorylated proteins in NCI-60 cells. To do this we
calculated the number of correlated probe-pairs between
miRNA(439)-mRNA(22k) and protein(222)-mRNA probe pairs. Then, two
significant output pair sets were combined by mRNA probes and then
counted the number of common probes. With these count numbers, finally we
generated Association score matrix between miRNA and protein probes.
Using those score matrix, we evaluated the highly associated miRNAs with
36 biological pathways, which play critical roles in cell cycle,
proliferation and metastasis. Among these associations, we found that
miR-500 cluster is highly associated with ERK/MAPK signaling pathway
through activating MEK1/2 phosphorylation in Melanoma and breast cancer
cells. In conclusion, we developed a novel expression profile based
approach to systematically predict potential miRNA functional targets
which play critical roles in cell signaling pathways from the NCI-60
genomic and proteomic data at whole genomic scale.

