Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular delineation of TIP150 function underlying kinetochore
microtubule dynamics during mitotic chromosome segregation


The microtubule cytoskeleton orchestrates the cellular dynamics and
plasticity that underlies cellular morphogenesis. Microtubule binding
proteins known as TIP proteins regulate the dynamic properties of
microtubules during chromosomal segregation and cellular division. Our
recent study revealed that TIP150 is a novel plus end tracking protein
interacting with EB1 and MCAK in vitro and in vivo (EMBO Reports. 2009.
10:857-65). However, it is unclear whether and how this interaction
regulates chromosome segregation in mitosis. We hypothesize that Tip150
is essential for chromosome segregation, and governs proper
kinetochore-microtubule attachment at the microtubule plus end. To
delineate the molecular function of TIP150 and its regulation in
chromosome segregation and the mitotic cell cycle, a combination of
biophotonic analyses with RNA interference was employed.
Immunofluorescence reveals that TIP150 localizes to the outer most part
of the kinetochore and to the ends of growing microtubules by its
C-terminal domain. Suppression of TIP150 resulted in an increase in
mitotic defects, reduced kinetochore-microtubule attachment, and
perturbed chromosome oscillation dynamics. Furthermore, the use of total
internal reflection microscopy reveals a novel role for TIP150-EB1
elicited tracking to the microtubule ends. We reason that TIP150 is
essential for kinetochore-microtubule attachment in mitosis and
microtubule dynamics.

