Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The chemokine receptor CXCR7 transduces its signal through mTOR:
the role of everolimus


Everolimus (RAD001, Afinitor) is an mTOR inhibitor FDA-approved for the
treatment of patients with advanced clear cell renal cancer (RCC) after
failure of treatment with sunitinib or sorafenib, or both drugs. It
targets the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex inhibiting a
serine/threonine kinase regulating PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. Previous
evidences demonstrated that the activation of the chemokine receptor
CXCR4 involved the mTOR pathway and that CXCR4 was overexpressed in RCC.
Recently, also the deorphanized chemokine receptor CXCR7 was described in
RCC and defined as an independent prognostic factor. Nevertheless, little
is known about the CXCR4-CXCL12-CXCR7-induced signalling. Aim of the
study was to investigate if the CXCL12/CXCR4/CXCR7 complex could
transduce the signal through mTOR identifying new therapeutic targets. In
human renal cancer cells (RXF393, A498) treatment with CXCL12, the CXCR4
and CXCR7 ligand, induced mTOR pathway, as demonstrated through p70S6K
and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) induction;
the CXCL12 induction is specifically inhibited by AMD3100, a CXCR4
inhibitor, and CCX733, a CXCR7 inhibitor. The inhibition of the mTOR
pathway through RAD001 treatment, inhibited CXCL12-induced pERK1/2 and
chemotaxis while AMD3100 and CCX733 were not able to inhibit pERK and
migration in RXF393 and A498 cell lines suggesting a role of mTOR
downstream of CXCR4 and CXCR7. To analyze the CXCR7 transduction pathway
the function of p38 kinase, a CXCR7 target, was evaluated. CXCL12
dramatically induced p38 MAPK in cell lines RXF393 and A498 and the
p38MAPK induction was specifically inhibited by CCX733, a CXCR7
inhibitory molecule but, interestingly, p38 MAPK is dramatically induced
by AMD3100, a CXCR4 antagonist. To further confirm the p38 role
downstream of CXCR7, CXCL12 was unable to induce p38 phosphorylation in
RXF393 cells CXCR7 siRNA transduced while inhibited by the specific CXCR7
inhibitor CCX733 in RXF393 cells. The treatment with RAD001 in human
renal cancer cells inhibited the p38 induction CXCL12-mediated. This is
the first evidence demonstrating that p38 is a CXCR7 target in human
renal cancer cells and that AMD3100, a specific CXCR4 antagonist,
potentiate the CXCL12 activity on CXCR7. Thus the combined inhibition of
the three members CXCR4/CXCR7/mTOR is a valid therapeutic strategy to
treat RCC inhibiting two cross talking pathways CXCR4-CXCR7 signaling to
mTOR.

