Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Childhood leukemia and lymphoma: African experience supports a
role for environmental factors


Major differences exist in the nature of leukaemia and lymphoma (Le/Ly)
in low-income African children (LIAC) compared to those of high-income
world (HIW). These include the absence of the peak incidence of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in the first quinquennium (FQ) that
characterizes the disease in HIW. Conversely, chloroma association with
acute myelogenous leukemia (CA-AML) and Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) are rare
in HIW. In 1982-1984, using standard international study protocol, we
performed immunophenotypic characterisation (IPC) in 86 Le/Ly patients,
including 18 2x106) were studied for spatial clustering, while the
incidence (x105) of childhood ALL (CAL) subtypes was estimated and
compared with those of contemporary populations elsewhere. Reduced
incidence of CAL in Ibadan was due to depletion of c-ALL and absence of
FQ-ALL, and correlated inversely with the incidence of Burkitt's lymphoma
(BL) and of chloroma-associated AML (CA-AML). C-ALL predominated in
low-density/higher socio-economic (SES), vis-a-vis BL and CA-AML in
high-density/lower SES lifestyle areas. The aberrant response model,
which has been hypothesized for the high prevalence of c-ALL in HIW may
also serve to explain the opposite pathology in LIAC. It is proposed that
either an identical or closely related etiological pathway is shared by
all three disorders.


