Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of glutathione pegylated liposomal doxorubicin
(2B3-101) for the treatment of brain cancer


Treatment options for brain cancer are limited and overall prognoses are
poor. Glutathione pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (2B3-101) is being
developed as a new treatment option for patients with brain cancer. It is
essentially based on the already marketed pegylated liposomal doxorubicin
(Doxil), with an additional glutathione (GSH) coating to safely enhance
delivery across the blood-brain barrier. In a GLP safety study 2B3-101
was administered by intravenous bolus injection on days 1, 15 and 29 to
Wistar rats at 1.75, 3.5 and 7 mg/kg. Doxil (7 mg/kg), empty
GSH-PEG-liposomes, and vehicle were included, resulting in 6 groups (10
animals/sex/group). Additional animals were allowed 4 weeks of recovery
or were used for toxicokinetic analysis. From observations during the
in-life part of the study, as well as after histopathological
investigations, no major differences were noted between 2B3-101 and Doxil
at 7 mg/kg q14dx3. No treatment-related changes in the brain were
observed neither after repeated 2B3-101 exposure, nor after treatment
with empty GSH-PEG liposomes. In addition, 2B3-101 did not result in
doxorubicin-related toxicity in heart tissue. After 1st and 3rd
administration of 7 mg/kg, plasma AUC values were 10-44% higher for Doxil
when compared to 2B3-101, while C0 values were considered similar for
both drug substances. Apparent half-lives for Doxil were 36.1 and 32.6
hours in males and females after the 3rd administration, respectively.
For 2B3-101 these values were slightly shorter at 30.0 and 28.8 hours in
males and females, respectively. The doxorubicin brain/plasma ratio
showed retention of both 2B3-101 and Doxil after repeated doses, where
2B3-101 resulted in significantly higher doxorubicin retention in the
brain 2 weeks after the 3rd administration (pTreatment options for brain
cancer are limited and overall prognoses are poor. Glutathione pegylated
liposomal doxorubicin (2B3-101) is being developed as a new treatment
option for patients with brain cancer. It is essentially based on the
already marketed pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil), with an
additional glutathione (GSH) coating to safely enhance delivery across
the blood-brain barrier. In a GLP safety study 2B3-101 was administered
by intravenous bolus injection on days 1, 15 and 29 to Wistar rats at
1.75, 3.5 and 7 mg/kg. Doxil (7 mg/kg), empty GSH-PEG-liposomes, and
vehicle were included, resulting in 6 groups (10 animals/sex/group).
Additional animals were allowed 4 weeks of recovery or were used for
toxicokinetic analysis. From observations during the in-life part of the
study, as well as after histopathological investigations, no major
differences were noted between 2B3-101 and Doxil at 7 mg/kg q14dx3. No
treatment-related changes in the brain were observed neither after
repeated 2B3-101 exposure, nor after treatment with empty GSH-PEG
liposomes. In addition, 2B3-101 did not result in doxorubicin-related
toxicity in heart tissue. After 1st and 3rd administration of 7 mg/kg,
plasma AUC values were 10-44% higher for Doxil when compared to 2B3-101,
while C0 values were considered similar for both drug substances.
Apparent half-lives for Doxil were 36.1 and 32.6 hours in males and
females after the 3rd administration, respectively. For 2B3-101 these
values were slightly shorter at 30.0 and 28.8 hours in males and females,
respectively. The doxorubicin brain/plasma ratio showed retention of both
2B3-101 and Doxil after repeated doses, where 2B3-101 resulted in
significantly higher doxorubicin retention in the brain 2 weeks after the
3rd administration (p<0.02). A modified Irwin test in male Wistar rats
(n=8 per group) showed no neurobehavioral effects and no effects of
2B3-101 on body temperature after administration of 1.75 mg/kg, 3.5 mg/kg
and 7 mg/kg. Also, empty GSH-PEG liposomes and Doxil did not result in
neurobehavioral effects and effects on body temperature. Efficacy of GMP
grade 2B3-101 at the maximum tolerated dose was confirmed in mice with
intracranial U87 xenografts; compared to saline 10 mg/kg q4dx4 and 18
mg/kg q8dx2 showed a survival benefit of up to 60%, where 18 mg/kg q8dx2
seemed superior. In addition, in mice carrying subcutaneous MDA-MB-231
xenografts it was shown that 10 mg/kg q4dx3 2B3-101 and Doxil both
produced significant anti-tumor activity, were well tolerated, and gave
similar weight loss profiles. In conclusion, the therapeutic benefit and
predictable safety profile of clinical-scale 2B3-101 was successfully
demonstrated in preclinical studies. A clinical trial to determine the
safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of 2B3-101 in patients with
solid tumors and brain metastases or recurrent malignant glioma was
initiated in June 2011.

