Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AZD2014, a dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor is differentiated from
allosteric inhibitors of mTORC1 in ER+ breast cancer


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a major sensor of nutrients
and energy and is part of two multiprotein complexes mTORC1 and mTORC2.
mTOR activation is widely reported in cancer and is associated with poor
prognosis and resistance to standard of care treatment. Allosteric
inhibitors of mTOR such as rapamycin partially inhibit mTORC1 and do not
inhibit mTORC2. AZD2014 is a close analogue of AZD8055 and a selective
inhibitor of mTOR kinase. AZD2014 has greater inhibitory activity against
mTORC1 compared to rapamycin: AZD2014 decreases p4EBP1 Thr37/46, inhibits
the translation initiation complex and decreases overall protein
synthesis while rapamycin has no effect. AZD2014 also inhibits the mTORC2
biomarkers pAKTSer473 and pNDRG1Thr346. AZD2014 has broad
antiproliferative activity across multiple tumour cell lines. In
particular, AZD2014 induces growth inhibition and cell death in breast
cancer cell lines, including ER+ cell lines with acquired resistance to
hormone therapy. In vitro, the potency of AZD2014 is 5-fold lower
compared to AZD8055. However, AZD2014 has improved pharmacokinetics
compared to AZD8055. In vivo, AZD2014 induces tumour growth inhibition
against several xenograft models including a human primary explant model
of ER+ breast cancer refractory to tamoxifen. The antitumour activity is
associated with modulation of both mTORC1 and mTORC2 substrates. Overall,
AZD2014 is a potent mTOR kinase inhibitor with an in vitro profile
comparable to AZD8055 but with improved pharmacokinetic properties over
AZD8055. AZD2014 is currently in phase 1 clinical trials.

