Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DSG3 facilitates cancer cell growth and invasion through
DSG3-plakoglobin-TCF signaling pathway


DSDSG3 has been reported to act as an oncogene in head and neck cancers
(HNCs), but the underlying mechanism of its oncogenic activity is
unclear. In this study, we aimed to validate the proposed oncogenic
function of DSG3 and investigate its downstream regulatory mechanisms.
When we stably transfected HNC cells with a short hairpin DSG3-RNAi
(shDSG3) to suppress DSG3 expression, reductions in cell growth and
colony formation were observed, in addition to cell cycle arrest at the
G0/G1 phase. Both cell migration and invasion abilities were also
decreased. BecauseDSG3 is associated with plakoglobin which has been
reported as a tumor suppressorin desmosomes, we examined whether or not
the phenotypic alterations that occur following DSG3 silencing were
mediated through the plakoglobin signaling pathway. Immunoprecipitation
and immunofluorescent staining analyses revealed that DSG3 silencing
disrupted the interaction of DSG3 with plakoglobin and induced the
translocation of plakoglobin from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Using a
luciferase reporter assay and western blot analysis, we found that
knockdown plakoglobin increasedTCF transcriptional activity butDSG3
silencing significantly reduced TCF transcriptional activity and
subsequently suppressed the expression of the downstream target genes of
the TCF transcription factors, including c-myc, cyclin D1, and MMP7,
which are involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and invasion.
Xenograft mice administered withDSG3 silencing significantly inhibited
tumor growth in nude mice and also reduced c-myc, cyclin D1 and MMP7
expression. In conclusion, we found that DSG3 has an oncogenic function
in HNC which is through DSG3-plakoglobin-TCF signaling pathway and
facilitates cancer growth and invasion. Key words: DSG3, plakoglobin,
TCF/LEF promoter, cell growth, cancer invasion

