Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metabolism and mechanism of action of fluorocyclopentenylcytosine
(RX-3117)


Cytidine analogs play an important role in the treatment of various types
of cancer, both solid tumors and leukemia. A novel cytidine analog
fluorocyclopentenylcytosine (RX-3117) was characterized for its cytotoxic
effects, its metabolism and its mechanism of action in a panel of 9 solid
tumor and leukemic cell lines, as well as 6 variants resistant to
gemcitabine, cytarabine and other pyrimidine analogs. Sensitivity in the
parent cell lines after 72 hr exposure varied 75 fold with IC50 values
from 0.4 to 30 M RX-3117. The human equilibrative nucleoside transporter
mediates transport of RX-3117, since its inhibition protected cells.
Uridine and cytidine also protected cells against RX-3117, indicating
that activation of RX-3117 is dependent on phosphorylation catalyzed by
uridine-cytidine kinase (UCK), which was abundant in all tested cell
lines, including the gemcitabine resistant variants. Deoxycytidine did
not protect cells against RX-3117. RX-3117 was a very poor substrate for
cytidine deaminase (66,000-fold less than gemcitabine). After its uptake
in cells, RX-3117 was rapidly metabolised to its nucleotides with the
triphosphate being the most prominent form (90% of all nucleotides),
while synthesis of the nucleotides was highest in the most sensitive cell
lines (U937 and A2780 cells) and lowest in the least sensitive cells
(CCRF CEM cells). No difference in nucleotide formation was observed
between the SW1573 and its gemcitabine resistant variant SW1573/G. In the
AG6000 cells, the dCK- variant of A2780 and resistant to gemcitabine and
RX-3117, a normal monophosphate level was found, but no di-and
triphosphates were formed, explaining its resistance. Similarly
incorporation of RX-3117 into RNA and DNA was higher in the sensitive
A2780 and low in the insensitive SW1573 cells, with no difference between
the gemcitabine sensitive and resistant variants. The effect of RX-3117
on synthesis of RNA and DNA was quite different; in the sensitive U937
cells 10 M RX-3117 inhibited RNA synthesis 90%, while in A2780 and
CCRF-CEM cells 100 M RX-3117 was required for 90% inhibition of RNA
synthesis. The effect on DNA synthesis was quite different. 1 M RX-3117
completely inhibited DNA synthesis in the sensitive U937 cells, 80-90%
inhibition was achieved with 10 M in both CCRF CEM variants and with 100
M in SW1573/G and AG6000, but in A2780 and SW1573 cells 100 M only
resulted in a partial or no inhibition, respectively. In conclusion,
RX-3117 showed a completely different sensitivity profile compared to
other cytidine analogs. Its uptake is transporter dependent; it is not
activated by dCK, but by UCK. RX-3117 is incorporated into RNA and DNA;
RX-3117 hardly affected RNA synthesis at IC50 values, but inhibited DNA
synthesis. Its metabolism to nucleotides is related with its sensitivity,
possibly because they directly inhibit the target presumably DNA
methyltransferase.

