Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin E forms and 13-carboxychromanol, a long-chain metabolite
of -tocopherol, induce cell death by interrupting de novo sphingolipid
synthesis in human cancer cells


Studies have shown that vitamin E forms including gamma-tocopherol (T),
delta-tocopherol (T) and especially gamma-tocotrienol (TE), a major form
of vitamin E in palm oil, exhibited potent anticancer activities in
various types of cancer cells. 13-carboxychromanol (13-COOH), a
long-chain metabolite of T, has recently been shown to have
anti-inflammatory activities and appears to induce apoptosis in certain
type of cancer cells. However, the molecular mechanisms of the anticancer
effects are not understood. In the current study, we found that 13-COOH
inhibited the growth and induced death of human colon and pancreatic
cancer cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. In these activities,
13-COOH was more potent than TE, which is much stronger than T and T.
Since we have previously shown that TE and T induce prostate cancer cell
death by modulation of sphingolipid metabolism, we investigated whether
TE and 13-COOH have effects on sphingolipids using liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry. Treatment of HCT116 cells with TE or 13-COOH
significantly increased dihydroceramides and dihydrosphingosine, two
sphingoid bases in de novo synthesis pathway of sphingolipids. In
contrast, sphingomyelins and ceramides remained largely unchanged after
treatment. This accumulation of intracellular dihydroceramides and no
apparent change of sphingomyelins suggest potential inhibition of
dihydroceramide desaturase (DEGS) enzyme by these compounds.
Consistently, we found that TE inhibited the DEGS activity in a time- and
dose-dependent manner in an in situ assay, while it did not have any
effect on DEGS expression. These results indicate that TE and 13-COOH
interrupt de novo synthesis of sphingolipids, which play a role in
regulating cell death.

