Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of the pro-apoptotic genes induced by tumor suppressor
p53


The tumor suppressor p53 regulates apoptosis in response to DNA damage.
Promoter selectivity of p53 depends mainly on its phosphorylation.
Notably, the phosphorylation at serine-46 (Ser46) of p53 is indispensable
to promote pro-apoptotic genes. However, little is known about the
pro-apoptotic genes induced by Ser46 phosphorylation of p53. In our
study, we aimed to investigate pro-apoptotic genes induced by p53 using
microarray analysis and ChIP sequencing assay. Although microarray
analysis became common tool in molecular biology, novelty of our research
is combining microarray analysis with ChIP sequencing assay to discover
direct target of p53 in Ser46 specific manner. Analyze of microarray
showed specific up-regulation of 2723 genes in wild type p53 (wt-p53).
Alternatively, 1338 genes were interacted directly with only wt-p53 but
not with mutant p53 (Ser46 is substituted with alanine, p53S46A) in ChIP
sequencing assay. The comparison of two assays, microarray analysis and
ChIP sequencing assay, investigated thirty genes in relation with Ser46
phosphorylation of tumor suppressor p53. Those thirty genes were
clarified by real time RT-PCR and the genes strongly elicited were chosen
further study. The research will be continued with more clarification and
apoptotic function of candidate genes in response to DNA damage will be
investigated. We hope that the discovery of pro-apoptotic genes induced
by p53 will convey the important role in cancer research and therapy.
Acknowledgement: This project is partly supported by Global Center of
Excellence (GCOE) program at TMDU.

