Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: gp78/AMFR is involved in ubiquitination of PGI/AMF


Phosphoglucose isomerase/autocrine motility factor (PGI/AMF) is a
multifunctional protein that intracellularly catalyzes the
interconversion of glucose 6-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate in both
glycolytic and gluconeogenesis pathways and extracellularly acts as a
cytokine associated with aggressive tumor phenotype. Secreted PGI/AMF
promotes cancer cell invasion and metastasis by stimulating cell motility
via an autocrine manner following binding to its seven-transmembrane
glycoprotein receptor gp78/AMFR. Gp78/AMFR also demonstrates an
additional function in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as ubiquitin ligase
(E3). Thus, gp78/AMFR represents a potential link between ubiquitination,
ER-associated degradation (ERAD) and metastasis. We questioned if
gp78/AMFR is involved in the ubiquitination of PGI/AMF, and whether the
ubiquitinated PGI/AMF can be related to cancer progression and
metastasis. In this study, we found that indeed PGI/AMF can be
ubiquitinated and gp78/AMFR is involved in this process. PGI/AMF was
predominantly ubiquitinated via K29-linked ubiquitin chains.
Monoubiquitinated PGI/AMF increases the secretion of PGI/AMF and this is
the first report to show that monoubiquitinated PGI/AMF is secreted out
of the cells. As secretion of PGI/AMF plays a significant role in tumor
cell migration and invasion during metastasis, these studies assist in
understanding the regulation of PGI/AMF and the mechanisms of its
secretion, which may provide a new therapeutic target for tumor
metastasis.

