Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folate coated platinum nanoparticles: An effective strategy for
targeting cancer therapy


PURPOSE: Platinum nanoparticles (Pt-NPs) are directly toxic to cancer,
but also to normal cells. The purpose of this project is to demonstrate
that Pt-NPs can selectively kill cancer cells by targeting their delivery
through the folate receptor, the expression of which is greatly increased
on cancer compared with normal cells. METHODS: Folate coated Pt-NPs were
synthesized and used to treat normal (MC-3T3-E1) and malignant (ROS
17/2.8) bone cells in tissue culture. The Pt-NPs were characterized using
transmission electron microscopy and zeta potential analysis, which
indicated that they had a diameter of 3.5 0.6 nm and were negatively
charged. The effects of dose titrated NP preparations and controls,
including the addition of free folate, were examined by optical, confocal
and transmission electron microscopy. Cell counts were performed using a
hemocytometer. RESULTS: Folate coated Pt-NPs were exquisitely toxic to
both MC-3T3-E1 and ROS 17/2.8 cell lines causing 100% lethality in the
initially tested concentration range (130 - 260 ug/mL). Dose dependent
toxicity for both cell lines was evident at lower folate coated Pt-NP
concentrations (2 - 22 ug/mL). At the lowest concentrations examined
(PURPOSE: Platinum nanoparticles (Pt-NPs) are directly toxic to cancer,
but also to normal cells. The purpose of this project is to demonstrate
that Pt-NPs can selectively kill cancer cells by targeting their delivery
through the folate receptor, the expression of which is greatly increased
on cancer compared with normal cells. METHODS: Folate coated Pt-NPs were
synthesized and used to treat normal (MC-3T3-E1) and malignant (ROS
17/2.8) bone cells in tissue culture. The Pt-NPs were characterized using
transmission electron microscopy and zeta potential analysis, which
indicated that they had a diameter of 3.5 0.6 nm and were negatively
charged. The effects of dose titrated NP preparations and controls,
including the addition of free folate, were examined by optical, confocal
and transmission electron microscopy. Cell counts were performed using a
hemocytometer. RESULTS: Folate coated Pt-NPs were exquisitely toxic to
both MC-3T3-E1 and ROS 17/2.8 cell lines causing 100% lethality in the
initially tested concentration range (130 - 260 ug/mL). Dose dependent
toxicity for both cell lines was evident at lower folate coated Pt-NP
concentrations (2 - 22 ug/mL). At the lowest concentrations examined
(<5.15 ug/mL), optical microscopy demonstrated selective delivery of the
Pt-NPs to malignant ROS 17/2.8 cells as compared with normal MC-3T3-E1
cells. At these concentrations, selective toxicity to the ROS 17/2.8
cells was also demonstrated by confocal microscopic examination of actin
elongation and cell alignment patterns as well as direct measures of cell
survival. With prolonged exposure to folate coated Pt-NPs at 3.2 ug/mL,
98.5% of normal MC-3T3-E1 cells survived compared with just 32.8%
survival of malignant ROS 17/2.8 cells (p PURPOSE: Platinum nanoparticles
(Pt-NPs) are directly toxic to cancer, but also to normal cells. The
purpose of this project is to demonstrate that Pt-NPs can selectively
kill cancer cells by targeting their delivery through the folate
receptor, the expression of which is greatly increased on cancer compared
with normal cells. METHODS: Folate coated Pt-NPs were synthesized and
used to treat normal (MC-3T3-E1) and malignant (ROS 17/2.8) bone cells in
tissue culture. The Pt-NPs were characterized using transmission electron
microscopy and zeta potential analysis, which indicated that they had a
diameter of 3.5 0.6 nm and were negatively charged. The effects of dose
titrated NP preparations and controls, including the addition of free
folate, were examined by optical, confocal and transmission electron
microscopy. Cell counts were performed using a hemocytometer. RESULTS:
Folate coated Pt-NPs were exquisitely toxic to both MC-3T3-E1 and ROS
17/2.8 cell lines causing 100% lethality in the initially tested
concentration range (130 - 260 ug/mL). Dose dependent toxicity for both
cell lines was evident at lower folate coated Pt-NP concentrations (2 -
22 ug/mL). At the lowest concentrations examined (<5.15 ug/mL), optical
microscopy demonstrated selective delivery of the Pt-NPs to malignant ROS
17/2.8 cells as compared with normal MC-3T3-E1 cells. At these
concentrations, selective toxicity to the ROS 17/2.8 cells was also
demonstrated by confocal microscopic examination of actin elongation and
cell alignment patterns as well as direct measures of cell survival. With
prolonged exposure to folate coated Pt-NPs at 3.2 ug/mL, 98.5% of normal
MC-3T3-E1 cells survived compared with just 32.8% survival of malignant
ROS 17/2.8 cells (p < 0.0001). Consistent with the postulated mechanism
of folate coated Pt-NP cell entry via the folate receptor, all toxic
effects of folate coated Pt-NPs (at 3.2 ug/mL) were completely eliminated
by the addition of high doses (10x normal) of free folate, postulated to
saturate folate receptor binding sites. CONCLUSION: Folate coated Pt-NPs
can be used to directly and selectively kill cancer cells by targeting
their delivery through the folate receptor. To our knowledge, this is the
first report to demonstrate that targeting a functionally over-expressed
cancer cell receptor with its natural ligand linked to toxic NPs can
impart selective cancer cytotoxicity.

