Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of CXCR5 and its natural ligand CXCL13 in ovarian cancer


Ovarian carcinoma (OvCa) is the most lethal gynecological malignancy
among women and its poor prognosis is mainly due to metastasis.
Chemokines and their corresponding receptors play an important role in
metastasis and organ specific homing of cancer cells including OvCa.
CXCL13 is a homeostatic chemokine for lymphocyte- and prostate cancer
cell-homing and -positioning within secondary lymphoid tissues. This
important chemokine acts through its only known receptor, CXCR5. In this
study, we provide the first evidence that in OvCa CXCR5 and CXCL13 are
highly elevated in OvCa cell lines and clinical samples. Flow cytometry
analysis of OvCa cell lines (OVCAR-3 and SK-OV-3) show significantly
higher expression of CXCR5 in comparison to normal adult ovarian
epithelial cells. To determine the clinical significance of CXCR5
expressed by OvCa cell lines, ovarian cancer tissue microarrays were
stained for CXCR5 and CXCL13. Aperio ScanScope scanning system was used
to quantify the immuno-histochemical staining of CXCR5 and CXCL13. Our
results show significantly higher expression of CXCR5 and CXCL13 (p
Ovarian carcinoma (OvCa) is the most lethal gynecological malignancy
among women and its poor prognosis is mainly due to metastasis.
Chemokines and their corresponding receptors play an important role in
metastasis and organ specific homing of cancer cells including OvCa.
CXCL13 is a homeostatic chemokine for lymphocyte- and prostate cancer
cell-homing and -positioning within secondary lymphoid tissues. This
important chemokine acts through its only known receptor, CXCR5. In this
study, we provide the first evidence that in OvCa CXCR5 and CXCL13 are
highly elevated in OvCa cell lines and clinical samples. Flow cytometry
analysis of OvCa cell lines (OVCAR-3 and SK-OV-3) show significantly
higher expression of CXCR5 in comparison to normal adult ovarian
epithelial cells. To determine the clinical significance of CXCR5
expressed by OvCa cell lines, ovarian cancer tissue microarrays were
stained for CXCR5 and CXCL13. Aperio ScanScope scanning system was used
to quantify the immuno-histochemical staining of CXCR5 and CXCL13. Our
results show significantly higher expression of CXCR5 and CXCL13 (p <
0.001) in cancerous tissue than compared to non-neoplastic ovarian
tissue. Among cancerous tissues, CXCR5 and CXCL13 expression was highest
in serous adenocarcinoma followed by serous papillary cystadenoma,
endometrioid adenocarcinoma, mucinous adenocarcinoma, cystadenoma,
mucinous boderline adenocarcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, granulosa cell
tumor, dysgerminoma, transitional cell carcinoma, brenner tumor, yolk sac
tumor, adenocarcinoma and fibroma. These data demonstrate biological and
clinical significance of CXCR5 and CXCL13 as an OvCa biomarker.

