Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implementation of -Image Guided Radio-Therapy in the treatment of
experimental glioma mouse models: Assessment of the potential of agents
that interfere with DNA repair


High-grade glioma is a devastating and uniformly fatal disease for which
better therapy is urgently needed. In order to evaluate the potential of
novel therapies, we have developed a set of glioma mouse models. These
include LoxP conditional mouse models that form spontaneous high-grade
gliomas following intracranial injection of lentiviral CMV-Cre vectors
and high-grade glioma models that develop following intracranial
injection of cell lines obtained from these spontaneous models and
maintained as neurosphere cultures. Standard treatment of newly diagnosed
high-grade glioma after surgical resection involves radiotherapy (RT) and
chemotherapy (CT) with temozolomide. Both modalities are based on
inflicting damage to the DNA of tumor cells but have only a limited
effect on overall survival. A potential strategy to improve the efficacy
of DNA damaging therapies is to combine these with agents that interfere
with DNA damage repair. In this study we have concentrated on the
inhibition of PARP by ABT-888 and the inhibition of Wee1 kinase by
PD0166285 and MK-1775. Importantly, we have mimicked the therapy of
patients as closely as possible by implementing -Image Guided
Radiotherapy (-IGRT) using the X-Rad 225Cx (Precision X-Ray Inc). Through
cone beam CT guidance this system offers precise delivery of high energy
beams (225 KVp) of small field sizes (1 - 5 mm), minimizing the exposure
of normal tissues and allowing the delivery of RT doses that can not be
given by conventional whole body RT. Here RT was delivered using a
fractionated schedule (5 Gy per day x 4) in combination with oral
temozolomide (100 mg/kg/day x 4) alone or with ABT-888 (10 mg/kg/bid x
4), PD0166285 (0.25 mg/kg/bid x 4 or MK1775 (20 mg/kg/bid x 4). Treatment
of orthotopically injected Ink4a/Arf;P53;K-Rasv12 neurosphere-cultured
cells (GBM652457) by RT + CT was much more efficacious than by CT alone.
In line with the expectations, the PARP inhibitor ABT-888 significantly
improved the response (assessed by bioluminescence monitoring) nd
survival. However, the same combination was not more efficacious against
spontaneous Ink4a/Arf;P53;K-Rasv12 tumors relative to RT + CT alone.
Addition of the Wee1 kinase inhibitors PD0166285 or MK1775 did not
improve the efficacy of RT+CT against intracranially injected GBM652457
cells. We are currently investigating the underlying reason of these
results. ABT-888, PD0166285 and MK1775 are all substrates of ABCB1 and
ABCG2 and especially MK1775 has a very poor BBB penetration. In
conclusion, -IGRT is an exciting new technique to mimic treatment of
glioma patients in mouse models more closely. Since all novel therapies
for treatment of high-grade glioma will be given in conjunction to the
current chemoradiation therapy, this technique will allow more accurate
preclinical evaluation of novel therapies in a clinically relevant
setting.

