Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of proliferative and migratory genes in regulatory T
cells from patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer


Immune suppression by regulatory T cells (Tregs) is associated with tumor
evasion. An increase in the frequency and suppressive function of Tregs
has been shown in a variety of solid tumors. The purpose of this study
was to determine if the enhanced number and activity of these cells in
prostate cancer patients could be due to tumor-induced changes in gene
expression. CD4+CD25hiCD127lo Tregs were isolated from the peripheral
blood of healthy donors and metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer (mCRPC) patients. These samples were selected based on similar
suppressive activity in a functional assay. A genome-wide expression
array of 38, 500 genes was then performed to detect any effects in
expression potentially induced by tumor. We found 384 genes had a
three-fold or greater difference in expression between the groups.
Differentially expressed genes were involved in cell cycle processes,
cellular growth and proliferation, immune response, hematological system
development and function, as well as the IL-2 and TGF- pathways. Genes
most up-regulated in the Tregs of mCRPC patients included C-FOS, C-JUN,
DUSP1 and RGS1, which are crucial for regulation of T cell proliferation,
activation and migration. We also observed increased expression of c-Jun
protein in patient Tregs by flow cytometry. Patients had a significantly
higher percentage of Tregs in their CD4+ population than the healthy
donors, but interestingly, there was no difference in FoxP3 expression.
These results indicate that tumor-derived factors may contribute to Treg
mediated immune suppression by up-regulating genes that increase their
proliferative and migratory capacities, allowing them to better home to
the tumor and inhibit the host response.

