Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of miR-17 and miR-20a in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia


MicroRNA (miRNA, miR) are an important class of small, non-coding RNAs
that function to regulate gene expression through transcriptional
repression or degradation of the target transcript. Functionally, miRNAs
have emerged as integral components of the oncogenic as well as the tumor
suppressor networks, regulating nearly all cellular processes altered
during tumor formation. Among these the miR-17-92 cluster has surfaced as
a highly over-expressed miRNA with oncogenic properties in several
lymphomas and solid tumors, including tumors of the lung, breast colon,
pancreas and prostate. In contrast to most solid tumors, two members of
this cluster, miR-17 and miR-20a, appear to be under-expressed in
specific subtypes of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). In this
study, we quantified the expression of miR-17 and miR-20a by real-time
PCR in lymphocytes from healthy donors (total and CD19+ sorted B-cells),
nine tumor B-cell lines, and primary CLL cells (n=83). Compared to normal
B-cells, miR-17 and miR-20a were over-expressed in all tumor B-cell lines
(3.1 - 33.3 fold). Expression was highest in mantle cell lymphoma cell
lines (average ratio 17.2, n=3) as compared to cell lines derived from
follicular lymphoma (ratio 10.2, n=1), Burkitt's lymphoma (average ratio
9.0, n=3), and multiple myeloma (average ratio 3.6, n=2). In contrast,
miR-17 and miR-20 were significantly under-expressed in primary CLL cells
as compared to normal B-cells (average ratios 0.33 and 0.48
respectively). Epigenetic mechanisms mediated by DNA methylation or the
action of the histone deacetylases (HDACs) and related gene repressors
represent one such mechanism by which miRNA may be silenced. We therefore
evaluated the role of the HDACs in silencing the expression of miR-17 and
miR-20 in CLL. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays against HDACs
1-3 revealed that silencing of miR-17 and miR-20a in CLL was associated
with increased recruitment of HDAC1 and HDAC2 to the miR-17-92 promoter.
Consequently, exposure of primary CLL cells to the HDAC inhibitor
panobinostat resulted in the accumulation of the transcriptionally
activating chromatin modification, H3K4me3 and re-expression of miR-17
and miR-20a in 22/83 (26%) and 25/83 (30%) cases respectively. Functional
evaluation of miR-17/20 revealed that the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1
was a target of miR-17 in subset of CLL cases. Over-expression of
anti-apoptotic proteins, including Mcl-1, is frequently observed in CLL
and is associated with increased apoptotic resistance. Therefore, HDAC
inhibitors may therefore offer a therapeutic strategy whereby the
aberrant silencing of miR-17/20a in CLL can be reversed so as to target
Mcl-1, thus lowering the apoptotic potential of the CLL cell. Microarray
studies are currently ongoing to identify other functionally relevant
targets of miR-17 in this disease.

