Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUMOylated CPAP contributes to NF-kB activation in cancer cells


Nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-B) is a transcription factor which involves in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The development of therapeutic drugs to
specifically target NF-B signaling pathway is imperative to achieve.
Centrosomal and P4.1-associated protein (CPAP) is a novel co-activator of
NF-B. The effects of CPAP on NF-B activation pathway were determined by
over-expression and knockdown approaches. CPAP increased the expression
of NF-B target genes by enhancing the transcriptional activaty of NF-B.
Through recruiting more IkappaB kinase beta (IKK) to the inactivated NF-B
complex, CPAP augmented the phosphorylation of inhibitor of NF-B (IB) and
NF-B. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay further showed that CPAP is
recruited to IL-8 and ICAM-1 promoter under TNF- treatment. CPAP was
covalently modified by SUMO-1 (small ubiquitin-related modifier-1)
protein at the C-terminal region. SUMO-deficient CPAP mutants lost the
co-activator activity on NF-B activation pathway and failed to enter the
nucleus upon TNF- treatment. By immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis, CPAP
was detected in the nucleus of HBV-associated HCC. Activation of NF-B was
synergically augmented by CPAP overexpression in HBx-expressing Hep3B
(Hep3BX) and HepG2 (HepG2X) cells lines. SUMOylation of CPAP could
modulate the activity of NF-B, and CPAP may serve as a target for
therapeutic purpose in HBV-associated HCC.

