Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microbiomic subprofiles and MDR1 promoter methylation in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma


Background: Clinical observations and epidemiologic studies suggest that
the incidence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) correlates
with dental hygiene, implying a role for bacteria-induced inflammation in
its pathogenesis. Differences in microbiota in HNSCC compared to matched
normal oral mucosa, and whether these differences are accompanied by
epigenetic modifications in selected HNSCC-associated genes and
clinico-pathologic features has not yet been investigated. Standard
microbiologic culturing techniques miss many fastidious organisms.
Methods: Human genomic DNA and associated microbial DNA were isolated
from 42 prospectively accrued consecutive HNSCC tumors and paired normal
oral mucosae. Microbiomic profiling was carried out by serially
characterizing bacteria-specific 16S rRNA and taxa classified by the
presence of specific polymorphisms in the 16S rDNA genes. Promoter
methylation and microbial populations of each sample was determined.
Microbiomic profiles were compared between HNSCC and matched normal
mucosa, to specific promoter methylation in four genes (MDR1, IL8, RARB,
TGFBR2) previously linked to HNSCC or inflammation, and to
clinico-pathologic features. Results: Specific microbiomic profiles
significantly associate with HNSCC over normal mucosae. While methylation
of both MDR1 (pBackground: Clinical observations and epidemiologic
studies suggest that the incidence of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) correlates with dental hygiene, implying a role for
bacteria-induced inflammation in its pathogenesis. Differences in
microbiota in HNSCC compared to matched normal oral mucosa, and whether
these differences are accompanied by epigenetic modifications in selected
HNSCC-associated genes and clinico-pathologic features has not yet been
investigated. Standard microbiologic culturing techniques miss many
fastidious organisms. Methods: Human genomic DNA and associated microbial
DNA were isolated from 42 prospectively accrued consecutive HNSCC tumors
and paired normal oral mucosae. Microbiomic profiling was carried out by
serially characterizing bacteria-specific 16S rRNA and taxa classified by
the presence of specific polymorphisms in the 16S rDNA genes. Promoter
methylation and microbial populations of each sample was determined.
Microbiomic profiles were compared between HNSCC and matched normal
mucosa, to specific promoter methylation in four genes (MDR1, IL8, RARB,
TGFBR2) previously linked to HNSCC or inflammation, and to
clinico-pathologic features. Results: Specific microbiomic profiles
significantly associate with HNSCC over normal mucosae. While methylation
of both MDR1 (p<10-9) and IL8 (pBackground: Clinical observations and
epidemiologic studies suggest that the incidence of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) correlates with dental hygiene, implying
a role for bacteria-induced inflammation in its pathogenesis. Differences
in microbiota in HNSCC compared to matched normal oral mucosa, and
whether these differences are accompanied by epigenetic modifications in
selected HNSCC-associated genes and clinico-pathologic features has not
yet been investigated. Standard microbiologic culturing techniques miss
many fastidious organisms. Methods: Human genomic DNA and associated
microbial DNA were isolated from 42 prospectively accrued consecutive
HNSCC tumors and paired normal oral mucosae. Microbiomic profiling was
carried out by serially characterizing bacteria-specific 16S rRNA and
taxa classified by the presence of specific polymorphisms in the 16S rDNA
genes. Promoter methylation and microbial populations of each sample was
determined. Microbiomic profiles were compared between HNSCC and matched
normal mucosa, to specific promoter methylation in four genes (MDR1, IL8,
RARB, TGFBR2) previously linked to HNSCC or inflammation, and to
clinico-pathologic features. Results: Specific microbiomic profiles
significantly associate with HNSCC over normal mucosae. While methylation
of both MDR1 (p<10-9) and IL8 (p<0.02) genes significantly associate with
HNSCC, only MDR1 methylation associates with specific microbiomic
profiles in HNSCC over normal mucosae. Furthermore, MDR1 methylation
correlates with regional nodal metastases in the context of two specific
bacterial taxa, Enterobacteriaceae and Tenericutes. Additionally,
microbial populations can separate tumors by tobacco status (pBackground:
Clinical observations and epidemiologic studies suggest that the
incidence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) correlates
with dental hygiene, implying a role for bacteria-induced inflammation in
its pathogenesis. Differences in microbiota in HNSCC compared to matched
normal oral mucosa, and whether these differences are accompanied by
epigenetic modifications in selected HNSCC-associated genes and
clinico-pathologic features has not yet been investigated. Standard
microbiologic culturing techniques miss many fastidious organisms.
Methods: Human genomic DNA and associated microbial DNA were isolated
from 42 prospectively accrued consecutive HNSCC tumors and paired normal
oral mucosae. Microbiomic profiling was carried out by serially
characterizing bacteria-specific 16S rRNA and taxa classified by the
presence of specific polymorphisms in the 16S rDNA genes. Promoter
methylation and microbial populations of each sample was determined.
Microbiomic profiles were compared between HNSCC and matched normal
mucosa, to specific promoter methylation in four genes (MDR1, IL8, RARB,
TGFBR2) previously linked to HNSCC or inflammation, and to
clinico-pathologic features. Results: Specific microbiomic profiles
significantly associate with HNSCC over normal mucosae. While methylation
of both MDR1 (p<10-9) and IL8 (p<0.02) genes significantly associate with
HNSCC, only MDR1 methylation associates with specific microbiomic
profiles in HNSCC over normal mucosae. Furthermore, MDR1 methylation
correlates with regional nodal metastases in the context of two specific
bacterial taxa, Enterobacteriaceae and Tenericutes. Additionally,
microbial populations can separate tumors by tobacco status (p<0.005),
but not by alcohol status (p=0.37). Conclusions: Specific microbial
populations may contribute to HNSCC pathogenesis, possibly by triggering
inflammation and consequent aberrant DNA methylation. These associations
could lead to better understanding of the pathogenesis and treatment of
HNSCC, suggesting novel roles for demethylating agents and probiotic
adjuncts particularly for patients with advanced or refractory disease.

