Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor cell compartment holds the unfavorable prognostic value
of miR-21 in gliomas


High-grade gliomas are some of the most lethal forms of human cancer and
new clinical biomarkers and therapeutic targets are highly needed.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of short noncoding RNAs, hold great potential
as new biomarkers and targets as they are commonly deregulated in a
variety of diseases including gliomas. MicroRNA-21 (miR-21) is the most
consistently over-expressed miRNA in several cancers including gliomas
and is therefore very promising as a useful clinical biomarker and
therapeutic target. To better understand the role of miR-21 in gliomas,
paraffin embedded glioma tissue samples from 193 patients with grade I,
II, III and IV tumors were analyzed by in situ hybridization (ISH) using
LNA-DNA chimeric probes. We found miR-21 expression in tumor cells and
tumor-associated blood vessels, whereas no expression was seen in
adjacent normal brain parenchyma. Using advanced image analysis we
obtained quantitative estimates reflecting the miR-21 expression levels.
The miR-21 levels correlated significantly with grade (p = 0.027, rs =
0.161, 95% CI, 0.015 to 0.301) with the highest levels measured in grade
IV gliomas. Furthermore, quantitative estimates obtained for the tumor
cells alone were significantly associated with poor prognosis in all
tumors (p = 0.012) and grade III and IV tumors alone (p = 0.005). This
was independent of known clinical parameters (age, grade and sex). In
conclusion, we have shown that miR-21 is constricted to tumor cells and
tumor blood vessels and that tumor cell miR-21 represent a valuable
prognostic biomarker for the disease.

