Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene network models identify targets for mammary tumor
normalization


The majority of breast cancer therapeutics aim at slowing tumor expansion
through selective killing of tumor cells. Given the enormous plasticity
of cells (highlighted by recent advances in the iPS field), we instead
sought to induce a cell state transition from a mammary tumor cell
phenotype to a normal mammary epithelial cell state. We have tackled the
critical problem of identifying target genes for the normalization or
differentiation of mammary tumor cells by employing a systems biology
approach that integrates computational modeling with in vivo and in vitro
studies. In vivo gene expression data of mammary tumor progression in the
FVB C3(1) SV40Tag transgenic mouse model were collected at multiple time
points as the disease progressed from normal gland to DCIS-like lesions
to invasive carcinoma. Gene regulatory network models predicted novel
transcription factor targets that appeared critical to the rise of the
tumor phenotype. These putative gene targets were then assessed in a 3D
spheroid assay. RNAi inhibition of two computationally predicted
transcription factors reverted mammary tumor cells to a normalized
mammary epithelial cell phenotype, with appropriate apical/basal
polarization, lumen formation and reduced proliferative index. This
integrated strategy has pinpointed transcription factors for RNAi
therapeutic targeting in vivo but importantly, the method is not limited
to breast cancer and may be useful for many different tumor types. In
summary, our major advance has been the demonstration that a gene
regulatory network reverse engineering approach can identify genes that
are causatively involved in cancer progression and that represent viable
therapeutic differentiation targets.

