Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant PEA-15 inhibits in vitro and in vivo tumorigenesis in
ovarian cancer by inhibiting beta-catenin


PEA-15 is 15-kDa serine-phosphoprotein that sequesters phospho-ERK from
the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Previously, we showed that overexpression
of PEA-15 had antitumor effects in both breast and ovarian cancer cells.
We also reported that PEA-15 expression was associated with prolonged
overall survival in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer, as found
using a tissue microarray. Because PEA-15 has two major phosphorylation
sites, Serine104 and Serine116, that are closely related to its
biological function in regulating cell proliferation and survival, we
sought to develop a more potent form of PEA-15 by modifying its two major
phosphorylation sites. To determine which mutant form of PEA-15 is a more
potent antitumor agent, we evaluated the function of double-mutated
PEA-15 at Ser104 and Ser116; PEA-15-AA, in which residues were
substituted with alanine (double-unphosphorylated form); and PEA-15-DD,
in which residues were substituted with aspartic acid
(double-phosphorylated form) were tested in vitro and in vivo in ovarian
cancer cell lines. PEA-15-AA resulted in 85% inhibition of SKOV3.ip1 cell
colony formation (PPEA-15 is 15-kDa serine-phosphoprotein that sequesters
phospho-ERK from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Previously, we showed that
overexpression of PEA-15 had antitumor effects in both breast and ovarian
cancer cells. We also reported that PEA-15 expression was associated with
prolonged overall survival in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer, as
found using a tissue microarray. Because PEA-15 has two major
phosphorylation sites, Serine104 and Serine116, that are closely related
to its biological function in regulating cell proliferation and survival,
we sought to develop a more potent form of PEA-15 by modifying its two
major phosphorylation sites. To determine which mutant form of PEA-15 is
a more potent antitumor agent, we evaluated the function of
double-mutated PEA-15 at Ser104 and Ser116; PEA-15-AA, in which residues
were substituted with alanine (double-unphosphorylated form); and
PEA-15-DD, in which residues were substituted with aspartic acid
(double-phosphorylated form) were tested in vitro and in vivo in ovarian
cancer cell lines. PEA-15-AA resulted in 85% inhibition of SKOV3.ip1 cell
colony formation (P<0.001) under anchorage-independent conditions.
Compared to vector control, PEA-15-AA reduced projection formation by
about 80%-90% (P=0.01) under the 3D Matrigel culture condition and
inhibition of cell migration by 60%-80% (P=0.02). Further, to determine
the in vivo effect of PEA-15-AA, we injected control vector, PEA-15-AA,
and PEA-15-DD stable transfectants of SKOV3.ip1 cells intraperitoneally
into nude mice. We observed that PEA-15-AA strongly inhibited tumor
formation and tumor size (6 of 15, P=0.02) compared to the control (9 of
10) or PEA-15-DD (16 of 16). Immunohistochemical data revealed that
beta-catenin and CD-31 (endothelial cell marker) expression was
significantly decreased in PEA-15-AA tumor tissues. These data show that
the antitumor effect of PEA-15-AA was partially dependent on both the
inhibition of beta-catenin expression and its nuclear translocalization.
We next determined the clinical relevance of phosphorylated PEA-15 in
patients with ovarian cancer using a human ovarian cancer tissue
microarray. Our analysis showed that total double-phosphorylated PEA-15
expression at Ser104 and Ser116 was significantly higher in high-grade
(II, P=0.002; III, P=0.001) ovarian tumor tissue than in adjacent normal
ovarian tissue. These data indicate that PEA-15 in ovarian tumor cells
exists predominantly in the double-phosphorylated form, PEA-15-DD.
Further studies are warranted to determine the correlation between the
phosphorylation status of PEA-15 and overall survival in patients with
ovarian cancer. Taken together, our results suggest that PEA-15-AA has
strong antitumor effects in vitro and in vivo that would justify its
development as an effective therapeutic molecule in ovarian cancer.

