Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P190B RhoGAP overexpression drives mammary epithelial cell
proliferation by altering stromal-epithelial interactions in the
developing mammary gland


Breast cancer development and progression is enabled by alterations in
the surrounding stroma originating from stromal interactions with
cancerous epithelium. Rho GTPases and their regulators have been
implicated as important mediators of stromal-epithelial interactions in
mammary epithelial cells (MECs), and alterations in the microenvironment
profoundly affect MEC morphogenesis in a Rho GTPase-dependent manner.
Previously, we demonstrated that p190B Rho GTPase activating protein
(RhoGAP), a major inhibitor of Rho GTPases, has pro-tumorigenic functions
during MMTV-Neu induced mammary tumorigenesis. We hypothesized that p190B
overexpression in the epithelium promotes mammary tumor development by
altering stromal-epithelial interactions to drive MEC proliferation and
disrupt tissue architecture. To investigate this hypothesis, we examined
the effects of p190B overexpression in the developing mammary gland (MG)
using Tet-regulatable p190B overexpressing mice. Interestingly,
overexpression of p190B in the mammary epithelium during postnatal MG
development causes hyperbranching and disorganization of the ductal tree.
Using a combination of in vivo morphometric and immunohistochemical
analyses and in vitro stromal-epithelial co-cultures, we have
demonstrated that p190B overexpression in MECs activates fibroblasts in
the adjacent microenvironment leading to increased extracellular matrix
(ECM) deposition, elevated expression of the collagen crosslinking enzyme
lysyl oxidase, and increased expression of potent regulators of branching
morphogenesis, including FGF and TGF growth factors. These stromal
alterations correlated with increased proliferation of p190B
overexpressing MECs in vivo. Taken together, these data suggest that
p190B overexpression may contribute to mammary tumorigenesis by creating
a pro-tumorigenic stromal environment leading to increased MEC
proliferation and altered tissue architecture.

