Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2 expression in different subtypes of human breast cancer


Introduction: Cancer is characterized by aberrant patterns of expression
of multiple genes believed to be due to not only genetic but also
epigenetic changes. The epigenetic changes are communicated through
chemical modifications, including modifications of histone proteins. For
each histone, multiple histone-modifying enzymes have been discovered in
mammals. We found that the expression of genes with histone modifications
was highly predictable from the level of expression of the corresponding
histone-modifying enzyme. Specifically, expression of genes displaying
histone H3 K27 methylation was dependent on EZH2 expression. Method: We
analyzed breast cancer tissue arrays for EZH2 expression. Tissue
microarrays were constructed from 95 histologically confirmed breast
cancer samples. To identify breast cancer subtypes, the tissues were
evaluated for the expression of ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6 and EGFR. Staining
with vimentin served as a control to monitor the quality of tissue
fixation in archival tumors. Breast cancer subtypes were defined as
luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2-), luminal B (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2+),
basal-like (ER-, PR-, HER2-, CK5/6+, and/or EGFR+), HER2+/ER- (HER2+,
ER-, PR-), and unclassified (negative for all five markers). EZH2
expression was measured by staining using an anti- EZH2 antibody
(Invitrogen, cat. #18-7395). Staining quantification was performed
independently by two pathologists. Results: The mean age of the patients
was 56 years old (SD=15.6). 63.7% of the patients had estrogen receptor
positive tumors, 50.6% had progesterone receptor positive tumors, and
21.2% had HER2+ tumors. The distribution of breast cancer subtypes is
luminal A (58.9%), luminal B (6.3%), HER2+/ER- (4.2%), basal-like
(28.5%), unclassified (2.1%). A majority of the patients had high grade
tumors (46.0% grade II and 47.1% grade III). High EZH2 expression was
associated with Her2+ and basal-like tumors (PIntroduction: Cancer is
characterized by aberrant patterns of expression of multiple genes
believed to be due to not only genetic but also epigenetic changes. The
epigenetic changes are communicated through chemical modifications,
including modifications of histone proteins. For each histone, multiple
histone-modifying enzymes have been discovered in mammals. We found that
the expression of genes with histone modifications was highly predictable
from the level of expression of the corresponding histone-modifying
enzyme. Specifically, expression of genes displaying histone H3 K27
methylation was dependent on EZH2 expression. Method: We analyzed breast
cancer tissue arrays for EZH2 expression. Tissue microarrays were
constructed from 95 histologically confirmed breast cancer samples. To
identify breast cancer subtypes, the tissues were evaluated for the
expression of ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6 and EGFR. Staining with vimentin served
as a control to monitor the quality of tissue fixation in archival
tumors. Breast cancer subtypes were defined as luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+,
HER2-), luminal B (ER+ and/or PR+, HER2+), basal-like (ER-, PR-, HER2-,
CK5/6+, and/or EGFR+), HER2+/ER- (HER2+, ER-, PR-), and unclassified
(negative for all five markers). EZH2 expression was measured by staining
using an anti- EZH2 antibody (Invitrogen, cat. #18-7395). Staining
quantification was performed independently by two pathologists. Results:
The mean age of the patients was 56 years old (SD=15.6). 63.7% of the
patients had estrogen receptor positive tumors, 50.6% had progesterone
receptor positive tumors, and 21.2% had HER2+ tumors. The distribution of
breast cancer subtypes is luminal A (58.9%), luminal B (6.3%), HER2+/ER-
(4.2%), basal-like (28.5%), unclassified (2.1%). A majority of the
patients had high grade tumors (46.0% grade II and 47.1% grade III). High
EZH2 expression was associated with Her2+ and basal-like tumors
(P<0.0001). Conclusion: In this cohort, high expression of EZH2 was
associated with the most aggressive breast cancer phenotypes and likely
reflects increased expression of histone modifying proteins in the
tumors. Supported by Grants: NIH R01CA138631 (E.V.B.), R01 CA142996 and
P50 CA125183 (O.I.O).

