Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphatidylserine-targeting betabodies for the treatment of cancer


Bavituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody that is being combined with
chemotherapy to treat patients with lung or pancreatic cancer in
randomized Phase II clinical trials. Bavituximab targets the
immunosuppressive lipid, phosphatidylserine (PS), which becomes exposed
on the outer membrane surface of tumor blood vessels and tumor cells in
tumors responding to therapy. The antibody acts by destroying tumor
vasculature and by reactivating tumor immunity. Here, we generated new
PS-targeting therapeutics by fusing domains of the PS-binding plasma
protein, mouse 2-glycoprotein I (2GP1), to the Fc region of mouse IgG2a.
Such betabodies potentially have advantages over bavituximab. They bind
directly to PS, whereas bavituximab requires a cofactor protein (2GP1)
for binding; they can be made fully human; they are smaller in size
(100KDa versus 250KDa for the bavituximab: 2GP1 complexes); and they have
slower blood clearance rates. Many different constructions of betabodies
were tested, each having different orientations, domains, and
glycosylation patterns. Constructs were identified that bound strongly to
PS-expressing cells and plates, localized to tumor vascular endothelium
in vivo, and had -phase blood half-lives of approximately seven days
after intravenous injection into mice as compared with two days for a
murine version of bavituximab. Betabodies could potentially be the next
generation of PS-targeting cancer therapeutics.

