Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo imaging and tracking of a PARP inhibitor at single-cell
resolution


PARP is an enzyme involved in sensing single-stranded DNA breaks and
plays a critical role in the organization of DNA damage repair. Several
PARP inhibitors have been developed for clinical use, particularly in
breast and ovarian cancers with BRCA mutations. Despite the scientific
rationale and promising early clinical results with PARP inhibitors, more
advanced clinical trials in breast cancer have been disappointing. One of
the questions arising from these trials is to better understand why the
PARP inhibitors failed. We used a window-chamber system in mice to image
the distribution and function of model PARP inhibitors such as
AZD2281-Bodipy. Specifically, we measured the kinetics of vascular,
cellular, and subcellular uptake and distribution of AZD2281-Bodipy in
breast (MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-436) and ovarian (OVCAR429, A2780) tumors over
time. Additionally, using the fluorescently-labeled inhibitor, we were
able to examine the heterogeneity of AZD2281 localization in single
cancer cells in vivo. Our data provide the first example of single-cell
distribution of fluorescent small molecule inhibitors. When coupled with
reporter cell lines (e.g. for apoptosis, DNA damage, autophagy, and
senescence), this approach will be a powerful tool to understand drug
action in vivo.

