Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment of soft tissue sarcoma cells by EGFR and/or STAT3
inhibitors


Background: We previously found Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
inhibitor can block liposarcoma cell EGFR (HER1) survival signalling.
However, it did not interfere with HER2 regulated Janus Kinases (JAK),
and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) signal
transduction. Our research suggested JAK/STAT may be one mechanism for
EGFR inhibitor resistance. Targeting both EGFR and STAT3, which has never
been tested in sarcoma may overcome this problem. The principal aim of
this preliminary study was to investigate the effect and mechanism of
both STAT3 inhibitor alone and in combination with EGFR inhibitor in the
treatment of soft tissue sarcoma (STS) cell lines. Methods: STAT3
inhibitor (S3I-201) mono-therapy or in combination with EGFR inhibitor
Gefitinib was investigated in 7 STS cell lines (449b, 778, SW872, SW684,
SW982, GCT and HT1080). Crystal-violet colorimetric and clonogenic assays
were used to measure drug effects. For assessing a potential role of
treatment, we investigated expression and activity of STAT and EGFR by
Western blot and immunohistochemistry staining before and after
treatment. Data were analysed using Chou & Talalay method and CalcuSyn
software. Results: All 7 STS cell lines expressed phosphorylated/total
STAT3 and EGFR. Anti-proliferative and anti-clonogenic effects of S3I-201
monotherapy on STS were dose- and time-dependent. Sensitive cells to
S3I-201 (IC50 50M) were HT1080, SW684, GCT and SW982 (90% HT1080 were
inhibited at day 3 post-administration of 25M drug), partially sensitive
cells were 449B and 778, and non-sensitive cells (IC50 200M) were SW872
(only 29% SW872 were inhibited at day 5 with 200M S3I-201). Western blot
analysis of whole-cell lysates from HT1080 showed phosphorylated STAT3
(pSTAT3) levels were significantly diminished after S3I-201 treatment,
whereas pSTAT3 were not down-regulated in resistant cells SW872. IC50 of
Gefitinib monotherapy on STS were 20 - 40M, and 778 had minor effect (33%
cells were inhibited after 5 days treatment). Combination therapy with
Gefitinib and S3I-201 achieved synergistic antiproliferative effect (mean
CIs Background: We previously found Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
(EGFR) inhibitor can block liposarcoma cell EGFR (HER1) survival
signalling. However, it did not interfere with HER2 regulated Janus
Kinases (JAK), and Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription
(STAT) signal transduction. Our research suggested JAK/STAT may be one
mechanism for EGFR inhibitor resistance. Targeting both EGFR and STAT3,
which has never been tested in sarcoma may overcome this problem. The
principal aim of this preliminary study was to investigate the effect and
mechanism of both STAT3 inhibitor alone and in combination with EGFR
inhibitor in the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma (STS) cell lines.
Methods: STAT3 inhibitor (S3I-201) mono-therapy or in combination with
EGFR inhibitor Gefitinib was investigated in 7 STS cell lines (449b, 778,
SW872, SW684, SW982, GCT and HT1080). Crystal-violet colorimetric and
clonogenic assays were used to measure drug effects. For assessing a
potential role of treatment, we investigated expression and activity of
STAT and EGFR by Western blot and immunohistochemistry staining before
and after treatment. Data were analysed using Chou & Talalay method and
CalcuSyn software. Results: All 7 STS cell lines expressed
phosphorylated/total STAT3 and EGFR. Anti-proliferative and
anti-clonogenic effects of S3I-201 monotherapy on STS were dose- and
time-dependent. Sensitive cells to S3I-201 (IC50 50M) were HT1080, SW684,
GCT and SW982 (90% HT1080 were inhibited at day 3 post-administration of
25M drug), partially sensitive cells were 449B and 778, and non-sensitive
cells (IC50 200M) were SW872 (only 29% SW872 were inhibited at day 5 with
200M S3I-201). Western blot analysis of whole-cell lysates from HT1080
showed phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) levels were significantly diminished
after S3I-201 treatment, whereas pSTAT3 were not down-regulated in
resistant cells SW872. IC50 of Gefitinib monotherapy on STS were 20 -
40M, and 778 had minor effect (33% cells were inhibited after 5 days
treatment). Combination therapy with Gefitinib and S3I-201 achieved
synergistic antiproliferative effect (mean CIs < 0.90) in 6/7 STS cell
lines (CI: 449b (0.3-1), 778 (0.1-0.2), SW872 (0.6-0.7), SW684 (0.2-0.5),
GCT (0.3-0.4) and HT1080 (0.5-0.6)), except SW982 (1-1.2). For the most
synergistic 778 cells, the drug reduction index for Gefitinib and S3I-201
was 5.9 and 12.7. Although treatment with Gefitinib alone inhibited
pSTAT3 expression on serum-starved 778, EGF stimulation reversed the
inhibition function. However in combination therapy, STAT3
phosphorylation was not induced by EGF stimulation. Conclusion:
Combination therapy targeting both EGFR and STAT3 is a worthwhile
treatment to pursue in anti-sarcoma therapy. Further studies will focus
on potential mechanisms as well as the anti-sarcoma effect in the animal
models. These results will have a clinical implication in treatment of
STS in the future.

