Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of EVI1 with siRNA inhibits the growth of ovarian tumor
cells


There is currently no effective treatment for ovarian cancer. EVI1
(ecotropic viral integration site 1) is an oncogenic transcription factor
that enables proliferation and inhibits apoptosis of ovarian tumor cells.
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) drugs provide ideal means for perturbing
intracellular oncogenic targets. Five (5) siRNA (21+21 nt) sequences were
identified by in silico analysis that target the coding region of human
EVI1 (siEVI1 A-E). Each of these siEVI1 species were transfected with
Dharmafect4 at 25nM into SKOV3, ES-2, OVCAR3, OV-90, TOV-112D, PA-1,
UWB1.289, and Coav-3 ovarian tumor cells. The non-tumorigenic cell line
Hs832.Tc was used as a control. Four species (siEVI1 B-E) decreased the
viability of each tumor cell line by at least 70% with none of the five
siEVI1 species altered the viability of control cells, demonstrating the
anti-proliferative effect of targeting EVI1 with siRNA. Both siEVI1-B and
-D potently decreased the viability of ovarian tumor cells, having IC50
values of 0.8 and 0.2 nM, respectively, which compare favorably to an
IC50 of 15 nM for paclitaxel. RT-PCR and immunoblot results showing
dose-dependent decreases in EVI1 mRNA and protein using either siEVI1-B
or-D are consistent with the mechanism of the anti-proliferative effect
occurring via RNA interference. Further, dose-dependent increases in
annexin staining upon siRNA treatment indicate that induction of
apoptosis contributes to the decrease in cell viability, a result
consistent with inhibition of EVI1 activity. These results suggest that
EVI1 is a good target for ovarian cancer therapy and silencing by siRNAs
is an effective means of triggering the death of ovarian tumor cells.
These findings also suggest that anti-EVI1 siRNAs have the potential to
be effective therapeutics for the treatment of patients with ovarian
cancer.

