Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Photoacoustic imaging of pancreatic cancer proliferation via
sigma-2 receptor/PGRMC1-eYFP


Sigma-2 receptor binding sites, recently identified as progesterone
receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) (Nature Communications, 2011;
2:380), are highly expressed in tumor cells. We have previously reported
that measuring the sigma-2 receptor expression is a novel strategy for
evaluating the proliferative status of tumors in vivo using the
non-invasive imaging technique, positron emission tomography (PET). Our
group has developed a series of sigma-2 receptor radioligands as PET
imaging probes, one sigma-2 receptor radiotracer [18F]ISO-1 is under
clinical evaluation for imaging the proliferation status in the patients
with different types of cancers. PGRMC1 depleted human ovarian SKOV-3
cancer cells have been reported to lack tumor formation in mice and
PGRMC1 depleted tumors displayed poor microvasculature system
(Endocrinology, 2009; 150:4846-4854). To further understand the
regulation of PGRMC1 in cell cycle and cancer proliferation, we have
stably transfected PGRMC1-eYFP, enhanced yellow fluorescent protein
conjugated PGRMC1, into human pancreatic BxPC3 cancer cells and those
cells were transplanted into immunodeficient nude mice to grow into solid
tumors; subsequently, a traditional fluorescence imaging system and an
optical-resolution photoacoustic microscopy (OR-PAM) were utilized for in
vivo monitoring of BxPC3 cancer cells growth and observing the
surrounding microvasculature development for those tumors under
conditions of sigma-2 receptor/PGRMC1 overexpression. Tumor tissue
sections were prepared and in vitro fluorescence microscopy analysis of
PGRMC1-eYFP cells revealed that PGRMC1-eYFP overexpressed cells form
cluster patterns which may represent the proliferation priority created
by PGRMC1 overexpression. The subcellular localization of PGRMC1-eYFP
appeared to be similar to that of sigma-2 receptors reported previously
by our group using the sigma-2 receptor fluorescent probes (Cancer Res
2007; 67, 6708-6716). PGRMC1-eYFP BxPC3 cells were surrounded by fully
developed microvasculature system. Further application of this in vivo
imaging platform for evaluating the sigma-2 receptor pharmacology and
imaging proliferation is ongoing in our group. (Supported by CA 102869
and CA136398).

