Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of PNT2258 combinations with docetaxel, dacarbazine, or
vemurafenib on the A375 melanoma xenograft


Bcl-2 and bcl-XL are anti-apoptotic proteins that promote drug resistance
and enhance tumor cell survival. Bcl-2 gene amplification occurs in 90%
of cutaneous melanomas implicating it as a potential target. PNT100 is a
24-mer unmodified DNA oligonucleotide complementary to a non-coding
region of bcl-2. PNT2258, is comprised of PNT100 encapsulated in a unique
pH tunable nuclear-targeted liposomes termed SMARTICLES. Preliminary
studies demonstrated fluorescently-labeled PNT100 in a SMARTICLE is
delivered to the cell nucleus and that PNT2258 produces dramatic tumor
regression in a diffuse large cell lymphoma xenograft, prolonging
survival with a coincident decrease in bcl-2 protein. PNT2258 activity in
the A375 melanoma model was assessed as a single agent or in combination
in two separate studies. Study 1: PNT2258 alone, IV, 5 days/week for 3
weeks, to mice bearing A375 produced growth delays of 10.4, 7.8, and 7.8
days at 12.5, 8.3, and 5.6 mg/kg/dose, respectively. Docetaxel alone, IV
weekly x3, produced growth delays of 19.4 (1/10 TFS), 14.8 (1/10 TFS),
and 11.5 days at 30, 20, and 13.3mg/kg/dose. Combination therapy produced
growth delays of 45.3 (5/10 TFS), 18.9, 28.1 (2/10 TFS), and 25.0 (3/10
TFS) days at 12.5+30, 12.5+20, 5.6+30, and 5.6+20 mg/kg/dose,
respectively. Study 2: PNT2258 alone produced a growth delay of 12 days
at 15mg/kg/dose. Dacarbazine alone was ineffective at 80 mg/kg/dose IP.
Combination therapy was not superior to PNT2258 alone. In contrast,
vemurafenib alone (37.5 mg/kg/dose, PO, BIDx18 days) was highly active
producing a growth delay in excess of 30 days, as did the combination of
PNT2258+vemurafenib. PNT2258 is currently being evaluated for safety and
tolerability in a phase Ia clinical trial. Preliminary mouse and human
pharmacokinetics suggest that exposure levels in humans are similar to
those producing anti-tumor efficacy in mice. Overall, 1)
PNT2258+docetaxel produced a greater than additive effect compared to
single agents, 2) PNT2258+dacarbazine was not superior to PNT2258 alone,
3) PNT2258+vemurafenib while highly active, was not superior to
vemurafinib therapy alone, and 4) therapeutic PNT2258 exposures have been
attained in patients.

