Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of DEC1-interacting protein DNAJB6 and its role in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has an especially high
incidence in China, with five-year survival rates in Hong Kong being of
14%. Previously, a critical region at 9q33-34 was narrowed down and
identified to be associated with tumor-suppressive function in ESCC.
Within this region, Deleted in Esophageal Cancer 1 (DEC1), was identified
to suppress anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenesis. In this
study, we searched for DEC1-interacting partners by yeast two-hybrid
screening. DNAJ (Hsp40) homologue subfamily B member 6 (DNAJB6) was
identified as a DEC1-interacting protein and its interaction was further
confirmed by the GST pull-down assay and co-localization studies. A
putative DEC1-interacting sequence was mapped to the C-terminal end of
DNAJB6 coding sequence. Using a tissue microarray constructed with
tissues from Hong Kong, significantly higher survival in distant
metastasis-free (M0) patients was found to be associated with higher
DNAJB6 nuclear staining. DNAJB6 is down-regulated in 12 out of 14 (85.7%)
ESCC cell lines, when compared to expression in an immortalized normal
esophageal epithelial cell line. The two isoforms of DNAJB6 have distinct
cellular localizations. DNAJB6a is mainly localized to the nucleus, while
DNAJB6b shows diffuse staining in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. Through
migration/invasion assay, we showed that expressions of both isoforms
were inversely associated with migration/invasion ability of ESCC cell
lines. These results suggest DNAJB6 plays a role in ESCC
migration/invasion and metastasis. This gene may play a critical role in
ESCC metastasis in an isoform-specific manner, which will be the focus of
future studies.

