Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and development of selective sphingosine kinase 2 inhibitors


Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) has been recently implicated to play a
vital role in regulating a variety of physiological and pathological
processes including proliferation, differentiation, migration, and cell
survival. S1P is produced endogenously by sphingosine kinases (SKs) and
the balance of the levels of S1P, its precursor sphingosine, and
ceramide, referred to as the sphingosine rheostat, is important for
normal cellular functions. To date, two isoforms of SPKs have been
reported, sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) and sphingosine kinase 2 (SK2). Many
efforts have been invested to study the roles of SK1 and SK1 has been
indicated in the regulation of cancer progression and development.
However, much is still remain unknown for SK2 and current results of the
function of SK2 are complex and controversial. This is also reflected in
the development of SK inhibitors. Several potent selective SK1 inhibitors
have been reported and tested as potential cancer treatment agents.
However, no potent and selective SK2 inhibitors have been developed to
date. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop SK2 selective
inhibitors as pharmacological tools to help unravel the roles of SK2.
Recently, we discovered that a series of thiazolidine-2,4-dione analogs
selectively inhibit SK2 and one lead compound was identified to inhibit
SK2 with sub-M potency but no activity to SK1 with a concentration up to
10 M. Herein, we will report the structure activity relationship (SAR)
studies of this newly identified lead SK2 inhibitor to optimize its
potency and selectivity towards SK2. Furthermore, these analogs will be
biologically characterized in human leukemia U937 cells.

