Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-7 functions as antimetastic microRNA in gastric cancer by
targeting insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor


Metastasis is a major clinical obstacle in the treatment of gastric
cancer (GC) and accounts for the majority of cancer-related mortality.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been recently emerged as regulators of metastasis
through acting on multiple signaling pathways. In this study, we found
that miR-7 is significantly down-regulated in high-metastatic GC cell
lines and metastatic tissues. Both gain-of-function and loss-of-function
studies showed that increased miR-7 expression significantly reduced
migration and invasion of GC cells, while decreased miR-7 expression
dramatically enhanced cell migration and invasion. In vivo metastasis
assays also shown that overexpression of miR-7 remarkably inhibits GC
metastasis. Moreover, the IGF1R oncogene, which is often mutated or
amplified in human cancers and has been shown to function as an important
regulator of cell growth and tumor invasion, was identified as a direct
target of miR-7. RNA interference silencing of IGF1R recapitulated the
antimetastic function of miR-7, whereas restoration of IGF1R expression
attenuated the function of miR-7 in GC cells. Furthermore, we found that
suppression of Snail by miR-7 through targeting IGF1R increased
E-cadherin expression and partly reversed the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Finally, analyses of the miR-7 and IGF1R level in human
primary GC with matched lymph node metastasis tissue arrays revealed that
miR-7 is inversely related to the increase of IGF1R expression. The
present study provides an insight into the specific biological behavior
of miR-7 in EMT and tumor metastasis. This novel miR-7/IGF1R/Snail axis
would be helpful in the therapeutic application to block GC metastasis.

