Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comprehensive resequence-analysis of 250kb region of 8q24 in
Africans


To date, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified more than
45 prostate cancer susceptibility variants, of which at least 5
independent loci were identified within a 654kb region on 8q24. This
region also harbors additional loci associated with cancers of the
breast, colon, bladder, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Previously, the
linkage disequilibrium (LD) pattern and recombination hotspots
(chr8:128050768-128300801, hg19) defined a 250kb span (region 2)
harboring multiple prostate cancer susceptibility loci identified in
multiple distinct populations, as well as a locus rs2456449 associated
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in Europeans. Because GWAS identify
genetic markers, fine-mapping using sequence analysis in diverse
populations is necessary for defining the optimal variants for biological
follow-up. Sequence analysis in populations of distinct ancestry can
provide important insights into the differences of LD patterns and thus
narrow down high interest variants. In the present study, we have
resequenced the region in 125 men of African ancestry, which included 78
individuals from a population-based study in Ghana and 47
African-American individuals from the Johns Hopkins Hospital. Upon
comparison with 1000 Genomes data (Oct 2011 release), we have identified
365 novel loci and additional surrogates of known susceptibility loci
which could be important in establishing priorities for future functional
work, designed to explain the biological basis of the association signal
for both prostate cancer and perhaps, chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

