Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A MUC1-C oncoprotein soluble decoy receptor effectively suppresses
the growth of human breast cancer cells


The Mucin 1 (MUC1) transmembrane glycoprotein is aberrantly overexpressed
by most human breast carcinomas and contributes to the malignant
phenotype. MUC1 is expressed as two subunits (MUC1-N and MUC1-C) that
form a stable heterodimer at the cell surface. MUC1-N is shed to
contribute to a protective physical barrier, leaving the oncogenic MUC1-C
subunit at the cell surface as a putative receptor for signaling the
presence of stress to the interior of the cell. As shown for the VEGF
receptor TRAP, aflibercept, a potential approach for blocking MUC1-C
function is to generate a soluble decoy receptor by fusing the MUC1-C
extracellular domain to an Ig constant (Fc) region. The present studies
demonstrate that in vitro treatment of human ZR-75-1 breast carcinoma
cells with the MUC1-C soluble decoy receptor is associated with a
dose-dependent induction of cell death. Similar findings were obtained
with human MCF-7 breast cancer cells. To explore the potential of the
MUC1-C soluble decoy receptor as an anti-cancer agent, we evaluated its
ability to block the growth of breast cancer cells in subcutaneous tumor
xenograft models growing in nude mice. Administration of the MUC1-C
soluble decoy receptor to nude mice bearing established ZR-75-1 breast
tumor xenografts was associated with a dose-dependent loss of
tumorigenicity and prolonged tumor regressions after completing therapy.
Taken together, these findings demonstrate that targeting the MUC1-C
oncoprotein with a soluble decoy receptor is effective in inducing death
of human breast cancer cells in vitro and in tumor models.

