Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anthropometric factors and breast cancer among African American
women participating in the Women's Circle of Health Study


There is convincing evidence that obesity is inversely associated with
breast cancer risk in premenopausal women, while increasing risk in
postmenopausal women. However, this is based on studies largely conducted
in Caucasian populations. Associations in African American women, who
have a higher prevalence of obesity, have been evaluated in few studies
and results are inconclusive. We evaluated the impact of body size, body
fat distribution, and body composition on breast cancer risk among
African American (AA) women (810 cases and 1022 controls) participating
in the Women's Circle of Health Study (WCHS). WCHS is an on-going
multi-site case-control study in New York City (NYC) and New Jersey (NJ),
which includes African American and Caucasian women. Cases were newly
diagnosed, histologically confirmed ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive
breast cancer, age 20-75 yrs. Controls were frequency matched on age to
the cases. In NYC, cases were recruited through hospitals with the
largest referral patterns for AA women and controls through random digit
dialing (RDD). In NJ, cases were identified in seven counties in NJ
thorough the NJ State Cancer Registry, and controls through RDD and
community recruitment efforts. In-person interviews were conducted during
which questionnaires were administered and detailed anthropometric
measurements were taken by trained interviewers. Body composition was
assessed by bioelectrical impedance analysis using a Tanita scale. We
found little evidence of an association with body mass index (BMI),
weight or height. However, both waist and hip circumference were
associated with risk in premenopausal women after adjusting for all major
known risk factors for breast cancer and BMI, with an OR (95% CI) of 2.52
(1.18-5.39) and 2.54 (1.17-5.50), respectively, comparing highest vs.
lowest quartile. For post-menopausal women, the OR was 1.41 (0.71-2.81)
for waist circumference and 0.97 (0.48-1.95) for hip circumference. ORs
for waist-to-hip ratio were weak and not statistically significant. There
was a suggestion of increased risk for higher fat mass and percent body
fat after adjusting for BMI and other risk factors in pre-menopausal and
post-menopausal women, but confidence intervals included the null. We
also evaluated the impact of obesity on clinical presentation at
diagnosis among cases. Obese women were diagnosed at a more advanced
stage (pThere is convincing evidence that obesity is inversely associated
with breast cancer risk in premenopausal women, while increasing risk in
postmenopausal women. However, this is based on studies largely conducted
in Caucasian populations. Associations in African American women, who
have a higher prevalence of obesity, have been evaluated in few studies
and results are inconclusive. We evaluated the impact of body size, body
fat distribution, and body composition on breast cancer risk among
African American (AA) women (810 cases and 1022 controls) participating
in the Women's Circle of Health Study (WCHS). WCHS is an on-going
multi-site case-control study in New York City (NYC) and New Jersey (NJ),
which includes African American and Caucasian women. Cases were newly
diagnosed, histologically confirmed ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive
breast cancer, age 20-75 yrs. Controls were frequency matched on age to
the cases. In NYC, cases were recruited through hospitals with the
largest referral patterns for AA women and controls through random digit
dialing (RDD). In NJ, cases were identified in seven counties in NJ
thorough the NJ State Cancer Registry, and controls through RDD and
community recruitment efforts. In-person interviews were conducted during
which questionnaires were administered and detailed anthropometric
measurements were taken by trained interviewers. Body composition was
assessed by bioelectrical impedance analysis using a Tanita scale. We
found little evidence of an association with body mass index (BMI),
weight or height. However, both waist and hip circumference were
associated with risk in premenopausal women after adjusting for all major
known risk factors for breast cancer and BMI, with an OR (95% CI) of 2.52
(1.18-5.39) and 2.54 (1.17-5.50), respectively, comparing highest vs.
lowest quartile. For post-menopausal women, the OR was 1.41 (0.71-2.81)
for waist circumference and 0.97 (0.48-1.95) for hip circumference. ORs
for waist-to-hip ratio were weak and not statistically significant. There
was a suggestion of increased risk for higher fat mass and percent body
fat after adjusting for BMI and other risk factors in pre-menopausal and
post-menopausal women, but confidence intervals included the null. We
also evaluated the impact of obesity on clinical presentation at
diagnosis among cases. Obese women were diagnosed at a more advanced
stage (p<0.01) and with larger tumors at diagnosis (pThere is convincing
evidence that obesity is inversely associated with breast cancer risk in
premenopausal women, while increasing risk in postmenopausal women.
However, this is based on studies largely conducted in Caucasian
populations. Associations in African American women, who have a higher
prevalence of obesity, have been evaluated in few studies and results are
inconclusive. We evaluated the impact of body size, body fat
distribution, and body composition on breast cancer risk among African
American (AA) women (810 cases and 1022 controls) participating in the
Women's Circle of Health Study (WCHS). WCHS is an on-going multi-site
case-control study in New York City (NYC) and New Jersey (NJ), which
includes African American and Caucasian women. Cases were newly
diagnosed, histologically confirmed ductal carcinoma in situ or invasive
breast cancer, age 20-75 yrs. Controls were frequency matched on age to
the cases. In NYC, cases were recruited through hospitals with the
largest referral patterns for AA women and controls through random digit
dialing (RDD). In NJ, cases were identified in seven counties in NJ
thorough the NJ State Cancer Registry, and controls through RDD and
community recruitment efforts. In-person interviews were conducted during
which questionnaires were administered and detailed anthropometric
measurements were taken by trained interviewers. Body composition was
assessed by bioelectrical impedance analysis using a Tanita scale. We
found little evidence of an association with body mass index (BMI),
weight or height. However, both waist and hip circumference were
associated with risk in premenopausal women after adjusting for all major
known risk factors for breast cancer and BMI, with an OR (95% CI) of 2.52
(1.18-5.39) and 2.54 (1.17-5.50), respectively, comparing highest vs.
lowest quartile. For post-menopausal women, the OR was 1.41 (0.71-2.81)
for waist circumference and 0.97 (0.48-1.95) for hip circumference. ORs
for waist-to-hip ratio were weak and not statistically significant. There
was a suggestion of increased risk for higher fat mass and percent body
fat after adjusting for BMI and other risk factors in pre-menopausal and
post-menopausal women, but confidence intervals included the null. We
also evaluated the impact of obesity on clinical presentation at
diagnosis among cases. Obese women were diagnosed at a more advanced
stage (p<0.01) and with larger tumors at diagnosis (p<0.01). The
distributions of grade and ER status were similar among obese and normal
BMI women. In conclusion, our study suggests that measures of body fat
distribution and body composition (higher waist and hip circumferences,
fat mass and percent body fat) are associated with increased breast
cancer risk, independent of BMI. Furthermore, while BMI did not appear to
affect risk, a higher BMI was associated with more advanced cancer
diagnosis among African American women.

