Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioma biomarker discovery by mass spectrometry


BACKGROUND Approximately 200.000 people are diagnosed with a primary
brain tumor each year worldwide. The most common type of primary brain
tumor (40%) are gliomas. Currently available prognostic markers require
evaluation of tumor tissue, such as 1p and 19q choromosome co-deletion in
oligodendroglial tumors, MGMT promoter methylation for glioblastomas
(GBMs), and IDH mutations in several glioma subtypes. Serum biomarkers
that correlate with tumor status have prognostic and predictive value and
could significantly improve the care for glioma patients. In addition
biomarkers could provide unique information related to longitudinal
response to therapy. The only clinically validated serum marker of
prognosis and disease status in high grade gliomas is serum YKL-40, a
chitinase homolog also called human cartilage glycoprotein 39 or
chitinase 3-like 1. DESIGN/METHODS For the discovery phase we used a set
of 31 cerebrospinal fluid samples. This sample set included 5 CSF samples
of patients with a GBM and 26 controls. These samples were digested by
trypsin and subsequently measured by LCMS-Orbitrap. The acquired data
were analyzed using a database search and a subsequent analyses of the
spectral counts by Scaffold. The spectral counts for each individual
identified protein are used as a semi quantitative measure for protein
abundance. RESULTS / CONCLUSIONS From the total list of 771 identified
proteins, candidate biomarker proteins were selected that showed a
significant difference between the control and GBM (pBACKGROUND
Approximately 200.000 people are diagnosed with a primary brain tumor
each year worldwide. The most common type of primary brain tumor (40%)
are gliomas. Currently available prognostic markers require evaluation of
tumor tissue, such as 1p and 19q choromosome co-deletion in
oligodendroglial tumors, MGMT promoter methylation for glioblastomas
(GBMs), and IDH mutations in several glioma subtypes. Serum biomarkers
that correlate with tumor status have prognostic and predictive value and
could significantly improve the care for glioma patients. In addition
biomarkers could provide unique information related to longitudinal
response to therapy. The only clinically validated serum marker of
prognosis and disease status in high grade gliomas is serum YKL-40, a
chitinase homolog also called human cartilage glycoprotein 39 or
chitinase 3-like 1. DESIGN/METHODS For the discovery phase we used a set
of 31 cerebrospinal fluid samples. This sample set included 5 CSF samples
of patients with a GBM and 26 controls. These samples were digested by
trypsin and subsequently measured by LCMS-Orbitrap. The acquired data
were analyzed using a database search and a subsequent analyses of the
spectral counts by Scaffold. The spectral counts for each individual
identified protein are used as a semi quantitative measure for protein
abundance. RESULTS / CONCLUSIONS From the total list of 771 identified
proteins, candidate biomarker proteins were selected that showed a
significant difference between the control and GBM (p<0.01) and were at
least 3 fold higher in spectral count than in the control group. Abundant
serum proteins were removed to avoid inclusion of proteins that relate to
the disruption of the blood-CSF barrier. Eventually, a list of eleven
proteins was obtained that included 14-3-3 protein gamma, 72 kDa type IV
collagenase, Alpha-enolase, Chitinase-3-like protein 1 (YKL-40),
Fetuin-B, Glial fibrillary acidic protein, Insulin-like growth factor II,
Metalloproteinase inhibitor 1, Serum paraoxonase/arylesterase 1, SPARC,
IGF binding protein 2 and Metalloproteinase inhibitor 2. Many of the
identified candidate markers have been previously reported in literature
in relation to glioma including the clinically validated serum marker for
glioma YKL-40. We are now planning a validation of these markers in a set
of serum samples of glioma patients.

