Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the role of IDO in MUC1 expressing breast cancers


Breast cancer is the second most common cancer in the U.S. and
contributes to 40,000 deaths a year. Breast cancer vaccines are currently
being considered as a clinical intervention that may reduce the chance of
metastasis and recurrence, and perhaps even function to be effective in
cancer prevention. MUC1, a membrane tethered mucin glycoprotein, is over
expressed in >90% of breast cancers, and therefore has been recently
described as the second most targetable tumor antigen by the National
Cancer Institute. There are currently ongoing trials using the MUC1
vaccine in patients with metastatic breast cancer. However, immunotherapy
has had limited success because tumors have the ability to undergo immune
evasion tactics. This includes expression of Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO) immunosuppressive enzymes. IDO was first identified in maintaining
maternal tolerance towards the antigenically foreign fetus during
pregnancy. Its activity is increased under pathological conditions,
including during tumor development. IDO is emerging as a key player in T
cell suppression and in the induction of immune tolerance to tumors. The
present study is focused on understanding the role of IDO enzymatic
activity on tumor development and immune function. In this study, we
injected two cell lines that express IDO, and one cell line that is IDO
null (MTAG, MTAG.MUC1 and IKOM, respectively). These cell lines were
injected into either IDO null mice, or control c57/bk6 mice (n=3 each).
We hypothesized that IDO expression in the tumor microenvironment of mice
creates a pathological state of immune suppression resulting in altered
tumor progression and immune function. We show that mice (whether they be
IDO null or blk6) injected with IKOM cells have significantly slower
tumor progression and rates of secondary metastasis as compared to those
injected with IDO expressing tumor cells (pBreast cancer is the second
most common cancer in the U.S. and contributes to 40,000 deaths a year.
Breast cancer vaccines are currently being considered as a clinical
intervention that may reduce the chance of metastasis and recurrence, and
perhaps even function to be effective in cancer prevention. MUC1, a
membrane tethered mucin glycoprotein, is over expressed in >90% of breast
cancers, and therefore has been recently described as the second most
targetable tumor antigen by the National Cancer Institute. There are
currently ongoing trials using the MUC1 vaccine in patients with
metastatic breast cancer. However, immunotherapy has had limited success
because tumors have the ability to undergo immune evasion tactics. This
includes expression of Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)
immunosuppressive enzymes. IDO was first identified in maintaining
maternal tolerance towards the antigenically foreign fetus during
pregnancy. Its activity is increased under pathological conditions,
including during tumor development. IDO is emerging as a key player in T
cell suppression and in the induction of immune tolerance to tumors. The
present study is focused on understanding the role of IDO enzymatic
activity on tumor development and immune function. In this study, we
injected two cell lines that express IDO, and one cell line that is IDO
null (MTAG, MTAG.MUC1 and IKOM, respectively). These cell lines were
injected into either IDO null mice, or control c57/bk6 mice (n=3 each).
We hypothesized that IDO expression in the tumor microenvironment of mice
creates a pathological state of immune suppression resulting in altered
tumor progression and immune function. We show that mice (whether they be
IDO null or blk6) injected with IKOM cells have significantly slower
tumor progression and rates of secondary metastasis as compared to those
injected with IDO expressing tumor cells (p<0.05). In vitro, IKOM cells
had significantly lower proliferative rates than the IDO expressing
cells. Furthermore, mice injected with IKOM cells had a greater
percentage of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells as compared to those mice injected
with IDO expressing tumor cells. Mice injected with IDO expressing cells
had a greater percentage of MDSC's characterized by the expression of gr1
and cd11b. Future studies would investigate the role of MUC1 based
vaccines in combination with an IDO inhibitor, with the goal of reducing
metastasis and increasing survival in patients with breast cancer.

