Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone marrow-derived epithelial cells contribute to chronic skin
inflammation and skin tumor formation in the mouse


Although a stem cell origin for tumors was postulated nearly 200 years
ago, a critical role of keratin-15 expressing hair follicle stem cells in
skin tumorigenesis has only recently been established. In addition to
tissue stem cells, bone marrow cells can play a reparative function in
damaged organs and contribute to cancer development as recently
demonstrated in a gastric cancer model of Helicobacter felis-induced
chronic inflammation. We report here that bone marrow derived cells
(BMDCs) are an exogenous source of epithelial cells in tumor development
in the multistage skin carcinogenesis model following gender mismatched
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. First, clusters of BMDCs were
detected in the epithelium of 37.78% papilloma samples with a genetic
marker (EGFP) indicating their bone marrow donor origin. Second, clusters
of keratin immunoreactive BMDCs were located primarily in the basal
epithelium of the papillomas. Third, a subset of BMDCs in the basal
epithelium was found to be highly proliferative as measured by
incorporation of BrdU and expression of Ki67. Furthermore, a significant
contribution of BMDCs was identified in 53.06% of ulcer-associated
dysplastic skin samples by immunostaining and confirmed by presence of a
Y chromosome. Moreover, an enhanced contribution of bone marrow-derived
epithelial cells was observed in the dysplastic epidermis. Therefore,
these results demonstrate that a subset of BMDCs participates as a new
epithelial cell source in chronically damaged skin lesions including
papillomas and ulcers.

