Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical relevance of elevated microsatellite alterations at
selected tetranucleotide repeats in colorectal adenocarcinomas


Purpose: Elevated microsatellite alterations at selected tetranucleotide
repeats (EMAST) are frequently observed in various cancers, including
colorectal cancers (CRCs). The incidence of EMAST and its clinical
relevance with respect to patient race, however, have not been studied.
Therefore, we assessed the frequency and clinical relevance of EMAST and
microsatellite instability (MSI) in African-American (AA) and
non-Hispanic Caucasian (NHCA) CRC patients. Methods: We analyzed 166
CRCs, collected from the University of Alabama at Birmingham and Grady
Memorial hospitals. The EMAST and MSI status of the CRCs was evaluated
using seven tetranucleotide microsatellite markers (MYCL1, D8S321,
D9S242, D9S747, D20S82, D20S85, L17686) and five National Cancer
Institute-recommended MSI markers (BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346,
D17S250). This was accomplished by polymerase chain reactions using
marker-specific primers. The status for EMAST and MSI was considered
positive if at least two EMAST- or MSI-specific loci were found to be
unstable. The EMAST and MSI phenotypes were correlated with
clinicopathologic features and patient survival. Results: The overall
incidence of EMAST was 46% (77 of 166 cases); AA patients had a higher
incidence (62 of 124, 50%) relative to NHCA patients (15 of 42, 36%).
Analyses based on tumor location and patient race showed that, for AAs,
EMAST was more common in colonic tumors (60 of 114, 53%) than in tumors
of NHCAs (10 of 32, 31%). In contrast, only 20% of rectal tumors in AAs
(2 of 10) demonstrated EMAST, as compared to NHCA (5 of 10, 50%)
patients. Combined analysis (both racial groups) showed that 16% (26 of
166) of cases exhibited both EMAST and the phenotype, MSI-high.
Furthermore, for AA patients, but not NHCA patients, EMAST was associated
with mucinous CRCs (2p = 0.02 and 2p = 0.56, respectively). NHCA patients
who had EMAST had lower median survival (24 months) relative to those
without EMAST (55 months). In contrast, the AA patients did not
demonstrate an appreciable difference in median survival. Conclusions:
These findings suggest that, for AA patients, CRCs with EMAST are
associated with the MSI-high phenotype and mucinous tumors. For NHCA
patients, EMAST is associated with short survival. This work was
supported by grants from the NCI/NIH (2U54-CA118948, R01-CA98932, and
R03-CA139629).

