Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of the 15q25 and 5p15 lung cancer susceptibility
regions with gene expression in lung tumor tissue


Lung cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers worldwide, with
1.6 million new cases reported each year and ranks first in annual global
cancer deaths. Genome-wide association studies have identified two
independent lung cancer susceptibility loci at chromosome 15q25 and one
locus at 5p15. We examined the association of genetic variants in these
lung cancer susceptibility regions with gene expression in lung tumor
tissue in an effort to elucidate carcinogenic mechanisms by which these
variants influence lung cancer risk. We used data from two independent
studies: the JBR.10 clinical trial (131 NSCLC patients) and a patient
sample from the University Health Network (UHN) in Toronto (181 NSCLC
patients). We genotyped seven 15q25 and five 5p15 variants and examined
their association with the expression profiles of genes in the
corresponding regions measured by Affymetrix HG-U133A. The minor allele
(C) of a variant representing one of the two loci at 15q25 (rs2036534)
was associated with increased expression of the IREB2 (iron-responsive
element binding protein 2) gene in both studies (JBR.10 P=0.042; UHN
P=0.002). An FDR0.05 in the UHN sample increased our confidence in this
association. The association appears to be more prominent among patients
with lung adenocarcinoma. We did not detect an association between the
genotype and expression profile for the other 15q25 locus (represented by
rs16969968 and rs1051730). Previous studies suggest that 15q25 variants
are associated with risk through an effect on smoking behaviour,
indicating risk is modulated through activity of nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor genes present in this region. Our results indicate there is a
second mechanism through which variants at 15q25 influence risk,
operating through modulation of IREB2 gene expression. This finding may
have implications for future research on lung cancer chemoprevention
strategies.

