Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AMG 511, a potent and selective class I PI3K inhibitor, suppresses
the growth of Kras mutant lung tumors in mice


Background: Somatic activating mutations of KRAS are the most frequent
genetic event in lung cancer, occurring in approximately 20% of NSCLC.
KRAS activates two major oncogenic signaling pathways, the PI3K pathway
and the MAPK pathway. Studies have suggested that blockade of both
pathways is required to inhibit the growth of tumors driven by KRAS
mutation. In this study, we investigated the effect of inhibiting solely
the PI3K pathway on the growth of Kras G12D lung tumors in mice using AMG
511, a potent and selective class I PI3K inhibitor. To track tumor growth
in this genetically engineered mouse model of lung carcinoma, we
performed longitudinal monitoring of lung tumor burden during treatment
using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Methods: Lox-stop-lox (LSL) Kras
G12D mice were infected with Ad-Cre by intra-tracheal injection. Eight
weeks after administration of virus, mice were randomized into two
treatment groups and treated daily with 10 mg/kg AMG 511 or vehicle (N=11
per group). At 8, 11, and 14 weeks post-infection, mice were imaged using
ultra-short echo time (UTE) MRI (N=6 vehicle, N=5 AMG 511). UTE MRI was
performed with 30, 75, 150, 500, and 1000 s echo times to visualize lung
and tumor tissue. Lung borders were traced manually on MR images, and
lung tumor volume was determined within the identified lung region using
an intensity threshold to segment denser tumor tissue from normal lung
tissue. At 14 weeks, lungs were harvested, weighed, and processed for
histological analysis. Lung tissue area fraction was determined
histomorphometrically from multiple step sections. UTE MRI images were
correlated with histological sections from the same animal. Body weights
were recorded. Results: Once daily treatment with AMG 511 at 10 mg/kg
significantly inhibited the development of Kras G12D mutant lung tumors.
Lung tumor volume, as assessed by UTE MRI, was reduced by 64% at 11 weeks
(PBackground: Somatic activating mutations of KRAS are the most frequent
genetic event in lung cancer, occurring in approximately 20% of NSCLC.
KRAS activates two major oncogenic signaling pathways, the PI3K pathway
and the MAPK pathway. Studies have suggested that blockade of both
pathways is required to inhibit the growth of tumors driven by KRAS
mutation. In this study, we investigated the effect of inhibiting solely
the PI3K pathway on the growth of Kras G12D lung tumors in mice using AMG
511, a potent and selective class I PI3K inhibitor. To track tumor growth
in this genetically engineered mouse model of lung carcinoma, we
performed longitudinal monitoring of lung tumor burden during treatment
using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Methods: Lox-stop-lox (LSL) Kras
G12D mice were infected with Ad-Cre by intra-tracheal injection. Eight
weeks after administration of virus, mice were randomized into two
treatment groups and treated daily with 10 mg/kg AMG 511 or vehicle (N=11
per group). At 8, 11, and 14 weeks post-infection, mice were imaged using
ultra-short echo time (UTE) MRI (N=6 vehicle, N=5 AMG 511). UTE MRI was
performed with 30, 75, 150, 500, and 1000 s echo times to visualize lung
and tumor tissue. Lung borders were traced manually on MR images, and
lung tumor volume was determined within the identified lung region using
an intensity threshold to segment denser tumor tissue from normal lung
tissue. At 14 weeks, lungs were harvested, weighed, and processed for
histological analysis. Lung tissue area fraction was determined
histomorphometrically from multiple step sections. UTE MRI images were
correlated with histological sections from the same animal. Body weights
were recorded. Results: Once daily treatment with AMG 511 at 10 mg/kg
significantly inhibited the development of Kras G12D mutant lung tumors.
Lung tumor volume, as assessed by UTE MRI, was reduced by 64% at 11 weeks
(P<0.05) and 68% at 14 weeks (PBackground: Somatic activating mutations
of KRAS are the most frequent genetic event in lung cancer, occurring in
approximately 20% of NSCLC. KRAS activates two major oncogenic signaling
pathways, the PI3K pathway and the MAPK pathway. Studies have suggested
that blockade of both pathways is required to inhibit the growth of
tumors driven by KRAS mutation. In this study, we investigated the effect
of inhibiting solely the PI3K pathway on the growth of Kras G12D lung
tumors in mice using AMG 511, a potent and selective class I PI3K
inhibitor. To track tumor growth in this genetically engineered mouse
model of lung carcinoma, we performed longitudinal monitoring of lung
tumor burden during treatment using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Methods: Lox-stop-lox (LSL) Kras G12D mice were infected with Ad-Cre by
intra-tracheal injection. Eight weeks after administration of virus, mice
were randomized into two treatment groups and treated daily with 10 mg/kg
AMG 511 or vehicle (N=11 per group). At 8, 11, and 14 weeks
post-infection, mice were imaged using ultra-short echo time (UTE) MRI
(N=6 vehicle, N=5 AMG 511). UTE MRI was performed with 30, 75, 150, 500,
and 1000 s echo times to visualize lung and tumor tissue. Lung borders
were traced manually on MR images, and lung tumor volume was determined
within the identified lung region using an intensity threshold to segment
denser tumor tissue from normal lung tissue. At 14 weeks, lungs were
harvested, weighed, and processed for histological analysis. Lung tissue
area fraction was determined histomorphometrically from multiple step
sections. UTE MRI images were correlated with histological sections from
the same animal. Body weights were recorded. Results: Once daily
treatment with AMG 511 at 10 mg/kg significantly inhibited the
development of Kras G12D mutant lung tumors. Lung tumor volume, as
assessed by UTE MRI, was reduced by 64% at 11 weeks (P<0.05) and 68% at
14 weeks (P<0.0005) post Ad-Cre infection, relative to vehicle-treated
animals. The morphometric analysis of the same tissue showed a
significant reduction in lung tissue area fraction that was consistent
with the imaging results (up to 30% reduction, PBackground: Somatic
activating mutations of KRAS are the most frequent genetic event in lung
cancer, occurring in approximately 20% of NSCLC. KRAS activates two major
oncogenic signaling pathways, the PI3K pathway and the MAPK pathway.
Studies have suggested that blockade of both pathways is required to
inhibit the growth of tumors driven by KRAS mutation. In this study, we
investigated the effect of inhibiting solely the PI3K pathway on the
growth of Kras G12D lung tumors in mice using AMG 511, a potent and
selective class I PI3K inhibitor. To track tumor growth in this
genetically engineered mouse model of lung carcinoma, we performed
longitudinal monitoring of lung tumor burden during treatment using
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Methods: Lox-stop-lox (LSL) Kras G12D
mice were infected with Ad-Cre by intra-tracheal injection. Eight weeks
after administration of virus, mice were randomized into two treatment
groups and treated daily with 10 mg/kg AMG 511 or vehicle (N=11 per
group). At 8, 11, and 14 weeks post-infection, mice were imaged using
ultra-short echo time (UTE) MRI (N=6 vehicle, N=5 AMG 511). UTE MRI was
performed with 30, 75, 150, 500, and 1000 s echo times to visualize lung
and tumor tissue. Lung borders were traced manually on MR images, and
lung tumor volume was determined within the identified lung region using
an intensity threshold to segment denser tumor tissue from normal lung
tissue. At 14 weeks, lungs were harvested, weighed, and processed for
histological analysis. Lung tissue area fraction was determined
histomorphometrically from multiple step sections. UTE MRI images were
correlated with histological sections from the same animal. Body weights
were recorded. Results: Once daily treatment with AMG 511 at 10 mg/kg
significantly inhibited the development of Kras G12D mutant lung tumors.
Lung tumor volume, as assessed by UTE MRI, was reduced by 64% at 11 weeks
(P<0.05) and 68% at 14 weeks (P<0.0005) post Ad-Cre infection, relative
to vehicle-treated animals. The morphometric analysis of the same tissue
showed a significant reduction in lung tissue area fraction that was
consistent with the imaging results (up to 30% reduction, P<0.005). At
the time of harvest, wet lung weights were also significantly reduced
after treatment with AMG 511 (60% inhibition; PBackground: Somatic
activating mutations of KRAS are the most frequent genetic event in lung
cancer, occurring in approximately 20% of NSCLC. KRAS activates two major
oncogenic signaling pathways, the PI3K pathway and the MAPK pathway.
Studies have suggested that blockade of both pathways is required to
inhibit the growth of tumors driven by KRAS mutation. In this study, we
investigated the effect of inhibiting solely the PI3K pathway on the
growth of Kras G12D lung tumors in mice using AMG 511, a potent and
selective class I PI3K inhibitor. To track tumor growth in this
genetically engineered mouse model of lung carcinoma, we performed
longitudinal monitoring of lung tumor burden during treatment using
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Methods: Lox-stop-lox (LSL) Kras G12D
mice were infected with Ad-Cre by intra-tracheal injection. Eight weeks
after administration of virus, mice were randomized into two treatment
groups and treated daily with 10 mg/kg AMG 511 or vehicle (N=11 per
group). At 8, 11, and 14 weeks post-infection, mice were imaged using
ultra-short echo time (UTE) MRI (N=6 vehicle, N=5 AMG 511). UTE MRI was
performed with 30, 75, 150, 500, and 1000 s echo times to visualize lung
and tumor tissue. Lung borders were traced manually on MR images, and
lung tumor volume was determined within the identified lung region using
an intensity threshold to segment denser tumor tissue from normal lung
tissue. At 14 weeks, lungs were harvested, weighed, and processed for
histological analysis. Lung tissue area fraction was determined
histomorphometrically from multiple step sections. UTE MRI images were
correlated with histological sections from the same animal. Body weights
were recorded. Results: Once daily treatment with AMG 511 at 10 mg/kg
significantly inhibited the development of Kras G12D mutant lung tumors.
Lung tumor volume, as assessed by UTE MRI, was reduced by 64% at 11 weeks
(P<0.05) and 68% at 14 weeks (P<0.0005) post Ad-Cre infection, relative
to vehicle-treated animals. The morphometric analysis of the same tissue
showed a significant reduction in lung tissue area fraction that was
consistent with the imaging results (up to 30% reduction, P<0.005). At
the time of harvest, wet lung weights were also significantly reduced
after treatment with AMG 511 (60% inhibition; P< 0.0001). AMG 511 had no
effect on the bodyweights of the treated animals over the duration of the
study. Conclusions: AMG 511 significantly inhibits the growth of Kras
mutant lung tumors in mice, supporting the investigation of PI3K
inhibition in patients with KRAS mutant tumors.

