Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of DHX33 during oncogenic stress and its crucial role
in Ras-initiated tumor formation


Previously we found that DHX33 is pivotal for RNA polymerase I
transcription, changes in DHX33 levels have a dramatic impact on RNA
polymerase I activity. In this report, we explore the regulation of DHX33
protein levels by ARF/p53 pathway and Ras signaling. In wild type primary
fibroblasts, Ras V12 infection induced a transient increase in DHX33
protein level as well as rRNA transcriptional rate which was eventually
overcome by suppression from ARF/p53 pathway. ARF/p53 dependent reduction
of DHX33 occurred at the translational level, while Ras activation
induced DHX33 levels both at the level of transcription and translation.
The induction of DHX33 by Ras activation is sensitive to inhibitors of
PI3K, mTOR as well as MAPK. Induction of DHX33 by Ras V12 is pivotal for
enhanced rDNA transcription, enhanced protein translation, and thus, the
oncogenecity of Ras V12, as DHX33 knockdown abolished the increase in
rRNA transcription and protein translation, and completely inhibited the
tumorigenecity of Ras V12 both in semisolid agar and xenografts. Our
results implicate that DHX33 level could be an important factor to adjust
rDNA transcriptional rate in response to ARF induction and Ras
activation. Most importantly, we identified DHX33 as a novel downstream
target of Ras signaling to regulate rRNA transcription and pointed toward
its pivotal role in Ras-initiated tumor formation and therapeutic value
to treat Ras mutated cancer patients.

