Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soy protein isolate consumption does not prevent biochemical
failure after radical prostatectomy in high risk men: A randomized
controlled trial


Epidemiologic and experimental data suggest that soy consumption may
prevent prostate cancer and be beneficial for men with prostate cancer.
Soy intake and risk of prostate cancer are inversely correlated; soy
isoflavones inhibit growth of prostate cancer cells and reduce prostate
carcinogenesis in animal models. We tested the hypothesis that soy
consumption reduces biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy in
a randomized controlled clinical trial with a soy protein supplement
versus a casein-based placebo in men at increased risk for PSA failure in
the first 2 years after radical prostatectomy. PSA was tested at 2-month
intervals in year 1 and every 3 months in year 2. Eligibility criteria
were: Gleason sum of >8, extra-capsular extension, seminal vesicle
invasion, positive surgical margins, positive lymph nodes, and/or a
preoperative PSA of >20 ng/ml. Biochemical recurrence was defined a
priori as reaching a PSA value of 0.07 ng/ml, confirmed twice. A two-year
PSA failure rate in eligible subjects of approximately 30% was expected,
based on data from NYU and previous literature. With a planned sample
size of 128 evaluable subjects per arm, the study had 80% power to detect
a 50% reduction in PSA failure rate at a 2-sided significance level of
0.05. The soy protein isolate and placebo (generously provided by Solae
LCC, St Louis, MO) were identical in composition, except for the protein
source (19.2-19.8 g protein/day); the soy product provided daily 23.5 mg
genistein and 40.9 mg total isoflavones (aglycone equivalents); the
placebo was devoid of any soy-specific constituents. Accrual did not
reach the intended level and 172 subjects were randomized and enrolled,
of whom 142 were evaluable (completed two years on study or developed
confirmed recurrence within two years). Soy protein consumption did not
alter recurrence rate or time-to-recurrence (TTR). Of the 74 evaluable
subjects in the soy arm 22 (30%) recurred as did 22 (32%) of the 68
subjects in the placebo arm recurred. The mean TTR was 40.7 + 29.3 (SD)
weeks in the soy group and 44.5 + 28.0 weeks in men on placebo.
Statistical analysis on intention-to-treat basis confirmed the absence of
an effect on these primary endpoints. The drop-out rate was 17% and there
were Epidemiologic and experimental data suggest that soy consumption may
prevent prostate cancer and be beneficial for men with prostate cancer.
Soy intake and risk of prostate cancer are inversely correlated; soy
isoflavones inhibit growth of prostate cancer cells and reduce prostate
carcinogenesis in animal models. We tested the hypothesis that soy
consumption reduces biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy in
a randomized controlled clinical trial with a soy protein supplement
versus a casein-based placebo in men at increased risk for PSA failure in
the first 2 years after radical prostatectomy. PSA was tested at 2-month
intervals in year 1 and every 3 months in year 2. Eligibility criteria
were: Gleason sum of >8, extra-capsular extension, seminal vesicle
invasion, positive surgical margins, positive lymph nodes, and/or a
preoperative PSA of >20 ng/ml. Biochemical recurrence was defined a
priori as reaching a PSA value of 0.07 ng/ml, confirmed twice. A two-year
PSA failure rate in eligible subjects of approximately 30% was expected,
based on data from NYU and previous literature. With a planned sample
size of 128 evaluable subjects per arm, the study had 80% power to detect
a 50% reduction in PSA failure rate at a 2-sided significance level of
0.05. The soy protein isolate and placebo (generously provided by Solae
LCC, St Louis, MO) were identical in composition, except for the protein
source (19.2-19.8 g protein/day); the soy product provided daily 23.5 mg
genistein and 40.9 mg total isoflavones (aglycone equivalents); the
placebo was devoid of any soy-specific constituents. Accrual did not
reach the intended level and 172 subjects were randomized and enrolled,
of whom 142 were evaluable (completed two years on study or developed
confirmed recurrence within two years). Soy protein consumption did not
alter recurrence rate or time-to-recurrence (TTR). Of the 74 evaluable
subjects in the soy arm 22 (30%) recurred as did 22 (32%) of the 68
subjects in the placebo arm recurred. The mean TTR was 40.7 + 29.3 (SD)
weeks in the soy group and 44.5 + 28.0 weeks in men on placebo.
Statistical analysis on intention-to-treat basis confirmed the absence of
an effect on these primary endpoints. The drop-out rate was 17% and there
were <5% missing values, none of which impacted the primary endpoints.
Compliance by self-report was excellent and is being confirmed by serum
isoflavone levels. There were no treatment-related adverse events, except
a few cases of constipation. We previously ruled out effects of the
intervention on anti-thyroid activity and iron status in a subset of
subjects. Thus, soy consumption is safe, but unlikely to benefit men
after radical prostatectomy, although the results of this study do not
rule out preventive effects of soy prior to prostate cancer development.
(Supported by NIH grants CA27790, CA166195 & RR029879 and the Prevent
Cancer Foundation)

