Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncolytic attenuated measles virus exploits autophagy for its
replication and spreads by suppressing Rig-1 like receptors (RLRs) in
non-small cell lung cancer cells


Both autophagy and RLRs are involved in response to microbial infection,
including oncolytic attenuated measles viruses, which are being tested in
several clinical trials in advanced cancer patients. As little is known
about the role of autophagy in measles virus infection and oncolytic
activity as well as the crosstalk with RLRs, these mechanisms require
further investigation. In this study, we show for the first time that
measles virus of the Edmonston strain (MV-Edm) exploits autophagy for its
replication and spreads by suppressing RLRs in non-small cell lung cancer
cells (NSCLCs). MV-Edm rapidly induced autophagosomes formation in
NSCLCs. Inhibition of autophagy by RNAi led to a hampered viral
replication/spread accompanied by robustly increased production of type-I
interferons. Conversely, overexpression of autophagic genes massively
reduced production of type-I interferons and enhanced viral replication.
Expression of RIG-I and MDA5 was enhanced in MV-Edm infected NSCLCs and
massively increased when autophagy was concomitantly inhibited,
suggesting that virus-induced autophagy participated in modulating
RLR-mediated anti-viral response. As enhancing viral replication and
spread within tumors could improve oncolytic efficiency, our work may
lead to improve clinical therapeutic efficacy of oncolytic MV-Edm when
combined with autophagy inducers.

