Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting both non-coding and coding sequences with small RNA
efficiently knocks down DNA repair genes and radiosensitizes human tumor
cells


During radiotherapy, human tumor cell death is mainly caused by ionizing
radiation (IR)-induced DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). In general, human
cells use two pathways: homologous recombination repair (HRR) and
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), to repair DNA DSBs. However, in many
cases, human tumors are resistant to IR due to the abnormal up-regulation
of DNA DSB repair genes. Previously it was reported that using a siRNA
approach could knock down the DNA DSB repair genes and sensitized the
tumor cells to IR, however, the levels of knock down using a siRNA
approach alone is limited. Here, we developed a novel combined approach
using an artificial microRNA (amiR) to target the 3-untranlated region
(UTR) of the DNA DSB repair gene, XRCC2 (a HRR factor) or XRCC4 (a NHEJ
factor), and the siRNA to target the coding region of the gene in
different human tumor cell lines. Our results indicate that the combined
approach is much more efficient than the amiR or siRNA approach alone in
knocking down the targeted gene and sensitizing human tumor cells to
IR-induced killing. The amiR decreased the targeted gene through reducing
the mRNA stability and blocking the translation. These results
demonstrate that the combined approach could be used for many different
purposes to knock down genes in different cell lines, especially genes
that are difficult to knock down using amiR or siRNA alone.

