Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Atypical PKC knockdown alters TGF signaling potential


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF) regulates many important cellular
processes including growth control and cell migration. In epithelial
tumor cells, TGF signaling is fundamentally altered and induces
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) leading to increased migratory
potential. We have recently reported that the inhibition of atypical PKC
isoforms (aPKC) extends TGF induced Smad signaling by altering receptor
trafficking. Here we report that siRNA targeting of aPKC in A549 lung
adenocarcinoma cells extends temporal P-Smad2 signaling but does not
alter the transcript levels of Snail and Slug, as assessed by qPCR
analysis. Interestingly, TGF was not observed to have as robust an
increase in MMP9 and PAI-1 levels in aPKC-silenced cells compared to
cells transfected with control siRNA. To further analyze the functional
consequences, we assessed EMT by immunofluorescence microscopy analysis
as well as immunoblotting for epithelial and mesenchymal cell markers. We
found that TGF-dependent EMT was significantly reduced in aPKC silenced
cells. We also uncovered that in addition to increased P-Smad2 signaling,
P38 MAPK phosphorylation was increased and extended in aPKC silenced
cells. Finally, we discovered that aPKC phosphorylates Par6 on a
conserved serine residue that has been shown to regulate EMT and
metastasis in breast cancer. Taken together, we believe that aPKC
regulates several aspects of TGF signaling, including P-Smad2, P-P38 and
P-Par6 levels. Consequently, convergence of these signals in aPKC
silenced cells leads to reduced EMT and migratory potential.

