Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphodiesterase 4 regulates lung tumor growth through HIF
regulation, proliferation, and angiogenesis


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Recent data
suggest that cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs) are relevant in
various cancer pathologies. Here, we elucidate the pathophysiological
role of PDE4 and its therapeutic prospects in lung cancer. We exposed 10
different non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (adenocarcinoma,
squamous, and large cell carcinoma) to hypoxia and assessed the
expression and activity of PDE4 by quantitative real-time PCR,
immunocytochemistry, western blotting, and PDE activity assays.
Expression and activity of distinct PDE4 isoforms (PDE4A and PDE4D)
increased in response to hypoxia in eight of the studied cell lines.
Furthermore, we determined various potential hypoxia-responsive elements
(HRE) in PDE4A and PDE4D. Silencing of hypoxia-inducible factor subunits
(HIF1A and HIF2) by siRNA reduced hypoxic induction of PDE4A and PDE4D.
Vice versa, using a PDE4 inhibitor (PDE4i), a cAMP-elevating agent, cAMP
analogs, PKA activator/inhibitor, and EPAC activator, we demonstrated
that PDE4-cAMP-PKA/EPAC axis regulates HIF signaling as measured by HRE
reporter gene assay and expression of HIF target genes (LDHA, PDK1,
VEGFA). Notably, PDE4i or PDE4A-/PDE4D-selective siRNA reduced human lung
tumor cell proliferation in vitro and colony formation and altered the
expression of cell-cycle regulators. Moreover, PDE4i treatment reduced
hypoxia-induced VEGF secretion in human cells. In vivo, PDE4i inhibited
tumor xenograft growth in athymic nude mice by altering proliferation and
angiogenesis. Collectively, our findings suggest that PDE4 is
overexpressed in lung cancer, exerts crosstalk with HIF pathways, and
promotes lung cancer progression; thus, PDE4 may represent a therapeutic
target for lung cancer therapy.

