Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D) selective inhibitors as candidate
drugs for prostate cancer


Our laboratory used an insertional somatic mutagenesis screen in mice to
identify novel genes that may drive prostate cancer initiation and
progression. Using this screen, we have identified candidate prostate
cancer genes including the candidate oncogene phosphodiesterase 4D
(PDE4D). Investigation of PDE4D showed that it was over-expressed in
human prostate cancer cell lines and in human prostate cancers. Stable
knockdown of PDE4D by shRNA reduced the growth and migration of prostate
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Several small molecule PDE4D-selective
inhibitors have been developed, including cilomilast and NVP-ABE171, and
we have used them as potential anti-prostate cancer drugs in vitro and in
vivo. The inhibitors were able to reduce the growth of prostate cancer
cells in the context of epithelial mono-cultures or co-cultures that
modeled stromal-epithelial interactions. Daily oral administration of
PDE4D inhibitors for 6 weeks also reduced the growth of several prostate
cancer xenograft lines in vivo through a dramatic induction of apoptosis.
Interestingly, NVP-ABE171 and cilomilast also reduced the size of the
prostates of treated mice without impacting overall animal health or the
sizes of other organs. Under in vitro conditions in which prostate cancer
cell growth was inhibited by either NVP-ABE171 or cilomilast, we also
observed changes in the activation of potential downstream molecular
targets of PDE4D inhibition including the sonic hedgehog and
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. We are continuing studies with
these inhibitors to further support the use of NVP-ABE171 and cilomilast
as anti-prostate cancer drugs and to understand their mechanism(s) of
action in the prostate.

