Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expanded simple tandem repeat (ESTR) mutations in offspring of
benzo(a)pyrene exposed DNA repair deficient male mice


Germ line mutations can be transmitted to the offspring and may thus
affect an infinite number of generations thereafter. To study germ line
mutations, expanded simple tandem repeats (ESTR) can be used as a
sensitive tool, because they are known to be highly unstable and
therefore exhibit high mutation rates. This facilitates the assessment of
germ line mutations in a relatively small number of offspring following
exposures that may pose a genetic risk to the germ line. We used two ESTR
loci Ms6-hm and Hm-2 in families of benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) exposed and
unexposed male mice, proficient or deficient for global genome repair
(Xpc-/-). Male mice (C57BL/6) were exposed to BaP during 6 weeks (13
mg/kg bw, 3 times per week) and were crossed with female mice (Balb/C) 6
weeks after the last exposure to obtain offspring and to ensure the
analysis of mutations originating from spermatogonial stem cells. The
overall ESTR mutation rate at both ESTR loci, irrespective of the DNA
repair capacity, was higher in offspring of benzo(a)pyrene exposed mice
than in control mice (9.4% vs. 4.5%, P=0.054). This effect was
predominantly seen in BaP exposed DNA repair deficient Xpc-/- mice;
mutation frequencies were 12.5% in the exposed group (12 out of 96
offspring carried a mutant allele) and 3.4% in the unexposed group (3 out
of 87), respectively (P=0.024). In DNA repair proficient mice, BaP was
unable to increase the mutation frequency transmitted to the offspring
(5.8% vs. 5.5% for offspring of exposed and unexposed fathers). These
results indicate that analysis of tandem repetitive sequences is a
sensitive method for the detection of germline mutations transmitted to
the offspring and that the environmental mutagen BaP is able to induce
germ line mutations in DNA repair deficient mice.

