Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P21-activated kinases (PAKs) are novel therapeutic targets in
human breast cancer


P21-activated kinases (PAKs) are important mediators of Rac and Cdc42
GTPase function as well as pathways required for Ras-driven
tumorigenesis. PAKs have been implicated in signaling by growth factor
receptors and morphogenetic processes that control cell polarity,
invasion and actin cytoskeleton organization. To better understand the
role of PAK1 and PAK4 in breast tumorigenesis, genomic copy number, mRNA
and protein expression were determined for a panel of 291 human breast
adenocarcinomas and loss-of function was assessed in cell lines using
genetic and pharmacologic approaches. Interestingly, PAK1 genomic
amplification at 11q13 was prevalent in luminal breast cancer and PAK1
levels in early ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) samples was similar to
that of primary adenocarcinoma suggesting that PAK1 dysregulation could
be an early event in some breast cancers. PAK1 protein expression in
adenocarcinoma was associated with lymph node invasion and further
increased expression was observed in metastatic tumors. In addition,
primary and secondary (28 local recurrences, 56 metastases)
adenocarcinomas from a total of 86 patients (81 with matching samples)
were evaluated for PAK1 and PAK4 expression to determine modulation of
these kinases following adjuvant hormone therapy. Breast cancer cell
lines with PAK1 genomic amplification rapidly underwent caspase
activation and apoptosis following inhibition of this kinase. Together,
our results provide evidence for dysregulation of PAK1 in breast cancer
and a role for PAK1 in cellular survival and proliferation in this
indication.

