Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivating BRAF mutations confer dasatinib sensitivity in lung
cancer


NSCLC is a lethal disease for which personalized therapies that target
specific genetic aberrations have been markedly effective in subsets of
patients. An important approach for discovering effective cancer
therapeutic targets is to characterize responsive tumors. We conducted a
phase II trial of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor dasatinib in stage IV
NSCLC. The dramatic response of one patient, who remains cancer free four
years later, led us to examine the molecular characteristics of his
tumor. We performed a comprehensive analysis of this NSCLC patient's
tumor including mutational analysis of 40 genes, array comparative
genomic hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. We discovered a novel,
inactivating BRAF mutation (Y472CBRAF) in the patient's tumor; no
inactivating BRAF mutations were found in the non-responding patients.
Cells transfected with Y472CBRAF exhibited CRAF, MEK, and ERK activation,
which were identical to signaling changes that occur with previously
known inactivating BRAF mutants. Dasatinib induced senescence in NSCLC
cells with endogenous inactivating BRAF mutations. Transfection of cells
with inactivating BRAF mutations led to increased dasatinib sensitivity;
conversely, cells transfected with an activating BRAF mutation were more
resistant. Likewise, BRAF inhibition in NSCLC cells expressing wild-type
BRAF enhanced dasatinib sensitivity. Dasatinib sensitivity may depend
upon CRAF since dasatinib led to decreased CRAF activity and only NSCLC
cells with inactivating BRAF mutations were sensitive to CRAF inhibition.
We hypothesize that patient's BRAF mutation was likely responsible for
his marked response to dasatinib and suggests that tumors bearing
inactive BRAF mutations will be exquisitely sensitive to dasatinib.

