Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative studies of TIMP-1 immunohistochemistry, TIMP-1 FISH
analysis and plasma TIMP-1 in glioblastoma patients


Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) has been associated
with poor prognosis in various cancers as well as with resistance towards
chemotherapy. In a previous study we found an association between a high
immunohistochemical TIMP-1 protein level and a shorter survival for
glioblastoma patients. The aim of the present study was to further
evaluate TIMP-1 as a prognostic marker in gliomas by performing TIMP-1
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and by measuring TIMP-1 in
plasma. TIMP-1 FISH analysis was performed on 33 glioblastoma biopsies in
order to elucidate if the increased levels of TIMP-1 protein could be
explained by gene amplification. Moreover, blood samples were collected
from 43 patients (31 gliomas including 21 glioblastomas) prior to brain
tumor surgery. The plasma TIMP-1 protein level was measured by ELISA. The
results showed TIMP-1 FISH scores between 0.7 and 1.1, suggesting neither
amplification nor loss of the TIMP-1 gene. The TIMP-1 level measured in
plasma was not significantly higher than the TIMP-1 level measured in
healthy matched controls. No correlation was identified between the
immunohistochemical TIMP-1 levels and the FISH scores or the plasma
TIMP-1 levels. In conclusion, TIMP-1 FISH scores or plasma TIMP-1 levels
are without prognostic potential in gliomas. The present study suggests
that the high immunohistochemical TIMP-1 protein levels in gliomas are
not caused by TIMP-1 gene amplification. Moreover, TIMP-1 in plasma is
low and not directly related to the tumor TIMP-1 level found by
immunohistochemistry. The study suggests that TIMP-1 immunohistochemistry
is the method of choice when using TIMP-1 as a biomarker in gliomas.

