Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flavonoid intake and risk of pancreatic cancer in the National
Institutes of Health-AARP Diet and Health Study Cohort


Flavonoids are the most common of the plant polyphenolics and are
obtained from foods such as tea, citrus and other fruits. Laboratory and
animal studies suggest that through anti-oxidant properties dietary
flavonoids may reduce the risk of pancreatic cancer, and the few previous
epidemiologic studies on flavonoid intake and pancreatic cancer risk have
shown protective associations for specific types of flavonoids. We
examined the association between total flavonoid intake, six flavonoid
subgroups, flavonoid-rich foods and development of exocrine pancreatic
cancer among 537,104 participants in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study
with complete dietary data. Men and women aged 50 to 71 years completed a
self-administered food frequency questionnaire at baseline (1995-1996)
that ascertained diet and other lifestyle information. During follow-up
through 2006 (median 10.6 years, max 11.2 years), 2379 incident
pancreatic cancer cases were identified. Flavonoid intake was estimated
from two databases developed from the USDA Nutrient Data laboratory. The
distribution of flavonoid intake differed by sex (mean female intake 216
mg/day, range 0.41-9456; mean male intake 153 mg/day, range 0.95-6561);
therefore, quintiles were based on sex specific cut-points. We used Cox
proportional hazard models with age as the underlying time metric to
calculate hazard ratios (HR) for pancreatic cancer. Models were adjusted
for sex, smoking, diabetes, body mass index, alcohol use, and saturated
fat and red meat intake. We found no association between total flavonoid
intake (hazard ratio (HR)=1.09; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.96-1.24)
or the six flavonoid subgroups and risk of pancreatic cancer. Although
there was no significant interaction by sex or smoking (p-interaction >
0.10), in stratified analyses we observed significant increased risks for
total flavonoid intake among current smokers (Q5 versus Q1 HR=1.45, 95%
CI 1.12-1.88, p-trend=0.002), while no such associations were evident
among never (HR=1.01, 95% CI 1.00-1.03) or former smokers (HR=0.99, 95%
CI 0.98-1.01). Among smokers flavonol and isoflavone intakes were
positively associated with pancreatic cancer comparing extreme quintiles,
with HRs =1.38 (95% CI 1.05-1.82, p trend=0.019) and 1.39 (95% CI
1.03-1.86, p trend=0.022) respectively. It is possible that exposures
correlated to smoking but not accounted for in our analysis explain the
observed associations. Our results do not support the hypothesis that
flavonoid intake plays a protective role in pancreatic cancer
carcinogenesis.

