Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide association study for age at onset in breast cancer:
results from the Seoul Breast Cancer Study


Introduction: While the incidence of breast cancer is relatively low in
Korean women, the proportion of breast cancer that develops in younger
age is much higher than in western countries. Family-based linkage study
has focused on the identification of a region which is associated with
the age at onset in familial breast cancer. However, genetic factors for
onset age of breast cancer are still largely unknown. While genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have identified over 20 susceptibility loci
for breast cancer, no previous study has examined the relationship
between the common genetic variations and the age at onset in breast
cancer. Methods: To identify genetic factors underlying onset age of
breast cancer, we investigated the association between genetic variants
and age at diagnosis in 2,155 breast cancer cases. Over 1.9 million SNPs
either directly genotyped using Affymetrix 6.0 or imputed with HapMap 2.0
as a reference panel were evaluated after quality control. Tests of
association were conducted with Plink v1.01 using the additive genetic
model and Mach2qtl with allelic dosages in a linear regression model in
which onset age was included as a dependent variable (continuous). The
differences of mean age across genotype-groups were also compared using
one-way analysis of variance. Results: The mean age at onset in breast
cancer was 48.1 9.31. The SNPs with p-value less than 110-5 obtained from
linear regression were clustered into two regions: two SNPs (rs6684400
and rs6659875) are at 1q25.3 in intergenic region between ZNF648 and GLUL
gene; the other two (rs669576 and rs667007) are at 11q25 in intronic
region of NTM gene. Per-allele effect size was 1.4 0.30 (p = 4.84E-06)
for rs6684400 C allele and 3.1 0.68 for rs669576 T allele (p = 7.11E-06).
The mean age at onset for the rs6684400 G/G, C/G and C/C groups were
found to be 47.2 9.00, 48.1 9.32 and 49.7 9.59, respectively (p =
0.0001). As for the rs669576, the mean age at onset for G/G, G/T and T/T
groups were 47.8 9.15, 50.9 10.38 and 54.3 7.80, respectively (p
Introduction: While the incidence of breast cancer is relatively low in
Korean women, the proportion of breast cancer that develops in younger
age is much higher than in western countries. Family-based linkage study
has focused on the identification of a region which is associated with
the age at onset in familial breast cancer. However, genetic factors for
onset age of breast cancer are still largely unknown. While genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have identified over 20 susceptibility loci
for breast cancer, no previous study has examined the relationship
between the common genetic variations and the age at onset in breast
cancer. Methods: To identify genetic factors underlying onset age of
breast cancer, we investigated the association between genetic variants
and age at diagnosis in 2,155 breast cancer cases. Over 1.9 million SNPs
either directly genotyped using Affymetrix 6.0 or imputed with HapMap 2.0
as a reference panel were evaluated after quality control. Tests of
association were conducted with Plink v1.01 using the additive genetic
model and Mach2qtl with allelic dosages in a linear regression model in
which onset age was included as a dependent variable (continuous). The
differences of mean age across genotype-groups were also compared using
one-way analysis of variance. Results: The mean age at onset in breast
cancer was 48.1 9.31. The SNPs with p-value less than 110-5 obtained from
linear regression were clustered into two regions: two SNPs (rs6684400
and rs6659875) are at 1q25.3 in intergenic region between ZNF648 and GLUL
gene; the other two (rs669576 and rs667007) are at 11q25 in intronic
region of NTM gene. Per-allele effect size was 1.4 0.30 (p = 4.84E-06)
for rs6684400 C allele and 3.1 0.68 for rs669576 T allele (p = 7.11E-06).
The mean age at onset for the rs6684400 G/G, C/G and C/C groups were
found to be 47.2 9.00, 48.1 9.32 and 49.7 9.59, respectively (p =
0.0001). As for the rs669576, the mean age at onset for G/G, G/T and T/T
groups were 47.8 9.15, 50.9 10.38 and 54.3 7.80, respectively (p <
0.0001) Conclusions: Our study suggests that the common genetic variants
may be closely linked to age at onset in breast cancer. Further
validation with a larger sample size is required to validate our result.

