Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional inhibition of HSP90 potentiates the effects of ionizing
radiation in colorectal cancer


Purpose/Objectives: Attempts at improving the outcome of colorectal
cancer patients by incorporating novel agents have been disappointing
indicating that in the majority of patients the therapeutic challenge
remains primary resistance to chemoradiotherapy. Major cellular signaling
pathways contributing to growth and resistance to chemoradiotherapy in
rectal cancer includes the PI3K/AKT/NF-B pathway. The heat shock protein
90 (HSP90) regulates the activity, turnover, and trafficking of several
proteins involved in these pathways of resistance. Inhibition of HSP90
provides a novel mechanism to target these pathways simultaneously.
Ganetespib (STA-9090) is a small molecule functional inhibitor of HSP90.
We tested the hypothesis that HSP90 inhibition can sensitize colorectal
cell lines to the effects of ionizing radiation (XRT). Methods:
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of 10 colorectal paired normal and
tumor tissue samples from the same 10 patients were stained with
antibodies against HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT. Cell proliferation (XTT),
colony formation (clonogenic assay), migration (spheroid), apoptosis
(Apoptosis/Necrosis Detection Kit), and Western blot analyses were
carried out in HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cell lines to determine the
effect of ganetespib alone or in combination with XRT. Results: IHC
analyses of paired human colorectal normal and tumor samples revealed
significant overexpression of HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT in the tumors when
compared to the normal tissues. In both colorectal cell lines, treatment
with ganetespib significantly inhibits proliferation in the XTT assay
(pPurpose/Objectives: Attempts at improving the outcome of colorectal
cancer patients by incorporating novel agents have been disappointing
indicating that in the majority of patients the therapeutic challenge
remains primary resistance to chemoradiotherapy. Major cellular signaling
pathways contributing to growth and resistance to chemoradiotherapy in
rectal cancer includes the PI3K/AKT/NF-B pathway. The heat shock protein
90 (HSP90) regulates the activity, turnover, and trafficking of several
proteins involved in these pathways of resistance. Inhibition of HSP90
provides a novel mechanism to target these pathways simultaneously.
Ganetespib (STA-9090) is a small molecule functional inhibitor of HSP90.
We tested the hypothesis that HSP90 inhibition can sensitize colorectal
cell lines to the effects of ionizing radiation (XRT). Methods:
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of 10 colorectal paired normal and
tumor tissue samples from the same 10 patients were stained with
antibodies against HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT. Cell proliferation (XTT),
colony formation (clonogenic assay), migration (spheroid), apoptosis
(Apoptosis/Necrosis Detection Kit), and Western blot analyses were
carried out in HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cell lines to determine the
effect of ganetespib alone or in combination with XRT. Results: IHC
analyses of paired human colorectal normal and tumor samples revealed
significant overexpression of HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT in the tumors when
compared to the normal tissues. In both colorectal cell lines, treatment
with ganetespib significantly inhibits proliferation in the XTT assay
(p<0.001); significantly decreased expression of PI3K and p-AKT, as well
as significantly increased levels of HSP70 in Western blot analyses
(pPurpose/Objectives: Attempts at improving the outcome of colorectal
cancer patients by incorporating novel agents have been disappointing
indicating that in the majority of patients the therapeutic challenge
remains primary resistance to chemoradiotherapy. Major cellular signaling
pathways contributing to growth and resistance to chemoradiotherapy in
rectal cancer includes the PI3K/AKT/NF-B pathway. The heat shock protein
90 (HSP90) regulates the activity, turnover, and trafficking of several
proteins involved in these pathways of resistance. Inhibition of HSP90
provides a novel mechanism to target these pathways simultaneously.
Ganetespib (STA-9090) is a small molecule functional inhibitor of HSP90.
We tested the hypothesis that HSP90 inhibition can sensitize colorectal
cell lines to the effects of ionizing radiation (XRT). Methods:
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of 10 colorectal paired normal and
tumor tissue samples from the same 10 patients were stained with
antibodies against HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT. Cell proliferation (XTT),
colony formation (clonogenic assay), migration (spheroid), apoptosis
(Apoptosis/Necrosis Detection Kit), and Western blot analyses were
carried out in HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cell lines to determine the
effect of ganetespib alone or in combination with XRT. Results: IHC
analyses of paired human colorectal normal and tumor samples revealed
significant overexpression of HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT in the tumors when
compared to the normal tissues. In both colorectal cell lines, treatment
with ganetespib significantly inhibits proliferation in the XTT assay
(p<0.001); significantly decreased expression of PI3K and p-AKT, as well
as significantly increased levels of HSP70 in Western blot analyses
(p<0.05); and inhibited the nuclear translocation (immunocyto studies)
and the DNA binding activity (EMSA) of the NF-B p65 molecules. We found
that ganetespib indeed potentiates the effects of XRT in both cell lines:
significant decrease in colony formation as determined by the clonogenic
assay (pPurpose/Objectives: Attempts at improving the outcome of
colorectal cancer patients by incorporating novel agents have been
disappointing indicating that in the majority of patients the therapeutic
challenge remains primary resistance to chemoradiotherapy. Major cellular
signaling pathways contributing to growth and resistance to
chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer includes the PI3K/AKT/NF-B pathway.
The heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) regulates the activity, turnover, and
trafficking of several proteins involved in these pathways of resistance.
Inhibition of HSP90 provides a novel mechanism to target these pathways
simultaneously. Ganetespib (STA-9090) is a small molecule functional
inhibitor of HSP90. We tested the hypothesis that HSP90 inhibition can
sensitize colorectal cell lines to the effects of ionizing radiation
(XRT). Methods: Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of 10 colorectal
paired normal and tumor tissue samples from the same 10 patients were
stained with antibodies against HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT. Cell
proliferation (XTT), colony formation (clonogenic assay), migration
(spheroid), apoptosis (Apoptosis/Necrosis Detection Kit), and Western
blot analyses were carried out in HCT-116 and HT-29 colorectal cell lines
to determine the effect of ganetespib alone or in combination with XRT.
Results: IHC analyses of paired human colorectal normal and tumor samples
revealed significant overexpression of HSP90, HSP70, and p-AKT in the
tumors when compared to the normal tissues. In both colorectal cell
lines, treatment with ganetespib significantly inhibits proliferation in
the XTT assay (p<0.001); significantly decreased expression of PI3K and
p-AKT, as well as significantly increased levels of HSP70 in Western blot
analyses (p<0.05); and inhibited the nuclear translocation (immunocyto
studies) and the DNA binding activity (EMSA) of the NF-B p65 molecules.
We found that ganetespib indeed potentiates the effects of XRT in both
cell lines: significant decrease in colony formation as determined by the
clonogenic assay (p<0.001); increase in the induction of necrosis; and
decreased migration. Conclusions: The HSP90 pathway is selectively
activated in patient's rectal tumors and is a rational target for drug
development. HSP90 inhibition potentiates the effects of ionizing
radiation in preclinical models. Evaluating HSP90 inhibitors in rectal
cancer is a rational approach that could have a significant impact on the
outcome of this common and deadly disease.

