Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional analysis of tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I catalytic
mutants


Tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase I (Tdp1) is a conserved eukaryotic DNA
repair enzyme involved in repair of 3-DNA adducts, such as the
3-phosphotyrosyl bond formed between DNA topoisomerase I (Top1) and DNA
which is reversibly stabilized by camptothecins (CPTs), like the FDA
approved analogs topotecan and irinotecan. Tdp1 is a member of the
phospholipase D superfamily and contains paired catalytic histidine and
lysine residues within two conserved HxK(x)4D motifs. Tdp1's two
catalytic histidines function as a nucleophile (N-terminal His182) and as
a general acid/base (C-terminal His432). Substitution of the latter in
human Tdp1 to Arg (hTdp1His493Arg) contributes to the rare recessive
neurodegenerative disease SCAN1. The hTdp1His493Arg mutant and its yeast
analog (Tdp1His432Arg) increase cell sensitivity to CPTs, whereas
mutation of this His to Asn produces a Top1-CPT-dependent lethality.
Interestingly, substitution of His432 to Lys produces wild type-like
biochemical and in cell activity. Our recent crystal structures revealed
that Tdp1 and Tdp1His432Arg stabilize the phospho-His182, which is not
observed in the Tdp1His432Asn structure. In vitro analysis showed that
Tdp1His432Arg and Tdp1His432Lys but not Tdp1 or Tdp1His432Asn, formed a
non-covalent interaction with the DNA while only the Tdp1His432Arg mutant
retained a covalent protein-DNA bond. However, a band depletion assay
showed that soluble Tdp1His432Asn and Top1 are depleted, suggesting
Tdp1His432Asn remains in complex with Top1 on the DNA. The difference
between our in vivo and in vitro observations could be the differences
between substrates; full length Top1-genomic DNA complex vs.
Tyr-oligonucleotide complex. While Tdp1His182Ala is reported to be
biochemically inactive, introduction of His182Ala in Tdp1His432Asn could
not suppress the observed lethality. Yet, Tdp1His182AlaHis432Asn gained a
Top1-independent toxic phenotype. Substitution of His182 to Phe
suppresses the His432Asn toxicity. Preliminary results revealed
Tdp1His182Ala activity in vitro, leading us to posit that substitution of
His182 to Ala would allow the adjacent conserved His181 to rotate into
the active site and act as a nucleophile to resolve the Top1-DNA
intermediate. Consistent with this model, mutating His181 to Ala
suppressed the Top1-CPT dependent lethality of the H182A and H432N single
and double mutants. However, the structure of the apo H182A mutants
revealed His181 in its wild type position, and showed that Ala at
position 182 introduces the necessary space for such rotation. We posit
that this rotation only occurs infrequently and upon binding of the
substrate, which we will investigate via NMR. Overall, our findings give
insight into the catalytic mechanism and suggest that protein-protein
interactions modulate Tdp1 catalytic activity, which supports Tdp1 as a
novel drug target. Supported by the Alabama Drug Discovery Alliance.

