Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PP2A signaling is overridden by MEK/ERK activity leading to
suppression of Bim and protection of melanoma cells from ER
stress-induced apoptosis


Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggers apoptosis by activating Bim in
diverse types of cells. This involves dephosphorylation of Bim by protein
phosphatase 2A (PP2A). However, melanoma cells are largely resistant to
ER stress-induced apoptosis, indicating that Bim activation is suppressed
in melanoma cells undergoing ER stress. We show here that this is due to
increased activation of MEK/ERK signaling that overrides the PP2A
activity leading to enhanced Bim phosphorylation and subsequent
proteosomal degradation. Upon pharmacological ER stress, the Bim protein
expression was rapidly downregulated after an initial increase, despite
its sustained upregulation at the transcriptional level. Although PP2A
exerted the dephosphorylating effect on BimEL, its activity appeared to
be superseded by increased activation of MEK/ERK signaling that led to
enchanced phosphorylation and accelerated turnover of the protein.
Moreover, in contrast to its upregulation by ER stress in MCF-7 and
HEK293 cells, PP2A was downregulated in melanoma cells undergoing ER
stress. Pharmacological activation or enforced expression of PP2A
decreased ERK and Bim phosphorylation, up-regulated Bim expression, and
rendered melanoma cells sensitive to ER stress-induced apoptosis.
Notably, instead of direct interaction with Bim, PP2A reduced Bim
phosphorylation indirectly by dephosphorylating ERK in melanoma cells.
Together, these results identify a key resistance mechanism of melanoma
cells against apoptosis induced by ER stress.

