Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of the RNA binding protein LIN28B in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is the most frequent extracranial solid tumor in children,
accounting for almost 9% of all childhood cancers and close to 15% of
childhood cancer deaths. Amplification of MYCN occurs in up to 40% of
neuroblastomas, and is a marker of very poor prognosis. Current treatment
strategies for MYCN amplified tumors are ineffective and in desperate
need of new therapeutic avenues. The LIN28 A and B RNA binding proteins
negatively regulate the let-7 family of pro-differentiation/ tumor
suppressor miRNAs, enhance the translation of mRNA binding partners, and
are emerging as novel onco-proteins. We show here that LIN28B is highly
expressed in neuroblastoma, both in human neuroblastoma cell lines and in
neuroblastoma patient samples, with an expression pattern similar to
MYCN. The LIN28 proteins have been shown to directly regulate MYC, and
knockdown of LIN28B in MYCN-amplified human neuroblastoma cells results
in markedly reduced MYCN expression, impaired growth, greater
differentiation, and reduced tumor size in mouse xenograft studies,
indicating an important functional link between LIN28B and MYCN. Through
LIN28B/mRNA co-immunoprecipitation we have discovered that LIN28B binds
MYCN mRNA, suggesting a novel mechanism of LIN28B contribution to MYCN
activity in high-risk neuroblastoma. In addition, we have also discovered
that LIN28B is acetylated within its RNA binding domain, and mutational
studies have suggested that modulating this post-translational
modification may destabilize LIN28B protein stability. Through proteomic
analysis of LIN28B -associated proteins, we have identified an
acetyl-transferase as a candidate drug target for disruption of the
LIN28B/MYCN oncogenic pathway.

