Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiotensin-(1-7), a peptide hormone with therapeutic potential
for the treatment of glioblastomas


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common primary malignant brain
tumor in adults, is characterized by aggressive proliferation throughout
the brain parenchyma and enhanced angiogenesis. Despite multimodality
treatment, GBM therapy is only palliative with a median patient survival
of less than 10 to 12 months after diagnosis, indicating a need for novel
agents with therapeutic potential. Angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)] is an
endogenous, seven amino acid peptide hormone with anti-proliferative and
anti-angiogenic properties which provides targeted therapy by activating
mas, a unique G protein-coupled receptor. In this study, Ang-(1-7)
effectively reduced the growth of human GBM in an orthotopic mouse model.
Athymic mice with brain tumors resulting from injection of human G48a GBM
cells, isolated from a grade 4 astrocytoma, were treated for 28 days with
24 g/kg/h Ang-(1-7), delivered by osmotic mini-pump. The G48 GBM cells
formed an aggressive and invasive phenotype, with outgrowths extending
into the brain parenchyma. Ang-(1-7) administration markedly reduced the
average tumor burden (a 75% reduction in tumor mass) as compared to
untreated control mice (9.4 1.6 x1010 vs 2.4 1.3 x1010 p/sec/cm2/sr, p
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common primary malignant brain
tumor in adults, is characterized by aggressive proliferation throughout
the brain parenchyma and enhanced angiogenesis. Despite multimodality
treatment, GBM therapy is only palliative with a median patient survival
of less than 10 to 12 months after diagnosis, indicating a need for novel
agents with therapeutic potential. Angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)] is an
endogenous, seven amino acid peptide hormone with anti-proliferative and
anti-angiogenic properties which provides targeted therapy by activating
mas, a unique G protein-coupled receptor. In this study, Ang-(1-7)
effectively reduced the growth of human GBM in an orthotopic mouse model.
Athymic mice with brain tumors resulting from injection of human G48a GBM
cells, isolated from a grade 4 astrocytoma, were treated for 28 days with
24 g/kg/h Ang-(1-7), delivered by osmotic mini-pump. The G48 GBM cells
formed an aggressive and invasive phenotype, with outgrowths extending
into the brain parenchyma. Ang-(1-7) administration markedly reduced the
average tumor burden (a 75% reduction in tumor mass) as compared to
untreated control mice (9.4 1.6 x1010 vs 2.4 1.3 x1010 p/sec/cm2/sr, p <
0.022). Histological analysis of brain tissue sections from untreated
mice showed a significantly higher percent of Ki67 positive
immunoreactivity in tumors as compared to tumor tissue from
Ang-(1-7)-treated animals, suggesting that the heptapeptide hormone
reduces cell proliferation. In support, proliferation of G48a cultured
cells which express the mas receptor was reduced approximately 50%
following incubation with 100 nM Ang-(1-7) for five days. Ang-(1-7)
treatment also resulted in a marked decrease in MAP kinase ERK1/ERK2
phosphorylation with a concomitant 2-fold increase in the MAP kinase
phosphatase DUSP1, suggesting that the heptapeptide hormone negatively
regulates GBM cell growth in part by attenuating ERK1/ERK2 activation.
Intratumoral vessel density in GBMs from mice administered Ang-(1-7) was
attenuated more than 50% as compared to tumors from control animals. VEGF
mRNA and protein were decreased over time with a maximal reduction at 8 h
in G48a cells following treatment with 100 nM Ang-(1-7). Conversely, the
soluble VEGF receptor sFlt-1 was significantly increased in cells
incubated with the heptapeptide hormone. sFlt-1, produced by alternative
mRNA splicing of Flt-1, is secreted into the circulation and serves as an
endogenous trap that sequesters VEGF family ligands, making the
angiogenic factors unavailable to the cell-bound VEGF receptors and
preventing the downstream activation of pro-angiogenic signaling
pathways. Taken together, these studies suggest that Ang-(1-7) inhibits
the growth of aggressive, invasive GMBs by pleiotrophic mechanisms and
may serve as a first-in-class, targeted, anti-proliferative,
anti-angiogenic chemotherapeutic agent for GBM.

