Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The processed pseudogene POU5F1P1in 8q24 is expressed in tumor and
shows oncogenicity


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a segment of
approximately 1 Mb of 8q24 as a multi-cancer cancer susceptibility
region. The region is flanked by two genes, FAM84B and MYC, the latter an
established oncogene. Within this region of 8q24, there is a processed
pseudogene, POU5F1P1. We have re-sequenced the exon regions of wild type
POU5F1 on chromosome 6 and its six counterpart pseudogenes on chromosomes
1, 3, 8, 10 and 12, and identified sequence variants unique to POU5F1P1
for which we have developed and confirmed analysis of expression of the
POU5F1P1 transcript on 8q24. The homolog between wild type POU5F1 and
pseudogene POU5F1P1 is about 97%. By using TaqMan DNA copy number
variation assays, we identified uncommon copy number variants across this
region. However, the DNA copy number variation does not contribute to
differences in expression of POU5F1P1. Expression of POU5F1P1 was
confirmed in a subset of the NCI60 panel using quantitative TaqMan
real-time PCR assays in cell lines of colon, ovarian and breast cancers.
Both POU5F1 and POU5F1P1were further evaluated in 14 colon cancer cell
lines of which two, DLD-1 and KM12, expressed POU5F1P1 but no wild type
POU5F1. Using shRNA technology (two constructs for each target), we
knocked down POU5F1P1 expression in DLD-1 and KM12, which lead to
reduction in the growth rate and anchorage-independent growth of colon
cancer cells. Our results suggest that the processed pseudogene, POU5F1P1
is expressed in cell lines and colon cancer tissues. Moreover,
preliminary studies suggest that its function could be related to
oncogenic activity, though further studies are needed to verify this
observation.

