Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cabozantinib (XL184) inhibits growth of prostate cancer in the
bone and results in an altered bone environment


There is a critical need for novel effective therapies for advanced
prostate cancer (PCa) and associated bone metastases. A great deal of
focus is being placed on investigations into the use of small molecule
kinase inhibitors. Cabozantinib (XL184) is a small molecule kinase
inhibitor which potently inhibits MET and VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2). In a
phase 2 adaptive randomized discontinuation trial cabozantinib has
demonstrated encouraging signs of clinical benefit in patients with
metastatic castration-resistant PCa. Complete or partial resolution of
lesions was evident in 82 of 110 (76%) patients with bone metastases as
assessed by bone scan. The objectives of our preclinical studies were to
investigate the efficacy of cabozantinib on growth of androgen-sensitive
and castration-resistant PCa in the bone and on the bone itself. For our
in vivo studies we used the androgen-sensitive LuCaP 23.1 PCa xenograft
that elicits an osteoblastic reaction in the bone, and the
castration-resistant C4-2B PCa xenograft that elicits mixed
osteolytic/osteoblastic lesions. Cabozantinib inhibited growth of LuCaP
23.1 in the bone as demonstrated by serum PSA levels (control: 20.1
0.8ng/ml vs. cabozantinib: 1.5 0.4ng/ml, P=0.020). Micro-CT analysis of
trabecular bone showed that LuCaP 23.1 growth in the bone resulted in
significant increases in bone volume (BV: 7.6 fold increase vs
non-tumored tibiae; P=0.017). These increases were attenuated by
cabozantinib (BV: 1.3 fold increase vs non-tumored tibiae, P=0.0021).
Micro-CT analysis also showed that cabozantinib treatment affected normal
bone. BV in non-tumored tibiae from mice treated with cabozantinib was
1.8 fold higher than BV of non-tumored tibiae from untreated mice
(P=0.013). To evaluate the effects on osteoblasts in vitro we used MC3T3
cells. In concordance with the detected effects on normal bone,
cabozantinib increased alkaline phosphatase activity in MC3T3 cells (1-3
M, 1.5-2.2 fold increases, ANOVA PThere is a critical need for novel
effective therapies for advanced prostate cancer (PCa) and associated
bone metastases. A great deal of focus is being placed on investigations
into the use of small molecule kinase inhibitors. Cabozantinib (XL184) is
a small molecule kinase inhibitor which potently inhibits MET and VEGF
receptor 2 (VEGFR2). In a phase 2 adaptive randomized discontinuation
trial cabozantinib has demonstrated encouraging signs of clinical benefit
in patients with metastatic castration-resistant PCa. Complete or partial
resolution of lesions was evident in 82 of 110 (76%) patients with bone
metastases as assessed by bone scan. The objectives of our preclinical
studies were to investigate the efficacy of cabozantinib on growth of
androgen-sensitive and castration-resistant PCa in the bone and on the
bone itself. For our in vivo studies we used the androgen-sensitive LuCaP
23.1 PCa xenograft that elicits an osteoblastic reaction in the bone, and
the castration-resistant C4-2B PCa xenograft that elicits mixed
osteolytic/osteoblastic lesions. Cabozantinib inhibited growth of LuCaP
23.1 in the bone as demonstrated by serum PSA levels (control: 20.1
0.8ng/ml vs. cabozantinib: 1.5 0.4ng/ml, P=0.020). Micro-CT analysis of
trabecular bone showed that LuCaP 23.1 growth in the bone resulted in
significant increases in bone volume (BV: 7.6 fold increase vs
non-tumored tibiae; P=0.017). These increases were attenuated by
cabozantinib (BV: 1.3 fold increase vs non-tumored tibiae, P=0.0021).
Micro-CT analysis also showed that cabozantinib treatment affected normal
bone. BV in non-tumored tibiae from mice treated with cabozantinib was
1.8 fold higher than BV of non-tumored tibiae from untreated mice
(P=0.013). To evaluate the effects on osteoblasts in vitro we used MC3T3
cells. In concordance with the detected effects on normal bone,
cabozantinib increased alkaline phosphatase activity in MC3T3 cells (1-3
M, 1.5-2.2 fold increases, ANOVA P<0.0001) and their mineralization (3 M:
2.2 fold increase, P=0.0023). In the castration-resistant model, C4-2B,
cabozantinib treatment also significantly decreased tumor growth based on
serum PSA (control: 24.936.80 ng/ml vs. cabozantinib: 5.771.29 ng/ml,
P=0.0096). Micro-CT assessment of tibiae from the C4-2B study and further
analyses of all generated tissues are ongoing to further investigate the
mechanisms underlying cabozantinib efficacy.In summary, our preclinical
results show that cabozantinib is an effective inhibitor of
androgen-sensitive as well as castration-resistant PCa in the bone.
Importantly our data also indicate that cabozantinib treatment results in
increases in bone formation which might be particularly beneficial to
patients with advanced PCa who are on androgen ablation therapy and
experiencing decreases in bone mineral density and increased frequency of
skeletal-related events.

