Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of obatoclax (GX15-070) and bortezomib (BTZ)
in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma


Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma (NHL) is the second most rapidly increasing cause
of cancer-related death in the US, making selection of appropriate
combinations against B-cell lymphoma increasingly important. Our aim was
to develop a pharmacodynamic (PD) model to characterize the interaction
of obatoclax and bortezomib (BTZ), which target pathways associated with
acquired resistance to therapies of rituximab and chemotherapy in NHL.
Primary tumor cells from patients (n=45) with previously untreated
relapsed/refractory (rel/ref) B-cell lymphoma were utilized. Sample
subtypes included: activated B-cell (ABC), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), germinal center B-cell (GCB), Transformed DLBCL, Follicular
lymphoma (FL), Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL), mantle cell lymphoma (MCL),
marginal zone lymphoma (MZL) and small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL).
Primary tumor cells were exposed to obatoclax and BTZ for 48-hours, and
cell viability was determined by luminescent cell viability assays.
Single agent IC50 values for obatoclax (0.0003-6.3nM) and BTZ
(0.0005-0.01nM) were determined across all cell lines. Tumors were
exposed to combinations of obatoclax and BTZ and a PD interaction model
was developed to assess synergy; (=1, additive; 1, antagonism). Patient
demographics, BCL-2 status, Ki67%, CD20 status, lifetime rituximab dose
and response to therapy were described for all patients. A total of 14
male (M) and 9 female (F) tumor cells were evaluable for synergy. Values
of were: 0.93-1.0 (DLBCL-ABC-Denovo (D)); 0.64-1.6 (DLBCL-ABC Refractory
(R)); 0.64-0.71 (DLBCL/GCB-D); 0.48-1.1 (FL-D); 0.97-2.5 (FL-R); 0.58-1.2
(HL-D); and (1.0-1.2) SLL-D. Synergy was observed in both MCL-R ( = 0.55)
and MZL-D ( = 0.56). Patients with progressive disease (n=3) after
therapy all had >1. Tumor cells from patients who had a complete (n=6) or
partial response (n=8) post-biopsy had a synergistic or additive effect
to obatoclax and BTZ. A non-significant difference in was observed
between M and F (p=0.5510), D and R cell types (p=0.31), and CD20
expression (p=0.678) by a two tailed Mann-Whitney. The for the
interaction between obatoclax and BTZ was correlated with lifetime
rituximab dose (r =0.61, t-score = 2.4, p0.05) and age (r =0.21, t-score
= 0.085, p>0.05). A one-way ANOVA indicates a significant difference
observed in with patients showing complete or partial response compared
with progressive disease (p0.05) and age (r =0.21, t-score = 0.085,
p>0.05). A one-way ANOVA indicates a significant difference observed in
with patients showing complete or partial response compared with
progressive disease (p<0.05). These results indicate combination of
obatoclax and BTZ have a synergistic effect in GCB-DLBCL-D, MCL-R and
MZL-D cell types. A partial synergy or additive effect was observed in
FL-D, HL-D, SLL-D and ABC-DLBCL-D. This approach provides a modeling
strategy that may serve as a framework for bridging in vitro and ex vivo
work to provide clinical benefit to patients, and supports the use of
obatoclax in combination with BTZ in the future.

