Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AT rich interactive domain 3A (ARID3A) overexpression correlates
with good prognosis in colorectal cancer


AT Rich Interactive Domain 3A (ARID3A) is a member of the ARID family of
DNA-binding proteins. Previous studies have shown that ARID3A controls
the cell growth through p53-dependent manner, whereas its significance in
the prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is not yet fully understood. In
this study, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors and matched normal
mucosae from 690 patients who underwent surgery for CRC were constructed
into tissue microarrays. The expression of ARID3A was investigated by
immunohistochemistry. We detected a nuclear positive expression of ARID3A
in a subset of colorectal cancers, whereas ARID3A was completely negative
in all normal mucosae. Of the 690 cases, 195 tumors (28.3%) were strong
positive for ARID3A, 187 tumors (27.1%) were weak positive and 308 tumors
(44.6%) were negative. We examined p53 expression status by
immunohistochemistry simultaneously. Among the 690 tumors, 358 tumors
(51.9%) were positive for p53 expression and 332 tumors (48.1%) were
negative for p53 expression. Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional
hazards modeling were used to analyze the overall survival between ARID3A
negative or weak expression group and ARID3A strong expression group. The
ARID3A expression in CRCs was significantly correlated with age
(P=0.003), degree of differentiation (PAT Rich Interactive Domain 3A
(ARID3A) is a member of the ARID family of DNA-binding proteins. Previous
studies have shown that ARID3A controls the cell growth through
p53-dependent manner, whereas its significance in the prognosis of
colorectal cancer (CRC) is not yet fully understood. In this study,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors and matched normal mucosae from
690 patients who underwent surgery for CRC were constructed into tissue
microarrays. The expression of ARID3A was investigated by
immunohistochemistry. We detected a nuclear positive expression of ARID3A
in a subset of colorectal cancers, whereas ARID3A was completely negative
in all normal mucosae. Of the 690 cases, 195 tumors (28.3%) were strong
positive for ARID3A, 187 tumors (27.1%) were weak positive and 308 tumors
(44.6%) were negative. We examined p53 expression status by
immunohistochemistry simultaneously. Among the 690 tumors, 358 tumors
(51.9%) were positive for p53 expression and 332 tumors (48.1%) were
negative for p53 expression. Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional
hazards modeling were used to analyze the overall survival between ARID3A
negative or weak expression group and ARID3A strong expression group. The
ARID3A expression in CRCs was significantly correlated with age
(P=0.003), degree of differentiation (P<0.001), depth of invasion
(P=0.001), lymph node metastasis (P=0.008), distant metastasis (P=0.007),
TNM stage (PAT Rich Interactive Domain 3A (ARID3A) is a member of the
ARID family of DNA-binding proteins. Previous studies have shown that
ARID3A controls the cell growth through p53-dependent manner, whereas its
significance in the prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is not yet fully
understood. In this study, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors and
matched normal mucosae from 690 patients who underwent surgery for CRC
were constructed into tissue microarrays. The expression of ARID3A was
investigated by immunohistochemistry. We detected a nuclear positive
expression of ARID3A in a subset of colorectal cancers, whereas ARID3A
was completely negative in all normal mucosae. Of the 690 cases, 195
tumors (28.3%) were strong positive for ARID3A, 187 tumors (27.1%) were
weak positive and 308 tumors (44.6%) were negative. We examined p53
expression status by immunohistochemistry simultaneously. Among the 690
tumors, 358 tumors (51.9%) were positive for p53 expression and 332
tumors (48.1%) were negative for p53 expression. Kaplan-Meier method and
Cox proportional hazards modeling were used to analyze the overall
survival between ARID3A negative or weak expression group and ARID3A
strong expression group. The ARID3A expression in CRCs was significantly
correlated with age (P=0.003), degree of differentiation (P<0.001), depth
of invasion (P=0.001), lymph node metastasis (P=0.008), distant
metastasis (P=0.007), TNM stage (P<0.001), status of microsatellite
instability (PAT Rich Interactive Domain 3A (ARID3A) is a member of the
ARID family of DNA-binding proteins. Previous studies have shown that
ARID3A controls the cell growth through p53-dependent manner, whereas its
significance in the prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is not yet fully
understood. In this study, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors and
matched normal mucosae from 690 patients who underwent surgery for CRC
were constructed into tissue microarrays. The expression of ARID3A was
investigated by immunohistochemistry. We detected a nuclear positive
expression of ARID3A in a subset of colorectal cancers, whereas ARID3A
was completely negative in all normal mucosae. Of the 690 cases, 195
tumors (28.3%) were strong positive for ARID3A, 187 tumors (27.1%) were
weak positive and 308 tumors (44.6%) were negative. We examined p53
expression status by immunohistochemistry simultaneously. Among the 690
tumors, 358 tumors (51.9%) were positive for p53 expression and 332
tumors (48.1%) were negative for p53 expression. Kaplan-Meier method and
Cox proportional hazards modeling were used to analyze the overall
survival between ARID3A negative or weak expression group and ARID3A
strong expression group. The ARID3A expression in CRCs was significantly
correlated with age (P=0.003), degree of differentiation (P<0.001), depth
of invasion (P=0.001), lymph node metastasis (P=0.008), distant
metastasis (P=0.007), TNM stage (P<0.001), status of microsatellite
instability (P<0.001), and CEA levels (P=0.003). Moreover, the strong
expression of ARID3A and the negativity of p53 were statistically
correlated (P=0.045). The survival of CRC patients with ARID3A strong
expression was significantly longer than that of patients with ARID3A
negative or weak expression (P=0.002), however the effect of ARID3A on
the survival rate of CRCs might differ by p53 status. Combined analysis
of ARID3A and p53 expression indicated that CRC group with ARID3A-strong
positive and p53-negative showed better prognosis compared with the
remaining groups (P=0.003). On multivariate analysis, ARID3A
overexpression was proven to be an independent predictor for better
prognosis in CRC (95% CI: 0.44-0.96; P=0.031). In conclusion, this study
strongly suggests the usefulness of ARID3A as a biomarker to predict the
prognosis of colorectal cancer.

