Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted DNA methylation reprogrammed differentiation and
tumorigenesis of mesenchymal stem cells


Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stem cells that can be
isolated from various sources and induced into different cell types.
Although MSCs possess immune privilege and are more easily obtained,
their propensity to tumorigenesis and immune responses they might bring
to patients have not been fully explored. Epigenomic revolution like
changes in DNA methylation and chromatin modification have been
hypothesized to be critical in the determination of lineage-specific
differentiation and tumorigenesis of MSCs but has not been forwardly
proved. We identified the Polycomb group-governed loci in MSCs and
tracked their differential methylation changes during the MSC-to-liver or
MSC-to-adipocyte differentiation. These loci were also differentially
methylated in breast cancer (n=93) and liver cancer (n=40). In an
independent collection of liver cancer (n=100), the methylation states of
these Polycomb-governed loci like Trip10, Casp8AP2, ENSA and ZNF484 were
clustered together in contrast to the non-Polycomb targets like HIC1 and
RassF1A. We then developed and applied a targeted DNA methylation method
to methylate the Polycomb group protein-governed gene, Trip10, in MSCs
which accelerated the cell fate determination of MSCs. Targeted
methylation of Casp8AP2, another Polycomb group protein-governed gene,
increased cellular survival and its resistance to drugs. The targeted
methylation of ENSA and ZNF484 reveal the epigenomic evolution. Targeted
methylation of HIC1 and RassF1A, both are tumor suppressors but not the
Polycomb target genes, transformed MSCs into tumor stem cell-like cells.
With this new method, we proved that DNA methylation within critical loci
is sufficient to steer the cell fate of MSCs. (Supported in part by NSC
100-2320-B-194-001)

