Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimal cleavable linker for antibody-SN-38 conjugates for cancer
therapy: Impact of linker's stability on efficacy


We reported therapeutic results of antibody (MAb) conjugates of the topo
I inhibitor, SN-38, in human tumor xenografts in nude mice. These
involved SN-38 derivatives, CL2-SN-38
(maleimido-[x]-Phe-Lys-PABOCO-20-O-SN-38) and its Phe-deleted variant,
CL2A-SN-38. Conjugates of these derivatives showed similar serum
stabilities and equivalent therapeutic efficacies. A more stably linked,
cathepsin-B sensitive, derivative, CL2E-SN-38
(maleimido-[x]-Phe-Lys-PABOCO-N(Me)-(CH2)2-N(Me)-CO-10-O-SN-38) was
prepared to determine the relative advantage of CL2E vs. CL2A linkers for
MAb-SN-38 conjugates using MAbs with a spectrum of internalizing rates in
hematological and solid tumor cell lines. Initial studies found these
linkers differed in the drug-release rate from the MAb conjugates in
human serum, with half-lives (t) of 1 day for CL2A- and >10 days for
CL2E-conjugates. The t for cathepsin-B cleavage at the lysosomal pH (pH
5) for CL2A- and CL2E-SN-38 derivatives were 10 h and 0.5 h,
respectively; the CL2A linker cleavage rate at this pH was the same with
or without the enzyme, indicating a pH-mediated, but cathepsin-B
insensitive, drug release. The release of SN-38 from CL2E-SN-38,
requiring both the cathepsin-B cleavage and an intramolecular
cyclization, proceeded with an overall t of 10 h at pH 5, very similar to
that for CL2A-SN-38, suggesting that the corresponding MAb conjugates
would liberate free SN-38 at a similar rate in the lysosome. For a slowly
internalizing anti-CEACAM5 MAb, hMN-14 (labetuzumab), SN-38 conjugate
with the CL2A linker was superior to that with CL2E in the LS174T colonic
tumor cell line and xenograft model. With a more rapidly internalizing
anti-TROP-2 MAb, hRS7, IC50s for CL2A- and CL2E-SN-38 conjugates were 9
nM and 132 nM, and 20 nM and 242 nM, in the pancreatic tumor cell line,
Capan-1, and the lung adenocarcinoma cell line, Calu-3, respectively.
CL2A-SN-38 and CL2E-SN-38 conjugates of the fast internalizing anti-CD22
MAb, hLL2 (epratuzumab), exhibited EC50 values of 3.2 nM and 135.8 nM,
respectively, in the Raji lymphoma cell line. With an anti-CD74 MAb, hLL1
(milatuzumab), which internalizes exceptionally quickly with rapid CD74
re-cycling, CL2A- and CL2E-SN-38 conjugates showed IC50 values of 5 nM
and 34 nM, respectively, in the CD74-positive melanoma cell line, A-375.
The IC50 for free SN-38 ranged from 0.5 nM to 7 nM in these cell lines.
While specific antitumor effects against human tumor xenografts were
found using CL2A-SN-38 conjugates, specificity could not be shown in a
4-day in vitro MTS assay, most likely because of the 1-day half-life for
drug release. However, with hLL1-CL2E-SN-38 conjugate in the A-375 cell
line, specificity was established vs. non-targeting anti-CD22 conjugate,
hLL2-CL2E-SN-38. The significance of these findings will be presented,
together with the data from ongoing therapy studies in xenograft models.

