Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of delta16HER2 splice variant in HER2-driven tumor
progression and response to targeted therapy


We reported that the splice variant of human HER2 lacking exon 16
(delta16HER2) represents a highly penetrating HER2 oncogenic alteration
identified in human primary breast tumor specimens and is able to
influence the response to Trastuzumab. This HER2 variant forms covalent
cysteine bonds that generate constitutively active homodimers, thereby
activating multiple oncogenic downstream signaling pathways that we
recently found to be mediated through activated Src kinase. To examine
the ability of delta16HER2 to transform mammary epithelium in vivo and to
monitor delta16HER2-driven tumorigenesis in live mice, we generated a FVB
transgenic mouse model for the human delta16HER2 isoform. Transgenic
female mice developed multifocal mammary tumors with a rapid onset
starting at about 12 weeks of age and progressively thereafter, clearly
pointing to the candidacy of the delta16HER2 isoform as the transforming
form of the human HER2 oncoprotein. Histological and immunohistochemical
analysis (IHC) of primary mammary nodules revealed a population of
polygonal cells with classical epithelia-like aspects distinctly
expressing HER2 and also a population of smaller spindle-shaped cells
arranged in fascicles with lower levels of HER2 expression, suggesting
the onset of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Consistent
with these findings, FACS analysis of delta16HER2-positive tumor cells
immunomagnetically purified from disaggregated transgenic primary tumors
indicated the increased mean fluorescence intensity of HER2 staining with
increasing tumor cell size. IHC analysis of the lung metastases that had
formed in the majority of female mice revealed monomorphic and classical
epithelial tumor cells homogeneously expressing high levels of
delta16HER2. FACS and IHC analyses confirmed the lower binding efficacy
of Trastuzumab to delta16HER2-overexpressing primary tumor cells cultured
both under bidimensional (2D) and tridimensional (3D) conditions as
compared to monoclonal reagents directed to different HER2 extracellular
domain epitopes. Experiments in both primary and metastatic in vitro and
in vivo delta16HER2-positive models are in progress to determine whether
delta16HER2-driven tumor aggressiveness and Trastuzumab susceptibility
depend not only on genetic changes intrinsic to the tumor cell, i.e., the
EMT process, but also on extrinsic tumor surrounding
microenvironment-related factors such as an imbalance between
extracellular and intracellular pH, redox state and hypoxia. Preliminary
FACS and IHC analyses indicate that delta16HER2-positive primary tumor
cells are reactive for known epithelial markers as EpCAM, E-cadherin- and
ck-18 and, a small subset of these mammary tumor cells, also stain
positive for the mesenchymal differentiation markers vimentin, N-cadherin
and ck14 significantly indicating an active EMT program. Supported by
AIRC and Ministry of Health

