Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-362-3p is associated with recurrence of colorectal cancer
and targets E2F1, USF2 and PTPN1


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
Western countries. A significant number of CRC patients undergoing
curative-intented surgery subsequently develop recurrence and die from
the disease. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are aberrantly expressed in cancers and
appear to have both diagnostic and prognostic significance. In this study
we identified novel miRNAs associated with recurrence of CRC. TaqMan
Human MicroRNA Array Set v2.0 was used to profile the expression of 667
miRNAs in 14 normal colon mucosas and 46 microsatellite stable CRC
tumors. Four miRNAs (miR-362-3p, miR-570, miR-148a* and miR-944) were
expressed at a lower level in the tumors from patients with recurrence (p
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
Western countries. A significant number of CRC patients undergoing
curative-intented surgery subsequently develop recurrence and die from
the disease. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are aberrantly expressed in cancers and
appear to have both diagnostic and prognostic significance. In this study
we identified novel miRNAs associated with recurrence of CRC. TaqMan
Human MicroRNA Array Set v2.0 was used to profile the expression of 667
miRNAs in 14 normal colon mucosas and 46 microsatellite stable CRC
tumors. Four miRNAs (miR-362-3p, miR-570, miR-148a* and miR-944) were
expressed at a lower level in the tumors from patients with recurrence (p
< 0.015) compared to tumors from patients with no recurrence. A
significant association of low expression with reduced disease free
survival was confirmed for miR-362-3p in a second independent cohort of
43 CRC patients using single TaqMan microRNA assays. In vitro functional
analysis showed that over-expression of miR-362-3p in colon cancer cell
lines (HCT116, LS174T, and DLD1) reduced cell viability and proliferation
mainly due to cell cycle arrest. E2F1, USF2 and PTPN1 were identified as
potential miR-362-3p targets by mRNA profiling of HCT116 cells
over-expressing miR-362-3p. Subsequently, these genes were confirmed as
direct targets by Luciferase reporter assays. In vitro knock-down
confirmed that these targets are important players in the miR-362-3p
target network. We conclude that miR-362-3p may be a novel prognostic
marker in CRC and hypothesize that augmented expression of miR-362-3p may
prevent the development of distant metastasis by targeting E2F1, USF2 and
PTPN1.

