Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NKP-2235 exhibits a novel pattern of cytotoxicity with synergism
across a broad range of antitumor agents demonstrated in multiple tumor
types


Background: NKP-2235 is a first-in-class, orally bioavailable gallium
based anti-cancer compound. The intracellular targets for NKP-2235
include the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). NKP-2235 treatment of tumor cells
causes ER stress, intracellular Ca2+ release and induction of
pro-apoptotic factors. In single agent in vitro cytotoxicity assays,
NKP-2235 has shown activity against tumor lines resistant to many
standard anti-cancer agents. The aims of this study were to evaluate the
anti-tumor effects of NKP-2235 in combination with standard cytotoxics or
targeted agents and assess its single agent cytotoxicity pattern in the
NCI 60 tumor cell line anti-cancer drug screen and COMPARE analysis.
Methods: NKP-2235 testing in the NCI 60 tumor cell line anticancer drug
screen was performed by the NCI. COMPARE analysis was conducted using
cytotoxicity data from 170 compounds in the NCI compound library. In
vitro combination studies were performed in breast, colon, glioma, lung
and prostate tumor cell lines. NKP-2235 was tested in combination with
5-FU, temozolomide, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, erlotinib, temsirolimus, or
docetaxel either simultaneously or sequentially. For simultaneous
combinations, cells were exposed to NKP-2235 and a combination agent, at
their respective ED50, for 72hrs. For sequential NKP-2235 combinations
cells were exposed to different dosing sequences, all agents at their
respective ED50, for a total of 96 hrs. Cytotoxicity was determined using
the MTT assay and combination index (CI) values were calculated using the
Chou-Talalay method. Results: Screening against the NCI 60 tumor cell
line panel and COMPARE analysis show that single agent NKP-2235 has a
markedly different pattern of cytotoxicity from the 170 anti-cancer
agents previously tested by the NCI. In addition, the screening confirmed
that the NKP-2235 cytotoxicity is distinct from that of gallium salts
such as gallium nitrate. The combination studies demonstrated that
NKP-2235 has synergistic activity when combined simultaneously with: 5-FU
(CI 0.6), temozolomide (CI 0.8), gemcitabine (CI 0.7), temsirolimus (CI
0.7), and docetaxel (CI 0.7) in the cell lines tested. Interestingly,
while simultaneous combination is synergistic with docetaxel in prostate
cancer cells, the NKP-2235-paclitaxel combinations required sequential
dosing for synergistic activity (CI 0.09) in lung cancer cells.
Similarly, the NKP-2235-temsirolimus combination is synergistic in
simultaneous setting, while NKP-2235-erlotinib combination required
sequential dosing for synergistic activity (CI 0.3) in lung cancer cells.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that NKP-2235 has a novel pattern of
cytotoxicity and marked synergism in combination with a broad range of
anti-tumor agents in many tumor types. These data support the study of
this novel agent in single agent and combination clinical trials.

