Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovering FUS-CHOP targets: A Chip-Seq approach


Myxoid liposarcoma (M-LS) is one of the most common soft tissue sarcomas
in adults. Approximately 90% of cases show the characteristic
t(12;16)(q13;p11) translocation, which produces the FUS-CHOP (FC)
oncogene. FUS is a RNA-binding protein expressed in several tissues; CHOP
a bZIP transcription factor involved in adipocyte differentiation.
Although it is known that CHOP bZIP region is essential for FC-induced
transformation, little is known about FC transcriptional targets and how
FC participates in the development and progression of M-LS. Moreover, it
is unclear whether FC controls the transcription of a set of genes
different from the set controlled by CHOP. Understanding how the FUS-CHOP
fusion protein causes M-LS will aid in the development of novel targeted
therapies. To shed light on this issue we sought to exploit the ChIP-Seq
technique (Chromatin Immunoprecipitation followed by next generation
sequencing). To this end, chromatin immunorecipitation was performed on
cell lines expressing FC (endogenous or ectopic). DNA co-precipitated
together with the FC protein was analyzed by using an Illumina GAIIX
platform. FC-bound DNA was mapped to the genome using the aligner Bowtie
and the enriched regions were identified by using the MACS peak caller.
ChIP-Seq data were combined with RNA-seq analysis to screen for the
potential targets. Our approach was validated by the identification of
LONP1, CLCN3 and GADD34, which have been previously reported to be
modulated by CHOP. The most interesting candidates will be further
investigated for their implication in FC development and progression.

