Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Motility of human colorectal cancer cells is promoted by H1047R
kinase mutation of PI3K p110-alpha


INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the catalytic subunit p110 of Class 1A
phosphatidyinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) occur in nearly 1/3 human colorectal
cancer (CRC). In vivo studies have demonstrated that cell lines bearing
the p110 mutation are more metastatic than wild type PI3K cells. The most
frequent cancer-specific mutations in p110 are the kinase domain mutation
H1047R and the helical domain mutation E542K/E545K. Our group has
previously shown that the two hotspot mutations in PI3K in either the
helical or kinase domains have a significantly different metastatic
potential in an orthotopic murine model. The aim of this study was to
compare the difference in cell motility between the helical and kinase
domain mutation bearing human CRC cell lines. METHODS: Wound healing
Assay was used to determine the motility of human CRC cells in vitro.
Effect of PI3K inhibition on cell motility was tested under the
treatments with 0.1 and 1.0 M of wortmannin, which is a class 1 PI3K
inhibitor, and PIK75, which is the specific inhibitor of p110. RESULTS:
Our data indicate that H1047R-p110 increases cell motility more than
E545K-p110 and the inhibition of PI3K significantly delayed or abrogated
the migration of CRC cells. Immuno-blotting analysis showed increased
downstream survival signaling pathway activation of PI3K in the cells
bearing H1047R-p110 knase domain mutation compared to the cells which
have E545K-p110 helical domain mutation. CONCLUSION: The PI3K-p110 kinase
mutation bearing CRC cells were more motile as compared to the helical
domain mutation bearing cells. This data supports our previous in vivo
data that kinase domain mutations have a greater metastatic capability
than helical domain bearing mutants. Cell motility was abrogated by both
nonspecific and p110 directed PI3K inhibition suggesting that the
activation of PI3K is necessary for CRC cell motility. This data supports
the efforts to target the PI3K pathway in patients with advanced CRC.

