Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular subtypes from PAM50 in a breast cancer cohort:
differences by patient characteristic, reproducibility


BACKGROUND Gene expression profiling has been shown to improve
prognostication in clinical trials, but data are lacking on
expression-based molecular subtypes in context of variables of interest
for epidemiology. We provide interim data on the distribution of subtypes
determined by PAM50 assay in relation to standard immunohistochemical
(IHC) markers and to subject characteristics in a breast cancer cohort.
METHODS The study population combines women from the Life After Cancer
Epidemiology (LACE) study with invasive breast cancer stages I (>=1 cm),
II, or IIIA, diagnosed in 1997-2000 and the Pathways Study with invasive
breast cancer at any stage (>= 0.5 cm) diagnosed in 2006-2008. IHC
results for estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER, PR) and her2-neu
(HER2) were obtained from records. Race, ethnicity, and breast cancer
risk factors were from self-report. For a stratified sample of cases, 1
mm punches were obtained from areas of representative tumor in
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Expression of the PAM50
genes was determined by RT-PCR of extracted RNA. Random blind duplicate
tissue punches were assayed. A published centroid-based algorithm
(Parker, J Clin Oncol 2009;27:1160-7) was used to generate, for each
sample, five continuous-scale normalized subtype scores and a predicted
subtype classification. We estimated sample-weighted subtype
distributions, Pearson correlations among subtype scores, and
age-adjusted odds ratios (OR). RESULTS PAM50 subtype predictions for 702
breast tumors from a community cohort were 55% Luminal (Lum) A, 19% LumB,
11% HER2-enriched, 10% Basal-like, and 5% Normal-like. Among the 72% of
tumors categorized as ER+ or PR+, HER2- by IHC, PAM50 subtypes were: 72%
LumA, 20% LumB, 2% HER2-enriched, 1% Basal-like, and 5% Normal-like.
Continuous-scale LumA, LumB, HER2-enriched, and Normal-like scores were
mutually positively correlated. Basal-like score was inversely correlated
with other subtypes. 32 of 34 (94%) blind duplicate pairs were concordant
for subtype. Compared to non-Hispanic whites, African-American women were
less likely to have LumB subtype, OR 0.1 (95% CI 0.03 - 0.4), and
somewhat more likely to have Basal-like subtype, OR 2.6 (95% CI 0.8-8.5)
and Hispanics more often had non-LumA subtypes. Women with a family
history of breast cancer had a lower frequency of HER2-enriched tumors,
OR 0.3 (95% CI 0.2-0.7). DISCUSSION Molecular subtyping by PAM50 shifted
23% of tumors from the low-risk IHC-based ER+ or PR+, HER2- category to
predicted higher-risk subtypes. Correlations among subtype scores and
(infrequent) discordance of duplicate tissue punches may be accounted for
by borderline phenotypes and/or heterogeneous cancers. Interim results
showing PAM50 subtype differences by race and ethnicity and by breast
cancer risk factors indicate that molecular subtyping is a promising tool
for describing etiologic heterogeneity.

