Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multidrug-resistance (MDR-1) gene expression in immature glioma
cells


Cancer stem cell hypothesis suggests that small populations of stem-like
cells exist in the tumor mass and harbor drug resistance and low
radio-sensitivity, and thus resulting in tumor recurrence after various
treatments. In this study, we investigated the relationship between cell
differentiation and drug resistant gene expression in glioblastoma.
Glioma stem-like cells freshly isolated from surgical specimens were
enriched in tumor sphere (TS) culture and were more resistant to
anti-cancer drugs compared with their differentiated cells in cell
viability assay. These cells were also tested for phosphorylation of
histone H2AX at Ser139, a biomarker of DNA lesions including DNA
double-strand and single-strand breaks. Differentiated cells were much
more susceptible to anti-cancer drug-induced DNA damage, compared with TS
cells. The expression of drug resistance genes, MDR-1, MRP-1 and MRP-2 in
TS cells was more than those in their differentiated cells by RT-PCR
analysis. However, there was no correlation between drug resistance genes
and stem cell marker CD133 expression. It is possibly caused by another
cell population expressing drug resistance genes, therefore, we sought to
define the existence of progenitor cells in glioma by detection of glial
progenitor marker, A2B5 using flow cytometric analysis. CD133 and A2B5
positive cells were more abundant in TS cells and were decreased during
induction of differentiation. The expression of MDR-1 was frequently
observed in CD133+/A2B5, CD133+/A2B5+ and CD133/A2B5+ cells. Reduction of
MDR-1 expression concomitantly occurred with the differentiation of these
immature glioma cells. Thus, it is revealed that CD133 negative cells
expressing MDR-1 are A2B5-positive glioma cells. These results suggest
that drug resistance genes are expressed not only in tumor stem cells but
also in progenitor cells.

