Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ccl17 and Ccr4 co-localize in mouse lung adenomas in vivo and are
associated with epithelial cell migration in vitro


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths among men and women in
the United States and improved treatments are urgently needed. Like many
cancers, long-term inflammation is now recognized to be a contributing
factor in the progression of lung cancer from a benign to a malignant
state. Exactly how inflammation contributes to lung cancer is
incompletely understood. Chemokines are a group of proteins that function
by attracting immune cells to areas of higher chemokine concentrations.
Specific chemokine-chemokine receptor pairs control the migratory
response of many inflammatory cell types. It is known that chemokines and
chemokine receptors can also have direct effects on cancer cells. Using
in situ hybridization, we determined that the chemokine Ccl17 and its
receptor Ccr4 are coordinately induced in tumor cells in transgenic and
benzo(a)pyrene-induced mouse models of lung cancer. In addition, multiple
subsets of T lymphocytes within mouse lung tissue express Ccr4.
Immunohistochemistry localized CCR4 to cancer cells in 11 of 32 (34%)
human non-small cell lung cancer biopsies while staining was not detected
in 12 non-neoplastic lung biopsies. We identified human lung cancer cell
lines expressing CCR4 using flow cytometry and immunofluorescence.
Treatment of human NCI-H292 lung cancer cells with CCL17 peptide induced
migration in a collagen-dependent manner in a transwell migration assay.
The presence of Ccr4 on both lung cancer cells and lymphocytes suggests
that this receptor has multiple roles in regulating lung tumor promotion
and progression. Characterization of these roles may provide novel
targets to inhibit lung tumor progression. Future studies will directly
address the function of Ccr4 during lung tumorigenesis in vivo.

