Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The identification of subgroups of obese women with differing
endometrial/systemic estrogenic metabolism: Potential consequences in the
development of endometrial cancer


Background: Enhanced endometrial proliferation correlates obesity to
type-I (estrogen-dependent) endometrial cancer (EC). However, not all
obese women develop type-I EC. Our laboratory identified cycling obese
women without type-I EC with differing endometrial proliferation levels:
Obese High Proliferating (OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP). We
propose that these differences are the result of impaired
endometrial/systemic estrogenic metabolism. Objectives: To assess the
endometrial activity and/or expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes,
such as aromatase and sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of
17-estradiol (E2), estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those
subgroups of obese patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and
blood samples were obtained from pre-menopausal women in the
proliferative phase (without type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) =
18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N, n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14;
OLP, n=6) and from obese women with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial
aromatase activity was assessed by measuring the amount of 3H2O released
from tritiated androstenedione (substrate), and aromatase expression was
measured by immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using
[3H] E1-S (substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid
scintillation. Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined
by radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, PBackground: Enhanced endometrial proliferation correlates
obesity to type-I (estrogen-dependent) endometrial cancer (EC). However,
not all obese women develop type-I EC. Our laboratory identified cycling
obese women without type-I EC with differing endometrial proliferation
levels: Obese High Proliferating (OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP).
We propose that these differences are the result of impaired
endometrial/systemic estrogenic metabolism. Objectives: To assess the
endometrial activity and/or expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes,
such as aromatase and sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of
17-estradiol (E2), estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those
subgroups of obese patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and
blood samples were obtained from pre-menopausal women in the
proliferative phase (without type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) =
18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N, n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14;
OLP, n=6) and from obese women with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial
aromatase activity was assessed by measuring the amount of 3H2O released
from tritiated androstenedione (substrate), and aromatase expression was
measured by immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using
[3H] E1-S (substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid
scintillation. Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined
by radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, P<0.05) and expression (71.8%, PBackground: Enhanced
endometrial proliferation correlates obesity to type-I
(estrogen-dependent) endometrial cancer (EC). However, not all obese
women develop type-I EC. Our laboratory identified cycling obese women
without type-I EC with differing endometrial proliferation levels: Obese
High Proliferating (OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP). We propose
that these differences are the result of impaired endometrial/systemic
estrogenic metabolism. Objectives: To assess the endometrial activity
and/or expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes, such as aromatase and
sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of 17-estradiol (E2),
estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those subgroups of obese
patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and blood samples were
obtained from pre-menopausal women in the proliferative phase (without
type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) = 18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N,
n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14; OLP, n=6) and from obese women
with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial aromatase activity was assessed by
measuring the amount of 3H2O released from tritiated androstenedione
(substrate), and aromatase expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using [3H] E1-S
(substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid scintillation.
Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined by
radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, P<0.05) and expression (71.8%, P<0.05) of aromatase,
higher endometrial E2 (25%, PBackground: Enhanced endometrial
proliferation correlates obesity to type-I (estrogen-dependent)
endometrial cancer (EC). However, not all obese women develop type-I EC.
Our laboratory identified cycling obese women without type-I EC with
differing endometrial proliferation levels: Obese High Proliferating
(OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP). We propose that these
differences are the result of impaired endometrial/systemic estrogenic
metabolism. Objectives: To assess the endometrial activity and/or
expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes, such as aromatase and
sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of 17-estradiol (E2),
estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those subgroups of obese
patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and blood samples were
obtained from pre-menopausal women in the proliferative phase (without
type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) = 18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N,
n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14; OLP, n=6) and from obese women
with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial aromatase activity was assessed by
measuring the amount of 3H2O released from tritiated androstenedione
(substrate), and aromatase expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using [3H] E1-S
(substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid scintillation.
Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined by
radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, P<0.05) and expression (71.8%, P<0.05) of aromatase,
higher endometrial E2 (25%, P<0.05) and E1-S (20%, PBackground: Enhanced
endometrial proliferation correlates obesity to type-I
(estrogen-dependent) endometrial cancer (EC). However, not all obese
women develop type-I EC. Our laboratory identified cycling obese women
without type-I EC with differing endometrial proliferation levels: Obese
High Proliferating (OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP). We propose
that these differences are the result of impaired endometrial/systemic
estrogenic metabolism. Objectives: To assess the endometrial activity
and/or expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes, such as aromatase and
sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of 17-estradiol (E2),
estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those subgroups of obese
patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and blood samples were
obtained from pre-menopausal women in the proliferative phase (without
type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) = 18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N,
n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14; OLP, n=6) and from obese women
with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial aromatase activity was assessed by
measuring the amount of 3H2O released from tritiated androstenedione
(substrate), and aromatase expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using [3H] E1-S
(substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid scintillation.
Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined by
radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, P<0.05) and expression (71.8%, P<0.05) of aromatase,
higher endometrial E2 (25%, P<0.05) and E1-S (20%, P<0.05) levels,
increased circulating E2 (57.1%, PBackground: Enhanced endometrial
proliferation correlates obesity to type-I (estrogen-dependent)
endometrial cancer (EC). However, not all obese women develop type-I EC.
Our laboratory identified cycling obese women without type-I EC with
differing endometrial proliferation levels: Obese High Proliferating
(OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP). We propose that these
differences are the result of impaired endometrial/systemic estrogenic
metabolism. Objectives: To assess the endometrial activity and/or
expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes, such as aromatase and
sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of 17-estradiol (E2),
estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those subgroups of obese
patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and blood samples were
obtained from pre-menopausal women in the proliferative phase (without
type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) = 18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N,
n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14; OLP, n=6) and from obese women
with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial aromatase activity was assessed by
measuring the amount of 3H2O released from tritiated androstenedione
(substrate), and aromatase expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using [3H] E1-S
(substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid scintillation.
Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined by
radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, P<0.05) and expression (71.8%, P<0.05) of aromatase,
higher endometrial E2 (25%, P<0.05) and E1-S (20%, P<0.05) levels,
increased circulating E2 (57.1%, P<0.05) and E1-S (42.6%, PBackground:
Enhanced endometrial proliferation correlates obesity to type-I
(estrogen-dependent) endometrial cancer (EC). However, not all obese
women develop type-I EC. Our laboratory identified cycling obese women
without type-I EC with differing endometrial proliferation levels: Obese
High Proliferating (OHP) and Obese Low Proliferating (OLP). We propose
that these differences are the result of impaired endometrial/systemic
estrogenic metabolism. Objectives: To assess the endometrial activity
and/or expression of estrogen metabolic enzymes, such as aromatase and
sulfatase, and the endometrial/systemic level of 17-estradiol (E2),
estrone (E1), estrone sulfate (E1-S) in those subgroups of obese
patients. Methodology: The endometrial tissue and blood samples were
obtained from pre-menopausal women in the proliferative phase (without
type-I EC) with body mass index (BMI) = 18-24.9 Kg/m2 (normal-weight, N,
n=10), BMI 30 kg/m2 (obese, OHP, n=14; OLP, n=6) and from obese women
with type-I EC (n=12). Endometrial aromatase activity was assessed by
measuring the amount of 3H2O released from tritiated androstenedione
(substrate), and aromatase expression was measured by
immunohistochemistry. Sulfatase activity was assayed using [3H] E1-S
(substrate) and the [3H] product was determined by liquid scintillation.
Endometrial and serum E2, E1, E1-S levels were determined by
radioimmunoassay. Results: OHP demonstrated increased endometrial
activity (26%, P<0.05) and expression (71.8%, P<0.05) of aromatase,
higher endometrial E2 (25%, P<0.05) and E1-S (20%, P<0.05) levels,
increased circulating E2 (57.1%, P<0.05) and E1-S (42.6%, P<0.05) levels
compared with OLP group. In addition, OHP did not differ from OLP in
endometrial sulfatase activity and endometrial/circulating E1 levels. No
differences were observed between OLP and normal-weight groups in
relation to aromatase activity/expression, circulating levels of E2, E1,
E1-S, and endometrial levels of E2. Interestingly, obese women with
type-I EC possessed similar aromatase and sulfatase activity as OHP.
Conclusions: These data suggest that the E2 produced in the endometrial
tissue from OHP group could amplify the estrogenic action of estrogens
delivered via the circulation and explain the higher endometrial
proliferation observed in this group. Our data may help identify obese
women more susceptible to develop type-I EC, allowing early intervention
and a potential reduction in mortality. (FONDECYT 1110232).

