Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Odonogenic Ameloblast Associated Protein (ODAM) moderates cell
growth and invasion in the human breast cancer line MDA-MB-231 in part
through the TGF- signaling pathway


Breast neoplasms are the second leading cause of cancer deaths of women
in the United States. Recently, it has been shown by immunohistochemical
staining of tumor biopsy tissue that nuclear localization of the
odontogenic ameloblast associated protein (ODAM) correlated with staging
and increased survival in patients, leading to the proposal of this
protein as a novel biomarker in breast cancer. Further, ectopic
expression of recombinant ODAM protein in the invasive breast carcinoma
line MDA-MB-231 (231-ODAM) was shown to slow cell growth to 30-50% of
that seen in control 231 cells, increase apoptosis, effect developmental
change, and decrease the ability of cells to migrate or invade through
extracellular matrix in transwell barrier assays. Further, this
expression reduced the ability of these cells to form solid tumors by
greater than 10-fold in immunodeficient mice, or establish tumor
colonization of the lungs after tail vein injection. Herein, we show
results of microarray and qRT-PCR data collected from 231-ODAM and
control cells revealing effects of ODAM on the expression of a number of
genes which have been reported to be affected by or active in the TGF-
pathway including TGF- I-II, HAS2, Gli-2, SMADs 2, 3 and 7, PLAU and
others. This suggests that ODAM interacts in part with the TGF- pathway.
When challenged with neutralizing antibodies to block TGF- activity we
observed an increase in 231-ODAM cell growth which was approximately 80%
that of the 231-control line. In addition, antibody blockade of TGF-
signaling restored the ability of 231-ODAM cells to invade and migrate
through matrigel-coated barriers to that of the 231-control line. Taken
together, these results and others suggest that ODAM acts in part through
the TGF- pathway, which has been implicated with invasion and metastasis
in breast cancer and other malignancies.

