Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A link between lactate dehydrogenase A, lactate and tumor
phenotype identified by imaging


Metabolic changes in primary tumors have a significant impact on tumor
progression and on the development of the metastatic phenotype. In cancer
patients, serum total lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels are often
increased, and the gene for LDH-A protein, is frequently upregulated in
tumors (Koukourakis, Giatromanolaki et al. 2003). These features have
been linked to poor prognosis, and a greater metastatic potential has
been reported in patients with high LDH serum levels. Since LDH-A protein
is required for the maintenance and progression of many tumors (Fantin,
St-Pierre et al. 2006), it is also becoming a potential target for cancer
therapy (Le, Cooper et al. 2010; Seth, Grant et al. 2011). We
investigated the relationship between LDH-A expression and lactate
production in two isogenic breast cancer lines (67NR and 4T1) (Serganova,
Rizwan et al. 2011). These two cell lines were derived from a single
mammary tumor that developed spontaneously in a BALB/c mouse. Each
subclone was shown to have different phenotypic properties (Aslakson and
Miller 1992). LDH-A expression, lactate concentration, glucose
utilization and oxygen consumption were measured in cells, and the
potential relationship between tumor lactate levels (measured by magnetic
resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI)) and tumor glucose utilization
(measured by [18F] 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose positron emission
tomography ([18F]FDG-PET)) was assessed in orthotopic breast tumors
derived from these cell lines. We show a substantial difference in LDH-A
expression between 67NR and 4T1 cells under normoxia and hypoxia. We also
show that small orthotopic 4T1 tumors generate ten-fold more lactate than
corresponding 67NR tumors. The high lactate levels in small primary 4T1
tumors are associated with intense pimonidazole staining (a hypoxia
indicator). Less intense hypoxia staining was observed in the larger 67NR
tumors, and is consistent with the gradual increase and plateau of
lactate concentration in enlarging 67NR tumors. We show that lactate-MRSI
has a greater dynamic range than [18F]FDG-PET and may be a more sensitive
measure to evaluate the aggressive and metastatic potential of primary
breast tumors. We hypothesized that tumor lactate levels monitored by
MRSI will reflect LDH-A enzymatic activity and tumor phenotype. We also
suggest that lactate-MRSI is a more sensitive measure than [18F]FDG-PET,
and could be used in the clinic to evaluate the aggressive potential of
primary breast tumors. Aslakson, C. J. and F. R. Miller (1992). Cancer
Res 52(6): 1399-1405. Fantin, V. R., J. St-Pierre, et al. (2006). Cancer
Cell 9(6): 425-434. Koukourakis, M. I., A. Giatromanolaki, et al. (2003).
Br J Cancer 89(5): 877-885.Le, A., C. R. Cooper, et al. (2010). Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 107(5): 2037-2042. Serganova, I., A. Rizwan, et al.
(2011). Clin Cancer Res 17(19): 6250-6261. Seth, P., A. Grant, et al.
(2011). Neoplasia 13(1): 60-71.

