Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plk1 phosphorylation of Orc2 promotes DNA replication under
conditions of stress


Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) plays pivotal roles in mitosis, however, little
is known about its function in S phase. In this study, we show that
inhibition of Plk1 impairs DNA replication and results in slow S-phase
progression in cultured cancer cells. We have identified Origin
Recognition Complex 2 (Orc2), a member of the DNA replication machinery,
as a Plk1 substrate and have shown that Plk1 phosphorylates Orc2 at
Ser188 in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, Orc2-S188 phosphorylation is
enhanced when DNA replication is under challenge induced by UV,
hydroxyurea, gemcitabine, or aphidicolin treatment; cells expressing the
unphosphorylatable mutant (S188A) of Orc2 had defects in DNA synthesis
under stress, suggesting that this phosphorylation event is critical to
maintain DNA replication under stress. To dissect the mechanism pertinent
to this observation, we showed that Orc2-S188 phosphorylation associates
with DNA replication origin and that cells expressing Orc2-S188A mutant
fail to maintain the functional pre-replicative complex (pre-RC) under
DNA replication stress. Furthermore, the intra-S phase checkpoint is
activated in Orc2-S188A-expressing cells to cause delay of S-phase
progress. Our study suggests a novel role of Plk1 in facilitating DNA
replication under conditions of stress to maintain genomic integrity.

