Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prevention of breast cancer by spices: Involvement of miRNA and
other molecular targets


We have previously demonstrated the chemoprotective effects of dietary
Apiaceae spices against estrogen induced mammary tumorigenesis in ACI
rats by inhibiting cell proliferation and few cellular and molecular
markers as early as three weeks of estrogen administration. Here we
report inhibition of 17-estradiol-mediated mammary carcinogenicity by
fennel, cumin and caraway and potential mechanisms. Groups of female ACI
rats were given either AIN-93M diet or diet supplemented with fennel,
cumin and caraway (7.5% each, w/w) and then treated with subcutaneous
17-estradiol silastic implants (1.2 cm; 9 mg). Four additional groups
were maintained on control or experimental diets. Rats received diet and
water ad libitum. Animals were euthanized when estrogen-treated group on
control diet reached over 90% tumor incidence. Tumor palpation from 12
wks revealed first tumor incidence by 92 days in control group that was
significantly delayed by 22, 37 and 29 days by fennel, cumin and caraway,
respectively. At the end of the study (26 wks), the tumor incidence was
found to be 96% in control group whereas only 83%, 55% and 90% animals
had tumors in fennel, cumin and caraway groups, respectively. Significant
reduction in tumor volume (661123 vs 19664, 13850 and 31381 mm3) and
tumor multiplicity (4.20.4 vs 2.20.4, 1.10.3 and 2.50.5 tumors/animal)
was also observed by fennel, cumin and caraway, respectively compared to
control. All experimental diets significantly offset estrogen-related
growth of pituitary prolactinomas, the plasma prolactin levels, and the
cell proliferation marker, PCNA in the mammary tissues. The spice
intervention had no significant effects on any of these markers in the
absence of estrogen treatment. Mechanistically, all the experimental
diets resulted in significant downregulation of estrogen-associated
increase in the expression of the ER and cyclin D1. We have recently
reported miRNA signature associated with estrogen treatment in the ACI
rat model. Of the four candidate miRNAs, miR-182 and miR-375 which were
overexpressed by 4- and 7-fold and miR-127 and miR-206 were downregulated
by 17- and 35-fold, respectively with estrogen treatment. These miRNAs
were significantly modulated favorably by dietary cumin analyzed thus
far; molecules downstream of these miRNAs remain to be explored.
Together, our data show that apiaceae spices can significantly delay and
prevent estrogen-mediated mammary tumorigenesis, with maximal protective
effects observed with cumin, by modulating different cellular and
molecular targets, including key dysregulated miRNAs. (Supported by
CA-125152 and Agnes Brown Duggan Endowment).

