Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) inhibitor BMS754807
is active against FLT3-ITD mutated acute myelogenous leukemia and
activity is p53 dependent


The Internal tandem mutation (ITD) in the FLT3 gene is associated with
shorter remission duration, overall survival and relapse free survival in
patients with normal karyotype acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). FLT3-ITD
inhibitors are in clinical development but single agent clinical activity
is of limited duration with activation of parallel signaling pathways
potentially contributing to most relapses thus highlighting the need for
new agents. Because common signaling pathways are activated downstream of
FLT3 and IGF1R, we investigated the preclinical activity of IGF1R
antagonist BMS754807 against AML cells with FLT3-ITD mutations. Results:
BMS 754807 induced apoptosis (Annexin V binding by flow cytometry) in
MOLM13 cells (AML cell line with FLT3-ITD mutation and wild type p53) at
48 hrs at submicromolar concentrations, while OCI AML3 cells (p53 and
FLT3 wild type) were resistant. Similarly, murine BAF3 cells expressing
human FLT3-ITD underwent prompt apoptosis with BMS 754807 while the same
cells with human wt-FLT3 were resistant to BMS 754807(IC50s 2.5 mol vs
>10 mol). Western blot analysis confirmed reduction in FLT3, Akt, ERK, S6
ribosomal protein and GSK3 beta phosphorylation and increase in p53
levels in MOLM13 cells. Interestingly, apoptosis induction was not
associated with caspase activation. Moreover, apoptosis induction by BMS
754807 appeared to be p53 dependent as MOLM13 cells with stable
expression of short hairpin RNA (sh-RNA) targeting p53 (p53-shRNA) were
resistant, while MOLM13 cells expressing scramble sh-RNA underwent
apoptosis comparable to parental MOLM13 cells. Surface expression of
IGF1R was comparable among parental and p53-shRNA MOLM13 cells. Apoptosis
induction by BMS 754807 in p53-WT and FLT3-ITD cells was associated with
phosphorylation of p53 at serine 15. Conclusion: BMS 754807 has selective
activity against AML cells with FLT3-ITD mutation and this activity is
p53 dependent and associated with phosphorylation of p53 at serine 15.
Results suggest that IGF1R inhibition has therapeutic potential as novel
targeted therapy for AML with FLT3-ITD mutation.

