Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome sequence and epigenome map of bladder cancer development
from occult field effects


We are pursuing a unique strategy to identify early events in bladder
cancer development by the genome-wide analysis of somatic changes in
tissues from resected bladders and characterized pathologically as
urothelial carcinoma. We then extend this analysis into precursor
intraurothelial lesions and normal tissue. Here we report on the
construction of a high resolution whole-organ histologic and genetic map
of bladder cancer development that tracks its progression from in situ
precursor conditions to invasive clinically aggressive cancer using total
genome and exome sequencing and complemented with HumanOmni 2.5-8 v1
SNP-based Illumina genotyping, combined with CpG island methylation and
cDNA microarray platforms derived from 12 whole-organ cystectomy
specimens with invasive urothelial carcinoma. This approach provided a
high resolution integrated map of structural genome, epigenome, and
transcriptome alterations that parallel the development of bladder cancer
from early field effects to invasive disease. By analyzing genome-wide
patterns of structural genomic, epigenomic, and transcriptome changes, we
found three major waves of alterations associated with growth advantage
of successive clones reflecting a stepwise conversion of normal
urothelial cells into cancer cells. This approach is significant for the
identification of specific chromosomal regions as well as epigenetically
and transcriptionally modified gene ontologies involved in early clonal
expansion of intraurothelial neoplasia and their clonal evolution to
carcinoma in situ progressing to invasive cancer. These studies suggest
involvement of specific gene networks in early clonal expansion of
intraurothelial neoplasia antecedent to microscopically recognizable
precursor lesions such as dysplasia and carcinoma in situ. This map
represents a prerequisite for specific studies on the mechanisms of
incipient phases of bladder cancer development and should have a
significant impact on the understanding of human carcinogenesis.

