Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-ME2-induced biological effects in prostate cancer: Role for
miR127-3p/SET8


Prostate cancer is the second most common cause of death related to
cancer in Western societies. 2-Methoxyestradiol (2-ME2), an endogenous
metabolite of 17- estradiol inhibits tumor cell proliferation in various
cancer cells, including the prostate. Previous studies from our
laboratory showed that 2-ME2 (i) inhibits proliferation of both androgen
responsive and independent cells through induction of apoptosis involving
G2/M check point block; (ii) prevents the development of prostate tumors
in transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Although
various molecular targets have been proposed, the mechanism of action
behind its antiproliferative activity is still uncertain. Here we
investigated the possible role for 2-ME2 induced antiproliferative
activity by examining the altered regulation of microRNA (miRNAs).
MicroRNA expression profiling identified miR127-3p as most significantly
up regulated in response to 2-ME2 treatment in androgen independent
(PC-3) cells. We have also identified histone methylase SET8 as a
potential target of miR 127-3p. We have validated these data using Q-PCR.
Further 2-ME2 treatment reduced binding of multiple transcription factors
including Sp1, Sp3 and NFB to the FLIP promoter as evidenced by transient
expression assays, ChIP and gel-shift assays. Our findings indicate that
2-ME2 suppresses proliferation and induces apoptosis in prostate cancer
cells possibly through miR127-3p/SET8 mediated regulation of FLIP.
Supported by NIH CA 135451 (APK).

