Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF-1alpha) mediates
Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMP) in colorectal carcinomas progression


Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are transcription factors that respond
to changes in available oxygen in the cellular environment, specifically,
to decreases in oxygen, or hypoxia. Most, if not all, oxygen-breathing
species express the highly-conserved transcriptional complex HIF-1, which
is a heterodimer, composed of an alpha and a beta subunit. HIF-1
transcription factor has been shown to promote pathogenesis of several
malignancies. We have shown previously using a large cohort of CRC
samples in a tissue micro array (TMA) format found that HIF-1 was
expressed in the majority of CRC samples. HIF-1 over expression was found
to be associated with MMP-2, and MMP-9. In the current study we
investigated whether down regulation of HIF-1 by YC-1 a pharmacological
inhibitor and gene silencing with specific HIF-1 siRNA leads to
inhibition of cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis using a
panel of CRC cell lines. Treatment of CRC cell lines with YC-1, inhibitor
of HIF-1 resulted in inhibition of cell viability via induction of
apoptosis. This apoptosis was initiated via loss of mitochondrial
potential leading to the release of cytochrome c that resulted in
sequential activation of caspases-9, and -3 and cleavage of PARP.
Interestingly, pharmacological inhibition of HIF-1 also down-regulated
expression of MMP-2, and MMP-9 in CRC cell lines. This data was further
validated by siRNA knockdown strategy where expression of siRNA against
HIF-1 also down-regulated the expression of HIF-1, MMP-2 and MMP-9.
Altogether, these data suggests that HIF-1 and its associated signaling
pathway play a critical role in CRC tumorigenesis, therefore targeting of
HIF-1 expression may be a viable therapeutic intervention for treatment
of these cancers.

