Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EZH2High and miR-101Low expressions are associated with
chemoresistance and shorter survival in patients with lung adenocarcinoma
who received adjuvant chemotherapy


Background. EZH2 (a histone methyltransferase and part of the polycomb
repressive complex-2) has been implicated in neoplastic transformation,
tumor progression, and resistance to chemotherapy. Though EZH2
overexpression has been described in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
there have been no functional studies reported. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that miR-101 negatively regulates the expression of EZH2. In
this study, we investigated the effect of EZH2 and miR-101 expression
levels on the outcome of lung adenocarcinoma patients treated with
surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy, and analyzed in vitro mechanisms
associated with the role in chemoresistance and cell migration of lung
adenocarcinoma. Methods. We analyzed EZH2 and miR-101 expression in RNA
extracted from 151 lung adenocarcinoma tumors obtained from patients
treated with surgery with (n=57) or without (n=94) platinum adjuvant
therapy, and compared those data with patients overall survival (median
follow-up 5.6 years). EZH2 and miR-101 expression levels were tested
using Illumina mRNA arrays W6-6 V.3 and Agilent V3 human microRNA,
respectively. We knockdown EZH2 expression in adenocarcinoma cell lines
using small interfering RNA (siRNA). Cisplatin sensitivity (IC50) was
determined by MTS assay. Cell migration was measured using Boyden
chamber. Results. We found that, high EZH2 expression (p=0.007) and low
miR101 (p=0.01) expression were significantly associated with worse
overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma patients who received platinum
adjuvant therapy, but not in patients who did not receive such therapy.
Similar results (p=0.008) were observed when combined EZH2High/miR-101Low
expression was examined. From a panel of 21 adenocarcinoma cell lines
with known EZH2 gene/protein expression, we selected 4 cell lines: 2 with
high EZH2 (H1993 and HCC1171), and 2 with low EZH2 (HCC461 and HCC193)
expression. Knockdown of EZH2 using siRNA reduced cell migration of H1993
and HCC1171 cells (3.7-fold decrease and 1.7-fold, respectively,
pBackground. EZH2 (a histone methyltransferase and part of the polycomb
repressive complex-2) has been implicated in neoplastic transformation,
tumor progression, and resistance to chemotherapy. Though EZH2
overexpression has been described in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
there have been no functional studies reported. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that miR-101 negatively regulates the expression of EZH2. In
this study, we investigated the effect of EZH2 and miR-101 expression
levels on the outcome of lung adenocarcinoma patients treated with
surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy, and analyzed in vitro mechanisms
associated with the role in chemoresistance and cell migration of lung
adenocarcinoma. Methods. We analyzed EZH2 and miR-101 expression in RNA
extracted from 151 lung adenocarcinoma tumors obtained from patients
treated with surgery with (n=57) or without (n=94) platinum adjuvant
therapy, and compared those data with patients overall survival (median
follow-up 5.6 years). EZH2 and miR-101 expression levels were tested
using Illumina mRNA arrays W6-6 V.3 and Agilent V3 human microRNA,
respectively. We knockdown EZH2 expression in adenocarcinoma cell lines
using small interfering RNA (siRNA). Cisplatin sensitivity (IC50) was
determined by MTS assay. Cell migration was measured using Boyden
chamber. Results. We found that, high EZH2 expression (p=0.007) and low
miR101 (p=0.01) expression were significantly associated with worse
overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma patients who received platinum
adjuvant therapy, but not in patients who did not receive such therapy.
Similar results (p=0.008) were observed when combined EZH2High/miR-101Low
expression was examined. From a panel of 21 adenocarcinoma cell lines
with known EZH2 gene/protein expression, we selected 4 cell lines: 2 with
high EZH2 (H1993 and HCC1171), and 2 with low EZH2 (HCC461 and HCC193)
expression. Knockdown of EZH2 using siRNA reduced cell migration of H1993
and HCC1171 cells (3.7-fold decrease and 1.7-fold, respectively, p<0.05),
but not of HCC193 and HCC461 cells. Knockdown of EZH2 significantly
decreased (pBackground. EZH2 (a histone methyltransferase and part of the
polycomb repressive complex-2) has been implicated in neoplastic
transformation, tumor progression, and resistance to chemotherapy. Though
EZH2 overexpression has been described in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), there have been no functional studies reported. Recently, it has
been demonstrated that miR-101 negatively regulates the expression of
EZH2. In this study, we investigated the effect of EZH2 and miR-101
expression levels on the outcome of lung adenocarcinoma patients treated
with surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy, and analyzed in vitro mechanisms
associated with the role in chemoresistance and cell migration of lung
adenocarcinoma. Methods. We analyzed EZH2 and miR-101 expression in RNA
extracted from 151 lung adenocarcinoma tumors obtained from patients
treated with surgery with (n=57) or without (n=94) platinum adjuvant
therapy, and compared those data with patients overall survival (median
follow-up 5.6 years). EZH2 and miR-101 expression levels were tested
using Illumina mRNA arrays W6-6 V.3 and Agilent V3 human microRNA,
respectively. We knockdown EZH2 expression in adenocarcinoma cell lines
using small interfering RNA (siRNA). Cisplatin sensitivity (IC50) was
determined by MTS assay. Cell migration was measured using Boyden
chamber. Results. We found that, high EZH2 expression (p=0.007) and low
miR101 (p=0.01) expression were significantly associated with worse
overall survival in lung adenocarcinoma patients who received platinum
adjuvant therapy, but not in patients who did not receive such therapy.
Similar results (p=0.008) were observed when combined EZH2High/miR-101Low
expression was examined. From a panel of 21 adenocarcinoma cell lines
with known EZH2 gene/protein expression, we selected 4 cell lines: 2 with
high EZH2 (H1993 and HCC1171), and 2 with low EZH2 (HCC461 and HCC193)
expression. Knockdown of EZH2 using siRNA reduced cell migration of H1993
and HCC1171 cells (3.7-fold decrease and 1.7-fold, respectively, p<0.05),
but not of HCC193 and HCC461 cells. Knockdown of EZH2 significantly
decreased (p<0.05) the viability (by MTS assay) of cell lines H1993 and
HCC1171 when treated with cisplatin, but not of HCC193 and HCC461 cells.
Conclusion. Our in vitro findings suggest that EZH2 overexpression may
promote a more malignant phenotype of lung adenocarcinoma, including
increased chemoresistance and cell migration capabilities. Expression of
EZH2 and miR-101 may represent a predictive marker of worse outcome in
lung adenocarcinoma patients treated with surgery and adjuvant platinum
chemotherapy. EZH2 is a potential target that regulates the epigenome to
overcome drug resistance in lung cancer (Supported in part by grants DoD
PROSPECT W81XWH-07-1-0306 and NCI/UT Lung SPORE 5P50CA70907-11, ER, Becas
Chile program)

