Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a prognostic gene expression signature for invasive
bladder cancer


Bladder cancer comprises of highly heterogeneous tumors and is a
malignancy requiring a high surveillance because of the frequent
recurrences and the poor clinical outcome when tumors progress into
invasive disease. Patients also with superficial and invasive tumors have
remarkably different 5-year survival rates reflecting their biological
differences. The profiles of gene-expression signatures have become an
important and promising way for cancer prognosis and treatment. In
addition to their application in cancer class prediction and discovery,
microarray gene expression signatures can be used for the prediction of
patient survival. Gene expression data were collected from tumor
specimens from 165 patients with Korean bladder cancer. We selected then
genes use Cox proportional hazard model whose expression patterns are
proportionally associated the length of cancer-specific survival (CFS).
The expression levels of 256 probes were correlated with CFS time
(pBladder cancer comprises of highly heterogeneous tumors and is a
malignancy requiring a high surveillance because of the frequent
recurrences and the poor clinical outcome when tumors progress into
invasive disease. Patients also with superficial and invasive tumors have
remarkably different 5-year survival rates reflecting their biological
differences. The profiles of gene-expression signatures have become an
important and promising way for cancer prognosis and treatment. In
addition to their application in cancer class prediction and discovery,
microarray gene expression signatures can be used for the prediction of
patient survival. Gene expression data were collected from tumor
specimens from 165 patients with Korean bladder cancer. We selected then
genes use Cox proportional hazard model whose expression patterns are
proportionally associated the length of cancer-specific survival (CFS).
The expression levels of 256 probes were correlated with CFS time
(p<0.005). In poor prognosis subtype, for example, the expression of STK6
(Aurora kinase A), AURKB (Aurora kinase B), and TPX2 (regulator of Aurora
kinases) are all up-regulated. One of the best characterized phenomenon
of invasion is Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). We can't see
either vimentin nor Krt19 over-expressed in better prognosis subtype.

