Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The ubiquitin-specific protease USP2a targets cyclin A1: A
potential role in bladder cancer


A deubiquitinating enzyme USP2a has shown oncogenic properties in many
cancer types by impairing ubiquitination of FASN, MDM2, MDMX, or
Aurora-A. Aberrant expression of USP2a has been linked to progression of
human tumors, particularly prostate cancer. However, little is known
about USP2a's role or mechanism in bladder cancer. Here we provide
evidence that USP2a functions as an oncoprotein in bladder cancer cells.
Overexpression of USP2a caused enhanced proliferation, invasion,
migration, and resistance to several chemotherapeutic reagents, while
USP2a loss resulted in slower proliferation, greater chemosensitivity,
and reduced migratory/invasive capability, compared to control cells.
USP2a, but not a catalytically inactive mutant, enhanced proliferation in
immortalized TRT-HU1 normal human bladder epithelial cells. USP2a bound
to cyclin A1 and prevented cyclin A1 ubiquitination, leading to
accumulation of cyclin A1 by blocking its degradation. Enforced
expression of wild type USP2a, but not an inactive USP2a mutant, resulted
in cyclin A1 accumulation and increased cell proliferation. Our finding
that USP2a impairs ubiquitination and stabilizes the important cell cycle
regulator, cyclin A1, raises the possibility of USP2a silencing as a
therapeutic strategy against bladder tumors in combination with
chemotherapy.

