Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ellagic acid induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in HeLa cells
and inhibits HPV oncogene expression


Ellagic Acid is a naturally occurring compound that demonstrated anti
cancer activity in vitro and in vivo. Ellagic acid inhibits protein
kinase CK2, which has been identified as a promoter of tumorogenesis.
Blocking CK2 activity can reactivate dormant cellular defensive mechanism
and further block signaling pathways that induce cancer. In this study,
we are testing HPV 18 positive cervical cancer cells (HeLa) to
investigate the effect of ellagic acid on CK2 kinase activity, HPV
oncogenes E6 and E7 expression and downstream targets leading to cell
death in vitro and in vivo. Treating HeLa cells with ellagic acid induced
in vitro cell cycle arrest and caspase mediated apoptosis in both time
and dose dependent manner. Ellagic acid inhibited CK2 phosphorylation
activity, as well as the expression of viral oncogenes E6 and E7.
Inhibition of HPV oncogene expression was accompanied by an increase in
P53 and a decrease in cyclin A expression. Ellagic acid treatment induced
cytochrome c release in the cytosol and subsequent activation of caspase
3, which led to the fragmentation of Poly (ADP) RibosePolymerase (PARP)
at the end of the caspase cascade. Finally, mice treated with ellagic
acid demonstrated inhibition of cervical cancer xenograft growth and
longer survival compared to vehicle-treated mice confirming the potent
anti-tumor activity of ellagic acid. Our results suggest that ellagic
acid has anti-tumor and anti-viral properties which could make it
suitable for the prevention of HPV induced cervical carcinoma.

