Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nkx3.1 and c-Myc co-regulate shared target genes involved in
prostate cancer


Cooperativity between oncogenic mutations is recognized as a fundamental
feature of malignant transformation, and may be mediated by synergistic
regulation of the expression of pro- and anti-tumorigenic target genes.
However, the mechanisms by which oncogenic mutations cooperatively
regulate downstream target gene expression remain largely unknown. Here
we used chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massively parallel
sequencing (ChIP-seq) and gene expression analyses to identify direct
targets of the prostate tumor suppressor Nkx3.1 in the mouse prostate.
Our analysis showed that a significant fraction of Nkx3.1 targets are
also targets of the oncoprotein c-Myc, suggesting that these two proteins
may cooperate in prostate tumorigenesis by directly co-regulating a
common set of target genes. Using ChIP, we confirmed binding of Nkx3.1
and c-Myc to the regulatory regions of shared target genes in mouse and
human prostate epithelial cells. In conditional mutant mice, loss of
Nkx3.1 cooperates with concurrent overexpression of c-MYC to promote
prostate tumorigenesis. Furthermore, dysregulation of the shared
NKX3.1/c-MYC target gene set was associated with relapse in human
prostate tumors. We propose that co-regulation of target gene expression
by oncogenic/tumor suppressor transcription factors may represent a
general mechanism for the cooperativity of oncogenic mutations during
tumorigenesis.

