Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The efficiency of Nek2 siRNA for liver metastasis of pancreatic
cancer


Background: Nek2 (NIMA-related kinase 2) is a member of the
serine/threonine kinase family, which related to the essential mitotic
regulator NIMA. Nek2 is involved in cell division and mitotic regulation
by centrosome splitting. We reported that the efficiency of Nek2 as
molecular target for several cancers, such as cholangiocarcinoma, breast
cancer and colorectal cancer. Methods: We examined the effect of Nek2
siRNA treatment on the tumor of pancreatic cancer in xenograft mouse
model. We also challenged Nek2 siRNA in the liver metastasis model of
pancreatic cancer. Results and Discussion: Nek2 siRNA suppressed the
growth of tumors in xenograft pancreas cancer model. In liver metastasis
model, Nek2 siRNA decreased the number of metastasis and resulted in
reduction of metastasis volume. Liver metastasis is one of the major
undesirable complications frequently associated with inoperable cases.
The Nek2 suppression with siRNA is also effective in the inhibition of
liver metastasis of pancreas cancer. Conclusions: Nek2 plays a critical
role in tumorigenic growth of various cancers, and inhibition of Nek2
expression with its siRNA causes suppression of cancer growth. Our data
provides a strong rationale for the further investigation of Nek2
inhibitors as a new cancer therapy, holding the potential to provide
regression of multiple human malignancies.

