Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caffeic acid phenethyl ester inhibits growth of human lung
adenocarcinoma cells with an epidermal growth factor receptor T790M
mutation susceptible property


Purpose: Target therapeutics targeting epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) effectively kills non-small cell lung cancer cells along with a
high proportion acquires T790M mutation of EGFR, an amino acid alteration
likely causing drug resistance. Caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE), a
naturally occurring small molecule isolated from honeybee propolis, is
known to possess preferential bioactivity against lung cancer cells.
Materials and Methods: In this study, we evaluated the effect of CAPE on
A549 (EGFR wild-type) and H1975 (EGFR T790M mutation) human lung
adenocarcinoma cells by using assays as follows: MTS for viability, DNA
histogram for hypoploidy and cell cycle analysis, DiOC6(3) staining for
mitochondrial transmembrane potential, and Western blotting for caspase-3
cleavage Results: We found that CAPE inhibited the growth of lung
adenocarcinoma H1975 cells with an extent greater than A549 (IC50
approximate 5 versus 10 mg/mL) after 24 - 48 h treatment. This
differential growth inhibition was accompanied by much higher percentages
of sub-G1 (7.5 folds) and G2/M arrest (2.6 folds) in H1975 cells. No
significant difference could be seen for changes in mitochondrial
transmembrane potential and caspase-3 cleavage, indicating a
mitochondria-independent and caspase-3-inependent pathway involved.
Conclusion: It suggests that CAPE may have potential to be developed as a
small-molecule therapeutics against lung adenocarcinoma cells harboring
wild-type epidermal growth factor receptor and, more effectively, the
T790M-mutated clone.

