Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulatory mechanism for Ras degradation and its role in the
suppression of cellular transformation and tumorigenesis


Ras is a well-characterized proto-oncogene, and its various mutations
contribute to transformation and tumorigenesis in a wide variety of human
cancers. Although the GTP/GDP loading switch is known as a major
regulatory mechanism of Ras, other mechanisms affecting Ras activity,
especially those related to cancer, are poorly understood. Here, we
report a novel regulatory mechanism for Ras degradation and its role in
suppression of cellular transformation and tumors induced by Ras
mutations. We show that the negative regulators of Wnt/-catenin signaling
are associated with polyubiquitin-dependent degradation of Ras following
phosphorylation and subsequent recruitment of -TrCP-E3 ligase. The
interaction of Ras with the WD40 domain of -TrCP targeted Ras for
polyubiquitination and degradation. This process stimulated by Axin or
adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) and was inhibited by Wnt3a via
modulating the phosphorylation status of Ras. Ras-mediated cellular
transformation was also inhibited by the expression of -TrCP and/or Axin.
In vivo regulation of Ras stability by Wnt/-catenin signaling was
indicated via measurements of the status of Ras in the intestines of mice
stimulated with recombinant Wnt3a by intravenous tail vein injection. The
Ras deregulation by negative Wnt/-catenin signaling was also revealed in
human cancers such as colorectal cancer and HCCs etc. Together, our
results indicate an essential role for phosphorylation and degradation of
Ras and suppression of Ras-induced transformation via the Wnt/-catenin
pathway and provide insight into the role of this novel regulatory
mechanism for Ras in colorectal tumorigenesis.

