Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P7170: A potent and oral phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and activin receptor-like
kinase 1 (ALK1) inhibitor with anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic activity


The PI3K/mTOR pathway plays an important role in regulating cancer cell
proliferation, growth, survival and metabolism. Activation of the
PI3K/mTOR pathway by multiple mechanisms is one of the most frequently
observed defects in human malignancies. The objective of these studies
was to identify a small molecule that has anti-angiogenic activity in
addition to PI3K and mTOR activity. P7170, a novel small molecule,
inhibits PI3K and mTOR enzyme activity with IC50 value of 2.2 nM and 4.4
nM respectively. P7170 also inhibits a number of PI3K mutants. The
Inhibition of PI3K-mTOR pathway in different cancer cell lines was
demonstrated by 80 to 100% inhibition of the expression of phosphorylated
AKT (pAKT), S6 ribosomal protein (pS6), and 4EBP1 (p4EBP1) upon treatment
with P7170 in a western blot assay. P7170 also inhibited ALK1, an
important enzyme involved in angiogenesis, and DNA-PK, an enzyme involved
in DNA repair with the IC50 values of 47 and 1.5 nM, respectively. P7170
exhibited potent cytotoxic activity with IC50 values ranging from 2 to 22
nM in a number of cancer cell lines eg. ovarian (A2780), prostate (PC3),
triple negative breast (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468), ER positive breast
(MCF7), hepatocellular (HuH-7), renal (786-O), pancreatic (Panc1, AsPC1,
and BxPC3), and colon (HCT116, HCT115, SW480) cancer cell lines. More
interestingly, P7170 inhibited pAKT and pS6 in stem-like cells isolated
from tumor samples of colon, breast, and head and neck cancer patients.
P7170 also inhibited anchorage independent colony formation of tumor
cells isolated from 39 different human tumor xenografts derived from
tumors of patients with different cancers. In addition, P7170 inhibited
angiogenesis in vitro in a tube formation assay, and in a matrigel plug
assay in animals. It also inhibited metastasis of breast cancer cells.
P7170 demonstrated significant in vivo efficacy when administered orally
in three human xenograft tumor models. Tumor growth inhibition of 79% at
15 mg/kg in prostate (PC3), 78% at 10 mg/kg in ovarian (A2780), and 64%
at 10 mg/kg in triple negative breast (MDA-MB-231) xenografts.
Conclusion: P7170 has a unique profile of PI3K-mTOR pathway inhibition
along with anti-angiogenic and anti- DNA repair activities. Combined with
its effect on stem-like cells, P7170 may prove to be an effective
anti-cancer drug.

