Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Engineering of trans kingdom RNAi (tkRNAi) against
gastrointestinal polyps


Trans Kingdom RNAi (tkRNAi) is a technology where nonpathogenic bacteria
synthesize and deliver shRNA. CEQ508 is our orally delivered tkRNAi
clinical candidate for delivery to intestinal polyp cells in patients
with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis. CEQ508 is an E. coli that has rnc
and dapA mutations engineered in its genome, harboring a plasmid called
pMBV43 encoding invasin, listeriolysin O (LLO) and a shRNA expression
cassette. It is the concerted expression of these elements that provides
the specificity and high activity of the tkRNAi platform. The shRNA in
CEQ508 targets -catenin in cancerous polyp cells. CEQ508 expresses
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis invasin enabling 1-integrin-dependent
cellular internalization. Bacterial death due to phagosome action is
enhanced by the cell-wall weakening dapA attenuation. LLO expression
provides for efficient intracellular release to the cytoplasm by lysis of
the phagosome. The shRNA expression cassette allows for precise
initiation and termination of the shRNA transcript, and rnc removes the
only dsRNA-specific RNase (RNase III) from the E. coli genome, leading to
significant accumulation of the expressed shRNA. Following Dicer
processing and incorporation into RISC, cleavage of -catenin mRNA induces
death of the targeted cancerous cells. Thus, the tkRNAi approach allows
effective local delivery of shRNA to mediate RNA interference. Since the
external body surfaces such as GI tract, GU tract, upper respiratory
tract and skin are colonized with bacterial species, this approach can be
extended to other indications by the combination of genetic engineering
of a carrier bacteria, expression of cell-specific targeting entities,
and expression of one or more shRNA sequences against disease-relevant
targets.

