Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin induces expression of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase in normal gastric mucosa RGM-1 cells: Possible involvement
of AP-1


Overproduction of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been reported to be
implicated in carcinogenesis. The intracellular level of PGE2 is
regulated not only by its biosynthesis, but also by the degradation
process. 15-Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) is the key
enzyme that catalyzes the first step in the inactivation of PGE2. In the
present study, we found that curcumin, a yellow coloring agent present in
the rhizome of Curcuma longa Linn (Zingiberaceae), induced expression of
15-PGDH in normal rat gastric mucosa cells (RGM-1) in a concentration and
time dependent manners. The mRNA level of 15-PGDH was also increased by
curcumin treatment. By using deletion constructs of 15-PGDH promoter, we
found that activator protein-1 (AP-1) is the most essential transcription
factor responsible for curcumin-induced upregulation of 15-PGDH
expression. Curcumin induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK1/2, but
did not affect activation of p38 MAP kinase. However, treatment with
U0126 and SP600125, pharmacological inhibitors of ERK and JNK,
respectively failed to suppress the induction of 15-PGDH expression in
curcumin-treated RGM-1 cells. Curcumin enhanced the expression of c-Jun,
c-Fos and CREB in the nuclear fraction of RGM-1 cells. In contrast,
tetrahydrocurcumin which lacks the ,-unsaturated carbonyl group failed to
induce expression 15-PGDH, suggesting that the electrophilic
,-unsaturated carbonyl group of curcumin plays a critical role in its
induction of 15-PGDH expression in RGM-1 cells.

