Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dihydroartemisinin inhibits ovarian cancer growth and metastasis
via targeting PDGFR


Artemisinin and its analogs, the well-established clinically used
anti-malarial traditional medicine, have been proven to have potent
anticancer activities. We have demonstrated that Artemisinin and analogs
have significant anti-ovarian cancer effect used alone or in combination
with conventional chemotherapeutic agents. However, the mechanisms of
action for their anticancer activities are not completely understood.
Herein we report that dihydroartemisinin, one of the most active
derivatives of artemisinin, directly targets platelet-derived growth
factor receptor-alpha (PDGFR) to repress ovarian cancer growth and
metastasis. Dihydroartemisinin directly interacts with PDGFR and induces
dephosphorylated inactivation and ubiquitin-mediated degradation of
PDGFR, which further inactivates downstream phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K) and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway and
subsequently represses epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in terms
of upregulation of epithelial marker E-cadherin and downregulation of
mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and vimentin and transcriptional
repressors Snail, Twist and Slug, leading to suppression of cell growth
and metastasis in PDGFR-positive ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo mouse orthotopic ovarian cancer model. These findings may contribute
to the development of more effective artemisinin-based targeted compounds
as novel target therapy for the treatment of human cancers.

