Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency of FGFR2 gene amplification in gastric cancer


Background: FGFR2 amplification confers hypersensitivity to FGFR
inhibitor in gastric cancer cell lines. However, the frequency of FGFR2
amplification, its clinicopathological features, and the results of high
throughput screening assays in a large cohort of gastric clinical samples
remain largely unclear. Patients and methods: The expression levels of
FGFR2 mRNA and proteins, the drug sensitivity to an FGFR inhibitor, and
the genomic copy numbers of FGFR1-4 were evaluated in gastric cancer cell
lines. The gene amplification of the FGFRs in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) gastric cancer tissues was determined by a
real-time PCR-based copy number assay. For confirming the results,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was conducted. Results: All of
the four gastric cancer cell lines with FGFR2 amplification were
sensitive to an FGFR inhibitor. The above copy number assay and FISH
analysis revealed that 4.1% (11/267) of the gastric cancers harbored
FGFR2 amplification (intestinal type, n=2; diffuse type, n=8 and
unclassified type, n=1). No amplification of the three other family
members was detected. A FISH analysis showed that six of these seven
cases were highly amplified, while the remaining one had a relatively low
grade of amplification. Although the difference was not significant,
patients with FGFR2 amplification tended to exhibit a shorter overall
survival period. Conclusions: FGFR2 amplification was observed in 4.1% of
gastric cancers and our established PCR-based copy number assay could be
a powerful tool for detecting FGFR2 amplification using FFPE samples. Our
results strongly encourage the development of FGFR-targeted therapy for
gastric cancers with FGFR2 amplification.

