Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum miR-21 is a promising biomarker for early detection and
prognosis of colorectal cancer


Background: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as potential
diagnostic and prognostic markers of human cancer. Recent studies
indicate that tumor-derived miRNAs can also be present in human serum and
plasma in remarkably stable form. Therefore, specific miRNAs that are
frequently over-expressed in cancer tissues present with logical targets
for the development of noninvasive miRNA biomarkers in blood. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether serum miR-21 can be used as a
biomarker for the earlier diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer
(CRC). Materials & Methods This study was divided into two steps. The
first step included determination of miR-21 expression using quantitative
TaqMan assays in a training set comprised of pre-operative serum samples
from 12 CRC patients and 12 healthy subjects. To enhance assay
specificity, we analyzed miR-21 expression in matched CRC and normal
tissues from 8 of the 12 patients. The second step included an
independent confirmation of these results in a validation set of serum
samples from 184 CRC patients, 43 patients with advanced adenomas and 53
healthy controls. We then examined miR-21 expression in matched normal
and cancer tissue samples from 167 CRC patients. In addition, we analyzed
post-operative serum samples from 60 CRC patients. Results: In the
training set, miR-21 expression was significantly up-regulated in both
serum (pBackground: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as potential
diagnostic and prognostic markers of human cancer. Recent studies
indicate that tumor-derived miRNAs can also be present in human serum and
plasma in remarkably stable form. Therefore, specific miRNAs that are
frequently over-expressed in cancer tissues present with logical targets
for the development of noninvasive miRNA biomarkers in blood. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether serum miR-21 can be used as a
biomarker for the earlier diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer
(CRC). Materials & Methods This study was divided into two steps. The
first step included determination of miR-21 expression using quantitative
TaqMan assays in a training set comprised of pre-operative serum samples
from 12 CRC patients and 12 healthy subjects. To enhance assay
specificity, we analyzed miR-21 expression in matched CRC and normal
tissues from 8 of the 12 patients. The second step included an
independent confirmation of these results in a validation set of serum
samples from 184 CRC patients, 43 patients with advanced adenomas and 53
healthy controls. We then examined miR-21 expression in matched normal
and cancer tissue samples from 167 CRC patients. In addition, we analyzed
post-operative serum samples from 60 CRC patients. Results: In the
training set, miR-21 expression was significantly up-regulated in both
serum (p<0.001) and tissue samples (pBackground: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
rapidly emerging as potential diagnostic and prognostic markers of human
cancer. Recent studies indicate that tumor-derived miRNAs can also be
present in human serum and plasma in remarkably stable form. Therefore,
specific miRNAs that are frequently over-expressed in cancer tissues
present with logical targets for the development of noninvasive miRNA
biomarkers in blood. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
serum miR-21 can be used as a biomarker for the earlier diagnosis and
prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC). Materials & Methods This study was
divided into two steps. The first step included determination of miR-21
expression using quantitative TaqMan assays in a training set comprised
of pre-operative serum samples from 12 CRC patients and 12 healthy
subjects. To enhance assay specificity, we analyzed miR-21 expression in
matched CRC and normal tissues from 8 of the 12 patients. The second step
included an independent confirmation of these results in a validation set
of serum samples from 184 CRC patients, 43 patients with advanced
adenomas and 53 healthy controls. We then examined miR-21 expression in
matched normal and cancer tissue samples from 167 CRC patients. In
addition, we analyzed post-operative serum samples from 60 CRC patients.
Results: In the training set, miR-21 expression was significantly
up-regulated in both serum (p<0.001) and tissue samples (p<0.01) of
patients with CRC compared to healthy controls. In the validation set,
serum miR-21 expression levels were significantly elevated in advanced
adenoma (pBackground: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as
potential diagnostic and prognostic markers of human cancer. Recent
studies indicate that tumor-derived miRNAs can also be present in human
serum and plasma in remarkably stable form. Therefore, specific miRNAs
that are frequently over-expressed in cancer tissues present with logical
targets for the development of noninvasive miRNA biomarkers in blood. The
aim of this study was to investigate whether serum miR-21 can be used as
a biomarker for the earlier diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer
(CRC). Materials & Methods This study was divided into two steps. The
first step included determination of miR-21 expression using quantitative
TaqMan assays in a training set comprised of pre-operative serum samples
from 12 CRC patients and 12 healthy subjects. To enhance assay
specificity, we analyzed miR-21 expression in matched CRC and normal
tissues from 8 of the 12 patients. The second step included an
independent confirmation of these results in a validation set of serum
samples from 184 CRC patients, 43 patients with advanced adenomas and 53
healthy controls. We then examined miR-21 expression in matched normal
and cancer tissue samples from 167 CRC patients. In addition, we analyzed
post-operative serum samples from 60 CRC patients. Results: In the
training set, miR-21 expression was significantly up-regulated in both
serum (p<0.001) and tissue samples (p<0.01) of patients with CRC compared
to healthy controls. In the validation set, serum miR-21 expression
levels were significantly elevated in advanced adenoma (p<0.001) and CRC
(pBackground: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as potential
diagnostic and prognostic markers of human cancer. Recent studies
indicate that tumor-derived miRNAs can also be present in human serum and
plasma in remarkably stable form. Therefore, specific miRNAs that are
frequently over-expressed in cancer tissues present with logical targets
for the development of noninvasive miRNA biomarkers in blood. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether serum miR-21 can be used as a
biomarker for the earlier diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer
(CRC). Materials & Methods This study was divided into two steps. The
first step included determination of miR-21 expression using quantitative
TaqMan assays in a training set comprised of pre-operative serum samples
from 12 CRC patients and 12 healthy subjects. To enhance assay
specificity, we analyzed miR-21 expression in matched CRC and normal
tissues from 8 of the 12 patients. The second step included an
independent confirmation of these results in a validation set of serum
samples from 184 CRC patients, 43 patients with advanced adenomas and 53
healthy controls. We then examined miR-21 expression in matched normal
and cancer tissue samples from 167 CRC patients. In addition, we analyzed
post-operative serum samples from 60 CRC patients. Results: In the
training set, miR-21 expression was significantly up-regulated in both
serum (p<0.001) and tissue samples (p<0.01) of patients with CRC compared
to healthy controls. In the validation set, serum miR-21 expression
levels were significantly elevated in advanced adenoma (p<0.001) and CRC
(p<0.001) patients. ROC analysis revealed high sensitivity and
specificity for serum miR-21 in discriminating advanced adenomas (AUC:
0.8, sensitivity: 76%, specificity: 82%) and CRC (AUC: 0.92, sensitivity:
90%, specificity: 83%) from control subjects. In addition, miR-21 levels
in serum closely correlated with those in CRC tissues (pBackground:
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as potential diagnostic and
prognostic markers of human cancer. Recent studies indicate that
tumor-derived miRNAs can also be present in human serum and plasma in
remarkably stable form. Therefore, specific miRNAs that are frequently
over-expressed in cancer tissues present with logical targets for the
development of noninvasive miRNA biomarkers in blood. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether serum miR-21 can be used as a biomarker
for the earlier diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC).
Materials & Methods This study was divided into two steps. The first step
included determination of miR-21 expression using quantitative TaqMan
assays in a training set comprised of pre-operative serum samples from 12
CRC patients and 12 healthy subjects. To enhance assay specificity, we
analyzed miR-21 expression in matched CRC and normal tissues from 8 of
the 12 patients. The second step included an independent confirmation of
these results in a validation set of serum samples from 184 CRC patients,
43 patients with advanced adenomas and 53 healthy controls. We then
examined miR-21 expression in matched normal and cancer tissue samples
from 167 CRC patients. In addition, we analyzed post-operative serum
samples from 60 CRC patients. Results: In the training set, miR-21
expression was significantly up-regulated in both serum (p<0.001) and
tissue samples (p<0.01) of patients with CRC compared to healthy
controls. In the validation set, serum miR-21 expression levels were
significantly elevated in advanced adenoma (p<0.001) and CRC (p<0.001)
patients. ROC analysis revealed high sensitivity and specificity for
serum miR-21 in discriminating advanced adenomas (AUC: 0.8, sensitivity:
76%, specificity: 82%) and CRC (AUC: 0.92, sensitivity: 90%, specificity:
83%) from control subjects. In addition, miR-21 levels in serum closely
correlated with those in CRC tissues (p<0.001). Of interest, surgical
treatment in CRC patients resulted in significantly lowered miR-21
expression levels in the post-operative serum samples (pBackground:
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as potential diagnostic and
prognostic markers of human cancer. Recent studies indicate that
tumor-derived miRNAs can also be present in human serum and plasma in
remarkably stable form. Therefore, specific miRNAs that are frequently
over-expressed in cancer tissues present with logical targets for the
development of noninvasive miRNA biomarkers in blood. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether serum miR-21 can be used as a biomarker
for the earlier diagnosis and prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC).
Materials & Methods This study was divided into two steps. The first step
included determination of miR-21 expression using quantitative TaqMan
assays in a training set comprised of pre-operative serum samples from 12
CRC patients and 12 healthy subjects. To enhance assay specificity, we
analyzed miR-21 expression in matched CRC and normal tissues from 8 of
the 12 patients. The second step included an independent confirmation of
these results in a validation set of serum samples from 184 CRC patients,
43 patients with advanced adenomas and 53 healthy controls. We then
examined miR-21 expression in matched normal and cancer tissue samples
from 167 CRC patients. In addition, we analyzed post-operative serum
samples from 60 CRC patients. Results: In the training set, miR-21
expression was significantly up-regulated in both serum (p<0.001) and
tissue samples (p<0.01) of patients with CRC compared to healthy
controls. In the validation set, serum miR-21 expression levels were
significantly elevated in advanced adenoma (p<0.001) and CRC (p<0.001)
patients. ROC analysis revealed high sensitivity and specificity for
serum miR-21 in discriminating advanced adenomas (AUC: 0.8, sensitivity:
76%, specificity: 82%) and CRC (AUC: 0.92, sensitivity: 90%, specificity:
83%) from control subjects. In addition, miR-21 levels in serum closely
correlated with those in CRC tissues (p<0.001). Of interest, surgical
treatment in CRC patients resulted in significantly lowered miR-21
expression levels in the post-operative serum samples (p<0.001). Higher
serum miR-21 levels were associated with larger tumor size (p=0.004),
distant metastases (p=0.01) and higher TNM stage (p=0.04). High
expression of miR-21 in both serum and primary CRC tissues were
significantly associated with poor survival (serum, p=0.005; tissue,
p=0.006). Serum miR-21 was an independent prognostic marker in CRC
patients (HR=4.1, p=0.03). Conclusions: Since serum miR-21 expression
levels accurately discriminated between healthy subjects and patients
with advanced adenomas and early CRC, it may serve as a promising
diagnostic biomarker for the early detection of colorectal neoplasia.
Because serum miR-21 levels were a better predictor for poor survival,
detection of this non-coding miRNA in serum also has potential for
development as a noninvasive prognostic biomarker in CRC.

