Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis-related single nucleotide polymorphisms and the risk of
non-small cell lung cancer in a case-control study of women


Background: Often, lung cancer is diagnosed at later stages, resulting in
a 15% 5-year survival rate. Improved survival is seen for those with
early stage disease, thus it is crucial to identify genetic markers that
can identify those at the highest risk for early disease. In this study,
we focused on understanding the risk of developing non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) associated with germline single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in apoptosis related genes among women in the Detroit metropolitan
area. Methods: 453 cases of NSCLC and 478 control subjects were examined
in a population based case-control study. Since the allele frequency
differed significantly in over 74% of the SNPs between whites and African
Americans, analysis was stratified by race. Eight SNPs found not to be in
HWE were excluded from the study, leaving 97 SNPs in 32 apoptosis related
genes examined for association with risk of lung cancer. Odds ratios and
95% confidence intervals were estimated from unconditional logistic
regression models using a dominant model, stratified by race, and
adjusted for age, pack years smoked, ever/never smoking status, family
history of lung cancer, history of COPD, BMI and education. Results:
Among whites, a polymorphism in APAF-1 (rs1007573) was associated with a
2.86 fold increase in risk of lung cancer among smokers (95% CI:
1.58-5.16). SNPS in CD40 rs3765459 and rs1535045 were associated with a
reduced risk of lung cancer among white smokers. After carrying out a
backwards elimination procedure, only APAF-1 rs1007573 and CD40 rs1535045
remained as significant predictors of risk. Both of these SNPs were found
to be noteworthy, as per the False Discovery Reporting Percentage (FDRP)
method. In African Americans, 7 SNPs were found to be significantly
associated with NSCLC. After the backwards elimination procedure, only
SNPs in ATM rs1801516 (OR=24.15, 95% CI: 3.50-166.55), TNF rs1800629 (OR=
0.42, 95% CI: 0.18-0.99) and p63 rs6790167 (OR: 2.85, 95% CI:1.33-6.09)
were found to be significant. Testing these SNPs using the FDRP method
revealed that only p63 (rs6790167) was noteworthy. Indeed, this locus may
represent an important target in NSCLC, as previous SNPs in p63 have been
reported to increase the risk of lung cancer in larger GWAS studies.
Conclusions: We report two significant SNPs associated with NSCLC risk in
whites (APAF-1 rs1007573 and CD40 rs1535045) and one significant SNP in
African Americans (p63 rs6790167) as potentially important contributors
to NSCLC.

