Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Early detection of cancer in the general population - a blinded
case control study of p53 auto-antibodies in colorectal cancer in UK
Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening (UKCTOCS)


Purpose: Recent reports from cancer screening trials in high-risk
populations suggest that autoantibodies are present prior to clinical
diagnosis. However there are few data on the role of autoantibody
signatures in cancer screening in the general population. Methods:
Informative p53 peptides were identified on an autoantibody microarray
with 15-mer overlapping peptides covering the complete p53 sequence using
sera from patients with colorectal cancer. The selected peptides were
evaluated in a blinded case control study using stored serum from the
multimodal arm of UKCTOCS where women gave annual blood samples. Cases
were postmenopausal women who developed colorectal cancer following
recruitment, with 2 or more serum samples preceding diagnosis. Controls
were age-matched women with no history of cancer. Results: The 50,640
women randomised to the multimodal group were followed up for a median of
6.8 (inter-quartile range 5.9-8.4) years. Colorectal cancer notification
was received in 101 women with serial samples of whom 97 (277 samples)
had given consent for secondary studies. They were matched 1:1 with 97
controls (276 serial samples). The four most informative peptides
identified 25.8% of colorectal cancer patients with a specificity of 95%.
The median lead time was 1.4 (range 0.12-3.8) years prior to clinical
diagnosis. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that in the general
population, autoantibody signatures are present during preclinical
disease and may be of value in cancer screening. In colorectal cancer
screening in particular, where the current need is to improve compliance,
it suggests that p53 autoantibodies may contribute towards risk
stratification.

