Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protein ps20 increases tumourigenic potential in prostate
cancer epithelial cells


Introduction The protein ps20 encoded by the WFDC1 gene contains a highly
conserved whey 4-disulphide core (WFDC) domain and is a member of a
protein family that regulates inflammation. Ps20/WFDC1 is expressed by
prostate cancer stromal cells but its expression by cancerous prostate
epithelium is associated with tumour progression in patients. The aim of
this study was to determine how WFDC1expression by prostate cancer cells
alters their tumourigenic properties. Methods The cell-lines LNCAP and
PC3 were transfected with WFDC1 vector or empty vector (EV) and their
growth, adhesive and migratory characteristics were investigated by MTT
proliferation, transwell migration and ICAM-1 adhesion assays. Results
PC3 and LNCAP cells transfected with WFDC1 increased in numbers by 3148
+/151% and 523+/311% after 48 hours respectively compared to EV
transfected cell lines (p Introduction The protein ps20 encoded by the
WFDC1 gene contains a highly conserved whey 4-disulphide core (WFDC)
domain and is a member of a protein family that regulates inflammation.
Ps20/WFDC1 is expressed by prostate cancer stromal cells but its
expression by cancerous prostate epithelium is associated with tumour
progression in patients. The aim of this study was to determine how
WFDC1expression by prostate cancer cells alters their tumourigenic
properties. Methods The cell-lines LNCAP and PC3 were transfected with
WFDC1 vector or empty vector (EV) and their growth, adhesive and
migratory characteristics were investigated by MTT proliferation,
transwell migration and ICAM-1 adhesion assays. Results PC3 and LNCAP
cells transfected with WFDC1 increased in numbers by 3148 +/151% and
523+/311% after 48 hours respectively compared to EV transfected cell
lines (p <0.01 by unpaired T test). WFDC1-transfected cells became
smaller and tightly clustered with greater cell-cell contact (See Figure
1). WFDC1 transfected cell migration through 8M transwells was increased
by 73% in PC3s and 57% in LNCaP compared to EV cells (pIntroduction The
protein ps20 encoded by the WFDC1 gene contains a highly conserved whey
4-disulphide core (WFDC) domain and is a member of a protein family that
regulates inflammation. Ps20/WFDC1 is expressed by prostate cancer
stromal cells but its expression by cancerous prostate epithelium is
associated with tumour progression in patients. The aim of this study was
to determine how WFDC1expression by prostate cancer cells alters their
tumourigenic properties. Methods The cell-lines LNCAP and PC3 were
transfected with WFDC1 vector or empty vector (EV) and their growth,
adhesive and migratory characteristics were investigated by MTT
proliferation, transwell migration and ICAM-1 adhesion assays. Results
PC3 and LNCAP cells transfected with WFDC1 increased in numbers by 3148
+/151% and 523+/311% after 48 hours respectively compared to EV
transfected cell lines (p <0.01 by unpaired T test). WFDC1-transfected
cells became smaller and tightly clustered with greater cell-cell contact
(See Figure 1). WFDC1 transfected cell migration through 8M transwells
was increased by 73% in PC3s and 57% in LNCaP compared to EV cells
(p<0.05 by paired t-test). ICAM-1 expression increased by 67% in
WFDC1-LNCAP and by 50% in WFDC1-PC3s compared to EV-cells (pIntroduction
The protein ps20 encoded by the WFDC1 gene contains a highly conserved
whey 4-disulphide core (WFDC) domain and is a member of a protein family
that regulates inflammation. Ps20/WFDC1 is expressed by prostate cancer
stromal cells but its expression by cancerous prostate epithelium is
associated with tumour progression in patients. The aim of this study was
to determine how WFDC1expression by prostate cancer cells alters their
tumourigenic properties. Methods The cell-lines LNCAP and PC3 were
transfected with WFDC1 vector or empty vector (EV) and their growth,
adhesive and migratory characteristics were investigated by MTT
proliferation, transwell migration and ICAM-1 adhesion assays. Results
PC3 and LNCAP cells transfected with WFDC1 increased in numbers by 3148
+/151% and 523+/311% after 48 hours respectively compared to EV
transfected cell lines (p <0.01 by unpaired T test). WFDC1-transfected
cells became smaller and tightly clustered with greater cell-cell contact
(See Figure 1). WFDC1 transfected cell migration through 8M transwells
was increased by 73% in PC3s and 57% in LNCaP compared to EV cells
(p<0.05 by paired t-test). ICAM-1 expression increased by 67% in
WFDC1-LNCAP and by 50% in WFDC1-PC3s compared to EV-cells (p<0.05 by
paired t-test). VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) was also
strongly detectable in the WFDC1-PC3 and LNCaP cells by western-blot
whereas none was detectable in EV cells. Conclusions WFDC1 transfection
of prostate cancer epithelial cells increases proliferation, migration
and ICAM-1 expression, and also induces VEGF, which is a potent
angiogenic growth factor. WFDC-1/ps20 may therefore be a critical target
for prostate cancer therapeutics.

