Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of reduction in serum androgens and change in serum
PSA in patients treated with abiraterone acetate (AA): A subset analysis
of the COU-AA-301 phase 3 randomized trial


Objective In study COU-AA-301 the androgen biosynthesis inhibitor AA
significantly increased overall survival vs placebo in mCRPC
post-docetaxel (HR=0.74) (Scher, ASCO 2011). The objective of the current
study was to determine the activity of AA in decreasing androgens in a
subset of patients in COU-AA-301 using an ultrasensitive assay that
measured serum testosterone (T), androstenedione (A4), and
dehydroepiandrostenedione (DHEA) below concentrations detectable with
commercially available methods, to determine the ability of AA +
prednisone (P), compared to placebo + P, to reduce androgen levels below
the lower limits of quantification (LLOQ), and to correlate decreases in
androgen levels with PSA response. Methods COU-AA-301 is a randomized
double blind study of AA (1000 mg QD + prednisone [P] 5 mg po BID) vs
placebo + P. Serum androgen levels were measured at baseline and week 12
in the AA + P and placebo + P arms by an ultrasensitive assay using
LC/MS/MS. The LLOQs were: T, Objective In study COU-AA-301 the androgen
biosynthesis inhibitor AA significantly increased overall survival vs
placebo in mCRPC post-docetaxel (HR=0.74) (Scher, ASCO 2011). The
objective of the current study was to determine the activity of AA in
decreasing androgens in a subset of patients in COU-AA-301 using an
ultrasensitive assay that measured serum testosterone (T),
androstenedione (A4), and dehydroepiandrostenedione (DHEA) below
concentrations detectable with commercially available methods, to
determine the ability of AA + prednisone (P), compared to placebo + P, to
reduce androgen levels below the lower limits of quantification (LLOQ),
and to correlate decreases in androgen levels with PSA response. Methods
COU-AA-301 is a randomized double blind study of AA (1000 mg QD +
prednisone [P] 5 mg po BID) vs placebo + P. Serum androgen levels were
measured at baseline and week 12 in the AA + P and placebo + P arms by an
ultrasensitive assay using LC/MS/MS. The LLOQs were: T, <0.05 ng/dL; A4,
Objective In study COU-AA-301 the androgen biosynthesis inhibitor AA
significantly increased overall survival vs placebo in mCRPC
post-docetaxel (HR=0.74) (Scher, ASCO 2011). The objective of the current
study was to determine the activity of AA in decreasing androgens in a
subset of patients in COU-AA-301 using an ultrasensitive assay that
measured serum testosterone (T), androstenedione (A4), and
dehydroepiandrostenedione (DHEA) below concentrations detectable with
commercially available methods, to determine the ability of AA +
prednisone (P), compared to placebo + P, to reduce androgen levels below
the lower limits of quantification (LLOQ), and to correlate decreases in
androgen levels with PSA response. Methods COU-AA-301 is a randomized
double blind study of AA (1000 mg QD + prednisone [P] 5 mg po BID) vs
placebo + P. Serum androgen levels were measured at baseline and week 12
in the AA + P and placebo + P arms by an ultrasensitive assay using
LC/MS/MS. The LLOQs were: T, <0.05 ng/dL; A4, <0.10 ng/dL; DHEA,
Objective In study COU-AA-301 the androgen biosynthesis inhibitor AA
significantly increased overall survival vs placebo in mCRPC
post-docetaxel (HR=0.74) (Scher, ASCO 2011). The objective of the current
study was to determine the activity of AA in decreasing androgens in a
subset of patients in COU-AA-301 using an ultrasensitive assay that
measured serum testosterone (T), androstenedione (A4), and
dehydroepiandrostenedione (DHEA) below concentrations detectable with
commercially available methods, to determine the ability of AA +
prednisone (P), compared to placebo + P, to reduce androgen levels below
the lower limits of quantification (LLOQ), and to correlate decreases in
androgen levels with PSA response. Methods COU-AA-301 is a randomized
double blind study of AA (1000 mg QD + prednisone [P] 5 mg po BID) vs
placebo + P. Serum androgen levels were measured at baseline and week 12
in the AA + P and placebo + P arms by an ultrasensitive assay using
LC/MS/MS. The LLOQs were: T, <0.05 ng/dL; A4, <0.10 ng/dL; DHEA, <0.10
g/dL. In this post hoc exploratory analysis, the reduction in androgen
levels from baseline to week 12 was compared between treatment arms using
the t-test. Also evaluated was the androgen response, defined as the
proportion of patients with week 12 androgen concentration below the
respective LLOQ. The association between PSA response (PSA 50% baseline)
and androgen response was analyzed by logistic regression. Results AA + P
treatment led to significant reductions in T, A4, and DHEA levels from
baseline to week 12 (T: 5.46 vs 2.74 ng/dL, P=0.0002; A4: 26.33 vs 8.81
ng/dL, P=0.0007; DHEA: 22.59 vs 10.40 g/dL, P=0.0179; AA + P vs placebo +
P, respectively). The number of patients with an androgen response at
week 12 was substantially greater for AA + P compared with placebo + P
(T: 34/72 [47%] vs 0/37; A4: 19/63 [30%] vs 0/31; DHEA: 46/80 [58%] vs
1/38 [3%]; AA + P vs placebo + P, respectively). Eleven patients showed
androgen response on all three androgens, 2 patients on A4 and T only, 4
patients on A4 and DHEA only, and 14 patients on T and DHEA only. There
was a positive association between PSA response and androgen response,
adjusted for treatment effect, in favor of androgen responders (T:
OR=1.54 [95% CI, 0.546, 4.347]; A4: OR=3.06 [95% CI, 0.975, 9.604]; DHEA:
OR=1.08 [95% CI, 0.401, 2.899]). Conclusions: In study COU-AA-301, AA + P
potently inhibited the production of serum androgens T, A4, and DHEA as
measured by an ultrasensitive assay. Reduction in T and A4 appears to
correlate with PSA response, providing further evidence that mCRPC
remains dependent on androgen-mediated signaling.

