Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p90/CIP2A may play a role in regulating the phosphorylation of
CREB1 in cancer


Cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) is a tumor-associated autoantigen
migrating in SDS-PAGE as a protein of 90kD (also called p90). This
protein was shown to be expressed in the mouse embryonic stage but
inactivated in adult tissues. It has been shown to inhibit PP2A function
thus stabilizing the oncogene c-myc in human malignancies. In the present
study, we used two-dimensional electrophoresis-based approach and
identified 47 differentially expressed proteins upon the loss of
p90/CIP2A in H1299 lung cancer cell line. Among these 47 proteins, 30
proteins have been well documented to be associated with cancer, of which
12 proteins are up-regulated and 18 proteins are down-regulated after
knock-down of p90/CIP2A via shRNA. To investigate whether these proteins
are associated with any known cancer-related pathway, differentially
expressed proteins were analyzed using Pathway Studio bioinformatics
software. The resulting data indicated that four possible transcription
factors (c-myc, ESR-1, ETS-1 and CREB) may involve in the regulation of
the differentially expressed proteins. Further studies showed that
down-regulation of p90/CIP2A may affect CREB phosphorylation: treatment
with serum induced less phosphorylation of CREB in cells transduced with
p90/CIP2A shRNA than the cells tranduced with control shRNA. However,
other treatments like KCl and forskolin did not show significant
difference between these two groups. We also found that the
phosphorylation of the CREB upstream kinase, AKT, was also down-regulated
while other kinases p38 and p90RSK was unaffected. These preliminary data
imply that p90/CIP2A may target AKT-CREB pathway to promote cell
proliferation in a c-myc independent manner.

