Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PDX from the nave NSCLC patients containing activating EGFR
mutations are resistant to erlotinib but sensitive to c-met inhibitor


NSCLC is a common cancer with the highest mortality and few effective
treatment options, except for the patients with EGFR (Erlotinib, Iressa)
and ALK (Crizotinib) activating mutations. Recent studies indicated that
some patients with the activating EGFR mutations but without pre-exposure
to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are resistant to TKIs. The
proposed mechanisms (1) include: T790M gatekeeper mutation preventing
accessing the kinase activation site, Kras mutation, pTEN loss (2), or
c-met amplification (3) that activates ERBB3 signaling (4). Patient
Derived Xenograft (PDX) models have been suggested to more closely
represent patient tumors (5, 6). We established several PDXs, including
HuPrime LU858, LU859, LU357, LU387, LU1901 and LU2503, using tumor
tissues from individual NSCLC patients. LU858/859 contain the classic
activating EGFR mutation, L858R; LU1868 contain L858R/T790M double
mutations; LU357/LUF387 contain the common exon 20 insertion (2319-2320
AACCCCCAC); and LU1901/2503 have wild type EGFR. To our surprise, the two
models with single L858R mutation, just like the model with double
mutations, respond to the erlotinib poorly, as seen in some of clinic
cases (1). Since they do not have T790M and Kras mutation, we examined
them for c-met status, finding that their c-met gene are significantly
amplified with also increased c-met/HGF expression as measured by at mRNA
and protein levels (IHC), consistent with those seen in clinic (3).
Furthermore, LU357 is sensitive to erlotinib while LU387 is not,
corresponding to no c-met amplification in LU357 but significant
amplification in LU387. All these suggest that the observed erlotinib
resistance in these models could potentially be attributed to c-met
signaling activation via c-met/HGF autocrine. To this end, we treated
LU858, LU859 and LU2503 (also with c-met amplification) with c-met
inhibitor, Crizotinib. Indeed, Crizotinib caused significant tumor
response as expected in all these models. In particular, the combination
treatment of LU858 and LU859 with erlotinib caused complete tumor
regression by overcoming the resistance, suggesting a new potential
effective treatment option. The results using PDX models can potentially
help to design a prospective human study to demonstrate improved efficacy
by the combination treatment via patient stratification to include the
nave NSCLC patient subjects with c-met amplification/EGFR mutation. 1. A.
F. Gazdar, Oncogene 28 Suppl 1, S24, 2009 2. M. L. Sos et al., Cancer Res
69, 3256, 2009 3. T. Kubo et al., Int J Cancer 124, 1778, 2009 4. A. B.
Turke et al., Cancer Cell 17, 77, 2010. 5. L. Ding et al., Nature 464,
999, 2010 6. E. Marangoni et al., Clin Cancer Res 13, 3989, 2007

