Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetically engineered osteoprotegerin for multiple myeloma
osteolytic bone damage


Current treatments for osteolytic cancers include a combination of
radiation, chemotherapy and cytotoxic products, but toxic side effects
are still of major concern. Studies have shown that osteoclast activity
is increased in patients with osteolytic cancers such as Multiple Myeloma
(MM), through increased expression of Receptor Activator of Nuclear
Factor Kappa B Ligand (RANKL) leading to RANKL/RANK signaling, resulting
in osteoclast activation and ultimately bone resorption. Moreover,
Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is drastically decreased in these patients who
presents with bone lesion. Thus, the use of OPG as a therapeutic molecule
would greatly decrease osteolytic damage and reduce morbidity. However,
despite the of OPG potential in inhibiting the activation of bone
resorbing osteoclast, OPG also binds to tumor related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL) making tumor cells resistant to apoptosis. TRAIL binds to
the Death Receptor 4 and 5 (DR4, DR5) and initiate cell death of
Transformed cells such as MM. The present study was designed to develop a
novel therapeutic approach to the treatment of osteolytic bone damage by
use of genetically altered OPG retaining RANKL binding but abolished of
TRAIL binding. In order to eliminate TRAIL binding while maintaining
RANKL binding, we created mutant OPG-Fc constructs by site directed
mutagenesis based on interactive domain identification and by
superimposing structural models of TRAIL, OPG and DR5. The mutant OPGs
were produced in HEK 293 cells for characterization of potential mutants
and their TRAIL binding ability. We conclude that using site-directed
mutagenesis at the N-terminal of OPG effectively retains RANKL binding
property but abolishes TRAIL binding property as determined by osteoclast
and TRAIL assays respectively.

