Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy-associated necroptosis contributes to cancer cell
cytotoxicity induced by the chalcone compound SBC2


Chalcone-based compounds are potential agents for cancer chemoprevention
and chemotherapy. The recently developed chalcone-based compound SBC2
suppresses xenograft tumor growth in nude mice, however, the mechanisms
by which SBC2 kills cancer cells are elusive. In this study, we have
investigated the cellular signaling pathways involved in SBC2's
cytotoxicity in cancer cells derived from lung and bladder tumors. SBC2
potently killed different cancer cells, which was effectively blocked by
the necroptosis inhibitor Necrostatin-1 and knockdown of the necroptosis
pathway components RIP1 and RIP3, suggesting that SBC2-induced
cytotoxicity is associated with necroptosis. SBC2 robustly activated JNK
and ERK through activation of their upstream activating kinases MEKK1 and
MKK7. Blocking JNK and ERK effectively blocked SBC2-induced cytotoxicity,
implying an important role of these MAPKs in SBC2-induced cancer cell
death. In addition, SBC2 strongly induced autophagy, which was suppressed
when JNK was blocked. Furthermore, SBC2 triggered BCL-XL phosphorylation
that was dependent on JNK. Importantly, suppression of autophagy with
either pharmacological inhibitors or a siRNA targeting the essential
autophagy component ATG7 effectively attenuated SBC2-induced cell death.
These results suggest that SBC2 kills cancer cells through activating
JNK-mediated and autophagy-associated necroptosis. Taken together, our
observations substantiate SBC2 as a potential anticancer therapeutic and
identify a novel pathway for cancer cell killing by SBC2 that involves
autophagy and necroptosis.

