Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aspirin acetylates multiple cellular proteins in HCT-116 cells:
Identification of novel targets


Aspirin, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug has been consistently
associated with a reduced risk of colon cancer; however, the molecular
mechanisms are not completely understood. In the present study, we
determined the ability of aspirin to acetylate, and post-transnationally
modify cellular proteins in HCT-116 human cancer cells to understand the
potential mechanisms by which it may exert anti-cancer effects. Using
anti-acetyl lysine antibodies, here we demonstrate that aspirin causes
the acetylation of multiple proteins whose molecular weight ranged from
20 to 200 kDa. The identity of these proteins was determined, using
immune-affinity purification, mass spectrometry and immunoblotting. A
total of 33 cellular proteins were potential targets of aspirin-mediated
acetylation, while 16 were identified as common to both the control and
aspirin-treated samples. These include enzymes of glycolytic pathway,
cytoskeletal proteins, histones, ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins.
The glycolytic enzymes which were identified include aldolase,
glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate dehydrogenase, enolase, pyruvate kinase M2,
and lactate dehydrogenase A and B chains. Immunoblotting experiments
showed that aspirin also acetylated glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase and
transketolase, both enzymes of pentose phosphate pathway involved in
ribonucleotide biosynthesis. In vitro assays of these enzymes revealed
that aspirin did not affect pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase
activity; however, it decreased glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
activity. Selective inhibition of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase and
other key proteins through acetylation may represent important mechanisms
by which aspirin may exert its anti-cancer effects.

