Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phospho-ERK as a predictor for different ways of metastasis and /
or survival in patients with metastasized colon cancer


Background: Not much is known about different signalling pathways and its
influence on metastasis in colon cancer. Phospho-ERK (pERK) is a
downstream-target of K-Ras within the EGFR-Pathway. The goal of our
investigations was the evaluation of the MAP-Kinase-cascade in regard to
different ways of metastasis. Methods: 98 patients with adenocarcinom of
the colon and a postoperative pT2/3-status, who underwent surgical
resection between 2006 and 2008 at the University of Tbingen had been
included within the study collective. 53 patients had no metastasis
(control group), while 45 patients revealed primary metastasis:
lymphogenetic metastasis (n=20), hepatic spread (n=20) and multiple
metastasize (n=5). On a tissue-micro-Array pERK was stained by
immunohistochemistry, the analysis was done semiquantitatively. Results:
The graduation in immunohistochemistry was done as followed: negative
staining (n=31), weak positive staining (n=36), moderate staining (n=20)
and strong staining (n=11). 19 out of 31 negative patients (61%) revealed
metastasis, while this had been 17 out of 36 weak positive (47%), 6 out
of 20 (30%) moderate and 4 out of 11 (36%) strongly positive stained
patients (p=0.229). No significant correlation was observed for
lypmhogenetic (p=0.683) or multiple metastatic localization (p=0.666) and
the pERK-expression. A significant correlation between the
pERK-expression and the number of hepatic metastasis was observed
(p=0.049). Additionally pERK-negative patients (31/98 = 32%) revealed a
significant worse survival compared to those with positive pERK-staining
(p=0.003). Conclusion: Our first results show, that a weak
pERK-expression is correlated with a higher incidence in patients with
liver metastasis. Patients without a pERK-expression revealed a worse
survival compared to patients with pERK-expression.

