Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the mu opioid receptor in human non-small cell
lung cancer promotes Akt and mTOR activation, tumor growth and metastasis


Background: Recent epidemiologic studies suggesting that there were
differences in cancer recurrence contingent on anesthetic regimens have
raised the possibility that mu opioid agonists can influence cancer
progression. Based on our previous studies indicating the mu opioid
receptor (MOR) is upregulated in several types of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), this study examined the functional significance of MOR
overexpression to elucidate a possible mechanism for the epidemiologic
findings. Methods: Stable vector control (VC) and MOR1 overexpressing
human NSCLC bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC) cells were evaluated using
immunoblot analysis, proliferation and transendothelial extravasation
assays with or without Akt inhibitor, mTOR inhibitor (temsirolimus) or
the peripheral MOR antagonist, methylnaltrexone (MNTX). In human NSCLC
xenograft models, primary tumor growth rates and lung metastasis were
analyzed using consecutive tumor volume measurements and nestin
immunoreactivity in nude mouse lungs. Results: We provide evidence that
MOR is an important regulator of lung cancer progression, a disease with
high mortality and few treatment options. MOR overexpression increased
Akt and mTOR activation, proliferation and extravasation in human BAC
cells. In vivo, overexpression of MOR in BAC increased primary tumor
growth rates in nude mice by 2.5 fold and lung metastasis by 20 fold
compared to VC BAC cells. Conclusions: Our overexpression data suggests a
possible direct effect of MOR on Akt and mTOR activation and lung cancer
progression. Such an effect provides a plausible explanation for the
epidemiologic findings. Our observations further suggest that exploration
of MOR in NSCLC merits further study both as a diagnostic and therapeutic
option.

