Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mutational status of the p53 tumor suppressor gene is a
determinant of GSTP1 expression and mediates GSTP1-dependent drug
resistance in human glioblastoma


Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, a transcription factor
activated by a variety of cellular stresses, including, those inflicted
by anti-cancer agents, is a common genetic abnormality in GBMs. Although,
p53 is involved in critical cellular processes, such as, cell cycle
arrest, DNA repair and apoptosis, studies of p53 in tumor drug resistance
and/or patient response to therapy have yielded mixed results. Thus, in
gliomas and other cancers, such as, breast, bladder, and ovarian
carcinomas, some studies have associated wild-type p53 with higher tumor
drug resistance, while other studies indicate that mutant or functionally
inactive p53, rather than wt p53, confers drug resistance. These
observations indicate the significant complexity of the role of p53 in
tumor response to therapy and suggest that other factors, including,
downstream p53 pathways and/or regulation, may be important determinants
of the p53 effects on the tumor drug resistance phenotype. We previously
reported that the human GSTP1 gene, that encodes a major drug
metabolizing protein, cell signaling regulator and a mediator of tumor
drug resistance, is transcriptionally activated by p53 via a canonical
p53 binding motif located in intron 4 of the GSTP1 gene. Our goal, in
this study, is to gain further insight into the relationship between
p53-dependent transcriptional control of GSTP1 in GBM and the extent to
which it contributes to GSTP1 expression in primary patient tumor and,
ultimately, to their response to therapy. For this, we sequenced the p53
gene across exons 2-11 in 42 primary GBM specimens quantified the level
of GSTP1 gene expression by RNA-PCR and genotyped the allelic variants in
them. The results showed, approx. half of the tumors to harbor wild-type
p53. In those with mutant p53, the mutations spanned the entire p53
target region, the majority in the core DNA binding domain with the hot
spots in codons 55, 72, 175, 245, 248, and 273. GSTP1 expression was
significantly heterogeneous between the tumors, and with a few
exceptions, correlated directly with the presence of wild-type p53. In
representative tumors, the high GSTP1 gene expression was associated with
resistance to cisplatin and temozolomide. These result suggest that, in
GBM, transcriptional activation of GSTP1 by wild-type, and some mutant
forms of p53, contributes to their resistance to therapy. Supported by
NIH grants RO1 CA 153050, RO1CA127872, RO1 CA 112519, P50CA108786 and
P30-CA14236.

