Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative gene expression analysis of proliferating stromal
cells from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, pancreatitis and normal
pancreas


Introduction: Stromal cells associated with cancer cells are considered
an important component of tumor microenvironment of pancreatic cancer.
The intratumoral desmoplasia characteristic of pancreatic cancer is a
result of growing carcinoma paracrine action on surrounding normal tissue
cells. Selective targeting of tumor stroma cells can markedly increase
the effectiveness of currently used chemotherapeutic agents against
pancreatic cancer. Therefore, a search for new targets in stromal cells
is an important part of developing new combined therapies of this
disease. Our work was aimed at comparative studying of gene expression in
stromal cells of normal pancreas, pancreatitis and pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma tissues. Methods: Cultured stromal cells were obtained
from samples of normal pancreatic (n=3), pancreatitis (n=3) and ductal
adenocarcinoma tissues (n=4). The cell cultures obtained were preliminary
characterized by immunofluorescence, RT-PCR and western blotting. A full
genome gene expression analysis was performed using a modified SAGE
technique. Expression of selected dysregulated genes was analyzed by
quantitative PCR. Results: Morphological and immunofluorescent analyses
of the obtained primary stromal cultures indicated that they could be
assigned to pancreatic stellate cells (PSC). The SAGE analysis allowed to
quantitatively estimate expression of 9860 genes in normal PSC, 8744 PSC
genes in pancreatitis, and 9311 genes in tumor PSC. A comparison of
normal and tumor PSC revealed statistically significant (PIntroduction:
Stromal cells associated with cancer cells are considered an important
component of tumor microenvironment of pancreatic cancer. The
intratumoral desmoplasia characteristic of pancreatic cancer is a result
of growing carcinoma paracrine action on surrounding normal tissue cells.
Selective targeting of tumor stroma cells can markedly increase the
effectiveness of currently used chemotherapeutic agents against
pancreatic cancer. Therefore, a search for new targets in stromal cells
is an important part of developing new combined therapies of this
disease. Our work was aimed at comparative studying of gene expression in
stromal cells of normal pancreas, pancreatitis and pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma tissues. Methods: Cultured stromal cells were obtained
from samples of normal pancreatic (n=3), pancreatitis (n=3) and ductal
adenocarcinoma tissues (n=4). The cell cultures obtained were preliminary
characterized by immunofluorescence, RT-PCR and western blotting. A full
genome gene expression analysis was performed using a modified SAGE
technique. Expression of selected dysregulated genes was analyzed by
quantitative PCR. Results: Morphological and immunofluorescent analyses
of the obtained primary stromal cultures indicated that they could be
assigned to pancreatic stellate cells (PSC). The SAGE analysis allowed to
quantitatively estimate expression of 9860 genes in normal PSC, 8744 PSC
genes in pancreatitis, and 9311 genes in tumor PSC. A comparison of
normal and tumor PSC revealed statistically significant (P<0.001)
differences in expression of 270 genes. Of them, 146 genes were
upregulated and 124 genes downregulated in tumor PSC as compared to
normal PSC. An expression analysis of selected dysregulated genes by
RT-PCR detected changes in the activity of some genes involved in tumor
progression of pancreatic cancer. In particular, the genes of two
chemokines (CXCL12 and CX3CL1) and the JAG1 Notch ligand were upregulated
in tumor PSC. A similar comparison of tumor PSC and PSC from pancreatitis
tissue detected 68 differentially expressed genes (PIntroduction: Stromal
cells associated with cancer cells are considered an important component
of tumor microenvironment of pancreatic cancer. The intratumoral
desmoplasia characteristic of pancreatic cancer is a result of growing
carcinoma paracrine action on surrounding normal tissue cells. Selective
targeting of tumor stroma cells can markedly increase the effectiveness
of currently used chemotherapeutic agents against pancreatic cancer.
Therefore, a search for new targets in stromal cells is an important part
of developing new combined therapies of this disease. Our work was aimed
at comparative studying of gene expression in stromal cells of normal
pancreas, pancreatitis and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissues.
Methods: Cultured stromal cells were obtained from samples of normal
pancreatic (n=3), pancreatitis (n=3) and ductal adenocarcinoma tissues
(n=4). The cell cultures obtained were preliminary characterized by
immunofluorescence, RT-PCR and western blotting. A full genome gene
expression analysis was performed using a modified SAGE technique.
Expression of selected dysregulated genes was analyzed by quantitative
PCR. Results: Morphological and immunofluorescent analyses of the
obtained primary stromal cultures indicated that they could be assigned
to pancreatic stellate cells (PSC). The SAGE analysis allowed to
quantitatively estimate expression of 9860 genes in normal PSC, 8744 PSC
genes in pancreatitis, and 9311 genes in tumor PSC. A comparison of
normal and tumor PSC revealed statistically significant (P<0.001)
differences in expression of 270 genes. Of them, 146 genes were
upregulated and 124 genes downregulated in tumor PSC as compared to
normal PSC. An expression analysis of selected dysregulated genes by
RT-PCR detected changes in the activity of some genes involved in tumor
progression of pancreatic cancer. In particular, the genes of two
chemokines (CXCL12 and CX3CL1) and the JAG1 Notch ligand were upregulated
in tumor PSC. A similar comparison of tumor PSC and PSC from pancreatitis
tissue detected 68 differentially expressed genes (P<0.001), 40 of which
were upregulated and 28 downregulated in tumor PSC as compared to
pancreatitis PSC. Expression of 23 genes was upregulated in tumor PSC as
compared with PSC both from pancreas and pancreatitis. On the whole, the
expression profile of tumor PSC was markedly more similar to that of PSC
from pancreatitis tissues than from normal PSC. Conclusions: The results
obtained in our work revealed statistically significant changes in the
expression of some PSC genes in stroma of ductal pancreatic
adenocarcinoma as compared to normal PSC. The similarity of tumor and
pancreatitis PSC expression profiles may suggest mutual mechanisms of
forming the fibrous tissue of pancreatitis and tumor stroma of pancreatic
carcinomas.

