Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmaceutically controlled replication of adenoviruses in
mesenchymal stem cell-based cell carriers improves oncolytic virotherapy
for advanced human renal cell carcinoma


Cell-based carriers were recently exploited as a tumor-targeting tool to
improve systemic delivery of oncolytic viruses for cancer therapy.
However, the slow clearance of carrier cells from normal organs indicates
the need for a controllable system which allows viral delivery only when
the carrier cells reach the tumor site. In this communication, we sought
to develop a pharmaceutically-inducible cell-based oncolytic adenovirus
delivery strategy for effective targeting and treatment of renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), which is one of the most malignant tumor types with an
unfavorable prognosis. Herein, we demonstrated the intrinsic tumor homing
property of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to
specifically localize primary and metastatic RCC tumors after systemic
administration in a clinically relevant orthotopic animal model. PDGF-AA
secreted from RCC was identified as a chemoattractant responsible for the
recruitment of hMSCs. Like endogenous osteocalcin whose barely detectable
level of expression was dramatically induced by vitamin D3, the silenced
replication of human osteocalcin promoter-directed Ad-hOC-E1 oncolytic
adenoviruses loaded in hMSCs was rapidly activated and the released viral
progenies sequentially killed co-cultured RCC cells upon vitamin D3
exposure. Moreover, systemic treatment of RCC tumor-bearing mice with
Ad-hOC-E1-loaded hMSCs had very limited effect on tumor growth, but when
it combined with vitamin D3 treatment induced effective viral delivery to
RCC tumors and significant tumor regression. Therapeutic effects of
hMSC-based Ad-hOC-E1 delivery were confirmed to be significantly greater
than those of injection of carrier-free Ad-hOC-E1. Our results presented
the first pre-clinical demonstration of a novel controllable cell-based
gene delivery strategy that combines the advantages of tumor tropism and
vitamin D3-regulatable human osteocalcin promoter-directed gene
expression of hMSCs to improve oncolytic virotherapy for advanced RCC.

