Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory pathway genes may have stronger associations with
hyperplastic polyps than with adenomas


The prostaglandin synthesis pathway is critical for regulation of
inflammatory processes in the colon and plays a well-defined role in
colorectal carcinogenesis. Genetic variation in prostaglandin synthases,
PTGS-1 (COX-1) and PTGS-2 (COX-2), and enzymes that regulate the pathway
such as IBKB and NFB, has been linked to colorectal cancer (CRC)
incidence and mortality. However, the role of variability in these genes
in relation to the development of distinct subtypes of early colorectal
neoplasia has not been investigated. We therefore examined polymorphisms
in prostaglandin synthesis pathway genes in relation to the risk of
various subtypes of colorectal polyps. Study participants were enrollees
of Group Health, an integrated healthcare provider in Washington State,
aged 20 to 79, who underwent colonoscopy for any indication between 1998
and 2007. We excluded those with prior CRC, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's
disease, Lynch syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis, or colectomy.
Participants completed a structured interview, provided a DNA sample, and
lesions discovered at colonoscopy received a standardized pathology
review. HapMap was used to select 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 4 genes for investigation: 5 in PTGS-1, 4 in PTGS-2, 3 in IBKB
and 6 in NFB. Multiplex genotyping was performed utilizing the Illumina
GoldenGate assay. Polytomous logistic regression compared genetic
variation between individuals free of colorectal pathology and two case
groups with colorectal polyps: 1) adenomas (ADs) and 2) hyperplastic
polyps (HPs). Models were adjusted for age, sex, and race. Differences by
type of lesion (AD vs. HP) were considered using contrasts of regression
parameters. A gene-by-gene analysis approach was taken; the false
discovery rate method of Benjamini and Hochberg was applied to address
multiple testing. We evaluated approximately 929 cases, including 526
with ADs and 403 with HPs, as well as 826 controls free of colorectal
pathologies. We observed a statistically significant association between
HPs and genetic variation in PTGS-1 (rs10306194, ORAC vs. CC: 1.26; 95%
CI 0.94-1.68, ORAA vs. CC: 1.74; 95% CI 0.88-3.42, P-trend=0.04). No
associations were observed for ADs. Significant heterogeneity in the
association between genetic variants and colorectal polyps according to
the polyp type (AD vs. HP) was observed for 1 SNP in both PTGS-2
(rs689466) and IBKB (rs5029748) and 2 SNPs in NFB (rs3774959, rs230510),
with p-values ranging from 0.03-0.05. In each case, the variant showed
evidence of an association with the risk of HPs but not ADs. Correction
for multiple testing confirmed the existence of heterogeneity in
associations according to type of colorectal polyp. These data suggest
that genetic variation in the prostaglandin synthesis pathway may be
associated with the development of specific subtypes of early colorectal
neoplasia.

