Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between loss of heterozygosity of HLA-A gene and HLA
class I expression in gastric cancer


[Introduction]Human leukocyte antigen (HLA), located on 6p21.3, encodes
for genes involved in antigen processing and presentation. Loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) at 6p21.3 may cause downregulation of HLA class I,
and may provide tumor cells with an immune-escape tumor phenotype. The
aim of this study is to examine HLA class I expression in gastric cancer
tissues and cell lines, to clarify the clinical impact of HLA-A
dawnregulation on progression of gastric cancer. [Materials and
methods]We examined HLA class I expression in clinical samples from 206
patients by immunohistochemical staining. By flow cytometric analysis, we
analyzed the expression of HLA class I antigen in gastric cancer cell
lines. Furthermore, we performed HLA-A typing in gastric cancer cell
lines by PCR-SBT method. [Results]We observed that HLA class I expression
was downregulated in metastatic lymph node compared with in primary
lesion. HLA class I expression in primary lesion was associated with ly
factors and histological types. Furthermore, patients with negative
expression of HLA class I showed significantly poorer prognosis. In
vitro, we observed the downregulation of HLA class I antigen in OCUM-2MLN
cells which have a high potential for lymph node metastasis. By PCR-SBT
method, we detected loss of heterozigosity of HLA-A gene in OCUM-2MLN.
[Conclusion]We observed that HLA class I expression was associated with
poor prognosis of gastric cancer and LOH of HLA-A was recognized in
cancer cell line which has potential to develop lymph node metastasis.
Our findings suggested that LOH of HLA-A gene would result in provide
cancer cells with capacity to metastasize into lymph nodes.

