Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The clinical significance of CD163 in patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma who underwent curative resection


Background We have found that the abundance of peritumoral CD68+
macrophages was associated with patients prognosis after curative
resection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the role of the
pro-tumoral or tumoricidal macrophages is still not clear. Methods In
this study, the clinical significance of immunostaining of CD163, a
marker of alternatively activated macrophages (M2), in tumor and
peritumoral liver tissue from a cohort of 295 Chinese HCC patients who
underwent curative resection was evaluated and compared with that of the
immunostaining of CD68. The clinical significance of soluble form of
CD163 (sCD163) in peripheral blood was also evaluated in another cohort
of 107 HCC patients. Results The count of CD163+ cells was well
correlated with and much higher than that of CD68+ cells in both tumors
and peritumoral liver tissues respectively, which was consistent with the
observation from immunostaining by CD68 or CD163 antibody on the
consecutive sections. Patients with a higher count of peritumoral CD68+
cells was associated with poor recurrence-free survival and overall
survival (P = 0.004 and, P = 0.001, respectively), whereas the counts of
tumor and peritumoral CD163+ cells did not. Plasma sCD163 level was
associated with active hepatitis-related factors (e.g. serum alanine
aminotransferase, serum aspartate aminotransferase, -glutamyl
transpeptidase and serum alkaline phosphatase). Conclusions CD163+ cell
count is of limited significance to predict patients prognosis in HCC.
Plasma sCD163 was more likely a factor related with active hepatitis
rather than tumor related features.

