Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Sox17 gene hypermethylation is useful as a molecular
diagnostic application in early stage of gastric cancer


Although minimal invasive treatment is widely accepted for early stage of
gastric cancer (GCa), we still do not have any appropriate risk markers
to detect residual neoplasia and some potential of recurrence. We
previously reported that aberrant DNA methylation is an early and
frequent process in gastric carcinogenesis and could be useful for
detection of gastric neoplasia. Our goal is to find and identify some
candidate genes as a treatment marker using genome wide DNA methylation
analysis for early stage of gastric cancer (EGC). We studied Methylated
CpG Island Amplification Microarray (MCAM) analysis using 12 gastric
washes (each 6 before (Pre) and after (Post) endoscopic treatment in same
patients). One of them are Sox17. We examined the DNA methylation status
of Sox17 in a validation set consisting of 128 washes samples (Pre, 64:
Post, 64) at EGC. We next identified functional studies about Sox17 as a
putative tumor suppressor gene. Sox17 showed significantly differential
methylation between before and after treatment in EGC patient (Sox17,
pAlthough minimal invasive treatment is widely accepted for early stage
of gastric cancer (GCa), we still do not have any appropriate risk
markers to detect residual neoplasia and some potential of recurrence. We
previously reported that aberrant DNA methylation is an early and
frequent process in gastric carcinogenesis and could be useful for
detection of gastric neoplasia. Our goal is to find and identify some
candidate genes as a treatment marker using genome wide DNA methylation
analysis for early stage of gastric cancer (EGC). We studied Methylated
CpG Island Amplification Microarray (MCAM) analysis using 12 gastric
washes (each 6 before (Pre) and after (Post) endoscopic treatment in same
patients). One of them are Sox17. We examined the DNA methylation status
of Sox17 in a validation set consisting of 128 washes samples (Pre, 64:
Post, 64) at EGC. We next identified functional studies about Sox17 as a
putative tumor suppressor gene. Sox17 showed significantly differential
methylation between before and after treatment in EGC patient (Sox17,
p<0.0001). Moreover, treating GCa cells that lacked Sox17 expression with
a methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, restored the gene's
expression. Moreover, introduction of exogenous Sox17 into silenced cells
suppressed colony formation. Gastric washes based DNA methylation
analysis is easy and useful for early detection of recurrence after ER in
EGC patients. Our data suggest that silencing of Sox17 occurs frequently
in EGC and may play a key role in development and progression of the
disease.

