Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo evaluation of dacomitinib (PF-00299804) in patient-derived
salivary gland tumor models: Identification of a potential treatment
options for adenoid cystic carcinoma


Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is an uncommon form of malignant neoplasm
that arises within secretory glands including the major and minor
salivary glands of the head and neck, trachea, lacrimal gland, breast,
skin, and vulva. Standard treatment options for this malignancy include
resection and local radiation therapy, although chemotherapy is sometimes
used to control metastatic or locally recurrent disease. Patients with
ACC may survive for years due to latent tumor growth and lack of lymph
node metastasis; however, the high rate of recurrence and metastasis to
the lungs lead to a poor prognosis beyond ten years. While specific
molecular abnormalities that underlie this disease process are unknown,
improved understanding of ACC tumor biology and oncogenesis has provided
some molecular targets for its treatment. Recently human epidermal growth
factor receptors (HER) family members including EGFR (HER1) and HER2 have
been found overexpressed in salivary gland carcinomas and HER2 has also a
role in this type of cancer as in many cancer types. Dacomitinib is an
orally available, highly selective irreversible small molecule inhibitor
of the HER family of tyrosine kinases. Figitumumab is a fully human
monoclonal antibody targeting the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
(IGF-1R). In a recent phase I trial, combination of these two agents
resulted in partial tumor responses in two ACC patients as well as minor
responses in other indications. To further examine the potential benefit
of these agents in ACC, we evaluated single agent and combination
activity of dacomitinib and figitumumab in five patient-derived
preclinical ACC tumor models including ACCx5M1, ACCx6, ACCx9, ACCx14 and
ACCx16. Endpoints for each study were a mean control tumor volume of
approximately 1 cm3 or sixty-days following treatment initiation. In
these studies dacomitinib and figitumumab were well tolerated at the
evaluated treatment regimens. Modest activity was reported with
dacomitinib alone which did not reach statistical significance. However,
single agent figitumumab demonstrated statistically significant (pAdenoid
cystic carcinoma (ACC) is an uncommon form of malignant neoplasm that
arises within secretory glands including the major and minor salivary
glands of the head and neck, trachea, lacrimal gland, breast, skin, and
vulva. Standard treatment options for this malignancy include resection
and local radiation therapy, although chemotherapy is sometimes used to
control metastatic or locally recurrent disease. Patients with ACC may
survive for years due to latent tumor growth and lack of lymph node
metastasis; however, the high rate of recurrence and metastasis to the
lungs lead to a poor prognosis beyond ten years. While specific molecular
abnormalities that underlie this disease process are unknown, improved
understanding of ACC tumor biology and oncogenesis has provided some
molecular targets for its treatment. Recently human epidermal growth
factor receptors (HER) family members including EGFR (HER1) and HER2 have
been found overexpressed in salivary gland carcinomas and HER2 has also a
role in this type of cancer as in many cancer types. Dacomitinib is an
orally available, highly selective irreversible small molecule inhibitor
of the HER family of tyrosine kinases. Figitumumab is a fully human
monoclonal antibody targeting the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
(IGF-1R). In a recent phase I trial, combination of these two agents
resulted in partial tumor responses in two ACC patients as well as minor
responses in other indications. To further examine the potential benefit
of these agents in ACC, we evaluated single agent and combination
activity of dacomitinib and figitumumab in five patient-derived
preclinical ACC tumor models including ACCx5M1, ACCx6, ACCx9, ACCx14 and
ACCx16. Endpoints for each study were a mean control tumor volume of
approximately 1 cm3 or sixty-days following treatment initiation. In
these studies dacomitinib and figitumumab were well tolerated at the
evaluated treatment regimens. Modest activity was reported with
dacomitinib alone which did not reach statistical significance. However,
single agent figitumumab demonstrated statistically significant (p<0.05)
tumor growth inhibition in two of five models and combination of
dacomitinib and figitumumab was found active in three of five models.
Partial tumor responses were reported in ACCx6 and ACCx14 studies with
figitumumab and combination treatment, respectively and minor tumor
regressions noted with combination treatment in ACCx5M1. Results from
these studies suggest a role for the IGF-1 pathway in ACC and further
demonstrate the utility of patient-derived models for translational
studies.

