Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Population prevalence of consensus translocations in follicular
and mantle cell lymphomas


Chromosomal translocations t(14;18)(q32;q21) of the anti-apoptotic gene
BCL2 and t(11;14)(q13;q32) of the cell cycle regulatory gene cyclin D1
are hallmark mutations of follicular lymphoma (FL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL), respectively, both driven by the enhancer of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene cluster IGH. These same translocations
have also been detected at low frequency in peripheral blood lymphocytes
(PBL) of clinically normal individuals, but association with risk of
subsequent lymphoma remains to be determined. We therefore evaluated
consensus PCR assays for these translocations towards development of
potential blood screening tests of lymphoma risk. Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tumor specimens were retrieved from 62 FL and 17 MCL
diagnosed during a large population-based cancer screening trial.
Lymphoma DNA was isolated from scrapings off glass slides and assessed
for quality and quantity by quantitative real-time PCR amplification of
the single copy reference gene KRAS. Samples were divided into three
aliquots and tested with consensus primers to detect translocations
within either the Major Breakpoint Region (MBR) on chromosome 18 or the
Major Translocation Cluster (MTC) on chromosome 11, as appropriate. For
MBR-positive reactions, PCR fragment length was estimated by agarose gel
electrophoresis. Overall, 21 (34%) of 62 FL and 7 (44%) of 16 MCL were
PCR-positive for the consensus translocation sequences. Translocation
detection was highly dependent upon testing an adequate quantity of DNA,
with 21 (45%) PCR-positives among 47 FL samples of at least 500 diploid
genome equivalents vs. 0 (0%) positives among the remaining 15 FL
(pChromosomal translocations t(14;18)(q32;q21) of the anti-apoptotic gene
BCL2 and t(11;14)(q13;q32) of the cell cycle regulatory gene cyclin D1
are hallmark mutations of follicular lymphoma (FL) and mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL), respectively, both driven by the enhancer of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene cluster IGH. These same translocations
have also been detected at low frequency in peripheral blood lymphocytes
(PBL) of clinically normal individuals, but association with risk of
subsequent lymphoma remains to be determined. We therefore evaluated
consensus PCR assays for these translocations towards development of
potential blood screening tests of lymphoma risk. Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tumor specimens were retrieved from 62 FL and 17 MCL
diagnosed during a large population-based cancer screening trial.
Lymphoma DNA was isolated from scrapings off glass slides and assessed
for quality and quantity by quantitative real-time PCR amplification of
the single copy reference gene KRAS. Samples were divided into three
aliquots and tested with consensus primers to detect translocations
within either the Major Breakpoint Region (MBR) on chromosome 18 or the
Major Translocation Cluster (MTC) on chromosome 11, as appropriate. For
MBR-positive reactions, PCR fragment length was estimated by agarose gel
electrophoresis. Overall, 21 (34%) of 62 FL and 7 (44%) of 16 MCL were
PCR-positive for the consensus translocation sequences. Translocation
detection was highly dependent upon testing an adequate quantity of DNA,
with 21 (45%) PCR-positives among 47 FL samples of at least 500 diploid
genome equivalents vs. 0 (0%) positives among the remaining 15 FL
(p<.001). PCR fragment lengths were identical from replicate assays for
all but one MBR-positive sample, which yielded two products differing by
30 base pairs. Within the FL group, PCR-positivity did not significantly
differ among Working Formulation histologies, including 2 (15%) of 13
mixed small cleaved and large cell FL, 5 (36%) of 14 small cleaved cell
FL, 6 (55%) of 11 large cell FL, 1 (100%) of 1 centroblastic lymphoma and
7 (30%) of 23 FL not otherwise specified. We confirmed that nearly half
of FL and MCL with adequate samples in this population-based cohort study
have consensus translocation sequences. Thus, translocation presence
and/or frequency in stored pre-diagnostic PBL can be usefully examined
for associations with risk of subsequent lymphoma. FL- and MCL-associated
translocations in PBL are a potential target for cancer risk prediction
and preventive intervention.

