Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effective siRNA delivery through specific targeting of tumor


The siRNA has been expected to apply for several diseases such as cancer
since siRNA specifically silences the disease-associated genes. However,
effective gene carriers should be developed to overcome the low siRNA
stability in vivo, form stable complexes and facilitate intracellular
uptake of siRNA. Here, we have investigated tumor targetable oligopeptide
carrier including tumor-homing peptide, AP-1, and rich positive peptide,
nine arginines, for systemic siRNA delivery. Phage display technique is a
promising tool for selecting peptides or proteins with specific binding
properties from a lot of variants. AP-1 peptide can bind with
interleukin-4 receptor which expressed on surface of several human cancer
cells like MDA-MB231. Arginine rich peptides have been widely used for
forming complex with DNA, which promote efficient transfection in various
mammalian cells. Oligopeptides formed ionic complex with siRNA at 150 nm
size and these peptide/siRNA complexes were transfected in MDA-MB231.
Under in vitro silencing experiments, peptide/siRNA complexes did
silencing of Dronpa gene as similar to lipofectamine/siRNA complexes,
which were observed by fluorescent microscope, flow cytometry, and
western blotting analysis. For in vivo experiments, we prepared
tumorbearing mice by inoculation of Dronpa-MDA-MB231 cells (Dronpa-stable
cells). Tumor targetable oligopeptide/siRNA complexes were administrated
through tale vein when tumor volume reached at 50 mm3 - we observed
fluorescent signals of Dronpa in tumor. In tumor targetable
oligopeptide/siRNA-treated mice, weak signals of Dronpa were observed
compared with free siRNA-treated mice. These results revealed the
promising potential of our oligopeptide carrier as a stable and effective
siRNA delivery system for cancer treatment.

