Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adjuvant breast cancer vaccine improves overall survival of
patients with depressed immunity


Breast cancer patients were vaccinated in the adjuvant setting with a
whole cell vaccine, containing autologous and allogeneic breast cancer
cells, to evaluate the effect on host lymphocyte immunity and overall
survival. We began preparing whole cell preparations for a breast cancer
vaccine clinical trial in 1995. Stage I and II breast cancer patients had
host lymphocyte immunity against tumors associated antigens evaluated
before standard therapy. Those patients with depressed immunity
determined by a lymphocyte blastogenesis assay (LBA) were offered the
whole cell vaccine. Patients were given six intradermal injections (three
weekly followed by three monthly). Ten weeks after the last injection the
LBA was repeated. Thirty-seven patients were vaccinated in the adjuvant
setting with the whole cell vaccine, containing autologous and allogeneic
breast cancer cells. Some patients experienced slight pain and swelling
at the injection site. There were no severe toxicities and the vaccine
was well tolerated. There has been a ten year follow-up for all
vaccinated patients. The survival data of the vaccinated patients with
depressed immunity (79% survival at 10 years) compared to an historic
control of unvaccinated patients with depressed immunity to their tumor
associated antigens (59% survival at 10 years), demonstrates an
improvement in overall survival of the vaccinated patients. This study
confirms the importance of maintaining good host lymphocyte immunity
after completion of standard therapy, and validates cancer immunotherapy
in the adjuvant setting.

