Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synthetic microRNA (miR)-181a nanoparticles (NP) target RAS and
sensitize cells to daunorubicin (DNR) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


Most AML patients (pts) fail to achieve long-term survival with current
treatments. New therapeutic options are needed. We recently showed that
high miR-181a expression is associated with better outcome in AML pts
with normal karyotype, but the mechanisms underlying this achievement are
unknown. Aberrant activation of RAS due to mutations or overexpression is
frequent in human malignancies, including AML. MiR-181a has been shown to
target KRAS. In this study, we show that it also targets NRAS. With
luciferase reporter constructs spanning the predicted binding site in
NRAS we found a 25% decrease in luciferase activity after co-transfection
with miR-181a vs scramble control (sc) in 293T cells. Reduced KRAS & NRAS
levels were found in miR-181a vs sc transfected OCI-AML3 and KG1a at mRNA
(1.9 & 1.4 and 3.2 & 2.9 fold, respectively) & protein levels (2.2 & 1.5
and 1.7 & 1.3 fold, respectively). Thus increasing miR-181a may improve
outcome in AML pts by inhibiting RAS signaling. Free synthetic miRs are
degraded in bio-fluid & have limited cellular uptake. We developed a
novel non-viral delivery system for synthetic miRs that overcomes these
limitations. Polyethylenimine was used to capture synthetic miRs & form a
polyplex core. An outside lipid layer of
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, linoleic acid &
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphoethanolamine, methoxypolyethylene
glycol protected the miRs from degradation & clearance & facilitated
their uptake. Since AML cells overexpress the transferrin (Tf) receptor,
we conjugated the NPs with Tf for targeted delivery. Mature miR-181a in
OCI-AML3 & KG1a cells were measured by qPCR after treatment with TfNP
encapsulating precursor miR-181a (pM181a) molecules (TfNP181a) or sc
(TfNPsc) at 0.5 nM. At 24h mature miR-181a levels increased 50 fold in
OCI-AML3 & 15 fold in KG1a cells, while the levels of unrelated miR-140
remained unchanged. We found that delivered pM181a downregulated levels
of KRAS & NRAS at mRNA and protein levels (OCI-AML3: 2 & 3 fold and 4.4 &
11.3 fold; KG1a: 1.7 & 1.6 fold, and 5 & 2.7 fold, respectively) vs.
TfNPsc treatment. To analyze downstream effects we measured MAPK & p-MAPK
protein & observed a TfNP181a-mediated decrease of p-MAPK by 2.9 & 3.2
fold in OCI-AML3 & KG1a vs. TfNPsc treatment. Next we tested if TfNP181a
sensitized AML cells to chemotherapy (DNR). After priming with 0.5 nM
TfNP181a or TfNPsc (for 48h) OCI-AML3 cells were treated with 0.2 uM DNR
(for 72h). MTS assays showed decreased cell viability for priming: 44.5%
vs 82.5% (pMost AML patients (pts) fail to achieve long-term survival
with current treatments. New therapeutic options are needed. We recently
showed that high miR-181a expression is associated with better outcome in
AML pts with normal karyotype, but the mechanisms underlying this
achievement are unknown. Aberrant activation of RAS due to mutations or
overexpression is frequent in human malignancies, including AML. MiR-181a
has been shown to target KRAS. In this study, we show that it also
targets NRAS. With luciferase reporter constructs spanning the predicted
binding site in NRAS we found a 25% decrease in luciferase activity after
co-transfection with miR-181a vs scramble control (sc) in 293T cells.
Reduced KRAS & NRAS levels were found in miR-181a vs sc transfected
OCI-AML3 and KG1a at mRNA (1.9 & 1.4 and 3.2 & 2.9 fold, respectively) &
protein levels (2.2 & 1.5 and 1.7 & 1.3 fold, respectively). Thus
increasing miR-181a may improve outcome in AML pts by inhibiting RAS
signaling. Free synthetic miRs are degraded in bio-fluid & have limited
cellular uptake. We developed a novel non-viral delivery system for
synthetic miRs that overcomes these limitations. Polyethylenimine was
used to capture synthetic miRs & form a polyplex core. An outside lipid
layer of 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, linoleic acid &
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphoethanolamine, methoxypolyethylene
glycol protected the miRs from degradation & clearance & facilitated
their uptake. Since AML cells overexpress the transferrin (Tf) receptor,
we conjugated the NPs with Tf for targeted delivery. Mature miR-181a in
OCI-AML3 & KG1a cells were measured by qPCR after treatment with TfNP
encapsulating precursor miR-181a (pM181a) molecules (TfNP181a) or sc
(TfNPsc) at 0.5 nM. At 24h mature miR-181a levels increased 50 fold in
OCI-AML3 & 15 fold in KG1a cells, while the levels of unrelated miR-140
remained unchanged. We found that delivered pM181a downregulated levels
of KRAS & NRAS at mRNA and protein levels (OCI-AML3: 2 & 3 fold and 4.4 &
11.3 fold; KG1a: 1.7 & 1.6 fold, and 5 & 2.7 fold, respectively) vs.
TfNPsc treatment. To analyze downstream effects we measured MAPK & p-MAPK
protein & observed a TfNP181a-mediated decrease of p-MAPK by 2.9 & 3.2
fold in OCI-AML3 & KG1a vs. TfNPsc treatment. Next we tested if TfNP181a
sensitized AML cells to chemotherapy (DNR). After priming with 0.5 nM
TfNP181a or TfNPsc (for 48h) OCI-AML3 cells were treated with 0.2 uM DNR
(for 72h). MTS assays showed decreased cell viability for priming: 44.5%
vs 82.5% (p<0.01). We confirmed these findings in primary pt blasts 62.4%
(TfNP181a) vs. 96.5% (TfNPsc) (pMost AML patients (pts) fail to achieve
long-term survival with current treatments. New therapeutic options are
needed. We recently showed that high miR-181a expression is associated
with better outcome in AML pts with normal karyotype, but the mechanisms
underlying this achievement are unknown. Aberrant activation of RAS due
to mutations or overexpression is frequent in human malignancies,
including AML. MiR-181a has been shown to target KRAS. In this study, we
show that it also targets NRAS. With luciferase reporter constructs
spanning the predicted binding site in NRAS we found a 25% decrease in
luciferase activity after co-transfection with miR-181a vs scramble
control (sc) in 293T cells. Reduced KRAS & NRAS levels were found in
miR-181a vs sc transfected OCI-AML3 and KG1a at mRNA (1.9 & 1.4 and 3.2 &
2.9 fold, respectively) & protein levels (2.2 & 1.5 and 1.7 & 1.3 fold,
respectively). Thus increasing miR-181a may improve outcome in AML pts by
inhibiting RAS signaling. Free synthetic miRs are degraded in bio-fluid &
have limited cellular uptake. We developed a novel non-viral delivery
system for synthetic miRs that overcomes these limitations.
Polyethylenimine was used to capture synthetic miRs & form a polyplex
core. An outside lipid layer of
1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, linoleic acid &
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphoethanolamine, methoxypolyethylene
glycol protected the miRs from degradation & clearance & facilitated
their uptake. Since AML cells overexpress the transferrin (Tf) receptor,
we conjugated the NPs with Tf for targeted delivery. Mature miR-181a in
OCI-AML3 & KG1a cells were measured by qPCR after treatment with TfNP
encapsulating precursor miR-181a (pM181a) molecules (TfNP181a) or sc
(TfNPsc) at 0.5 nM. At 24h mature miR-181a levels increased 50 fold in
OCI-AML3 & 15 fold in KG1a cells, while the levels of unrelated miR-140
remained unchanged. We found that delivered pM181a downregulated levels
of KRAS & NRAS at mRNA and protein levels (OCI-AML3: 2 & 3 fold and 4.4 &
11.3 fold; KG1a: 1.7 & 1.6 fold, and 5 & 2.7 fold, respectively) vs.
TfNPsc treatment. To analyze downstream effects we measured MAPK & p-MAPK
protein & observed a TfNP181a-mediated decrease of p-MAPK by 2.9 & 3.2
fold in OCI-AML3 & KG1a vs. TfNPsc treatment. Next we tested if TfNP181a
sensitized AML cells to chemotherapy (DNR). After priming with 0.5 nM
TfNP181a or TfNPsc (for 48h) OCI-AML3 cells were treated with 0.2 uM DNR
(for 72h). MTS assays showed decreased cell viability for priming: 44.5%
vs 82.5% (p<0.01). We confirmed these findings in primary pt blasts 62.4%
(TfNP181a) vs. 96.5% (TfNPsc) (p<0.01). In conclusion we report an
effective NP-based delivery system for miRs. TfNP181a treatment showed
RAS downregulation, RAS signaling inhibition & increased sensitivity to
DNR in AML cells. TfNP181a may be a new therapeutic in AML & other
malignancies involving RAS.

