Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictive marker discovery for Sorafenib using patient derived
xenograft models of hepatocellular carcinoma


Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor targeting vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF)- mediated angiogenesis and blocking the RAF/extracellular
signal regulated kinase (ERK) kinase (MEK)/ERK cascade, is the first drug
found to prolong survival of patients with advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Although it is only used in treating advanced renal cell
carcinoma and unresectable HCC, many patients with other malignant
diseases as well as patient with resectable HCC may also benefit from
this treatment. There is a clear need for predictive markers of Sorafenib
to help selecting the patient population that may benefit the most. We
set out to discover the predictive markers using patient derived
xenograft (PDX) models of HCC. The response to Sorafenib was investigated
in 20 PDX subcutaneous models and 6 orthotopic cell line (MHCC97H, HUH-1,
HepG2, Hep3B, SK-Hep-1 and PLC/PRF/5) derived xenogrft (CDX) models. 11
out of 20 PDX models (55%), and 4 out of 6 CDX models (67%) achieved
significant tumor growth inhibition by the treatment of Sorafenib at the
dose range from 25-50 mg/kg in nude mice. Gene expression profile,
hotspot mutation detection and copy number variations were analyzed to
sift out the molecular signatures that may be predictive of the response
to Sorafenib. Genes and pathways such as VEGF, PDGF, FGF, Raf/MAPK/ERK,
PTEN/ PI3K/AKT/mTOR, TGF-beta/Wnt, EGFR, IGF and HGF/c-MET, were
investigated using methods such as IHC analysis of pretreatment xenograft
tissues. Our results indicate that more than half of the resectable HCC
may be responsive to Sorafenib treatment, and markers other than the
usual targets of Sorafenib may be predictive of this response. This study
may shed light on the predictive markers of Sorafenib and help patients
that may be mostly benefited from this drug.

