Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic regulation and growth suppression by NDN, an imprinted
tumor suppressor gene whose expression is decreased in epithelial ovarian
cancers


NDN is a monoallelically expressed, maternally imprinted gene located on
chromosome 15q11.2. Deletion and uniparental disomy of the NDN gene is
causally associated with the Prader-Willi syndrome, a congenital
neuro-developmental disorder. Studies of brain development suggest that
NDN functions as a suppressor of neuronal growth. Recent studies have
shown that NDN gene expression is downregulated in melanoma and
urothelial cancers, indicating that it may also act as a tumor suppressor
gene. We have now found that NDN gene expression is also downregulated in
50% of 14 ovarian tumors and 9 out of 10 ovarian cancer cell lines.
Hypermethylation of 2 CpG sites in NDN promoter was detected in 5 out of
10 cell lines by pyrosequencing, and 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine treatment
revived NDN expression at different levels, suggesting that DNA
hypermethylation is one of the mechanisms of NDN downregulation.
Re-expression of the NDN gene product Necdin in SKOv3 ovarian cancer
cells significantly inhibited growth by clonogenic assays associated with
upregulation of caspase-3 activity. Expression of Necdin did not induce
autophagy. As SKOv3 cells are p53 null, the mechanism(s) by which Necdin
induces cell death is independent of p53 activity. Our observations that
Necdin expression is downregulated in majority of ovarian cancers and
cancer cell lines and that re-expression of Necdin inhibited cancer cell
growth support the notion that NDN is a tumor suppressor gene.

