Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of Erlotinib derivatives as CIP2A inhibitors


PP2A is a protein phosphatase which involves in negatively regulating
cell proliferation, survival and differentiation. Literature has shown
that cancerous inhibitor of PP2A (CIP2A) is an inhibitor of PP2A in
cancer cells. Overexpression of CIP2A contributes to tumor aggressiveness
and renders resistance to chemotherapy. Inhibiton of CIP2A by small
molecules shut off the downstream signal pathway of Akt through
increasing PP2A phosphatase activity. For example, Bortezomib, a
poteasome inhibitor, suppressed expression level of CIP2A and further
reduced phospho-Akt in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Hence, Agents that
can repress CIP2A have potentials for the treatment in cancers.
Erlotinib, an EGFR inhibitor, shows therapeutic effects in clinical. Our
data show that CIP2A represents a major factor whereby erlotinib
derivatives induce apoptosis in HCC cells. Here, a series of mono- and
di-substituted erlotinb derivatives were synthesized and their
bioactivities against hepatocellular carcinoma were evaluated. The
di-substituted erlotinib derivatives were more potent inhibitors of
cancer-cell proliferation than the mono-substituted derivatives. Further
assays confirmed a correlation between cell death, and CIP2A and Akt
inhibition by these derivatives. Among them, compound 19 provides a proof
of concept for the design of a new class of agents that repress CIP2A
activity in HCC.

