Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Beta-catenin signaling initiates the activation of astrocytes and
contributes to the pathogenesis of astrocytomas


Astrocytes are the most abundant cell in the central nervous system
(CNS). Following injury to the nervous system, astrocytes respond through
a repair process known as astrocyte activation. While the molecular
mechanisms of astrocyte activation are not completely established,
understanding the dynamic changes that occur in response to injury could
help identify critical signaling pathways involved in the pathogenesis of
brain tumors. To determine the mechanisms underlying astrocyte
activation, including the initiating events and regulatory mediators of
this process, we analyzed the molecular signaling changes after scratch
injury of astrocytes. We discovered that the interruption and
destabilization of cadherin-catenin complexes plays a critical role in
the initiation and regulation of astrocyte activation. We further found
that similar expression changes and signaling pathways are also featured
in gliomas, but were found to exist in a dysregulated manner. Inhibition
of -catenin signaling was also found to diminish both the astrocyte
response to injury and the malignant phenotype of gliomas. These findings
provide a unique mechanism of normal astrocyte activation and shed light
on the pathogenic mechanism of glioma, which may help to develop the
diagnostic and therapeutic targets for gliomas.

