Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted Casp8AP2 methylation increased drug resistance in
mesenchymal stem cell and cancer cells


Casp8AP2 is a FLASH protein that is critical for the formation of death
complex and the relay of death signal into the cells. Genetic defect of
Casp8AP2 was found in diseases like acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
implying that the miss-expression of Casp8AP2 might cause disease. On the
other hand, the promoter of Casp8AP2 is enriched with CpG islands and we
observed differential methylation changes within Casp8AP2 promoter during
mesenchymal stem cell (MSCs) differentiation. Aberrant DNA methylation
was also identified within the Casp8AP2 promoter in vivo like in liver
cancers. It was then hypothesized that the abnormal DNA methylation
within the Casp8AP2 promoter might contribute to the enhanced survival or
drug resistance in cancer development. We determined the epigenetic
states within the Casp8AP2 promoter in different cells and confirmed that
there are methylation differences between the normal and tumoral samples
within the Casp8AP2 promoter. Differential methylation was also observed
between the drug resistant cancer cells and primary cancer cells. Global
demethylation in drug resistant cell lines reversed the Casp8AP2
methylation, which was correlated with the reversed resistance phenotype.
We then target-methylated the Casp8AP2 promoter in normal somatic stem
cells and cancer cells like MDA-MB-231 and found increased drug
resistance in these cells. These data point out that methylation within
the death complex like Casp8AP2 might be able to serve as biomarker and
treatment target for drug resistance in cancer cells. (Supported in part
by NSC100-2320-B-194-001)

