Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multivalency of non-peptide integrin V3 antagonist slows tumor
growth


To date, more than 200 angiogenesis inhibitors have been reported. These
include only a few antiangiogenic peptide drugs. In addition, many
molecules upregulated on angiogenic endothelial cells have been explored
in the past decades. One of these is integrin v3, which recognizes RGD
(Arg-Gly-Asp) motifs in extracellular protein components. Targeting the
v3 integrin with drugs may provide an opportunity to destroy tumor
vessels without harmful effects on microvessels of normal tissues.
Multivalency is a strategy for increasing the binding affinity of
compounds ostensibly to increase their potency or imaging potential.
Surprisingly, multivalent versions of successful drugs showing enhanced
binding have not always demonstrated enhanced therapeutic efficacy. For
example, multivalent RGDs have not generally shown better therapeutic
efficacy. In our study, we prepared a multivalent nonpeptide integrin v3
antagonist (multivalent IA,
4-[2-(3,4,5,6-tetrahydropyrimidine-2-ylamino)ethyloxy]benzoyl-2-(S)-aminoet
hylsulfonyl-amino-halanine monomer, dimer and trimer) for anti-tumor
therapy. The anti-tumor efficacies of the IA multivalent compounds were
evaluated in B16F10 melanoma tumor-bearing mice. Tumors were inoculated
subcutaneously and allowed to progress before treating. IA compounds were
given by intraperitoneal injection every 12 hours for 14 days. It was
observed that 30 mg/kg of IA-trimer showed higher antitumor efficacy and
lower toxicity compared to IA-Monomer and IA-Dimer, as shown by changes
in tumor volume against control group (IA-Trimer, 32.05 % > IA-Dimer,
45.33 % > IA-Monomer 59.29 %). Based on these results, we conclude that
the success of a multivalent strategy depends on the details of the
individual components and how they are put together. This may be the
first v3 multivalent ligand showing clear enhancement in anti-tumor
effectiveness.

