Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute inflammation-induced abrogation of base excision repair as a
potential mechanism of cancer initiation in inflammation-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers
worldwide, and chronic inflammation seems to be the most important risk
factor. Since inflammation induces oxidative stress and DNA damage, base
excision repair (BER) of oxidative damage in prevention of mutations and
subsequent tumorigenesis in an inflammatory environment seems to be
important, but a direct link between deficient DNA repair and
carcinogenesis in the highly damaging environment of the inflamed liver
has not been shown. Furthermore, the longstanding question about how and
in which cells cancer initiation occurs and the roles that DNA damage and
repair play in the process are larger problems that remain unanswered. In
our study we utilize the Long Evans Cinnamon (LEC) rat, which develops
spontaneous HCC after consecutive phases of acute and chronic hepatitis
induced by the accumulation of copper due to a mutation in the copper
transporter gene ATP7B, mimicking Wilson's disease in humans. We have
previously shown that the LEC rat exhibits deficient BER during acute
hepatitis, particularly in the activity of 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase
(Ogg1), and activity returns during chronic hepatitis as preneoplastic
foci begin to form. In order to study the role of BER in cancer
initiation, we have generated three new cell lines from the animal. We
report here that we have isolated and grown apparently spontaneously
immortalized LEC hepatocytes from the acute hepatitis liver (LEC-AH) and
the chronic hepatitis liver (LEC-CH) in long term culture. We have also
developed a carcinoma cell line from a LEC liver tumor (LEC-T). The newly
generated cell lines express albumin, and preliminary karyotyping
analysis shows that the LEC-AH and LEC-CH cells are cytogenetically
normal (average 42 chromosomes). As observed in the acute and chronic
hepatitis tissues, LEC-AH cells exhibit decreased activity (-2.5 fold) of
Ogg1 compared to LEC-CH cells. Furthermore, at 12 days post-confluency,
we have observed spontaneous foci formation in the LEC-AH cells (96 foci
per 106 cells) in culture while LEC-CH cells do not form foci
(Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers
worldwide, and chronic inflammation seems to be the most important risk
factor. Since inflammation induces oxidative stress and DNA damage, base
excision repair (BER) of oxidative damage in prevention of mutations and
subsequent tumorigenesis in an inflammatory environment seems to be
important, but a direct link between deficient DNA repair and
carcinogenesis in the highly damaging environment of the inflamed liver
has not been shown. Furthermore, the longstanding question about how and
in which cells cancer initiation occurs and the roles that DNA damage and
repair play in the process are larger problems that remain unanswered. In
our study we utilize the Long Evans Cinnamon (LEC) rat, which develops
spontaneous HCC after consecutive phases of acute and chronic hepatitis
induced by the accumulation of copper due to a mutation in the copper
transporter gene ATP7B, mimicking Wilson's disease in humans. We have
previously shown that the LEC rat exhibits deficient BER during acute
hepatitis, particularly in the activity of 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase
(Ogg1), and activity returns during chronic hepatitis as preneoplastic
foci begin to form. In order to study the role of BER in cancer
initiation, we have generated three new cell lines from the animal. We
report here that we have isolated and grown apparently spontaneously
immortalized LEC hepatocytes from the acute hepatitis liver (LEC-AH) and
the chronic hepatitis liver (LEC-CH) in long term culture. We have also
developed a carcinoma cell line from a LEC liver tumor (LEC-T). The newly
generated cell lines express albumin, and preliminary karyotyping
analysis shows that the LEC-AH and LEC-CH cells are cytogenetically
normal (average 42 chromosomes). As observed in the acute and chronic
hepatitis tissues, LEC-AH cells exhibit decreased activity (-2.5 fold) of
Ogg1 compared to LEC-CH cells. Furthermore, at 12 days post-confluency,
we have observed spontaneous foci formation in the LEC-AH cells (96 foci
per 106 cells) in culture while LEC-CH cells do not form foci (<1 foci
per 106 cells). These preliminary results indicate a correlation between
foci formation in culture and Ogg1 activity, demonstrating a potential
direct link between decreased BER and preneoplastic foci formation.
Additionally, the foci may represent an enriched population of initiated
cells, providing a unique opportunity to study the mechanism of
spontaneous cancer initiation in vitro and identify initiation markers.
Experiments elucidating the specific roles of Ogg1, other BER enzymes,
and oxidative damage in foci formation of LEC-AH cells are in progress,
as is further molecular analysis of the foci-forming cell populations as
they may reflect the biochemical and molecular characteristics of
preneoplastic foci in vivo. (Supported by a grant from NIH/NCI RO1
CA113447)

