Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-1826 targets VEGFC, beta-catenin (CTNNB1) and MEK1
(MAP2K1) in human bladder cancer.


Introduction and Objective: The Wnt/beta-catenin (CTNNB1) and
Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling pathway play an important role in bladder
cancer progression. Tumor suppressive miRNAs targeting these cancer
pathways may provide a new therapeutic approach for bladder cancer.
Methods: We initially identified miRNA-1826 potentially targeting CTNNB1,
VEGFC, MEK1 using several target scan algorithms. The expression of
miR-1826 was confirmed in bladder cancer tissues and bladder cancer cell
lines. Then we performed several functional analyses of miR-1826. Finally
3UTR luciferase assay and Western blot were performed to look at
relationship between miR-1826 and target genes. Results: MiR-1826
expression was significantly lower in bladder cancer tissues and bladder
cancer cell lines (J82, T24, TCC-SUP) compared to normal bladder tissues
and normal bladder cell lines (SV-HUC-1). The expression of miR-1826 was
lower in bladder cancer tissues and inverse correlation of miR-1826 with
several clinical parameters (pT, grade) was observed. The functional
analyses showed that miR-1826 inhibited bladder cancer cell viability,
invasion and migration. Also we also found increased apoptosis and G1
cell cycle arrest in miR-1826 transfected bladder cancer cells. 3UTR
luciferase activity and protein expression of these target genes (CTNNB1,
MEK1, VEGFC) were significantly down-regulated in miR-1826 transfected
bladder cancer cells (J82, T24). To examine whether the effect of
miR-1826 was through CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) or MEK1 knock down, we knocked
down CTNNB1/MEK1 mRNA using a si-RNA technique. We observed that CTNNB1
or MEK1 siRNA knockdown resulted in effects similar to those with
miR-1826 in bladder cancer cells. Conclusions: Our data suggests that the
miR-1826 plays an important role as tumor suppressor via
CTNNB1/MEK1/VEGFC down-regulation in bladder cancer.

