Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: N--acetyltransferase 10 protein suppresses cancer cell metastasis
by binding PIX proteins and inhibiting Cdc42/Rac1 activity


80%-90% of eukaryotic proteins are N--terminally acetylated. They are
mediated by specific N--acetyltransferases. However, the biological
importance of these N--acetyltransferases remains largely unknown.
Recently, these N--acetyltransferases have been recognized as important
characters in many biological processes, including embryonic development,
neuron disease and cancer. N--acetyltransferase A (Nat A) was first
characterized in yeast, it composed of Naa10p, also known as hARD1 (human
Arrest defective 1), and Naa15p, also known as NATH (N-acetyl transferase
human), are responsible for the N--acetylation of majority proteins in
mammalian cells. Naa10p is known to be involved in cell cycle control and
apoptosis. However, the role of Naa10p in human cancers is elusive. In
this study, we found that elevated Naa10p levels are associated with less
metastasis to lymph nodes and better prognosis of cancer patients. Naa10p
significantly suppressed migration, tumor growth, and metastasis
independent of its enzymatic activity. Instead, Naa10p binds to the
GIT-binding domain of PIX, thereby preventing the formation of the
GIT-PIX-Paxillin complex, resulting in reduced intrinsic Cdc42/Rac1
activity and decreased cell migration. Forced expression of PIX in
Naa10-transfected tumor cells restored the migration and metastasis
ability. We suggest that Naa10p functions as a tumor metastasis
suppressor by disrupting the migratory complex, PIX-GIT- Paxillin, in
cancer cells. Our study not only highlights the potential of Naa10p as a
therapeutic target for tumor metastasis, but also identifies Naa10p as a
regulatory component of the migration complex PIX-GIT-Paxillin.

