Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D pathway gene variants associated with vitamin D
deficiency in African Americans


Background: Cancer incidence and mortality rate is disproportionate among
the racial/ethnic groups in the U.S. and higher in African Americans
(AAs) due to a combination of genes and environmental factors. The
difference in serum vitamin D3, 25(OH)D, concentration among racial
groups is suspected to be one of the sources of cancer health
disparities. Vitamin D has protective effects against several types of
cancer, and vitamin D deficiency is more common among AAs than the
European Americans (EAs). Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) among
EAs found vitamin D pathway gene (VDPG) variants associated with serum
25(OH)D level, but association between VDPG variants and serum 25(OH)D
level has not examined in AAs. Here, we tested if thirty-nine VDPG
variants are associated with serum 25(OH)D concentration. Samples and
Methods: Nineteen variants in GC, VDR, CYP3A4, CYP2R1, and CYP24A1 were
genotyped in a total of 462 AAs from Washington, D.C. and Chicago area.
Twenty GWAS identified VDPG variants were genotyped in a subset of
subjects (n=332). West Africa Ancestry (WAA) was estimated using STRUCTRE
from 105 ancestry informative markers typed. Then, we tested for
association adjusting for WAA, age, and skin color. Results: Eight GWAS
identified SNPs (five in GC, one in CYP2R1, and two in DHCR7/NADSYN1)
were associated with serum 25(OH)D levels and/or vitamin D deficiency.
Among darker-skinned AAs, the VDR SNP rs11568820 (Cdx2), was
significantly associated (PBackground: Cancer incidence and mortality
rate is disproportionate among the racial/ethnic groups in the U.S. and
higher in African Americans (AAs) due to a combination of genes and
environmental factors. The difference in serum vitamin D3, 25(OH)D,
concentration among racial groups is suspected to be one of the sources
of cancer health disparities. Vitamin D has protective effects against
several types of cancer, and vitamin D deficiency is more common among
AAs than the European Americans (EAs). Genome-Wide Association Studies
(GWAS) among EAs found vitamin D pathway gene (VDPG) variants associated
with serum 25(OH)D level, but association between VDPG variants and serum
25(OH)D level has not examined in AAs. Here, we tested if thirty-nine
VDPG variants are associated with serum 25(OH)D concentration. Samples
and Methods: Nineteen variants in GC, VDR, CYP3A4, CYP2R1, and CYP24A1
were genotyped in a total of 462 AAs from Washington, D.C. and Chicago
area. Twenty GWAS identified VDPG variants were genotyped in a subset of
subjects (n=332). West Africa Ancestry (WAA) was estimated using STRUCTRE
from 105 ancestry informative markers typed. Then, we tested for
association adjusting for WAA, age, and skin color. Results: Eight GWAS
identified SNPs (five in GC, one in CYP2R1, and two in DHCR7/NADSYN1)
were associated with serum 25(OH)D levels and/or vitamin D deficiency.
Among darker-skinned AAs, the VDR SNP rs11568820 (Cdx2), was
significantly associated (P<0.05) with the risk of vitamin D deficiency
(Background: Cancer incidence and mortality rate is disproportionate
among the racial/ethnic groups in the U.S. and higher in African
Americans (AAs) due to a combination of genes and environmental factors.
The difference in serum vitamin D3, 25(OH)D, concentration among racial
groups is suspected to be one of the sources of cancer health
disparities. Vitamin D has protective effects against several types of
cancer, and vitamin D deficiency is more common among AAs than the
European Americans (EAs). Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) among
EAs found vitamin D pathway gene (VDPG) variants associated with serum
25(OH)D level, but association between VDPG variants and serum 25(OH)D
level has not examined in AAs. Here, we tested if thirty-nine VDPG
variants are associated with serum 25(OH)D concentration. Samples and
Methods: Nineteen variants in GC, VDR, CYP3A4, CYP2R1, and CYP24A1 were
genotyped in a total of 462 AAs from Washington, D.C. and Chicago area.
Twenty GWAS identified VDPG variants were genotyped in a subset of
subjects (n=332). West Africa Ancestry (WAA) was estimated using STRUCTRE
from 105 ancestry informative markers typed. Then, we tested for
association adjusting for WAA, age, and skin color. Results: Eight GWAS
identified SNPs (five in GC, one in CYP2R1, and two in DHCR7/NADSYN1)
were associated with serum 25(OH)D levels and/or vitamin D deficiency.
Among darker-skinned AAs, the VDR SNP rs11568820 (Cdx2), was
significantly associated (P<0.05) with the risk of vitamin D deficiency
(<20 ng/ml) (OR=1.94; CI 1.11-3.38). Conclusion: We found VDPG variants
associated with serum 25(OH)D level and/or vitamin D deficiency in AAs.
We also replicated the findings from a previous GWAS in EAs and found
that the same variants were associated with serum 25(OH)D in AAs.
Additional studies are necessary to assess whether these variants are
associated with cancer risk. Impact: Increased attention is focused on
the role of vitamin D in cancer risk. Our findings provide insights on
the biological and environmental modifiers of serum vitamin D3 and will
help guide future studies on the role of vitamin D in cancer in high risk
populations such as AAs.

