Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldo-keto reductase family 1B10 (AKR1B10): Novel biomarker and
molecular target of hepatocellular carcinoma


Aldo -keto reductase family 1B10 (AKR1B10) is a member of aldo-keto
reducase (AKR) superfamily with biologic functions involved in osmolytic
regulation, carbonyl detoxification, and carcinogenesis. Overexpression
of AKR1B10 is identified in tumors of liver, lung, cervix and pancreas.
However, the functional role of AKR1B10 in cancer remains unclear. In the
present studies, we determined the expression and function of AKR1B10 in
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using ex vivo HCC tissues and HCC
cell lines. Thirty nine of HCC surgical resected specimens have been
analyzed for the expression of AKR1B10 using immunohistochemistry method
and revealed that 92.3% (36/39) of HCC expressed AKR1B10, including 100%
(10/10) well differentiated, 95.2% (20/21) moderate differentiated, and
75% (6/8) poor differentiated HCC. No expression was observed in the
adjacent morphologically normal liver. Expression of AKR1B10 in HCC
confined to the cytoplasm. In order to investigate the oncogenic role of
AKR1B10 in HCC, silence or inhibition of AKR1B10 in HCC cells (Huh 7) was
approached using lentivirus mediated shRNA method or AKR1B10 inhibitor
epalrestat. The results showed that the expression of AKR1B10 protein was
significantly decreased in the AKR1B10 silenced cell lines with three
different shRNA sequences using western blot approach. Knockdown AKR1B10
resulted in a significant inhibition of Huh 7 cell
proliferation/tumorigenesis by colony formation assay and showed the
average clone number was 17425 of pGIPZ vector control Huh7 cell, and
8632 of the AKR1B10 shRNA silencing cells (pAldo -keto reductase family
1B10 (AKR1B10) is a member of aldo-keto reducase (AKR) superfamily with
biologic functions involved in osmolytic regulation, carbonyl
detoxification, and carcinogenesis. Overexpression of AKR1B10 is
identified in tumors of liver, lung, cervix and pancreas. However, the
functional role of AKR1B10 in cancer remains unclear. In the present
studies, we determined the expression and function of AKR1B10 in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using ex vivo HCC tissues and HCC cell
lines. Thirty nine of HCC surgical resected specimens have been analyzed
for the expression of AKR1B10 using immunohistochemistry method and
revealed that 92.3% (36/39) of HCC expressed AKR1B10, including 100%
(10/10) well differentiated, 95.2% (20/21) moderate differentiated, and
75% (6/8) poor differentiated HCC. No expression was observed in the
adjacent morphologically normal liver. Expression of AKR1B10 in HCC
confined to the cytoplasm. In order to investigate the oncogenic role of
AKR1B10 in HCC, silence or inhibition of AKR1B10 in HCC cells (Huh 7) was
approached using lentivirus mediated shRNA method or AKR1B10 inhibitor
epalrestat. The results showed that the expression of AKR1B10 protein was
significantly decreased in the AKR1B10 silenced cell lines with three
different shRNA sequences using western blot approach. Knockdown AKR1B10
resulted in a significant inhibition of Huh 7 cell
proliferation/tumorigenesis by colony formation assay and showed the
average clone number was 17425 of pGIPZ vector control Huh7 cell, and
8632 of the AKR1B10 shRNA silencing cells (p<0.05). The average clone
size was also significantly decreased in AKR1B10 shRNA silencing cells. A
slightly increased cell apoptosis was found in AKR1B10 silenced cells as
detected with both caspase-3 immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Annexin V
flow cytometry. Furthermore, AKR1B10 silenced cells or pGIPZ vector
control Huh7 cells pretreated with AKR1B10 inhibitor epalrestat
significantly increased sensitivity to doxorubicin and 4-hydroxy
Hexenal-induced cell death as measured with Annexin V flow cytometry.
Reduction of GTP-KRAS activity and its downstream MAPK signals were
observed in AKR1B10 silencing cells as measured by western bolt approach.
Our results indicated that AKR1B10 is involved in the process of cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and Kras activation, and further imply that
AKR1B10 is a novel biomarker and crucial molecular target of HCC.

