Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and Survivin are promising prognostic
protein markers for progression in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer


The majority of patients with bladder cancer are initially diagnosed with
noninvasive or superficially invasive urothelial tumors. These tumors
form a heterogeneous group, spanning from benign low grade Ta tumors that
rarely progress to high grade T1 tumors with concomitant CIS that
progress in up to 60% of cases. The histopathological parameters used in
the clinic cannot precisely predict the individual disease course, and no
molecular markers are currently in clinical use for predicting tumor
recurrence or later progression. Previously, we have identified gene
expression signatures for prediction of disease outcome for patients with
non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. The aim of the present study was to
validate key candidate markers from these signatures at the protein
level. Four proteins were selected for investigation: Cathepsin E,
Maspin, PLK1, and Survivin. We used three different tissue-microarrays
with a total of 693 non-muscle invasive urothelial carcinomas from
Danish, Swedish, and Spanish patient cohorts. The Danish patient cohort
was used for optimizing IHC cutoff values and the Swedish-Spanish cohort
was used as independent validation. Protein expression was measured by
IHC and antibody specificity was validated by Western blotting. In the
Danish patient cohort, we found the expression of Cathepsin E, Maspin,
PLK1, and Survivin to be significantly associated with progression to
stage T2-4 bladder cancer (for each marker: log-rank test; pThe majority
of patients with bladder cancer are initially diagnosed with noninvasive
or superficially invasive urothelial tumors. These tumors form a
heterogeneous group, spanning from benign low grade Ta tumors that rarely
progress to high grade T1 tumors with concomitant CIS that progress in up
to 60% of cases. The histopathological parameters used in the clinic
cannot precisely predict the individual disease course, and no molecular
markers are currently in clinical use for predicting tumor recurrence or
later progression. Previously, we have identified gene expression
signatures for prediction of disease outcome for patients with non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer. The aim of the present study was to validate key
candidate markers from these signatures at the protein level. Four
proteins were selected for investigation: Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and
Survivin. We used three different tissue-microarrays with a total of 693
non-muscle invasive urothelial carcinomas from Danish, Swedish, and
Spanish patient cohorts. The Danish patient cohort was used for
optimizing IHC cutoff values and the Swedish-Spanish cohort was used as
independent validation. Protein expression was measured by IHC and
antibody specificity was validated by Western blotting. In the Danish
patient cohort, we found the expression of Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and
Survivin to be significantly associated with progression to stage T2-4
bladder cancer (for each marker: log-rank test; p<0.001). Multivariate
Cox regression analysis identified Cathepsin E (pThe majority of patients
with bladder cancer are initially diagnosed with noninvasive or
superficially invasive urothelial tumors. These tumors form a
heterogeneous group, spanning from benign low grade Ta tumors that rarely
progress to high grade T1 tumors with concomitant CIS that progress in up
to 60% of cases. The histopathological parameters used in the clinic
cannot precisely predict the individual disease course, and no molecular
markers are currently in clinical use for predicting tumor recurrence or
later progression. Previously, we have identified gene expression
signatures for prediction of disease outcome for patients with non-muscle
invasive bladder cancer. The aim of the present study was to validate key
candidate markers from these signatures at the protein level. Four
proteins were selected for investigation: Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and
Survivin. We used three different tissue-microarrays with a total of 693
non-muscle invasive urothelial carcinomas from Danish, Swedish, and
Spanish patient cohorts. The Danish patient cohort was used for
optimizing IHC cutoff values and the Swedish-Spanish cohort was used as
independent validation. Protein expression was measured by IHC and
antibody specificity was validated by Western blotting. In the Danish
patient cohort, we found the expression of Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and
Survivin to be significantly associated with progression to stage T2-4
bladder cancer (for each marker: log-rank test; p<0.001). Multivariate
Cox regression analysis identified Cathepsin E (p<0.001), Maspin
(p=0.001), PLK1 (p=0.021), and Survivin (p=0.001) as independent
prognostic markers. Furthermore, Cathepsin E, Maspin and Survivin
expression significantly sub-grouped patients already stratified by EORTC
risk scores. Survivin expression (log-rank test; p=0.004) and Maspin
expression (log-rank test; pThe majority of patients with bladder cancer
are initially diagnosed with noninvasive or superficially invasive
urothelial tumors. These tumors form a heterogeneous group, spanning from
benign low grade Ta tumors that rarely progress to high grade T1 tumors
with concomitant CIS that progress in up to 60% of cases. The
histopathological parameters used in the clinic cannot precisely predict
the individual disease course, and no molecular markers are currently in
clinical use for predicting tumor recurrence or later progression.
Previously, we have identified gene expression signatures for prediction
of disease outcome for patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.
The aim of the present study was to validate key candidate markers from
these signatures at the protein level. Four proteins were selected for
investigation: Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and Survivin. We used three
different tissue-microarrays with a total of 693 non-muscle invasive
urothelial carcinomas from Danish, Swedish, and Spanish patient cohorts.
The Danish patient cohort was used for optimizing IHC cutoff values and
the Swedish-Spanish cohort was used as independent validation. Protein
expression was measured by IHC and antibody specificity was validated by
Western blotting. In the Danish patient cohort, we found the expression
of Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and Survivin to be significantly associated
with progression to stage T2-4 bladder cancer (for each marker: log-rank
test; p<0.001). Multivariate Cox regression analysis identified Cathepsin
E (p<0.001), Maspin (p=0.001), PLK1 (p=0.021), and Survivin (p=0.001) as
independent prognostic markers. Furthermore, Cathepsin E, Maspin and
Survivin expression significantly sub-grouped patients already stratified
by EORTC risk scores. Survivin expression (log-rank test; p=0.004) and
Maspin expression (log-rank test; p<0.001) significantly subgrouped the
EORTC low risk patients. Cathepsin E expression subgrouped the EORTC high
risk patients (log-rank test; p=0.001). Finally, we successfully
validated the results in tumors from 410 patients from Sweden and Spain.
Using univariate Cox regression analysis we identified Cathepsin E
(p=0.002), Maspin (pThe majority of patients with bladder cancer are
initially diagnosed with noninvasive or superficially invasive urothelial
tumors. These tumors form a heterogeneous group, spanning from benign low
grade Ta tumors that rarely progress to high grade T1 tumors with
concomitant CIS that progress in up to 60% of cases. The
histopathological parameters used in the clinic cannot precisely predict
the individual disease course, and no molecular markers are currently in
clinical use for predicting tumor recurrence or later progression.
Previously, we have identified gene expression signatures for prediction
of disease outcome for patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.
The aim of the present study was to validate key candidate markers from
these signatures at the protein level. Four proteins were selected for
investigation: Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and Survivin. We used three
different tissue-microarrays with a total of 693 non-muscle invasive
urothelial carcinomas from Danish, Swedish, and Spanish patient cohorts.
The Danish patient cohort was used for optimizing IHC cutoff values and
the Swedish-Spanish cohort was used as independent validation. Protein
expression was measured by IHC and antibody specificity was validated by
Western blotting. In the Danish patient cohort, we found the expression
of Cathepsin E, Maspin, PLK1, and Survivin to be significantly associated
with progression to stage T2-4 bladder cancer (for each marker: log-rank
test; p<0.001). Multivariate Cox regression analysis identified Cathepsin
E (p<0.001), Maspin (p=0.001), PLK1 (p=0.021), and Survivin (p=0.001) as
independent prognostic markers. Furthermore, Cathepsin E, Maspin and
Survivin expression significantly sub-grouped patients already stratified
by EORTC risk scores. Survivin expression (log-rank test; p=0.004) and
Maspin expression (log-rank test; p<0.001) significantly subgrouped the
EORTC low risk patients. Cathepsin E expression subgrouped the EORTC high
risk patients (log-rank test; p=0.001). Finally, we successfully
validated the results in tumors from 410 patients from Sweden and Spain.
Using univariate Cox regression analysis we identified Cathepsin E
(p=0.002), Maspin (p<0.001), PLK1 (p=0.003), and Survivin (p=0.002) to
show significant association with disease progression to muscle invasive
bladder cancer in the Spanish-Swedish validation cohort. Furthermore, in
multivariate analysis Cathepsin E (p=0.019) and Survivin (p=0.014) were
significantly associated with disease progression when adjusting for
other known clinical and histopathological risk factors. We conclude that
all four protein markers may have prognostic value in non-muscle invasive
bladder cancer for guiding optimal treatment of patients. Additional
prospective studies are needed for further validation of the clinical
relevance of the marker panel.

