Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA sequencing of circulating tumor cells implicates WNT signaling
in pancreatic cancer metastasis


Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) shed into blood from primary cancers
include putative precursors that initiate distal metastases. While
isolation and molecular analysis of these cells is technically
challenging, they may identify cellular pathways that contribute to the
blood-borne dissemination of cancer cells. Here, we adapted a
microfluidic device for efficient capture of CTCs from an endogenous
mouse pancreatic cancer model and subjected CTCs to digital gene
expression (DGE) analysis using single molecule RNA sequencing. We
identified Wnt2 as enriched in both CTCs and metastatic ascites cells,
compared with primary tumors. Expression of Wnt2 in pancreatic cancer
cells suppresses anoikis, enhances anchorage-independent sphere
formation, and increases metastatic propensity in vivo. The effect of
Wnt2 is correlated with fibronectin upregulation, and it is mediated in
part through non-canonical Wnt signaling and suppressed by inhibition of
the Map3k7 (Tak1) kinase, an integrator of Wnt, BMP and TGF- signaling.
DGE analysis of human pancreatic CTCs reveals significant enrichment for
non-canonical Wnt signaling in 5 of 11 cases, with Wnt2 RNA detectable by
in situ hybridization in a subset of CTCs. Identifying CTC-enriched
transcripts such as Wnt2 may point to pathways that enhance haematogenous
metastasis, thus providing novel therapeutic targets to prevent the
distal spread of cancer.

