Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Heritable polymorphism predisposes to high expression of BAALC in
cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML)


Introduction: Risk-adapted therapy of AML patients (pts) is presently
based on cytogenetic and molecular findings. However, the outcome remains
poor for the majority of pts. Overexpression of BAALC is implicated in
leukemogenesis and poor survival of CN-AML pts, but the underlying
mechanisms are unknown. We hypothesized that the elevated expression of
BAALC might result from a genetic variant in or close to the gene (in
cis). Methods and Results: BAALC and RUNX1 expression were measured in
pre-therapy samples from a test set of 253 CN-AML pts (Cancer And
Leukemia Group B) using Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays. Pts were grouped
as high or low BAALC and high or low RUNX1 expressers using the median
expression value as the cut-off and screened for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) by direct sequencing of the BAALC gene. Nine
informative SNPs were identified. By genotyping, marker rs62527607, a
non-coding SNP in the promoter region correlated with high BAALC
expression (rs62527607G>T: genotypes TT/GT vs. GG: P=2.01E-04).
Luciferase reporter constructs (pGL4.11) spanning the respective alleles
demonstrated that the T allele (risk allele) of rs62527607 increased
luciferase activity compared to the G allele (P=1.0E-02). The T allele of
rs62527607 is predicted to create a binding site for the transcription
factor RUNX1. Indeed, RUNX1-cotransfection showed an increase in
luciferase activity for the T allele of rs62527607 (P=2.0E-02) but not
for the G allele (P=2.7E-01). An Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
comparing the binding activity of the two alleles showed highly increased
binding activity of RUNX1 to the T allele vs. the G allele. Testing of
the pt samples for a potential correlation of RUNX1 and BAALC expression
levels revealed a positive correlation in pts with genotypes TT/GT but
not GG when restricting the analysis to the high RUNX1 expressing group
(P=1.18E-04). For validation of our findings, a set of 105 CN-AML pts
comprising 52 high and 53 low BAALC expressers (AML Study Group [AMLSG],
quantitative Real-Time PCR [qPCR]) was genotyped for rs62527607,
determined for RUNX1 expresser status (qPCR) and analyzed alone and in
combination with the test set. A non-significant association of TT/GT vs.
GG with high BAALC expression (31% vs. 19%; P=1.6E-01) was seen.
Analyzing both sets combined resulted in a P-value of 9.3E-05 (Odds Ratio
[OR]=2.59 [1.62, 4.22; 95%CI]). Combining the results of the CALGB &
AMLSG series showed a highly significant association between RUNX1 and
BAALC expression in pts with genotypes TT/GT belonging to the high RUNX1
expressing group (P=7.97E-05, OR=4.02 [2.05, 8.21; 95%CI]). Conclusion:
We show that the risk allele of rs62527607 creates a RUNX1 binding site,
thereby leading to increased transcription of BAALC. The observation that
a heritable trait is involved in the leukemogenesis process might
initiate a new era of personalized medicine in AML.

