Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A sumoylation-dependent transcriptional subprogram is required for
Myc-driven tumorigenesis


Myc is an oncogenic transcription factor frequently dysregulated in human
malignancies. While the transcriptional programs and other functions of
Myc have been intensively studied, there remains no effective strategy
for inhibiting Myc in patients. To search for pathways that support the
Myc oncogenic program, we employed a next-generation RNAi screen for
Myc-synthetic lethal (MySL) genes. Using this strategy, we have
identified several cellular processes required to tolerate oncogenic Myc.
Key among these is the core sumoylation machinery, and we define the
Sumo-activating enzyme (SAE) as a central component in this MySL network.
Loss of SAE drives synthetic lethality with Myc, and the enzymatic
activity of SAE is required to support the Myc oncogenic state.
Inactivation of SAE leads to mitotic catastrophe and cell death
selectively upon Myc hyper-activation. Mechanistically, depletion of SAE
switches a subprogram of Myc transcriptional targets governing mitotic
spindle function from activated to repressed, a subprogram we term
Sumoylation-dependent Myc Switchers, or SMS genes. Notably, SMS genes are
required to tolerate Myc hyper-activation, and SAE and the SMS program
are required for Myc-dependent breast cancer cell survival in vitro and
tumor growth and progression in vivo. Importantly, patient survival
significantly correlates with levels of SAE and SMS gene expression in
Myc-high tumors. Collectively, these studies reveal a mitotic
vulnerability of Myc-driven cancers and demonstrate that inhibiting
sumoylation can selectively impair mitosis and survival in an oncogenic
Myc-dependent manner. We propose that drugs targeting SAE and its
downstream SMS targets may have therapeutic benefits for patients with
Myc-driven cancer.

