Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Superoxide dismutase 3 is induced by antioxidants, inhibits
oxidative DNA damage, and is associated with inhibition of
estrogen-induced breast cancer


Epidemiological data and studies in rodent models strongly support the
role of estrogens in the development of breast cancers. Oxidant stress
has been implicated in this carcinogenic process. We have recently
demonstrated that antioxidants vitamin C or butylated hydroxyanisole
(BHA) severely inhibit 17-estradiol (E2)-induced breast tumor development
in female ACI rats. The objective of the present study was to
characterize the mechanism of antioxidant-mediated prevention of breast
cancer. Female ACI rats were treated with E2; vitamin C; vitamin C + E2;
BHA; and BHA + E2 for up to 8 months. mRNA and protein levels of
superoxide dismutase 3 (SOD3) were suppressed in E2-exposed mammary
tissues and in mammary tumors of rats treated with E2. This suppression
was overcome by co-treatment of rats with E2 and vitamin C or BHA.
8-Hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) levels determined as a marker of
oxidative DNA damage were higher in E2-exposed mammary tissues and in
mammary tumors compared to age-matched controls. Vitamin C or BHA
treatment significantly decreased E2-mediated increase in 8-OHdG levels
in the mammary tissues and in MCF-10A cells. Increased nuclear
translocation of SOD3 was demonstrated in vitamin C-treated mammary
tissues and in MCF-10A cells. Increased DNA damage was detected after
silencing SOD3. Our studies suggest that SOD3 provides protection against
nuclear DNA damage. Our studies further demonstrate that SOD3 but not
SOD2 and SOD1 is induced by antioxidants and is regulated through NRF2.
SOD3 may thus be an important gene in defense against oxidant stress and
in the prevention of estrogen-mediated breast cancer.

