Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Disease-free survival and overall survival from colon cancer is
improved with fluorescence-guided surgery in metastatic mouse models


The aim of this study was to improve disease-free survival and overall
survival in orthotopic nude mouse models of human colon cancer with
fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS). Fluorescent orthotopic or
carcinomatosis models were established in nude mice using human colon
cancer cell lines HCT-116 and HT-29 expressing either green fluorescent
protein (GFP) or red fluorescent protein (RFP). The tumors were later
resected by bright light surgery (BLS) or FGS. In orthotopic and
carcinomatosis models, pre- and post-operative images were obtained with
the OV-100 Small Animal Imaging System (Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan) to
assess the extent of surgical resection. In the orthotopic model, whole
body imaging of the mice was performed in the postoperative period to
assess cancer recurrence and to follow subsequent tumor progression. The
mice were sacrificed when they became premorbid and their abdomens were
exposed for intravital and ex vivo imaging. Tumor burden was measured in
mm2 using ImageJ v1.440. A greater extent of tumor resection in mice with
carcinomatosis was achieved using FGS compared to BLS (99.9% vs. 76.9%, p
= 0.006). Furthermore, all mice with localized disease had a complete
surgical resection with FGS. In contrast, complete resection was achieved
in only 56% of the mice undergoing BLS. (p=0.001) Fewer mice in the FGS
group had evidence of tumor recurrence (33%) compared to mice in the BLS
group (58%), lengthening disease-free survival from 9 weeks in the BLS
group to 27 weeks in the FGS group. Overall survival of the mice also
increased from 17 weeks in the BLS group to 29 weeks in the FGS group.
The results of the present study demonstrate that improved surgical
outcomes in the treatment of colon cancer can be achieved with FGS.

