Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone morphogenetic proteins signal through Smad2 and Smad3 to
regulate cell migration and proliferation


The TGF- superfamily consists of a large number of growth factors,
including transforming growth factor- (TGF-) and bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs) that regulate cellular proliferation, differentiation,
invasion, migration and apoptosis. TGF- activates the transcription
factors Smad2/3, as well as Smad1/5/8, while BMP stimulation results in
the activation of Smad1/5/8. Unexpectedly, we have demonstrated that BMP
family members, including BMP2, 3, 4, 7, 9 and GDF5 can also induce
Smad2/3 phosphorylation and downstream gene transcription in ovarian,
pancreatic and breast cancer cell lines. BMP2-induced Smad2
phosphorylation can be attenuated by expression of dominant negative TRII
or shRNA-mediated knockdown of TRII, while BMP2-induced Smad3
phosphorylation can be attenuated by expression of dominant negative
BMPRII or shRNA-mediated knockdown of BMPRII, suggesting different
mechanisms of BMP-mediated activation of Smad2 and Smad3. BMP2-induced
Smad1, Smad2 and Smad3 phosphorylation increase cell invasion, migration
and proliferation, respectively. BMP stimulated Smad2/3 phosphorylation
suggests that BMP-mediated effects on cancer progression may be
regulated, in part, through these novel signaling pathways. Current
studies are focused on further elucidating the role of BMP-induced Smad2
and Smad3 phosphorylation on human cancer progression.

