Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nitric oxide-donating aspirin induces G2/M phase cell cycle arrest
in human cancer cells by regulating phase transition proteins


NO-aspirin (NO-ASA), consisting of aspirin, a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), and a nitric oxide (NO)-releasing group,
is reportedly safer than aspirin and effective in colon cancer
chemoprevention. NO-ASA reduced the growth of several cancer cell lines
much more potently than aspirin, with IC50 values at 24-h as follows: (a)
colon (HT-29, SW480, HCT-15, and LoVo) 174 to 257 M; (b) pancreas
(BxPC-3), 175 M; (c) skin (A431), 133 M; (d) cervix (Hela), 240 M; and
(e) breast (MCF-7), 268 M. In all instances, the IC50 values for the
parent compound were >1,000 M. To assess NO-ASA's mechanism of action, we
studied in vitro its effect on colonocyte kinetics. In all cell lines
examined, the growth inhibitory effect of NO-ASA was accompanied by cell
cycle arrest in the G2/M phase transition. This inhibition directly
correlated to altered expression of G2/M transition related proteins.
Specifically, NO-ASA had a time- and concentration-dependent effect on
the expression of cyclin D1. Here we propose that NO-ASA-mediated G2/M
arrest is probably caused by ROS generation. This conclusion is based on
(a) treatment with NO-ASA generates ROS in SW480 and (b) the G2/M arrest
induced by NO-ASA is abolished on pretreatment with the antioxidant NAC.
Thus, NO-ASA's superior effectiveness compared to traditional aspirin is
due in part to its ability to induce G2/M phase cell cycle arrest in
human cancer cells.

