Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- from niche fibroblasts increases the stemness cancer stem
cell-like side population cells in gastric cancer


Introduction: Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs) are thought to possess tumor
initiation and self-renewal and are associated with tumor progression.
The niche cells of microenvironment, such as fibroblast might play an
important role for the progression of cancer cells. The aim of this study
is to examine the effect of cancer-associated fibroblasts on the stemness
of CSCs. Material and Methods: A gastric cancer cell line, OCUM-12, and
cancer-associated gastric fibroblast, CaF-37, were used. SP cells, known
as CSCs rich population, were isolated from OCUM-12 cells by
flowcytometry using Hoechest33342, and were named as OCUM-12/SP. The
percentage of SP cells was evaluated by flowcytometry, after it was
cultured with condition medium from CaF-37 for three days. SP fraction
was evaluated by flowcytometry, in the presence or absence of TGF-
receptor inhibitor, FGF receptor inhibitor, and c-Met Receptor inhibitor.
In vivo, tumorigenicity of OCUM-12/SP cells were evaluated by
subcutaneous inoculation in the presence or abcence of CaF-37. Results:
The inoculation of 1.5x105, 5x104, and 1.5x104 OCUM-12/SP cells with
5x105 CaF-37 fibroblasts resulted in tumor formation in all of mice,
respectively. However, the inoculation of 1.5x105, 5x104, and 1.5x104
OCUM-12/SP cells alone results in poor tumor formation at 3(60%) of 5
mice, 0(0%) of 5 mice and 0(0%) of 5 mice, respectively. The percentage
of SP fraction of OCUM-12/SP was significantly increased in the presence
of condition medium from CaF-37. The increase of SP fraction of
OCUM-12/SP cells by condition medium from CaF-37 was inhibited by TGF-
receptor inhibitor, but not FGF receptor inhibitor and c-Met inhibitor.
Conclusion: TGF- from the niche, fibroblasts, might sustain the stemness
of CSCs and might be associated with the progression of Cancer Cells.

