Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA aptamer-targeted periostin inhibits adhesion and migration of
breast cancer


Tumor metastasis is multiple step pathological process involved in the
final phase of tumor development. During this process, tumor cells obtain
invasiveness and metastatic potential. Periostin, a mesenchyme-specific
gene, has emerged as critical contributor of tumor metastasis and
angiogenesis. Clinical evidence has supported that periostin are highly
expressed in several cancers including breast, where it is associated
with a poor outcome. Thus, periostin is a potential therapeutic target
for the regulation of breast cancer growth and metastasis. In this study,
we generated and characterized a DNA aptamer directed against human
periostin (PNDAs) through utilization of Advanced-SELEX process. Aptamers
have been selected that bind to periostin with nanomolar binding affinity
(Kd: 1nM) and specificity. Furthermore, PNDA specifically binds to
periostin which is expressed in breast cancer tissues and serum. In
addition, PNDA treatment led to a reduction of integrin-mediated breast
cancer cell migration and adhesion by 50%. Also, PNDA can significantly
decrease activation of various components of integrin signal transduction
pathways and their downstream effector molecules. Together, our data
suggest that DNA aptamer targeting periostin may have potential as an
agent to inhibit breast cancer growth and metastasis.

