Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of Radiation Response after TGF signaling Blockade in
Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) Cell Carcinomas


Lung cancer remains one of the most prevalent and deadliest malignancies
worldwide. Radiotherapy (RT) is a major therapeutic modality for
inoperable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). There is substantial
evidence that ionizing radiation triggers activation of TGF especially in
lung, breast and liver tumor. TGF inhibition prior to IR inhibits the DNA
damage response in epithelial cells via blockade of ATM kinase activity
(Cancer Res 62:5627, 2002; Cancer Res 66:10861, 2006) and sensitizes
radiation responses in breast cancer cell lines and tumors (Clin Cancer
Res 2011;17:6754-6765.). The current studies test whether TGF blockade
prior to irradiation modulates radiation response of NSCLC cell lines,
NCI-H1299, NCI-H292, H460 and Lewis Lung Cancer (LLC), assessed in vitro
and in vivo. All NSCLC cell lines responded to TGF by phosphorylation of
Smad2, which was blocked by LY364947, a small molecule TGF type 1
receptor inhibitor. NCI-H1299 and LLC were insensitive to TGF growth
inhibition in vitro. LY364947 increased radiosensitivity in NCI-H1299 and
H460 in clonogenic assays. Consistent with increased clonogenic cell
death, TGF inhibition also compromised radiation-induced phosphorylation
of H2AX and ATM in NCI-H1299. Treatment of cultured LLC cells with either
small molecule TGF type 1 receptor inhibitor or TGF neutralizing
antibody, 1D11, significantly increased LLC radiosensitivity as measured
by clonogenic assay. Furthermore, C57BL mice bearing subcutaneous LLC
tumors treated before and after RT with 1D11 or 13C4 isotype control
antibody (20 mg/kg i.p.) resulted in greater tumor growth delay compared
to RT and control antibody. Together, these data indicate that TGF
inhibition prior to radiation attenuates DNA damage responses, enhances
clonogenic cell killing, and promotes tumor growth delay. Given the
recognized role of radiation-induced TGF in lung fibrosis, the
therapeutic index for RT could be significantly increased if
circumstances are defined in which TGF inhibition during RT both enhances
lung cancer radiosensitivity and protects normal lung.

