Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galectin-3 SNP rs10148371 in the anti-death motif NWGR is related
to the colon cancer incidence in African Americans


Survival after cancer diagnosis is poorer for African Americans than for
Caucasians. While some of this survival difference is driven by
differences in the stage at diagnosis, even within the stage this trend
is evident. For example, 5-year relative survival for colorectal cancer
diagnosed as regional stage is 68.5% for Caucasians and only 60.6% for
African Americans. Little is known about racial differences in response
to chemotherapy and the subsequent impact on survival. A number of recent
reports have focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the
notion that such genetic event(s) can/may contribute to cancer
development or progression. We have identified a SNP, rs10148371, which
results in the substitution of R183K in the NWGR anti-death motif of the
galectin-3 gene. Galectin-3, belonging to the family of
carbohydrate-binding galectins is a multi-function tumor associated
protein, which regulates cell growth, cell proliferation, cell adhesion,
angiogenesis and apoptosis. It contains the NWGR motif characteristic of
BH1 domain of Bcl-2 family responsible for protecting cells from
apoptosis. To understand the significance of this SNP, we generated point
mutation G548 to A in galectin-3 cDNA leading to R183K substitution. The
resulting cDNA was stably transfected into low galectin-3 expressing
colon carcinoma cells SW480 and RKO. Selected clones were analyzed for
cell survival and apoptotic potential against cisplatin, 5 fluoro-uracil
and oxaliplatin. The clones containing mutated galectin-3 showed a higher
susceptibility to apoptosis compared to the wild type galectin-3. The WT
clones showed an up-regulation of -catenin and its downstream target
proteins, which was not seen in the mutant clones. Ability/inability of
mutated galectin-3 in the nuclear translocation of -catenin is being
studied. The racial distribution of the SNP rs10148371 in the normal
population of the African Americans is 22%, while in Caucasians and
Asians disease free population it can be found in less than 1%. To
analyze the significance of this SNP in relation to breast and colorectal
cancer, we performed genotype analysis with breast cancer (N=124) or
colorectal cancer (N=129) patients. Stratified analyses revealed that the
Lys variant was marginally significantly inversely associated with
advanced tumor stage (p=0.08) and younger (Survival after cancer
diagnosis is poorer for African Americans than for Caucasians. While some
of this survival difference is driven by differences in the stage at
diagnosis, even within the stage this trend is evident. For example,
5-year relative survival for colorectal cancer diagnosed as regional
stage is 68.5% for Caucasians and only 60.6% for African Americans.
Little is known about racial differences in response to chemotherapy and
the subsequent impact on survival. A number of recent reports have
focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the notion that
such genetic event(s) can/may contribute to cancer development or
progression. We have identified a SNP, rs10148371, which results in the
substitution of R183K in the NWGR anti-death motif of the galectin-3
gene. Galectin-3, belonging to the family of carbohydrate-binding
galectins is a multi-function tumor associated protein, which regulates
cell growth, cell proliferation, cell adhesion, angiogenesis and
apoptosis. It contains the NWGR motif characteristic of BH1 domain of
Bcl-2 family responsible for protecting cells from apoptosis. To
understand the significance of this SNP, we generated point mutation G548
to A in galectin-3 cDNA leading to R183K substitution. The resulting cDNA
was stably transfected into low galectin-3 expressing colon carcinoma
cells SW480 and RKO. Selected clones were analyzed for cell survival and
apoptotic potential against cisplatin, 5 fluoro-uracil and oxaliplatin.
The clones containing mutated galectin-3 showed a higher susceptibility
to apoptosis compared to the wild type galectin-3. The WT clones showed
an up-regulation of -catenin and its downstream target proteins, which
was not seen in the mutant clones. Ability/inability of mutated
galectin-3 in the nuclear translocation of -catenin is being studied. The
racial distribution of the SNP rs10148371 in the normal population of the
African Americans is 22%, while in Caucasians and Asians disease free
population it can be found in less than 1%. To analyze the significance
of this SNP in relation to breast and colorectal cancer, we performed
genotype analysis with breast cancer (N=124) or colorectal cancer (N=129)
patients. Stratified analyses revealed that the Lys variant was
marginally significantly inversely associated with advanced tumor stage
(p=0.08) and younger (<50 years for breast cancer and Survival after
cancer diagnosis is poorer for African Americans than for Caucasians.
While some of this survival difference is driven by differences in the
stage at diagnosis, even within the stage this trend is evident. For
example, 5-year relative survival for colorectal cancer diagnosed as
regional stage is 68.5% for Caucasians and only 60.6% for African
Americans. Little is known about racial differences in response to
chemotherapy and the subsequent impact on survival. A number of recent
reports have focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the
notion that such genetic event(s) can/may contribute to cancer
development or progression. We have identified a SNP, rs10148371, which
results in the substitution of R183K in the NWGR anti-death motif of the
galectin-3 gene. Galectin-3, belonging to the family of
carbohydrate-binding galectins is a multi-function tumor associated
protein, which regulates cell growth, cell proliferation, cell adhesion,
angiogenesis and apoptosis. It contains the NWGR motif characteristic of
BH1 domain of Bcl-2 family responsible for protecting cells from
apoptosis. To understand the significance of this SNP, we generated point
mutation G548 to A in galectin-3 cDNA leading to R183K substitution. The
resulting cDNA was stably transfected into low galectin-3 expressing
colon carcinoma cells SW480 and RKO. Selected clones were analyzed for
cell survival and apoptotic potential against cisplatin, 5 fluoro-uracil
and oxaliplatin. The clones containing mutated galectin-3 showed a higher
susceptibility to apoptosis compared to the wild type galectin-3. The WT
clones showed an up-regulation of -catenin and its downstream target
proteins, which was not seen in the mutant clones. Ability/inability of
mutated galectin-3 in the nuclear translocation of -catenin is being
studied. The racial distribution of the SNP rs10148371 in the normal
population of the African Americans is 22%, while in Caucasians and
Asians disease free population it can be found in less than 1%. To
analyze the significance of this SNP in relation to breast and colorectal
cancer, we performed genotype analysis with breast cancer (N=124) or
colorectal cancer (N=129) patients. Stratified analyses revealed that the
Lys variant was marginally significantly inversely associated with
advanced tumor stage (p=0.08) and younger (<50 years for breast cancer
and <60 years for colorectal) onset (p=0.05). However, survival did not
show that this variant was associated with the risk of overall deaths
(hazard ratio 0.79 (95% confidence interval: 0.40-1.56)). Next, we
analyzed if the variations in genotype distribution can be related to sex
in colorectal cancer. We saw a significant increase in the percent of
Lysine harboring males with colorectal cancer. The Chi-Square probability
was 0.0509. Albeit not a dramatic difference but certainly suggestive,
which will require further study.

