Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 89Zr-bevacizumab PET as an early biomarker for response to
everolimus treatment in an ovarian cancer xenograft model


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is activated in the
majority of ovarian cancers and is involved in tumor angiogenesis.
Inhibitors of mTOR, like everolimus, are potentially interesting drugs as
they can exert antitumor activity in part through reducing downstream
vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) production. We investigated
whether early effects of everolimus treatment could be monitored with
89Zr-bevacizumab positron emission tomography (VEGF-PET). Methods: The
effect of everolimus on VEGF-A secretion was determined in three human
ovarian cancer cell lines and in A2780luc+ ovarian cancer cells
xenografted subcutaneously in BALB/c mice. Mice received daily everolimus
(10 mg/kg intraperitoneally) for 14 days. PET scans with the tracer
89Zr-labeled bevacizumab were performed to monitor tumor VEGF-A
expression before (baseline) and after treatment. Images were obtained 6
days after tracer injection. Tracer uptake was quantified and expressed
as mean standardized uptake values (SUVmean). For ex vivo
89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution and correlative tissue analyses, control
animals were sacrificed after the baseline scans. Tumor VEGF-A levels
were measured with ELISA in tumor lysates and mean vascular density (MVD)
was determined with immunohistochemistry. Results: Everolimus treatment
lowered VEGF-A levels in the supernatant of all cell lines. Everolimus
lowered 89Zr-bevacizumab tumor uptake by 21.7 4.0% (SUVmean 2.26 0.18
versus 2.89 0.20, p The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is
activated in the majority of ovarian cancers and is involved in tumor
angiogenesis. Inhibitors of mTOR, like everolimus, are potentially
interesting drugs as they can exert antitumor activity in part through
reducing downstream vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A)
production. We investigated whether early effects of everolimus treatment
could be monitored with 89Zr-bevacizumab positron emission tomography
(VEGF-PET). Methods: The effect of everolimus on VEGF-A secretion was
determined in three human ovarian cancer cell lines and in A2780luc+
ovarian cancer cells xenografted subcutaneously in BALB/c mice. Mice
received daily everolimus (10 mg/kg intraperitoneally) for 14 days. PET
scans with the tracer 89Zr-labeled bevacizumab were performed to monitor
tumor VEGF-A expression before (baseline) and after treatment. Images
were obtained 6 days after tracer injection. Tracer uptake was quantified
and expressed as mean standardized uptake values (SUVmean). For ex vivo
89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution and correlative tissue analyses, control
animals were sacrificed after the baseline scans. Tumor VEGF-A levels
were measured with ELISA in tumor lysates and mean vascular density (MVD)
was determined with immunohistochemistry. Results: Everolimus treatment
lowered VEGF-A levels in the supernatant of all cell lines. Everolimus
lowered 89Zr-bevacizumab tumor uptake by 21.7 4.0% (SUVmean 2.26 0.18
versus 2.89 0.20, p < 0.01). Ex vivo 89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution
showed less tracer uptake in the tumors of treated compared to control
animals (7.78 0.84 %ID/g versus 14.02 1.68 %ID/g, p The mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is activated in the majority of ovarian
cancers and is involved in tumor angiogenesis. Inhibitors of mTOR, like
everolimus, are potentially interesting drugs as they can exert antitumor
activity in part through reducing downstream vascular endothelial growth
factor-A (VEGF-A) production. We investigated whether early effects of
everolimus treatment could be monitored with 89Zr-bevacizumab positron
emission tomography (VEGF-PET). Methods: The effect of everolimus on
VEGF-A secretion was determined in three human ovarian cancer cell lines
and in A2780luc+ ovarian cancer cells xenografted subcutaneously in
BALB/c mice. Mice received daily everolimus (10 mg/kg intraperitoneally)
for 14 days. PET scans with the tracer 89Zr-labeled bevacizumab were
performed to monitor tumor VEGF-A expression before (baseline) and after
treatment. Images were obtained 6 days after tracer injection. Tracer
uptake was quantified and expressed as mean standardized uptake values
(SUVmean). For ex vivo 89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution and correlative
tissue analyses, control animals were sacrificed after the baseline
scans. Tumor VEGF-A levels were measured with ELISA in tumor lysates and
mean vascular density (MVD) was determined with immunohistochemistry.
Results: Everolimus treatment lowered VEGF-A levels in the supernatant of
all cell lines. Everolimus lowered 89Zr-bevacizumab tumor uptake by 21.7
4.0% (SUVmean 2.26 0.18 versus 2.89 0.20, p < 0.01). Ex vivo
89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution showed less tracer uptake in the tumors
of treated compared to control animals (7.78 0.84 %ID/g versus 14.02 1.68
%ID/g, p < 0.01), while no differences were observed for other tissues.
VEGF-A protein levels in tumor lysates were lower in treated versus
untreated tumors (p = 0.04), as was the MVD (p The mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is activated in the majority of ovarian cancers
and is involved in tumor angiogenesis. Inhibitors of mTOR, like
everolimus, are potentially interesting drugs as they can exert antitumor
activity in part through reducing downstream vascular endothelial growth
factor-A (VEGF-A) production. We investigated whether early effects of
everolimus treatment could be monitored with 89Zr-bevacizumab positron
emission tomography (VEGF-PET). Methods: The effect of everolimus on
VEGF-A secretion was determined in three human ovarian cancer cell lines
and in A2780luc+ ovarian cancer cells xenografted subcutaneously in
BALB/c mice. Mice received daily everolimus (10 mg/kg intraperitoneally)
for 14 days. PET scans with the tracer 89Zr-labeled bevacizumab were
performed to monitor tumor VEGF-A expression before (baseline) and after
treatment. Images were obtained 6 days after tracer injection. Tracer
uptake was quantified and expressed as mean standardized uptake values
(SUVmean). For ex vivo 89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution and correlative
tissue analyses, control animals were sacrificed after the baseline
scans. Tumor VEGF-A levels were measured with ELISA in tumor lysates and
mean vascular density (MVD) was determined with immunohistochemistry.
Results: Everolimus treatment lowered VEGF-A levels in the supernatant of
all cell lines. Everolimus lowered 89Zr-bevacizumab tumor uptake by 21.7
4.0% (SUVmean 2.26 0.18 versus 2.89 0.20, p < 0.01). Ex vivo
89Zr-bevacizumab biodistribution showed less tracer uptake in the tumors
of treated compared to control animals (7.78 0.84 %ID/g versus 14.02 1.68
%ID/g, p < 0.01), while no differences were observed for other tissues.
VEGF-A protein levels in tumor lysates were lower in treated versus
untreated tumors (p = 0.04), as was the MVD (p < 0.01). Conclusion:
89Zr-bevacizumab PET showed reduced tumor VEGF-A levels in vivo in
response to everolimus therapy, coinciding with inhibition of tumor
angiogenesis. Currently there are 2 clinical trials ongoing to study the
value of 89Zr-bevacizumab PET to monitor tumor VEGF-A levels as an early
biomarker of response to mTOR inhibitor therapy.

