Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical antitumor activity of S 49076, a novel MET / AXL /
FGFR kinase inhibitor and molecular stratification for tumor sensitivity


Aberrant activity of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) has been associated
with tumor progression in a wide variety of human malignancies, making
them promising drug targets for cancer therapy. Although, in some
instances, specific inhibition of just one of these RTKs suffices for
inhibition of tumor progression, in the majority of cases, targeting more
than one RTK could be required for therapeutic efficacy. Moreover,
increased expression or activation of RTKs is often associated with
resistance to standard chemotherapy agents or signal transduction
modulators. S 49076 is a novel, potent, ATP-competitive tyrosine kinase
inhibitor of the RTKs MET, AXL and FGFR. S 49076 blocks
autophosphorylation of these RTKs and their downstream signaling in cells
with IC50 values of less than 50 nM in the case of MET and AXL, and at
below 200 nM for FGFR1/2/3. In vitro, S 49076 inhibits the proliferation
of MET- and FGFR2- dependent gastric cancer cells, blocks MET-driven
migration of lung carcinoma cells and inhibits colony formation of
hepatocarcinoma cells overexpressing FGFR2 and AXL. In vivo, oral
administration of S 49076 inhibits MET autophosphorylation and tumor
growth in subcutaneous GTL-16 human gastric carcinoma and U87-MG human
glioblastoma at 6 mg/kg/day. In FGFR2-dependent SNU-16 gastric tumors S
49076 inhibits FGFR2 autophosphorylation, downstream signaling and tumor
growth at 25 mg/kg/day. In a panel of 53 patient-derived tumors and 14
cell lines of diverse origin growing in three-dimensional in vitro
culture, twenty-five (37%) were found to be sensitive to S 49076 at 1 M
or less. In the majority of cases, analysis of the expression, activation
and mutation status of MET, AXL, FGFR1/2/3 and other target kinases of S
49076 as well as that of major signaling proteins enabled hypotheses to
be made concerning the sensitivity or resistance to S 49076. Moreover, in
many of these resistant tumors, a rationale for association of S 49076
with other targeted therapies emerged. Examples of the efficacy of such
combined therapies will be shown. Based on these preclinical studies
showing a favorable and novel pharmacological profile of S 49076, a phase
I study is currently underway in patients with advanced solid tumors.

