Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VAL083, a novel N7 alkylating agent, surpasses temozolomide
activity and inhibits cancer stem cells providing a new potential
treatment option for glioblastoma multiforme


Glioblastoma (GBM) remains one of the most difficult tumors to treat in
part because many new agents fail to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB)
and secondly due to intrinsic drug resistance. Temozolomide (TMZ) is a
front-line therapy for the treatment of GBM, however, it is often
ineffective due to drug inactivation by O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT). Cancer stem cells (CSC) are a subpopulation of
the tumor that resist therapy and give rise to relapse. Here we described
VAL083 a novel alkylating agent that creates N7 methylation on DNA, which
was initially intriguing because it crosses the BBB. We addressed how it
compared to TMZ, whether it could be used to overcome MGMT-driven drug
resistance and if it has activity against CSCs. Addressing these
questions provides further preclinical support for VAL083, which is
currently undergoing human clinical trials in the USA against refractory
GBM. VAL083 inhibited U251 and SF188 cell growth in monolayer and as
neurospheres better then TMZ and caused apoptosis after 72 hrs. In a
10-day colony formation assay, VAL083 (5uM) suppressed SF188 growth by
95%. T98G cells are classically TMZ resistant and express MGMT yet VAL083
inhibited their growth in monolayer after 72 hrs in a dose-dependent
manner (IC50Glioblastoma (GBM) remains one of the most difficult tumors
to treat in part because many new agents fail to cross the blood brain
barrier (BBB) and secondly due to intrinsic drug resistance. Temozolomide
(TMZ) is a front-line therapy for the treatment of GBM, however, it is
often ineffective due to drug inactivation by O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT). Cancer stem cells (CSC) are a subpopulation of
the tumor that resist therapy and give rise to relapse. Here we described
VAL083 a novel alkylating agent that creates N7 methylation on DNA, which
was initially intriguing because it crosses the BBB. We addressed how it
compared to TMZ, whether it could be used to overcome MGMT-driven drug
resistance and if it has activity against CSCs. Addressing these
questions provides further preclinical support for VAL083, which is
currently undergoing human clinical trials in the USA against refractory
GBM. VAL083 inhibited U251 and SF188 cell growth in monolayer and as
neurospheres better then TMZ and caused apoptosis after 72 hrs. In a
10-day colony formation assay, VAL083 (5uM) suppressed SF188 growth by
95%. T98G cells are classically TMZ resistant and express MGMT yet VAL083
inhibited their growth in monolayer after 72 hrs in a dose-dependent
manner (IC50<5 uM). VAL083 also inhibited the growth of CSCs by 100% in
neurosphere growth assays. In summary, VAL083 has better in vitro
efficacy than TMZ against brain tumor cells, can overcome resistance
associated with MGMT, and targets brain tumor CSCs demonstrating that it
has the potential to surpass the standard-of-care.

