Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relevance of mTOR pathway in prognosis of patients with urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder


Purpose. To investigate the role of mTOR signalling pathway on stage and
outcome of patients with high grade and/or invasive bladder cancer.
Methods. Tissue microarrays were built from archival of high grade and
mostly superficial bladder tumour specimens (n=143 with complete clinical
data collected). Immunohistochemical staining was performed for
Phosphatase and tensin homolog (Pten), phosphorylated (phos) Akt,
phos-mTOR, phos-S6, phos-4EBP1 and p27. The markers were evaluated for
pattern, percentage and intensity of staining (H-score), and results
correlated with clinicopathological characteristics and outcome. Results.
The median age at diagnosis of the patient cohort was 71 years (range:
38-96 years). The TNM stage group was distributed as pTa (44%), pT1(49%)
and pT2 (6%). After a median follow-up of 34 months, the disease
recurrence, disease progression and overall death rates were 44%, 13%,
and 11% respectively. The expression of p27 was significantly lower among
pT2 compared to pTa and pT1 patients (p Purpose. To investigate the role
of mTOR signalling pathway on stage and outcome of patients with high
grade and/or invasive bladder cancer. Methods. Tissue microarrays were
built from archival of high grade and mostly superficial bladder tumour
specimens (n=143 with complete clinical data collected).
Immunohistochemical staining was performed for Phosphatase and tensin
homolog (Pten), phosphorylated (phos) Akt, phos-mTOR, phos-S6, phos-4EBP1
and p27. The markers were evaluated for pattern, percentage and intensity
of staining (H-score), and results correlated with clinicopathological
characteristics and outcome. Results. The median age at diagnosis of the
patient cohort was 71 years (range: 38-96 years). The TNM stage group was
distributed as pTa (44%), pT1(49%) and pT2 (6%). After a median follow-up
of 34 months, the disease recurrence, disease progression and overall
death rates were 44%, 13%, and 11% respectively. The expression of p27
was significantly lower among pT2 compared to pTa and pT1 patients (p <
0.03). The H-score of phos-mTOR was significantly correlated with p27 (p
Purpose. To investigate the role of mTOR signalling pathway on stage and
outcome of patients with high grade and/or invasive bladder cancer.
Methods. Tissue microarrays were built from archival of high grade and
mostly superficial bladder tumour specimens (n=143 with complete clinical
data collected). Immunohistochemical staining was performed for
Phosphatase and tensin homolog (Pten), phosphorylated (phos) Akt,
phos-mTOR, phos-S6, phos-4EBP1 and p27. The markers were evaluated for
pattern, percentage and intensity of staining (H-score), and results
correlated with clinicopathological characteristics and outcome. Results.
The median age at diagnosis of the patient cohort was 71 years (range:
38-96 years). The TNM stage group was distributed as pTa (44%), pT1(49%)
and pT2 (6%). After a median follow-up of 34 months, the disease
recurrence, disease progression and overall death rates were 44%, 13%,
and 11% respectively. The expression of p27 was significantly lower among
pT2 compared to pTa and pT1 patients (p < 0.03). The H-score of phos-mTOR
was significantly correlated with p27 (p <0.003), pS6 (p Purpose. To
investigate the role of mTOR signalling pathway on stage and outcome of
patients with high grade and/or invasive bladder cancer. Methods. Tissue
microarrays were built from archival of high grade and mostly superficial
bladder tumour specimens (n=143 with complete clinical data collected).
Immunohistochemical staining was performed for Phosphatase and tensin
homolog (Pten), phosphorylated (phos) Akt, phos-mTOR, phos-S6, phos-4EBP1
and p27. The markers were evaluated for pattern, percentage and intensity
of staining (H-score), and results correlated with clinicopathological
characteristics and outcome. Results. The median age at diagnosis of the
patient cohort was 71 years (range: 38-96 years). The TNM stage group was
distributed as pTa (44%), pT1(49%) and pT2 (6%). After a median follow-up
of 34 months, the disease recurrence, disease progression and overall
death rates were 44%, 13%, and 11% respectively. The expression of p27
was significantly lower among pT2 compared to pTa and pT1 patients (p <
0.03). The H-score of phos-mTOR was significantly correlated with p27 (p
<0.003), pS6 (p < 0.004) and 4EBP1 (p Purpose. To investigate the role of
mTOR signalling pathway on stage and outcome of patients with high grade
and/or invasive bladder cancer. Methods. Tissue microarrays were built
from archival of high grade and mostly superficial bladder tumour
specimens (n=143 with complete clinical data collected).
Immunohistochemical staining was performed for Phosphatase and tensin
homolog (Pten), phosphorylated (phos) Akt, phos-mTOR, phos-S6, phos-4EBP1
and p27. The markers were evaluated for pattern, percentage and intensity
of staining (H-score), and results correlated with clinicopathological
characteristics and outcome. Results. The median age at diagnosis of the
patient cohort was 71 years (range: 38-96 years). The TNM stage group was
distributed as pTa (44%), pT1(49%) and pT2 (6%). After a median follow-up
of 34 months, the disease recurrence, disease progression and overall
death rates were 44%, 13%, and 11% respectively. The expression of p27
was significantly lower among pT2 compared to pTa and pT1 patients (p <
0.03). The H-score of phos-mTOR was significantly correlated with p27 (p
<0.003), pS6 (p < 0.004) and 4EBP1 (p <0.001). In multivariate analysis,
which included age, number of tumors, tumor size and stage, phos-S6 was
an independent predictor of shorter recurrence-free (Hazard Ratio [HR]:
2.75, 95% Confidence Interval [CI]: 1.16-6.51). The expression of p27 was
inversely correlated with recurrence-free survival (HR:0.37, 95%
CI:0.18-0.88). None of the markers showed correlation with progression
free survival and overall survival. Conclusion. Our results demonstrate
that activation of mTOR pathway, as assessed by phosS6 might be used to
provide prognostic information particularly as predictor of recurrence
among patients with high-risk non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.

