Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 is useful for identifying some subtypes
of non-basal triple negative breast cancer


BACKGROUND Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is heterogeneous and
consists of tumors associated with basal-type and cancer stem cell (CSC)
phenotypes. Identifying these specific phenotypes is important for
treating TNBC. The expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH-1), a
biomarker of CSC phenotype, is observed more frequently in TNBC than
non-TNBC and is associated with biologically aggressive features. AIM In
order to categorize types of breast cancer, especially TNBC, ALDH-1 was
examined in terms of 1) its association with pathological factors and 2)
the genes significantly expressed in ALDH-1 positive cells. METHODS 1)
The expression of ALDH-1 and its association with the other pathological
factors of ER, PgR, HER2, p53, Ki-67, CK5/6, EGFR were examined
immunohistochemically in 87 breast cancer samples. Histological grade was
assigned to each of the samples.2) ALDH-1 positive and negative cells
were collected by microdissection from formalin-fixed paraffin- embedded
samples of 5 ALDH-1 positive breast cancer cases. mRNA was extracted and
the expression profile of approximately 5,000 genes was assessed by cDNA
microarray (Affymetrix GeneChip, Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array). By
comparing gene expressions of ALDH-1 positive and negative cells in the
same sample, characteristic genes related to CSC were identified. RESULTS
1) ALDH-1 was inversely correlated with ER (p=0.0006) and PgR (p=0.0054),
while positively correlated with Ki67 (p=0.0023) and TopoII (p=0.0014).
No association was found between ALDH-1 with CK5/6 or with EGFR. 2)
Approximately 800 annotated genes were significantly up- or down-
regulated. Several characteristic genes related to ALDH-1 have been
presently confirmed by other methodologies. CONCLUSION CK5/6 and EGFR are
currently used to identify basal-type TNBC. Because ALDH-1 was not
associated with CK5/6 or EGFR, ALDH-1 and related genes may be helpful in
identifying some non-basal types of TNBC.

