Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Green tea catechin intervention of human breast cell
carcinogenesis chronically induced by
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine


The purpose of our study was to investigate the mechanism by which
dietary carcinogen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP)
induces breast cell carcinogenesis. More than 85% of breast cancers are
sporadic and attributable to long-term exposure to environmental factors,
such as carcinogens in the diet, through a multi-step disease process
progressing from non-cancerous to premalignant and malignant stages. The
dietary carcinogen PhIP is one of the most abundant heterocyclic amines
found in high-temperature cooked meats and is recognized as a mammary
carcinogen. Here, we demonstrated, for the first time, that cumulative
exposures to PhIP at physiologically-achievable, pico- to nano-molar
concentrations effectively induced progressive carcinogenesis of human
breast epithelial MCF10A cells from a non-cancerous stage to premalignant
and malignant stages in a dose- and exposure-dependent manner.
Progressive carcinogenesis was measured by increasingly-acquired,
cancer-associated properties of reduced dependence on growth factors,
anchorage-independent growth, acinar-conformational disruption,
proliferation, migration, invasion, tumorigenicity with metastasis, and
increased stem-like cell populations. These biological changes were
accompanied by biochemical and molecular changes, including upregulated
H-Ras gene expression, ERK pathway activation, Nox-1 expression and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) elevation. The Ras-ERK-Nox-ROS pathway
played an important role in not only initiation but also maintenance of
cellular carcinogenesis induced by PhIP. Using biological, biochemical,
and molecular changes as targeted endpoints, we identified that the green
tea catechin components, at non-cytotoxic doses, were capable of
suppressing PhIP-induced cellular carcinogenesis and tumorigenicity.

