Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Use of four biomarkers to evaluate survival disparity between
black women and white women 35 to 64 years of age at diagnosis with
invasive breast cancer


Purpose: To evaluate the extent to which the black-white disparity in
mortality following breast cancer diagnosis is explained by the
expression status of four biomarkers - estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2), and p53 protein. Methods: The four biomarkers were assessed in
paraffin-embedded breast tumor tissue for 1204 (523 black, 681 white)
women, ages 35-64 years at diagnosis, who participated in the Women's
CARE Study, a population-based case-control study of newly incident
breast cancer, and who accrued a median of 10 years follow-up. The impact
of these biomarkers on black-white disparity in breast cancer-specific
and all-cause mortality was determined by fitting multivariable Cox
proportional hazards regression models. Results: The black-white
disparity in breast cancer-specific mortality was 54% in an age- and
study site-adjusted model (relative risk [RR], 1.54; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.21 to 1.97); it declined to a 36% greater risk for black
women than white women after additionally controlling the status of the
four markers (RR, 1.36; 95% CI, 1.06 to 1.75). Similar results were
observed for all cause-mortality. Separate analyses for triple negative
(ER-/PR-/HER2-) and luminal A (ER+ and/or PR+ plus HER2-) tumors showed
that the black-white differences in mortality were predominately observed
for older (50-64 years) women with luminal A tumors (breast
cancer-specific RR, 2.07; 95% CI, 1.16 to 3.70; all-cause RR, 2.21; 95%
CI, 1.40 to 3.47). For luminal A tumors, the greater mortality risk for
older black women was attenuated after adjustment for stage,
comorbidities, and education, and was most evident for all-cause
mortality. Conclusions: Black-white differences in mortality following
breast cancer diagnosis vary by tumor biomarker subtypes.

