Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The cancer testis antigen MAGED2 protects human melanoma cells
from TRAIL-induced apoptosis by suppressing TRAIL-R2 expression


Melanoma-associated antigen D2 (MAGED2), a member of the MAGE-II cancer
testis antigen family, is expressed by almost all normal tissues and many
different cancer tissues. Although it has been reported that MAGE
proteins have a pro-survival role in cancer cells such as malignant mast
cells, the potential biological significance of MAGE proteins in melanoma
remains to be established. Here, we show that MAGED2 is involved in the
protection of melanoma cells against apoptosis induced by TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) through suppressing the expression of
TRAIL-R2, the major TRAIL death receptor that mediates TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in melanoma. siRNA knockdown of MAGED2 sensitised melanoma
cells to apoptosis induced by TRAIL. This was associated with enhanced
activation of the caspase cascade and formation of the TRAIL
death-inducing signalling complex (DISC), suggesting that MAGED2 acts at
or above the DISC to protect melanoma cells against TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. Indeed, inhibition of MAGED2 by siRNA resulted in
up-regulation of TRAIL-R2 on the melanoma cell surface, which appeared to
be specific, because knockdown of MAGED2 did not impinge on the
expression of other TNF receptor family members, nor did it up-regulate
TRAIL-R2 in melanocytes. Up-regulation of TRAIL-R2 by inhibition of
MAGED2 was mediated by a p53-responsive transcriptional increase, in that
p53 was also up-regulated in melanoma cells with MAGED2 knocked down, and
that knockdown of MAGED2 did not up-regulate TRAIL-R2 in melanoma cells
deficient in p53. In summary, our results identify MAGED2 as an important
mechanism that suppresses TRAIL-R2 expression, thus protecting melanoma
cells from TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

