Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cancer by a chimeric nanoparticle formulation of
Cisplatin and PI828, a PI3 kinase inhibitor


Combination chemotherapy is the mainstay of cancer regimes. However,
additive off target effect of the drugs is still a major drawback of
combination therapy. Nanoscale drug delivery systems, through enhanced
permeation and retention effect, target the tumour more efficiently while
reducing side effects. Combination of Cisplatin, a widely used platinum
based chemotherapeutic with PI3 kinase/mTOR inhibitor has shown
synergism. In this study, we designed a chimeric nanoparticle of
Cisplatin and PI828, a PI3 kinase inhibitor. PI828 was chemically
conjugated to cholesterol by a carbamate linkage. Cisplatin was
coordinated to a cholesterol-succinic acid derivative via a unique
monocarboxylato and OPt bond. The chimeric nanoparticle was formulated by
mixing both the conjugates in definite proportions with
phosphatidylcholine and DSPE-PEG. The chimeric naoparticle had a
consistent size between 100 to 130 nm determined by dynamic light
scattering. The in vitro release kinetics experiment showed slow and
sustained release of both the drugs over a time period of 96 hours. In
vitro cell proliferation assay expressed cytotoxicity of the chimeric
nanoformulation in 4T1, a murine breast cancer cell line and in KRAS
upregulated and PTEN suppressed ovarian cancer model cells. We have
evaluated the activity of chimeric nanoparticle in a
K-Ras(LSL/+)/PTEN(fl/fl) ovarian cancer model, with a luciferase reporter
system. The mice treated with chimeric nanoparticle exhibited suppressed
tumour growth as well as reduced toxicity as compared to the free drug
combination and vehicle treated mice. These results indicate that
chimeric nanoformulation can better the outcome of Cisplatin and PI828
combination.

