Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic biomarkers in patients with clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC)


In Argentina the renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the 9th cause of death for
cancer in males and 13th in women. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC), the most
common histological type of RCC, exhibits a wide spectrum of molecular
characteristics that are closely associated with the deregulations of
metabolic pathways involved in oxygen-, iron-, energy-, or
nutrient-sensing. Primary ccRCC comprises a heterogeneous group of
entities with variable clinical outcomes, so the understanding of their
molecular features has critical importance to define individual
metastatic risk. The aim of this study was to determine tumor tissue
expression of specific molecules associated with angiogenic pathways
triggered by hypoxic conditions (VEGFR1/Flk-1, VEGFR2/Flt-4 and PDGF-A
receptor), with the glucose metabolism (Glut-1) or with survival pathways
(p53). Antigen expressions were analyzed by immunohistochemistry on
formalin fixed paraffin embedded ccRRC tumors [men: n=18, age: Md 55
years (range 46-72); women: n=12, age: 54.5 (49-82)], from patients who
underwent a surgical resection as first treatment. The relationships
between the expression of the different antigens and the known prognostic
factors in ccRCC were analyzed by Chi-square. The Pearson test was used
for correlation analysis. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate
disease-free survival (DFS). We observed that about 60-70% of ccRCC
tumors expressed VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and Glut-1 at membrane level, but only
15% of them showed PDGF-A staining. In addition, 34% of samples expressed
p53 at nuclear level. VEGFR1 expression correlated with the expression of
the other membrane receptors studied (pIn Argentina the renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) is the 9th cause of death for cancer in males and 13th in
women. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC), the most common histological type of RCC,
exhibits a wide spectrum of molecular characteristics that are closely
associated with the deregulations of metabolic pathways involved in
oxygen-, iron-, energy-, or nutrient-sensing. Primary ccRCC comprises a
heterogeneous group of entities with variable clinical outcomes, so the
understanding of their molecular features has critical importance to
define individual metastatic risk. The aim of this study was to determine
tumor tissue expression of specific molecules associated with angiogenic
pathways triggered by hypoxic conditions (VEGFR1/Flk-1, VEGFR2/Flt-4 and
PDGF-A receptor), with the glucose metabolism (Glut-1) or with survival
pathways (p53). Antigen expressions were analyzed by immunohistochemistry
on formalin fixed paraffin embedded ccRRC tumors [men: n=18, age: Md 55
years (range 46-72); women: n=12, age: 54.5 (49-82)], from patients who
underwent a surgical resection as first treatment. The relationships
between the expression of the different antigens and the known prognostic
factors in ccRCC were analyzed by Chi-square. The Pearson test was used
for correlation analysis. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate
disease-free survival (DFS). We observed that about 60-70% of ccRCC
tumors expressed VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and Glut-1 at membrane level, but only
15% of them showed PDGF-A staining. In addition, 34% of samples expressed
p53 at nuclear level. VEGFR1 expression correlated with the expression of
the other membrane receptors studied (p<0.05 Pearson test). Interestingly
VEGFR2 and PDGF-A immunopositivity on ccRCC tumors could be associated
with the presence of metastasis at diagnosis (pIn Argentina the renal
cell carcinoma (RCC) is the 9th cause of death for cancer in males and
13th in women. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC), the most common histological type
of RCC, exhibits a wide spectrum of molecular characteristics that are
closely associated with the deregulations of metabolic pathways involved
in oxygen-, iron-, energy-, or nutrient-sensing. Primary ccRCC comprises
a heterogeneous group of entities with variable clinical outcomes, so the
understanding of their molecular features has critical importance to
define individual metastatic risk. The aim of this study was to determine
tumor tissue expression of specific molecules associated with angiogenic
pathways triggered by hypoxic conditions (VEGFR1/Flk-1, VEGFR2/Flt-4 and
PDGF-A receptor), with the glucose metabolism (Glut-1) or with survival
pathways (p53). Antigen expressions were analyzed by immunohistochemistry
on formalin fixed paraffin embedded ccRRC tumors [men: n=18, age: Md 55
years (range 46-72); women: n=12, age: 54.5 (49-82)], from patients who
underwent a surgical resection as first treatment. The relationships
between the expression of the different antigens and the known prognostic
factors in ccRCC were analyzed by Chi-square. The Pearson test was used
for correlation analysis. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate
disease-free survival (DFS). We observed that about 60-70% of ccRCC
tumors expressed VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and Glut-1 at membrane level, but only
15% of them showed PDGF-A staining. In addition, 34% of samples expressed
p53 at nuclear level. VEGFR1 expression correlated with the expression of
the other membrane receptors studied (p<0.05 Pearson test). Interestingly
VEGFR2 and PDGF-A immunopositivity on ccRCC tumors could be associated
with the presence of metastasis at diagnosis (p<0.05, Chi square test).
On the other hand, the expression of membrane VEGFR2 correlated with
tumor size (pIn Argentina the renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the 9th cause
of death for cancer in males and 13th in women. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC),
the most common histological type of RCC, exhibits a wide spectrum of
molecular characteristics that are closely associated with the
deregulations of metabolic pathways involved in oxygen-, iron-, energy-,
or nutrient-sensing. Primary ccRCC comprises a heterogeneous group of
entities with variable clinical outcomes, so the understanding of their
molecular features has critical importance to define individual
metastatic risk. The aim of this study was to determine tumor tissue
expression of specific molecules associated with angiogenic pathways
triggered by hypoxic conditions (VEGFR1/Flk-1, VEGFR2/Flt-4 and PDGF-A
receptor), with the glucose metabolism (Glut-1) or with survival pathways
(p53). Antigen expressions were analyzed by immunohistochemistry on
formalin fixed paraffin embedded ccRRC tumors [men: n=18, age: Md 55
years (range 46-72); women: n=12, age: 54.5 (49-82)], from patients who
underwent a surgical resection as first treatment. The relationships
between the expression of the different antigens and the known prognostic
factors in ccRCC were analyzed by Chi-square. The Pearson test was used
for correlation analysis. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate
disease-free survival (DFS). We observed that about 60-70% of ccRCC
tumors expressed VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and Glut-1 at membrane level, but only
15% of them showed PDGF-A staining. In addition, 34% of samples expressed
p53 at nuclear level. VEGFR1 expression correlated with the expression of
the other membrane receptors studied (p<0.05 Pearson test). Interestingly
VEGFR2 and PDGF-A immunopositivity on ccRCC tumors could be associated
with the presence of metastasis at diagnosis (p<0.05, Chi square test).
On the other hand, the expression of membrane VEGFR2 correlated with
tumor size (p<0.01 Pearson). No association was observed between the
expression of these biomarkers and histological grade, Fuhrman
classification or clinical stage. Kaplan-Meier curves and Log rank test
showed that no one of the tumor markers studied were associated with DFS;
however we observed that those patients who never relapsed were negative
for VEGFR2 and Glut1 antigens.In conclusion, we found that some of the
studied biomarkers could be associated with some clinical parameters. In
particular, VEGFR2 and PDGF-A membrane immunopositivity was associated
with metastatic disease. However, the presence of these antigens in ccRCC
samples obtained from surgery did not predict disease-free survival.

