Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHEK2 (Chk2) endogenous activation is associated with p53
deficiency and downregulation of BRCA2 and Fanconi Anemia pathway gene
members in the National Cancer Institute Anticancer Tumor Cell Line Panel
(NCI-60)


CHEK2 codes for a serine/threonine kinase (Chk2) activated by ATM in
response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSB). CHEK2 has been described as a
tumor suppressor with pro-apoptotic, cell cycle checkpoint and mitotic
functions. However, Chk2 is also commonly activated (phosphorylated at
T68) in cancers and precancerous lesions. In the present report, we
characterized CHEK2 across the panel of 60 established cancer cell lines
from the NCI Anticancer Tumor Cell Line panel (the NCI-60) using genomic
and proteomic analyses including exon-specific mRNA expression, DNA copy
number variation (CNV) by aCGH, exome sequencing, as well as Western
blotting analyses for total and activated (pT68-Chk2) Chk2. We
demonstrate that the high heterogeneity of Chk2 levels in the NCI-60 is
primarily due to its inactivation (owing to low gene expression,
alternative splicing, point mutations, copy number alterations and
premature truncation) or reduction of protein levels. Notably, we also
found that a significant percentage of cancer cells (12% of the NCI-60
and the HeLa cervix cell line) display high endogenous Chk2 activation,
always associated with p53 loss of function. Notably, all the 12 cancer
cell lines characterized as being p53 wild-type showed almost
undetectable levels of pT68-Chk2. The potential impact of endogenous Chk2
activation was analyzed by transcriptome profiling of the five highest
pT68-Chk2 cell lines, comparing them with five, tissue-matched low
pT68-Chk2 and p53-matched deficient cell lines. Two-sided t tests
revealed 176 genes differentially expressed with statistical significance
(P CHEK2 codes for a serine/threonine kinase (Chk2) activated by ATM in
response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSB). CHEK2 has been described as a
tumor suppressor with pro-apoptotic, cell cycle checkpoint and mitotic
functions. However, Chk2 is also commonly activated (phosphorylated at
T68) in cancers and precancerous lesions. In the present report, we
characterized CHEK2 across the panel of 60 established cancer cell lines
from the NCI Anticancer Tumor Cell Line panel (the NCI-60) using genomic
and proteomic analyses including exon-specific mRNA expression, DNA copy
number variation (CNV) by aCGH, exome sequencing, as well as Western
blotting analyses for total and activated (pT68-Chk2) Chk2. We
demonstrate that the high heterogeneity of Chk2 levels in the NCI-60 is
primarily due to its inactivation (owing to low gene expression,
alternative splicing, point mutations, copy number alterations and
premature truncation) or reduction of protein levels. Notably, we also
found that a significant percentage of cancer cells (12% of the NCI-60
and the HeLa cervix cell line) display high endogenous Chk2 activation,
always associated with p53 loss of function. Notably, all the 12 cancer
cell lines characterized as being p53 wild-type showed almost
undetectable levels of pT68-Chk2. The potential impact of endogenous Chk2
activation was analyzed by transcriptome profiling of the five highest
pT68-Chk2 cell lines, comparing them with five, tissue-matched low
pT68-Chk2 and p53-matched deficient cell lines. Two-sided t tests
revealed 176 genes differentially expressed with statistical significance
(P < 0.01, uncorrected) in the two groups (high vs. low pT68-Chk2). Among
the downregulated expressed genes, a significant number codes for
proteins involved in DNA recombination, replication and repair (FANCA,
FANCG, FANCL, BRCA2, RAD51C, EME1, and RECQL5 being the most relevant),
and centromere organization. Several of these downregulated genes were
parts of the Fanconi Anemia pathway or related to homologous
recombination (HR, P CHEK2 codes for a serine/threonine kinase (Chk2)
activated by ATM in response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSB). CHEK2 has
been described as a tumor suppressor with pro-apoptotic, cell cycle
checkpoint and mitotic functions. However, Chk2 is also commonly
activated (phosphorylated at T68) in cancers and precancerous lesions. In
the present report, we characterized CHEK2 across the panel of 60
established cancer cell lines from the NCI Anticancer Tumor Cell Line
panel (the NCI-60) using genomic and proteomic analyses including
exon-specific mRNA expression, DNA copy number variation (CNV) by aCGH,
exome sequencing, as well as Western blotting analyses for total and
activated (pT68-Chk2) Chk2. We demonstrate that the high heterogeneity of
Chk2 levels in the NCI-60 is primarily due to its inactivation (owing to
low gene expression, alternative splicing, point mutations, copy number
alterations and premature truncation) or reduction of protein levels.
Notably, we also found that a significant percentage of cancer cells (12%
of the NCI-60 and the HeLa cervix cell line) display high endogenous Chk2
activation, always associated with p53 loss of function. Notably, all the
12 cancer cell lines characterized as being p53 wild-type showed almost
undetectable levels of pT68-Chk2. The potential impact of endogenous Chk2
activation was analyzed by transcriptome profiling of the five highest
pT68-Chk2 cell lines, comparing them with five, tissue-matched low
pT68-Chk2 and p53-matched deficient cell lines. Two-sided t tests
revealed 176 genes differentially expressed with statistical significance
(P < 0.01, uncorrected) in the two groups (high vs. low pT68-Chk2). Among
the downregulated expressed genes, a significant number codes for
proteins involved in DNA recombination, replication and repair (FANCA,
FANCG, FANCL, BRCA2, RAD51C, EME1, and RECQL5 being the most relevant),
and centromere organization. Several of these downregulated genes were
parts of the Fanconi Anemia pathway or related to homologous
recombination (HR, P < 0.05 for statistically significant enrichment
using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis). In conclusion, the biology of Chk2
remains complex, multifaceted and fast evolving. Our study provides
information on the relationship between different genomic and proteomic
parameters related to Chk2 in cancer, and suggests a possible role for
activated Chk2 in p53-deficient or HR/Fanconi Anemia-deficient cells.

