Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: [18F]-FLT Positron Emission Tomography can be used to image the
response of sensitive tumours to PI3-Kinase inhibition with the novel
agent GDC-0941.


Emerging targeted therapeutics are characterised by high efficacy rates
in selected patient sub-populations as well as potentially high running
costs. This calls for companion diagnostic tools that contribute to the
better management of such therapies, in terms of patient selection and
monitoring therapeutic response. The Phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase
pathway is deregulated in a range of cancers, and several targeted
inhibitors are entering the clinic. This study aimed to investigate
whether the PET tracer [18F]-FLT is suitable to mark the effect of the
novel PI-3K inhibitor GDC-0941 which has entered Phase II clinical trial.
Methods Nude mice bearing U87 and HCT116 xenografts were imaged at
baseline with [18F]-FLT (10-15MBq per mouse produced using a GE
Tracerlab). GDC-0941 or vehicle was then administered at a concentration
of 50mg/kg twice daily by gavage and animals were rescanned at acute
(18h) and chronic (186h) timepoints post-therapy. Standard uptake value
(SUV)s for tumour uptake were calculated, and tissue was analysed at
sacrifice for phospho-AKT. To generate normalised uptake values (NUV)s
the SUV [tumour] was divided by the SUV for heart. NUV figures are given
for the 100-105min post-injection time interval. Results Growth of U87
xenografts was significantly inhibited by GDC-0941 treatment throughout
the course of the study (average growth rate of treated = 1.09.3 mm3,
control = 69.222.1mm3 per day). Growth of HCT116 xenografts was not
significantly different between groups (average growth rate of treated =
34.615.9 mm3, control =54.811.1 mm3 per day). Tumour uptake of [18F]-FLT
was significantly reduced in treated animals bearing U87 xenografts at
the acute timepoint compared to baseline (NUVmax 2.17 0.38 vs 1.59 0.29,
pEmerging targeted therapeutics are characterised by high efficacy rates
in selected patient sub-populations as well as potentially high running
costs. This calls for companion diagnostic tools that contribute to the
better management of such therapies, in terms of patient selection and
monitoring therapeutic response. The Phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase
pathway is deregulated in a range of cancers, and several targeted
inhibitors are entering the clinic. This study aimed to investigate
whether the PET tracer [18F]-FLT is suitable to mark the effect of the
novel PI-3K inhibitor GDC-0941 which has entered Phase II clinical trial.
Methods Nude mice bearing U87 and HCT116 xenografts were imaged at
baseline with [18F]-FLT (10-15MBq per mouse produced using a GE
Tracerlab). GDC-0941 or vehicle was then administered at a concentration
of 50mg/kg twice daily by gavage and animals were rescanned at acute
(18h) and chronic (186h) timepoints post-therapy. Standard uptake value
(SUV)s for tumour uptake were calculated, and tissue was analysed at
sacrifice for phospho-AKT. To generate normalised uptake values (NUV)s
the SUV [tumour] was divided by the SUV for heart. NUV figures are given
for the 100-105min post-injection time interval. Results Growth of U87
xenografts was significantly inhibited by GDC-0941 treatment throughout
the course of the study (average growth rate of treated = 1.09.3 mm3,
control = 69.222.1mm3 per day). Growth of HCT116 xenografts was not
significantly different between groups (average growth rate of treated =
34.615.9 mm3, control =54.811.1 mm3 per day). Tumour uptake of [18F]-FLT
was significantly reduced in treated animals bearing U87 xenografts at
the acute timepoint compared to baseline (NUVmax 2.17 0.38 vs 1.59 0.29,
p<0.01), whereas uptake in HCT116 tumours was unchanged. Analysis of the
downstream marker phospho-AKT showed that this was decreased in U87, but
not HCT116, tumours. Conclusion [18F]-FLT is a strong candidate for the
non-invasive measurement of GDC-0941 action. In addition to FLT, we are
assessing the performance of a range of other imaging agents, including
proprietary tracers, that can potentially bring value in monitoring of
PI3-kinase targeting therapies.

