Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A decade of changed behavior: Trends in screening adherence and
incidence 2000-2010


Background: Cancer is still one of the most prominent diseases of all
times claiming more than 569,490 lives in 2010. Over the past decade the
United States (U.S.), like many other industrialized and developed
nations have seen a significant decrease in the incidence of cancers and
have experienced an increase in the number of cancer survivors. The
decrease in incidence can be attributed to an increase in the number of
persons adhering to recommended cancer screenings. In 2012, there will be
an estimated 1 million newly diagnosed Americans, 75% of who would have
adhered to recommended cancer screening in the previous year. Methods: We
used incidence data from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results
database (2000 -2008) to assess the trend in incidence rates of some of
the most common cancers in the United States. Using SAS version 9.2, we
pooled data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) - Cancer
Supplements (2000, 2005 and 2010) and analyzed adherence to recommended
screening (n= 90,959). The guidelines provided by the American Cancer
Society were used to guide analyses. Screening compliance was measured
among the appropriate age and sex cohort within the U.S. population.
Results: There has been a 17.22% decrease in the incidence of colorectal
cancers and a11.06% decrease in lung cancer incidence between 2000 and
2008. While Bladder and Cervical cancer showed no significant time
trends, gender specific cancers, namely prostate and breast also showed
significant decreases; 16.21% and 6.78% respectively. There was an 18.12%
increase in the incidence of Melanoma cases. There was a significant
increase in adherence to recommended screening between 2000 and 2010.
Adherence to mammography screening guidelines increased two fold between
2000 and 2010 as represented by women interviewed in the NHIS. Similar
trends were observed for pap smears and colorectal screenings; 2010
analyses showed 70.48% compliance for mammography, 72.80% for colorectal
screening and 68.19% for pap smears. Conclusion: Though screening
compliance is below the preferred level, there has been an increase in
adherence to recommended screening in the U.S. population over the past
decade. This has translated into decreased cancer incidence and an
increased prevalence as more persons live beyond the five year survivor
mark. Identification of cancers with high incidence rates is needed to
direct targeted interventions and public health campaigns.

