Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt pathway activation involves inhibition of -catenin
ubiquitination within the endogenous Axin1 complex


Degradation of cytosolic -catenin by the APC/Axin1 Destruction Complex
represents the key regulated step of the Wnt pathway. It is incompletely
understood how the Axin1 complex exerts its Wnt-regulated function. We
have now examined the compositional change of the endogenous Axin1
complex in HEK293T cells upon Wnt signaling. Our results demonstrate that
not only phosphorylation, but also ubiquitination and proteasomal
degradation of -catenin occur within the Axin1 complex. In disagreement
with current views, we find neither a disassembly of the complex, nor an
inhibition of phosphorylation of Axin1-bound -catenin upon Wnt signaling.
Comparable observations are made in primary intestinal epithelium and in
colorectal cancer cell lines carrying activating Wnt pathway mutations.
Wnt signaling induces the loss of the dedicated E3 ligase -TrCP from the
complex, leading to complex saturation by accumulated phospho--catenin.
Subsequently, newly synthesized -catenin can accumulate in a free
cytosolic form, travel to the nucleus and engage the TCF Wnt effector
transcription factors. In contrast to current belief, the Axin complex
remains compositionally intact in APC-mutant colorectal cancer. Rather,
failure of -catenin ubiquitination is the principle biochemical
activating event in these malignant cells. Together we demonstrate a
novel mechanism of the destruction complex for Wnt signal activation in
both physiological and malignant states.

