Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular endothelial growth inhibitor - potential role in targeted
therapy in kidney neoplasma via angiogenic inhibition


Vascular endothelial growth inhibitor (VEGI, also known as TNFSF15) is an
anti-angiogenic cytokine found to be associated with tumour-related
vasculature in certain maligancies. Three isoforms, VEGI 251, VEGI192,
and VEGI174, have been identified, all sharing a common extracellular
domain of 151 C-terminal amino acid sequence critical for biological
activity of all three isoforms. Previous studies showed tumor inhibitory
effect of truncated recombinant VEGI proteins in breast and colorectal
cancer xenograft models, however, the antitumor activity of the full
length VEGI molecules have not been well characterized in other
malignancies, including kidney neoplasm. The objective of the present
study was set to evaluate biological impact of forced expression of full
length VEGI-174 in a renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cell line, 786-O, and in
786-O derived xenograft models. We found that Increased VEGI-174
expression in 786-O cells did not affect cell growth and apoptosis in
vitro, but did reduce cell adhesion and the ability of endothelial cells
to form capillary-like structures in co-culture. Subcutaneous xenograft
models were successfully established using the 786-O RCC cells with or
without forced expression of VEGI-174. Significantly reduced tumor
volume, accompanied by reduced tumor microvessel density and decreased
Ki67 and VEGFR2 expression, was observed in animals injected with
VEGI-174 transfected 786-O cells compared to those in the control groups.
Our results demonstrated that increased expression of full length
VEGI-174 in RCC 786-O cells resulted in significant reduction in tumor
volume most likely via angiogenic inhibition rather than on tumor growth
per se. Despite the lack of antitumor effect of full length VEGI174 in
some xenograft tumor models in other studies, our results suggest that
antitumor effect of the full length VEGI-174 may be cancer type specific,
and VEGI-174 may still be a valuable candidate toward angiogenesis based
cancer therapy.

