Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development and evaluation of a molecular decoy against SLUG
function in the breast cancer cells


SLUG, also known as SNAI2, is a member of the SNAI superfamily of
zinc-finger transcriptional repressors. It is a C2H2-type zinc finger
transcription factor that binds to E2-box motif (5-CAGGTG-3/5-CACCTG-3),
and silences gene expression by chromatin remodeling. More than ninety
genes are shown to bind tightly to SLUG as was revealed by ChIP-on-chip
analysis, showing the large regulatory network involving SLUG. It is
recently implicated as the major mediator of the master transcriptional
regulator protein TWIST. SLUG represses several genes to directly
contribute towards the metastatic transformation of several epithelial
cancer cells. Specific inhibitor against SLUG is not known. We describe
here the development and evaluation of a nuclease resistant
double-stranded DNA decoy that specifically inhibit the repressor
activity of SLUG in the human breast cancer cells. The decoy is designed
from the VDR gene promoter which is repressed by SLUG. This decoy has two
SLUG-binding E2-box sequences. EMSA analysis showed in vitro binding of
SLUG to the wild-type decoy but not to the E2-box mutated decoy. In vitro
pull down analysis also showed high affinity binding of SLUG to the
decoy. Biotin-tagged wild-type decoy DNA could immunopull down SLUG but
little SNAIL from the extracts from decoy-transfected cells. The decoy
increased the mRNA and protein levels of several SLUG target genes in
MDA-MB-231 cells. The decoy also alleviated the repressive activity of
SLUG on the SLUG target gene promoters in MDA-MB-231 cells. Since SLUG
overexpression is implicated in the drug-resistance and antiapoptosis
development in breast cancer cells, the SLUG decoy we developed should be
useful to combat breast cancer progression when used with classical
anticancer drugs. Supported in parts by the DOD-CDMRP grants BC050641,
BC086542 and BC103645 to GC.

