Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate-specific inhibition of PI3 Kinase and protein synthesis
as a therapy for advanced hormone-refractory prostate cancer


Prostate cancer remains the second leading cause of cancer-related death
in men in the United States, as at present there are no effective
treatments for advanced stage-affected patients. Recurrence usually
involves hormonal androgen suppression, which typically translates into
androgen-ablation insensitivity with accompanied limited or transient
response to systemic chemotherapy. Our preliminary experiments have shown
that it is possible to induce massive and rapid apoptosis in the
hormone-refractory prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, by using
the PI3K inhibitor ZSTK474 in combination with a prostate
cancer-selective cytotoxin J591PE38, a fusion protein between two
fragments: one from the J591 antibody (that recognizes the
Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen, expressed in nearly all prostate
cancers with the highest rate in poorly differentiated, metastatic and
hormone-refractory cases), and the other from the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
exotoxin A (PE38, that ADP-ribosylates and inhibits the Eukaryotic
Elongation Factor 2). The PI3K inhibitor ZSTK474 in combination with the
cytotoxin J591PE38 induces massive cell death (around 100%) in prostate
cancer C4-2tetLuc and C4-2 cells monitored by Time-Lapse Video Microscopy
during 24 hours, when compared to controls. Combined agents at 6 hours
synergistically increases Caspase 3 activity, as confirmed by DEVD-Afc
enzymatic assay (about 25 and 30 folds in C4-2tetLuc and C4-2 cells
respectively, compared to control) and Western blotting (3.28 and 2.45
folds in C4-2tetLuc and C4-2 cells respectively, compared to control).
Apoptosis activation was confirmed by detecting the cleaved fragments of
Caspase 7 and PARP (compared to control respectively: 4.12 and 3.58 folds
for C4-2tetLuc; 5.38 and 13.38 folds for C4-2 cells). No any major
effects were found in the PSMA-negative prostate cancer PC-3 and breast
cancer BT-549 cells treated with both agents when compared to controls,
confirming the specificity of the cytotoxin J591PE38. PI3 Kinase
inhibition by ZSTK474 was confirmed in all cell lines used by monitoring
the phosphorylation levels of Akt (Thr308) by Western blotting. Prostate
cancer C4-2tetLuc xenografts in nude mice showed a potent reduction of
luminescence (around 95% at day 7) in tumors treated with a single local
injection of both agents, when compared to controls. Apoptosis activation
and PI3 Kinase inhibition at 6 hours were confirmed by monitoring the
protein levels of cleaved-PARP and the phosphorylation levels of Akt by
Western blotting. In summary, in this study we demonstrated the efficacy
of a potential combinatorial approach using a specific PI3 Kinase and de
novo protein synthesis inhibitor to treat hormone-refractory prostate
cancer with constitutive active PI3K/Akt pathway, by generating massive
and rapid apoptosis in vitro and in vivo (This work is supported by
NIH/NCI grant 3R01 CA 118329 02S2).

