Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated cAMP decreases migratory potential in pancreatic cancer
cells


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains one of the most lethal
cancers, primarily resulting from inherent, aggressive dissemination. As
elevated concentrations of cAMP are known to inhibit cell movement in
multiple tissues, we investigated the role of cAMP in regulating
migration of model pancreatic cancer cells. Increased cAMP concentrations
were induced either through forskolin, an activator of adenylyl cyclase,
the cAMP analog 6-bnz-cAMP, or by two phosphodiesterase cyclic nucleotide
inhibitors, cilostamide or IBMX. Transwell migration assays demonstrated
cAMP elevating agents significantly decreased migration of Panc1,
MiaPaCa2, and HPAFII pancreatic cancer cell lines. In Panc1 cells,
inhibition was dose-dependent and not significantly different between
forskolin, cilostamide, or IBMX treatment. Importantly, a significant
decrease in cell migration was also observed in cells treated with
6-bnz-cAMP, a specific activator of protein kinase A. The decrease in
migration did not reflect alterations in cell proliferation as cell cycle
analysis demonstrated little to no change in proliferation in treated
compared to control cells. Similarly, the decrease in cell migration was
not a function of programmed cell death as apoptosis was not elevated in
cells treated with cAMP elevating agents. Consistent with its known role
in F-actin rearrangement, elevated levels of cAMP increased
phosphorylated RhoA and the resultant decrease in active RhoA-GTP. As
expected, fluorescence microscopy indicated a significant increase in
cortical actin formation along the perimeter of forskolin or
cilostamide-treated cells. Taken together these data suggest that the
novel use of existing anti-inflammatory drugs that target the cAMP
signaling networks have the potential to block pancreatic cancer
dissemination.

