Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultraviolet B-induced platelet-activating factor receptor agonists
mediate augmentation of melanoma tumor growth via regulatory T cells:
Implication of systemic immunosuppression


Ultraviolet B (UVB)-irradiation to human or mouse skin generates
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) and novel oxidatively-modified
glycerophosphocholines (Ox-GPCs) with PAF-receptor (PAF-R) agonistic
activity. These lipids mediate systemic immunosuppression in a process
involving IL-10. The current studies sought to determine the functional
significance of UVB-mediated systemic immunosuppression in an established
model of murine melanoma progression. As our studies demonstrated that
B16F10 tumors do not express functional PAF-Rs, retroviral-mediated
transduction of the PAF-R was used to create PAF-R-positive B16F10
melanoma tumor cells. We show that UVB irradiation augments B16F10 tumor
growth and is dependent on host, but not melanoma cell, PAF-R-expression
as UVB or the PAF-R agonist, carbamoyl- PAF (CPAF), both promote B16F10
tumor growth in wild-type mice, independent of whether B16F10 cells
express PAF-Rs, but do not augment tumor growth in PAF-R deficient (Pafr
-/-) mice. Systemic antioxidant treatment ameliorated UVB-mediated
augmentation of tumor growth, indicating involvement of Ox-GPC PAF-R
agonists produced non-enzymatically. Host immune cells are required as
CPAF-induced augmentation of tumor growth is not seen in immunodeficient
NOD SCID mice. Finally, depleting antibodies against IL-10 in WT mice, or
depletion of CD25-positive cells (suggestive of FoxP3 directed regulatory
T cells) in FoxP3EGFP transgenic mice block UVB/CPAF-induced tumor
growth, supporting a requirement for IL-10 and regulatory T cells (Tregs)
in this process. These findings indicate that UVB-generated Ox-GPCs with
PAF-R agonistic activity enhance experimental murine melanoma tumor
growth through targeting host immune cells, most notably Tregs, to
mediate systemic immunosuppression. These studies describe a previously
unrecognized mechanism by which melanoma tumor cells can escape antitumor
immunity. Inasmuch as other pro-oxidative stressors could potentially
generate PAF-R agonists, this pathway could have clinical relevance in
terms of devising better strategy for melanoma immunotherapy.

