Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-10b promotes migration and invasion in pancreatic cancer cells


Pancreatic ductal carcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in Unites States. Due to its aggressive local
invasion and metastatic nature, the median survival for patients with
PDAC is only 6-month. There is therefore an urgent need to improve our
understanding of the pathobiology of this malignancy. In this regard,
microRNAs (miRs) have emerged as potentially important regulators in PDAC
progression by acting on multiple signaling pathways involved in
proliferation, apoptosis, invasiveness and metastasis. MiR-10b is an
important RNA implicated in the facilitation of cancer cell invasion and
metastasis in several cancers. We have previously shown that miR-10b is
upregulated in pancreatic cancer cells, and that high levels of miR-10b
are associated with decreased time to metastasis following therapy,
enhanced resistance to gemcitabine, and decreased overall survival. In
the present study, we have sought to characterize the mechanisms of
action of miR-10b in PDAC. We found that overexpression of miR-10b
promoted migration and invasion of PANC-1 cells in vitro, without
enhancing their proliferation. Microarray analysis revealed that TIP30, a
tumor and metastasis suppressor, was downregulated by miR-10b
overexpression. Validation experiments using luciferase readout assays
showed that TIP30 is a direct target of miR-10b. Taken together, these
observations suggest that miR-10b plays an important role in PDAC and may
be a novel therapeutic target in this deadly malignancy.

