Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNMT1: An emerging target in the treatment of invasive urinary
bladder cancer


Introduction: More than 14,000 people die from invasive transitional cell
carcinoma (InvTCC) of the urinary bladder each year in the US, and more
effective therapies are needed. Naturally-occurring canine InvTCC very
closely resembles the disease in humans and serves as a highly relevant
translational model for novel therapy of human InvTCC. Work was
undertaken to identify new entry points for anticancer therapy in dogs
with the goal of translating successful therapeutic strategies into
humans with InvTCC. Methods: Microarray expression analyses were
conducted on canine normal bladder from dogs with no urinary tract
disease (n=4) and InvTCC tissues (n=4) using Genome Array 1.0 and
analyzed by GeneSpring GX 11, with the stringency of p 5M) and by TSA (at
concentrations > 0.1M). Western blot results were supportive of
DNMT1-related effects having a role in the antiproliferative activity.
Discussion and Conclusions: Microarray expression analyses on canine
tissues identified DNMT1 as a potentially targetable gene. Expression of
DNMT1 in canine InvTCC was confirmed by IHC, and in vitro studies
confirmed that drugs that inhibit DNMT1 have antiproliferative effects.
These findings are similar to those recently reported by Wu et al.
(Cancer, 2011) in human InvTCC. These findings are also in line with
results of a pre-clinical (pre-human) trial of 5-azaC in dogs with
naturally-occurring InvTCC, in which remission or cancer control occurred
in 72% of dogs. In conclusion, DNMT1 has excellent potential as a target
for InvTCC therapy in humans.

