Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insights into the molecular mechanism of HSP90 binding of
methoxy-substituted resorcinylic isoxazole amide inhibitors reveal
different isoform selectivity profiles


The molecular chaperone Heat Shock Protein 90 (HSP90) regulates the
conformation, stability and activity of several oncogenic client proteins
(eg ERBB2, ALK, BRAF, CRAF and AKT). Inhibition of HSP90 results in the
degradation of these clients, leading to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
The resorcinylic isoxazole amide HSP90 inhibitor NVP-AUY922 is currently
in Phase I/II clinical trials and other related agents are in
development. We previously reported that one or both of the phenolic
groups on the resorcinol ring are important for HSP90 inhibitory
activity. To further characterise the importance of the phenol groups on
protein binding and biological activity, a series of mono- and
dimethoxy-substituted resorcinylic 5-ethyl isoxazole amides were
synthesized and compared with the 2,4-dihydroxy compound by X-ray crystal
structure and biological techniques. The most potent HSP90 inhibitors in
terms of binding to the HSP90 target was the 2,4-dihydroxy-5-ethyl
isoxazole CCT239215 (Kd=11nM), followed by the 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy
analogue CCT078722 (Kd=36nM). In contrast, the 2-methoxy-4-hydroxy and
2,4-dimethoxy derivatives showed no binding to HSP90. X-ray crystal
structures showed that for CCT078722, the 4-methoxy group of the
resorcinol ring disrupts the hydrogen bonding that is seen with
2,4-dihydroxy CCT239215 and NVP-AUY922, and instead is involved in van
der Waals contacts. CCT239215 also showed the greatest cellular growth
inhibitory potency (GI50=5-16nM in a panel of human cancer cell lines),
followed by CCT078722 (GI50=59-588nM). As predicted, CCT078723 and
CCT078721 were inactive in the cells (GI50>10M). This structure-activity
relationship was also maintained with respect to biomarkers of HSP90
target inhibition, as measured by depletion of HSP90 client proteins and
induction of HSP72. In HCT116 human colon cells, CCT239215 and CCT078722
caused a loss of HSP90 from immunoprecipitates of the HSP90 co-chaperone,
demonstrating dissociation between P23 and HSP90, further confirming
their on-target effects. No such dissociation was observed with the
inactive analogs. These results explain how the hydroxy group at the
2-position on the resorcinol ring is crucial for HSP90 inhibitory
activity. Interestingly, the 2-hydroxy-4-methoxy-5-ethyl isoxazole
CCT078722 exhibited 55-fold less affinity for GRP94 when compared to
HSP90/, indicating that these compounds show potential for different
isoform selectivity profiles. Modelling studies suggest that IIe247 in
GRP94 negatively impacts on the binding of CCT078722. Our findings offer
insights into the molecular mechanism of HSP90 binding by resorcinylic
isoxazole inhibitors, provide active/inactive probe compounds for
mechanistic studies and suggest potential approaches to isoform
selectivity.

