Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing anti cancer activity of PI103, a dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor, by designing a self assembled Nanoformulation


The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/ mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) pathway plays a pivotal role in the growth and survival of various
cancers. Small molecule inhibitors targeting PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway (eg.
Wortmannin, LY294002, PI-103, PI828) are promising anti cancer agents.
Major drawbacks of these drugs are their poor water solubility and
off-target toxicity. Nanoscale drug delivery systems have been harnessed
as drug carriers to target tumours through enhanced permeation and
retention effect. In this study, we developed a nanoformulation of PI103,
a potent dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, to improve delivery and reduce side
effects. PI103 was encapsulated in a homogeneous self-assembled mixture
of phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol. DSPE-PEG protective shell was
introduced to increase its circulation time. Thin-film-hydration
technique followed by extrusion through 200 nm porous membranes developed
nanoparticles of 110-150 nm size with 0.15-0.20 mM drug loading. Release
kinetics study confirmed the stability of this formulation in PBS for
several days as well as a sustained release property in in-vitro Cell
Lysate system. In-vitro cell proliferation assay demonstrated improved
cytotoxicity of nanoformulated PI103 in murine breast cancer cell line
4T1 and K-ras upregulated and PTEN suppressed ovarian cancer model cells.
Fluorescent Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) analysis with FITC tagged
Annexin-V, an early apoptosis marker, showed increased apoptosis with the
nanoformulation than the free drug. Western blot analysis expressed more
potent inhibition of PI3 kinase/Akt pathway by the nanoformulated PI103.
These results indicate that nanoformulation can enhance the potential of
PI103.

