Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced delivery of T cells to tumor after chemotherapy using
membrane-anchored, apoptosis-targeted peptide


Chemotherapy-induced apoptosis of tumor cells enhances the antigen
presentation and sensitizes tumor cells to T cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
Here we harnessed the apoptosis of tumor cells as a homing signal for the
delivery of T cells to tumor. Jurkat T cells were anchored with ApoPep-1,
an apoptosis-targeted peptide ligand, using the biocompatible anchor for
membrane (BAM), an oleyl acid derivative. The ApoPep-1-BAM conjugate was
efficiently anchored to cell membrane, while little anchoring was
obtained with ApoPep-1 alone. The retention period of the ApoPep-1-BAM
conjugate on cells was approximately 40 and 20 minutes in the absence and
presence of serum, respectively. The apoptosis-targeted T cells that were
anchored with the ApoPep-1-BAM preferentially bound to apoptotic tumor
cells over living cells. When intravenously injected into tumor-bearing
mice, the number of the apoptosis-targeted T cells and in vivo
fluorescence signals by the homing of the cells to doxorubicin-treated
tumor were higher than those of untargeted T cells. These results suggest
that the chemotherapy-induced apoptosis and subsequent enhancement of T
cell delivery to tumor by the membrane anchoring of the
apoptosis-targeted peptide could be a novel strategy for cancer
immunotherapy.

