Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Eicosapentaenoic acid increases mammary tumor inhibition of
intermittent calorie restriction and regulates adipokines


It has become clear that the use of combination therapies for prevention
of breast cancer may be more efficacious than individual therapies.
Therefore, we combined two different interventions which had each been
shown alone to inhibit mammary tumorigenesis but had not been tested in
combination. The first intervention was consumption of the omega-3 fatty
acid eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) which is found in fish oil and the
second intervention was calorie restriction. We utilized six groups of
MMTV-Her2/neu mice as a model for human breast cancers which over express
Her2/neu. Starting at 10 weeks of age half of the mice were fed a control
diet composed of a modified AIN-93M formula with fat derived from soy
oil. The other half consumed a diet with 71.75% of fat calories from EPA.
Mice were further divided into ad libitum (AL), chronic calorie
restricted (CCR) or intermittent caloric restricted (ICR) groups. AL
groups (Control and EPA) received unrestricted access to their diets. CCR
groups were given 75% of the total calories that the AL age-matched
groups consumed. ICR groups were fed calories equal to 100% of the AL
age-matched groups for three weeks followed by three weeks of calories
equal to 50% of the AL age-matched groups. The 6 week cycles of
restriction and refeeding were maintained until the mice were 60 weeks of
age or were euthanized due to mammary tumors (MTs). MT incidence was
lowest in the ICR-EPA group (15%) and highest in the AL-Con group (87%)
while the AL-EPA, CCR-Con, CCR-EPA and ICR-Con had MT incidence rates of
63%, 47%, 40% and 59%, respectively The average survival until terminal
end point was also longest in the ICR-EPA group at 59.2 weeks and
shortest in the AL-Con group at 52.6 (PIt has become clear that the use
of combination therapies for prevention of breast cancer may be more
efficacious than individual therapies. Therefore, we combined two
different interventions which had each been shown alone to inhibit
mammary tumorigenesis but had not been tested in combination. The first
intervention was consumption of the omega-3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA) which is found in fish oil and the second intervention was
calorie restriction. We utilized six groups of MMTV-Her2/neu mice as a
model for human breast cancers which over express Her2/neu. Starting at
10 weeks of age half of the mice were fed a control diet composed of a
modified AIN-93M formula with fat derived from soy oil. The other half
consumed a diet with 71.75% of fat calories from EPA. Mice were further
divided into ad libitum (AL), chronic calorie restricted (CCR) or
intermittent caloric restricted (ICR) groups. AL groups (Control and EPA)
received unrestricted access to their diets. CCR groups were given 75% of
the total calories that the AL age-matched groups consumed. ICR groups
were fed calories equal to 100% of the AL age-matched groups for three
weeks followed by three weeks of calories equal to 50% of the AL
age-matched groups. The 6 week cycles of restriction and refeeding were
maintained until the mice were 60 weeks of age or were euthanized due to
mammary tumors (MTs). MT incidence was lowest in the ICR-EPA group (15%)
and highest in the AL-Con group (87%) while the AL-EPA, CCR-Con, CCR-EPA
and ICR-Con had MT incidence rates of 63%, 47%, 40% and 59%, respectively
The average survival until terminal end point was also longest in the
ICR-EPA group at 59.2 weeks and shortest in the AL-Con group at 52.6
(P<0.0002). The average tumor burden was 0.98 grams for ICR-EPA mice and
1.78 grams for AL-Con mice but due to the very small number of MTs in the
ICR-EPA group this was not a significant difference. Histopathology
showed no significant difference in tumor grades between the groups. To
better understand the effects of the interventions we examined serum for
alterations in adipokines and growth factors. We found that EPA
consumption dramatically reduced the levels of leptin (PIt has become
clear that the use of combination therapies for prevention of breast
cancer may be more efficacious than individual therapies. Therefore, we
combined two different interventions which had each been shown alone to
inhibit mammary tumorigenesis but had not been tested in combination. The
first intervention was consumption of the omega-3 fatty acid
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) which is found in fish oil and the second
intervention was calorie restriction. We utilized six groups of
MMTV-Her2/neu mice as a model for human breast cancers which over express
Her2/neu. Starting at 10 weeks of age half of the mice were fed a control
diet composed of a modified AIN-93M formula with fat derived from soy
oil. The other half consumed a diet with 71.75% of fat calories from EPA.
Mice were further divided into ad libitum (AL), chronic calorie
restricted (CCR) or intermittent caloric restricted (ICR) groups. AL
groups (Control and EPA) received unrestricted access to their diets. CCR
groups were given 75% of the total calories that the AL age-matched
groups consumed. ICR groups were fed calories equal to 100% of the AL
age-matched groups for three weeks followed by three weeks of calories
equal to 50% of the AL age-matched groups. The 6 week cycles of
restriction and refeeding were maintained until the mice were 60 weeks of
age or were euthanized due to mammary tumors (MTs). MT incidence was
lowest in the ICR-EPA group (15%) and highest in the AL-Con group (87%)
while the AL-EPA, CCR-Con, CCR-EPA and ICR-Con had MT incidence rates of
63%, 47%, 40% and 59%, respectively The average survival until terminal
end point was also longest in the ICR-EPA group at 59.2 weeks and
shortest in the AL-Con group at 52.6 (P<0.0002). The average tumor burden
was 0.98 grams for ICR-EPA mice and 1.78 grams for AL-Con mice but due to
the very small number of MTs in the ICR-EPA group this was not a
significant difference. Histopathology showed no significant difference
in tumor grades between the groups. To better understand the effects of
the interventions we examined serum for alterations in adipokines and
growth factors. We found that EPA consumption dramatically reduced the
levels of leptin (P<0.02) and increased the levels of adiponectin in the
AL mice (PIt has become clear that the use of combination therapies for
prevention of breast cancer may be more efficacious than individual
therapies. Therefore, we combined two different interventions which had
each been shown alone to inhibit mammary tumorigenesis but had not been
tested in combination. The first intervention was consumption of the
omega-3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) which is found in fish oil
and the second intervention was calorie restriction. We utilized six
groups of MMTV-Her2/neu mice as a model for human breast cancers which
over express Her2/neu. Starting at 10 weeks of age half of the mice were
fed a control diet composed of a modified AIN-93M formula with fat
derived from soy oil. The other half consumed a diet with 71.75% of fat
calories from EPA. Mice were further divided into ad libitum (AL),
chronic calorie restricted (CCR) or intermittent caloric restricted (ICR)
groups. AL groups (Control and EPA) received unrestricted access to their
diets. CCR groups were given 75% of the total calories that the AL
age-matched groups consumed. ICR groups were fed calories equal to 100%
of the AL age-matched groups for three weeks followed by three weeks of
calories equal to 50% of the AL age-matched groups. The 6 week cycles of
restriction and refeeding were maintained until the mice were 60 weeks of
age or were euthanized due to mammary tumors (MTs). MT incidence was
lowest in the ICR-EPA group (15%) and highest in the AL-Con group (87%)
while the AL-EPA, CCR-Con, CCR-EPA and ICR-Con had MT incidence rates of
63%, 47%, 40% and 59%, respectively The average survival until terminal
end point was also longest in the ICR-EPA group at 59.2 weeks and
shortest in the AL-Con group at 52.6 (P<0.0002). The average tumor burden
was 0.98 grams for ICR-EPA mice and 1.78 grams for AL-Con mice but due to
the very small number of MTs in the ICR-EPA group this was not a
significant difference. Histopathology showed no significant difference
in tumor grades between the groups. To better understand the effects of
the interventions we examined serum for alterations in adipokines and
growth factors. We found that EPA consumption dramatically reduced the
levels of leptin (P<0.02) and increased the levels of adiponectin in the
AL mice (P<0.001) but did not significantly alter animal weights at 25
weeks of age. Calorie restriction was also able to significantly decrease
serum leptin levels and increase serum adiponectin levels. Serum IGF-I
was significantly reduced by calorie restriction with the ICR-Con having
the lowest level. The presence of EPA in the diet did not significantly
change the levels of IGF-I. These results illustrate that MT inhibition
is significantly increased when ICR and EPA are combined as compared to
either intervention alone or no intervention. This effect may be related
to alterations in serum growth factors and adipokines. Support: Susan
G.Komen for the Cure and The Hormel Foundation.

