Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen modulates angiogenic factors of thyroid tumor
microenvironment


Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine related cancer with the
incidences occurring three to four times higher in women than in men,
thus suggesting that estrogen plays a critical role in thyroid cancer
progression. We have previously demonstrated that thyroid cancer cells
express functionally active estrogen receptors (ER), ER- and ER- and that
estrogen enhances the metastatic propensity of thyroid cancer cells by
increased migration, adhesion and invasion, potentially mediated by
enhanced secretion of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP), MMP-2 and MMP-9.
However, to successfully grow and metastasize, thyroid cancer cells must
initiate endothelial cell induced neo-vascularization such that adequate
blood supply is maintained within the tumor. In an effort to define the
interacting factors between endothelial cells and thyroid cancer
epithelial cells, we developed an in vitro cell culture based system
using three thyroid cancer cell lines (a papillary thyroid carcinoma cell
line B-CPAP, and two follicular thyroid carcinoma cell lines, CGTH-W-1
and ML-1) and human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVECs). We observed
that conditioned medium from estrogen treated thyroid cancer cells
induced prolific tubulogenesis of endothelial cells which was abrogated
in presence of the anti-estrogen, fulvestrant or neutralizing antibody to
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). We also observed that
conditioned medium from thyroid cancer cells was able to induce migration
of endothelial cells, again a phenomenon which was abrogated by
fulvestrant and VEGF neutralizing antibodies. We further demonstrate that
estrogen acts as a modulator of endothelial-epithelial cell interaction
by modulating angiogenic factors that include VEGF and MMPs, which in
turn induce mitogenic signaling and help promote and maintain cellular
tumor heterogeneity. Estrogen modulated tumor modulating factors are
viewed as novel therapeutic targets and provide evidence that the higher
incidence of thyroid cancer in females is potentially attributed to the
presence of a functional ER that mediates upregulation of pro-angiogenic
factors and thus anti-estrogens can be potentially used to treat and/or
prevent thyroid cancer.

