Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic antitumor activity of AKT inhibitor MK2206 and
FUS1-nanoparticles in LKB1 mutant NSCLC


FUS1, a novel tumor suppressor gene in the human chromosome 3p21.3
region, is deleted in many cancers. A phase I clinical trial assessing
FUS1-mediated molecular therapy has reported antitumor activity in lung
cancer patients. Previous studies showed that FUS1 regulates the
activation of multiple oncogenic kinases. MK2206 is a highly selective
non-ATP-competitive allosteric inhibitor of AKT currently being evaluated
in early-phase clinical trials for treatment of patients with lung
cancer. In this study, we evaluated the combined effects of the tumor
suppressor gene FUS1 and MK2206 on tumor cell growth and apoptosis
induction in NSCLC cells and explored the molecular mechanism of their
mutual action. We found that exogenous expression of FUS1 sensitized the
response of NSCLC cells to MK2206, resulting in a marked increase in
growth suppression and apoptosis in LKB1-mutant NSCLC cells. However,
FUS1 had no effect on the response of LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cells to
MK2206. Systemic treatment with a combination of FUS1-nanoparticles and
MK2206 in an LKB1 mutant H322 lung cancer subcutaneous xenograft mouse
model enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of MK2206. The mice receiving the
combination of MK2206 and FUS1-nanoparticles showed a significantly
reduced mean tumor volume (364164 mm3) compared with mice receiving empty
vector/MK2206 (728101 mm3), MK2206 alone (926250 mm3), FUS1 alone
(1171294 mm3), or empty vector (2405737 mm3) by day 21 (PFUS1, a novel
tumor suppressor gene in the human chromosome 3p21.3 region, is deleted
in many cancers. A phase I clinical trial assessing FUS1-mediated
molecular therapy has reported antitumor activity in lung cancer
patients. Previous studies showed that FUS1 regulates the activation of
multiple oncogenic kinases. MK2206 is a highly selective
non-ATP-competitive allosteric inhibitor of AKT currently being evaluated
in early-phase clinical trials for treatment of patients with lung
cancer. In this study, we evaluated the combined effects of the tumor
suppressor gene FUS1 and MK2206 on tumor cell growth and apoptosis
induction in NSCLC cells and explored the molecular mechanism of their
mutual action. We found that exogenous expression of FUS1 sensitized the
response of NSCLC cells to MK2206, resulting in a marked increase in
growth suppression and apoptosis in LKB1-mutant NSCLC cells. However,
FUS1 had no effect on the response of LKB1-wild-type NSCLC cells to
MK2206. Systemic treatment with a combination of FUS1-nanoparticles and
MK2206 in an LKB1 mutant H322 lung cancer subcutaneous xenograft mouse
model enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of MK2206. The mice receiving the
combination of MK2206 and FUS1-nanoparticles showed a significantly
reduced mean tumor volume (364164 mm3) compared with mice receiving empty
vector/MK2206 (728101 mm3), MK2206 alone (926250 mm3), FUS1 alone
(1171294 mm3), or empty vector (2405737 mm3) by day 21 (P<0.01 for all
three comparisons). Our results show that FUS1 may play a role in
modulating the sensitivity of lung cancer cells to AKT inhibition, and
suggests that a combination of FUS1-nanoparticles and MK2206 may be an
effective treatment strategy for LKB1 mutant human lung cancers.

