Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Does ICAM-2 contribute to the metastatic phenotype of pancreatic
cancer cells


Pancreatic Cancer (PC) is the 10th most diagnosed cancer and the 4th
leading cause of cancer related deaths in the United States, and of those
deaths, approximately 90% are due to metastatic disease. Metastasis
involves many different proteins and pathways, but one family of
proteins, cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) have been implicated in the
metastatic process. CAMs are membrane bound glycoproteins involved in
cell adhesion to other cells or the extracellular matrix. A specific
protein within the CAM superfamily is intercellular adhesion molecule 2
(ICAM-2), which was shown to be expressed in leukocytes and vascular
endothelium. Previously, our lab reported a novel function for ICAM-2 in
neuroblastoma (NB) cells. ICAM-2 expression correlated with decreased
cell motility in vitro, a decreased capacity to form disseminated tumors
in vivo in an experimental metastasis model, and coincided with a
favorable prognosis in primary tumor samples. The objective of our
current study is to examine if these findings could be expanded to other
types of solid tumors. Interestingly, in a preliminary screen for ICAM-2
expression, we detected ICAM-2 expression in other types of solid tumors,
including PC cell lines. We detected RNA and protein expression of ICAM-2
in two cell lines (BxPC-3 and CFPAC-1), while ICAM-2 expression was not
detectable in Panc-1 cells. Next, we wanted to determine if the absence
of ICAM-2 expression correlated with increased colony formation in
anchorage independent growth in soft agar assay, which was previously
reported to be an in vitro indicator of either tumorigenic or metastatic
potential. Surprisingly, ICAM-2 expressing PC cells showed significantly
(pPancreatic Cancer (PC) is the 10th most diagnosed cancer and the 4th
leading cause of cancer related deaths in the United States, and of those
deaths, approximately 90% are due to metastatic disease. Metastasis
involves many different proteins and pathways, but one family of
proteins, cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) have been implicated in the
metastatic process. CAMs are membrane bound glycoproteins involved in
cell adhesion to other cells or the extracellular matrix. A specific
protein within the CAM superfamily is intercellular adhesion molecule 2
(ICAM-2), which was shown to be expressed in leukocytes and vascular
endothelium. Previously, our lab reported a novel function for ICAM-2 in
neuroblastoma (NB) cells. ICAM-2 expression correlated with decreased
cell motility in vitro, a decreased capacity to form disseminated tumors
in vivo in an experimental metastasis model, and coincided with a
favorable prognosis in primary tumor samples. The objective of our
current study is to examine if these findings could be expanded to other
types of solid tumors. Interestingly, in a preliminary screen for ICAM-2
expression, we detected ICAM-2 expression in other types of solid tumors,
including PC cell lines. We detected RNA and protein expression of ICAM-2
in two cell lines (BxPC-3 and CFPAC-1), while ICAM-2 expression was not
detectable in Panc-1 cells. Next, we wanted to determine if the absence
of ICAM-2 expression correlated with increased colony formation in
anchorage independent growth in soft agar assay, which was previously
reported to be an in vitro indicator of either tumorigenic or metastatic
potential. Surprisingly, ICAM-2 expressing PC cells showed significantly
(p<0.001) decreased colony growth compared to non-ICAM-2 expressing
cells. Currently, we are i) evaluating functional differences between
ICAM-2 expressing and non-ICAM-2 expressing PC cell lines, and ii)
producing a stable transfected Panc-1 cell line over-expressing ICAM-2 to
further assess its potential role in metastasis. This work was supported
by UAB - comprehensive cancer center - young supporters board - new
faculty development award 2010.

