Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Jab1/CSN5 a negative regulator of p27 plays a role in the
pathogenesis and cisplatin sensitivity of nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus-associated
malignancy most common in East Asia and Africa. Previous studies have
reported that genetic susceptibility is associated with NPC. Jab1/CSN5
promotes cell growth and proliferation. Recent studies have shown that
Jab1/CSN5 is aberrantly expressed, is correlated with low expression of
p27, and is associated with advanced tumor stage and poor prognosis in
several human cancers. In this study, we examined the functional role and
correlation between Jab1/CSN5 and p27 protein expression in NPC tissue
samples and cell lines, the association of their expression with clinical
outcome and the antitumor effects of cisplatin in NPC cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Jab1/CSN5 aberrant expression
was inversely associated with p27 expression in NPC tissue samples, and
Jab1/CSN5 overexpression was correlated with poor survival
(pNasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus-associated
malignancy most common in East Asia and Africa. Previous studies have
reported that genetic susceptibility is associated with NPC. Jab1/CSN5
promotes cell growth and proliferation. Recent studies have shown that
Jab1/CSN5 is aberrantly expressed, is correlated with low expression of
p27, and is associated with advanced tumor stage and poor prognosis in
several human cancers. In this study, we examined the functional role and
correlation between Jab1/CSN5 and p27 protein expression in NPC tissue
samples and cell lines, the association of their expression with clinical
outcome and the antitumor effects of cisplatin in NPC cells.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Jab1/CSN5 aberrant expression
was inversely associated with p27 expression in NPC tissue samples, and
Jab1/CSN5 overexpression was correlated with poor survival (p<0.01).
Further analysis showed that Jab1/CSN5 mediated p27 degradation in a
proteasome-dependent manner, and Jab1/CSN5 directly interacted with p27
in NPC cells. In addition, inactivation of Jab1/CSN5 by small interfering
RNAs resulted in a remarkable increase in p27 levels and in the
inhibition of cell proliferation, thereby indicating that Jab1/CSN5
controls the stability of p27 by targeting it for degradation in NPC.
Moreover, suppression of Jab1/CSN5 enhanced the antitumor effects of
cisplatin in NPC cells. To our knowledge, these findings are the first to
suggest that Jab1/CSN5 overexpression is involved in NPC pathogenesis via
Jab1-mediated p27 degradation, thus explaining the low p27 levels seen in
NPC. Therefore, Jab1/CSN5 could be a diagnostic marker and a novel
therapeutic target in patients with NPC.

