Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of dietary fatty acids on mammary macrophages in
HER-2/neu-mediated mammary carcinogenesis


Purpose: HER-2/neu overexpression is a molecular subtype of breast cancer
associated with poorer clinical outcome. The association of low-grade
inflammation with increased risk for cancer and correlation of HER-2/neu
overexpression and immune cell infiltration in human breast tumors
suggest that an inflammatory mammary microenvironment is critical to
early events in HER-2/neu carcinogenesis. Of interest are nutritional,
complementary interventions that may suppress mammary gland inflammation,
such as dietary -3 fatty acids. This study is testing the hypothesis that
dietary fat content can modulate inflammation during early stages of
HER-2/neu mammary carcinogenesis, with inhibition of mammary macrophage
infiltration and activation by fish oil/-3 fatty acids relative to corn
oil/-6 fatty acids. Methods: Female MMTV-HER-2/neu transgenic mice were
fed semi-purifed diets with 25% energy as menhaden fish oil or corn oil x
29 weeks or corn oil x 19 weeks then fish oil x 10 weeks. Mammary glands
were harvested at 35 weeks for F480, CD3, and LY6G immunostaining to
identify macrophages, T cells, and granulocytes, respectively. A novel
MMTV-HER-2/neu;c-fms-YFP double transgenic mouse model was generated to
facilitate isolation of mammary gland macrophages. HER-2/neu;c-fms-YFP
and control c-fms-YFP mice were fed fish or corn oil based diets x 19
weeks. YFP+ cells were sorted using high-speeed digital FACS and RNA
isolated from the enriched cells. Differential gene expression based on
diet and genotype was determined by Affymetrix microarray. Results: Diets
were well tolerated by the mice without toxicity. By immunostaining,
MMTV-HER-2/neu mammary glands of fish oil fed mice had a lower number of
macrophages/area of mammary duct relative to the corn oil fed mice
(pPurpose: HER-2/neu overexpression is a molecular subtype of breast
cancer associated with poorer clinical outcome. The association of
low-grade inflammation with increased risk for cancer and correlation of
HER-2/neu overexpression and immune cell infiltration in human breast
tumors suggest that an inflammatory mammary microenvironment is critical
to early events in HER-2/neu carcinogenesis. Of interest are nutritional,
complementary interventions that may suppress mammary gland inflammation,
such as dietary -3 fatty acids. This study is testing the hypothesis that
dietary fat content can modulate inflammation during early stages of
HER-2/neu mammary carcinogenesis, with inhibition of mammary macrophage
infiltration and activation by fish oil/-3 fatty acids relative to corn
oil/-6 fatty acids. Methods: Female MMTV-HER-2/neu transgenic mice were
fed semi-purifed diets with 25% energy as menhaden fish oil or corn oil x
29 weeks or corn oil x 19 weeks then fish oil x 10 weeks. Mammary glands
were harvested at 35 weeks for F480, CD3, and LY6G immunostaining to
identify macrophages, T cells, and granulocytes, respectively. A novel
MMTV-HER-2/neu;c-fms-YFP double transgenic mouse model was generated to
facilitate isolation of mammary gland macrophages. HER-2/neu;c-fms-YFP
and control c-fms-YFP mice were fed fish or corn oil based diets x 19
weeks. YFP+ cells were sorted using high-speeed digital FACS and RNA
isolated from the enriched cells. Differential gene expression based on
diet and genotype was determined by Affymetrix microarray. Results: Diets
were well tolerated by the mice without toxicity. By immunostaining,
MMTV-HER-2/neu mammary glands of fish oil fed mice had a lower number of
macrophages/area of mammary duct relative to the corn oil fed mice
(p<0.0001). Mice treated first with corn oil then changed to menhaden oil
also had a lower number of macrophages/duct area compared to the corn oil
fed mice, without significant differences from the fish oil group. CD3
and LY6G immunostaining did not reveal a similar pattern. In
MMTV-HER-2/neu;c-fms-YFP and c-fms-YFP control mice, the mean percentage
of YFP+ cells in thoracic and inguinal mammary fat pads and abdominal fat
did not differ significantly by diet or genotype. Gene expression
analyses by Affymetrix microarray indicate that the corn oil diets
elicited a pro-inflammatory gene signature in mammary macrophages from
HER-2/neu(+/+) mice relative to all other genotypes and dietary
conditions. Conclusions: Dietary -3 versus -6 fatty acids may modulate
mammary macrophage localization patterns without affecting the overall
number of infiltrating macrophages. Dietary fish oil/-3 fatty acids may
inhibit pro-inflammatory signaling mediated by mammary macrophages in
early stages of HER-2/neu carcinogenesis.

