Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor microRNA-493 decreases cell motility and
migration ability in human bladder cancer cells by down-regulating RhoC
and FZD4


Introduction and Objective: The purpose of this study was to identify new
tumor suppressor microRNAs in bladder cancer to carry out functional
analysis of their suppressive role and identify their specific target
genes. Methods: To identify tumor suppressor microRNAs in bladder cancer,
microRNA microarray was performed using SV-HUC-1, T24, J82 and TCCSUP
cells. Based on the microRNA microarray, 10 microRNAs were selected and
expression levels confirmed using real-time PCR. The function of miR-493
was measured by MTS, cell cycle, migration, and wound healing assays
using T24 and J82 cells. Based on the observation that miR-493 affects
cell motility and migration, we searched for target genes of miR-493
related to motility and migration using a target scan algorithm,
identified RhoC and FZD4 and performed 3UTR luciferase assays. To examine
whether RhoC and FZD4 affects T24 and J82 cell migration, RhoC siRNA,
FZD4 siRNA or control siRNA was transfected into T24 and J82 cells and
migration, and wound healing assays were performed. We also analyzed
whether over-expression of miR-493 affects the binding of RhoC to
Rock-1by immunoprecipitation at 72 hr after transfection in T24 cells.
Results: Expression of miR-493 in bladder cancer (T24, J82 and TCCSUP)
cells was down-regulated compared to normal SV-HUC-1 cells. Also the
expression of miR-493 was significantly lower in human bladder cancer
tissues than in their corresponding non-cancerous tissues. Transfection
of miR-493 into T24 and J82 cells decreased cell growth and migration
abilities. To identify potential miR-493 target genes, we used target
scan algorithms to identify target oncogenes (FZD4 and RhoC) related to
invasion and migration. MiR-493 decreased 3UTR luciferase activity and
protein expression of FZD4 and RhoC. Cell migration was significantly
decreased by 35 to 50% in RhoC and FZD4 siRNA transfectants compared with
control cells. MiR-493 also decreased binding of RhoC and Rock-1.
Conclusions: MiR-493 is a new tumor suppressor microRNA in bladder cancer
and inhibits cell motility through down-regulation of RhoC and FZD4.

