Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor tissue dissection for gene expression assessments in
translational research studies


Background - aim: Translational research studies increasingly employ
routine histologic material (FFPE) for the investigation of gene
expression with extract-based methods, like quantitative real time PCR
(QPCR). Statistically significant differences in the expression levels of
mRNA transcripts in tumor vs neighbouring non-tumor tissues have led to
the consensus of including as high as possible tumor cell rates in the
extract. Herein, we investigated whether the same mRNA markers yield
different clinically relevant values when examined in macrodissected (MD)
and non-macrodissected (NMD) FFPE breast carcinoma tissues. Methods:
Matched NMD and MD samples from primary tumors (P, n=98 sample pairs) and
from metastatic lymph nodes (LN, n=72, overlapping but not matching P
samples) were recruited from a cohort of 357 early high-risk breast
cancer patients that had been adjuvantly treated with epirubicin-CMF
regimens with or without paclitaxel. FFPE sections were evaluated for
tumor cell content (TCC) and were used as whole sections and upon manual
macrodissection for the same tumor. All samples were assessed for ESR1,
ERBB2, MAPT, MMP7 and RACGAP1 mRNA expression with QPCR, and the obtained
relative quantification (RQ) values were compared as continuous variables
and upon hierarchical clustering in matched sample series with respect to
patient outcome. Results: Mean, median (SD) values for TCC% in P-NMD /
P-MD samples were 27.0, 25.0 (14.8) / 68.1, 67.5 (20.5) and in LN-NMD /
LN-MD samples 30.1, 35.0 (18.0) / 82.0, 90.0 (18.2), respectively.
Minimum TCC% was 2.5 in P-NMD and in LN-NMD samples, 35.0 in P-MD and
27.5 in LN-MD. In comparison to matched NMD samples, mRNA expression of
ESR1 (pBackground - aim: Translational research studies increasingly
employ routine histologic material (FFPE) for the investigation of gene
expression with extract-based methods, like quantitative real time PCR
(QPCR). Statistically significant differences in the expression levels of
mRNA transcripts in tumor vs neighbouring non-tumor tissues have led to
the consensus of including as high as possible tumor cell rates in the
extract. Herein, we investigated whether the same mRNA markers yield
different clinically relevant values when examined in macrodissected (MD)
and non-macrodissected (NMD) FFPE breast carcinoma tissues. Methods:
Matched NMD and MD samples from primary tumors (P, n=98 sample pairs) and
from metastatic lymph nodes (LN, n=72, overlapping but not matching P
samples) were recruited from a cohort of 357 early high-risk breast
cancer patients that had been adjuvantly treated with epirubicin-CMF
regimens with or without paclitaxel. FFPE sections were evaluated for
tumor cell content (TCC) and were used as whole sections and upon manual
macrodissection for the same tumor. All samples were assessed for ESR1,
ERBB2, MAPT, MMP7 and RACGAP1 mRNA expression with QPCR, and the obtained
relative quantification (RQ) values were compared as continuous variables
and upon hierarchical clustering in matched sample series with respect to
patient outcome. Results: Mean, median (SD) values for TCC% in P-NMD /
P-MD samples were 27.0, 25.0 (14.8) / 68.1, 67.5 (20.5) and in LN-NMD /
LN-MD samples 30.1, 35.0 (18.0) / 82.0, 90.0 (18.2), respectively.
Minimum TCC% was 2.5 in P-NMD and in LN-NMD samples, 35.0 in P-MD and
27.5 in LN-MD. In comparison to matched NMD samples, mRNA expression of
ESR1 (p<0.001) and MMP7 (p=0.016) was significantly lower in P-MD
samples; MMP7 was also lower (p=0.006) but ESR1 (p=0.008), ERBB2
(pBackground - aim: Translational research studies increasingly employ
routine histologic material (FFPE) for the investigation of gene
expression with extract-based methods, like quantitative real time PCR
(QPCR). Statistically significant differences in the expression levels of
mRNA transcripts in tumor vs neighbouring non-tumor tissues have led to
the consensus of including as high as possible tumor cell rates in the
extract. Herein, we investigated whether the same mRNA markers yield
different clinically relevant values when examined in macrodissected (MD)
and non-macrodissected (NMD) FFPE breast carcinoma tissues. Methods:
Matched NMD and MD samples from primary tumors (P, n=98 sample pairs) and
from metastatic lymph nodes (LN, n=72, overlapping but not matching P
samples) were recruited from a cohort of 357 early high-risk breast
cancer patients that had been adjuvantly treated with epirubicin-CMF
regimens with or without paclitaxel. FFPE sections were evaluated for
tumor cell content (TCC) and were used as whole sections and upon manual
macrodissection for the same tumor. All samples were assessed for ESR1,
ERBB2, MAPT, MMP7 and RACGAP1 mRNA expression with QPCR, and the obtained
relative quantification (RQ) values were compared as continuous variables
and upon hierarchical clustering in matched sample series with respect to
patient outcome. Results: Mean, median (SD) values for TCC% in P-NMD /
P-MD samples were 27.0, 25.0 (14.8) / 68.1, 67.5 (20.5) and in LN-NMD /
LN-MD samples 30.1, 35.0 (18.0) / 82.0, 90.0 (18.2), respectively.
Minimum TCC% was 2.5 in P-NMD and in LN-NMD samples, 35.0 in P-MD and
27.5 in LN-MD. In comparison to matched NMD samples, mRNA expression of
ESR1 (p<0.001) and MMP7 (p=0.016) was significantly lower in P-MD
samples; MMP7 was also lower (p=0.006) but ESR1 (p=0.008), ERBB2
(p<0.001), MAPT (p=0.005) and RACGAP1 (pBackground - aim: Translational
research studies increasingly employ routine histologic material (FFPE)
for the investigation of gene expression with extract-based methods, like
quantitative real time PCR (QPCR). Statistically significant differences
in the expression levels of mRNA transcripts in tumor vs neighbouring
non-tumor tissues have led to the consensus of including as high as
possible tumor cell rates in the extract. Herein, we investigated whether
the same mRNA markers yield different clinically relevant values when
examined in macrodissected (MD) and non-macrodissected (NMD) FFPE breast
carcinoma tissues. Methods: Matched NMD and MD samples from primary
tumors (P, n=98 sample pairs) and from metastatic lymph nodes (LN, n=72,
overlapping but not matching P samples) were recruited from a cohort of
357 early high-risk breast cancer patients that had been adjuvantly
treated with epirubicin-CMF regimens with or without paclitaxel. FFPE
sections were evaluated for tumor cell content (TCC) and were used as
whole sections and upon manual macrodissection for the same tumor. All
samples were assessed for ESR1, ERBB2, MAPT, MMP7 and RACGAP1 mRNA
expression with QPCR, and the obtained relative quantification (RQ)
values were compared as continuous variables and upon hierarchical
clustering in matched sample series with respect to patient outcome.
Results: Mean, median (SD) values for TCC% in P-NMD / P-MD samples were
27.0, 25.0 (14.8) / 68.1, 67.5 (20.5) and in LN-NMD / LN-MD samples 30.1,
35.0 (18.0) / 82.0, 90.0 (18.2), respectively. Minimum TCC% was 2.5 in
P-NMD and in LN-NMD samples, 35.0 in P-MD and 27.5 in LN-MD. In
comparison to matched NMD samples, mRNA expression of ESR1 (p<0.001) and
MMP7 (p=0.016) was significantly lower in P-MD samples; MMP7 was also
lower (p=0.006) but ESR1 (p=0.008), ERBB2 (p<0.001), MAPT (p=0.005) and
RACGAP1 (p<0.001) were higher in LN-MD samples. A three-cluster approach
yielded 68% concordance between P-NMD and P-MD, and 61% concordance
between LN-NMD and LN-MD samples. Upon testing in each one of the four
sample series, significant associations were observed for the above
markers individually and in clusters with respect to patient disease-free
and overall survival. However, the results obtained for P-NMD and LN-NMD
samples did not differ from the ones in P-MD and in LN-MD samples,
respectively. Conclusions: Although TCC% largely affects the obtained RQ
values reflecting mRNA expression, the obtained results for ESR1, ERBB2,
MAPT, MMP7 and RACGAP1 mRNA expression in MD samples did not practically
add to, nor did they alter the evaluation of these markers with respect
to patient outcome. For the five markers examined in this study, and
probably for additional markers as well, the necessity of performing
tissue macrodissection for enrichment in tumor cells in translational
research and, potentially, diagnostics may need to be revisited.

