Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ID3 contributes to cerebrospinal fluid seeding and poor prognosis
of medulloblastoma


Seeding of medulloblastoma is the most influential prognostic factor for
survival, but little has been known about the molecular mechanism of
seeding in medulloblastoma. Inhibitor of differentiation (ID) genes are
implicated as promoter of tumor progression and metastasis in many human
cancers. We investigated the expression and functional roles of ID genes
in terms of seeding and prognosis of medulloblastoma. Significantly
higher ID3 expression was observed in medulloblastoma with seeding than
in tumors without seeding. In vitro studies using D283 medulloblastoma
cells and ID3-siRNA showed that ID3 knockdown resulted in decreased
proliferation, enhanced apoptosis, and suppressed migration. We made a
seeding model of medulloblastoma in mice and injected a stable cell line
with ID3 knockdown with shRNA. ID3 knockdown in vivo inhibited growth of
primary tumor and development of leptomeningeal seeding and prolonged
survival of animals compared with controls. A mRNA mini-array revealed
that ID3 knockdown leads to up-regulation (TIMP3, ITGB4, COL12A1,
ADAMTS8) and down-regulation (TNC, CTGF, ICAM1) of several genes related
to cellular invasion and migration. High ID3 expression was associated
with poor survival of patients with medulloblastoma as with seeding at
presentation. These findings indicated that ID3 plays an important role
in seeding of medulloblastoma and may be a target of therapeutic
intervention for enhancing survival of the patients in the
poor-prognostic group.

