Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancing the anticancer activity of pegylated interferon by dual
specificity protein phsphatase 1 (DUSP1) silencing in hepatocellular
carcinoma based replicon


Chronic hepatitis C infection is one of the important causes of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), or primary liver cancer, throughout the
world. Worldwide, HCC causes over a million deaths per year (about 10% of
all deaths in the adult age range), making it one of the most common
malignancies in adults. Although pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) is a
treatment for HCC among patients with HCV, non-responders remains a
challenging issue. In this study, we investigated whether anticancer
activity of IFN was enhanced after dual specificity protein phosphatase 1
(DUSP1) silencing by regulation of HCV titer. To investigate anticancer
activity of IFN by DUSP1, we silenced DUSP1 expression into HCC based
replicon. The DUSP1 expression was determined using RT-PCR and western
blot analysis. Next, the quantification of viral RNA was measured by
real-time PCR. The activity of the proteins belonged to IFN-mediated
signaling pathway was detected by Western blot analysis. The number of
copies of viral RNA was more decreased in DUSP1 than negative control.
Furthermore, the activity of ERK was enhanced through DUSP1 silencing
under treatment of IFN. Taken together, these results showed that
modulation of DUSP1 activity enhanced the anticancer activity of IFN. Our
study suggested that DUSP1 may play an important role in resistance of
IFN non-responder patients.This work was supported by Basic Science
Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(2011-0026332).

