Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticle mediated measurement of target-drug binding in cancer
cells


Responses to molecularly targeted therapies can be highly variable and
depend on mutations, fluctuations in target protein levels in individual
cells and drug delivery. The ability to rapidly quantitate drug response
in cells harvested from patients in a point-of-care setting would have
far reaching implications. Capitalizing on recent developments with
miniaturized diagnostic NMR (DMR) technologies, we have developed a
magnetic nanoparticle based approach to directly measure both target
expression and drug binding in freshly harvested human cancer cells. The
method involves covalent conjugation of a small molecule drug to a
magnetic nanoparticle that is then used as a read-out for target
expression and drug binding affinity. Using poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibition as a model system, we developed an approach to
distinguish differential expression of PARP across various cell lines
with excellent correlation of DMR measurements to gold standards such as
flow cytometry (r2 = 0.97) and western blotting (r2 = 0.92). We also
sought to mimic drug pharmacodynamics ex-vivo through competitive
target-drug binding and could quantify the relative binding affinities of
several PARP inhibitors (e.g. Olaparib, Velaparib, AG-014699, and
3-aminobenzamide) in whole cells. Finally, we demonstrate the potential
to perform such measurements directly in clinical samples. Further
applications of the assay could result in a drug development platform to
probe drug binding in cells, the identification of resistant cancer
cells, and the ability to determine whether a drug has reached its target.

