Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -catenin (CTNNB1) and BRAF mutations in advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma


Background: Specific mutations in Wnt/-catenin and mitogen activated
protein kinase pathways have been reported to have associations with
tumorigenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The clinical
implications of CTNNB1 (the coding gene for -catenin) and BRAF mutations
in advanced HCC and their associations with prognosis have not been well
studied. Patients and Methods: We reviewed patients with HCC who were
screened for enrollment in clinical trials of first-line
molecular-targeted therapy for advanced diseases between Mar 2006 and Aug
2009 in a tertiary medical center. Only patients with adequate pathologic
specimens obtained at the time of developing advanced disease were
included. Direct sequencing of exon 3 of CTNNB1 and exon 15 of BRAF were
performed to detect mutations. Associations between the specific
mutations and clinicopathologic features or survival of the patients were
analyzed. Results: Eighty-one patients were enrolled in the study, with
the median age of 56.3 years. Among them, 55 (67.9%) patients were
seropositive for hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen; 19 (23.5%)
patients were seropositive for antibody against hepatitis C virus (HCV);
77 (95.1%) patients had BCLC stage C; 42 (51.9%) patients had a CLIP
score 3. Missense mutations of CTNNB1 were identified in 10 (12.3%)
patients. BRAF mutations were found in 4 (4.9%) patients, including 3
missense and 1 silent mutations. The two gene mutations were mutually
exclusive. The median overall survival of patients with and without
CTNNB1 mutation were 7.5 and 6.5 months, respectively (P = 0.430). The
median overall survival of patients with and without BRAF mutation were
2.8 and 6.6 months, respectively (p = 0.350). CTNNB1 or BRAF mutation had
no statistically significant associations with the gender, the ECOG
performance status, HBV infection, HCV infection, alpha-fetoprotein
levels, prior local treatment, macrovascular invasion, extrahepatic
metastasis, BCLC stages, Okuda stages or CLIP scores. Patients with
CTNNB1 mutations were more likely to be > 70 years old than patients
without CTNNB1 mutations (40% vs. 11.3%, p = 0.017). Conclusions: CTNNB1
and BRAF mutations were relatively rare events in patients with advanced
HCC. CTNNB1 mutations were associated with older ages in this specific
population (This study was supported by the grant NTUHYLN005).

