Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HLJ1 serves as an inhibitor of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
by inactivating -catenin signaling


HLJ1 (DnaJ-like heat shock protein), also known as DNAJB4, was classified
as a tumor suppressor gene. The expression of HLJ1 inversely associates
with invasive ability and can predict the clinical outcomes of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. However, the role of HLJ1 in
suppressing cancer metastasis is still unclear. Here, we identified HLJ1
as a novel inhibitor of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our
functional assays in vitro and in vivo demonstrated that Knock-down of
HLJ1 promotes invasion capabilities of lung cancer cells and causes liver
macrometastasis; meanwhile, the crucial domain of HLJ1 in suppression of
cancer invasion was also confirmed. We found that the HLJ1-overexpressing
cells maintain the well-organized cell adhesion and polarity. Inversely,
an increase in actin polymerization and the formation of actin stress
fibers were observed in the HLJ1-silencing cells. HLJ1 down-regulates the
transcriptional activities of slug promoter and facilitates E-cadherin
transcription, leading to the inhibition of epithelial to mesenchymal
transition. Further, we identified the Wnt/-catenin signalling pathway in
which HLJ1 involved by cDNA microarray and pathway analysis. The
subcellular distribution of -catenin is predominant in the nucleus and
the tyrosine-phosphorylated levels of -catenin are up-regulated in the
HLJ1-silenced clones. Finally, we showed a decreased accumulation of
-catenin and an enhanced degradation of -catenin in absence of HLJ1
expression. Taken together, our study reveals that HLJ1 has
anti-metastatic activity by repressing -catenin signaling and provides a
molecular model for the development of new anticancer agents.

