Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional study of missense variants localized in the DNA
binding domain of BRCA2


Genetic evidence of pathogenicity is not available for most missense
mutations (Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUS)) detected in the DNA
binding domain (DBD) of BRCA2 by clinical genetic testing. In the absence
of this evidence, functional assays may be useful for classification of
the clinical relevance of these VUS. We used a cell based
Homology-Directed repair reporter assay to characterize 14 known
pathogenic and 18 known non-pathogenic BRCA2 missense mutations and 34
VUS from the DBD of BRCA2. We transfected each full-length wildtype and
mutant BRCA2 construct into V-C8 BRCA2 deficient cells along with an
I-Sce1-expression plasmid, which induces a unique double strand break in
an integrated DR-GFP reporter plasmid. The protein expression levels were
evaluated by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. The ability of
each BRCA2 mutant to repair the induced break was evaluated by
fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS) for GFP. The HDR assay
exhibited 100% (95% CI: 75.3% - 100%) sensitivity and 100% (95% CI: 81.5%
- 100%) specificity for pathogenic missense mutations. Next, we developed
a statistical classifier for prediction of the pathogenicity or
non-pathogenicity of BRCA2 variants based on results from the HDR assay.
Using known pathogenic and non-pathogenic variants as standards we
computed the probability that each variant is pathogenic or
non-pathogenic based on HDR activity. A probability of 99% in favor of
pathogenicity correctly classified the known pathogenic mutations and the
non-pathogenic variants. The evaluation of an additional 34 variants
identified 18 variants as deleterious and eight as neutral. In summary
the HR assay serves as a reliable high-quality surrogate for
classification of VUS located in the BRCA2 DBD.

