Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ginsenoside compound K inhibits colorectal tumorigenesis via
multiple pathways including ATM/p53-p21


To date, colorectal cancer (CRC) remains one of the most prevalent
malignancies in the United States. Health benefits derived from medicinal
plants have been investigated for years. Ginseng has been shown to induce
diverse pharmacological effects mediated predominantly by saponins, a
type of ginsenoside contained in ginseng. Compound K
(20-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-20(S)-protopanaxadiol, CK), an intestinal
bacterial metabolite of ginseng protopanaxadiol saponins, has been shown
to inhibit cell growth in a variety of tumors. However, the detailed
mechanism, especially the effects of CK on cell cycle regulation in CRC
cells, has not been examined. In addition, it is uncertain whether CK can
inhibit colorectal tumor growth in vivo. In this study, we observed that
CK significantly inhibited the growth of HCT-116 cells in athymic nude
mouse xenograft models. Quantitative analysis revealed that CK
significantly inhibited xenograft tumor growth from the 3rd week after CK
administration (pTo date, colorectal cancer (CRC) remains one of the most
prevalent malignancies in the United States. Health benefits derived from
medicinal plants have been investigated for years. Ginseng has been shown
to induce diverse pharmacological effects mediated predominantly by
saponins, a type of ginsenoside contained in ginseng. Compound K
(20-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-20(S)-protopanaxadiol, CK), an intestinal
bacterial metabolite of ginseng protopanaxadiol saponins, has been shown
to inhibit cell growth in a variety of tumors. However, the detailed
mechanism, especially the effects of CK on cell cycle regulation in CRC
cells, has not been examined. In addition, it is uncertain whether CK can
inhibit colorectal tumor growth in vivo. In this study, we observed that
CK significantly inhibited the growth of HCT-116 cells in athymic nude
mouse xenograft models. Quantitative analysis revealed that CK
significantly inhibited xenograft tumor growth from the 3rd week after CK
administration (p<0.001); the higher dose (30mg/kg) of CK treatment
exhibited a stronger effect than the lower dose (15mg/kg)(pTo date,
colorectal cancer (CRC) remains one of the most prevalent malignancies in
the United States. Health benefits derived from medicinal plants have
been investigated for years. Ginseng has been shown to induce diverse
pharmacological effects mediated predominantly by saponins, a type of
ginsenoside contained in ginseng. Compound K
(20-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-20(S)-protopanaxadiol, CK), an intestinal
bacterial metabolite of ginseng protopanaxadiol saponins, has been shown
to inhibit cell growth in a variety of tumors. However, the detailed
mechanism, especially the effects of CK on cell cycle regulation in CRC
cells, has not been examined. In addition, it is uncertain whether CK can
inhibit colorectal tumor growth in vivo. In this study, we observed that
CK significantly inhibited the growth of HCT-116 cells in athymic nude
mouse xenograft models. Quantitative analysis revealed that CK
significantly inhibited xenograft tumor growth from the 3rd week after CK
administration (p<0.001); the higher dose (30mg/kg) of CK treatment
exhibited a stronger effect than the lower dose (15mg/kg)(p<0.001). Using
MTS assay, we showed that CK significantly inhibited the viability of
human colorectal cancer cell lines HCT-116, HT-29 and SW480 in a dose-
and time-dependent manner(with IC50 at around 10, 25, and 25uM
respectively, pTo date, colorectal cancer (CRC) remains one of the most
prevalent malignancies in the United States. Health benefits derived from
medicinal plants have been investigated for years. Ginseng has been shown
to induce diverse pharmacological effects mediated predominantly by
saponins, a type of ginsenoside contained in ginseng. Compound K
(20-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-20(S)-protopanaxadiol, CK), an intestinal
bacterial metabolite of ginseng protopanaxadiol saponins, has been shown
to inhibit cell growth in a variety of tumors. However, the detailed
mechanism, especially the effects of CK on cell cycle regulation in CRC
cells, has not been examined. In addition, it is uncertain whether CK can
inhibit colorectal tumor growth in vivo. In this study, we observed that
CK significantly inhibited the growth of HCT-116 cells in athymic nude
mouse xenograft models. Quantitative analysis revealed that CK
significantly inhibited xenograft tumor growth from the 3rd week after CK
administration (p<0.001); the higher dose (30mg/kg) of CK treatment
exhibited a stronger effect than the lower dose (15mg/kg)(p<0.001). Using
MTS assay, we showed that CK significantly inhibited the viability of
human colorectal cancer cell lines HCT-116, HT-29 and SW480 in a dose-
and time-dependent manner(with IC50 at around 10, 25, and 25uM
respectively, p<0.01). In a flow cytometry assay, it was shown that CK
could significantly induce HCT-116 cell apoptosis and arrest the cell
cycle in the G1 phase. By screening with cell cycle and cell signal PCR
arrays, some of the most relevant genes(such as CDKs/cyclins, BCL2, E2F4,
p21CDKN1A, p15CDKN2B, TP53, etc.) and signal transduction pathways(such
as p53, TGF-, PI3K/AKT, pathways) were shown to be transcriptionally
regulated after CK exposure. Western blots showed that the major
regulated targets of CK are cyclin dependent inhibitors, including p21,
p27, and p15. CK-induced colorectal cancer cell apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest were related to the up-regulation of p53/p21, FoxO3a-p27/p15,
Smad3, etc and down-regulation of cdc25A, CDK4/6 and cyclin D1/3 as well.
Taken together, the results indicate that CK inhibits transcriptional
activation of multiple tumor-promoting pathways in colorectal cancer,
which suggest that CK could be useful for the prevention or treatment of
CRC. Key words: Colorectal cancer, Ginsenoside, xenograft tumor, p53/p21,
cell cycle arrest

