Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of Dicer expression by Sox4 and its role in melanoma
cell invasion and patient survival


Deregulated expression of Sox4 transcription factor has been observed in
various types of cancers. We previously reported reduced expression of
Sox4 in metastatic melanoma and its role in suppression of cell migration
and invasion. We also demonstrated binding of Sox4 to the promoter
sequence of Dicer, an RNase involved in maturation of miRNAs.
Interestingly, altered expression of Dicer has also been reported in
different types of cancers. However, the potential mechanisms which
regulate Dicer expression and its potential significance in melanoma are
unknown. Here we studied the regulation of Dicer expression by Sox4 and
its role in suppression of melanoma invasion. Our data revealed a reduced
expression of Dicer mRNA and protein upon Sox4 knockdown. On the other
hand, overexpression of Sox4 increased Dicer expression at both mRNA and
protein levels. We found that knockdown of Dicer, similar to Sox4
knockdown, enhances the matrigel invasion ability of melanoma cells by at
least 2-fold. However, cell growth assays showed that Dicer knockdown
does not have a major effect on the growth rate of melanoma cells. In
addition, we revealed that overexpression of exogenous Dicer can
abrogated the enhanced melanoma cells invasion upon Sox4 knockdown.
Furthermore, we examined the expression of Dicer protein in different
stages of melanocytic lesions by tissue microarray (TMA) and
immunohistochemistry using a construct containing 30 normal nevi, 87
dysplastic nevi, 262 primary and 135 metastatic melanomas. Our data
revealed that Dicer expression is inversely correlated with melanoma
progression (PDeregulated expression of Sox4 transcription factor has
been observed in various types of cancers. We previously reported reduced
expression of Sox4 in metastatic melanoma and its role in suppression of
cell migration and invasion. We also demonstrated binding of Sox4 to the
promoter sequence of Dicer, an RNase involved in maturation of miRNAs.
Interestingly, altered expression of Dicer has also been reported in
different types of cancers. However, the potential mechanisms which
regulate Dicer expression and its potential significance in melanoma are
unknown. Here we studied the regulation of Dicer expression by Sox4 and
its role in suppression of melanoma invasion. Our data revealed a reduced
expression of Dicer mRNA and protein upon Sox4 knockdown. On the other
hand, overexpression of Sox4 increased Dicer expression at both mRNA and
protein levels. We found that knockdown of Dicer, similar to Sox4
knockdown, enhances the matrigel invasion ability of melanoma cells by at
least 2-fold. However, cell growth assays showed that Dicer knockdown
does not have a major effect on the growth rate of melanoma cells. In
addition, we revealed that overexpression of exogenous Dicer can
abrogated the enhanced melanoma cells invasion upon Sox4 knockdown.
Furthermore, we examined the expression of Dicer protein in different
stages of melanocytic lesions by tissue microarray (TMA) and
immunohistochemistry using a construct containing 30 normal nevi, 87
dysplastic nevi, 262 primary and 135 metastatic melanomas. Our data
revealed that Dicer expression is inversely correlated with melanoma
progression (P<0.0001). Accordingly, the number of samples with positive
staining for Dicer reduced from 100% in normal nevi to 85% in dysplastic
nevi and 87% in primary melanoma and further reduced to 65% in metastatic
melanoma. Expression of Dicer was also negatively correlated with the
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging of the melanoma samples
(P=0.0004). Strikingly, reduced Dicer expression was correlated with a
poorer overall and disease-specific 5-year survival of patients (P=0.015
and 0.0029, respectively). Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed
that reduced Dicer expression is an independent prognostic factor to
predict patient outcome (P=0.030). In addition, we analyzed the possible
correlation between the expression of Sox4 and Dicer in melanoma TMA
samples and found a significant correlation between expression of these
markers (P=0.009), further indicating the regulation of Dicer expression
by Sox4. Our results pinpoint the regulation of Dicer expression by Sox4
and the critical role of Dicer and probably the miRNA machinery in the
suppression of melanoma metastasis. Our data also suggest that Dicer
might be a suitable marker for the prognosis of melanoma patients and a
potential therapeutic target for human melanoma.

