Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive glucan profile exploration of mutated K-ras
knockdown in colorectal cancer


(Background) In colorectal cancer (CRC), K-ras mutation is found in
nearly 40% of the patients, and it is of prognostic significance (Onozato
W et al, J Surg Oncol, 2010). Moreover, its knockdown in CRC cell lines
with mutated K-ras gene results in robust reduction of ability of cell
proliferation and anchorage independent growth (Shirasawa S, Science,
1993), both of which reflect metastatic ability. On the other hand,
robust alterations of glycan structures have been reported in CRC
promotion steps, accompanied by remarkable phenotypic changes, however
there is no report that mentions the relationship of K-ras mutation and
glycan change. (Materials and Methods) We examined glycan change of CRC
cell lines (DLD1 and HCT116) somatically knocked out for K-ras gene by
lectin array including 41 lectins to elucidate whether K-ras
mutation-induced glycan changes play a critical role in CRC promotion.
(Result) (1) In DLD1, we compared DLD1 wild type genotype cells (DLD1,
DKS-5) with those that were knocked out for mutated K-ras gene (DKO-3,
DKS-8), and the signals of MAL, MPA, UEA-I, and TJA-II were remarkably
decreased in the knockdown cells. (2) In HCT116, we compared HCT116 wild
type genotypic cells (HCT116, Hk2-10) with those that were knocked out
for the mutated K-ras gene (Hke-3), and both MAL and MPA were remarkably
declined. (3) In both cell lines, expression changes of glycans which can
bind with MAL and MPA were consistent with the results of the lectin
blotting, and both lectin signals were confirmed to be commonly altered
by removing the mutated K-ras gene. (Conclusion) Mutated K-ras may be
involved in critical phenotype change of CRC, accompanied by abnormal
sialic acid recognition.

