Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of clofarabine on apoptosis and DNA synthesis in human
breast cancer


As a second-generation nucleoside analogue, clofarabine, is employed
primarily for the treatment of paediatric patients with relapsed or
refractory acute lymphoblastic leukaemia after at least two prior
regimens, but its application toward the solid tumors attracts more and
more attention recently. In this study, the effect of clofarabine was
investigated in several breast cancer cell lines and compared to a normal
cell line (hTERT RPE-1). Upon treatment with 0.1 or 0.2M clofarabine for
48 hrs, inhibition of cell growth (S-phase arrest) was investigated in
both breast cancer and normal cell lines. And we observed that the
induction of apoptosis was obvious in the all breast cancer cells but not
in the normal cells. More than 40% breast cancer cells entered apoptotic
or/and necrotic process after they were treated to 0.2M clofarabine for
48 hrs. This was associated with an increase in dCK activity in malignant
cells between 2.2 and 4.7 folds but only 1.2-fold in hTERT RPE-1 cells.
Upon treatment with clofarabine, the cleaved-caspase 3 was observed and
the level of anti-apoptotic protein (Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL) down-regulated
significantly in the breast cancer cell lines, but not in the hTERT RPE-1
cells. In addition, the sensitivity of all breast cancer cells to the
toxicity of clofarabine was attenuated significantly by down-regulation
of dCK with siRNA. These results showed that as a single-agent and
combination regim clofarabine is worth to be explored in solid tumor.

