Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER phosphorylation patterns at hinge domain Ser294 and Ser305
differentiate ligand-dependent from ligand-independent receptor activation


Domain-specific phosphorylation of estrogen receptor alpha (ER) is
critical for its transcription factor activity and may determine its
predictive and therapeutic biomarker value. Recent attention has turned
to the poorly understood ER hinge domain in light of preliminary evidence
that phosphorylation at serine 305 (pSer305) associates with poor
clinical outcome and endocrine resistance. Using multiple reaction
monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry (MS), we have studied a number of ER
overexpressing human breast cancer cells lines (MCF-7, BT474, T47D) and
found that robust ER phosphorylation occurs on a neighboring hinge domain
site at Ser294, but only upon ligand (estradiol, tamoxifen) stimulation
of the receptor since growth factor cell stimulation (EGF, insulin,
heregulin-, forskolin) fails to induce pSer294. As well, pSer294
formation appears to be essential for full ligand induction of ER gene
transcription in experimental models. Selective inhibition of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) by roscovitine or SNS-032 in the breast
cancer cell lines blocks ligand induced pSer294 formation, indicating
that this hinge domain phosphorylation is mediated by CDKs; likewise,
cell-free studies with recombinant ER and specific cyclin-CDK complexes
reveal that Ser294 phosphorylation is most effectively induced by the
transcription-regulating and cell cycle-independent kinases, CDK7 and
CDK9. In contrast to this ligand specific induction of pSer294, western
analysis of immunopurified ER from MCF-7 probed with a newly available
pSer305 monoclonal demonstrates that pSer305 formation occurs in response
to growth factor stimulation (EGF, insulin, forskolin) but not in
response to cell stimulation by ligand alone. Interestingly, co-treatment
with ligand and growth factor reduces pSer294 formation relative to
ligand stimulation alone while co-treatment reduces pSer305 formation
relative to growth factor stimulation alone, suggesting that these two
hinge phosphorylation sites not only respond reciprocally to specify
different aspects of ER function but are also antagonistically responsive
to crosstalk. Unlike the better studied N-terminal domain phosphorylation
sites at Ser118 and Ser167, which are phosphorylated jointly and
additively upon combined ligand-dependent and ligand-independent ER
activation, the two hinge domain sites at Ser294 and Ser305 appear to
respond in a reciprocal fashion differentiating ligand-dependent from
ligand-independent ER activation. Pending current development of a
pSer294 monoclonal, future immunohistochemical interrogation of the ER
hinge domain phosphorylation status at Ser294 and Ser305 is expected to
improve the biomarker value of this receptor by better predicting ER
overexpressing breast cancers most likely to respond to endocrine agents.

