Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD14+S100A9 high monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells and
their clinical relevance in non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are heterogeneous
family of myeloid cells suppressing T cell immunity in tumor bearing
hosts. We recently described an increased population of granulocyte-like
CD11b+/CD14-/CD15+ MDSC in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
The role of CD11b+/CD14+ MDSC, being characterized as an
inflammatory-type monocyte in mice, has not been well studied in human
cancer. Methods: CD11b+/CD14- and CD11b+/CD14+ cells, determined and
phenotyped by FACS analysis, in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) of treatment-nave advanced NSCLC patients were correlated to
clinical data. T cells activation in response to CD3/CD28 co-stimulation
was determined by CFSE staining and ELISA analysis of IFN-. Cytokines and
growth factors in the cultured supernatants were analyzed by ELISA.
Results: NSCLC patients had significant higher ratio of CD11b+/CD14+ and
CD11b+/CD14- cells than normal subjects. CD11b+/CD14+, but not
CD11b+/CD11b- cells, correlated with poor performance and poor response
to chemotherapy. Suppression of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells in NSCLC PBMCs was
reversed by depleting either CD11b+ cells or CD14+ cells, an effect not
seen in normal PBMCs. Both isolated CD11b+/CD14- and CD11b+/CD14+ cells
suppressed CD8+ T cells proliferation and IFN- production in
CD11b-depleted PBMC with equal ability. Enrichment of HLA-DR-/low cells
decreased the suppressive ability of the CD14+ cells. CD11b+/CD14+ cells
were monocyte-like expressing CD33+, CD15-/low, IL-4R+ and S100A9high and
produced iNOS/arginase. The ratio of S100A9high cells positively
correlated with the suppressive ability of the CD14+ cells and was
associated with poor response to chemotherapy. CD11b+/CD14+ cell
suppression of T cell proliferation was revered by the iNOS inhibitor
aminoguanidine hydrochloride, the arginase inhibitor nor-NOHA, the STAT3
inhibitor AG490 and the blocking antibodies for IL-13, IL-4R+ and IL-10.
CD11b+/CD14+ MDSCs secreted significant higher amounts of TNF-, IL-8,
IL-10, IL-13 and HGF than normal CD11b+/CD14+ cells. Conclusion: The
CD11b+/CD14+ inflammatory monocyte in NSCLC patients is a distinct subset
of MDSC with important clinical relevance, probably through secreting
inflammatory cytokines and growth factors. These cells expressed IL-4R
and high levels of S100A9. Among CD11b+/CD14+ monocytic MDSC, the
expression of S100A9 protein seemd to be related to the immunosuppression
activity and clinical response to chemotherapy. The role of S100A9
protein deserves further investigation.

