Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ki67 index is an independent prognostic factor in pleural
mesothelioma


Aims: Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a devastating cancer with
increasing incidence. Despite the fact that for establishing the
diagnosis a number of immunohistochemical markers are needed, there is
only one pathological prognosticator accepted and utilized, namely the
histological subtype. Accordingly, we have investigated the prognostic
significance of the Ki76 labeling index in malignant pleural
mesothelioma. Patients and Methods: Ki67 index has been determined by
assessing the labeled nuclei per high power field and correlated in a
retrospective manner with patients clinical history and outcome. The
prognostic power of the routine proliferation marker Ki67 was first
determined in a test cohort (TC) of paraffin-embedded tissue samples from
55 patients. The independence of prognostic power against basic
clinicopathological characteristics has been determined by multivariate
analysis. Next, we measured the prognostic power in an independent
validation cohort (VC) of 42 patients from another center. Results:
Median Ki67 index was found to be 10 for both the test and validation.
Patients whose tumor sample was categorized by low Ki67 index ( 10) had
significantly longer survival times than those with higher Ki76 indices
(in the test cohort: hazard ratio [HR] 2.49, 95% confidence interval [CI]
1.30-4.79, pAims: Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a devastating cancer
with increasing incidence. Despite the fact that for establishing the
diagnosis a number of immunohistochemical markers are needed, there is
only one pathological prognosticator accepted and utilized, namely the
histological subtype. Accordingly, we have investigated the prognostic
significance of the Ki76 labeling index in malignant pleural
mesothelioma. Patients and Methods: Ki67 index has been determined by
assessing the labeled nuclei per high power field and correlated in a
retrospective manner with patients clinical history and outcome. The
prognostic power of the routine proliferation marker Ki67 was first
determined in a test cohort (TC) of paraffin-embedded tissue samples from
55 patients. The independence of prognostic power against basic
clinicopathological characteristics has been determined by multivariate
analysis. Next, we measured the prognostic power in an independent
validation cohort (VC) of 42 patients from another center. Results:
Median Ki67 index was found to be 10 for both the test and validation.
Patients whose tumor sample was categorized by low Ki67 index ( 10) had
significantly longer survival times than those with higher Ki76 indices
(in the test cohort: hazard ratio [HR] 2.49, 95% confidence interval [CI]
1.30-4.79, p<0.01; in the validation cohort: HR 2.54, CI 1.26-5.13,
pAims: Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a devastating cancer with
increasing incidence. Despite the fact that for establishing the
diagnosis a number of immunohistochemical markers are needed, there is
only one pathological prognosticator accepted and utilized, namely the
histological subtype. Accordingly, we have investigated the prognostic
significance of the Ki76 labeling index in malignant pleural
mesothelioma. Patients and Methods: Ki67 index has been determined by
assessing the labeled nuclei per high power field and correlated in a
retrospective manner with patients clinical history and outcome. The
prognostic power of the routine proliferation marker Ki67 was first
determined in a test cohort (TC) of paraffin-embedded tissue samples from
55 patients. The independence of prognostic power against basic
clinicopathological characteristics has been determined by multivariate
analysis. Next, we measured the prognostic power in an independent
validation cohort (VC) of 42 patients from another center. Results:
Median Ki67 index was found to be 10 for both the test and validation.
Patients whose tumor sample was categorized by low Ki67 index ( 10) had
significantly longer survival times than those with higher Ki76 indices
(in the test cohort: hazard ratio [HR] 2.49, 95% confidence interval [CI]
1.30-4.79, p<0.01; in the validation cohort: HR 2.54, CI 1.26-5.13,
p<0.01). In the multivariate analyses of the test cohort (n=54), we could
prove the prognostic power of Ki67, independent from gender, age,
treatment, stage and histology. Treatment (HR 4.02, CI 1.82-8.90, pAims:
Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a devastating cancer with increasing
incidence. Despite the fact that for establishing the diagnosis a number
of immunohistochemical markers are needed, there is only one pathological
prognosticator accepted and utilized, namely the histological subtype.
Accordingly, we have investigated the prognostic significance of the Ki76
labeling index in malignant pleural mesothelioma. Patients and Methods:
Ki67 index has been determined by assessing the labeled nuclei per high
power field and correlated in a retrospective manner with patients
clinical history and outcome. The prognostic power of the routine
proliferation marker Ki67 was first determined in a test cohort (TC) of
paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 55 patients. The independence of
prognostic power against basic clinicopathological characteristics has
been determined by multivariate analysis. Next, we measured the
prognostic power in an independent validation cohort (VC) of 42 patients
from another center. Results: Median Ki67 index was found to be 10 for
both the test and validation. Patients whose tumor sample was categorized
by low Ki67 index ( 10) had significantly longer survival times than
those with higher Ki76 indices (in the test cohort: hazard ratio [HR]
2.49, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.30-4.79, p<0.01; in the validation
cohort: HR 2.54, CI 1.26-5.13, p<0.01). In the multivariate analyses of
the test cohort (n=54), we could prove the prognostic power of Ki67,
independent from gender, age, treatment, stage and histology. Treatment
(HR 4.02, CI 1.82-8.90, p<0.01) and Ki67 index (HR 2.19, CI 1.07-4.47,
p=0.03) were the remaining independent significant prognosticators in the
multivariate Cox regression model, whereas biphasic histology showed a
clear tendency to worse prognosis when compared to the epitheloid subtype
(HR 1.96, CI 0.94-4.07, p=0.07). Conclusion: Our study identifies Ki67
index as an independent, reproducible prognostic factor in malignant
pleural mesothelioma and warrants its further investigation and clinical
application in patients with this malignancy.

