Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of ribosomal RNA genes by Mybbp1a


Transcription of the ribosomal RNA gene repeats by Pol I occurs in the
nucleolus and is a fundamental step in ribosome biogenesis and protein
translation. Due to tight coordination between ribosome biogenesis and
cell proliferation, transcription of rRNA and stable maintenance of rDNA
clusters are thought to be under intricate control by intercalated
mechanisms, particularly at the epigenetic level. Here we identify the
nucleolar protein Myb-binding protein 1a (Mybbp1a) as a novel negative
regulator of rRNA expression. Suppression of rDNA transcription by
Mybbp1a was linked to promoter regulation as illustrated by its binding
to the chromatin around the hypermethylated, inactive rDNA gene
promoters. Our data further showed that downregulation of Mybbp1a
abrogated the local DNA methylation levels and histone marks associated
with gene silencing, and altered the promoter occupancy of various
factors such UBF and HDACs, consequently leading to elevated rRNA
expression. Mechanistically, we propose that Mybbp1a maintains rDNA
repeats in a silenced state while in association with the negative
epigenetic modifiers HDAC1/2. Results from our present work reveal a
previously unrecognized co-repressor role of Mybbp1a in rRNA expression.
They are further consistent with the scenario that Mybbp1a is an integral
constituent of the rDNA epigenetic regulation that underlies the balanced
state of rDNA clusters.

