Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Bim, Noxa, and Puma in non-small cell lung cancer


Background: The BH3-only members of the Bcl-2 protein family have been
proposed to play a key role in the control of apoptosis and in the
initiation of the apoptotic pathways. In this study, we evaluated the
expression of Bim, Noxa, and Puma in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Methods: A total of 135 surgically resected NSCLCs were
immunohistochemically assessed for Bim, Noxa, and Puma expression. The
immunoscores were determined, and then its correlation with either the
clinicopathological variables or the survival outcomes were analyzed.
Results: Immunohistochemical reactivity for Bim, Noxa, and Puma was
detected in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells. Bim expression was
associated with several clinicopathological factors, including sex
(pBackground: The BH3-only members of the Bcl-2 protein family have been
proposed to play a key role in the control of apoptosis and in the
initiation of the apoptotic pathways. In this study, we evaluated the
expression of Bim, Noxa, and Puma in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Methods: A total of 135 surgically resected NSCLCs were
immunohistochemically assessed for Bim, Noxa, and Puma expression. The
immunoscores were determined, and then its correlation with either the
clinicopathological variables or the survival outcomes were analyzed.
Results: Immunohistochemical reactivity for Bim, Noxa, and Puma was
detected in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells. Bim expression was
associated with several clinicopathological factors, including sex
(p<0.001), smoking habit (p=0.03), pathological histology (p=0.001),
pathological T stage (p=0.03), pathological disease stage (p=0.02), and
differentiation of tumor (pBackground: The BH3-only members of the Bcl-2
protein family have been proposed to play a key role in the control of
apoptosis and in the initiation of the apoptotic pathways. In this study,
we evaluated the expression of Bim, Noxa, and Puma in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Methods: A total of 135 surgically resected NSCLCs were
immunohistochemically assessed for Bim, Noxa, and Puma expression. The
immunoscores were determined, and then its correlation with either the
clinicopathological variables or the survival outcomes were analyzed.
Results: Immunohistochemical reactivity for Bim, Noxa, and Puma was
detected in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells. Bim expression was
associated with several clinicopathological factors, including sex
(p<0.001), smoking habit (p=0.03), pathological histology (p=0.001),
pathological T stage (p=0.03), pathological disease stage (p=0.02), and
differentiation of tumor (p<0.001). Multivariate logistic regression
analysis showed a significant correlation between low Bim expression and
squamous cell carcinoma (p=0.04), in addition to a correlation between
high Bim expression and well differentiated tumors (p=0.02). Analysis of
cellular biological expression demonstrated a link between low Bim
expression and high Ki67. While Noxa expression was also shown to be
correlated with both smoking habit (p=0.02) and the pathological
histology (p=0.03), there was no strong association observed between the
expression and the clinical features when they were examined by a
multivariate logistic regression analysis. No correlations were noted
between Puma expression and any of the variables. Our analyses also
indicated that the expression levels of the BH3-only proteins were not
pertinent to the survival outcome. Conclusions: The current analyses
demonstrated that Bim expression in the NSCLCs was associated with both
squamous cell carcinoma histology and tumor proliferation.

