Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anthocyanin-rich black raspberry extract negatively regulates stem
cell related molecules, EMT, and pluripotency of pancreatic cancer stem
cells


Ascertaining the potentials of diet-derived phenolics in eradicating
cancer stem cells (CSCs), that proliferate and self-renew extensively
leading to the initiation and progression of tumor, may escort
significant clinical implications. Recently, we have shown that black
raspberry extract (RSE) potentiates pancreatic cancer (PC) cell killing
by targeting transcriptional machinery. Herein, we investigated ex vivo
the effect of RSE on the regulation of EMT, pluripotency maintaining and
other stem cell related molecules in PC-CSCs. CD133+CD44+CD24+ESA+
PC-CSCs isolated from human PC xenografts developed in athymic NCr-nu/nu
nude mice with human MiaPaCa2, BXPC3, Panc-1 or Panc-3.27 cells were
maintained in vitro. PC-CSCs exposed to RSE (2.0g) for 3h were assessed
for transcriptional regulation of 93 stem cell related molecules using
QPCR profiling. Expression and cellular localization of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and pluripotent
maintaining factors including ABCG2, E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin, MYB, MYC,
Nanog and SOX2 in MiaPaCa2, BXPC3 xenografts were assessed using
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The results revealed that RSE significantly
inhibited 83, 50 and 54 stem cell related molecules in PC-CSCs isolated
from xenografts developed using MiaPaCa2, Panc-1 and Panc 3.27
respectively. Of these, 27 genes were commonly suppressed by RSE in all
three PC-CSCs population. Further, IHC staining showed complete
repression of EMT and pluripotent markers in both MiaPaCa2 and BXPC3
xenografts. Together, these data imply that RSE may exert selective
inhibition of EMT and pancreatic CSCs self renewal capacity and, may thus
serve as a potential deliverable to negate PC initiation and progression.

