Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MK-4827, a PARP-1/-2 inhibitor, strongly enhances response of
human lung and breast cancer xenografts to radiation


The poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, MK-4827, is a novel
potent, orally bioavailable PARP-1 and PARP-2 inhibitor currently in
phase I clinical trials for cancer treatment. No preclinical data
currently exist on the combination of MK-4827 with radiotherapy (XRT). We
examined whether MK-4827 enhances radiosensitivity of a variety of human
tumor xenografts of differing p53 status. Human lung cancer xenografts,
Calu-6 (p53 null), A549 (p53 wild-type [wt]) and H-460 (p53 wt) and
triple negative MDA-MB-231 human breast carcinoma xenografts were used.
Tumor xenografts growing in the hind leg of nude mice were exposed to
fractionated XRT at 8 mm (diameter). Fractionated XRT (2 Gy per fraction)
was delivered for 7 (twice daily, 6 h in between) or 14 (once daily)
consecutive days, total dose 28 Gy. MK-4827 was given by gavage once (50
mg/kg, 1 h before first XRT of the day) or twice daily (25 mg/kg, 1 h
before each XRT of the day) starting when tumors were 6 mm diameter. Mice
received (a) no treatment, (b) MK-4827, (c) XRT or (d) MK-4827 plus XRT.
Tumor growth delay (TGD, days for tumors to grow from 8.0 mm to 12.0 mm)
was the endpoint. Radiation enhancement factor (EF) was then calculated.
MK-4827 alone had no effect on tumor growth for any of the tumors types.
For p53 mutant Calu-6 xenografts TGD for untreated tumors was 13.2 0.5
and for twice daily XRT was 30.9 2.4 days. Combination of XRT for 7 days
with MK-4827, 25mg/kg twice daily for 21 consecutive days, further
extended TGD to 39.7 2.0 days (EF 1.4) and 47.8 4.0 days (EF 2.03) for
MK-4827, 50mg/kg once daily. Maximum radiation enhancement was observed
when MK-4827 was given at a dose of 50 mg/kg once daily. For XRT and
MK-4827 given once daily, MK-4827 was continued until 2 days after
completion of XRT, MK-4827 was found to be similarly effective and the EF
was 1.7. For p53 wt H460and A459 xenografts, twice daily XRT and once
daily MK-4827 was used. MK-4827 was continued until 2 days after
completion of XRT. TGD for untreated H460 and A459 xenografts was 7.8 0.5
and 33.2 1.5 days respectively; whereas it was 15.6 0.5 and 53.2 3.1 days
respectively for irradiated tumors. TGDs were further extended to 26.0
3.5 days for H460 (EF 2.2) and 64.1 4.2 days (EF 1.9) for A549 xenografts
in MK-4827 plus XRT groups. Similarly, using MDA-MB-231 human breast
carcinoma xenografts, the potency of combination treatment was greater
than XRT alone showing essentially no local tumor regrowth until the
occurrence of metastases. When MK-4827 was given as a single dose of 50
mg/kg and tumors were assayed for PAR, MK-4827 reduced PAR levels in
tumors by 1 h after administration which persisted for up to 24 h. In
conclusion, MK-4827 strongly enhanced the effect of radiation on a
variety of human tumor xenografts irrespective of p53 status. The long
lasting PARP inhibition (1-24h) potentially adds flexibility to future
clinical trial design.

