Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The potential role of IMP-3 and PDPN in invadopodia formation and
collective cancer invasion: Anti-invadopodia therapy as a therapeutic
target


Better understanding the mechanisms underlying the metastatic process is
essential to developing novel targeted therapeutics. Recently,
invadopodia have been increasingly recognized as important drivers of
local invasion in metastasis. Invadopodia are actin-rich structures that
have the ability to degrade the underlying extracellular matrix (ECM) and
promote cell invasion. However, many questions concerning the mechanisms
of invadopodia formation, regulation and function remain open to debate.
Meanwhile, invasion of cells into the surrounding tissue and destruction
of normal tissue architecture are two hallmarks of malignant tumors.
Morphologically, two patterns of tumor invasion can be distinguished;
single cell and collective cell invasion. The invasion of single cells
and collective cells is often correlated with dramatic changes in the
expression and function of adhesive and regulatory proteins. These
changes are reminiscent of early developmental processes when cells
acquire a migratory, mesenchymal phenotype. Currently, the role of
invadopodia in collective cancer invasion is completely unknown. In the
present study, we reveal that insuline-like growth factor-II mRNA-binding
protein-3 (IMP-3) associated with invadopodial infiltration and
collective cancer invasion through podoplanin (PDPN) mRNA stabilization
as a component of invadopodia, suggesting that invadopodia plays a
pivotal role in invasive front of collective cancer invasion and thereby
involved the cancer metastasis. This finding, combined with other
investigations into the mechanisms of invadopodia formation, reveal
clinically-relevant targets for intervention in invadopodia, including
IMP-3 and PDPN.

