Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase 1 open-label study to investigate the potential drug-drug
interaction (DDI) between single-dose (SD) dacomitinib (PF-00299804; DC)
and steady-state (SS) paroxetine (PX) in healthy volunteers (HVs)


Introduction: DC, a small molecule, pan-HER inhibitor, is partly
metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6. Concomitant administration with
therapeutic agents that are inhibitors of CYP2D6 could potentially cause
DDIs. This study evaluated the effect of PX, a potent CYP2D6 inhibitor,
on the pharmacokinetics (PK) of DC in HVs who were extensive CYP2D6
metabolizers. The safety and tolerability of SD DC was also assessed when
given alone and co-administered with PX. Methods: In this Phase 1, single
fixed-sequence, 2-period study, 14 HVs received a 45 mg SD of DC alone
(Period 1). After a 21-day washout, 30 mg of PX was given daily for 10
days (Period 2) and on Day 4, a 45 mg SD of DC was co-administered with
PX. Blood samples were collected up to 240 h post DC dose in both periods
and analyzed for DC, its CYP2D6 metabolite PF-05199265, and PX using
validated high performance liquid chromatographic tandem mass
spectrometric methods. PK parameters were calculated using
noncompartmental methods. Analysis of variance was performed on natural
log transformed AUC and Cmax to estimate adjusted mean treatment
differences and 90% confidence intervals (CI) which were exponentiated to
produce the adjusted geometric mean ratio (GMR) and 90% CI of the ratios.
Results: 14 males (median age 41 [23-54] yrs; 9 black, 5 Caucasian) were
evaluated for PK and safety. The GMR and 90% CI of AUCinf and Cmax for DC
when given as DC + PX vs DC alone was 137.2% (109.1%, 172.6%) and 110%
(82.9%, 145.1%), respectively. Median Tmax of DC was 8 and 10 h post
dose, and its half-life was 96 and 90 h, in the presence and absence of
PX, respectively. Total exposure (AUC240) to PF-05199265 was decreased in
the presence of SS PX (33.5 vs 322 ng.hr/mL). There were no serious
adverse events (AEs), severe AEs, or deaths during the study. The
majority of AEs were mild (including all 14 events reported during DC
treatment alone) and resolved. Conclusions: PX inhibited DC metabolism
resulting in 90% reduction in exposure (AUC240) of the CYP2D6 metabolite,
PF-05199265. No meaningful change in absorption was observed when DC was
given with SS concentrations of PX. DC seems to present a low extraction
profile and high variability during the absorption phase, the latter
probably due to its physicochemical characteristics (BCS Class II). In
the presence of PX, there was an approximate 37% increase in DC exposure
(AUCinf) with a wide CI, reflecting large intra-subject variability. The
DC change in exposure reported in this study is likely to be less in the
clinical setting (45 mg QD). As the exposure of DC reported in the
presence of PX is within the range shown to be tolerated and efficacious,
no dose adjustment is recommended for DC when administered concomitantly
with a CYP2D6 inhibitor, such as PX. SD DC administered alone and in
combination with PX was well tolerated.

