Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dichloroacetate reverses the Warburg effect, inhibiting growth and
sensitizing breast cancer cells towards apoptosis


The Warburg effect occurs in 90% of tumours and causes a high rate of
glycolysis even in the presence of oxygen, resulting in increased lactate
production and reduced mitochondrial oxidation of pyruvate. Glucose
metabolites are diverted to anabolic processes as a consequence, reducing
pyruvate oxidation, hyperpolarizing the mitochondrial membrane potential,
causing apoptotic resistance. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is a drug that can
reverse the Warburg effect by inhibiting the pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinases (PDKs), promoting oxidative metabolism of pyruvate. We are
investigating in breast cancer cells (a) the effects of DCA on cell
growth, (b) factors governing DCA sensitivity and (c) if DCA can enhance
apoptosis induced by 4-(N-(S-penicillaminylacetyl)amino) phenylarsonous
acid (PENAO), a novel anti-mitochondrial agent. At 5 mM DCA (48 hr
treatment) there were 3-40% less viable cells present in MDA-MB-231,
MCF7, MDA-MB-468, MCF10AT1, and T-47D breast cancer cell cultures. Growth
of MCF10A non-cancerous cells was not affected, showing DCA selectively
targets cancer cells. The PDKs have different sensitivities towards DCA
inhibition (PDK2>PDK4>PDK1>PDK3). To determine if PDKs governed DCA
sensitivity, PDK expression was examined by western blotting. In T-47D
cells the expression of PDK2 (Ki 0.2 mM) and low levels of PDK1 (Ki 1 mM)
and 3 (Ki 8 mM) correlated with their high sensitivity to DCA treatment.
In MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cells, high expression of PDK3 (Ki 8 mM) may
explain their relative insensitivity to DCA. Extracellular lactate was
also reduced by 50% at 1 mM and 5 mM DCA in T-47D and MCF7 cells
respectively after 24 hr, indicating reversal of the Warburg effect,
correlating with the PDK profiles. Induction of PDK1 in MCF7 cells under
hypoxia increased sensitivity to DCA, showing the PDK profile still
correlated with DCA sensitivity. The ability of DCA to enhance apoptosis
induced by PENAO was also examined. The IC50 for PENAO (48 hr) was 3-13 M
for MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231, T-47D, MCF7 and MCF10AT1 cells, whereas 12 M
reduced cell viability by only 7% in the non-cancerous MCF10A cells. When
combined with 5 mM DCA, the IC50 of PENAO for all cancer cell lines
decreased by 15-70%, while toxicity to MCF10A cells was not increased. To
measure apoptosis, cells were stained with annexin V and sorted by FACS.
Treatment for 48 hr with 5 mM DCA and 5 M PENAO doubled the proportion of
apoptotic cells compared to PENAO alone on T-47D and MDA-MB-231 cells.
DCA alone did not inhibit growth or induce apoptosis of MDA-MB-231 cells,
thus showing potentiation of apoptosis. We have shown that DCA reverses
the Warburg effect, inhibiting growth and enhancing apoptosis. PDKs may
be a useful biomarker in determining whether DCA alone will be effective
against different tumour types.

