Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serological levels of folate at birth and risk of childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


A role for folate in the etiology of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) has long been suspected due to folate's dual role in
control of DNA methylation as well as maintenance of DNA synthesis.
Case-control studies examining self-reported maternal folate intake and
supplementation during pregnancy have been inconclusive. Furthermore,
while studies of children's own folate metabolism and transport genes
have identified potential disease loci, the results have been mixed on
the whole. A child's exposure to folate in utero is modulated by a number
of factors, including maternal intake/supplementation, maternal genes,
and child's genes. Therefore, we examined the role of folate in childhood
ALL risk more directly by utilizing a quantitative microbiologic assay to
measure newborn red blood cell folate levels in archived dried bloodspots
collected at birth from 319 incident cases and 413 matched
population-based controls who enrolled in the Northern California
Childhood Leukemia Study between 1995 and 2002. After adjustment for
income, race/ethnicity, gender, and age, we found no difference in
newborn folate levels between cases and controls overall (971 vs. 968
nmol/L, p=0.94). In addition, no differences between cases and controls
were observed after stratification by birth year to account for the start
of folate fortification of grain products in the US (1982-1994: 953 vs.
952 nmol/L, p=0.98; 1995-1998: 1018 vs. 975 nmol/L, p=0.34; and
1999-2002: 878 vs. 990 nmol/L, p=0.23). Children whose mothers reported
pre-pregnancy supplement use had somewhat higher newborn folate levels
overall, but we observed no case-control differences in folate levels
after stratification by supplement use. Our results do not support an
association between folate levels at birth and risk of childhood ALL.
However, our results do not rule out a role for folate exposures after
birth. Future epidemiologic studies of childhood ALL should pay
particular attention to post-natal folate exposures.

