Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of repeated minor liver resection and major resection
on lung metastasis growth in mice


This study examines the effects of types of liver resection on the growth
of liver and lung metastasis. Experimental liver metastases were
established by spleen injection of the Colon 26 murine adenocarcinoma
cell line expressing GFP into transgenic nude mice expressing RFP.
Experimental lung metastases were established by tail vein injection with
Colon 26-GFP. Three days after cell injection, groups of mice underwent
liver resection (35%+35% [repeated minor resection] vs. 70% [major
resection]). Metastatic tumor growth was measured by color-coded
fluorescence imaging of the GFP-expressing cancer cells and
RFP-expressing stroma. Although major and repeated minor resection
removed the same volume of liver parenchyma, the two procedures had very
different effects on metastatic tumor growth: major resection, stimulated
liver and lung metastatic growth as well as recruitment of host-derived
stroma compared to repeated minor resection. Repeated minor resection did
not stimulate metastasis or stromal recruitment. There was no significant
difference in liver regeneration between the two groups. Host-derived
stroma density, which is stimulated by major resection compared to
repeated minor resection, may stimulate growth in the liver-metastatic
tumor. TGF- is also preferentially stimulated by major resection and may
play a role in stroma and metastasis stimulation. The results of this
study indicate that when liver resection is necessary, repeated minor
liver resection is superior to major liver resection, since major
resection, in contrast to repeated minor resection, stimulates
metastasis, which should be taken into consideration in clinical
situations indicating liver resection.

