Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular characterization of PI3K pathway alterations in
non-small cell lung carcinoma


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Several
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have been implicated in lung
carcinogenesis. Among them, PIK3CA pathway activation is one of the key
pathways that link cell surface receptor kinases to effectors for tumor
growth, metabolism and survival. To support predictive diagnostic
biomarker efforts for the selective PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941, we conducted
detailed molecular characterization of NSCLC tumor samples. We evaluated
the key oncogenic mutations (KRAS, EGFR, PIK3CA, BRAF and NRAS), gene
expression, protein expression (PTEN) and gene copy number alterations in
genes in the PI3K pathway in NSCLC tumors. We found that oncogenic
mutations and copy number alternations were associated with histological
subtype. Of note, mutations in KRAS and EGFR were found with high
frequency (30%) in adenocarcinoma, as was loss of the tumor suppressor
LKB1. On the other hand, amplification of PI3K was found in the squamous
subtype, as were rare mutations in PI3K. The tumor suppressor PTEN showed
a high frequency of reduced expression in both squamous and
adenocarcinomas, though total loss of PTEN was more common in squamous
carcinomas. Our studies suggest that the PI3K pathway is an attractive
therapeutic target in NSCLC, and that distinct biomarker strategies may
be required for development in squamous and non-squamous patient
populations.

