Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silibinin inhibits UVB-induced DNA-damage and apoptosis by
enhancing interleukin-12 expression in JB6 cells and SKH-1 mouse skin


Ultraviolet-B (UVB) radiation plays a pivotal role in non-melanoma human
skin cancers (NMSCs) by inducing cellular DNA damage, mutations and
immunosuppression. Decades of research has demonstrated silibinin
efficacy against UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis by regulating different
molecular pathways in various cell lines and animal models; however, the
role of silibinin in regulating interleukin-12 (IL-12), an
immunomodulatory cytokine with the capacity to reduce UVB-induced DNA
damage and apoptosis, has not been studied. Here, we report that UVB
irradiation caused a dose- and time-dependent caspase 3 and PARP cleavage
as well as apoptosis in JB6 cells. Addition of recombinant IL-12 or
silibinin immediately after UVB significantly protected UVB-induced
apoptosis in JB6 cells, and antibody-mediated blocking of IL-12 activity
compromised the protective effect of both IL-12 and silibinin. In
addition, both silibinin and IL-12 accelerated the repair of UVB-caused
cyclobutane-pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) in JB6 cells. Additional studies
confirmed that indeed silibinin causes a significant increase in IL-12
levels in UVB-irradiated JB6 cells as well as in the SKH-1 hairless mouse
epidermis, and that similar to in vitro findings, silibinin topical
application immediately after UVB exposure causes a very strong
protection against UVB-induced TUNEL positive cells in epidermis possibly
through a significantly accelerated repair of UVB-caused CPDs in skin
epidermis. Together, these findings for the first time identify an
important insight regarding the pharmacological mechanism wherein
silibinin induces endogenous IL-12 in its efficacy against UVB-caused
skin damages. Considering the fact that millions of people get constantly
exposed to solar UVB radiation and live with persistent UVB-induced DNA
lesions, the post-damage use of silibinin as an inducer of endogenous
IL-12 in UVB-damaged human skin for the rapid repair of DNA damage could
be a more practical and translational approach in reducing
sunlight-caused damages in human skin which eventually lead to NMSCs.

