Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiplexed mutational profiling of breast tumor as an efficient
clinical tool for personalized breast cancer treatment


Introduction: Breast cancer is increasingly being recognized as a
heterogeneous disease and previous studies have reported various
oncogenic mutations in breast cancer specimens. However, a validated
methodology for clinical assessment of mutation profiles is lacking.
Applying such technologies will be increasingly important to accelerate
development of targeted therapies toward tumor-specific oncogene
pathways. Utilizing a high-throughput genotyping platform we evaluated
the commonly described somatic mutations in tumor tissue among women
diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer. Methods: We developed a CLIA
(Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments) validated, highly sensitive
multiplexed PCR-based assay (SNaPshot) to simultaneously identify 130
previously described mutations in 13 cancer genes using DNA derived from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. Data regarding
demographics, tumor phenotype based on estrogen and progesterone receptor
(ER, PR) status, HER-2 (Human Epidermal growth factor Receptor-2) status,
BRCA carrier status, and clinical outcomes, was abstracted from clinical
charts. Results: A total of 138 tumors from women with metastatic breast
cancer, median age 69 (range 29-82), were analyzed. In this study, 34.7%
of tumors had a detectable mutation, with PIK3CA mutation (70.8%) being
the most common mutation detected followed by TP53 (27.1%), and Akt (4%).
Unanticipated mutations in KRAS and BRAF were observed at lower
frequencies. Detectable mutations were seen in all tumor sub-types
although the frequency varied by tumor phenotype: ER+/PR+ (34.5%),
ER+/PR- (52.6%), HER-2+ (44.4%), and triple negative (23.2%) tumors.
Similarly, while the type of mutation varied somewhat by tumor phenotype,
the common driver mutations were seen in all tumor subtypes. For PIK3CA
mutations: ER+/PR+ (27.7%), ER+/PR- (42.8%), HER-2+ (29.6%), triple
negative (6.7%) tumors, and for TP53 mutations: ER+/PR+ (3.6%), ER+/PR-
(14.2%), HER-2+ (18.5%) and triple negative (10%) tumors. Correlation
with clinical outcomes is ongoing. BRCA1/2 carriers were less likely to
have a detectable somatic mutation in their tumor (15.3%) than patients
with negative BRCA1/2 status (25.8%). Only 4 patients (2.8%) had more
than one detectable somatic mutation. Conclusion: Oncogenic driver
mutations can be detected by SNaPshot from routinely-collected FFPE
tissue specimens obtained from women seen in the oncology clinic for
metastatic breast cancer. While the type and frequency of mutation varies
somewhat by tumor phenotype, the common oncogenic mutations are seen in
all breast cancer subtypes and are often found in isolation. These
findings highlight the necessity for broad tumor mutational analysis,
independent of traditional breast cancer subtype, to efficiently tailor
personalized therapies in the clinic based on individual tumor genetic
profiles.

