Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pathway analysis of bladder cancer genome-wide association study
identifies several novel pathways involved in bladder cancer development


Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple
genetic variants associated with bladder cancer risk but only explain a
small fraction of the inherited variability. A recurring problem in
traditional GWAS analysis (i.e., single-SNP analysis) is the lack of
consideration of biological pathways that contains network of genes with
subtle, undetectable effect at the single SNP or single gene level.
Application of innovative secondary analyses focusing on genes and
pathways will complement and expand traditional GWAS analysis and
identify novel genes and pathways that are associated with bladder cancer
risk. We used the genome-wide scan data from MD Anderson's bladder cancer
case control study to identify cellular signaling pathways involved in
bladder cancer tumorigenesis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was
applied as a secondary analysis of our previous bladder cancer GWAS data.
GSEA can detect subtle effects of multiple SNPs in the same gene set, and
multiple genes in the same biological pathway, which are often missed in
traditional GWAS analysis. Using three GSEA approaches (Gen-Gen,
Aligator, and SNP Ratio Test), we consistently identified 18 pathways
significantly associated with bladder cancer risk. The top pathways
included two cell cycle pathways involved in the G1/S transition
(PGenGen: 0.001, PAligator: 0.001, PSRT: 0.002), neural cell adhesion
molecule (NCAM) pathway (PGenGen:Recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified multiple genetic variants associated with bladder
cancer risk but only explain a small fraction of the inherited
variability. A recurring problem in traditional GWAS analysis (i.e.,
single-SNP analysis) is the lack of consideration of biological pathways
that contains network of genes with subtle, undetectable effect at the
single SNP or single gene level. Application of innovative secondary
analyses focusing on genes and pathways will complement and expand
traditional GWAS analysis and identify novel genes and pathways that are
associated with bladder cancer risk. We used the genome-wide scan data
from MD Anderson's bladder cancer case control study to identify cellular
signaling pathways involved in bladder cancer tumorigenesis. Gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) was applied as a secondary analysis of our
previous bladder cancer GWAS data. GSEA can detect subtle effects of
multiple SNPs in the same gene set, and multiple genes in the same
biological pathway, which are often missed in traditional GWAS analysis.
Using three GSEA approaches (Gen-Gen, Aligator, and SNP Ratio Test), we
consistently identified 18 pathways significantly associated with bladder
cancer risk. The top pathways included two cell cycle pathways involved
in the G1/S transition (PGenGen: 0.001, PAligator: 0.001, PSRT: 0.002),
neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) pathway (PGenGen:<0.001, PAligator:
0.020, PSRT: 0.014), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) induced
intracellular pathway (PGenGen: Recent genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified multiple genetic variants associated with bladder
cancer risk but only explain a small fraction of the inherited
variability. A recurring problem in traditional GWAS analysis (i.e.,
single-SNP analysis) is the lack of consideration of biological pathways
that contains network of genes with subtle, undetectable effect at the
single SNP or single gene level. Application of innovative secondary
analyses focusing on genes and pathways will complement and expand
traditional GWAS analysis and identify novel genes and pathways that are
associated with bladder cancer risk. We used the genome-wide scan data
from MD Anderson's bladder cancer case control study to identify cellular
signaling pathways involved in bladder cancer tumorigenesis. Gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) was applied as a secondary analysis of our
previous bladder cancer GWAS data. GSEA can detect subtle effects of
multiple SNPs in the same gene set, and multiple genes in the same
biological pathway, which are often missed in traditional GWAS analysis.
Using three GSEA approaches (Gen-Gen, Aligator, and SNP Ratio Test), we
consistently identified 18 pathways significantly associated with bladder
cancer risk. The top pathways included two cell cycle pathways involved
in the G1/S transition (PGenGen: 0.001, PAligator: 0.001, PSRT: 0.002),
neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM) pathway (PGenGen:<0.001, PAligator:
0.020, PSRT: 0.014), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) induced
intracellular pathway (PGenGen: <0.001, PAligator: 0.026, PSRT: 0.006)
and unfolded protein response pathway (PGenGen: 0.007, PAligator: 0.001,
PSRT: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified
multiple genetic variants associated with bladder cancer risk but only
explain a small fraction of the inherited variability. A recurring
problem in traditional GWAS analysis (i.e., single-SNP analysis) is the
lack of consideration of biological pathways that contains network of
genes with subtle, undetectable effect at the single SNP or single gene
level. Application of innovative secondary analyses focusing on genes and
pathways will complement and expand traditional GWAS analysis and
identify novel genes and pathways that are associated with bladder cancer
risk. We used the genome-wide scan data from MD Anderson's bladder cancer
case control study to identify cellular signaling pathways involved in
bladder cancer tumorigenesis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was
applied as a secondary analysis of our previous bladder cancer GWAS data.
GSEA can detect subtle effects of multiple SNPs in the same gene set, and
multiple genes in the same biological pathway, which are often missed in
traditional GWAS analysis. Using three GSEA approaches (Gen-Gen,
Aligator, and SNP Ratio Test), we consistently identified 18 pathways
significantly associated with bladder cancer risk. The top pathways
included two cell cycle pathways involved in the G1/S transition
(PGenGen: 0.001, PAligator: 0.001, PSRT: 0.002), neural cell adhesion
molecule (NCAM) pathway (PGenGen:<0.001, PAligator: 0.020, PSRT: 0.014),
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) induced intracellular pathway
(PGenGen: <0.001, PAligator: 0.026, PSRT: 0.006) and unfolded protein
response pathway (PGenGen: 0.007, PAligator: 0.001, PSRT: <0.001). We
identified that CCNE1 rs8110447 and rs8102137 were the most significant
SNPs and gene in the two cell cycle pathways. As previously reported in
GWAS, CCNE1 at 19q12 is a hotspot for bladder cancer susceptibility.
However, other pathways with known susceptibility genes, such as those
containing GSTM1, were not significant in the GSEA analysis, suggesting
that this approach has identified novel biological pathways involved in
bladder cancer tumorigenesis. Future studies are needed to validate in
independent population. Overall, these findings contribute to a coherent
understanding of the overall gene networks involved in bladder cancer
susceptibility as well as offer additional etiologic insights
highlighting the specific genes and pathways involved.

