Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutually exclusive somatic mutations in WNT pathway
medulloblastomas reveal a critical interaction between DDX3X and SMARCA4


DDX3X is an ATP-dependent RNA helicase that belongs to an extended family
of D-E-A-D motif (DEAD-box) containing proteins whose functions have been
implicated in key biological processes ranging from RNA transcription and
splicing to the regulation of translation initiation. Through whole exome
sequencing of 94 primary medulloblasotmas, we have identified DDX3X as
one of the most common recurrently mutated genes in medulloblastoma.
These mutations predominantly occur in WNT pathway medulloblastomas which
concurrently harbor stabilized forms of mutant beta-catenin.
Interestingly, we have also identified SMARCA4 mutations in WNT pathway
tumors that are mutually exclusive of DDX3X mutations. In addition, two
WNT pathway tumors that have neither DDX3X nor SMARCA4 gene mutations
have mutations in genes known to encode for direct binding partners of
DDX3X and SMARCA4 (EIF3E and ACTL6A, respectively). This mutual
exclusivity of DDX3X and SMARCA4 mutations suggests either a direct
interaction between the DDX3X and SMARCA4 gene products or an overlap of
the biological processes regulated by each. Here we reveal the direct
interaction between DDX3X and SMARCA4 in normal physiological conditions
and further investigate the impact of somatic mutations in DDX3X and
SMARCA4 on this interaction in WNT pathway associated medulloblastomas.
Our results point to a critical link between RNA helicases and the
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex in WNT/beta-catenin signaling and
disease.

