Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of neuronal repressor gene REST inhibits tumor
growth in Ewing's sarcoma


Ewing's sarcoma is a peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET).
The abnormal differentiation of neuronal stem cells may relate to
tumorigenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. The RE1-silencing transcription factor
(REST) is a neuronal repressor gene which regulates neuronal stem cell
differentiation. The aim of this study is to investigate the role of REST
in Ewing's sarcoma. Our results demonstrated that three human Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines TC71, A4573 and SK-ES expressed high levels of REST.
Six of seven tumor samples from patients with Ewing's sarcoma were shown
REST positive. Transfection of EWS-FLI-1 into mesenchymal stem cells
up-regulated REST expression. Down-regulation of EWS-FLI-1 using si-RNA
inhibited REST expression in TC71 cells, suggesting EWS-FLI-1 fusion
protein regulates REST expression in Ewing's sarcoma. The siRNA-REST
stable transfected cell line was established to down-regulate REST
expression in TC71 Ewing's sarcoma cells. In vivo experiments indicated
that Ewing's sarcoma tumor growth was significantly inhibited in the mice
injected with si-REST-TC71 cells compared to the mice injected with
si-control cells. Down-regulation of REST inhibited cell proliferation
and induced apoptosis in TC71 tumors. The immunohistochemical staining
indicated that the tumor vessels and pericyte marker expression were
reduced in si-REST tumor tissues. Inhibition of REST decreased the early
neural differentiation marker MSX-1 expression and up-regulated the
terminal neural differentiation marker -Tubulin III (Tuj) expression.
These data suggesting that neuronal repressor gene REST plays an
important role in tumor development of Ewing's sarcoma. Inhibition of
REST suppressed tumor growth and altered neuronal differentiation marker
expression in Ewing's sarcoma. REST is a potential target for treatment
of Ewing's sarcoma.

