Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of PIK3CA somatic mutations in cell-free DNA of breast
cancer patients by high-resolution melting curve analysis


Introduction: Somatic mutations in the gene encoding for the
phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase (PI3K) catalytic subunit, PIK3CA, have
been discovered in many different human cancers. We have recently
developed a high-resolution melting curve analysis method for the
detection of the three hotspot mutations of PIK3CA gene (Vorkas et al, J
of Mol Diagn 2010). The aim of our study was to evaluate this method for
the presence of PIK3CA mutations in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in
plasma of breast cancer patients and healthy individuals. Patients and
methods: cfDNA was isolated from plasma (200L) of 30 patients with
operable breast cancer, 45 patients with metastatic breast cancer and 12
healthy donors. After DNA extraction, real-time PCR was performed in
triplicate for all samples in the LightCycler (Roche), in the presence of
LC-Green Plus saturating dye (Idaho Technology Inc.). High-resolution
melting curves were obtained with HR-1 High Resolution Melter (Idaho
Technology Inc.). Results: We identified 15 cfDNA samples mutated out of
75 tested (20%). 3/75 (4%) cfDNA samples were mutated within the exon 9
amplified region, and 12/75 (16%) cfDNA samples were mutated within exon
20 (31.6%). In operable breast cancer 1/30 (3.3%) cfDNA sample was
mutated in exon 9 and 3/30 (10%) cfDNA samples were mutated in exon 20,
while in metastatic breast cancer 2/45 (4.4%) cfDNA samples wer mutated
in exon 9 and 9/45 (20%) cfDNA samples were mutated in exon 20. PIK3CA
mutations were not detected in any of the 12 cfDNA samples from healthy
donors, used as negative controls. Conclusions: Using High-Resolution
Melting curve Analysis (HRMA) PIK3CA gene mutations were detected in
cfDNA circulating in plasma of patients with operable and metastatic
breast cancer, but not in plasma of healthy individuals. The prognostic
significance of this finding will be evaluated when a longer follow up
period will be completed for these patients and a larger number of
clinical samples will be analyzed.


