Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of AKT abrogates resistance to endocrine therapy in
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer


Estrogen receptor -positive (ER+) breast cancers eventually adapt to
hormone deprivation and acquire resistance to aromatase inhibitors. Upon
acquisition of hormone independence, ER+ breast cancer cells increase
their dependence on the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT
signaling pathway. Herein we investigated the effects of AKT inhibition
on the hormone-independent growth of four ER+ breast cancer cell lines
(MCF-7, ZR75-1, MDA-MB-361 and HCC-1428) with acquired resistance to
estrogen deprivation (termed long-term estrogen-deprived cells, LTED).
Treatment with the ATP-competitive AKT inhibitor AZD5363 inhibited
phosphorylation of the AKT/mTOR substrates PRAS40, GSK3/, and S6K while
inducing hyperphosphorylation of AKT at S473 and T308. AZD5363 suppressed
the hormone-independent growth of 3/4 LTED lines. AZD5363 prevented the
emergence of hormone-independent MCF-7, ZR75-1, and MDA-361 cells.
Further, treatment of ovariectomized athymic mice with AZD5363 suppressed
the hormone-independent growth of ER+/PI3K mutant MCF-7 xenografts.
Combined treatment with AZD5363 and the ER downregulator fulvestrant more
effectively suppressed xenograft growth than either drug alone. AZD5363
also caused dose-dependent inhibition of an ER+ breast cancer explant
model unresponsive to fulvestrant or tamoxifen. We next examined whether
AKT inhibition results in feedback upregulation of mitogenic signaling
pathways. Treatment with AZD5363 resulted in upregulation and
phosphorylation of the HER3 receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), as well as
upregulation of insulin receptor (InsR) protein levels and
phosphorylation of Src at Y416. A Src family kinase inhibitor suppressed
AZD5363-induced upregulation of P-HER3 in MCF-7/LTED cells. Src
inhibition or siRNA-mediated knockdown of InsR or IGF-IR significantly
enhanced the growth inhibitory effects of AZD5363. Following treatment
with AZD5363, phospho-RTK array analysis revealed increased
phosphorylation of multiple RTKs in MCF-7/LTED and/or ZR75-1/LTED cells,
including InsR, IGF-IR, EGFR, HER2, HER3, HER4, Dtk, and FGFR3. Treatment
with AZD5363 also upregulated RTK mRNA levels. Further, treatment of
MCF-7/LTED cells with AZD5363 resulted in marked translocation of AKT
PH-GFP to the membrane, reflective of increased PIP3 production and,
thus, AKT phosphorylation at T308. Pre-treatment with the PI3K inhibitor
BKM120 or the IGF-IR/InsR TKI AEW541 prevented AZD5363-induced membrane
localization of PH-GFP. These results suggest that 1) AKT signaling is
critical for hormone-independent growth of ER+ breast cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo; and 2) AKT inhibition in these cells induces feedback
upregulation of RTK expression and activity. Thus, inhibitors of AKT
merit evaluation as a potential treatment for endocrine-resistant breast
cancer. The combination of these agents with inhibitors of upstream RTKs
are under evaluation.

