Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P1446A-05: a new oral cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor with
potent preclinical antitumor activity


Cell cycle deregulation is one of the first steps that transform normal
cells into tumor cells. Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) related
alterations such as overexpression and amplification of cell-cycle
activators or inactivation of cell cycle inhibitors are among the most
common genetic changes in human tumors. The pursuit for drugs that
inhibit Cdks has been an intense area of research for more than 15 years.
A number of Cdk inhibitors are being evaluated in clinical trials for the
treatment of cancer. P1446A-05 has been identified as a Cdk4-D1, Cdk1-B
and Cdk9-T inhibitor. P1446A-05 exhibited greater selectivity to Cdk4-D1
and Cdk1-B that are involved in the G1 and G2/M phase of the cell cycle
respectively. The IC50 values were 0.09 and 0.025 M for Cdk4-D1 and
Cdk1-B respectively. P1446A-05 also inhibited Cdk9-T, which plays a role
in transcription, with an IC50 of 0.022 M. P1446A-05 was inactive against
many non-Cdks with an IC50 of more than 50 M. In cytotoxicity assay using
30 human cancer cell lines P1446A-05 showed IC50 in the range of 0.5 to
3.9 M, whereas the cytotoxicity for unstimulated normal human PBMNCs was
> 10 M. P1446A-05 arrested cell cycle progression at G1 and G2 phases and
induced apoptosis in human cancer cell lines such as non-small-cell lung
cancer (H-460), colorectal carcinoma (HCT-116) and prostate cancer (PC-3)
in a dose and time dependent manner. Furthermore, P1446A-05 affected the
proteins involved in cell cycle and apoptosis. It down-regulated cyclin
D1, inhibited Cdk4 specific phosphorylation (ser780 of retinoblastoma),
induced the tumor suppressor protein p53, and reduced the levels of the
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Pharmacokinetic studies revealed that
P1446A-05 exhibited an absolute oral bioavailability of 82.48% in mice
and 79.07% in rats. It showed dose-dependent increase in 1446A-05 levels
in plasma of mice and rats. In in vivo efficacy studies, orally
administered P1446A-05 significantly (pCell cycle deregulation is one of
the first steps that transform normal cells into tumor cells.
Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) related alterations such as
overexpression and amplification of cell-cycle activators or inactivation
of cell cycle inhibitors are among the most common genetic changes in
human tumors. The pursuit for drugs that inhibit Cdks has been an intense
area of research for more than 15 years. A number of Cdk inhibitors are
being evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment of cancer. P1446A-05
has been identified as a Cdk4-D1, Cdk1-B and Cdk9-T inhibitor. P1446A-05
exhibited greater selectivity to Cdk4-D1 and Cdk1-B that are involved in
the G1 and G2/M phase of the cell cycle respectively. The IC50 values
were 0.09 and 0.025 M for Cdk4-D1 and Cdk1-B respectively. P1446A-05 also
inhibited Cdk9-T, which plays a role in transcription, with an IC50 of
0.022 M. P1446A-05 was inactive against many non-Cdks with an IC50 of
more than 50 M. In cytotoxicity assay using 30 human cancer cell lines
P1446A-05 showed IC50 in the range of 0.5 to 3.9 M, whereas the
cytotoxicity for unstimulated normal human PBMNCs was > 10 M. P1446A-05
arrested cell cycle progression at G1 and G2 phases and induced apoptosis
in human cancer cell lines such as non-small-cell lung cancer (H-460),
colorectal carcinoma (HCT-116) and prostate cancer (PC-3) in a dose and
time dependent manner. Furthermore, P1446A-05 affected the proteins
involved in cell cycle and apoptosis. It down-regulated cyclin D1,
inhibited Cdk4 specific phosphorylation (ser780 of retinoblastoma),
induced the tumor suppressor protein p53, and reduced the levels of the
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2. Pharmacokinetic studies revealed that
P1446A-05 exhibited an absolute oral bioavailability of 82.48% in mice
and 79.07% in rats. It showed dose-dependent increase in 1446A-05 levels
in plasma of mice and rats. In in vivo efficacy studies, orally
administered P1446A-05 significantly (p<0.001) inhibited the tumor growth
in two xenograft models that of colon cancer (Colo-205) and non-small
cell lung cancer (H-460) in SCID mice. These data demonstrated that
P1446A-05 is an orally active inhibitor of Cdk with a unique target
profile that may have therapeutic potential in human malignancies.

