Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ionizing radiation reduces VLA4 mediated adhesion of macrophage
via generation of ROS


Adhesion molecules have direct connection with radiation-associated
atherosclerosis which is an adverse effect observed after radiation
therapy, but the mechanism is still not fully understood. Considerable
interest has been focused on the effect of radiation on endothelial
cells. Previous work has demonstrated that adhesion molecules of
endothelium are up-regulated after exposure to ionizing radiation, which
facilitates adhesion of leukocytes and lymphocytes. However, as the
initiator in the atherosclerosis development, not enough attention was
paid to macrophages which are exposed to the same radiation. In this
study, we report that the adhesion between very late Antigen-4 (VLA-4)
and its ligand vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), the most
important adhesion molecules for atherosclerotic lesion formation, was
reduced after a clinical dose of radiation (5 Gy). All the adhesion
evaluations were tested under flow conditions by using a parallel plate
flow chamber to mimick physiological shear stress. We found that the
adhesion decreased after irradiation despite macrophage surface
expression of VLA-4 was up-regulated in a time dependent manner. Total
level of alpha-4 integrin increased whereas beta-1 had no change.
Pretreatment with free radical scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC) did not
change integrin expression but eliminated the adhesion difference
following irradiation. Taken together, we hypothesize high levels of ROS
generated by ionizing radiation inhibits the affinity of VLA-4 to VCAM-1,
in which integrin expression is not the dominant factor.

