Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular targeting of v3 integrin by echistatin inhibits tumor
progression and metastasis in osteosarcoma


Expression of v3 integrin is associated with tumor progression and
metastasis in several types of cancer, including metastatic osteosarcoma.
We tested echistatin, an antagonist of v3 integrin, as a molecular
targeting drug, in an imageable orthotopic mouse model of human
metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin expression was measured in a series
of human osteosarcoma cell lines (143B parental and LM1-LM4) with
increasing metastatic potential, using RT-PCR and immunoprecipitation.
The cell lines expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm and
therefore could be imaged down to the subcellular level in vitro and in
vivo. v3 integrin expression correlated with the metastatic potential of
the cells, with the LM4 cells showing the highest expression and highest
metastatic capability, 6-fold and 18-fold, respectively, compared to
parental 143B cells. In vitro cell proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by
echistatin (pExpression of v3 integrin is associated with tumor
progression and metastasis in several types of cancer, including
metastatic osteosarcoma. We tested echistatin, an antagonist of v3
integrin, as a molecular targeting drug, in an imageable orthotopic mouse
model of human metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin expression was
measured in a series of human osteosarcoma cell lines (143B parental and
LM1-LM4) with increasing metastatic potential, using RT-PCR and
immunoprecipitation. The cell lines expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP
in the cytoplasm and therefore could be imaged down to the subcellular
level in vitro and in vivo. v3 integrin expression correlated with the
metastatic potential of the cells, with the LM4 cells showing the highest
expression and highest metastatic capability, 6-fold and 18-fold,
respectively, compared to parental 143B cells. In vitro cell
proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by echistatin (p<0.01). In vitro
migration, invasion, and adhesion of LM4 were also inhibited by
echistatin (pExpression of v3 integrin is associated with tumor
progression and metastasis in several types of cancer, including
metastatic osteosarcoma. We tested echistatin, an antagonist of v3
integrin, as a molecular targeting drug, in an imageable orthotopic mouse
model of human metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin expression was
measured in a series of human osteosarcoma cell lines (143B parental and
LM1-LM4) with increasing metastatic potential, using RT-PCR and
immunoprecipitation. The cell lines expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP
in the cytoplasm and therefore could be imaged down to the subcellular
level in vitro and in vivo. v3 integrin expression correlated with the
metastatic potential of the cells, with the LM4 cells showing the highest
expression and highest metastatic capability, 6-fold and 18-fold,
respectively, compared to parental 143B cells. In vitro cell
proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by echistatin (p<0.01). In vitro
migration, invasion, and adhesion of LM4 were also inhibited by
echistatin (p<0.01). Tumor-induced angiogenesis by LM4 in the chick CAM
model was also inhibited by echistatin (pExpression of v3 integrin is
associated with tumor progression and metastasis in several types of
cancer, including metastatic osteosarcoma. We tested echistatin, an
antagonist of v3 integrin, as a molecular targeting drug, in an imageable
orthotopic mouse model of human metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin
expression was measured in a series of human osteosarcoma cell lines
(143B parental and LM1-LM4) with increasing metastatic potential, using
RT-PCR and immunoprecipitation. The cell lines expressed GFP in the
nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm and therefore could be imaged down to
the subcellular level in vitro and in vivo. v3 integrin expression
correlated with the metastatic potential of the cells, with the LM4 cells
showing the highest expression and highest metastatic capability, 6-fold
and 18-fold, respectively, compared to parental 143B cells. In vitro cell
proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by echistatin (p<0.01). In vitro
migration, invasion, and adhesion of LM4 were also inhibited by
echistatin (p<0.01). Tumor-induced angiogenesis by LM4 in the chick CAM
model was also inhibited by echistatin (p<0.05). Mice treated with an
echistatin-doxorubicin conjugate had significantly smaller primary tumors
and longer survival compared to control untreated tumor-bearing mice
(pExpression of v3 integrin is associated with tumor progression and
metastasis in several types of cancer, including metastatic osteosarcoma.
We tested echistatin, an antagonist of v3 integrin, as a molecular
targeting drug, in an imageable orthotopic mouse model of human
metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin expression was measured in a series
of human osteosarcoma cell lines (143B parental and LM1-LM4) with
increasing metastatic potential, using RT-PCR and immunoprecipitation.
The cell lines expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm and
therefore could be imaged down to the subcellular level in vitro and in
vivo. v3 integrin expression correlated with the metastatic potential of
the cells, with the LM4 cells showing the highest expression and highest
metastatic capability, 6-fold and 18-fold, respectively, compared to
parental 143B cells. In vitro cell proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by
echistatin (p<0.01). In vitro migration, invasion, and adhesion of LM4
were also inhibited by echistatin (p<0.01). Tumor-induced angiogenesis by
LM4 in the chick CAM model was also inhibited by echistatin (p<0.05).
Mice treated with an echistatin-doxorubicin conjugate had significantly
smaller primary tumors and longer survival compared to control untreated
tumor-bearing mice (p<0.05 and pExpression of v3 integrin is associated
with tumor progression and metastasis in several types of cancer,
including metastatic osteosarcoma. We tested echistatin, an antagonist of
v3 integrin, as a molecular targeting drug, in an imageable orthotopic
mouse model of human metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin expression was
measured in a series of human osteosarcoma cell lines (143B parental and
LM1-LM4) with increasing metastatic potential, using RT-PCR and
immunoprecipitation. The cell lines expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP
in the cytoplasm and therefore could be imaged down to the subcellular
level in vitro and in vivo. v3 integrin expression correlated with the
metastatic potential of the cells, with the LM4 cells showing the highest
expression and highest metastatic capability, 6-fold and 18-fold,
respectively, compared to parental 143B cells. In vitro cell
proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by echistatin (p<0.01). In vitro
migration, invasion, and adhesion of LM4 were also inhibited by
echistatin (p<0.01). Tumor-induced angiogenesis by LM4 in the chick CAM
model was also inhibited by echistatin (p<0.05). Mice treated with an
echistatin-doxorubicin conjugate had significantly smaller primary tumors
and longer survival compared to control untreated tumor-bearing mice
(p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively). Treatment with echistatin resulted in
decreased experimental pulmonary metastases, imaged at the cellular
level, in a nude mouse model compared to the untreated control
(pExpression of v3 integrin is associated with tumor progression and
metastasis in several types of cancer, including metastatic osteosarcoma.
We tested echistatin, an antagonist of v3 integrin, as a molecular
targeting drug, in an imageable orthotopic mouse model of human
metastatic osteosarcoma. v3 integrin expression was measured in a series
of human osteosarcoma cell lines (143B parental and LM1-LM4) with
increasing metastatic potential, using RT-PCR and immunoprecipitation.
The cell lines expressed GFP in the nucleus and RFP in the cytoplasm and
therefore could be imaged down to the subcellular level in vitro and in
vivo. v3 integrin expression correlated with the metastatic potential of
the cells, with the LM4 cells showing the highest expression and highest
metastatic capability, 6-fold and 18-fold, respectively, compared to
parental 143B cells. In vitro cell proliferation of LM4 was inhibited by
echistatin (p<0.01). In vitro migration, invasion, and adhesion of LM4
were also inhibited by echistatin (p<0.01). Tumor-induced angiogenesis by
LM4 in the chick CAM model was also inhibited by echistatin (p<0.05).
Mice treated with an echistatin-doxorubicin conjugate had significantly
smaller primary tumors and longer survival compared to control untreated
tumor-bearing mice (p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively). Treatment with
echistatin resulted in decreased experimental pulmonary metastases,
imaged at the cellular level, in a nude mouse model compared to the
untreated control (p<0.01). The results of this study indicate that v3
integrin plays an essential role in osteosarcoma metastasis and that
echistatin has potential to target v3 integrin and inhibit tumor
progression and metastasis.

