Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a high-throughput screen for breast cancer
metastatic potential


Metastasis is a frequent cause of cancer-associated morbidity and
mortality. Identification of genetic signatures or expression profiles
which are associated with metastasis typically involves microarray
analysis or genomic sequencing of isolated metastases, either in a
clinical setting or animal models. In order to explore the contribution
of individual genes to metastasis, we have developed an in vitro culture
method for preferential expansion of breast cancer cells with high
metastatic potential. Growing breast cancer cells in low growth factor,
anchorage independent conditions maintains cells with low metastatic
potential in a dormant or non-proliferative state while cells with more
aggressive characteristics rapidly proliferate to form ascini.
Low-throughput manual testing of this system is currently being carried
out using two dormant cell lines (PMC 42 LA and MCF-7) and one aggressive
metastatic line (MDA MB 231) and ectopic expression of a subset of genes
which we anticipate could promote metastasis (PTK2, MYLK, ROCK1, S100A4,
Rad51 and ID1). In the high-content genetic screens, genes which cause a
significant change in the number or size of ascini will be identified and
validated in culture manually as well as in mouse models of breast cancer
metastasis. The genetic data derived from these screens will identify
genes which promote metastasis, yielding mechanistic information about
the progress of metastatic disease. It will also provide convenient
platform for testing therapeutic strategies to maintain micrometastases
in a dormant state and prevent the onset of clinically relevant
metastatic disease.

