Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) on prostate cancer
cell adhesion, invasion and metastasis


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed form of cancer among
American men, and the second leading cause of all cancer-related deaths.
PCa death is caused by the process of metastasis. In order to
metastasize, tumor cells must acquire a series of phenotypic alterations,
collectively known as the metastatic cascade. We have demonstrated that
the small heat-shock protein, HSP27, affects key early steps of the
metastatic cascade, and therefore may be a regulator of human PCa
metastasis. HSP27 protein expression increases during PCa progression. It
is phosphorylated in response to signaling from transforming growth
factor- (TGF-), which in turn increases matrix metalloproteinase 2
(MMP-2) and cell invasion in vitro. We now demonstrate that HSP27 does
not affect human PCa cell adhesion, cell detachment or cell migration,
all of which contribute to the composite function of cell invasion. We
went on to show that proteolysis by MMPs is necessary for HSP27-driven
cell invasion by demonstrating that it was abrogated Marimastat, a
broad-spectrum MMP inhibitor. By orthotopically implanting HSP27 variant
human PCa cell lines, we demonstrated that HSP27 increases metastasis in
a murine model. We also found that HSP27 increased tumor size. HSP27
increases human PCa metastasis and tumor growth in vivo. These findings
provide a mechanistic explanation for the poor prognosis associated with
increased HSP27 expression in human prostate tissue.

