Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy induction by low dose cisplatin: The role of p53 in
autophagy


Cisplatin has been mainly used for lung-cancer. However, cisplatin has
many side effects, so the usage of cisplatin has a limitation. Recently,
autophagy has become an important mechanism of cell death. The purpose of
this study was to determine whether low dose cisplatin treated lung
cancer cell induce autophagy and the autophagy inhibition resulted in
apoptosis or necrosis. H460 cells were treated with 5 M or 20 M cisplatin
for 12, 24, or 48 h. To detect the cisplatin-induced autophagy, we
examined the autophagic vacuoles, and LC3 localization. To confirm the
low-dose of cisplatin could induce autophagy, we detectd acidic vesicle
using autophagy specific inhibitors(3-MA). To confirm the result of
autophagy inhibition, we had done Annexin-V/PI and cell cycle assay. To
find out the cisplatin mediated autophagic mechanisms, we examined the
apoptotic regulator, p53. We used p53-/- null cancer cell line, H1299, to
prove the role of p53 during autophagy. Low dose of cisplatin(5 M)
induced the autophagy after 24 h treatment in H460. Also low dose of
cisplatin showed autophagic vacuoles and cytoplasmic LC3 formation in
H460. The induction of autophagy by low dose cisplatin was inhibited by
3-MA, which was proven by reduced acidic vesicles. When the autohpagy
inhibited, Annexin-V+/PI- and subG1 was an increased. The inhibition of
autophagy resulted in decrease of LC3B-II band. Also cleaved caspase-3
and PARP were increased. Taken together, low dose cisplatin induced
autophagy and the inhibition of autophagy resulted in the apoptosis.

