Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGCG inhibits growth of human pancreatic tumors orthotopically
implanted in BALB/c Nude mice through activation of FKHRL1/FOXO3a
transcription factor.


The forkhead transcription factors of the O class (FOXO) play a major
role in cell proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis and tumorigenesis.
The objectives of this study were to examine whether FKHRL1/FOXO3a
modulates antitumor activity of EGCG in pancreatic cancer model in vivo.
PANC-1 cells were orthotopically implanted into BALB/c Nude mice and
gavaged with EGCG after tumor formation. Cell proliferation and apoptosis
were measured by Ki67 and TUNEL staining, respectively. FKHRL1 nuclear
translocation, and DNA binding were measured by immunohistochemistry and
gelshift assay, respectively. The expression of PI3K, AKT, ERK, and
FOXO3a and its target genes were measured by the Western blot analysis.
EGCG-treated mice showed significant inhibition in tumor growth which was
associated with reduced phosphorylation of ERK, PI3K, AKT, FKHRL1/FOXO3a
and expression of FOXO target genes. EGCG induced apoptosis by
up-regulating Bim and activating caspase-3. EGCG inhibited markers of
cell cycle (p27/KIP1), angiogenesis (CD31, VEGF, IL-6, IL-8 and HIF1),
and metastasis (MMP2 and MMP7). EGCG inhibited epithelial mesenchymal
transition by upregulating the expression of E-cadherin and inhibiting
the expression of N-cadherin, and Zeb1. These data suggest that EGCG
inhibits pancreatic cancer orthotopic tumor growth, angiogenesis and
metastasis which are associated with inhibition of PI3K/AKT and ERK
pathways resulting in activation of FKHRL1/FOXO3a transcription factor.

