Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CONSERTING: an accurate method for detecting focal and gross
somatic copy number alterations in cancer genome by next generation
sequencing


The Identification of somatically acquired DNA copy number alterations
(CNA) is extremely important for finding causal genes in cancer. Although
next-generation sequencing (NGS) can assay a genome at base-pair
resolution, accurate identification of CNA from NGS data has been
hindered by sequencing artifacts, coverage bias and paralogous genomic
duplication. As a result, existing algorithms tend to generate many CNA
segments that are not corroborated by an alternative assay such as SNP
array, suggesting high false discovery rate. To improve CNA analysis for
NGS data, we developed Copy Number Segmentation by Regression Tree in
Next Generation Sequencing (CONSERTING), a novel copy number detection
method that integrates read depth analysis with structural variation (SV)
detection and adjustment for sequencing artifacts. Analysis of simulated
data shown that CONSERTING outperforms existing methods by achieving high
sensitivity of focal copy number detection (CONSERTING: 0.80, CNV-Seq:
0.26, SegSeq: 0.19, FREEC: 0.02) at a low false discovery rate
(CONSERTING: 0.09, CNV-Seq: 0.19, SegSeq: 0.46, FREEC: 0.07). When
applied to matching tumor/normal samples of hematopoietic malignancies
and solid tumors, CONSERTING showed a high concordance with SNP array,
with a mean of 18 uncorroborated CNA segments compared with 104 by
CNVSeq, 182 by SegSeq and 63 by FREEC. In addition, CONSERTING is able to
discover bona fide focal CNAs in genes of biological importance that were
not detectable by SNP array, such as a 36 kb homozygous deletion in SH2B3
and a 20 kb deletion in CDK6. Finally, CONSERTING is able to find CNAs
and SVs present in tumor subclone that are missed by SNP array or SV
analysis of NGS data. The novel CNAs and SVs reported here were
experimentally validated, demonstrating that the high sensitivity and
accuracy of CONSERTING enable discovery of key genetic lesions in cancer.

