Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Associations between hormone therapy with incident colorectal
cancer by p53 protein expression in a population-based cohort of older
women


Background: Cigarette smoking (CS) is an established colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk factor. The p53 protein, encoded by the TP53 tumor suppressor
gene that is commonly mutated in CRC, is important in cell cycle arrest
needed to repair DNA damage or induce apoptosis to prevent tumor
propagation. In this prospective cohort study, we examined CS-associated
CRC risks by p53 protein expression level in the population-based Iowa
Women's Health Study (IWHS). Methods: The IWHS recruited 41,836 randomly
selected Iowa women, ages 55-69 years, with a valid driver's license at
study entry (1986). CS and other exposure variables were assessed at
baseline, by self-report. Incident CRC cases were ascertained by annual
linkage with the Iowa Cancer Registry. Archived, paraffin-embedded tissue
specimens were collected from 732 CRC cases diagnosed through 12/31/2002.
CS was categorized by smoking status (never, current, former), average
number of cigarettes per day (1-19, 20-39, > 40) and cumulative
pack-years (1-19, 20-39, > 40). P53 protein expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays. Tumor cores were scored by
combining both staining intensity and percent of cells stained to
determine negative, low or high p53 protein expression levels.
Multivariate Cox regression models were fit to estimate relative risks
(RRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Results: Of the 732 available
CRC cases, 486 (66%) had complete CS and p53 data. Associations between
CS and CRC subtypes defined by p53 expression level are shown in the
Table. Conclusions: These data demonstrate no clear heterogeneity of CS
with CRC subtypes defined by p53 expression levels among older women.


