Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pharmacological characterization of BI 847325, a dual inhibitor of
MEK and Aurora kinases


The RAS-dependent MAP kinase signaling pathway plays an important role in
the regulation of cell proliferation and survival. RAS genes are
frequently mutated in human cancer; however, it has not been possible to
date to design direct inhibitors of RAS proteins. Inhibitors of the
downstream kinase MEK are active against a subset of KRAS-mutant cancers
in preclinical studies, but have shown limited success to date in
clinical trials. We have identified a compound that potently inhibits MEK
as well as Aurora kinases, a family of serine/threonine kinases involved
in the regulation of mitosis. In enzymatic assays, BI 847325 inhibited
the activity of Aurora A, B and C with IC50 values of 3, 25 and 15 nM,
respectively; IC50 values of 25 and 4 nM were determined for MEK1 and
MEK2, respectively. To determine whether the enzyme profile translates
into cellular activity we used Western blot and FACE-ELISA assays of
phospho-histone H3 (pHH3) and phospho-ERK (pERK) levels in cells treated
with BI 847325 and observed EC50 values of 44 nM (NCI-H460 cells, KRAS
and PI3K mutant) and 37 nM (A375 cells, BRAF mutant), respectively. In
vitro profiling in a panel of 240 cell lines with diverse tissue origin
and genetic background demonstrated that BI 847325 is a potent inhibitor
of cell proliferation (gm GI50 = 28 nM) and induces cell death in a
subset of cell lines. In vitro potency significantly correlated with
mutations in RAS or BRAF. For comparison, a significant correlation of
mutation status and sensitivity was also observed for a selective MEK
inhibitor, AZD6244, but not for a selective Aurora inhibitor, BI 811283.
In vivo efficacy was studied in nude mouse xenograft models of NSCLC
(Calu-6, mutant KRAS) and cutaneous melanoma (A375, mutant BRAF). A daily
oral dose of 10 mg/kg resulted in complete inhibition of tumor growth in
the Calu-6 model (TGI = 102%, regression in 4/7 animals) and the A375
model (TGI = 116%, regression in 7/7 animals). Inhibition of Aurora B and
MEK was monitored ex vivo by determining the phosphorylation state of
histone H3 and ERK1/2 in tumor tissue. Immunohistochemical analyses
confirmed a significant reduction of both pERK and pHH3 levels in the
A375 tumors of treated animals compared to controls. To further profile
the mode of action of the compound, the efficacy of BI 847325 in the
MIAPaCa2-pancreatic adenocarcinoma model (mutant KRAS) was directly
compared with that of the MEK inhibitor GSK 1120212. BI 847325
effectively induced tumor regression (TGI on day 22 = 126%) that was
maintained in all animals on day 43. In contrast, treatment with GSK
112021 resulted in initial tumor regression, followed by re-growth after
3-4 weeks (TGI on day 22 = 129%; regrowth on day 43 in 5/7 animals).
Inhibition of Aurora kinase in addition to MEK blockade thus may
prevent/delay onset of resistance. Additional xenograft models with
diverse genetic background are currently under investigation. Clinical
development of BI 847325 has been initiated.

