Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Villin expression is frequently lost in colon cancers with
microsatellite instability.


Colorectal cancers are classified as having chromosomal instability (CIN)
or microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI colon cancers frequently display
poorly differentiated histology the molecular basis of which is not well
understood. Gene expression profiling of CIN and MSI colon cancer cell
lines and tumours revealed significant downregulation of the
intestinal-specific cytoskeletal protein villin, in MSI tumours, with
complete absence observed in 62% and 17% of MSI cell lines and primary
tumours, respectively. Investigation of 577 colon cancers demonstrated
loss of villin expression was linked to poorly differentiated histology
in MSI and MSS (microsatellite stable) tumours. Furthermore,
mislocalization of villin away from the membrane was prognostic for
poorer outcome in MSS patients. Loss of villin expression was not due to
coding sequence mutations, epigenetic inactivation, or promoter mutation.
Conversely, villin promoter activity reflected endogenous villin
expression, suggesting villin loss is transcriptionally mediated. A
screen of gut-specific transcription factors revealed a significant
correlation between expression of villin and the homeobox transcription
factor, Cdx-1. Cdx-1 overexpression induced villin promoter activity,
Cdx-1 knockdown downregulated endogenous villin expression, and deletion
of a key Cdx binding site within the villin promoter attenuated promoter
activity. Loss of Cdx-1 expression was associated with Cdx-1 promoter
methylation. These findings demonstrate that loss of villin expression as
a result of Cdx-1-dependent transcriptional deregulation is a feature of
poorly differentiated colon cancers.

