Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic interplay between long-term overweight and long
menstrual years in endometrial cancer


Long-term exposure to estrogen is one of the established mechanisms
underlying the development of endometrial cancer. Early menarche, late
menopause, low number of pregnancies, and obesity, as risk factors of
endometrial cancer, are all linked to this mechanism. However, the
synergy among these factors is still less clear. To evaluate the
interplay among long-term overweight, menstrual and reproductive features
in endometrial cancer, a population-based case-control study was
conducted with 668 incident cases and 674 age-matched population
controls. Information on menstrual and reproductive features,
anthropometric measurements in each decade of adult life as well as
hormone replacement therapy was ascertained through a structured
questionnaire administered by interviewers. Unconditional logistic
regression model was used to examine the associations of these factors
with endometrial cancer. As expected, the results show that early
menarche, late menopause, low number of pregnancies and live births, and
long-term overweight were associated with increased risk. To assess all
the menstrual and reproductive factors together, we calculated net
menstrual years by subtracting age at menarche from age at menopause,
which was further subtracted by the total years of pregnancy. Women with
long net menstrual years (> 38 years) had nearly two-fold increases in
risk of endometrial cancer (95% CI: 1.43-2.41) compared to those with
shorter years (Long-term exposure to estrogen is one of the established
mechanisms underlying the development of endometrial cancer. Early
menarche, late menopause, low number of pregnancies, and obesity, as risk
factors of endometrial cancer, are all linked to this mechanism. However,
the synergy among these factors is still less clear. To evaluate the
interplay among long-term overweight, menstrual and reproductive features
in endometrial cancer, a population-based case-control study was
conducted with 668 incident cases and 674 age-matched population
controls. Information on menstrual and reproductive features,
anthropometric measurements in each decade of adult life as well as
hormone replacement therapy was ascertained through a structured
questionnaire administered by interviewers. Unconditional logistic
regression model was used to examine the associations of these factors
with endometrial cancer. As expected, the results show that early
menarche, late menopause, low number of pregnancies and live births, and
long-term overweight were associated with increased risk. To assess all
the menstrual and reproductive factors together, we calculated net
menstrual years by subtracting age at menarche from age at menopause,
which was further subtracted by the total years of pregnancy. Women with
long net menstrual years (> 38 years) had nearly two-fold increases in
risk of endometrial cancer (95% CI: 1.43-2.41) compared to those with
shorter years (<35 years). Approximately a 3.5-fold increase in risk (95%
CI: 2.79-7.04) was observed in those who were overweight since ages 20's
or 30's compared to those who maintained BMI under 25 throughout life.
Women with both long net menstrual years and long-term overweight
combined had over 7-fold increases in risk compared to those with short
years and normal weight. These finding suggest that long-term overweight
and long menstrual years may have a synergistic effect on endometrial
cancer risk.

