Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Axl and VE-cadherin expression as markers of angiogenesis in human
breast cancers


Background: The aim of our study was to investigate vascular expression
of Axl and VE-cadherin as potential markers of angiogenesis in human
breast carcinoma. Materials and methods: Immunohistochemical staining was
performed using antibodies against Axl and VE-cadherin. Expression was
examined in a population-based series of breast cancers collected in
Hordaland County (Norway) during 1996-2001. The series is a nested
case-control study as part of the Norwegian Breast Cancer Screening
Program, and consists of 95 invasive interval cancers and 95 invasive
screen detected cancers matched by tumor diameter. Positive microvessels
were counted in 10 consecutive high power fields within hot-spot areas
according to previously established criteria and expressed as microvessel
density (MVD) by mean number of microvessels per mm2. Results: The MVD
for Axl was associated with progesterone receptor status (p=0.026), HER-2
status (p=0.030) and basal-like phenotypes: CK5/6+ P-cadherin+ (p=0.009),
ER- HER2-CK5/6+ (p=0.014) and ER- HER2- CK5/6+ and/or EGFR+ (p=0.027). In
contrast, MVD by VE-cadherin expression (n=127) indicated negative
associations with basal-like phenotypes: CK5/6+ or P-cadherin+ or EGFR+
(p=0.034), and ER- HER2- P-cadherin+ (p=0.003). VE-cadherin expression
also tended to be associated with better patient survival (p=0.067).
Conclusion: High MVD by vascular expression of Axl was associated with
aggressive features in our breast cancer series, especially the
basal-like phenotype, whereas MVD by VE-cadherin expression appeared to
be related to less aggressive tumors.

