Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A primer dose followed by low-bolus dose schedule of
tumor-targeting of S. typhimurium A1-R is effective for tumor-targeted
therapy


The S. typhimurium A1-R mutant, which is auxotrophic for leu-arg, and
selected for high antitumor virulence, has been shown to be effective as
monotherapy against human prostate, breast, pancreatic, and fibrosarcoma
tumors. In the present study, we developed a strategy to maximize
efficacy and minimize toxicity for bacterial tumor treatment in
immunocompetent mice with subcutaneous Lewis lung carcinoma expressing
red fluorescent protein (RFP). A small dose of S. typhimurium A1-R
bacteria was first administered to tumor-bearing animals (the primer
dose, 1106 cfu i.v.) as pre-treatment followed by a high dose (1107 cfu
i.v.) 4 hours later. Compared with non-primer-dose bacteria treatment,
the primer-dose strategy resulted in smaller tumors and no observable
side effects. The serum lever of TNF- was elevated in the primer-dose
arms compared to non-primer dose arms. Vessel destruction by S.
typhimurium A1-R was observed in immunocompetent mice expressing
nestin-driven green fluorescent protein (ND-GFP), which is selectively
expressed in nascent blood vessels. Vessel destruction was enhanced in
the primer-dose arms compared to non-primer-dose arms. The primer dose
may activate the immune system and induce cytokines in the mouse
necessary for invasion of the tumor by the bacteria allowing a relatively
small subsequent dose to be effective and safe.

