Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Uptake of 18F-FDOPA analogue 3H-L-DOPA is mediated by large
neutral amino acid transporter LAT1 in human glioblastoma


INTRODUCTION: The L-Type amino acid transporter 1 (LAT1) transports large
neutral amino acids across the plasma membrane in a variety of cells.
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging with the amino acid tracer
6-18F-fluoro-L-dopa (18F-FDOPA) provides useful histological information
in human gliomas in addition to providing better localizing information
then CT or MRI alone. This study is the first to correlate LAT1
expression with uptake of the 18F-FDOPA analog, 3H-L-DOPA in human
glioblastomas. METHODS: Endogenous expression of LAT1 was evaluated in
two established glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines and three
primary GBM xenografts using Western blotting and quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Uptake of FDOPA was
assessed in vitro using 3H-L-DOPA as an analog to 18F-FDOPA. Knockdown of
LAT1 expression was achieved by lentiviral expression of anti-LAT1 shRNA
in GBM lines with high LAT1 expression. The effect of LAT1 knockdown on
3H-L-DOPA uptake was then quantified. RESULTS: Results from Western
blotting and qRT-PCR demonstrate that LAT1 is variably expressed in GBM.
Levels of 3H-L-DOPA uptake were directly related to LAT1 expression
(pINTRODUCTION: The L-Type amino acid transporter 1 (LAT1) transports
large neutral amino acids across the plasma membrane in a variety of
cells. Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging with the amino acid
tracer 6-18F-fluoro-L-dopa (18F-FDOPA) provides useful histological
information in human gliomas in addition to providing better localizing
information then CT or MRI alone. This study is the first to correlate
LAT1 expression with uptake of the 18F-FDOPA analog, 3H-L-DOPA in human
glioblastomas. METHODS: Endogenous expression of LAT1 was evaluated in
two established glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines and three
primary GBM xenografts using Western blotting and quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Uptake of FDOPA was
assessed in vitro using 3H-L-DOPA as an analog to 18F-FDOPA. Knockdown of
LAT1 expression was achieved by lentiviral expression of anti-LAT1 shRNA
in GBM lines with high LAT1 expression. The effect of LAT1 knockdown on
3H-L-DOPA uptake was then quantified. RESULTS: Results from Western
blotting and qRT-PCR demonstrate that LAT1 is variably expressed in GBM.
Levels of 3H-L-DOPA uptake were directly related to LAT1 expression
(p<0.001) across the 5 lines. Knockdown of LAT1 was achieved in T98 cells
(knockdown efficiency = 82.8%) and xenograft GBM 28 (knockdown efficiency
= 73.7%) as confirmed by qRT-PCR and Western blotting. Knockdown of LAT1
reduced 3H-L-DOPA uptake by 57.2% (pINTRODUCTION: The L-Type amino acid
transporter 1 (LAT1) transports large neutral amino acids across the
plasma membrane in a variety of cells. Positron emission tomography (PET)
imaging with the amino acid tracer 6-18F-fluoro-L-dopa (18F-FDOPA)
provides useful histological information in human gliomas in addition to
providing better localizing information then CT or MRI alone. This study
is the first to correlate LAT1 expression with uptake of the 18F-FDOPA
analog, 3H-L-DOPA in human glioblastomas. METHODS: Endogenous expression
of LAT1 was evaluated in two established glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
cell lines and three primary GBM xenografts using Western blotting and
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
Uptake of FDOPA was assessed in vitro using 3H-L-DOPA as an analog to
18F-FDOPA. Knockdown of LAT1 expression was achieved by lentiviral
expression of anti-LAT1 shRNA in GBM lines with high LAT1 expression. The
effect of LAT1 knockdown on 3H-L-DOPA uptake was then quantified.
RESULTS: Results from Western blotting and qRT-PCR demonstrate that LAT1
is variably expressed in GBM. Levels of 3H-L-DOPA uptake were directly
related to LAT1 expression (p<0.001) across the 5 lines. Knockdown of
LAT1 was achieved in T98 cells (knockdown efficiency = 82.8%) and
xenograft GBM 28 (knockdown efficiency = 73.7%) as confirmed by qRT-PCR
and Western blotting. Knockdown of LAT1 reduced 3H-L-DOPA uptake by 57.2%
(p<0.0001) in T98 and 52.1% in GBM 28 (pINTRODUCTION: The L-Type amino
acid transporter 1 (LAT1) transports large neutral amino acids across the
plasma membrane in a variety of cells. Positron emission tomography (PET)
imaging with the amino acid tracer 6-18F-fluoro-L-dopa (18F-FDOPA)
provides useful histological information in human gliomas in addition to
providing better localizing information then CT or MRI alone. This study
is the first to correlate LAT1 expression with uptake of the 18F-FDOPA
analog, 3H-L-DOPA in human glioblastomas. METHODS: Endogenous expression
of LAT1 was evaluated in two established glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
cell lines and three primary GBM xenografts using Western blotting and
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
Uptake of FDOPA was assessed in vitro using 3H-L-DOPA as an analog to
18F-FDOPA. Knockdown of LAT1 expression was achieved by lentiviral
expression of anti-LAT1 shRNA in GBM lines with high LAT1 expression. The
effect of LAT1 knockdown on 3H-L-DOPA uptake was then quantified.
RESULTS: Results from Western blotting and qRT-PCR demonstrate that LAT1
is variably expressed in GBM. Levels of 3H-L-DOPA uptake were directly
related to LAT1 expression (p<0.001) across the 5 lines. Knockdown of
LAT1 was achieved in T98 cells (knockdown efficiency = 82.8%) and
xenograft GBM 28 (knockdown efficiency = 73.7%) as confirmed by qRT-PCR
and Western blotting. Knockdown of LAT1 reduced 3H-L-DOPA uptake by 57.2%
(p<0.0001) in T98 and 52.1% in GBM 28 (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: This is the
first report of 3H-L-DOPA uptake being driven by LAT1 in human GBM. Our
findings suggest LAT1 as a transporter of 18F-FDOPA in GBM. Additional
studies are underway to correlate LAT1 expression with PET 18F-FDOPA
uptake in patients with GBM.

