Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Shp2 is required for CML initiation and maintenance


Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative neoplasm
(MPN) caused by the constitutively activated BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. CML
progresses from an initial chronic phase, through an accelerated phase,
to a final and fatal blast crisis. Current first-line therapy for CML
involves tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as imatinib, dasatinib,
or nilotinibs. However, TKIs don't completely cure CML, as revealed by
low complete molecular response rate and frequent disease relapse upon
drug withdrawal. Studies of patient samples and mouse models indicate
that this most likely results from lack of dependence of CML stem cells
(CML-SCs) on BCR-ABL for survival. It is important to further identify
potential targets of CML-SC. Shp2 is a non-receptor protein tyrosine
phosphatase involed in RTK, cytokine, and integrine signaling pathways,
and is a target of Abl kinase during cell proliferation. It is required
for survival and maintenance of normal hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs).
In the context of CML, BCR-ABL constitutively phosphorylates Gab2, which
then binds to Shp2, resulting in its inappropriate activation of
downstream pathways, including the Ras-Erk cascade. Gab2 is required for
CML initiation in vivo. We hypothesized that Shp2 is required for CML
development from the stem cell level and might be an effective target for
treatment of CML. Using our induced Shp2 deletion tools, we found that
Shp2 is required for CML initiation and maintenance in a bone marrow
transplant model of CML. Moreover, primitive CML cells undergo elevated
cell death upon Shp2 knockout. This implicates Shp2 as a potential target
for CML therapy in future.

