Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical studies on tumor retention, antitumor efficacy and
toxicity of thermally responsive polypeptide-based radionuclide
intratumoral depot in nude mice


Despite clear advantages of brachytherapy over external beam
radiotherapy, current implementations of this approach have several
limitations. These include the need for general anesthesia or intravenous
sedation, complicated placement procedures and the need for post
-treatment re-excision for device removal. An alternative approach that
circumvents these constraints would be clearly attractive. In a previous
study, we demonstrated that a thermally sensitive elastin-like
polypeptide (ELP) displayed increased tumor retention through a thermally
triggered in-situ coacervation and delayed tumor growth through the
therapeutic action of a conjugated radionuclide, 131I, over a
non-thermally sensitive ELP following intratumoral (i.t.) administration.
However, this smart radionuclide carrier did not lead to complete tumor
regression and had a small effect on survival. To improve the antitumor
efficacy of this thermally sensitive ELP-radionuclide conjugate
(ELP-depot), we investigated the effects of three orthogonal parameters
upon radionuclide retention in tumor following i.t administration: the
ELP concentration, molecular weight and tyrosine content
(hydrophobicity). Furthermore, using the ELP-depot optimized in the above
studies, we examined the antitumor efficacy and toxicity in two human
tumors (human head and neck squamous carcinoma (FaDu) and human prostate
(PC-3) tumor) xenografts in nude mice. The results demonstrate that the
injected concentration, the transition temperature (Tt), and the
hydrophobicity are critical design parameters with significant influence
over radionuclide tumor retention. A 16-fold increase in concentration
from 62.5 M to 1000 M resulted in a 5-fold increase in retention (16% ID
versus 85% ID) 7 days post-injection (p Despite clear advantages of
brachytherapy over external beam radiotherapy, current implementations of
this approach have several limitations. These include the need for
general anesthesia or intravenous sedation, complicated placement
procedures and the need for post -treatment re-excision for device
removal. An alternative approach that circumvents these constraints would
be clearly attractive. In a previous study, we demonstrated that a
thermally sensitive elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) displayed increased
tumor retention through a thermally triggered in-situ coacervation and
delayed tumor growth through the therapeutic action of a conjugated
radionuclide, 131I, over a non-thermally sensitive ELP following
intratumoral (i.t.) administration. However, this smart radionuclide
carrier did not lead to complete tumor regression and had a small effect
on survival. To improve the antitumor efficacy of this thermally
sensitive ELP-radionuclide conjugate (ELP-depot), we investigated the
effects of three orthogonal parameters upon radionuclide retention in
tumor following i.t administration: the ELP concentration, molecular
weight and tyrosine content (hydrophobicity). Furthermore, using the
ELP-depot optimized in the above studies, we examined the antitumor
efficacy and toxicity in two human tumors (human head and neck squamous
carcinoma (FaDu) and human prostate (PC-3) tumor) xenografts in nude
mice. The results demonstrate that the injected concentration, the
transition temperature (Tt), and the hydrophobicity are critical design
parameters with significant influence over radionuclide tumor retention.
A 16-fold increase in concentration from 62.5 M to 1000 M resulted in a
5-fold increase in retention (16% ID versus 85% ID) 7 days post-injection
(p < 0.01, ANOVA). Decreasing the Tt (a value dependent upon the
molecular weight) from 30 C to 24 C resulted in a 14-fold increase in
tumor retention over the same time period (p Despite clear advantages of
brachytherapy over external beam radiotherapy, current implementations of
this approach have several limitations. These include the need for
general anesthesia or intravenous sedation, complicated placement
procedures and the need for post -treatment re-excision for device
removal. An alternative approach that circumvents these constraints would
be clearly attractive. In a previous study, we demonstrated that a
thermally sensitive elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) displayed increased
tumor retention through a thermally triggered in-situ coacervation and
delayed tumor growth through the therapeutic action of a conjugated
radionuclide, 131I, over a non-thermally sensitive ELP following
intratumoral (i.t.) administration. However, this smart radionuclide
carrier did not lead to complete tumor regression and had a small effect
on survival. To improve the antitumor efficacy of this thermally
sensitive ELP-radionuclide conjugate (ELP-depot), we investigated the
effects of three orthogonal parameters upon radionuclide retention in
tumor following i.t administration: the ELP concentration, molecular
weight and tyrosine content (hydrophobicity). Furthermore, using the
ELP-depot optimized in the above studies, we examined the antitumor
efficacy and toxicity in two human tumors (human head and neck squamous
carcinoma (FaDu) and human prostate (PC-3) tumor) xenografts in nude
mice. The results demonstrate that the injected concentration, the
transition temperature (Tt), and the hydrophobicity are critical design
parameters with significant influence over radionuclide tumor retention.
A 16-fold increase in concentration from 62.5 M to 1000 M resulted in a
5-fold increase in retention (16% ID versus 85% ID) 7 days post-injection
(p < 0.01, ANOVA). Decreasing the Tt (a value dependent upon the
molecular weight) from 30 C to 24 C resulted in a 14-fold increase in
tumor retention over the same time period (p < 0.01, ANOVA). Tyrosine
content-induced the changes of ELP hydrophobicity have significantly
affected the behavior of radionuclide in tumor, presenting that the tumor
retention, radioactivity stability and antitumor efficacy were enhanced
with the increase in the tyrosine number from 1,4 to 7. This optimized
ELP depot achieved a 100% of tumor response to this radiotherapy in both
tumor xenografts and no significant toxicity was found in either of tumor
models. Interestingly, complete tumor regression (tumor size turned out
to be zero at the end of the experiment) rate was 67% in FaDu and 77% in
PC-3. Together, all our data indicates that the ELP radionuclide depot is
an ideal intratumoral radionuclide carrier, because it is injectable,
biocompatible, has long tumor retention and good antitumor efficacy for
local radiotherapy of solid tumors.

