Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic Kras inhibits mitochondrial metabolism by regulating the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex under conditions of nutrient stress


Kras is one of the most frequently mutated oncogenes in human cancer.
Previous studies have suggested a role for oncogenic Kras in regulating
glucose metabolism, although the exact mechanism is unclear. By analyzing
the transcriptional consequences of Kras mutation under conditions of
nutrient stress, a direct role for oncogenic Kras in regulating oxidative
phosphorylation was observed. Signaling downstream of Kras via the
MEK/ERK pathway inhibits expression of PDP1, a mitochondrial phosphatase
that regulates the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC). PDC is a key
enzyme in the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA. Decreased
expression of PDP1 induced by oncogenic Kras leads to increased
phosphorylation and thereby inactivation of PDC. Therefore, oncogenic
Kras represses mitochondrial function and oxygen consumption by
maintaining PDC in an inactive state. This effect is not apparent under
the high-glucose conditions in which cells are typically cultured.
However, at glucose concentrations more closely reflective of what cells
experience in vivo, the effect of oncogenic Kras signaling on PDP1
expression becomes readily apparent. This study demonstrates a novel role
for oncogenic Kras in the regulation of mitochondrial metabolism. Further
studies underway may clarify a role for this pathway as a target for
therapeutic intervention in Kras-mutant tumors.

