Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers of HPV in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Human papillomavirus (HPV) is an accepted cause of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and patients with HPV-associated disease have a
favorable prognosis. Currently there is no general guidance on the most
appropriate biomarkers for clinical assessment of HPV. We measured
DNA-based and serological markers in a single population-based study to
assess their associations with disease outcome and to determine the most
relevant biomarker for clinical use. HPV16 serology was determined using
an immunoassay for the capsid protein L1, and multiplex serology based on
the capsid protein L1 and the early oncoproteins E6/E7 for 488 patients.
Immunohistochemical detection of p16 expression in tumors was performed
in a subset of 233 cases, and we used two different methods to assess the
presence of HPV16 DNA in a subset of 179 cases tumors. Seropositivity for
the E6 and E7 proteins (individually) was significantly associated with
enhanced survival (HRE6 or HRE7=0.3, 95%CI=0.2-0.5). Neither the presence
of HPV16 DNA or p16 overexpression was associated with significant
enhanced overall survival (HRDNA=0.8, 95%CI=0.5-1.3; HRp16=0.8,
95%CI=0.5-1.4). However the combination of HPV positive DNA and E6/E7
serology was associated with similarly enhanced overall survival
(HRDNA+/E6+/E7+=0.1, 95%CI=0.01-0.6), while E6/E7 seronegative patients
with evidence of HPV in tumor DNA did not show any evidence of favorable
survival (HRDNA+/E6-/E7-=1.2, 95%CI = 0.7-2.2). Further, the combination
of p16 staining and early gene seropositivity showed a favorable survival
(HRp16+/E6+/E7+=0.3, 95%CI=0.1-0.9), while those who were p16 positive
and early gene seronegative had significantly increased hazard of death
(HRp16+/E6-/E7-=2.1, 95%CI=1.1-4.2). Determination of only HPV16 DNA
status or p16 immunostaining is not an effective prognostic biomarker for
HNSCC. However the combination of measurement of HPV16 DNA and p16
immunostaining with E6/E7 antibodies has high predictive clinical value,
strongly suggesting that a combined biomarker approach is necessary for
the assessment of the prognosis of HNSCC patients.

