Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of Cell-able spheroid culture system for culturing
patient derived primary tumor cells


Tumor cell microenvironment has significant impact on growth kinetics,
cell signaling and response to drug treatments. 3D models are more
biologically relevant models compared to 2D models and have gained
preference among researchers and drug developers. It is well recognized
that primary tumor cell cultures grown in 2D monolayer quickly lose the
ability to proliferate while 3D culture conditions on extracellular
matrix allows for spheroid formation and proliferation. Cell-able, a
novel micropatterned plate has cell adhesion areas in the well bottom
where the size and shape of these areas are tightly controlled.
Micro-fabrication of the well bottom enables rapid cell attachment and
spheroid formation. Cell-able plates are potentially an alternative to
culturing cells in 3D without extracellular matrix. We have evaluated
spheroid formation, morphology, duration of viability, histopathology and
expression of markers in patient-derived primary tumor cells from
different tumor types when cultured on Cell-able plates compared to
Cultrex extracellular matrix (ECM) coated plates. In addition we have
utilized Cell-able plates to grow patient-derived tumor cells and
evaluate the anti-proliferative responses to cytotoxic and targeted
agents using high content imaging coupled with immunofluorescence
characterization enabling subpopulation analysis within the spheroids.
Our results indicate that patient-derived tumor cells from multiple
indications as well as tumor cell lines can be cultured on Cell-able
plates as spheroids that resemble the micro architecture of tumors and
are therefore a suitable 3D model. The results of high content imaging
analysis suggest that Cell-able plates could be used as a valuable tool
in in vitro predictive assay models in oncology drug development.

