Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Downregulation of topoisomerase II by all-trans retinoic acid in
human cervical carcinoma cells


Cervical cancer remains a threatening disease to women worldwide.
Topoisomerase II is a novel proliferation marker for cervical cancer
diagnosis, therapy and prognosis. Understanding of the regulation of
topoisomerase II would facilitate prevention and therapy of cervical
cancer. In the present study, a significant repression of topoisomerase
II level in stage Ib of squamous cervical carcinoma tissue was observed
in patients with chemotherapeutic treatment, suggesting topoisomerase II
is a target for chemotherapeutic drugs. All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), a
chemopreventive agent, was shown to suppress both endogenous and
exogenous topoisomerase II protein but not mRNA expression in human
cervical carcinoma HeLa cells. Cycloheximide (CHX) prior to ATRA
treatment augmented the topoisomerase II instability. ATRA induced the
degradation of topoisomerase II via the proteasome pathway but not
lysosome pathway. Ubiquitination was involved in this ATRA-induced
topoisomerase II degradation. The ATRA-induced topoisomerase II
repression occurred only in cell nucleus. Interestingly, overexpression
of topoisomerase II enhanced cyclin D1 expression and caused HeLa cells
de-differentiation while knockdown of topoisomerase II resulted in the
cells differentiation and decreased cyclin D1. ATRA suppressed drug
resistant protein P-gp while the typical topoisomerase II inhibitor
etoposide did not. The molecular therapeutic implication of ATRA in
cervical cancer therapy is discussed.

