Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EphB2 receptor controls proliferation/migration dichotomy of
glioblastoma by interacting with focal adhesion kinase


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) are the most frequent and aggressive
primary brain tumors in adults. Uncontrolled proliferation and abnormal
cell migration are two prominent spatially and temporally disassociated
characteristics of GBMs. In this study, we investigated the role of the
receptor tyrosine kinase EphB2 in controlling the proliferation/migration
dichotomy of GBM. We studied EphB2 gain-of-function and loss-of function
in glioblastoma-derived stem-like neurospheres (GBM-SCs), whose in vivo
growth pattern closely replicates human GBM. EphB2 expression stimulated
GBM neurosphere cell migration and invasion, and inhibited neurosphere
cell proliferation in vitro. In parallel, EphB2 silencing increased tumor
cell proliferation and decreased tumor cell migration. EphB2 was found to
increase tumor cell invasion in vivo using an internally controlled
dual-fluorescent xenograft model. Xenografts derived from EphB2
overexpressing GBM neurospheres also showed decreased cellular
proliferation. The non-receptor tyrosine kinase focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) was found to be co-associated with and highly activated by EphB2
expression and FAK activation facilitated focal adhesion formation,
cytoskeleton structure change and cell migration in EphB2-expression GBM
neurosphere cells. Taken together, our findings indicate that EphB2 has
pro-invasive and anti-proliferative actions in GBM stem-like neurospheres
mediated, in part, by interactions between EphB2 receptors and FAK. These
novel findings suggest that tumor cell invasion can be therapeutically
targeted by inhibiting EphB2 signaling and that optimal anti-tumor
responses to EphB2 targeting may require the concurrent use of
anti-proliferative agents.

