Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated ALK collaborates with MYCN in neuroblastoma pathogenesis


Neuroblastoma is a developmental tumor that arises in the peripheral
sympathetic nervous system and accounts for 10% of all cancer-related
deaths in children. The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene is
mutationally activated in a subset of primary neuroblastomas, including
those with MYCN gene amplification, suggesting pathogenic cooperation.
Because the mechanism underlying this cooperation is unclear, we
generated a novel transgenic zebrafish model that overexpresses human
MYCN and activated ALK in the peripheral sympathetic nervous system to
analyze their interaction. The expression of MYCN in this model induces
neuroblastomas in the inter-renal gland, the zebrafish analogue of the
adrenal medulla, which is the site of origin observed in approximately
half of childhood neuroblastomas. Furthermore, the tumors resemble human
neuroblastomas histologically, immunohistochemically and
ultrastructurally. Concomitant expression of activated ALK with MYCN in
this model profoundly accelerates the onset of neuroblastoma and markedly
increases disease penetrance. Detailed in vivo analyses show that MYCN
overexpression induces adrenal sympathetic neuroblast hyperplasia, blocks
chromaffin cell differentiation, and triggers a developmentally-timed
apoptotic response in the hyperplastic sympathoadrenal cells.
Coexpression of activated ALK with MYCN provides prosurvival signals that
block this apoptotic response and allow continued expansion and oncogenic
transformation of hyperplastic neuroblasts. Taken together, these
findings provide a mechanism for the synergistic interplay of MYCN with
activated ALK in neuroblastoma pathogenesis and demonstrate the utility
of the zebrafish model in understanding human disease processes that may
aid the development of improved therapeutic strategies.

