Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activities of tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate in breast
cancer patients under radiotherapy


Abstract: The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that
administration of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a polyphenol present
in abundance in widely consumed tea, inhibits cell proliferation,
invasion, and angiogenesis in breast cancer patients. EGCG in 400 mg
capsules was orally administered three times daily to breast cancer
patients undergoing treatment by radiotherapy. Parameters related to cell
proliferation, invasion, and angiogenesis were analyzed while blood
samples were collected at different time points to determine efficacy of
the EGCG treatment. Compared to patients who received radiotherapy alone,
those given radiotherapy plus EGCG for an extended time period (two to
eight weeks) showed significantly lower serum levels of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and
reduced activation of metalloproteinase-9 and metalloproteinase-2
(MMP9/MMP2). Addition of sera obtained from patients treated by
combination of radiotherapy and EGCG feeding for 2-8 weeks to in vitro
cultures of highly-metastatic human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
resulted in the following significant changes: (1) suppression of cell
proliferation and invasion; (2) arrest of cell cycles at the G0/G1 phase;
(3) reduction of activation of MMP9/MMP2, expressions of Bcl-2/Bax, c-Met
receptor, NF-B, and the phosphorylation of Akt. MDA-MB-231 cells exposed
to 5-10 M EGCG also showed significant augmentation of the apoptosis
inducing effects of -radiation, concomitant with reduced NF-B protein
level and AKT phosphorylation. These results provide hitherto unreported
evidence that EGCG potentiated efficacy of radiotherapy in breast cancer
patients, and raise the possibility that this tea polyphenol has
potential to be a therapeutic adjuvant against human metastatic breast
cancer.

