Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progression of ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive breast cancer
is associated with gene expression programs of EMT and myoepithelia


Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a precursor lesion that can give rise
to invasive breast cancer (IBC). It has been proposed that both the
nature of the lesion and the tumor microenvironment play key roles in
progression to IBC. Here laser capture microdissected tissue from pure
DCIS and pure IBC were employed to define key gene expression profiles in
either the epithelial or stromal compartment associated with disease
progression. Each tissue had distinct gene expression profiles, and a
DCIS/IBC classifier accurately distinguished DCIS versus IBC in multiple
independent data sets. However, contrary to other studies that profiled
DCIS associated with IBC, we found that the most significant alterations
in gene expression were observed in the epithelial compartment rather
than in the stroma. In particular, genes associated with epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and myoepithelial cell specific genes were
enriched in invasive cancer relative to pure DCIS. Such alterations in
transcript levels were associated with all subtypes of breast cancer, but
were particularly indicative of poor outcome in ER-negative breast
cancer. Together, these studies indicate that lesion specific differences
in gene expression associated with invasive phenotype are particularly
relevant in the progression of DCIS to IBC.

