Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The relevance of exosomes in prostate cancer and their potential
to confer docetaxel resistance to secondary cells


While Docetaxel offers an improvement in overall survival of patients
with HRPC, unfortunately relapse is almost inevitable. Reasons for
failure of docetaxel to increase survival beyond a median of 2.5 months
have yet to be completely elucidated. Extracellular proteins and RNAs
secreted in small vesicles known as exosomes may hold relevance as
predictive biomarkers of docetaxel response. This study aimed to to (i)
characterize in vitro models of docetaxel resistance from three prostate
cancer cell lines: DU145, PC3 and 22Rv1 compared to their aged-parent
populations; (ii) isolate exosomes from medium conditioned by these cell
line models and investigate their effects on motility, invasion,
proliferation and docetaxel resistance of secondary cells; and to (iii)
perform a proof-of-principle translational investigation of the clinical
relevance of exosomes isolated from prostate cancer serum. We
successfully generated docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines
that were found to be substantially more resistant to docetaxel than
age-matched sensitive cells (1097.4 fold for DU145RD; 718.4 fold for
22Rv1RD; 192.3 for PC2RD). In addition, all resistant variants displayed
cross resistance to the antracycline Doxorubicin (4.31.0 for DU145RD;
8.31.2 for 22Rv1RD; 4.21.2). Docetaxel-resistance was associated with
alterations in motility, migration, invasion, proliferation, anchorage
independent growth and response to TRAIL-induced cell death. Furthermore,
MDR-1/P-gp expression associated with docetaxel-resistance (detected in
two of the resistant three cell lines) was also detectable in
corresponding exosomes secreted from those cells. Application of exosomes
derived from DU145 and its docetaxel resistant variant, DU145RD, did not
infer any significant affects on the motility of DU145 cells or the
invasion of DU145 or 22RV1 cells. Interestingly, however, in the presence
of DU145RD exosomes, a significant increase in docetaxel resistance was
observed in both DU145 cells (22%; pWhile Docetaxel offers an improvement
in overall survival of patients with HRPC, unfortunately relapse is
almost inevitable. Reasons for failure of docetaxel to increase survival
beyond a median of 2.5 months have yet to be completely elucidated.
Extracellular proteins and RNAs secreted in small vesicles known as
exosomes may hold relevance as predictive biomarkers of docetaxel
response. This study aimed to to (i) characterize in vitro models of
docetaxel resistance from three prostate cancer cell lines: DU145, PC3
and 22Rv1 compared to their aged-parent populations; (ii) isolate
exosomes from medium conditioned by these cell line models and
investigate their effects on motility, invasion, proliferation and
docetaxel resistance of secondary cells; and to (iii) perform a
proof-of-principle translational investigation of the clinical relevance
of exosomes isolated from prostate cancer serum. We successfully
generated docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines that were found
to be substantially more resistant to docetaxel than age-matched
sensitive cells (1097.4 fold for DU145RD; 718.4 fold for 22Rv1RD; 192.3
for PC2RD). In addition, all resistant variants displayed cross
resistance to the antracycline Doxorubicin (4.31.0 for DU145RD; 8.31.2
for 22Rv1RD; 4.21.2). Docetaxel-resistance was associated with
alterations in motility, migration, invasion, proliferation, anchorage
independent growth and response to TRAIL-induced cell death. Furthermore,
MDR-1/P-gp expression associated with docetaxel-resistance (detected in
two of the resistant three cell lines) was also detectable in
corresponding exosomes secreted from those cells. Application of exosomes
derived from DU145 and its docetaxel resistant variant, DU145RD, did not
infer any significant affects on the motility of DU145 cells or the
invasion of DU145 or 22RV1 cells. Interestingly, however, in the presence
of DU145RD exosomes, a significant increase in docetaxel resistance was
observed in both DU145 cells (22%; p<0.01) and 22RV1 cells (15%; pWhile
Docetaxel offers an improvement in overall survival of patients with
HRPC, unfortunately relapse is almost inevitable. Reasons for failure of
docetaxel to increase survival beyond a median of 2.5 months have yet to
be completely elucidated. Extracellular proteins and RNAs secreted in
small vesicles known as exosomes may hold relevance as predictive
biomarkers of docetaxel response. This study aimed to to (i) characterize
in vitro models of docetaxel resistance from three prostate cancer cell
lines: DU145, PC3 and 22Rv1 compared to their aged-parent populations;
(ii) isolate exosomes from medium conditioned by these cell line models
and investigate their effects on motility, invasion, proliferation and
docetaxel resistance of secondary cells; and to (iii) perform a
proof-of-principle translational investigation of the clinical relevance
of exosomes isolated from prostate cancer serum. We successfully
generated docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines that were found
to be substantially more resistant to docetaxel than age-matched
sensitive cells (1097.4 fold for DU145RD; 718.4 fold for 22Rv1RD; 192.3
for PC2RD). In addition, all resistant variants displayed cross
resistance to the antracycline Doxorubicin (4.31.0 for DU145RD; 8.31.2
for 22Rv1RD; 4.21.2). Docetaxel-resistance was associated with
alterations in motility, migration, invasion, proliferation, anchorage
independent growth and response to TRAIL-induced cell death. Furthermore,
MDR-1/P-gp expression associated with docetaxel-resistance (detected in
two of the resistant three cell lines) was also detectable in
corresponding exosomes secreted from those cells. Application of exosomes
derived from DU145 and its docetaxel resistant variant, DU145RD, did not
infer any significant affects on the motility of DU145 cells or the
invasion of DU145 or 22RV1 cells. Interestingly, however, in the presence
of DU145RD exosomes, a significant increase in docetaxel resistance was
observed in both DU145 cells (22%; p<0.01) and 22RV1 cells (15%;
p<0.001); effects that were independent of proliferation influences. In
order to explore the clinical relevance of exosomes in prostate cancer,
we performed a pilot study using serum from docetaxel-treatment naive
prostate cancer patients and healthy age-matched controls. We observed a
significant increase of invasion (20%; pWhile Docetaxel offers an
improvement in overall survival of patients with HRPC, unfortunately
relapse is almost inevitable. Reasons for failure of docetaxel to
increase survival beyond a median of 2.5 months have yet to be completely
elucidated. Extracellular proteins and RNAs secreted in small vesicles
known as exosomes may hold relevance as predictive biomarkers of
docetaxel response. This study aimed to to (i) characterize in vitro
models of docetaxel resistance from three prostate cancer cell lines:
DU145, PC3 and 22Rv1 compared to their aged-parent populations; (ii)
isolate exosomes from medium conditioned by these cell line models and
investigate their effects on motility, invasion, proliferation and
docetaxel resistance of secondary cells; and to (iii) perform a
proof-of-principle translational investigation of the clinical relevance
of exosomes isolated from prostate cancer serum. We successfully
generated docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines that were found
to be substantially more resistant to docetaxel than age-matched
sensitive cells (1097.4 fold for DU145RD; 718.4 fold for 22Rv1RD; 192.3
for PC2RD). In addition, all resistant variants displayed cross
resistance to the antracycline Doxorubicin (4.31.0 for DU145RD; 8.31.2
for 22Rv1RD; 4.21.2). Docetaxel-resistance was associated with
alterations in motility, migration, invasion, proliferation, anchorage
independent growth and response to TRAIL-induced cell death. Furthermore,
MDR-1/P-gp expression associated with docetaxel-resistance (detected in
two of the resistant three cell lines) was also detectable in
corresponding exosomes secreted from those cells. Application of exosomes
derived from DU145 and its docetaxel resistant variant, DU145RD, did not
infer any significant affects on the motility of DU145 cells or the
invasion of DU145 or 22RV1 cells. Interestingly, however, in the presence
of DU145RD exosomes, a significant increase in docetaxel resistance was
observed in both DU145 cells (22%; p<0.01) and 22RV1 cells (15%;
p<0.001); effects that were independent of proliferation influences. In
order to explore the clinical relevance of exosomes in prostate cancer,
we performed a pilot study using serum from docetaxel-treatment naive
prostate cancer patients and healthy age-matched controls. We observed a
significant increase of invasion (20%; p<0.05) and proliferation (10%;
pWhile Docetaxel offers an improvement in overall survival of patients
with HRPC, unfortunately relapse is almost inevitable. Reasons for
failure of docetaxel to increase survival beyond a median of 2.5 months
have yet to be completely elucidated. Extracellular proteins and RNAs
secreted in small vesicles known as exosomes may hold relevance as
predictive biomarkers of docetaxel response. This study aimed to to (i)
characterize in vitro models of docetaxel resistance from three prostate
cancer cell lines: DU145, PC3 and 22Rv1 compared to their aged-parent
populations; (ii) isolate exosomes from medium conditioned by these cell
line models and investigate their effects on motility, invasion,
proliferation and docetaxel resistance of secondary cells; and to (iii)
perform a proof-of-principle translational investigation of the clinical
relevance of exosomes isolated from prostate cancer serum. We
successfully generated docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell lines
that were found to be substantially more resistant to docetaxel than
age-matched sensitive cells (1097.4 fold for DU145RD; 718.4 fold for
22Rv1RD; 192.3 for PC2RD). In addition, all resistant variants displayed
cross resistance to the antracycline Doxorubicin (4.31.0 for DU145RD;
8.31.2 for 22Rv1RD; 4.21.2). Docetaxel-resistance was associated with
alterations in motility, migration, invasion, proliferation, anchorage
independent growth and response to TRAIL-induced cell death. Furthermore,
MDR-1/P-gp expression associated with docetaxel-resistance (detected in
two of the resistant three cell lines) was also detectable in
corresponding exosomes secreted from those cells. Application of exosomes
derived from DU145 and its docetaxel resistant variant, DU145RD, did not
infer any significant affects on the motility of DU145 cells or the
invasion of DU145 or 22RV1 cells. Interestingly, however, in the presence
of DU145RD exosomes, a significant increase in docetaxel resistance was
observed in both DU145 cells (22%; p<0.01) and 22RV1 cells (15%;
p<0.001); effects that were independent of proliferation influences. In
order to explore the clinical relevance of exosomes in prostate cancer,
we performed a pilot study using serum from docetaxel-treatment naive
prostate cancer patients and healthy age-matched controls. We observed a
significant increase of invasion (20%; p<0.05) and proliferation (10%;
p<0.05) of cells in the presence of prostate cancer exosomes. Our in
vitro observations and preliminary clinical studies indicate that
exosomes play an important role in prostate cancer and may offer
potential as vehicles containing predictive biomarkers and new
therapeutic targets. Acknowledgements: Science Foundation Ireland's SRC
award to MTCI (08/SRC/B1410).

