Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for mDia formins in epithelial ovarian cancer spheroid
invasion


Ovarian Cancers (OvCa) metastasis is highly unusual, relative to other
metastatic cancers, and is typically confined to the peritoneal cavity;
metastases are derived from exfoliated epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
cells that adhere to and invade the mesothelial cell layer and
extracellular matrix (ECM) underlying the peritoneal cavity and viscera.
Exfoliated ovarian tumor cells are detected in the peritoneal ascites as
single cells, small aggregates or highly ordered, compacted
multi-cellular spheroids Compacted spheroids are poorly understood yet
clinically relevant structures that are highly invasive and
chemoresistant. Little is known about the molecular underpinnings of EOC
spheroid formation or their cellular invasion into the underlying
peritoneal mesothelial lining. Spheroid formation and ensuing invasion
requires tight regulation of the actin cytoskeleton; a thorough
understanding of the contribution of proteins regulating the spheroid
actin cytoskeleton during cell-cell adhesions and adhesion to and
transmigration through the peritoneal mesothelium is essential for
progress in therapy of metastatic EOC. We showed that a panel of human
EOC cells representing serous and clear cell adenocarcinomas express
robust levels of mDia1 and mDia2 formins, irrespective of the ability to
form compacted spheroids. mDia proteins were localized to the leading
edge of migrating (spheroid-forming) serous epithelial OvCa 429 cells and
disruption of mDia function inhibited this 2D chemotactic migration;
conversely, dominant activated mDia2 in OvCa 429 cells enhanced
chemotactic migration. Upon culture in 3D gels, both mDia1 and mDia2 are
highly expressed and localized along with F-actin to the leading invasive
edges of the compacted spheroids. Confocal analysis of single cell
migration away from the spheroids revealed that multiple motility
programs are employed by EOC cells- including single cell streaming and
amoeboid cell motility. These data indicate a potential role for mDia
proteins in driving localized invasion of EOC cells from compacted
spheroids, and EOC cells exhibit a morphological plasticity while
migrating in 3-dimensions.

