Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chlorinated drinking water alters carcinogenesis in a mice model
of colon cancer


Purpose: The gastrointestinal tract is constantly exposed to vast numbers
of commensal bacteria and inflammatory product. The diet and enteric
environment has been implicated in the pathogenesis of enterocolitis and
colon cancer. Probiotic Lactbacilli modify the enteric microflora and are
thought to have a beneficial effect on enterocolitis, eventually on colon
cancer. We conducted this study to evaluate the effects of chlorinated
drinking water which was used in general institutions. Experimental
design: Mouse stains carrying colon epithelium-preferential Apc mutation
(CPC;Apc mice), that show sporadic colorectal adenomas and carcinomas are
used in this study. Nine of Eighteen CPC;Apc mice were consumed
chlorinated drinking water (chlorinate concentrations of 10.0 mg/L) and 9
consumed tap water (chlorinate concentrations of 0.7 mg/L) for 25 week.
Body weight was measured weekly. Faecal microbial analysis was performed.
At sacrifice, the small and large bowel were histologically assessed.
Results: Chlorinated drinking water strongly prevented intestinal
tumorigenesis in terms of polyps formation in distal portion of small
intestine. However, in colon we observed an increase in numbers and
volumes of tumors. Body weight gain was more favorable by chlorine
treated. Conclusions: These results show for the first time the efficacy
and associated mechanisms of chlorinated drinking water feeding against
spontaneous intestinal tumorigenesis in the CPC;Apc mice suggesting its
chemopreventive potential against intestinal cancers.

