Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor mRNA level in breast cancer predicts response to
tamoxifen


PURPOSE: Quantification of mRNA has historically been done by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Recently, a robust
method of detection of mRNA utilizing in situ hybridization has been
described that is linear and shows high specificity with low background.
Here we describe the use of the AQUA method of quantitative
immunofluorescence (QIF) for measuring mRNA in situ using ESR1 (the
estrogen receptor alpha gene) in breast cancer to determine its
predictive value compared to Estrogen Receptor (ER) protein. METHODS:
Messenger RNA for ER (ESR1) and Ubiquitin C (UbC) were visualized using
RNAscope probes and levels were quantified by quantitative in situ
hybridization (qISH) on two Yale breast cancer cohorts on tissue
microarrays. ESR1 levels were compared to ER protein levels measured by
QIF using the SP1 antibody. RESULTS: ESR1 mRNA is reproducibly and
specifically measurable by qISH on tissue collected from 1993 or later.
ESR1 levels were correlated to ER protein levels in a non-linear manner
on two Yale cohorts. High levels of ESR1 were found to be predictive of
response to tamoxifin. CONCLUSION: Quantification of mRNA using qISH may
allow assessment of large cohorts with minimal formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded tissue. Exploratory data using this method suggests that
measurement of ESR1 mRNA levels may be predictive of response to
endocrine therapy in a manner that is different from the predictive value
of ER. Further studies are underway using tissue microarrays from other
institutions to determine how tissue age affects this assay.

