Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Spicing up radiation treatment for prostate cancer


Introduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to
the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower
doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer control thereby
minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their lack of
toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal potential
radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound chilli
peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain syndromes;
however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models
describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our preliminary studies we
have demonstrated the radio-sensitizing capacity of in PCa cells in
vitro. Cells treated with capsaicin and/or IR to have increased
expression of pro-apoptotic tumour-suppressor proteins p21 and p27 and
reduced androgen-receptor. The objective of the present study is to
assess the radio-sensitizing capacity in an in vivo model. Methods:
Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously with human PCa (LNCaP)
cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals will be randomized into
4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment), capsaicin alone, ionizing
radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR. Treatments were administered
over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5 mg/kg/d) or vehicle was
administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be delivered to animals in sterile
cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Control animals were mock irradiated.
Tumours were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours
were fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation. Results: There were no differences in food consumption or
body weight of mice between groups. Two mice experienced mild to moderate
inflammation of the stomach. No other toxicities were observed. Mice
treated with capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour
growth overtime (p Introduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents
sensitize cells to the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This
permits use of lower doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer
control thereby minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their
lack of toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal
potential radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound
chilli peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain
syndromes; however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer
(PCa) models describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our
preliminary studies we have demonstrated the radio-sensitizing capacity
of in PCa cells in vitro. Cells treated with capsaicin and/or IR to have
increased expression of pro-apoptotic tumour-suppressor proteins p21 and
p27 and reduced androgen-receptor. The objective of the present study is
to assess the radio-sensitizing capacity in an in vivo model. Methods:
Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously with human PCa (LNCaP)
cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals will be randomized into
4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment), capsaicin alone, ionizing
radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR. Treatments were administered
over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5 mg/kg/d) or vehicle was
administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be delivered to animals in sterile
cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Control animals were mock irradiated.
Tumours were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours
were fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation. Results: There were no differences in food consumption or
body weight of mice between groups. Two mice experienced mild to moderate
inflammation of the stomach. No other toxicities were observed. Mice
treated with capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour
growth overtime (p < 0.001). Mice treated with capsaicin and IR capsaicin
had a reduction in the tumour volume greater than either capsaicin alone
(pIntroduction and Objective: Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to
the lethal effects of ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower
doses of radiation to achieve equivalent cancer control thereby
minimizing adverse effects to normal tissues. Given their lack of
toxicity compounds occurring naturally in the diet make ideal potential
radio-sensitizing agents. Capsaicin is the active compound chilli
peppers. Traditionally capsaicin is used to treat chronic pain syndromes;
however, recently evidence using in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models
describes its anti-carcinogenic potential. In our preliminary studies we
have demonstrated the radio-sensitizing capacity of in PCa cells in
vitro. Cells treated with capsaicin and/or IR to have increased
expression of pro-apoptotic tumour-suppressor proteins p21 and p27 and
reduced androgen-receptor. The objective of the present study is to
assess the radio-sensitizing capacity in an in vivo model. Methods:
Athymic nude mice were inoculated subcutaneously with human PCa (LNCaP)
cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3 forty animals will be randomized into
4 groups (15 /group); control (no treatment), capsaicin alone, ionizing
radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin and IR. Treatments were administered
over a two-week time period. Capsaicin (5 mg/kg/d) or vehicle was
administered 3/week by gavage. RT will be delivered to animals in sterile
cages as one fraction (6 Gray). Control animals were mock irradiated.
Tumours were measured thrice weekly and volumes were calculated. Tumours
were fixed and stained for pathological analyses and immunohistochemical
evaluation. Results: There were no differences in food consumption or
body weight of mice between groups. Two mice experienced mild to moderate
inflammation of the stomach. No other toxicities were observed. Mice
treated with capsaicin or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour
growth overtime (p < 0.001). Mice treated with capsaicin and IR capsaicin
had a reduction in the tumour volume greater than either capsaicin alone
(p<0.001) or radiation alone.(pIntroduction and Objective:
Radio-sensitizing agents sensitize cells to the lethal effects of
ionizing radiation (IR). This permits use of lower doses of radiation to
achieve equivalent cancer control thereby minimizing adverse effects to
normal tissues. Given their lack of toxicity compounds occurring
naturally in the diet make ideal potential radio-sensitizing agents.
Capsaicin is the active compound chilli peppers. Traditionally capsaicin
is used to treat chronic pain syndromes; however, recently evidence using
in vitro prostate cancer (PCa) models describes its anti-carcinogenic
potential. In our preliminary studies we have demonstrated the
radio-sensitizing capacity of in PCa cells in vitro. Cells treated with
capsaicin and/or IR to have increased expression of pro-apoptotic
tumour-suppressor proteins p21 and p27 and reduced androgen-receptor. The
objective of the present study is to assess the radio-sensitizing
capacity in an in vivo model. Methods: Athymic nude mice were inoculated
subcutaneously with human PCa (LNCaP) cells. Once xenografts reach 100mm3
forty animals will be randomized into 4 groups (15 /group); control (no
treatment), capsaicin alone, ionizing radiation (IR) alone and capsaicin
and IR. Treatments were administered over a two-week time period.
Capsaicin (5 mg/kg/d) or vehicle was administered 3/week by gavage. RT
will be delivered to animals in sterile cages as one fraction (6 Gray).
Control animals were mock irradiated. Tumours were measured thrice weekly
and volumes were calculated. Tumours were fixed and stained for
pathological analyses and immunohistochemical evaluation. Results: There
were no differences in food consumption or body weight of mice between
groups. Two mice experienced mild to moderate inflammation of the
stomach. No other toxicities were observed. Mice treated with capsaicin
or IR alone had a significant reduction in tumour growth overtime (p <
0.001). Mice treated with capsaicin and IR capsaicin had a reduction in
the tumour volume greater than either capsaicin alone (p<0.001) or
radiation alone.(p<0.03) We are currently investigating mechanism.
Conclusion: These studies confirm the radio-sensitizing capacity of
capsaicin in PCa xenograft model cells. Ongoing studies using are further
delineating the mechanism of interaction of these treatment modalities.

