Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The E3 ligase Itch and deubiquitinase Cyld act together to
regulate Tak1 and inflammation


Chronic inflammation has been strongly associated with tumor progression,
but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Our previous studies have
achieved important new insights into key regulatory mechanism in the
immune system mediated by the ubiquitin ligase, Itch, whose deficiency
results in inflammatory disorders and pulmonary inflammation (Venuprasad
K et al. Nat. Immunol. 2008, Venuprasad K. et al. J.Clin. Invest. 2004).
We demonstrate that E3 ligase Itch and deubiquitinase Cyld formed a
complex via interaction through WW-PPXY motifs. The Itch-Cyld complex
sequentially cleaved K63-linked ubiquitin chains and catalyzed
Lys48-linked ubiquitination on TGF-beta activated kinase 1(Tak1) to
terminate inflammatory signaling. Itch or Cyld deficiency resulted in
sustained Tak1 activation and elevated production of proinflammatory
cytokines by bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs). Tak1 selective
inhibitor, (5Z)-7-Oxozeaenol abrogated Tak1 activation and production of
proinflammatory cytokines by Itch-/- and Cyld-/- BMDMs. Similarly,
ectopic expression of a catalytically inactive dominant-negative
(Tak1-K63W) inhibited elevated cytokine production by Itch-/- and Cyld-/-
BMDMs. Reconstitution of wild-type Cyld but not the mutant Cyld(Y485A),
which cannot associate with Itch, blocked sustained Tak1 activation and
proinflammatory cytokine production by Cyld/ BMDMs. Deficiency in Itch or
Cyld led to chronic production of tumor-promoting cytokines by
tumor-associated macrophages and aggressive growth of lung carcinoma.
Thus, we have identified an Itch-Cyld-mediated regulatory mechanism in
innate inflammatory cells.

