Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment of P53 mutant type specific spontaneous lung tumor
in transgenic mice for treatment


Mutant p53 can be classified into two major types, the type I (contact)
mutation and type II (conformational) mutation. Important differences
between these types have been established, including a higher oncogenic
potential for the type II mutation, and the conservation of some wild
type activity for type I. To investigate the role of typeI and II p53
mutant in lung tumorigenesis, two transgenic mouse models with human
mutant p53(type I,273H and type II, 175H) were developed. To evaluate
feasibility of treatment, we treated the SPC-p53(273H) tumor baring mice
with PRIMA-1, a small molecule which has been shown to induce apoptosis
in human tumor cells containing mutant p53. To evaluate lung tumor rate
and age of onset of the type I and II transgenic mice, we evaluated 108
non-transgenic mice, 159 SPC-p53(273H) and 160 SPC-p53(175H) transgenic
mice at age of 4-15 months. Among the 108 non-transgenic mice, no tumors
were observed among 44 mice in the 4-6 months and 7-9 months groups
combined; 2/31 and 2/33 in the 10-12 and 13-15 month groups. Among the
159 type I transgenic mice, lung tumors per age group were observed as
follows: 1/29 at 4-6 months; 1/20 at 7-9 months; 5/59 at 10-12 months;
13/51 at 13-15 months. Among the 160 type II mice, tumor developed in
2/14 at 4-6 months; 5/23 at 7-9 months; 14/59 at 10-12 months and 20/64
at 13-15 months. All tumors were identified histopathologically as
adenocarcinomas. We treated SPC-p53-273H lung tumor bearing mice via
intraperitoneal injection (i.p) with PRIMA-1 at a dose of 100 mg/kg in
0.2 ml PBS every other day for two weeks. Lung tumor bearing mice were
identified with a micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) system and pre-
and post-treatment tumor volumes were estimated based on the micro-CT
image. Twelve tumor bearing mice were received the PRIMA-1 and a control
group of 13 lung tumor mice were received PBS only. Among the PRIMA-1
treated group, responses of the PRIMA-1 treated mice were five stability
(decreasing less than 50% to growing less than 25% in tumor volume), 3
partial responses (more than 50% reduction in tumor volume), and 4
progressions (25% or greater increase in tumor volume). In the control
group, responses were 11 progressions and 2 stabilities. Compared to the
type I (273H) mice and the non-transgenic control group at age of 4-15
months, the type II mice have a higher lung tumor incidence statistically
(non-trasgenic/175H, pMutant p53 can be classified into two major types,
the type I (contact) mutation and type II (conformational) mutation.
Important differences between these types have been established,
including a higher oncogenic potential for the type II mutation, and the
conservation of some wild type activity for type I. To investigate the
role of typeI and II p53 mutant in lung tumorigenesis, two transgenic
mouse models with human mutant p53(type I,273H and type II, 175H) were
developed. To evaluate feasibility of treatment, we treated the
SPC-p53(273H) tumor baring mice with PRIMA-1, a small molecule which has
been shown to induce apoptosis in human tumor cells containing mutant
p53. To evaluate lung tumor rate and age of onset of the type I and II
transgenic mice, we evaluated 108 non-transgenic mice, 159 SPC-p53(273H)
and 160 SPC-p53(175H) transgenic mice at age of 4-15 months. Among the
108 non-transgenic mice, no tumors were observed among 44 mice in the 4-6
months and 7-9 months groups combined; 2/31 and 2/33 in the 10-12 and
13-15 month groups. Among the 159 type I transgenic mice, lung tumors per
age group were observed as follows: 1/29 at 4-6 months; 1/20 at 7-9
months; 5/59 at 10-12 months; 13/51 at 13-15 months. Among the 160 type
II mice, tumor developed in 2/14 at 4-6 months; 5/23 at 7-9 months; 14/59
at 10-12 months and 20/64 at 13-15 months. All tumors were identified
histopathologically as adenocarcinomas. We treated SPC-p53-273H lung
tumor bearing mice via intraperitoneal injection (i.p) with PRIMA-1 at a
dose of 100 mg/kg in 0.2 ml PBS every other day for two weeks. Lung tumor
bearing mice were identified with a micro-computed tomography (micro-CT)
system and pre- and post-treatment tumor volumes were estimated based on
the micro-CT image. Twelve tumor bearing mice were received the PRIMA-1
and a control group of 13 lung tumor mice were received PBS only. Among
the PRIMA-1 treated group, responses of the PRIMA-1 treated mice were
five stability (decreasing less than 50% to growing less than 25% in
tumor volume), 3 partial responses (more than 50% reduction in tumor
volume), and 4 progressions (25% or greater increase in tumor volume). In
the control group, responses were 11 progressions and 2 stabilities.
Compared to the type I (273H) mice and the non-transgenic control group
at age of 4-15 months, the type II mice have a higher lung tumor
incidence statistically (non-trasgenic/175H, p<0.001, 273H/175H, p=0.017,
Fisher's exact test). The type II mutant p53 has a higher oncogenic
potential than the type I mutant protein in the lung specific transgenic
mice. Furthermore, these animal models provide a framework to further
evaluation of the effects of these mutations on response to novel anti
anticancer treatment interventions. These mice develop a single-lung
tumor that is easy to follow and they survive for more than 18 months,
providing sufficient time for evaluation of therapeutic strategies.

