Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cerium oxide nanoparticles sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to
radiation by modulating the JNK pathway


Pancreatic cancer, one of the most lethal cancers, has a poor prognosis
and a high mortality rate. Currently, the absence of effective therapies
increases reliance on radiation therapy (RT) to treat pancreatic cancer.
We have previously reported that Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles (CONPs) are
selectively toxic to cancer cells and possess the ability to selectively
sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to radiation-induced cell death.
Radiation-induced H2O2 production was significantly increased in the
presence of less than or equal to 10 M of CONPs and radiation-induced ROS
production was increased in human L3.6pl pancreatic cancer cells
pre-treated with 10 M CONPs, which correlated with a significant decrease
in cell viability and clonogenicity as compared to radiation alone.
Conversely, ROS production was decreased in normal hTERT-HPNE pancreatic
cells without impacting cell viability. The volume of pancreatic tumors
was reduced by 48% in mice treated with combination therapy compared to
radiation alone. Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed that
combination therapy resulted in a significant increase in tumor cell
apoptosis. In the most recent study, we determined the mechanism
responsible for the increase in apoptosis as a result of increased ROS
levels. L3.6pl cells (radiation sensitive), PANC-1 (radiation resistant)
and HPNE (normal pancreatic cells) were treated with 5 Gy radiation in
the presence or absence of 10 M CONPs. CONPs selectively increased
RT-induced Thioredoxin (TRX) oxidation in the cancer cells (L3.6pl:
14.2%, pPancreatic cancer, one of the most lethal cancers, has a poor
prognosis and a high mortality rate. Currently, the absence of effective
therapies increases reliance on radiation therapy (RT) to treat
pancreatic cancer. We have previously reported that Cerium Oxide
Nanoparticles (CONPs) are selectively toxic to cancer cells and possess
the ability to selectively sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to
radiation-induced cell death. Radiation-induced H2O2 production was
significantly increased in the presence of less than or equal to 10 M of
CONPs and radiation-induced ROS production was increased in human L3.6pl
pancreatic cancer cells pre-treated with 10 M CONPs, which correlated
with a significant decrease in cell viability and clonogenicity as
compared to radiation alone. Conversely, ROS production was decreased in
normal hTERT-HPNE pancreatic cells without impacting cell viability. The
volume of pancreatic tumors was reduced by 48% in mice treated with
combination therapy compared to radiation alone. Immunohistochemical
(IHC) analysis revealed that combination therapy resulted in a
significant increase in tumor cell apoptosis. In the most recent study,
we determined the mechanism responsible for the increase in apoptosis as
a result of increased ROS levels. L3.6pl cells (radiation sensitive),
PANC-1 (radiation resistant) and HPNE (normal pancreatic cells) were
treated with 5 Gy radiation in the presence or absence of 10 M CONPs.
CONPs selectively increased RT-induced Thioredoxin (TRX) oxidation in the
cancer cells (L3.6pl: 14.2%, p<0.001; PANC-1: 23.5%, pPancreatic cancer,
one of the most lethal cancers, has a poor prognosis and a high mortality
rate. Currently, the absence of effective therapies increases reliance on
radiation therapy (RT) to treat pancreatic cancer. We have previously
reported that Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles (CONPs) are selectively toxic to
cancer cells and possess the ability to selectively sensitize pancreatic
cancer cells to radiation-induced cell death. Radiation-induced H2O2
production was significantly increased in the presence of less than or
equal to 10 M of CONPs and radiation-induced ROS production was increased
in human L3.6pl pancreatic cancer cells pre-treated with 10 M CONPs,
which correlated with a significant decrease in cell viability and
clonogenicity as compared to radiation alone. Conversely, ROS production
was decreased in normal hTERT-HPNE pancreatic cells without impacting
cell viability. The volume of pancreatic tumors was reduced by 48% in
mice treated with combination therapy compared to radiation alone.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis revealed that combination therapy
resulted in a significant increase in tumor cell apoptosis. In the most
recent study, we determined the mechanism responsible for the increase in
apoptosis as a result of increased ROS levels. L3.6pl cells (radiation
sensitive), PANC-1 (radiation resistant) and HPNE (normal pancreatic
cells) were treated with 5 Gy radiation in the presence or absence of 10
M CONPs. CONPs selectively increased RT-induced Thioredoxin (TRX)
oxidation in the cancer cells (L3.6pl: 14.2%, p<0.001; PANC-1: 23.5%,
p<0.005) which correlated with a 35-40% increase in ASK-1 phosphorylation
in both cell lines. Excitingly, western blot analyses showed a selective
increase in JNK phosphorylation in both radiation sensitive (L3.6pl: JNK1
at 15%, JNK2 at 20%) and radiation resistant (PANC-1: JNK1 at 36%, JNK2
at 37%) cells which correlated with an increase in Caspase 3/7 activity
(L3.6pl: 36.4%, pPancreatic cancer, one of the most lethal cancers, has a
poor prognosis and a high mortality rate. Currently, the absence of
effective therapies increases reliance on radiation therapy (RT) to treat
pancreatic cancer. We have previously reported that Cerium Oxide
Nanoparticles (CONPs) are selectively toxic to cancer cells and possess
the ability to selectively sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to
radiation-induced cell death. Radiation-induced H2O2 production was
significantly increased in the presence of less than or equal to 10 M of
CONPs and radiation-induced ROS production was increased in human L3.6pl
pancreatic cancer cells pre-treated with 10 M CONPs, which correlated
with a significant decrease in cell viability and clonogenicity as
compared to radiation alone. Conversely, ROS production was decreased in
normal hTERT-HPNE pancreatic cells without impacting cell viability. The
volume of pancreatic tumors was reduced by 48% in mice treated with
combination therapy compared to radiation alone. Immunohistochemical
(IHC) analysis revealed that combination therapy resulted in a
significant increase in tumor cell apoptosis. In the most recent study,
we determined the mechanism responsible for the increase in apoptosis as
a result of increased ROS levels. L3.6pl cells (radiation sensitive),
PANC-1 (radiation resistant) and HPNE (normal pancreatic cells) were
treated with 5 Gy radiation in the presence or absence of 10 M CONPs.
CONPs selectively increased RT-induced Thioredoxin (TRX) oxidation in the
cancer cells (L3.6pl: 14.2%, p<0.001; PANC-1: 23.5%, p<0.005) which
correlated with a 35-40% increase in ASK-1 phosphorylation in both cell
lines. Excitingly, western blot analyses showed a selective increase in
JNK phosphorylation in both radiation sensitive (L3.6pl: JNK1 at 15%,
JNK2 at 20%) and radiation resistant (PANC-1: JNK1 at 36%, JNK2 at 37%)
cells which correlated with an increase in Caspase 3/7 activity (L3.6pl:
36.4%, p<0.05; PANC-1: 43.1%, pPancreatic cancer, one of the most lethal
cancers, has a poor prognosis and a high mortality rate. Currently, the
absence of effective therapies increases reliance on radiation therapy
(RT) to treat pancreatic cancer. We have previously reported that Cerium
Oxide Nanoparticles (CONPs) are selectively toxic to cancer cells and
possess the ability to selectively sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to
radiation-induced cell death. Radiation-induced H2O2 production was
significantly increased in the presence of less than or equal to 10 M of
CONPs and radiation-induced ROS production was increased in human L3.6pl
pancreatic cancer cells pre-treated with 10 M CONPs, which correlated
with a significant decrease in cell viability and clonogenicity as
compared to radiation alone. Conversely, ROS production was decreased in
normal hTERT-HPNE pancreatic cells without impacting cell viability. The
volume of pancreatic tumors was reduced by 48% in mice treated with
combination therapy compared to radiation alone. Immunohistochemical
(IHC) analysis revealed that combination therapy resulted in a
significant increase in tumor cell apoptosis. In the most recent study,
we determined the mechanism responsible for the increase in apoptosis as
a result of increased ROS levels. L3.6pl cells (radiation sensitive),
PANC-1 (radiation resistant) and HPNE (normal pancreatic cells) were
treated with 5 Gy radiation in the presence or absence of 10 M CONPs.
CONPs selectively increased RT-induced Thioredoxin (TRX) oxidation in the
cancer cells (L3.6pl: 14.2%, p<0.001; PANC-1: 23.5%, p<0.005) which
correlated with a 35-40% increase in ASK-1 phosphorylation in both cell
lines. Excitingly, western blot analyses showed a selective increase in
JNK phosphorylation in both radiation sensitive (L3.6pl: JNK1 at 15%,
JNK2 at 20%) and radiation resistant (PANC-1: JNK1 at 36%, JNK2 at 37%)
cells which correlated with an increase in Caspase 3/7 activity (L3.6pl:
36.4%, p<0.05; PANC-1: 43.1%, p<0.05) compared to radiation alone.
Knockdown of JNK expression by siRNA resulted in abrogation of Caspase
3/7 activity and corresponding cell death. Combination therapy of CONPs
and radiation in an orthotopic murine model produced significant
increases in JNK phosphorylation and Caspase 3 cleavage shown by IHC
analysis. These data suggest that CONPs may act as a radiosensitizer in
treatment of pancreatic cancer through the induction of JNK activation.

