Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic anti-tumor activity of CDK4/6 inhibitor combined with
paclitaxel in NSCLC cells harboring mutant KRAS


Background: Deregulation of the p16INK4A-cyclin D-cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDK) 4/6-retinoblastoma (RB) pathway is frequently observed in
various cancers and represents one of the attractive therapeutic targets.
The gain of function mutation in KRAS gene confers intrinsic resistance
to targeted anti-cancer drugs as well as cytotoxic chemotherapeutic
agents leading to treatment failure. More effective treatment for
adenocarcinomas harboring KRAS mutations should be developed to improve
clinical outcomes. Purpose: CINK4, a chemical inhibitor of
cyclin-dependent kinase 4, has demonstrated potent anti-proliferative
activity in the presence of pRb. Herein, when combined with paclitaxel,
we investigated that CINK4 may increase its anti-proliferative activity
in the NSCLC cells harboring KRAS mutant. Methods: We measured the
anti-proliferative activities of CINK4 in A549 (KRAS mutant), H358 (KRAS
mutant), SK-LU-1 (KRAS mutant), H23 (KRAS mutant), PC14 (KRAS wild), and
Calu-3 (KRAS wild) cell lines using SRB assay, cell cycle distribution
quantified by flow cytometric analysis, and the expression of cell cycle
regulators and apoptosis-related proteins was evaluated by Western
blotting. Multiple drug effect was analyzed to study an interaction
between two drugs. The nature of the interaction between two agents was
calculated for the combination index (CI). Results: Concentration- and
time- dependent anti-proliferative effects of CINK4 (0.1 40 M
concentration range) and paclitaxel (0.1300 nM) alone were observed in
six NSCLC cell lines, and were not significantly different between each
cell line (48 h IC50: 10.4 0.2 M and 5.5 0.9 nM, 10.1 1.9 M and 5.2 0.9
nM, 6.6 0.8 M and 3.6 1.0 nM, 8.6 0.8 M and >10 nM, 8.9 0.5 M and 3.5 0.2
nM, and 8.4 0.2 M and > 10 nM, in A549, H358, PC14, and Calu-3, SKLU-1,
and H23 cells, respectively). After 48 h CINK4 treatment alone, the
G0/G1phase cell population increased with increment of subG1 faction in
concentration-dependent manner. CINK4 reduced cyclinD1 and Rb
phosphorylation and increase the expression of cleaved PARP in
concentration-dependent manner in A549, H358, and PC14 cells. The CINK4
combined with paclitaxel in four KRAS mutant cell lines enhanced
anti-proliferative activity of paclitaxel. The CI values of CINK4 and
palitaxel in A549, H358, SKLU-1 and H23 were 0.51 0.16, 0.63 0.12, 0.60
0.15, and 0.55 0.15, respectively. Conclusions: Taken together, our data
suggest that CINK4 alone has promising anti-tumor activity in NSCLC cells
with or without KRAS mutation. In addition, CDK4/6 inhibitor in combined
with paclitaxel demonstrated more enhanced anti-tumor activity in NSCLC
cells harboring mutant KRAS.

