Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interplay between dietary trace metal, energy balance, genes in
DNA repair pathway and bladder cancer risk


We analyzed the association between dietary trace metals and bladder
cancer (BC) risk using data collected in a large on-going case-control
study. The study included 932 histologically confirmed BC cases and 1239
healthy controls matched to cases by age ( 5 years), gender and
ethnicity. Epidemiologic and dietary data were collected using structured
questionnaires via an in-person interview. Dietary intake was reported on
the National Cancer Institute- Block 135-item food frequency
questionnaire (FFQ). Multivariate unconditional logistic regression was
used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and the 95% confidence intervals (95%
CI). We observed increased ORs with decreasing intakes of copper, iron,
and manganese. For example, compared to the first quartile (the highest
quartile) of copper intake, we observed increased ORs for the second
(OR=1.64; 95%CI=1.23-2.17), third (OR=2.14; 95% CI=1.55-2.94), and fourth
(OR=2.97; 95% CI=2.01-4.38) quartile, respectively (p trend We analyzed
the association between dietary trace metals and bladder cancer (BC) risk
using data collected in a large on-going case-control study. The study
included 932 histologically confirmed BC cases and 1239 healthy controls
matched to cases by age ( 5 years), gender and ethnicity. Epidemiologic
and dietary data were collected using structured questionnaires via an
in-person interview. Dietary intake was reported on the National Cancer
Institute- Block 135-item food frequency questionnaire (FFQ).
Multivariate unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds
ratios (ORs) and the 95% confidence intervals (95% CI). We observed
increased ORs with decreasing intakes of copper, iron, and manganese. For
example, compared to the first quartile (the highest quartile) of copper
intake, we observed increased ORs for the second (OR=1.64;
95%CI=1.23-2.17), third (OR=2.14; 95% CI=1.55-2.94), and fourth (OR=2.97;
95% CI=2.01-4.38) quartile, respectively (p trend < 0.001). Similar
results were found for intakes of iron and manganese. The association was
borderline significant for zinc and there was no association for selenium
intake. Interestingly, in stratified analyses, the increased risk
associated with low copper and manganese was only present in subjects
with high energy intake, with low physical activity and in subjects who
were overweight and or obese. For example, the ORs for the lowest
quartile copper intake was only significantly increased in overweight
subjects (OR=3.42; 95% CI=1.88-6.22), in obese subjects (OR=4.21; 95%
CI=2.01-8.79), in subjects with low physical activity (OR=4.72; 95%
CI=1.89-11.78), and in subjects with high energy intake (OR=3.88; 95%
CI=1.00-14.93). These associations were not present in subjects with
normal weight (OR=1.68; 95% CI=0.79-3.61), with high physical activity
(OR=0.96; 0.35-2.64) or with low energy intake (OR=1.65; 95%
CI=0.39-6.92). When analyzed with genetic variants in DNA repair
pathways, compared with subjects in the highest quartile of copper intake
and who carried low number of unfavorable genotypes (less than 6),
subjects carrying eight or more unfavorable genotypes and whose copper
intake was in the lowest quartile were at 7.55-fold increased risk (95%
CI=3.94-14.48; PWe analyzed the association between dietary trace metals
and bladder cancer (BC) risk using data collected in a large on-going
case-control study. The study included 932 histologically confirmed BC
cases and 1239 healthy controls matched to cases by age ( 5 years),
gender and ethnicity. Epidemiologic and dietary data were collected using
structured questionnaires via an in-person interview. Dietary intake was
reported on the National Cancer Institute- Block 135-item food frequency
questionnaire (FFQ). Multivariate unconditional logistic regression was
used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and the 95% confidence intervals (95%
CI). We observed increased ORs with decreasing intakes of copper, iron,
and manganese. For example, compared to the first quartile (the highest
quartile) of copper intake, we observed increased ORs for the second
(OR=1.64; 95%CI=1.23-2.17), third (OR=2.14; 95% CI=1.55-2.94), and fourth
(OR=2.97; 95% CI=2.01-4.38) quartile, respectively (p trend < 0.001).
Similar results were found for intakes of iron and manganese. The
association was borderline significant for zinc and there was no
association for selenium intake. Interestingly, in stratified analyses,
the increased risk associated with low copper and manganese was only
present in subjects with high energy intake, with low physical activity
and in subjects who were overweight and or obese. For example, the ORs
for the lowest quartile copper intake was only significantly increased in
overweight subjects (OR=3.42; 95% CI=1.88-6.22), in obese subjects
(OR=4.21; 95% CI=2.01-8.79), in subjects with low physical activity
(OR=4.72; 95% CI=1.89-11.78), and in subjects with high energy intake
(OR=3.88; 95% CI=1.00-14.93). These associations were not present in
subjects with normal weight (OR=1.68; 95% CI=0.79-3.61), with high
physical activity (OR=0.96; 0.35-2.64) or with low energy intake
(OR=1.65; 95% CI=0.39-6.92). When analyzed with genetic variants in DNA
repair pathways, compared with subjects in the highest quartile of copper
intake and who carried low number of unfavorable genotypes (less than 6),
subjects carrying eight or more unfavorable genotypes and whose copper
intake was in the lowest quartile were at 7.55-fold increased risk (95%
CI=3.94-14.48; P<0.001). Finally, in joint analysis, subjects who had low
trace metal intake, carried high number of genetic variants and who were
at worst energy balance status (obese, low physical activity and high
energy intake) were at the highest increased risk (e.g. more than
8-fold), as compared to subjects with none of these risk factors. This is
the first study reporting joint effects of dietary trace metal, energy
balance, and genetic variants in DNA repair pathway in BC. Our results
strongly support that dietary intakes of trace metal are associated with
BC risk and the association may be modified by energy balance status and
genetic variants in the DNA repair pathways.

