Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel combination of carbonic anhydrase inhibitor with a
phytochemical for treatment of human bronchial carcinoids


Bronchial carcinoids are pulmonary neuroendocrine cell derived tumors
comprising typical (TC) and atypical (AT) malignant phenotypes. The
5-year survival rate in metastatic disease, despite multiple current
therapies, is 14-25%. Carcinoids are found in the gastrointestinal tract
are more frequent (61%) and also more aggressive; however, 31% of
carcinoids are located in bronchopumonary system, which can metastize
beyond the longs. Therefore, new strategies are needed for effective
treatment of carcinoid malignant progression and metastatic disease. The
progenitor neuroendocrine cells are O2/CO2 chemosensory. Hypoxia and
hypercapnia stimulate secretion of the neuroendocrine associated
bioactive amine, serotonin, which can also serve as an autocrine growth
factor. CO2 sensing and metabolism is associated with physiological
activities of different carbonic anhydrases (CAs) which function in tumor
cell pH homeostasis and therein regulation of growth, survival, and
metastasis. CAs are abundantly expressed in lung carcinoids. We
postulated that acetazolamide (AZ), a pan CA inhibitor, and the
anti-tumor phytochemical sulforaphane (SFN), which can inhibit expression
of serotonin receptors could function cooperatively and synergistically
to inhibit growth of pulmonary carcinoids. A dose dependent effect of AZ
(0-80 M, 48h) and SFN (0-80M, 48h) on carcinoid cell lines H727 (TC),
H835 (intermediate phenotype) and H720 (AT) was assessed in vitro. Both
compounds reduced cell viability (via Alamar Blue) and mitochondrial
integrity (via JC-1 mitochondrial staining) dose-dependently in all cell
lines. IC50 values for cell viability were 9.29 M (H727), 16.67 M (H835)
and 30.85 M (H720) for AZ and 51.93 M (H727), 5.31 M (H835) and 10.82 M
(H720) for SFN. The mitochondrial integrity JC1 IC50 values were 50.16 M
(H727), 15.52 M (H835), 11.93 M (H720) for AZ and 9.29 M (H727), 16.67 M
(H835) and 30.85 M (H720) for SFN treatment. Treatment of H727
subcutaneous xenografts in NOD/SCID mice for 2 weeks demonstrated modest
growth inhibition with AZ (7%, 20mg/kg) and SFN (23%, 40mg/kg) alone.
However, a highly significant reduction (57%; p=0.02) was shown with the
combination treatment. Furthermore, the combination did not show any
signs of morbidity in treated mice. Since these doses are at the low end
and well within clinical range and bioavailability, our results suggest a
potential new therapeutic strategy for the treatment of pulmonary
carcinoids. The molecular mechanism underlying this synergistic
anti-tumor effect, currently under investigation, suggests a novel
targeting of tumor cell homeostasis.

