Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)


The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) was established to
bring together researchers from around the globe to comprehensively
analyze the genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic changes in 50
different tumor types or subtypes that are of clinical and societal
importance across the globe. (International network of cancer genome
projects (Nature 464, 993-998 (15 April 2010)). As of November 2011, the
ICGC has received commitments from funding organizations in Asia,
Australia, Europe and North America for 43 project teams in 13
jurisdictions to study over 18,000 tumor genomes. The genomic analyses of
tumors conducted by ICGC members in Australia and Canada (pancreatic
cancer), Japan (liver cancer), Spain (blood cancer), the UK (breast, lung
and skin cancer) and the USA (blood, brain, breast, colon, kidney, lung,
ovarian, rectal, stomach and uterine cancer) are now available through
the Data Coordination Center housed on the ICGC website at www.icgc.org.
The ICGC's informed consent and ethical oversight policies state that
cancer patients enrolled in an ICGC-related study should be informed that
their participation is voluntary, that their clinical care will not be
affected by their participation and that data obtained from analyses
using their samples will be made available to the international research
community. Ultimately, over 25,000 tumor genomes will be sequenced
worldwide. This will provide a comprehensive catalogue of genomic
abnormalities associated with cancer, a collection of data that will
reveal the repertoire of mutations that cause this wide-ranging disease
and help define clinically relevant subtypes of cancer. The data will
also provide a rich resource for the world's researchers who are working
to develop new treatments to make patient care move forward.


