Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-metastasis effect of EW-7197, a novel ALK5 inhibitor in both
breast cancer cells in vitro and mouse model in vivo


We have synthesized new ALK5 inhibitor, EW-7197 and investigated their
effects of on breast cancer cells as well as tumor bearing MMTV/cNeu
transgenic mouse, 4T1 or 4T1-Luc cell-orthotopic implanted mouse models.
The level of -casein or the number of metastatic nodule in the lung of
the breast tumor bearing MMTV/cNeu transgenic mice or 4T1 cell-orthotopic
implanted mice, respectively, were decreased by EW-7197 treatment. The
treatment of the EW-7197 also inhibited the luciferase activity in the
lung of 4T1-Luc cell-orthotopic implanted mouse compared to that of
untreated animal. The levels of MMP2 and MMP9 were decreased in the lung
and breast tumor of the EW-7197 treated mice. To determine the inhibitory
effect of EW-7197 on TGF-1-induced transcriptional activation, we
performed luciferase reporter gene assay in breast cancer cells. EW-7197
effectively blocked TGF-1-induced luciferase activity in the cells in a
dose-dependent manner. TGF signaling, the phosphorylation of smad2/3 was
decreased by EW-7197. TGF-stimulated mesenchymal markers of epithelial
mesenchymal transition (EMT) were inhibited by ALK5 inhibitor concomitant
treatment. Furthermore, EW-7197 rescued TGF--induced loss of E-cadherin
in NMuMG cells. And also, EW-7197 showed higher inhibition on cell
motility and cell invasion based on wound healing assay or invasion assay
than SB-505124 and LY-2157299. In summary, EW-7197 have anti-metastatic
effect on breast cancer cells in vitro as well as breast cancer models in
vivo. This data strongly argue that the ALK5 inhibitor have
anti-metastasis effects via inhibiting ALK5 activity in vivo and in vitro.

