Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a novel HDM2 inhibitor with potent in vivo anti-tumor
activity


HDM2 is a major negative regulator of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway.
Aberrant HDM2 overexpression and gene amplification contributed to
accelerated cancer development and growth. Several small molecule
inhibitors of HDM2-p53 protein-protein interaction have been reported in
recent years with anti-tumor activities in tumor xenograft models. Here
we describe a novel and potent small molecule inhibitor of HDM-p53
inhibitor that binds selectively to HDM2 with high affinity compared to
HDM4. Treatment of cancer cells with this HDM2 inhibitor results in
activation of p53 pathway as demonstrated by study of pharmacodynamic
biomarkers both in cell culture and in tumor xenograft in vivo. More
importantly, cancer cells response to this HDM2 inhibitor is mechanism
based and dependent on the presence of functional p53 status as shown in
a profiling of a broad-panel of cancer cell lines. This inhibitor is very
potent against cancer cell growth with IC50 below 200 nM for most cell
lines tested in vitro. It is orally bioavailable and has single agent
activity that results tumor regression in SJSA-1 osteosarcoma model or
growth inhibition in A549 NSCLC and A2780 ovarian cancer xenograft
models. In addition, combination of this HDM2 inhibitor with various
chemotherapy agents results in added or synergistic anti-tumor response
both in vitro and in vivo in several human cancer xenograft models with
limited bone marrow toxicity at the efficacious dose.

