Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-888 synergizes treatment of colon cancer cell lines with
irinotecan


Numerous studies have associated poly [ADP-ribosolose] polymerase 1
(PARP1) with DNA-damage repair. PARP1 rapidly localizes to DNA damage
sites where it alters target proteins, (e. g. histones, topoisomerase I
and DNA dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK)), through the addition of
poly-ADP ribose side chains. By this mechanism, PARP1 plays a role in
diverse repair pathways including homologous recombination/non-homologous
end joining (HRR/NHEJ). Presently, third generation PARP inhibitors are
in use clinically. These drugs have resulted in meaningful clinical
responses and an increase in survival in metastatic breast and ovarian
cancer patients bearing BRCA-deficient or triple negative tumors. The
Abbott lead compound, ABT-888, is a potent PARP1 inhibitor that
sensitizes many cancer cells in-vitro and in-vivo to temozolomide. In the
present work, we hypothesized that colon cancers would be sensitized to
the DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agent, irinotecan by ABT-888. Since
PARP1 is involved in DNA repair, we propose that its inhibition would
increase irinotecan-induced DNA damage and cell death in colon cancer
cells lines. Using the sulforhodamine B assay (SRB), significant synergy
(INumerous studies have associated poly [ADP-ribosolose] polymerase 1
(PARP1) with DNA-damage repair. PARP1 rapidly localizes to DNA damage
sites where it alters target proteins, (e. g. histones, topoisomerase I
and DNA dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK)), through the addition of
poly-ADP ribose side chains. By this mechanism, PARP1 plays a role in
diverse repair pathways including homologous recombination/non-homologous
end joining (HRR/NHEJ). Presently, third generation PARP inhibitors are
in use clinically. These drugs have resulted in meaningful clinical
responses and an increase in survival in metastatic breast and ovarian
cancer patients bearing BRCA-deficient or triple negative tumors. The
Abbott lead compound, ABT-888, is a potent PARP1 inhibitor that
sensitizes many cancer cells in-vitro and in-vivo to temozolomide. In the
present work, we hypothesized that colon cancers would be sensitized to
the DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agent, irinotecan by ABT-888. Since
PARP1 is involved in DNA repair, we propose that its inhibition would
increase irinotecan-induced DNA damage and cell death in colon cancer
cells lines. Using the sulforhodamine B assay (SRB), significant synergy
(I<1 indicates synergy) was observed between ABT-888 and irinotecan at
concentrations as low as 0.06 M (Table 1). Levels of synergy observed in
the SRB assay correlated with levels of PARP1 inhibition measured
biochemically in cell lysates. Furthermore, 24h post treatment
combinations of ABT-888/SN38 resulted in increased G2/M cell cycle arrest
and increased levels of DNA damage as determined by H2AX staining and
comet assay. Additionally, 48h post treatment increased levels of
apoptosis were associated with this drug combination. In conclusion this
study suggests that ABT-888 may be a clinically effective adjuvant to
current colon cancer therapies that include the use of irinotecan.


