Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of the phytochemical crinumaquine on prostate and prostate
cancer cell lines


We have published a new prostate cell culture model in which benign,
immortalized prostate epithelial EP156T cells gave rise to progeny cells
with a stepwise accumulation of defined malignant features. In a screen
of a panel of phytochemicals using this cell culture model, the small
molecular compound crinumaquine exerted differential effects on benign
prostate cancer cells compared with progeny cells with accumulated
malignant features. The differential effect included proliferation and
induction of a striking phenotype of the more malignant cells. The
induced phenotype comprised extensive membrane protrusions and cell
contacts between neighbouring cells following crinumaquine treatment for
2 - 4 days. Conditioned medium from the changed cultures induced a
similar phenotype within hours in non-treated cells. Genome-wide gene
expression analysis using the Agilent 44k oligoarray platform revealed
that crinumaquine treatment reduced expression of multiple genes involved
in cell division and strongly induced several genes involved in apoptosis
induction. Furthermore, crinumaquine treatment induced multiple genes of
cell adhesion modules such as gap junctions, adherens junctions and
desmosomes. These findings have motivated further examinations of the
ability of crinumaquine to compromise epithelial to mesenchymal
plasticity and its potential in the treatment of prostate cancer.

