Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low serum levels of a novel anti-inflammatory fatty acid as a new
risk factor for colorectal cancer


Low serum levels of novel, long-chain, hydroxylated and polyunsaturated
fatty acids (GTAs) in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients has been
previously reported. This study prospectively investigated the
relationship between serum GTA levels and CRC incidence among subjects
undergoing colonoscopy. Serum samples and pathology data were collected
from 4923 representative subjects undergoing colonoscopy in a typical,
non-screening, colonoscopy population and from 964 representative age and
geographically-matched subjects from the general population. Serum
GTA-446 levels were determined on all subjects using a sensitive tandem
mass spectrometric method. A low serum GTA-446 level was defined as a
GTA-446 concentration below the tenth percentile of 40-49 year-olds in
the general population sampling. Eighty-six percent of newly diagnosed
CRC subjects (87% for stage 0-II and 85% for stage III-IV) were observed
to have low serum GTA-446 levels, with a PPV of 15% and NPV of 99.7%. CRC
incidence was observed to increase significantly with age in all subjects
(pLow serum levels of novel, long-chain, hydroxylated and polyunsaturated
fatty acids (GTAs) in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients has been
previously reported. This study prospectively investigated the
relationship between serum GTA levels and CRC incidence among subjects
undergoing colonoscopy. Serum samples and pathology data were collected
from 4923 representative subjects undergoing colonoscopy in a typical,
non-screening, colonoscopy population and from 964 representative age and
geographically-matched subjects from the general population. Serum
GTA-446 levels were determined on all subjects using a sensitive tandem
mass spectrometric method. A low serum GTA-446 level was defined as a
GTA-446 concentration below the tenth percentile of 40-49 year-olds in
the general population sampling. Eighty-six percent of newly diagnosed
CRC subjects (87% for stage 0-II and 85% for stage III-IV) were observed
to have low serum GTA-446 levels, with a PPV of 15% and NPV of 99.7%. CRC
incidence was observed to increase significantly with age in all subjects
(p<0.05) and in low GTA-446 subjects (pLow serum levels of novel,
long-chain, hydroxylated and polyunsaturated fatty acids (GTAs) in
colorectal cancer (CRC) patients has been previously reported. This study
prospectively investigated the relationship between serum GTA levels and
CRC incidence among subjects undergoing colonoscopy. Serum samples and
pathology data were collected from 4923 representative subjects
undergoing colonoscopy in a typical, non-screening, colonoscopy
population and from 964 representative age and geographically-matched
subjects from the general population. Serum GTA-446 levels were
determined on all subjects using a sensitive tandem mass spectrometric
method. A low serum GTA-446 level was defined as a GTA-446 concentration
below the tenth percentile of 40-49 year-olds in the general population
sampling. Eighty-six percent of newly diagnosed CRC subjects (87% for
stage 0-II and 85% for stage III-IV) were observed to have low serum
GTA-446 levels, with a PPV of 15% and NPV of 99.7%. CRC incidence was
observed to increase significantly with age in all subjects (p<0.05) and
in low GTA-446 subjects (p<0.05), but not in subjects with normal serum
GTA-446 levels (p=0.86). The CRC incidence rate in subjects with low
GTA-446 levels (3.1%) was over six times higher than for subjects with
normal GTA-446 levels (0.5%) and approximately twice that of subjects
with GI symptoms (2.0%). The results indicate that a low serum GTA-446
level is a significant risk factor for CRC and a sensitive predictor of
early-stage disease, and that low-GTA levels could be responsible for the
age-associated increase in CRC incidence. Implications for
population-wide screening are discussed.

