Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unique ovarian cancer cell line panel: Molecular subtypes and
therapy response


Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy in
the Western world. Up to 70% of the patients do not survive the first 5
years after diagnosis, mostly due to acquired chemotherapy resistance.
With the goal to stratify a heterogeneous group of patients, recently, a
number of studies have identified molecular subtypes within ovarian
carcinomas. However, the relation with response to chemotherapeutics is
unknown. An extensive model system in which the response to different
chemotherapeutics can be related to molecular subtypes is therefore
imperative to know how to individualize treatment based on these
molecular subtypes. We have an (increasing) collection of so far 40
ovarian cancer cell lines. The large number and extensive
characterization of the cell lines makes this a unique model. We have
data of the growth and morphological properties, exon-based gene
expression (22.000 genes), microRNA expression (400 miRNAs), mutation
analysis (PIK3CA, RAF & RAS genes), microsatellite instability status
(MSI) and response curves for eight chemotherapeutics used in first- and
second-line treatment. Unsupervised absolute clustering using the most
variable expressed genes and microRNAs revealed two even clusters of cell
lines with significantly different characteristics. The cell lines in the
first cluster compared to the second: -show more often a round and less
often an epithelial morphology (cell lines with spindle morphology are
divided over both clusters), -show more often no Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) and high CD44 membrane expression -are highly
proliferative -are more often PI3K/Ras mutated and MSI Interestingly, the
cell lines within the first cluster are significantly more sensitive to
six of the eight tested chemotherapeutics compared to the second cluster
BRB class comparison analysis revealed that 287 genes were differentially
expressed between the two clusters (permutation pEpithelial ovarian
cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy in the Western world.
Up to 70% of the patients do not survive the first 5 years after
diagnosis, mostly due to acquired chemotherapy resistance. With the goal
to stratify a heterogeneous group of patients, recently, a number of
studies have identified molecular subtypes within ovarian carcinomas.
However, the relation with response to chemotherapeutics is unknown. An
extensive model system in which the response to different
chemotherapeutics can be related to molecular subtypes is therefore
imperative to know how to individualize treatment based on these
molecular subtypes. We have an (increasing) collection of so far 40
ovarian cancer cell lines. The large number and extensive
characterization of the cell lines makes this a unique model. We have
data of the growth and morphological properties, exon-based gene
expression (22.000 genes), microRNA expression (400 miRNAs), mutation
analysis (PIK3CA, RAF & RAS genes), microsatellite instability status
(MSI) and response curves for eight chemotherapeutics used in first- and
second-line treatment. Unsupervised absolute clustering using the most
variable expressed genes and microRNAs revealed two even clusters of cell
lines with significantly different characteristics. The cell lines in the
first cluster compared to the second: -show more often a round and less
often an epithelial morphology (cell lines with spindle morphology are
divided over both clusters), -show more often no Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) and high CD44 membrane expression -are highly
proliferative -are more often PI3K/Ras mutated and MSI Interestingly, the
cell lines within the first cluster are significantly more sensitive to
six of the eight tested chemotherapeutics compared to the second cluster
BRB class comparison analysis revealed that 287 genes were differentially
expressed between the two clusters (permutation p<0.01, FDREpithelial
ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy in the Western
world. Up to 70% of the patients do not survive the first 5 years after
diagnosis, mostly due to acquired chemotherapy resistance. With the goal
to stratify a heterogeneous group of patients, recently, a number of
studies have identified molecular subtypes within ovarian carcinomas.
However, the relation with response to chemotherapeutics is unknown. An
extensive model system in which the response to different
chemotherapeutics can be related to molecular subtypes is therefore
imperative to know how to individualize treatment based on these
molecular subtypes. We have an (increasing) collection of so far 40
ovarian cancer cell lines. The large number and extensive
characterization of the cell lines makes this a unique model. We have
data of the growth and morphological properties, exon-based gene
expression (22.000 genes), microRNA expression (400 miRNAs), mutation
analysis (PIK3CA, RAF & RAS genes), microsatellite instability status
(MSI) and response curves for eight chemotherapeutics used in first- and
second-line treatment. Unsupervised absolute clustering using the most
variable expressed genes and microRNAs revealed two even clusters of cell
lines with significantly different characteristics. The cell lines in the
first cluster compared to the second: -show more often a round and less
often an epithelial morphology (cell lines with spindle morphology are
divided over both clusters), -show more often no Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) and high CD44 membrane expression -are highly
proliferative -are more often PI3K/Ras mutated and MSI Interestingly, the
cell lines within the first cluster are significantly more sensitive to
six of the eight tested chemotherapeutics compared to the second cluster
BRB class comparison analysis revealed that 287 genes were differentially
expressed between the two clusters (permutation p<0.01, FDR<5%, 10.000
permutations). Pathway analysis of these genes revealed the significantly
overrepresented canonical pathways and molecular & cellular functions
including Interferon Signaling (p=0.007), Arachidonic Acid Metabolism
(p=0.030) and Cell-To-Cell Signaling and Interaction (pEpithelial ovarian
cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy in the Western world.
Up to 70% of the patients do not survive the first 5 years after
diagnosis, mostly due to acquired chemotherapy resistance. With the goal
to stratify a heterogeneous group of patients, recently, a number of
studies have identified molecular subtypes within ovarian carcinomas.
However, the relation with response to chemotherapeutics is unknown. An
extensive model system in which the response to different
chemotherapeutics can be related to molecular subtypes is therefore
imperative to know how to individualize treatment based on these
molecular subtypes. We have an (increasing) collection of so far 40
ovarian cancer cell lines. The large number and extensive
characterization of the cell lines makes this a unique model. We have
data of the growth and morphological properties, exon-based gene
expression (22.000 genes), microRNA expression (400 miRNAs), mutation
analysis (PIK3CA, RAF & RAS genes), microsatellite instability status
(MSI) and response curves for eight chemotherapeutics used in first- and
second-line treatment. Unsupervised absolute clustering using the most
variable expressed genes and microRNAs revealed two even clusters of cell
lines with significantly different characteristics. The cell lines in the
first cluster compared to the second: -show more often a round and less
often an epithelial morphology (cell lines with spindle morphology are
divided over both clusters), -show more often no Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) and high CD44 membrane expression -are highly
proliferative -are more often PI3K/Ras mutated and MSI Interestingly, the
cell lines within the first cluster are significantly more sensitive to
six of the eight tested chemotherapeutics compared to the second cluster
BRB class comparison analysis revealed that 287 genes were differentially
expressed between the two clusters (permutation p<0.01, FDR<5%, 10.000
permutations). Pathway analysis of these genes revealed the significantly
overrepresented canonical pathways and molecular & cellular functions
including Interferon Signaling (p=0.007), Arachidonic Acid Metabolism
(p=0.030) and Cell-To-Cell Signaling and Interaction (p<0.03). We are
currently identifying the published clinical molecular subtypes in our
cell lines and relating it with response to treatment. This will give
information on which of the commonly used therapeutics are expected to be
most effective in the different molecular subtype. In the future, the
response to targeted therapeutics can be tested in our cell line panel
which may give additional information on how to treat each subtype. In
conclusion, this large panel of extremely well characterized ovarian
cancer cell lines is a unique model system that can be used in many
future translational and functional studies and we are happy to
collaborate (j.helleman@erasmusmc.nl).

