Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking effects on CYP24A1 in lung adenocarcinoma: Epigenetic
changes by smoking


CYP24A1 is the rate limiting catabolic enzyme for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 (1,25-D3), the active form of vitamin D. We have previously
demonstrated that the mRNA expression of CYP24A1 is an independent
prognostic factor for survival in lung adenocarcinoma (AC) and that the
antiproliferative effects of 1,25-D3 are inversely proportional to
CYP24A1 expression. We then asked if smoking is associated with increased
expression of CYP24A1 and a decrease in serum level of 1,25-D3; whether
increased CYP24A1 expression was due to epigenetic changes caused by
smoking. We measured CYP24A1 mRNA in resected lung AC (n=100) specimens
and compared CYP24A1 in smokers (former/current) versus non-smokers. In
parallel, we performed metabolism experiments in A549 (high CYP24A1) and
SKLU-1 (low CYP24A1) cells to study the functional relevance of increased
CYP24A1. We evaluated the promoter methylation status of CYP24A1 in the
cancer cell lines and lung AC patients using pyrosequencing PCR analysis.
Finally, quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation PCR (ChIP-qPCR)
analysis was performed to validate the CYP24A1 methylation was regulated
by histone modifiers. Non-smokers had higher serum levels of 25-D3
compared with smokers (albeit small numbers of non-smokers, n=11).
Smoking lung AC patients showed higher mRNA expression of CYP24A1 (P
CYP24A1 is the rate limiting catabolic enzyme for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 (1,25-D3), the active form of vitamin D. We have previously
demonstrated that the mRNA expression of CYP24A1 is an independent
prognostic factor for survival in lung adenocarcinoma (AC) and that the
antiproliferative effects of 1,25-D3 are inversely proportional to
CYP24A1 expression. We then asked if smoking is associated with increased
expression of CYP24A1 and a decrease in serum level of 1,25-D3; whether
increased CYP24A1 expression was due to epigenetic changes caused by
smoking. We measured CYP24A1 mRNA in resected lung AC (n=100) specimens
and compared CYP24A1 in smokers (former/current) versus non-smokers. In
parallel, we performed metabolism experiments in A549 (high CYP24A1) and
SKLU-1 (low CYP24A1) cells to study the functional relevance of increased
CYP24A1. We evaluated the promoter methylation status of CYP24A1 in the
cancer cell lines and lung AC patients using pyrosequencing PCR analysis.
Finally, quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation PCR (ChIP-qPCR)
analysis was performed to validate the CYP24A1 methylation was regulated
by histone modifiers. Non-smokers had higher serum levels of 25-D3
compared with smokers (albeit small numbers of non-smokers, n=11).
Smoking lung AC patients showed higher mRNA expression of CYP24A1 (P <
0.00374) and poorer 5-year survival compared to nonsmokers in Kaplan-Meir
survival analysis (Logrank P CYP24A1 is the rate limiting catabolic
enzyme for 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25-D3), the active form of vitamin
D. We have previously demonstrated that the mRNA expression of CYP24A1 is
an independent prognostic factor for survival in lung adenocarcinoma (AC)
and that the antiproliferative effects of 1,25-D3 are inversely
proportional to CYP24A1 expression. We then asked if smoking is
associated with increased expression of CYP24A1 and a decrease in serum
level of 1,25-D3; whether increased CYP24A1 expression was due to
epigenetic changes caused by smoking. We measured CYP24A1 mRNA in
resected lung AC (n=100) specimens and compared CYP24A1 in smokers
(former/current) versus non-smokers. In parallel, we performed metabolism
experiments in A549 (high CYP24A1) and SKLU-1 (low CYP24A1) cells to
study the functional relevance of increased CYP24A1. We evaluated the
promoter methylation status of CYP24A1 in the cancer cell lines and lung
AC patients using pyrosequencing PCR analysis. Finally, quantitative
chromatin immunoprecipitation PCR (ChIP-qPCR) analysis was performed to
validate the CYP24A1 methylation was regulated by histone modifiers.
Non-smokers had higher serum levels of 25-D3 compared with smokers
(albeit small numbers of non-smokers, n=11). Smoking lung AC patients
showed higher mRNA expression of CYP24A1 (P < 0.00374) and poorer 5-year
survival compared to nonsmokers in Kaplan-Meir survival analysis (Logrank
P < 0.0435). A549 cells catabolized 1,25-D3 to a greater extent compared
to SKLU-1 at 48-h treatment of 100 nM 1,25-D3 (5.67 vs 103 pmole 1,25-D3
remained). Smoking increased CYP24A1 expression in lung AC patients
through hypomethylation of CYP24A1 promoter. In the pyrosequencing
analysis, A549 cells were unmethylated (1.01%) but SKLU-1 cells highly
methylated (52.02%). Treatment with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor
5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Aza) activates CYP24A1 expression in lung cancer
cells. Furthermore, inhibition of histone deacetylases by trichostatin A
(TSA) enhances the expression of CYP24A1 in lung cancer cells. ChIP-qPCR
reveals that treatment with 5-Aza and/or TSA increases H3K9ac and H3K4me2
and simultaneously decreases H3K9me2 at the CYP24A1 promoter. ChIP-qPCR
assay reveals that treatment with 5-Aza and/or TSA increases the
recruitment of vitamin D receptor to the CYP24A1 promoter. Taken
together, smoking induced the expression of CYP24A1 and showed faster
metabolism of 1,25-D and led to poorer survival in lung AC patients, This
induction might be related to epigenetic changes in CYP24A1 gene. By
increasing the substrate or silencing CYP24A1 gene, the possibility of
CYP24A1 gene for chemoprevention will be investigated. Supported by NIH
R21CA128193-01-A1 and VA Merit I01CX000333-02.

