Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quinacrine and sorafenib combination as potential therapy for
anaplastic thyroid cancer


Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is uncommon and represents 2-5% of all
thyroid cancers. It remains amongst the most lethal human cancers with a
reported median survival of 6 months despite therapy. ATC represents over
50% of all thyroid cancer fatalities annually. We have previously shown
the effectiveness of quinacrine in combination with standard therapies in
hepatocellular and colon carcinoma. Quinacrine has been used in the past
to treat lupus and malaria and in addition to being available and
affordable (30 USD/month of therapy) it has a well-known and acceptable
toxicity profile. Here, we evaluate the efficacy of quinacrine in
combination with sorafenib on a panel of human anaplastic thyroid cancer
tumor cells. We observed that quinacrine as a single agent effectively
kills anaplastic thyroid cancer cells in vitro in a
concentration-dependent manner as assessed by CellTiter-Glo and sub-G1
analysis. Quinacrine in combination with sorafenib provides an additive
effect in vitro. On analyzing, we observe that the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family member Mcl-1, which is over-expressed in a number of solid tumors
is down-regulated with this combination treatment. Unlike chloroquine
that inhibits autophagy, our previous results have not shown that
quinacrine's anti-tumor efficacy involves alterations in autophagy. We
are testing the quinacrine plus sorafenib combination in vivo by
sub-cutaneous or orthotopic injection in immune-deficient mice of
established cell lines as well as freshly isolated cells from patients
with anaplastic thyroid cancer. Our findings suggest that quinacrine in
combination with sorafenib may be an effective therapeutic strategy for
anaplastic thyroid cancer.

