Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Liver cancer risk prediction model from a large prospective cohort
in Taiwan


Models predicting liver cancer are only available for the high risk
population with hepatitis carriers but not for the general population. we
developed risk prediction models for liver cancer using data collected
from a large health screening program in Taiwan with long term follow up.
The cohort included 444,023 subjects at baseline. During a median follow
up time of 7.4 years, 1,668 subjects developed liver cancer.
Epidemiologic data, medical history and routine blood panel including
serum transaminases data were collected with optional additional testing
for HBV or HCV status. Liver cancer cases were ascertained by
computerized record linkage with both the National Cancer Registry and
the National Death Certification profiles in Taiwan. Stepwise Cox
regression analysis was performed to identify significant predictors in
the multivariate models. Individualized risk of developing liver cancer
in 10 years was calculated from baseline probability and relative risk
profile estimated from the Cox regression model. Models were developed
separately to provide risk prediction for subjects who chose to have HCV
tested (130,533 subjects at baseline and 416 liver cancer cases) and who
chose otherwise (313,490 subjects and 1,252 liver cancer cases). Since
the results for both sub-cohorts are comparable and we only reported
results for the sub-cohort with HCV tested. In the sub-cohort with HCV
tested, the model with only questionnaire data identified significant
main effects for male gender, older age, prior history of diabetes, pack
year of smoking, alcohol use, and physical inactivity. This epidemiologic
model had an AUC of 0.798 (95% CI=0.772-0.815) for 10-year risk
prediction. With only data from measures of Transaminases, the model
achieved an AUC of 0.927 (95% CI=0.911-0.938), a significant increase as
compared to the model with only epidemiologic variables. The addition of
HBV improved the AUC to 0.936 (95% CI=0.913-0.958). Similar results were
obtained for sub-cohort without HCV testing. The addition of HCV status
in combination with HBV status, the AUC improve to 0.941 (95%
CI=0.918-0.967). Among models using key history and blood panels, the use
of serum Transaminases only, available in routine health check-ups, was
able to provide most information needed in predicting liver cancer in the
general public. Additional testing of HBV and /or HCV further increased
the prediction power. This simple transaminase-based model for the
general public can be valuable in clinical practice for identifying high
risk individuals.

