Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequency and type of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation in
basaloid squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract


Recent reports on nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status predicts response to EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment signifies the importance of molecular
footprint of EGFR. The mass array system has emerged as a more sensitive
and economical method of mutation typing than direct sequencing. Basaloid
squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC) is an aggressive variant of squamous cell
carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract. We observed unexceptional
EGFR expression in this type of malignancy by immunohistochemistry, and
23 cases (8 hypopharynx, 7 esophagus, 3 oropharynx, 2 oral cavity, 1
larynx, 1 paranasal sinus, 1 external auditory canal) with diffuse EGFR
positivity were subjected to mutation analysis. Briefly, genome DNA from
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded blocks were run through ASAN Panel,
which addresses 74 somatic mutations including 38 point and 36 indel
mutations for EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA genes. Amplified PCR products
in 8 separated multiplex fashion were treated with shrimp alkaline
phosphatase, and followed by single base extension reaction using
iPLEX-Pro kit from Sequenom with extension primers that hybridize
immediately adjacent to the mutations. After incubation with resin for
removing salt adductive, products were transferred to SpectroCHIPII for
analysis using MALDI-ToF. Eight cases (35%) of BSCC were found to have
substitution mutations or deletions in EGFR exon 1821, including both
sensitive (L858R, del19) and resistant types (T790M) to EGFR-TKI. Two
cases showed KRAS or PIK3CA point mutation. The results confirmed the
mismatch between EGFR expression and mutation status in BSCC, and the
presence of various mutations like NSCLC. Tailoring EGFR-TKI therapy for
a subset of BSCC patients is in prospect.

