Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability harbor an
inflammatory microenvironment, different from the one observed in
microsatellite stable colorectal cancers


Introduction Most of sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers (CRC) with
microsatellite instability (MSI) have a peculiar histopathologic pattern,
notably with a frequent inflammatory lymphocytic component. MSI CRC are
associated with a better outcome than microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR,
probably in relation with a more effective immune response. The aim of
our work was to highlight the inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI
CRC, by analyzing the cytokines and the in situ immune response
encountered in this tumor subtype. Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was
measured from 48 MSI CRC and 62 MSS CRC using the bioplex cytokine
multiplexed assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). Immunohistochemistry was
performed on a tissue microarray constructed from the same tumors, with
the following markers: CD3 (T lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T
lymphocytes), CD45RO (memory T lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and
FoxP3 (regulatory T-cells). After immunostaining of each marker, T-cell
density was assessed by image analysis. Results Analysis of the 48
cytokines allowed us to assess a higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a,
IL-8, Ip-10, Mig, Mip-1, Mip-1, Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS
CRC (pIntroduction Most of sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers
(CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) have a peculiar
histopathologic pattern, notably with a frequent inflammatory lymphocytic
component. MSI CRC are associated with a better outcome than
microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in relation with a more
effective immune response. The aim of our work was to highlight the
inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by analyzing the cytokines
and the in situ immune response encountered in this tumor subtype.
Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48 MSI CRC and 62 MSS
CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA,
USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a tissue microarray
constructed from the same tumors, with the following markers: CD3 (T
lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO (memory T
lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory T-cells). After
immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was assessed by image
analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed us to assess a
higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig, Mip-1, Mip-1,
Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001, p=0.049, p=0.011,
p=0.033, pIntroduction Most of sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers
(CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) have a peculiar
histopathologic pattern, notably with a frequent inflammatory lymphocytic
component. MSI CRC are associated with a better outcome than
microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in relation with a more
effective immune response. The aim of our work was to highlight the
inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by analyzing the cytokines
and the in situ immune response encountered in this tumor subtype.
Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48 MSI CRC and 62 MSS
CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA,
USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a tissue microarray
constructed from the same tumors, with the following markers: CD3 (T
lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO (memory T
lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory T-cells). After
immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was assessed by image
analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed us to assess a
higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig, Mip-1, Mip-1,
Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001, p=0.049, p=0.011,
p=0.033, p<0.001, pIntroduction Most of sporadic or hereditary colorectal
cancers (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) have a peculiar
histopathologic pattern, notably with a frequent inflammatory lymphocytic
component. MSI CRC are associated with a better outcome than
microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in relation with a more
effective immune response. The aim of our work was to highlight the
inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by analyzing the cytokines
and the in situ immune response encountered in this tumor subtype.
Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48 MSI CRC and 62 MSS
CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA,
USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a tissue microarray
constructed from the same tumors, with the following markers: CD3 (T
lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO (memory T
lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory T-cells). After
immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was assessed by image
analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed us to assess a
higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig, Mip-1, Mip-1,
Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001, p=0.049, p=0.011,
p=0.033, p<0.001, p<0.001, pIntroduction Most of sporadic or hereditary
colorectal cancers (CRC) with microsatellite instability (MSI) have a
peculiar histopathologic pattern, notably with a frequent inflammatory
lymphocytic component. MSI CRC are associated with a better outcome than
microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in relation with a more
effective immune response. The aim of our work was to highlight the
inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by analyzing the cytokines
and the in situ immune response encountered in this tumor subtype.
Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48 MSI CRC and 62 MSS
CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA,
USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a tissue microarray
constructed from the same tumors, with the following markers: CD3 (T
lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO (memory T
lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory T-cells). After
immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was assessed by image
analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed us to assess a
higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig, Mip-1, Mip-1,
Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001, p=0.049, p=0.011,
p=0.033, p<0.001, p<0.001, p<0.001, p=0.032, p=0.022, pIntroduction Most
of sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers (CRC) with microsatellite
instability (MSI) have a peculiar histopathologic pattern, notably with a
frequent inflammatory lymphocytic component. MSI CRC are associated with
a better outcome than microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in
relation with a more effective immune response. The aim of our work was
to highlight the inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by
analyzing the cytokines and the in situ immune response encountered in
this tumor subtype. Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48
MSI CRC and 62 MSS CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay
(Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a
tissue microarray constructed from the same tumors, with the following
markers: CD3 (T lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO
(memory T lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory
T-cells). After immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was
assessed by image analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed
us to assess a higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig,
Mip-1, Mip-1, Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001,
p=0.049, p=0.011, p=0.033, p<0.001, p<0.001, p<0.001, p=0.032, p=0.022,
p<0.001 and p=0.038, respectively). Conversely, Lif et Mif were expressed
at a lower level in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p=0.031 and p=0.039,
respectively). Immunohistochemistry combined with image analysis
evidenced a higher density of CD3+, CD8+, CD45RO+ and T-bet+ T
lymphocytes in MSI than in MSS CRC (p=0.046, pIntroduction Most of
sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers (CRC) with microsatellite
instability (MSI) have a peculiar histopathologic pattern, notably with a
frequent inflammatory lymphocytic component. MSI CRC are associated with
a better outcome than microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in
relation with a more effective immune response. The aim of our work was
to highlight the inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by
analyzing the cytokines and the in situ immune response encountered in
this tumor subtype. Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48
MSI CRC and 62 MSS CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay
(Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a
tissue microarray constructed from the same tumors, with the following
markers: CD3 (T lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO
(memory T lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory
T-cells). After immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was
assessed by image analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed
us to assess a higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig,
Mip-1, Mip-1, Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001,
p=0.049, p=0.011, p=0.033, p<0.001, p<0.001, p<0.001, p=0.032, p=0.022,
p<0.001 and p=0.038, respectively). Conversely, Lif et Mif were expressed
at a lower level in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p=0.031 and p=0.039,
respectively). Immunohistochemistry combined with image analysis
evidenced a higher density of CD3+, CD8+, CD45RO+ and T-bet+ T
lymphocytes in MSI than in MSS CRC (p=0.046, p<0.001, pIntroduction Most
of sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers (CRC) with microsatellite
instability (MSI) have a peculiar histopathologic pattern, notably with a
frequent inflammatory lymphocytic component. MSI CRC are associated with
a better outcome than microsatellite stable (MSS) CCR, probably in
relation with a more effective immune response. The aim of our work was
to highlight the inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI CRC, by
analyzing the cytokines and the in situ immune response encountered in
this tumor subtype. Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was measured from 48
MSI CRC and 62 MSS CRC using the bioplex cytokine multiplexed assay
(Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). Immunohistochemistry was performed on a
tissue microarray constructed from the same tumors, with the following
markers: CD3 (T lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), CD45RO
(memory T lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and FoxP3 (regulatory
T-cells). After immunostaining of each marker, T-cell density was
assessed by image analysis. Results Analysis of the 48 cytokines allowed
us to assess a higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a, IL-8, Ip-10, Mig,
Mip-1, Mip-1, Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p<0.001,
p=0.049, p=0.011, p=0.033, p<0.001, p<0.001, p<0.001, p=0.032, p=0.022,
p<0.001 and p=0.038, respectively). Conversely, Lif et Mif were expressed
at a lower level in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p=0.031 and p=0.039,
respectively). Immunohistochemistry combined with image analysis
evidenced a higher density of CD3+, CD8+, CD45RO+ and T-bet+ T
lymphocytes in MSI than in MSS CRC (p=0.046, p<0.001, p<0.001, and
pIntroduction Most of sporadic or hereditary colorectal cancers (CRC)
with microsatellite instability (MSI) have a peculiar histopathologic
pattern, notably with a frequent inflammatory lymphocytic component. MSI
CRC are associated with a better outcome than microsatellite stable (MSS)
CCR, probably in relation with a more effective immune response. The aim
of our work was to highlight the inflammatory mechanisms occurring in MSI
CRC, by analyzing the cytokines and the in situ immune response
encountered in this tumor subtype. Methods A panel of 48 cytokines was
measured from 48 MSI CRC and 62 MSS CRC using the bioplex cytokine
multiplexed assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). Immunohistochemistry was
performed on a tissue microarray constructed from the same tumors, with
the following markers: CD3 (T lymphocytes), CD8 (cytotoxic T
lymphocytes), CD45RO (memory T lymphocytes), T-bet (Th1 CD4 cells) and
FoxP3 (regulatory T-cells). After immunostaining of each marker, T-cell
density was assessed by image analysis. Results Analysis of the 48
cytokines allowed us to assess a higher level of IL1, IL1-R, IL16, Gro-a,
IL-8, Ip-10, Mig, Mip-1, Mip-1, Rantes and IFN- in MSI CRC than in MSS
CRC (p<0.001, p=0.049, p=0.011, p=0.033, p<0.001, p<0.001, p<0.001,
p=0.032, p=0.022, p<0.001 and p=0.038, respectively). Conversely, Lif et
Mif were expressed at a lower level in MSI CRC than in MSS CRC (p=0.031
and p=0.039, respectively). Immunohistochemistry combined with image
analysis evidenced a higher density of CD3+, CD8+, CD45RO+ and T-bet+ T
lymphocytes in MSI than in MSS CRC (p=0.046, p<0.001, p<0.001, and
p<0.001, respectively) whereas the density of Treg cells (FoxP3+) was not
statistically different between both tumor sets (p= 0.276). In addition,
within the MSS group, no difference of cytokine expression was seen,
according to the presence of a lymphocytic inflammatory component.
Conclusion The inflammatory component frequently observed in MSI CRC is
associated with a cytokine expression profile different from the one
observed in MSS CRC. Interestingly, this profile includes Gro-a, IP 10
and Mig cytokines, involved in the T Helper 1 response and the memory
CD45RO+ T cells recruitment. Moreover MSS CRC with lymphocytic
inflammatory component do not share the same cytokine pattern suggesting
an activation of inflammatory pathways specific of MSI CRC. Taken
together, these data indicate the major role of adaptative immunity in
MSI CRC which may explain the better prognosis of this CRC subtype.

