Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics study of sequence specificity
of the PARP inhibitor, olaparib (O) with carboplatin (C) in recurrent
women's cancers NCT01237067


Background: C, O, and C+O have documented activity in BRCA1/2mut+ or
BRCA-like breast and ovarian cancers (Br/OvCa). The effect of drug
sequence on DNA damage and cell death is unknown. Our in vitro modeling
suggests that exposure to O prior to C (O>C) reduced double stranded DNA
damage and cell loss. Our trial tests the hypothesis that C>O causes more
cellular injury. Methods: Eligible pts have recurrent women's cancers,
good end organ function, and evaluable disease. A 3+3 dose escalation
run-in defined the O tablet dose in combination with C (AUC 4). The study
will now randomize pts to schedule A or B (below), allowing intra-pt and
inter-cohort analysis of PK/PD endpoints. PBMCs will be collected C1/2
for measurement of platination and DNA damage/repair; DNA repair protein
integrity will be assessed on archival tissues. Clinical benefit,
response frequency and duration, and toxicity will be ascertained.
Mutation carriers will undergo progression biopsy for analysis of BRCA1/2
re-expression mutations. Results: The phase I portion is complete. 12
women (8Ov/3Br/1Endometrial[En]) have been accrued on 3 dose levels
(DLs). Median prior number of regimens was 5. No DLT have been seen in 5
evaluable pts on DL3 (O tablet 200mg q12h/C AUC4 [1 pt pending]). Gr3 AEs
included neutropenia (44%), and gr2 were anemia (56%), fatigue (22 %), C
hypersensitivity (22%), thrombocytopenia (11%), and nausea (11%). 1 pt
(DL2; stable disease) died of unrelated bleeding during C4. Clinical
benefit has been observed in 8 evaluable pts with PR in 2 BRCA1mut+ OvCa
(9+, 11+ mo), stabilization > 4mo in 6 pts (4OvCa,1BrCa, 1EnCa), and 3
are TETE. Conclusions: O in tablet formulation at 200mg q12h x 7d with C
AUC4 q21d is active and tolerable, with observed interactive marrow
suppression. Subsequent women will be randomized to examine schedule
dependence of activity and toxicity.


