Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma
leads to downregulation of adaptive immunity via COX-2 pathway


The immune system targets pre-malignant and malignant cells and can
attenuate or eliminate carcinogenesis. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is known to promote tumor progression in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). It is, however, unknown whether EMT promotes HCC by dysregulating
the immune system. A clear understanding of the mechanisms underlying
immune evasion in HCC may reveal targets that can be exploited for
immunotherapy. In this study, we have used the murine HCC cell line 1MEA
that we have successfully used to establish a syngeneic mouse model of
aggressive HCC. The cells were exposed to TGF-1 (2ng/ml) and EGF
(50ng/ml), two well-established inducers of EMT in HCC. Induction of EMT
was confirmed by analysis of the gene expression profiles of E-cadherin,
albumin, fibronectin and collagen I. Effects on clonogenicity were
analyzed using colony formation assays. Effects on adaptive immunity were
examined by analyzing gene and protein expression of major
histocompatibility complexes I and II (MHC I and MHC II). The role of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) was determined by examining the effect of the
selective COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib (1M). Exposure to TGF-1 and EGF led
to downregulation of E-cadherin and albumin and upregulation of
fibronectin and collagen I. TGF-1 and EGF both promoted increased
clonogenicity. Interestingly, exposure to TGF-1 and EGF both resulted in
significant downregulation of both gene and protein expression of MHC I
and MHC II. However, pre-treatment of cells with celecoxib significantly
reversed these effects. Consequently, we conclude that EMT induction in
HCC is associated with downregulation of adaptive immunity in a manner
dependent on the COX-2 pathway. Immunotherapeutic targeting of COX-2 may,
therefore, be a useful strategy for HCC management.

