Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sustained gene silencing by liposomal siRNA incorporated
mesoporous silicon particles


The use of small interfering RNA (siRNA) technology has rapidly become an
attractive revolutionary tool in silencing gene expression and holds
potential as a therapeutic strategy in cancer and other diseases.
However, for siRNA-based therapeutics to become a reality, an efficient
method for in vivo systemic delivery is needed. Here, we demonstrate
effective and sustained delivery of siRNA using mesoporous silicon
particles (MSP). We first developed a novel variant of multistage MSP by
tuning the size and shape properties, which can load dioleoyl
phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) nanoliposomes containing siRNA. To test this
concept, we targeted EphA2 oncoprotein, which is highly overexpressed in
most cancers such as breast, lung, pancreas and ovarian carcinoma. MSP
incorporated with EphA2 siRNA-DOPC (MSP-siEphA2-DOPC) resulted in
effective gene silencing for up to 15 days after single i.v. injection
into mice bearing either SKOV3ip1 or HeyA8.MDR ovarian tumors in the
peritoneal cavity. In addition, with a single injection of
MSP-siEphA2-DOPC given every 15 days during 6 weeks of treatment, there
was significant reduction (83%, P** 0.0032, 64%, P* 0.028, 36%, P, ns
0.0032) of tumor weight and number of nodules in a dose dependent manner
(15,10 and 5 g/mice) respectively compared with control groups.
Furthermore, when we administrated MSP-siEphA2-DOPC in combination with
either paclitaxel or docetaxel, we observed 87% and 91% tumor reduction
compared to the control group respectively. Taken together,
MSP-siEphA2-DOPC provides a new approach for sustained release of siRNA
into disease sites without repetition of injection.

