Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression and genomic DNA stabilization in whole blood
stored at room temperature


Genomic and mitochondrial DNA and gene expression profiles from blood
samples are increasingly being used to diagnose specific diseases,
including cancer, monitor disease progression and assess patient
responses to medical treatment. However, such applications require
reliable preservation of total RNA and DNA in patient samples during
collection, transport and storage. Numerous agents threaten DNA and RNA
profiles in collected blood samples, including nucleolytic attack,
oxidative damage and hydrolysis. Such damage can severely disrupt
genotyping and DNA sequencing efforts. Transcription profiles are highly
dynamic and can change rapidly during and after blood collection using
current methods, potentially affecting interpretation of the expression
analysis, and ultimately lead to inadequate treatment options. In this
study, we compare freezer storage with room temperature stabilization
formulations, DNAgard Blood and PAXgene Blood DNA, in their capacities to
preserve genomic DNA integrity in human whole blood for 8 months. In a
separate analysis, we compare freezer storage with room temperature
stabilization formulations, PAXgene Blood RNA and Biomatrica formulation
DRG, in their capacities to stabilize RNA in whole blood samples. We
assess changes in the relative expression of a panel of 34000 genes in
whole blood specimens over the course of 7 days using RT-qPCR and the
Human HT-12 Bead Array (Illumina). Our results demonstrate that room
temperature blood storage is a valid alternative to cold-storage for
preserving gDNA for more than a year, and RNA for at least 7 days.

