Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDF inhibits cell migration by inactivating cancer stem cell
markers, and expression of VEGF, IL-6 and miR-21 in human pancreatic and
prostate cancer cells under hypoxic condition


Hypoxia has been well recognized to cause therapeutic resistance
associated with solid tumors and considered to play critical roles in
other of biological events including cell growth and proliferation, cell
survival, angiogenesis, immunosurveillance, tumor invasion and
metastasis. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1, a master transcription
factor that regulates hypoxia responsive genes, plays critical roles in
the adaptation of tumor cells to a hypoxic microenvironment. Tumor
hypoxia and over-expression of HIF-1 have been reportedly associated with
resistance to radiation therapy and chemotherapy, increased risk of
invasion and metastasis and poor clinical prognosis, all of which leads
to higher mortality of patients diagnosed with solid tumors. Emerging
evidence suggest that hypoxia and HIF signaling pathways leads to the
acquisition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), maintenance of
cancer stem cell (CSC) functions, and causing inflammatory tumor
microenvironment, which contributes to therapeutic resistance; however,
the exact mechanisms by which hypoxia/HIF regulates these events are not
fully understood. Here, we demonstrates that hypoxia increases the
productions of VEGF and IL-6, and increased expression of CSC marker
genes such as Nanog, Oct4, EZH2 as well as miR-21, an oncogenic miRNA, in
human pancreatic cancer (AsPC-1 and MiaPaCa-2) and prostate cancer (PC-3
and LNCaP) cells. The treatment of these cells with CDF, a novel curcumin
analog that was previously shown to be biologically superior than
curcumin as an anti-tumor agent both in vitro and in vivo, inhibited the
productions of VEGF, IL-6, Nanog, Oct4 and EZH2 mRNAs, as well as down
regulated the expression of miR-21 in these cells under hypoxic
condition. CDF also decreased cell migration in pancreatic and prostate
cancer cells under hypoxic condition as documented by wound healing
assay. Taken together, these data suggest for the first time that the
anti-tumor effect of CDF could in part be due to inhibition of tumor
hypoxic pathways including the inhibition of CSC markers and thereby
reconditioning the tumor microenvironment, which would be useful for
overcoming therapeutic resistance.

