Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytokine therapy by allogenic IFN-alpha-expressing murine
colorectal cancer cells suppresses outgrowth of established tumors in a
murine hepatocellular carcinoma model


Although several effective therapies for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
have been developed, many patients with both advanced cirrhosis and HCC
are not able to receive those treatments because of their poor liver
function. Thus, it is needed to establish a new effective therapy that
has lesser side effects for those patients. We previously reported that
immunotherapy by interferon-alpha (IFNa) and dendritic cells effectively
suppressed outgrowth of established tumors and showed preventive effects
in the murine colorectal cancer, MC38 cell model. We also revealed that
tumor-specific cytotoxic T cell responses were important for these
anti-tumor effects. In this study, we investigated the antitumor effect
of allogenic cytokine (IFNa and IL-4)- expressing MC38 cells in the
murine hepatocellular carcinoma, BNL model. There were no differences in
cell growth between BNL cells and BNL cells co-incubated with
cytokine-expressing MC38 cells in vitro. Balb/c mice were injected with
5x105 of BNL cells on their flank. Once BNL tumors were established,
these mice received therapeutic injection of cytokine-expressing MC38
cells (2.5x105/mouse or 5x105/mouse) and tumor size was measured twice
weekly. While tumor growth of the mice injected with MC38-IL4 was not
suppressed (control; 421.0146.9mm2, MC38-IL4 (5x105); 351.3126.1mm2,
p=0.33), injection of MC38-IFNa cells significantly suppressed the tumor
growth by dose-dependent manner (MC38-IFNa: 5x105 cells; 183.546.2mm2,
p=0.02). When we injected mice with both IFNa cells and IL-4 cells, any
additive anti-tumor effects were not observed (mice injected both
modified MC38: 5x105 cells each; 18244.6 mm2, p=0.01). A BNL-specific
cytolysis was detected when splenocytes of mice injected with MC38-IFNa
were used as effector cells in a chromium-release assay. Furthermore,
immunohistocemistrical analysis revealed that CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells
and especially Gr-1+ cells infiltrated established BNL tumors of mice
injected with MC38-IFNa. Our results suggest that the immunotherapy with
allogenic IFNa-expressing cells has potent antitumor effects, and that it
would be applicable for treatment to advanced HCC patients.

