Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A flexible micro spring array (FMSA) device for the high
throughput enrichment of viable CTCs


The ability of metastatic cancer to release cells that travel through the
circulatory system and invade different parts of the body accounts for
over 90% of cancer related deaths. The fundamental challenge with
detecting these circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in blood samples is the
fact that they are so rare, with only a few tumors cells occurring among
billions of blood cells. Size based separation has been demonstrated to
be an effective method for CTC capture and enrichment. While useful for
detection, size based techniques apply concentrated stresses that affect
the viability of captured cells. We have incorporated a novel micro
spring array to mitigate the stresses experienced by CTCs during
filtration to encourage their health and proliferability. The geometric
design and filtration pressures have been optimized to maximize capture
efficiency, enrichment against leukocytes, and tumor cell viability. The
FMSA device can process 7.5 mL of whole blood in approximately 10
minutes, while still preserving cell viability. The successful enrichment
and primary culture of viable CTCs from clinical samples will allow
unprecedented analysis and genetic testing amounting to a minimally
invasive biopsy that may be repeated often to monitor tumor progression.
This can also provide the basis for externally testing tumor cell
response to a variety of anticancer drugs without having to expose a
patient to the unnecessary cost and toxic effects of chemotherapy,
thereby improving patient outcomes through the development of
personalized treatment plans.

