Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy of an anti-CEA bispecific antibody
and 177Lu-labeled peptide: a phase I study in patients with advanced
colorectal cancer


Table of Contents * Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy of an anti-CEA
bispecific antibody and 177Lu-labeled peptide: a phase I study in
patients with advanced colorectal cancer * Abstract Objectives:
Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy (PRIT) with bispecific monoclonal
antibodies (bsMAb) in combination with a radiolabeled peptide reduces the
radiation dose of conventional RIT to normal tissues by rapid tumor
targeting and fast blood clearance of the radiolabeled molecule. In this
phase I trial, PRIT was investigated in 20 patients with advanced
colorectal cancer (CRC), using a humanized recombinant bsMAb, TF2,
targeting carcinoembryonic antigen (CEACAM5) and the hapten-peptide,
IMP288, which was radiolabeled with177Lu. The safety, pharmacokinetics,
and tumor targeting of these agents were studied, by optimizing the dose
schedule of the pretargeting system. Methods: We included four cohorts
with five patients per cohort. We studied the interval between the bsMAb
and peptide administration and its consequences for the blood clearance
of the radiolabeled peptide (cohort 1: 5 days interval vs next cohorts: 1
day). We escalated TF2 dose to saturate tumor antigens (cohort 3: 150 mg
TF2, vs other cohorts: 75 mg). Furthermore, we investigated the effect of
labelling the same radioactivity doses to a lower peptide dose, which
ideally would increase the fractional targeting to the tumors (cohort 4:
25 g IMP288 vs other cohorts: 100 g) A pre-therapy cycle with
111In-labeled IMP288 was used to predict the pharmacokinetics and tumor
targeting of 177Lu-IMP288, and to assure safety of high 177Lu activity
doses (3.7 GBq in cohort 1 and 7.4 GBq in cohorts 2-4). Toxicity was
determined by NCI-CTC v3.0. Whole-body planar and SPECT images were
acquired. Results: Toxicity was generally very mild, with only two
patients showing grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia, and one with grade 3
dyspnea. Dose escalation did not increase toxicity. Rapid localization of
the radiolabeled peptide in the tumor lesions was clearly visualized with
scintigraphy within 1 h of injection, with excellent tumor-to-normal
tissue ratios (>20 at 24 h after injection in all cohorts). Low absorbed
radiation doses to the red bone marrow (Table of Contents * Pretargeted
radioimmunotherapy of an anti-CEA bispecific antibody and 177Lu-labeled
peptide: a phase I study in patients with advanced colorectal cancer *
Abstract Objectives: Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy (PRIT) with
bispecific monoclonal antibodies (bsMAb) in combination with a
radiolabeled peptide reduces the radiation dose of conventional RIT to
normal tissues by rapid tumor targeting and fast blood clearance of the
radiolabeled molecule. In this phase I trial, PRIT was investigated in 20
patients with advanced colorectal cancer (CRC), using a humanized
recombinant bsMAb, TF2, targeting carcinoembryonic antigen (CEACAM5) and
the hapten-peptide, IMP288, which was radiolabeled with177Lu. The safety,
pharmacokinetics, and tumor targeting of these agents were studied, by
optimizing the dose schedule of the pretargeting system. Methods: We
included four cohorts with five patients per cohort. We studied the
interval between the bsMAb and peptide administration and its
consequences for the blood clearance of the radiolabeled peptide (cohort
1: 5 days interval vs next cohorts: 1 day). We escalated TF2 dose to
saturate tumor antigens (cohort 3: 150 mg TF2, vs other cohorts: 75 mg).
Furthermore, we investigated the effect of labelling the same
radioactivity doses to a lower peptide dose, which ideally would increase
the fractional targeting to the tumors (cohort 4: 25 g IMP288 vs other
cohorts: 100 g) A pre-therapy cycle with 111In-labeled IMP288 was used to
predict the pharmacokinetics and tumor targeting of 177Lu-IMP288, and to
assure safety of high 177Lu activity doses (3.7 GBq in cohort 1 and 7.4
GBq in cohorts 2-4). Toxicity was determined by NCI-CTC v3.0. Whole-body
planar and SPECT images were acquired. Results: Toxicity was generally
very mild, with only two patients showing grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia, and
one with grade 3 dyspnea. Dose escalation did not increase toxicity.
Rapid localization of the radiolabeled peptide in the tumor lesions was
clearly visualized with scintigraphy within 1 h of injection, with
excellent tumor-to-normal tissue ratios (>20 at 24 h after injection in
all cohorts). Low absorbed radiation doses to the red bone marrow (<0.3
Gy) and kidneys (Table of Contents * Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy of an
anti-CEA bispecific antibody and 177Lu-labeled peptide: a phase I study
in patients with advanced colorectal cancer * Abstract Objectives:
Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy (PRIT) with bispecific monoclonal
antibodies (bsMAb) in combination with a radiolabeled peptide reduces the
radiation dose of conventional RIT to normal tissues by rapid tumor
targeting and fast blood clearance of the radiolabeled molecule. In this
phase I trial, PRIT was investigated in 20 patients with advanced
colorectal cancer (CRC), using a humanized recombinant bsMAb, TF2,
targeting carcinoembryonic antigen (CEACAM5) and the hapten-peptide,
IMP288, which was radiolabeled with177Lu. The safety, pharmacokinetics,
and tumor targeting of these agents were studied, by optimizing the dose
schedule of the pretargeting system. Methods: We included four cohorts
with five patients per cohort. We studied the interval between the bsMAb
and peptide administration and its consequences for the blood clearance
of the radiolabeled peptide (cohort 1: 5 days interval vs next cohorts: 1
day). We escalated TF2 dose to saturate tumor antigens (cohort 3: 150 mg
TF2, vs other cohorts: 75 mg). Furthermore, we investigated the effect of
labelling the same radioactivity doses to a lower peptide dose, which
ideally would increase the fractional targeting to the tumors (cohort 4:
25 g IMP288 vs other cohorts: 100 g) A pre-therapy cycle with
111In-labeled IMP288 was used to predict the pharmacokinetics and tumor
targeting of 177Lu-IMP288, and to assure safety of high 177Lu activity
doses (3.7 GBq in cohort 1 and 7.4 GBq in cohorts 2-4). Toxicity was
determined by NCI-CTC v3.0. Whole-body planar and SPECT images were
acquired. Results: Toxicity was generally very mild, with only two
patients showing grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia, and one with grade 3
dyspnea. Dose escalation did not increase toxicity. Rapid localization of
the radiolabeled peptide in the tumor lesions was clearly visualized with
scintigraphy within 1 h of injection, with excellent tumor-to-normal
tissue ratios (>20 at 24 h after injection in all cohorts). Low absorbed
radiation doses to the red bone marrow (<0.3 Gy) and kidneys (<6 Gy) were
calculated for all cohorts. TF2 and 111In/177Lu-IMP288 cleared rapidly
from the blood (Table of Contents * Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy of an
anti-CEA bispecific antibody and 177Lu-labeled peptide: a phase I study
in patients with advanced colorectal cancer * Abstract Objectives:
Pretargeted radioimmunotherapy (PRIT) with bispecific monoclonal
antibodies (bsMAb) in combination with a radiolabeled peptide reduces the
radiation dose of conventional RIT to normal tissues by rapid tumor
targeting and fast blood clearance of the radiolabeled molecule. In this
phase I trial, PRIT was investigated in 20 patients with advanced
colorectal cancer (CRC), using a humanized recombinant bsMAb, TF2,
targeting carcinoembryonic antigen (CEACAM5) and the hapten-peptide,
IMP288, which was radiolabeled with177Lu. The safety, pharmacokinetics,
and tumor targeting of these agents were studied, by optimizing the dose
schedule of the pretargeting system. Methods: We included four cohorts
with five patients per cohort. We studied the interval between the bsMAb
and peptide administration and its consequences for the blood clearance
of the radiolabeled peptide (cohort 1: 5 days interval vs next cohorts: 1
day). We escalated TF2 dose to saturate tumor antigens (cohort 3: 150 mg
TF2, vs other cohorts: 75 mg). Furthermore, we investigated the effect of
labelling the same radioactivity doses to a lower peptide dose, which
ideally would increase the fractional targeting to the tumors (cohort 4:
25 g IMP288 vs other cohorts: 100 g) A pre-therapy cycle with
111In-labeled IMP288 was used to predict the pharmacokinetics and tumor
targeting of 177Lu-IMP288, and to assure safety of high 177Lu activity
doses (3.7 GBq in cohort 1 and 7.4 GBq in cohorts 2-4). Toxicity was
determined by NCI-CTC v3.0. Whole-body planar and SPECT images were
acquired. Results: Toxicity was generally very mild, with only two
patients showing grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia, and one with grade 3
dyspnea. Dose escalation did not increase toxicity. Rapid localization of
the radiolabeled peptide in the tumor lesions was clearly visualized with
scintigraphy within 1 h of injection, with excellent tumor-to-normal
tissue ratios (>20 at 24 h after injection in all cohorts). Low absorbed
radiation doses to the red bone marrow (<0.3 Gy) and kidneys (<6 Gy) were
calculated for all cohorts. TF2 and 111In/177Lu-IMP288 cleared rapidly
from the blood (<2%ID in the blood 1 day p.i. in all cohorts).
Conclusion: These first results in man show that CEACAM5-expressing CRC
can be safely, specifically and rapidly targeted with TF2 and
177Lu-IMP288, with limited toxicity, by pretargeted radioimmunotherapy.

