Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integration of centrosome-associated and kinase-related screens to
identify centrosome amplification-related synthetic lethal interactions


Centrosome amplification is one of the most commonly observed
abnormalities in human cancer and is associated with increased chromosome
instability (CIN), aneuploidy and tumor progression. Cancer cells have
been shown to cluster supernumerary centrosomes in a bipolar fashion in
mitosis, thus preventing the formation of lethal multipolar spindles. We
have developed isogenic cell lines, which enable us to identify genes
which selectively kill tumor cells with centrosome amplification. The
model is based on the generation of genomically stable human colon cancer
DLD1 diploid and tetraploid (DLD1-T) cells with normal centrosome numbers
and genomically unstable DLD1 intermediate (DLD1-I) with extra
centrosomes generated by transiently blocking cytokinesis. Diploid and
tetraploid populations did not show significant differences in gene
expression, fitness, rate of spontaneous apoptosis, centrosome
amplification and mitotic abnormalities. However, growth rate examination
of the generated isogenic cell lines showed a slight increase in doubling
time of DLD1-I clones, possibly due to a longer activation of the mitotic
checkpoint machinery to allow time for microtubule attachment and
centrosome clustering. To identify genes that their ablation leads to a
selective cell killing of centrosome amplified cancer cells by centrosome
declustering, we envisaged two parallel paths of investigation, an siRNA
and a chemical library screening with a two-fold readout assay: a cell
viability and a spindle morphology phenotypic assay by high-content
microscopy. This approach allowed us to identify target genes and
generate networks of genes that specifically kill cells with centrosome
amplification by preventing centrosome clustering.

