Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of SAHA with dietary energy restriction for breast
cancer prevention


Studies of human populations and experimental models indicate that
dietary energy restriction (DER) inhibits the development of breast
cancer. Of the several candidate mechanisms that DER is known to affect,
one that is the widely observed is the induction of class III histone
deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1). Evidence is controversial as to whether
induction of SIRT1 is essential for DER's cancer preventive activity or
if it limits DER's effectiveness. Therefore an experiment was designed to
determine if suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, would diminish or enhance the cancer preventive
activity of DER. Female Sprague Dawley rats (n=30/group) were injected
with 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50 mg/kg) at 21 days of age and 7 days
thereafter were randomized to groups and fed either control diet
(AIN-93G) or that diet formulation supplemented with 0.1% SAHA (w/w).
Other treatment groups were 40% DER, or 0.1% SAHA+40% DER; diets were a
modification of AIN93-G that assured that the only variables among groups
were DER and/or SAHA. Rats were fed respective diets for 8 weeks. An
additional group, 0.1% SAHA+40%DER-release, was fed 0.1% SAHA+40%DER diet
for 5 weeks and released to control diet for the final 3 weeks of the
experiment. Both 40%DER or 0.1%SAHA+40%DER significantly reduced mammary
cancer incidence, the number of mammary adenocarcinomas per rat, and
cancer burden, as well as prolonging cancer latency (pStudies of human
populations and experimental models indicate that dietary energy
restriction (DER) inhibits the development of breast cancer. Of the
several candidate mechanisms that DER is known to affect, one that is the
widely observed is the induction of class III histone deacetylase sirtuin
1 (SIRT1). Evidence is controversial as to whether induction of SIRT1 is
essential for DER's cancer preventive activity or if it limits DER's
effectiveness. Therefore an experiment was designed to determine if
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
would diminish or enhance the cancer preventive activity of DER. Female
Sprague Dawley rats (n=30/group) were injected with
1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50 mg/kg) at 21 days of age and 7 days thereafter
were randomized to groups and fed either control diet (AIN-93G) or that
diet formulation supplemented with 0.1% SAHA (w/w). Other treatment
groups were 40% DER, or 0.1% SAHA+40% DER; diets were a modification of
AIN93-G that assured that the only variables among groups were DER and/or
SAHA. Rats were fed respective diets for 8 weeks. An additional group,
0.1% SAHA+40%DER-release, was fed 0.1% SAHA+40%DER diet for 5 weeks and
released to control diet for the final 3 weeks of the experiment. Both
40%DER or 0.1%SAHA+40%DER significantly reduced mammary cancer incidence,
the number of mammary adenocarcinomas per rat, and cancer burden, as well
as prolonging cancer latency (p<0.01). After releasing rats from
SAHA+DER, the number of mammary adenocarcinomas per rat was significantly
lower and the cancer latency was still significantly longer than the
control gp (pStudies of human populations and experimental models
indicate that dietary energy restriction (DER) inhibits the development
of breast cancer. Of the several candidate mechanisms that DER is known
to affect, one that is the widely observed is the induction of class III
histone deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1). Evidence is controversial as to
whether induction of SIRT1 is essential for DER's cancer preventive
activity or if it limits DER's effectiveness. Therefore an experiment was
designed to determine if suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, would diminish or enhance the cancer
preventive activity of DER. Female Sprague Dawley rats (n=30/group) were
injected with 1-methyl-1-nitrosourea (50 mg/kg) at 21 days of age and 7
days thereafter were randomized to groups and fed either control diet
(AIN-93G) or that diet formulation supplemented with 0.1% SAHA (w/w).
Other treatment groups were 40% DER, or 0.1% SAHA+40% DER; diets were a
modification of AIN93-G that assured that the only variables among groups
were DER and/or SAHA. Rats were fed respective diets for 8 weeks. An
additional group, 0.1% SAHA+40%DER-release, was fed 0.1% SAHA+40%DER diet
for 5 weeks and released to control diet for the final 3 weeks of the
experiment. Both 40%DER or 0.1%SAHA+40%DER significantly reduced mammary
cancer incidence, the number of mammary adenocarcinomas per rat, and
cancer burden, as well as prolonging cancer latency (p<0.01). After
releasing rats from SAHA+DER, the number of mammary adenocarcinomas per
rat was significantly lower and the cancer latency was still
significantly longer than the control gp (p<0.05). The mechanisms of the
cancer inhibition include effects on circulating factors, IGF1/IGFBP3,
insulin, adiponectin, leptin, and C-reactive protein. Thus it does not
appear that SIRT1 induction is not requisite for the cancer preventive
activity of DER. Rather inhibition of cancer was associated with cellular
AMPK activation and Akt-mTOR down regulation by SAHA+DER with additional
effects being mediated via FOXO3a. Supported by PHS grant CA52626 from
the National Cancer Institute.

