Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX7 is a potential tumor suppressor in breast cancer


Among U.S. women, breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Both epigenetic
silencing and genetic deletion of tumor suppressors are critical for the
development and progression of breast cancer. The SOX (Sex-determining
region Y-box) genes encode a family of over 20 transcription factors,
including SOX7. The SOX7 gene is located on chromosome arm 8p and is
deleted in a number of human cancers, including breast cancer.
Previously, SOX7 has been demonstrated to be down-regulated in human
tissues of prostate and colon cancers and its ectopic expression inhibits
proliferation and increase apoptosis in prostate and colon cancer cell
lines. However, the functional role of SOX7 in breast cancer has not yet
been reported. Our studies revealed a significant correlation between
SOX7 transcript levels and clinical outcome in gene array data from an
international meta-cohort of 674 breast cancer patients. Consistently, we
observed that SOX7 mRNA levels and protein expression are down-regulated
in multiple breast cancer tissues and breast cancer cell lines compared
to adjacent normal tissue and non-tumorigenic cells, respectively.
Further, we have observed that the SOX7 promoter is hyper-methylated in
breast cancer cell lines compared to non-tumorigenic breast cells, and
that inhibition of SOX7 methylation results in an increase in SOX7 mRNA.
Importantly, shRNA-mediated silencing of SOX7 conferred a growth
advantage to non-tumorigenic breast cells, while induced ectopic SOX7
expression inhibited proliferation and migration of breast cancer cells.
Overall, our data suggest that SOX7 may act as a novel tumor suppressor
in breast cancer.

