Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of cabazitaxel in pediatric tumor xenografts


Background: Cabazitaxel (Jevtana), a novel semi-synthetic taxane derived
from 10-deacetyl baccatin III, was recently approved by the FDA and EMA
for patients with metastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer
previously treated with docetaxel-based therapy. Cabazitaxel, which
stabilizes in vitro microtubules as efficiently as docetaxel, was
selected for clinical development for several reasons including: better
anti-proliferative activity than docetaxel against chemotherapy resistant
tumor cell lines (Bissery MC, AACR 2000), broad spectrum of in vivo
anti-tumor activity docetaxel-sensitive tumors, and activity in tumor
models in which docetaxel was either poorly active or inactive (Vrignaud
P, AACR 2000). Interestingly, unlike docetaxel, cabazitaxel is able to
cross the blood-brian barrier (Dykes DJ, AACR 2000) and has demonstrated
activity in intracranial human glioblastomas. Further, in preclinical
studies the combination of cabazitaxel and cisplatin exhibit therapeutic
synergism (Vrignaud P, AACR 2011). Methods: In order to explore other
therapeutic indications, the anti-tumor activity of cabazitaxel was
evaluated in comparison to docetaxel in 3 different xenograft models of
human pediatric tumors: RH-30 (rhabdomyosarcoma), TC-71 and SK-ES-1
(Ewing's tumors) in SCID female mice. Cabazitaxel and docetaxel were
administered as single agents, IV in a dose response study (14.5, 9.0,
5.6 & 3.5 mg/kg), 5 days apart (e.g., days 14 and 18) after SC tumor
implantation. Results: In the rhabdomysarcoma RH-30 model, cabazitaxel
achieved 100% complete regression (CR) at the 2 highest dose levels and
tumor regressions were also observed at the third dose level. Tumor free
survivors (TFS on day 120) were observed only in the cabazitaxel
treatment groups, 14.5 mg/kg (6/6) and at 9 mg/kg (5/6). In comparison,
docetaxel induced CR only at the highest dose-level (14.5 mg/kg) tested.
Against TC-71, cabazitaxel achieved 6/7 TFS at14.5 mg/kg and 9 mg/kg and
6/7 partial regressions (PR) were observed at 5.6 mg/kg. However,
docetaxel only induced CR at the highest dose-level tested (14.5 mg/kg)
with 1/7 TFS at day 120. Against SK-ES-1, cabazitaxel achieved 100% PR at
14.5, 9.0, 5.6 mg/kg, with 6/7 CR, leading to 3/7 TFS at the highest
doses tested. In comparison, docetaxel induced 3/7 CR at the highest dose
tested and no TFS were observed. Conclusion: Both cabazitaxel and
docetaxel showed significant antitumor activity in all 3 human pediatric
tumor xenografts; however, cabazitaxel demonstrated greater activity than
docetaxel at comparable dose levels. Taken together, preclinical data
with cabazitaxel including activity in brain tumors and therapeutic
synergism with cisplatin, support its development in pediatric
indications.

