Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of miRNA27, miRNA125a and 125b in ERalpha-negative
breast cancers


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a major class of small endogenous RNA molecules
that post-transcriptionally inhibit gene expression. Many miRNAs have
been implicated in the human breast cancer. We show here the correlation
between breast cancer types characterized upon histological and
immunohistochemical analysis and miRNA expression in 22 Polish patients.
The group was divided into three categories: ERalpha-negative /
ERalpha-positive, HER2-negative / HER2-positive and lymph node -negative
/ lymph node -positive (N-/N+) cases. Surgically removed tumors were
congealed in liquid nitrogen and subsequently small RNA was extracted. We
investigated the level of miR-17-5p, miR-27, miR-125a, miR-125b and
miR-206 using real-time PCR TaqMan probes. Let-7 miRNA and U6 RNA were
used as reference genes. We observed upregulation of the subsequent
suppressor miRNAs miR-27, miR-125a and 125b in ERalpha-negative tumors
(pMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a major class of small endogenous RNA molecules
that post-transcriptionally inhibit gene expression. Many miRNAs have
been implicated in the human breast cancer. We show here the correlation
between breast cancer types characterized upon histological and
immunohistochemical analysis and miRNA expression in 22 Polish patients.
The group was divided into three categories: ERalpha-negative /
ERalpha-positive, HER2-negative / HER2-positive and lymph node -negative
/ lymph node -positive (N-/N+) cases. Surgically removed tumors were
congealed in liquid nitrogen and subsequently small RNA was extracted. We
investigated the level of miR-17-5p, miR-27, miR-125a, miR-125b and
miR-206 using real-time PCR TaqMan probes. Let-7 miRNA and U6 RNA were
used as reference genes. We observed upregulation of the subsequent
suppressor miRNAs miR-27, miR-125a and 125b in ERalpha-negative tumors
(p<0.05). Comparison of expression of miR-17-5p, miR-27, miR-125a,
miR-125b and miR-206 in N- and N+ samples did not reveal any significant
differences. We also observed a tendency to lower level of expression of
all investigated miRNAs in HER2-positive patients in comparison with
HER2-negative. We concluded that miR-27, miR-125a and miR-125b may play
an important role in the regulation of ER-alpha expression in breast
cancer cells. They could also be regarded as surrogate markers of
ER-alpha -negativity. However, the small number of patients included to
the study warrants further investigation in the larger cohort of breast
cancer patients.

