Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design and characterization of novel targeted nanoparticle
delivery systems for cancer chemotherapy


The success of cancer chemotherapy was considerably hindered by tumor
resistance and drug toxicity. A possibly efficient approach to overcoming
drug resistance and serious toxicities is the application of targeted
nanoparticles linked to or encapsulating cytotoxic drugs. In this study,
novel self-assembly targeting supramolecular nanodrug complex was
synthesized using v-intergrin targeting peptidyl cyclodextrins (CyDs) and
classic chemotherapeutic drugs used in the therapy of tumor. The
targeting supramolecular drug complex were obtained through host-guest
interaction between the tripeptide RGD with sequence Arg-Gly-Asp or
cyclotripeptide cRGDyk with sequence c (Arg-Gly-Asp-DTyr-Lys) grafting
-cyclodextrin (or -cyclodextrin) and a cytotoxic prodrug; the
supramolecular drug inclusion are in specific and efficient binding to
integrin-expressing tumor cells and would release the chemotherapeutics
in a prolonged period. The guest molecule was generated by the reaction
of adamantyl chloride and doxorubicin hydrochloride in which the
adamantly group acts as a perfect candidate for the host-guest
interaction with CyDs. The host moiety was gained through the reaction of
mono-6-deoxy-6-(p-tolylsulfonyl)--cyclodextrin and the N-terminal of the
oligopeptides through nuclephilic reaction. The promising nanodrug
complex is expected to offer attractive pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties for cancer treatment and is undergoing
preclinical evaluation using cancer cell lines and nude mouse models.

