Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NADPH oxidase is a novel target of delphinidin to inhibits
UVB-induced MMP-1 expression in human dermal fibroblasts


Ultraviolet (UV) induced ROS production is considered a major cause of
photoaging via abnormal expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1
and NADPH oxidase (NOX) is a key enzyme of endogenous ROS production.
Here, we investigated the anti-photoaging effect of delphidin, a major
anthocyanin found in berry, beans, and red wine, and its molecular target
in UVB-induced MMP-1 expression using primary cultured human dermal
fibroblast. Delphinidin inhibited UVB-induced MMP-1 expression in human
dermal fibroblasts. UVB-induced MKK4-JNK1/2, MKK3/6-p38, and MEK-ERK1/2
phosphorylation were suppressed by delphinidin. In addition,
quantification of ROS stained with the 2,7-dichlorofluorescein diacetate
(DCF-DA) dye showed that delphinidin significantly inhibited UVB-induced
ROS production. Delphinidin significantly inhibited UVB-induced NOX
activity. Interestingly, the inhibitory effect of delphinidin on
UVB-induced NOX activity was stronger than apocynin, a pharmaceutical NOX
inhibitor. Fractioned cell analysis results using a western blot assay
showed that delphinidin strongly suppressed UVB-induced P47phox, a NOX
subunit, translocation from the cytosol to the membrane. Delphinidin
produced similar effects with apocynin on UVB-induced MMP-1 expression.
Pull down assays showed that delphinidin directly bound to P47phox.
Collectively, our results suggest that NOX is a potential target of
delphinidin in the suppression of UVB-induced MMP-1 expression in human
dermal fibroblasts.

