Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Estrogen receptor alpha transcriptionally regulates p53 in MCF7
human breast cancer cells


The p53 tumor suppressor plays a critical role in maintaining genome
stability. In response to genotoxic stress, p53 induces target genes for
cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and DNA repair. While p53 is the most
commonly mutated gene in all cancers, it is only mutated in 20% of breast
cancers. Interestingly, 70% of all breast cancer cases are estrogen
receptor (ER) positive and are associated with wild type p53 expression.
An ER-positive breast cancer diagnosis generally indicates good patient
prognosis and treatment responsiveness with anti-estrogens such as
tamoxifen. The relationship between ER and p53 remains poorly defined.
Here, we found that ER positively regulates p53 expression. Specifically,
knockdown of ER decreases the amount of p53 along with its downstream
target p21, a regulator of cell cycle arrest, in MCF7 breast cancer
cells. Furthermore, we found that ER transcriptionally regulates p53
expression via binding to the p53 promoter. Luciferase promoter reporter
experiments showed that two estrogen receptor element half sites located
at nt 1828 and 1611 from the p53 transcriptional start site responded to
addition of ER with increased reporter activity. Mutation of those two
sites resulted in no reporter activity. To determine the biological
significance of ER regulation of p53, we found that knockdown of ER
desensitized cells to growth arrest and cell death upon treatment with
DNA damage-inducing drugs in a p53-dependent manner. Conversely, cells
overexpressing ER were sensitized to growth arrest and cell death upon
DNA damage-inducing drugs via the p53 pathway. Together, these results
provide an insight into the reciprocal regulation of p53 and ER at the
transcript level and how their pathways interact in ER-positive breast
cancers under basal and stress conditions.

