Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential expression of NILCO reveals pathogenesis of human
breast cancer


Introduction: Notch, IL-1 and leptin are known pro-angiogenic factors
linked to breast cancer (BC) development, aggressiveness and poor
prognosis. We have recently reported leptin as an inducer of IL-1 and
Notch in BC cells. Furthermore, we have unveiled a novel signaling
crosstalk between these factors: NILCO (Notch, IL-1, leptin crosstalk
outcome). Our data show NILCO impacts on VEGF/VEGFR2 levels in BC cells.
Objective: In this investigation, we aim to elucidate differences in
NILCO relationships to the pathogenesis of triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) as compared to ER positive BC. We hypothesize that the expression
of NILCO components correlates to TNBC etiology. Methods: Expression
levels of Notch 1, 4, Jagged 1, DLL4, VEGF/VEGFR2 (FLK-1), Ob, Ob-R and
IL-1R tI were examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissue
microarrays (n=75/duplicate from Pantomics, Inc.) BC samples included
normal/hyperplastic specimens (n=3), fibroadenomas (n=2), invasive ductal
carcinomas (n=62; 13 were TNBC: ER-, PR- and HER2/neu-), ductal
carcinomas in situ (n=2) and Paget's disease (n=1). IHC evaluations were
conducted by two independent observers using semi-quantitative analysis
of staining [HSCORE = pi (i + 1), where i is the intensity of staining
with a value of 1, 2 or 3 (weak, moderate or strong, respectively) and pi
is the percentage of stained cells for each intensity]. The following
cell lines: TNBC (MDA-MB231 and HCC1806) and ER+ (T47D and MCF-7) were
treated with increasing doses of human leptin; leptin peptide receptor
antagonist, LPrA2 and a -secretase inhibitor (DAPT: Notch pathway
inhibitor). After treatments, NILCO and targets were determined by
western blot (WB) and ELISA. Results: Data from BC tissue array showed
NILCO components were present in the majority of samples. However, lower
expression of Notch1, leptin and IL-1R tI was found in non-malignant
tissues. In general, TNBC overexpressed Notch1/leptin as compared to ER
positive BC. ELISA and WB analysis of cell lysates revealed that leptin
increased NILCO component/activation and targets in a dose-dependent
manner. Both DAPT and LPrA2 reduced leptin's effects on NILCO.
Conclusions: These results support the hypothesis that NILCO may play an
important role in BC pathogenesis. [This work was supported in part by
NIH/NCI1SC1CA138658-03; NIH/ARRA/3SC1CA138658-02S1 and the Georgia Cancer
Coalition Distinguished Cancer Scholar Award (to RRGP); CREDO (MSCR)
2R25RR017694-06A1 to L.S.C; the Morehouse School of Medicine (MSM) MBRS
RISE Program (NIH/NIGMS 506 GM08248) to T.Z.M; Blacksone Academy,
NIH/NIDDK Step-up HS Research Program: Short-Term Education Program for
Underrepresented Persons to K.W. and facilities and support services at
Morehouse School of Medicine (NIH RR03034 and 1C06 RR18386)].

