Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-17 receptor c (IL-17RC) knockout mice developed fewer
and smaller prostate tumors compared to the wild-type mice in
Pten-deficient context


Introduction: Interleukin17 (IL17) is a key cytokine in inflammatory and
immune diseases. IL17 may promote or inhibit tumor growth. Several
studies have linked IL17 with prostate cancer. IL17's role in prostate
cancer is unknown. The objective of this study is to investigate IL17's
role in formation and growth of prostate adenocarcinoma. Methods: IL17
receptor C (IL17RC) knockout mice were crossed with Pten conditional
knockout mice (using ProbasinCre). Pten/ male mice with intact IL17
signaling (named RC+ mice, including IL17RC+/+ and IL17RC+/) were
compared with Pten/ male mice without IL17 signaling (IL17RC/, named RC
mice). Results: There was no difference between the weight of
genitourinary bloc of RC+ mice and that of RC mice at 4, 6 and 9 weeks.
At 12 and 30 weeks, the GUbloc weight of RC+ mice was 14% and 47% heavier
than that of RC mice, respectively (P = 0.005, N = 54, and P = 0.004, N =
32, respectively). We found similar prostatic epithelial hyperplasia at 4
weeks and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) at 6 weeks in both
RC+ and RC mice, suggesting that IL17RC knockout did not affect PIN
formation. At 9 weeks, invasive cancer was formed in 87% of RC+ prostate
lobes, but only in 25% of RC prostate lobes (P Introduction:
Interleukin17 (IL17) is a key cytokine in inflammatory and immune
diseases. IL17 may promote or inhibit tumor growth. Several studies have
linked IL17 with prostate cancer. IL17's role in prostate cancer is
unknown. The objective of this study is to investigate IL17's role in
formation and growth of prostate adenocarcinoma. Methods: IL17 receptor C
(IL17RC) knockout mice were crossed with Pten conditional knockout mice
(using ProbasinCre). Pten/ male mice with intact IL17 signaling (named
RC+ mice, including IL17RC+/+ and IL17RC+/) were compared with Pten/ male
mice without IL17 signaling (IL17RC/, named RC mice). Results: There was
no difference between the weight of genitourinary bloc of RC+ mice and
that of RC mice at 4, 6 and 9 weeks. At 12 and 30 weeks, the GUbloc
weight of RC+ mice was 14% and 47% heavier than that of RC mice,
respectively (P = 0.005, N = 54, and P = 0.004, N = 32, respectively). We
found similar prostatic epithelial hyperplasia at 4 weeks and prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) at 6 weeks in both RC+ and RC mice,
suggesting that IL17RC knockout did not affect PIN formation. At 9 weeks,
invasive cancer was formed in 87% of RC+ prostate lobes, but only in 25%
of RC prostate lobes (P < 0.001). At 30 weeks, 100% of RC+ prostate lobes
formed invasive cancer, whereas only 70% of RC prostate lobes showed
invasive cancer (P Introduction: Interleukin17 (IL17) is a key cytokine
in inflammatory and immune diseases. IL17 may promote or inhibit tumor
growth. Several studies have linked IL17 with prostate cancer. IL17's
role in prostate cancer is unknown. The objective of this study is to
investigate IL17's role in formation and growth of prostate
adenocarcinoma. Methods: IL17 receptor C (IL17RC) knockout mice were
crossed with Pten conditional knockout mice (using ProbasinCre). Pten/
male mice with intact IL17 signaling (named RC+ mice, including IL17RC+/+
and IL17RC+/) were compared with Pten/ male mice without IL17 signaling
(IL17RC/, named RC mice). Results: There was no difference between the
weight of genitourinary bloc of RC+ mice and that of RC mice at 4, 6 and
9 weeks. At 12 and 30 weeks, the GUbloc weight of RC+ mice was 14% and
47% heavier than that of RC mice, respectively (P = 0.005, N = 54, and P
= 0.004, N = 32, respectively). We found similar prostatic epithelial
hyperplasia at 4 weeks and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) at 6
weeks in both RC+ and RC mice, suggesting that IL17RC knockout did not
affect PIN formation. At 9 weeks, invasive cancer was formed in 87% of
RC+ prostate lobes, but only in 25% of RC prostate lobes (P < 0.001). At
30 weeks, 100% of RC+ prostate lobes formed invasive cancer, whereas only
70% of RC prostate lobes showed invasive cancer (P < 0.005). This
suggests that IL17RC knockout decreased progression of PIN to invasive
cancer. The RC PINs were surrounded with a thick layer of fibromuscular
stroma, whereas the stroma layer was significantly thinner in RC+
prostate glands, suggesting that failure of PIN to invade stroma was a
critical deficit in RC mice. We found that MMP7 expression was
significantly decreased in RC prostates compared to RC+ prostates,
suggesting that lack of MMP7 expression is likely responsible for the
observed phenotype. Furthermore, we found that IL17 treatment induced
MMP7 mRNA and protein expression in exvivo cultured RC+ prostate tissues
but not in RC prostate tissues, suggesting that MMP7 is a downstream
target gene of IL17 signaling. Conclusions: IL17 promotes prostate
adenocarcinoma formation and growth through induction of MMP7 expression
in mouse prostate. Funding provided by NIH/NCRR COBRE Grant
(2P20RR02015206), DoD (W81XWH0510567 and W81XWH1010937), Tulane Cancer
Center, Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium, and Tulane Framework for
Global Health Seed Grant.

