Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating the molecular mechanisms of tumor cell invasion


Increased MAPK signaling, small GTPase activation, cytoskeletal
rearrangements and the directed targeting of proteases to sites of
extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, all accompany the process of
tumor cell invasion. We have shown that nucleotide cycling on ARF6, a
Ras-related small GTP-binding protein, regulates the release of
protease-loaded, plasma membrane-derived microvesicles from tumor cells
into the microenvironment to promote ECM degradation. These invasive
microvesicles can be isolated from peripheral body fluids and thereby,
represent a source of disease and tissue specific markers. They are
distinct from invadopodia, which also mediate cell invasion, rather they
appear to be linked to amoeboid motility of tumor cells. While
pre-invasive tumor cells shed microvesicles, the amount of shed
microvesicles increases with invasiveness. We suggest that the release of
protease-loaded microvesicles potentially serves as a mechanism to bring
about matrix degradation and also deposit paracrine information at distal
locations, creating paths of least resistance as tumor cells traverse
distances and invade through surrounding tissue. Invadopodia, on the
other hand, facilitate pericellular proteolysis of the ECM at the cell's
invasive front and appear to be linked to mesenchymal type of tumor cell
motility. Rho GTPase signaling in part governs whether tumor cells
produce invadopodia or adopt the amoeboid type movement and release
microvesicles. Moreover, the specific targeting of distinct cargo to each
of these sites enables the biogenesis of each invasive structure.
Understanding the interplay between these two invasive cell programs will
provide new and important insights into the progression toward
pathophysiological states.

