Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of the association of the ABO blood group SNP rs505922
with breast cancer phenotypes


Purpose: To date, evaluation of the association of the ABO blood group
and breast cancer has yielded mixed results. SNP rs505922, located within
the first intron of the ABO gene, has been associated with the
adenocarcinoma subtype of pancreatic cancer. To determine whether the ABO
blood group is associated with risk of breast cancer, rs505922 was
genotyped in 629 Caucasian women with invasive breast cancer,
representing a variety of clinical and pathological tumor types. Methods:
Genomic DNA was isolated from blood clots. TaqMan SNP assay C_2253769_10
was used to determine the genotypes for rs505922. Statistical analysis
was performed using chi-square analysis using a P-value Purpose: To date,
evaluation of the association of the ABO blood group and breast cancer
has yielded mixed results. SNP rs505922, located within the first intron
of the ABO gene, has been associated with the adenocarcinoma subtype of
pancreatic cancer. To determine whether the ABO blood group is associated
with risk of breast cancer, rs505922 was genotyped in 629 Caucasian women
with invasive breast cancer, representing a variety of clinical and
pathological tumor types. Methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from blood
clots. TaqMan SNP assay C_2253769_10 was used to determine the genotypes
for rs505922. Statistical analysis was performed using chi-square
analysis using a P-value <0.05 to define significance. Results: Genotypes
were generated for 100% of the 629 patients in this study. Allele and
genotype frequencies did not vary significantly for age at diagnosis,
tumor stage, size or grade, hormone, HER2 or lymph node status, intrinsic
subtype, tumor type or patient outcome. Conclusions: Allele frequencies
for rs505922 did not differ between women with breast cancer and
published HapMap frequencies. Further stratification into different tumor
phenotypes also failed to reveal an association between rs505922 and any
tumor characteristics. Together, these data suggest that the minor allele
of rs505922 and the resulting non-O blood types, are not associated with
increased risk or less favorable tumor characteristics or prognosis in
breast cancer.

