Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A tumor-targeted 5-pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine antifolate is a
selective substrate for folate receptor and potent inhibitor of
5-amino-4-carboxamide formyltransferase in de novo purine nucleotide
biosynthesis


Clinically used antifolates are transported into cells by three major
systems including the reduced folate carrier (RFC), folate receptor (FR),
and proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT). RFC is ubiquitiously
expressed in normal tissues, however, expression of FR and PCFT is more
limited. FR and PCFT are expressed in human tumors, suggesting their
potentials for tumor targeting with cytotoxic antifolates selective for
these systems. We previously identified 6-substituted
pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine benozyl antifolates characterized by 3 (AG17)
and 4 (AG23) carbons in the bridge region with potent antiproliferative
activities toward human tumor cells. AG17 and AG23 were selectively
transported by FR over RFC and inhibited de novo purine biosynthesis at
-glycinamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARFTase). We synthesized
the corresponding 5-substituted pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine benzoyl
antifolates with 2 to 6 bridge carbons and tested growth inhibition of
Chinese hamster ovary sublines that express human FR (RT16), PCFT
(R2/PCFT4), or RFC (PC43-10). Studies were extended to include KB human
tumor cells expressing all three transporters. The 5-substituted analog
(AG127) with a 4 carbon bridge was the most active of the series and
inhibited proliferation of FR-expressing RT16 (IC50 = 3.1 nM) and KB
(IC50 = 1.9 nM) cells. Inhibitory effects of AG127 toward RFC-expressing
PC43-10 and PCFT-expressing R2/PCFT4 cells were substantially reduced
(IC50s of 54 and 733 nM, respectively), establishing FR selectivity. In
KB cells, AG17, AG23 and AG127 bound to FR with high affinity. The
antiproliferative effects of both 5- and 6-substituted analogs (AG127 and
AG17/AG23, respectively) were protected by excess adenosine but not
thymidine at drug concentrations up to 1 M. Whereas 5-amino-4-imidazole
carboxamide (AICA) completely protected KB cells from the effects of
AG17/AG23, establishing GARFTase inhibition, AICA protection was
incomplete for AG127. This suggests that AG127 inhibits AICA
ribonucleotide formyltransferase (AICARFTase), the 2nd folate-dependent
step in de novo purine biosynthesis, as its primary target. Consistent
with targeting AICARFTase, using an in situ GARFTase assay in intact KB
cells, inhibition by AG127 was modest and far less than for AG17 and
AG23. Treatment of KB cells with AG127 resulted in time- and
dose-dependent accumulation of the AICARFTase substrate ZMP (AICA
ribonucleotide), confirming AICARFTase inhibition. ZMP accumulation was
accompanied by activation of AMPK and inhibition of mTOR downstream
targets. AG127 is a prototype of an entirely new generation of
tumor-targeted antifolates with solid tumor selectivity over chemotherapy
drugs currently available.

