Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of total dissected lymph node number on metastatic
detection rate and survival in 10,382 esophageal cancer patients from the
high incidence area for esophageal cancer in northern China


Lymph node (LN) metastasis has been recognized as one of the most
important factors for poor prognosis of esophageal cancer (EC). However,
the influence of dissected LN number on metastatic detection rate and
survival in EC has not been well documented. The present study was
undertaken to correlate the total number of dissected LN, metastatic
detection rate and survival on 10,382 EC patients. All the patients had
been performed surgical treatment and confirmed as esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) by histopathological examination. The patients were
from Henan, Hebei and Shanxi provinces, the high incidence areas for EC
in northern China, including 6,375 males with a mean age of 589 and 4,007
females with a mean age of 599. Of the patients, 2,714 cases have been
followed up by interview at home until July, 2010. Eight EC groups had
been classified based on the total number of dissected LN (1-3, 4-5, 6-7,
8-9, 10-11, 12-13, 14-16 and 17). The results showed that the positive
metastatic detection rate apparently increased with the total extended
dissected LN number (PLymph node (LN) metastasis has been recognized as
one of the most important factors for poor prognosis of esophageal cancer
(EC). However, the influence of dissected LN number on metastatic
detection rate and survival in EC has not been well documented. The
present study was undertaken to correlate the total number of dissected
LN, metastatic detection rate and survival on 10,382 EC patients. All the
patients had been performed surgical treatment and confirmed as
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) by histopathological
examination. The patients were from Henan, Hebei and Shanxi provinces,
the high incidence areas for EC in northern China, including 6,375 males
with a mean age of 589 and 4,007 females with a mean age of 599. Of the
patients, 2,714 cases have been followed up by interview at home until
July, 2010. Eight EC groups had been classified based on the total number
of dissected LN (1-3, 4-5, 6-7, 8-9, 10-11, 12-13, 14-16 and 17). The
results showed that the positive metastatic detection rate apparently
increased with the total extended dissected LN number (P< 0.05) until
reaching the level with a total of 17 or more dissected LN. 5-year
survival analysis showed that the patients without LN metastasis had a
higher survival rate than those with LN metastasis in all seven groups
(P0.05). We concluded that the total dissected LN number could affect the
survival rate for EC and that a total of 10 to 16 dissected LN should be
recommended for EC surgical treatment. (supported by Innovation
Scientists and Technicians Troop Construction Projects of Henan Province).

