Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apolipoprotein E polymorphisms, plasma cholesterol, and prostate
cancer


Background: Men who use cholesterol-lowering statin drugs and those with
lower cholesterol levels may have a decreased risk of aggressive prostate
cancer (PCa), providing support for further investigation of cholesterol
metabolism in the etiology of PCa. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) plays an
important role in cholesterol metabolism and may also affect tumor growth
and angiogenesis. Compared to the APOE wild-type isoform (e3e3), the e4
allele has been associated with elevated cholesterol and the e2 allele
with lower cholesterol. Our study aimed to determine if APOE
polymorphisms were associated with PCa risk, especially aggressive
disease, and whether this association varied by plasma total cholesterol
level. Methods: We included 1193 total PCa cases and 1244 controls nested
in the prospective Health Professionals Follow-up Study (1993-2004). APOE
status was characterized by genotyping two SNPs (rs429358 and rs7412).
Total plasma cholesterol was measured enzymatically. We calculated odds
ratios and 95% confidence intervals for PCa risk (overall, high grade,
and advanced stage/lethal) using unconditional logistic regression
comparing e2 and e4 carriers to men homozygous for e3. Results: APOE
genotype prevalence in controls was: e3e3 (0.60), e2e3 (0.14), e2e2
(0.007), e3e4 (0.22), e4e4 (0.016); those with e2e4 (0.027) were excluded
from the analysis. APOE genotype was significantly associated with total
plasma cholesterol: e2 carriers had significantly lower mean and standard
deviation (188.5+/34.7 mg/dL) compared to the e3e3 men (200.4+/35.4
mg/dL) or the e4 carriers (201.2+/36.3 mg/dL). However, we saw no
significant associations with PCa by APOE genotype for total, advanced
stage/lethal, or high-grade PCa (Table). There was no significant effect
modification by plasma total cholesterol. Conclusions: In this large
prospective cohort study we did not observe an association between APOE
genotype and PCa. Future analyses will assess whether associations are
modified by statin use.


