Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of stable knockdown of NOX1 gene expression with siRNA in
human colon cancer cells


NADPH oxidase (Nox)-dependent reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a
critical role in cell signaling, cell proliferation, and mitogenesis. We
have previously shown that silencing NOX1 gene expression with siRNA
decreases cell growth and angiogenesis in human HT-29 colon cancer
xenografts. To investigate the mechanism of growth inhibition, we studied
cell cycle and signaling pathways. We found using RT-PCR and Western
analysis that the expression of the INK4 inhibitors (p15, p18, p19), as
well as CDK6, phospho-Cyclin E, Cyclin E, and Cyclin D1 were all
decreased when NOX1 was decreased by >80%. We detected important changes
in the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway that were associated with NOX1 knockdown. Our
stable knock-out cells (clone 6A) showed lower phosphorylation of Rac1,
c-Raf, MEK1/2, ERK1/2, p90RSK and CREB. To understand this observation,
we studied the activity of Tyr and Ser/Threonine protein phosphatases
(PP) in our stable siRNA containing cells (6A) compared to stable
scrambled siRNA containing cells (SA) and parental HT-29 cells. PTP1B
activity was elevated (100.4+4.4 pmol of phosphate/min/g) in 6A cells
compared to both SA (69.2+3.8) and parental (47.8+2.1) cell controls,
PNADPH oxidase (Nox)-dependent reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a
critical role in cell signaling, cell proliferation, and mitogenesis. We
have previously shown that silencing NOX1 gene expression with siRNA
decreases cell growth and angiogenesis in human HT-29 colon cancer
xenografts. To investigate the mechanism of growth inhibition, we studied
cell cycle and signaling pathways. We found using RT-PCR and Western
analysis that the expression of the INK4 inhibitors (p15, p18, p19), as
well as CDK6, phospho-Cyclin E, Cyclin E, and Cyclin D1 were all
decreased when NOX1 was decreased by >80%. We detected important changes
in the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway that were associated with NOX1 knockdown. Our
stable knock-out cells (clone 6A) showed lower phosphorylation of Rac1,
c-Raf, MEK1/2, ERK1/2, p90RSK and CREB. To understand this observation,
we studied the activity of Tyr and Ser/Threonine protein phosphatases
(PP) in our stable siRNA containing cells (6A) compared to stable
scrambled siRNA containing cells (SA) and parental HT-29 cells. PTP1B
activity was elevated (100.4+4.4 pmol of phosphate/min/g) in 6A cells
compared to both SA (69.2+3.8) and parental (47.8+2.1) cell controls,
P<0.05. Serine/Threonine protein phosphatases demonstrated a similar
pattern; elevated in 6A cells (127.3+3.8 pmol of phosphate/min/g) versus
both SA cells (91.7+2.1) and the parental line (88.9+1.9), PNADPH oxidase
(Nox)-dependent reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a critical role in
cell signaling, cell proliferation, and mitogenesis. We have previously
shown that silencing NOX1 gene expression with siRNA decreases cell
growth and angiogenesis in human HT-29 colon cancer xenografts. To
investigate the mechanism of growth inhibition, we studied cell cycle and
signaling pathways. We found using RT-PCR and Western analysis that the
expression of the INK4 inhibitors (p15, p18, p19), as well as CDK6,
phospho-Cyclin E, Cyclin E, and Cyclin D1 were all decreased when NOX1
was decreased by >80%. We detected important changes in the Raf-MEK-ERK
pathway that were associated with NOX1 knockdown. Our stable knock-out
cells (clone 6A) showed lower phosphorylation of Rac1, c-Raf, MEK1/2,
ERK1/2, p90RSK and CREB. To understand this observation, we studied the
activity of Tyr and Ser/Threonine protein phosphatases (PP) in our stable
siRNA containing cells (6A) compared to stable scrambled siRNA containing
cells (SA) and parental HT-29 cells. PTP1B activity was elevated
(100.4+4.4 pmol of phosphate/min/g) in 6A cells compared to both SA
(69.2+3.8) and parental (47.8+2.1) cell controls, P<0.05.
Serine/Threonine protein phosphatases demonstrated a similar pattern;
elevated in 6A cells (127.3+3.8 pmol of phosphate/min/g) versus both SA
cells (91.7+2.1) and the parental line (88.9+1.9), P<0.05. To demonstrate
that protein phosphatases play a key role in the regulation of ERK-CREB
signaling, we used a c-Raf antibody to immunoprecipitate the c-Raf-PPs
complex, and detected PTP1B and PP2C proteins by Western analysis. These
data indicate that siRNA-mediated gene silencing of Nox1 deactivated
ERK-CREB signaling, and that increased activity of protein phosphatases,
that occur as a consequence of decreased Nox-mediated ROS formation,
might play role in modifying the growth enhancing effects of the MAP
kinase pathway in HT-29 colon cancer cells.

