Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Naturally occurring variants of human 9 nicotinic receptor
differentially affect bronchial cell proliferation and transformation


Isolation of polyadenilated mRNA from human immortalized bronchial
epithelial cell line BEP2D revealed the presence of multiple isoforms of
RNA coded by the CHRNA9 gene for 9 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR). BEP2D cells were homozygous for the rs10009228 polymorphism
encoding for N442S amino-acid substitution, and also contained mRNA
coding for several truncated isoforms of 9 protein. To elucidate the
biologic significance of the naturally occurring variants of 9 nAChR, we
compared the biologic effects of overexpression of full-length 9 N442 and
S442 proteins, and the truncated 9 variant occurring due to a loss of the
exon 4 sequence that causes frame shift and early termination of the
translation. These as well as control vector were overexpressed in the
BEP2D cells that were used in the assays of proliferation rate,
spontaneous vs. tobacco nitrosamine
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK)-induced cellular
transformation, and tumorigenicity in cell culture and mice.
Overexpression of the S442 variant significantly increased cellular
proliferation, and spontaneous and NNK-induced transformation. The N442
variant significantly decreased cellular transformation, without
affecting proliferation rate. Overexpression of the truncated 9
significantly decreased proliferation and suppressed cellular
transformation. These results suggested that 9 nAChR plays important
roles in regulation of bronchial cell growth by endogenous acetylcholine
and exogenous nicotine and susceptibility to NNK-induced carcinogenic
transformation. The biologic activities of 9 nAChR may be regulated at
the splicing level, and genetic polymorphisms in CHRNA9 affecting protein
levels, amino-acid sequence and RNA splicing may influence the risk for
lung cancer.

