Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Second generation PIM inhibitors exhibit improved activity in
solid tumor models


The proto-oncogene PIM kinase family (PIM-1, -2 and -3) includes
constitutively active serine/threonine kinases upregulated in multiple
cancer indications, including lymphomas, leukemias, multiple myeloma,
prostate and bladder cancers. Overexpression of one or more PIM family
members in patient tumors frequently correlates with poor prognosis. The
PIM kinases function by inhibiting apoptosis in MYC-driven tumors, and
promoting tumor cell survival and proliferation. In the HEK-293T cell
line, enhanced PIM kinase substrate BAD phosphorylation (pBAD) was
observed following PIM and BAD overexpression. Enhancement of pBAD was
inhibited by SGI-1776, a well-described PIM inhibitor, and more
effectively by second generation PIM inhibitors exhibiting 4-10 fold
improved potency against the PIM kinase family. The current PIM
inhibitors display sub-M activity in pharmacodynamic marker,
proliferation and 2D colony formation assays using the UM-UC-3 human
bladder cancer cell line. PIM1 and PIM2 overexpression models were
established in the human prostate cancer cell line 22RV-1 and the
non-tumorigenic mouse NIH-3T3 cell background. Overexpression of PIM
kinases led to enhanced cell growth and tumorigenicity in both NIH-3T3
and 22RV-1 cell lines. In vivo xenograft studies using both PIM
overexpression models and a clinically relevant solid tumor model
facilitated identification of a lead candidate with demonstrated efficacy
and favorable toxicity. IND-enabling studies with a lead candidate are
underway.

