Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibody-based array proteomics identify proteins differentially
expressed in human metastatic and non-metastatic triple negative breast
cancer cells


Triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) lacking hormone receptors (ER, PR)
and HER-2 amplification are very aggressive tumors. The IIB-BR-G cell
line isolated from a primary TNBC, and its spontaneous metastatic
variant, IIB-BR-G-MTS6 were compared using an antibody-based protein
array to characterize their expression profile. We also analyzed their
growth kinetics, migration, invasiveness, lymphangiogenesis and
cytoskeleton structure. Doubling times in vitro were shorter for IIB-BR-G
although in vivo IIB-BR-G-MTS6 tumors grew significantly faster than
IIB-BR-G. IIB-BR-GMTS6 showed higher anchorage independent growth in a
clonogenic assay. IIB-BR-G-MTS6 cells showed 100% incidence of lymph node
metastasis at 5-6 weeks, although no metastasis was observed for IIB-BR-G
even 19 weeks after inoculation. CCL3, IL1, CXCL1, CSF2, CSF3, IGFBP1,
IL1, IL6, IL8, CCL20, PLAUR, PlGF and VEGF were strongly up-regulated in
IIB-BR-G-MTS6 compared to IIB-BR-G, while CCL4, ICAM3, CXCL12, TNFRSF18,
FIGF, were the more down-regulated proteins in the metastatic cell line.
IIB-BR-G-MTS6 protein expression profile was compatible with higher NF-B
activation. In vitro, IIB-BR-G displayed higher migration but
IIB-BR-G-MTS6 had a higher matrigel invasion. Accordingly, IIB-BR-G-MTS6
had an up-regulated expression of MMP1, MMP9, MMP13, PLAUR and HGF as
compared to IIB-BR-G. IIB-BR-G-MTS6 tumors presented higher local
lymphatic invasion than IIB-BR-G but similar lymphatic vessel densities.
VEGFC and VEGFA/B expression were higher both in vitro and in vivo for
IIB-BR-G-MTS6. Higher vimentin expression was mainly localized in the
cellular extremities in IIB-BR-G-MTS6.Our results suggest that
IIB-BR-G-MTS6 have acquired an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
phenotype, modulating tumor stroma to favor tumor growth, increase
angiogenesis and promote their metastatic dissemination.

