Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prevalence of KRAS, PIK3CA, and BRAF mutant subpopulations in
tumors may be impacting the success of personalized cancer treatment


Tumor mutations are being used as predictive biomarkers of response, in
order to select the most effective treatment for individual cancer
patients. Currently, this is being done without sufficient
characterization of relevant oncogene mutations as quantitative
biomarkers. The goal of the current study was to define normal and
pathological levels of the most prevalent hotspot mutations in the KRAS,
PIK3CA, and BRAF genes, to establish the frequency with which the
mutations occur as subpopulations, and what diagnostic sensitivity is
needed to detect defined percentages of tumors carrying mutant
subpopulations. Therefore, the sensitive Allele-specific Competitive
Blocker-PCR (ACB-PCR) was used to quantify the levels of specific hotspot
point mutations in a panel of normal human tissues and tumors. The
mutations examined have established significance in terms of personalized
cancer treatment, specifically KRAS G12D, KRAS G12V, BRAF V600E, and
PIK3CA H1047R. The tissues examined included lung, colon, pancreas, and
thyroid. In colon tumors, the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles
of KRAS G12D mutant fraction (MF) are 1.7 x 105, 7.4 x 105, 3.0 x 104,
2.8 x 102, and 8.4 x 101, respectively. In lung tumors, the 5th, 25th,
50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles of KRAS G12V MF are 7.0 x 106, 1.1 x
105, 3.3 x 105, 2.3 x 102, and 1.2 x 101, respectively. Based on the data
across these tissue types, 67.5% of tumors carry KRAS G12D or G12V
mutation at a subpopulation frequency higher than that observed in normal
tissue. Only 18.1% of tumors had a KRAS MF 101 (i.e., that detectable by
DNA sequencing). From these data it was determined a diagnostic with a
sensitivity of 102 or 103 would detect 27.7% or 43.4% of these tumors,
respectively. Surprisingly, analysis of KRAS mutation in papillary
thyroid tumors showed KRAS G12V mutations were present above normal
thyroid levels, but as subpopulations in 42.1% of papillary thyroid
tumors, even though the COSMIC database indicates this mutation occurs in
only 0.15% of papillary thyroid tumors. The occurrence of these KRAS G12V
mutations was positively correlated with percent tumor necrosis. For
PIK3CA H1047R mutation in colon tumors, the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and
95th percentiles are 1.2 x 106, 5.3 x 104, 7.6 x 104, 1.1 x 103, and 4.2
x 102, respectively. Data on BRAF V600E shows it occurs primarily as
large subpopulations in papillary thyroid tumors. For effective
development of personalized cancer treatment, quantitative and sensitive
analyses of tumor mutations are needed to establish the effect of mutant
subpopulations on patient response and/or relapse. Because so many tumors
carry KRAS mutation, therapies targeting KRAS mutant cells are needed for
use in conjunction with therapies directed against other targets. The
views presented do not necessarily reflect those of the US FDA.

