Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor (AR) degradation is controlled by the
co-operation of PMEPA1 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase NEDD4-1


Introduction and Objective: Androgen receptor (AR) plays critical roles
in prostate growth and differentiation and prostate tumorigenesis. Our
recent investigations have discovered a novel mechanism of AR degradation
in CaP cells involving PMEPA1 and NEDD4-1 which is independent of MDM2.
Previously we have shown that PMEPA1 is a highly androgen-inducible gene
in CaP cells that recruits the NEDD4-1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, to
degrade AR. In an independent study NEDD4-1 has been identified as an E3
ligase controlling the levels of PTEN. We hypothesize that decreased or
loss of PMPEA1 expression that is frequently observed in human prostate
tumor cells may lead to enhanced AR functions. Elevated AR levels may
increase NEDD4-1 and in turn destabilize PTEN in prostate cancer cells.
Here, we further investigate the co-operation between PMEPA1 and NEDD4-1
to alter AR and PTEN protein levels. Methods: PMEPA1 and NEDD4-1 were
ectopically expressed in androgen responsive LNCaP and VCaP cells by
pCMV-XL4 and pcDNA3.1 vectors, respectively. AR, PMEPA1, NEDD4-1, MDM2
and PTEN were silenced by using specific siRNAs. Cell growth was
monitored in response modulation of PMEPA1, NEDD4 and AR. Protein levels
of AR, PMEPA1, NEDD4-1, PTEN and PSA were assessed by immunoblot assays.
Results: Decreases in AR protein levels, inhibited AR signaling and cell
growth in response to heterologous expression of NEDD4-1. Consistent with
this observation, inhibition of NEDD4-1 by siRNA resulted in elevated AR
protein levels, AR signaling and increased cell growth. Reduced cell
growth by AR knock-down or by heterologous expression of NEDD4-, were
rescued by the knockdown of PMEPA1. It was also shown that AR
up-regulates the expression of NEDD4-1 in hormone responsive CaP cells.
In VCaP cells, overexpression of NEDD4-1 resulted in decreased PTEN
protein levels. Remarkably, PMEPA1 knockdown resulted in elevated AR and
NEDD4-1 levels and the downregulation of PTEN protein. Conclusions:
NEDD4-1 mediated AR degradation in hormone responsive CaP cells requires
PMEPA1. The frequently observed decreased expression of PMEPA1 results in
elevated AR protein levels and may facilitate NEDD4-1 mediated
degradation of PTEN in CaP. Our findings revealed a complex interplay of
the AR, PMEPA1, NEDD4 and PTEN underscoring the impact of the loss of
PMEPA1 to increased AR and decreased PTEN, both proteins critical in
prostate tumorigenesis. This study is supported by the NIH grant
(R01CA106653) to SS.

