Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PWT33597 regresses 786-0 renal xenografts


PWT33597 is a balanced dual inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
alpha (PI3K alpha) and mTOR, currently in clinical development.
Inhibition of signaling downstream of PI3K and mTOR by PWT33597 has been
demonstrated, and PWT33597 is strongly efficacious in multiple xenograft
models tested to date with different PIK3CA and PTEN genotypes.
Inhibitors of mTORC1 (rapalogs) are approved for treatment of advanced
renal cell carcinoma (RCC), but their effect is restricted to a subset of
patients, and is not sustained. Inhibitors of VEGFR signaling such as
sorafenib and sunitinib have also demonstrated clinical activity in RCC
and are approved in this indication. Based on the proven role of rapalogs
in RCC, we tested PWT33597 in a renal xenograft model with the hypothesis
that inhibition of both mTORC1 and mTORC2, as well as PI3K, may offer
increased efficacy by direct targeting of multiple signaling nodes
including VEGFR signaling. Dual inhibition would also be expected to
decrease release of negative feedback loops triggered by either mTOR or
PI3K inhibition alone. PWT33597 was tested in 786-0 (VHL -/-, PTEN -/-)
xenografts in comparison to rapamycin (mTORC1 inhibitor), and sorafenib
(VEGFR/RAF inhibitor). While sorafenib and rapamycin showed tumor growth
inhibition (TGI), the maximal effect with sorafenib was 64% TGI, and
rapamycin had a largely cytostatic effect. The overall efficacy observed
with PWT33597 was superior, with 93% TGI observed. PWT33597 was also
tested in comparison to a pan-PI3K inhibitor (GDC-0941, 49% TGI) and
demonstrated superior efficacy. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumors
for cleaved caspase 3 (CC3) as an indicator of apoptosis showed that a
single dose of PWT33597 induced a several fold increase in CC3 staining,
and this effect was also apparent after 18 days of dosing. Based on these
results we tested the ability of PWT33597 to regress large 786-0 tumors
(approx. 500 mm3), and a rapid decrease in tumor size was observed in
100% of animals. Additional cellular and xenograft studies in RCC models
are ongoing to further define the mechanism of action of PWT33597, and
will be presented. Taken together, these data provide rationale for
testing PWT33597 in patients with RCC.

