Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of genetic and epigenetic alterations reveals
CpG island methylator phenotype associated with distinct clinical
characters of lung adenocarcinoma


Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause of human cancer death
worldwide. DNA methylation affects the aggressiveness of human
malignancies. Cancers with CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), a
distinct group with extensive DNA methylation, show characteristic
features in several types of tumors. However, the existence and
characteristics of CIMP in lung adenocarcinomas (AdCas) from the global
point of view has remained elusive. The aim of this study is to clarify
the significance of DNA methylation, especially the clinical impact of
CIMP, in AdCas. Methods: Using genome-wide microarray analysis, DNA
methylation profiling of 41 AdCas were initially examined. DNA
methylation status of six CIMP markers newly identified by microarray
analysis was further estimated in a validation set of 87 AdCas by
bisulfate pyrosequencing. A total of 128 AdCas were examined for the
significance of CIMP. In addition, responsiveness to DNA methylation
inhibitor was examined in AdCa cell lines with different CIMP status.
Results: Consensus clustering analysis based on DNA methylation showed
that AdCas were classified into three subgroups, clusters 1, 2, and 3
(average of 767, 486, and 319 methylated genes in each subgroup,
respectively; PBackground: Lung cancer is the leading cause of human
cancer death worldwide. DNA methylation affects the aggressiveness of
human malignancies. Cancers with CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP),
a distinct group with extensive DNA methylation, show characteristic
features in several types of tumors. However, the existence and
characteristics of CIMP in lung adenocarcinomas (AdCas) from the global
point of view has remained elusive. The aim of this study is to clarify
the significance of DNA methylation, especially the clinical impact of
CIMP, in AdCas. Methods: Using genome-wide microarray analysis, DNA
methylation profiling of 41 AdCas were initially examined. DNA
methylation status of six CIMP markers newly identified by microarray
analysis was further estimated in a validation set of 87 AdCas by
bisulfate pyrosequencing. A total of 128 AdCas were examined for the
significance of CIMP. In addition, responsiveness to DNA methylation
inhibitor was examined in AdCa cell lines with different CIMP status.
Results: Consensus clustering analysis based on DNA methylation showed
that AdCas were classified into three subgroups, clusters 1, 2, and 3
(average of 767, 486, and 319 methylated genes in each subgroup,
respectively; P<0.001), indicating existence of CIMP in AdCas. DNA
methylation status of six CIMP markers was examined in a total of 128
AdCas and revealed that 10 (7.8%), 40 (31.3%), and 78 (60.9%) were
classified as CIMP-high (CIMP-H), CIMP-low, and CIMP-negative,
respectively. Notably, CIMP-H AdCas were strongly associated with wild
type EGFR, males, and heavy smokers (P=0.0089, 0.0047, 0.0036,
respectively). In addition, CIMP-H was significantly associated with
worse prognosis; especially among male smokers, CIMP-H was an independent
prognostic factor (HR 1.7617, 95%CI 1.0030-2.9550, P=0.0489). The
existence of CIMP in AdCas was supported by the deposited data, the
Cancer Genome Atlas dataset and mRNA expression profile dataset as well.
Intriguingly, analysis of AdCa cell lines revealed that CIMP-positive
AdCa cell lines were more sensitive to a DNA methylation inhibitor than
CIMP-negative ones regardless of EGFR mutation status. Conclusions: Our
data demonstrate that CIMP in AdCas appears to be a unique subgroup that
has distinct clinical traits from other AdCas. CIMP classification using
our six-marker panel has implications for personalized medical strategies
for lung cancer patients; especially, DNA methylation inhibitor might be
of therapeutic benefit to patients with CIMP-positive tumors.

