Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nm23, a metastasis suppressor gene, binds the cytoskeletal linker
Ezrin to regulate motility


Nm23 was the first metastasis suppressor gene characterized. One of the
best correlates of the metastasis suppressive effect of Nm23 is its
inhibition of tumor cell motility, but the mechanistic basis for this
phenotype have not been elucidated. Our data in this abstract describe a
novel interaction of Nm23-H1 with the FERM domain of Ezrin, which
competitively inhibits the ability of FAK to bind Ezrin and induce
motility. We hypothesized that Nm23-H1 may suppress motility and
metastasis through the binding and inactivation of proteins that promote
aggressive behavior. An unbiased survey of Nm23-H1 binding proteins was
conducted in a 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma system. Flag tagged Nm23-H1
and its mouse variant, M1, were transfected into 4T1 cancer cells.
Primary tumor size was unaffected by over-expression of Nm23-H1 or M1.
Histological examination revealed a 75% decrease in liver metastasis by
Nm23-H1 or M1 over-expression (P Nm23 was the first metastasis suppressor
gene characterized. One of the best correlates of the metastasis
suppressive effect of Nm23 is its inhibition of tumor cell motility, but
the mechanistic basis for this phenotype have not been elucidated. Our
data in this abstract describe a novel interaction of Nm23-H1 with the
FERM domain of Ezrin, which competitively inhibits the ability of FAK to
bind Ezrin and induce motility. We hypothesized that Nm23-H1 may suppress
motility and metastasis through the binding and inactivation of proteins
that promote aggressive behavior. An unbiased survey of Nm23-H1 binding
proteins was conducted in a 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma system. Flag
tagged Nm23-H1 and its mouse variant, M1, were transfected into 4T1
cancer cells. Primary tumor size was unaffected by over-expression of
Nm23-H1 or M1. Histological examination revealed a 75% decrease in liver
metastasis by Nm23-H1 or M1 over-expression (P < 0.001). To characterize
Nm23-H1/M1 binding proteins, Flag tagged Nm23 from both H1 and M1 clones
were immunoprecipitated (IP) from cell lines in vitro as well as isolated
primary tumors and metastases. Mass spectrometry analysis of the IP
samples identified Ezrin as a potential binding partner. Ezrin is a
member of the ERM family of proteins, which have been described to link
the actin cytoskeleton to membrane associated proteins. Using co-IP,
Ezrin was validated as a binding partner of Nm23-H1 and M1 in both the
4T1 and human MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Nm23-H1 and M1 were found to bind to
the N terminal of Ezrin, which contains the highly conserved FERM domain.
Deletion mutants established the interaction of Nm23 in both cell lines
with the FERM-C portion, corresponding to Ezrin amino acids 205 to 300.
Ezrin exists as a folded circular protein that, when activated by
phosphorylation at amino acid 567 unfurls, exposing the FERM domain.
Nm23-H1 co-immunoprecipitated constitutively active (T567D) but not
inactive (T567A) mutants of Ezrin, suggesting that the active open
structure permitted access to the FERM domain. As focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) binds to Ezrin also through the FERM domain, it was hypothesized
that Nm23-H1 would competitively prevent this association, confirmed in
triple co-IP experiments. Expression of the T567D mutant of Ezrin
increased cell motility of the 4T1 cells by an average of 148% (PNm23 was
the first metastasis suppressor gene characterized. One of the best
correlates of the metastasis suppressive effect of Nm23 is its inhibition
of tumor cell motility, but the mechanistic basis for this phenotype have
not been elucidated. Our data in this abstract describe a novel
interaction of Nm23-H1 with the FERM domain of Ezrin, which competitively
inhibits the ability of FAK to bind Ezrin and induce motility. We
hypothesized that Nm23-H1 may suppress motility and metastasis through
the binding and inactivation of proteins that promote aggressive
behavior. An unbiased survey of Nm23-H1 binding proteins was conducted in
a 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma system. Flag tagged Nm23-H1 and its mouse
variant, M1, were transfected into 4T1 cancer cells. Primary tumor size
was unaffected by over-expression of Nm23-H1 or M1. Histological
examination revealed a 75% decrease in liver metastasis by Nm23-H1 or M1
over-expression (P < 0.001). To characterize Nm23-H1/M1 binding proteins,
Flag tagged Nm23 from both H1 and M1 clones were immunoprecipitated (IP)
from cell lines in vitro as well as isolated primary tumors and
metastases. Mass spectrometry analysis of the IP samples identified Ezrin
as a potential binding partner. Ezrin is a member of the ERM family of
proteins, which have been described to link the actin cytoskeleton to
membrane associated proteins. Using co-IP, Ezrin was validated as a
binding partner of Nm23-H1 and M1 in both the 4T1 and human MDA-MB-231
cell lines. Nm23-H1 and M1 were found to bind to the N terminal of Ezrin,
which contains the highly conserved FERM domain. Deletion mutants
established the interaction of Nm23 in both cell lines with the FERM-C
portion, corresponding to Ezrin amino acids 205 to 300. Ezrin exists as a
folded circular protein that, when activated by phosphorylation at amino
acid 567 unfurls, exposing the FERM domain. Nm23-H1 co-immunoprecipitated
constitutively active (T567D) but not inactive (T567A) mutants of Ezrin,
suggesting that the active open structure permitted access to the FERM
domain. As focal adhesion kinase (FAK) binds to Ezrin also through the
FERM domain, it was hypothesized that Nm23-H1 would competitively prevent
this association, confirmed in triple co-IP experiments. Expression of
the T567D mutant of Ezrin increased cell motility of the 4T1 cells by an
average of 148% (P<0.01). The expression of the T567D mutant did not
overcome the motility inhibiting phenotype of Nm23 when co-expressed in
4T1 cells. We therefore hypothesize that Nm23 functions as a secondary
regulator for Ezrin, binding to the N terminus and preventing the FERM
domain from interacting with cell membrane associated proteins such as
FAK that control tumor cell motility.

