Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted PI3K/mTOR inhibition impairs tumor cell motility and bone
metastatic outgrowth via modulation of p27


The pleiotropic oncogenic effects of PI3K/mTOR have stimulated
development of catalytic PI3K and mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of
cancer. Present data provide a novel rationale for the use of dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitors to oppose tumor motility, invasion and metastasis.
Cytoplasmic mislocalization of p27 is implicated as a key downstream
driver of PI3K/mTOR-dependent tumor cell motility in vitro and bone
metastatic outgrowth in vivo. Here, we report that PI3K/mTOR-kinase
inhibition with PF-04691502 impairs breast cancer metastasis to bone, in
part via effects on p27. Low-dose PF-04691502 impaired motility and
invasion of highly PI3K/mTOR activated, bone-metastatic MDA-MB-1833 cells
in vitro without affecting apoptosis or proliferation. Moreover, drug
pre-treatment impaired bone metastasis in vivo. PF-04691502 decreased
cytoplasmic p27pT157 and p27pT198, and p27T157D/T198D overexpression
conferred resistance to inhibition of motility by PF-04691502. p27
knockdown in MDA-MB-1833 relieved RhoA-ROCK inhibition, decreased cell
motility/invasion in vitro, and bone metastasis in vivo. p27 knockdown
also reversed EMT phenotypic markers in MDA-MB-1833, as did PI3K/mTOR
inhibition, demonstrating that p27 may be critical for maintenance of the
EMT cellular program. Indeed, loss of cytoplasmic p27 reversed expression
of an EMT gene profile supporting the notion that p27 acts as a key
mediator of metastasis downstream of PI3K/mTOR. Cytoplasmic p27 in human
cancers may prove to be a useful predictive marker to assess both
PI3K/mTOR activation and the potential efficacy of catalytic PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors.

