Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of Polo-like kinase 1 as a strategy in the treatment of
adrenocortical carcinoma


Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is an aggressive cancer with a 5-year
survival rate of 20-30%. Mitotane is the only approved drug for the
treatment of patients with ACC. It often carries significant toxicities
which result in the discontinuation of treatment. There are no approved
second line therapies. The increased incidence of ACC in the cancer
predisposition syndrome, Li-Fraumeni, suggests the involvement of the p53
pathway in ACC pathogenesis. Our analysis of the gene expression profiles
of 19 ACC samples identified dysregulation of the G2/M transition and the
activity of the p53 modulator, MDM2 as important in ACC pathogenesis.
Polo-like kinase-1 (PLK1) is involved in the G2/M transition and acts to
promote MDM2 activity through its phosphorylation. We observed that PLK1
inhibition by siRNA results in up to a 70% reduction in viability in the
ACC cell lines SW-13 and H295R. Therefore, we studied PLK1 inhibition as
a potential therapeutic strategy. We used the small molecule inhibitor,
BI-2536, to inhibit PLK1 function in SW-13 and H295R. Drug-dose response
curves demonstrated that both cell lines are sensitive to pharmacological
inhibition of PLK1 (IC50 doses of 0.0094815 M and 0.062805 M for SW-13
and H295R, respectively.) Murine xenograft studies demonstrated that
BI-2536 resulted in a statistically significant reduction in tumor growth
in SW-13 but not H295R. Examination of p53 protein levels in the presence
of the drug showed a dose-dependent reduction in p53 levels in SW-13,
which carries a homozygous p53 mutation. The same was not true in H295R,
which is p53 wild-type. To test the hypothesis that BI-2536 was
decreasing mutant p53 levels by promoting its proteasomal degradation,
both cell lines were treated with previously determined inhibitory
concentrations of BI-2536, either alone or in combination with the
proteasome inhibitor, MG132. Western blot analysis showed recovery of p53
protein when cells were concomitantly treated with MG132, supporting a
role for BI-2536 as a regulator of proteasomal degradation. Both ACC cell
lines are relatively insensitive to MDM2 inhibition by nutlin-3 (NCI60
GI50 values range from 4 uM to 2 uM versus ACC cell lines @13-15uM),
possibly because PLK1 stimulates MDM2 and renders nutlin-3 ineffective.
We therefore assessed the ability of BI-2536 to sensitize ACC cell lines
to the effects of the MDM2 inhibitor. BI-2636 did show synergy with
nutlin-3, shifting the IC50 in SW-13 from 19.78 M to 6.45 M and from
12.75 M to 2.84 M in H295R. These results demonstrate that inhibition of
PLK1 alone or in combination with an MDM2 inhibitor warrants further
investigation as a treatment for patients with ACC. Cells with mutant p53
are more sensitive to the growth inhibitory effects of BI-2536. In the
context of wild-type p53, the combined inhibition of both PLK1 and MDM2
results in loss of viability. Further clinical development of PLK1 as a
target should take p53 mutation status into account.

