Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3 overexpressing endometrial cancer cells, using HO-3867, a
novel STAT3 inhibitor


OBJECTIVE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
proteins have important roles in cancer cell survival and proliferation.
Recent studies show constitutive activation of STAT3 is associated with
tumor growth and oncogenic transformation in several human cancers;
however, little is known about STAT3 expression in endometrial cancer.
The objectives of this study were to examine the expression of the STAT
family of proteins in endometrial cancer cell lines and to evaluate the
efficacy of HO-3867, a novel STAT3 inhibitor. METHODS: Expression of STAT
family proteins, cell cycle and apoptotic proteins were evaluated via
western blot on Ishikawa, AN3-CA, RL95-2, HEC1B, HEC-1A, and SK-UT1B
human endometrial cancer cell lines. Cell viability and proliferation of
these cell lines were analyzed with MTT and nucleo counter assay after
treatment with increasing concentrations of HO-3867. Cell cycle analysis
and apoptosis were performed using flow cytometry and annexin V staining.
An ubiquitination assay was used to examine the inhibition of CDK5
degradation. Finally, STAT3 over-expression or suppression experiments
were performed using wild-type STAT3 cDNA and STAT3 siRNA. RESULTS:
Expression of activated STAT1, 2, 5, and 6 was inconsistent among cell
lines tested, while pSTAT3 Ser727 had consistently high expression.
HO-3867 decreased cell viability through induced G2/M arrest and
apoptosis within 24h of treatment. HO-3867 inhibited pSTAT3 Ser727 with
no change in total STAT3. This was associated with an increase in
expression of cell cycle related proteins p53 and p21, a decrease in
anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl2 and Bcl-XL, as well as increased cleavage of
caspases. After 24h of treatment with HO-3867, 55-88% of cells were
apoptotic. The downregulation of Ser727 was, at least in part, due to an
accelerated inhibition of ubiquitin-dependent CDK5 degradation, as a
positive regulator of STAT3 Ser727. Suppression of STAT3 expression with
siRNA significantly reduced cell survival. In addition, we confirmed that
over-expression of STAT3 cDNA provides resistance to HO-3867. CONCLUSION:
Endometrial cancer cells express high levels of pSTAT3 Ser727. HO-3867
induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis by targeting pSTAT3 Ser727. Our
findings suggest a specific role of serine-phosphorylated STAT3 that is
independent of tyrosine phosphorylation. HO-3867 may be a potential
adjunct to chemotherapy and radiation in the treatment of endometrial
cancer.

