Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated analysis of the whole exome sequencing (WES) identifies
novel mutations and suggests patient selection hypothesis


Whole exome sequencing was done on 257 breast and 102 ovarian tumors
using next generation sequencing. Seven gigabases of sequencing data were
generated for each sample or 100x coverage of the whole exome, which
enable to determine sequence variations with >99% confidence. The results
of the mutation calls were compared with recently published TCGA breast
and ovarian datasets. Genes with large number of passenger mutations were
called out and frequency of passenger mutations per sample was linked to
MMR signature. In ovarian tumors, a high prevalence of p53 and BRCA1
mutation was confirmed in serous tumors. A signature of BRCA1/2 deficient
tumors was developed and cross-validated between the datasets. In
no-serous tumors, a high prevalence of mutations MAPK pathway and
beta-catenin pathway were found. FOXL2 mutation was identified in 100% of
granulose ovarian tumors and linked to high levels of EMT signature. In
addition we showed a significant overlap between genes found to be
mutated in TCGA datasets and in our dataset, suggesting a larger number
of potentially significantly mutated genes than previously reported. In
breast tumors, known high frequency of mutations was confirmed in PIK3CA
and TP53 genes and validated with respective pathway specific gene
expression signatures. In addition, prevalent mutations were identified
in MAPK and PI3K pathways and linked with respective pathway signatures.
These findings strengthen and enrich our understanding of molecular
subtypes of ovarian and breast tumors and can be used for identification
of novel targets and for development of responder hypothesis.

