Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AR42, a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACI), increases microRNA
(miR)-29b and sensitizes cells to decitabine (DAC) treatment: A novel
epigenetic-targeting approach in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)


The outcome of the majority of older AML patients (pts) remains poor
despite advances made in both pathogenesis and prognostication.
Epigenetic gene silencing by DNA hypermethylation contributes to AML
pathogenesis. Recently we reported promising results in older previously
untreated AML pts receiving low-dose of hypomethylating agent DAC alone.
However these results can be improved upon. In our study pts with higher
miR-29b expression were more likely to respond to DAC therapy (P=.02).
MiR-29b directly or indirectly targets and downregulates the DNA
methyltransferases (i.e. DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B) and has
hypomethylating and tumor suppressor activity in AML. We recently showed
that miR-29b is repressed by a Sp1/NFkB/HDAC1 complex, and that the HDACI
AR42 can increase miR-29b expression by disrupting this complex in AML.
Thus we hypothesized that priming AML cells with AR42 would result in
miR-29b upregulation and increased response to DAC in AML pts. Here we
showed first that in three AML cell lines i.e. THP-1, NB4 & Kasumi-1,
miR-29b is upregulated (1.7, 2.4 & 1.6, fold respectively) as early as 1h
after 1 M AR42 vs DMSO control treatment. Confirming the upregulation of
miR-29b by AR42, we next tested if this would sensitize the cells to DAC
treatment. Priming THP-1 cells with 1 M AR42 (for 12h) followed by 2.5 M
DAC treatment (for 24h) decreased the cell viability (measured by MTS
assays) by 7-fold when compared to cells that were treated with the
reverse drug sequence i.e., 2.5 M DAC (for 12h) followed by 1 M AR42 (for
24h). The decrease of cell viability was also higher than for each drug
alone; 1 M AR42 (for 12h) followed by 2.5 M DAC treatment (for 24h)
decreased the cell viability by 5-fold compared to 1 M AR42 alone (for
36h) and 2-fold compared to 2.5 M DAC therapy alone (for 36h). To test
this effect in vivo we utilized an AML model constituted by FDCP1 cells
expressing mutant KIT (KITmut) that we engrafted in NOD/SCID mice. Mice
developed AML at 4 weeks from inoculation. The sequential administration
of AR42 followed by DAC resulted in longer overall survival (PThe outcome
of the majority of older AML patients (pts) remains poor despite advances
made in both pathogenesis and prognostication. Epigenetic gene silencing
by DNA hypermethylation contributes to AML pathogenesis. Recently we
reported promising results in older previously untreated AML pts
receiving low-dose of hypomethylating agent DAC alone. However these
results can be improved upon. In our study pts with higher miR-29b
expression were more likely to respond to DAC therapy (P=.02). MiR-29b
directly or indirectly targets and downregulates the DNA
methyltransferases (i.e. DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B) and has
hypomethylating and tumor suppressor activity in AML. We recently showed
that miR-29b is repressed by a Sp1/NFkB/HDAC1 complex, and that the HDACI
AR42 can increase miR-29b expression by disrupting this complex in AML.
Thus we hypothesized that priming AML cells with AR42 would result in
miR-29b upregulation and increased response to DAC in AML pts. Here we
showed first that in three AML cell lines i.e. THP-1, NB4 & Kasumi-1,
miR-29b is upregulated (1.7, 2.4 & 1.6, fold respectively) as early as 1h
after 1 M AR42 vs DMSO control treatment. Confirming the upregulation of
miR-29b by AR42, we next tested if this would sensitize the cells to DAC
treatment. Priming THP-1 cells with 1 M AR42 (for 12h) followed by 2.5 M
DAC treatment (for 24h) decreased the cell viability (measured by MTS
assays) by 7-fold when compared to cells that were treated with the
reverse drug sequence i.e., 2.5 M DAC (for 12h) followed by 1 M AR42 (for
24h). The decrease of cell viability was also higher than for each drug
alone; 1 M AR42 (for 12h) followed by 2.5 M DAC treatment (for 24h)
decreased the cell viability by 5-fold compared to 1 M AR42 alone (for
36h) and 2-fold compared to 2.5 M DAC therapy alone (for 36h). To test
this effect in vivo we utilized an AML model constituted by FDCP1 cells
expressing mutant KIT (KITmut) that we engrafted in NOD/SCID mice. Mice
developed AML at 4 weeks from inoculation. The sequential administration
of AR42 followed by DAC resulted in longer overall survival (P<.001) of
FDCP1-KITmut mice (60% alive at day 120) compared to mice treated with
DAC followed by AR42 or either drug alone (0% alive at day 120 in each
group). The sequence of HDACIs followed by DAC is novel as to our
knowledge only the sequence of hypomethylating agents followed by HDACIs
has been explored in the clinic. These preclinical results support AR42
as an effective compound to upregulate miR-29b and in turn the approach
of priming AML blasts with HIDACIs in order to sensitize them to
treatment with hypomethylating agents. Phase I trials with microRNA
priming with AR42 prior to DAC treatment are presently underway.

