Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase is
downstream of ATM and feeds forward oxidative stress in selenium-induced
senescence response


Selenium induces a senescence response through induction of
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Although a role of the DNA-PK complex, including the catalytic subunit of
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs), Ku70 and Ku80, in DNA double
strand break repair is established, it is unclear how these proteins
function in the response to selenium-induced oxidative stress and
senescence induction. In this study we demonstrate that pre-treating
normal human diploid fibroblasts with DNA-PK kinase inhibitor NU 7026
suppresses selenium-induced senescence response. Selenium treatment
induces phosphorylation of DNA-PKcs on Thr-2647 and Ser-2056, the extent
of which is decreased in the presence of ATM kinase inhibitor KU 55933 or
the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine or 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl.
In contrast, the selenium-induced phosphorylation of ATM on Ser-1981 is
not affected by NU 7026. Cells deficient in DNA-PKcs or pre-treated with
NU 7026 or N-acetylcysteine are defective in selenite-induced ROS
formation. Opposed to DNA-PKcs, Ku70 and Ku80 are dispensable for
selenite-induced ROS and H2A.X formation and removal. Taken together,
these results indicate a distinct role of DNA-PKcs from Ku70 and Ku80, in
which this kinase can respond to and feed forward selenium-induced ROS
formation and is placed downstream of ATM in the resultant senescence
response.

