Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: eIF4E/4eBP-1 as predictive factor(s) of response to EGFR targeted
drug in head and neck cancer


Purpose: There is a clinical need to identify predictive markers of the
response to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors in
patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). In breast
cancer, the resistance to targeted therapies against HER2 implicates the
reactivation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and eIF4E overexpression. The
axis eIF4E/4eBP-1 is one of the major downstream effector of the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. The aim of this study was to further investigate
these markers in the response to preclinical and clinical EGFR inhibitors
used in HNSCC, cell lines and patients. Experimental Design: We studied
the effects of cetuximab using human HNSCC cell lines (CAL33 and CAL166)
on proliferation, survival pathways, eIF4E and 4eBP activities and
expression by western blot or immunohistochemistry in initial biopsies of
patients treated for an HNSCC with cetuximab used in combination with
radiotherapy or cisplatin (n=28). Results: The HNSCC cell lines have an
opposite effect under cetuximab treatment. Whereas the CAL33 are not
sensitive, the CAL166 shows a moderate cytostatic effect allowing us to
determine an IC20 of 5,56 +/ 0.37 g/mL. In the CAL33 cell lines cetuximab
doesn't significantly modify the 4eBP phosphorylation level. On the
contrary in CAL166 cetuximab induces the inhibition of the 4eBP
phosphorylation level corroborating the cytostatic effect previously
observed. More over, in patients the combination Cetuximab / radiotherapy
or cisplatin shows, in the initial biopsie examination in the
non-responder group, a significant higher level of eIF4E. Conclusion: The
couple eIF4E expression levels and/or activities appeared to be
determinant to discriminate the response to the EGFR targeted inhibitor
in HNSCC.

