Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human Stn1 protects telomere integrity by promoting efficient
lagging strand synthesis at telomeres


Telomeres, the chromosomal termini, are critical for maintaining genome
stability. The length of telomere is regulated by multiple genes
including telomere-specific shelterin proteins and telomere non-specific
proteins such as DNA replication proteins. Stn1, a component of the newly
identified Ctc1/Stn1/Ten1 complex, is also known as (DNA polymerase)
-accessory factor AAF44 and plays an unclear role in telomere
maintenance. In our studies, Stn1 depletion causes elongated G-overhang
and persistent ssDNA at G-rich strand in both telomerase-positive and
negative cells. Furthermore, Stn1 depletion shows an increase of fragile
telomeres in strands replicated by lagging strand synthesis, implicating
that Stn1 is important in efficient replication of lagging strand
telomeres. Consistently, BrdU incorporation into lagging telomeres is
reduced when Stn1 is depleted. In addition, Stn1 depletion leads to rapid
telomere shortening. Examination of the cell cycle-regulated G-overhang
dynamics showed that deficiency of hStn1 delays and compromises C-strand
synthesis that occurs in the late S/G2 phase, leading to persistent
lengthening of G-overhangs at lagging daughter telomeres. We also found
that Stn1 interacts with Pol throughout the cycle. ChIP experiments
showed that Stn1 depletion results in increased and prolonged Pol
association with telomeres, but does not affect the association of Pot1
with telomeres. Our data indicate a key role of Stn1 in telomere
replication and maintenance.

