Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of Glypican-3 (GPC3) in breast cancer tumors from
Brazilian and Argentinean patients


The heparan sulfate proteoglycan Glypican-3 (GPC3) is involved in the
signaling regulation of several growth factors. GPC3 is widely expressed
in embryonic tissues, but disappears from most adult tissues, except for
the mammary gland, among others. Several studies have involved GPC3 with
cancer and some data indicate that this glypican is diminished in breast
tumors. Previously, we have transfected the murine mammary tumor cell
line LM3 (GPC3 negative) with the GPC3 complete cDNA sequence. We found
that GPC3 reexpression is able to inhibit invasion and metastasis in vivo
as well as to induce an in vitro EMT reversion, suggesting that GPC3
could act as a metastasis suppressor. The aim of the present work was to
determine, in a prospective trial, whether GPC3 expression might be
useful as a biomarker able to predict metastasis outcome in breast cancer
patients. Our local access to a major source of breast human tissues from
a representative Latin American population is an exceptional tool for the
development of this new biomarker. A preliminary study was perform to
analyze the expression of GPC3 at the mRNA level, by quantitative real
time RT-PCR, in breast cancer samples (Brazilian n=15, Argentinean n=22)
and peri-tumoral normal breast tissues (Brazilian n=16, Argentinean n=4).
Even though the analyzed sample size was small, we found that both
Brazilian and Argentinean tumor populations presented similar
characteristics related to GPC3 expression. It was established a lower
GPC3 level in tumor (n=37) than in peri-tumoral normal tissues (n=20)
(pThe heparan sulfate proteoglycan Glypican-3 (GPC3) is involved in the
signaling regulation of several growth factors. GPC3 is widely expressed
in embryonic tissues, but disappears from most adult tissues, except for
the mammary gland, among others. Several studies have involved GPC3 with
cancer and some data indicate that this glypican is diminished in breast
tumors. Previously, we have transfected the murine mammary tumor cell
line LM3 (GPC3 negative) with the GPC3 complete cDNA sequence. We found
that GPC3 reexpression is able to inhibit invasion and metastasis in vivo
as well as to induce an in vitro EMT reversion, suggesting that GPC3
could act as a metastasis suppressor. The aim of the present work was to
determine, in a prospective trial, whether GPC3 expression might be
useful as a biomarker able to predict metastasis outcome in breast cancer
patients. Our local access to a major source of breast human tissues from
a representative Latin American population is an exceptional tool for the
development of this new biomarker. A preliminary study was perform to
analyze the expression of GPC3 at the mRNA level, by quantitative real
time RT-PCR, in breast cancer samples (Brazilian n=15, Argentinean n=22)
and peri-tumoral normal breast tissues (Brazilian n=16, Argentinean n=4).
Even though the analyzed sample size was small, we found that both
Brazilian and Argentinean tumor populations presented similar
characteristics related to GPC3 expression. It was established a lower
GPC3 level in tumor (n=37) than in peri-tumoral normal tissues (n=20)
(p<0.001, Wilcoxon test). In matched samples, we found that 7 out of 8
tumors expressed less GPC3 than their corresponding normal peri-tumoral
tissue. On the other hand, we studied by univariate analysis, the
association of GPC3 expression with the parameters frequently used in the
management of breast cancer patients, such as age, status, tumor size and
stage, histology, metastatic axillary nodules, histological grade,
nuclear grade, mitotic index, hormonal receptors, as well as with the
disease-free survival probability (DFS). No association was found between
GPC3 expression and these clinical-pathological parameters (Chi square
and Pearson correlation tests). These results suggest the independence of
GPC3 expression. The Kaplan-Meier curves and the Log Rank test indicated
that GPC3 expression was not able to predict the DFS in our population of
breast cancer patients. However, interestingly the only two patients who
relapsed were those that expressed very low relative levels of GPC3. We
believe that a longer patients follow-up, as well as a higher number of
samples, will be needed in this prospective study to determine the
usefulness of GPC3 as a biomarker to predict metastasis.

