Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I study of PARP inhibitor ABT-888 and carboplatin with novel
imaging in metastatic breast cancer (MBC) (NCI-8609)


Purpose: ABT-888 is an oral inhibitor of PARP 1 and 2 and potentiates
activity of platinums in preclinical models. We are conducting a phase I
study of ABT-888 on 2 different schedules (7 and 14 day) plus q 3 week
carboplatin (C) to identify the recommended phase II dose schedules
(RPTD-7and 14 day) for this regimen in patients (pts) with MBC who are:
(1) triple negative (TN); or (2) estrogen receptor positive (ER+) with
defective Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway (no FANCD2 foci in tumor). Study
design: Eligible pts received C-AUC 5 Q 3weeks (except dose level 1-AUC
6) plus escalating doses of ABT-888 BID on a 7 or 14-day schedule using a
3+3 dose escalation design. Blood samples were collected during cycles 1
and 2 for PAR assay and CTCs isolated to measure gamma H2Ax. We performed
3-[F-18] Fluoro-3-deoxythymidine(FLT) PET scans to assess cellular tumor
proliferation at baseline, cycle 1 day 7 and 14 and after cycle 3.
FDG-PET-CT scans were used to assess response. Results: 22 pts (20-TN,
2-ER+ w/FA defect) with median age of 56.5 yrs (range 31-69) were
enrolled on 5 dose levels. Dose level 1 with C at AUC 6 was too toxic
with 3 DLTs (Table 1). Further dose escalations were performed with C at
AUC-5. Dose reductions in C were made in subsequent cycles for
thrombocytopenia, anemia and fatigue. Maximum reduction in thymidine
uptake in tumors was seen on day 7 FLT scans. CTCs were isolated using an
immunomagnetic negative depletion method on 8 pt samples to date
(median-59, range 0-684 CTCs). Gamma H2Ax analysis on sequential samples
is ongoing. Four pts have had an unconfirmed partial response (PR) with >
50% tumor shrinkage; 2 of the 4 pts had a defective FA pathway.
Conclusions: Thrombocytopenia is the major DLT when ABT-888 is given in
combination with C, where lower AUC of C is better tolerated and shows
promising activity of this combination. FA deficiency (5/14=27%) seen in
this group is consistent with our previous reports. The study is
supported U01 CA076576.


