Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aplidin induces a non-canonical ER stress response in HeLa cells
response in HeLa cells


Aplidin (APL), a marine cyclic depsipeptide originally found in the
Mediterranean tunicate Aplidium albicans, is currently under phase II/III
clinical investigation for cancer therapy. The mechanism of action of the
compound includes the oxidative-stress mediated activation of Rac1 and
JNK1, which rapidly trigger the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway.
Comparing the protein expression profiles of HeLa wt cells and an
APL-resistant subclone previously generated in our lab (HeLa-APL), we
identified a subset of differentially expressed proteins the function of
which was related to the unfolded protein response (UPR). HeLa-APL
resistant cells showed reduced levels of BiP (GRP78) and relatively
higher levels of Ero1 and phospho-eIF2, indicating a higher basal
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. To investigate whether APL was
inducing a bona fide ER stress response in HeLa cells and whether this
process was essential in the mechanism of action of this compound, we
compared the molecular and cellular effects elicited by APL with those
induced by two well-known ER-stress inducing agents, thapsigargin and
tunicamycin. Basically, while these agents elicited a complete canonical
UPR response, APL only triggered part of the stress signaling cascade,
including the phosphorylation of eIF2 and JNK1 and a rapid inhibition of
protein synthesis. By contrast, CHOP, a transcription factor involved in
launching apoptosis by the UPR, was not induced by APL. Rather, it seemed
to be slightly reduced in treated cells. Similarly, while tunicamycin
induced the alternative splicing of XBP1 by IRE1 and the activation of
the ER-related caspase-4, APL failed to induce the same response in HeLa
cells. At present, the precise connection between the partial activation
of the ER stress signaling pathway and the rapid induction of apoptosis
by APL remains poorly understood, although it could represent a new,
aberrant UPR response

