Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct interaction of inhibitory molecules LAG-3 and PD-1 in
murine CD8+ T cell signaling


Chronic stimulation by tumor antigens results in exhaustion of
antigen-specific T cells and loss of ability to produce key cytokines
that are critical for the maintenance of T cell function. We have
previously demonstrated that a subset of tumor antigen-specific CD8+ T
cells coexpressing LAG-3 and PD-1 are impaired in IFN- and TNF-
production and that simultaneous blockade of LAG-3 and PD-1 restores
effector function of ovarian tumor antigen-specific T cells in humans.
Recently, others have reported that dual blocade of LAG-3 and PD-1 via
either by antibodies or gene knockout leads to severe autoimmunity and
enhanced immunity to tumors in mice. However, direct evidence of
molecular interaction between LAG-3 and PD-1 in T cell signaling is
lacking. The signaling molecules downstream of LAG3 are also unknown.
Using a combination of ImageStream and confocal microscopy analyses, here
we demonstrate that LAG-3 and PD-1 molecules co-localize in approximately
10-15% of activated murine antigen specific CD8+ T cells. Co-localization
also occurred with trans-Golgi vesicles, microtubule organizing center,
and early/recycling endosomes. Reciprocal immunoprecipitation with
specific antibodies for LAG-3 and PD-1 revealed a physical association
between LAG-3 and PD-1 and this interaction was abolished in T cells
isolated from LAG3- and PD-1 knockout mice. The recruitment of Src family
tyrosine kinases and phosphatases to the LAG-3 and PD-1 interaction
complex are also implicated. Our data reveal a potential molecular
mechanism by which LAG3 and PD-1 co-regulate T cell function.

