Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated
with anticancer drug effects using the SNPChip384 platform


The identification of genetic factors associated with anticancer drug
efficacy is an important challenge for optimising chemotherapy and
developing personalised treatments. One of the difficulties lies in the
absence of preclinical models for identifying reliable tracks that could
be translated to the clinics. We have used in vitro models to identify
relationships between the presence of a given polymorphic variation and
the cytotoxicity of anticancer drugs: the National Cancer Institute (NCI)
and the Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research (JFCR) cell line panels,
which had been used for the primary screening of thousands of potential
anticancer drugs. In order to discover new SNPs of potential interest,
high-throughput screening could be an option, but genome-wide studies
cannot be used because of the relatively small number of cell lines (105)
and the high false-discovery rate that would result. As an intermediate
option, we have established a tool (SNPChip384) allowing the simultaneous
determination of 384 SNPs in a single DNA sample. The SNPs have been
chosen among DNA repair genes, phase I and II drug metabolism genes, drug
transport genes and genes involved in oncogenesis, signal transduction
and oxidative stress. Genotyping of the 60 cell lines from the NCI panel
and the 45 cell lines from the JFCR panel was carried out using the
SNPChip384. The concordance between this multiplexed approach and the
individual previous determinations was around 95% (0-3 discordances in
the 60 cell lines of the NCI panel and 0-2 discordances in the 45 cell
lines of the JFCR panel). We first confirmed the significant
relationships we had already observed and published concerning MDM2,
MTHFR, CYP1B1, ATIC and ERCC2 gene polymorphisms. In addition, we
identified novel SNPs involved in the in vitro cytotoxicity of anticancer
drugs. The NCI panel was used for establishing these associations and the
JFCR panel for validating them independently. The Benjamini-Hochberg
correction for multiple testing was used in order to minimize the
false-discovery rate. In the NCI panel, ten gene polymorphisms
successfully passed this stringent filter (the p values indicated are
those obtained after correction): AHR R554K was significantly associated
with irofulven cytotoxicity (p=0.0001); APC Y486Y with SN-38 cytotoxicity
(p=0.007); ATP7B K832R with carmustine, busulfan and melphalan
cytotoxicity (p=0.004 to 0.036); BRCA1 E1038G with geldanamycin
cytotoxicity (p=0.01); CASP9 Q221R with the cytotoxicity of a taxol
analogue (p=0.03); CDC25C R70C with vinblastine cytotoxicity (p=0.04);
CDH1 with spiromustine cytotoxicity (p=0.02); CYP2E1 F421F with irofulven
cytotoxicity (p=0.007); PARP4 G1280R with thioguanine cytotoxicity
(p=0.04); TLR4 D299G with doxorubicin cytotoxicity (p=0.03). These
associations open new tracks for identifying novel determinants of
anticancer drug activity.

