Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase-specific replication-selective virotherapy combined
with radiation therapy for oral squamous cell carcinoma cells


Replication-selective tumor-specific viruses present a novel approach for
treating neoplastic disease. These vectors are designed to induce
virus-mediated lysis of tumor cells after selective viral propagation
within the tumor. Telomerase activation is considered to be a critical
step in carcinogenesis, and its activity is closely correlated with human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) expression. We previously,
investigated the antitumor effect of the hTERT-specific
replication-competent adenovirus (Telomelysin: OBP-301) on oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells in vitro and in vivo orthotopic graft model.
OBP-301 replicated efficiently and induced more over 50% cell killing in
a panel of human OSCC cell lines, but not in normal human fibroblasts,
which were lacking telomerase activity. In orthotopic graft model,
intratumoral injection of OBP-301 resulted in a significant inhibition of
tumor growth and prolongation of survival. Moreover, OBP-301 in use has
limited potency when administered alone; however, combination therapy
using these agents and conventional anticancer agents, such as radiation
exhibits encouraging levels of efficacy. Here, we describe the
mechanistic basis for synergy of irradiation and OBP-301. This
combination therapy was more effective compared with OBP-301 alone in
OSCC cells. These results illustrate the potential of combining oncolytic
virotherapy and ionizing radiation as a promising strategy in the
management of human oral cancer.

