Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AKT-mTOR pathway mediates mutant p53 gain-of-function by
inhibiting autophagy


Nearly half of human cancers harbor p53 mutations, which are
predominantly through missense mutations that result in accumulation of
mutant p53 proteins in cancer cells. Persistent evidence supports that
the mutant p53 proteins not only lose tumor suppressor activity, but also
acquire gain-of-function abilities to promote carcinogenesis, metastasis,
tumor recurrence and chemoresistance. Indeed, knock-in mouse models
bearing the mutant p53R172H (equivalent to human R175H mutation) at
physiological level in vivo display gain-of-function phenotypes, such as
enhanced cell transformation potentials and tumor metastasis. However,
the molecular mechanism of mutated p53R172H conferring gain-of-function
remains poorly understood. In this study, utilizing mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) and lung adenocarcinoma cells (93-1) derived from
p53R172H knock-in mice, we observed that AKT was preferentially activated
in p53R172H mutant cells over p53-deficient cells. This activation of AKT
allows p53R172H mutant cells to bypass contact inhibition, grow in an
anchorage-independent manner and form tumors after subcutaneous injection
into SCID mice. In contrast, expression of dominant negative AKT or
shRNA-mediated AKT knockdown in p53R172H mutant cells inhibited colony
formation in soft-agar and suppressed tumor growth in mouse xenograft
tumor model. To directly dissect the essential role of AKT in p53R172H
mutant-initiated tumorigenesis in vivo, we bred AKT1 knockout mice to
p53R172H mutant knock-in mice. Loss of AKT1 significantly reduced the
incidence of tumor development and extended the life span from around 3
months in AKT1-proficient and p53R172H mutant mice (AKT1+/+;
p53R172H/R172H) to about 12 months in AKT1-deficient and p53R172H mutant
mice (AKT1/; p53R172H/R172H). To understand how the activated AKT
conferred mutant p53 gain-of-function, we demonstrated that p53R172H
mutant activated AKT-mTOR signaling pathway that led to an inhibition of
autophagy both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, induction of autophagy
in p53R172H mutant lung cancer cells through suppressing AKT-mTOR pathway
pharmacologically by the dual kinase inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 treatment or
genetically by RNAi-mediated knockdown of mTOR dramatically inhibited
p53R172H mutant-induced colony formation in soft agar and tumor growth in
SCID mice. Our results support that AKT plays a crucial role in mediating
mutant p53 gain-of-function phenotypes in vivo through the inhibition of
autophagy by the activated AKT-mTOR signaling pathway. These findings
provide the proof-of-principle that targeting the AKT-mTOR-autophagy
pathway might have promising therapeutic benefits for cancer patients
carrying such p53 mutations.

