Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogenic properties shared by all Snail family members


The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a latent embryonic
process promoting cell migration by transiently affording epithelial
cells a mesenchymal phenotype, motility and a survival advantage. The
inappropriate activation of this program in adult cells is associated
with several pathologies including tumor development where EMT promotes
cancer cell dissemination and multidrug resistance development. We have
recently demonstrated that EMT-inducers, beyond their prometastatic
potential, facilitate the malignant transformation of human mammary
epithelial cells in vitro and promote breast carcinogenesis in vivo.
Although their ability to alleviate senescence and apoptosis failsafe
program induction unquestionably contributes to their oncogenic
potentials, we sought to investigate whether EMT inducers share
additional properties. To this end, the activities of all three Snail
members were examined. Likewise SNAI1 and SNAI2, SNAI3 expression is
aberrantly activated in cancers, especially in mammary carcinomas.
Ectopic expression of all three proteins in mammary epithelial cells
induces their commitment into EMT, provides cells with a survival
advantage in low adherent conditions and promotes their neoplastic
transformation, with a similar gradient of efficiencies. Interestingly,
this efficiency parallels with their ability to upregulate intracellular
signaling pathways. We will update on the progress of our work aimed at
understanding how these dysregulations impact on their oncogenic and
prometastatic potential.

