Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dynamic changes of epigenetic abnormalities during initiation and
progression of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL)


HTLV-1 causes ATLL in 3-5% of infected individuals after a long latent
period of 40 to 60 years. ATLL is divided into four stages: namely,
smoldering, chronic, lymphoma and acute types. The smoldering and chronic
types are indolent, but the acute and lymphoma types are aggressive ATLL
characterized by resistance to chemotherapy and a poor prognosis. Such a
long latent period suggests that a multi-step leukemogenic/lymphomagenic
mechanism is involved in the development of ATLL, although the critical
events in the progression have not been characterized. To determine
whether epigenetic abnormalities are playing the important role in the
progression of ATLL, we analyzed the methylation profiles, showing that
number of CpG island methylated genes increased with disease progression
and aberrant hyper-methylation in specific genes was detected even in
HTLV-1 carriers and correlated with progression to ATLL. The CpG island
methylator phenotype (CIMP) was observed most frequently in lymphoma type
ATLL and was also closely associated with the progression and crisis of
ATLL. The high number of methylated genes and increase of CIMP incidence
were shown to be unfavorable prognostic factors and correlated with a
shorter overall survival with the Kaplan-Meyer analysis. Dynamic changes
of aberrant DNA methylation status in the specific genes were observed
during the progression of an ATLL patient. The present findings strongly
suggest that the multi-step accumulation of aberrant CpG methylation in
specific target genes and the presence of CIMP are deeply involved in the
initiation and progression of ATLL not only epidemiologically but also in
the clinical course of a specific ATLL patient.

