Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
associated receptors as prognostic and predictive factors in advanced
solid tumors


Introduction: Angiogenesis is an important host factor that is utilized
by cancer cells to both grow and metastasize. In an attempt to halt the
progression of cancer growth, new agents, such as bevacizumab, have been
developed to target VEGF. Host genetic variability in the VEGF pathway
may influence angiogenesis-dependent signalling during cancer
development, cancer biology and therefore may impact on sensitivity to
various therapies and survival. Here, we conducted a systematic review of
the predictive and prognostic significance of polymorphisms in VEGF and
VEGF receptor (VEGFR) and their isoforms. Materials and Methods: We
performed a literature search of PubMed in July 2011 using the keywords
and MeSH terms: {angiogenesis, VEGF, VEGFR1, FLT1, KDR, VEGFR2, VEGFA,
VEGFB, bevacizumab} and cancer and polymorphism. Eligible studies were
those comparing wild-type and variant polymorphisms and reporting one or
more of the following outcomes: overall survival (OS), progression free
survival, time to progression, time to recurrence, disease free survival,
response rate or drug toxicities. Meta-analysis was performed for studies
reporting identical outcome data for pre-specified polymorphisms.
Results: We identified 44 prognostic studies and 12 predictive studies.
There was marked inter and intra-disease site heterogeneity in the effect
of polymorphisms on both outcome and response to therapy. Meta-analysis
was possible for six polymorphisms (VEGF +936C>T, VEGF 460T>C, VEGF
+405G>C, VEGF 1154G>A, VEGF 2578C>A and VEGF 634G>C) each of which
reported the effect of wild-type and variant forms on OS. VEGF 634G>C
showed a statistically significant improvement in OS (HR: 0.75, 95% CI:
0.57-0.98, p=0.03). There were non-significant associations between VEGF
+936C>T with worse OS and VEGF +405G>C with improved survival (HR: 1.38,
95% CI: 0.96-1.97, p=0.08 and HR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0.72-1.01, p=0.07,
respectively). There were no significant differences between homozygosity
and heterozygosity for these polymorphisms. Conclusions: VEGF 634G>C
appears to predict for improved outcome while VEGF +936C>T and +405G>C
both show non-significant associations with outcome. These polymorphisms
should be investigated in prospective studies to ensure standardization
of measurement and reporting.

