Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NADPH Oxidase 4 induced ROS regulates anoikis resistance through
activation of Src and EGFR.


Since cancer cells must overcome the anoikis for the metastasis, anoikis
resistance is an important process for tumor progression and metastasis.
To identify anoikis resistance mechanism, we performed mRNA microarray
analysis with attached and suspended human lung epithelial adenocarcinoma
A549 cells. Our microarray data reveals that Nox4 mRNA is up-regulated in
the suspended cells. We evaluated both mRNA and protein levels of Nox4
and found that Nox4 is up-regulated in both mRNA and protein levels. In
addition, higher levels of ROS are detected and Src activation was
enhanced in suspended cells than attached cells. Interestingly, increased
level of ROS in suspended cells was decreased by ROS scavengers or Nox4
inhibitors, leading to inactivation of Src and EGFR. Furthermore,
knock-down of Nox4 by si-RNA specific for Nox4 resulted in inactivation
of Src and EGFR. Because Src activation is not inhibited by EGFR
inhibitor, Src activation appears to be independent on EGFR. In addition,
si-RNA for Nox4 transfection decreased viability of cells in suspension.
These results suggest that upon cell detachment, Nox4 expression is
up-regulated and thus ROS levels are increased, which are important for
activation of Src and EGFR, leading to sustained cell viability in the
suspended cells. Therefore, we postulate that ROS generation through the
Nox4 is an important process for anoikis resistance.

