Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: On-demand reversible boronate-catechol crosslinked nanocarriers
for cancer therapy


We have previously reported the development of a versatile nanocarrier
platform comprised of PEG-cholic acid cluster telodendrimers that can
self-assemble together with hydrophobic cytotoxic anti-cancer agents to
form stable nanoparticle drugs. We have successfully loaded these
nanoparticles with a number of different cancer drugs. These include
paclitaxel, doxorubicin, vincristine, vinblastine, actinomycin D,
bortezomib, temsirolimus, sarofinib, and lapatinib. Using electron
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, we have demonstrated that the
micelles can be disrupted by LDL and VLDL causing premature drug release.
Such undesirable properties can be eliminated by cross-linking the
telodendrimers with disulfide bonds. The disulfide crosslinked micelles
can be triggered to release drugs by endogenous glutathione inside the
cancer cells or via exogenous addition of N-acetyl cysteine, a FDA
approved-drug that has been used for years in the treatment of Tylenol
overdose. Very recently, we created a novel crosslinking strategy by
incorporating boronic acids or catechols into the telodendrimers. The
final nanocarriers were crosslinked by boronate-catechol bonds resulting
in stable micelles, thus avoiding premature drug release. Inside the
endosomal compartment, the boronate-catechol bonds were cleaved by the
acidic environment resulting in drug release. An additional very
important feature of this nanocarrier is that exogenous mannitol (another
FDA-approved drug for diuresis) can be administered in vivo to trigger
drug release. Therapeutic studies in ovarian cancer xenograft model
indicated that paclitaxel-loaded boronate-catechol crosslinked
nanoparticles were much more efficacious when mannitol was given 24 hours
after each dose of nanoparticle drug.

