Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The hypoxia-activated pro-drug tirapazamine suppresses outgrowth
of colorectal liver metastases following radiofrequency ablation


Background Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a common procedure for the
management of colorectal liver metastases. RFA-generated lesions are
surrounded by a rim of hypoxia that is associated with aggressive
outgrowth of intrahepatic micrometastases. Hypoxia-activated pro-drugs
such as tirapazamine (TPZ) are designed to selectively kill tumour cells
under hypoxic conditions. Therefore we hypothesised that TPZ may have
therapeutic value in limiting hypoxia-associated tumour outgrowth
following RFA. Methods Murine C26 and MC38 colorectal cancer cells were
grown under hypoxia and normoxia in vitro and were treated with different
concentrations of TPZ. Apoptosis and cell cycle distribution were
assessed by western blot and FACS analysis. Proliferative capacity was
tested by colony formation assays. Mice harbouring microscopic colorectal
liver metastases were treated with RFA, followed by a single injection of
TPZ (60 mg/kg) or saline. Tumour load was assessed morphometrically 7
days later. Results TPZ induced apoptosis of colorectal tumour cells
under hypoxia in vitro, which completely abolished clone-forming
capacity. Under normoxia, TPZ caused a G2 cell cycle arrest from which
cells recovered partly. This reduced, but did not abolish, colony-forming
capacity. A single dose of TPZ largely prevented accelerated outgrowth of
hypoxic micrometastases following RFA. TPZ administration was associated
with minimal toxicity. Conclusions TPZ kills colorectal cancer cells in a
hypoxia-dependent manner and potently suppresses hypoxia-associated
outgrowth of liver metastases with limited toxicity. This warrants
further studies to assess the potential value of TPZ, or other
hypoxia-activated pro-drugs, as adjuvant therapeutics following RFA
treatment of colorectal liver metastases.

