Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Galanin has a tumor suppressor activity and is frequently
inactivated by aberrant promoter methylation in head and neck cancer


Purpose: Chromosome 11q13 alterations have repeatedly been reported to be
associated with bad prognosis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). Our recent findings support a growth regulatory function for
GALR1 since antibody blockade of this receptor enhances proliferation of
on HNSCC cells and Galanin and GALR1 induce a marked and prolonged ERK1/2
activation, up-regulation of p27Kip1 and p57Kip2, down-regulation of
cyclin D1, and consequent inhibition of cell proliferation. Furthermore,
expression-negative squamous cell cancers and cell lines exhibit
hypermethylation of CpG islands in the GALR1 promoter region. Based on
the hypothesis that CpG hypermethylation might silence the Galanin gene,
promoter methylation status and gene expression were assessed in a large
panel of HNSCC cell lines and primary tumors. Experimental Design:
Promoter methylation of Galanin in 62 UM-SCC and 10 UT-SCC cell lines and
100 primary tumor samples using methylation-specific PCR. Galanin
expression and methylation status of 12 UM-SCC cell lines were analyzed
further by Quantitative real-time PCR and bisulfite sequencing analysis.
To establish that methylation was responsible for silencing Galanin gene
expression, we treated three cell lines (UM-SCC-2, -10B and -54). These
cell lines that showed absence of Galanin expression and hypermethylation
were cultured with 5-Azacytidine alone, TSA alone, or 5-Azacytidine plus
TSA. UM-SCC-54 cell line was used in a relative colony-forming assay.
Wild-type preprogalanin in the pCMV-SPORT6 construct or empty pCMV-SPORT6
construct were transfected into UM-SCC-54 cell line exhibiting Galanin
hypermethylation and loss of Galanin expression. Results: MSP analysis
revealed that the Galanin promoter was fully or partially methylated in
24 of 72 cell lines (33.3%) but was unmethylated in the majority 19/20
(95.0%) of non-malignant lines. Methylation correlated with decreased
Galanin expression. Galanin methylation found in 24/100 HNSCC tumor
specimens significantly correlated with GALR1 methylation status
(PPurpose: Chromosome 11q13 alterations have repeatedly been reported to
be associated with bad prognosis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). Our recent findings support a growth regulatory function for
GALR1 since antibody blockade of this receptor enhances proliferation of
on HNSCC cells and Galanin and GALR1 induce a marked and prolonged ERK1/2
activation, up-regulation of p27Kip1 and p57Kip2, down-regulation of
cyclin D1, and consequent inhibition of cell proliferation. Furthermore,
expression-negative squamous cell cancers and cell lines exhibit
hypermethylation of CpG islands in the GALR1 promoter region. Based on
the hypothesis that CpG hypermethylation might silence the Galanin gene,
promoter methylation status and gene expression were assessed in a large
panel of HNSCC cell lines and primary tumors. Experimental Design:
Promoter methylation of Galanin in 62 UM-SCC and 10 UT-SCC cell lines and
100 primary tumor samples using methylation-specific PCR. Galanin
expression and methylation status of 12 UM-SCC cell lines were analyzed
further by Quantitative real-time PCR and bisulfite sequencing analysis.
To establish that methylation was responsible for silencing Galanin gene
expression, we treated three cell lines (UM-SCC-2, -10B and -54). These
cell lines that showed absence of Galanin expression and hypermethylation
were cultured with 5-Azacytidine alone, TSA alone, or 5-Azacytidine plus
TSA. UM-SCC-54 cell line was used in a relative colony-forming assay.
Wild-type preprogalanin in the pCMV-SPORT6 construct or empty pCMV-SPORT6
construct were transfected into UM-SCC-54 cell line exhibiting Galanin
hypermethylation and loss of Galanin expression. Results: MSP analysis
revealed that the Galanin promoter was fully or partially methylated in
24 of 72 cell lines (33.3%) but was unmethylated in the majority 19/20
(95.0%) of non-malignant lines. Methylation correlated with decreased
Galanin expression. Galanin methylation found in 24/100 HNSCC tumor
specimens significantly correlated with GALR1 methylation status
(P<0.001). The presence of Galanin promoter hypermethylation
statistically correlated with a decrease in disease-free survival (DFS)
(log-rank test, P Purpose: Chromosome 11q13 alterations have repeatedly
been reported to be associated with bad prognosis in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Our recent findings support a growth
regulatory function for GALR1 since antibody blockade of this receptor
enhances proliferation of on HNSCC cells and Galanin and GALR1 induce a
marked and prolonged ERK1/2 activation, up-regulation of p27Kip1 and
p57Kip2, down-regulation of cyclin D1, and consequent inhibition of cell
proliferation. Furthermore, expression-negative squamous cell cancers and
cell lines exhibit hypermethylation of CpG islands in the GALR1 promoter
region. Based on the hypothesis that CpG hypermethylation might silence
the Galanin gene, promoter methylation status and gene expression were
assessed in a large panel of HNSCC cell lines and primary tumors.
Experimental Design: Promoter methylation of Galanin in 62 UM-SCC and 10
UT-SCC cell lines and 100 primary tumor samples using
methylation-specific PCR. Galanin expression and methylation status of 12
UM-SCC cell lines were analyzed further by Quantitative real-time PCR and
bisulfite sequencing analysis. To establish that methylation was
responsible for silencing Galanin gene expression, we treated three cell
lines (UM-SCC-2, -10B and -54). These cell lines that showed absence of
Galanin expression and hypermethylation were cultured with 5-Azacytidine
alone, TSA alone, or 5-Azacytidine plus TSA. UM-SCC-54 cell line was used
in a relative colony-forming assay. Wild-type preprogalanin in the
pCMV-SPORT6 construct or empty pCMV-SPORT6 construct were transfected
into UM-SCC-54 cell line exhibiting Galanin hypermethylation and loss of
Galanin expression. Results: MSP analysis revealed that the Galanin
promoter was fully or partially methylated in 24 of 72 cell lines (33.3%)
but was unmethylated in the majority 19/20 (95.0%) of non-malignant
lines. Methylation correlated with decreased Galanin expression. Galanin
methylation found in 24/100 HNSCC tumor specimens significantly
correlated with GALR1 methylation status (P<0.001). The presence of
Galanin promoter hypermethylation statistically correlated with a
decrease in disease-free survival (DFS) (log-rank test, P <0.01).). In
multivariate logistic-regression analysis, methylation of Galanin and
methylation of the gene pair Galanin and GALR1 were associated with an
odds ratio for recurrence of 8.95 (95% CI, 2.29 to 35.03; P=0.002) and
23.84 (95% CI, 2.74 to 207.17; P=0.004), respectively. In UM-SCC-54 cells
that have hypermethylated Galanin and GALR1-proficient cell lines,
exogenous expression of Galanin and stimulation suppressed cell
proliferation. Conclusions: Frequent promoter hypermethylation, gene
silencing, association with prognosis, and growth suppression after
reexpression support the hypothesis that Galanin may act as a tumor
suppressor activity in HNSCC.

