Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutant p53 disrupts the role of ShcA in balancing the
Smad-dependent and -independent signaling activity of TGF-


Biomarkers are lacking for identifying the switch of transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-) from tumor-suppressing to tumor-promoting. Mutated p53
(mp53) has been suggested to switch TGF- to a tumor promoter. However, we
found that mp53 does not always promote the oncogenic role of TGF-. Here,
we show that endogenous mp53 knockdown enhanced cell migration and
phosphorylation of ERK in DU145 prostate cancer cells. Further, ectopic
expression of mp53 in p53-null PC-3 prostate cancer cells enhanced
Smad-dependent signaling, but inhibited TGF--induced cell migration by
downregulating activated ERK. Reactivation of ERK by the expression of
its activator, MEK-1, restored TGF--induced cell migration. Since TGF- is
known to activate MAPK/ERK pathway through direct phosphorylation of
adaptor protein ShcA and MAPK/ERK signaling is pivotal to tumor
progression, we investigated whether ShcA contributed to mp53-induced ERK
inhibition and the conversion of TGF-'s role during carcinogenesis. We
found that mp53 expression led to decrease of phosphorylated p52ShcA/ERK
levels and increase of phosphorylated Smad levels in a panel of
mp53-expressing cancer cell lines, and in mammary glands and tumors from
mp53 knock-in mice. By manipulating ShcA levels to regulate ERK and Smad
signaling in human untransformed and cancer cell lines, we show that
TGF-'s role in regulating anchorage-dependent and -independent growth,
and migration, can be shifted between growth suppression and migration
promotion. Thus, our results, for the first time, suggest that mp53
disrupts ShcA's role in balancing Smad-dependent and -independent
signaling activity of TGF- and that ShcA/ERK signaling is a major pathway
regulating the tumor-promoting activity of TGF-.

