Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menopausal hormone therapy and breast cancer risk: The CECILE Study


Breast cancer in post-menopausal women has been associated with the use
of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). Estrogen-only (EO) and combined
estrogen-progestagen (EP) therapies have been evaluated as potentially
carcinogenic to human by the IARC. However, the type of estrogen and
progestagen in the MHT varies considerably by country. For example,
besides synthetic progestagens, the use of natural progesterone in
combined EP therapy is specific to France. We investigated whether the
association between MHT and breast cancer in postmenopausal women differ
by type of chemical compound. We conducted a population-based
case-control study in France in 762 cases and 840 controls recruited
among postmenopausal women in two French dpartements. Data were collected
including name of medication, date of start and end of each medication
used. Unconditional logistic regression models were used, with adjustment
for age, study area, and known risk factors for breast cancer. We
observed a significant increased risk of breast cancer for current users
of estrogen plus synthetic progestagen while no association was found for
any use of estrogen-only therapy or combined therapy of estrogen plus
natural progesterone. Among current users of estrogen plus synthetic
progestagen, the association with breast cancer increased with duration
of use and was higher in women who started their treatment before or
shortly after menopause. Our study suggests that the use of natural
progesterone as the progestagen component in a combined EP therapy is not
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. This result
reinforces the findings reported in another cohort study of French women
(E3N).


