Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune-based therapy with tumor lysate remodeled to express -gal
epitopes induce significant B- and T-cell responses against pancreatic
cancer


Current strategies in the treatment of pancreatic cancer (PC) offer
little hope for a cure. New treatment modalities, including immunotherapy
are warranted for this type of cancer. In our previous study, we showed
the in vitro and in vivo effectiveness of immunotherapy through
vaccination with whole PC cells, remodeled to express -gal epitopes
(Cancer Res; 70(13); 5259-69, 2010). It was thought that the
immunogenicity of well-characterized as well as uncharacterized multiple
TAAs contained in cancer cells was upregulated by -gal epitopes and these
TAAs ultimately leaded to polyclonal expansion of both B and T cells. For
the clinical development of more effective immunotherapy, we proposed
that tumor lysate is a suitable source of TAAs, because it contains
several known as well as unknown TAAs that could elicit an anti-tumor
immune response. In this study, we investigated whether vaccination with
PC tumor lysate, expressing -gal epitopes can efficiently induce T cell
response and antibody production against multiple TAAs. A human PC cell
line, PANC1, which expresses MUC1 was employed and transfected with 1,3GT
gene (-gal PANC1), 2 106 of either parental or -gal PANC1 were injected
s.c. into NOD/SCID mice. The grown PANC1 tumors were enucleated for
generating tumor lysate. 1,3GT KO mice were immunized with pig tissues to
produce anti-Gal in their sera like human. These mice were vaccinated
intraperitoneally by 10 mg of either parental (control group) or -gal
PANC1 tumor lysate (-gal group). Tumor lysate of parental PANC1 lacked of
-gal epitopes and it of -gal PANC1 clearly expressed 40 106 of these
epitopes per 1mg of lysate. These tumor lysates express MUC1 at similar
level. Specific proliferation, assessed by CFSE assay of both CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells responses to either MUC1 peptide or PANC1 tumor lysate in
-gal group were significantly higher in comparison with these in control
group [MUC1; CD4+ T cell: -gal vs control; 12.13.7 vs 2.00.7% (p=0.0058),
MUC1; CD8+ T cell: -gal vs control; 8.21.4 vs 3.80.9% (p=0.036), Tumor
lysate; CD4+ T cell: -gal vs control; 71.37.0 vs 7.91.0% (p=0.0005),
tumor lysate; CD8+ T cell: -gal vs control; 20.22.8 vs 7.10.7%
(p=0.0054)]. To prove the antibody production response to multiple TAAs,
the presence of immunostained PANC1 proteins was investigated by Western
blots, using mice sera before/after vaccination. The sera from control
group did not display obvious bands that were recognized by anti-MUC1 Ab.
In contrast, sera from -gal group showed positive bands that bound to not
only MUC1 but also different TAAs in PANC1 cells. These results suggested
that vaccination with tumor lysate, remodeled to express -gal epitopes
enabled the immune system to generate multi-clonal B- and T-cell
responses against a broad spectrum of tumor antigens and can provide a
chance to develop the potential immunotherapy for PC patients.

