Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microglial stimulation of glioblastoma invasion involves EGFR and
CSF-1R signaling


The ability of glioma tumor cells to infiltrate the surrounding brain
parenchyma makes complete removal of these tumors nearly impossible. We
investigated how microglia, the resident macrophages of the brain,
stimulate glioma cell invasion. Coculture with microglia stimulates the
invasion of GL261 glioma cells in-vitro. Pharmacological inhibition of
EGFR using Iressa completely inhibits microglia-stimulated invasion and
sequestration of EGF using an EGF-specific function-blocking antibody
also fully inhibits microglia-stimulated glioma invasion. Furthermore, we
demonstrate using novel CSF-1R (c-fms) inhibitors that CSF-1R signaling
is also required for microglial enhancement of glioma invasion. GL261
cells were found to constitutively secrete CSF-1, the levels of which are
unaffected by EGF stimulation, EGFR inhibition or coculture with
microglia. In addition, GL261 tumors orthotopically injected into the
brains of C57 mice fed with PLX3397 were compromised in their ability to
recruit microglia/macrophages. Interestingly, tumors from these animals
also showed a 50% reduction in invasion into the parenchyma. These data
indicate that during invasion, glioma and microglia cells signal to each
other using EGF and CSF-1 similar to what has been observed in breast
cancer models. The results of this study indicate the possibility of
inhibiting glioblastoma invasion by targeting functions of
tumor-associated microglia in addition to glioma cells.

