Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stromal AKT2 controls epithelial invasions


The tumor microenvironment is gaining importance in the regulation of
tumorigenesis, invasion and metastasis. Loss of PTEN, a negative
regulator of AKT, in stromal fibroblasts results in an increased tumor
occurrence in ErbB2 expressing murine mammary tumors. Furthermore, we
have shown that activation of AKT in stromal fibroblasts, following loss
of the Retinoblastoma Protein (Rb), induces epithelial invasions in
organotypic raft cultures, via an increase in Keratinocyte Growth Factor
(KGF) expression. In addition, we have shown that loss of the PTEN tumor
suppressor in stromal fibroblasts and subsequent activation of AKT,
increases invasive potential of Human Papilloma Virus Type 16 E6 and E7
expressing keratinocytes. This is mediated by an increase in KGF
expression. There are three isoforms of AKT expressed in human
fibroblasts, AKT1, AKT2 and AKT3. By depleting each individual AKT
isoform in stromal fibroblasts we have been able to establish that AKT2
is essential in regulating the cross talk between epithelium and stroma,
and depletion of stromal AKT2 inhibits invasions. However, loss of
stromal AKT2 does not function exclusively through regulation of KGF
levels as it activates a second, protective pathway, which is able to
counteract the effects of KGF. This protective pathway is mediated by
increased Interleukin1 beta levels produced by the fibroblasts.
Preliminary data from head and neck cancer specimens show that AKT is
activated in stroma of cells associated with tumor but not normal tissue.
Future work will determine the AKT dependent pathways that lead to
increased KGF and Interleukin1 beta expression as well as how these
factors mediate invasions.

