Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOSH-aspirin, a novel nitric oxide- and hydrogen sulfide-releasing
hybrid, is a potent inhibitor of colon cancer cell growth


Introduction: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are
recognized as the prototypical chemopreventive agents. However, their
wide use is precluded due to significant toxicity. The search for better
NSAIDs has led to generation of nitric oxide-releasing NSAIDs (NO-NSAIDs)
and more recently, to a new class of hydrogen sulfide-releasing agents
(HS-NSAIDs). Both of these have shown to be more potent and less toxic
than their parent NSAID. However, the draw back to these compounds is
their IC50 for cell growth inhibition. It is too high to make them
attractive for development as pharmaceuticals. Therefore, we postulated
that a new hybrid that incorporated the active parts of each compound may
be more potent and effective than either one. Our hypothesis has proved
to be correct. Here we describe the effects of a nitric oxide- and
hydrogen sulfide-releasing aspirin (NOSH-aspirin) on the growth
properties of several human colon cancer cell lines, on induction of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and on NF-B whose induction is strongly
implicated in some cancers. Methods: NOSH-aspirin was synthesized and
purified at our lab with 1H-NMR verification. Colon cancer cell lines:
HT-29, HCT 15, and SW480; Cell growth: MTT; Cell cycle phase
distribution: Flow cytometry; Apoptosis: subdiploid (sub-G0/G1) peak in
DNA content histograms; Proliferation: PCNA; NF-kB: enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA); Reactive oxygen species (ROS):
2,7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (H2DCFDA, probe for peroxides) or
dihydroethidium (DHE, probe for superoxide anion) measured fluorescence
by flow cytometry. Results: NOSH-aspirin inhibited the growth of HT-29,
HCT 15, and SW480 cells with IC50 values of 48 3, 50 5, and 60 4 nM at 24
hr, respectively. The corresponding IC50 for aspirin in all 3 cell lines
was >5000 M. This represents and enhanced potency of >80,000-fold in the
3 cell lines at 24 h. NOSH-aspirin treatment of HT-29 cells at 0.5xIC50,
1xIC50, and 2xIC50 for 24 hrs induced apoptosis (20 1%, 52 3%, 75 3%),
inhibited proliferation (PCNA, 70 3%, 45 4%, 22 3%), and caused a G0/G1
cell cycle block. Activation of NF-B was inhibited as demonstrated by
ELISA, at 0.5xIC50, 1xIC50, and 2xIC50 the reduction was 11 1%, 33 2%,
and 46 3% respectively. NOSH-aspirin caused induction of oxidative stress
as evidenced by increases in both H2DCFDA and DHE-derived fluorescence
representing increases in intracellular levels of H2O2 and superoxide
anion respectively Conclusions: NOSH-aspirin by inducing ROS is a potent
inhibitor of colon cancer cell growth and it inhibits NF-B activation.
These data suggest that NOSH-aspirin may be useful as a chemopreventive
agent against colon cancer and merits further evaluation.

