Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin-A inhibits prostate tumor growth by enhancing
anti-tumor immune response


Indolent nature of prostate cancer provides a large window of opportunity
for chemopreventive strategies. Most chemopreventive strategies are
primarily focused on controlling and/or reversing the mechanisms involved
in neoplastic transformation and cancer progression. It is now well
accepted that tumors evade the patient's defense system during
progression and growth at distant sites. Mounting evidences suggest
immunological defects in prostate cancer patients with higher numbers of
functionally suppressive CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ T cells (Treg) and lower number
of effectors T cells. Furthermore, tumor microenvironment exerts a
profound immunosuppressive effect on effectors T cells by secreting TGF-
and IL-10. Therefore, modulating TGF- and IL-10 using natural and dietary
components constitutes an innovative approach for prostate cancer
prevention and treatment. In this study, we have shown that Withaferin-A
(WA), a bioactive compound isolated from Withania Somnifera also called
Ashwagandha has the ability to modulate immunosuppressive cytokines
(IL-10 and TGF-) produced by the prostate cancer cells. Additionally, we
show selective inhibition of Treg proliferation and induction of
apoptosis in Tregs cells in immune competent prostate cancer mouse model
treated with WA compared to controls. Our results suggest that WA have
potential to fine-tune immunosuppressive phenotype of tumor-associated
lymphocytes by modulating immuno-suppressive cytokines. Significant
inhibition of tumor growth in immune competent prostate cancer mouse
model as compared to immune deficient xenograft suggest potential role of
WA on reversal of anti-tumor immune response from immune suppression to
immune competence, which is required to fight against prostate cancer.

