Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biological evaluation of paclitaxel-peptide conjugates as a model
for MMP2-targeted drug delivery


Paclitaxel (PTX) is a highly effective cytotoxic agent widely used for
the treatment of several solid tumors. However, PTX shows dose-limiting
cytotoxicity and in most cases induces drug resistance followed by
failure in treatment. To enhance the therapeutic index of a given drug,
various drug delivery methods have been explored to systemically deliver
sufficient amount of the drug to the desired site. In the present study,
we designed and synthesized two PTX prodrugs by conjugating PTX at
different sites with an octapeptide (AcGpLGIaGQ) that can be cleaved by
MMP2 at tumor sites. As a result, PTX is expected to be released at the
tumor sites, absorbed by the tumor cells, and thereby inhibit the tumor
growth. We evaluated the in vitro activities of the two drugs in a panel
of drug-sensitive and -resistant cancer cell lines and their in vivo
efficacies in a HT1080 fibrosarcoma mouse xenograft model that
overexpresses MMP2. Our in vitro results showed that the PTX-AcGpLGIaGQ
conjugates inhibited cancer cell proliferation with higher activity
compared to that observed for free PTX, both of which were mediated by an
arrest of G2/M-phase of the cell cycle. Consistent with the in vitro
results, treatment with PTX-octapeptide conjugate resulted in extensive
areas of necrosis and a lower percentage of proliferating cells in
xenograft tumor sections. Together, our results indicate the potential of
the tumor-targeted delivery of PTX to exploit the specific recognition of
MMP2, reduce toxicity, and selectively kill tumor cells.

