Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel MEK Inhibitor GSK1120212b inhibits HMCL growth in vitro
and synergises with a range of conventional and novel anti-myeloma
therapies


Improved therapeutic interventions over the past decade has led to
prolonged survival rates of patients with multiple myeloma (MM) but
unfortunately, the subsequent development of progressive disease is
inevitable. As such, the identification of novel compounds and strategies
that improve therapeutic response is essential. GSK1120212b, a novel
orally bio-available MEK inhibitor, has been shown to inhibit tumour
growth and induce cell cycle arrest in some cancer cells. Here we report
the efficacy of GSK1120212b in human myeloma cell lines (HMCL) and
primary myeloma cells when used as a single agent and in combination with
conventional and novel anti-myeloma therapies. HMCL response to variable
doses of GSK1120212b (10nM-5M) was determined by MTS assay. FACS and cell
cycle analysis were used to evaluate the profiles of the cells post-MEK
inhibition. Mechanistic studies using Western analysis with antibodies
against p-MEK, MEK, p-ERK and ERK were performed. Subsequently, the
anti-MM activity of GSK1120212b was evaluated in HMCL co-cultured with
the human stromal cell line HS5. Primary samples from relapsed/refractory
MM patients were subjected to GSK1120212b treatment and the level of
apoptosis in CD45negCD38pos myeloma cells was assessed by Apo2.7-PE.
Finally, combination studies with conventional and novel anti-MM
therapies were also performed. GSK1120212b demonstrated an IC50 of
10-5000nM against 3 HMCL at 72h hours. Induction of both apoptosis and
accumulation of cells in the G0/G1 phase occurred in a dose dependent
manner. Western Blot analysis revealed increased p-MEK activity while
total MEK levels decreased. Moreover, a decrease in p-ERK was observed
with no change in total ERK levels. GSK1120212b demonstrated variable
ability to induce HMCL apoptosis in stromal cell (HS5) co-culture, with
or without transwells. Finally, GSK1120212b exhibited synergism with a
variety of conventional and novel anti-MM therapies but was most
pronounced when used in combination with GSK2110183b (Akt inhibitor) or
LBH589 (HDAC inhibitor). Considering the potent anti-MM effects of
GSK1120212b and its ability to synergise with other anti-MM agents, MEK
inhibition demonstrates a promising future avenue for the management of
MM and warrants further investigation.

