Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: pmTOR and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-2
expressions in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs)


The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a key role in cellular
growth and homeostasis and its regulation is frequently altered in
tumors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to mediate its
biological functions via activation of the protein tyrosine kinase
receptors, VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR-1/Flt1) and VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk1).
Recently, mTOR inhibitors and multi-targeted kinase inhibitors have
entered late-phase clinical trials in a heterogenous set of
neuroendocrine neoplasms. To identify new biomarkers to predict patient
outcome, we studied the expressions of AKT-mTOR pathway and VEGFR-2 in
290 gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs). We performed
immunoshistochemistry of phospho-Akt (pAkt), phospho-mTOR (pmTOR),
VEGFR-2, Chromogranin A (Chr A), and Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) 1, 2,
and 5 and analyzed the association with AJCC stage and WHO grade. All
cases were re-graded and re-staged according to WHO 2010 classification
and AJCC 7th edition. The cases were composed of 131 foregut (49 stomach,
32 duodenum, and 50 pancreas) and 159 hindgut (20 colon and 139 rectum);
204 (70%) Stage I, 40 (14%) Stage II, 33 (12%) Stage III, and 13 (4%)
Stage IV; 179 (62%) NET G1, 61 (21%) NET G2, 20 (7%) NEC, 16 (5%) mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma, and 14 (5%) grade not available. We found
that 43%, 41%, and 72% of GEP-NET were positive for pAkt, pmTOR, and
VEGFR-2 respectively. In hindgut tumors, the frequencies of pAkt, pmTOR,
and VEGFR-2 were significantly higher than foregut tumors (PThe mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a key role in cellular growth and
homeostasis and its regulation is frequently altered in tumors. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to mediate its biological
functions via activation of the protein tyrosine kinase receptors, VEGF
receptor 1 (VEGFR-1/Flt1) and VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk1). Recently, mTOR
inhibitors and multi-targeted kinase inhibitors have entered late-phase
clinical trials in a heterogenous set of neuroendocrine neoplasms. To
identify new biomarkers to predict patient outcome, we studied the
expressions of AKT-mTOR pathway and VEGFR-2 in 290 gastroenteropancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs). We performed immunoshistochemistry of
phospho-Akt (pAkt), phospho-mTOR (pmTOR), VEGFR-2, Chromogranin A (Chr
A), and Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) 1, 2, and 5 and analyzed the
association with AJCC stage and WHO grade. All cases were re-graded and
re-staged according to WHO 2010 classification and AJCC 7th edition. The
cases were composed of 131 foregut (49 stomach, 32 duodenum, and 50
pancreas) and 159 hindgut (20 colon and 139 rectum); 204 (70%) Stage I,
40 (14%) Stage II, 33 (12%) Stage III, and 13 (4%) Stage IV; 179 (62%)
NET G1, 61 (21%) NET G2, 20 (7%) NEC, 16 (5%) mixed adenoneuroendocrine
carcinoma, and 14 (5%) grade not available. We found that 43%, 41%, and
72% of GEP-NET were positive for pAkt, pmTOR, and VEGFR-2 respectively.
In hindgut tumors, the frequencies of pAkt, pmTOR, and VEGFR-2 were
significantly higher than foregut tumors (P<0.001, 64%, 54%, and 85% in
hindgut vs. 18%, 24%, and 56% in foregut). The activated status of mTOR
pathway was proved by the strong correlation of pmTOR with pAkt and SSTRs
(PThe mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a key role in cellular
growth and homeostasis and its regulation is frequently altered in
tumors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to mediate its
biological functions via activation of the protein tyrosine kinase
receptors, VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR-1/Flt1) and VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk1).
Recently, mTOR inhibitors and multi-targeted kinase inhibitors have
entered late-phase clinical trials in a heterogenous set of
neuroendocrine neoplasms. To identify new biomarkers to predict patient
outcome, we studied the expressions of AKT-mTOR pathway and VEGFR-2 in
290 gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs). We performed
immunoshistochemistry of phospho-Akt (pAkt), phospho-mTOR (pmTOR),
VEGFR-2, Chromogranin A (Chr A), and Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) 1, 2,
and 5 and analyzed the association with AJCC stage and WHO grade. All
cases were re-graded and re-staged according to WHO 2010 classification
and AJCC 7th edition. The cases were composed of 131 foregut (49 stomach,
32 duodenum, and 50 pancreas) and 159 hindgut (20 colon and 139 rectum);
204 (70%) Stage I, 40 (14%) Stage II, 33 (12%) Stage III, and 13 (4%)
Stage IV; 179 (62%) NET G1, 61 (21%) NET G2, 20 (7%) NEC, 16 (5%) mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma, and 14 (5%) grade not available. We found
that 43%, 41%, and 72% of GEP-NET were positive for pAkt, pmTOR, and
VEGFR-2 respectively. In hindgut tumors, the frequencies of pAkt, pmTOR,
and VEGFR-2 were significantly higher than foregut tumors (P<0.001, 64%,
54%, and 85% in hindgut vs. 18%, 24%, and 56% in foregut). The activated
status of mTOR pathway was proved by the strong correlation of pmTOR with
pAkt and SSTRs (P<0.001). There was a strong intercorrelation between
pmTOR and VEGFR-2 expressions (PThe mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
plays a key role in cellular growth and homeostasis and its regulation is
frequently altered in tumors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
is known to mediate its biological functions via activation of the
protein tyrosine kinase receptors, VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR-1/Flt1) and
VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk1). Recently, mTOR inhibitors and multi-targeted kinase
inhibitors have entered late-phase clinical trials in a heterogenous set
of neuroendocrine neoplasms. To identify new biomarkers to predict
patient outcome, we studied the expressions of AKT-mTOR pathway and
VEGFR-2 in 290 gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs).
We performed immunoshistochemistry of phospho-Akt (pAkt), phospho-mTOR
(pmTOR), VEGFR-2, Chromogranin A (Chr A), and Somatostatin receptors
(SSTRs) 1, 2, and 5 and analyzed the association with AJCC stage and WHO
grade. All cases were re-graded and re-staged according to WHO 2010
classification and AJCC 7th edition. The cases were composed of 131
foregut (49 stomach, 32 duodenum, and 50 pancreas) and 159 hindgut (20
colon and 139 rectum); 204 (70%) Stage I, 40 (14%) Stage II, 33 (12%)
Stage III, and 13 (4%) Stage IV; 179 (62%) NET G1, 61 (21%) NET G2, 20
(7%) NEC, 16 (5%) mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma, and 14 (5%) grade
not available. We found that 43%, 41%, and 72% of GEP-NET were positive
for pAkt, pmTOR, and VEGFR-2 respectively. In hindgut tumors, the
frequencies of pAkt, pmTOR, and VEGFR-2 were significantly higher than
foregut tumors (P<0.001, 64%, 54%, and 85% in hindgut vs. 18%, 24%, and
56% in foregut). The activated status of mTOR pathway was proved by the
strong correlation of pmTOR with pAkt and SSTRs (P<0.001). There was a
strong intercorrelation between pmTOR and VEGFR-2 expressions (P<0.001).
The expression of pmTOR were inversely associated with AJCC stage and WHO
grade (PThe mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a key role in
cellular growth and homeostasis and its regulation is frequently altered
in tumors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to mediate
its biological functions via activation of the protein tyrosine kinase
receptors, VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR-1/Flt1) and VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk1).
Recently, mTOR inhibitors and multi-targeted kinase inhibitors have
entered late-phase clinical trials in a heterogenous set of
neuroendocrine neoplasms. To identify new biomarkers to predict patient
outcome, we studied the expressions of AKT-mTOR pathway and VEGFR-2 in
290 gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs). We performed
immunoshistochemistry of phospho-Akt (pAkt), phospho-mTOR (pmTOR),
VEGFR-2, Chromogranin A (Chr A), and Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) 1, 2,
and 5 and analyzed the association with AJCC stage and WHO grade. All
cases were re-graded and re-staged according to WHO 2010 classification
and AJCC 7th edition. The cases were composed of 131 foregut (49 stomach,
32 duodenum, and 50 pancreas) and 159 hindgut (20 colon and 139 rectum);
204 (70%) Stage I, 40 (14%) Stage II, 33 (12%) Stage III, and 13 (4%)
Stage IV; 179 (62%) NET G1, 61 (21%) NET G2, 20 (7%) NEC, 16 (5%) mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma, and 14 (5%) grade not available. We found
that 43%, 41%, and 72% of GEP-NET were positive for pAkt, pmTOR, and
VEGFR-2 respectively. In hindgut tumors, the frequencies of pAkt, pmTOR,
and VEGFR-2 were significantly higher than foregut tumors (P<0.001, 64%,
54%, and 85% in hindgut vs. 18%, 24%, and 56% in foregut). The activated
status of mTOR pathway was proved by the strong correlation of pmTOR with
pAkt and SSTRs (P<0.001). There was a strong intercorrelation between
pmTOR and VEGFR-2 expressions (P<0.001). The expression of pmTOR were
inversely associated with AJCC stage and WHO grade (P<0.05), however the
expression of VEGFR-2 was not associated with them. The expressions of
pmTOR and VEGFR-2 showed a significant correlation with expression Chr A
(PThe mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a key role in cellular
growth and homeostasis and its regulation is frequently altered in
tumors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is known to mediate its
biological functions via activation of the protein tyrosine kinase
receptors, VEGF receptor 1 (VEGFR-1/Flt1) and VEGFR-2 (KDR/Flk1).
Recently, mTOR inhibitors and multi-targeted kinase inhibitors have
entered late-phase clinical trials in a heterogenous set of
neuroendocrine neoplasms. To identify new biomarkers to predict patient
outcome, we studied the expressions of AKT-mTOR pathway and VEGFR-2 in
290 gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs). We performed
immunoshistochemistry of phospho-Akt (pAkt), phospho-mTOR (pmTOR),
VEGFR-2, Chromogranin A (Chr A), and Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) 1, 2,
and 5 and analyzed the association with AJCC stage and WHO grade. All
cases were re-graded and re-staged according to WHO 2010 classification
and AJCC 7th edition. The cases were composed of 131 foregut (49 stomach,
32 duodenum, and 50 pancreas) and 159 hindgut (20 colon and 139 rectum);
204 (70%) Stage I, 40 (14%) Stage II, 33 (12%) Stage III, and 13 (4%)
Stage IV; 179 (62%) NET G1, 61 (21%) NET G2, 20 (7%) NEC, 16 (5%) mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma, and 14 (5%) grade not available. We found
that 43%, 41%, and 72% of GEP-NET were positive for pAkt, pmTOR, and
VEGFR-2 respectively. In hindgut tumors, the frequencies of pAkt, pmTOR,
and VEGFR-2 were significantly higher than foregut tumors (P<0.001, 64%,
54%, and 85% in hindgut vs. 18%, 24%, and 56% in foregut). The activated
status of mTOR pathway was proved by the strong correlation of pmTOR with
pAkt and SSTRs (P<0.001). There was a strong intercorrelation between
pmTOR and VEGFR-2 expressions (P<0.001). The expression of pmTOR were
inversely associated with AJCC stage and WHO grade (P<0.05), however the
expression of VEGFR-2 was not associated with them. The expressions of
pmTOR and VEGFR-2 showed a significant correlation with expression Chr A
(P<0.05). Inverse association between pmTOR with AJCC stage or WHO grade
was noted in hindgut tumors, but no association was noted in foregut
tumors. Regarding to VEGFR-2, in hindgut tumors, there was a positive
correlation between VEGFR-2 with Chr A. None of pAkt, pmTOR or VEGFR-2
had an impact on survival. In foregut tumors, VEGFR-2 was associated with
N stage. In conclusion, pmTOR and VEGFR-2 were inversely associated with
AJCC stage or WHO grade. Our results showed that pmTOR and VEGFR-2 showed
considerable variations in expression in GEP-NET in dependence of tumor
location. These differences in expressions of pmTOR and VEGFR-2 might
possibly influence response to mTOR inhibitiors or multi-targeted
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

