Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of HM-018, a potent and selective JAK
inhibitor in the treatment of myloproliferative disorders


JAK2 kinase mutation V617F is prevalent in myeloproliferative diseases
(MPD), including polycythemia vera (PV, 81-99%), essential thrombocytosis
(ET, 41-72%) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF, 39-57%). This point mutation
constitutively activates the JAK kinase and leads to oncogenic potential
of host cells, and thus making JAK2 a promising molecular target for MPD
therapy. HM-018 is a small molecule inhibitor against JAK kinase and the
compound's preclinical anti-MPD effects from signal transduction to
biological consequences were investigated. HM-018 was found to inhibit
JAK kinase 1, 2, 3 and TYK with IC50 of 0.010, 0.006, 0.040 and 0.047 M,
respectively. The compound demonstrated >100 folds selectivity against a
panel of 63 kinases. In accordance with enzymatic activity, HM-018
suppressed ligand dependent or constitutive JAK activation in multiple
cell lines as evidenced by the decrease of STAT3/5 phosphorylation. As a
result, JAK dependent cell proliferation was significantly inhibited by
HM-018. EPO-mediated mouse PV model was utilized to evaluate the in vivo
efficacy of the compound. HM-018 could shrink enlarged mouse spleen, a
typical symptom of PV, in a dose dependent manner accompanied with
decreased STAT5 phosphorylation both in animal spleen and in bone marrow
after oral dosing for 7 days. To better mimic MPD development in a more
clinically-relevant manner, JAK2-V617F-tranfected 32D cells were injected
into mice intravenously, and it was observed that oral treatment of
HM-018 not only prolonged the animal's life span, but also reduced
MPD-related symptoms, such as spleen weight increase and organ invasion
by malignant cells. Meanwhile, HM-018 exhibited a favorable
pharmacokinetic profile and acceptable safety window in rats. Based on
the preclinical data, HM-018 demonstrated anti-MPD potency both in vitro
and in vivo, and the studies have provided rationale to further develop
this compound as possible MPD therapeutics.

