Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3-dependent phosphorylation of LCRMP-1 is required for filopoda
formation and tumor invasion


LCRMP-1, a novel isoform of CRMP-1, can promote cancer cell migration,
invasion and associates with poor clinical outcome in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the underlying mechanisms
for regulation of LCRMP-1 in cancer cell invasiveness remain still
obscure. Here, we report that GSK-3 can phosphorylate LCRMP-1 at Thr-628
in consensus sequences and this phosphrylation is crucial for function of
LCRMP-1 on filopodia formation and cancer cell invasion. Impediment of
Thr-628 phosphorylation attenuates the effects of LCRMP-1 to form
filopodia and promote cancer invasion; simultaneously, kinase-dead GSK-3
diminishes regulation of LCRMP-1 on cancer cell invasion. Furthermore, we
also found that patients with low-level inactive GSK-3 expression and
high-level LCRMP-1 expression have worse overall survival than those with
high-level inactive GSK-3 expressions and low-level LCRMP-1 expressions
(PLCRMP-1, a novel isoform of CRMP-1, can promote cancer cell migration,
invasion and associates with poor clinical outcome in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the underlying mechanisms
for regulation of LCRMP-1 in cancer cell invasiveness remain still
obscure. Here, we report that GSK-3 can phosphorylate LCRMP-1 at Thr-628
in consensus sequences and this phosphrylation is crucial for function of
LCRMP-1 on filopodia formation and cancer cell invasion. Impediment of
Thr-628 phosphorylation attenuates the effects of LCRMP-1 to form
filopodia and promote cancer invasion; simultaneously, kinase-dead GSK-3
diminishes regulation of LCRMP-1 on cancer cell invasion. Furthermore, we
also found that patients with low-level inactive GSK-3 expression and
high-level LCRMP-1 expression have worse overall survival than those with
high-level inactive GSK-3 expressions and low-level LCRMP-1 expressions
(P< 0.0001). Collectively, these results demonstrate that GSK-3-dependent
phosphorylation of LCRMP-1 provides an important mechanism for regulation
of LCRMP-1 on cancer cell invasiveness and clinical outcome.

