Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel Wnt pathway antagonist antibody, OMP-18R5,
that reduces tumor initiating cell frequency in breast cancer


The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, which signals through the Frizzled (Fzd)
receptor family and several co-receptors, is known to play a critical
role in several major cancer types. Mutations in the signalling pathway
occur in most cases of human colon cancer, and activation of Wnt
signalling through various mechanisms has been reported in multiple major
tumor types. We have developed a novel Wnt pathway antagonist antibody,
OMP-18R5 which was initially identified by binding to Frizzled7, and
subsequently found to also bind several other human FZDs through a
conserved epitope within the extracellular domain. OMP-18R5 blocks Wnt
binding and canonical signalling induced by multiple Wnt family members.
In xenograft studies with minimally passaged human tumors, OMP-18R5
inhibited the growth of a broad range of tumor types and has been found
to be particularly active in breast cancer. OMP-18R5 treatment reduced
tumor growth and the frequency of tumor initiating cells in combination
with pacilitaxel. Furthermore, we found that OMP-18R5 treatment can
restore chemosensitivity in drug resistant breast tumors. Molecular
analyses indicated OMP-18R5 inhibits the expression of EMT markers in
breast tumors, thus providing additional evidence linking EMT with
resistance to chemotherapy and cancer stem cells. In addition to
combination activity with paclitaxel, OMP-18R5 treatment also resulted in
increased anti-tumor activity in combination with trastuzumab in a Her2+
breast cancer model. These data suggest that OMP-18R5, which has recently
entered Phase 1 clinical testing, may be useful in the treatment of
various types of breast cancer.

