Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expressional alterations in functional ultra-conserved non-coding
RNAs in response to ATRA-induced differentiation and changes in MYCN
levels in neuroblastoma cells


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a childhood cancer arising from precursor cells of
the sympathetic nervous system with highly heterogeneous clinical
behaviour, ranging from spontaneous regression to rapid progression and
death due to disease. Amplification and over-expression of the MYCN
transcription factor in NB tumors is highly correlated with poor
survival. Children with high risk NB are given the synthetic retinoic
acid, 13-cis-retinoic acid to reduce minimal residual disease, and
exposure of a number of NB cell lines to the compound all-trans-retinoic
acid (ATRA) induces neural differentiation along with the down-regulation
of MYCN. Thus, identification of targets regulated by either ATRA or MYCN
is of potential interest for the development of novel therapeutics.
Ultra-conserved regions (UCRs) are sequences 200bp in length that are
100% conserved between human, mouse and rat genomes. In NB, transcribed
UCRs (T-UCRs) exhibit specific profiles in MYCN-amplified (MNA) compared
to non-MNA tumors (Mestdagh et al., Oncogene 2010 29:3583), and in high
risk versus low risk tumors (Scaruffi et al., BMC Cancer 2009 9;441).
Here we identify T-UCRs that are responsive to ATRA as well as T-UCRs
that are directly or indirectly regulated by MYCN, and evaluate the
biological significance of selected T-UCRs in functional studies of NB
cell lines. We designed a custom tiling microarray to profile the
expression of 481 UCRs in sense and antisense orientation (962 potential
T-UCRs) in three ATRA-sensitive NB cell lines, and in SHEP-21N cells
which contain a MYCN trans-gene controlled by a tetracycline responsive
repressor element. Thirty-two T-UCRs were differentially expressed
following ATRA treatment across all three ATRA sensitive cell lines
(pNeuroblastoma (NB) is a childhood cancer arising from precursor cells
of the sympathetic nervous system with highly heterogeneous clinical
behaviour, ranging from spontaneous regression to rapid progression and
death due to disease. Amplification and over-expression of the MYCN
transcription factor in NB tumors is highly correlated with poor
survival. Children with high risk NB are given the synthetic retinoic
acid, 13-cis-retinoic acid to reduce minimal residual disease, and
exposure of a number of NB cell lines to the compound all-trans-retinoic
acid (ATRA) induces neural differentiation along with the down-regulation
of MYCN. Thus, identification of targets regulated by either ATRA or MYCN
is of potential interest for the development of novel therapeutics.
Ultra-conserved regions (UCRs) are sequences 200bp in length that are
100% conserved between human, mouse and rat genomes. In NB, transcribed
UCRs (T-UCRs) exhibit specific profiles in MYCN-amplified (MNA) compared
to non-MNA tumors (Mestdagh et al., Oncogene 2010 29:3583), and in high
risk versus low risk tumors (Scaruffi et al., BMC Cancer 2009 9;441).
Here we identify T-UCRs that are responsive to ATRA as well as T-UCRs
that are directly or indirectly regulated by MYCN, and evaluate the
biological significance of selected T-UCRs in functional studies of NB
cell lines. We designed a custom tiling microarray to profile the
expression of 481 UCRs in sense and antisense orientation (962 potential
T-UCRs) in three ATRA-sensitive NB cell lines, and in SHEP-21N cells
which contain a MYCN trans-gene controlled by a tetracycline responsive
repressor element. Thirty-two T-UCRs were differentially expressed
following ATRA treatment across all three ATRA sensitive cell lines
(p<0.05), while analysis of doxycyclin-treated SHEP-21N cells (to deplete
MYCN levels) indicated that 42 T-UCRs were altered by changing MYCN
levels. In addition we identified a small number of T-UCRs, including
T-UC.396 (intergenic) and T-UC.324 (antisense to host gene), whose
expression was altered in both systems. These T-UCRs may represent
independent ncRNAs directly or indirectly regulated by MYCN.
Functionality of T-UC.300A and T-UC.324 was assessed by siRNA knockdown.
While knockdown of T-UC.324 had no effect on cell viability or invasion,
depletion of T-UC.300A resulted in a significant decrease in both cell
viability and invasion. Our results indicate that significant numbers of
T-UCRs have altered expression levels in response to changing MYCN levels
and ATRA-induced differentiation. While the precise roles that these
ncRNAs might play in cancer or in normal development are largely unknown,
we have identified a T-UCR, T-UC.300A, whose down-regulation results in
the decreased viability and invasiveness of ATRA-responsive cell lines
and may play a functional role in ATRA-induced differentiation.

