Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCN5/WISP-2 upregulates p27Kip1 in breast cancer cell lines
through AKT/FOXO3a signaling


CCN5 is a member of the CCN (cysteine rich 61-connective tissue growth
factor-nephroblastoma-overexpressed) family of growth factors. Our
studies have shown that CCN5 is mainly expressed in less aggressive human
breast cancer cells (i.e., MCF-7 and ZR-75-1) and noninvasive lesion
(i.e., atypical ductal hyperplasia and ductal carcinoma in situ), whereas
its expression is minimally detected in moderately aggressive breast
cancer cell lines (i.e., SKBR-3), and it is undetected in triple negative
highly aggressive breast cancer cell line (i.e., MDA-MB-231) and invasive
lesion. Ectopic expression of CCN5 has been shown to inhibit
tumorigenicity in MDA-MB-231-xenograft models therefore suggesting that
CCN5 is an anti-invasive molecule. The objective of the present study was
to determine how CCN5 overexpression affects cell-cycle progression of
breast cancer cells. We found knocking down of CCN5 in non-invasive
breast cancer cells significantly downregulated the expression of
p27Kip1, a tumor suppressor molecule. In contrast, enforced/ectopic
expression of CCN5 overexpression in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
caused cell cycle arrest at G1 phase and dramatically reduced
proliferation of these cells. CCN5 overexpression results in increased
the stability as well as the expression of p27Kip1 protein. The
regulation of p27Kip1 by CCN5 is mediated through AKT/FOXO3a signaling.
Collectively, the studies suggest that CCN5 exerts its anti-invasive
action through the regulation of p27Kip1.

