Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of BRCA2 mutation in primary human triple negative breast
cancer xenografts on the responses to ionizing radiation and in vivo
tumor growth after treatment


Introduction: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive
disease associated with a high risk of distant recurrence and poor
overall survival and, as for other BC subtypes, loco-regional treatment
relies on surgery and radiotherapy. To prevent relapses, there is a need
for both better systemic therapies and improvements in local treatments.
Primary human TNBC xenografts are a useful tool for such preclinical
studies. Using two TNBC models, one of which carrying a BRCA2 mutation
(De Plater et al, BJC 2010;103:1192-200), we have investigated ionizing
radiation sensitivity and the impact of the treatment on the growth of
irradiated tumors. Experimental design: Two TNBC models, the BRCA2
HBCx-17 and the wild-type HBCx-12A xenografts were subcutaneously
transplanted into the flanks of nude mice. After immobilization of the
animals, the tumors were locally irradiated with low energy photons
generated by an X-Ray tube (voltage: 200 kV, filter: 1 mm Al + 0.3 mm Cu,
mean energy: 100 keV). Irradiation fields adapted to the targeted tissue
were obtained using Cerrobend shields. With a daily fraction of 3.25 Gy,
the cumulative dose ranged between 0 Gy to 32.25 Gy. In addition for both
models, three tumor fragments from non irradiated tumors, 9.25
Gy-irradiated tumors with initial partial local control and subsequent
progressive disease, and 19.5 Gy-irradiated tumors with initial complete
remission and subsequent relapse were regrafted 3 months after treatment
into nude mice. In all experiments, tumor take and growth were assessed
by measuring tumor volume with a caliper twice a week for 5 months.
Results: In both TNBC models, a strong sensitivity to ionizing radiation
was observed with the occurrence of complete remission seen at higher
doses. However, after 32.25 Gy, this was 100% in the BRCA2-mutated
xenograft and only 50% in the HBCx-12A model (p Introduction: Triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive disease associated with a
high risk of distant recurrence and poor overall survival and, as for
other BC subtypes, loco-regional treatment relies on surgery and
radiotherapy. To prevent relapses, there is a need for both better
systemic therapies and improvements in local treatments. Primary human
TNBC xenografts are a useful tool for such preclinical studies. Using two
TNBC models, one of which carrying a BRCA2 mutation (De Plater et al, BJC
2010;103:1192-200), we have investigated ionizing radiation sensitivity
and the impact of the treatment on the growth of irradiated tumors.
Experimental design: Two TNBC models, the BRCA2 HBCx-17 and the wild-type
HBCx-12A xenografts were subcutaneously transplanted into the flanks of
nude mice. After immobilization of the animals, the tumors were locally
irradiated with low energy photons generated by an X-Ray tube (voltage:
200 kV, filter: 1 mm Al + 0.3 mm Cu, mean energy: 100 keV). Irradiation
fields adapted to the targeted tissue were obtained using Cerrobend
shields. With a daily fraction of 3.25 Gy, the cumulative dose ranged
between 0 Gy to 32.25 Gy. In addition for both models, three tumor
fragments from non irradiated tumors, 9.25 Gy-irradiated tumors with
initial partial local control and subsequent progressive disease, and
19.5 Gy-irradiated tumors with initial complete remission and subsequent
relapse were regrafted 3 months after treatment into nude mice. In all
experiments, tumor take and growth were assessed by measuring tumor
volume with a caliper twice a week for 5 months. Results: In both TNBC
models, a strong sensitivity to ionizing radiation was observed with the
occurrence of complete remission seen at higher doses. However, after
32.25 Gy, this was 100% in the BRCA2-mutated xenograft and only 50% in
the HBCx-12A model (p < 0.05). Similarly, relapses occurred more
frequently in the wild-type xenograft (57.1% vs 14.9%; p Introduction:
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive disease associated
with a high risk of distant recurrence and poor overall survival and, as
for other BC subtypes, loco-regional treatment relies on surgery and
radiotherapy. To prevent relapses, there is a need for both better
systemic therapies and improvements in local treatments. Primary human
TNBC xenografts are a useful tool for such preclinical studies. Using two
TNBC models, one of which carrying a BRCA2 mutation (De Plater et al, BJC
2010;103:1192-200), we have investigated ionizing radiation sensitivity
and the impact of the treatment on the growth of irradiated tumors.
Experimental design: Two TNBC models, the BRCA2 HBCx-17 and the wild-type
HBCx-12A xenografts were subcutaneously transplanted into the flanks of
nude mice. After immobilization of the animals, the tumors were locally
irradiated with low energy photons generated by an X-Ray tube (voltage:
200 kV, filter: 1 mm Al + 0.3 mm Cu, mean energy: 100 keV). Irradiation
fields adapted to the targeted tissue were obtained using Cerrobend
shields. With a daily fraction of 3.25 Gy, the cumulative dose ranged
between 0 Gy to 32.25 Gy. In addition for both models, three tumor
fragments from non irradiated tumors, 9.25 Gy-irradiated tumors with
initial partial local control and subsequent progressive disease, and
19.5 Gy-irradiated tumors with initial complete remission and subsequent
relapse were regrafted 3 months after treatment into nude mice. In all
experiments, tumor take and growth were assessed by measuring tumor
volume with a caliper twice a week for 5 months. Results: In both TNBC
models, a strong sensitivity to ionizing radiation was observed with the
occurrence of complete remission seen at higher doses. However, after
32.25 Gy, this was 100% in the BRCA2-mutated xenograft and only 50% in
the HBCx-12A model (p < 0.05). Similarly, relapses occurred more
frequently in the wild-type xenograft (57.1% vs 14.9%; p < 0.001). With
respect to the treated or untreated tumors that were regrafted into mice,
no differences of tumor take, in vivo tumor growth nor kinetics were
observed for the BRCA2-mutated model for the 3 tumor types, in contrast
to the HBCx-12A xenograft where 9.25 Gy-irradiated tumors grew faster
than the 2 other groups. Conclusion: Our preclinical results confirm the
sensitivity of TNBC to ionizing radiation and the impact of BRCA2
mutations on this sensitivity. In addition the presence of BRCA2
mutations would appear to modulate the post-radiotherapy growth of the
tumors making them less aggressive. Such a characterization of highly
relevant preclinical models supports their use for pharmacological
assessments that will combine both radiotherapy and new therapeutic
approaches to improve the outcome of TNBC patients.

