Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot feasibility study to evaluate the efficacy of lapatinib in
the elimination of HER2-positive circulating tumor cells in peripheral
blood of women with metastatic breast cancer


Background: The monitoring of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) detected in
peripheral blood (PB) of patients (pts) with metastatic breast cancer
(BC) has been proven a potent prognostic tool. CTCs detected after the
completion of therapy are theoretically chemo- and/or hormone-resistant
and could lead to disease progression. EGFR and HER2 expression has been
demonstrated in CTCs from pts with BC. In the present trial we aimed to
evaluate the efficacy of lapatinib, a dual EGFR and HER2 tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, in eliminating HER2 positive (+) CTCs of women with metastatic
BC. Pts and methods: Pts with metastatic BC and HER2+ CTCs detected
despite disease stabilization or response after the completion of prior
therapy were eligible. Pts received lapatinib, 1500 mg/day orally till
disease or CTC progression, whichever occurred first. HER2 expression was
evaluated in cytospins of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
prepared from PB obtained at baseline and monthly thereafter. Cytospins
were stained with HER2 along with cytokeratin antibody; a total of 10^6
PBMCs/pt were analyzed by double immunofluorescence. Results: Nineteen
pts were enrolled from September 2008 to October 2011. Median age was 62
years, 12 (63.2%) pts were post-menopausal and 2 had HER2+ tumors. Twelve
(63.2%) pts had visceral disease and 7 (36.8%) had received 3 lines of
treatment. One pt discontinued treatment prior to the completion of the
first cycle due to toxicity and 2 pts are not evaluable yet. The median
duration of treatment was 4.0 (range, 0.5 - 34.0) months (mo). CTC counts
declined in 15 out of 16 pts during treatment with a maximum percentage
of decrease of 100% in all of them. The median time to and the median
duration of nadir CTC counts were 1 mo (range, 1 - 3 mo) and 1 mo (range,
0 - 7 mo), respectively. Prior to the second treatment cycle, a decrease
in CTC counts was observed in 14 (88%) pts, in 1 (7%) the CTC count
increased by 33% and in 1 (7%) remained stable. Median percentage of CTC
count decrease per pt was 100% (range, 45-100%). At baseline, a total of
2642 HER2+ CTCs were detected (median: 79/pt, range 2 - 617), whereas
after the completion of first cycle a total of 430 HER2+ CTCs were
identified (median: 0, range 0 - 223). Disease evaluation revealed stable
disease in 5 pts and progressive disease in 11. In pts with stable
disease a sustained decrease in CTC counts over 2 to 7 mo was observed.
On the contrary, in 9 out of 11 pts with disease progression, the
decrease in CTC counts was short-lasting (median 1.0 mo, range 0 - 4).
Conclusions: Lapatinib is effective in decreasing HER2+ CTCs in pts with
metastatic BC, irrespective of the HER2 status of the primary tumor.
Sustained CTC reduction was associated with disease stabilization. The
above results suggest that tailoring therapy according to targets present
on CTCs could be an effective therapeutic strategy in BC.

