Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel human fusion protein composed of the serine protease
Granzyme B and VEGF121 to target the vasculature of solid tumors


Targeting solid tumors and their metastases continue to be viewed as an
essential aspect of therapeutic success to achieve long-term tumor
control. Targeted therapy is a promising approach in this regard and the
utilization of human proteins assures the potential for long-term therapy
without immunological restrictions. VEGF121 is a naturally-occurring
splice variant that binds to both VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2 receptors
over-expressed on the endothelium of tumor vasculature but not normal
vasculature. The serine protease granzyme B (GrB) is capable of inducing
intense cellular apoptosis through both caspase-dependent and
caspase-independent multiple-cascade mechanisms. We expressed
pro-GrB/VEGF121 in HEK293T cells and harvested the fusion protein under
serum-free conditions. The purified protein expressed as a homodimer and
Western blotting confirmed incorporation of both VEGF121 and GrB
components into the construct. Comparison of GrB/VEGF121 with its
expected molecular weight by SDS-PAGE suggests minimal (1-2 kDa)
glycosylation. The enzymatic activity of GrB in GrB/VEGF121 was
comparable to that of human GrB. The cytotoxicity of GrB/VEGF121
confirmed specific targeting and internalization into PAE/hVEGFR-2 (IC50
10 nM), but not PAE/hVEGFR-1 cells (IC50 > 300 nM). GrB/VEGF121 induced
apoptosis in PAE/VEGFR-2, but not PAE/VEGFR-1 cells, as determined by
Annexin V staining. The targeting efficacy of GrB/VEGF121 against a panel
of cells expressing a range of VEGFR receptor levels is under study.
Studies investigating GrB/VEGF121 signaling events and in vivo efficacy
against various tumor models are currently ongoing and will be presented.
Research conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research.

