Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of common genetic variants contributing to
cisplatin-induced apoptosis and cytotoxicity in lymphoblastoid cell lines


Cisplatin is a platinum agent effective against head and neck, ovarian,
cervical, testicular, and lung cancers; however, severe toxicities and
intrinsic/acquired resistance hinder its utility. Identifying genetic
variants to predict patients at risk for toxicity or non-response would
be highly beneficial. To this end, we utilized lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCLs) to identify variants associated with cisplatin-induced
cytotoxicity (cell growth inhibition) and apoptosis (caspase 3/7
activity). International HapMap LCLs derived from populations of Northern
and Western European (CEU), African (YRI), and African-American (ASW)
ancestry were phenotyped for cell growth inhibition and caspase 3/7
activity followed by Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS). Analysis
revealed expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) enrichment in
cytotoxicity-associated SNPs (pCisplatin is a platinum agent effective
against head and neck, ovarian, cervical, testicular, and lung cancers;
however, severe toxicities and intrinsic/acquired resistance hinder its
utility. Identifying genetic variants to predict patients at risk for
toxicity or non-response would be highly beneficial. To this end, we
utilized lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) to identify variants associated
with cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity (cell growth inhibition) and
apoptosis (caspase 3/7 activity). International HapMap LCLs derived from
populations of Northern and Western European (CEU), African (YRI), and
African-American (ASW) ancestry were phenotyped for cell growth
inhibition and caspase 3/7 activity followed by Genome Wide Association
Studies (GWAS). Analysis revealed expression quantitative trait loci
(eQTL) enrichment in cytotoxicity-associated SNPs (p<0.001) and in
apoptosis-associated SNPs (pCisplatin is a platinum agent effective
against head and neck, ovarian, cervical, testicular, and lung cancers;
however, severe toxicities and intrinsic/acquired resistance hinder its
utility. Identifying genetic variants to predict patients at risk for
toxicity or non-response would be highly beneficial. To this end, we
utilized lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) to identify variants associated
with cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity (cell growth inhibition) and
apoptosis (caspase 3/7 activity). International HapMap LCLs derived from
populations of Northern and Western European (CEU), African (YRI), and
African-American (ASW) ancestry were phenotyped for cell growth
inhibition and caspase 3/7 activity followed by Genome Wide Association
Studies (GWAS). Analysis revealed expression quantitative trait loci
(eQTL) enrichment in cytotoxicity-associated SNPs (p<0.001) and in
apoptosis-associated SNPs (p<0.001) for all population sets. Applying a
threshold of pCisplatin is a platinum agent effective against head and
neck, ovarian, cervical, testicular, and lung cancers; however, severe
toxicities and intrinsic/acquired resistance hinder its utility.
Identifying genetic variants to predict patients at risk for toxicity or
non-response would be highly beneficial. To this end, we utilized
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) to identify variants associated with
cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity (cell growth inhibition) and apoptosis
(caspase 3/7 activity). International HapMap LCLs derived from
populations of Northern and Western European (CEU), African (YRI), and
African-American (ASW) ancestry were phenotyped for cell growth
inhibition and caspase 3/7 activity followed by Genome Wide Association
Studies (GWAS). Analysis revealed expression quantitative trait loci
(eQTL) enrichment in cytotoxicity-associated SNPs (p<0.001) and in
apoptosis-associated SNPs (p<0.001) for all population sets. Applying a
threshold of p<0.001 resulted in 19, 14, 0, and 1 SNP(s) overlapping in
CEU, YRI, ASW, and meta analysis combining the 3 populations
respectively. Furthermore, we found that 16/19 and 9/14 overlapping SNPs
for CEU and YRI are eQTLs. Of the 16 eQTLs in CEU, rs4343077 correlated
with cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity (p=0.0007) and apoptosis (p=0.0007)
and is intronic of epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 8
(EPS8). Given that EPS8 encodes an oncoprotein participating in malignant
transformation of tumor cells and has been formerly linked to
cisplatin-induced drug response, we evaluated cellular sensitivity to
cisplatin following siRNA knockdown in 5 CEU LCLs. Successful knockdown
of greater than 70% of endogenous EPS8 resulted in a 7% increase in
percent survival (p=1e-6) and a 6.6% decrease for caspase 3/7 activity
(p=0.033) across cell lines. We also evaluated expression levels of 6
target genes of rs4343077 and found that 5 significantly (pCisplatin is a
platinum agent effective against head and neck, ovarian, cervical,
testicular, and lung cancers; however, severe toxicities and
intrinsic/acquired resistance hinder its utility. Identifying genetic
variants to predict patients at risk for toxicity or non-response would
be highly beneficial. To this end, we utilized lymphoblastoid cell lines
(LCLs) to identify variants associated with cisplatin-induced
cytotoxicity (cell growth inhibition) and apoptosis (caspase 3/7
activity). International HapMap LCLs derived from populations of Northern
and Western European (CEU), African (YRI), and African-American (ASW)
ancestry were phenotyped for cell growth inhibition and caspase 3/7
activity followed by Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS). Analysis
revealed expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) enrichment in
cytotoxicity-associated SNPs (p<0.001) and in apoptosis-associated SNPs
(p<0.001) for all population sets. Applying a threshold of p<0.001
resulted in 19, 14, 0, and 1 SNP(s) overlapping in CEU, YRI, ASW, and
meta analysis combining the 3 populations respectively. Furthermore, we
found that 16/19 and 9/14 overlapping SNPs for CEU and YRI are eQTLs. Of
the 16 eQTLs in CEU, rs4343077 correlated with cisplatin-induced
cytotoxicity (p=0.0007) and apoptosis (p=0.0007) and is intronic of
epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 8 (EPS8). Given that
EPS8 encodes an oncoprotein participating in malignant transformation of
tumor cells and has been formerly linked to cisplatin-induced drug
response, we evaluated cellular sensitivity to cisplatin following siRNA
knockdown in 5 CEU LCLs. Successful knockdown of greater than 70% of
endogenous EPS8 resulted in a 7% increase in percent survival (p=1e-6)
and a 6.6% decrease for caspase 3/7 activity (p=0.033) across cell lines.
We also evaluated expression levels of 6 target genes of rs4343077 and
found that 5 significantly (p<0.01) changed following EPS8 knockdown. Our
genome wide approach evaluating both cytotoxicity and apoptosis led to
the identification of EPS8, a gene that confers sensitivity to cisplatin.
Identification of genetic variants contributing to cisplatin-induced cell
death through apoptosis is necessary for a better mechanistic
understanding of the drug and ultimately to identify patients most likely
to respond.

