Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of weight gain on quality of life in young indigent breast
cancer survivors


Background: Prior studies have reported weight gain in over 50% of early
stage breast cancer patients regardless of adjuvant therapy received.
Weight gain may impair quality of life (QOL) and have a deleterious
psychological impact on pts already suffering from loss of self-esteem
and altered self-image. Little is known about the relationship between
weight gain and QOL in young ethnic/racial minority or low socio-economic
status (SES) breast cancer survivors. Louisiana has an obesity prevalence
above 25% and has the third highest poverty level in the US. Louisiana
State University Health in Shreveport provides cancer care to most
residents with low SES. The objective of this study was to determine the
association between weight gain after breast cancer diagnosis and QOL in
young indigent long-term survivors. Methods: Pts with a history of stage
0-3 breast cancer diagnosed prior to age 50 and prior to 2006 were
eligible. Pts, identified on clinic follow-up, signed an IRB approved
informed consent and completed a self-administered questionnaire that
combined demographics, co-morbidities, self-rated body image and QOL
(Quality of Life in Adult Survivors Scale [QLACS]). The pts weight and
height at diagnosis were obtained from the medical records. Percent
weight change between time of diagnosis and study entry was calculated.
Pts were classified according to their weight change (5% increase versus
Background: Prior studies have reported weight gain in over 50% of early
stage breast cancer patients regardless of adjuvant therapy received.
Weight gain may impair quality of life (QOL) and have a deleterious
psychological impact on pts already suffering from loss of self-esteem
and altered self-image. Little is known about the relationship between
weight gain and QOL in young ethnic/racial minority or low socio-economic
status (SES) breast cancer survivors. Louisiana has an obesity prevalence
above 25% and has the third highest poverty level in the US. Louisiana
State University Health in Shreveport provides cancer care to most
residents with low SES. The objective of this study was to determine the
association between weight gain after breast cancer diagnosis and QOL in
young indigent long-term survivors. Methods: Pts with a history of stage
0-3 breast cancer diagnosed prior to age 50 and prior to 2006 were
eligible. Pts, identified on clinic follow-up, signed an IRB approved
informed consent and completed a self-administered questionnaire that
combined demographics, co-morbidities, self-rated body image and QOL
(Quality of Life in Adult Survivors Scale [QLACS]). The pts weight and
height at diagnosis were obtained from the medical records. Percent
weight change between time of diagnosis and study entry was calculated.
Pts were classified according to their weight change (5% increase versus
<5% increase). Socio-demographics and breast cancer staging were
collected from existing medical records. Responses were scored and
compared between the two groups. Results: 106 pts participate in the
study. 71 were African American and 35 were Caucasian. The median age at
breast cancer diagnosis was 43, 85% completed 12th grade, 48% were
uninsured and 17% had Medicaid coverage. 59 pts were obese, 27 overweight
and 20 normal weight at the time of cancer diagnosis. 47 pts (44%) gained
5%. Pts who gained 5% weight were more likely to be non-smokers (48% vs.
15%, p=0.0025) and have a younger age at cancer diagnosis (42yo. vs.
45yo, p=0.01). QOL measurement showed pts who gained 5% had lower median
scores in the domains of negative feelings (anxiety, mood swings) p=0.007
and family distress (worries about family risk of cancer) p=0.01. There
were no differences in other domains regarding generic concerns and
cancer-specific concerns. Conclusion: Surprisingly, QOL was superior in
pts who gained weight after breast cancer therapy. These results are
concerning as increased body weight may adversely impact breast cancer
outcomes. Other factors that might contribute to this finding are not
defined and additional research on a larger population will be necessary
to identify interventions to improve QOL in pts with early stage breast
cancer.

