Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors against CHK1 and WEE1, MK-8776 and MK-1775, strongly
synergize in vitro and in vivo to inhibit tumor growth


Inhibitors of the checkpoint kinases CHK1 and WEE1 are under development
as sensitizers to chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Disruption of either
CHK1 or WEE1 activity compromises the cell cycle arrest that normally
accompanies the DNA damage response, forcing cells to prematurely divide
before repairing damaged DNA. However, inhibition of either CHK1 or WEE1
alone also disrupts DNA replication, resulting in DNA double strand
breaks (DSBs) primarily in S-phase cells. Here we describe the ability of
inhibitors against CHK1 and WEE1 to synergize both in vitro and in vivo.
MK-8776 and MK-1775 are advancing through early clinical trials as potent
and selective inhibitors of CHK1 and WEE1, respectively. MK-8776
increases the cell-based potency of MK-1775 in multiple cancer cell lines
by as much as a 10-fold EC50 shift in proliferation assays. Staining for
the DSB marker H2AX at low concentrations of each drug demonstrates that
MK-8776 and MK-1775 in combination induce up to 50-fold more DNA damage
than either MK-8776 or MK-1775 alone. The ability of the combination to
drive premature mitosis, determined by pHH3 quantitation, was variable,
suggesting that generation of DSBs rather than G2/M checkpoint abrogation
is the mechanism underlying combination cytotoxicity. Induction of DSBs
requires cyclin-dependent kinase activity and takes place largely in
S-phase cells, implying deregulation of DNA replication. Furthermore,
staining for DNA damage response markers H2AX and pCHK1-ser345 was both
more intense and more durable in a LoVo xenograft model of cancer when
MK-8776 and MK-1775 were dosed together compared to either compound
alone. At tolerated doses, the combination demonstrated significantly
greater anti-tumor efficacy than either MK-8776 or MK-1775 alone in LoVo
xenografts (91% tumor growth inhibition for the combination versus 28%
and 41% for MK-8776 and MK-1775, respectively). Similar observations were
made in additional xenograft models. These results demonstrate in vitro
and in vivo synergy between MK-8776 and MK-1775, indicating unique and
complimentary anti-tumor effects of CHK1 and WEE1 inhibition. Our studies
provide preclinical rationale for combining WEE1 and CHK1 inhibitors as a
novel cancer treatment regimen.

