Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phenylmethimazole decreases constitutively high basal levels of
Interleukin 6 (IL-6) in a triple negative breast cancer cell line


Interleukin 6 (IL-6) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that plays an
important role in the progression of many types of cancers by regulating
macrophage recruitment and differentiation, as well as modulating the
activation of the JAK/Stat signal cascade, and inducing pro-angiogenic
factors. Several studies have correlated a negative prognosis in cancer
with a high level of IL-6 in patient serum. Triple (i.e. progesterone,
human epidermal growth factor-2, and estrogen receptor) negative breast
cancer has been reported to be highly aggressive and invasive.
MDA-MB-231, a triple negative breast cancer cell line, expresses high
basal levels of IL-6. Recently our laboratory demonstrated that
phenylmethimazole (C10), a novel toll-like receptor inhibitor, diminishes
basal expression of IL-6 in pancreatic cancer and melanoma cells as well
as their growth and migration. Based on these observations, we sought to
test the hypothesis that C10 inhibits IL-6 expression in MDA-MB-231
cells. Here we report that triple negative breast cancer cells express
considerably higher levels of IL-6 than estrogen receptor positive breast
cancer cells and that C10 significantly reduces IL-6 expression in the
triple negative breast cancer cells. This inhibition was observed at both
the RNA and protein level. Given the importance of IL-6 in cancer
progression, and our finding that C10 attenuates IL-6 expression in the
MDA-MB-231 cell line, this study suggests that C10 may have therapeutic
potential for triple negative breast cancers. Additional studies are
currently underway to further explore these hypotheses.

