Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EBV infectivity determines sensitivity to bortezomib in
hematopoietic malignancy cells


Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is closely associated with several human
malignancies where it expresses limited subsets of latent proteins. Of
the latent proteins, latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a potent
transforming protein that constitutively induces multiple cell signaling
pathways. C-terminal signaling domain of LMP1 (CTAR2) is known to engage
the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and NF-B pathways, which contributes to
EBV-associated oncogenesis. Bortezomib, proteasome inhibitor, blocks
degradation of IB, thereby blocking not only NF-B activation but also
related cytokine production and the survival advantage for patients.
However, to date, no study has examined that EBV infectivity is
correlated with efficacy of bortezomib in the hematopoietic malignancies
cells. Here, we used EBV-positive cell lines (Hank-1, Jijoye, Daudi and
Granta519), EBV-negative cells (NK-92, Ramos, Jurkat and Rec1) and stable
EBV-transfected cells (Ramos/EBV, Jurkat/EBV and Rec1/EBV) to evaluate
the bortezomib sensitivity, highlighting the role of NF-B. In the present
study, we investigated that treatment with bortezomib significantly
induced apoptosis and growth inhibition through blocking nuclear NF-B
signaling pathway in EBV-positive cells than EBV-negative cells. Thus,
this data suggest that LMP1-induced NF-B plays a critical role of
survival and growth in EBV-positive cells. Additionally, treatment with
bortezomib may provide a therapeutic advantage for patients with
EBV-positive cells.

