Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear IGF-1R expression as a prognostic factor in cervical
cancer patients


Background: Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) is an unusual
transmembrane receptor in that both and subunits, regulated by IGF-1,
translocate from the membrane to the nucleus and then bind to DNA,
increasing gene transcription. Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), a
docking protein for IGF-1R, also traffics to the nucleus and then
activates promoters of cell cycle progression genes. We studied the
prognostic significance of nuclear and membranous IGF-1R and nuclear
IRS-1 in cervical cancer, previously unreported. Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed all patients (pts) with stage Ib2-IIb disease
who received platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) at Hyogo
Cancer Center between 2002 and 2009. Age, performance status, FIGO stage,
histology, tumor size, pelvic lymph nodes on MRI, squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) antigen level, hemoglobin levels before NAC, chemotherapeutic
agents and chemotherapy cycles were evaluated. Paraffin-embedded
pretreatment tissue was stained immunohistochemically with an anti-IGF-1R
(Cell signaling, MA) or anti-IRS-1 (Millipore, MA) rabbit polyclonal
antibody. IGF-1R and IRS-1 expressions were scored from 0 to 3 according
to frequency and intensity. All slides were reviewed by a single
pathologist. We analyzed prognostic factors associated with overall
survival by a Cox proportional-hazards model. Results: A total of 128 pts
(median age 57 years) were identified. The majority had stage II (61%)
and SCC (69%). Median tumor size was 40 mm. Overall response rate to NAC
was 59%, and median follow-up was 34 months. Nuclear and membranous
IGF-1R and nuclear IRS-1 expressions were scored as 0/1-2/3 in 49/60/19
pts, 97/12/19 pts, and 65/41/22 pts, respectively. Multivariate analysis
revealed that nuclear IGF-1R expression (HR, 2.6; P= .035 for score 1-3
vs. 0) and age Background: Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R)
is an unusual transmembrane receptor in that both and subunits, regulated
by IGF-1, translocate from the membrane to the nucleus and then bind to
DNA, increasing gene transcription. Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1),
a docking protein for IGF-1R, also traffics to the nucleus and then
activates promoters of cell cycle progression genes. We studied the
prognostic significance of nuclear and membranous IGF-1R and nuclear
IRS-1 in cervical cancer, previously unreported. Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed all patients (pts) with stage Ib2-IIb disease
who received platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) at Hyogo
Cancer Center between 2002 and 2009. Age, performance status, FIGO stage,
histology, tumor size, pelvic lymph nodes on MRI, squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) antigen level, hemoglobin levels before NAC, chemotherapeutic
agents and chemotherapy cycles were evaluated. Paraffin-embedded
pretreatment tissue was stained immunohistochemically with an anti-IGF-1R
(Cell signaling, MA) or anti-IRS-1 (Millipore, MA) rabbit polyclonal
antibody. IGF-1R and IRS-1 expressions were scored from 0 to 3 according
to frequency and intensity. All slides were reviewed by a single
pathologist. We analyzed prognostic factors associated with overall
survival by a Cox proportional-hazards model. Results: A total of 128 pts
(median age 57 years) were identified. The majority had stage II (61%)
and SCC (69%). Median tumor size was 40 mm. Overall response rate to NAC
was 59%, and median follow-up was 34 months. Nuclear and membranous
IGF-1R and nuclear IRS-1 expressions were scored as 0/1-2/3 in 49/60/19
pts, 97/12/19 pts, and 65/41/22 pts, respectively. Multivariate analysis
revealed that nuclear IGF-1R expression (HR, 2.6; P= .035 for score 1-3
vs. 0) and age <40 (HR, 2.6; P= .026) were independently associated with
worse overall survival. Neither membranous IGF-1R nor IRS-1 expression
had a prognostic impact on survival. Conclusions: Nuclear IGF-1R is
commonly expressed in cervical cancer and is an independent prognostic
factor, unlike membranous IGF-1R or nuclear IRS-1. Approaches that block
the translocation of IGF-1R from the cell membrane to nucleus might hold
promise for the treatment of cervical cancer.

