Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Receptor mediated delivery of therapeutic Fe3O4 core TiO2 shell
nanoparticles


Our goal is to target the delivery of therapeutic nanoparticles (NPs)
composed of an Fe3O4 core and a TiO2 shell (Fe@Ti NPs) to specific cancer
cells and to the appropriate organelles within these cells. Controlled
delivery of these therapeutic NPs could lead to the development of more
effective therapies for individual types of cancer. In order to control
the delivery of these Fe@Ti NPs, we have attached a small peptide that
can bind Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) to the TiO2 molecules at
the surface of the NPs. EGFR is an ideal target because it is
overexpressed in epithelial type cancers, can induce its own endocytosis,
and can translocate to the nucleus. We hypothesize that Fe@Ti NPs
conjugated with these peptides (Fe@Ti NCs) will be able to bind EGFR
resulting in improved internalization and nuclear localization of these
NCs by EGFR positive cancer cells. In fact, we have shown that these NCs
can indeed bind and extract EGFR from cancer cell protein extracts.
Furthermore, we have shown by Flow Cytometry that EGFR positive cancer
cells internalize EGFR binding Fe@Ti NCs to a greater degree than NCs
displaying a scrambled peptide or bare NPs. Finally, recent experiments
utilizing X-ray Fluorescence Microscopy (XFM) indicate that these EGFR
binding NCs but not bare NPs can cluster with EGFR at the surface of
cancer cells as well as within the cell nucleus.

