Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of pomegranate extract dose on prostate cancer growth
in a carbohydrate restricted mouse xenograft model


Introduction: Preclinical studies have shown that dietary carbohydrate
restriction slows prostate tumor growth in multiple xenograft models in
part due to a reduction insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis signaling.
Pomegranate extract (PE) has been shown to slow prostate tumor growth
in-vitro and in vivo similarly through this pathway, as well as decrease
markers of angiogenesis and inflammation. In this study, we determined
the dose-response of PE on prostate tumor growth in the setting of
dietary carbohydrate restriction in a slow-growing mouse xenograft model.
For this study, we chose a standardized PE (POMx, Pom Wonderful, Los
Angeles, CA), at doses which are easily translatable to human
equivalents. Materials and Methods: Male athymic nude mice housed 5 per
cage (n = 130) were subcutaneously injected with 1 10^5 LAPC-4 cells
after a 10 day acclimation period. 14 days post-injection, all mice were
all placed on an ad-libitum no-carbohydrate ketogenic diet (NCKD: 83%
fat, 0% carbohydrate, 17% protein) (day 0). Each cage was randomly
assigned to 1 of 4 doses of PE (placebo = 0 mg, low dose = 2.62 mg,
intermediate dose = 5.25mg, or high dose = 7.87mg) suspended in 0.2 mL of
PBS delivered via oral gavage 5 days per week. These doses are equivalent
to 0, 1, 2, or 3 POMx capsules/day consumed by a 70 kg human. Mice will
be sacrificed when tumors reach 1,000 mm^3. Results: At randomization,
there were no differences in median body weight among groups (p = 0.623).
Currently, at day 32, overall survival is decreased in the placebo group
(hazard ratio 2.26, 95% confidence interval, 0.83 - 6.10, p = 0.109)
relative to the low dose PE group with no survival differences among PE
groups. Median tumor volumes for the placebo group are 83.3mm^3, compared
to 74.5mm^3, 76.3mm^3, and 70.1mm^3 for the low, intermediate, and high
PE doses respectively, which are not statistically different (p = 0.98).
Conclusions: Preliminary data show a trend toward improved survival with
the combination of an NCKD and PE at the selected doses. Currently, tumor
volumes are not significantly different, however completed results will
be presented.

