Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adenovirus E1A binding to p300 is essential for synergistic cell
killing in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs in prostate cancer
cells


Commonly prostate cancer becomes insensitive to androgen ablation
therapy, developing hormone-refractory metastatic PCa (HRPC). The
available therapies for HRPC are palliative. Therefore, novel therapeutic
strategies to target treatment resistant PCa are needed.
Replication-selective oncolytic adenoviruses (ONYX-015, H-101, and
CTL-102) represent a promising anticancer approach with proven efficacy
in cancer cell lines, tumour xenografts in vivo and demonstrated safety
in numerous clinical trials. It has been established that expression of
the viral E1A gene in combination with chemodrugs is essential for the
enhancement of cell killing. The E1A gene is the first viral gene to be
expressed after infection and is an absolute requirement for viral gene
expression and replication. Specific regions in the E1A proteins bind to
numerous cellular factors to regulate the host cell function and the
viral life cycle including p300, p400, pRb proteins and various
transcription factors. We demonstrate that adenoviral mutants expressing
only the small E1A12S protein potently sensitizes prostate cancer cell
lines to the cytotoxic drugs mitoxantrone and docetaxel, the current
standard of care for late stage prostate cancers. We generated AdE1A12S
mutants with gene deletions in the regions binding p300 (AdE1A1104), p400
(AdE1A1102) and pRb (Ad1108) and potently expressed the E1A gene in the
absence of viral replication. Preliminary findings suggest that binding
to p300 (AdE1A12S, AdE1A1102, AdE1A1108) was essential for sensitization
of the PCa cells to cytotoxic drugs. The decreases in EC50 values for
mitoxantrone after infection with AdE1A1102 in PC3 and 22Rv1 cells were
405% and 373% respectively. In addition, all viruses binding p300, caused
an accumulation of cells in the G2/M-phase in combination with
mitoxantrone that increased from 682% to 805% with AdE1A1102 compared to
mitoxantrone alone in PC3 cells. The G2/M accumulation was accompanied by
higher levels of cyclin A and B in PC3 cells (AR-, p53-) but not in 22Rv1
cells (AR+, p53+). Under these conditions, using sub-optimal doses of
mitoxantrone, p21 was induced an induction that could not be prevented by
any E1A12S mutant. AdE1A1102 caused synergistic cell killing in
combination with mitoxantrone in 10/20 conditions (CI0.9) while the
corresponding replicating mutant (dl1102) further increased the
synergistic effects (CI0.9) in 20/20 conditions. The AdE1A1104 and dl1104
in combination with mitoxantrone either caused antagonism or low levels
of synergy in both cell lines. Data is presented to demonstrate that the
enhanced cell killing with cytotoxic drugs and both replicating and
non-replicating mutants is caused by increased apoptosis. Preliminary
findings from miRNA-mRNA pathway analysis will be presented indicating
activation of cell death programmes and inhibition of cell survival
pathways.

