Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional and molecular characterization of macrophage-tumor cell
communication


Lung Cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. It is
increasingly appreciated that the tumor stroma, consistent of a
heterogeneous population of non-neoplastic host cells, is an essential
part of cancer initiation, growth and progression. Tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) can influence cancer progression and metastasis, but
the responsible mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we focus on the
involvement of bone-marrow derived macrophages (BM- MM) and two of their
major chemotactic pathways (CX3CR1-CX3CL1 and CCR2-CCL2 axis) in cancer
proliferation and migration. We demonstrate that conditioned medium (CM)
derived from co-cultures of lewis lung carcinoma (LLC1) cells with BM- MM
(purity >99%) enhances proliferation of LLC1-cells significantly from
1.790.1717 to 2.430.2067 in an absorbance based BrdU-Assay and a higher
colony-number was found in a colony-formation-assay compared to control.
In addition LLC1-migration in presence of CM was 5 fold increased
compared to controls (172.92.18 versus 33.932.29). Further, analysis of
the cytokine profile of co-culture-derived CM showed regulation of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (Interleukin-6 and Interleukin-1),
anti-inflammatory cytokines (Interleukin-10 and Interleukin-1RA) and
several chemokines (CCL5 and CCL2). Importantly, evaluation of tumor
growth in chemokine receptor knockout mice, CX3CR1-KO and CCR2-KO
demonstrated reduced tumor size compared to wild type mice. CX3CR1-KO and
CCR2-KO tumor showed reduced in vivo proliferation as assessed by PCNA
immunostaining (12.46%3.188 versus 46.45%2.922). Further analysis of the
tumor microenvironment in CX3CR1-KO and CCR2-KO demonstrated a
significant decrease in monocyte/ macrophage accumulation compared to
control tumors as assessed by FACS. Compared to the percentage of
macrophages in control tumor (7.5180.78%), a significant decrease was
observed in CCR2-KO (2.96 0.233%) and CX3CR1-KO (3.9750.6019%) tumors.
Based on these findings, we conclude that macrophage plays a crucial role
in lung cancer progression and the knowledge of tumor-host interactions
can provide novel therapeutic approaches for lung cancer.

