Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIR-18b decreases self-renewal of glioblastoma cancer stem-like
cells through targeting NOTCH2, NEDD9, and MEKK1


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant brain tumor in human with
extremely poor prognosis and new treatment for this deadly disease is
desperately needed. Cancer Stem-like cells (CSCs) have been prospectively
isolated from GBM and shown required for tumor propagation. We and others
have demonstrated recently that differentiation of GBM neurospheres
decreases GBM cell propagation both in vitro and in vivo (Zhu et al,
Cancer Research, 71:6061-72, 2011). In the current study, we found that
miR-18b was up-regulated upon differentiation of GBM neurosphere. When we
introduced miR-18b into GBM neurospheres by lentivirus, we found that
miR-18b decreases clonogenesis and growth of three different GBM
neurosphere lines, indicating that GBM CSC population was reduced by
miR-18b. Mechanistically, we found that miR-18b down-regulates luciferase
activity of 3-UTR reporters of NOTCH2, NEDD9, and MEKK1. Furthermore,
protein expression of NOTCH2, NEDD9, and MEKK1 are also decreased by
miR-18b, suggesting that NOTCH2, NEDD9 and MEKK1 are the direct targets
of miR-18b in GBM CSCs. In addition, we have demonstrated previously that
NOTCH regulates GBM CSC propagation through pAKT (Fan et al, Stem Cells,
28:5-16, 2010). Here, we found that pAKT and pERK1/2 were also
down-regulated in miR-10b infected GBM neurosphere lines, indicating that
miR-18b reduces GBM CSC propagation through NOTCH2/pAKT pathways. Taken
together, we have demonstrated that miR-18b functions as a tumor
suppressor and decreases GBM CSC propagation through targeting NOTCH2,
NEDD9, and MEKK1, indicating that miR-18b can be a potential therapeutic
molecule to target GBM CSCs and improve GBM treatment.

