Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FLT3-driven redox signalling in acute myeloid leukemia


The concept of reactive oxygen species (ROS) being produced via the
activation of specific oncogenes provides a basis for generating genomic
instability and pro-survival signalling in tumor cells. The purpose of
this study was to identify downstream targets of NADPH oxidase
(Nox)-derived ROS signalling in acute myeloid leukemia cells, by
performing a proteomic analysis utilizing two-dimensional phosphotyrosine
immnoblotting. The majority of the targets identified were
cytoskeletal-associated proteins including Ezrin, a known regulator of
the cytoskeleton, which was examined further. The study demonstrated that
inhibition of Nox enzymes, using diphenyleneiodonium chloride in the
acute myeloid leukemia cell line MOLM-13, resulted in a decrease in Ezrin
tyrosine phosphorylation and also triggered a shift in Ezrin sub-cellular
localization as detected by immunofluorescence. The change in Ezrin
localization coincided with altered cell morphology, observed using
scanning electron microscopy and a decreased ability to migrate through a
polycarbonate transwell membrane. Similar effects were observed upon
inhibition of the oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 using the
staurosporine derivate PKC412, implicating a role for FLT3 as an upstream
regulator of Ezrin. Our results indicate that FLT3 drives production of
ROS by Nox, which stimulates changes in Ezrin tyrosine phosphorylation
and localization via redox regulation of Src. Furthermore, the modulation
of Ezrin by FLT3 leads to subsequent alterations of MOLM-13 cell
morphology and a significant influence on cell motility.

