Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Wnt transcription factor TCF4 mediates resistance of
colorectal cancer cells to (chemo-) radiotherapy in a
-catenin-independent manner


Background: We recently demonstrated that the Wnt transcription factor
TCF4 is over-expressed in rectal cancers that were resistant to
preoperative chemoradiotherapy. Because the association between Wnt
signaling and chemoradioresistance is a novel finding, we aimed to
investigate whether this over-expression is functionally relevant.
Methods: Three colorectal cancer cell lines were transfected with two
shRNA-vectors targeting TCF4. Stable single-cell clone (SCC) populations
were established, and selected clones were irradiated at 0, 1, 2, 4, 6
and 8 Gy. H2AX staining was used to evaluate DNA double strand repair
after irradiation, and changes in cell cycle distribution were analyzed
before and after radiation. Finally, -catenin activity was inhibited
using both siRNAs and the small molecule inhibitor XAV939. Results:
Silencing of TCF4 led to a significant radiosensitization in SW837 and
SW480, whereas there was no effect in HT-29. Well-fitting, we observed
significantly more H2AX foci 24 hrs after radiation in SW837 SCCs
compared to HT-29 SCCs, pointing to an impaired DNA damage repair in
SW837. Furthermore, in SW837 SCCs, but not in HT-29 SCCs, we noticed a
change in the cell cycle distribution towards radiosensitive cell cycle
phases before radiation, and compromised cell cycle control after
radiation. Finally, both siRNA- and small molecule-mediated inhibition of
-catenin activity did not influence the sensitivity to chemoradiotherapy.
Conclusion: Our results indicate a novel mechanism through which the Wnt
transcription factor TCF4 mediates chemoradioresistance in a
-catenin-independent manner. Moreover, they suggest that TCF4 is a
potential molecular target to sensitize resistant tumor cells to (chemo-)
radiotherapy.

