Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic TNF treatment enhances cancer stem cell-like phenotype via
Notch1 activation in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells


Although there is an increasing evidence of chronic
inflammation-associated tumorigenesis, the molecular and cellular
mechanisms linking chronic inflammation to tumorigenesis have not yet
been fully understood. Recent studies have uncovered and validated the
pathophysiological role of self-renewing cells, named cancer stem cells
(CSC; also called tumor-initiating cells), in long-term sustenance of
cancers. In this study, we investigated the effect of chronic
inflammation on CSC phenotype of oral squamous cell carcinoma cells
(OSCC). We treated OSCC cell lines with tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF), a major proinflammatory cytokine, for extended periods and
examined the effect of chronic TNF on CSC characteristics, i.e.,
undifferentiated tumor sphere forming ability, stem cell-associated genes
expression and chemo-radioresistance. Chronic treatment of OSCC with TNF
enhanced CSC phenotype, which is shown by increased tumor sphere forming
ability, greatly increased tumorigenicity and chemo-radioresistance, and
increased expression of stemness-related genes. Moreover, activation of
Notch1 signaling was detected in the TNF treated cell, and suppression of
Notch1 signaling inhibited CSC phenotype. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that inhibition of Hes-1, the downstream target of Notch1, led to
suppression of CSC phenotype. Taken together, the data suggest that
proinflammatory cytokine exposure can generate or/and enrich OSCC CSC
population, in part, by activation of the Notch1 signaling pathway.

