Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large-scale RNAi screening of human kinome identifies putative
breast cancer related molecular targets


To identify vulnerable genes in breast cancer cells that may be
therapeutic candidates for treatment of breast cancer, we conducted an
unbiased, large-scale, synthetic siRNA-mediated RNAi screen. Using cell
viability as the read-out, we first screened a whole human kinome library
plus 350 additional genes (four siRNAs per gene) in a cell line
representative of triple negative (ER -ve, PR -ve, Her2/Neu -ve) breast
cancer, MDA-MB-468. We identified approximately 40 kinases whose
loss-of-function reduced the viability of MDA-MB-468 cells based on the
criteria of at least two of four siRNAs per gene generating a Z score of
1.5. To validate the top candidates from our screen, PLK1, AURKB and
PCTK3/CDK18), we tested additional siRNAs (from multiple vendors) in
different breast cancer cell lines including ER positive cell lines,
CAMA-1 and MCF-7, HER-2 amplified cell lines, HCC-1954 and AU565,
triple-Negative (Basal A) cell lines HCC-1937 and MDA-MB-468, and
triple-Negative (Basal B) cell lines BT549 and MDA-MB-231. We found
silencing of PLK1, AURKB or PCTK3/CDK18 reduced the cell viability in
majority of these cell lines to a certain degree and also induced cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. PLK1 and AURKB are being actively pursued as
molecular targets in cancer but little is known of the function of the
PCTK3/CDK18 protein, with most of the limited functional studies of
PCTK3/CDK18 having focused on a role in neuronal cell signaling. One
study has though reported an increase in the expression of PCTK3/CDK18 in
breast cancer (Valladares et al., Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 170:147).
We found silencing of PCTK3/CDK18 is lethal to most breast cancer cells,
but it is well tolerated in the untransformed breast epithelial cell line
MCF10A. The PCTK3/CDK18 gene encodes a member of the PCTAIRE protein
kinase subfamily of CDC2-related serine/threonine-specific protein
kinases. We observed that with multiple siRNAs, we induced an 80%
decrease in the viability of MDA-MB-468 cells 96 hours following siRNA
transfection. To ensure that the observed inhibitory effect is indeed due
to silencing of PCTK3/CDK18 we performed an RNAi rescue experiment, by
creating a silent third-codon point mutation within the region targeted
by one of the PCTK3 siRNAs. We found the RNAi-induced inhibition and cell
cycle arrest is countered by expression of a functional version of the
target gene that is resistant to the silencing siRNA. No specific
inhibitor of PCTK3/CDK18 is available, but a proteome-wide
CDK/CRK-specific kinase inhibitor RGB-286147 does decrease cell
viability, and induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of MDA-MB-468
cells. We are currently further investigating the normal and
cancer-related functional roles of PCTK3/CDK18 and are pursuing
strategies for the identification of PCTK3/CDK18 specific inhibitors.

