Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic profiling of triple negative breast cancer from South of
Brazil


Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) are defined by the lack of
expression of ER, PR and HER2 receptors and characterized by an
aggressive clinical history and poor outcome. Considering that these
tumors do not present a good response to the available adjuvant target
therapies (hormonal and HER-2 based therapies), there is a critical need
to identify new markers to improve treatment options for these patients.
The use of genome-wide methodologies is a progress towards this
direction, through the identification of biomarkers that can be
translated into novel target-based therapies. We report the genomic
profiling performed by array-CGH (Agilent 4x44K) in 33 cases of TNBC
obtained from Hospital N.S. das Gracas and Hospital das Clinicas (UFPR),
Curitiba, South of Brazil. Copy number alterations in potentially
therapeutic target genes for TNBC (involved in the PI3K-AKT pathway) were
evaluated by TaqMan copy number assay (Applied Biosystems). The data was
correlated with pathological parameters from the patients. Copy number
changes were observed by array-CGH in 87% (25/30) of the TNBC cases
analyzed, with a median of 9.97+12.37 alterations per case. Based on this
value, the samples were divided into two categories (>10 and 0.05) or the
presence of lymph node (LN) metastasis (2=1.8;P>0.10) and tumor grade
(2=1.18;P>0.20). Although a high degree of molecular heterogeneity was
observed, amplification on 8q was observed in 50% (15/30) of the cases,
mostly involving 8q24.3. Tumor size was not significantly different among
the cases with or without 8q amplification (t=1,88; P>0.20). These cases
were also equally distributed in relation to LN metastasis
(2=2.67;P>0.10) and tumor grade (2=0.5;P>0.50). Finally, alterations in
at least one gene involved in the PIK3/AKT pathway were observed in 88%
(29/33) of the cases and in more than three genes in 45% (13/29) of the
cases. PIK3CA and PTEN were the most frequently altered genes: gained and
lost in 42% and 40% of the cases respectively. AKT2, AKT1, and FGFR2
genes were observed gained in 24%, 21% and 21% of the cases respectively.
Alterations in those genes were also not significantly correlated with
tumor size (t=0.95; P>0.30), LN metastasis (2=0.16; P>0.50) and tumor
grade (2=3.23; P>0.05). Our results indicate a high level of DNA copy
number changes in TNBC cases, involving mostly chromosome 8q. Alterations
on genes involved in the PIK3/AKT pathway were also common;
immunohistochemistry analyses are in progress to evaluate those
alterations at the expression level. No significant correlations were
observed among the genomic alterations and the pathological parameters
from the patients. This lack of correlation can be due to the limited
sample size or can indicate that in our set of TNBC cases tumor size, LN
metastasis and tumor grade are not associated with an elevated genomic
instability.

