Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of stem cell-like compartments in Embryonal
Rhabdomyosarcoma modulated by Sonic Hedgehog signaling


Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a heterogeneous group of malignancies with
features of impaired skeletal muscle differentiation and represents the
majority of the soft tissue cancers in the pediatric age group. Current
treatment regimens offer some clinical respite but at a significant risk
of averse side effects and secondary tumors later in life. Identifying
and targeting sub-populations with higher tumorigenic potential and self
renewal capacity not only decreases tumor burden but also lowers the
probability of relapse. Using the sphere formation assay we could select
for self-renewing cells from the heterogeneous monolayer cultures of
embryonal RMS cell lines, RD and Rh36, which had multipotent
differentiation ability in vitro and greater tumorigenic potential in
vivo. Preliminary results suggest that the self renewing ability of RMS
cells could be modulated by Hedgehog signaling, a developmental pathway
important in RMS biology. Microarray analysis of the sphere cultures
revealed Prominin 1 (CD133) as one of the surface markers with
significantly higher expression. The CD133-positive cellular
sub-population was more resistant to DNA damaging agents and had a
greater capacity for tumor formation in an orthotopic xenotransplantation
model. Embryonal RMS patients with higher expression of CD133 had a
significantly lower overall survival. Ongoing work seeks to validate the
importance of Hedgehog signaling in the embryonal RMS stem cell-like
compartment.

