Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of 2-Deoxyglucose on colorectal cancer cell lines


Aerobic glycolysis (Warburg Effect) has long been regarded as a hallmark
of many types of cancers. Colorectal cancer is known to exist in hypoxic
conditions and hence, it is believed that most of the colorectal
carcinoma tumors depend more on glycolysis than other tumors. A number of
drugs have been developed in the past to target the up-regulated
glycolytic pathway of the tumor cells, including 2-Deoxy-glucose (2DG).
Being structurally similar to D-Glucose, it is utilized in the glycolytic
pathway and is phosphorylated to 2DG-phosphate, which starts to
accumulate in the cells. The accumulated 2DG-phosphate, inhibits key
glycolysis enzymes - hexokinase and phospho-glucoisomerase leading to
inhibition of glycolysis, and thus starving the cells of ATP. Although
this has been regarded as the major mechanism of 2DG, various
observations question this being the sole mechanism of action. To further
investigate the molecular mechanism of 2DG, we studied its effect on
colorectal carcinoma cell lines (GC3/Cl, SW620 and SW480) alone or in
combination with 5-fluorouracil (5FU). We have observed that colorectal
carcinoma cells are highly susceptible to 2DG compared to other cancer
cells or non-cancerous cells and exert an additive effect in combination
with 5FU. 2DG treatment arrested cell cycle at G1/G0 checkpoint and
promoted apoptosis. The treatment of 2DG also resulted in a transient
increase in the expression of p21. A reduced expression of other cell
cycle proteins such as cyclin D1 and cyclin A was also observed following
the 2DG treatment. Here, we provide evidence that in colorectal carcinoma
cell lines, the 2DG causes a cell cycle arrest in addition to glycolysis
inhibition and this additional activity may be responsible for an
increased susceptibility of colorectal cancer cell lines to 2DG.

