Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EGCG enhances the therapeutic potential of gemcitabine and
CP690550 (Tasocitinib) by inhibiting STAT3 signaling pathway in human
pancreatic cancer cells


Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) is an
oncogene, which promotes cell survival, proliferation, motility and
progression in cancer cells. Targeting STAT3 signaling may lead to the
development of novel therapeutic approaches for human cancers. Here, we
examined the effects of epigallocathechin gallate (EGCG) on STAT3
signaling in pancreatic cancer cells, and assessed the therapeutic
potential of EGCG with gemcitabine or JAK3 inhibitor CP690550
(Tasocitinib) for the treatment and/or prevention of pancreatic cancer.
Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by XTT assay and TUNEL
staining, respectively. Gene and protein expressions were measured by
qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis, respectively. The results revealed
that EGCG inhibited the expression of phospho and total JAK3 and STAT3,
STAT3 transcription and activation, and the expression of STAT3-regulated
genes, resulting in the inhibition of cell motility, migration and
invasion, and the induction of caspase-3 and PARP cleavage. The
inhibition of STAT3 enhanced the inhibitory effects of EGCG on cell
motility and viability. Additionally, gemcitabine and CP690550 alone
inhibited STAT3 target genes and synergized with EGCG to inhibit cell
viability and induce apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. Overall, these
results suggest that EGCG suppresses the growth, invasion and migration
of pancreatic cancer cells, and induces apoptosis by interfering with the
STAT3 signaling pathway. Moreover, it can be combined with other
chemotherapeutic agents like gemcitabine and CP690550 for the treatment
and/or prevention of pancreatic cancer.

