Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: C5a complement enhances generation of APC-induced Foxp3+ T
regulatory cells


Introduction: The complement system has complex interactions with the
cellular immune system. Preliminary studies demonstrated that presence of
complement significantly enhances the ability of malignant B cells and
professional antigen-presenting cells to induce T regulatory (Treg) cells
in vitro. The current study was designed to identify the specific
complement component involved and to evaluate if complement depletion
improves active immune responses through inhibition of Treg activity.
Methods: Enriched CD4+ T cells from healthy human donors were co-cultured
in vitro with primary myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) in the presence of
purified active complement proteins or unmodified human serum. The effect
of serum treated with agents that block C5a generation, such as soluble
complement receptor 1 (sCR1) that inhibits C5 convertase formation, or
cobra venom factor (CVF) that enzymatically depletes C3 and C5, was also
evaluated. Following culture, the percent of CD4+ T cells expressing Treg
phenotype (CD3+CD4+CD25highFoxp3+) was evaluated by flow cytometry. In
vivo, the effect of C5a inhibition on active immunization was also
assessed following immunization of C57Bl/6 mice with a single,
subcutaneous injection of ovalbumin (100 g/mice) with or without agents
that block C5a generation. Development of anti-ovalbumin antibody and
anti-ovalbumin T cell responses were analyzed by ELISA and flow
cytometry. Results: In vitro (human system): 1. In the presence of
purified C5a protein, primary mDCs induced significantly more Tregs in
co-cultured CD4+ T cells. Fewer Tregs were seen in the absence of
complement, or with purified C1q, C3a, C3b or C5 proteins [p0.05 for
Media vs other proteins]. 2. Serum C5a depletion or inhibition of C5a
generation by anti-human C5a or sCR1 treatments decreased serum's ability
to enhance mDC-induced Tregs [Intact serum vs depleted serum,
pIntroduction: The complement system has complex interactions with the
cellular immune system. Preliminary studies demonstrated that presence of
complement significantly enhances the ability of malignant B cells and
professional antigen-presenting cells to induce T regulatory (Treg) cells
in vitro. The current study was designed to identify the specific
complement component involved and to evaluate if complement depletion
improves active immune responses through inhibition of Treg activity.
Methods: Enriched CD4+ T cells from healthy human donors were co-cultured
in vitro with primary myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) in the presence of
purified active complement proteins or unmodified human serum. The effect
of serum treated with agents that block C5a generation, such as soluble
complement receptor 1 (sCR1) that inhibits C5 convertase formation, or
cobra venom factor (CVF) that enzymatically depletes C3 and C5, was also
evaluated. Following culture, the percent of CD4+ T cells expressing Treg
phenotype (CD3+CD4+CD25highFoxp3+) was evaluated by flow cytometry. In
vivo, the effect of C5a inhibition on active immunization was also
assessed following immunization of C57Bl/6 mice with a single,
subcutaneous injection of ovalbumin (100 g/mice) with or without agents
that block C5a generation. Development of anti-ovalbumin antibody and
anti-ovalbumin T cell responses were analyzed by ELISA and flow
cytometry. Results: In vitro (human system): 1. In the presence of
purified C5a protein, primary mDCs induced significantly more Tregs in
co-cultured CD4+ T cells. Fewer Tregs were seen in the absence of
complement, or with purified C1q, C3a, C3b or C5 proteins [p0.05 for
Media vs other proteins]. 2. Serum C5a depletion or inhibition of C5a
generation by anti-human C5a or sCR1 treatments decreased serum's ability
to enhance mDC-induced Tregs [Intact serum vs depleted serum, p<0.05]. In
vivo (murine system): 1. Circulating CD4+ T cells with T regulatory
phenotype (Foxp3+) were significantly lower in mice injected with Ova
plus CVF or sCR1 than mice injected with Ova alone [p=0.021 (CVF), 0.016
(sCR1)]. 2. Inhibition of C5a generation by sCR1 or CVF at the site of
ovalbumin immunization resulted in higher anti-ovalbumin serum IgM levels
[Ova alone vs Ova plus CVF or sCR1 p=0.047 or p-0.014, respectively] and
higher ovalbumin-specific CD8+ T cells in draining lymph nodes [Ova alone
vs Ova plus CVF or sCR1 - p=0.048 or 0.041, respectively]. Conclusion:
C5a complement plays a key role in the induction of Tregs induced by
professional APCs. Inhibition of C5a generation at the site of
immunization results in increased antigen-specific active immune
responses. Ongoing studies are exploring the mechanisms responsible for
the effect of C5a on APC-induced Treg generation. The data from this
study has potential clinical applications, such as enhancing active
immune responses against a broad variety of less immunogenic antigens,
including cancer.

