Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The importance of FGF pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma and its
role in acquired resistance to anti-angiogenic therapies


INTRODUCTION: Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF) signaling has an important
role in different biological functions and human cancers, being some of
its members described as driver oncogenes and components of evasive
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapies. AIMS: 1) To identify molecular
alterations of FGF signaling in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 2)
to study the mechanism of acquired resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy
in HCC to identify novel targets, and 3) to evaluate the role of brivanib
in overcoming acquired resistance in animal models of HCC. METHODS: FGF
pathway was analyzed in 104 early HCCs by whole-genome expression,
genome-wide methylation status, microRNA expression and chromosomal
aberrations. Subcutaneous tumors in nude mice (n=26) were treated with
sorafenib (30 mg/kg/day) until development of acquired resistance,
afterwards mice were randomized into either brivanib (BMS, 100 mg/kg/day)
or sorafenib treatment. Anti-tumoral effect and survival were assessed.
The mechanisms involved in acquired resistance were studied by gene
expression profiling and protein evaluation. RESULTS: 31% of the HCC
samples presented overexpression of oncogenic ligands (i.e. FGF19, FGF 21
and FGF2), and 19% overexpression of FGFR3 and FGFR4 -feature clustered
in the proliferation HCC subclass (Chiang, Cancer Res, 2008). Promoter
hypermethylation of FGFR2 (FDR=0.015) and regulation of FGFR3 expression
by miR-483-5p (6 fold-change, FDRINTRODUCTION: Fibroblast Growth Factor
(FGF) signaling has an important role in different biological functions
and human cancers, being some of its members described as driver
oncogenes and components of evasive resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapies. AIMS: 1) To identify molecular alterations of FGF signaling in
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 2) to study the mechanism of
acquired resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy in HCC to identify novel
targets, and 3) to evaluate the role of brivanib in overcoming acquired
resistance in animal models of HCC. METHODS: FGF pathway was analyzed in
104 early HCCs by whole-genome expression, genome-wide methylation
status, microRNA expression and chromosomal aberrations. Subcutaneous
tumors in nude mice (n=26) were treated with sorafenib (30 mg/kg/day)
until development of acquired resistance, afterwards mice were randomized
into either brivanib (BMS, 100 mg/kg/day) or sorafenib treatment.
Anti-tumoral effect and survival were assessed. The mechanisms involved
in acquired resistance were studied by gene expression profiling and
protein evaluation. RESULTS: 31% of the HCC samples presented
overexpression of oncogenic ligands (i.e. FGF19, FGF 21 and FGF2), and
19% overexpression of FGFR3 and FGFR4 -feature clustered in the
proliferation HCC subclass (Chiang, Cancer Res, 2008). Promoter
hypermethylation of FGFR2 (FDR=0.015) and regulation of FGFR3 expression
by miR-483-5p (6 fold-change, FDR<0.05) were also observed, as well as
high level amplification in FGF19 locus (8% of samples), and allelic
losses of FGFR2 and Spry2 (pINTRODUCTION: Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF)
signaling has an important role in different biological functions and
human cancers, being some of its members described as driver oncogenes
and components of evasive resistance to anti-angiogenic therapies. AIMS:
1) To identify molecular alterations of FGF signaling in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 2) to study the mechanism of acquired
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy in HCC to identify novel targets,
and 3) to evaluate the role of brivanib in overcoming acquired resistance
in animal models of HCC. METHODS: FGF pathway was analyzed in 104 early
HCCs by whole-genome expression, genome-wide methylation status, microRNA
expression and chromosomal aberrations. Subcutaneous tumors in nude mice
(n=26) were treated with sorafenib (30 mg/kg/day) until development of
acquired resistance, afterwards mice were randomized into either brivanib
(BMS, 100 mg/kg/day) or sorafenib treatment. Anti-tumoral effect and
survival were assessed. The mechanisms involved in acquired resistance
were studied by gene expression profiling and protein evaluation.
RESULTS: 31% of the HCC samples presented overexpression of oncogenic
ligands (i.e. FGF19, FGF 21 and FGF2), and 19% overexpression of FGFR3
and FGFR4 -feature clustered in the proliferation HCC subclass (Chiang,
Cancer Res, 2008). Promoter hypermethylation of FGFR2 (FDR=0.015) and
regulation of FGFR3 expression by miR-483-5p (6 fold-change, FDR<0.05)
were also observed, as well as high level amplification in FGF19 locus
(8% of samples), and allelic losses of FGFR2 and Spry2 (p<0.05). FGF2
overexpression was associated with WNT-beta-catenin HCC subclass and
correlated with expression of WNT-liver specific targets (i.e. GLUL,
LGR5, TBX3, SPARCL1, pINTRODUCTION: Fibroblast Growth Factor (FGF)
signaling has an important role in different biological functions and
human cancers, being some of its members described as driver oncogenes
and components of evasive resistance to anti-angiogenic therapies. AIMS:
1) To identify molecular alterations of FGF signaling in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 2) to study the mechanism of acquired
resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy in HCC to identify novel targets,
and 3) to evaluate the role of brivanib in overcoming acquired resistance
in animal models of HCC. METHODS: FGF pathway was analyzed in 104 early
HCCs by whole-genome expression, genome-wide methylation status, microRNA
expression and chromosomal aberrations. Subcutaneous tumors in nude mice
(n=26) were treated with sorafenib (30 mg/kg/day) until development of
acquired resistance, afterwards mice were randomized into either brivanib
(BMS, 100 mg/kg/day) or sorafenib treatment. Anti-tumoral effect and
survival were assessed. The mechanisms involved in acquired resistance
were studied by gene expression profiling and protein evaluation.
RESULTS: 31% of the HCC samples presented overexpression of oncogenic
ligands (i.e. FGF19, FGF 21 and FGF2), and 19% overexpression of FGFR3
and FGFR4 -feature clustered in the proliferation HCC subclass (Chiang,
Cancer Res, 2008). Promoter hypermethylation of FGFR2 (FDR=0.015) and
regulation of FGFR3 expression by miR-483-5p (6 fold-change, FDR<0.05)
were also observed, as well as high level amplification in FGF19 locus
(8% of samples), and allelic losses of FGFR2 and Spry2 (p<0.05). FGF2
overexpression was associated with WNT-beta-catenin HCC subclass and
correlated with expression of WNT-liver specific targets (i.e. GLUL,
LGR5, TBX3, SPARCL1, p<0.05) suggesting a crosstalk among FGF and WNT
pathways in HCC. Regarding the in vivo model, 65% mice acquired
resistance after sorafenib therapy [median: 42 days; tumor size: 855 mm3
resistant group vs 316 mm3 sorafenib-responder group (p=0.002)]. This
acquired resistance phenotype has been evaluated by gene profiling and
GSEA revealing an enrichment of gene signatures of poor prognosis and
resistance to cancer therapies (FDRINTRODUCTION: Fibroblast Growth Factor
(FGF) signaling has an important role in different biological functions
and human cancers, being some of its members described as driver
oncogenes and components of evasive resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapies. AIMS: 1) To identify molecular alterations of FGF signaling in
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 2) to study the mechanism of
acquired resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy in HCC to identify novel
targets, and 3) to evaluate the role of brivanib in overcoming acquired
resistance in animal models of HCC. METHODS: FGF pathway was analyzed in
104 early HCCs by whole-genome expression, genome-wide methylation
status, microRNA expression and chromosomal aberrations. Subcutaneous
tumors in nude mice (n=26) were treated with sorafenib (30 mg/kg/day)
until development of acquired resistance, afterwards mice were randomized
into either brivanib (BMS, 100 mg/kg/day) or sorafenib treatment.
Anti-tumoral effect and survival were assessed. The mechanisms involved
in acquired resistance were studied by gene expression profiling and
protein evaluation. RESULTS: 31% of the HCC samples presented
overexpression of oncogenic ligands (i.e. FGF19, FGF 21 and FGF2), and
19% overexpression of FGFR3 and FGFR4 -feature clustered in the
proliferation HCC subclass (Chiang, Cancer Res, 2008). Promoter
hypermethylation of FGFR2 (FDR=0.015) and regulation of FGFR3 expression
by miR-483-5p (6 fold-change, FDR<0.05) were also observed, as well as
high level amplification in FGF19 locus (8% of samples), and allelic
losses of FGFR2 and Spry2 (p<0.05). FGF2 overexpression was associated
with WNT-beta-catenin HCC subclass and correlated with expression of
WNT-liver specific targets (i.e. GLUL, LGR5, TBX3, SPARCL1, p<0.05)
suggesting a crosstalk among FGF and WNT pathways in HCC. Regarding the
in vivo model, 65% mice acquired resistance after sorafenib therapy
[median: 42 days; tumor size: 855 mm3 resistant group vs 316 mm3
sorafenib-responder group (p=0.002)]. This acquired resistance phenotype
has been evaluated by gene profiling and GSEA revealing an enrichment of
gene signatures of poor prognosis and resistance to cancer therapies
(FDR<0.05), and identifying IGF-1R and FGFR1 overexpression as the
potential drivers of the development of this resistance. Brivanib delayed
tumor growth (p=0.03), increased survival after development of acquired
resistance (median survival: 32 days vs 15 days on sorafenib, p=0.07) and
inhibited FGF downstream signaling, reverting the resistant phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: FGF pathway is activated in a subclass of early HCC due to
deregulation of ligands and receptors by different mechanisms. Acquired
resistance to sorafenib in experimental models seems to be driven by FGF
and IGF signaling pathways. Brivanib significantly delayed tumor growth
and increased survival in the sorafenib-resistant in vivo model.

