Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alpharadin (Radium-223 chloride) completely prevents tumor growth
in bone and increases survival in a mouse model of breast cancer bone
metastases in preventive and micro-metastatic settings


Radium-223 chloride is an alpha-emitting radiopharmaceutical that has
been shown to improve overall survival in the phase III clinical study
(ALSYMPCA) in the treatment of castration resistant prostate cancer with
bone metastases (Parker et al. ECCO/ESMO 2011, abstract LBA1). As a
calcium mimetic, radium-223 localizes to bone, where the emission of
alpha-particles provide an efficient and localized radiation treatment to
metastatic skeletal tumor lesions. As previously reported, radium-223
decreases osteolysis and also tumor burden in established model of breast
cancer bone metastasis in nude mice (Suominen et al. AACR 2011, abstract
2664). In this study, we investigated the effects of radium-223 on the
development of breast cancer bone metastases when administered in the
preventive and micro-metastastic settings. The effects of radium-223 were
studied in a breast cancer bone metastatic model using intra-cardiac
injection of human MDA-MB-231SA/GFP cells in nude mice at day 0. In the
first study, the animals were randomized into four groups (n=7) and dosed
with either vehicle or a single dose of radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) at days
-1, 2 or 15. Three mice were also sacrificed at day 2 for
immunohistochemical (pan-cytokeratin and GFP) detection of tumor cells in
the bone marrow. Radiography and fluorescence imaging were performed at
sacrifice (day 25). Tumor burden was also analysed from mid-sagittal
sections of both hind limbs. The second study was a survival study, in
which the animals were randomized to three groups (n=12) and dosed with
either vehicle or a single dose of radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) at days -1 or
2. Radiography and fluorescence imaging were performed only on animals
surviving to day 50. In the first study there were disseminated tumor
cells in the bone marrow of all three animals (altogether 18/18 positive
sections) sacrificed at day 2, as detected by IHC staining. Radium-223
decreased whole body tumor burden by 81, 84 and 55% and osteolysis by 98,
99.6 and 82%, when administered at days -1, 2 or 15, respectively. No
tumor foci were detected in the bone sections of mice treated at days -1
and 2, and tumor area was decreased by 65% in animals treated at day 15.
In the survival study, median survival was 24.5 days in the control
group, 39.5 days (p Radium-223 chloride is an alpha-emitting
radiopharmaceutical that has been shown to improve overall survival in
the phase III clinical study (ALSYMPCA) in the treatment of castration
resistant prostate cancer with bone metastases (Parker et al. ECCO/ESMO
2011, abstract LBA1). As a calcium mimetic, radium-223 localizes to bone,
where the emission of alpha-particles provide an efficient and localized
radiation treatment to metastatic skeletal tumor lesions. As previously
reported, radium-223 decreases osteolysis and also tumor burden in
established model of breast cancer bone metastasis in nude mice (Suominen
et al. AACR 2011, abstract 2664). In this study, we investigated the
effects of radium-223 on the development of breast cancer bone metastases
when administered in the preventive and micro-metastastic settings. The
effects of radium-223 were studied in a breast cancer bone metastatic
model using intra-cardiac injection of human MDA-MB-231SA/GFP cells in
nude mice at day 0. In the first study, the animals were randomized into
four groups (n=7) and dosed with either vehicle or a single dose of
radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) at days -1, 2 or 15. Three mice were also
sacrificed at day 2 for immunohistochemical (pan-cytokeratin and GFP)
detection of tumor cells in the bone marrow. Radiography and fluorescence
imaging were performed at sacrifice (day 25). Tumor burden was also
analysed from mid-sagittal sections of both hind limbs. The second study
was a survival study, in which the animals were randomized to three
groups (n=12) and dosed with either vehicle or a single dose of
radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) at days -1 or 2. Radiography and fluorescence
imaging were performed only on animals surviving to day 50. In the first
study there were disseminated tumor cells in the bone marrow of all three
animals (altogether 18/18 positive sections) sacrificed at day 2, as
detected by IHC staining. Radium-223 decreased whole body tumor burden by
81, 84 and 55% and osteolysis by 98, 99.6 and 82%, when administered at
days -1, 2 or 15, respectively. No tumor foci were detected in the bone
sections of mice treated at days -1 and 2, and tumor area was decreased
by 65% in animals treated at day 15. In the survival study, median
survival was 24.5 days in the control group, 39.5 days (p <0.001 vs ctrl)
in the group administered at day -1, and 35.5 days (pRadium-223 chloride
is an alpha-emitting radiopharmaceutical that has been shown to improve
overall survival in the phase III clinical study (ALSYMPCA) in the
treatment of castration resistant prostate cancer with bone metastases
(Parker et al. ECCO/ESMO 2011, abstract LBA1). As a calcium mimetic,
radium-223 localizes to bone, where the emission of alpha-particles
provide an efficient and localized radiation treatment to metastatic
skeletal tumor lesions. As previously reported, radium-223 decreases
osteolysis and also tumor burden in established model of breast cancer
bone metastasis in nude mice (Suominen et al. AACR 2011, abstract 2664).
In this study, we investigated the effects of radium-223 on the
development of breast cancer bone metastases when administered in the
preventive and micro-metastastic settings. The effects of radium-223 were
studied in a breast cancer bone metastatic model using intra-cardiac
injection of human MDA-MB-231SA/GFP cells in nude mice at day 0. In the
first study, the animals were randomized into four groups (n=7) and dosed
with either vehicle or a single dose of radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) at days
-1, 2 or 15. Three mice were also sacrificed at day 2 for
immunohistochemical (pan-cytokeratin and GFP) detection of tumor cells in
the bone marrow. Radiography and fluorescence imaging were performed at
sacrifice (day 25). Tumor burden was also analysed from mid-sagittal
sections of both hind limbs. The second study was a survival study, in
which the animals were randomized to three groups (n=12) and dosed with
either vehicle or a single dose of radium-223 (300 kBq/kg) at days -1 or
2. Radiography and fluorescence imaging were performed only on animals
surviving to day 50. In the first study there were disseminated tumor
cells in the bone marrow of all three animals (altogether 18/18 positive
sections) sacrificed at day 2, as detected by IHC staining. Radium-223
decreased whole body tumor burden by 81, 84 and 55% and osteolysis by 98,
99.6 and 82%, when administered at days -1, 2 or 15, respectively. No
tumor foci were detected in the bone sections of mice treated at days -1
and 2, and tumor area was decreased by 65% in animals treated at day 15.
In the survival study, median survival was 24.5 days in the control
group, 39.5 days (p <0.001 vs ctrl) in the group administered at day -1,
and 35.5 days (p<0.001 vs ctrl) in the group administered at day 2. Three
of twelve animals, all administered at day -1, survived until day 50 and
two of them had only minimal residual disease. In summary, Alpharadin
(radium-223) administered in a preventive or micro-metastatic setting
completely prevented progression of osteolytic breast cancer bone
metastases and increased survival in this preclinical model. These
findings strongly support the clinical development of radium-223 for
patients at risk of developing bone metastases.

