Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stathmin suppression influences ROCK signaling and reduces cell
invasion and metastasis in neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma is a highly metastatic childhood cancer of the sympathetic
nervous system. Stathmin is a microtubule destabilizing protein highly
expressed in neuroblastoma though studies addressing its functional role
in this malignancy have been limited. The Rho- Rho-associated coiled-coil
forming kinase (Rho-ROCK) signaling pathway has been implicated in
metastasis through its regulation of the cell cytoskeleton namely the
actin remodeling proteins, cofilin and myosin light chain (MLC), and
microtubule dynamics. The aims of this study were to determine whether
stathmin influenced the Rho-ROCK signaling pathway and metastasis in
neuroblastoma. Methods: SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression was confirmed
in 2 independent neuroblastoma cell lines, BE(2)-C and SY5Y, by qPCR and
western blot. The cell cytoskeleton of siRNA-transfected cells was
visualized by staining with phalloidin (actin filaments) and -tubulin
(microtubules) and tubulin polymer levels were examined by western blot.
The expression of cofilin and MLC in siRNA-transfected cells, following
treatment with the ROCK inhibitor Y-27632, were analyzed by western blot.
SiRNA-transfected cells were subjected to chemotaxis transwell migration
and invasion assays. To assess stathmin's role in neuroblastoma
metastasis, two million control or stathmin shRNA/luciferase-expressing
neuroblastoma cells [SK-N-BE(2)/TGL] were injected into the left adrenal
fat pad of 8 week old SCID-Beige mice. Tumor growth was monitored weekly
using the Xenogen IVIS System. Mice were sacrificed when primary tumors
reached 1500mm3, 38 days post-injection or upon health decline. Ex vivo
imaging and IHC confirmed neuroblastoma cells in the lungs of mice.
Results: SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression significantly reduced
neuroblastoma cell migration by 44-47% [SY5Y cells 44% reduction
(pNeuroblastoma is a highly metastatic childhood cancer of the
sympathetic nervous system. Stathmin is a microtubule destabilizing
protein highly expressed in neuroblastoma though studies addressing its
functional role in this malignancy have been limited. The Rho-
Rho-associated coiled-coil forming kinase (Rho-ROCK) signaling pathway
has been implicated in metastasis through its regulation of the cell
cytoskeleton namely the actin remodeling proteins, cofilin and myosin
light chain (MLC), and microtubule dynamics. The aims of this study were
to determine whether stathmin influenced the Rho-ROCK signaling pathway
and metastasis in neuroblastoma. Methods: SiRNA-mediated stathmin
suppression was confirmed in 2 independent neuroblastoma cell lines,
BE(2)-C and SY5Y, by qPCR and western blot. The cell cytoskeleton of
siRNA-transfected cells was visualized by staining with phalloidin (actin
filaments) and -tubulin (microtubules) and tubulin polymer levels were
examined by western blot. The expression of cofilin and MLC in
siRNA-transfected cells, following treatment with the ROCK inhibitor
Y-27632, were analyzed by western blot. SiRNA-transfected cells were
subjected to chemotaxis transwell migration and invasion assays. To
assess stathmin's role in neuroblastoma metastasis, two million control
or stathmin shRNA/luciferase-expressing neuroblastoma cells
[SK-N-BE(2)/TGL] were injected into the left adrenal fat pad of 8 week
old SCID-Beige mice. Tumor growth was monitored weekly using the Xenogen
IVIS System. Mice were sacrificed when primary tumors reached 1500mm3, 38
days post-injection or upon health decline. Ex vivo imaging and IHC
confirmed neuroblastoma cells in the lungs of mice. Results:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression significantly reduced neuroblastoma
cell migration by 44-47% [SY5Y cells 44% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C
cells 47% reduction (pNeuroblastoma is a highly metastatic childhood
cancer of the sympathetic nervous system. Stathmin is a microtubule
destabilizing protein highly expressed in neuroblastoma though studies
addressing its functional role in this malignancy have been limited. The
Rho- Rho-associated coiled-coil forming kinase (Rho-ROCK) signaling
pathway has been implicated in metastasis through its regulation of the
cell cytoskeleton namely the actin remodeling proteins, cofilin and
myosin light chain (MLC), and microtubule dynamics. The aims of this
study were to determine whether stathmin influenced the Rho-ROCK
signaling pathway and metastasis in neuroblastoma. Methods:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression was confirmed in 2 independent
neuroblastoma cell lines, BE(2)-C and SY5Y, by qPCR and western blot. The
cell cytoskeleton of siRNA-transfected cells was visualized by staining
with phalloidin (actin filaments) and -tubulin (microtubules) and tubulin
polymer levels were examined by western blot. The expression of cofilin
and MLC in siRNA-transfected cells, following treatment with the ROCK
inhibitor Y-27632, were analyzed by western blot. SiRNA-transfected cells
were subjected to chemotaxis transwell migration and invasion assays. To
assess stathmin's role in neuroblastoma metastasis, two million control
or stathmin shRNA/luciferase-expressing neuroblastoma cells
[SK-N-BE(2)/TGL] were injected into the left adrenal fat pad of 8 week
old SCID-Beige mice. Tumor growth was monitored weekly using the Xenogen
IVIS System. Mice were sacrificed when primary tumors reached 1500mm3, 38
days post-injection or upon health decline. Ex vivo imaging and IHC
confirmed neuroblastoma cells in the lungs of mice. Results:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression significantly reduced neuroblastoma
cell migration by 44-47% [SY5Y cells 44% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C
cells 47% reduction (p<0.001)] and invasion through an extra-cellular
matrix by 55-62% [SY5Y cells 55% reduction (pNeuroblastoma is a highly
metastatic childhood cancer of the sympathetic nervous system. Stathmin
is a microtubule destabilizing protein highly expressed in neuroblastoma
though studies addressing its functional role in this malignancy have
been limited. The Rho- Rho-associated coiled-coil forming kinase
(Rho-ROCK) signaling pathway has been implicated in metastasis through
its regulation of the cell cytoskeleton namely the actin remodeling
proteins, cofilin and myosin light chain (MLC), and microtubule dynamics.
The aims of this study were to determine whether stathmin influenced the
Rho-ROCK signaling pathway and metastasis in neuroblastoma. Methods:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression was confirmed in 2 independent
neuroblastoma cell lines, BE(2)-C and SY5Y, by qPCR and western blot. The
cell cytoskeleton of siRNA-transfected cells was visualized by staining
with phalloidin (actin filaments) and -tubulin (microtubules) and tubulin
polymer levels were examined by western blot. The expression of cofilin
and MLC in siRNA-transfected cells, following treatment with the ROCK
inhibitor Y-27632, were analyzed by western blot. SiRNA-transfected cells
were subjected to chemotaxis transwell migration and invasion assays. To
assess stathmin's role in neuroblastoma metastasis, two million control
or stathmin shRNA/luciferase-expressing neuroblastoma cells
[SK-N-BE(2)/TGL] were injected into the left adrenal fat pad of 8 week
old SCID-Beige mice. Tumor growth was monitored weekly using the Xenogen
IVIS System. Mice were sacrificed when primary tumors reached 1500mm3, 38
days post-injection or upon health decline. Ex vivo imaging and IHC
confirmed neuroblastoma cells in the lungs of mice. Results:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression significantly reduced neuroblastoma
cell migration by 44-47% [SY5Y cells 44% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C
cells 47% reduction (p<0.001)] and invasion through an extra-cellular
matrix by 55-62% [SY5Y cells 55% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C cells 62%
reduction (pNeuroblastoma is a highly metastatic childhood cancer of the
sympathetic nervous system. Stathmin is a microtubule destabilizing
protein highly expressed in neuroblastoma though studies addressing its
functional role in this malignancy have been limited. The Rho-
Rho-associated coiled-coil forming kinase (Rho-ROCK) signaling pathway
has been implicated in metastasis through its regulation of the cell
cytoskeleton namely the actin remodeling proteins, cofilin and myosin
light chain (MLC), and microtubule dynamics. The aims of this study were
to determine whether stathmin influenced the Rho-ROCK signaling pathway
and metastasis in neuroblastoma. Methods: SiRNA-mediated stathmin
suppression was confirmed in 2 independent neuroblastoma cell lines,
BE(2)-C and SY5Y, by qPCR and western blot. The cell cytoskeleton of
siRNA-transfected cells was visualized by staining with phalloidin (actin
filaments) and -tubulin (microtubules) and tubulin polymer levels were
examined by western blot. The expression of cofilin and MLC in
siRNA-transfected cells, following treatment with the ROCK inhibitor
Y-27632, were analyzed by western blot. SiRNA-transfected cells were
subjected to chemotaxis transwell migration and invasion assays. To
assess stathmin's role in neuroblastoma metastasis, two million control
or stathmin shRNA/luciferase-expressing neuroblastoma cells
[SK-N-BE(2)/TGL] were injected into the left adrenal fat pad of 8 week
old SCID-Beige mice. Tumor growth was monitored weekly using the Xenogen
IVIS System. Mice were sacrificed when primary tumors reached 1500mm3, 38
days post-injection or upon health decline. Ex vivo imaging and IHC
confirmed neuroblastoma cells in the lungs of mice. Results:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression significantly reduced neuroblastoma
cell migration by 44-47% [SY5Y cells 44% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C
cells 47% reduction (p<0.001)] and invasion through an extra-cellular
matrix by 55-62% [SY5Y cells 55% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C cells 62%
reduction (p<0.05)]. Stathmin suppression also altered neuroblastoma cell
morphology and this was associated with changes in the cytoskeleton
including increased tubulin polymer levels and the phosphorylation of
cofilin and MLC. Treatment of stathmin-suppressed neuroblastoma cells
with Y-27632 ablated MLC phosphorylation, and returned the level of
cofilin phosphorylation and cell invasion back to that of untreated
control cells. This highlights a novel link between stathmin expression
and ROCK signaling. In vivo, shRNA-mediated stathmin suppression did not
influence neuroblastoma tumor growth. In contrast, stathmin suppression
significantly reduced metastatic neuroblastoma tumor burden in the lungs
by 71% (pNeuroblastoma is a highly metastatic childhood cancer of the
sympathetic nervous system. Stathmin is a microtubule destabilizing
protein highly expressed in neuroblastoma though studies addressing its
functional role in this malignancy have been limited. The Rho-
Rho-associated coiled-coil forming kinase (Rho-ROCK) signaling pathway
has been implicated in metastasis through its regulation of the cell
cytoskeleton namely the actin remodeling proteins, cofilin and myosin
light chain (MLC), and microtubule dynamics. The aims of this study were
to determine whether stathmin influenced the Rho-ROCK signaling pathway
and metastasis in neuroblastoma. Methods: SiRNA-mediated stathmin
suppression was confirmed in 2 independent neuroblastoma cell lines,
BE(2)-C and SY5Y, by qPCR and western blot. The cell cytoskeleton of
siRNA-transfected cells was visualized by staining with phalloidin (actin
filaments) and -tubulin (microtubules) and tubulin polymer levels were
examined by western blot. The expression of cofilin and MLC in
siRNA-transfected cells, following treatment with the ROCK inhibitor
Y-27632, were analyzed by western blot. SiRNA-transfected cells were
subjected to chemotaxis transwell migration and invasion assays. To
assess stathmin's role in neuroblastoma metastasis, two million control
or stathmin shRNA/luciferase-expressing neuroblastoma cells
[SK-N-BE(2)/TGL] were injected into the left adrenal fat pad of 8 week
old SCID-Beige mice. Tumor growth was monitored weekly using the Xenogen
IVIS System. Mice were sacrificed when primary tumors reached 1500mm3, 38
days post-injection or upon health decline. Ex vivo imaging and IHC
confirmed neuroblastoma cells in the lungs of mice. Results:
SiRNA-mediated stathmin suppression significantly reduced neuroblastoma
cell migration by 44-47% [SY5Y cells 44% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C
cells 47% reduction (p<0.001)] and invasion through an extra-cellular
matrix by 55-62% [SY5Y cells 55% reduction (p<0.05) and BE(2)C cells 62%
reduction (p<0.05)]. Stathmin suppression also altered neuroblastoma cell
morphology and this was associated with changes in the cytoskeleton
including increased tubulin polymer levels and the phosphorylation of
cofilin and MLC. Treatment of stathmin-suppressed neuroblastoma cells
with Y-27632 ablated MLC phosphorylation, and returned the level of
cofilin phosphorylation and cell invasion back to that of untreated
control cells. This highlights a novel link between stathmin expression
and ROCK signaling. In vivo, shRNA-mediated stathmin suppression did not
influence neuroblastoma tumor growth. In contrast, stathmin suppression
significantly reduced metastatic neuroblastoma tumor burden in the lungs
by 71% (p<0.01) compared to controls. Conclusion: Stathmin is a novel
mediator of metastasis in neuroblastoma and potential therapeutic target
for this deadly disease.

