Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serum ferritin predicts response to trastuzumab and is a biomarker
for breast and pancreatic cancers: A potential novel inflammatory
effector mechanism


Inflammation plays a critical role in cancer. However, it is still
unclear what inflammatory effector mechanisms, if any, are directly
responsible for enhancing tumorigenesis. Serum ferritin is an acute-phase
protein that is elevated in multiple cancer types including breast
cancer. However due to the prevailing paradigm on ferritin as a
house-keeping iron storage protein, no further investigation of the
functional significance of serum ferritin or its clinical utility in
cancer has been made thus far. In light of recent advances in iron and
ferritin biology, we hypothesized that the elevation in serum ferritin
represents an inflammatory effector mechanism that is actively and
directly enhancing tumorigenesis, and thus it can be used to predict
clinical outcome. Herein we provide data that extracellular ferritin
stimulates proliferation of breast cancer cells and activates AKT
signaling through an iron-independent mechanism - a novel function for
this traditional iron storage protein. With this novel mechanism in mind,
we made clinical predictions about the ability of serum ferritin to
predict response to the anti-HER2/neu antibody trastuzumab. Higher
pretreatment serum ferritin was significant on a continuous basis for
predicting reduced Overall Survival (OS, pInflammation plays a critical
role in cancer. However, it is still unclear what inflammatory effector
mechanisms, if any, are directly responsible for enhancing tumorigenesis.
Serum ferritin is an acute-phase protein that is elevated in multiple
cancer types including breast cancer. However due to the prevailing
paradigm on ferritin as a house-keeping iron storage protein, no further
investigation of the functional significance of serum ferritin or its
clinical utility in cancer has been made thus far. In light of recent
advances in iron and ferritin biology, we hypothesized that the elevation
in serum ferritin represents an inflammatory effector mechanism that is
actively and directly enhancing tumorigenesis, and thus it can be used to
predict clinical outcome. Herein we provide data that extracellular
ferritin stimulates proliferation of breast cancer cells and activates
AKT signaling through an iron-independent mechanism - a novel function
for this traditional iron storage protein. With this novel mechanism in
mind, we made clinical predictions about the ability of serum ferritin to
predict response to the anti-HER2/neu antibody trastuzumab. Higher
pretreatment serum ferritin was significant on a continuous basis for
predicting reduced Overall Survival (OS, p<0.0001) and Progression Free
Survival (PFS, pInflammation plays a critical role in cancer. However, it
is still unclear what inflammatory effector mechanisms, if any, are
directly responsible for enhancing tumorigenesis. Serum ferritin is an
acute-phase protein that is elevated in multiple cancer types including
breast cancer. However due to the prevailing paradigm on ferritin as a
house-keeping iron storage protein, no further investigation of the
functional significance of serum ferritin or its clinical utility in
cancer has been made thus far. In light of recent advances in iron and
ferritin biology, we hypothesized that the elevation in serum ferritin
represents an inflammatory effector mechanism that is actively and
directly enhancing tumorigenesis, and thus it can be used to predict
clinical outcome. Herein we provide data that extracellular ferritin
stimulates proliferation of breast cancer cells and activates AKT
signaling through an iron-independent mechanism - a novel function for
this traditional iron storage protein. With this novel mechanism in mind,
we made clinical predictions about the ability of serum ferritin to
predict response to the anti-HER2/neu antibody trastuzumab. Higher
pretreatment serum ferritin was significant on a continuous basis for
predicting reduced Overall Survival (OS, p<0.0001) and Progression Free
Survival (PFS, p<0.0001) in a patient cohort (n=66) receiving first-line
trastuzumab-containing therapy. When analyzed as dichotomous categorical
groups using the median pretreatment serum ferritin level as a cutoff
point, patients with elevated serum ferritin had significantly reduced
PFS (p Inflammation plays a critical role in cancer. However, it is still
unclear what inflammatory effector mechanisms, if any, are directly
responsible for enhancing tumorigenesis. Serum ferritin is an acute-phase
protein that is elevated in multiple cancer types including breast
cancer. However due to the prevailing paradigm on ferritin as a
house-keeping iron storage protein, no further investigation of the
functional significance of serum ferritin or its clinical utility in
cancer has been made thus far. In light of recent advances in iron and
ferritin biology, we hypothesized that the elevation in serum ferritin
represents an inflammatory effector mechanism that is actively and
directly enhancing tumorigenesis, and thus it can be used to predict
clinical outcome. Herein we provide data that extracellular ferritin
stimulates proliferation of breast cancer cells and activates AKT
signaling through an iron-independent mechanism - a novel function for
this traditional iron storage protein. With this novel mechanism in mind,
we made clinical predictions about the ability of serum ferritin to
predict response to the anti-HER2/neu antibody trastuzumab. Higher
pretreatment serum ferritin was significant on a continuous basis for
predicting reduced Overall Survival (OS, p<0.0001) and Progression Free
Survival (PFS, p<0.0001) in a patient cohort (n=66) receiving first-line
trastuzumab-containing therapy. When analyzed as dichotomous categorical
groups using the median pretreatment serum ferritin level as a cutoff
point, patients with elevated serum ferritin had significantly reduced
PFS (p <0.004, median 8.30 vs. 23.90 months) and OS (p Inflammation plays
a critical role in cancer. However, it is still unclear what inflammatory
effector mechanisms, if any, are directly responsible for enhancing
tumorigenesis. Serum ferritin is an acute-phase protein that is elevated
in multiple cancer types including breast cancer. However due to the
prevailing paradigm on ferritin as a house-keeping iron storage protein,
no further investigation of the functional significance of serum ferritin
or its clinical utility in cancer has been made thus far. In light of
recent advances in iron and ferritin biology, we hypothesized that the
elevation in serum ferritin represents an inflammatory effector mechanism
that is actively and directly enhancing tumorigenesis, and thus it can be
used to predict clinical outcome. Herein we provide data that
extracellular ferritin stimulates proliferation of breast cancer cells
and activates AKT signaling through an iron-independent mechanism - a
novel function for this traditional iron storage protein. With this novel
mechanism in mind, we made clinical predictions about the ability of
serum ferritin to predict response to the anti-HER2/neu antibody
trastuzumab. Higher pretreatment serum ferritin was significant on a
continuous basis for predicting reduced Overall Survival (OS, p<0.0001)
and Progression Free Survival (PFS, p<0.0001) in a patient cohort (n=66)
receiving first-line trastuzumab-containing therapy. When analyzed as
dichotomous categorical groups using the median pretreatment serum
ferritin level as a cutoff point, patients with elevated serum ferritin
had significantly reduced PFS (p <0.004, median 8.30 vs. 23.90 months)
and OS (p <0.0001, median 12.73 vs. 69.57 months). Because several
reports have suggested the elevation in serum ferritin is due to
localized secretion within breast tumors, we examined the ability of
breast caner cells to secrete ferritin. Breast cancer cell lines did not
secrete detectable levels of ferritin. However, macrophages (a prominent
cell type in the breast tumor microenvironment) were capable of ferritin
secretion, and this secretion was potentiated in response to
pro-inflammatory cytokines. We also expanded our analysis of the
prognostic value of serum ferritin to include pancreatic cancer. Serum
ferritin was significant in predicting overall survival (P=0.003) in a
metastatic pancreatic cancer cohort (n=164). Collectively, these data
suggest that the elevation in serum ferritin may represent an
inflammatory effector mechanism involving tumor-associated macrophages in
which ferritin serves as a pro-tumor factor. Therapeutic strategies
targeting ferritin functionality or secretion may have potential
usefulness in multiple cancer types, and its cancer-associated elevation
may have clinical value as a prognostic factor or a predictor of response
to established therapies.

