Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-menopausal women with luminal A subtype might not require
breast radiotherapy: Preliminary results from a randomized clinical trial
of tamoxifen + radiation


Objectives: To determine the predictive value for ipsilateral breast
tumour recurrence (IBTR), molecular subtyping using six
immunohistochemical (IHC) biomarkers were evaluated on the breast cancer
specimens from patients age 50 and older with T1 and T2 node negative
breast cancer, who were participants in a randomized trial of tamoxifen
(Tam) +/ whole breast radiation (WBRT). Methods: Between December 1992
and June 2000, 769 women were randomized to WBRT and Tamoxifen (Tam/WBRT;
n=386) 20 mg daily for 5 years, or Tam alone (Tam; n=383). Median age was
68 years; 639 (83%) had pT1 tumors. Intrinsic molecular subtyping was
determined using semi-quantitative analysis of ER, PR, Ki-67, HER2, EGFR
and cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 on tissue microarrays (TMAs) constructed from
the tumor blocks of 304 of the 345 available tumors. Patients were
classified into the following categories: luminal A, luminal B,
luminal-HER2, HER2 enriched, basal-like, or triple-negative
phenotype-nonbasal. The median follow-up for this cohort was 10 years.
Results: For the overall group, IBTR at 10 years was 13.8% with Tam
compared to 5.0% with Tam/WBRT (pObjectives: To determine the predictive
value for ipsilateral breast tumour recurrence (IBTR), molecular
subtyping using six immunohistochemical (IHC) biomarkers were evaluated
on the breast cancer specimens from patients age 50 and older with T1 and
T2 node negative breast cancer, who were participants in a randomized
trial of tamoxifen (Tam) +/ whole breast radiation (WBRT). Methods:
Between December 1992 and June 2000, 769 women were randomized to WBRT
and Tamoxifen (Tam/WBRT; n=386) 20 mg daily for 5 years, or Tam alone
(Tam; n=383). Median age was 68 years; 639 (83%) had pT1 tumors.
Intrinsic molecular subtyping was determined using semi-quantitative
analysis of ER, PR, Ki-67, HER2, EGFR and cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 on tissue
microarrays (TMAs) constructed from the tumor blocks of 304 of the 345
available tumors. Patients were classified into the following categories:
luminal A, luminal B, luminal-HER2, HER2 enriched, basal-like, or
triple-negative phenotype-nonbasal. The median follow-up for this cohort
was 10 years. Results: For the overall group, IBTR at 10 years was 13.8%
with Tam compared to 5.0% with Tam/WBRT (p<0.0001). Tumour size (HR 1.54,
p=0.001), ER positive status (HR 0.35, p=0.006), age (HR 0.96, p=0.014),
and treatment with Tam/WBRT (HR 0.28, pObjectives: To determine the
predictive value for ipsilateral breast tumour recurrence (IBTR),
molecular subtyping using six immunohistochemical (IHC) biomarkers were
evaluated on the breast cancer specimens from patients age 50 and older
with T1 and T2 node negative breast cancer, who were participants in a
randomized trial of tamoxifen (Tam) +/ whole breast radiation (WBRT).
Methods: Between December 1992 and June 2000, 769 women were randomized
to WBRT and Tamoxifen (Tam/WBRT; n=386) 20 mg daily for 5 years, or Tam
alone (Tam; n=383). Median age was 68 years; 639 (83%) had pT1 tumors.
Intrinsic molecular subtyping was determined using semi-quantitative
analysis of ER, PR, Ki-67, HER2, EGFR and cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 on tissue
microarrays (TMAs) constructed from the tumor blocks of 304 of the 345
available tumors. Patients were classified into the following categories:
luminal A, luminal B, luminal-HER2, HER2 enriched, basal-like, or
triple-negative phenotype-nonbasal. The median follow-up for this cohort
was 10 years. Results: For the overall group, IBTR at 10 years was 13.8%
with Tam compared to 5.0% with Tam/WBRT (p<0.0001). Tumour size (HR 1.54,
p=0.001), ER positive status (HR 0.35, p=0.006), age (HR 0.96, p=0.014),
and treatment with Tam/WBRT (HR 0.28, p<0.0001) were significant factors
for IBTR. For the 304 TMAs, 145 patients were treated with Tam alone, 159
with both. Luminal A tumors (ER or PR positive, HER2 negative, Ki-67 60,
IBTR was 4.3% with Tam alone vs. 6% with Tam/WBRT (n=103, p=0.9). Grade
I/II Luminal A tumors (n=114) had a similar rate of IBRT regardless of
treatment: 4.9% with Tam alone vs. 5.5% with Tam/WBRT (p=0.9). In
contrast, luminal B tumours (Ki-67>14%, n=82) demonstrated an IBTR rate
of 16.1% with Tam alone vs. 3.9% with Tam/WBRT (p=0.05). Lum HER2 (n=11),
HER2-enriched (n=11) and basal-like (n=16) demonstrated even higher risks
of IBTR, although the number is small in each group. Conclusions: These
preliminary data demonstrate that the 6-marker IHC subtype appears to
prognosticate for IBTR for women with early stage breast cancer. In
particular, older (age >60) luminal A patients with grade I/II tumors
demonstrated the lowest risk of breast relapse, for which RT had minimal
impact, suggesting that such patients could be managed with Tam alone. It
is of note that this subgroup represents a significant proportion of
women in this trial (133/304 or 43%). In contrast, breast RT remains
beneficial for women with higher risk subtypes (Luminal B, HER2 enriched,
and basal). Further corroborations are required using the remaining
tumour blocks, and validated in a prospective study.

