Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor suppressor effects of ETS2 transcriptional factor in human
non-small cell lung cancer


Advances in prevention and treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) are dependent in part on the characterization of tumor suppressor
genes and oncogenes and the roles they elicit in the pathogenesis of this
malignancy. Although v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2
(ETS2) is a canonical transcription factor that regulates various
cancer-associated cellular and developmental processes including
proliferation and migration, its function in lung carcinogenesis is still
unknown. In this study we sought to examine the role of ETS2 in NSCLC
pathogenesis. We first examined ETS2 mRNA expression in lung
adenocarcinomas (n=80) and normal lung (n=30) which we profiled using
microarrays, and in seven matched adenocarcinoma and normal lung pairs
analyzed using next-generation sequencing technology. Both array and
sequencing datasets revealed that ETS2 mRNA was significantly lower in
lung adenocarcinomas relative to normal lung (pAdvances in prevention and
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are dependent in part on
the characterization of tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes and the
roles they elicit in the pathogenesis of this malignancy. Although v-ets
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2 (ETS2) is a canonical
transcription factor that regulates various cancer-associated cellular
and developmental processes including proliferation and migration, its
function in lung carcinogenesis is still unknown. In this study we sought
to examine the role of ETS2 in NSCLC pathogenesis. We first examined ETS2
mRNA expression in lung adenocarcinomas (n=80) and normal lung (n=30)
which we profiled using microarrays, and in seven matched adenocarcinoma
and normal lung pairs analyzed using next-generation sequencing
technology. Both array and sequencing datasets revealed that ETS2 mRNA
was significantly lower in lung adenocarcinomas relative to normal lung
(p<0.001) which was confirmed by quantitative PCR analysis. Moreover and
in the microaray dataset, ETS2 mRNA expression was significantly
anti-correlated with that of the proliferation marker KI67 (R=0.59,
pAdvances in prevention and treatment of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) are dependent in part on the characterization of tumor suppressor
genes and oncogenes and the roles they elicit in the pathogenesis of this
malignancy. Although v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2
(ETS2) is a canonical transcription factor that regulates various
cancer-associated cellular and developmental processes including
proliferation and migration, its function in lung carcinogenesis is still
unknown. In this study we sought to examine the role of ETS2 in NSCLC
pathogenesis. We first examined ETS2 mRNA expression in lung
adenocarcinomas (n=80) and normal lung (n=30) which we profiled using
microarrays, and in seven matched adenocarcinoma and normal lung pairs
analyzed using next-generation sequencing technology. Both array and
sequencing datasets revealed that ETS2 mRNA was significantly lower in
lung adenocarcinomas relative to normal lung (p<0.001) which was
confirmed by quantitative PCR analysis. Moreover and in the microaray
dataset, ETS2 mRNA expression was significantly anti-correlated with that
of the proliferation marker KI67 (R=0.59, p<0.001). In addition, in
silico analysis of publicly available datasets demonstrated that ETS2
mRNA was lower in NSCLC compared to normal lung (all pAdvances in
prevention and treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are
dependent in part on the characterization of tumor suppressor genes and
oncogenes and the roles they elicit in the pathogenesis of this
malignancy. Although v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 2
(ETS2) is a canonical transcription factor that regulates various
cancer-associated cellular and developmental processes including
proliferation and migration, its function in lung carcinogenesis is still
unknown. In this study we sought to examine the role of ETS2 in NSCLC
pathogenesis. We first examined ETS2 mRNA expression in lung
adenocarcinomas (n=80) and normal lung (n=30) which we profiled using
microarrays, and in seven matched adenocarcinoma and normal lung pairs
analyzed using next-generation sequencing technology. Both array and
sequencing datasets revealed that ETS2 mRNA was significantly lower in
lung adenocarcinomas relative to normal lung (p<0.001) which was
confirmed by quantitative PCR analysis. Moreover and in the microaray
dataset, ETS2 mRNA expression was significantly anti-correlated with that
of the proliferation marker KI67 (R=0.59, p<0.001). In addition, in
silico analysis of publicly available datasets demonstrated that ETS2
mRNA was lower in NSCLC compared to normal lung (all p<0.001), and
interestingly, was also lower in airways of healthy smokers relative to
non-smokers (pAdvances in prevention and treatment of non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) are dependent in part on the characterization of tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes and the roles they elicit in the
pathogenesis of this malignancy. Although v-ets erythroblastosis virus
E26 oncogene homolog 2 (ETS2) is a canonical transcription factor that
regulates various cancer-associated cellular and developmental processes
including proliferation and migration, its function in lung
carcinogenesis is still unknown. In this study we sought to examine the
role of ETS2 in NSCLC pathogenesis. We first examined ETS2 mRNA
expression in lung adenocarcinomas (n=80) and normal lung (n=30) which we
profiled using microarrays, and in seven matched adenocarcinoma and
normal lung pairs analyzed using next-generation sequencing technology.
Both array and sequencing datasets revealed that ETS2 mRNA was
significantly lower in lung adenocarcinomas relative to normal lung
(p<0.001) which was confirmed by quantitative PCR analysis. Moreover and
in the microaray dataset, ETS2 mRNA expression was significantly
anti-correlated with that of the proliferation marker KI67 (R=0.59,
p<0.001). In addition, in silico analysis of publicly available datasets
demonstrated that ETS2 mRNA was lower in NSCLC compared to normal lung
(all p<0.001), and interestingly, was also lower in airways of healthy
smokers relative to non-smokers (p<0.001). We next assessed ETS2
immunohistochemical protein expression using tissue microarrays comprised
of 342 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded NSCLC (adenocarcinoma, n=226;
SCC, n=116) tissue specimens. There were no statistically significant
differences in ETS2 expression by histology, stage or age. We then
assessed the association of ETS2 protein expression with clinical
outcome. Non-treated all stage (n=206) or stage-I (n=157) patients with
relatively lower ETS2 protein expression exhibited significantly
shortened disease-free survival compared to patients with higher
expression (p=0.008 and p=0.004 of the log-rank test, respectively). In
addition, patients with relatively lower ETS2 expression exhibited
significantly poorer response to adjuvant therapy compared to patients
with higher ETS2 expression (p=0.01). We then probed the effect of
modulating ETS2 expression in NSCLC cells. Knockdown of ETS2 expression
by RNA interference significantly increased anchorage-dependent colony
formation (p=0.004) as well as augmented cellular migration (p=0.01) and
invasion through matrigel (p=0.02) compared to cells transfected with
control siRNA. Our findings provide evidence that ETS2 may function as a
tumor suppressor gene in NSCLC that can aid clinically in identification
of aggressive tumors and biologically in increasing our understanding of
the pathogenesis of this malignancy (Supported by DoD PROSPECT
W81XWH-07-1-0306 and Lung Cancer Research Foundation grants).

