Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarker identification of residual triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) after standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NCT)


Backgrounds Residual TNBC after standard NCT has a poor prognosis. The
aim of this study was to identify biomarkers that correlate with
prognosis and can be used as novel therapeutic targets in this disease
Methods 54 residual TNBC were identified. Protein was extracted and 76
antibiotics to proteins related to breast cancer signaling were measured
by reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA). Univariable and multivariable Cox
proportional hazard model ratios were fitted for each protein and
simultaneously. Cross-validation was also performed. The coefficient in
the multivariable Cox model were used to calculate a risk score (RS) for
each sample. Results The unsupervised clustering analysis of the
proteomic profiles for the 54 residual breast cancers and 76 proteins
divided the tumors into two groups without significant survival
difference. Multivariable analysis using the top 25 proteins from
univariable analysis at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.3 showed that
IGFPB2, LKB1, and S6 were significant predictors in relapse free survival
(RFS). RS model calculated based on multivariable analysis was
0.3746*IGFPB2-0.8852*LKB1+0.6012*S6, AUC=0.807. Employing crossvalidation
the model was found to be reproducible. Multivariable analysis suggested
that RS was an independent predictor of RFS (HR: 2.705, 95% CI 1.549 to
4.723, P-value=0.0005). Conclusions We identified a RS of three
biomarkers that predict outcome in patients with residual TNBC that could
be studied as therapeutic targets for this disease.

