Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-182 acts as a chemosensitizer in GBM by repressing Bcl2L12


Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the most prevalent and aggressive brain
tumor, exhibiting high mortality rate and increased resistance to current
forms of treatment. GBM development has been linked to deregulation of
several signaling cascades involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis.
Bcl2-Like 12 (Bcl2L12) is a multi-functional glioma oncoprotein, which is
over-expressed in the majority of GBM and regulates tumor progression and
resistance to therapy-induced apoptosis. We identified, Bcl2L12 as a
potent inhibitor of post-mitochondrial caspases and the p53 tumor
suppressor. To dissect the cellular mechanisms that regulate Bcl2L12
expression and function, we interrogated whether Bcl2L12 is under the
control of microRNAs (miRs). In silico analysis of 272 primary GBM
samples of the TCGA dataset aimed to identify miRs displaying expression
levels that anti-correlate with Bcl2L12 mRNA abundance, as such
candidates represent potential Bcl2L12-targeting miRs. This approach
revealed a significant anti-correlation between Bcl2L12 mRNA and miR-182
expression, preferentially in the proneural subtype, a GBM class with
established low Bcl2L12 genomic amplification and mRNA expression and a
longer survival compared to patients with mesenchymal, neural or
classical tumors. Enforced expression of miR182 in various glioma cell
lines confirmed robust downregulation of Bcl2L12 mRNA and protein levels,
identified the miR-182 binding site within the 3UTR of Bcl2L12, and
documented that miR-mediated downregulation of Bcl2L12 is highly specific
for miR182, but not for other related miRs, such as miR-96 and miR-183.
Transfection of pre-miR-182 significantly sensitized cells to various
anti-glioma therapeutics, via enhancement of effector caspase activation.
Furthermore, it was demonstrated that p53 regulates miR-182 levels. Taken
together, our studies confirmed a Bcl2L12- miR-182 axis on genetic and
biological levels, and identified miR182 as a potential therapeutic agent
to halt GBM progression.

