Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of pomegranate extract on proliferation, apoptosis and
mRNA expression in human breast cancer cells


Pomegranates (Punica granatum L.) contain a mixture of phytochemicals
such as ellagitannins, ellagic acid and anthocyanins and possess
antioxidant and anticancer activities. Pomegranate juice, aqueous
pomegranate extract or seed oil reduces growth of different cancer cell
lines and human prostate and lung cancer xenografts. Although several
potential mechanisms such as stimulation of apoptosis, inhibition of
inflammation and angiogenesis have been identified, further mechanistic
investigations, especially in breast cancer, are needed. In this study,
we examined the growth inhibitory effects of PE in association with
antioxidant activity and global gene expression changes in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. PE caused a time and concentration-dependent inhibition of
cell proliferation associated with the G2/M cell cycle arrest. In
addition, PE induced apoptosis in a concentration-dependent manner. High
antioxidant activity of PE was confirmed using the Trolox Equivalent
Antioxidant Capacity assay (Trolox assay). Our data shows that 50 g/ml of
PE, which inhibits 50% of cell growth, is equivalent to 75 g/ml of
Trolox, a water-soluble vitamin E analog, and 40 g/ml of N-acetyl
Cysteine, a well-known low molecular weight thiol antioxidant. To
understand whether the antioxidant activity of PE contributed to the
observed cell growth inhibition, we determined whether PE (dose range
0-50 g/ml) and equivalent doses of N-acetyl Cysteine and Trolox inhibit
MCF-7 cell growth. Only PE but not equivalent doses N-acetyl Cysteine and
Trolox inhibited cell growth suggesting that the growth inhibition of PE
cannot solely be attributed to its antioxidant potential. To get insight
into the molecular mechanisms of action of PE we conducted gene
expression profiling on the cells treated with 50% growth inhibitory dose
of PE using Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array. Our data showed that 903
gene entities were altered by PE treatment (1.5-fold cut-off,
pPomegranates (Punica granatum L.) contain a mixture of phytochemicals
such as ellagitannins, ellagic acid and anthocyanins and possess
antioxidant and anticancer activities. Pomegranate juice, aqueous
pomegranate extract or seed oil reduces growth of different cancer cell
lines and human prostate and lung cancer xenografts. Although several
potential mechanisms such as stimulation of apoptosis, inhibition of
inflammation and angiogenesis have been identified, further mechanistic
investigations, especially in breast cancer, are needed. In this study,
we examined the growth inhibitory effects of PE in association with
antioxidant activity and global gene expression changes in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. PE caused a time and concentration-dependent inhibition of
cell proliferation associated with the G2/M cell cycle arrest. In
addition, PE induced apoptosis in a concentration-dependent manner. High
antioxidant activity of PE was confirmed using the Trolox Equivalent
Antioxidant Capacity assay (Trolox assay). Our data shows that 50 g/ml of
PE, which inhibits 50% of cell growth, is equivalent to 75 g/ml of
Trolox, a water-soluble vitamin E analog, and 40 g/ml of N-acetyl
Cysteine, a well-known low molecular weight thiol antioxidant. To
understand whether the antioxidant activity of PE contributed to the
observed cell growth inhibition, we determined whether PE (dose range
0-50 g/ml) and equivalent doses of N-acetyl Cysteine and Trolox inhibit
MCF-7 cell growth. Only PE but not equivalent doses N-acetyl Cysteine and
Trolox inhibited cell growth suggesting that the growth inhibition of PE
cannot solely be attributed to its antioxidant potential. To get insight
into the molecular mechanisms of action of PE we conducted gene
expression profiling on the cells treated with 50% growth inhibitory dose
of PE using Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST Array. Our data showed that 903
gene entities were altered by PE treatment (1.5-fold cut-off, p<0.05),
from which 398 were downregulated, while 505 were upregulated. Most of
the genes that were downregulated by PE treatment affect processes
associated with mitosis, chromosomal organization and segregation, DNA
replication, DNA recombination and repair, whereas most upregulated genes
constitute genes involved in the regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle.
Of particular interest, PE downregulated important DNA damage response
and repair genes including genes of MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 complex and
BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex. Given that targeting of DNA
repair in cancer may sensitize cancer cells to drugs, these findings may
have a translational potential. We are currently validating the genes at
their mRNA and protein levels to identify novel pomegranate-target gene
interactions that are relevant to breast cancer. It may provide novel
molecular and cellular targets for pomegranate-based anticancer
approaches.

