Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Trypanosoma brucei: A model to evaluate joint contribution of
BRCA2 and PARP in DNA damage repair


The DNA repair protein BRCA2, initially discovered as a tumor suppressor
for familial breast cancer cases, is now found to play critical role in
the biology of many eukaryotes. The extracellular protozoan parasite
Trypanosoma brucei significantly relies on its BRCA2 protein for stress
management as well as surviving from host humoral immunity during its
mammalian stage of its complex digenetic life cycle. An interesting
aspect of BRCA2 deficiency in cancer cells is that these cells are
ultra-sensitive to the inhibitors of the chromatin modifying enzyme
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). In the absence of PARP, spontaneous
single-strand breaks collapse replication forks and trigger homologous
recombination for repair. Thus, PARP activity is essential in homologous
recombination-deficient BRCA2-mutant cancer cells. BRCA2 and PARP are not
only expressed in the mammalian cells but also present in high levels in
many other eukaryotic cells including the parasitic protozoan T. brucei.
To evaluate the universality of the importance of these two proteins in
the management of DNA damage, we determined the effect of PARP inhibitors
such as 3-AB, Veliparib, PF-01367338, Olaparib and Iniparib in BRCA2
knocked down T. brucei cells treated with the DNA damaging agent
cisplatin. Our in vitro data strongly suggest that a combination of a
BRCA2 inhibitor (e.g. BRCA2 BRC peptide), a PARP inhibitor and a DNA
damaging agent (e.g. cisplatin) will be a chemical regimen for the
management of trypanosomiasis and similar protozoan infections. Supported
by NIH grants 2SC1GM081146-05 to MC, 1U54RR026140-01 to SM and NIH grants
R01AI042327, R21AI076757 to GC.

