Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential effects of IGF-2 on epithelial mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in African- American and Caucasian breast cancer cell lines


Breast cancer is a multifactorial disease that disproportionately affects
women. Breast cancer patients with the worst prognosis tend to be
premenopausal, African-American (AA) and present with aggressive,
estrogen-independent tumors unresponsive to standard endocrine therapy.
Because of these factors, it is important to discover unique biomarkers
for screening and treatment of breast cancer. One potential candidate is
the insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-2). Studies indicate that tumors
that express high levels of IGF-2 are more aggressive, exhibit a
basal-like phenotype and tend to metastasize. Suggesting that enhanced or
altered IGF-2-mediated cell signaling pathways may be involved in the
pathogenesis and disease progression of metastatic, ER-null breast
cancer. We hypothesize that this may be due to the ability of IGF-2 to
affect the mesenchymal epithelial transition (EMT) of these cells. To
assess the potential effect(s) of proIGF-2 on EMT, we have over-expressed
pro- and mature- forms of IGF-2 in human breast cancer cell lines: MCF-7,
T47D, Hs578T, CRL-2329, CRL-2335 and Z75D-30. There are phenotypic
changes that are characteristic of EMT, cellular morphology was evaluated
by phase-contrast and confocal microscopy on days 5, 15, 20, and 30
post-transfection. In cells overexpressing proIGF-2 and mIGF-2, qRT-PCR
and Western immunoblot analysis were used to assess expression and
activation of E-cadherin, PI3K/AKT, SNAI1/2, RelB, Bcl-2, ER and ER. This
project will evaluate proIGF-2 as an initator of EMT and cancer
metastisis. [Research support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and
Loma Linda University School of Pharmacy]

