Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of the matricellular protein SPARC in breast tumor growth and
metastatic dissemination


Breast cancer is the leading cause of death on women worldwide. Whereas
surgical resection and adjuvant therapy can cure well-confined primary
tumors, metastatic disease is largely incurable because of its systemic
nature and the resistance of disseminated tumor cells to existing
therapeutic agents. SPARC (Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cystein)
is a matricellular protein whose normal expression is associated with
remodeling tissues. In this context SPARC was described as involved in
cell cycle and proliferation, invasion, adhesion, migration, angiogenesis
and apoptosis. Expression array technology among other approaches
identified SPARC as marker of poor prognosis, very often associated with
most aggressive tumors in the vast majority of human cancer types.
However, there is confusing data regarding the role of this protein
during the development and progression of breast tumors. In order to
achieve a better understanding of the role of this protein during breast
cancer progression, we used the murine metastatic breast cancer model,
4T1. We found that silencing SPARC in these epithelial cells, after
transduction with a lentiviral vector carrying a siRNA against murine
SPARC, results in the completely loss of their metastatic capability
(pBreast cancer is the leading cause of death on women worldwide. Whereas
surgical resection and adjuvant therapy can cure well-confined primary
tumors, metastatic disease is largely incurable because of its systemic
nature and the resistance of disseminated tumor cells to existing
therapeutic agents. SPARC (Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cystein)
is a matricellular protein whose normal expression is associated with
remodeling tissues. In this context SPARC was described as involved in
cell cycle and proliferation, invasion, adhesion, migration, angiogenesis
and apoptosis. Expression array technology among other approaches
identified SPARC as marker of poor prognosis, very often associated with
most aggressive tumors in the vast majority of human cancer types.
However, there is confusing data regarding the role of this protein
during the development and progression of breast tumors. In order to
achieve a better understanding of the role of this protein during breast
cancer progression, we used the murine metastatic breast cancer model,
4T1. We found that silencing SPARC in these epithelial cells, after
transduction with a lentiviral vector carrying a siRNA against murine
SPARC, results in the completely loss of their metastatic capability
(p<0.001) and inhibits the in vivo growth capability (pBreast cancer is
the leading cause of death on women worldwide. Whereas surgical resection
and adjuvant therapy can cure well-confined primary tumors, metastatic
disease is largely incurable because of its systemic nature and the
resistance of disseminated tumor cells to existing therapeutic agents.
SPARC (Secreted Protein Acidic and Rich in Cystein) is a matricellular
protein whose normal expression is associated with remodeling tissues. In
this context SPARC was described as involved in cell cycle and
proliferation, invasion, adhesion, migration, angiogenesis and apoptosis.
Expression array technology among other approaches identified SPARC as
marker of poor prognosis, very often associated with most aggressive
tumors in the vast majority of human cancer types. However, there is
confusing data regarding the role of this protein during the development
and progression of breast tumors. In order to achieve a better
understanding of the role of this protein during breast cancer
progression, we used the murine metastatic breast cancer model, 4T1. We
found that silencing SPARC in these epithelial cells, after transduction
with a lentiviral vector carrying a siRNA against murine SPARC, results
in the completely loss of their metastatic capability (p<0.001) and
inhibits the in vivo growth capability (p<0.001) in an immunocompetent
murine model. This was consistently found in three different
siRNA-expressing 4T1-derived cell clones. In order to identify genes
involved in this SPARC-induced behavior we designed two microarray
studies to compare gene expression in the c18-4T1 SPARC-deficient clone
and the control SCR-4T1 cells. The first array was aimed to compare gene
expression of cells grown in vitro (in vitro array) while the second
array was carried out using orthotopic tumors and their derived lung
metastasis (in vivo array). When analyzing the in vitro array, the
comparative ontological analysis indicated that SPARC knockdown alters
mainly the transcription of cell cycle and extracellular matrix response
genes. In agreement, functional assays confirmed that the downregulation
of SPARC in tumor cells enhances the G1/S checkpoint. In the in vivo
array, the alteration of the transcription of immune response genes
became evident, indicating a strong contribution of SPARC to the tumor
implantation response. Moreover, the changes in the extracellular matrix
and immune response gene expression were evident both in the metastasis
and in the primary tumor. In addition, we were able to identify a minimal
SPARC-dependent metastasis signature, found in early SPARC-expressing
tumors but not in SPARC-deficient ones, including 22 genes with
expression levels similar to those found in their derived metastasis.
Validation of this signature by meta-analysis of previously published
human tumor signatures might serve to further test the relevance of SPARC
in breast cancer progression.

