Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oncogene-mediated alterations in chromatin conformation


Emerging evidence suggests that chromatin adopts a non-random three
dimensional (3D) topology and that the organization of genes into
structural hubs and domains affects their transcriptional status. How
chromatin conformation changes in diseases such as cancer is poorly
understood. Moreover, how oncogenic transcription factors, which bind to
thousands of sites across the genome, influence gene regulation by
globally altering the topology of chromatin requires further elucidation.
To address these questions, we performed unbiased high-resolution mapping
of intra- and inter-chromosome interactions upon over-expression of ERG,
an oncogenic transcription factor frequently over-expressed in prostate
cancer as a result of a gene fusion. By integrating data from genome-wide
chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C), ERG binding and gene expression,
we demonstrate for the first time that an oncogenic transcription factor
can induce global, reproducible and functionally coherent changes in
chromatin organization. We also show using spectral karyotyping that ERG
over-expression is associated with a specific translocation involving
chromosomes 13 and 15 at loci that are enriched in ERG binding. The
results presented here have broader implications, as many driving genetic
lesions in other cancer types involve altered levels of transcription
factors due to genomic alterations (e.g. EWS-FLI1, c-Myc, n-Myc, PML-RAR).

