Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-dose acetaminophen with N-acetylcysteine rescue enhances the
efficacy of cisplatin chemotherapy


Acetaminophen (AAP) has been shown to enhance cisplatin (CDDP)
cytotoxicity in hepatoblastoma cell lines. Further, one published case
report demonstrated clinical efficacy of administering acetaminophen in
conjunction with cisplatin and followed 6 hours later with
n-acetylcysteine (NAC) rescue. In this study, atypical rhabdoid tumor
(ATRT) and germinoma cells were treated with CDDP and AAP with or without
NAC rescue. We then evaluated the cells with western blots for cleaved
PARP and caspase 3 to demonstrate effects on apoptosis. Further, MTS
assays were performed to evaluate cell viability of treated cells. To
evaluate the effects of the various treatments on oxidative stress,
dihydroethidium (DHE) and 2,7-dichlorofluorescin (DCFH) assays were
performed to test for superoxide and hydrogen peroxide levels,
respectively. It was demonstrated that AAP enhances CDDP cell kill and
apoptosis in germinoma and ATRT cell lines. Further, both AAP and CDDP,
independently and together, cause increased oxidative stress as measured
by DHE and DCFE, but this oxidative stress is only reversed by NAC in the
DCFE assay. This makes sense because NAC, a glutathione precursor,
detoxifies peroxide but not superoxide. Further, our group has learned of
five previously unpublished patients with recurrent liver tumors
(hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatoblastoma) treated with AAP and CDDP
with delayed NAC rescue. All patients tolerated the treatment well. Two
of the five patients responded to the treatment, suggesting the potential
of this approach.

