Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiation modulates expression of microRNAs in breast cancer cell
lines grown under adherent and stem cell promoting culture conditions


Although mounting evidence demonstrates that cancer stem/progenitor cells
are radioresistant, explicit mechanisms of resistance have not been fully
explored. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that are involved
in regulating cancer stem cell self-renewal and play an important role in
response to cellular stress. Few studies have been conducted to
investigate the role of specific miRNAs in cellular radiation response.
Knowledge of how radiation therapy modulates miRNA expression in cancer
stem cells vs. non-stem cells is critical to developing cancer stem cell
sensitizers. We isolated total RNA from adherent (2D) and non-adherent
mammosphere (3D) cultures of six breast cancer cell lines (MCF12F, MCF7,
SUM190, SUM149, MDA-IBC-3, and SUM159) subjected to 0Gy or 4Gy radiation
and examined differentially expressed miRNAs using Exiqon's miRCURY
microarray. Analysis of the data showed 62 differentially expressed
miRNAs between 2D and 3D independent of radiation treatment (fold change
of at least 1.5, FDR Although mounting evidence demonstrates that cancer
stem/progenitor cells are radioresistant, explicit mechanisms of
resistance have not been fully explored. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small
noncoding RNAs that are involved in regulating cancer stem cell
self-renewal and play an important role in response to cellular stress.
Few studies have been conducted to investigate the role of specific
miRNAs in cellular radiation response. Knowledge of how radiation therapy
modulates miRNA expression in cancer stem cells vs. non-stem cells is
critical to developing cancer stem cell sensitizers. We isolated total
RNA from adherent (2D) and non-adherent mammosphere (3D) cultures of six
breast cancer cell lines (MCF12F, MCF7, SUM190, SUM149, MDA-IBC-3, and
SUM159) subjected to 0Gy or 4Gy radiation and examined differentially
expressed miRNAs using Exiqon's miRCURY microarray. Analysis of the data
showed 62 differentially expressed miRNAs between 2D and 3D independent
of radiation treatment (fold change of at least 1.5, FDR <0.1; PAlthough
mounting evidence demonstrates that cancer stem/progenitor cells are
radioresistant, explicit mechanisms of resistance have not been fully
explored. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that are involved
in regulating cancer stem cell self-renewal and play an important role in
response to cellular stress. Few studies have been conducted to
investigate the role of specific miRNAs in cellular radiation response.
Knowledge of how radiation therapy modulates miRNA expression in cancer
stem cells vs. non-stem cells is critical to developing cancer stem cell
sensitizers. We isolated total RNA from adherent (2D) and non-adherent
mammosphere (3D) cultures of six breast cancer cell lines (MCF12F, MCF7,
SUM190, SUM149, MDA-IBC-3, and SUM159) subjected to 0Gy or 4Gy radiation
and examined differentially expressed miRNAs using Exiqon's miRCURY
microarray. Analysis of the data showed 62 differentially expressed
miRNAs between 2D and 3D independent of radiation treatment (fold change
of at least 1.5, FDR <0.1; P<0.05). While no radiation based signature
was observed when comparing all irradiated samples to unirradiated
samples, assessment of each cell line indicated that the levels of
specific microRNAs were altered in response to radiation treatment in 2D
and 3D cells. Further studies to validate the functions of top candidate
miRNAs using inhibitors or mimics to alter the self renewal and
radiosensitivity of cancer stem cells are underway.

