Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhancement of hypoxia-activated prodrug TH-302 activity by Chk1
inhibition


TH-302 is a hypoxia-activated prodrug currently in clinical trials for
the treatment of cancer. TH-302 releases the DNA cross-linking
bromo-isophosphoramide mustard under hypoxic conditions. When DNA damage
occurs, a signal transduction cascade is activated in response to the
damage and transmits signals to the downstream effectors that connect
with the cell cycle machinery. Checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) is a vital link
between the upstream sensors of the DNA damage checkpoints and the cell
cycle effectors. Generally, cell cycle progression is interrupted at the
stage where the cell was when injured to give the cell time to repair the
damage by activating DNA damage response and repair pathways. Due to its
integral role in maintaining genomic integrity, Chk1 has been considered
an attractive molecular target for inhibition to treat cancer. In recent
years, Chk1 inhibitors have been studied for use in combination with DNA
damaging anticancer agents that cause S and G2/M arrest in attempts to
increase the efficacy of cancer treatment while sparing normal cells. We
have shown that TH-302 induces G2/M arrest at low concentrations and a
pan-cell cycle arrest at high concentrations. We hypothesized that the
pharmacological inhibition of Chk1 kinase activity could potentiate the
efficacy of TH-302. To investigate this possibility, we tested Chk1
inhibitors PF477736, AZD7762 and LY2603618 in combination with TH-302 in
HeLa cervical, HT-29 colon, and H460 NSCLC cell lines. Employing an in
vitro proliferation assay, we show that TH-302 activity is greatly
enhanced (15 to 50 fold) by the addition of the Chk1 inhibitors in the
two p53-deficient HeLa and HT29. In contrast, TH-302 activity is not
affected by the presence of the Chk1 inhibitors in the p53 wild-type
H460. The differential effects on TH-302 activity in combination with the
Chk1 inhibitors were confirmed using clonogenic survival assays. These
results are consistent with published studies showing p53 status playing
a critical role in the activity of Chk1 inhibitors in combination with
other DNA damaging agents. We hypothesized that TH-302 induced cell-cycle
arrest at the G2/M phase may be mediated by activation of Chk1 and
prevention of the activation of downstream Cdc2 kinase activity. We show
that Chk1 inhibitors can abrogate TH-302-induced G2 checkpoint arrest in
HeLa cells. Since Chk1 affects Cdc2 phosphorylation, we also evaluated
the status of Cdc2 phosphorylation in response to the Chk1 inhibitor
alone, TH-302 alone, or the combination of Chk1 inhibitor and TH-302. The
results demonstrate that TH-302 alone, but not Chk1 inhibitor alone,
increases Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation due to the induced G2/M arrest. In the
combination study, the addition of the Chk1 inhibitor blocks the
TH-302-induced increase of Cdc-Y15 phosphorylation. Taken together, the
results suggest a novel approach for the treatment of cancer combining
Chk1 inhibitors with the tumor-hypoxia targeted TH-302.

