Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: c-Met antibody LY2875358 (LA480) shows differential antitumor
effects in non-small cell lung cancer


c-Met is a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase family and is the
receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). c-Met is involved in many
mechanisms of cancer proliferation and metastasis. Inappropriate
activation of c-Met can be induced by ligand-independent mechanisms such
as gene amplification, specific genetic mutations, and transcriptional
up-regulation, or by ligand-dependent autocrine or paracrine mechanisms.
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Despite the
successful development of EGFR- or EML4-ALK-targetd therapies, treatment
options remain limited for patients with advanced lung cancer, making the
identification of new therapeutic targets essential. c-Met expression was
reported in 41-72% non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), amplification of
c-Met occurs in 5-10 % of patients, and c-Met mutations have been
detected in 8-13% of patients. We have developed a bi-valent c-Met
antibody LY2875358 (LA480), which blocks ligand-dependent and
ligand-independent c-Met activations. It is currently in clinical
development. Here, we have demonstrated that LY2875358 alone or in
combination with standard-of-care (SOC) affected cell proliferation,
migration and signal transduction in NSCLC cells with c-Met gene
amplification, mutations and overexpression. In vitro, LY2875358 induces
wild type and mutant c-Met internalization and degradation. In vivo,
LY2875358 alone shows a marked antitumor activity in Met amplification
NSCLC xenograft models. The combination of LY2875358 with SOC
chemotherapeutics treatments has better efficacy than either treatment
alone, both in vitro and in vivo.

