Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endocrine resistance: The influence of stromal-epithelial
interaction on intracrine pathways of oestrogen synthesis


Resistance to endocrine therapy, both de novo and acquired, poses a
significant clinical challenge. Two primary pathways, the aromatase and
steroid sulphatase (STS) pathways, exist for the production of estrogenic
steroids from androstenedione and DHEAS, respectively. Numerous studies
have demonstrated an upregulation of these pathways in breast tumour
tissue compared to normal breast tissue. Therapies targeting oestrogenic
pathways form the mainstay of the pharmacological approach to breast
cancer treatment. The SERM, Tamoxifen, and aromatase inhibitors (AI) such
as Letrozole, have shown substantial clinical benefit in
hormone-dependent breast cancer patients. Additionally, to date one STS
inhibitor has entered clinical trials. Despite this success, a proportion
of hormone-receptor positive patients do not respond to hormone therapy
with 40% of patients who initially show a response to Tamoxifen
relapsing. As little is known about the influence of the tumour
microenvironment, particularly stromal-fibroblasts, on these pathways in
the development of endocrine resistance, we have examined the influence
of stromal-epithelial interactions on the expression of enzymes of
steroidogenesis in endocrine resistant cells. Wild type and
tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells (MCF-7wt and MCF-7TamR,
respectively) were indirectly co-cultured with primary fibroblasts
derived from breast tumour and reduction mammoplasty samples, using 0.4m
6-well inserts. Expression levels of 17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
types 1 (17-HSD1) and 2, (17-HSD2), aromatase, oestrogen receptor (ER)
and , progesterone receptor, steroid sulphatase (STS), and steroid
sulphotransferase were assessed basally and in co-culture using RT-PCR.
Significantly higher basal expression of STS (pResistance to endocrine
therapy, both de novo and acquired, poses a significant clinical
challenge. Two primary pathways, the aromatase and steroid sulphatase
(STS) pathways, exist for the production of estrogenic steroids from
androstenedione and DHEAS, respectively. Numerous studies have
demonstrated an upregulation of these pathways in breast tumour tissue
compared to normal breast tissue. Therapies targeting oestrogenic
pathways form the mainstay of the pharmacological approach to breast
cancer treatment. The SERM, Tamoxifen, and aromatase inhibitors (AI) such
as Letrozole, have shown substantial clinical benefit in
hormone-dependent breast cancer patients. Additionally, to date one STS
inhibitor has entered clinical trials. Despite this success, a proportion
of hormone-receptor positive patients do not respond to hormone therapy
with 40% of patients who initially show a response to Tamoxifen
relapsing. As little is known about the influence of the tumour
microenvironment, particularly stromal-fibroblasts, on these pathways in
the development of endocrine resistance, we have examined the influence
of stromal-epithelial interactions on the expression of enzymes of
steroidogenesis in endocrine resistant cells. Wild type and
tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells (MCF-7wt and MCF-7TamR,
respectively) were indirectly co-cultured with primary fibroblasts
derived from breast tumour and reduction mammoplasty samples, using 0.4m
6-well inserts. Expression levels of 17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
types 1 (17-HSD1) and 2, (17-HSD2), aromatase, oestrogen receptor (ER)
and , progesterone receptor, steroid sulphatase (STS), and steroid
sulphotransferase were assessed basally and in co-culture using RT-PCR.
Significantly higher basal expression of STS (p<0.001), aromatase
(p=0.012) and 17-HSD2 (p=0.032) was seen in fibroblast versus epithelial
lines. On co-culture a 2.5 - 5 fold up-regulation of aromatase expression
was seen in MCF-7wt and MCF-7TamR (p=0.009, p=0.046 respectively). The
expression of STS (p=0.150, p=0.05) and 17-HSD1 (p=0.001, p=0.071) was
also increased. Epithelial lines showed a significant down-regulation in
ER on co-culture. Both malignant and normal fibroblast lines demonstrated
up-regulation of aromatase expression on co-culture (p=0.037). These data
suggest that stromal-fibroblasts make a significant contribution to the
tumour hormonal environment through both expression and modulation of the
pathways associated with intracrine oestrogen production. The
differential effect of cell-type combinations implicates these
interactions in both oestrogen sensitivity and insensitivity.

