Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor driven transcription in a subtype of estrogen
receptor negative breast cancer is controlled by FoxA1


Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and several distinct subtypes
exist based on differential gene expression patterns. Molecular apocrine
tumors were recently identified as an additional subgroup, characterised
as ER- AR+, but with an expression profile that resembles ER+ luminal
breast cancer. Previously, we mapped global AR binding events in a cell
line model of molecular apocrine breast cancer (termed MDA-MB-453 cells)
using ChIP-seq. Our results suggested that these tumours are driven by AR
through its interaction with critical ER cis-regulatory elements,
resulting in a transcriptional programme reminiscent of ER-mediated
transcription in luminal breast cancers. Additionally, we found that AR
binding is a near-perfect subset of FoxA1 binding regions, a level of
concordance never previously seen with a Nuclear Receptor. By silencing
FoxA1 using specific siRNA, we observe dramatic changes in the gene
expression profile of the cells (730 genes are differentially expressed)
including many of the signature molecular apocrine genes. Furthermore,
silencing of FoxA1 in these breast cancer cells results in altered AR
binding to the chromatin (lost, conserved and de novo binding events are
found) as has been previously seen in the prostate cancer cell line,
LNCaP. We are investigating this phenomenon further using proteomics to
discover new AR interacting proteins and histone mark ChIP-seq to
understand the proteins and epigenetic events that may mediate the
reprogrammed AR binding in the absence of FoxA1.

