Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of PAX2 expression/activity by hypoxia and EGF in
breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and is associated with
the highest mortality rate after lung cancer. The leading cause of deaths
associated with this cancer is metastasis, but cellular and molecular
mechanisms controlling the metastatic ability of breast cancer cells are
only partially elucidated. There is direct and indirect evidence
suggesting that PAX2, a transcription factor preferentially activated in
breast cancer cells of the luminal subtype, could reduce the invasive and
metastatic ability of these cells, by downregulating the expression of
ERBB2. It is thus primordial to understand the mechanisms regulating the
expression and activity of PAX2 in breast cancer cells. Specifically,
because hypoxic conditions prevailing in the center of solid primary
tumours are known to regulate the expression of many genes controlling
invasion and metastasis, we are investigating the impact of
hypoxia-mimicking agent cobalt chloride (CoCl2) on PAX2 expression in
breast cancer cells. Similarly, because EGF growth factor regulates the
expression and/or activity of many genes controlling invasion and
metastasis, we are determining the impact of EGF exposure on PAX2
activation and/or gene expression in ER+ MCF-7 cell line. The
identification of factors and mechanisms regulating the expression and
activity of PAX2 in breast cancer cells will help understand the biology
of this emerging factor in breast cancer cells and may provide multiple
strategies to control invasion and metastasis of these cells.

