Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNA from brush cytology to noninvasively screen for oral squamous
cell carcinoma


Much effort is invested in defining gene expression changes that can be
monitored in surgical and biopsy samples of oral lesions to identify oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), a cancer that strikes over 30000 people
in the United States each year. There is an extensive list of genes shown
to be differentially expressed in surgically obtained oral tumor tissue
versus normal, non-malignant, tissue. These have been catalogued over the
years and have the potential to inform OSCC characterization. At the same
time noninvasive detection and diagnosis of OSCC is a goal that is being
explored using a number of methods including brush oral cytology. Using
RNA from oral cells obtained with brush cytology we tested levels of
mRNAs of 22 genes shown to be differentially expressed in surgically
obtained OSCC and normal tissue. Of these 10 showed differential
expression in our training set of 12 tumor versus 18 non-malignant lesion
samples all from tobacco users. Using Support Vector Machines an
algorithm was developed that provided class prediction based on a subset
5 of these mRNAs. With the exception of one case, cross validation during
training revealed that this OSCC classifier showed greater than 92%
accuracy in differentiating OSCC from non-malignant oral lesions. We will
report on its accuracy for correctly identifying OSCC samples in a
validation set of RNA from brush cytology samples from an independent set
of samples. This test of this methodology using RNA from brush cytology
in identifying OSCC highlights the possibility of developing an RNA based
classifier from brush cytology to screen for OSCC and perhaps
pre-malignancies.

