Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased incidence of adult cancers in relatives of childhood
cancer patients and difference in tumor spectra between families with
single and multiple cases of childhood tumors


Background: Recently, we found a two-fold increased risk for childhood
tumors among first- to third degree relatives of childhood cancer
patients. Whether cancer predisposing familial factors are associated
with childhood tumors is unclear. The purpose was to study the incidence
of adult tumors in extended families of children with cancer and whether
there are any differences in cancer incidence between families with
single and multiple cases of childhood tumors. Methods: Family history of
cancer was obtained through questionnaires, and the Swedish Population-,
and Cancer Registries for 194 childhood cancer patients aged 18 years,
diagnosed 1972-2009. Standardized cancer incidence ratios (SIR), and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were estimated by comparing with expected rates
in the general population. Results: Overall, an increased incidences of
adult tumors (179 observed cases vs. 121.3 expected; SIR=1.5; 95% CI:
1.3-1.7) was found among first- to third degree relatives. Highest
incidence was found among first degree relatives (SIR=2.2; 95% CI:
1.2-3.5), while the incidence was somewhat lower for second degree
relatives (SIR=1.4; 95% CI: 1.2-1.7). No increased risk was observed for
third degree relatives (SIR=1.1; 95% CI: 0.1-3.9). A significantly
increased risk for tumors in the prostate (SIR=2.7; 95% CI: 1.9-3.8) and
breast (SIR=1.7; 95% CI: 1.2-2.4) were observed among first- to third
degree relatives, both observed at earlier than average ages. Excess of
breast cancer was especially found in first degree relatives, all
observed cases were mothers (SIR=4.6; 95% CI: 1.7-10.1). The cancer
incidence in relatives of first- to third degree were found to be similar
for families with multiple cases (16 observed cases vs. 10.9 expected;
SIR=1.5; 95% CI: 0.8-2.4) and with single cases (163 observed cases vs.
110.4 expected; SIR=1.5; 95% CI: 1.3-1.7) of childhood tumors. An excess
of breast cancer was found in both subgroups. However, this was somewhat
higher in families with multiple cases (SIR=2.6; 95% CI: 0.9-6.2)
compared with families with single cases (SIR=1.6; 95% CI: 1.1-2.3).
Moreover, families with single childhood cases also had an excess of lung
cancer (SIR=1.7; 95% CI: 0.9-2.8), prostate cancer (SIR=2.8; 95% CI:
1.9-3.9), and Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (SIR=2.5; 95% CI:1.2-4.8). There was
no significantly increased incidence for these cancers in families with
multiple childhood tumors. Conclusions: Familial factors may increase the
risk for both childhood and adult cancers and modify the age of onset of
common adult tumors. To identify common pathways that confers increased
risk for both childhood and adult tumors and to assess the possible
interplay between genetic susceptibility and environmental factors
further molecular epidemiological studies are needed.

