Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HSP90 inhibitors target KRAS mutant human tumors through
degradation of STK33


Mutations in the KRAS proto-oncogene occur in 30% of human cancers and
are particularly prevalent in adenocarcinomas of the pancreas, lung, and
colon. Previous efforts to develop drugs that directly inhibit the
activity of mutant KRAS have not met with success. We have recently shown
that cancer cells driven by mutant KRAS require expression of the
serine/threonine kinase STK33 for their viability and proliferation,
supporting STK33 as a context-dependent therapeutic target. However,
specific strategies for interfering with the critical functions of STK33,
which remain to be elucidated, are not yet available. Using a mass
spectrometry-based screen for STK33 protein interaction partners, we
report that the HSP90/CDC37 chaperone complex and BAG2, a member of the
BAG family of molecular chaperone regulators, bind to and stabilize STK33
in human cancer cells. Pharmacologic inhibition of HSP90, using
structurally divergent small molecules currently in clinical development,
induced proteasome-mediated degradation of STK33 in human cancer cells of
various tissue origin in vitro and in vivo, and triggered apoptosis
preferentially in KRAS mutant cells in an STK33-dependent manner.
Furthermore, HSP90 inhibitor treatment impaired sphere formation and
viability of primary human colon cancer-initiating cells harboring mutant
KRAS. Similar to HSP90 inhibition, short hairpin RNA-mediated suppression
of BAG2 depleted STK33, whereas BAG2 overexpression rescued STK33 protein
levels in the presence of HSP90 inhibitors, resulting in diminished
apoptosis in KRAS mutant cancer cells. These findings (1) provide
mechanistic insight into the activity of HSP90 inhibitors in KRAS mutant
cancer cells, (2) indicate that the enhanced requirement for STK33 can be
exploited to target mutant KRAS-driven tumors, (3) identify STK33
depletion through HSP90 inhibition as a biomarker-guided therapeutic
strategy with immediate translational potential, and (4) point to BAG2 as
a candidate cancer drug target.

