Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor LT-626: Sensitivity
correlates with MRE11 and synergizes with cisplatin, oxaliplatin, and
SN-38 in colorectal cancer cells


Approximately 15% of colorectal cancer (CRC) cases display microsatellite
instability (MSI) that is caused by defects in genes involved in the DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) pathway. MSI leads to secondary mutations in
critical genes including the double-strand break repair gene MRE11. Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors have shown efficacy in cancer
cells containing defects in DNA repair pathways. The aim of this study
was to determine whether CRC cell lines that are MSI-High (MSI-H) or
contain a MRE11 mutation are more sensitive to the PARP inhibitor, LT-626
(BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA) than cells that are
microsatellite stable (MSS) with wild-type MRE11. A second aim was to
test whether LT-626 in combination with cisplatin (CIS), oxaliplatin
(OXA), and SN-38 (the active metabolite of irinotecan) is synergistic,
antagonistic, or additive. We performed cytotoxicity assays on a panel of
eleven CRC cell lines of varying MMR and MRE11 status (MSI-H/MRE11-/-:
HCT116, HCT116/Chr 2, RKO, SW48, and LoVo; MSI-H/MRE11+/: DLD1; MSS/
MRE11-/-: HCT116/Chr 3; MSS/ MRE11+/+: SW837, HT29, SW480, and SW403).
Cells were treated with serial dilutions of LT-626, CIS, OXA, and SN-38
for 12 days and cell viability was measured by MTT assay to determine
IC50 for each drug. Combination drug treatment was performed using a
constant ratio design based on the IC50 of each drug and combination
index was calculated using CalcuSyn Version 2.0. To demonstrate that
sensitivity to LT-626 correlates with MRE11 status, stable cell lines
were generated to overexpress MRE11 in SW48 cells and to knock-down
expression of MRE11 in SW480 cells. MRE11 cDNA and shRNA retroviral
constructs were purchased from Open Biosystems (Huntsville, AL) and used
to infect SW48 and SW480 cell lines. Stable clones were selected using
puromycin and expression of MRE11 mRNA and protein was confirmed by
RT-qPCR and Western blot. Stable cell lines were tested in cytotoxicity
assays as described above. Although we found no correlation between MSI
status and LT-626 sensitivity, we did observe a significant increase in
sensitivity to LT-626 in cells harboring a biallelic mutation in MRE11
(p=0.05). When compared to controls, overexpression of MRE11 in SW48
cells resulted in decreased sensitivity to LT-626 (p=0.002) while
knock-down of MRE11 in SW480 cells resulted in increased sensitivity to
LT-626. In combination assays, synergism was evident between LT-626 and
CIS, OXA and SN-38 in the majority of treated CRC cell lines. These data
demonstrate that sensitivity of CRC cell lines to LT-626 correlates with
MRE11 mutational status. The observation of synergism in a wide range of
CRC cell lines, irrespective of MSI and MRE11 status, suggests that PARP
inhibitors in combination with DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents may
be a novel and successful strategy for treatment of CRC.

