Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of Ras/PI3K/ERK pathway induces c-Myc stabilization to
upregulate argininosuccinate synthetase, leading to arginine deiminase
resistance in melanoma cells


Arginine (Arg) depletion with pegylated recombinant arginine deiminase
(ADI-PEG20), a novel strategy under clinical investigations for treating
Arg-auxotrophic malignancies in humans, has produced promising results in
several types of cancer, including malignant melanoma. These tumors are
sensitive to ADI-PEG20 because they do not express argininosuccinate
synthetase (AS), the rate-limiting enzyme for the de novo biosynthesis of
Arg, and therefore require Arg from extracellular source for survival.
ADI-PEG20 treatment, which catalyzes the conversion of Arg into
citrulline and ammonia, results in Arg deprivation. Melanoma cells
develop ADI-resistance because of induced AS upregulation. We previously
demonstrated that induction of AS expression by ADI-PEG20 involves
upregulation of transcription regulator c-Myc that positively regulates
AS expression, but the underlying mechanism of c-Myc induction is not
known. Here, we show that ADI-PEG20 activates Ras signaling and its
downstream ERK and PI3K/Akt/GSK-3 kinase cascades. These cascades
phosphorylate c-Myc, resulting in c-Myc stabilization by attenuating the
ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation mechanism. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that intervention of these signaling pathway using PI3K/Akt
inhibitors suppressed c-Myc induction and enhance ADI-mediated cell
killing. Because the Ras activation signaling is known to play important
roles in tumor growth, our findings have important implications in
Arg-deprivation and cancer cell metabolism and suggest that targeting the
Ras signaling pathway may be beneficial in ADI-PEG20 anti-cancer therapy.

