Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I trial of fractionated-dose 177Lutetium radiolabeled
anti-prostate-specific membrane antigen monoclonal antibody J591
(177Lu-J591) in patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate
cancer (metCRPC)


Background: J591 is a monoclonal antibody against the external domain of
PSMA; 177Lu is a short-range and emitter. A phase II trial of single-dose
177Lu-J591 radioimmunotherapy (RIT) in patients (pts) with metCRPC
demonstrated efficacy with acceptable toxicity and an apparent
dose-response relationship. Dose fractionation of RIT may decrease
toxicity while maintaining or increasing efficacy. Methods: In this phase
I study, cohorts of 3-6 pts with progressive metCRPC received 2
fractionated doses of 177Lu -J591 2 weeks apart: Cohort 1 (20 mCi/m2 x2),
dose escalation 5 mCi/m2 per dose per cohort up to 45 mCi/m2 x2. The
primary endpoint was to determine dose limiting toxicity and the
cumulative maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of fractionated 177Lu -J591 RIT
and secondary endpoints of efficacy, with expansion cohorts enrolling.
177Lu-J591 imaging with semi-quantitative scoring was performed. Results:
28 pts were treated in the dose-escalation phase, receiving up to 45
mCi/m2 x2 (highest anticipated dose), 6 additional pts have been enrolled
to date in expansion cohorts at the 2 highest dose levels. Median age is
73 (range 55-86), median baseline PSA 44.7 (2 - 766.5). 88% had bone mets
and 38.2% extra-osseous visceral mets (lung, liver). Median Halabi
nomogram score 147 (range 108-192, predicted median survival 15 mo). All
pts had progressed after 1-4 hormonal therapies and 47.1% progressed on
1-4 lines of chemotherapy including docetaxel. Despite cumulative doses
exceeding the single-dose MTD (70 mCi/m2, a dose at which 41% require
platelet transfusions), during the dose-escalation phase only 6 pts
receiving up to 90 mCi/m2 experienced Gr 4 thrombocytopenia (2 requiring
a transfusion). 3 pts experienced Gr 4 neutropenia without fever or
growth factors. Gr >1 non-heme toxicity was rare. The MTD for the regimen
without growth factor is 40 mCi/m2 x2 (no transfusions needed at this
dose). By planar imaging, accurate targeting of known sites of PC mets
was seen in 82.4%. Including expansion cohorts, 50% overall experienced
PSA declines, with 10 of 18 experiencing PSA decline at the recommended
phase 2 doses. 12 of 13 pts with baseline and follow up circulating tumor
cell counts (CellSearch methodology) became or remained favorable at
follow up. Median survival is 25.3 mo [95% CI 15.3, 35.3] Conclusions:
Fractionated dose 177Lu-J591 is well tolerated, with reversible
myelosuppression. With dose-fractionation, pts are able to tolerate
higher cumulative doses than with single-dose 177Lu-J591 (confirming our
hypothesis) and preliminary efficacy has been demonstrated. Building upon
these data, a phase I fractionated-dose 177Lu-J591 plus docetaxel study
has begun enrollment, utilizing improved tolerability of fractionated
dose RIT plus the radiosensitizing and debulking properties of docetaxel.

