Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is familial risk of cancer limited to relatively early onset cases


Purpose: It is widely believed that familial cancers are of early onset.
We aimed to find out whether familial risk of cancer is limited to
relatively early onset cases. Methods and material: Standardized
incidence ratios (SIR) were calculated for familial risk in offspring by
parental age at diagnosis in the nation-wide Swedish Family-Cancer
Database including all Swedes born after 1931 with their biological
parents, totaling >12.2 million individuals and including >1.1 million
first primary cancer cases. Results: Median parental age at diagnosis in
those whose offspring were affected with a concordant cancer was somewhat
over 70 years. Some 56-86% of familial cancers in parents occurred at age
over 69 years. Even when parents were diagnosed at advanced age (90+),
the risk of concordant cancer in offspring was significantly increased
for skin (SIR=2.1), colorectal (1.7), breast (1.6), and prostate cancer
(1.5). In offspring aged 60 to 76 years whose parents were affected with
a concordant cancer, almost none of the cases had a parent affected at
Purpose: It is widely believed that familial cancers are of early onset.
We aimed to find out whether familial risk of cancer is limited to
relatively early onset cases. Methods and material: Standardized
incidence ratios (SIR) were calculated for familial risk in offspring by
parental age at diagnosis in the nation-wide Swedish Family-Cancer
Database including all Swedes born after 1931 with their biological
parents, totaling >12.2 million individuals and including >1.1 million
first primary cancer cases. Results: Median parental age at diagnosis in
those whose offspring were affected with a concordant cancer was somewhat
over 70 years. Some 56-86% of familial cancers in parents occurred at age
over 69 years. Even when parents were diagnosed at advanced age (90+),
the risk of concordant cancer in offspring was significantly increased
for skin (SIR=2.1), colorectal (1.7), breast (1.6), and prostate cancer
(1.5). In offspring aged 60 to 76 years whose parents were affected with
a concordant cancer, almost none of the cases had a parent affected at
<40 years. Conclusion: Despite the common believe that familial cancers
are of early onset, the majority of familial cancers occur at advanced
ages. Familial cancers may not be early onset in those whose probands
were affected at advanced ages, which may suggest concordance of age of
onset in familial cancers. We identified reliable familial risks for
skin, colorectal, breast, and prostate cancer even when parents were
diagnosed at age 90+. The present study provides novel information,
important for clinical counseling, cancer genetics and screening guidance.

