Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic normal duct epithelial and cancer cells express an
autocrine catecholamine loop that is activated by the 3, 5 and 7
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in
developed countries. Smoking is an established risk factor for this
malignancy but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Previous
reports have provided evidence that nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
(nAChRs) and beta-adrenergic receptors (-ARs) stimulate the growth and
migration of pancreatic cancer cells. But a potential cooperation of
these two receptor families in the regulation of pancreatic cancer has
not been studied to date. Using two pancreatic cancer cell lines and
immortalized pancreatic duct epithelia in vitro, our current data show,
that all three cell lines synthesized and released the catecholamine
neurotransmitters noradrenaline and adrenaline upon exposure to nicotine
and that this activity was regulated by the 3, 5 & 7-nAChRs. In accord
with the established function of these catecholamines as -AR agonists,
nicotine-induced cell proliferation was blocked by the -AR antagonist
propranolol. Nicotine-induced proliferation was also abolished by the
7-nAChR antagonist -bungarotoxin and catecholamine production in response
to nicotine was blocked by 3, 5 or 7-nAChR gene knockdown. Moreover, our
results show that the nicotinic agonists acetylcholine, nicotine, and its
nitrosated carcinogenic derivative NNK induced the phosphorylation of
CREB, ERK, Src and AKT and that those responses were inhibited by the
beta-blocker, propranolol. Our findings identify this hitherto unknown
autocrine catecholamine loop as an important regulatory cascade in
pancreatic cancer that may prove a promising new target for cancer
intervention. Supported by R01CA042829 and R01CA130888 with the National
Cancer Institute.

