Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dose-banding of docetaxel in MT-3 tumor bearing nude mice


Background: Body surface area (BSA)-based dosing of chemotherapy has a
number of limitations and - this coupled with a need to improve
production efficiencies in hospital pharmacy compounding units - led to
the development of dose-banding in a 5% range around BSA. However, there
is a paucity of data on the impact of dose-banding on clinical outcomes.
In addition, it is unknown whether variations above 5% have an impact on
chemotherapy-associated toxicity or anti-tumor activity. Therefore, the
aim of the present study was to investigate the impact of dose-banding,
with variations from the calculated dose 5%, on antitumor activity of
docetaxel using a mouse xenograft model. Materials and methods: Female
nude mice NMRI:nu/nu aged 6 to 8 weeks received s.c. implants of 5x106
cells (human breast cancer MT-3) on study day 0. Experiment 1: Six groups
of 13-14 mice received on day 7 a single i.v. injection (200l/20g mouse)
with either vehicle (saline:polysorbate 80:EtOH at 1:0.5:0.5), the
maximum tolerated dose of docetaxel (DocMTD, 25 mg/kg), or 5% and 7.5%
MTD. Experiment 2: All animals (n=13-14/group) received i.v. injections
on study days 8 and 22 with vehicle, or DocMTD, 10%, 15%, 30% and 80%
MTD. Results: In the first experiment, tumor volume of the vehicle group
increased 21-fold during the 28 days observation period, whereas
treatment with DocMTD resulted in a 36% tumor volume reduction.
Variations of the MTD up to 7.5% showed no significant effect on the mean
tumor volume in comparison to the DocMTD group (21-36% tumor growth
reduction). Body weight decreased transiently in response to all
docetaxel treatments (up to 14%, nadir 7-8 days after injection). In the
second experiment, tumor growth rate of the vehicle group was comparable
to the first study and administration of DocMTD resulted in 65% decreased
tumor growth at day 28. At MTD +10% to +30% the tumor volume was 68% and
74% reduced vs. vehicle control group. At +80% (45 mg/kg) the tumor
volumes were significantly lower after treatment (88% reduction vs.
vehicle). No dose-related increase in tumor volume was observed for the
-10 to -30% docetaxel-treated animals compared to the DocMTD group (mean
tumor growth reduction 55% to 66% vs. vehicle). At -80% (5 mg/kg), tumor
growth was comparable to vehicle-treated animals and reached a similar
absolute volume at the end of the study. Conclusions: In the single-dose
study, variations of up to 7.5% from the calculated dose had no effect on
tumor volume. In the repeat-dose study, doses of MTD 30% resulted in
similar efficacy on tumor volume. These data suggest that dose-banding
with variations of greater than the currently accepted 5% is possible
without affecting the efficacy of docetaxel. The potential impact of this
finding on clinical practice may be a simplification of dose preparation
in pharmacy, reduced drug wastage, as well as an improvement in the
oncology service and patient experience.

