Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial mesenchymal plasticity in xenograft models of
circulating and disseminated tumour cells from human breast cancer


Over the past several decades, there have been numerous breast cancer
patient studies aimed at detecting disseminated (DTC) and circulating
tumor cells (CTC) within bone marrow and blood respectively. Although
they offer prognostic and predictive value they are not yet used
clinically, and qualitative analysis of these cells may provide
additional valuable information. In view of this, we have set about to
establish reproducible and robust mouse models for breast cancer DTC/CTC
research. We have developed a species-specific tandem nested RT-qPCR
approach which enables us to detect and measure a panel of human markers
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity (EMP; CDH1, ILK, CD24
and VIM, normalised to RPL32), which are hypothesised to be involved in
the generation and function of DTC/CTC. Mock experiments have
demonstrated the ability to detect high abundance transcripts from a
single cell's worth of RNA amongst a very large amount of mouse
background using our assays. Blood, bone marrow and tumor tissue were
collected from xenografts generated utilizing the MDA-MB-231
(mesenchymal) and MDA-MB-468 (epithelial) cell lines, and a
transplantable breast cancer xenograft (ED03). MDA-MB-468 xenografts
exhibit two zones of VIM expression, one at the stromal interface and
another at the necrotic interface, which may correspond to the EGF- and
hypoxia-inducible EMP seen with these cells in vitro. Large secondary
deposits in lymph node or lungs are intensely epithelial, while small
lymphovascular deposits appear mesenchymal. No evidence of EMP is seen in
the ED-03 xenografts despite these xenografts producing the most CTC. The
MDA-MB-231 xenografts appear mesenchymal with widespread VIM staining and
lack of CDH1. Preliminary analysis of the blood of mice with MDA-MB-231
xenografts revealed human RPL32 levels significantly higher than the
background levels measured in RNA collected from the blood of control
mice (p = Over the past several decades, there have been numerous breast
cancer patient studies aimed at detecting disseminated (DTC) and
circulating tumor cells (CTC) within bone marrow and blood respectively.
Although they offer prognostic and predictive value they are not yet used
clinically, and qualitative analysis of these cells may provide
additional valuable information. In view of this, we have set about to
establish reproducible and robust mouse models for breast cancer DTC/CTC
research. We have developed a species-specific tandem nested RT-qPCR
approach which enables us to detect and measure a panel of human markers
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity (EMP; CDH1, ILK, CD24
and VIM, normalised to RPL32), which are hypothesised to be involved in
the generation and function of DTC/CTC. Mock experiments have
demonstrated the ability to detect high abundance transcripts from a
single cell's worth of RNA amongst a very large amount of mouse
background using our assays. Blood, bone marrow and tumor tissue were
collected from xenografts generated utilizing the MDA-MB-231
(mesenchymal) and MDA-MB-468 (epithelial) cell lines, and a
transplantable breast cancer xenograft (ED03). MDA-MB-468 xenografts
exhibit two zones of VIM expression, one at the stromal interface and
another at the necrotic interface, which may correspond to the EGF- and
hypoxia-inducible EMP seen with these cells in vitro. Large secondary
deposits in lymph node or lungs are intensely epithelial, while small
lymphovascular deposits appear mesenchymal. No evidence of EMP is seen in
the ED-03 xenografts despite these xenografts producing the most CTC. The
MDA-MB-231 xenografts appear mesenchymal with widespread VIM staining and
lack of CDH1. Preliminary analysis of the blood of mice with MDA-MB-231
xenografts revealed human RPL32 levels significantly higher than the
background levels measured in RNA collected from the blood of control
mice (p = <0.01), however the blood burden was too low to allow
measurement of other transcripts. Very low levels of human RNA were
detected in the blood of MDA-MB-468 mice, necessitating the use of
various transfected vector markers for RT-qPCR analysis. A reduction in
CD24 expression relative to the primary tumour was seen, suggestive of
reduced epithelial nature, however no changes were seen in VIM compared
to the primary site. Cells in the blood of ED-03 xenograft-bearing mice
showed higher CHD1 levels than seen in the tumour. The CDH1 levels in the
ED-03 CTCs decreased with increased blood burden, which may reflect
altered intravasation or intracellular interactions in the blood. IHC
analysis on cytospin slides of bone marrow from the MDA-MB-468 and ED-03
xenografts supported the presence of low numbers of DTC in these models.
These data provide evidence for altered expression of some EMP markers in
these CTC models, and provide a test system for further analyses.

