Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influx of thiosemicarbazone NSC73306 is mediated by the cisplatin
and copper transporter SLC31A1 (CTR1)


Multidrug resistance (MDR) mediated via the drug efflux pump
P-glycoprotein (P-gp/ABCB1) overexpression is a major obstacle to the
success of chemotherapy to combat many cancers. Clinically, P-gp
expression correlates with poor clinical response to chemotherapy in
patients, and its presence on the blood-brain barrier (BBB) can reduce
the efficacy of otherwise promising agents targeted to the brain.
Attempts to reverse drug resistance by inhibiting P-gp have not been
successful, and we have been investigating alternative strategies for
targeting multidrug-resistant (MDR) cancer cells. One such strategy is
the use of NSC73306, a thiosemicarbazone compound that is selectively
toxic towards P-gp-expressing cells. Here, we investigate the cellular
uptake of NSC73306, and examine its interaction with P-gp and copper
transporter 1 (SLC31A1, CTR1). In porcine kidney epithelial LLC-PK1
cells, cellular accumulation of NSC73306 is saturable, and overexpression
of human P-gp in LLC-PK1 cells sensitizes them to NSC73306. Accumulation
of [3H]NSC73306 in LLC-PK1 cells is inhibited by cyclosporin A (IC50 =
500 M), verapamil (IC50= 700 M) and cisplatin (IC50 = 77 M). Among these
compounds, we tested the effect of cisplatin on NSC73306. Selective
toxicity of NSC73306 to P-gp-expressing LLC-PK1 cells was reversed by
cisplatin in a dose-dependent manner (up to 40 M). In contrast, the
amount of cisplatin required to kill 50% of LLC-PK1 cells was not
affected by increasing the amount of NSC73306 (up to 2M). Since cisplatin
could inhibit NSC73306 uptake, we hypothesize that these two compounds
share a common uptake pathway, but cisplatin has additional routes of
entry into cells. Cells transiently expressing CTR1 showed significantly
higher [3H]NSC73306 accumulation. In contrast, CTR1 knockdown cells had
lower [3H]NSC73306 uptake. Although cisplatin is a transport substrate of
CTR1, we found that CTR1 protein was overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant
KB-CP20 and BEL7404-CP20 cell lines. Compared to their parental
cisplatin-sensitive cells, even though these resistance cells show
decreased cisplatin accumulation, suggesting that CTR1 is not
rate-limited for cisplatin uptake. These cell lines also showed higher
[3H]NSC73306 uptake compared to their parental cells. In contrast, MDR
cell lines overexpressing P-gp had unchanged CTR1 protein levels.
Incubation with NSC73306 for 24 hours down-regulated CTR1 in a
dose-dependent manner. These results suggest that NSC73306 is a transport
substrate of CTR1.

