Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allele-specific effect of rs2294008 on mRNA and protein expression
of the prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA) in human normal and tumor
bladder tissue


Background: A recent GWAS identified a SNP rs2294008 within the prostate
stem cell antigen (PSCA) at 8q24.3 as a risk factor for bladder cancer,
[OR=1.13 (1.09-1.17), p=4E-11, Rothman, 2010]. PSCA encodes a
GPI-anchored cell membrane glycoprotein expressed in the prostate,
bladder, stomach and pancreas. A transcript with the non-risk C allele of
rs2294008 generates a protein of 114 amino acids, while the risk T allele
creates a novel upstream translation start site (acg->aTg) that extends
the N-terminal leader peptide by 9 amino acids, to generate a protein of
123 amino acids. A humanized monoclonal anti-PSCA antibody is already
used in clinical trials for prostate and pancreatic cancer, but the
functional roles of PSCA and its genetic variants remain unknown.
Methods: We performed RNA-sequencing in 3 matched normal-tumor bladder
tissue samples and mRNA expression analysis in 42 tumor and 41 normal
bladder tissue samples (24 matched normal-tumor pairs). Genotyping and
AEI (Allelic Expression Imbalance) was performed using an allelic
discrimination genotyping assay. PSCA isoforms with T and C alleles were
cloned into a pFC14A CMV Flexi expression vector. Protein PSCA expression
in normal/tumor bladder tissues and transfected cells was analyzed with
Western blot and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Results and Conclusion:
RNA-sequencing detected PSCA expression in all bladder tissue samples.
Analysis of three samples heterozygous for rs2294008 showed evidence of
strong AEI - 90% of all PSCA transcripts carried the risk T allele, while
only 10% showed the non-risk C allele. Similar pattern of expression was
observed for 11 other transcribed SNPs within the PSCA, but not for SNPs
located in neighboring genes, Ly6K and JRK, implying that the AEI is
specific for PSCA. By using an allele-specific expression assay that
measured allelic ratio of rs2294008 in PSCA transcripts, we also
confirmed AEI detected by RNA-seq. PSCA mRNA expression was strongly
increased in individuals with risk T allele in both normal (ptrend
=0.0155 for rs2294008) and tumor samples rs2294008 (ptrend=0.0054), which
is further indicative of effect of AEI. IHC on a panel of paired
normal-tumor bladder tissue microarrays (TMA) confirmed mRNA expression
results and showed PSCA protein expression only in carriers of risk
genotype (TT) but not in non-risk genotype (CC), both in tumor and normal
bladder tissue sections. Analysis of recombinant PSCA expression in
transfected cells showed stronger surface expression of the risk T
allele, compared to C allele. In conclusion, we show preferential mRNA
and protein expression of PSCA in individuals with risk allele T of
rs2294008. Thus, genotyping information for PSCA rs2294008 may emerge as
an important decisive factor for response to PSCA antibody mediated
treatment.

