Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcubitacin B exhibits cytotoxic effects by inhibiting
ILK-Paxillin signaling in breast cancer cells


Integrins are known to play an important role in promotion of cell
motility and survival though activation of Integrin-Linked Kinase (ILK)
signaling. Therefore ILK has been an attractive target to inhibit
metastasis and tumor growth. Curcubitacin B (CuB) is a steroidal class of
chemical present in the plants belonging to cucurbitaceae family. CuB has
shown cytotoxic potential in several cancers by causing G2/M cell cycle
arrest and inhibition of JAK/STAT3 pathway. However, the exact mechanism
of CuB and its role in metastasis is not known. Integrins transmit cell
survival signals through ILK-Paxillin complex and further play role in
activating AKT signaling. This cascade ultimately works through the
activation of Rho kinases like ROCK1 and RhoA. Our results show that CuB
significantly suppressed the growth of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer
cells in a concentration and time-dependent manner. CuB also induced
apoptosis and down-regulated ILK1 expression. In addition, CuB suppressed
the phosphorylation of AKT at Ser473, paxillin at Tyr118 and
down-regulated ROCK1 protein expression. Previous studies have shown that
heregulin, a ligand of HER2 induces paxillin expression, indicating a
correlation between HER2 and paxillin. Interestingly we observed
significant downregulation of paxillin in HER2 overexpressing breast
cancer cells, suggesting that CuB is equally effective in HER2
overexpressing tumor cells. Taken together our results indicate the
anti-cancer effects of CuB in breast cancer cells by targeting paxillin,
ILK and ROCK. Further detailed mechanistic work is in progress.
[Supported in part by R01 grants CA106953 and CA129038 (to S.K.S) awarded
by the National Cancer Institute].

