Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase Ciota is a new prognostic factor in gastric cancer


Background: Protein kinase Ciota (PKCiota) have been reported to be an
important effector of oncogenic K-ras. Furthermore, PKCiota is correlated
with tumor angiogenesis. The role of PKCiota in gastric cancer remains
unclear. The aim of this study is to clarify the role of PKCiota in human
gastric cancer. Methods: Twenty-eight patients with gastric cancer who
underwent gastrectomy were enrolled. The expression of PKCiota mRNA was
determined in clinicopathological factors. Next, the patients were
divided into two groups: the PKCiota high expression group (n = 14) and
low expression group (n = 14). 5-year survival rate, ERK mRNA, which was
the gene of downstream K-ras, and VEGF mRNA were compared between the two
groups. The prognostic factors were investigated by multivariate
analysis. Results: High expressions of PKCiota mRNA were observed in
undifferentiation, deeper tumor invasion (MP), advanced stage (Stage III,
IV) and peritoneal dissemination (+). The 5-year survival rate in the
PKCiota high expression group were lower than that in the PKCiota low
expression group. The multivariate analysis revealed that high expression
of PKCiota mRNA was an independent prognostic factor. The expressions of
ERK mRNA and VEGF mRNA in the PKCiota high expression group were higher
than that in the PKCiota low expression group. Conclusion: Our results
indicate that PKCiota was correlated with tumor progression and
angiogenesis. PKCiota may be a new prognostic factor in gastric cancer.

