Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The multi-targeted kinase inhibitor Sunitinib induces apoptosis in
colon cancer cells via PUMA


Key words: Sunitinib; PUMA; FoxO3a; Bcl-2 family; colon cancer Purpose:
Sunitinib is a FDA approved multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
inhibitor for treating solid tumors. Inhibition of angiogenesis, immune
modulation and induction of apoptosis has been suggested to mediate the
anti-tumor effects of sunitinib. However, its cell killing mechanisms are
not well-understood. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms and
significance of sunitinib-mediated apoptosis in its antitumor activities
using colon cancer cells and xenografts. Experimental Design: The
expression of various Bcl-2 family proteins, apoptosis and long-term
growth in response to sunitinib were examined in colon cancer cells. The
mechanism of PUMA induction and effects of PUMA deficiency, BH3 mimetics
and 5-FU on sunitinib-induced apoptosis were investigated. The effects of
PUMA deficiency in responses to sunitinib were determined in xenografts.
Results: We found that consistent PUMA induction mediated by
transcription factor FoxO3a plays an important role in the apoptosis
induced by sunitinib. PUMA deficiency led to impaired apoptosis and
caspase activation in colon cancer cells with either wildtype or mutant
p53. Small molecule BH3 mimetics or elevated PUMA levels sensitized colon
cancer cells to sunitinib-induced apoptosis. PUMA deficiency
significantly blocked apoptosis and therapeutic responses to sunitinib in
xenografts. Conclusions: Our results establish a critical role of PUMA in
mediating sunitinib sensitivity in colon cancer cells and lack of
apoptosis induction as a potential resistance mechanism. Our study
suggests modulations of Bcl-2 family proteins as potential biomarkers,
and combination of sunitinib with BH3 mimetics or chemotherapeutic agents
might improve the treatment efficacy in colon cancer patients.

