Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of antiangiogenic small molecule natural products
targeting anthrax toxin receptor 2


Bacillus anthracis protective antigen (PA), the B-subunit of the binary
anthrax toxin, binds to the cellular receptors capillary morphogenesis
gene protein 2 (CMG2) and tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) with high
affinity. Both CMG2 and TEM8 are expressed on endothelial cells during
angiogenesis. We have shown that wild-type PA inhibits both VEGF-induced
and bFGF-induced angiogenesis at moderate but statistically significant
levels. Structure-activity studies identified a PA mutant that exhibited
markedly enhanced inhibition of angiogenesis and also inhibited tumor
growth in vivo. This mutant, PASSSR, is unable to undergo normal cellular
processing and thus, remains bound to the surface receptor. Further
mutation of PASSSR so that it does not bind to these cell surface
receptors abolished its ability to inhibit angiogenesis. We conclude that
high affinity anthrax receptor ligands, such as PA and PASSSR, are
angiogenesis inhibitors, and that anthrax toxin receptors are useful
targets for anti-angiogenic therapy. The long-term goal of our research
is to determine the extent to which antrax toxin receptor directed
therapeutics can control tumor growth and metastasis. Here we show that
in addition to inhibition of subcutaneous lung tumors, PASSSR can inhibit
the growth of orthotopically implanted breast cancer cells and extend
survival in this mouse model. We also sought to identify small molecule
natural products that can inhibit the interaction with the anthrax toxin
receptor CMG2 and to determine their antiangiogenic and antitumor
capacity in vivo. This work was based on the hypothesis that small
molecule natural products can inhibit CMG2-ECM interactions required for
breast cancer angiogenesis. This work leverages the wide variety of
chemical entities generated by endophytic fungi, and the ability of other
fungal compounds such as fumagillin to provide interesting insights into
angiogenesis inhibitors. Following a high-throughput screen of >10,000
natural product extracts, we identified 48 extracts with significant
inhibitory activity, of which 0.5% exhibited measurable activity. Of
these, 9 exhibited 1:1 binding to CMG2 with IC50 Bacillus anthracis
protective antigen (PA), the B-subunit of the binary anthrax toxin, binds
to the cellular receptors capillary morphogenesis gene protein 2 (CMG2)
and tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) with high affinity. Both CMG2 and
TEM8 are expressed on endothelial cells during angiogenesis. We have
shown that wild-type PA inhibits both VEGF-induced and bFGF-induced
angiogenesis at moderate but statistically significant levels.
Structure-activity studies identified a PA mutant that exhibited markedly
enhanced inhibition of angiogenesis and also inhibited tumor growth in
vivo. This mutant, PASSSR, is unable to undergo normal cellular
processing and thus, remains bound to the surface receptor. Further
mutation of PASSSR so that it does not bind to these cell surface
receptors abolished its ability to inhibit angiogenesis. We conclude that
high affinity anthrax receptor ligands, such as PA and PASSSR, are
angiogenesis inhibitors, and that anthrax toxin receptors are useful
targets for anti-angiogenic therapy. The long-term goal of our research
is to determine the extent to which antrax toxin receptor directed
therapeutics can control tumor growth and metastasis. Here we show that
in addition to inhibition of subcutaneous lung tumors, PASSSR can inhibit
the growth of orthotopically implanted breast cancer cells and extend
survival in this mouse model. We also sought to identify small molecule
natural products that can inhibit the interaction with the anthrax toxin
receptor CMG2 and to determine their antiangiogenic and antitumor
capacity in vivo. This work was based on the hypothesis that small
molecule natural products can inhibit CMG2-ECM interactions required for
breast cancer angiogenesis. This work leverages the wide variety of
chemical entities generated by endophytic fungi, and the ability of other
fungal compounds such as fumagillin to provide interesting insights into
angiogenesis inhibitors. Following a high-throughput screen of >10,000
natural product extracts, we identified 48 extracts with significant
inhibitory activity, of which 0.5% exhibited measurable activity. Of
these, 9 exhibited 1:1 binding to CMG2 with IC50 <100 ug/ml total solids.
Purification and chemical and in vitro characterization resulting in the
identification of six compounds with anti-CMG2 and endothelial cell
inhibitory, one of which exhibits antiangiogenic activity. Thus, we have
identified several small molecule natural product inhibitors of CMG2 and
demonstrated that CMG2 inhibitors can inhibit angiogenesis and breast
cancer growth. While none of these molecules is currently suitable as a
lead for the development of a breast cancer therapeutic, we believe that
these studies confirm that the approach that we have taken is suitable
for the development of such a therapeutic and propose to dramatically
expand the number of molecules screened for such activity.

