Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential rapamycin sensitivity distinguishes two distinct
populations of tumor cells in murine glioma


Solid tumors are complex ecosystems, composed of a heterogeneous ensemble
of cells that comprise the tumor mass (neoplastic compartment) and the
surrounding stroma (non-neoplastic compartment). Currently, research
efforts are aimed at defining the individual contributions of each cell
type to tumor development and maintenance. Previous studies using a
genetically-engineered mouse model of Neurofibromatosis type 1
(NF1)-associated optic glioma have underscored the critical role of one
stromal cell type (microglia) in the growth of these tumors. In the
current study, we analyze neoplastic cell heterogeneity and demonstrate
that two distinct proliferating populations of neoplastic cells exist in
the tumor. These distinct cell types, neuroglial progenitors and
differentiated astrocytes, are distinguished by their sensitivity to
rapamycin. The molecular basis for this differential sensitivity to
rapamycin reflects dramatic differences in mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) complex protein expression and basal mTOR activation. We leverage
this cell type-specific sensitivity to target neuroglial progenitor cells
in the tumor and inhibit optic glioma formation in vivo. Collectively,
these findings emphasize the importance of cellular diversity in glioma
formation and growth, and highlight the importance of developing novel
treatment strategies that co-target multiple cell populations for maximal
therapeutic benefit.

