Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PF-04605412 induces cytokine activation and marginalization of NK
cells and macrophages in patients with solid tumor


Introduction: Integrin 51 is a fibronectin receptor involved in cell
adhesion, proliferation, and survival expressed by cancer cells in
addition to tumor-associated macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial
cells. PF-04605412 is a fully human IgG1 mAb against integrin 15, with
enhanced FcRIII binding capacity, currently in Phase 1. Pre-clinical
studies indicate this antibody has anti-angiogenic properties and is
capable of inducing antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity. We report
on correlative biological studies designed to understand the underlying
mechanisms for infusion reactions which occurred to some patients during
the dose escalation. Methods: This sub-study includes 9 patients (5
female, 4 males; median age 58, ECOG PS 0-1) who received doses of
PF-04605412 from 7.5 mg to 34 mg as 2 hrs infusion. Cytokine-like
infusion reactions was observed at the first dose level (7.5 mg). To
mitigate symptoms, subsequent patients were pre-medicated and the
infusion time was extended to two hours. An extensive cytokine panel was
assessed at time points corresponding to pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis.
Circulating monocytes (CD14+/CD16+) and NK (CD56+/CD16+) cells were
evaluated by flow cytometry. Cell-bound PF-04605412 was detected using
Fab2 anti-human antibody. PK analysis has been conducted in four patients
to date (7.5 mg (n=3) and 11.25 mg (n=1). Results: Infusion reactions
with premedications were mild and included chills, fever, rigors and
hypotension (grades 1-2). A decline in white blood cell subsets occurred
at the onset of fevers and chills, independent of the dose administered,
and normalized within 24 hours post infusion. Activation of cell
populations was evident by an increase in percentage of cells expressing
CD16 at 24 hour post infusion compared to baseline. Persistent (up to 24
hours) in vivo cell-bound PF-04605412 was observed with the Fab2
anti-human antibody in all patients. Cmax values for the 7.5 mg and 11.25
mg doses were 671 ng/mL and 933 ng/mL, respectively. PF-04605412 serum
concentrations were below quantitation limit 24 hours post infusion at
these two doses. Pro inflammatory mediators such as IL 6, IL 8, and TNF
alpha typically increased within 1-1.5 hours post infusion and normalized
over 10-24 hours. Marked increases were seen in several patients with the
first infusion while this was reduced with subsequent doses. There was
not a direct relationship between adverse events and the magnitude of
cytokine increase. Conclusions: PF-04605412 leads to robust cellular
activation and cytokine induction resulting from Fc- FcRIII engagement of
effector cells. Biopsies of metastatic sites pre- and post- treatment
will be examined for evidence of effector cell accumulation at the tumor
site and will be presented at the meeting.

