Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of the glutamine-to-lipid pathway by HIF: Reductive TCA
cycle is a metabolic signature of VHL deficiency


Cancer cells undergo fundamental changes in glucose and glutamine
metabolism to support anabolic processes. Acetyl-CoA is a central
precursor for lipid synthesis, being generated from glucose-derived
citrate in well oxygenated cells. Cells exposed to hypoxia divert glucose
to lactate, raising the question of how TCA cycle is maintained to
support lipogenesis. We recently showed that, under hypoxia conditions,
cancer cells primarily utilize glutamine for lipid synthesis through
reductive TCA cycle (redTCA). To investigate the regulation of this
metabolic switch, we studied the role of Hypoxia Inducible Factors
(HIF1s) in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cell lines that are deficient in
the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene. These cells exhibit
constitutive HIF activity irrespective of oxygen availability. Here, we
show that loss-of-VHL engages RCC cells in redTCA even under normoxia
conditions in a HIF-dependent manner. Reintroduction of VHL restores the
glucose-to-lipid flux. Inactivation of HIF regulatory subunits
dramatically attenuates redTCA in RCC cell lines. Inversely, exogenous
expression of a VHL-insensitive HIF2 mutant (P564toA) in VHL proficient
cell lines is sufficient to stimulate redTCA cycle and lipogenesis from
glutamine, under conditions of normoxia. Importantly, loss of VHL
rendered RCC cells sensitive to glutamine restriction. VHL-deficient RCC
cells grow less than their VHL-replete isogenic counterparts when
cultured under conditions of low glutamine availability. Our results
elucidate the metabolic control of lipogenesis by the VHL-HIF signaling
pathway and highlight novel therapeutic targets for RCC and
HIF-overexpressing tumors.

