Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma S-adenosylmethionine levels, genetic polymorphisms of DNMT1
and DNMT3A, and LINE-1 DNA methylation among Chinese in Singapore


Genome-wide DNA hypomethylation is believed to be one of the early
molecular abnormalities in carcinogenesis and there is great interest in
identifying traits and exposures that contribute to genomic DNA
hypomethylation. One-carbon metabolism has been extensively studied in
relation to cancer because its key metabolite, S-adenosylmethionine
(SAM), is a methyl donor for DNA methylation reactions which are
catalyzed by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). Here we have tested the
hypothesis that plasma SAM levels alone or in combination with DNMT1 and
DNMT3A genetic variation are associated with DNA methylation levels at
long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1), a surrogate marker for
genome-wide DNA methylation. A total of 440 healthy Singapore Chinese
adults (192 men and 248 women, 46-77 y) were selected from participants
of the Singapore Chinese Health Study, who donated biospecimens during
1994-1998. Plasma SAM levels and LINE-1 DNA methylation were measured
using stored blood samples. We chose tagging SNPs of the DNMT1 and DNMT3A
genes for the Han Chinese population based on the HapMap database and
literature search. LINE-1 methylation was compared among quartiles of
plasma SAM levels and DNMT genotypes using multivariate linear regression
methods in men and women separately. We also evaluated the effect
modification of DNMT genotypes on the association between plasma SAM
levels and LINE-1 methylation. Age-adjusted LINE-1 methylation was
significantly higher in men (mean=78.1%, 95%CI=77.7-78.4%) than in women
(mean=77.4%, 95%CI=77.1-77.7%, p=0.002). Higher LINE-1 methylation was
associated with older age in men (ptrend=0.004) but not in women. LINE-1
methylation was significantly lower among those with the lowest quartile
of plasma SAM compared with those with higher plasma SAM in both men and
women. LINE-1 methylation increased with increasing plasma SAM levels,
with a plateau at 55 nmol/L SAM in men and 50 nmol/L in women. Compared
with men carrying wildtype genotype, men carrying at least one copy of
the variant DNMT1 rs2114724 allele had higher LINE-1 methylation
(ptrend=0.007), while men carrying at least one copy of the variant
DNMT3A rs7581217 allele had lower LINE-1 methylation (ptrend=0.004). No
similar associations were observed in women. When stratified by DNMT1
rs2114724 genotype, a positive association between plasma SAM levels and
LINE-1 methylation was present among men with low LINE1 methylation and
wildtype genotype, but not with variant genotypes of DNMT1. DNMT1 and
DNMT3A haplotypes were not associated with LINE-1 methylation in either
men or women. Our findings support a role of SAM on genome-wide DNA
methylation. Further, DNMT1 genetic polymorphisms may exert modifying
effect on the SAM-DNA methylation association. The study was supported by
grant R01 CA144034.

