Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluating the effects of bortezomib (Velcade) on the
pharmacokinetics (PK) of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil, PLD)


Background: PLD is a pegylated liposomal formulation of doxorubicin
approved for the treatment of ovarian cancer, Kaposi's sarcoma, and
multiple myeloma. We have reported that age, gender, and monocyte count
may affect the clearance (CL) of PLD. In multiple myeloma, PLD is used
with bortezomib, a proteosome inhibitor which can affect monocyte count.
The purpose of this cross study comparison was to assess the effects of
bortezomib on the CL of PLD. Methods: This was a cross trial comparison
of patients with solid tumors who received PLD alone and PLD +
bortezomib. The PLD alone group (n = 34) received PLD at 10 to 60 mg/m2
IV every 28 days. The PLD + bortezomib group (n = 25) received bortezomib
at 0.90 to 1.50 mg/m2 IV on days 1, 4, 8, and 11, and PLD at 30 mg/m2 IV
on day 4, every 21 days. PK studies of PLD were performed for cycle 1,
after administration of PLD alone and PLD + bortezomib. Serial blood
samples were obtained from 0 to 96 h and from 7 to 28 days after
administration of PLD. Plasma samples were processed to measure sum total
(encapsulated + released) doxorubicin via HPLC and the clearance (CL) was
calculated with WinNonlin using noncompartmental methods. Results: In
patients = 60 years old, the PLD CL after administration of PLD alone and
in combination with bortezomib was 39.1 ( 18.5) and 38.0 ( 15.5) mL/h,
respectively (P>0.05). In male patients, the PLD CL after administration
of PLD alone and in combination with bortezomib was 65.4 ( 33.4) and 38.4
( 9.7) mL/h respectively (p>0.05). In female patients, the PLD CL after
administration of PLD alone and in combination with bortezomib was 40.1 (
33.4) and 24.6 ( 11.2) mL/h respectively (P>0.05). Conclusion: This cross
study comparison suggests that bortezomib decreases PLD CL in younger
patients and in male patients. Although the underlying mechanism for this
effect on PLD CL is not known, it may be related to bortezomib inhibition
of mononuclear phagocyte activity in certain patient populations, which
is responsible for the CL of PLD. There is a need to further investigate
this in a prospective drug interaction study.

