Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonmelanoma skin cancer as a marker of a cancer-prone phenotype:
Potential role of DNA repair gene variants


Purpose: For unknown reasons, nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is
associated with increased risk of other malignancies. This study tested
the hypothesis that DNA repair gene variants contribute to the increased
cancer risk associated with a personal history of NMSC. Methods: From the
parent CLUE II cohort study, established in 1989 in Washington County MD,
the study consisted of a cancer-free control group (n=2,296) compared to
three mutually exclusive groups of cancer cases ascertained through 2007:
1) Other (non-NMSC) cancer only (n=2,349); 2) NMSC only (n=694); and 3)
NMSC plus other cancer (n=577). The frequency of minor alleles in 759 DNA
repair single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was compared in these four
groups. Results: Comparing those with both NMSC and other cancer versus
those with no cancer, 10 SNPs had additive model p-valuesPurpose: For
unknown reasons, nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is associated with
increased risk of other malignancies. This study tested the hypothesis
that DNA repair gene variants contribute to the increased cancer risk
associated with a personal history of NMSC. Methods: From the parent CLUE
II cohort study, established in 1989 in Washington County MD, the study
consisted of a cancer-free control group (n=2,296) compared to three
mutually exclusive groups of cancer cases ascertained through 2007: 1)
Other (non-NMSC) cancer only (n=2,349); 2) NMSC only (n=694); and 3) NMSC
plus other cancer (n=577). The frequency of minor alleles in 759 DNA
repair single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was compared in these four
groups. Results: Comparing those with both NMSC and other cancer versus
those with no cancer, 10 SNPs had additive model p-values<0.01. The two
top-ranked SNPs were both within the thymine DNA glycosylase gene (TDG).
One was a nonsynonymous coding SNP (rs2888805) (per allele odds ratio
(OR) 1.40, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.16-1.70; p-value=0.0006) and
the other was an intronic SNP in high linkage disequilibrium with
rs2888805 (rs4135150). Conclusion: The results pinpoint DNA repair genes
most likely to contribute to the NMSC cancer-prone phenotype. A promising
lead is genetic variants in TDG, important not only in base excision
repair but also in regulating the epigenome and gene expression, which
may contribute to the NMSC-associated increase in overall cancer risk.

