Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gemcitabine pathway SNPs are associated with its PK parameters in
patients with solid tumors


Gemcitabine (2, 2-difluoro 2-deoxycytidine, dFdC) is a cytotoxic
pyrimidine antimetabolite used as first-line chemotherapeutic agent for
the treatment of a wide range of solid tumors and hematologic
malignancies. It is as a pro-drug that undergoes cellular uptake through
transporters like human equilibrative nucleoside transporter
(hENT1/SLC29A1) and human concentrative nucleoside transporters
(hCNT1/SLC28A1 and hCNT3/SLC28A3) followed by extensive intracellular
phosphorylation by kinases like deoxycytidine kinase (DCK) and cytidine
monophosphate kinase (CMPK) to its active diphosphorylated (dFdCDP) and
triphosphorylated (dFdCTP) forms. Gemcitabine is primarily inactivated
via deamination to its less potent metabolite 2, 2-difluorodeoxyuridine
(dFdU) by cytidine deaminase (CDA). High inter-patient variability in
response to gemcitabine treatment has been a major concern in gemcitabine
chemotherapy. However, association of pharmacogenomics with gemcitabine
pharmacokinetics (PK) has not been extensively studied so far. In the
present study, therefore, we investigated association between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within genes involved in gemcitabine
transport/metabolic pathway and pharmacokinetic parameter estimates for
gemcitabine and metabolites in patients diagnosed with solid tumors.
Pharmacokinetic blood sampling (n=40) was as follows: pre-infusion, 5,
15, 30, 45 min, and 1, 1.25, 1.5, 2, 6, 24, 48 and 72 hours after the end
of gemcitabine infusion. Gemcitabine and dFdU concentrations in plasma
and intracellular dFdCTP levels in PBMCs were measured using HPLC-UV and
LC MS/MS. A total of 86 SNPs in 14 genes viz. CDA, CMPK, CTPS, DCK, DCTD,
NME1, NME2, NME3, NME4, NT5C2, NT5C3, SLC28A1, SLC28A3, and SLC29A1 were
genotyped using Sequenom-based assays. Pharmacogenomic association was
evaluated using Wilcoxon rank-sum test and Kruskal-Wallis one-way
analysis of variance by ranks (p0.05). SNPs in 5 nucleotidase genes-
rs1163075, rs1926029, rs11598702 and rs1712517 in NT5C2 and rs3750117 in
NT5C3 were associated with gemcitabine elimination clearance. SNPs in
CDA- rs1048977 and rs4655226 were associated with dFdU clearance. SNPs in
CTPS- rs4430318, rs61780437 and rs1044457 were strongly associated with
higher dFdCTP formation clearance. Additionally, CDA, DCTD, SLC28A1,
SLC28A3 and SLC29A1 SNPs were also associated with dFdCTP formation
clearance. The results from our study indicate pharmacogenomic
association between gemcitabine pharmacokinetic pathway SNPs and PK
parameters. Presence of these SNPs could impact outcomes for patients
receiving gemcitabine therapy.

