Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Allyl isothiocyanate (AITC), a naturally occurring compound,
combined with platinum-based therapies enhances apoptosis in vitro, and
inhibits lung tumor growth in vivo


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death in the United
States, and it is estimated more than 220,000 new cases will be diagnosed
in 2011. The first-line therapy for advanced lung cancer almost always
contains a platinum-based chemotherapeutic agent, regardless of the
disease's histological profile. In vitro studies have shown that
isothiocyanate compounds can sensitize lung cancer cells to cisplatin
treatment, however the underlying mechanisms have not been well defined
and until now, there have been no in vivo demonstrations to support the
in vitro results. Our lab recently discovered that allyl isothiocyanate
(AITC), a naturally occurring isothiocyanate molecule found in
cruciferous vegetables such as horseradish and mustard seeds, can
sensitize lung cancer cells to cisplatin treatment. Our data demonstrate
that the combination of cisplatin and AITC can induce apoptosis more
effectively than cisplatin alone. Furthermore, drug combination index
(CI) analysis from cancer cell-based ex vivo studies showed synergistic
effects between AITC and cisplatin in defined dose ranges. Mechanistic
studies revealed that combination treatment of cisplatin and AITC
decreases the expression of survivin and Bcl-2 and concomitantly
increases caspase-3 activation, PARP cleavage and DNA fragmentation,
hallmarks of apoptosis. Most importantly, our data demonstrate that
cisplatin, in combination with orally administered AITC, shows
significantly improved suppression of lung tumor growth in human lung
tumor xenograft mouse models compared to cisplatin or AITC alone. Given
its oral bioavailability and potential to overcome cisplatin resistance,
AITC shows promise as a chemotherapeutic-sensitizer for the treatment of
advanced lung cancer.

