Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vitro selection of prostate cancer cell-specific molecular
recognition elements


Among males in the United States, prostate cancer is the most-diagnosed
cancer and is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Current
detection and therapeutic methods are not specific for the disease. The
current standard in detection, prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels in
the blood, was recently given a D grade by the U.S. Preventative Services
Task Force. To address this problem, molecular recognition elements
(MREs) that bind with high affinity and specificity to a molecule
displayed on the surface of prostate cancer cells but not benign prostate
cells are being developed. MREs are obtained through the in vitro
selection process, which is the iterative enrichment of a large pool of
random biomolecules for those that bind to a target of interest but not
closely related targets. Seven rounds of in vitro selection have been
completed, enriching a yeast-displayed single-chain variable fragment
(scFv) antibody library with an initial diversity of 10^9 molecules.
First, three rounds of biopanning were performed. In the positive panning
selections, yeast-displayed scFv molecules were incubated with the LNCaP
prostate cancer cell line. Those that bound to the LNCaP cells were
amplified and subjected to a negative panning selection, in which the
scFv's were incubated with benign prostate cell lines. These cell lines
represented high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, benign
prostate hyperplasia, and normal prostate cells. Those that did not bind
to the benign cells were amplified. Then, four rounds of fluorescent
activated cell sorting (FACS) were completed with increasing stringency.
Binding of selected scFv MREs is being characterized. This work will
produce a prostate cancer cell-specific MRE useful in specific detection
and therapeutic targeting of prostate cancer.

