Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Homozygosity for Arg of p53 codon 72 correlates with poor
prognosis in Puerto Rican patients with head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma


Objective: Genetic variations at codon 72 of p53 gene results in altered
activities for p53 and are suggested as a potential cancer risk. However,
epidemiologic findings have been inconsistent. The p53 gene has a
polymorphic site at exon 4 codon 72, which, in an occurrence of a base
substitution, can produce Proline or Arginine (Arg72Pro). This
polymorphism is differentially dispersed among different ethnic
populations. The objective of this study is to evaluate the association
between p53 polymorphism and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) in the Puerto Rican population. Methods: Genotyping of the p53
polymorphism at exon 4 codon 72 was performed using PCR-based restriction
fragment polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) in a study with 72 HNSCC patients.
Correlations between clinicopathological parameters and p53 polymorphism
were analyzed by Fisher's exact test and chi-square when suitable.
Survival analysis of HNSCC patients, with each type of p53 genotype, was
performed using Mantel-Cox test. Results: The frequencies for homozygote
Arg allele were 34.7% in HNSCC cases and 31.1% in controls. The Pro
allele carriers (Arg/Pro or Pro/Pro) had a frequency of 65.3% in HNSCC
cases and 68.9% in healthy controls. The OR of HNSCC cancer-associated
with the Arg-Arg genotypes of codon 72 was 1.18 [95% confidence interval
(CI): 0.53-2.61]. Survival analysis showed that HNSCC patients with the
Arg/Arg allele had a poorer survival rate compared to patients with the
Pro allele (Hazard Ratio = 2.40, 95% CI: 1.27-4.56, P=0.0074). Also,
there were differences in survival based on patient's genotype and
response to treatment. However, no statistically significant association
was found between p53 polymorphic variants and gender, age, risk factors
and staging. Conclusion: Our results suggest that homozygosity for Arg of
p53 Arg72Pro may have a role in the progression of HNSCC in the Puerto
Rican population. Detection of the p53 polymorphic variants may be used
as an indicator of prognosis in HNSCC patients. Accurate prognosis in
HNSCC will help clinicians to establish proper treatment and increase the
survival of HNSCC patients.

