Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic value of 18F-FDG PET/CT in nasopharyngeal carcinoma


Background: To investigate the prognostic value of pretreatment tumor
maximal standardized uptake (SUVmax) values of 18F-FDG PET/CT in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) patients treated with intensity-modulated
radiotherapy (IMRT). Methods: Consecutive biopsy-proven, non-metastatic
NPC patients undergoing pretreatment 18F-FDG PET/CT and receiving IMRT
from 2002 to 2005 were retrospectively reviewed. SUVmax of primary tumor
(SUVmax-T) and regional lymph nodes (SUVmax-N) was measured. Survival was
estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. Prognostic significance was
assessed using univariate and multivariate analyses. Results: One hundred
sixty-nine eligible patients were enrolled, with 132 male and 37 female.
Median age was 42 years. The distribution of stages was 14 for I, 39 for
II, 61 for III and 55 for IV. Median SUVmax-T was 4.0 and median SUVmax-N
was 3.5. Median follow-up was 71 months. Thirty five patients died and
distant metastasis was the main reason of death (71.4%). Among 134 living
patients, most patients are disease free (92.6%). In univariate analysis,
older age, advanced T stage, advanced N stage, advanced clinical stage,
higher SUVmax-T and higher SUVmax-N were all associated with lower OS,
DFS and DMFS (Table 1). Remarkably, multivariate analysis found SUVmax-T
and SUVmax-N were significant prognostic factors for OS, DFS and DMFS,
independent of T and N stage (Table 1). Conclusion: SUVmax-T and SUVmax-N
have prognostic value for survivals in IMRT-treated NPC patients. High
FDG uptake in primary tumor and regional lymph nodes are useful for the
identification of patients at higher risk. Abbreviations: OS, overall
survival; DFS, disease-free survival; DMFS, distant metastasis-free
survival; uni, univariate analysis; multi, multivariate analysis Table 1.


