Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of common cancer susceptibility variants on risk of second
primary cancers: results from the Multiethnic Cohort and PAGE studies


Second primary cancers (SPC) account for approximately 16% of all
incident cancers in the U.S. Genome-wide associations studies (GWAS) have
identified over one hundred-fifty genetic variants associated with
different cancer sites. A few of these SNPs, such as rs6983267 on
chromosome 8q24, have been associated with multiple cancer sites.
However, the association of cancer risk variants with the occurrence of
second primary cancers has not been investigated. As part of the
Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE)
consortium, using data from the Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC), we
investigated the association of 148 cancer risk variants with the risk of
SPC. Persons with SPC (n=666) were defined as cohort members diagnosed
with >1 incident cancers after cohort entry. Two sets of controls were
selected for this analysis: i) single-index cancer controls (n=9,195):
participants who had a single incident cancer of the same site as the
case after cohort entry, ii) cancer-free controls (n=8,974): participants
who remained cancer-free at end of follow-up. Tests of main effects for
each SNP were conducted using unconditional logistic regression, assuming
a genetic log-additive model, and were adjusted for age at primary
cancer, sex and race/ethnicity. When using single-index cancer controls,
models were also adjusted for stage and site of the primary cancer.
Analyses using cancer-free controls showed 15 of 148 SNPs associated with
risk of SPC (pSecond primary cancers (SPC) account for approximately 16%
of all incident cancers in the U.S. Genome-wide associations studies
(GWAS) have identified over one hundred-fifty genetic variants associated
with different cancer sites. A few of these SNPs, such as rs6983267 on
chromosome 8q24, have been associated with multiple cancer sites.
However, the association of cancer risk variants with the occurrence of
second primary cancers has not been investigated. As part of the
Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE)
consortium, using data from the Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC), we
investigated the association of 148 cancer risk variants with the risk of
SPC. Persons with SPC (n=666) were defined as cohort members diagnosed
with >1 incident cancers after cohort entry. Two sets of controls were
selected for this analysis: i) single-index cancer controls (n=9,195):
participants who had a single incident cancer of the same site as the
case after cohort entry, ii) cancer-free controls (n=8,974): participants
who remained cancer-free at end of follow-up. Tests of main effects for
each SNP were conducted using unconditional logistic regression, assuming
a genetic log-additive model, and were adjusted for age at primary
cancer, sex and race/ethnicity. When using single-index cancer controls,
models were also adjusted for stage and site of the primary cancer.
Analyses using cancer-free controls showed 15 of 148 SNPs associated with
risk of SPC (p<0.05): 5 prostate cancer SNPs, 3 breast cancer SNPs, 3
lung cancer and/or nicotine dependence SNPs, 1 colorectal cancer SNP, 1
melanoma SNP, 1 basal cell carcinoma SNP, and 1 glioma SNP. Twelve SNPs
were positively and 3 SNPs inversely associated with risk. The
associations for four of these 15 SNPs remained statistically significant
(pSecond primary cancers (SPC) account for approximately 16% of all
incident cancers in the U.S. Genome-wide associations studies (GWAS) have
identified over one hundred-fifty genetic variants associated with
different cancer sites. A few of these SNPs, such as rs6983267 on
chromosome 8q24, have been associated with multiple cancer sites.
However, the association of cancer risk variants with the occurrence of
second primary cancers has not been investigated. As part of the
Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE)
consortium, using data from the Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC), we
investigated the association of 148 cancer risk variants with the risk of
SPC. Persons with SPC (n=666) were defined as cohort members diagnosed
with >1 incident cancers after cohort entry. Two sets of controls were
selected for this analysis: i) single-index cancer controls (n=9,195):
participants who had a single incident cancer of the same site as the
case after cohort entry, ii) cancer-free controls (n=8,974): participants
who remained cancer-free at end of follow-up. Tests of main effects for
each SNP were conducted using unconditional logistic regression, assuming
a genetic log-additive model, and were adjusted for age at primary
cancer, sex and race/ethnicity. When using single-index cancer controls,
models were also adjusted for stage and site of the primary cancer.
Analyses using cancer-free controls showed 15 of 148 SNPs associated with
risk of SPC (p<0.05): 5 prostate cancer SNPs, 3 breast cancer SNPs, 3
lung cancer and/or nicotine dependence SNPs, 1 colorectal cancer SNP, 1
melanoma SNP, 1 basal cell carcinoma SNP, and 1 glioma SNP. Twelve SNPs
were positively and 3 SNPs inversely associated with risk. The
associations for four of these 15 SNPs remained statistically significant
(p<0.05) even after using single-index cancer controls and adjusting for
stage and site of the primary cancer. These four SNPs were previously
found to be associated with glioma (CCDC26 rs10464870, OR: 1.22, 95% CI:
1.05, 1.41); basal cell carcinoma (CDKN2BAS rs2151280, OR: 1.15, 95% CI:
1.02, 1.30); lung cancer/nicotine dependence (CTNNA3 rs4142041, OR: 0.81,
95% CI: 0.71, 0.93); and melanoma (MC1R rs4785763, OR: 1.18, 95% CI:
1.03, 1.35). In addition, when using these single-index cancer controls,
we also found an association with a testicular germ cell tumor SNP
(CENPE/TACR3 rs4699052, OR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.77, 0.99). However, none of
these associations remained statistically significant after Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons. No heterogeneity across
race/ethnicity was observed. Replications are ongoing in other PAGE
cohorts. In conclusion, site-specific cancer risk variants may be
associated with risk of SPC, suggesting common biological pathways in
subsequent cancer development among cancer survivors.

