Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bone morphogenetic proteins stimulate mammary fibroblasts to
promote mammary tumorigenesis


Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are secreted cytokines/growth factors
belonging to the Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) superfamily. BMPs have
recently been shown to be overexpressed in human breast cancers, however
loss of BMP signaling in mammary carcinomas has also been shown to
accelerate metastases. Stimulation of dermal fibroblasts with BMP4 can
enhance pro-tumorigenic factors uniquely from the epidermal response.
Additionally, treatment of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)
derived from a mouse prostate carcinoma with BMP have been reported to
stimulate tumor-associated angiogenesis. We sought to determine the
effect of BMP treatment on mammary fibroblasts and determine their
response during mammary tumor progression. We first identified secreted
pro-inflammatory cytokines and matrix-metalloproteinases (MMPs)
upregulated in response to BMP4 treatment. We found that fibroblasts
stimulated with BMP4 could enhance tumor invasion, which was inhibited by
a BMP receptor kinase antagonist. We next demonstrated that BMP signaling
was specifically absent in the stroma of human ductal and lobular
carcinoma in situ (DCIS & LCIS). Yet after progression to invasion,
breast tumors of many distinct subtypes contained a stroma active for BMP
signaling. We further extended these observations with human normal
mammary fibroblasts and compared them to human fibroblasts from breast
cancer and found that BMP was capable of inducing MMP3 and IL-6 secretion
in normal fibroblasts. However carcinoma associated fibroblasts had
constitutively elevated levels of MMP3 and IL-6 that corresponded to
enhanced BMP signaling in addition to loss of secreted BMP antagonists.
These experiments demonstrate that BMP may play important tumor promoting
functions within the tumor microenvironment.

