Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combinatorial expression of histone modifying enzymes
differentiates Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors from mesenchymal stem
cells and other sarcomas


Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) regroups mesenchymal tumors of
bone and soft tissues that affect mostly children and young adults. ESFT
is characterized by genetic lesions that include chromosomal
translocations that generate de novo chimeric fusion oncoproteins between
the TLS/EWS/TAF15 family of RNA-binding proteins and members of the ETS
family of transcription factors. Contrary to the progress made in
uncovering the genetic bases of Ewing's sarcoma, much remains to be
discovered in the epigenetic mechanisms underlying ESFT pathogenesis. We
have recently shown that alterations in the expression of EZH2 (a.k.a.
KMT6), a methyltransferase that catalyzes the H3K27me3 mark, and of LSD1
(a.k.a. KDM1A), an H3K4me3 demethylase, contribute to ESFT pathology and
can be targeted with drugs to curtail Ewing's sarcoma cell growth in
vitro (EZH2 and LSD1) and in vivo (EZH2). To start deciphering the
contribution of epigenetic modifiers to ESFT pathology, we surveyed the
expression of all known histone modifying enzymes (HMEs) in four ESFT
patient cohorts, totaling 96 tumors. We used the Ican analytical method
to infer gene expression significance compared to a mesenchymal stem cell
benchmark, as previously reported (Clin. Cancer Res 16: 3769-78, 2010).
We show that, in addition to EZH2 and LSD1, several HMEs are up-regulated
in ESFT compared to mesenchymal stem cell progenitors, indicating that
the combinatorial activities of several HMEs are likely to promote an
ESFT-specific epigenomic landscape. These findings represent the first
extensive analysis of HMEs in ESFT, suggest a role of HMEs in ESFT
pathogenesis and/or maintenance, and offer putative drug targets that may
provide much needed novel ESFT epigenetic therapies.

