Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanism of cellular uptake of Pt drugs: The role of hCTR1


Cisplatin is an anti-cancer drug used to treat various human malignancies
including breast, testicular, ovarian, prostrate, lung, head, neck, and
colon cancers. While this drug has been shown to successfully treat
tumors, its use is limited by the rapid development of resistance. This
drug has been used since the 70's to treat different forms of cancer and
recent studies have attempted to understand the mechanism of resistance
by examining how this anti-cancer drug is taken into the cell,
distributed within the cell, and exported. It has been claimed that
hCTR1, the human high affinity Cu transporter, is the major entry pathway
for cis-Pt and related anti-cancer drugs in human cells. Furthermore,
that the entry mechanism via hCTR1 mimics that of Cu. Since hCTR1 is a
very selective transporter for Cu(I), its function as a cisplatin entry
pathway is unexpected. We will describe the results of our recent studies
on HEK293 cells that over-express wild-type hCTR1 and a number of mutant
Cu transporters, ovarian tumor cells that are sensitive or resistant to
cis-Pt, and a number of human breast cell tumor lines. We have compared
the relative entry rates of Cu and Pt in these cells and, via cell
surface biotinylation and imaging, the effects of extracellular Cu, which
causes regulatory endocytosis of the transporter, to that of the cis-Pt
drugs. Our results suggest that hCTR1 is not the major entry route of Pt
drugs into human cells and that the response of the transporter, in a
number of these cells, to the presence of extracellular drug is different
from its response to Cu. Supported by NIH Grant P01 GM 067166.

