Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ex vivo characterization of CTCs isolated using the FMSA device


Although technological advances in recent years have enabled isolatation
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs), only the VeridexCellSearch System has
been approved by the FDA for assessment of patient prognosis in
metastatic breast, colon, and prostate cancers. A fundamental challenge
with the CellSearch System is that the technique it uses to enrich and
detect CTCs, EpCAM-basedimmunomagnetic isolation, fixates captured cells
and prevents further molecular characterization by functional assays and
primary cell culture. Progress in addressing these issues may help with
progress with a variety of clinical needs including further
characterization of the biology of individual patient tumors as well as
their potential response top various therapeutics. In this study, we use
the Flexible Micro Spring Array (FMSA) Device a novel portable
microfluidic device that captures and isolates viable CTCs by two
physical parameters: size and flexibilityto capture, culture, and further
characterize CTCs.GFP-labeled HCT-116 cells were spiked into healthy
samples of donor blood to mimic blood samples of metastatic cancer
patients. This spiked blood was filtered using the FMSA device, and the
recovered cells were expanded in cell culture. A series of experiments
were carried out to characterize these cells and investigate the effect
of chemotherapy on the resulting cultures. Studies are ongoing to
evaluate the potential of using this model to culture CTCs from patients
and to evaluate the response of these cells to chemotherapies using
high-throughput methodologies. The isolation of viable CTCs from human
blood using the FMSA device provides a novel means for studying viable
CTCs and for testing drug efficacy ex vivo. The analysis and
identification of CTC-specific characteristics and their relation to
chemotherapy susceptibility suggests a potential paradigm shift toward
personalized and targeted cancer therapy based on the specific genetic
defects of each patient's malignancy and CTCs.

