Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intracranial administration of activated NK-cells and mAb9.2.27
against NG2/CSPG4 activates microglial cytotoxicity and prolongs survival
in glioblastoma xenograft model


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most malignant brain tumour in
adults with dismal prognosis despite multimodal treatment. We have
previously shown that the NG2 proteoglycan mediates an aggressive disease
course in GBMs and therefore aimed to target it using the monoclonal
antibody 9.2.27 and adoptively transferred natural killer (NK) cells in
athymic rats. We demonstrated that intracranial administration of
activated NK cells and mAb9.2.27 eradicated established GBM and led to
significantly increased survival, mediated by diminished tumour
proliferation and increased cell death. The mechanisms involved sustained
activation of pro-inflammatory ED1+CD8+ microglia and subsequent
development of a Th1 immune response in the combination therapy compared
to monotherapy controls. The Th1 response was characterized by increased
tumour infiltration by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, as well as augmented IFN-
and TNF- release into the cerebrospinal fluid. Furthermore, we showed
that activated NK cells released IFN- and TNF-, they shifted activated
microglia from M2- to highly cytotoxic M1-like phenotype and
preferentially killed M2-microglia compared to M1-microglia in vitro.
These findings implicate NK cells in the pro-inflammatory environment
that facilitated the tumour cytotoxicity by microglia in vivo. Our
results suggest that the administration of activated NK cells and
mAb9.2.27 is a promising approach to treat GBM.

