Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemosensitizing effects of the novel, small molecule DNA
methylation inhibitor SGI-110 in ovarian cancer


Deoxycytosine methylation of CpG islands in promoter regions of tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) plays a prominent role in the development and
progression of drug-resistant epithelial ovarian cancer (OC). We
previously demonstrated in a phase I/II trial that the DNA methylation
inhibitor decitabine alters DNA methylation and restores platinum
sensitivity in platinum-resistant OC patients, resulting in significant
clinical activity. SGI-110 (Astex Pharmaceuticals) is a DNA
hypomethylating agent with demonstrated activity in restoring silenced
TSG expression in cancer cells by reversal of DNA methylation. As a
decitabine-deoxyguanosine dinucleotide, SGI-110 has been shown to be less
prone to deamination by cytidine deaminase and could have advantages over
decitabine, such as better stability, less toxicity and a more convenient
and less frequent SQ administration. We examined SGI-110 for its ability
to inhibit OC cell proliferation and to demethylate and induce TSGs in
vitro and in vivo. A 48 hour pretreatment with SGI-110 resensitized
drug-resistant ovarian cancer cell lines to cisplatin (3-fold reduction
in IC50 of cisplatin). In A2780 platinum sensitive OC cells, SGI-110
pre-treatment for 5 days reduced cisplatin IC50 by >2-fold. Prolonged (7
days) SGI-110 treatment reduced by 2-fold the number of ALDH1+ cells in
SKOV3 and A2780 cells, suggesting an effect on the stem cell population,
potentially involved in drug resistance. SGI-110 induced significant
demethylation of TSGs ras-associated domain family 1A (RASSF1A) and human
MutL homologue-1 (MLH1) and the differentiation-associated gene HOXA10;
furthermore, RASSF1A, MLH1 and HOXA10 gene reexpression was also observed
after 48 hour SGI-110 treatment. SGI-110 prevented TGF- induced
epithelial to mesenchymal transition of OC cells, as measured
morphologically and by quantification of E-cadherin, Zeb1, Slug and
miR200c expression levels. SGI-110 suppressed E-cadherin promoter
methylation induced by TGF-. We then examined the in vivo tolerability
and efficacy of SGI-110, singly and in combination with cisplatin, in
nude athymic mice. Mice were injected qd or bi-weekly with SGI-110 (sc)
and/or cisplatin (ip) and body weights were measured twice weekly. In the
qd regimen, SGI-110 2 mg/kg plus 4 mg/kg cisplatin was tolerated. The 10
mg/kg bi-weekly dose of SGI-110 was tolerated, either alone or in
combination with 2 mg/kg cisplatin (5mg/kg SGI-110 plus 4 mg/kg cisplatin
was similarly tolerated). SGI-110 induced significant global
hypomethylation, as determined by pyrosequencing analysis of LINE1
demethylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We are currently
assessing the activity of SGI-110 in combination with cisplatin to retard
the growth of platinum resistant human ovarian cancer xenografts. In
summary, SGI-110 combined with platinum is a promising clinical
combination for the therapy of ovarian cancer.

