Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unidentified genetic variants influence pancreatic cancer risk: An
analysis of the PanScan genome-wide association study


Genome-wide association (GWA) methods have been used to identify multiple
pancreatic cancer susceptibility loci. However, it is likely that other
unidentified common susceptibility variants exist. In this work we used
data on 493,619 common autosomal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
from the PanScan GWA study (2,857 cases and 2,967 controls) to confirm
the existence of unidentified susceptibility variants using two
cross-validation methods: a polygenic risk score (PRS) approach and a
power-replication approach. For the PRS approach, after excluding all
SNPs from known pancreatic cancer susceptibility loci, we first
constructed a polygenic risk models based on a training dataset and then
tested the model in an independent testing dataset. The second approach
(i.e., power-replication) was based on calculating power to detect
association for each SNP based on association estimates from a training
set and then testing the power estimate for association with probability
of replication in an independent testing data set. Using the polygenic
risk score method, we demonstrate the existence of additional pancreatic
cancer risk variants, the majority of which have P-values > 0.01 in the
PanScan study. We also demonstrate enrichment for unidentified loci near
gene regions. We reach similar conclusions using the power-replications
approach, where SNPs with higher power to detect association were more
likely to be replicated in an independent dataset at PGenome-wide
association (GWA) methods have been used to identify multiple pancreatic
cancer susceptibility loci. However, it is likely that other unidentified
common susceptibility variants exist. In this work we used data on
493,619 common autosomal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the
PanScan GWA study (2,857 cases and 2,967 controls) to confirm the
existence of unidentified susceptibility variants using two
cross-validation methods: a polygenic risk score (PRS) approach and a
power-replication approach. For the PRS approach, after excluding all
SNPs from known pancreatic cancer susceptibility loci, we first
constructed a polygenic risk models based on a training dataset and then
tested the model in an independent testing dataset. The second approach
(i.e., power-replication) was based on calculating power to detect
association for each SNP based on association estimates from a training
set and then testing the power estimate for association with probability
of replication in an independent testing data set. Using the polygenic
risk score method, we demonstrate the existence of additional pancreatic
cancer risk variants, the majority of which have P-values > 0.01 in the
PanScan study. We also demonstrate enrichment for unidentified loci near
gene regions. We reach similar conclusions using the power-replications
approach, where SNPs with higher power to detect association were more
likely to be replicated in an independent dataset at P<0.05, especially
when analyses were restricted to SNPs in gene regions. While our results
do not substantially improve pancreatic cancer prediction, they do
provide further rationale for focusing association studies on genic
regions and suggest that conducting larger GWA studies and innovative
secondary analyses have the potential to reveal novel susceptibility loci.

