Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peptidylprolyl cis/trans isomerase A1 (Pin1) is modified by lipid
electrophiles generated during oxidative stress


Oxidation of membrane phospholipids is associated with inflammation and
cancer. Phospholipid peroxidation results in the production of reactive
electrophiles that adduct proteins and modulate their function.
4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE), a common product of oxidative damage to lipids,
adducts proteins at exposed Cys, His, or Lys residues. Here, we provide
evidence that peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase A1 (Pin1), an enzyme
that catalyzes the conversion of pSer/pThr-Pro moieties in signaling
proteins from cis to trans, is highly susceptible to HNE-modification.
Incubation of purified Pin1 with HNE followed by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass
spectrometry revealed that the most reactive amino acids are His-157 and
Cys-113, both of which are active site residues. Pin1 was adducted in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells treated with 8-alkynyl-HNE as judged by
click chemistry conjugation with biotin followed by streptavidin-based
pulldown and western blotting with anti-Pin1 antibody. siRNA knockdown of
Pin1 in MDA-MB-231 cells partially protected the cells from HNE-induced
toxicity. Recent studies indicate that Pin1 is an important molecular
target for the chemopreventive effects of green tea polyphenols. The
present study establishes that it is also a target for electrophilic
modification by products of lipid peroxidation.

