Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effects of chitosan and docosahexanoic acid on
osteopontin expression and secretion in an ovarian cancer cell line,
SKOV-3


Current treatment for the deadliest gynecological disease, ovarian
cancer, is surgical debulking followed by chemotherapy or radiotherapy,
but reoccurrence is still significantly high. Hence, there is a need for
alternative treatments, and more specifically a natural therapeutic
product. Recent studies have shown that natural products, such as
chitosan and omega-3 fatty acids, inhibit the proliferation of cancer
cells. Osteopontin (OPN), a cell surface and secretory glycoprotein, has
been implicated as an important biomarker for ovarian cancer. Therefore,
the objective of this study was to determine the effect of chitosan and
DHA on OPN secretion and expression levels in an ovarian cancer cell
line, SKOV-3 cells. We hypothesized that chitosan and DHA will decrease
OPN expression in a dose-dependent manner. To test our hypothesis, SKOV-3
cells were treated with (a) 0 ng/mL, (b) 1% acetic acid; (c) 250 ng/mL of
chitosan, (d) 100 M of DHA, (e) 250 ng/mL of chitosan + 100 M of DHA for
24 and 48 hours. Western Blot analysis and immunocytochemistry were
performed to observe the expression and localization of OPN, while an
ELISA was used to determine OPN secretion. Quantitative RT-PCR was also
performed to determine OPN mRNA expression in the treated cells.
Osteopontin (OPN) protein was localized on the surface of SKOV-3 cells
and its expression decreased in both chitosan and DHA-treated cells.
Furthermore in cells treated with both chitosan and DHA, there was an
even greater decrease in OPN expression. The synergistic effects of
chitosan and DHA suggest that these natural products may serve as
potential natural treatment for ovarian cancer.

