Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EphB3 mediates kinase-dependent suppression of non-small cell lung
cancer metastasis


Eph family is one of the largest subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases.
Their important but controversial roles in cancer development have drawn
growing attentions in recent years. We have recently reported that EphB3
acts as a tumor promoter in human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
independent of its kinase activity (Cancer Research. 71(3):1156, 2011).
In the present study, we find that despite overexpression of EphB3 in
NSCLC, the expression of its cognate ligands, ephrin-B1 and ephrin-B2, is
significantly down-regulated, leading to reduced tyrosine phosphorylation
of EphB3. Activation of EphB3 kinase with either ligand stimulation or
genomic engineering (Y608/614E) in EphB3-overexpressing NSCLC cells
inhibits cell migratory capability in vitro as well as in vivo metastatic
seeding. Furthermore, we have identified a novel EphB3-binding protein,
the receptor for activated C-kinase 1 (RACK1), which mediates the
assembly of a ternary signal complex comprising protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A), Akt and itself in response to EphB3 activation, leading to
reduced Akt phosphorylation and subsequent inhibition of cell migration.
Our study reveals a novel tumor-suppressing signaling pathway associated
with kinase-activated EphB3 in NSCLC, and provides a potential
therapeutic strategy by activating EphB3 signaling, thus inhibiting tumor
metastasis.

