Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of pre-treatment body mass index on patients with head and
neck cancer treated with radiation


Purpose: Radiation therapy (RT) may lead to difficulty in swallowing and
subsequently weight loss in patients with head and neck cancer. We
investigated the association of pre-treatment body mass index (preT BMI)
with outcomes of head and neck cancer in patients treated with radiation.
Methods: All 1562 patients diagnosed with head and neck cancer and
treated with curative-intent RT to a dose of 60Gy or higher between 1994
and 2004 were retrospectively studied. Body weight was measured both at
entry and at the end of RT. cancer-specific survival (CSS), overall
survival (OS), locoregional control (LRC) and distant metastasis (DM)
were analyzed by preT BMI (Purpose: Radiation therapy (RT) may lead to
difficulty in swallowing and subsequently weight loss in patients with
head and neck cancer. We investigated the association of pre-treatment
body mass index (preT BMI) with outcomes of head and neck cancer in
patients treated with radiation. Methods: All 1562 patients diagnosed
with head and neck cancer and treated with curative-intent RT to a dose
of 60Gy or higher between 1994 and 2004 were retrospectively studied.
Body weight was measured both at entry and at the end of RT.
cancer-specific survival (CSS), overall survival (OS), locoregional
control (LRC) and distant metastasis (DM) were analyzed by preT BMI (< 25
Kg/m2 vs 25Kg/m2). The median follow-up was 8.6 years. Results: Patients
with higher preT BMI appeared to have earlier T and N stage. Patients
with lower preT BMI were statistically significantly associated with poor
CSS (p = 0.023) and OS (p Purpose: Radiation therapy (RT) may lead to
difficulty in swallowing and subsequently weight loss in patients with
head and neck cancer. We investigated the association of pre-treatment
body mass index (preT BMI) with outcomes of head and neck cancer in
patients treated with radiation. Methods: All 1562 patients diagnosed
with head and neck cancer and treated with curative-intent RT to a dose
of 60Gy or higher between 1994 and 2004 were retrospectively studied.
Body weight was measured both at entry and at the end of RT.
cancer-specific survival (CSS), overall survival (OS), locoregional
control (LRC) and distant metastasis (DM) were analyzed by preT BMI (< 25
Kg/m2 vs 25Kg/m2). The median follow-up was 8.6 years. Results: Patients
with higher preT BMI appeared to have earlier T and N stage. Patients
with lower preT BMI were statistically significantly associated with poor
CSS (p = 0.023) and OS (p < 0.0001) than those with higher preT BMI.
There is no significant difference between high and low preT BMI in LRC
and DM. Body weight loss (BWL) during radiation did not influence
survival outcomes. However, in the group of higher preT BMI, CSS, OS and
DM-free survival of patients with less BWL during radiation was
statistically longer when compared with greater BWL (p = 0.002, Purpose:
Radiation therapy (RT) may lead to difficulty in swallowing and
subsequently weight loss in patients with head and neck cancer. We
investigated the association of pre-treatment body mass index (preT BMI)
with outcomes of head and neck cancer in patients treated with radiation.
Methods: All 1562 patients diagnosed with head and neck cancer and
treated with curative-intent RT to a dose of 60Gy or higher between 1994
and 2004 were retrospectively studied. Body weight was measured both at
entry and at the end of RT. cancer-specific survival (CSS), overall
survival (OS), locoregional control (LRC) and distant metastasis (DM)
were analyzed by preT BMI (< 25 Kg/m2 vs 25Kg/m2). The median follow-up
was 8.6 years. Results: Patients with higher preT BMI appeared to have
earlier T and N stage. Patients with lower preT BMI were statistically
significantly associated with poor CSS (p = 0.023) and OS (p < 0.0001)
than those with higher preT BMI. There is no significant difference
between high and low preT BMI in LRC and DM. Body weight loss (BWL)
during radiation did not influence survival outcomes. However, in the
group of higher preT BMI, CSS, OS and DM-free survival of patients with
less BWL during radiation was statistically longer when compared with
greater BWL (p = 0.002, < 0.0001, and 0.033). Conclusion: This study
demonstrates preT BMI greater than or equal to 25 Kg/m2 positively
influenced survival outcomes for patients with head and neck cancer.
Patients with higher preT BMI who were able to maintain their weight
during radiation had significantly better survival and distant outcomes
than patients experiencing greater BWL.

