Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distant delivery of glioma-restricted oncolytic adenovirus loaded
into a neural stem cell-based carrier prolongs the survival of animals
with human glioblastoma


Despite recent advancements in the treatment of brain tumors, the
prognosis for patients with malignant glioblastoma (GBM) still remains
poor due to the invasive nature of these tumors. In this context, our lab
and others have investigated the unique inherent tumor tropic properties
of neural stem cells (NSCs) as a novel platform for the targeted delivery
of oncolytic adenovirus for anti-glioma therapy. NSCs hold great promise
for glioma therapy because of their inherent ability to target satellite
tumor foci throughout the brain. In this study, we report that the
infection/loading of NSCs with oncolytic adenovirus upregulate various
chemoattractant receptors such as CXCR4 (10-fold, P=0.0054), VEGFR2
(5-fold, P=0.0143) and significantly enhances glioma specific migration
of NSCs both in vitro and in vivo. In a human glioma xenograft animal
model, virus loaded NSCs retain a majority of their tumor homing capacity
with minimal effect on their viability, and are capable of delivering a
therapeutic payload to tumor cells located far from the original
implanted site. Moreover, NSC-based cell carriers significantly reduce
the non-specific distribution of therapeutic virus in the animal brain.
Finally, distance delivery of NSCs-loaded with CRAd-S-pk7, a glioma
restricted oncolytic adenovirus, in multiple orthotropic xenograft models
of human glioma have shown the ability to inhibit tumor growth and
increase median survival by about 38 days (54%) as compared to the animal
group treated with the CRAd-S-pk7 alone (P=0.0416). Our data suggest that
NSC-based cell carriers have the potential to improve the therapeutic
efficacy of anti-glioma virotherapy by not only protecting the
therapeutic virus from the host immune system, but also by enhancing
targeted delivery of therapeutic virus at disseminated tumor sites.

