Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Yes-associated protein increases hepatocellular carcinoma
chemosensitivity by modulating p53


The function of the yes-associated protein (YAP) transcription
co-activator remains an enigma since reports indicate that YAP either
acts as an oncogene or enhances apoptosis. In this study, we found that
YAP expression occurs in 51% of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
biopsies while phosphorylated YAP (pYAP) expression occurs in 33% of
Grade II and III HCCs. In addition, we found that YAP and p53 expression/
nuclear translocation increase in chemo-treated HepG2 cells. In
chemo-treated HepG2 cells transfected with WT-YAP or blank (control), the
chemosensitivity of the HepG2 + WT-YAP cells increases compared to
HepG2+blank cells. In chemo-treated HepG2 cells transfected with
Flag-S94A (TEAD binding domain mutant), Flag-W1W2 (WW domain mutant), or
blank (control), the chemosensitivity and p53 expression/ nuclear
translocation of the HepG2+Flag-S94A cells and HepG2+Flag-W1W2 cells
decrease compared to HepG2+blank cells. In chemo-treated HepG2 cells
transfected with Flag-5SA-S94A or Flag-5SA-W1W2, the chemosensitivity and
p53 expression/ nuclear translocation of the HepG2+Flag-5SA-S94A cells
and HepG2+Flag-5SA-W1W2 cells increase again compared to HepG2+Flag-S94A
cells or HepG2+Flag-W1W2 cells respectively. These results indicate that
YAP promotes chemosensitivity by modulating p53 during chemo-treatment,
and YAP-modulated p53 activity requires the TEAD binding domain and the
WW domain. In summary, our data indicate that YAP functions as a
tumor-suppressor that enhances apoptosis by modulating p53 activity
during chemo-treatment.

