Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined glycolytic inhibition and anti-vascular treatment in
retinoblastoma: Novel strategy for tumor control avoids chemotherapy


Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the combination
treatment of glycolytic inhibitors and anti-angiogenic agents on tumor
burden and hypoxia in advanced retinoblastoma using the LHbetaTag murine
transgenic retinoblastoma model. Methods: Under IACUC protocol, thirty
advanced LHbetaTag mice (16 weeks of age) were divided into 5 groups (n=6
per group) and treated with periocular injections of (a) saline, (b)
2-deoxy-glucose (2-DG), (c) anecortave acetate (AA) or (d) 2-DG plus AA
(one day post AA treatment) or (e) 2-DG plus AA (one week post AA
treatment). Eyes were enucleated at 21 weeks and tumor sections were
analyzed for tumor burden and intra-tumoral hypoxia. Results: Combined
treatment with 2-DG and AA (both 2-DG one day and one week post AA
treatment) showed significant reduction in tumor burden compared to
saline control (61% and 56% respectively, p Purpose: The purpose of this
study was to evaluate the combination treatment of glycolytic inhibitors
and anti-angiogenic agents on tumor burden and hypoxia in advanced
retinoblastoma using the LHbetaTag murine transgenic retinoblastoma
model. Methods: Under IACUC protocol, thirty advanced LHbetaTag mice (16
weeks of age) were divided into 5 groups (n=6 per group) and treated with
periocular injections of (a) saline, (b) 2-deoxy-glucose (2-DG), (c)
anecortave acetate (AA) or (d) 2-DG plus AA (one day post AA treatment)
or (e) 2-DG plus AA (one week post AA treatment). Eyes were enucleated at
21 weeks and tumor sections were analyzed for tumor burden and
intra-tumoral hypoxia. Results: Combined treatment with 2-DG and AA (both
2-DG one day and one week post AA treatment) showed significant reduction
in tumor burden compared to saline control (61% and 56% respectively, p
<.001). Eyes treated with 2-DG one day post AA injection showed a
significant tumor burden reduction as compared to 2-DG alone or 2-DG plus
AA injected after one week (pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the combination treatment of glycolytic inhibitors and
anti-angiogenic agents on tumor burden and hypoxia in advanced
retinoblastoma using the LHbetaTag murine transgenic retinoblastoma
model. Methods: Under IACUC protocol, thirty advanced LHbetaTag mice (16
weeks of age) were divided into 5 groups (n=6 per group) and treated with
periocular injections of (a) saline, (b) 2-deoxy-glucose (2-DG), (c)
anecortave acetate (AA) or (d) 2-DG plus AA (one day post AA treatment)
or (e) 2-DG plus AA (one week post AA treatment). Eyes were enucleated at
21 weeks and tumor sections were analyzed for tumor burden and
intra-tumoral hypoxia. Results: Combined treatment with 2-DG and AA (both
2-DG one day and one week post AA treatment) showed significant reduction
in tumor burden compared to saline control (61% and 56% respectively, p
<.001). Eyes treated with 2-DG one day post AA injection showed a
significant tumor burden reduction as compared to 2-DG alone or 2-DG plus
AA injected after one week (p<01). Further, intra-tumoral hypoxia was
eliminated in 2-DG treated eyes at one day post AA injection and was
significantly reduced in 2-DG eyes treated one week after AA injection
(pPurpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the combination
treatment of glycolytic inhibitors and anti-angiogenic agents on tumor
burden and hypoxia in advanced retinoblastoma using the LHbetaTag murine
transgenic retinoblastoma model. Methods: Under IACUC protocol, thirty
advanced LHbetaTag mice (16 weeks of age) were divided into 5 groups (n=6
per group) and treated with periocular injections of (a) saline, (b)
2-deoxy-glucose (2-DG), (c) anecortave acetate (AA) or (d) 2-DG plus AA
(one day post AA treatment) or (e) 2-DG plus AA (one week post AA
treatment). Eyes were enucleated at 21 weeks and tumor sections were
analyzed for tumor burden and intra-tumoral hypoxia. Results: Combined
treatment with 2-DG and AA (both 2-DG one day and one week post AA
treatment) showed significant reduction in tumor burden compared to
saline control (61% and 56% respectively, p <.001). Eyes treated with
2-DG one day post AA injection showed a significant tumor burden
reduction as compared to 2-DG alone or 2-DG plus AA injected after one
week (p<01). Further, intra-tumoral hypoxia was eliminated in 2-DG
treated eyes at one day post AA injection and was significantly reduced
in 2-DG eyes treated one week after AA injection (p<.0001). Conclusion:
Combination focal therapy with glycolytic inhibitors and angiogenic
inhibitors significantly enhanced tumor control and reduced tumor
hypoxia. Treatment timing greatly impacted the effect of combined
treatment. Combination therapy with 2-DG and AA was as effective as
current chemotherapy regimens in the treatment of LHbetaTag murine
transgenic retinoblastoma and may potentially serve as an alternative
treatment strategy for advanced pediatric retinoblastoma.

