Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced expression of DDB2 promotes epithelial to mesenchymal
transition in colon cancer


Invasion and metastasis are the hallmarks of malignant tumor progression
and the principal cause of death related to solid tumors. Epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) is intricately associated with cancer
progression, as it confers cancer cells the ability to invade and
metastasize to a distant organ. Here we identify a novel function of
nucleotide excision repair protein DDB2 as an important antagonist of the
EMT in colon carcinoma through its maintenance of epithelial phenotype.
In human colon carcinoma samples, loss of DDB2 expression is highly
correlated with the aggressiveness of the disease. Moreover, stimuli
(TGF-beta and hypoxia) that induce EMT inhibit expression of DDB2; and
loss of DDB2 is sufficient to promote EMT of colon cancer cells. The
mechanism involves DDB2 mediated transcriptional repression of VEGF and
MMP3. DDB2 represses these genes by histone deacetylation. We also
observed that loss of DDB2 results in resistance to anoikis, an important
barrier to metastasis. The lack of anoikis response is associated with
increased Akt and ERK activity. Furthermore, treatment with Phenethyl
Isothiocyanate (PEITC), a promising cancer chemopreventive component,
augmented E-cadherin expression that is related to an increase in DDB2
expression. The present study suggests that anti-metastatic effect of
PEITC involves important role of DDB2. Together, our results show that
loss of DDB2 expression is both necessary and sufficient for EMT during
colon carcinoma progression.

