Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enriching and characterizing cancer stem cell grown on collagen
type IV-coated plate in primary pediatric brain tumors


There is accumulating evidence that cancer stem cells (CSC) in adherent
culture maintain and enrich their characteristics by extracellular matrix
(ECM). This study focused on differential expression of not only CSC
markers and differentiation markers, but also embryonic signaling
pathways when cultured on various ECM-coated plates. Four cells from
pediatric patients with brain tumor were grown in DMEM/F12 medium
supplemented with 10ng/ml FGF, bFGF and 0.5x B-27. After forming of
neurosphere, the cells were cultivated on each three kinds of ECM-coated
plate including collagen type IV, fibronectin and poly-D-lysine. And the
expression level of CD133, CD15, Nestin, Oct3/4, SOX2 as CSC markers,
GFAP, -tubuliln III for differentiation markers, Wnt, Notch, Shh, their
transcription factors like -catenin, Hes1, Gli1 respectively for
embryonic signaling pathways was assessed by reverse transcriptase
(RT)-PCR. As a result, two among four brain tumor cells grown on collagen
type IV-coated plate expressed higher expression level of CD133, CD15,
Nestin, SOX2, Oct3/4, Wnt5a and Notch than in the cells cultured on
fibronectin or poly-D-lysine-coated plate. And residual two cells
cultivated on collagen type IV and fibronectin, not on poly-D-lysine were
shown similar expression level of almost all genes. There is no
difference of Shh, Gli1, GFAP and -tubuliln III expressions in all cells
grown on each of three ECM-coated plates. In conclusion, collagen type IV
is required for enriching and maintaining of CSC characteristics in
primary pediatric brain tumors.

