Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutational analysis in circulating tumor cells (CTC):ScreenCell MB
Filtration Unit and ICE COLD-PCR


The aim of this study was to validate the use of the ScreenCell MB
Filtration Unit for detection of mutations in Circulating Tumor Cells.
This device allows physicians to easily isolate any CTCs using a simple
blood draw which can be performed at a local doctor's office. This is
especially important when trying to analyze CTCs in elderly patient
populations and in regions where the large medical centers are far away.
Once isolated, the filter containing the CTCs can be sent to a laboratory
for DNA isolation and the mutation analysis. Mutational analysis using
ICE COLD-PCR can then be performed without the use of expensive or
specialized equipment. The mutation was characterized using standard
Sanger DNA sequencing with a detection limit of 0.5 - 0.1% mutant
sequence in the wild-type background. Results will be presented from a
mock experiment where PC9 cells (EGFR exon 19 deletion: p.E746_A750del)
or H1975 cells (EGFR exon 21: p.L858R) were spiked into blood and then
these mock CTCs were collected on the ScreenCell Molecular Filter Device.
Following DNA isolation, the mutations were easily detected at the lowest
number of cells spiked in to the blood samples (10 cells). Additional
data from CTCs collected from NSCLC patients detected the L858R point
mutation, an exon 19 E746_A750del mutation, and an exon 19
E746_S752delinsV. Mutations in these same samples could not be detected
in DNA sequencing following standard PCR amplification. These data show
that the ScreenCell MB Filtration Unit coupled to mutational analysis
using ICE COLD-PCR can be an easy, cost-effective method for collection
and analysis of CTCs in patient blood samples. Moreover, the device is
simple enough to be used in any doctor's office.

