Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The rate of vertical transmission of human papillomavirus from
mothers to infants: Relationship between infection rate and mode of
delivery


Objectives: To assess the prevalence of human papillomavirus(HPV)
infection among pregnant women and to evaluate the rate of vertical
transmission of HPVs to their infants. Methods: 491 pregnant women and
their infants delivered at Cheil General Hospital & Women's Healthcare
Center were prospectively recruited for this study between February 2010
and November 2011. Cervical swabs and blood samples were collected from
the women at 32-36 weeks of gestation. Neonatal buccal swabs and cord
blood were taken immediately after birth. HPV positive neonates were
rechecked HPV DNA at 6 months postpartum. HPV genotyping with HPV DNA
chip (MyGene Co., Seoul, Korea) was used to detect the HPV of mothers and
neonates. Type specific PCR was performed to see HPV DNA in the maternal
and cord blood in cases of mother and infant infected same types of HPV
DNA. Results: HPV DNA was positive in 16%(80/500) of mothers and
3.5%(17/491) of neonates. The rate of vertical transmission of HPV to
their infant was 21.3%(17/80). HPV DNA type-specific maternal/neonate
concordance was 100%. 16 HPV positive infants were delivered vaginally
and 1 HPV positive infant was delivered by cesarean section with labor.
There is no HPV positive infants delivered from cesarean section without
labor. All HPV positive neonates were converted HPV negative at 6 months
after birth. There was no viremia in maternal and cord blood in cases of
mother and infant infected same type of HPV DNA. Conclusions: Prevalence
of HPV DNA in neonates born from HPV positive mothers was significantly
high. However, these data suggest that neonatal HPV DNA positive is not
true vertical infection but contamination during vaginal delivery. Key
words: Human papillomavirus, vertical transmission

