Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The expression of Ki-67, but not IGF1R, predicts a poor
disease-free survival in patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung


Background: Ki-67 expression has been established as a predictive marker
for recurrence in breast cancer. The insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF1R) is a transmembrane heterotetrameric protein implicated
in promoting the oncogenic transformation, growth and survival of cancer
cells. However, no useful data are presently available regarding the
biological significance of both molecules in lung cancer. Therefore, we
investigated the relationship between the expression of Ki-67 and IGF1R.
This is the first molecular analysis of the correlation between the
expression of Ki-67 and IGF1R in a Japanese population of primary lung
adenocarcinoma patients. Methods: Tumor specimens were collected from 183
consecutive patients who underwent a complete resection for lung
adenocarcinoma from 2003 to 2007 in our department. We analyzed the Ki-67
and IGF1R expression levels in the primary lung adenocarcinomas by
immunohistochemistry. Results: The positive expression of Ki-67 and IGF1R
was identified in 41 (22.4%) and 43 (23.6%) patients, respectively. The
positive expression of Ki-67 was identified in 14 (50.0%) of 28 patients
and 27 (18.1%) of 155 patients with and without recurrence, respectively
(pBackground: Ki-67 expression has been established as a predictive
marker for recurrence in breast cancer. The insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF1R) is a transmembrane heterotetrameric protein implicated
in promoting the oncogenic transformation, growth and survival of cancer
cells. However, no useful data are presently available regarding the
biological significance of both molecules in lung cancer. Therefore, we
investigated the relationship between the expression of Ki-67 and IGF1R.
This is the first molecular analysis of the correlation between the
expression of Ki-67 and IGF1R in a Japanese population of primary lung
adenocarcinoma patients. Methods: Tumor specimens were collected from 183
consecutive patients who underwent a complete resection for lung
adenocarcinoma from 2003 to 2007 in our department. We analyzed the Ki-67
and IGF1R expression levels in the primary lung adenocarcinomas by
immunohistochemistry. Results: The positive expression of Ki-67 and IGF1R
was identified in 41 (22.4%) and 43 (23.6%) patients, respectively. The
positive expression of Ki-67 was identified in 14 (50.0%) of 28 patients
and 27 (18.1%) of 155 patients with and without recurrence, respectively
(p< 0.001). The positive expression of Ki-67 was associated with a poorer
disease-free survival (DFS) according to the survival analysis. A
multivariate analysis also demonstrated that Ki-67 expression was
independently associated with an increased risk of a poor DFS. On the
other hand, a significant relationship was also observed between the
expression levels of Ki-67 and IGF1R in NSCLC. However, in the subgroup
analysis, no significant correlation was not observed. Conclusions: The
expression of Ki-67, but not IGF1R, may be a useful marker for predicting
postoperative recurrence in patients with the primary lung adenocarcinoma
following complete resection.

