Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of hydroxybutyl(butyl)nitrosamine (OH-BBN)-induced
mouse urinary bladder cancer by the kava chalcone flavokawain A


About 75% of human bladder cancers are associated with cigarette smoking
or exposure to industrial carcinogens. Kava roots have been traditionally
used to prepare beverage and herb medicine in the South Pacific Island
nations (Fiji, Vanutu, Samoa, etc.) for thousands of years. Recently, an
epidemiological study has linked high kava consumption to lower
incidences of cancers, including lung and bladder cancers, despite the
presence of many smokers in the populations of the South Pacific Islands.
We therefore examined the potential of flavokawain A, a predominant
chalcone isolated from the kava plant for prevention of mouse urinary
bladder cancer induced by the organ-specific and tobacco-smoking related
nitrosamine OH-BBN. B6D2F1 mice at 8 weeks of age were gavaged 7.5 mg
OH-BBN once per week for 12 weeks. In the standard prevention protocol,
0.1% FKA or vehicle food was administered as a dietary supplement to each
group of mice beginning 1 week before the first OH-BBN administration and
ending 32 weeks after the initial OH-BBN treatment. Dietary feeding of
OH-BBN treated mice with 0.1% flavokawain A in the mouse diet decreased
bladder wet weight by about 57% (Bladder weights for control versus
flavokawain A were 74.18 16.7 versus 32 1.5 mg; PAbout 75% of human
bladder cancers are associated with cigarette smoking or exposure to
industrial carcinogens. Kava roots have been traditionally used to
prepare beverage and herb medicine in the South Pacific Island nations
(Fiji, Vanutu, Samoa, etc.) for thousands of years. Recently, an
epidemiological study has linked high kava consumption to lower
incidences of cancers, including lung and bladder cancers, despite the
presence of many smokers in the populations of the South Pacific Islands.
We therefore examined the potential of flavokawain A, a predominant
chalcone isolated from the kava plant for prevention of mouse urinary
bladder cancer induced by the organ-specific and tobacco-smoking related
nitrosamine OH-BBN. B6D2F1 mice at 8 weeks of age were gavaged 7.5 mg
OH-BBN once per week for 12 weeks. In the standard prevention protocol,
0.1% FKA or vehicle food was administered as a dietary supplement to each
group of mice beginning 1 week before the first OH-BBN administration and
ending 32 weeks after the initial OH-BBN treatment. Dietary feeding of
OH-BBN treated mice with 0.1% flavokawain A in the mouse diet decreased
bladder wet weight by about 57% (Bladder weights for control versus
flavokawain A were 74.18 16.7 versus 32 1.5 mg; P<0.01). In the standard
promotion protocol, 0.1% FKA or vehicle food was given 1 week after the
final OH-BBN administration for 19 weeks. Flavokawain A also significant
reduced the bladder wet weight by about 27% (Bladder weights for control
versus flavokawain A were 89.4 23.4 versus 65.5 10.6 mg; pAbout 75% of
human bladder cancers are associated with cigarette smoking or exposure
to industrial carcinogens. Kava roots have been traditionally used to
prepare beverage and herb medicine in the South Pacific Island nations
(Fiji, Vanutu, Samoa, etc.) for thousands of years. Recently, an
epidemiological study has linked high kava consumption to lower
incidences of cancers, including lung and bladder cancers, despite the
presence of many smokers in the populations of the South Pacific Islands.
We therefore examined the potential of flavokawain A, a predominant
chalcone isolated from the kava plant for prevention of mouse urinary
bladder cancer induced by the organ-specific and tobacco-smoking related
nitrosamine OH-BBN. B6D2F1 mice at 8 weeks of age were gavaged 7.5 mg
OH-BBN once per week for 12 weeks. In the standard prevention protocol,
0.1% FKA or vehicle food was administered as a dietary supplement to each
group of mice beginning 1 week before the first OH-BBN administration and
ending 32 weeks after the initial OH-BBN treatment. Dietary feeding of
OH-BBN treated mice with 0.1% flavokawain A in the mouse diet decreased
bladder wet weight by about 57% (Bladder weights for control versus
flavokawain A were 74.18 16.7 versus 32 1.5 mg; P<0.01). In the standard
promotion protocol, 0.1% FKA or vehicle food was given 1 week after the
final OH-BBN administration for 19 weeks. Flavokawain A also significant
reduced the bladder wet weight by about 27% (Bladder weights for control
versus flavokawain A were 89.4 23.4 versus 65.5 10.6 mg; p<0.05). To
increase the incidence of palpable OH-BBN induced bladder tumors, we
extended 7.5mg OH-BBN treatment once per week for one more week up to a
total of 13 weeks. In this modified promotion protocol, the percentage of
palpable tumors in control group has reached to about 53%, which is
similar to that reported by published literatures. Dietary feeding of
0.6% flavokawain A significantly decrease bladder wet weight by 73%
(Bladder weights for control versus flavokawain A were 314.9 106.7 versus
87.3 15.2 mg, p=0.0265). In addition, we showed that flavokawain A
induced activities of phase II enzyme (i.e. glutathione S-transferase and
quinone reductase) in different organs (bladder, liver, prostate, etc.)
of mice. Taken together, these results suggest that flavokawain A
deserves further investigation for bladder cancer chemoprevention by
targeting smoking or carcinogens exposed populations.

