Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of NAD(P)H-Quinone oxidoreductase 1 by antioxidants in
female ACI rats is associated with decrease in oxidative DNA damage and
inhibition of estrogen-induced breast cancer


Exact mechanisms underlying the initiation and progression of
estrogen-related cancers are not clear. Literature evidence and our
studies strongly support the role of estrogen metabolism-mediated
oxidative stress in estrogen-induced breast carcinogenesis. We have
recently demonstrated that antioxidants vitamin C and butylated
hydroxyanisole (BHA) or estrogen metabolism inhibitor -naphthoflavone
(ANF) inhibit 17-estradiol (E2)-induced mammary tumorigenesis in female
ACI rats. The objective of the current study was to identify the
mechanism of antioxidant-mediated protection against E2-induced DNA
damage and mammary tumorigenesis. Female ACI rats were treated with E2 in
the presence or absence of vitamin C or BHA or ANF for up to 240 days.
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) and NAD(P)H-Quinone
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) mRNA and protein levels were suppressed in
E2-exposed mammary tissue and in mammary tumors after treatment of rats
with E2 for 240 days. This suppression was overcome by co-treatment of
rats with E2 and vitamin C or BHA. Vitamin C and BHA significantly
increased NQO1 levels after 120 days. 8-Hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG)
levels were higher in E2-exposed mammary tissue and in mammary tumors
compared to age-matched controls. Vitamin C or BHA treatment
significantly decreased E2-mediated increase in 8-OHdG levels in the
mammary tissue. In vitro studies using silencer RNA confirmed the role of
NQO1 in prevention of oxidative DNA damage. Our studies further
demonstrate that NQO1 upregulation by antioxidants is mediated through
NRF2.

