Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic polymorphisms in NAT2 gene influence overall survival in
bladder cancer patients


Aromatic amines are involved in the etiology of bladder cancer and these
compounds are acetylated by N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) and 2 (NAT2).
Epidemiological studies have shown that the slow NAT2 acetylator
phenotype is associated with increased risk of bladder cancer. Although
several studies have shown an association between bladder cancer risk and
SNPs in NAT2, the impact on survival has not been established. Because
SNPs are innate characteristics of individuals, we hypothesize that their
presence could have an effect even after tumor resection and, thus, be
useful as prognostic markers. In order to investigate this possibility,
we examined 5 SNPs in NAT2 gene (rs1041983, rs1801280, rs1799931,
rs1495741, rs12545528) and investigated their impact on overall survival
(OS). The study population comprised the cohort of new histologically
confirmed cases of bladder cancers treated in the urology departments of
the S. Giovanni Battista Hospital in Turin. Vital status ascertainment
was carried out through linkage with the local town offices. Blood
samples and questionnaires of 331 subjects were collected before therapy.
White blood cell DNA was purified from stored blood samples. Polymorphic
sites were genotyped by 5Nuclease assay (TaqMan) with fluorogenic Minor
Groove Binder probes. Subjects phenotype was estimated using a standard
approach based on the combination of two polymorphisms: rs1041983 and
rs1801280; we also estimated phenotype from SNP rs1495741 (Garcia-Closas
et al. 2011). For each SNP we calculated crude and adjusted (by age,
stage, grading and therapy) Hazard Ratios (HR) and the corresponding 95%
Confidence Interval (95% CI) using the Cox proportional-hazard regression
model for the co-dominant and per-allele model. Stratified analyses by
kind of therapy and tumour type were also performed. We computed the
phase of the haplotype using PHASE 2.1: for each haplotype we computed
HR, comparing subjects carrying 2, 1 or 0 copies of the same haplotype.
The rs1799931 and the rs1801280 variant alleles, which lead to reduced
N-acetyltransferase activity and/or reduced protein stability, were
significantly associated with a decreased OS (HR: 4.54; 95% CI:
1,78-11,61 and HR: 1.43; 95% CI: 1,04-1,96 adjusted per allele model,
respectively); in contrast variant alleles of SNPs which do not seem to
modify the protein activity (rs12545528 non-coding and rs1041983 silent)
were significantly associated with an increased OS (HR: 0.68; 95% CI:
0,49-0,96 and HR: 0.58; 95% CI: 0,40-0,85 per allele model,
respectively). Similar observations were made when the cases were
stratified into papillary and non-papillary tumours or stratified by kind
of therapy. Haplotype analysis confirmed the results described above not
providing any other indication. In conclusion, NAT2 rs1799931 and
rs1801280 functional SNPs can be considered as potential prognostic
factors for the survival of patients with bladder cancer.

