Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: H-RASG12V transformation modulates antioxidant activities and
enhances genotoxicity to arsenite in human urothelial cells


Inorganic arsenite (iAs) is a human carcinogen. Epidemiological evidence
has revealed the strong association of chronic exposure to arsenic with
increased incidences of cancers, including skin, lung, liver, bladder,
etc. However, the exact carcinogenic mechanisms of iAs are not completely
understood. Numerous studies have shown that mutation-activated H-Ras is
frequently observed (about 30 50%) in human urothelial carcinoma. In this
study, we explored the gentoxic effects of iAs in human urothelial cells
ectopically expressing H-RasG12V, an activated H-Ras oncogene. Our
results showed that H-RasG12V-transformed human uroepithelial cells
(HUC-RAS) were more susceptible to arsenite-induced cell death, DNA
damage, micronuclei formation, and anchorage independent growth than
control cells (HUC-neo). Furthermore, we found that iAs treatment induced
higher intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in HUC-RAS
cells than HUC-neo. In addition, iAs-induced genetic damages could be
effectively suppressed by N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC). We therefore further
determined the effects of iAs on antioxidant activities in these 2 cell
lines. Our results showed that glutathione (GSH) and superoxide dismutase
(SOD) activity were significantly elevated by treatment of HUC-neo cells
with iAs, but not in HUC-RAS cells.Alternatively, catalase activity,
2-fold increase in HUC-RAS cells as compared to HUC-neo cells, was
significantly suppressed by iAs. Taken together, we may infer that
H-RasG12V expression disturbs redox homeostasis by increasing catalase
activity. Since catalase activity is sensitive to iAs, it may account for
the susceptibility of H-RAS transformed cells to iAs.

