Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of hematopoietic protein kinases in GBM


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and deadly form of brain
cancer. Despite intensive research the median survival of GBM remains at
1 year, with less than 10 % of patients surviving over 5 years. Our
analysis of fresh GBM, secondary GBM, high grade astrocytoma,
oligodendroglioma, normal brain and normal human astrocytes showed
increased expression of 19 novel protein kinases in GBM and targets
previously associated with gliomagenesis (e.g. EGFR or PDGF). Two of
these kinases which are mainly expressed in hematopoietic cells were the
cytoplasmic kinases SYK and LYN. We confirmed the overexpression in GBM
tumours and cell lines through western blot and immunohistochemistry
analysis. More importantly, SYK expression was derived from the GBM
tumours and not from infiltrating leukocytes as shown through
colocalization with GFAP, and not with CD45. SYK was found strongly
activated at the membrane after EGF and treatment with three specific
small molecule inhibitors and siRNA targeting SYK strongly blocked
proliferation and migration of GBM cells. This was confirmed through
wtSYK and kinase dead SYK overexpression. In addition, SYK
phosphorylation was found to be cell cycle regulated after
synchronization. Due to our preliminary results we will test the
therapeutic potential of SYK inhibitors and epistatic kinase interactions
on our xenograft model measuring the efficacy of therapeutics crossing
the blood brain barrier with the ultimate goal of discovering alternative
treatments for GBM.

