Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New targets of mTORC1 pathway in ER-positive cells


mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) regulates protein translation, autophagy, and
cell growth. These cellular functions are often dysregulated in cancer,
therefore identification of mTORC1 targets in control of these processes
is of great interest for development of targeted cancer therapies. While
rapamycin shown an effect in early clinical trials, the effectiveness of
rapamycin in treatment of breast cancer has been variable. Estrogen
receptor (ER) mediates the proliferative effects of estrogen and
represents an important clinical target in treatment of ER-positive
cancers. Tamoxifen is an anti-estrogen that has become the standard agent
for the treatment of ER-positive breast cancer, where it acts as an
antagonist. However, resistance to tamoxifen, and other endocrine or
anti-estrogen therapies develops in many cases. One mechanism by which
resistance develops is through phosphorylation of ER, allowing it to act
in estrogen-independent manner. Phosphorylation of Ser118 and Ser167 is
important for transcriptional activity of ER. The regulation of these
sites is complex, involving inputs from the mTOR and MAPK signaling
pathways. Importantly, ER phosphorylation correlates with resistance to
tamoxifen, and is a prognostic marker for disease progression and
survival. Therefore, the goal of our study is to identify new targets of
mTORC1 pathway important for growth and proliferation of ER-positive
cells. Thus, inhibition of downstream components of the mTORC1 pathway
together in combination with anti-estrogen therapy may prove to be an
effective strategy in treatment of ER-positive cancer.

