Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D3 induces 15-Hydroxyprostaglandin Dehydrogenase to
suppress pancreatic cancer cell proliferation


BACKGROUND: Excess prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) mediates growth and survival
of several cancers, including prostate and pancreatic cancers (PaCa).
15-Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH) catalyzes PGE2 to an
inactive 15-keto metabolite. We have previously shown that PGDH is
down-regulated in human PaCa, contributing to accumulated levels of PGE2
that can subsequently feed back to suppress further PGDH expression. In
contrast, PGDH expression has been reportedly up-regulated by vitamin D3
(VD3) in prostate cancer cells but has not been confirmed in pancreatic
cancer cells. AIM: The study focuses on whether VD3 up-regulates PGDH
expression in pancreatic cancer cells. METHODS: Human PaCa cell lines
BxPC-3, HPAF-II and MIA PaCa-2 were treated with VD3 were analyzed for
vitamin D receptor (VDR), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and PGDH expression by
RT-PCR. Protein extracts were analyzed by Western blotting for VDR,
COX-2, PGDH, SNAI1, SNAI2 and GAPDH expression. Cellular proliferation
was analyzed by MTT assay. PGE2 was measured by ELISA. RESULTS:
Dose-dependent treatment with VD3 at 1000 nM resulted in a maximal
decrease in proliferation by 1.3 0.1-fold in BxPC-3, 1.7 0.3-fold in
HPAF-II expressing elevated VDR and 1.1 0.3-fold in MIA PaCa-2. VD3 at 10
nM resulted a time-dependent increase in PGDH mRNA expression by 3.8
0.3-fold in BxPC-3 and 7.7 0.6-fold in HPAF-II, whereas expression
remained unchanged in MIA PaCa-2. Conversely, COX-2 mRNA expression
decreased by 0.5 0.1-fold in BxPC-3 and 0.6 0.1-fold in HPAF-II, but not
in MIA PaCa-2. PGDH protein expression increased at 96 and 120 hrs
following treatment with VD3 in BxPC-3 and HPAF-II whereas COX-2 protein
expression decreased in HPAF-II cells but was abolished by 96 and 120 hrs
in BxPC-3 cells. PGDH protein expression was increased at 120 hrs in MIA
PaCa-2 following addition of VD3 but COX-2 protein expression in this
cell line was not detected. VD3 decreased the PGDH transcriptional
regulators SNAI1 protein expression by 120 hrs in BxPC-3 and HPAF-II
cells but not MIA PaCa-2 whereas SNAI2 decreased in all cell types by 96
hrs. Knockdown of SNAI by siRNA at 100 nM in HPAF-II resulted in a 1.3
0.3-fold decrease proliferation and 1.4 0.1-fold decrease in PGE2
production. Combined treatment with 100 nM of siSNAI and 10 nM of VD3 did
not result in synergistic decrease in proliferation or PGE2 production.
CONCLUSION: PaCa cells expressing vitamin D receptors responded to VD3
treatment with a corresponding increase in PGDH coupled with a decrease
in COX-2 expression. VD3 or siSNAI resulted in a decrease in cellular
proliferation and PGE2 production but the combined treatment did not
augment further decreases, suggesting that the decrease by VD3 could be
mediated through SNAI regulation of PGDH.

