Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical and prognostic comparison between triple-negative and
non-triple-negative breast cancer


Aim: The triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype is characterized by
the lack of expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER/PR) and
Her2/neu protein. The present study aimed to evaluate the five-year
survival rates and clinico-pathological characteristics of patients with
TNBCs and those with non-TNBCs in Taiwan. Methods: This study was
conducted on 313 ethnic Chinese women with primary breast cancer using
tissue microarrays to perform a standardized immunohistochemical
analysis. Results: Of the 313 patients, 10.5% had the TNBC phenotype. The
median age of the TNBC patients was lower than that of the non-TNBC
patients (47 vs. 59 years). One of the more striking differences between
the TNBC and non-TNBC women was tumor differentiation, with 29.6% of the
non-TNBC group having a poorly differentiated tumor compared to 45.5% of
the TNBC group (p=0.01). Cox proportional hazards model results showed
that (a) ER, PR, or Her2/neu status was not associated with survival rate
in early-stage patients and (b) ER negativity (p = 0.03, HR = 3.4) and
Her2/neu negativity (p = 0.04, HR= 4.4) were two independent predictors
of the five-year survival rate in advanced-stage (stage III-IV) women.
Conclusion: The TNBC phenotype represents a specific molecular profile.
However, it does not always lead to worse survival, especially in women
with early breast cancer.

