Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel bcl-2/xL inhibitor induces tumor cell apoptosis and
potentiates the activity of standard chemotherapeutics


Tumor cells often evade apoptosis by tipping the balance of Bcl-2 family
and BH3-only protein expression towards a more anti-apoptotic
environment, thus providing a survival advantage as well as a means of
resistance to anti-cancer therapies. Indeed, over-expression of Bcl-2
family members has been shown to confer chemo-resistance in multiple
tumor types. One potential result of this survival adaptation, however,
is that the tumor cells become dependent on said Bcl-2 family member and
hence increasingly vulnerable to targeted pro-apoptotic BH3 mimetics.
Clinical validation of this concept has been demonstrated with the
Bcl-2/xL inhibitor Navitoclax, where as a single agent in phase I/II
trials in relapsed, refractory CLL patients, a 20% response rate was
observed. Due to the potential that directly targeting the apoptotic
machinery holds in treating cancer, developing BH3 mimetics that easily
and effectively combine with standard chemotherapies is an attractive
proposition. With this in mind, we have discovered and characterized a
novel small molecule BH3 mimetic with nanomolar affinity for Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL. Here we characterize the in vitro and in vivo activity of this
inhibitor in a variety of cell types. In addition to exhibiting potent
single agent anti-cancer activity, it also potentiates the effectiveness
of standard chemotherapeutic agents. Importantly, it also induces
regression of sensitive tumors in vivo after a single IV bolus dose.
Overall, this novel Bcl-2/xL inhibitor represents an exciting tool to
further explore the mechanistic rationale for using potent BH3 mimetics
as a foundation therapy across a broad range of tumor types where
resistance to standard therapies arises from deregulation of the Bcl-2
family of anti-apoptotic proteins.

