Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reprimo, a p53-dependent G2 arrest mediator, reduces tumorigenic
capacity in human gastric cancer cell lines


Introduction: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the leading cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. The progression of GC is related to
genetic as well as epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation, that
involves the downregulation of tumor suppressor genes. Recently we have
identified Reprimo (RPRM), a p53-dependent G2 arrest mediator candidate
as a putative biomarker for early diagnosis of GC (Clin Cancer Res
2008;14:6264-9). However, the role of RPRM in GC is unknown. Methods: The
expression and sequence of the promoter and the coding region of RPRM
were performed in five GC cell lines (AGS, NCI-N87, KATOIII, MKN28,
MKN45). Two expression negative RPRM cell lines were stable transfected
with a pCMV6 vector containing the full-length of the coding region of
RPRM (pCMV6-RPRM). Cell growth and proliferation were analyzed by MTS,
colony formation and soft agar assays. In addition, we analyzed the
ability of migration through wound/healing assay. Results: Only two cell
lines were negative for RPRM expression (AGS & MKN45). Bisulfite sequence
analysis of the promoter region showed a dense CG-rich CpG island
suggesting a role for methylation in regulation of gene expression. No
mutations in the coding region were found. A significant decreased of
cellular proliferation and anchorage independent growth were observed
after the transfection with pCMV6-RPRM. The migration ability was also
decreased in both cell lines. Conclusion: Our results suggest that RPRM
reduces tumorigenic capacity in GC cell lines. Taken together we suggest
that downregulation of RPRM is not only a putative biomarker for early
diagnosis but also might play a role in the pathogenesis of GC.
Grants-in-Aid for Scientific &Technological Research (Fondecyt #1111014 &
Fondef #D09I1137) to AH Corvaln from the Government of Chile.

