Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional liaison between E2F and aberrant ETS oncogenes


Timing, mode and amplitude of gene regulation depend on the tissue
specific dynamic composition of transcription factor complexes.
Abnormalities of the constituents of the complex are expected to modify
the regulatory behavior of the entire module. Here we report a novel
E2F-ETS proliferation control module in Ewing's sarcoma. FLI1 and other
ETS factors are frequently found to be fused to EWS in this highly
aggressive pediatric cancer of the bone. In a genome-wide localization
analysis of EWS/FLI1 as well as E2F3 by ChipSeq, two patterns associated
with distinct gene sets and modes of regulation were identified and
integrated with gene expression data. EWS/FLI1 significantly colocalized
with E2F3 to proximal promoters of activated proliferation genes while
EWS/FLI1 binding independent of E2F3 occurred predominantly distant to
repressed differentiation genes. We find that this key module of the
transcription factor network underlying Ewing's sarcoma is of general
importance and not limited to this specific ETS driven neoplasm.
Recently, prostate cancer was shown to frequently harbor fusions of the
ERG gene. Here we demonstrate that the ETS/E2F3 complex is also present
in VCap prostate cancer cells, identify a common set of genes responsive
to this module and computationally show that this set of core-responders
is involved in proliferation control and translation. Acknowledgement:
This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of
the NIH, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research.

