Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Short-term romidepsin treatment combined with mitogen-activated
protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibition causes
increased Bim expression and cell death in KRAS mutant cell lines


Romidepsin (FK228) is a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDI) that
modulates chromatin and activates apoptotic pathways in vitro. Clinical
efficacy observed in peripheral and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma has not
been replicated in solid tumors, as for other HDIs. We thus sought drug
combinations that might improve the activity of romidepsin in solid
tumors. Mutations in KRAS induce the mitogen activated protein kinase
pathway (MAPK) and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway.
Laboratory data have suggested that activated MEK or AKT can confer
resistance to HDIs. To determine if mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase (MEK) or AKT inhibitors could increase sensitivity to romidepsin,
we measured cell death by annexin assay in a panel of 20 cell lines, nine
KRAS mutants and eleven KRAS wild-type (WT). Cells were exposed to 25
ng/ml romidepsin for 6 h in the presence of 250 nM MEK inhibitor
PD0325901 and/or 1 M AKT inhibitor MK2206, after which romidepsin was
removed and cells were incubated with the inhibitors alone for an
additional 42 h. Among the 20 solid tumor cell lines examined, those
harboring a KRAS mutation had a higher percentage of cell death than
lines with WT KRAS when treated with the PD0325901/romidepsin combination
(46.118% vs. 21.67.6% respectively, p-value .0057), the MK2206/romidepsin
combination (43.815.8% vs. 28.613.6%, respectively, p-value .0470), or
the PD0325901/MK2206/romidepsin combination (66.514.8% vs. 35.018.8%,
respectively, p-value .0008). There was no statistically significant
difference (p-value > .05) in cell death between KRAS and WT cell lines
treated with any of the compounds alone. As expression of the
pro-apoptotic protein Bim has been associated with romidepsin-mediated
cell death, and as the MAPK pathway has been shown to phosphorylate and
inactivate Bim, we examined Bim expression in cell lines sensitive to
combined treatment with romidepsin and inhibitors. In the OVCAR5 cell
line, which harbors a G12V KRAS mutation, we noted that romidepsin
induced Bim expression and that combined treatment with PD0325901 led to
higher expression by western blot. The high levels of Bim expression were
associated with increased poly ADP ribose polymerase cleavage. These data
demonstrate the benefit of combining an HDI with MEK and AKT inhibitors
in KRAS mutant cell lines. Romidepsin and MAPK pathway inhibitor
combinations should be further evaluated in patients with mutant KRAS
cancers.

