Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of DAB2IP is related with cancer progression and
prognosis of gastric cancer


Background: Gastric cancer remains the fourth most common cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. DAB2IP, a novel
member of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family, is down-regulated in
various human cancers and functions as a bona fide tumor suppressor in
cancer development. In gastric cancer, the expression of DAB2IP and its
relation to tumor progression and prognosis has not been investigated.
Therefore, we undertook a clinicpathologic study of gastric cancer to
investigate the correlation between the expression of DAB2IP and clinical
characteristics. Results: Immunohistochemistry was performed in 120 cases
of gastric cancer tissues and corresponding adjacent normal mucosas, 36
cases of non-metastatic lymph node and 68 cases of metastatic lymph node.
Overall results showed that 69 of 104 gastric cancer tissues expressed
low level of DAB2IP, and 94 of 104 adjacent normal mucosas expressed high
level of DAB2IP. We also scored the expression level of DAB2IP based on
both the intensity of staining and the percentage of positive cell The
expression of DAB2IP in gastric cancer tissues or lymphatic metastatic
tissues was clearly lower than that in normal mucosas (pBackground:
Gastric cancer remains the fourth most common cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. DAB2IP, a novel member
of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family, is down-regulated in various
human cancers and functions as a bona fide tumor suppressor in cancer
development. In gastric cancer, the expression of DAB2IP and its relation
to tumor progression and prognosis has not been investigated. Therefore,
we undertook a clinicpathologic study of gastric cancer to investigate
the correlation between the expression of DAB2IP and clinical
characteristics. Results: Immunohistochemistry was performed in 120 cases
of gastric cancer tissues and corresponding adjacent normal mucosas, 36
cases of non-metastatic lymph node and 68 cases of metastatic lymph node.
Overall results showed that 69 of 104 gastric cancer tissues expressed
low level of DAB2IP, and 94 of 104 adjacent normal mucosas expressed high
level of DAB2IP. We also scored the expression level of DAB2IP based on
both the intensity of staining and the percentage of positive cell The
expression of DAB2IP in gastric cancer tissues or lymphatic metastatic
tissues was clearly lower than that in normal mucosas (p<0.01). DAB2IP
expression was obviously decreased in gastric cancer tissues with
lymphatic metastasis compared to those without lymphatic metastasis
(pBackground: Gastric cancer remains the fourth most common cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. DAB2IP, a
novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family, is
down-regulated in various human cancers and functions as a bona fide
tumor suppressor in cancer development. In gastric cancer, the expression
of DAB2IP and its relation to tumor progression and prognosis has not
been investigated. Therefore, we undertook a clinicpathologic study of
gastric cancer to investigate the correlation between the expression of
DAB2IP and clinical characteristics. Results: Immunohistochemistry was
performed in 120 cases of gastric cancer tissues and corresponding
adjacent normal mucosas, 36 cases of non-metastatic lymph node and 68
cases of metastatic lymph node. Overall results showed that 69 of 104
gastric cancer tissues expressed low level of DAB2IP, and 94 of 104
adjacent normal mucosas expressed high level of DAB2IP. We also scored
the expression level of DAB2IP based on both the intensity of staining
and the percentage of positive cell The expression of DAB2IP in gastric
cancer tissues or lymphatic metastatic tissues was clearly lower than
that in normal mucosas (p<0.01). DAB2IP expression was obviously
decreased in gastric cancer tissues with lymphatic metastasis compared to
those without lymphatic metastasis (p<0.01). The expression of DAB2IP was
correlated with gender, serosal invasion, lymphatic metastasis, remote
metastasis, tumor grade, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels
(pBackground: Gastric cancer remains the fourth most common cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. DAB2IP, a
novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family, is
down-regulated in various human cancers and functions as a bona fide
tumor suppressor in cancer development. In gastric cancer, the expression
of DAB2IP and its relation to tumor progression and prognosis has not
been investigated. Therefore, we undertook a clinicpathologic study of
gastric cancer to investigate the correlation between the expression of
DAB2IP and clinical characteristics. Results: Immunohistochemistry was
performed in 120 cases of gastric cancer tissues and corresponding
adjacent normal mucosas, 36 cases of non-metastatic lymph node and 68
cases of metastatic lymph node. Overall results showed that 69 of 104
gastric cancer tissues expressed low level of DAB2IP, and 94 of 104
adjacent normal mucosas expressed high level of DAB2IP. We also scored
the expression level of DAB2IP based on both the intensity of staining
and the percentage of positive cell The expression of DAB2IP in gastric
cancer tissues or lymphatic metastatic tissues was clearly lower than
that in normal mucosas (p<0.01). DAB2IP expression was obviously
decreased in gastric cancer tissues with lymphatic metastasis compared to
those without lymphatic metastasis (p<0.01). The expression of DAB2IP was
correlated with gender, serosal invasion, lymphatic metastasis, remote
metastasis, tumor grade, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels
(p<0.05). DAB2IP expression appears to be an independent prognostic
marker for survival of patients with gastric cancer (pBackground: Gastric
cancer remains the fourth most common cancer and the second leading cause
of cancer-related death worldwide. DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras
GTPase-activating protein family, is down-regulated in various human
cancers and functions as a bona fide tumor suppressor in cancer
development. In gastric cancer, the expression of DAB2IP and its relation
to tumor progression and prognosis has not been investigated. Therefore,
we undertook a clinicpathologic study of gastric cancer to investigate
the correlation between the expression of DAB2IP and clinical
characteristics. Results: Immunohistochemistry was performed in 120 cases
of gastric cancer tissues and corresponding adjacent normal mucosas, 36
cases of non-metastatic lymph node and 68 cases of metastatic lymph node.
Overall results showed that 69 of 104 gastric cancer tissues expressed
low level of DAB2IP, and 94 of 104 adjacent normal mucosas expressed high
level of DAB2IP. We also scored the expression level of DAB2IP based on
both the intensity of staining and the percentage of positive cell The
expression of DAB2IP in gastric cancer tissues or lymphatic metastatic
tissues was clearly lower than that in normal mucosas (p<0.01). DAB2IP
expression was obviously decreased in gastric cancer tissues with
lymphatic metastasis compared to those without lymphatic metastasis
(p<0.01). The expression of DAB2IP was correlated with gender, serosal
invasion, lymphatic metastasis, remote metastasis, tumor grade, and
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (p<0.05). DAB2IP expression appears
to be an independent prognostic marker for survival of patients with
gastric cancer (p<0.05). Patients with lower expression of DAB2IP had
worse overall survival than those with higher expression of DAB2IP
(pBackground: Gastric cancer remains the fourth most common cancer and
the second leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. DAB2IP, a
novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family, is
down-regulated in various human cancers and functions as a bona fide
tumor suppressor in cancer development. In gastric cancer, the expression
of DAB2IP and its relation to tumor progression and prognosis has not
been investigated. Therefore, we undertook a clinicpathologic study of
gastric cancer to investigate the correlation between the expression of
DAB2IP and clinical characteristics. Results: Immunohistochemistry was
performed in 120 cases of gastric cancer tissues and corresponding
adjacent normal mucosas, 36 cases of non-metastatic lymph node and 68
cases of metastatic lymph node. Overall results showed that 69 of 104
gastric cancer tissues expressed low level of DAB2IP, and 94 of 104
adjacent normal mucosas expressed high level of DAB2IP. We also scored
the expression level of DAB2IP based on both the intensity of staining
and the percentage of positive cell The expression of DAB2IP in gastric
cancer tissues or lymphatic metastatic tissues was clearly lower than
that in normal mucosas (p<0.01). DAB2IP expression was obviously
decreased in gastric cancer tissues with lymphatic metastasis compared to
those without lymphatic metastasis (p<0.01). The expression of DAB2IP was
correlated with gender, serosal invasion, lymphatic metastasis, remote
metastasis, tumor grade, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels
(p<0.05). DAB2IP expression appears to be an independent prognostic
marker for survival of patients with gastric cancer (p<0.05). Patients
with lower expression of DAB2IP had worse overall survival than those
with higher expression of DAB2IP (p<0.01). Conclusions: DAB2IP is a
potential new marker for predicting the progression and prognosis of
gastric cancer. Loss of DAB2IP expression is related with poor overall
survival of patients in gastric cancer, indicating its potent role in
gastric carcinogensis.

