Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of 14-3-3 as a predictor of early time to
recurrence and a molecular target in metastatic hormone receptor-positive
and -negative breast cancers


Introduction: The 14-3-3 gene, on 8q22, is often amplified in breast
cancer. It encodes a survival factor that interacts with many key
signaling proteins, thereby increasing cell proliferation and
invasiveness, and contributing to therapy resistance and poor clinical
outcome. We examined the relationship between the expression of 14-3-3,
FOXM1, and EGFR in matched primary and recurrence tumor tissue and how
this impacts time to recurrence, properties of the recurrent tumors, and
site of metastasis. Findings: In this cohort of 130 patients, median time
to recurrence 3 years (range 1-17 yrs), our analysis of primary tumor
microarray cores showed 45% were 14-3-3 -positive, 53% were hormone
receptor-positive, and 20% were triple negative. Examination of 14-3-3
and ER status indicated that tumors 14-3-3-positive and ER-negative had
the earliest time to recurrence [p Introduction: The 14-3-3 gene, on
8q22, is often amplified in breast cancer. It encodes a survival factor
that interacts with many key signaling proteins, thereby increasing cell
proliferation and invasiveness, and contributing to therapy resistance
and poor clinical outcome. We examined the relationship between the
expression of 14-3-3, FOXM1, and EGFR in matched primary and recurrence
tumor tissue and how this impacts time to recurrence, properties of the
recurrent tumors, and site of metastasis. Findings: In this cohort of 130
patients, median time to recurrence 3 years (range 1-17 yrs), our
analysis of primary tumor microarray cores showed 45% were 14-3-3
-positive, 53% were hormone receptor-positive, and 20% were triple
negative. Examination of 14-3-3 and ER status indicated that tumors
14-3-3-positive and ER-negative had the earliest time to recurrence [p
<0.001, hazard ratio of 2.89 (95% CI of 2.37-3.41)]. To assess the
prognostic importance of 14-3-3, we stratified primary tumors based on
14-3-3 IHC and compared these to levels in the matched recurred tumors.
Of recurred tumors, 65% were positive for 14-3-3, showing an increase in
positive cases of 20% compared to the primary tumors. Thus, a significant
proportion of primary tumors negative for 14-3-3 became positive in the
recurrence (P=0.0001). Positive 14-3-3 status was correlated with site of
recurrence, with a propensity for metastases to lung and chest wall.
Multifactor correlation regression analysis revealed 14-3-3 status to be
a non-redundant, i.e. independent, variable that adds clinical strength
in predicting recurrence in ER-positive and -negative breast cancers and
provides information in addition to all other clinical pathological
features examined (tumor size, grade, receptor status, FOXM1, CERB2,
EGFR, p53, positive lymph nodes). Conclusions: High expression of 14-3-3
in the primary tumor or its acquisition in the recurrence was
significantly associated with earlier time to recurrence and with distant
metastasis. 14-3-3 is an independent variable that can alone improve the
prediction of clinical outcome. FOXM1, while not being an independent
variable, showed strong correlation with 14-3-3 positivity, and tumors
positive for both factors showed the shortest time to recurrence. The
findings underscore the very detrimental roles played by 14-3-3 and FOXM1
in tumor aggressiveness and metastasis, and suggest that reducing their
expression or interfering with their actions might substantially improve
the clinical outcome for breast cancer patients. (Supported by grants
from The Breast Cancer Research Foundation to BSK and The Sirazi
Foundation to BSK and JF, and DOD postdoctoral fellowship
(W81XWH-09-1-0398) to AB)

