Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of STAT3 in Pten-dependent hematopoietic malignancy


Dysregulation of the Janus kinase (Jak) - signal transducer and activator
of transcription (Stat) signaling pathway is often associated with
cancer. Persistent Stat3 activation has been described in many
hematological malignancies. Two isoforms due to alternative splicing have
been described for Stat3: Stat3 and Stat3. Both isoforms exhibit
overlapping but distinct biochemical properties. Interestingly, Stat3 has
been found in the bone marrow of patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and in several AML cell lines. The role of Stat3 in leukemia
development remained elusive so far. To test for an impact of Stat3 in
leukemia formation, transgenic mice overexpressing Stat3 have been
generated. The expression of the transgene depends on Cre-recombinase
activity therefore the mice were intercrossed with Mx-Cre transgenic
animals, which enables activation of Cre recombinase in the hematopoietic
compartment. This was verified by detection of the reporter protein eYFP
in bone marrow cells upon treatment with poly I/C. The Stat3tgMx-Cretg
compound mice were further bred with Ptenfl/fl mice, since loss of Pten
in hematopoietic stem cells of mice was reported to lead to
myeloproliferative disorder (MPD) that later on progresses to an AML or
ALL like disease. Upon poly I/C treatment Stat3tgMx-CretgPtenfl/fl
compound mice diseased with significantly enhanced latency when compared
to Mx-CretgPtenfl/fl mice. Accordingly, 20 days after poly I/C injection
Stat3tgMx-CretgPtenfl/fl animals displayed also far less Mac1+Gr1+
myeloid cells than Mx-CretgPtenfl/fl mice. Taken together, our findings
suggest that Stat3 acts as a tumor suppressor to prevent Pten dependent
MPD/leukemia.

