Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Study of the high-grade ovarian cancer precursors in the oviduct


The discovery that many high-grade ovarian cancers originate in the
oviduct has generated a paradigm shift in the field of ovarian cancer.
The description of new entities in the oviduct that signify early phases
of ovarian carcinogenesis, including both serous tubal intraepithelial
carcinomas and their precursors the p53 signatures, has provided a
tangible sequence of events leading to malignancy that can be linked to
DNA damage and p53 mutations. However, it has become clear that other
pathway disturbances also play a critical role in the early development
of ovarian cancer. We hypothesize that molecular alterations present in
morphologically normal oviductal epithelium from ovarian cancer patients
reflect the earliest events in ovarian carcinogenesis and may be markers
of increased cancer risk as well as targets for risk reduction.
Whole-genome transcriptome analysis of laser microdissected oviductal
epithelium from histologically normal ovarian cancer patients and
controls was performed. We identified a set of aberrantly expressed genes
in the oviductal epithelium from women who developed high-grade ovarian
cancer and demonstrated some of these genes are also abnormally expressed
in the ovarian cancers due to the genomic alterations. We further
examined the function of these genes using three-dimensional cell culture
system and mouse models. Our work demonstrates the synergistic effects of
defective p53 pathway and other newly found pathways in driving early
steps of ovarian cancer development.

