Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxia activated pro-drug TH-302 induces hypoxia-dependent
anti-leukemia activity in vitro and in vivo


Hypoxia in tumors is generally associated with chemoresistance and
radioresistance. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) was expressed in the
bone marrow in 58% of primary acute myelogenous (AML) cases by
immunohistochemistry (n=156). We have recently demonstrated a marked
expansion of hypoxia in leukemia bone marrow (Benito PLoSOne 2011) and
demonstrated hypoxia promotes chemoresistance in acute leukemias.
Normoxic stabilization of HIF-1 using inhibitor of prolyl hydroxylases
DMOG, or overexpression through infection with lentiviral non-degradable
mutant HIF-1, significantly diminished apoptosis induced by vincristine
and etoposide in REH and Nalm-6 cells. These findings suggest that
hypoxia mediates chemoresistance at least in part through HIF-1a. TH-302
is a 2-nitroimidazole of the cytotoxin bromo-isophosphoramide mustard
that upon hypoxia-dependent activation induces DNA alkylation, a novel
approach to target leukemia. We report the in vitro and in vivo anti
leukemia activity of TH-302. In vitro, TH-302 exhibited potent
anti-leukemia activity in pre-B ALL (REH, NALM6), AML (OCI-AML3, MOLM-13,
KG-1) and CML cell lines (KBM5), with IC50s at 1% O2 ranging from 0.04M
to 2.3M. The hypoxic cytotoxicity ratios (aerobic IC50/hypoxic IC50) were
11 and 92 in ALL (REH, NALM6) and 14, 80 and 116 in AML (OCI-AML3, KG-1,
KBM5). The drug at 5-7.5M also exhibited specific hypoxia dependent
anti-leukemia activity in primary ALL and AML samples (normoxic vs
hypoxic specific apoptosis defined as %AnnV positive cells +/ SEM
normalized to untreated control cells): ALL-1: 5.1+/0.5% vs 65.3+/4.2%;
ALL-2: 8.3+/1.9% vs 28.4+/6.3%; AML 1: 2.6+/0.2% vs 40.3+/1.5%). In in
vivo leukemia models TH-302 (50 mg/kg IP 3 times a week for three weeks)
reduced the number of circulating AML cells (control, 13.2+/5.7 x106/ml;
TH-302, 2.5+/2.1 x106/ml) and prolonged survival of NSG mice engrafted
with primary AML cells compared to the vehicle treated mice (median
survival time: TH-302=75 days; Control=56 days; P=0.003). Finally,
anti-leukemia efficacy of TH-302 was tested in vitro in combination with
chemotherapy commonly used for treatment of AML (AraC, doxorubicin) and
with demethylating agents azacitidine (5-AZA) and decitabine (DAC).
Combination TH-302 with AraC or with DAC were synergistic in killing
OCI-AML3 and MOLM-13 AML cells under hypoxia (combination index values of
0.4 and 0.67 for AraC plus TH-302 in MOLM13 and OCI-AML3, respectively;
0.3 for DAC plus TH-302 in OCI-AML3). In summary, our findings suggest
that hypoxia and HIF-1 constitute important factors in the survival of
leukemic blasts within the BM microenvironment. The results support
targeting hypoxia with a hypoxia-activated drug such as TH-302 to enhance
the efficacy of therapeutic regimens in AML. A Phase 1 clinical study of
TH-302 in patients with relapsed/refractory hematologic malignancies is
ongoing.

