Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A phase 1 study of ABT-806, a humanized recombinant anti-EGFR
monoclonal antibody, in patients with advanced solid tumors


Background: ABT-806 is a humanized recombinant IgG1 monoclonal antibody
that binds to a unique EGFR epitope exposed only in the EGFRde2-7
(EGFRvIII) deletion mutant and activated EGFR proteins. Preclinical data
suggest that ABT-806 does not significantly bind to non-activated,
wild-type EGFR expressed on normal tissues. This phase I study evaluates
the safety, pharmacokinetic (PK) profile, and antitumor activity of
ABT-806 in patients (pts) with advanced solid tumors and suggests a
recommended phase 2 dose (RPTD). Methods: Pts with advanced solid tumors
thought to be EGFR expressing, adequate organ function and ECOG
performance status were eligible for enrollment. Glioblastoma pts were
not eligible for the dose escalation phase. Pts received ABT-806
intravenously at a rate no higher than 15 mg/min. Doses explored were 2,
6, 12, 18, and 24 mg/kg every other week, preceded by 30 min with
acetaminophen 650 mg and diphenhydramine 2550 mg. A 3+3 dose escalation
design was followed. Assessments included adverse events (AEs) graded by
NCI CTCAE v4.0, PK, maximum tolerated dose (MTD), RPTD, and tumor
response by RECIST. Results: At the time of reporting, 26 pts (M/F,
14/12; median age, 63 y; range, 3981 y) have been dosed. No dose limiting
toxicities (DLTs) were observed at the 2, 6, 12, and 18 mg/kg dose
levels. One pt in the 24 mg/kg group experienced a DLT of a grade 3
morbilliform rash, resolving after the administration of loratidine.
Other ABT-806related grade 3/4 AEs were dyspnea (15%) and hypotension
(12%). Frequently occurring AEs (10%) possibly or probably related to
ABT-806 were nausea (23%), vomiting (19%), fatigue (15%), and rash (12%).
The systemic exposures (AUC and Cmax) to ABT-806 were dose-proportional
between 224 mg/kg and the terminal half-life (mean t1/2) was 9 days.
Sixteen pts had at least 1 post-baseline tumor assessment. Five pts
achieved stable disease (more than 8 weeks) as best response (head and
neck cancer, 2; colorectal cancer, 2; lung cancer, 1). One pt with EGFR
amplified head and neck cancer at 6 mg/kg dose had stable disease for 23
weeks. The RPTD was determined as the highest protocol-defined dose
tested at 24 mg/kg, as the MTD was not reached. Infrequent episodes of
rash were observed, 5 pts with grade 1/2 and only 1 pt with grade 3.
Three pts reported grade 1 diarrhea. EGFR H-score has been performed for
each pt enrolled and will be correlated with clinical outcome. EGFRde2-7
analysis is in process. Conclusions: ABT-806 showed a unique PK and
safety profile distinct from other anti-EGFR therapies. The PK appeared
to be linear across doses. The RPTD was the highest dose tested (24
mg/kg). Unlike other EGFR inhibitors, rash was infrequent and typically
grade 1 or 2. The exception was 1 grade 3 morbilliform rash that had a
very different morphology than the typical acneiform rash associated with
EGFR inhibitors. Phase 2 development in the EGFR amplified and/or
EGFRde2-7 pts is planned.

