Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA polymerase eta and a novel anticancer selenophene compound


Human DNA polymerase (pol ) plays a key role in replicating across the UV
radiation induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) in DNA and
mutations in pol gene result in a syndrome called Xeroderma Pigmentosum
Variant (XP-V). In the absence of pol , the DNA replication forks
collapse after prolonged stalling at CPD sites, which consequently lead
to DNA breakages and cell death. Therefore, pol has been considered to
serve as a cellular protection mechanism to enhance cell survival and
reduce mutagenesis. In addition to UV-induced CPD lesion, pol has the
ability to handle DNA lesions introduced by chemotherapeutic anticancer
agents, such as platinum based compounds and nucleoside analogs. Such
damage tolerance ability of pol has been shown to reduce cell sensitivity
to these DNA targeting agents. D-501036
[2,5-bis(5-hydroxymethyl-2-selenienyl)-3-hydroxymethyl-N-methylpyrrole]
is a selenophene compounds that demonstrated promising antitumor activity
against various human cancer cells and in vivo xenograft mouse model.
Mechanistic studies have shown that D-501036 induced DNA adduct(s) and
caused genome instability, which result in cell cycle accumulation in the
S-phase, DNA breakage, and subsequently lead to cell death.
Interestingly, the IC50 for human fibroblast XP30RO cells derived from
XP-V patients was >50 fold higher than the XP30RO cells that stably
transfected with a pol expressing vector (XP30RO-EGFP-pol ). In addition,
D-501036 caused an increased amount of DNA breakage in the
XP30RO-EGFP-pol cells as compared to its parental XP30RO cells in both
DNA fragmentation and comet assays. These results revealed a novel role
of pol in the action of D-501036 that is very different from its
protective role against UV irradiation or cisplatin.

