Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Utilization of methylation levels across the H19 and IGF2 genes as
a predictive marker for various types of cancer


H19 and IGF2 are reciprocally imprinted genes found on chromosome 11.
Epigenetic gene deregulation is increasingly shown to play a role in many
types of cancer. Imprinted genes are especially susceptible to epigenetic
regulatory changes because of silencing of one allele and the dependence
on proper methylation for normal function. One of the goals in cancer
research is to identify molecular markers that will predict the onset of
specific cancers. The pattern of methylation across the IGF2 and H19
genes can be used to characterize the difference between normal and
cancerous tissue as well as the difference between different tumor
tissues. By developing methylation assays that can determine the levels
of methylation for all of the CpG sites across these two genes, we can
establish patterns that could be predictive in detecting the onset of
specific cancer types. We have developed numerous methylation assays
across the H19 and IGF2 genes and have determined the methylation levels
of DNA isolated from breast, cervical, ovarian and colon cancers and
their corresponding normal tissue DNAs. We show that there are unique
patterns of methylation between normal and cancerous tissues, as well as
distinct patterns across different types of cancers. The differences in
methylation patterns between DNA isolated from tumor and normal adjacent
tissue across four different tumor types in these genes indicates the
critical influence of epigenetic regulation in this region on the
progression of cancer.

