Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of OTX-008, a novel
calyx[4]arene, are mediated by galectin-1 inhibition in human tumor
xenograft models


Background. Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling,
and contributes to membrane anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those
effects may modulate cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor
angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to
bind galectin-1. We previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct
antiproliferative effects and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer
cell lines (AACR 2011, Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the
antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008
or shRNA in xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9)
ovarian cells, head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with
shGalectin-1 RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic
mice. When tumors became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with
vehicle (PBS) or 5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of
treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors collected.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on OCT-embedded tumor stained with
H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2 or CD31. Image quantification was
done with Histolab software (Microvision, France) subtracting the
background. Results. OTX-008 inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B
xenografts after 21 days of treatment. A major decrease in the number of
secondary tumors development was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease
in galectin-1 expression was seen in treated tumors respect to control
tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2 vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, pBackground.
Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and
contributes to membrane anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects
may modulate cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor
angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to
bind galectin-1. We previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct
antiproliferative effects and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer
cell lines (AACR 2011, Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the
antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008
or shRNA in xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9)
ovarian cells, head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with
shGalectin-1 RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic
mice. When tumors became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with
vehicle (PBS) or 5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of
treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors collected.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on OCT-embedded tumor stained with
H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2 or CD31. Image quantification was
done with Histolab software (Microvision, France) subtracting the
background. Results. OTX-008 inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B
xenografts after 21 days of treatment. A major decrease in the number of
secondary tumors development was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease
in galectin-1 expression was seen in treated tumors respect to control
tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2 vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B:
3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/ 7.103 m2, pBackground. Galectin-1 binds
neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and contributes to membrane
anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects may modulate cancer
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a
non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to bind galectin-1. We
previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct antiproliferative effects
and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer cell lines (AACR 2011,
Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the antitumor and
antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008 or shRNA in
xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9) ovarian cells,
head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with shGalectin-1
RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic mice. When tumors
became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with vehicle (PBS) or
5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of treatment, mice
were sacrificed and tumors collected. Immunohistochemistry was performed
on OCT-embedded tumor stained with H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2
or CD31. Image quantification was done with Histolab software
(Microvision, France) subtracting the background. Results. OTX-008
inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B xenografts after 21 days of
treatment. A major decrease in the number of secondary tumors development
was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease in galectin-1 expression was
seen in treated tumors respect to control tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2
vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B: 3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/
7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008 treated tumors also expressed
significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2. Furthermore, a decreased in vessels
number (pBackground. Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2
signalling, and contributes to membrane anchorage of H-RAS in cancer
cells. Those effects may modulate cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis,
and tumor angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a non-peptide chemical antagonist
designed to bind galectin-1. We previously showed that OTX-008 displays
direct antiproliferative effects and inhibits galectin-1 expression in
cancer cell lines (AACR 2011, Abstract n685). In this study we focused on
the antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by
OTX-008 or shRNA in xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9
(1A9) ovarian cells, head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B
transfected with shGalectin-1 RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female
nu/nu athymic mice. When tumors became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice
were treated with vehicle (PBS) or 5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3
weeks. At the end of treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors
collected. Immunohistochemistry was performed on OCT-embedded tumor
stained with H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2 or CD31. Image
quantification was done with Histolab software (Microvision, France)
subtracting the background. Results. OTX-008 inhibited tumor growth in
both 1A9 and SQ20B xenografts after 21 days of treatment. A major
decrease in the number of secondary tumors development was observed in
SQ20B xenografts. A decrease in galectin-1 expression was seen in treated
tumors respect to control tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2 vs 26.103 +/
6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B: 3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/ 7.103 m2,
p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008 treated tumors also expressed
significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2. Furthermore, a decreased in vessels
number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and diameter were observed using CD31 staining
(1A9 treated vs control: 0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2,
pBackground. Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling,
and contributes to membrane anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those
effects may modulate cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor
angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to
bind galectin-1. We previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct
antiproliferative effects and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer
cell lines (AACR 2011, Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the
antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008
or shRNA in xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9)
ovarian cells, head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with
shGalectin-1 RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic
mice. When tumors became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with
vehicle (PBS) or 5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of
treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors collected.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on OCT-embedded tumor stained with
H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2 or CD31. Image quantification was
done with Histolab software (Microvision, France) subtracting the
background. Results. OTX-008 inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B
xenografts after 21 days of treatment. A major decrease in the number of
secondary tumors development was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease
in galectin-1 expression was seen in treated tumors respect to control
tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2 vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B:
3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/ 7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008
treated tumors also expressed significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2.
Furthermore, a decreased in vessels number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and
diameter were observed using CD31 staining (1A9 treated vs control:
0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2, p<0.01; SQ20B treated vs
control: 10.103 +/ 1.103 m2 vs 28.103 +/ 4.103 m2, pBackground.
Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and
contributes to membrane anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects
may modulate cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor
angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to
bind galectin-1. We previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct
antiproliferative effects and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer
cell lines (AACR 2011, Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the
antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008
or shRNA in xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9)
ovarian cells, head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with
shGalectin-1 RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic
mice. When tumors became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with
vehicle (PBS) or 5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of
treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors collected.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on OCT-embedded tumor stained with
H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2 or CD31. Image quantification was
done with Histolab software (Microvision, France) subtracting the
background. Results. OTX-008 inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B
xenografts after 21 days of treatment. A major decrease in the number of
secondary tumors development was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease
in galectin-1 expression was seen in treated tumors respect to control
tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2 vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B:
3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/ 7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008
treated tumors also expressed significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2.
Furthermore, a decreased in vessels number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and
diameter were observed using CD31 staining (1A9 treated vs control:
0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2, p<0.01; SQ20B treated vs
control: 10.103 +/ 1.103 m2 vs 28.103 +/ 4.103 m2, p<0.005), suggesting
OTX-008 antiangiogenic effects. In order to confirm our findings,
SQ-shGAL1 cells were injected into nude mice. Galectin-1 inhibition by
shRNA recapitulated the effects of OTX-008 in SQ20B xenografts. Tumor
growth reduction, downregulation of MIB1 (pBackground. Galectin-1 binds
neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and contributes to membrane
anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects may modulate cancer
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a
non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to bind galectin-1. We
previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct antiproliferative effects
and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer cell lines (AACR 2011,
Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the antitumor and
antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008 or shRNA in
xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9) ovarian cells,
head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with shGalectin-1
RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic mice. When tumors
became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with vehicle (PBS) or
5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of treatment, mice
were sacrificed and tumors collected. Immunohistochemistry was performed
on OCT-embedded tumor stained with H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2
or CD31. Image quantification was done with Histolab software
(Microvision, France) subtracting the background. Results. OTX-008
inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B xenografts after 21 days of
treatment. A major decrease in the number of secondary tumors development
was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease in galectin-1 expression was
seen in treated tumors respect to control tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2
vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B: 3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/
7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008 treated tumors also expressed
significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2. Furthermore, a decreased in vessels
number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and diameter were observed using CD31 staining
(1A9 treated vs control: 0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2,
p<0.01; SQ20B treated vs control: 10.103 +/ 1.103 m2 vs 28.103 +/ 4.103
m2, p<0.005), suggesting OTX-008 antiangiogenic effects. In order to
confirm our findings, SQ-shGAL1 cells were injected into nude mice.
Galectin-1 inhibition by shRNA recapitulated the effects of OTX-008 in
SQ20B xenografts. Tumor growth reduction, downregulation of MIB1
(p<0.005) and VEGFR2 (pBackground. Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1,
enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and contributes to membrane anchorage of
H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects may modulate cancer cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a
non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to bind galectin-1. We
previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct antiproliferative effects
and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer cell lines (AACR 2011,
Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the antitumor and
antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008 or shRNA in
xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9) ovarian cells,
head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with shGalectin-1
RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic mice. When tumors
became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with vehicle (PBS) or
5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of treatment, mice
were sacrificed and tumors collected. Immunohistochemistry was performed
on OCT-embedded tumor stained with H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2
or CD31. Image quantification was done with Histolab software
(Microvision, France) subtracting the background. Results. OTX-008
inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B xenografts after 21 days of
treatment. A major decrease in the number of secondary tumors development
was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease in galectin-1 expression was
seen in treated tumors respect to control tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2
vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B: 3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/
7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008 treated tumors also expressed
significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2. Furthermore, a decreased in vessels
number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and diameter were observed using CD31 staining
(1A9 treated vs control: 0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2,
p<0.01; SQ20B treated vs control: 10.103 +/ 1.103 m2 vs 28.103 +/ 4.103
m2, p<0.005), suggesting OTX-008 antiangiogenic effects. In order to
confirm our findings, SQ-shGAL1 cells were injected into nude mice.
Galectin-1 inhibition by shRNA recapitulated the effects of OTX-008 in
SQ20B xenografts. Tumor growth reduction, downregulation of MIB1
(p<0.005) and VEGFR2 (p<0.05) expression in cancer cells, as well as a
reduction of vessels number (pBackground. Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1,
enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and contributes to membrane anchorage of
H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects may modulate cancer cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a
non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to bind galectin-1. We
previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct antiproliferative effects
and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer cell lines (AACR 2011,
Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the antitumor and
antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008 or shRNA in
xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9) ovarian cells,
head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with shGalectin-1
RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic mice. When tumors
became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with vehicle (PBS) or
5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of treatment, mice
were sacrificed and tumors collected. Immunohistochemistry was performed
on OCT-embedded tumor stained with H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2
or CD31. Image quantification was done with Histolab software
(Microvision, France) subtracting the background. Results. OTX-008
inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B xenografts after 21 days of
treatment. A major decrease in the number of secondary tumors development
was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease in galectin-1 expression was
seen in treated tumors respect to control tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2
vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B: 3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/
7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008 treated tumors also expressed
significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2. Furthermore, a decreased in vessels
number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and diameter were observed using CD31 staining
(1A9 treated vs control: 0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2,
p<0.01; SQ20B treated vs control: 10.103 +/ 1.103 m2 vs 28.103 +/ 4.103
m2, p<0.005), suggesting OTX-008 antiangiogenic effects. In order to
confirm our findings, SQ-shGAL1 cells were injected into nude mice.
Galectin-1 inhibition by shRNA recapitulated the effects of OTX-008 in
SQ20B xenografts. Tumor growth reduction, downregulation of MIB1
(p<0.005) and VEGFR2 (p<0.05) expression in cancer cells, as well as a
reduction of vessels number (p<0.05) and diameter (pBackground.
Galectin-1 binds neuropilin-1, enhances VEGFR2 signalling, and
contributes to membrane anchorage of H-RAS in cancer cells. Those effects
may modulate cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor
angiogenesis. OTX-008 is a non-peptide chemical antagonist designed to
bind galectin-1. We previously showed that OTX-008 displays direct
antiproliferative effects and inhibits galectin-1 expression in cancer
cell lines (AACR 2011, Abstract n685). In this study we focused on the
antitumor and antiangiogenic effects of galectin-1 inhibition by OTX-008
or shRNA in xenograft models. Material and Methods. A2780-1A9 (1A9)
ovarian cells, head and neck SQ20B and SQ-shGAL-1 (SQ20B transfected with
shGalectin-1 RNA) cells were injected s.c. into female nu/nu athymic
mice. When tumors became palpable, 1A9- and SQ20B- mice were treated with
vehicle (PBS) or 5-10 mg/kg OTX008 i.p. q.d for 3 weeks. At the end of
treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors collected.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on OCT-embedded tumor stained with
H&E, galectin-1, MIB1 (Ki67), VEGFR2 or CD31. Image quantification was
done with Histolab software (Microvision, France) subtracting the
background. Results. OTX-008 inhibited tumor growth in both 1A9 and SQ20B
xenografts after 21 days of treatment. A major decrease in the number of
secondary tumors development was observed in SQ20B xenografts. A decrease
in galectin-1 expression was seen in treated tumors respect to control
tumors (1A9: 11.103 +/ 2.103 m2 vs 26.103 +/ 6.103 m2, p<0.05; SQ20B:
3.103 m2 +/ 0,6.103 vs 28.103 +/ 7.103 m2, p<0.01; respectively). OTX-008
treated tumors also expressed significantly lower MIB1 and VEGFR2.
Furthermore, a decreased in vessels number (p<0.01 for SQ20B) and
diameter were observed using CD31 staining (1A9 treated vs control:
0,5.103 +/ 0,1.103 m2 vs 6.103 +/ 2.103 m2, p<0.01; SQ20B treated vs
control: 10.103 +/ 1.103 m2 vs 28.103 +/ 4.103 m2, p<0.005), suggesting
OTX-008 antiangiogenic effects. In order to confirm our findings,
SQ-shGAL1 cells were injected into nude mice. Galectin-1 inhibition by
shRNA recapitulated the effects of OTX-008 in SQ20B xenografts. Tumor
growth reduction, downregulation of MIB1 (p<0.005) and VEGFR2 (p<0.05)
expression in cancer cells, as well as a reduction of vessels number
(p<0.05) and diameter (p<0.005) were detected in SQ-shGAL1 tumors.
Conclusion. Our findings show that antitumor and antiangiogenic
activities of OTX-008 in xenograft models are associated with galectin-1
expression inhibition.

