Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent anti-tumor activity of AbGn-100, an anti-CD326 x anti-TCR
bispecific antibody to CD326-expressing solid tumors


CD326 is one of the first and prominent immunotherapeutic targets in
cancer therapy due to its frequent and high-level expression on most
carcinomas of various origins. The dominant role of cytotoxic T cells for
tumor suppression and surveillance in vivo is well documented in
literature. A novel bi-specific antibody AbGn-100 was constructed, in
which the antigen-binding domain of an anti- human CD326 antibody was
linked to the antigen-binding domain of an anti-human T cell receptor
(TCR) chain antibody. Human serum albumin was incorporated into this
construct to prolong the half life in vivo. This bi-specific antibody is
able to direct T cells toward CD326-expressing cancer cells to execute T
cell cytotoxic function after TCR cross-linking mediated by CD326
expressed on cancer cells while it remains harmless when either T cells
or CD326-expressing cancer cells is absent. In vitro cytotoxicity assays
with PBMCs from different donors have demonstrated potent (up to 60%
above the background) cytotoxicity eliciting activity of AbGn-100 to lung
(NCI-H358), ovarian (OMC3) and colorectal (COLO205) cancer cells lines.
In the absence of cancer cells, the addition of AbGn-100 didn't trigger
the up-regulation of T cell activation markers such as CD25 or CD69, nor
did it increase the secretion of cytokines such as IL-2 and Interferon ,
demonstrating the safety profile of AbGn-100. In vivo activity of
AbGn-100 was tested with established lung (NCI-H358) and ovarian (OMC-3)
cancer xenografts in NOD-SCID mice. AbGn-100, in the presence of human
PBMC, significantly reduced the size of the established lung and ovarian
tumors. Most notably, in some of the mice, tumor was not detectable after
50 days of treatment, suggesting the possibility of tumor eradication. PK
studies in mice showed the half-life of AbGn-100 to be around 20 hours,
which is substantially longer than conventional single-chain Fv
bi-specific antibodies. These data support the potential of further
development of AbGn-100 as therapeutics for the treatment of
CD326-expressing solid tumors.

