Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PARP inhibition reverses radiation resistance conferred by ETS
fusions in prostate cancer


Background: ETS gene fusions, which are found in approximately half of
all prostate cancers, result in overexpression of ETS transcription
factors, of which ERG is the prototype. We previously discovered that ERG
interacts with the DNA damage response protein poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP1). Therefore, we hypothesized that the ERG-PARP1
interaction may confer radiation resistance by increasing DNA repair
efficiency, and this radioresistance can be reversed with PARP1
inhibition. Methods: We used lentiviral approaches to establish isogenic
models of ERG overexpression in PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cell lines.
We then assessed the role of ERG overexpression on 1) PARP1 activity (via
immunoblots for poly ADP-ribose (PAR) formation), 2) DNA repair (via
COMET assays and immunofluorescent microscopy for gamma-H2aX foci), and
3) clonogenic survival, before and following radiation +/ the PARP1
inhibitor olaparib. We also created ERG mutants with a point mutation
(Y373) which disrupted the ERG-PARP interaction, and assessed the role of
this interaction on radiation response. Finally, we established
xenografts from ERG-overexpressing and control PC3 cells, and treated
these xenografts with radiation +/ PARP1 inhibition. Results: In both PC3
and DU145 cells, ERG overexpression resulted in increased PARP1 activity
and quicker repair of DNA damage, both of which were reversed with
olaparib. ERG overexpression resulted in a 1.3 fold increase in
clonogenic survival following radiation, consistent with radioresistance.
PARP1 inhibition with olaparib preferentially radiosensitized
ERG-positive cells, by a factor of 1.5 relative to ERG-negative cells
(pBackground: ETS gene fusions, which are found in approximately half of
all prostate cancers, result in overexpression of ETS transcription
factors, of which ERG is the prototype. We previously discovered that ERG
interacts with the DNA damage response protein poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP1). Therefore, we hypothesized that the ERG-PARP1
interaction may confer radiation resistance by increasing DNA repair
efficiency, and this radioresistance can be reversed with PARP1
inhibition. Methods: We used lentiviral approaches to establish isogenic
models of ERG overexpression in PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cell lines.
We then assessed the role of ERG overexpression on 1) PARP1 activity (via
immunoblots for poly ADP-ribose (PAR) formation), 2) DNA repair (via
COMET assays and immunofluorescent microscopy for gamma-H2aX foci), and
3) clonogenic survival, before and following radiation +/ the PARP1
inhibitor olaparib. We also created ERG mutants with a point mutation
(Y373) which disrupted the ERG-PARP interaction, and assessed the role of
this interaction on radiation response. Finally, we established
xenografts from ERG-overexpressing and control PC3 cells, and treated
these xenografts with radiation +/ PARP1 inhibition. Results: In both PC3
and DU145 cells, ERG overexpression resulted in increased PARP1 activity
and quicker repair of DNA damage, both of which were reversed with
olaparib. ERG overexpression resulted in a 1.3 fold increase in
clonogenic survival following radiation, consistent with radioresistance.
PARP1 inhibition with olaparib preferentially radiosensitized
ERG-positive cells, by a factor of 1.5 relative to ERG-negative cells
(p<0.05). Additionally, disruption of ERG-PARP interaction via point
mutation reversed the ERG-mediated increase in clonogenic survival
following radiation. Within PC3 xenografts, ERG overexpression also
conferred radioresistance which was reversed with PARP1 inhibition.
Conclusions: In these prostate cancer cell models, ERG overexpression
confers radiation resistance via increased efficiency of DNA repair
following radiation. This radioresistance is dependent on the ERG-PARP1
interaction, and can be reversed via inhibition of PARP1 both in vitro
and in vivo. These novel findings motivate the use of PARP1 inhibitors as
radiosensitizers in patients with localized ETS fusion-positive prostate
cancers.

