Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MR imaging in human glioma tumor xenograft models using
enzyme-conjugated anti-EGFRvIII-specific antibody fragments


A truncated and constitutively active form of the EGF receptor variant
III (EGFRvIII) is a major determinant of tumor growth and poor prognosis
in glioblastoma multiforme [1]. To test a system for targeted imaging of
EGFRvIII we investigated the retention of peroxidase-generated products
of a paramagnetic substrate diTyr-DTPAGd in U87EGFR orthotopic human
glioma xenografts. F(ab)2 fragments of EMD72000 mAb were conjugated to
deglycosylated horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and glucose oxidase (GOX) and
used as a self-complementing enzymatic signal amplification system [2]
for EGFRvIII targeted imaging. We anticipated that receptor expression
sites will exhibit a prolonged MR signal enhancement due to the formation
of polymerized products of diTyr-DTPAGd oxidation by mAb conjugates [2].
F(ab)2 fragments of mAb were linked to enzymes using bisaromatic
hydrazone bonds and purified by HPLC. The conjugates were characterized
in U87EGFR cell culture and optimal ratios of HRP and GOX conjugates were
determined to provide the maximum signal with low cytotoxicity.
F(ab)2-GOX and F(ab)2-HRP were also modified with NHS-MAG3 for
radiolabeling. U87EGFR cells were stereotaxically implanted in the brains
of RNU rats. Ten days after tumor implantation, each animal was imaged
using T1-weighted spin-echo MRI (TR/TE=700ms/8.2ms) at 3T on two
occasions: Day 1 - images were acquired after IV injection of 0.1 mmol/kg
diTyr-DTPAGd over a 1.5h period; Day 2 - anti-EGFRvIII conjugates (100 g
mAb/animal) were injected IV, and then 4h later 0.1 mmol/kg diTyr-DTPAGd
was injected IV followed by image acquisition for 2h. Both 99mTc-labeled
conjugates showed specific binding to U87EGFR cells in vitro and in vivo
as demonstrated using SPECT/CT. Cell-binding and internalization studies
showed that 80% conjugates were internalized at 37C. MR T1-weighted
images showed significantly higher enhancement and longer retention of
the MR signal on Day 2 in rats pre-injected with conjugates compared to
Day 1 over the same time period due to the conjugate co-localization at
the EGFRvIII target sites. The washout of the contrast agent was best
modeled using a biexponential decay as compared to Gli36EGFR-bearing rats
[4]. U87EGFR tumors showed biexponential MR signal decay on both days.
Administration of EGFRvIII-targeted mAb conjugates resulted in specific
binding to U87EGFR cells of which at least 20% remained on the surface
enabling the reaction with the contrast agent. The biexponential decay
constants on Day 2 for both Gli36EGFR and U87EGFR animals were not
significantly different indicating a similarity of conjugate accumulation
in both tumor models which resulted in a similar bimodal washout of the
contrast agent. References: [1] Hu, J et al. (2011) PNAS 108:15984 [2]
Bogdanov, A., et al. (2007). Bioconjug Chem 18: 1123 [3] Shazeeb, M.S.,
et al. (2011). Cancer Res 71: 2230. Supported by NIH 5R01EB000858-09.

