Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Osteoprotegerin mediates resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma


[Purpose] Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand
(TRAIL) has been shown to have great potential for the treatment of most
human tumor cells without harming normal cells. However, some cancers
show resistance to TRAIL induced apoptosis. The poor prognosis of both
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is likely due to the absence of
valid approaches for early detection, the frequency of its metastases at
the time of diagnosis, frequent recurrence after surgery, and poor
responsiveness to chemotherapy. PDAC is also known as the most common
resistant cells to TRAIL. Since osteoprotegerin (OPG) is known as a decoy
receptor that binds to TRAIL and inhibits TRAIL-induced apoptosis, we
hypothesized that OPG might play a role in mediating resistance to
apoptosis in PDAC cells. [Methods and Results] To investigate the
expression of OPG in PDAC cells, RT-PCR, Western blot and ELISA were
performed. From the results, we found significant expression of OPG in
both cell and cell culture medium. To investigate the apoptotic activity
of TRAIL, we performed cell viability assay and apoptosis assay with or
without siRNA against OPG. We found that PDAC cells showed significantly
resistance to TRAIL induced apoptosis and knocking down of OPG sensitized
TRAIL induced apoptosis in PDAC cells. [Conclusion] This study
demonstrated that OPG played a role in resistance to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in PDAC cells. Expression of OPG might provide PDAC cells with
an essential growth advantage through resistance to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. Inhibition of OPG expression and blocking OPG function might
be a new therapeutic approach for the treatment of pancreatic cancer
patients.

