Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NR2F1 and SOX9 mediate reprogramming of tumor cells into dormancy:
Potential role in dormant bone marrow DTCs


Single disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) found in secondary organs (i.e.
bone marrow BM, lung, liver) appear to activate a quiescence program and
undergo a dormancy phase triggered by specific tissue microenvironment
signals. The timing of this asymptomatic clinical phase may rely on
specific signals that convert a previous non-permissive/non-proliferative
environment into a permissive one, fueling metastasis development. The
mechanisms underlying dormancy and means to maintain this state remain
unknown. Here we show that the orphan nuclear receptor NR2F1/COUP-TF1 is
silenced in breast and HNSCC tumors, cancer cell lines and MMTV-Neu and
-Myc mouse tumor models. Surprisingly, retinoid signaling, stress
signaling and microenvironmental cues from target organs (i.e. bone
marrow) can induce re-expression of NR2F1 and dormancy of HNSCC cells.
Forced NR2F1 re-expression resulted in induction of tumor cell quiescence
in vivo and this effect depended on the expression of the transcription
factor SOX9 and p27 induction. In contrast, RNAi-mediated silencing of
NR2F1 or SOX9 interrupted the quiescence of dormant tumor cells. Further,
quiescence induction was associated with p27, p15, p16 and HES-1.
Mechanistic analysis revealed that NR2F1 is primarily nuclear and that
its expression is activated by MKK6-p38 stress signaling and is
negatively regulated by DNA promoter methylation. Lastly, we showed that
atRA treatment followed 5-Aza-C treatment reprograms tumorigenic cells
into dormancy in an NR2F1-dependent fashion. Our data suggest that
re-expression of NR2F1 may promote reprogramming of aggressive tumor
cells into dormancy identifying a new target for maintenance therapies
for residual disease.

