Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Death Associated Protein Kinase 2 (DAPK2) is a novel
transcriptional target of PML-RARA and PU.1 (SPI1) during neutrophil
differentiation of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells


APL is characterized by the fusion protein promyelocytic
leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha (PML-RARA) which blocks myeloid
differentiation. Pharmacological doses of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
relieve transcriptional repression inducing terminal differentiation of
the leukemic blasts. DAPK2 mRNA levels are much lower in acute myeloid
leukemia cells than in normal granulocytes, particularly so in APL cells,
and are up-regulated during ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation of
APL cells. To extend our data from primary APL patients, we
differentiated two APL cell lines, namely NB4 and HT93 as well as an
ATRA-resistant NB4 subline, NB4-R2, towards neutrophils using ATRA. DAPK2
mRNA levels were increased 210- and 280-fold upon ATRA-treatment in NB4
and HT93 cells, respectively, and were paralleled by marked induction of
protein expression. No significant increase was measured in NB4-R2
suggesting that upregulation of DAPK2 is clearly associated with
neutrophil differentiation. Next, MatInspector software analysis allowed
the identification of two putative retinoic acid responsive elements
(RAREs) in the DAPK2 promoter region. To verify PML-RARA binding to these
sites we performed PML and RARA chromatin immunoprecipitations (ChIP) in
NB4 cells. We showed in vivo binding of PML-RARA to the RARE at position
739 of the DAPK2 promoter. A repressive function of PML-RARA on DAPK2
expression was further shown by overexpression of PML-RARA in U937 AML
cells. Exogenous expression of PML-RARA reduced DAPK2 expression levels
by 20%. RAREs often coexist with PU.1 (SPI1) binding motifs. Indeed, we
also identified three putative PU.1 binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter.
The PU.1 transcription factor is a master regulator of myeloid
differentiation and PU.1-mediated transactivation of myeloid genes is
repressed by PML-RARA. We confirmed in vivo binding of PU.1 to two
binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter using ChIP analysis. In addition, a
DAPK2 promoter reporter plasmid was significantly (pAPL is characterized
by the fusion protein promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor alpha
(PML-RARA) which blocks myeloid differentiation. Pharmacological doses of
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) relieve transcriptional repression
inducing terminal differentiation of the leukemic blasts. DAPK2 mRNA
levels are much lower in acute myeloid leukemia cells than in normal
granulocytes, particularly so in APL cells, and are up-regulated during
ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation of APL cells. To extend our data
from primary APL patients, we differentiated two APL cell lines, namely
NB4 and HT93 as well as an ATRA-resistant NB4 subline, NB4-R2, towards
neutrophils using ATRA. DAPK2 mRNA levels were increased 210- and
280-fold upon ATRA-treatment in NB4 and HT93 cells, respectively, and
were paralleled by marked induction of protein expression. No significant
increase was measured in NB4-R2 suggesting that upregulation of DAPK2 is
clearly associated with neutrophil differentiation. Next, MatInspector
software analysis allowed the identification of two putative retinoic
acid responsive elements (RAREs) in the DAPK2 promoter region. To verify
PML-RARA binding to these sites we performed PML and RARA chromatin
immunoprecipitations (ChIP) in NB4 cells. We showed in vivo binding of
PML-RARA to the RARE at position 739 of the DAPK2 promoter. A repressive
function of PML-RARA on DAPK2 expression was further shown by
overexpression of PML-RARA in U937 AML cells. Exogenous expression of
PML-RARA reduced DAPK2 expression levels by 20%. RAREs often coexist with
PU.1 (SPI1) binding motifs. Indeed, we also identified three putative
PU.1 binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter. The PU.1 transcription factor
is a master regulator of myeloid differentiation and PU.1-mediated
transactivation of myeloid genes is repressed by PML-RARA. We confirmed
in vivo binding of PU.1 to two binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter using
ChIP analysis. In addition, a DAPK2 promoter reporter plasmid was
significantly (p<0.05) induced 1.6-fold in the presence of PU.1.
Moreover, knocking down PU.1 in NB4 cells using two different shRNA
constructs resulted in a 4-fold reduction of DAPK2 mRNA (pAPL is
characterized by the fusion protein promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid
receptor alpha (PML-RARA) which blocks myeloid differentiation.
Pharmacological doses of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) relieve
transcriptional repression inducing terminal differentiation of the
leukemic blasts. DAPK2 mRNA levels are much lower in acute myeloid
leukemia cells than in normal granulocytes, particularly so in APL cells,
and are up-regulated during ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation of
APL cells. To extend our data from primary APL patients, we
differentiated two APL cell lines, namely NB4 and HT93 as well as an
ATRA-resistant NB4 subline, NB4-R2, towards neutrophils using ATRA. DAPK2
mRNA levels were increased 210- and 280-fold upon ATRA-treatment in NB4
and HT93 cells, respectively, and were paralleled by marked induction of
protein expression. No significant increase was measured in NB4-R2
suggesting that upregulation of DAPK2 is clearly associated with
neutrophil differentiation. Next, MatInspector software analysis allowed
the identification of two putative retinoic acid responsive elements
(RAREs) in the DAPK2 promoter region. To verify PML-RARA binding to these
sites we performed PML and RARA chromatin immunoprecipitations (ChIP) in
NB4 cells. We showed in vivo binding of PML-RARA to the RARE at position
739 of the DAPK2 promoter. A repressive function of PML-RARA on DAPK2
expression was further shown by overexpression of PML-RARA in U937 AML
cells. Exogenous expression of PML-RARA reduced DAPK2 expression levels
by 20%. RAREs often coexist with PU.1 (SPI1) binding motifs. Indeed, we
also identified three putative PU.1 binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter.
The PU.1 transcription factor is a master regulator of myeloid
differentiation and PU.1-mediated transactivation of myeloid genes is
repressed by PML-RARA. We confirmed in vivo binding of PU.1 to two
binding sites in the DAPK2 promoter using ChIP analysis. In addition, a
DAPK2 promoter reporter plasmid was significantly (p<0.05) induced
1.6-fold in the presence of PU.1. Moreover, knocking down PU.1 in NB4
cells using two different shRNA constructs resulted in a 4-fold reduction
of DAPK2 mRNA (p<0.05) and protein expression during ATRA-induced
neutrophil differentiation as compared to control transduced cells. To
show that DAPK2 is a relevant PU.1 target during myeloid differentiation,
we used lentiviral vectors to re-express DAPK2 in NB4 PU.1 knockdown
cells (DAPK2 rescue). CD11b and CEBPE, two neutrophil differentiation
markers, were significantly increased in DAPK2 restored PU.1 knockdown
NB4 cells upon neutrophil differentiation. In summary, we found that
transcription of DAPK2 in APL cells is repressed by PML-RARA. We further
identified DAPK2 as novel PU.1 transcriptional target during neutrophil
differentiation of APL cells.

