Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mTOR inhibition radiosensitizes bladder cancer tumor cells in
vitro and in vivo: A novel strategy for treatment


Background: Radiation therapy for invasive bladder cancer allows for
organ preservation but systemic toxicity and local control remain
problematic. As such, there is a need to increase radiosensitization of
tumor cells to improve efficacy. The aim of this study was to investigate
if mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), a downstream kinase of the
PI3K/Akt survival pathway, may be a target for combined bladder cancer
therapy. Methods: Clonogenic assays were performed using 6 bladder cancer
cell lines in order to address the effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on
growth, when tested alone and in combination with RAD001, a potent mTOR
inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis was performed using flow cytometry. In the
in vivo study, nude mice were subcutaneously injected with KU7 and
253J-BV cells. Treatment with RAD001 (1.5 mg/kg, daily), fractionated IR
(total 9 Gy), and the combination of RAD001 and IR was followed over 4
weeks. Tumor growth kinetics was measured and tumor weight at the
experimental endpoint. Results: In vitro, a significant decrease in
colony formation was observed in the combined treatment when compared to
RAD001 or radiation alone (pBackground: Radiation therapy for invasive
bladder cancer allows for organ preservation but systemic toxicity and
local control remain problematic. As such, there is a need to increase
radiosensitization of tumor cells to improve efficacy. The aim of this
study was to investigate if mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), a
downstream kinase of the PI3K/Akt survival pathway, may be a target for
combined bladder cancer therapy. Methods: Clonogenic assays were
performed using 6 bladder cancer cell lines in order to address the
effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on growth, when tested alone and in
combination with RAD001, a potent mTOR inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis was
performed using flow cytometry. In the in vivo study, nude mice were
subcutaneously injected with KU7 and 253J-BV cells. Treatment with RAD001
(1.5 mg/kg, daily), fractionated IR (total 9 Gy), and the combination of
RAD001 and IR was followed over 4 weeks. Tumor growth kinetics was
measured and tumor weight at the experimental endpoint. Results: In
vitro, a significant decrease in colony formation was observed in the
combined treatment when compared to RAD001 or radiation alone (p<0.05) in
all cell lines. A G0/G1 as well as a significant increase in G2 arrest
was observed in the combined treatment compared to either treatment
alone. Changes in the levels of Cyclin D1, p27 and p21 correlated with
the observed changes in the cell cycle. Moreover, IR rapidly activated
AKT whereas RAD001 effectively inhibited the mTOR downstream signaling as
shown by the inhibition of the phosphorylation of S6. Furthermore,
autophagy was induced following the treatment with RAD001 and in
combination as indicated by the conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II, a protein
marker for autophagy. Our in vivo data confirmed our in vitro data,
wherein a significant decrease in tumor weight was observed in the
combined treatment arm (90% decrease, pBackground: Radiation therapy for
invasive bladder cancer allows for organ preservation but systemic
toxicity and local control remain problematic. As such, there is a need
to increase radiosensitization of tumor cells to improve efficacy. The
aim of this study was to investigate if mTOR (mammalian target of
rapamycin), a downstream kinase of the PI3K/Akt survival pathway, may be
a target for combined bladder cancer therapy. Methods: Clonogenic assays
were performed using 6 bladder cancer cell lines in order to address the
effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on growth, when tested alone and in
combination with RAD001, a potent mTOR inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis was
performed using flow cytometry. In the in vivo study, nude mice were
subcutaneously injected with KU7 and 253J-BV cells. Treatment with RAD001
(1.5 mg/kg, daily), fractionated IR (total 9 Gy), and the combination of
RAD001 and IR was followed over 4 weeks. Tumor growth kinetics was
measured and tumor weight at the experimental endpoint. Results: In
vitro, a significant decrease in colony formation was observed in the
combined treatment when compared to RAD001 or radiation alone (p<0.05) in
all cell lines. A G0/G1 as well as a significant increase in G2 arrest
was observed in the combined treatment compared to either treatment
alone. Changes in the levels of Cyclin D1, p27 and p21 correlated with
the observed changes in the cell cycle. Moreover, IR rapidly activated
AKT whereas RAD001 effectively inhibited the mTOR downstream signaling as
shown by the inhibition of the phosphorylation of S6. Furthermore,
autophagy was induced following the treatment with RAD001 and in
combination as indicated by the conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II, a protein
marker for autophagy. Our in vivo data confirmed our in vitro data,
wherein a significant decrease in tumor weight was observed in the
combined treatment arm (90% decrease, p<0.001) compared to either
treatment alone (60% decrease for RAD001, pBackground: Radiation therapy
for invasive bladder cancer allows for organ preservation but systemic
toxicity and local control remain problematic. As such, there is a need
to increase radiosensitization of tumor cells to improve efficacy. The
aim of this study was to investigate if mTOR (mammalian target of
rapamycin), a downstream kinase of the PI3K/Akt survival pathway, may be
a target for combined bladder cancer therapy. Methods: Clonogenic assays
were performed using 6 bladder cancer cell lines in order to address the
effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on growth, when tested alone and in
combination with RAD001, a potent mTOR inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis was
performed using flow cytometry. In the in vivo study, nude mice were
subcutaneously injected with KU7 and 253J-BV cells. Treatment with RAD001
(1.5 mg/kg, daily), fractionated IR (total 9 Gy), and the combination of
RAD001 and IR was followed over 4 weeks. Tumor growth kinetics was
measured and tumor weight at the experimental endpoint. Results: In
vitro, a significant decrease in colony formation was observed in the
combined treatment when compared to RAD001 or radiation alone (p<0.05) in
all cell lines. A G0/G1 as well as a significant increase in G2 arrest
was observed in the combined treatment compared to either treatment
alone. Changes in the levels of Cyclin D1, p27 and p21 correlated with
the observed changes in the cell cycle. Moreover, IR rapidly activated
AKT whereas RAD001 effectively inhibited the mTOR downstream signaling as
shown by the inhibition of the phosphorylation of S6. Furthermore,
autophagy was induced following the treatment with RAD001 and in
combination as indicated by the conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II, a protein
marker for autophagy. Our in vivo data confirmed our in vitro data,
wherein a significant decrease in tumor weight was observed in the
combined treatment arm (90% decrease, p<0.001) compared to either
treatment alone (60% decrease for RAD001, p<0.05; 77% decrease for IR,
pBackground: Radiation therapy for invasive bladder cancer allows for
organ preservation but systemic toxicity and local control remain
problematic. As such, there is a need to increase radiosensitization of
tumor cells to improve efficacy. The aim of this study was to investigate
if mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), a downstream kinase of the
PI3K/Akt survival pathway, may be a target for combined bladder cancer
therapy. Methods: Clonogenic assays were performed using 6 bladder cancer
cell lines in order to address the effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on
growth, when tested alone and in combination with RAD001, a potent mTOR
inhibitor. Cell cycle analysis was performed using flow cytometry. In the
in vivo study, nude mice were subcutaneously injected with KU7 and
253J-BV cells. Treatment with RAD001 (1.5 mg/kg, daily), fractionated IR
(total 9 Gy), and the combination of RAD001 and IR was followed over 4
weeks. Tumor growth kinetics was measured and tumor weight at the
experimental endpoint. Results: In vitro, a significant decrease in
colony formation was observed in the combined treatment when compared to
RAD001 or radiation alone (p<0.05) in all cell lines. A G0/G1 as well as
a significant increase in G2 arrest was observed in the combined
treatment compared to either treatment alone. Changes in the levels of
Cyclin D1, p27 and p21 correlated with the observed changes in the cell
cycle. Moreover, IR rapidly activated AKT whereas RAD001 effectively
inhibited the mTOR downstream signaling as shown by the inhibition of the
phosphorylation of S6. Furthermore, autophagy was induced following the
treatment with RAD001 and in combination as indicated by the conversion
of LC3-I to LC3-II, a protein marker for autophagy. Our in vivo data
confirmed our in vitro data, wherein a significant decrease in tumor
weight was observed in the combined treatment arm (90% decrease, p<0.001)
compared to either treatment alone (60% decrease for RAD001, p<0.05; 77%
decrease for IR, p<0.05). These findings point to additive and possibly
synergistic beneficial effects of the combined on bladder cancer.
Conclusions: The inhibition of mTOR signaling appears promising as a
therapeutic modality for bladder cancer, especially in the context of
combination with radiation therapy.

