Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomics approach to identify drug transporter ABCF1 associated
with liver cancer recurrence and chemo-resistance


Background: Liver cancer is the third leading cause of cancer death
globally. Surgery is the mainstay for early stage patients with the best
survival outcome, but cancer recurrence is still common after curative
surgery. Chemotherapy has been widely used to treat advanced liver cancer
but with marginal efficacy. There is an urgent need to elucidate the key
genes that regulate recurrence and chemo-resistance in the clinical
situation. Recently, we have demonstrated that the novel growth factor
granulin-epithelin precursor (GEP) is associated with chemo-resistance
and recurrence-free survival. GEP has been identified as a potential
therapeutic target for liver cancer in our earlier genomic studies. We
demonstrated that GEP overexpressed in the majority of liver cancers,
regulated proliferation, invasion and tumorigenicity. Importantly, the
anti-GEP monoclonal antibody treatment inhibited the growth of in vivo
human liver cancer. GEP modulated the expression of the drug transporter
ABCB5, and blockage of ABCB5 sensitized the liver cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic agents and attenuated the expression of hepatic cancer
stem cell markers CD133 and EpCAM. Notably, GEP expression is detectable
in all liver cancer tissues while only half show detectable ABCB5
transcript. Importantly, the majority of the patients were
chemo-resistant. Therefore, there should be additional crucial drug
transporters. Objective: To use genomics approach to systematically
examine the drug transporters in association with GEP, recurrence-free
survival outcome, and functional role on chemo-resistance. Methods: The
liver cancer gene expression profiles reported previously were
re-examined, and all the drug transporter family members were ranked in
association with GEP expression patterns. The genes that have shown high
correlation with GEP expressions in the microarray hybridization datasets
were further validated in an independent cohort of clinical specimens
using independent research platform real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
Results: Here, we reported that the expression levels of drug transporter
ABCF1 and GEP were significantly correlated in human liver tissues (P
Background: Liver cancer is the third leading cause of cancer death
globally. Surgery is the mainstay for early stage patients with the best
survival outcome, but cancer recurrence is still common after curative
surgery. Chemotherapy has been widely used to treat advanced liver cancer
but with marginal efficacy. There is an urgent need to elucidate the key
genes that regulate recurrence and chemo-resistance in the clinical
situation. Recently, we have demonstrated that the novel growth factor
granulin-epithelin precursor (GEP) is associated with chemo-resistance
and recurrence-free survival. GEP has been identified as a potential
therapeutic target for liver cancer in our earlier genomic studies. We
demonstrated that GEP overexpressed in the majority of liver cancers,
regulated proliferation, invasion and tumorigenicity. Importantly, the
anti-GEP monoclonal antibody treatment inhibited the growth of in vivo
human liver cancer. GEP modulated the expression of the drug transporter
ABCB5, and blockage of ABCB5 sensitized the liver cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic agents and attenuated the expression of hepatic cancer
stem cell markers CD133 and EpCAM. Notably, GEP expression is detectable
in all liver cancer tissues while only half show detectable ABCB5
transcript. Importantly, the majority of the patients were
chemo-resistant. Therefore, there should be additional crucial drug
transporters. Objective: To use genomics approach to systematically
examine the drug transporters in association with GEP, recurrence-free
survival outcome, and functional role on chemo-resistance. Methods: The
liver cancer gene expression profiles reported previously were
re-examined, and all the drug transporter family members were ranked in
association with GEP expression patterns. The genes that have shown high
correlation with GEP expressions in the microarray hybridization datasets
were further validated in an independent cohort of clinical specimens
using independent research platform real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
Results: Here, we reported that the expression levels of drug transporter
ABCF1 and GEP were significantly correlated in human liver tissues (P <
0.001). ABCF1 was detectable in all tumor tissues, upregulated in the
tumor as compared with the adjacent non-tumor liver (P Background: Liver
cancer is the third leading cause of cancer death globally. Surgery is
the mainstay for early stage patients with the best survival outcome, but
cancer recurrence is still common after curative surgery. Chemotherapy
has been widely used to treat advanced liver cancer but with marginal
efficacy. There is an urgent need to elucidate the key genes that
regulate recurrence and chemo-resistance in the clinical situation.
Recently, we have demonstrated that the novel growth factor
granulin-epithelin precursor (GEP) is associated with chemo-resistance
and recurrence-free survival. GEP has been identified as a potential
therapeutic target for liver cancer in our earlier genomic studies. We
demonstrated that GEP overexpressed in the majority of liver cancers,
regulated proliferation, invasion and tumorigenicity. Importantly, the
anti-GEP monoclonal antibody treatment inhibited the growth of in vivo
human liver cancer. GEP modulated the expression of the drug transporter
ABCB5, and blockage of ABCB5 sensitized the liver cancer cells to
chemotherapeutic agents and attenuated the expression of hepatic cancer
stem cell markers CD133 and EpCAM. Notably, GEP expression is detectable
in all liver cancer tissues while only half show detectable ABCB5
transcript. Importantly, the majority of the patients were
chemo-resistant. Therefore, there should be additional crucial drug
transporters. Objective: To use genomics approach to systematically
examine the drug transporters in association with GEP, recurrence-free
survival outcome, and functional role on chemo-resistance. Methods: The
liver cancer gene expression profiles reported previously were
re-examined, and all the drug transporter family members were ranked in
association with GEP expression patterns. The genes that have shown high
correlation with GEP expressions in the microarray hybridization datasets
were further validated in an independent cohort of clinical specimens
using independent research platform real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
Results: Here, we reported that the expression levels of drug transporter
ABCF1 and GEP were significantly correlated in human liver tissues (P <
0.001). ABCF1 was detectable in all tumor tissues, upregulated in the
tumor as compared with the adjacent non-tumor liver (P < 0.001), and that
the increased ABCF1 level was associated with poor recurrence-free
survival (log-rank test, P = 0.001). Functionally, GEP regulated ABCF1
expresson levels, and suppression of ABCF1 rendered the liver cancer
cells sensitive to chemotherapeutic agents. Conclusion: In summary,
chemo-resistance and cancer recurrence are dictated by a subset of cells
expressing GEP and ABC transporters. Targeting the novel growth factor
GEP and drug transporters, in combination with chemotherapy, could
provide novel treatment modalities to eradicate the aggressive liver
cancer cells.

