Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IGF2 activation of HER2 receptor in HER2 positive breast cancer
cell lines


Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in women.
Overexpression of Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) is
detected in 20-30% of breast cancers. Overexpression of HER2 is linked to
poor prognosis, more aggressive phenotype, and resistance to chemotherapy
and hormonal treatment. HER2 is part of a four member family of cell
surface receptors that are implicated in transmission of signals
controlling cell growth and differentiation. HER2 has an intracellular
domain with tyrosine kinase catalytic activity and dimerization of HER2
activates the MAP kinase and AKT pathways. HER2 receptor also
heterodimerizes with the IGF1 receptor and can be activated by IGF1
receptor ligand. The insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) has an important
role in fetal and cancer development signaling through the insulin-like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R), insulin receptor (InsR), and cross-talk
with the estrogen receptor alpha and beta (ER, ER). We hypothesized that
binding of IGF-II to the IGF-1R/HER2 dimer may activate the HER2
signaling pathway. We characterized the IGF2 mRNA and protein levels in
HER2 positive cell lines (BT474, SKBR3, and ZR 75-30) by qPCR and Western
blot. We also analyzed the effect of IGF2 treatment on the
phosphorylation levels of HER2. We measured the signaling levels of HER2
and IGF1R in the presence and absence of IGF2. Our study showed that IGF2
increases HER2 phosphorylation. Furthermore, blocking IGF1R increases
HER2 protein levels. Thus, we propose that IGF2 has an important role in
the activation of HER2 signaling pathway.

