Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Areca users in combination with tobacco and alcohol use are
associated with younger age of diagnosed esophageal cancer in Taiwanese
men


Background/Aim: Several studies have reported the association between
habitual use of substances (tobacco, alcohol, or areca nut) and the risk
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, whether the use of
these substances can affect the age of ESCC presentation has rarely been
examined. Since esophageal cancer in Taiwanese women only accounted for
10% of total, this study focused on the analysis of men. Methods: We
conducted a multicenter (Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, National
Taiwan University Hospital and Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital)
hospital-based case-control study between 2000 and 2009 to answer this
inquiry. The study subjects were those diagnosed of ESCC (ICD-9 150) for
the first time and visited these three medical centers for help. A
standardized questionnaire was used to collect comprehensive information
of demographic characteristics and substance use within 1 week of cancer
diagnosis. The ethics review boards at the study hospitals reviewed and
approved this investigation. Written consents were obtained from all
participants. Alcohol drinkers, tobacco smokers and areca chewers were
defined, respectively, as subjects who had consumed any alcoholic
beverage 1 times per week, those who had smoked 10 tobacco cigarettes per
week and those who had chewed 1 areca-nut (measured as quid) per day for
at least 6 months. In addition, other information such as educational
levels, and clinical stages were also collected. Results: Among the 668
pathology-proven ESCC male patients, we found that the mean age (SD) at
presentation of ESCC was 59.2 (11.3) years. All substance users,
including alcohol drinkers, cigarette smokers, and areca chewers, were,
on average, younger at the time of ESCC diagnosis than non-drinkers,
non-smokers, and non-chewers. After adjusting for other covariates,
alcohol drinkers were 3.58 years younger to have ESCC than non-drinkers
(p = 0.002). A similar result was found among areca chewers, who were
6.34 years younger to have ESCC than non-chewers (p Background/Aim:
Several studies have reported the association between habitual use of
substances (tobacco, alcohol, or areca nut) and the risk of esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, whether the use of these
substances can affect the age of ESCC presentation has rarely been
examined. Since esophageal cancer in Taiwanese women only accounted for
10% of total, this study focused on the analysis of men. Methods: We
conducted a multicenter (Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, National
Taiwan University Hospital and Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital)
hospital-based case-control study between 2000 and 2009 to answer this
inquiry. The study subjects were those diagnosed of ESCC (ICD-9 150) for
the first time and visited these three medical centers for help. A
standardized questionnaire was used to collect comprehensive information
of demographic characteristics and substance use within 1 week of cancer
diagnosis. The ethics review boards at the study hospitals reviewed and
approved this investigation. Written consents were obtained from all
participants. Alcohol drinkers, tobacco smokers and areca chewers were
defined, respectively, as subjects who had consumed any alcoholic
beverage 1 times per week, those who had smoked 10 tobacco cigarettes per
week and those who had chewed 1 areca-nut (measured as quid) per day for
at least 6 months. In addition, other information such as educational
levels, and clinical stages were also collected. Results: Among the 668
pathology-proven ESCC male patients, we found that the mean age (SD) at
presentation of ESCC was 59.2 (11.3) years. All substance users,
including alcohol drinkers, cigarette smokers, and areca chewers, were,
on average, younger at the time of ESCC diagnosis than non-drinkers,
non-smokers, and non-chewers. After adjusting for other covariates,
alcohol drinkers were 3.58 years younger to have ESCC than non-drinkers
(p = 0.002). A similar result was found among areca chewers, who were
6.34 years younger to have ESCC than non-chewers (p < 0.0001), but not
among cigarette smokers (p = 0.10). Among subjects with habitual areca
use (n = 298), subjects who started using before age 20 were, on average,
younger to have ESCC than those who started after age 20 (p
Background/Aim: Several studies have reported the association between
habitual use of substances (tobacco, alcohol, or areca nut) and the risk
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, whether the use of
these substances can affect the age of ESCC presentation has rarely been
examined. Since esophageal cancer in Taiwanese women only accounted for
10% of total, this study focused on the analysis of men. Methods: We
conducted a multicenter (Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, National
Taiwan University Hospital and Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital)
hospital-based case-control study between 2000 and 2009 to answer this
inquiry. The study subjects were those diagnosed of ESCC (ICD-9 150) for
the first time and visited these three medical centers for help. A
standardized questionnaire was used to collect comprehensive information
of demographic characteristics and substance use within 1 week of cancer
diagnosis. The ethics review boards at the study hospitals reviewed and
approved this investigation. Written consents were obtained from all
participants. Alcohol drinkers, tobacco smokers and areca chewers were
defined, respectively, as subjects who had consumed any alcoholic
beverage 1 times per week, those who had smoked 10 tobacco cigarettes per
week and those who had chewed 1 areca-nut (measured as quid) per day for
at least 6 months. In addition, other information such as educational
levels, and clinical stages were also collected. Results: Among the 668
pathology-proven ESCC male patients, we found that the mean age (SD) at
presentation of ESCC was 59.2 (11.3) years. All substance users,
including alcohol drinkers, cigarette smokers, and areca chewers, were,
on average, younger at the time of ESCC diagnosis than non-drinkers,
non-smokers, and non-chewers. After adjusting for other covariates,
alcohol drinkers were 3.58 years younger to have ESCC than non-drinkers
(p = 0.002). A similar result was found among areca chewers, who were
6.34 years younger to have ESCC than non-chewers (p < 0.0001), but not
among cigarette smokers (p = 0.10). Among subjects with habitual areca
use (n = 298), subjects who started using before age 20 were, on average,
younger to have ESCC than those who started after age 20 (p < 0.0001).
When compared to the group using 0-1 substances, subjects using both
cigarettes and alcohol were nearly 3 years younger to contract ESCC.
Furthermore, those who use areca plus another substance were 7-8 years
younger. Subjects using all three substances had the greatest age
difference, 9.20 years younger (pBackground/Aim: Several studies have
reported the association between habitual use of substances (tobacco,
alcohol, or areca nut) and the risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC). However, whether the use of these substances can affect the age
of ESCC presentation has rarely been examined. Since esophageal cancer in
Taiwanese women only accounted for 10% of total, this study focused on
the analysis of men. Methods: We conducted a multicenter (Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, National Taiwan University Hospital and
Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital) hospital-based case-control study
between 2000 and 2009 to answer this inquiry. The study subjects were
those diagnosed of ESCC (ICD-9 150) for the first time and visited these
three medical centers for help. A standardized questionnaire was used to
collect comprehensive information of demographic characteristics and
substance use within 1 week of cancer diagnosis. The ethics review boards
at the study hospitals reviewed and approved this investigation. Written
consents were obtained from all participants. Alcohol drinkers, tobacco
smokers and areca chewers were defined, respectively, as subjects who had
consumed any alcoholic beverage 1 times per week, those who had smoked 10
tobacco cigarettes per week and those who had chewed 1 areca-nut
(measured as quid) per day for at least 6 months. In addition, other
information such as educational levels, and clinical stages were also
collected. Results: Among the 668 pathology-proven ESCC male patients, we
found that the mean age (SD) at presentation of ESCC was 59.2 (11.3)
years. All substance users, including alcohol drinkers, cigarette
smokers, and areca chewers, were, on average, younger at the time of ESCC
diagnosis than non-drinkers, non-smokers, and non-chewers. After
adjusting for other covariates, alcohol drinkers were 3.58 years younger
to have ESCC than non-drinkers (p = 0.002). A similar result was found
among areca chewers, who were 6.34 years younger to have ESCC than
non-chewers (p < 0.0001), but not among cigarette smokers (p = 0.10).
Among subjects with habitual areca use (n = 298), subjects who started
using before age 20 were, on average, younger to have ESCC than those who
started after age 20 (p < 0.0001). When compared to the group using 0-1
substances, subjects using both cigarettes and alcohol were nearly 3
years younger to contract ESCC. Furthermore, those who use areca plus
another substance were 7-8 years younger. Subjects using all three
substances had the greatest age difference, 9.20 years younger
(p<0.0001), compared to the comparison group. Conclusion: Since the
development of ESCC is insidious and life-threatening, our observation is
worthy to be reconfirmed in the large-scale and long-term follow-up
prospective cohort studies to recommend the screening strategy of this
disease.

