Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA sequence mutations and risk of pancreatic cancer


Although the mitochondrial genome exhibits high mutation rates, common
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variation has not been consistently associated
with pancreatic cancer. Here, we comprehensively examined mitochondrial
genomic variation by sequencing the mtDNA of participants (cases=286,
controls=283) in a San Francisco Bay Area pancreatic cancer case-control
study. Five common variants were associated with pancreatic cancer at
nominal statistical significance (pAlthough the mitochondrial genome
exhibits high mutation rates, common mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variation
has not been consistently associated with pancreatic cancer. Here, we
comprehensively examined mitochondrial genomic variation by sequencing
the mtDNA of participants (cases=286, controls=283) in a San Francisco
Bay Area pancreatic cancer case-control study. Five common variants were
associated with pancreatic cancer at nominal statistical significance
(p<0.05) with the strongest finding for mt5460g in the ND2 gene (odds
ratio (OR)=3.9, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.5-10; p=0.004) which
encodes an A331T substitution. Haplogroup K was nominally associated with
reduced pancreatic cancer risk (OR = 0.32, CI=0.13-0.76; p=0.01) when
compared with the most common haplogroup, H. A total of 19
haplogroup-specific rare variants yielded nominal statistically
significant associations (pAlthough the mitochondrial genome exhibits
high mutation rates, common mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variation has not
been consistently associated with pancreatic cancer. Here, we
comprehensively examined mitochondrial genomic variation by sequencing
the mtDNA of participants (cases=286, controls=283) in a San Francisco
Bay Area pancreatic cancer case-control study. Five common variants were
associated with pancreatic cancer at nominal statistical significance
(p<0.05) with the strongest finding for mt5460g in the ND2 gene (odds
ratio (OR)=3.9, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.5-10; p=0.004) which
encodes an A331T substitution. Haplogroup K was nominally associated with
reduced pancreatic cancer risk (OR = 0.32, CI=0.13-0.76; p=0.01) when
compared with the most common haplogroup, H. A total of 19
haplogroup-specific rare variants yielded nominal statistically
significant associations (p<0.05) with pancreatic cancer risk, with the
majority observed in genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation.
Weighted-sum statistics were used to identify an aggregate effect of
variants in the 22 mitochondrial tRNAs on pancreatic cancer risk
(p=0.02). While the burden of singleton variants in the HV2 and 12S RNA
regions was three times higher among European haplogroup N cases than
controls, the prevalence of singleton variants in ND4 and ND5 was two to
three times higher among African haplogroup L cases than in controls.
Together, the results of this study provide evidence that aggregated
common and rare variants and the accumulation of singleton variants are
important contributors to pancreatic cancer risk.

