Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome wide DNA copy number analysis of serous type ovarian
carcinomas identifies genetic markers predictive of clinical outcome


Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in women.
Ovarian cancers display a high degree of complex genetic alterations
involving many oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Analysis of the
association between genetic alterations and clinical endpoints such as
survival will lead to improved patient management via genetic
stratification of patients into clinically relevant subgroups. In this
study, we aim to define subgroups of high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas
that differ with respect to prognosis and overall survival. Genome-wide
DNA copy number alterations (CNAs) were measured in 72 clinically
annotated, high-grade serous tumors using high-resolution oligonucleotide
arrays. Two clinically annotated, independent cohorts were used as
validation sets. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of copy number data
resulted in two clusters with significant difference in progression free
survival (PFS) and marginal difference in overall survival (OS). GISTIC
analysis of the two clusters identified altered regions unique to each
cluster. Supervised clustering of two independent large cohorts of
high-grade serous tumors using the classification scheme derived from the
two initial clusters validated our results and identified 8 genomic
regions that are distinctly different among the subgroups. These 8
regions map to 8p21.3, 8p23.2, 12p12.1, 17p11.2, 17p12, 19q12, 20q11.21
and 20q13.12; and harbor potential oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
that are likely to be involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian carcinoma.
We have identified a set of genetic alterations that could be used for
stratification of high-grade serous tumors into clinically relevant
treatment subgroups.

