Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Humanized hepsin neutralizing antibody RO5486055 inhibits tumor
growth and leads to accumulation of hepsin substrate laminin-332


Hepsin is overexpressed in prostate and other cancers where it is
implicated in promoting tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. To
further our understanding of the role of hepsin in prostate and breast
cancer, a fully humanized monoclonal antibody that recognizes human and
cynomolgus hepsin has been developed. RO5486055 selectively binds to
hepsin but not related type II transmembrane serine proteases, and
neutralizes hepsin serine protease activity with an IC50 in the single
digit nM range. In LNCaP prostate cancer cells, both shRNA knockdown of
the hepsin gene and RO5486055 treatment cause a similar accumulation of
the 3 chain of laminin-332, a known hepsin substrate. With ip
administration in mice, RO5486055 demonstrates dose-dependent exposure
and a long serum half-life of 168-406 hours. RO5486055 attenuates tumor
growth in the LNCaP prostate cancer and T-47D breast cancer xenograft
models, but not in the CRW-22Rv1 prostate or MCF-7 breast cancer
xenografts. In these models, it has been shown that the level of the 3
chain of laminin-332 detected by Western blot analysis predicts
sensitivity to RO5486055-mediated growth inhibition. Moreover,
accumulation of the 3 chain during RO5486055 treatment correlates with
antitumor activity. In 8/10 hepsin-expressing patient-derived prostate
tumors, an inverse correlation between hepsin and 3 chain expression is
observed. The 3 chain of laminin-332 may therefore be useful as both a
predictive and response biomarker for anti-hepsin therapy.
RO5486055-mediated tumor growth inhibition is enhanced by combination
with the EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab in LNCaP prostate cancer
xenografts, and by combination with hormone withdrawal in T-47D breast
cancer xenografts. These preclinical results suggest that hepsin-directed
therapy could be effective in prostate and breast cancer treatment.

