Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioma stem cells stimulate the motility of brain endothelial
cells: Identification of cell-adhesion molecules mediating motility and
direct interaction


Angiogenesis is a prominent characteristic of malignant glioma. Glioma
stem cells (GSCs) reside adjacent to blood vessels in the perivascular
niche, and recent evidence suggests a role for GSCs in promoting
angiogenesis. Here we examined the interplay between GSCs and endothelial
cells (ECs) on a laminin substrate, and the potential for GSC promotion
of EC motility. In an in vitro 2D motility assay, we found that GSCs
dramatically stimulated EC migration, and ECs also stimulated GSC
migration. An antibody to integrin 6 blocked in part the motility of both
GSCs and ECs. We also found that GSCs directly interact with ECs;
therefore, we investigated which cell-adhesion molecules mediated the
interaction. In a cell-cell binding assay, blocking antibodies to both
L1-cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) and integrin v3 inhibited in part the
direct contact between GSCs and ECs. In the motility assay, the
combination of antibodies to L1CAM and v3 significantly inhibited the
motility and interaction of both cell types. These data suggest GSCs can
promote angiogenesis by promoting EC migration, and indicate a role for
the cell-adhesion receptors L1CAM and v3 in the direct interaction
between GSCs and ECs that may promote EC motility.

