Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new approach for colocalization of proteins using HRP and AP
enzyme detection in paraffin embedded tissues


Co-localization of two proteins is a powerful tool in immunofluorescence,
however the stability of the fluorescence limits the ability to screen
large sample sets. Double and triple staining with the ability to
visualize co-localization of proteins using HRP and AP enzymes in
paraffin embedded tissue may prove to be a useful tool for discovery and
functional analysis of gene and protein expression. Here we present a
novel chromogen mix by GBILabs.com of Emerald and Red that yields a third
color (Dark Blue/Purple) when proteins are co-localized using HRP and AP
enzymes for detection. Initial tests evaluated combinations of ER, Her2,
CEA, Keratin, PR, p53, PCNA, and Ki67 in 10 breast and 10 colon cancer
cases to screen the percentage of co-localized proteins in these cases.
In addition, a 70 case breast cancer tissue array containing duplicate
samples and known diagnosis of ER, PR, and Her2 for each case were
screened with ER, PR, Her2, p53, PCNA, or Ki67and keratin antibodies. The
core tumors sections showed co-localization of PCNA, Ki67 and p53
proteins. This new double and triple staining protocols in combination
with tissue arrays, will allow researchers to rapidly determine the
association between expression of two or more proteins in the tissue and
if proteins co-localize within the cell.

