Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis of newly diagnosed Multiple Myeloma (MM)
patients carrying amplified MDM4 and/or deleted p53


The p53 tumor suppressor pathway is tightly kept in check or completely
silenced in cancer cells. A potent inhibitor of p53 is MDM4, which is
located on chr.1q: it is critical for the control of p53 activity during
the response to stress and is often amplified in several types of cancer.
Since both del(17p) and amp(1q) identify a subgroup of high-risk MM pts,
even when the novel agents are part of up-front treatment strategy, we
molecularly analyzed a subgroup of MM patients treated with
bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone (VTD) and autologous stem cell
transplantation (ASCT) in order to investigate mechanisms which might be
activated in myeloma plasma cells to direct and/or indirect limit the p53
function. CD138+ plasma cells obtained at diagnosis from 61 pts,
subsequently treated with VTD and ASCT were analysed by means of GEP and
unpaired analysis of CNA (Affymetrix U133 Plus2.0 and 6.0 SNP arrays).
Nineteen out of 61 pts (31%) carried a minimal amplification region on
chr.1q, harboring MDM4. Eight out of 61 pts (13%) carried a 482 Kb
minimal deletion region on chr.17 harboring TP53. To explore the
involvement of the p53 pathway in MM, pts were stratified according to
the presence of amplified MDM4 and/or deleted p53 (group A, 24 pts) or
the absence of both these abnormalities (group B, 37 pts). Baseline
clinical characteristics were homogeneous, except for a higher rate of 3
bone lesions in pts of group A. The rate of best complete or near
complete response was 40% in group A and 14% in group B (p = 0.04). With
a median follow-up of 36 months, the risk of progression was 46% for pts
in group A and 19% for those in group B (p = 0.03). The average number of
aberrations per group was overall higher in group A as compared to group
B (165 vs. 103 CNAs, p =0.03). A comparison of expression profiles of the
two subgroups of pts highlighted a deregulated expression of genes
involved in the mechanisms of response to genotoxic stress, i.e. of
damage sensor genes (ATM, RAD9, RAD 50, ATRip), of damage signal mediator
genes (H2AFX, 14-3-3), of genes involved in regulation of cell
proliferation (CDK6, CDC25, CCND2) and of anti-apoptotic genes (BCL2,
p73) (one-way ANOVA plus multiple-test correction with FDR The p53 tumor
suppressor pathway is tightly kept in check or completely silenced in
cancer cells. A potent inhibitor of p53 is MDM4, which is located on
chr.1q: it is critical for the control of p53 activity during the
response to stress and is often amplified in several types of cancer.
Since both del(17p) and amp(1q) identify a subgroup of high-risk MM pts,
even when the novel agents are part of up-front treatment strategy, we
molecularly analyzed a subgroup of MM patients treated with
bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone (VTD) and autologous stem cell
transplantation (ASCT) in order to investigate mechanisms which might be
activated in myeloma plasma cells to direct and/or indirect limit the p53
function. CD138+ plasma cells obtained at diagnosis from 61 pts,
subsequently treated with VTD and ASCT were analysed by means of GEP and
unpaired analysis of CNA (Affymetrix U133 Plus2.0 and 6.0 SNP arrays).
Nineteen out of 61 pts (31%) carried a minimal amplification region on
chr.1q, harboring MDM4. Eight out of 61 pts (13%) carried a 482 Kb
minimal deletion region on chr.17 harboring TP53. To explore the
involvement of the p53 pathway in MM, pts were stratified according to
the presence of amplified MDM4 and/or deleted p53 (group A, 24 pts) or
the absence of both these abnormalities (group B, 37 pts). Baseline
clinical characteristics were homogeneous, except for a higher rate of 3
bone lesions in pts of group A. The rate of best complete or near
complete response was 40% in group A and 14% in group B (p = 0.04). With
a median follow-up of 36 months, the risk of progression was 46% for pts
in group A and 19% for those in group B (p = 0.03). The average number of
aberrations per group was overall higher in group A as compared to group
B (165 vs. 103 CNAs, p =0.03). A comparison of expression profiles of the
two subgroups of pts highlighted a deregulated expression of genes
involved in the mechanisms of response to genotoxic stress, i.e. of
damage sensor genes (ATM, RAD9, RAD 50, ATRip), of damage signal mediator
genes (H2AFX, 14-3-3), of genes involved in regulation of cell
proliferation (CDK6, CDC25, CCND2) and of anti-apoptotic genes (BCL2,
p73) (one-way ANOVA plus multiple-test correction with FDR <0,05).
Finally, this group of pts significantly over-express the transcription
factor YY1, which is known to interact with p53, thus inhibiting its
transcriptional activity. In conclusion, pts carrying amplified MDM4
and/or deleted p53 showed a significantly higher number of CNAs and the
significant over-expression of genes involved in the response mechanisms
to genotoxic stress, as compared to pts lacking these chromosomal
aberrations. This might account for the worse outcome of patients
harboring del(17p) and/or amp(1q). The MDM4 locus amplification and the
YY1 over-expression might contribute to maintain p53 in an OFF state by
an indirect mechanism. Supported by: Fondazione Del Monte di Bo e Ra,
Ateneo RFO grants (M.C.) BolognAIL.

