Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Posttranslational modification of the RBBP6 isoform 3 is required
for excessive cell proliferation


RBBP6 isoform 3 belongs to a family of RBBP6 cell cycle-related proteins.
There are 3 human RBBP6 isoforms; iso 1, 2 and 3, transcribed from RBBP6
mRNA variants 1, 2 and 3 respectively. RBBP6 isoform 1 has been shown to
be a pro-apoptotic protein while the function of isoform 2 has not been
confirmed. Recently isoform 3 has shown to be involved in G2/M cell cycle
regulation and is deregulated in human cancers. This study aimed at
investigating how the RBBP6 isoform 3 regulates cell proliferation. Cell
culture and transfections were used to determine the effect of RBBP6
isoform 3 on cell cycle progression. RBBP6 variant 3 mRNA was cloned into
a pCDNA3.1/Zeo (+) vector and expressed in human kidney embryonic cells,
Hek 293T. Cell cycle and cell counts analysis were conducted by using
Flow Assorted Cell Sorting (FACS). Western blotting analysis was used to
analyse RBBP6 isoform 3 using a polyclonal antibody against RBBP6 isoform
3 N-terminal region. Transfection of Hek 293T cells with RBBP6 variant 3
mRNA resulted in temporal G2/M cell cycle arrest. This cell cycle arrest
ceased after 48 hours and Western blotting showed that RBBP6 isoform 3
was posttranslationally modified through either glycosylation or
phosphorylation or both. Mass spectrometry confirmed that the higher
molecular weight protein was indeed RBBP6 isoform 3. This higher
molecular weight product was accompanied by excessive cell proliferation.
This result suggests that cancer cells use this posttranslational
modification to bypass G2/M cell cycle arrest. RBBP6 isoform 3 could
therefore be targeted for new anti-cancer therapeutic strategies.

