Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Biomarkers for lung adenocarcinoma in salivary proteome


Lung cancer is the major cause of cancer-related deaths and has a poor
prognosis with a 5-yr overall survival of 80% of the cases. Previous
studies have demonstrated that former smokers have a higher risk of lung
cancer compared to nonsmokers. Early detection of lung cancer would
improve the overall survival of this disease. However, there is no
validated screening test for lung cancer. To develop an early detection
test, we selected saliva as the biofluid of choice due to its
accessibility, protein content that provides diagnostic information on a
variety of diseases, including cancer. To identify differentially
expressed proteins in saliva from individuals with lung adenocarcinoma,
whole saliva samples were collected from 6 patients with lung
adenocarcinoma and 6 matched healthy controls (male individuals, >40
years, smokers >10 pack year). Proteins and peptides from whole saliva
samples were analyzed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis identifying
20 differentially expressed protein spots. Mass spectrometry analysis
identified 63 peptides and revealed fourteen non-redundant proteins in
saliva obtained from lung adenocarcinoma patients. Four of these proteins
have been previously reported as serum biomarkers of cancer, and two of
them were associated with non-small cell lung cancer. These potential
biomarkers are being tested in an independent and larger cohort for
validation. Patient-based saliva proteomics is a promising approach to
searching for cancer biomarkers. Further characterization of these
markers may provide the basis for new, noninvasive tests for screening,
detection, and monitoring of high-risk individuals.

