Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Methylated PLK2 predicts response to taxanes


Polo-like-kinases (Plk) are a family of mitotic kinases with close
structural similarity but showing functional diversity. Plk2 was
originally described as an early response gene as is sometimes referred
to as Snk. It has been shown to be a transcriptional target of p53 and
activates a G2M checkpoint. Following a screening of a number of taxane
resistant ovarian cancer cell lines we saw a close association with
down-regulation of PLK2 and the extent of taxane resistance. Methylation
analysis including methylation specific PCR (MSP) and pyrosequencing
showed heavy methylation of CpG islands in the promoter region. We also
saw that when sensitivity to paclitaxel is restored by a process of
resistance reversal by growing cells in a drug free environment and this
corresponded with upregulation of PLK2. We have also then gone on to look
at a range of taxane-resistant breast cancer cell lines and have in many
cases seen an association of PLK2 down-regulation with the acquisition of
resistance. Translational studies using clinical biopsies and matched
serum samples from a total of 43 ovarian cancer patients have indicated
that the presence of methylated PLK2 in ovarian cancer tissue at first
presentation may predict future relapse on platinum and taxane
combination therapy. We also saw an association of presence of methylated
PLK2 in either serum or tumour tissue with reduced survival. At present
we are examining a series of samples from 40 breast cancer patients in
the neo-adjuvant setting treated with taxane containing regimens to look
for the association of PLK2 methylation with clinical outcome. We propose
that methylated PLK2 is a useful marker of chemoresponse in ovarian and
breast cancers.

