Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A requirement for SOCS-1 and SOCS-3 phosphorylation in
BCR-ABL-mediated transformation


Previous studies have demonstrated that constitutive activation of
JAK/STAT signaling is required for efficient transformation by the
Abelson murine leukemia virus (A-MuLV), which expresses v-Abl
oncoprotein. Importantly, there is increasing evidence that deregulation
of the JAK or STAT activity plays a critical role in BCR-ABL-induced
malignant transformation. SOCS-1 and SOCS-3 are inhibitors of JAK-STAT
pathway and as such are involved in a negative feedback loop of cytokine
signaling. However, the mechanism by which Abl oncogene bypasses SOCS
inhibitory regulation remains poorly defined. Here, we found that
co-expression of BCR-ABL with SOCS-1 or SOCS-3 resulted in tyrosine
phosphorylation of these SOCS proteins. Interestingly,
tyrosine-phosphorylated SOCS-1 was detected in three of five primary CML
samples which express BCR-ABL. BCR-ABL-dependent phosphorylation of
SOCS-1 and SOCS-3 occurred mainly on Tyr 155 and Tyr 204 residues of
SOCS-1, and Tyr 221 residue of SOCS-3. Phosphorylation of these SOCS
proteins was associated with its binding to BCR-ABL, and this interaction
was disrupted by mutation of the sites of SOCS phosphorylation. We
demonstrated that BCR-ABL-dependent phosphorylation of SOCS-1 and SOCS-3
alters their inhibitory effects on the activation of JAK1 and JAK2 and
thereby enhances JAK-STAT signaling. Moreover, disrupting the tyrosine
phosphorylation of SOCS-1 or SOCS-3 promotes K562 leukemic cells to
undergo apoptosis and blocks tumor formation in mouse model. Together,
these results reveal a requirement for tyrosine phosphorylation of SOCS-1
and SCOCS-3 in BCR-ABL-mediated transformation in the presence of these
SOCS proteins.

