Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiviral and antitumoral effects of the anti-CTLA4 agent
tremelimumab in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and chronic
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection: Results from a phase II clinical trial


Tremelimumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds to CTLA-4
expressed on the surface of activated T lymphocytes and results in
inhibition of B7-CTLA-4-mediated downregulation of T-cell activation. The
safety and therapeutic effects of this immunostimulating agent were
explored in 20 patients (pts) (median age 68, 71% males) with chronic HCV
infection and advanced HCC (57% BCLC C, 43% Child B, 28% portal vein
invasion, 28% AFP > 400 UI/ml). Tremelimumab was administered at a dose
of 15 mg/kg IV every 90 days for a median of 2 cycles (range 1-4). Two
patients are still under treatment and have received 2 cycles. Tumor
response was analyzed in 20 pts that had at least one of the imaging
evaluations planned at 3-monthly intervals. Two of these 20 pts had a
partial response (12%) and 11 pts had stable disease (65%) as the best
tumor response (disease control rate 76.4%). The duration of stable
disease was > 12 months in 33% of pts (excluding the 2 pts that are still
on treatment). In an intention-to-treat analysis, median overall survival
and time to progression were 7.5 months (95%CI 4.6-18.0) and 6.4 months
(95%CI 3.9-9.1), respectively. Tremelimumab was globally very well
tolerated. 80% of pts had treatment-related adverse events (AE), the most
frequent being mild to moderate rash (40%), itching (45%), increased
transaminases (30%), fatigue (20%), diarrhea (10%), constipation (10%),
and anorexia (10%). Some patients showed a marked, transient increase in
transaminases after the first dose that did not result in liver failure.
CTCAE v.3.0 grade > 3 treatment-related AE included pruritus (1 case),
purpura (1 case) and elevated transaminases (5 cases). No
life-threatening AE was observed. A significant and progressive decline
in serum HCV viral load was observed (median values: basal 3.78x10e5
copies/ml vs day 120 3.02x10e4 copies/ml, p=0.02; vs day 210 1.69x10e3
copies/ml, p=0.04). This was associated with an increase in anti-HCV
immune response in 76% of patients (evaluated by measuring at different
time points IFN-g spot forming cells after incubation of PBMC with pools
of peptides spanning the whole HCV polyprotein and recombinant core, NS3,
NS4 and NS5 proteins). A significant increase in circulating CD4+Foxp3+
cells was also observed at day 30. In conclusion, in this preliminary
analysis Tremelimumab has shown a promising antitumor efficacy against
HCC and an intense antiviral activity against HCV together with an
excellent safety profile even among patients with advanced cirrhosis.
Further clinical trials are needed to explore the potential role of
Tremelimumab in the treatment of HCV infection and HCC.

