Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dishevelled proteins are highly upregulated in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia


Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia and
is characterized by the progressive accumulation of CD5+ B cells. An
important signaling pathway in CLL cells might be Wnt signaling pathways.
Wnt signaling pathways include the Wnt/ -catenin pathway and the
non-canonical Wnt pathways. Dishevelled proteins (DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3)
are important mediators in Wnt signaling and have been shown in to be
expressed many cancer types but their precise role is not clear. The aim
of the study was to characterize the expression of DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3
proteins in indolent and progressive CLL and compare to normal white
blood cells (PBMC) as well as to assess the expression of other important
proteins of the canonical pathway as -catenin and the non-canonical
pathways as GSK-3, PKC, ERK and AKT respectively. Leukemic cells from
indolent (n=9) and progressive (n=9) CLL patients were isolated by Ficoll
gradient centrifugation as well as PBMC from healthy donors (n=9). Six
cell lines including four CLL cell lines EHEH, CII, I83, 232 B4, and the
Jurkat and Lucas cell lines were also used. DVL 1, DVL 2, DVL 3 were
analyzed by Western blot and densitometric calculations as well as PKC,
GSK-3, AKT and ERK using antibodies against the total protein and the
phosphorylated protein respectively. Overexpression of DVL1, DVL 2, and
DVL3 was seen in all indolent and progressive CLL patients and the six
cell lines. There was a significantly higher expression of DVL 1 and DVL
3 in indolent compared to progressive CLL patients (pChronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia and is characterized by
the progressive accumulation of CD5+ B cells. An important signaling
pathway in CLL cells might be Wnt signaling pathways. Wnt signaling
pathways include the Wnt/ -catenin pathway and the non-canonical Wnt
pathways. Dishevelled proteins (DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3) are important
mediators in Wnt signaling and have been shown in to be expressed many
cancer types but their precise role is not clear. The aim of the study
was to characterize the expression of DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3 proteins in
indolent and progressive CLL and compare to normal white blood cells
(PBMC) as well as to assess the expression of other important proteins of
the canonical pathway as -catenin and the non-canonical pathways as
GSK-3, PKC, ERK and AKT respectively. Leukemic cells from indolent (n=9)
and progressive (n=9) CLL patients were isolated by Ficoll gradient
centrifugation as well as PBMC from healthy donors (n=9). Six cell lines
including four CLL cell lines EHEH, CII, I83, 232 B4, and the Jurkat and
Lucas cell lines were also used. DVL 1, DVL 2, DVL 3 were analyzed by
Western blot and densitometric calculations as well as PKC, GSK-3, AKT
and ERK using antibodies against the total protein and the phosphorylated
protein respectively. Overexpression of DVL1, DVL 2, and DVL3 was seen in
all indolent and progressive CLL patients and the six cell lines. There
was a significantly higher expression of DVL 1 and DVL 3 in indolent
compared to progressive CLL patients (p<0.01 and pChronic Lymphocytic
Leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia and is characterized by
the progressive accumulation of CD5+ B cells. An important signaling
pathway in CLL cells might be Wnt signaling pathways. Wnt signaling
pathways include the Wnt/ -catenin pathway and the non-canonical Wnt
pathways. Dishevelled proteins (DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3) are important
mediators in Wnt signaling and have been shown in to be expressed many
cancer types but their precise role is not clear. The aim of the study
was to characterize the expression of DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3 proteins in
indolent and progressive CLL and compare to normal white blood cells
(PBMC) as well as to assess the expression of other important proteins of
the canonical pathway as -catenin and the non-canonical pathways as
GSK-3, PKC, ERK and AKT respectively. Leukemic cells from indolent (n=9)
and progressive (n=9) CLL patients were isolated by Ficoll gradient
centrifugation as well as PBMC from healthy donors (n=9). Six cell lines
including four CLL cell lines EHEH, CII, I83, 232 B4, and the Jurkat and
Lucas cell lines were also used. DVL 1, DVL 2, DVL 3 were analyzed by
Western blot and densitometric calculations as well as PKC, GSK-3, AKT
and ERK using antibodies against the total protein and the phosphorylated
protein respectively. Overexpression of DVL1, DVL 2, and DVL3 was seen in
all indolent and progressive CLL patients and the six cell lines. There
was a significantly higher expression of DVL 1 and DVL 3 in indolent
compared to progressive CLL patients (p<0.01 and p<0.01 respectively). In
contrast to DVL 1 and DVL 3, DVL 2 was highly expressed in indolent as
compared to progressive CLL patients. -catenin followed the same
expression pattern as DVL2 being highly expressed in indolent CLL as
compared to progressive CLL patients (pChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
is the most common adult leukemia and is characterized by the progressive
accumulation of CD5+ B cells. An important signaling pathway in CLL cells
might be Wnt signaling pathways. Wnt signaling pathways include the Wnt/
-catenin pathway and the non-canonical Wnt pathways. Dishevelled proteins
(DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3) are important mediators in Wnt signaling and have
been shown in to be expressed many cancer types but their precise role is
not clear. The aim of the study was to characterize the expression of
DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3 proteins in indolent and progressive CLL and compare
to normal white blood cells (PBMC) as well as to assess the expression of
other important proteins of the canonical pathway as -catenin and the
non-canonical pathways as GSK-3, PKC, ERK and AKT respectively. Leukemic
cells from indolent (n=9) and progressive (n=9) CLL patients were
isolated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation as well as PBMC from healthy
donors (n=9). Six cell lines including four CLL cell lines EHEH, CII,
I83, 232 B4, and the Jurkat and Lucas cell lines were also used. DVL 1,
DVL 2, DVL 3 were analyzed by Western blot and densitometric calculations
as well as PKC, GSK-3, AKT and ERK using antibodies against the total
protein and the phosphorylated protein respectively. Overexpression of
DVL1, DVL 2, and DVL3 was seen in all indolent and progressive CLL
patients and the six cell lines. There was a significantly higher
expression of DVL 1 and DVL 3 in indolent compared to progressive CLL
patients (p<0.01 and p<0.01 respectively). In contrast to DVL 1 and DVL
3, DVL 2 was highly expressed in indolent as compared to progressive CLL
patients. -catenin followed the same expression pattern as DVL2 being
highly expressed in indolent CLL as compared to progressive CLL patients
(p<0.001). There was no significant difference in the degree
phosphorylation of PKC and GSK-3 between indolent CLL, progressive CLL
and healthy donors.The degree of AKT and ERK phosphorylation was
significantly higher in indolent than in progressive CLL patients
(pChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL) is the most common adult leukemia
and is characterized by the progressive accumulation of CD5+ B cells. An
important signaling pathway in CLL cells might be Wnt signaling pathways.
Wnt signaling pathways include the Wnt/ -catenin pathway and the
non-canonical Wnt pathways. Dishevelled proteins (DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3)
are important mediators in Wnt signaling and have been shown in to be
expressed many cancer types but their precise role is not clear. The aim
of the study was to characterize the expression of DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3
proteins in indolent and progressive CLL and compare to normal white
blood cells (PBMC) as well as to assess the expression of other important
proteins of the canonical pathway as -catenin and the non-canonical
pathways as GSK-3, PKC, ERK and AKT respectively. Leukemic cells from
indolent (n=9) and progressive (n=9) CLL patients were isolated by Ficoll
gradient centrifugation as well as PBMC from healthy donors (n=9). Six
cell lines including four CLL cell lines EHEH, CII, I83, 232 B4, and the
Jurkat and Lucas cell lines were also used. DVL 1, DVL 2, DVL 3 were
analyzed by Western blot and densitometric calculations as well as PKC,
GSK-3, AKT and ERK using antibodies against the total protein and the
phosphorylated protein respectively. Overexpression of DVL1, DVL 2, and
DVL3 was seen in all indolent and progressive CLL patients and the six
cell lines. There was a significantly higher expression of DVL 1 and DVL
3 in indolent compared to progressive CLL patients (p<0.01 and p<0.01
respectively). In contrast to DVL 1 and DVL 3, DVL 2 was highly expressed
in indolent as compared to progressive CLL patients. -catenin followed
the same expression pattern as DVL2 being highly expressed in indolent
CLL as compared to progressive CLL patients (p<0.001). There was no
significant difference in the degree phosphorylation of PKC and GSK-3
between indolent CLL, progressive CLL and healthy donors.The degree of
AKT and ERK phosphorylation was significantly higher in indolent than in
progressive CLL patients (p<0.001 and pChronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
is the most common adult leukemia and is characterized by the progressive
accumulation of CD5+ B cells. An important signaling pathway in CLL cells
might be Wnt signaling pathways. Wnt signaling pathways include the Wnt/
-catenin pathway and the non-canonical Wnt pathways. Dishevelled proteins
(DVL1, DVL2, and DVL3) are important mediators in Wnt signaling and have
been shown in to be expressed many cancer types but their precise role is
not clear. The aim of the study was to characterize the expression of
DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3 proteins in indolent and progressive CLL and compare
to normal white blood cells (PBMC) as well as to assess the expression of
other important proteins of the canonical pathway as -catenin and the
non-canonical pathways as GSK-3, PKC, ERK and AKT respectively. Leukemic
cells from indolent (n=9) and progressive (n=9) CLL patients were
isolated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation as well as PBMC from healthy
donors (n=9). Six cell lines including four CLL cell lines EHEH, CII,
I83, 232 B4, and the Jurkat and Lucas cell lines were also used. DVL 1,
DVL 2, DVL 3 were analyzed by Western blot and densitometric calculations
as well as PKC, GSK-3, AKT and ERK using antibodies against the total
protein and the phosphorylated protein respectively. Overexpression of
DVL1, DVL 2, and DVL3 was seen in all indolent and progressive CLL
patients and the six cell lines. There was a significantly higher
expression of DVL 1 and DVL 3 in indolent compared to progressive CLL
patients (p<0.01 and p<0.01 respectively). In contrast to DVL 1 and DVL
3, DVL 2 was highly expressed in indolent as compared to progressive CLL
patients. -catenin followed the same expression pattern as DVL2 being
highly expressed in indolent CLL as compared to progressive CLL patients
(p<0.001). There was no significant difference in the degree
phosphorylation of PKC and GSK-3 between indolent CLL, progressive CLL
and healthy donors.The degree of AKT and ERK phosphorylation was
significantly higher in indolent than in progressive CLL patients
(p<0.001 and p<0.01 respectively). In summary DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3 are
highly expressed in CLL patients and CLL cell lines but their expression
in normal PBMC is almost negligible but expression of other canonical and
non-canonical pathways proteins are seen both in CLL and healthy donors.
DVL1, DVL2 and DVL3 may have a key role in the transduction of Wnt
mediated signals in CLL.

