Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide analysis of CpG island methylation identified OTX1,
OSR1 and ONECUT2 as biomarkers for recurrent bladder cancer detection in
voided urine


Cancers of the urinary bladder (BC) present as muscle-invasive (MIBC) or
non-muscle invasive (NMIBC). Major problems with NMIBC are that 70% of
the tumors will recur and 10-20% will eventually progress to MIBC.
Therefore the patients are monitored by cystoscopy every 3-6 months after
transurethral resection of the tumor in order to spot potential
recurrences. DNA methylation has been shown to contribute to the
pathogenesis cancer and may serve as useful biomarker. Recent studies
showed promising urine methylation biomarkers for BC, but none of these
were specifically tested for detection of recurrent BCs which are often
smaller and hence more difficult to detect than primary tumors. Therefore
we aimed to develop an assay specific for the diagnosis of recurrent
bladder tumors in voided urine. From our earlier genome-wide study, we
selected 8 candidate CGIs (CpG islands) methylated in BC to screen for
the detection of recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine. We first
screened these 8 CGIs on an independent set of 50 FFPE bladder tumors and
70 urines from age matched individuals without any history of BC as
controls using BS-SNaPshot (Bisulfite specific single nucleotide primer
extension assay). Subsequently, the 8 CGIs were investigated in a test
set of 100 preTUR (before Trans Urethral Resection) urines associated
with a concomitant recurrent tumor. We analyzed the sensitivity,
specificity, AUC (area under the curve), PPV and NPV of all the
individual markers and five best combinations. We then validated this on
a separate cohort of 100 preTUR urines samples. Single marker OTX1
identified recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine with a sensitivity of
71% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.85 (CI: 0.80-0.91, PCancers
of the urinary bladder (BC) present as muscle-invasive (MIBC) or
non-muscle invasive (NMIBC). Major problems with NMIBC are that 70% of
the tumors will recur and 10-20% will eventually progress to MIBC.
Therefore the patients are monitored by cystoscopy every 3-6 months after
transurethral resection of the tumor in order to spot potential
recurrences. DNA methylation has been shown to contribute to the
pathogenesis cancer and may serve as useful biomarker. Recent studies
showed promising urine methylation biomarkers for BC, but none of these
were specifically tested for detection of recurrent BCs which are often
smaller and hence more difficult to detect than primary tumors. Therefore
we aimed to develop an assay specific for the diagnosis of recurrent
bladder tumors in voided urine. From our earlier genome-wide study, we
selected 8 candidate CGIs (CpG islands) methylated in BC to screen for
the detection of recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine. We first
screened these 8 CGIs on an independent set of 50 FFPE bladder tumors and
70 urines from age matched individuals without any history of BC as
controls using BS-SNaPshot (Bisulfite specific single nucleotide primer
extension assay). Subsequently, the 8 CGIs were investigated in a test
set of 100 preTUR (before Trans Urethral Resection) urines associated
with a concomitant recurrent tumor. We analyzed the sensitivity,
specificity, AUC (area under the curve), PPV and NPV of all the
individual markers and five best combinations. We then validated this on
a separate cohort of 100 preTUR urines samples. Single marker OTX1
identified recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine with a sensitivity of
71% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.85 (CI: 0.80-0.91,
P<0.0001). A 3 gene methylation panel OTX1, ONECUT2 and OSR1 showed a
sensitivity of 73% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.86 (CI:
0.80-0.91, PCancers of the urinary bladder (BC) present as
muscle-invasive (MIBC) or non-muscle invasive (NMIBC). Major problems
with NMIBC are that 70% of the tumors will recur and 10-20% will
eventually progress to MIBC. Therefore the patients are monitored by
cystoscopy every 3-6 months after transurethral resection of the tumor in
order to spot potential recurrences. DNA methylation has been shown to
contribute to the pathogenesis cancer and may serve as useful biomarker.
Recent studies showed promising urine methylation biomarkers for BC, but
none of these were specifically tested for detection of recurrent BCs
which are often smaller and hence more difficult to detect than primary
tumors. Therefore we aimed to develop an assay specific for the diagnosis
of recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine. From our earlier genome-wide
study, we selected 8 candidate CGIs (CpG islands) methylated in BC to
screen for the detection of recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine. We
first screened these 8 CGIs on an independent set of 50 FFPE bladder
tumors and 70 urines from age matched individuals without any history of
BC as controls using BS-SNaPshot (Bisulfite specific single nucleotide
primer extension assay). Subsequently, the 8 CGIs were investigated in a
test set of 100 preTUR (before Trans Urethral Resection) urines
associated with a concomitant recurrent tumor. We analyzed the
sensitivity, specificity, AUC (area under the curve), PPV and NPV of all
the individual markers and five best combinations. We then validated this
on a separate cohort of 100 preTUR urines samples. Single marker OTX1
identified recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine with a sensitivity of
71% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.85 (CI: 0.80-0.91,
P<0.0001). A 3 gene methylation panel OTX1, ONECUT2 and OSR1 showed a
sensitivity of 73% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.86 (CI:
0.80-0.91, P< 0.0001). Combining this 3-gene panel methylation assay with
FGFR3 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 3) mutation assay achieved a
sensitivity of 78% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.87 (CI:
0.82-0.93, PCancers of the urinary bladder (BC) present as
muscle-invasive (MIBC) or non-muscle invasive (NMIBC). Major problems
with NMIBC are that 70% of the tumors will recur and 10-20% will
eventually progress to MIBC. Therefore the patients are monitored by
cystoscopy every 3-6 months after transurethral resection of the tumor in
order to spot potential recurrences. DNA methylation has been shown to
contribute to the pathogenesis cancer and may serve as useful biomarker.
Recent studies showed promising urine methylation biomarkers for BC, but
none of these were specifically tested for detection of recurrent BCs
which are often smaller and hence more difficult to detect than primary
tumors. Therefore we aimed to develop an assay specific for the diagnosis
of recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine. From our earlier genome-wide
study, we selected 8 candidate CGIs (CpG islands) methylated in BC to
screen for the detection of recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine. We
first screened these 8 CGIs on an independent set of 50 FFPE bladder
tumors and 70 urines from age matched individuals without any history of
BC as controls using BS-SNaPshot (Bisulfite specific single nucleotide
primer extension assay). Subsequently, the 8 CGIs were investigated in a
test set of 100 preTUR (before Trans Urethral Resection) urines
associated with a concomitant recurrent tumor. We analyzed the
sensitivity, specificity, AUC (area under the curve), PPV and NPV of all
the individual markers and five best combinations. We then validated this
on a separate cohort of 100 preTUR urines samples. Single marker OTX1
identified recurrent bladder tumors in voided urine with a sensitivity of
71% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.85 (CI: 0.80-0.91,
P<0.0001). A 3 gene methylation panel OTX1, ONECUT2 and OSR1 showed a
sensitivity of 73% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.86 (CI:
0.80-0.91, P< 0.0001). Combining this 3-gene panel methylation assay with
FGFR3 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 3) mutation assay achieved a
sensitivity of 78% at a specificity of 90% with an AUC of 0.87 (CI:
0.82-0.93, P< 0.0001). This panel of markers showed a sensitivity of 100%
in detecting bladder tumor tissue DNA. These markers were also
investigated on 40 urines collected from patients who are recurrence free
for a period of longer than 6 months. A total of 9/40 (22%) urines were
positive in these recurrence free patients. The lower specificity of
these samples could be due to the anticipatory effect that has been
attributed to urine tests, i.e. urines test sees the tumor earlier than
cystocopy. We also observed that multiple tumors from a patient are
highly concordant in their methylation percentage, which underlines the
usefulness of the markers. In summary the panel biomarkers that are
identified will be able to detect the recurrent bladder tumors in voided
urine, thereby helping in surveillance of patients with bladder cancer.

