Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manipulating the Noxa/Bim axis undermines the multicellular
resistance of 3D tumor spheroids


When grown in 3D cultures as spheroids, cancer cells acquire a
multicellular resistance to apoptosis that resembles that of solid
tumors. We have previously found in lung cancer and mesothelioma that
multicellular resistance lies at the level of mitochondria and can be
reduced by manipulating the Bcl-2 repertoire with BH3-mimetics. One
mechanism for the multicellular resistance to apoptosis is the lack of
up-regulation of the pro-apoptotic sensitizer Noxa upon treatment; Noxa
displaces pro-apoptotic Bim from its anti-apoptotic buffering proteins
allowing the Bim to induce apoptosis. Interestingly, we have found that,
at the same time that cells acquire apoptotic resistance in 3D, they also
acquire a pro-apoptotic potential that has been termed apoptotic priming,
due to an elevated Bim that is sequestered by the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
proteins. We found that multicellular resistance could be abolished
either by restoring Noxa levels using a permeable Noxa peptide or by
releasing Bim via inhibition of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins using
the small molecule inhibitor, ABT-737. Moreover, multicellular resistance
was also abolished by the histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA which
upregulated both Noxa and Bim expression. Knockdown of Bim blocked the
effect of the Noxa peptide, ABT-737 or SAHA showing the importance of Bim
in the chemotherapeutic response. Our results using a clinically-relevant
3D model show that manipulation of the core apoptotic repertoire in order
to release Bim may improve chemosensitivity of lung cancer and
mesothelioma.

