Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional knockdown of urokinase-type plasminogen activator
receptor (uPAR) induces apoptosis in glioblastoma xenograft cells via
activation of p53


Elevated levels of urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), a
glycoprotein tethered to the cell membrane with a
glycosylphosphotidylinositol (GPI) anchor, is associated with tumor
malignancy in a variety of cancers including glioblastoma (GBM). In this
study, we show that inhibition of uPAR via RNA interference (puPAR-Si)
induced p53-mediated massive cell death in human GBM xenograft cell
lines, 4910 and 5310. Induction of Fas expression and cleavage of
caspases-8, -9 and -3 and PARP (poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase) revealed
induction of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. Inhibition of Fas death
receptor blocked puPAR-Si-induced apoptosis. Further, uPAR inhibition
induced the expression of tumor suppressor p53 and its downstream target
gene p21. Transcriptional knockdown of p53 rescued cells from apoptosis,
thereby indicating that p53 was critical for induction of apoptosis.
Moreover, puPAR-Si treatment inhibited pre-established tumor growth in an
intracranial model. Indeed, histological analysis of tumor sections
collected from mice that were treated with uPAR siRNA revealed increased
immunoreactivity of phosphorylated p53, Fas, active caspase 3 and
induction of programmed cell death. These data suggest a novel function
of uPAR acting as a survival factor for GBM by downregulating p53;
inhibition of uPAR induces a pro-apoptotic signaling pathway via p53.
These findings may offer new treatment strategies for GBM.

