Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Amplification of the STOML3, FREM2, and LHFP genes is associated
with mesenchymal differentiation in gliosarcoma


Gliosarcoma is a rare glioblastoma variant characterized by a biphasic
tissue pattern with alternating areas displaying glial (GFAP-positive) or
mesenchymal (reticulin-positive) differentiation. Previous analyses
showed identical genetic alterations in both glial and mesenchymal tumor
areas, suggesting that gliosarcomas are genetically monoclonal, and
mesenchymal differentiation was considered to reflect the elevated
genomic instability of glioblastomas. In the present study, we compared
genome-wide chromosomal imbalances using array CGH (105K) in glial and
mesenchymal tumor areas of 13 gliosarcomas. Patterns of gain and loss
were similar, except for gain at 13q13.3-q14.1 (log2 ratio 3), containing
the STOML3, FREM2, and LHFP genes, which was restricted to the
mesenchymal tumor area of a gliosarcoma. Further analyses of 64 cases of
gliosarcoma using quantitative PCR showed amplification of the STOML3,
FREM2 and LHFP genes in 14 (21%), 10 (15%), and 7 (11%) of mesenchymal
tumor areas but not in glial tumor areas. Immunohistochemistry confirmed
that STOML3 and FREM2 overexpression was more extensive in mesenchymal
than in glial tumor areas. These results suggest that mesenchymal
components in a small fraction of gliosarcomas may be derived from glial
cells with additional genetic alterations.

