Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of microRNA-32 leads to decreased expression of the
survival-enhancing scaffold protein hKSR2 in human myeloid leukemia cells
treated with vitamin D derivatives


1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) has potential for treatment and/or
prevention of human AML by inducing terminal differentiation of AML cells
to monocyte-like phenotype, but the mechanisms underlying this action are
not fully understood. We hypothesized that one or more microRNAs (miRNAs)
known to control mouse hematopoiesis and lineage commitment may
contribute to the known ability of 1,25D to control the malignant
phenotype. We found that miR181a and miR32 both participate in the
differentiating effects of 1,25D, with effects on cellular levels of cell
cycle regulator p27Kip1 and the pro-apoptotic protein Bim, respectively.
Here we report that in human AML cells modulation of 1,25D-induced
expression of miR32 and miR181a can result in the down-regulation of the
abundance of the scaffold protein hKSR2, which is associated with
inhibition of differentiation. This supports the concept that hKSR2 is
under miRNA control in AML cells. However, ectopic expression of miR32
had little effect on hKSR2 protein levels, suggesting that there is an
indirect effect of miR32 on hKSR2 expression, and that intracellular
levels of the intermediary regulators are already at saturation levels.
Since hKSR2 protein has cell survival-enhancing properties, 1,25D-induced
miRNAs and hKSR2 changes may reduce the therapeutic efficacy of 1,25D and
analogs in human AML, especially when vitamin D analogs are combined with
conventional cytotoxic anti-leukemia agents. This warrants consideration
in the design of clinical trials. (This research was supported by NIH
grant R01 CA 044722-22 from the National Cancer Institute).

