Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-angiogenic activity of a CovX bi-functional antibody
conjugate targeting both activin-receptor like kinase type 1 (ALK-1) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)


Angiogenesis is essential for tumor growth and metastasis, and
controlling tumor-associated angiogenesis is a proven therapeutic
intervention to limit tumor progression. Several pathways have been
involved in tumor-associated angiogenesis and the predominant target of
current interventions is the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
pathway. Recently, Activin-receptor like kinase type 1 (ALK-1) has been
proven to be a novel and potent target of tumor angiogenesis. Our results
indicate that inhibiting VEGF and ALK1 have different effects on tumor
vasculature, suggesting that targeting both pathways could have a more
potent effect than targeting either pathway alone. We have created a
bi-functional antibody conjugate targeting both ALK-1 and VEGF by
conjugating VEGF-trap peptides to an anti-ALK1 monoclonal antibody. We
demonstrate that our bi-functional molecule binds both ALK-1 and VEGF
with high affinity in vitro, blocks both ALK-1 and VEGF pathways in HUVEC
primary human endothelial cells and has good pharmacokinetics properties
in mice. Finally, in a MDA-MB-231 xenograft model in SCID mice, the
ALK-1/VEGF bi-functional antibody conjugate slowed tumor growth and
prolonged survival with greater efficacy than anti-VEGF therapy alone.

