Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A): a transcriptional
target of PAX3-FKHR and mediates PAX3-FKHR-dependent motility in alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma cells


Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS) has a high propensity to metastasize,
leading to its aggressiveness and a poor survival rate among those with
the disease. More than 80% of aggressive ARMSs harbor a PAX3-FKHR fusion
transcription factor, which regulates cell migration and promotes
metastasis, most likely by regulating the fusion protein's
transcriptional targets. Therefore, identifying druggable transcription
targets of PAX3-FKHR that are also downstream effectors of
PAX3-FKHR-mediated cell migration and metastasis may lead to novel
therapeutic approaches for treating ARMS. To identify genes whose
expression is directly affected by the level of PAX3-FKHR in an ARMS
cellular-context, we first developed an ARMS cell line in which PAX3-FKHR
is stably down-regulated, and showed that stably downregulating PAX3-FKHR
in ARMS cells significantly decreased the cells motility. We also found
that when PAX3-FKHR was downregulated, the expression level of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) decreased. Analysis of the CPT1A promoter
identified 4 putative PAX3-FKHR binding sites. Results of mutational
analysis, promoter reporter assays, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that PAX3-FKHR binds directly and specifically to a
paired-domain binding-site in the CPT1A promoter region, indicating that
CPT1A is a novel direct transcriptional target of PAX3-FKHR.
Downregulating CPT1A, either by gene knockdown or by using a
pharmacologic modulator of CPT1A activity, decreased cell motility in
ARMS cells. Taken together, we have identified CPT1A as a novel direct
transcriptional target of PAX3-FKHR and revealed the novel function of
CPT1A in promoting cell motility. CPT1A may represent a novel therapeutic
target for the treatment of ARMS.

