Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapamycin inhibits lymph node metastasis in an orthotopic model of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: A possible role for a suppression
of VEGFR-3 expression


Background: Tumor cell dissemination to cervical lymph nodes via the
lymphatic system represents the first step in the metastasis of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and is the most significant
prognostic factor for tumor recurrence decreasing survival by 50%. The
anti-lymphangiogenic properties of mTOR inhibitors are not yet well
understood nor have the effects of rapalogues on tumor-associated
lymphangiogenesis been investigated in HNSCC. Methods: The lymphatic
suppressing effects of rapamycin were evaluated in vitro using lymphatic
endothelial cell lines (SV-LEC; HMEC-1a). An orthotopic model of HNSCC
was used to evaluate anti-lymphangiogenic effects of rapamycin in vivo.
OSC-19 cells were injected into the basolateral tongue of SCID mice.
After 5 days mice were given daily IP injections of vehicle (control
group) or rapamycin at 5 mg/kg. On day 21 after OSC-19 administration
mice were sacrificed and tongues, cervical lymph nodes and serum
collected. The incidence of cervical lymph node metastasis, the number of
tumor-free and tumor-associated lymphatic vessels in mouse lingual
tissue, and expression of pro-lymphangiogenic markers were assessed.
Results: We found that LEC proliferation was significantly reduced by
rapamycin. LEC growth inhibition by rapamycin was linked with decreased
expression of VEGFR-3 in both LECs, and in some HNSCC cell lines.
Rapamycin significantly lowered the fraction of tumor-associated
lymphatic vessels in mouse tongues (p=0.0167) and decreased the number of
metastasis-positive lymph nodes (p=0.04). Rapamycin also significantly
attenuated the extent of metastatic tumor cell spread within the lymph
nodes (pBackground: Tumor cell dissemination to cervical lymph nodes via
the lymphatic system represents the first step in the metastasis of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and is the most significant
prognostic factor for tumor recurrence decreasing survival by 50%. The
anti-lymphangiogenic properties of mTOR inhibitors are not yet well
understood nor have the effects of rapalogues on tumor-associated
lymphangiogenesis been investigated in HNSCC. Methods: The lymphatic
suppressing effects of rapamycin were evaluated in vitro using lymphatic
endothelial cell lines (SV-LEC; HMEC-1a). An orthotopic model of HNSCC
was used to evaluate anti-lymphangiogenic effects of rapamycin in vivo.
OSC-19 cells were injected into the basolateral tongue of SCID mice.
After 5 days mice were given daily IP injections of vehicle (control
group) or rapamycin at 5 mg/kg. On day 21 after OSC-19 administration
mice were sacrificed and tongues, cervical lymph nodes and serum
collected. The incidence of cervical lymph node metastasis, the number of
tumor-free and tumor-associated lymphatic vessels in mouse lingual
tissue, and expression of pro-lymphangiogenic markers were assessed.
Results: We found that LEC proliferation was significantly reduced by
rapamycin. LEC growth inhibition by rapamycin was linked with decreased
expression of VEGFR-3 in both LECs, and in some HNSCC cell lines.
Rapamycin significantly lowered the fraction of tumor-associated
lymphatic vessels in mouse tongues (p=0.0167) and decreased the number of
metastasis-positive lymph nodes (p=0.04). Rapamycin also significantly
attenuated the extent of metastatic tumor cell spread within the lymph
nodes (p<0.0001). Conclusion: The results of this study demonstrate
anti-lymphangiogenic properties of mTOR inhibitors in HNSCC. These
findings provide preclinical data showing that rapalogues exert
anti-lymphatic effects in head and neck cancer via suppressing ofVEGFR-3
expression.

