Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression analysis as a biomarker study for ACTS-CC trial
(TRICC0706), a phase III trial for adjuvant chemotherapy of S-1 and
UFT/LV against stage III colon cancer in Japan


Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a phase III trial designed to validate
non-inferiority of S-1 to UFT/ LV, a standard treatment in Japan as
adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer and the initial safety
report of the trial was reported in ASCO 2011. In biomarker study of
ACTS-CC trial, gene expression levels were studied using formalin fixed
and paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens. Methods: Blocks from resected
colorectal cancer specimens were obtained under informed consent for this
biomarker study from 892 patients enrolled between Apr.2009 and Jan.2010.
Gene expression levels of 11 enzymes (TS, DPD, TP, OPRT, FPGS, GGH, DHFR,
MTHFR, MTHFD, FOLRA, GART), that correlate to 5-FU and folic acid
metabolism, are studied according to Danenberg Tumor ProfileTM method
(Shirota, Y. JCO 2001). Correlation coefficients between gene expressions
of the 11 enzymes were computed using Spearman rank correlation test
(Rs). Results: Gene expression levels were successfully estimated in
521-808 samples (84.0-90.0%, 89.4% in median). Highest Rs was observed
between DPD and TP (0.68. 95% confidence interval; 0.64-0.71).
Classifying Rs value into 3 groups (positive (0.5Background: The ACTS-CC
trial is a phase III trial designed to validate non-inferiority of S-1 to
UFT/ LV, a standard treatment in Japan as adjuvant chemotherapy for stage
III colon cancer and the initial safety report of the trial was reported
in ASCO 2011. In biomarker study of ACTS-CC trial, gene expression levels
were studied using formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens.
Methods: Blocks from resected colorectal cancer specimens were obtained
under informed consent for this biomarker study from 892 patients
enrolled between Apr.2009 and Jan.2010. Gene expression levels of 11
enzymes (TS, DPD, TP, OPRT, FPGS, GGH, DHFR, MTHFR, MTHFD, FOLRA, GART),
that correlate to 5-FU and folic acid metabolism, are studied according
to Danenberg Tumor ProfileTM method (Shirota, Y. JCO 2001). Correlation
coefficients between gene expressions of the 11 enzymes were computed
using Spearman rank correlation test (Rs). Results: Gene expression
levels were successfully estimated in 521-808 samples (84.0-90.0%, 89.4%
in median). Highest Rs was observed between DPD and TP (0.68. 95%
confidence interval; 0.64-0.71). Classifying Rs value into 3 groups
(positive (0.5<), week (0.31-0.50) and negative (0.3 or less)), TS and
OPRT had positive or week correlation with 4 of 7 metabolic enzymes of
folic acid (DHFR, MTHFR, MTHFD, and GART). Conclusions: This is the first
and largest gene expression analysis for metabolic enzymes of 5-FU and
folic acid. Positive correlation was observed between gene expression
level of DPD and TP, which are DNA catabolic enzymes. Gene expression
level of TS and OPRT, which are DNA synthetic enzymes, had correlation
with metabolic enzymes of folic acid.

