Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical evaluation of combined TKI258 and RAD001 in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most lethal cancers.
Signaling pathways including AKT-mTOR axis is often dysregulated in HCC.
RAD001 principally targets at the mTOR complex 1. mTOR inhibition is
reportedly associated with activation of feedback loop and parallel
pathways. TKI258 is a potent tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting the
FGFRs and VEGFRs, which blocks subsequent PI3K/AKT signaling pathways in
cancer cells. In the current study, we aim to study the in-vitro and
in-vivo effects of the drug combination with reference to the parallel
and upstream pathway of AKT-mTOR axis. We have treated the HCC cell line
Hep3B with TKI258 and RAD001. RAD001 could suppress the phosphorylation
of down stream signal mediators of mTOR pathway including p70S6 kinase 1
(S6K) and eukaryotic initiation factor binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and led
to G1 phase arrest. The results demonstrated a significant increase in
suppression of cell proliferation in vitro with the combination of TKI258
(300nM) and RAD001 (either 200nM or 200pM) compared with either drug
alone. Although the addition of the TKI258 only slightly suppressed the
AKT positive feedback loop induced by RAD001, the combination of drugs
could significantly suppress the phosphorylation of mTOR (Ser2448),
ERK1/2 (Ser217/221) and p38 (Thr180/Tyr182) as well as their endogenous
protein expression levels. The expression levels of FGFR1 and FGFR2 were
also suppressed. The overall protein reduction was due to the synergistic
inhibition of p70S6 (Ser240/244) and 4E-BP1 (Ser65) phosphorylation,
which indicated a strong suppression in translation and protein
synthesis. Pro-caspases 3 and PARP cleavage were not observed at 24 hours
and only slightly detected at 48 hours post-treatment, suggesting that
the drug combination did not further increase cytotoxic effects but
mainly increased in cytostatic arrest ability. In Hep3B derived xenograft
model, TKI258 (15mg/ml) and RAD001 (2.5mg/kg) had shown a synergistic
inhibition of tumor growth in volume and weight. In addition, there was a
significant reduction in microvessel density (MVD) in the xenograft,
which indicated an improved effect in angiogenesis inhibition. Our data
showed that the combination of RAD001 and TKI258 were active in
controlling HCC proliferation via double inhibition of both AKT-mTOR axis
and its parallel pathway. Acknowledge: The works are supported by
Novartis Oncology.

