Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A dynamic TGFBR3-JUND expression circuit in single basal-like
breast epithelial cells


Basal-like carcinoma is a subtype of breast cancer that is characterized
by poor prognosis and high intratumor heterogeneity. In basal-like breast
epithelia, we have identified two anticorrelated gene-expression programs
that arise among single extracellular matrix (ECM)-attached cells during
organotypic 3D culture. The first program contains multiple TGF-related
genes including TGFBR3, and its heterogeneous induction is critical to
suppress ductal branching. The second program contains JUND together with
the basal-like marker, KRT5. Homogenizing JUND expression in single cells
leads to 3D acini with bridged lumina that are similar to cribiform
ductal carcinoma in situ. TGFBR3 and JUND together comprise a circuit
that is interconnected via four negative-feedback loops. Computational
modeling of the circuit predicts damped, antiphase oscillations upon
stimulation with endogenous impulses of TGF-like ligand, and we directly
observe these spontaneous responses in 3D culture by live-cell imaging.
The TGFBR3-JUND circuit and its ECM-dependent regulation are remarkably
conserved in early basal-like tumors that heterogeneously express KRT5,
suggesting that asynchronous circuit dynamics are active in this patient
subset. Preliminary studies suggested this intrinsic single-cell
expression circuit might be regulated by a transcription factor, Nrf2,
and a tumor suppressor, menin. Together, breast tumor heterogeneity need
not stem from partial basal-like differentiation and could instead
reflect dynamic toggling of individual cells between expression states.

