Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular and clinicopathological impact of miR-375 deregulation
in prostate cancer


Background: Prostate cancer is a leading cause of tumor mortality. In
order to identify the underlying mechanisms we have analyzed microRNA
(miRNA) expression profiles of primary prostate cancers and non-cancer
prostate tissue. As recently reported by our group, miR-375 was found to
be upregulated in prostate cancer using deep sequencing and microarray
analyses. We now set out to study whether there is an association between
miR-375 expression and the expression of different gene members of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway. Material and Methods:
Expression of miR-375 and genes of the EMT pathway (ZEB1, ZEB2,
N-Cadherin) was measured by qRT-PCR in 26 pairs of prostate cancer and
corresponding non-tumor prostate tissue. Bivariate correlation analyses
of miR-375 and EMT members as well as for miR-375 and clinicopathological
features were carried out. Results: MiR-375 showed a significant
upregulation in prostate cancer using qRT-PCR (p=0.0019, paired student's
t-test), whereas ZEB1, ZEB2, and N-Cadherin were consistently found
downregulated (pBackground: Prostate cancer is a leading cause of tumor
mortality. In order to identify the underlying mechanisms we have
analyzed microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of primary prostate cancers
and non-cancer prostate tissue. As recently reported by our group,
miR-375 was found to be upregulated in prostate cancer using deep
sequencing and microarray analyses. We now set out to study whether there
is an association between miR-375 expression and the expression of
different gene members of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
pathway. Material and Methods: Expression of miR-375 and genes of the EMT
pathway (ZEB1, ZEB2, N-Cadherin) was measured by qRT-PCR in 26 pairs of
prostate cancer and corresponding non-tumor prostate tissue. Bivariate
correlation analyses of miR-375 and EMT members as well as for miR-375
and clinicopathological features were carried out. Results: MiR-375
showed a significant upregulation in prostate cancer using qRT-PCR
(p=0.0019, paired student's t-test), whereas ZEB1, ZEB2, and N-Cadherin
were consistently found downregulated (p<0.05, paired student's t-test).
Applying bivariate correlation analysis, a negative correlation of
miR-375 expression to N-Cadherin, ZEB1, and ZEB2 could be documented
(pBackground: Prostate cancer is a leading cause of tumor mortality. In
order to identify the underlying mechanisms we have analyzed microRNA
(miRNA) expression profiles of primary prostate cancers and non-cancer
prostate tissue. As recently reported by our group, miR-375 was found to
be upregulated in prostate cancer using deep sequencing and microarray
analyses. We now set out to study whether there is an association between
miR-375 expression and the expression of different gene members of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway. Material and Methods:
Expression of miR-375 and genes of the EMT pathway (ZEB1, ZEB2,
N-Cadherin) was measured by qRT-PCR in 26 pairs of prostate cancer and
corresponding non-tumor prostate tissue. Bivariate correlation analyses
of miR-375 and EMT members as well as for miR-375 and clinicopathological
features were carried out. Results: MiR-375 showed a significant
upregulation in prostate cancer using qRT-PCR (p=0.0019, paired student's
t-test), whereas ZEB1, ZEB2, and N-Cadherin were consistently found
downregulated (p<0.05, paired student's t-test). Applying bivariate
correlation analysis, a negative correlation of miR-375 expression to
N-Cadherin, ZEB1, and ZEB2 could be documented (p<0.05, Spearman Rho
test). Furthermore, we could detect an inverse correlation of miR-375
expression to patient age (p=0.002, Spearman Rho test). Remarkably,
miR-375 expression higher than median is significantly correlated to a
lower tumor grade (p=0.011, Fisher's exact test). Conclusion: Expression
of miR-375 is inversely correlated to the expression of N-Cadherin, ZEB1,
and ZEB2. As SLUG is the only member of the EMT pathway, which is a
predicted target of miR-375, we suppose SLUG to constitute the putative
link between miR-375 and EMT. Furthermore, our findings show that
expression of miR-375 is correlated with patient age and tumor grade.

