Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic effect of magnetic nanoparticles and docetaxel on
prostate cancer cells in vitro


Current chemotherapy approaches to prostate cancer need to be improved
because of limitations by lack of specificity and systemic toxicity
although docetaxel-based chemotherapy has been shown to improve the
quality of life in patients with the advanced disease. Nanotechnology has
prompted new and improved materials for biomedical applications with
particular emphasis in therapy and diagnostics. Especially, magnetic
nanoparticles (Fe3O4) have potential applications in drug delivery,
cancer diagnosis and therapy. We have shown that magnetic nanoparticles
would modify the effect of chemotherapy in cancer cells. In this study,
we analyzed the combined effects of docetaxel and magnetic nanoparticles
on prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, DU145, and PC3) and their
mechanisms. The combination of docetaxel and magnetic nanoparticles more
effectively inhibited cancer cell growth and induced apoptosis. Only
magnetic nanoparticles produced reactive oxygen species (ROS), however
did not inhibit cancer cell growth significantly. Magnetic nanoparticles
were also found to have the effect on the expression of ABC transporter
genes, and have the possibility to inhibit the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway.
These results suggest that magnetic nanoparticles may result in favorable
development of current chemotherapy for the advanced disease and leading
to new tumor ablation therapies.

