Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of human nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) as a potential
transcription factor which regulates the gene expression of
Sulfotransferase isoform 1A1 (SULT1A1) in human breast cancer


Sulfotransferase isoform 1A1 (SULT1A1) plays a central role in drug
metabolism. SULT1A1 expression is tissue specific, with little to no
expression in normal breast epithelia but plentiful protein expression in
most breast tumors. Revelation of the regulators of SULT1A1 expression in
breast tissues is important in predicting breast tissue response to
therapeutic agents that are substrates of SULT1A1, particularly tamoxifen
which can be used for both breast cancer treatment and chemoprevention.
In order to identify the appropriate transcription factors that regulate
the gene expression of SULT1A1, we performed transcription factor (TF)
Activation Profiling Plate Array assay (Signosis, Sunnyvale, CA) in
normal breast MCF10A cells and breast cancer ZR-75 cells. TF activation
profile differences in MCF10A cells and ZR-75 cells were quantitatively
analyzed and compared. Out of 48 TFs DNA-binding activities allowed per
plate, 18 TFs activities were at least 1.5 fold higher in ZR75 cells
compared to that of in MCF10A cells. Matching of the 18 TFs to the
possible TF binding consensus sequences in SULT1A1, which were predicted
by software Alibaba 2.0, was performed and we found that nuclear factor 1
(NF-1) and GATA transcription factor 1 (GATA-1) were putative
transcription factors involved in the regulation of SULT1A1 expression.
To further study the relationship between NF-1 and GATA-1 and SULT1A1, we
measured mRNA levels of NF-1, GATA-1, and SULT1A1 using total RNA
isolated from 97 human liver samples. The liver samples were obtained
from 43 female and 54 male health subjects (age range 26-102 year, mean
59.0 years). The real-time RT-PCR results showed that only NF-1, not
GATA-1, mRNA level showed significant correlation with SULT1A1 mRNA level
(r=0.64, pSulfotransferase isoform 1A1 (SULT1A1) plays a central role in
drug metabolism. SULT1A1 expression is tissue specific, with little to no
expression in normal breast epithelia but plentiful protein expression in
most breast tumors. Revelation of the regulators of SULT1A1 expression in
breast tissues is important in predicting breast tissue response to
therapeutic agents that are substrates of SULT1A1, particularly tamoxifen
which can be used for both breast cancer treatment and chemoprevention.
In order to identify the appropriate transcription factors that regulate
the gene expression of SULT1A1, we performed transcription factor (TF)
Activation Profiling Plate Array assay (Signosis, Sunnyvale, CA) in
normal breast MCF10A cells and breast cancer ZR-75 cells. TF activation
profile differences in MCF10A cells and ZR-75 cells were quantitatively
analyzed and compared. Out of 48 TFs DNA-binding activities allowed per
plate, 18 TFs activities were at least 1.5 fold higher in ZR75 cells
compared to that of in MCF10A cells. Matching of the 18 TFs to the
possible TF binding consensus sequences in SULT1A1, which were predicted
by software Alibaba 2.0, was performed and we found that nuclear factor 1
(NF-1) and GATA transcription factor 1 (GATA-1) were putative
transcription factors involved in the regulation of SULT1A1 expression.
To further study the relationship between NF-1 and GATA-1 and SULT1A1, we
measured mRNA levels of NF-1, GATA-1, and SULT1A1 using total RNA
isolated from 97 human liver samples. The liver samples were obtained
from 43 female and 54 male health subjects (age range 26-102 year, mean
59.0 years). The real-time RT-PCR results showed that only NF-1, not
GATA-1, mRNA level showed significant correlation with SULT1A1 mRNA level
(r=0.64, p<0.0001). Therefore, we have identified that NF-1 as a new
strong candidate for SULT1A1 gene expression regulation. The finding has
laid foundation for the study on the effect of NF-1 on SULT1A1 gene
expression, which could provide a mechanistic explanation for the
differential expression of SULT1A1 between normal breast tissue and
breast tumors.

