Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Is development of hepatocellular carcinoma driven by liver homing
signals?


There are a limited number of models to study hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Hepa 1-6 cell line can be used to develop tumors when injected
directly in the liver of C57/BL6 mice. We isolated cells from a tumor
which developed in the liver following the intrasplenic injection of Hepa
1-6 cells and found that the daughter cells led to more systematic
development of tumors. Studies were performed to test the characteristics
of the 2 cell lines. In vivo tumorigenicity was assessed by injecting
cells in the spleen. Minimal cell dose and liver specificity were
assessed at 28 days. Tumors (0,5mm) were counted and alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP) mRNA measured by relative RT-PCR. Cell lines were compared in vitro
for their alpha-1 integrin (ITGa1), beta1-integrin (ITGb1), AFP and
Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule (EpCAM) mRNA expression. Apoptosis was
measured following exposure to cisplatinum [25g/ml]. Invasiveness and
motility were assessed using a modified wound healing assay and a double
layered COL1 hemisphere invasion assay. Cell doubling time (CDT) was
measured by cell count. Intrahepatic tumours developed more quickly (21d
vs. 70d) and more often (66% (4/6) vs. 15% (1/7)) with the daughter cell
line. Tumors first appeared 21 days after intrasplenic injection and
increased steadily thereafter: this was associated with increased AFP
expression in liver homogenates. The minimal cell concentration required
to give raise to visible tumors was 10K with the daughter cell line while
no tumor was observed at 28d with the parental cell line (1M cells). No
extra hepatic tumours were found at any point and with any cell
concentration. However, subcutaneous injection induced hepatic tumours in
every animal only when using the more tumorigenic daughter cell line
(100% 3/3 at 28d). In vitro, the daughter cell line showed increased
resistance to apoptosis when exposed to COL1, did not show increase
proliferation, but were less motile and less invasive. Cell doubling time
was longer with the daughter cell line then with the parental one
(45.5h2.7h vs 34.6h0.4h; pThere are a limited number of models to study
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hepa 1-6 cell line can be used to develop
tumors when injected directly in the liver of C57/BL6 mice. We isolated
cells from a tumor which developed in the liver following the
intrasplenic injection of Hepa 1-6 cells and found that the daughter
cells led to more systematic development of tumors. Studies were
performed to test the characteristics of the 2 cell lines. In vivo
tumorigenicity was assessed by injecting cells in the spleen. Minimal
cell dose and liver specificity were assessed at 28 days. Tumors (0,5mm)
were counted and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) mRNA measured by relative
RT-PCR. Cell lines were compared in vitro for their alpha-1 integrin
(ITGa1), beta1-integrin (ITGb1), AFP and Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) mRNA expression. Apoptosis was measured following
exposure to cisplatinum [25g/ml]. Invasiveness and motility were assessed
using a modified wound healing assay and a double layered COL1 hemisphere
invasion assay. Cell doubling time (CDT) was measured by cell count.
Intrahepatic tumours developed more quickly (21d vs. 70d) and more often
(66% (4/6) vs. 15% (1/7)) with the daughter cell line. Tumors first
appeared 21 days after intrasplenic injection and increased steadily
thereafter: this was associated with increased AFP expression in liver
homogenates. The minimal cell concentration required to give raise to
visible tumors was 10K with the daughter cell line while no tumor was
observed at 28d with the parental cell line (1M cells). No extra hepatic
tumours were found at any point and with any cell concentration. However,
subcutaneous injection induced hepatic tumours in every animal only when
using the more tumorigenic daughter cell line (100% 3/3 at 28d). In
vitro, the daughter cell line showed increased resistance to apoptosis
when exposed to COL1, did not show increase proliferation, but were less
motile and less invasive. Cell doubling time was longer with the daughter
cell line then with the parental one (45.5h2.7h vs 34.6h0.4h; p<0.05).
There was no significant difference in the levels of the pro-apoptotic
Bid, Bak and Bad proteins and in the Bcl-xL anti-apoptotic protein,
ERK1/2 and AKT between the 2 cell lines. On the other hand, the more
aggressive cell line showed almost a tenfold increased expression of
EpCAM (9.772.71 vs 1.050.24), and lower expressions of ITGa1 (0.050.03 vs
1.060.24) and ITGb1 (0.360.14 vs 1.030.16), all these differences being
significant (pThere are a limited number of models to study
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hepa 1-6 cell line can be used to develop
tumors when injected directly in the liver of C57/BL6 mice. We isolated
cells from a tumor which developed in the liver following the
intrasplenic injection of Hepa 1-6 cells and found that the daughter
cells led to more systematic development of tumors. Studies were
performed to test the characteristics of the 2 cell lines. In vivo
tumorigenicity was assessed by injecting cells in the spleen. Minimal
cell dose and liver specificity were assessed at 28 days. Tumors (0,5mm)
were counted and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) mRNA measured by relative
RT-PCR. Cell lines were compared in vitro for their alpha-1 integrin
(ITGa1), beta1-integrin (ITGb1), AFP and Epithelial Cell Adhesion
Molecule (EpCAM) mRNA expression. Apoptosis was measured following
exposure to cisplatinum [25g/ml]. Invasiveness and motility were assessed
using a modified wound healing assay and a double layered COL1 hemisphere
invasion assay. Cell doubling time (CDT) was measured by cell count.
Intrahepatic tumours developed more quickly (21d vs. 70d) and more often
(66% (4/6) vs. 15% (1/7)) with the daughter cell line. Tumors first
appeared 21 days after intrasplenic injection and increased steadily
thereafter: this was associated with increased AFP expression in liver
homogenates. The minimal cell concentration required to give raise to
visible tumors was 10K with the daughter cell line while no tumor was
observed at 28d with the parental cell line (1M cells). No extra hepatic
tumours were found at any point and with any cell concentration. However,
subcutaneous injection induced hepatic tumours in every animal only when
using the more tumorigenic daughter cell line (100% 3/3 at 28d). In
vitro, the daughter cell line showed increased resistance to apoptosis
when exposed to COL1, did not show increase proliferation, but were less
motile and less invasive. Cell doubling time was longer with the daughter
cell line then with the parental one (45.5h2.7h vs 34.6h0.4h; p<0.05).
There was no significant difference in the levels of the pro-apoptotic
Bid, Bak and Bad proteins and in the Bcl-xL anti-apoptotic protein,
ERK1/2 and AKT between the 2 cell lines. On the other hand, the more
aggressive cell line showed almost a tenfold increased expression of
EpCAM (9.772.71 vs 1.050.24), and lower expressions of ITGa1 (0.050.03 vs
1.060.24) and ITGb1 (0.360.14 vs 1.030.16), all these differences being
significant (p<0.05). In conclusion, we observed that HCC cells derived
from the same clone can have strikingly different tumorigenic potential.
Increased expression of the epithelial cell adhesion molecule was
associated with a high potential for intrahepatic tumor development
despite a less aggressive phenotype in vitro. These results suggest that
liver homing signals might be important for the establishment/survival of
HCC.

