Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Array CGH genomic profile of hereditary breast cancer tumors:
Identification of tumor suppressor genes in deleted regions,
determination of promoter hypermethylation and their protein expression
in tumor biopsies


Breast cancer, as other cancer types, is a genetic disease caused by
sequential accumulation of mutations and genomic alterations involving
tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. In this matter, inactivation of
tumor suppressor genes may occur by deletion, promoter hypermethylation
or point mutations. We analyzed by array-CGH tumor DNA from 52 patients
with hereditary breast cancer: 3 BRCA1, 4 BRCA2 and 45 from patients with
no identified mutations (BRCAX). Our analysis revealed that BRCA1 mutated
tumors have different genomic alterations compared to BRCA2 tumors. BRCAX
tumors showed frequent deletions at: 1q21.3 (20%), 1p31.1 and 9q33.1
(18%); and frequent amplifications at 1q23.1 (20%), followed by 1q21.1
and several gains in chromosome 19 (18%). All genes involved in the
deleted or amplified regions were compared with gene expression data in
the ONCOMINE database finding correspondence among genomic alterations
and gene expression. Based on these results, we selected 3 tumor
suppressor genes for promoter methylation and protein expression
analyses: RASSF1A, SLIT2 and WIF1. Methylation analysis through MS-PCR
revealed that RASSF1A promoter was hypermethylated in 67% of hereditary
tumors, and significantly associated to loss of expression (p=0.007, OR
9.6, CI 1.77-52.19). WIF1 promoter was hypermethylated in 68% of tumors
with a significant association to loss of expression (p=0.042, OR 6.4, CI
1.155-35.45). Finally, SLIT2 was found as the most frequently
hypermethylated promoter among tumors (80%) showing loss of expression in
90% of these tumors. Our results indicate that silencing of RASSF1A,
SLIT2 and WIF1 through promoter hypermethylation may have an important
role in hereditary breast tumor development. Fondecyt 1040779 y 1080595.

