Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TWEAK receptor (Fn14) Is a novel target in melanoma:
Characterization of unique targeted therapeutics


Previous studies have indicated that Fn14, the cell surface receptor for
the cytokine TWEAK, is over-expressed in multiple human solid tumor
types, including brain, breast, and lung cancers, and overexpression can
be a negative prognostic indicator. We analyzed a series of melanoma cell
lines and tumor tissue microarrays and detected Fn14 expression in 60% of
the melanoma cell lines, including both B-Raf WT and B-Raf V600E lines.
Fn14 expression was elevated in 178/190 (93.6%) of primary melanoma
specimens and in 87/150 (58%) of melanoma metastases tested. Fn14
expression was not elevated in normal skin tissues. Initial development
and characterization of an immunoconjugate designated ITEM4-rGel
targeting Fn14 receptor has been published (Zhou et al., Mol. Cancer
Ther. 10:1276 (2011)). We have now developed an Fn14-targeted immunotoxin
more suitable for long-term clinical use. Specifically, we generated a
humanized, dimeric single-chain version of ITEM-4 and fused this scFv to
rGel. The resulting anti-Fn14 immunotoxin, designated hSGZ, bound to Fn14
with a Kd of 1.4 nM as determined by Biacore analysis. Confocal
immunofluoresence studies showed that hSGZ specifically and rapidly
(within 2 hrs) internalized into Fn14-expressing MDA-MB-435 melanoma
cells. Cytotoxicity studies showed that hSGZ was highly cytotoxic to a
panel of different melanoma cell lines (IC50 ranged from 0.1 pM to 1.1
nM) and was 2.2 to 2.8 105 fold more potent than free rGel. Treatment of
cells expressing the multidrug resistance protein MDR1 showed no
cross-resistance to the fusion construct in vitro. When hSGZ was combined
with 5-FU, cisplatin, doxorubicin, etoposide or dacarbazine, we found an
additive effect on melanoma cell growth inhibition. Mechanistic studies
showed that hSGZ induced melanoma cell death consistent with a necrotic
mechanism. Additionally, Fn14-targeted immunotoxins increased Fn14
expression and triggered cell signaling events similar to those induced
by the TWEAK ligand. Finally, treatment of mice bearing human melanoma
MDA-MB-435 and breast MDA-MB-231 xenografts with either ITEM4-rGel or
hSGZ showed significant tumor growth inhibition compared to controls
(PPrevious studies have indicated that Fn14, the cell surface receptor
for the cytokine TWEAK, is over-expressed in multiple human solid tumor
types, including brain, breast, and lung cancers, and overexpression can
be a negative prognostic indicator. We analyzed a series of melanoma cell
lines and tumor tissue microarrays and detected Fn14 expression in 60% of
the melanoma cell lines, including both B-Raf WT and B-Raf V600E lines.
Fn14 expression was elevated in 178/190 (93.6%) of primary melanoma
specimens and in 87/150 (58%) of melanoma metastases tested. Fn14
expression was not elevated in normal skin tissues. Initial development
and characterization of an immunoconjugate designated ITEM4-rGel
targeting Fn14 receptor has been published (Zhou et al., Mol. Cancer
Ther. 10:1276 (2011)). We have now developed an Fn14-targeted immunotoxin
more suitable for long-term clinical use. Specifically, we generated a
humanized, dimeric single-chain version of ITEM-4 and fused this scFv to
rGel. The resulting anti-Fn14 immunotoxin, designated hSGZ, bound to Fn14
with a Kd of 1.4 nM as determined by Biacore analysis. Confocal
immunofluoresence studies showed that hSGZ specifically and rapidly
(within 2 hrs) internalized into Fn14-expressing MDA-MB-435 melanoma
cells. Cytotoxicity studies showed that hSGZ was highly cytotoxic to a
panel of different melanoma cell lines (IC50 ranged from 0.1 pM to 1.1
nM) and was 2.2 to 2.8 105 fold more potent than free rGel. Treatment of
cells expressing the multidrug resistance protein MDR1 showed no
cross-resistance to the fusion construct in vitro. When hSGZ was combined
with 5-FU, cisplatin, doxorubicin, etoposide or dacarbazine, we found an
additive effect on melanoma cell growth inhibition. Mechanistic studies
showed that hSGZ induced melanoma cell death consistent with a necrotic
mechanism. Additionally, Fn14-targeted immunotoxins increased Fn14
expression and triggered cell signaling events similar to those induced
by the TWEAK ligand. Finally, treatment of mice bearing human melanoma
MDA-MB-435 and breast MDA-MB-231 xenografts with either ITEM4-rGel or
hSGZ showed significant tumor growth inhibition compared to controls (P<
0.05). Fn14 appears to be an excellent new target for melanoma and the
Fn14-targeting construct hSGZ appears to warrant further development as a
novel therapeutic agent against Fn14-positive tumors. Melanoma lines
appear to be the most sensitive tumor type tested but the reasons for
this are unclear. Additional studies are in progress to investigate the
biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of hSGZ in tumor-bearing mice. This
work was conducted, in part, by the Clayton Foundation for Research
(MGR); and supported by NIH grant NS055126 (JAW) and DOD Breast Cancer
Concept Award BC086135 (JAW).

