Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Insulin-like growth factor 1 promotes cancer cell growth via RAC1
activation in ovarian epithelial cancer cells


Ovarian cancer is the most lethal of all gynecological malignancies, due
in part to the diagnosis at an advanced stage caused by the lack of
specific signs and symptoms and the absence of reliable tests for
screening and early detection. Furthermore, survival is reduced by
recurrence of chemo-resistant tumors. The insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1)/IGF1 receptor (IGFR) signaling system exerts a broad
anti-apoptotic function and plays a crucial role in human cancer
progression, including ovarian cancers. The small GTP-binding protein
RAC1 regulates a diverse array of cellular events, including the control
of cell growth, cytoskeleton reorganization for motility, and the
activation of protein kinases. Although RAC1 is expressed in most
tissues, it can be elevated in tumors at various stages of neoplastic
progression. This study was conducted to explore the role of RAC1 in
IGF1-stimulated ovarian cancer cell growth. While IGFR was expressed in
normal human ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) cells and all OSE cancer
cell lines examined, the IGF1R was over expressed in IGROV1 ovarian
cancer cells. Exposure of IGROV1 cells to IGF1 rapidly (1.0 min) and
p70S6K (T389) (1.0 min); indicating that IGF1 actives PI3K and MAPK
signaling pathways that are known to be important in cell growth. We
observed a maximal effect of IGF1 on IGROV1 cell growth at 50 ng/ml (2.2
fold increase, p1.0 min) and p70S6K (T389) (1.0 min); indicating that
IGF1 actives PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways that are known to be
important in cell growth. We observed a maximal effect of IGF1 on IGROV1
cell growth at 50 ng/ml (2.2 fold increase, p<0.001) after 24 h. In
contrast, exposure of IGROV1 cells to the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 or the
MEK1/2 inhibitor UO126 decreased cell viability. Pull-down assays
revealed that IGF1 stimulated GTP loading of RAC1 in less than 1.0 min
with maximal increases observed after 5 min (2.6 fold, p1.0 min) and
p70S6K (T389) (1.0 min); indicating that IGF1 actives PI3K and MAPK
signaling pathways that are known to be important in cell growth. We
observed a maximal effect of IGF1 on IGROV1 cell growth at 50 ng/ml (2.2
fold increase, p<0.001) after 24 h. In contrast, exposure of IGROV1 cells
to the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 or the MEK1/2 inhibitor UO126 decreased
cell viability. Pull-down assays revealed that IGF1 stimulated GTP
loading of RAC1 in less than 1.0 min with maximal increases observed
after 5 min (2.6 fold, p<0.05). Treatment with the PI3K inhibitor
LY294002 significantly reduced RAC1 activation in response to IGF1.
Pre-treatment of IGROV1 cells with the RAC1 inhibitor (NSC23766) for 1 h
inhibited IGF1-induced activation of RAC1; and decreased cell survival in
a concentration-dependent manner (5- 50 M NSC23766, p1.0 min) and p70S6K
(T389) (1.0 min); indicating that IGF1 actives PI3K and MAPK signaling
pathways that are known to be important in cell growth. We observed a
maximal effect of IGF1 on IGROV1 cell growth at 50 ng/ml (2.2 fold
increase, p<0.001) after 24 h. In contrast, exposure of IGROV1 cells to
the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 or the MEK1/2 inhibitor UO126 decreased cell
viability. Pull-down assays revealed that IGF1 stimulated GTP loading of
RAC1 in less than 1.0 min with maximal increases observed after 5 min
(2.6 fold, p<0.05). Treatment with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002
significantly reduced RAC1 activation in response to IGF1. Pre-treatment
of IGROV1 cells with the RAC1 inhibitor (NSC23766) for 1 h inhibited
IGF1-induced activation of RAC1; and decreased cell survival in a
concentration-dependent manner (5- 50 M NSC23766, p<0.05). The reduction
in viability after 48 hr was accompanied by an increase in apoptotic
cells, cleaved PARP and elevated cytosolic cytochrome C. In contrast,
treatment of HOSE cells with NSC23766 did not alter cell viability. Of
interest, following 6 h treatment of IGROV1 cells with 20-50 M NSC23766
we observed increases in the phosphorylation of Akt (S473), GSK3 (S9),
and p70S6K (T389), suggesting the activation of PI3K/AKT pathway was not
sufficient to rescue cells from death. Furthermore, treatment with
NSC23766 (50 M) and cisplatin (20 M) reduced cell viability to an extent
greater than achieved by either agent alone (p1.0 min) and p70S6K (T389)
(1.0 min); indicating that IGF1 actives PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways
that are known to be important in cell growth. We observed a maximal
effect of IGF1 on IGROV1 cell growth at 50 ng/ml (2.2 fold increase,
p<0.001) after 24 h. In contrast, exposure of IGROV1 cells to the PI3K
inhibitor LY294002 or the MEK1/2 inhibitor UO126 decreased cell
viability. Pull-down assays revealed that IGF1 stimulated GTP loading of
RAC1 in less than 1.0 min with maximal increases observed after 5 min
(2.6 fold, p<0.05). Treatment with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002
significantly reduced RAC1 activation in response to IGF1. Pre-treatment
of IGROV1 cells with the RAC1 inhibitor (NSC23766) for 1 h inhibited
IGF1-induced activation of RAC1; and decreased cell survival in a
concentration-dependent manner (5- 50 M NSC23766, p<0.05). The reduction
in viability after 48 hr was accompanied by an increase in apoptotic
cells, cleaved PARP and elevated cytosolic cytochrome C. In contrast,
treatment of HOSE cells with NSC23766 did not alter cell viability. Of
interest, following 6 h treatment of IGROV1 cells with 20-50 M NSC23766
we observed increases in the phosphorylation of Akt (S473), GSK3 (S9),
and p70S6K (T389), suggesting the activation of PI3K/AKT pathway was not
sufficient to rescue cells from death. Furthermore, treatment with
NSC23766 (50 M) and cisplatin (20 M) reduced cell viability to an extent
greater than achieved by either agent alone (p<0.05). Thus, disruption of
RAC1 activation reduces IGF1-stimulated cell growth, induces apoptosis,
and enhances cell death by anti-cancer agents in ovarian cancer cells.

