Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Efficacy of gemcitabine combined with hyperthermia therapy in the
treatment of unresectable pancreatic cancer: Phase II study


[Background] Pancreatic cancer is an aggressive malignant tumor.
Gemcitabine is the standard first line therapy for pancreatic cancer.
Several gemcitabine based chemotherapy combinations were studied for the
treatment of pancreatic cancer, but these combination therapies showed no
major success over single agent gemcitabine in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer. Hyperthermia has been shown to increase the cytotoxic
effects of some anticancer agents by facilitating drug penetration into
tissue, and Gemcitabine has recently been shown to be a potent
hyperthermic sensitizer in preclinical studies. We conducted a phase II
study to determine the availability of combination therapy with
gemcitabine and hyperthermia in the treatment of unresectable pancreatic
cancer. [Methods] Patients who participated in the study had advanced
pancreatic cancer and their performance status score ware 0-2. The
primary end point was one-year survival rate. And the secondary end
points were safety and response rate. We set the expectation one-year
survival rate to 30% Gemcitabine (1000mg/m2) was given weekly for 3 weeks
(day 1,8,15) in four-week cycles, and hyperthermia (40min/once) weekly.
This schedule was repeated until disease progression. [Result] From
November 2008 to November 2009,18 patients were enrolled in this study.
Median patient age was 64 years old(range 47-78), male/female:10/8 All
patient died until September 2011, and the one year survival rate is
33.3%, exceeded the expected rate. Disease control rates (CR+PR+SD) were
61.1% (PR/SD/PD=2/9/7) Median survival times were 6 months. Adverse
events (Grade3/4) were neutropenia (16.7%), anemia (16.7%), anorexia
(5.6%), gastrointestinal bleeding (5.6%). [Conclusion] Combination
therapy with gemcitabine and hyperthermia is both a safe and effective
treatment in patients with advanced unresectable pancreatic cancer. To
clarify the effects of sequential combination of hyperthermia and
Gemcitabine as compared with Gemcitabine monotherapy, further studies
should be performed, particularly prospective randomized trials.

