Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the tight junctions protein IGSF5 in the colorectal
adenoma-carcinoma sequence


Patients with advanced adenomas are at high risk for the development of
colorectal cancer, but predictors of disease progression remain elusive.
Genome wide association study (GWAS) data from the Adenoma Prevention
with Celecoxib (APC) Trial identified six germline single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that predicted advanced adenoma recurrence. These
SNPs are located in tight linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 21 in or
around the coding sequence for Immunoglobulin Superfamily Member 5
(IGSF5). This transmembrane protein localizes to tight junctions and
modulates cell adhesion with its binding partner MAGI-1. We examined the
expression of IGSF5 in normal colon tissue, adenomas and adenocarcinomas.
By immunohistochemistry, IGSF5 was expressed in both crypt cells and
stromal cells of normal human colon. With progression to adenoma and
adenocarcinoma, IGSF5 expression became more membranous and diffuse in
comparison to normal colon. Immunofluorescence histochemistry (IF) showed
co-localization of IGSF5 with BMI-1 in normal colon crypt cells,
indicating that intestinal stem cells express IGSF5. Pericryptal stromal
cells expressing IGSF5 included both mesenchymal stem cells and
hematopoietic stem cells, but not myofibroblasts, as indicated by IF
colocalization with CD73 and CD34 but not SMA, respectively. These
results suggest that IGSF5 expression is altered in the progression from
colorectal adenoma to carcinoma, and may exert its effects through stem
cell modulation of intestinal homeostasis.

