Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential anti-tumor effect of a small molecule dipeptidyl
peptidase inhibitor, 4175, in colorectal cancer


Introduction: Cetuximab is an effective therapeutic agent in a number of
malignancies. Current data indicates that about 30% of colorectal cancer
patients bearing mutated K-ras do not benefit from this agent. A possible
mechanism of the antitumor effect of cetuximab is mediated through
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). The present study
is aimed to investigate the potential activity of Ari-4175, a broad
-spectrum inibitor of prolyl peptidases and a potent immune stimulator in
the treatment of K-ras mutant colorectal cancer xenografts as a single
agent or in combination with cetuximab. Methods: The effect of Ari-4175
alone or in combination with cetuximab was evaluated both in vitro and in
vivo. In vitro, the proliferation of K-ras mutant colon cancer cell lines
DLD-1 and HCT-116 was detected after three days of culture in the medium
containing various concentrations of Ari-4175 or cetuximab. In vivo, nude
mice bearing DLD-1 or HCT-116 xenograft tumors were randomly divided into
four groups, control, Ari-4175 alone, cetuximab alone and Ari-4175 plus
cetuximab. Ari-4175 was administered orally at 100 ug, q.d or b.i.d and
cetuximab was injected i.p at 200 ug per week. Tumor measurements were
conducted twice a week. Peripheral blood was collected from the mice
before the treatment or after 7 to 14 days of the treatment. CD16
expression on NK cells was monitored by flow cytometry. Results: Ari-4175
(10 nM 200 uM) alone or in combination with cetuximab did not show
significant cytotoxicity on either DLD-1 or HCT-116 in cell culture.
However, the growth of both DLD-1 and HCT-116 tumors were significantly
blocked by the application of Ari-4175 in a dose-dependent manner. The
combination of Ari-4175 with cetuximab lead to a further decrease in
tumor size although not statistically significant, probably due to lower
number of animals. Cetuximab alone did not show any therapeutic effect on
HCT-116 xenograft but did have moderate efficacy on DLD-1 tumors.
Treatment with Ari-4175 also increased the level of CD16 on mouse NK
cells. Conclusion: The prolyl peptidase inhibitor, Ari-4175, showed
anti-tumor effect in K-ras mutant colorectal cancer xengrafts when given
alone or in combination with cetuximab. The therapeutic effect of 4175
might partially be due to the augmentation of ADCC through elevating
expression of CD16 (FcRIIIA) on NK cells. Our study provides the basis of
testing Ari-4175 in a clinical trial.

