Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of automated and manual RNA isolation from stabilized
peripheral blood samples (PBL) for expression analysis of colorectal
cancer patients


Background and aims: PBL based molecular diagnostics requires automated
sample processing and evaluation of the isolated RNA for RT-PCR analysis.
Our aim was to compare the automated PBL RNA isolation on MagNA Pure 96
with conventional manual RNA isolation by the PAXgene Blood RNA kit and
to determine the purity, recovery, RNA integrity (RIN) and sensitivity of
downstream RT-PCR applications. Materials and Methods: PBL samples were
taken from 25 CRC and 19 healthy normal patients into PAXgene Blood RNA
Tubes (PreAnalytix). Total RNA was manually isolated using the PAXgene
Blood RNA Kit (Qiagen) for 2 blood samples of each patient. In parallel,
the MagNA Pure 96 Cellular RNA Kit LV and MagNA Pure 96 instrument (MP96)
(Roche) were applied for total RNA extraction from the other 2 blood
samples of each patient. Total RNA concentration was measured using a
NanoDrop spectrophotometer. RIN was determined on a Bioanalyzer 2100
(Agilent) using the RNA6000 Nano Kit. Reverse transcription was carried
out from 1ug total RNA using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Roche). The expression of 6 CRC markers from previous microarray
analysis (ASGR2, CLIP1, ARHGAP18, 1569263_at, C19orf43, MALAT1) was
determined by quantitative real-time PCR on LightCycler 480 System
(Roche). Results: The MP96 isolation resulted in higher RNA yields (MP96:
5.992.04 ug/tube; manual: 5.652.75 ug/tube). The purity OD260/280 of
manually isolated samples (2.09 0.03) was equal to that of MP96 isolated
ones (2.01 0.05), all samples fulfilled the requirement. The OD230/260
was significantly better in case of MP96 isolated samples (1.85 0.23)
compared to manually isolated ones (1.52 0.57) (pBackground and aims: PBL
based molecular diagnostics requires automated sample processing and
evaluation of the isolated RNA for RT-PCR analysis. Our aim was to
compare the automated PBL RNA isolation on MagNA Pure 96 with
conventional manual RNA isolation by the PAXgene Blood RNA kit and to
determine the purity, recovery, RNA integrity (RIN) and sensitivity of
downstream RT-PCR applications. Materials and Methods: PBL samples were
taken from 25 CRC and 19 healthy normal patients into PAXgene Blood RNA
Tubes (PreAnalytix). Total RNA was manually isolated using the PAXgene
Blood RNA Kit (Qiagen) for 2 blood samples of each patient. In parallel,
the MagNA Pure 96 Cellular RNA Kit LV and MagNA Pure 96 instrument (MP96)
(Roche) were applied for total RNA extraction from the other 2 blood
samples of each patient. Total RNA concentration was measured using a
NanoDrop spectrophotometer. RIN was determined on a Bioanalyzer 2100
(Agilent) using the RNA6000 Nano Kit. Reverse transcription was carried
out from 1ug total RNA using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Roche). The expression of 6 CRC markers from previous microarray
analysis (ASGR2, CLIP1, ARHGAP18, 1569263_at, C19orf43, MALAT1) was
determined by quantitative real-time PCR on LightCycler 480 System
(Roche). Results: The MP96 isolation resulted in higher RNA yields (MP96:
5.992.04 ug/tube; manual: 5.652.75 ug/tube). The purity OD260/280 of
manually isolated samples (2.09 0.03) was equal to that of MP96 isolated
ones (2.01 0.05), all samples fulfilled the requirement. The OD230/260
was significantly better in case of MP96 isolated samples (1.85 0.23)
compared to manually isolated ones (1.52 0.57) (p<0.0001). The RNA
integrity was acceptable in both isolation method, however the manual
protocol provided more intact RNA with slightly higher RNA integrity
numbers (RIN manual: 9,19 0,26; RIN MP96: 8,25 0,35; pBackground and
aims: PBL based molecular diagnostics requires automated sample
processing and evaluation of the isolated RNA for RT-PCR analysis. Our
aim was to compare the automated PBL RNA isolation on MagNA Pure 96 with
conventional manual RNA isolation by the PAXgene Blood RNA kit and to
determine the purity, recovery, RNA integrity (RIN) and sensitivity of
downstream RT-PCR applications. Materials and Methods: PBL samples were
taken from 25 CRC and 19 healthy normal patients into PAXgene Blood RNA
Tubes (PreAnalytix). Total RNA was manually isolated using the PAXgene
Blood RNA Kit (Qiagen) for 2 blood samples of each patient. In parallel,
the MagNA Pure 96 Cellular RNA Kit LV and MagNA Pure 96 instrument (MP96)
(Roche) were applied for total RNA extraction from the other 2 blood
samples of each patient. Total RNA concentration was measured using a
NanoDrop spectrophotometer. RIN was determined on a Bioanalyzer 2100
(Agilent) using the RNA6000 Nano Kit. Reverse transcription was carried
out from 1ug total RNA using Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Roche). The expression of 6 CRC markers from previous microarray
analysis (ASGR2, CLIP1, ARHGAP18, 1569263_at, C19orf43, MALAT1) was
determined by quantitative real-time PCR on LightCycler 480 System
(Roche). Results: The MP96 isolation resulted in higher RNA yields (MP96:
5.992.04 ug/tube; manual: 5.652.75 ug/tube). The purity OD260/280 of
manually isolated samples (2.09 0.03) was equal to that of MP96 isolated
ones (2.01 0.05), all samples fulfilled the requirement. The OD230/260
was significantly better in case of MP96 isolated samples (1.85 0.23)
compared to manually isolated ones (1.52 0.57) (p<0.0001). The RNA
integrity was acceptable in both isolation method, however the manual
protocol provided more intact RNA with slightly higher RNA integrity
numbers (RIN manual: 9,19 0,26; RIN MP96: 8,25 0,35; p<0.0001). No
significant RIN differences were detected between prospective and
archived samples. Comparison of both extraction methods and evaluation by
RT-PCR showed a linear regression (r = 0.98). In real-time PCR
experiments, ARHGAP18 (spec.:80%, sens.:75%) and ASGR2 (spec.:70%,
sens.:75%) were proved to be the best differentiating individual markers.
The CTs of the RNA extracted by MP96 were lower than those of the manual
extraction (means higher expression) reflecting the higher mRNA
yield/ratio of the MP96 method. Conclusion: Automated RNA isolation from
stabilized PBL samples on MP96 device provides a high quality, purity and
yield of total RNA. The CTs of the RNA extracted by MP96 were better than
those of the manual extraction. The MP96 extraction is a fully automated,
fast and reliable method with 96 RNA extractions within 85 min, compared
to the equally precise, but time consuming manual extraction by the
PAXgene Blood RNA kit.

