Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICGC PedBrain Tumor - Next-generation sequencing identifies novel
subgroup-specific mutations and copy number aberrations in medulloblastoma


Introduction: The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) is a
worldwide network aiming to provide comprehensive molecular genetic
profiles of 50 clinically and societally important tumors. A major focus
of the ICGC PedBrain Tumor project is medulloblastoma (MB) - the most
common malignant brain tumor in childhood. Importantly, recent work has
shown that MB is not a single disease, but is in fact comprised of 4
distinct molecular subgroups (WNT, SHH, Group 3, Group 4). Using an
integrative next-generation sequencing-based approach, we have
investigated tumorigenic events underlying medulloblastoma, with the aim
of identifying novel diagnostic or prognostic markers, and therapeutic
targets. Methods: The whole genome of 50 tumor-normal DNA pairs, plus the
whole exome or 2,500 target genes in a further 100 sample pairs from
different histological and transcriptomic subgroups, was sequenced on an
Illumina HiSeq platform. Sequencing-based high-resolution copy-number
data was also generated for all cases. Results: Overall, a smaller number
of non-synonymous somatic mutations was seen than in most adult
malignancies. The number of somatic changes also clearly showed a
positive correlation with patient age, suggesting either longer-term
selection for more weakly transforming alterations, or the acquisition of
additional passenger mutations in tumors which grew over a longer period.
Whilst some point mutations and small InDels affected known MB or
cancer-related genes (e.g. CTNNB1, PTCH1, MLL2), the vast majority were
in genes which have not previously been implicated in medulloblastoma.
Furthermore, even the most recurrently altered genes were mutated in
Introduction: The International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) is a
worldwide network aiming to provide comprehensive molecular genetic
profiles of 50 clinically and societally important tumors. A major focus
of the ICGC PedBrain Tumor project is medulloblastoma (MB) - the most
common malignant brain tumor in childhood. Importantly, recent work has
shown that MB is not a single disease, but is in fact comprised of 4
distinct molecular subgroups (WNT, SHH, Group 3, Group 4). Using an
integrative next-generation sequencing-based approach, we have
investigated tumorigenic events underlying medulloblastoma, with the aim
of identifying novel diagnostic or prognostic markers, and therapeutic
targets. Methods: The whole genome of 50 tumor-normal DNA pairs, plus the
whole exome or 2,500 target genes in a further 100 sample pairs from
different histological and transcriptomic subgroups, was sequenced on an
Illumina HiSeq platform. Sequencing-based high-resolution copy-number
data was also generated for all cases. Results: Overall, a smaller number
of non-synonymous somatic mutations was seen than in most adult
malignancies. The number of somatic changes also clearly showed a
positive correlation with patient age, suggesting either longer-term
selection for more weakly transforming alterations, or the acquisition of
additional passenger mutations in tumors which grew over a longer period.
Whilst some point mutations and small InDels affected known MB or
cancer-related genes (e.g. CTNNB1, PTCH1, MLL2), the vast majority were
in genes which have not previously been implicated in medulloblastoma.
Furthermore, even the most recurrently altered genes were mutated in <20%
of samples overall, although several showed a clear enrichment in
distinct subgroups. Pathway analysis revealed chromatin modification as
one of the most frequently altered cellular processes, with hits in
multiple pathway members. Novel copy-number alterations were also
identified. For example, a pattern of catastrophic chromosome shattering
(chromothripsis) was observed almost exclusively in the SHH tumor
subgroup. Conclusion: Next-generation sequencing of this large tumor
cohort has provided a number of new insights into this deadly pediatric
tumor. The overriding pattern is one of enormous heterogeneity, but
integration with molecular subgrouping shows clear enrichment of certain
alterations. This first stage of the ICGC PedBrain project has
demonstrated the power of next-gen sequencing approaches to reveal
significant new insights, providing a number of novel targets for
potential therapeutic intervention. It also, however, indicates the
importance of personalised approaches to treatment optimisation, and
shows the scale of the coming challenge in terms of functionally
validating the huge number of novel mutations.

