Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatitis B virus X protein interacts with PARP1 that inhibits DNA
repair


Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is strongly associated with the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Among the HBV viral proteins, X protein
(HBx) is regarded as a major risk factor of HCC. HBx contributes to HCC
development through regulating expression of many host or viral genes and
interacting with other cellular proteins. In this study, proteins that
interact with HBx were analyzed by immunoprecipitation and subsequent
LC/MS/MS. We identified 60 HBx interacting proteins that function in a
wide spectrum of biology. Among these proteins, we were interested in
PARP1, Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, a crucial factor in base excision
repair (BER) pathway, since HBx was known to inhibit DNA repair capacity
in cancer cells. Therefore, we characterized the cross-talk between HBx
and PARP-1. HBx and PARP-1 colocalized in the nucleus and they are
physically associated. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that
the catalytic domain of PARP-1 bound to HBx. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that HBx inhibited the recruitment of DNA
damage induced by paraquat treatment. HBx overexpression significantly
inhibited the protein expression of the DNA damage response factors that
respond to the paraquat-induced oxidative stress. Finally, HBx further
enhanced the level of 8-OHdG, the marker of DNA damage, under oxidative
stress. Together, these data suggest that the interaction between HBx and
PARP1 inhibits DNA repair, which could result in onset of
hepatocarcinogenesis.

