Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gastrokine 1 functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating
inflammatory mediators


Gastrokine 1 (GKN1) plays an important role in the gastric mucosal
defense mechanisms and also acts as a functional gastric tumor
suppressor. The specific aim of this study was to determine the
inflammatory mediator regulation underlying GKN1 activity in the tumor
development/progression of gastric cancer. We examined the effect of GKN1
on expression of inflammatory mediators including NF-B, COX-2, and
cytokines in GKN1-transfected and recombinant GKN1-treated AGS gastric
cancer cells by western blot and real time RT-PCR. Lymphocyte migration
and cell viability were also analyzed in AGS cells after being treated
with GKN1 and inflammatory mediators by transwell chemotaxis and MTT
assay, respectively. In GKN1-transfected AGS cells, we observed
inactivation and reduced expression of NF-B and COX-2. Ectopic GKN1
expression induced the production of inflammatory mediators including
IL-8 and -17A, but decreased IL-6 and IL-10 expressions. GKN1 also
functions as a chemoattractant in migration of Jurkat T cells and
peripheral B lymphocytes in transwell assay. In addition, GKN1
significantly inhibited cell viability, whereas treatment of IL-10, IL-17
and TNF- in AGS cells did not show significant difference in cell
viability. These data suggest that the GKN1 gene may play an important
role in the regulation of inflammatory mediators in the tumor
development/progression of gastric cancer.

