Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptome sequencing identifies oncogenic microRNA signatures
that interact with NF-kappaB, TP53 and Notch signaling in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


MicroRNA dysregulation has been shown to be nearly universal in cancer
biology, driving oncogenic signaling networks. However, microRNA mediated
global regulatory mechanisms underlying malignant phenotypes of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) remain unclear. In this study, we
have performed genome-wide small RNA sequencing on a panel of nine HNSCC
cell lines and three normal primary oral keratinocyte cell lines, as well
as matched primary tumor and normal tissues using the SOLiD parallel
sequencing platform. A panel of microRNAs with altered expression was
identified, including several novel oncogenic microRNAs which are
upregulated in parallel with altered activation of NF-kB c-REL, TP53
family members Np63 and TAp73, and involved in the down-modulation of p53
and Notch1, two genes most often mutated or inactivated in HNSCC. To
examine the hypothesis that these microRNAs could potentially be
regulated by NF-B and p53 pathways, NF-B inducer TNF- was used to treat
an HNSCC cell line overexpressing mtTP53, Np63 and TAp73. Genome-wide
small RNA sequencing revealed significant changes in microRNA expression
modulated by TNF- that overlaps with the panel of constitutively
dysregulated microRNAs in HNSCC. Furthermore, genome-wide ChIP-sequencing
revealed that TNF- modulated DNA binding activities of c-REL, Np63 and
TAp73 aligned within the regulatory regions of several differentially
expressed microRNAs. Modulation of these microRNAs with anti-miR
repression reduced proliferation and motility in HNSCC cell lines, which
confirmed the oncogenic activity of the microRNAs and their potential for
therapeutic targeting.

