Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypoxic regulation of RIO kinase 3 promotes cell migration and
invasion


RIO kinase 3 (RIOK3) is an atypical serine/threonine protein kinase that
is located on a focal amplification at 18q11 observed in several cancer
subtypes. Dysregulated expression of RIOK3 has been implicated in
migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells (Kimmelman et al.,
2008). We identified increased RIOK3 expression in microarray analysis of
MCF7 cells exposed to severe hypoxia (RIO kinase 3 (RIOK3) is an atypical
serine/threonine protein kinase that is located on a focal amplification
at 18q11 observed in several cancer subtypes. Dysregulated expression of
RIOK3 has been implicated in migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer
cells (Kimmelman et al., 2008). We identified increased RIOK3 expression
in microarray analysis of MCF7 cells exposed to severe hypoxia (<0.01%
O2) for 24 h. Given the importance of intratumoural hypoxia in promoting
cell invasion and metastasis we hypothesised that RIOK3 may contribute to
the enhanced migratory phenotype observed in hypoxia. The expression of
RIOK3 mRNA was increased 3-9 fold in a panel of cell lines (MCF7,
MDA-MB-231, HCT 116 and U-87 MG) following exposure to 0.1% O2 for 48 h.
Likewise, RIOK3 protein levels were also increased in each of the cell
lines after 24-48 h at 0.1% O2. Knockdown of either HIF-1 or HIF-2 using
siRNA reduced the hypoxic up-regulation of RIOK3, suggesting that RIOK3
transcription is mediated by both HIF-1 and HIF-2. To investigate RIOK3
expression in tissue, immunohistochemistry was carried out on tumour
spheroids. A modest increase in RIOK3 expression was observed in the
hypoxic, pimonidazole-binding area adjacent to the necrotic core.
Noticeably, the RIOK3 stain in these hypoxic regions relocalised to the
cell membrane, in contrast to the predominantly cytoplasmic localisation
in cells located in the oxygenated rim of the spheroid suggesting a role
in cytoskeletal organisation. Depletion of RIOK3 using siRNA (siRIOK3)
caused MDA-MB-231 cells to become long and spindle-shaped with a
reduction of the number of lamellipodia, confirming a role for RIOK3 in
cytoskeletal organisation. In the scratch wound assay, siRIOK3 caused a
modest reduction in MDA-MB-231 migration in normoxic conditions but
strongly inhibited migration in hypoxia. Likewise, MDA-MB-231 invasion
through Matrigel was increased approximately 7-fold by 1% O2 and this
effect was completely abolished in siRIOK3 cells. To investigate the role
of RIOK3 in invasion and metastasis in vivo we utilised a zebrafish
tumour model (Rouhi et al., 2010). Following implantation into the
perivitelline cavity of developing embryos, metastasis of siRIOK3 cells
was significantly reduced compared with control siRNA-transfected
MDA-MB-231 cells resulting in 49% less disseminated cells and foci (P RIO
kinase 3 (RIOK3) is an atypical serine/threonine protein kinase that is
located on a focal amplification at 18q11 observed in several cancer
subtypes. Dysregulated expression of RIOK3 has been implicated in
migration and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells (Kimmelman et al.,
2008). We identified increased RIOK3 expression in microarray analysis of
MCF7 cells exposed to severe hypoxia (<0.01% O2) for 24 h. Given the
importance of intratumoural hypoxia in promoting cell invasion and
metastasis we hypothesised that RIOK3 may contribute to the enhanced
migratory phenotype observed in hypoxia. The expression of RIOK3 mRNA was
increased 3-9 fold in a panel of cell lines (MCF7, MDA-MB-231, HCT 116
and U-87 MG) following exposure to 0.1% O2 for 48 h. Likewise, RIOK3
protein levels were also increased in each of the cell lines after 24-48
h at 0.1% O2. Knockdown of either HIF-1 or HIF-2 using siRNA reduced the
hypoxic up-regulation of RIOK3, suggesting that RIOK3 transcription is
mediated by both HIF-1 and HIF-2. To investigate RIOK3 expression in
tissue, immunohistochemistry was carried out on tumour spheroids. A
modest increase in RIOK3 expression was observed in the hypoxic,
pimonidazole-binding area adjacent to the necrotic core. Noticeably, the
RIOK3 stain in these hypoxic regions relocalised to the cell membrane, in
contrast to the predominantly cytoplasmic localisation in cells located
in the oxygenated rim of the spheroid suggesting a role in cytoskeletal
organisation. Depletion of RIOK3 using siRNA (siRIOK3) caused MDA-MB-231
cells to become long and spindle-shaped with a reduction of the number of
lamellipodia, confirming a role for RIOK3 in cytoskeletal organisation.
In the scratch wound assay, siRIOK3 caused a modest reduction in
MDA-MB-231 migration in normoxic conditions but strongly inhibited
migration in hypoxia. Likewise, MDA-MB-231 invasion through Matrigel was
increased approximately 7-fold by 1% O2 and this effect was completely
abolished in siRIOK3 cells. To investigate the role of RIOK3 in invasion
and metastasis in vivo we utilised a zebrafish tumour model (Rouhi et
al., 2010). Following implantation into the perivitelline cavity of
developing embryos, metastasis of siRIOK3 cells was significantly reduced
compared with control siRNA-transfected MDA-MB-231 cells resulting in 49%
less disseminated cells and foci (P < 0.01). In addition to genomic
amplification, we have demonstrated that HIF-dependent increased
expression of RIOK3 occurs and contributes to cell migration and invasion
in hypoxia. References: Kimmelman et al., (2008) PNAS 105(49): 19372-7
Rouhi et al., (2010) Nat Protoc. 5(12): 1911-8

