Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple testing in a phase II trial design for the detection of
tumor subtypes


Tumor subtypes may be especially responsive to a particular treatment.
Phase II designs that incorporate tumor subtypes typically require
prospective tumor subtyping and stratified patient enrollment. These
features are cumbersome, discourage patient and investigator
participation, and select for patients with relatively indolent disease
who can wait for subtyping results. Previously we described a two stage
phase II design that permits tumor subtyping at the end of stage 1 and
that does not require stratified enrollment (Clin Cancer Res
2011;17:5538). In this design results from stage 1 are used to select an
appropriate stage 2 objective. The stage 2 objective may be either to
estimate the response rate of either the tumor or a subtype or a formal
test of the hypothesis that the response rate for a subtype is greater
than the overall response rate. Previously, although our design
accommodated multiple subtypes in stage 1, it allowed further testing of
only a single subtype in stage 2. Here we expand upon the previous design
by describing a method to evaluate multiple tumor subtypes in stage 2
with appropriate adjustments for multiple testing. As there are practical
limits on sample size, these adjustments tend to reduce power. We
identify strategies to limit loss of power by taking advantage of tumor
biology. For example, when tumor subtypes are mutually exclusive or
nested, some comparisons can be made without further alpha spending. We
explore the promise of our approach for the efficient identification of
clinically significant tumor subtypes more responsive to a specific
targeted therapy.

