Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial targeting photosensitizer-lipophilic cation
conjugates for photodynamic therapy


Mitochondrion of a living cell plays a pivotal role in apoptosis.
Targeting the mitochondria of cancer cell for the induction of apoptosis
in photodynamic therapy (PDT) has gained importance. Cancer cells have
higher plasma and mitochondrial membrane potential compared to normal
cells, consequently delocalized lipophilic cations (DLCs) tend to
accumulate more in them than in normal cells. In PDT photosensitizers can
be specifically delivered to the mitochondria of cancerous cell by
conjugating them with DLCs. Three conjugates: CMP-TPP (a
porphyrin-triphenyl phosphene monocation conjugate) and CMP-(TPP)2 (a
porphyrin- triphenyl phosphene dication conjugate), CMP-Rh (a porphyrin
-rhodamine monocation conjugate) were synthesized as mitochondria
targeting photosensitizers. The conjugates were synthesized by
conjugating a core modified porphyrin (CMP-TPP) to either 1 or 2
triphenyl phosphene (TPP) molecules or rhodamine B (Rh B) respectively
via a saturated hydrocarbon linker. To evaluate the efficiency of the
conjugates, the photophysical properties like fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET in CMP-Rh) and singlet oxygen generation was
compared to that of the unconjugated CMP. Potent in vitro photodynamic
activity was observed in Colon 26 cells upon treatment with CMP
conjugates and exposure to 690 nm diode laser light source (5.6 mW/cm2
for 30 min, 10.8 J/cm2). No significant darktotoxicity was observed in
cells treated up to 5 M of the conjugates. The conjugates showed
approximately 12-14 times higher uptake in Colon 26 cells compared to
unconjugated porphyrin. Further, sub-cellular localization, comparison of
preferential uptake by cancerous cells versus normal cells, in vivo
bio-distribution, PDT in BALB/c mice will be discussed.

