Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Periprostatic fat from obese patients promotes prostate cancer
growth


Background: Obesity, particularly visceral obesity, increases the risk of
prostate cancer (PCa) progression. However, the mechanism of this remains
unclear. Here, we hypothesized that the visceral periprostatic fat (PPF)
from obese PCa patients stimulates progression as compared to
subcutaneous fat (SQF) or PPF from lean patients. Methods: PPF and SQF
were collected from PCa patients. MTT assays were performed on
endothelial and PC-3 PCa cells to test proliferative activity in explant
culture tissue conditioned media (CM). Angiogenesis was evaluated ex vivo
using MR to generate T2 relaxation times from a series of T2-weighted
spin-echo images (Bruker 14.1 T imager). Results: PPF CM from an obese
patient increased endothelial cell proliferation 5 times that of PPF CM
from a lean patient (PBackground: Obesity, particularly visceral obesity,
increases the risk of prostate cancer (PCa) progression. However, the
mechanism of this remains unclear. Here, we hypothesized that the
visceral periprostatic fat (PPF) from obese PCa patients stimulates
progression as compared to subcutaneous fat (SQF) or PPF from lean
patients. Methods: PPF and SQF were collected from PCa patients. MTT
assays were performed on endothelial and PC-3 PCa cells to test
proliferative activity in explant culture tissue conditioned media (CM).
Angiogenesis was evaluated ex vivo using MR to generate T2 relaxation
times from a series of T2-weighted spin-echo images (Bruker 14.1 T
imager). Results: PPF CM from an obese patient increased endothelial cell
proliferation 5 times that of PPF CM from a lean patient (P<0.01). In
contrast, SQF CM, from lean or obese patients, showed only minimal
activity. When tested on PC-3 cells, SQF CM from obese or lean patients
only weakly promoted proliferation. In contrast, PPF CM significantly
induced proliferation; however, obese PPF CM was significantly higher
than that of lean PPF CM (PBackground: Obesity, particularly visceral
obesity, increases the risk of prostate cancer (PCa) progression.
However, the mechanism of this remains unclear. Here, we hypothesized
that the visceral periprostatic fat (PPF) from obese PCa patients
stimulates progression as compared to subcutaneous fat (SQF) or PPF from
lean patients. Methods: PPF and SQF were collected from PCa patients. MTT
assays were performed on endothelial and PC-3 PCa cells to test
proliferative activity in explant culture tissue conditioned media (CM).
Angiogenesis was evaluated ex vivo using MR to generate T2 relaxation
times from a series of T2-weighted spin-echo images (Bruker 14.1 T
imager). Results: PPF CM from an obese patient increased endothelial cell
proliferation 5 times that of PPF CM from a lean patient (P<0.01). In
contrast, SQF CM, from lean or obese patients, showed only minimal
activity. When tested on PC-3 cells, SQF CM from obese or lean patients
only weakly promoted proliferation. In contrast, PPF CM significantly
induced proliferation; however, obese PPF CM was significantly higher
than that of lean PPF CM (P<0.05). Interestingly, the MR data revealed
key differences between PPF and SQF and between lean and obese fat (Table
1). In all patients, the PPF T2 was lower than that of the SQF
(PBackground: Obesity, particularly visceral obesity, increases the risk
of prostate cancer (PCa) progression. However, the mechanism of this
remains unclear. Here, we hypothesized that the visceral periprostatic
fat (PPF) from obese PCa patients stimulates progression as compared to
subcutaneous fat (SQF) or PPF from lean patients. Methods: PPF and SQF
were collected from PCa patients. MTT assays were performed on
endothelial and PC-3 PCa cells to test proliferative activity in explant
culture tissue conditioned media (CM). Angiogenesis was evaluated ex vivo
using MR to generate T2 relaxation times from a series of T2-weighted
spin-echo images (Bruker 14.1 T imager). Results: PPF CM from an obese
patient increased endothelial cell proliferation 5 times that of PPF CM
from a lean patient (P<0.01). In contrast, SQF CM, from lean or obese
patients, showed only minimal activity. When tested on PC-3 cells, SQF CM
from obese or lean patients only weakly promoted proliferation. In
contrast, PPF CM significantly induced proliferation; however, obese PPF
CM was significantly higher than that of lean PPF CM (P<0.05).
Interestingly, the MR data revealed key differences between PPF and SQF
and between lean and obese fat (Table 1). In all patients, the PPF T2 was
lower than that of the SQF (P<0.01). And, the PPF T2 from obese patients
was lower than that of lean patients. A lower T2 reflects elevated
hemoglobin levels and thus could serve as an indirect measure of
vascularity. And, our data suggest that vascularity is increased in obese
PPF as compared to SQF and lean PPF tissues. Conclusions: Our data reveal
that PPF has increased angiogenic and tumorigenic capacity as compared to
SQF and this potential is markedly increased by the presence of obesity.
Adipokines and/or other molecules expressed by the PPF may modify the PCa
microenvironment to potentiate tumor growth. Our results also support the
potential use of MR clinically as a non-invasive test of the angiogenic
potential of PPF in PCa patients.


