Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profiling potential for human breast cancer
diagnosis using a bead-based microRNA-specific capturing method


MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a family of small, endogenous, non-coding (17-24
nucleotides) nucleic acids, were initially discovered in 1993, but the
discovery of a second miRNA led to their use as molecular markers of
disease and potential therapeutic targets. MiRNAs regulate RNA
translation, play a role in cell proliferation, control timing of
organism development, and are associated with carcinogenesis. Because of
their regulatory function in cell differentiation and renewal during
physiologic and malignant conditions, miRNAs are emerging as a new class
of effective biomarkers for cancer research. The miRNA expression
profiling of tumor cells will allow for the identification of prognostic
markers to indicate potential targets for patient- or disease-specific
therapies. Three criteria important for profiling miRNAs are ease of use,
simplicity and sensitivity. We have designed and developed a new method
to quickly extract and purify specific miRNAs for detection using our
current reverse transcription and real-time quantitative PCR workflows.
The method involved 1m-diameter magnetic beads conjugated with anti-miRNA
oligoncleotides to capture these select miRNA targets from blood, plasma,
and other tissues. The miRNAs were then transcribed into cDNA and
subsequently used as templates for TaqMan qRT-PCR analysis. We used this
method to evaluate the miRNA signatures from normal and cancerous human
breast modeled by cell lines and represented by formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissues.

