Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PET imaging of c-Met expression in non-human primates using
[18F]AH113804


[18F]AH113804 is a peptide based molecular imaging agent with high
affinity for the human c-Met receptor. The objective of this study was to
investigate the biodistribution, specific uptake and elimination of
[18F]AH113804 in the non-human primate. Cynomolgus monkey (Macaca
fascicularis) was selected since [18F]AH113804 retains high affinity to
c-Met in this species. The route of administration was intravenous as
this is the route of administration in humans. The target compound was
prepared in a two-step synthesis route starting with synthesis of
4-[18F]fluorobenzaldehyde which was reacted with the peptide precursor to
produce the corresponding oxime. Following semipreparative HPLC
purification the pure product was obtained. Frozen section
autoradiography using Rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) liver (relatively
high c-Met expression) and muscle (relatively low c-Met) was performed in
PBS buffer with [18F]AH113804 (2.5 kBq/ml) and with and without 0.5 g/ml
of AH113804 to establish specific binding in vitro. In vivo dynamic and
repeated whole body PET/CT [18F]AH113804 imaging was performed (GE
Discovery16 ST scanner, General Electric, USA), in female Cynomolgus
monkeys (n=3) before and after administration of 0.15 mg/ml AH113804 or
AH112361 (a scrambled peptide i.e. a negative control). The binding of
[18F]AH113804 in Rhesus monkey liver sections was blocked by 40%
following co-incubation of unlabelled AH113804 (>1000-fold excess)
whereas binding in muscle was unaffected. This result demonstrated
specific binding in vitro in Rhesus monkey liver with a certain amount of
unspecific binding. In vivo PET imaging studies in the Cynomolgus monkey
showed rapid uptake in liver which was reduced by 42% after co-injection
of 0.15 mg/kg of AH113804. Consistent with in vitro results, there was no
noteworthy muscle retention in vivo. In liver the individual SUV varied
but the magnitude of effect by blockade was similar. The ratio of
baseline to blockade scans in liver was 1.7, suggesting the presence of
specific binding. [18F]AH113804 uptake in liver or muscle was however not
significantly reduced after co-injection of 0.15 mg/kg of AH112361
(negative control), the ratio of baseline and blockade scans in liver was
[18F]AH113804 is a peptide based molecular imaging agent with high
affinity for the human c-Met receptor. The objective of this study was to
investigate the biodistribution, specific uptake and elimination of
[18F]AH113804 in the non-human primate. Cynomolgus monkey (Macaca
fascicularis) was selected since [18F]AH113804 retains high affinity to
c-Met in this species. The route of administration was intravenous as
this is the route of administration in humans. The target compound was
prepared in a two-step synthesis route starting with synthesis of
4-[18F]fluorobenzaldehyde which was reacted with the peptide precursor to
produce the corresponding oxime. Following semipreparative HPLC
purification the pure product was obtained. Frozen section
autoradiography using Rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) liver (relatively
high c-Met expression) and muscle (relatively low c-Met) was performed in
PBS buffer with [18F]AH113804 (2.5 kBq/ml) and with and without 0.5 g/ml
of AH113804 to establish specific binding in vitro. In vivo dynamic and
repeated whole body PET/CT [18F]AH113804 imaging was performed (GE
Discovery16 ST scanner, General Electric, USA), in female Cynomolgus
monkeys (n=3) before and after administration of 0.15 mg/ml AH113804 or
AH112361 (a scrambled peptide i.e. a negative control). The binding of
[18F]AH113804 in Rhesus monkey liver sections was blocked by 40%
following co-incubation of unlabelled AH113804 (>1000-fold excess)
whereas binding in muscle was unaffected. This result demonstrated
specific binding in vitro in Rhesus monkey liver with a certain amount of
unspecific binding. In vivo PET imaging studies in the Cynomolgus monkey
showed rapid uptake in liver which was reduced by 42% after co-injection
of 0.15 mg/kg of AH113804. Consistent with in vitro results, there was no
noteworthy muscle retention in vivo. In liver the individual SUV varied
but the magnitude of effect by blockade was similar. The ratio of
baseline to blockade scans in liver was 1.7, suggesting the presence of
specific binding. [18F]AH113804 uptake in liver or muscle was however not
significantly reduced after co-injection of 0.15 mg/kg of AH112361
(negative control), the ratio of baseline and blockade scans in liver was
<1.25. These results further confirmed that the reduction in
[18F]AH113804 liver uptake and retention observed after competition with
non-radioactive AH113804 reflects specific binding of [18F]AH113804.
Dynamic distribution studies showed a rapid uptake in liver and kidney
and mainly urinary excretion. There were no obvious effects on body
temperature, blood pressure or heart rate following co-injection of 0.15
mg/kg of AH113804. Overall, these results confirmed that [18F]AH113804
has desirable properties for a c-Met targeted molecular imaging agent.
Since there are a number of anti-c-Met therapies in clinical development,
[18F]AH113804 has potential to be used as an aid in therapy selection
and/or monitoring.

