Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Small interfering RNA targeting CD44 blocks EGFR signaling in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)


INTRODUCTION: Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) is a disease
that accounts for 90% of the 600,000 new diagnoses of head and neck
cancers worldwide each year. CD44 is a purported cancer stem cell (CSC)
marker, and its colocalization with EGFR has been proposed to activate
tyrosine kinase (TK) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK).
Therapies tend to have dismal cure rates. Understanding the interaction
between CD44 and EGFR may result in improved therapies for HNSCC.
METHODS: To evaluate the effect of CD44 on EGFR, we inhibited CD44
expression in a CD44-overexpressing HNSCC cell line, CAL27, using the
siRNA method. The cell line was stably transfected with a DNA plasmid
designed to knock down the expression of CD44. We then performed western
blots examining CD44 and phosphorylated EGFR (Y1068) in siRNA knockdown
clones and in scrambled sequence, followed by implantation of the
CD44siRNA clones and scramble controls in nude mice. The mice were
sacrificed, and the tumors were embedded in paraffin for IHC analysis.
CD44 and EGFR colocalization was examined in 5 HNSCC cases and in CAL 27
xenografts by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and laser scanning confocal
microscopy (LSCM). RESULTS: Downregulation of CD44 by siRNA in CAL 27
cells inhibited constitutive EGFR phosphorylation in vitro and in vivo.
Knocking down of CD44 by siRNA reduced the tumor growth in mice compared
to CAL 27 and scrambled siRNA. CD44 and EGFR coexpression and
colocalization were observed in 80% (4/5) of HNSCC cases and in CAL 27
xenografts. CONCLUSION: Based on these studies, targeting CD44 may
provide an additional therapeutic option for HNSCC that does not respond
favorably to other treatments. Anti- CD44 therapy in HNSCC may target the
cancer stem cell population and alter EGFR signaling.

