Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bypassing the dominant-negative effect of mutant p53 in cancer
cells


The tumor suppressor p53 is mutated in more than 50% of all cancers. The
transcriptional activity of p53 depends on localization to the nucleus
and formation of p53 tetramers. Use of wild-type (wt) p53 for gene
therapy is limited due to the dominant-negative effect of mutant (mut)
p53 over wt p53. Mut p53 will hetero-oligomerize with wt p53 via the
tetramerization domain (TD) found in p53, deactivating the tumor
suppressor function of wt p53. In order to use p53 for gene therapy, an
alternative oligomerization domain for p53 was investigated. The
coiled-coil (CC) domain from Bcr (breakpoint cluster region), similar to
the native TD of p53, can form an antiparallel dimer of dimers. The TD
from p53 was then substituted with this CC, and the activity of this new
p53 (p53-CC) was tested. We evaluated the transcriptional activity of
p53-CC compared to wt p53 in a dual luciferase reporter gene assay. To
demonstrate the ability of our p53-CC to bypass the dominant-negative
effect prompted by hetero-oligomers, the reporter gene assay was carried
in human breast adenocarcinoma (MCF-7) and human breast ductal carcinoma
(T47D) cell lines. MCF-7 cells contain wt p53 population that is
mislocalized to the cytoplasm, whereas, T47D cells contain mutant p53.
Indeed, data from the reporter gene experiment shows a reduction in wt
p53 activity introduced to T47D cells compared to MCF-7 cells, while the
activity of p53-CC remains consistent regardless of the presence of an
endogenous mut p53 population. We also tested the biological activity of
p53-CC and its ability to induce apoptosis using 7-AAD and Annexin-V
assays (late stage apoptosis). In addition, Caspase-3/7 assay (mid-stage
apoptosis) was performed to further validate a p53-dependent apoptotic
pathway. Data obtained from the aforementioned experiments suggest that
p53-CC has a very similar biological activity to wt p53. Furthermore, we
examined the gene expression profile of p53-CC using wt p53 as a
reference. The assay was performed using real-time PCR array technology
to analyze the expression of 84 genes related to p53-mediated signal
transduction. Two negative controls were used; the first is a p53
construct that lacks its tetramerization domain (p53TDC) and should not
possess any transcriptional activity, and the second is the CC by itself.
Indeed, p53-CC shows comparable gene expression profile to wt p53 and has
the ability to transactivate the various p53 target genes. In summary,
p53-CC retains p53 activity and excludes hetero-oligomer formation,
overcoming a major barrier in using p53 for cancer gene therapy.

