Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Esophagectomy with extended 2-field lymph node dissection for
patients with thoracic esophageal carcinoma


Objective: To summarize the surgical effect and clinical application of
esophagectomy with extended 2- field lymph node dissection for patients
with thoracic esophageal carcinoma. Methods: From June, 1987 to December,
2008, 1690 patients with thoracic esophageal cancer underwent
esophagectomy with extended 2-field (thoracic and abdominal) dissection
of lymph nodes were recruited and followed up. Patients with the middle
and lower thoracic esophageal cancer underwent Ivor-Lewis esophagectomy,
while patients with upper thoracic esophageal cancer underwent Akiyama
esophagectomy. Both thoracic and abdominal lymph node metastases were
recorded. Survival rates on 1, 3, 5, and 10 years were analyzed
respectively. Results: Totally, 1690 eligible patients were recruited and
successfully followed. Lymph node metastases were found in 713 patients,
with the proportion of 42.2%(713/1690). Thoracic lymph node metastasis
rate was 39.3%(665/1690), of which 20.7%(349/1690) were found in the
right apical pleural para-tracheal triangle, 26.3%(444/1690) were found
in the posterior upper mediastinum, and 18.2%(307/1690) were found in the
lower mediastinum. Abdominal lymph node metastasis rate was
20.1%(339/1690). Out of 1690 patients underwent esophagectomy, 278
patients were reported postoperative complications, among which the
pulmonary complication was ranked as the first one (43.6%). The death
rate due to operation was 0.2%.The l-year, 3-year, 5-year and 10-year
survival rates were 88.2%, 63.5%, 54.8% and 30.8%, respectively. Patients
without lymph node metastasis had higher 5-year survival rate (76.2%), as
compared to those with lymph node metastases (36.8%). Conclusion:
Findings from this study demonstrated that Ivor-Lewis and Akiyarna
esophagectomy with 2-field lymph node dissection could expose the
operation fields clearly and make radical lymphadenectomy thoroughly,
which was useful for observing the lymph nodes in the posterior upper
mediastinum around the recurrent laryngeal nerve and in the right pleural
apical para-tracheal triangle. We believe that esophageal cancer patients
with potential lymph node metastases could benefit from esophagectomy
with extended 2-field dissection of lymph nodes.

