Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetically engineered natural killer (NK) cell immunotherapy for
poor risk B-cell (CD20+) leukemia and lymphoma (L/L)


Background: Patients with CD20+ L/L at relapse have a chemotherapy
resistant phenotype and a dismal prognosis (Cairo et al, Blood, 2007).
Novel, non-chemotherapy-based therapies are desperately needed for this
specific poor risk population. Natural Killer (NK) cells play an
important role in tumor surveillance post allogeneic stem cell
transplantation (Beziat V et al, Leukemia, 2009) but cell number and
tumor recognition limit adoptive NK cell therapy (Shereck/Cairo, PBC
2007). Ex vivo expansion of PBNK cells with genetically engineered
K562-mbIL15-41BBL cells (modified K562) and the expanded PBNK cells
transduced with chimeric anti-CD19 antigen receptor (CAR) have been
previously reported (Imai C et al, Blood. 2005). Objective: We
investigated the functional activities and cytolytic effect of chimeric
anti-CD20 antigen receptor (CAR+) engineered PBNK cells expanded with
K562-mbIL15-41BBL cells (modified K562) against CD20+ L/L both in vitro
and in vivo. Methods: Whole peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation. PBMC
were incubated with mitomycin C modified K562 cells in culture medium
with 10 IU/ml IL-2 for 7 or 14 days. CD56 and CD3 expression were
evaluated by flow cytometry. The CAR+ was constructed in a
MSCV-anti-CD20BB-CD3-zeta-GFP plasmid (generously supplied by Dario
Campana, MD, PhD, St. Jude Children's Hospital). CAR+ and CAR
retroviruses were generated in 293T cells with helper plasmids. Jurkat
cells were used to examine infection efficiency. Anti-CD20 CAR expression
was examined by flow cytometry and by western blot of whole cell lysates
for CD3zeta. PBMC stimulated with modified K562 were transduced with
retroviruses as previous described (Imai C et al, Blood. 2005). PBNK
cells cytotoxicity was assessed by europium release assay at 2:1 E:T
ratio against CD20+ Ramos. Results: CD56+CD3 PBNK cells were expanded
significantly more following modified K562 stimulation compared to media
alone at day7 (60.94+ 3.63% vs 8.05+0.49%, n=6, PBackground: Patients
with CD20+ L/L at relapse have a chemotherapy resistant phenotype and a
dismal prognosis (Cairo et al, Blood, 2007). Novel,
non-chemotherapy-based therapies are desperately needed for this specific
poor risk population. Natural Killer (NK) cells play an important role in
tumor surveillance post allogeneic stem cell transplantation (Beziat V et
al, Leukemia, 2009) but cell number and tumor recognition limit adoptive
NK cell therapy (Shereck/Cairo, PBC 2007). Ex vivo expansion of PBNK
cells with genetically engineered K562-mbIL15-41BBL cells (modified K562)
and the expanded PBNK cells transduced with chimeric anti-CD19 antigen
receptor (CAR) have been previously reported (Imai C et al, Blood. 2005).
Objective: We investigated the functional activities and cytolytic effect
of chimeric anti-CD20 antigen receptor (CAR+) engineered PBNK cells
expanded with K562-mbIL15-41BBL cells (modified K562) against CD20+ L/L
both in vitro and in vivo. Methods: Whole peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient
centrifugation. PBMC were incubated with mitomycin C modified K562 cells
in culture medium with 10 IU/ml IL-2 for 7 or 14 days. CD56 and CD3
expression were evaluated by flow cytometry. The CAR+ was constructed in
a MSCV-anti-CD20BB-CD3-zeta-GFP plasmid (generously supplied by Dario
Campana, MD, PhD, St. Jude Children's Hospital). CAR+ and CAR
retroviruses were generated in 293T cells with helper plasmids. Jurkat
cells were used to examine infection efficiency. Anti-CD20 CAR expression
was examined by flow cytometry and by western blot of whole cell lysates
for CD3zeta. PBMC stimulated with modified K562 were transduced with
retroviruses as previous described (Imai C et al, Blood. 2005). PBNK
cells cytotoxicity was assessed by europium release assay at 2:1 E:T
ratio against CD20+ Ramos. Results: CD56+CD3 PBNK cells were expanded
significantly more following modified K562 stimulation compared to media
alone at day7 (60.94+ 3.63% vs 8.05+0.49%, n=6, P<0.001). CD56CD3+ PBT
cells were significantly reduced compared to media alone at day7
(22.08+2.22% vs 75.73+0.75%, n=6, PBackground: Patients with CD20+ L/L at
relapse have a chemotherapy resistant phenotype and a dismal prognosis
(Cairo et al, Blood, 2007). Novel, non-chemotherapy-based therapies are
desperately needed for this specific poor risk population. Natural Killer
(NK) cells play an important role in tumor surveillance post allogeneic
stem cell transplantation (Beziat V et al, Leukemia, 2009) but cell
number and tumor recognition limit adoptive NK cell therapy
(Shereck/Cairo, PBC 2007). Ex vivo expansion of PBNK cells with
genetically engineered K562-mbIL15-41BBL cells (modified K562) and the
expanded PBNK cells transduced with chimeric anti-CD19 antigen receptor
(CAR) have been previously reported (Imai C et al, Blood. 2005).
Objective: We investigated the functional activities and cytolytic effect
of chimeric anti-CD20 antigen receptor (CAR+) engineered PBNK cells
expanded with K562-mbIL15-41BBL cells (modified K562) against CD20+ L/L
both in vitro and in vivo. Methods: Whole peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient
centrifugation. PBMC were incubated with mitomycin C modified K562 cells
in culture medium with 10 IU/ml IL-2 for 7 or 14 days. CD56 and CD3
expression were evaluated by flow cytometry. The CAR+ was constructed in
a MSCV-anti-CD20BB-CD3-zeta-GFP plasmid (generously supplied by Dario
Campana, MD, PhD, St. Jude Children's Hospital). CAR+ and CAR
retroviruses were generated in 293T cells with helper plasmids. Jurkat
cells were used to examine infection efficiency. Anti-CD20 CAR expression
was examined by flow cytometry and by western blot of whole cell lysates
for CD3zeta. PBMC stimulated with modified K562 were transduced with
retroviruses as previous described (Imai C et al, Blood. 2005). PBNK
cells cytotoxicity was assessed by europium release assay at 2:1 E:T
ratio against CD20+ Ramos. Results: CD56+CD3 PBNK cells were expanded
significantly more following modified K562 stimulation compared to media
alone at day7 (60.94+ 3.63% vs 8.05+0.49%, n=6, P<0.001). CD56CD3+ PBT
cells were significantly reduced compared to media alone at day7
(22.08+2.22% vs 75.73+0.75%, n=6, P<0.001). CAR+ and CAR retrovirus
supernants infected Jurkat cells at 40%-97% efficiency and infected
expanded PBMC at 1%-10% range (n=3). The anti-CD20 CAR expression was
further confirmed by flow cytometry and western blot. We also observe
that cytotoxicity was enhanced with anti-CD20 CAR+ PBNK compared to CAR
PBNK (41+ 1.1% vs 24.5+ 3.7%, n=3) against Ramos at effector to target
ratio 2:1. Conclusion and Future Directions: PBNK can be significantly
induced following modified K562 stimulation. Anti-CD20 CAR enhances PBNK
anti-tumor activity against CD20+ Ramos. Future directions include
further characterizing the cytotoxicity activity of Anti-CD20 CAR
engineered expanded PBNK cells against L/L in-vitro and survival in
xenogafted mice.

