Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implementing CAD cells quantify the relationships between
Ig-CAM-mediated adhesion, force transduction, and actin dynamics


Several neuro-degenerative diseases and motor defects have been linked to
malfunctions in the motility of neurons. This project is focused on the
determining whether the roles of the transmembrane proteins NCAM and
L1-CAM can be studied using the CAD cell line as a model. CAD cells are a
cancer cell line that come from mice and can be stimulated to grow as
either neurons or glial cells. In addition, this cell line has been shown
to be an easily transfected line. In order to determine usefulness of
this cell line several techniques were used. Western blots were
implemented in order to determine if the NCAM and/or L1-CAM and proteins
known to be involved in their signaling pathways were present in the cell
line. Western blots were then confirmed by immunocytochemistry staining.
Next, the CAD cell line was transfected with photoactivateable actin.
Finally, immuno beads were attached to the membranes of these CAD cells
and then holographic optical tweezers were used to determine whether or
not thsee ligands coupled to the retrograde actin flow in the cells. The
combination of these experiments should provide the evidence for whether
or not the CAD cells would be a feasible model to study the nature of the
NCAM and L1-CAM proteins and their relationship to the movement of actin
in the cytoskeleton of neurons.

