Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menthol cigarettes in relation to breast cancer incidence in
African American women


The Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee has found that smokers
of menthol cigarettes have an earlier age at smoking initiation, less
success in smoking cessation, and are more likely to be African American
than smokers of non-menthol cigarettes. However, whether menthol
cigarettes are associated with higher cancer risk relative to non-menthol
cigarettes is unclear. Recent studies of smoking and breast cancer
suggest that long-term smoking may associated with a small increase in
risk, but no data are available on type of cigarette. We assessed the
relative effects of menthol and non-menthol cigarettes on incidence of
breast cancer in a large prospective cohort of African American women.
The Black Women's Health Study has followed approximately 59,000 women
with biennial questionnaires since enrollment in 1995. Beginning in 2003,
data has been collected on whether cigarettes smoked were menthol or
non-menthol; menthol cigarettes were reported by 64.7% of smokers who
provided information. During follow-up from 2003 through 2010, 739
incident breast cancer cases occurred. In proportional hazard models that
controlled for age and numerous breast cancer risk factors, hazard ratios
(HR) were computed for categories of pack-years of smoking of the two
types of cigarettes relative to a reference group of never-smokers who
reported no regular exposure to second-hand smoke. The HR for 20
pack-years of smoking non-menthol cigarettes was 1.70 (95% confidence
interval (CI) 1.04-2.76); for 20 pack-years of smoking menthol
cigarettes, the HR was 1.14 (95% CI, 0.72-1.82). Our findings suggest
that, to the extent that higher pack-years of smoking may be associated
with breast cancer, smoking menthol cigarettes is not more harmful than
smoking non-menthol cigarettes.

