Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potent preclinical antitumor effects induced by pan-histone
deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat in combination with sorafenib in
hepatocellular carcinoma


Background: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major worldwide health
problem, with over 750,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Sorafenib
represents the only systemic agent approved for advanced HCC and new
therapies are eagerly demanded. Histone Deacetylases (HDAC) are
regulators of gene expression frequently overexpressed in cancer.
HDAC-inhibitors (HDACi) represent promising agent for the treatment of
HCC. Aims: (1) To analyze the expression levels and copy number
alterations of 11 HDACs in human HCC and (2) to investigate the effects
of the pan-HDACi panobinostat and its combination with sorafenib in
experimental models of HCC. Methods: Gene expression and copy number
analysis of HDACs were analyzed in 101 HCC samples, matched cirrhotics,
and 10 normal livers. Cell viability (MTT assay), proliferation
(3[H]-Thymidine incorporation) and cell cycle changes (FACS) were
performed on Huh7, HepG2 and Hep3B cells treated with panobinostat and
combination with sorafenib. A subcutaneous xenograft model using Huh7
cells was generated to assess the anti-tumor effects in vivo. Mice were
randomized into 4 arms: vehicle (n=10), panobinostat (n=14, 15mg/kg),
sorafenib (n=12, 30mg/kg), and combination (n=12, panobinostat 7.5
mg/kg). Endpoints were tumor growth, toxicity and survival. Vessel
density, proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) and apoptosis (Tunnel
assay) were analyzed on tumor sections. Target gene and protein
expression levels were investigated by qRT-PCR and western blot on tumor
tissues. Results: HDAC2, 4, 11 and HDAC3 and 5 were significantly
upregulated in HCCs compared to normal and cirrhotic livers, respectively
(pBackground: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major worldwide health
problem, with over 750,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Sorafenib
represents the only systemic agent approved for advanced HCC and new
therapies are eagerly demanded. Histone Deacetylases (HDAC) are
regulators of gene expression frequently overexpressed in cancer.
HDAC-inhibitors (HDACi) represent promising agent for the treatment of
HCC. Aims: (1) To analyze the expression levels and copy number
alterations of 11 HDACs in human HCC and (2) to investigate the effects
of the pan-HDACi panobinostat and its combination with sorafenib in
experimental models of HCC. Methods: Gene expression and copy number
analysis of HDACs were analyzed in 101 HCC samples, matched cirrhotics,
and 10 normal livers. Cell viability (MTT assay), proliferation
(3[H]-Thymidine incorporation) and cell cycle changes (FACS) were
performed on Huh7, HepG2 and Hep3B cells treated with panobinostat and
combination with sorafenib. A subcutaneous xenograft model using Huh7
cells was generated to assess the anti-tumor effects in vivo. Mice were
randomized into 4 arms: vehicle (n=10), panobinostat (n=14, 15mg/kg),
sorafenib (n=12, 30mg/kg), and combination (n=12, panobinostat 7.5
mg/kg). Endpoints were tumor growth, toxicity and survival. Vessel
density, proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) and apoptosis (Tunnel
assay) were analyzed on tumor sections. Target gene and protein
expression levels were investigated by qRT-PCR and western blot on tumor
tissues. Results: HDAC2, 4, 11 and HDAC3 and 5 were significantly
upregulated in HCCs compared to normal and cirrhotic livers, respectively
(p<0.05). Overexpression of HDAC3 and 5 correlated with copy number gains
(pBackground: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major worldwide health
problem, with over 750,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Sorafenib
represents the only systemic agent approved for advanced HCC and new
therapies are eagerly demanded. Histone Deacetylases (HDAC) are
regulators of gene expression frequently overexpressed in cancer.
HDAC-inhibitors (HDACi) represent promising agent for the treatment of
HCC. Aims: (1) To analyze the expression levels and copy number
alterations of 11 HDACs in human HCC and (2) to investigate the effects
of the pan-HDACi panobinostat and its combination with sorafenib in
experimental models of HCC. Methods: Gene expression and copy number
analysis of HDACs were analyzed in 101 HCC samples, matched cirrhotics,
and 10 normal livers. Cell viability (MTT assay), proliferation
(3[H]-Thymidine incorporation) and cell cycle changes (FACS) were
performed on Huh7, HepG2 and Hep3B cells treated with panobinostat and
combination with sorafenib. A subcutaneous xenograft model using Huh7
cells was generated to assess the anti-tumor effects in vivo. Mice were
randomized into 4 arms: vehicle (n=10), panobinostat (n=14, 15mg/kg),
sorafenib (n=12, 30mg/kg), and combination (n=12, panobinostat 7.5
mg/kg). Endpoints were tumor growth, toxicity and survival. Vessel
density, proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) and apoptosis (Tunnel
assay) were analyzed on tumor sections. Target gene and protein
expression levels were investigated by qRT-PCR and western blot on tumor
tissues. Results: HDAC2, 4, 11 and HDAC3 and 5 were significantly
upregulated in HCCs compared to normal and cirrhotic livers, respectively
(p<0.05). Overexpression of HDAC3 and 5 correlated with copy number gains
(p<0.05). Panobinostat together with sorafenib inhibited cell viability
(26.3-73.4%) and proliferation (0.1-14.2%) of HCC cells at 72h and
induced apoptosis (23% Huh7 sub-G1 phase). In vivo, combination therapy
significantly inhibited tumor growth at day 20 (227.3 mm3) compared to
panobinostat (531.2 mm3) or sorafenib (806.7mm3) alone (p=0.005 and
pBackground: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major worldwide health
problem, with over 750,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Sorafenib
represents the only systemic agent approved for advanced HCC and new
therapies are eagerly demanded. Histone Deacetylases (HDAC) are
regulators of gene expression frequently overexpressed in cancer.
HDAC-inhibitors (HDACi) represent promising agent for the treatment of
HCC. Aims: (1) To analyze the expression levels and copy number
alterations of 11 HDACs in human HCC and (2) to investigate the effects
of the pan-HDACi panobinostat and its combination with sorafenib in
experimental models of HCC. Methods: Gene expression and copy number
analysis of HDACs were analyzed in 101 HCC samples, matched cirrhotics,
and 10 normal livers. Cell viability (MTT assay), proliferation
(3[H]-Thymidine incorporation) and cell cycle changes (FACS) were
performed on Huh7, HepG2 and Hep3B cells treated with panobinostat and
combination with sorafenib. A subcutaneous xenograft model using Huh7
cells was generated to assess the anti-tumor effects in vivo. Mice were
randomized into 4 arms: vehicle (n=10), panobinostat (n=14, 15mg/kg),
sorafenib (n=12, 30mg/kg), and combination (n=12, panobinostat 7.5
mg/kg). Endpoints were tumor growth, toxicity and survival. Vessel
density, proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) and apoptosis (Tunnel
assay) were analyzed on tumor sections. Target gene and protein
expression levels were investigated by qRT-PCR and western blot on tumor
tissues. Results: HDAC2, 4, 11 and HDAC3 and 5 were significantly
upregulated in HCCs compared to normal and cirrhotic livers, respectively
(p<0.05). Overexpression of HDAC3 and 5 correlated with copy number gains
(p<0.05). Panobinostat together with sorafenib inhibited cell viability
(26.3-73.4%) and proliferation (0.1-14.2%) of HCC cells at 72h and
induced apoptosis (23% Huh7 sub-G1 phase). In vivo, combination therapy
significantly inhibited tumor growth at day 20 (227.3 mm3) compared to
panobinostat (531.2 mm3) or sorafenib (806.7mm3) alone (p=0.005 and
p<0.001, respectively). Median survival improved to 33 days in the
combination arm compared to 22 days in panobinostat and sorafenib groups,
and 12 days in control mice (pBackground: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
is a major worldwide health problem, with over 750,000 new cases
diagnosed each year. Sorafenib represents the only systemic agent
approved for advanced HCC and new therapies are eagerly demanded. Histone
Deacetylases (HDAC) are regulators of gene expression frequently
overexpressed in cancer. HDAC-inhibitors (HDACi) represent promising
agent for the treatment of HCC. Aims: (1) To analyze the expression
levels and copy number alterations of 11 HDACs in human HCC and (2) to
investigate the effects of the pan-HDACi panobinostat and its combination
with sorafenib in experimental models of HCC. Methods: Gene expression
and copy number analysis of HDACs were analyzed in 101 HCC samples,
matched cirrhotics, and 10 normal livers. Cell viability (MTT assay),
proliferation (3[H]-Thymidine incorporation) and cell cycle changes
(FACS) were performed on Huh7, HepG2 and Hep3B cells treated with
panobinostat and combination with sorafenib. A subcutaneous xenograft
model using Huh7 cells was generated to assess the anti-tumor effects in
vivo. Mice were randomized into 4 arms: vehicle (n=10), panobinostat
(n=14, 15mg/kg), sorafenib (n=12, 30mg/kg), and combination (n=12,
panobinostat 7.5 mg/kg). Endpoints were tumor growth, toxicity and
survival. Vessel density, proliferation index (Ki-67 staining) and
apoptosis (Tunnel assay) were analyzed on tumor sections. Target gene and
protein expression levels were investigated by qRT-PCR and western blot
on tumor tissues. Results: HDAC2, 4, 11 and HDAC3 and 5 were
significantly upregulated in HCCs compared to normal and cirrhotic
livers, respectively (p<0.05). Overexpression of HDAC3 and 5 correlated
with copy number gains (p<0.05). Panobinostat together with sorafenib
inhibited cell viability (26.3-73.4%) and proliferation (0.1-14.2%) of
HCC cells at 72h and induced apoptosis (23% Huh7 sub-G1 phase). In vivo,
combination therapy significantly inhibited tumor growth at day 20 (227.3
mm3) compared to panobinostat (531.2 mm3) or sorafenib (806.7mm3) alone
(p=0.005 and p<0.001, respectively). Median survival improved to 33 days
in the combination arm compared to 22 days in panobinostat and sorafenib
groups, and 12 days in control mice (p<0.05). Histone 3 acetylation, p21
protein levels and autophagy (increased LC3 II, decreased p62) were
significantly induced by this combination. Decrease in vessel density and
Ki-67 staining as well as increase in TUNEL staining were reported.
Panobinostat induced downregulation of Survivin and UHRF1 target genes
and up-regulation of CDH1. Conclusion: HDACs expression is altered in HCC
and related to copy gains for HDAC3 and 5. The HDACi panobinostat
exhibited strong antitumor effects enhanced by the combination with
sorafenib. These findings support the rationale for early clinical
studies with this novel combination.

