Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fluorescent imaging in animal model of human tongue squamous cell
carcinoma in vivo by Nimotuzumab conjugated near-infrared quantum dots
and small molecule fluorescent dye


Objectives:To explore near-infrared fluorescent imaging in vivo using
quantum dots Qdot800 and Alexa680 dye labeling Nimotuzumab for human
tongue squamous cell carcinoma diagnosis, location. Methods:
Near-infrared fluorescent quantum dots Qdot800 and Alexa680 dye were
respectively conjugated with Nimotuzumab. Subsequently, the probes were
used to detect fixed or live human tongue squamous cell carcinoma cell
line Tca8113. After Tca8113 subcutaneous xenografts grown in, the nude
mice were injected intravenously with one of the conjugates followed by
fluorescent imaging using small animal imaging system. The images of
targeting tumor in vivo were required and analyzed. Results:
Near-infrared fluorescent quantum dots Qdot800 and Alexa680 dye were
successfully conjugated with Nimotuzumab. The conjugates were able to
specifically and efficiently recognize fixed and live Tca8113 with
intense fluorescence. Although Nimotuzumab labeled with Qdot800 could not
be detected targeting the subcutaneous Tca8113 xenografts grown in vivo,
Nimotuzumab labeled with Alexa680 performed very well with bright
fluorescence in contrast to surrounding normal tissue. Conclusions: The
fluorescent conjugates probes Nimotuzumab conjugated with Near-infrared
fluorescent Qdot800 and Alexa680 dye were able to specifically target
human tongue squamous cell carcinoma cell in vitro. Alexa680 labeling
with Nimotuzumab was more suitable than Qdot800 to perform fluorescent
imaging in vivo for the study of human tongue squamous cell carcinoma.
[Key words] tongue squamous cell carcinoma, fluorescent imaging,
fluorescent probe, Nimotuzumab

