Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
Pdk2 by tumor suppressors


Conversion of pyruvate into lactate despite the presence of oxygen is a
hallmark of the Warburg effect, and distinguishes the metabolism of many
tumors from the metabolism of many normal cell types. Pdk2, a pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase, facilitates conversion of pyruvate into lactate by
inhibiting the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which would otherwise
convert pyruvate into acetyl-CoA. Previously, Pdk2 activity was thought
to be controlled exclusively in a post-translational fashion, through
inhibition or activation by metabolites. But in this study we show that
two important tumor suppressor pathways, p53 and retinoblastoma, prevent
the Warburg effect, and do so through repression of pdk2 transcription.
Importantly, a heterologous promoter that drives physiological expression
of Pdk2, but disallows repression by p53 or Rb, prevents these tumor
suppressors from blocking the Warburg effect. Another consequence of pdk2
repression is increased production of reactive oxygen species, which
stimulates p53-dependent apoptosis. We further show that when unable to
downregulate Pdk2 expression, p53 can no longer cause apoptosis. Thus two
critical features of tumor suppression, apoptosis and pyruvate
metabolism, are mediated by repression of pdk2 transcription. This study
proves that proper transcriptional regulation of the pdk2 gene is
critical for tumor suppression.

