Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel organotypic 3D invasion platform to advance anticancer
drug development


Tumor cell invasion is traditionally studied in three-dimensional (3D)
organotypic models composed of type I collagen and fibroblasts, where
various cell types and the extracellular matrix in the tumor
microenvironment (TME) affects tumor cell behavior. As both molecular and
cellular components of TME are cardinal participants in tumor
progression, special attention should be addressed in the growth
environment. As there is urgent need for more predictive models to be
utilized in drug discovery and development, organotypic 3D in vitro assay
provides an applicable platform. We characterized a novel organotypic
model based on human uterine leiomyoma tissue to be used in drug
development. To evaluate the general applicability of the myoma model,
human tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells (HSC-3) and human triple
negative breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231(SA)-GFP) were cultured on top of
human uterine leiomyoma tissue. Organotypic sections were examined by
immunohistochemical stainings against cytokeratin and GFP, where invasion
area and depth were measured. The organotypic myoma model also gives
opportunity for ELISA, RIA and Western blotting analysis of the culture
media. The used cell lines were found to invade in highly distinct
patterns. This organotypic 3D myoma model provides a potent tool for
analyzing the behavior of tumor cells. Moreover, we conclude that
established organotypic 3D in vitro platform gives remarkable advantages
to screen potential therapeutic options by producing totally new
commercially usable models and innovative treatment approaches that
target both the cancer cells and the TME components.

