Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear export (karyopherin) inhibitors: A novel therapeutic
strategy for treating Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) acute leukemias


Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-based therapies do not induce long-term
response in myeloid or lymphoid blast crisis (BC) chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) and Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Increased
expression/activity of nucleocytoplasmic-shuttling heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) A1, E2 and K, are critical for the expression
of factors (e.g. SET/PP2A, C/EBP/miR-328, and c-Myc) regulating
proliferation and survival of Ph+ progenitors. Because the karyopherin
CRM1 controls nuclear export of hnRNPs, we assessed the therapeutic
potential of CRM1 inhibitors in CML-BC and Ph+ ALL models. Thus, myeloid
32D-p210BCR-ABL1 and lymphoid Baf3-p190BCR-ABL1 progenitors were exposed
to the CRM1 selective & potent inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE)
KPT-185 and KPT-207. MTT viability assays revealed that KPT-185 and
KPT-207 decreased cell viability by 80% at concentrations ranging from
150-350 nM. The KPT-SINE not only induced killing, but also affected
cytokine-independent growth of BCR-ABL1+ cells: proliferation was
inhibited 89% and 81% by KPT-185 and KPT-207, respectively. Notably,
growth and survival of non-transformed 32Dcl3 and BaF3 cells was not
affected (70-100% viable cells) by KPT-SINE. As expected, treatment (1 M;
48h) with these inhibitors altered the nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio of
hnRNPs important for BCR-ABL1 leukemogenesis. As a result, treatment of
BCR-ABL1+ cells with KPT-185 and KPT-207 (1 M; 48h) resulted in 75% and
50% suppression of BCR-ABL1 expression and kinase activity, respectively.
Furthermore, KPT-207 also reduced Myc expression in 32D-p210BCR-ABL1
cells; this is consistent with the potential interference of KPT-207 with
the proliferation/survival signals triggered by the BCR-ABL1/MAPK/hnRNP
K/Myc pathway in CML-BC progenitors. Because both KPT-185 and KPT-207
significantly alter hnRNP A1 localization, which is important for
regulation of the PP2A inhibitor SET and, therefore, for BCR-ABL1
leukemogenesis, we assessed whether KPT-207 and KPT-185 negatively
regulate PP2A activity. Indeed, treatment with KPT-207 and KPT-185 (250
nM; 48h) restored PP2A activity in 32D-p210BCR-ABL1 cells to levels
similar to those detected in non-transformed 32Dcl3 cells. Although
further investigation of KPT-207 and KPT-185 mechanism of action and
assessment of their biologic/therapeutic effects in CML-BC and Ph+ ALL
mouse models and primary leukemic and normal progenitors is currently
ongoing, it is safe to conclude that selective nuclear export (SINE CRM1)
inhibitors represent potentially powerful therapeutic tools that, if used
alone or in combination with TKIs, might lead to sustained complete
molecular remission in CML-BC and Ph+ ALL patients.

