Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Syntaxin 6- and microtubule-mediated intracellular trafficking
contributes to Golgi and nuclear translocation of EGFR


Receptor mediated endocytosis is well known for its degradation and
recycling trafficking. Recent evidence shows that these cell surface
receptors translocate from cell surface to different cellular
compartments, including the Golgi, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and the nucleus to regulate physiological and pathological
functions. Although some trafficking mechanisms have been resolved, the
completed mechanism of intracellular trafficking from cell surface to the
Golgi is still unknown. Herein, we report a mechanism of the Golgi
translocation of EGFR in which EGF-induced EGFR travels to the Golgi via
microtubule (MT)-dependent movement by interacting with dynein and fuses
with the Golgi through syntaxin 6 (Syn6) mediated membrane fusion. We
also demonstrate that the Golgi translocation of EGFR is necessary for
its consequent nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity.
Interestingly, foreign protein such as bacterial cholera toxin, which is
known to activate its pathological function through the Golgi/ER
retrograde pathway, also utilizes the MTs/Syn6 pathway. Thus, the
MTs/Syn6/Golgi/ER pathway defines a comprehensive retrograde trafficking
route for both cellular and foreign molecules to travel from cell surface
to the Golgi and the nucleus.

