Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Web-based access for whole genome analyses of gene expression, DNA
copy number, microRNA transcript levels, drug activity, and their pattern
comparisons for the NCI-60


High-throughput data is increasingly being integrated into the fields of
biology, molecular biology, and pharmacology. However, a difficult
problem has been the rapid and fluid access to and integration of this
data, which tends to reside in huge unwieldy databases. One set of cell
lines with substantial potential for benefit from this type of access and
integration is the NCI-60 cancerous cell lines. We present here a set of
tools within our CellMiner web-application designed to address this need
for the areas of transcript expression, microRNA expression, gene DNA
copy number, and drug activity. CellMiner allows the user to rapidly
access data for relative levels of transcript expression for 18,532
genes, 360 microRNAs, and 16,861 compounds including 91 Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved drugs. These levels in turn create patterns
across the NCI-60 that can be compared to one another using our pattern
match tool. Together, these tools allow one to query the data for
potential relationships between these parameters, in a manner specific to
a users area of expertise and interest, in a rapid and flexible manner
without the need for expertise in computer science or bioinformatics. The
output will be demonstrated with cancer interesting microRNAs 18a, 21,
29a, 30c-2, 30d, and 31, cancer interesting genes ABCB1, ATM, ATR, BRCA2,
and TP53, and the clinically relevant drugs belinostat, crizotinib,
pazopanib, selumetinib and tanespimycin.

