Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide identification of possible methylation markers
chemosensitive to targeted regimens in colorectal cancers


Purpose Few efficient methylation markers of chemosensitivity have been
discovered. The genome-wide analysis of methylation markers is needed to
identify chemosensitive candidates to targeted therapy. Methods This
study describes a two-step process to select chemosensitive candidates of
methylation genes. A genome-wide screening of methylation genes was
performed using a beadarray and an in vitro chemosensitivity assay of 119
colorectal cancers (CRCs). Results Ten candidate genes identified during
the initial screening were verified by biological utility assessment
using cell viability assays of transfected CRC cells. Five methylation
genes related to sensitivity to bevacizumab regimens (RASSF1, MMP25,
KCNQ1, ESR1, and GALR2) or cetuximab regimens (SCL18A2, GPX7, NID2,
IGFBP3, and ALX4) were chosen during the first step. A viability assay
revealed that GALR2-overexpressing HCT116 cells were significantly more
chemosensitive to bevacizumab regimens than control cells (P = 0.022 and
0.019 for bevacizumab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX, respectively),
concurrently verified on a caspase-3 activity assay. GPX7- or
ALX4-overexpressed RKO cells were significantly less viable to cetuximab
regimens compared to control cells (GPX7: P = 0.027 each for cetuximab
with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX; ALX4: P = 0.049 and 0.003 for cetuximab with
FOLFIRI and FOLFOX, respectively), but caspase-3 activity was not
prominent in GPX7-overexpressed RKO cells. Conclusions Two novel genes,
GALR2 and ALX4, have been identified as chemosensitive methylation
candidates to bevacizumab and cetuximab regimens, respectively. As our
study did not include a clinical association study, the two candidates
should be validated in large clinical cohorts, hopefully predicting
responsive patients to targeted regimens.

