Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PRDX4 and P4HA2 as metastasis-associated
proteins in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma by comparative tissue
proteomics of microdissected specimens using iTRAQ technology


Background Cervical lymph node metastasis represents the major
prognosticator for oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Methods
Here, we used an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to identify
proteins that are differentially expressed between microdissected primary
and metastatic OSCC tumors. The selected candidates were examined in
tissue sections via immunohistochemistry, and their roles in OSCC cell
function investigated using RNA interference. Results Seventy-four
differentially expressed proteins in nodal metastases, including PRDX4
and P4HA2, were identified. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed
significantly higher levels of PRDX4 and P4HA2 in tumor cells than
adjacent non-tumor epithelia (P Background Cervical lymph node metastasis
represents the major prognosticator for oral cavity squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC). Methods Here, we used an iTRAQ-based quantitative
proteomic approach to identify proteins that are differentially expressed
between microdissected primary and metastatic OSCC tumors. The selected
candidates were examined in tissue sections via immunohistochemistry, and
their roles in OSCC cell function investigated using RNA interference.
Results Seventy-four differentially expressed proteins in nodal
metastases, including PRDX4 and P4HA2, were identified.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed significantly higher levels of
PRDX4 and P4HA2 in tumor cells than adjacent non-tumor epithelia (P <
0.0001 and P Background Cervical lymph node metastasis represents the
major prognosticator for oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
Methods Here, we used an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic approach to
identify proteins that are differentially expressed between
microdissected primary and metastatic OSCC tumors. The selected
candidates were examined in tissue sections via immunohistochemistry, and
their roles in OSCC cell function investigated using RNA interference.
Results Seventy-four differentially expressed proteins in nodal
metastases, including PRDX4 and P4HA2, were identified.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed significantly higher levels of
PRDX4 and P4HA2 in tumor cells than adjacent non-tumor epithelia (P <
0.0001 and P < 0.0001, respectively), and even higher expression in the
31 metastatic tumors of lymph nodes, compared to the corresponding
primary tumors (P = 0.060 and P Background Cervical lymph node metastasis
represents the major prognosticator for oral cavity squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC). Methods Here, we used an iTRAQ-based quantitative
proteomic approach to identify proteins that are differentially expressed
between microdissected primary and metastatic OSCC tumors. The selected
candidates were examined in tissue sections via immunohistochemistry, and
their roles in OSCC cell function investigated using RNA interference.
Results Seventy-four differentially expressed proteins in nodal
metastases, including PRDX4 and P4HA2, were identified.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed significantly higher levels of
PRDX4 and P4HA2 in tumor cells than adjacent non-tumor epithelia (P <
0.0001 and P < 0.0001, respectively), and even higher expression in the
31 metastatic tumors of lymph nodes, compared to the corresponding
primary tumors (P = 0.060 and P < 0.0001, respectively). Overexpression
of PRDX4 and P4HA2 was significantly associated with positive pN status
(P = 0.048 and P = 0.041, respectively). PRDX4 overexpression was a
significant prognostic factor for disease-specific survival in both
univariate and multivariate analyses (P = 0.034 and P = 0.032,
respectively). Additionally, cell migration and invasiveness were
attenuated in OEC-M1 cells upon in vitro knockdown of PRDX4 and P4HA2
with specific interfering RNA. Conclusions Novel metastasis-related
prognostic markers for OSCC could be identified by our approach.

