Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic effect of trastuzumab on macrophage-infiltrated human
mammary tumor spheroids


The HER2 receptor, overexpressed in 20-25% of breast invasive tumors, is
associated with low disease-free survival. Trastuzumab (Tz), monoclonal
antibody anti HER2 is used as immunotherapy in HER2+ mammary tumors;
however, 60% of patients are unresponsive to this therapy. The aim of our
study is the analysis of the effect of Tz on the growth of human mammary
tumor cells cultured in 3D (shperoids). The human adenocarcinoma cell
line BT474 (HER2+) was used to generate spheroids grown in liquid
RPMI1640 medium. One spheroid/well was seeded on a 1.5% agar layer,
reaching 2.5 mm diameter at day 62 of culture. Differential expression of
HER2, HIF-1, Bcl-2 and Ki67 were detected by immunohistochemistry.
Proliferating, quiescent as well as apoptotic cells towards the hypoxic
core of the tumor spheroids were identified. The effect of Tz (10 and 50
ug/ml/spheroid, 3 times/week) on the growth of 3D cultures of BT474 cells
was evaluated, beginning with a volume of 0.23 0.03 mm3 (day 0). Tz 10
ug/ml arrested spheroids growth since day 7 (3 doses) while Tz 50 ug/ml
induced a significant reduction in the volume since the first dose (day
0) until day 27, when spheroids showed 71% of growth inhibition compared
to untreated or human IgG controls (Tz 50= 0.12 0.04 mm3 vs control= 0.45
0.03 mm3, pThe HER2 receptor, overexpressed in 20-25% of breast invasive
tumors, is associated with low disease-free survival. Trastuzumab (Tz),
monoclonal antibody anti HER2 is used as immunotherapy in HER2+ mammary
tumors; however, 60% of patients are unresponsive to this therapy. The
aim of our study is the analysis of the effect of Tz on the growth of
human mammary tumor cells cultured in 3D (shperoids). The human
adenocarcinoma cell line BT474 (HER2+) was used to generate spheroids
grown in liquid RPMI1640 medium. One spheroid/well was seeded on a 1.5%
agar layer, reaching 2.5 mm diameter at day 62 of culture. Differential
expression of HER2, HIF-1, Bcl-2 and Ki67 were detected by
immunohistochemistry. Proliferating, quiescent as well as apoptotic cells
towards the hypoxic core of the tumor spheroids were identified. The
effect of Tz (10 and 50 ug/ml/spheroid, 3 times/week) on the growth of 3D
cultures of BT474 cells was evaluated, beginning with a volume of 0.23
0.03 mm3 (day 0). Tz 10 ug/ml arrested spheroids growth since day 7 (3
doses) while Tz 50 ug/ml induced a significant reduction in the volume
since the first dose (day 0) until day 27, when spheroids showed 71% of
growth inhibition compared to untreated or human IgG controls (Tz 50=
0.12 0.04 mm3 vs control= 0.45 0.03 mm3, p<0.001). Spheroids showed lower
sensitivity to the cytostatic effect of Tz 10 ug/ml when compared to the
same cells cultured as monolayers. Tz exerted a direct and dose-dependent
effect on BT474 tumor spheroids: while it was cytostatic at the lower
dose (Tz10), it was cytotoxic at the higher (Tz50). Nitric oxide (NO)
levels measured by Griess reaction in tumor spheroid supernatants were
significantly higher upon Tz50 treatment compared to untreated controls
(pThe HER2 receptor, overexpressed in 20-25% of breast invasive tumors,
is associated with low disease-free survival. Trastuzumab (Tz),
monoclonal antibody anti HER2 is used as immunotherapy in HER2+ mammary
tumors; however, 60% of patients are unresponsive to this therapy. The
aim of our study is the analysis of the effect of Tz on the growth of
human mammary tumor cells cultured in 3D (shperoids). The human
adenocarcinoma cell line BT474 (HER2+) was used to generate spheroids
grown in liquid RPMI1640 medium. One spheroid/well was seeded on a 1.5%
agar layer, reaching 2.5 mm diameter at day 62 of culture. Differential
expression of HER2, HIF-1, Bcl-2 and Ki67 were detected by
immunohistochemistry. Proliferating, quiescent as well as apoptotic cells
towards the hypoxic core of the tumor spheroids were identified. The
effect of Tz (10 and 50 ug/ml/spheroid, 3 times/week) on the growth of 3D
cultures of BT474 cells was evaluated, beginning with a volume of 0.23
0.03 mm3 (day 0). Tz 10 ug/ml arrested spheroids growth since day 7 (3
doses) while Tz 50 ug/ml induced a significant reduction in the volume
since the first dose (day 0) until day 27, when spheroids showed 71% of
growth inhibition compared to untreated or human IgG controls (Tz 50=
0.12 0.04 mm3 vs control= 0.45 0.03 mm3, p<0.001). Spheroids showed lower
sensitivity to the cytostatic effect of Tz 10 ug/ml when compared to the
same cells cultured as monolayers. Tz exerted a direct and dose-dependent
effect on BT474 tumor spheroids: while it was cytostatic at the lower
dose (Tz10), it was cytotoxic at the higher (Tz50). Nitric oxide (NO)
levels measured by Griess reaction in tumor spheroid supernatants were
significantly higher upon Tz50 treatment compared to untreated controls
(p<0.01), suggesting NO is involved in the direct cytotoxic mechanism of
Tz. BT474 cells growing in monolayers responded to TZ with higher NO
levels than 3D cultures. In order to assess whether immune system and
tissue architecture have an impact on the Tz cytotoxic effect, we
co-cultured single BT474 tumor spheroids with macrophages from human
peripheral blood (ratio1:5). At 10 days co-culture, the macrophages had a
type I response (M1) against tumor cells. In fact, we observed that the
presence of macrophages in the culture increased the cytotoxicity of Tz.
This period of time was not enough to switch macrophages to the M2
phenotype. Conditioned media from Tz50-treated BT474 spheroids decreased
MMP9 production by macrophages cultures. We propose this 3D culture model
as a useful tool to study susceptibility to trastuzumab therapy in HER2 +
tumor cells, as well as to analyze the mechanisms of action and
resistance of this treatment.

