Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stat1 plays a major role in skin tumor promotion by chrysarobin
but not TPA


The cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie promotion by diverse
tumor promoting agents remain to be fully elucidated. Studies using Stat1
knockout (KO) mice have shown that they were highly resistant to
two-stage skin carcinogenesis using chrysarobin as the promoter. In
contrast, Stat1 KO mice treated with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate
(TPA) as the tumor promoter exhibited no significant differences in tumor
formation. To further investigate mechanism(s) whereby Stat1 mediates
skin tumor promotion by chrysarobin Stat1 KO mice and wild-type (WT)
controls were treated with the respective tumor promoters and
Stat1-dependent signaling pathways were evaluated. Mice deficient in
Stat1 displayed an attenuated induction of epidermal Cox-2 mRNA and
protein as well as reduced PGE2 levels compared to WT controls following
topical application of chrysarobin, whereas, mice treated with TPA
exhibited no significant differences in Cox-2 levels or PGE2 levels.
Other results also suggest that Stat1 may regulate various
cytokine/chemokines involved in the inflammatory response following
chrysarobin treatment. Preliminary experiments have also shown that Stat1
KO mice exhibit reduced induction of interferon regulatory factor-1
(IRF-1) following chrysarobin treatment, compared to WT controls. In
contrast, treatment with TPA caused no significant differences in
expression of IRF-1. Collectively, these findings suggest that
chrysarobin may elicit a Stat1-dependent signaling response that is
dependent on IRF-1, whereas TPA-mediated tumorigenesis is independent of
this signaling pathway. These and other ongoing studies aimed at
characterizing the role of Stat1 and IRF-1 signaling in
chrysarobin-mediated tumor promotion will be presented.

