Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phosphorylation and regulation of PTEN by Polo-like kinase 1


The tumor suppressor PTEN plays a critical role in the regulation of cell
survival, proliferation, and angiogenisis. Deregulated expression and/or
activities frequently result in tumor development. Several recent studies
have revealed that PTEN also localizes to the nucleus and that nuclear
PTEN may regulate the level and activity of mitotic checkpoint proteins,
thus suppressing chromosomal instability during cell division. However,
the mechanism by which PTEN is translocated to the nucleus remains
unclear. Given that PTEN is heavily phosphorylated and that Plk1 is an
important mitotic kinase, we have asked whether Plk1 directly
phosphorylates PTEN and whether Plk1-mediated phosphorylation of PTEN
functions as an important regulatory mechanism during cell division. Here
we report that a significant fraction of PTEN localized to nuclear
chromatin. The chromatin association of PTEN was enhanced during mitosis,
which was correlated with an increase in PTEN phosphorylation at
threonine 366 (T366) and serine 370 (S370). Using purified recombinant
proteins, we demonsatrated that Plk1 was at least partly responsible for
this phosphorylation. Plk1 strongly catalyzed the incorporation of 32P
into PTEN, resulting in increased signals detected by a phospho-specific
antibody that recognized T366/S370 phosphorylation. Furthermore, BI-2536,
a potent Plk1 inhibitor, significantly blocked PTEN phosphorylation by
Plk1 in vitro, as well as its chromatin association in vivo. Combined,
these results strongly suggest that Plk1 phosphorylates PTEN at T366
and/or S370 and that this phosphorylation promotes its association with
chromatin during the cell cycle.

