Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multiple myeloma cells cross talk with bone marrow stroma lead to
induction of DKK1 expression and produce bortezomib resistance


The importance of the micro-environment in tumor progression is now well
established. Dynamic interaction between multiple myeloma (MM) cells and
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) plays critical role in the progression
of MM including drug response and bone erosion. Firstly, we found that
DKK1 expression was statistically increased in MM cells (MOLP8, KMS12BM,
KMS12PE, NCIH929, LP1, MOLP2, EJM, U266, RPMI8226, and 536MM,
respectively) co-cultured with BMSCs obtained from MM patients when
compared to MM cells alone (pThe importance of the micro-environment in
tumor progression is now well established. Dynamic interaction between
multiple myeloma (MM) cells and bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) plays
critical role in the progression of MM including drug response and bone
erosion. Firstly, we found that DKK1 expression was statistically
increased in MM cells (MOLP8, KMS12BM, KMS12PE, NCIH929, LP1, MOLP2, EJM,
U266, RPMI8226, and 536MM, respectively) co-cultured with BMSCs obtained
from MM patients when compared to MM cells alone (p<0.05). Also, MM cells
co-cultured with BMSCs were significantly more resistant against 25 nM
bortezomib than MM cells alone (pThe importance of the micro-environment
in tumor progression is now well established. Dynamic interaction between
multiple myeloma (MM) cells and bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) plays
critical role in the progression of MM including drug response and bone
erosion. Firstly, we found that DKK1 expression was statistically
increased in MM cells (MOLP8, KMS12BM, KMS12PE, NCIH929, LP1, MOLP2, EJM,
U266, RPMI8226, and 536MM, respectively) co-cultured with BMSCs obtained
from MM patients when compared to MM cells alone (p<0.05). Also, MM cells
co-cultured with BMSCs were significantly more resistant against 25 nM
bortezomib than MM cells alone (p<0.05). We, therefore, established a
bortezomib-resistant cell line using U266 cells (U266/velR), and explored
the characteristics of U266/velR cells. Cytotoxic effect of bortezomib in
U266/velR was 1.5 folds lower than U266 cells, and the cross-resistance
against thalidomide was observed. DKK1 expression in U266/velR was higher
than that in parental cells. We found that elevated levels of p-p65 were
detected in U266/velR, and the degree of p65 and I-B expression levels
reduced by bortezomib was different between U266/velR and U266. Elevated
levels of p-p65/p65 were effectively suppressed by treating with NF-B
activator inhibitor (6-aminoquinazoline). Also, combined treatment of
bortezomib and 6-aminoquinazoline reduced the expression of DKK1 in
co-culture of U266 cells and BMSCs. The expression of HGF in CD138
fractions of MM bone marrow cells was higher than that in its CD138+
fractions. Whereas, IL-6 and OPN in CD138+ fraction of MM bone marrow
cells was higher compared to its CD138 fractions. In co-culture of U266
and BMSCs, IL-6, OPN and HGF was dramatically increased compared to U266
alone and BMSC alone (pThe importance of the micro-environment in tumor
progression is now well established. Dynamic interaction between multiple
myeloma (MM) cells and bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) plays critical
role in the progression of MM including drug response and bone erosion.
Firstly, we found that DKK1 expression was statistically increased in MM
cells (MOLP8, KMS12BM, KMS12PE, NCIH929, LP1, MOLP2, EJM, U266, RPMI8226,
and 536MM, respectively) co-cultured with BMSCs obtained from MM patients
when compared to MM cells alone (p<0.05). Also, MM cells co-cultured with
BMSCs were significantly more resistant against 25 nM bortezomib than MM
cells alone (p<0.05). We, therefore, established a bortezomib-resistant
cell line using U266 cells (U266/velR), and explored the characteristics
of U266/velR cells. Cytotoxic effect of bortezomib in U266/velR was 1.5
folds lower than U266 cells, and the cross-resistance against thalidomide
was observed. DKK1 expression in U266/velR was higher than that in
parental cells. We found that elevated levels of p-p65 were detected in
U266/velR, and the degree of p65 and I-B expression levels reduced by
bortezomib was different between U266/velR and U266. Elevated levels of
p-p65/p65 were effectively suppressed by treating with NF-B activator
inhibitor (6-aminoquinazoline). Also, combined treatment of bortezomib
and 6-aminoquinazoline reduced the expression of DKK1 in co-culture of
U266 cells and BMSCs. The expression of HGF in CD138 fractions of MM bone
marrow cells was higher than that in its CD138+ fractions. Whereas, IL-6
and OPN in CD138+ fraction of MM bone marrow cells was higher compared to
its CD138 fractions. In co-culture of U266 and BMSCs, IL-6, OPN and HGF
was dramatically increased compared to U266 alone and BMSC alone (p<0.01;
pThe importance of the micro-environment in tumor progression is now well
established. Dynamic interaction between multiple myeloma (MM) cells and
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) plays critical role in the progression
of MM including drug response and bone erosion. Firstly, we found that
DKK1 expression was statistically increased in MM cells (MOLP8, KMS12BM,
KMS12PE, NCIH929, LP1, MOLP2, EJM, U266, RPMI8226, and 536MM,
respectively) co-cultured with BMSCs obtained from MM patients when
compared to MM cells alone (p<0.05). Also, MM cells co-cultured with
BMSCs were significantly more resistant against 25 nM bortezomib than MM
cells alone (p<0.05). We, therefore, established a bortezomib-resistant
cell line using U266 cells (U266/velR), and explored the characteristics
of U266/velR cells. Cytotoxic effect of bortezomib in U266/velR was 1.5
folds lower than U266 cells, and the cross-resistance against thalidomide
was observed. DKK1 expression in U266/velR was higher than that in
parental cells. We found that elevated levels of p-p65 were detected in
U266/velR, and the degree of p65 and I-B expression levels reduced by
bortezomib was different between U266/velR and U266. Elevated levels of
p-p65/p65 were effectively suppressed by treating with NF-B activator
inhibitor (6-aminoquinazoline). Also, combined treatment of bortezomib
and 6-aminoquinazoline reduced the expression of DKK1 in co-culture of
U266 cells and BMSCs. The expression of HGF in CD138 fractions of MM bone
marrow cells was higher than that in its CD138+ fractions. Whereas, IL-6
and OPN in CD138+ fraction of MM bone marrow cells was higher compared to
its CD138 fractions. In co-culture of U266 and BMSCs, IL-6, OPN and HGF
was dramatically increased compared to U266 alone and BMSC alone (p<0.01;
p<0.05). Taken together, cytokines and growth factor regulated by dynamic
interplay between MM cells and BMSCs contributes the bortezomib response
and bone erosion.

