Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin prevents human prostate cancer cell invasion by
inhibiting of matriptase activity


Curcumin has been shown with potent chemopreventive and antitumor effects
on prostate cancer. However, the molecular mechanism how curcumin
suppresses prostate cancer cell migration and invasion is not well
understood. In this study we showed that curcumin could significantly
suppress prostate cancer PC3 cell migration and invasion. Moreover, our
data also showed that curcumin was able to suppress EGF- or
heregulin-stimulated PC-3 cell invasion, as well as androgen-induced
LNCaP cell invasion. Curcumin treatment resulted in not only significant
reductions on MMP-9 and MMP-2 activities, but also on activated level of
matriptase which is a membrane-bound serine protease and has been
proposed to play important roles in tumor invasion and malignancy.
Matriptase is synthesized as a full length zymogen, which is rapidly
stepped into the maturation process, mature form through a cleavage
within the SEA domain to from a latent matriptase. Our data further
showed that curcumin can inhibit the latent matriptase formation in the
maturation process to affect matriptase activity. Furthermore, the
reduction of activated matriptase by curcumin was also partly due to
curcumin promoting the shedding of activated matriptase into
extracellular environment, but not due to curcumin effect on matriptase
gene expression. In addition, we established the stable pools of CWR22Rv1
cells with matriptase overexpression and found that expression of
matriptase in CWR22Rv1 cells enhanced their invasive ability. With
curcumin treatment, the invasive ability induced by matriptase
overexpression was significantly suppressed. In summary, the data
indicated that curcumin exhibits a suppressive effect on prostate cancer
cell invasion, at least in part by down-regulating matriptase activity.

