Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Parf-1A (Partner of ARF isoform 1A) promotes oxaliplatin
resistance and is a new prognostic marker of survival in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma


Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an incurable malignancy with
ineffective treatments and dismal median survival. The INK4a/ARF locus,
which encodes the alternative reading frame (ARF) tumor suppressor, is
commonly inactivated in PDAC tumors. We recently discovered Parf-1A, a
novel Partner of ARF whose role in ARF signaling and tumorigenesis is not
known. Parf-1A is highly expressed in the normal pancreas and microarray
databases suggest Parf expression is altered (both up- and
down-regulated) in human PDAC tumors. We generated Parf-1A specific
antibodies and examined its protein levels by immunohistochemistry in
PDAC tumors from patients who underwent resective surgery. Parf-1A
expression was altered in 72% of tumors (33% reduced, 39% elevated)
compared to adjacent normal ductal tissue. Tumors with the highest
Parf-1A levels were significantly associated with poor patient outcome
(median survival 6 months) while patients with undetectable Parf-1A in
tumors had a dramatically extended lifespan (median survival 59 months,
p=0.0037). Notably, Parf-1A knockdown in cultured PDAC cells increased
the p53-independent growth inhibitory activity of ARF. Parf-1A loss also
sensitized PDAC cells to oxaliplatin, a chemotherapeutic agent used in
combination with gemcitabine to treat PDAC patients. This work identifies
Parf-1A as a new inhibitor of ARF p53-independent activity that promotes
PDAC chemoresistance in vitro and is a novel prognostic marker of
survival in PDAC patients.

