Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel, rapid and sensitive technology to analyze gene expression
directly from archived FFPE clinical oncology specimens without sample
preparation


Formalin-Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) tissue samples are the standard
for clinical oncology tissue sample archiving worldwide. It is estimated
that there are approximately a billion FFPE tissue cancer samples
archived in hospitals and tissue banks around the world, and many of
these samples have full clinical annotation including long term follow-up
data. Current methods of analyzing gene expression in these samples
involve laborious and expensive sample preparation protocols and long
turnaround times (2 days or longer). We have developed a novel, rapid (3
hours), sample-to-answer technology to analyze gene expression from
clinical FFPE tissues without the need for RNA extraction. The technique
is highly sensitive and requires only 2 mm x 5 mm x 10 microns of FFPE
material scraped from a pathology slide. The gene expression data
obtained directly from FFPE without sample preparation correlates highly
with data obtained on RNA extracted from the same FFPE sample using
conventional methods. Importantly, the gene expression data obtained from
prostate and breast FFPE samples correlate highly with microarray data,
and with data from matching mirrored FF (Fresh Frozen) samples. The assay
can be developed for detection using Luminex instrument or Capillary
Electrophoresis instrument (Caliper GX or ABI 3500).

