Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peripheral T-cell lymphomas not otherwise specified correspond to
distinct mature T-cell populations basing on the global gene expression
profile


Peripheral T-cell lymphomas not otherwise specified (PTCLs/NOS) are the
commonest T-cell neoplasms. Recent studies suggested that different
PTCL/NOS subgroups might be identified according to a diverse cellular
derivation or correspondence to various cellular counterparts. However,
so far, it was possible only to discriminate T-helper (TH) vs.
T-cytotoxic (TC) tumors. Noteworthy, due to their typical aberrant
phenotype, such distinction could be effectively performed only by gene
expression profiling (GEP). In addition, further distinctions (i.e. TH
subtypes) were only occasionally described in scattered cases. In this
study, we aimed to define the counterparts of PTCLs/NOS based on their
global GEP. We generated and analyzed GEP from 108 PTCLs/NOS by using
either Affymetrix HG-U133 2.0 plus microarray (N=28 cases) or Illumina
whole genome DASL assay (N=80). The two groups corresponded to
fresh/frozen samples and formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) ones,
respectively. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were built including the same
cases, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used for candidate markers
validation. The molecular signatures of T-cell subsets (Th1, Th2, Th17,
T-follicular helper/Tfh, Treg, T-central memory/Tcm, T-effector
memory/Tem, and T-cytotoxic/TC) were studied in the tumor samples using
previously validated cell classifiers as well as gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA). First, we studied the 28 samples for which fresh/frozen
biopsies were available. We found that 23/28 corresponded to TH and 5/28
to TC cells. Moreover, the TH were more related to Th1 (18/23) rather
then to Th2 (1/23) cells, in 4 instances not being a significant
enrichment in neither one signature. When further signatures were tested,
we found that PTCLs/NOS were more frequently related to Tcm cells
(12/23), than to Tem (5/23), Tfh (2/23), Treg (0/23), or Th17 (0/23).
Four again presented no significant similarity with the studied
populations. We then tested whether reliable profiles could be obtained
from FFPE samples. Notably, we could assign 66/80 (83%) cases to a
specific counterpart. In particular, 42/80 were TH, while 24/80 were TC.
At further analysis, the TH cases were first classified as Th1 (N=21) or
Th2 (N=13) and then as Tcm (N=20), Tem (N=7), Tfh (N=4) or Treg (N=2), 1
not being further classified. IHC confirmed the genomic data as far as
Tfh and Treg markers were concerned, not being available, at present,
consistent IHC markers for Th1, Th2, Tcm and Tem. Conversely, it was
inadequate to distinguish TH and TC, due to the frequent lack of CD4, CD8
and other cytotoxic molecules. In conclusion, we showed that PTCL/NOS
heterogeneity is largely due to the correspondence to different
counterparts and confirmed our previous observation that GEP is probably
more effective than IHC for the sub classification of this tumor type.

