Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of folate deficiency on chemosensitivity of colon
cancer cells to 5-Fluorouracil


Background: Folate is an essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer
reactions including nucleotide biosynthesis, thereby playing an important
role in DNA replication and repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion
interrupts DNA synthesis, thereby causing cancer cell death. This has
been the basis for chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil
(5FU). We determined the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity
of colon cancer cells to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of
folate deficiency. Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116,
Caco-2, HT29) were grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and
2.3 M (replete) of folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth
curves every 3 days for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations
were determined at day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was
determined by the deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro
chemosensitivity of these colon cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin
(LV; 5 M) was determined using a modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116
and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase (TS) activity was measured and TS, p53
and p21 protein expression was determined by immunoblotting. Results: All
three colon cancer cell lines grown in the folate-deficient medium
exhibited significantly slower growth rates than the corresponding cell
lines grown in the folate-replete medium (pBackground: Folate is an
essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer reactions including nucleotide
biosynthesis, thereby playing an important role in DNA replication and
repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion interrupts DNA synthesis,
thereby causing cancer cell death. This has been the basis for
chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil (5FU). We determined
the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity of colon cancer cells
to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of folate deficiency.
Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, Caco-2, HT29) were
grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and 2.3 M (replete) of
folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth curves every 3 days
for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations were determined at
day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was determined by the
deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro chemosensitivity of these colon
cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin (LV; 5 M) was determined using a
modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116 and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase
(TS) activity was measured and TS, p53 and p21 protein expression was
determined by immunoblotting. Results: All three colon cancer cell lines
grown in the folate-deficient medium exhibited significantly slower
growth rates than the corresponding cell lines grown in the
folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Intracellular folate concentrations were
significantly lower in all three cell lines grown in the folate-deficient
medium than those grown in the folate-replete medium (pBackground: Folate
is an essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer reactions including
nucleotide biosynthesis, thereby playing an important role in DNA
replication and repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion interrupts DNA
synthesis, thereby causing cancer cell death. This has been the basis for
chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil (5FU). We determined
the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity of colon cancer cells
to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of folate deficiency.
Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, Caco-2, HT29) were
grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and 2.3 M (replete) of
folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth curves every 3 days
for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations were determined at
day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was determined by the
deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro chemosensitivity of these colon
cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin (LV; 5 M) was determined using a
modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116 and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase
(TS) activity was measured and TS, p53 and p21 protein expression was
determined by immunoblotting. Results: All three colon cancer cell lines
grown in the folate-deficient medium exhibited significantly slower
growth rates than the corresponding cell lines grown in the
folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Intracellular folate concentrations were
significantly lower in all three cell lines grown in the folate-deficient
medium than those grown in the folate-replete medium (p<0.05).
Intracellular folate depletion induced in these cells was functionally
significant as indicated by the deoxyuridine suppression test
(pBackground: Folate is an essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer
reactions including nucleotide biosynthesis, thereby playing an important
role in DNA replication and repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion
interrupts DNA synthesis, thereby causing cancer cell death. This has
been the basis for chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil
(5FU). We determined the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity
of colon cancer cells to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of
folate deficiency. Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116,
Caco-2, HT29) were grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and
2.3 M (replete) of folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth
curves every 3 days for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations
were determined at day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was
determined by the deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro
chemosensitivity of these colon cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin
(LV; 5 M) was determined using a modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116
and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase (TS) activity was measured and TS, p53
and p21 protein expression was determined by immunoblotting. Results: All
three colon cancer cell lines grown in the folate-deficient medium
exhibited significantly slower growth rates than the corresponding cell
lines grown in the folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Intracellular folate
concentrations were significantly lower in all three cell lines grown in
the folate-deficient medium than those grown in the folate-replete medium
(p<0.05). Intracellular folate depletion induced in these cells was
functionally significant as indicated by the deoxyuridine suppression
test (p<0.05). All cells grown in the folate-deficient medium showed
progressively lower intracellular folate concentrations over time
(pBackground: Folate is an essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer
reactions including nucleotide biosynthesis, thereby playing an important
role in DNA replication and repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion
interrupts DNA synthesis, thereby causing cancer cell death. This has
been the basis for chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil
(5FU). We determined the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity
of colon cancer cells to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of
folate deficiency. Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116,
Caco-2, HT29) were grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and
2.3 M (replete) of folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth
curves every 3 days for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations
were determined at day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was
determined by the deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro
chemosensitivity of these colon cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin
(LV; 5 M) was determined using a modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116
and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase (TS) activity was measured and TS, p53
and p21 protein expression was determined by immunoblotting. Results: All
three colon cancer cell lines grown in the folate-deficient medium
exhibited significantly slower growth rates than the corresponding cell
lines grown in the folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Intracellular folate
concentrations were significantly lower in all three cell lines grown in
the folate-deficient medium than those grown in the folate-replete medium
(p<0.05). Intracellular folate depletion induced in these cells was
functionally significant as indicated by the deoxyuridine suppression
test (p<0.05). All cells grown in the folate-deficient medium showed
progressively lower intracellular folate concentrations over time
(p<0.05). All three cell lines grown in the folate-deficient medium
exhibited significantly higher chemosensitivity to 5FU+LV, albeit to a
different degree, compared with those grown in the folate-replete medium
(pBackground: Folate is an essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer
reactions including nucleotide biosynthesis, thereby playing an important
role in DNA replication and repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion
interrupts DNA synthesis, thereby causing cancer cell death. This has
been the basis for chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil
(5FU). We determined the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity
of colon cancer cells to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of
folate deficiency. Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116,
Caco-2, HT29) were grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and
2.3 M (replete) of folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth
curves every 3 days for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations
were determined at day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was
determined by the deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro
chemosensitivity of these colon cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin
(LV; 5 M) was determined using a modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116
and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase (TS) activity was measured and TS, p53
and p21 protein expression was determined by immunoblotting. Results: All
three colon cancer cell lines grown in the folate-deficient medium
exhibited significantly slower growth rates than the corresponding cell
lines grown in the folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Intracellular folate
concentrations were significantly lower in all three cell lines grown in
the folate-deficient medium than those grown in the folate-replete medium
(p<0.05). Intracellular folate depletion induced in these cells was
functionally significant as indicated by the deoxyuridine suppression
test (p<0.05). All cells grown in the folate-deficient medium showed
progressively lower intracellular folate concentrations over time
(p<0.05). All three cell lines grown in the folate-deficient medium
exhibited significantly higher chemosensitivity to 5FU+LV, albeit to a
different degree, compared with those grown in the folate-replete medium
(p<0.05). Caco-2, but not HCT116, cells grown in the folate-deficient
medium showed significantly lower TS activity (pBackground: Folate is an
essential cofactor in one-carbon transfer reactions including nucleotide
biosynthesis, thereby playing an important role in DNA replication and
repair. In cancer cells, folate depletion interrupts DNA synthesis,
thereby causing cancer cell death. This has been the basis for
chemotherapy using antifolates and 5-Fluorouracil (5FU). We determined
the effect of folate deficiency on the sensitivity of colon cancer cells
to 5FU in a well established in vitro model of folate deficiency.
Methods: Three human colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, Caco-2, HT29) were
grown in RPMI1640 medium containing 0 (deficient) and 2.3 M (replete) of
folic acid. Proliferation was measured with growth curves every 3 days
for 12 days and intracellular folate concentrations were determined at
day 0, 6 and 12. Functional folate depletion was determined by the
deoxyuridine suppression test. In vitro chemosensitivity of these colon
cancer cell lines to 5FU with leucovorin (LV; 5 M) was determined using a
modified SRB protein assay. In HCT116 and Caco-2, thymidylate synthase
(TS) activity was measured and TS, p53 and p21 protein expression was
determined by immunoblotting. Results: All three colon cancer cell lines
grown in the folate-deficient medium exhibited significantly slower
growth rates than the corresponding cell lines grown in the
folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Intracellular folate concentrations were
significantly lower in all three cell lines grown in the folate-deficient
medium than those grown in the folate-replete medium (p<0.05).
Intracellular folate depletion induced in these cells was functionally
significant as indicated by the deoxyuridine suppression test (p<0.05).
All cells grown in the folate-deficient medium showed progressively lower
intracellular folate concentrations over time (p<0.05). All three cell
lines grown in the folate-deficient medium exhibited significantly higher
chemosensitivity to 5FU+LV, albeit to a different degree, compared with
those grown in the folate-replete medium (p<0.05). Caco-2, but not
HCT116, cells grown in the folate-deficient medium showed significantly
lower TS activity (p<0.05). Caco-2 cells grown in the folate-deficient
medium had significantly lower protein expression of p53 and p21 but not
TS. No differences in protein expression of TS, p53, and p21 were
observed in HCT116 cells. Conclusion: Our data suggest that folate
deficiency significantly enhances the sensitivity of colon cancer cells
to 5FU based chemotherapy. Dietary or other strategies to deplete
intracellular folate concentrations in colon cancer cells to enhance
chemosensitivity to 5FU are worthy of further investigation. Given the
dramatically increased dietary intake and blood levels of folate in North
America resulting from folic acid fortification and supplementation,
whether or not high folate status would affect chemotherapy for colon
cancer also warrants future studies.

