Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Farletuzumab (mAb003), a neutralizing monoclonal antibody to
folate receptor alpha, enhances paclitaxel efficacy in an ovarian cancer
model


Farletuzumab, MORAb-003 is a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) that
recognizes the folate receptor alpha (FR) which is over-expressed in
various malignancies including ovarian and lung cancers. This presents a
unique approach to an unmet medical need in ovarian cancer therapy by
targeting this receptor. Farletuzumab is currently in clinical trials in
combination with paclitaxel for metastatic ovarian and lung cancer. In
this study we evaluated potential benefit that farletuzumab offers when
added to a traditional chemotherapy in a pre-clinical murine model. In a
human ovarian cancer model, female athymic nude mice were implanted
intraperitoneally with IGROV cells which express FR. One week post tumor
establishment, these mice were treated with Paclitaxel, MORAb-003, or the
combination of the two, respectively. A group of the tumor-bearing mice
received PBS as control. Tumors found in peritoneal cavity were harvested
and weighed, then recorded as tumor burden. In animals treated with
MORAb-003 at 25mg/kg twice weekly for 4 weeks, tumor growth was reduced
near 30%. With treatment of paclitaxel at 0.5 mg/kg weekly for 4 weeks,
the tumor burden in these mice was reduced 65%. An enhancement of
therapeutic effect on tumor burden was clearly observed when MORAb-003
was added to the chemo treatment and resulted in a growth inhibition of
greater than 80%. Our results demonstrate the ability of MORAb003, as a
mono-agent, in inhibiting the growth of ovarian cancer in a murine model.
When added to the chemotherapeutic regimen, it enhances the therapeutic
efficacy of traditional chemotherapy.

