Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TPX2 overexpression is associated with tumorigenesis and patient
outcome of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Background Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is an aggressive
malignancy with dismal prognosis. By microarray data analysis, we aim to
identify molecular changes involved in ESCC tumorigenesis and investigate
their clinical relevance. Methods Five microarray datasets were obtained
from GEO database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified
using t-test with permutation. Pathway analysis was performed with LS/KS
permutation statistics and Efron-Tibshirani's gene set analysis. As for
the validation, we studied: (i) mRNA expression of tumor (T) and matched
normal (N) tissues in 16 ESCC cases from Taipei and Taichung Veterans
General Hospital by the Affymetrix HG U133A array, (ii) protein
expression of target genes in 97 ESCC specimens by immunohistochemical
stains (IHC), and (iii) impact of TPX2 expression on tumor cell
proliferation in ESCC cell line (CE81T). Results A set of 69 DEGs (46 up
and 23 down-regulated in T) was found to be overlapped among five
datasets. Pathway analysis revealed eight out of 306 gene sets to have
altered expression between T and N esophageal epithelium in at least
three datasets. The Role of Ran in mitotic spindle regulation pathway,
which includes AURKA and TPX2 as key regulators, was selected for further
investigation. Verification by microarray analysis of 16 ESCC patients
identified 12 out of 306 gene sets to have altered expression between T
and N specimens. In accordance with previous results, the Role of Ran in
mitotic spindle regulation pathway remains a significant overexpressed
gene set. Both AURKA and TPX2 showed overexpression in tumor tissues
(AURKA, T/N ratio = 3.13, p = 2e-07; TPX2, T/N ratio = 3.22, p = 3e-07).
IHC verification showed positive AURKA and TPX2 expression in 88.4% and
90.6% of ESCC specimens, respectively. Although the expression of AURKA
and TPX2 did not correlate with any clinicopathological factor,
univariate survival analysis indicated high TPX2 expression as a
significant prognostic factor for overall (OS) and disease-free survival
(DFS) (p = 0.036 for OS and 0.038 for DFS). There was also a
non-significant trend toward worse outcome in patients with high AURKA
expression. In multivariate analysis, high TPX2 expression remained an
independent prognostic factor (HR = 2.255, p = 0.005). To further
investigate the effect of TPX2 expression, we performed MTT assay to
determine cell growth of CE81T cell line after manipulating TPX2
expression level. Growth curves demonstrated that growths of vector-based
TPX2 shRNA-mediated knockdown clones were inhibited compared with that of
the parental and vector control groups (p Background Esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) is an aggressive malignancy with dismal prognosis.
By microarray data analysis, we aim to identify molecular changes
involved in ESCC tumorigenesis and investigate their clinical relevance.
Methods Five microarray datasets were obtained from GEO database.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified using t-test with
permutation. Pathway analysis was performed with LS/KS permutation
statistics and Efron-Tibshirani's gene set analysis. As for the
validation, we studied: (i) mRNA expression of tumor (T) and matched
normal (N) tissues in 16 ESCC cases from Taipei and Taichung Veterans
General Hospital by the Affymetrix HG U133A array, (ii) protein
expression of target genes in 97 ESCC specimens by immunohistochemical
stains (IHC), and (iii) impact of TPX2 expression on tumor cell
proliferation in ESCC cell line (CE81T). Results A set of 69 DEGs (46 up
and 23 down-regulated in T) was found to be overlapped among five
datasets. Pathway analysis revealed eight out of 306 gene sets to have
altered expression between T and N esophageal epithelium in at least
three datasets. The Role of Ran in mitotic spindle regulation pathway,
which includes AURKA and TPX2 as key regulators, was selected for further
investigation. Verification by microarray analysis of 16 ESCC patients
identified 12 out of 306 gene sets to have altered expression between T
and N specimens. In accordance with previous results, the Role of Ran in
mitotic spindle regulation pathway remains a significant overexpressed
gene set. Both AURKA and TPX2 showed overexpression in tumor tissues
(AURKA, T/N ratio = 3.13, p = 2e-07; TPX2, T/N ratio = 3.22, p = 3e-07).
IHC verification showed positive AURKA and TPX2 expression in 88.4% and
90.6% of ESCC specimens, respectively. Although the expression of AURKA
and TPX2 did not correlate with any clinicopathological factor,
univariate survival analysis indicated high TPX2 expression as a
significant prognostic factor for overall (OS) and disease-free survival
(DFS) (p = 0.036 for OS and 0.038 for DFS). There was also a
non-significant trend toward worse outcome in patients with high AURKA
expression. In multivariate analysis, high TPX2 expression remained an
independent prognostic factor (HR = 2.255, p = 0.005). To further
investigate the effect of TPX2 expression, we performed MTT assay to
determine cell growth of CE81T cell line after manipulating TPX2
expression level. Growth curves demonstrated that growths of vector-based
TPX2 shRNA-mediated knockdown clones were inhibited compared with that of
the parental and vector control groups (p < 0.05 on day 4 and 5).
Conclusions Using bioinformatics resources, which were validated by
microarray analysis/IHC in our clinical cohorts, and manipulation of TPX2
expression in CE81T cell line, we demonstrated that TPX2 overexpression
is associated with tumorigenesis and patient outcome of ESCC.

