Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44v9 involving in multiple myeloma cells adhesion to bone marrow
stromal cell promotes bone erosion by augmenting the activation of
HGF-receptor/cMet


The main aim of our study is to determine the significance of the stromal
microenvironment in the malignant behavior of multiple myeloma cells. The
stroma-derived growth factors/cytokines and hyaluronan act in
autocrine/paracrine ways with their receptors, including
receptor-tyrosine kinases and CD44 variants (CD44v), to potentiate and
support multiple myeloma cell survival. In this study, we found that
CD44s and CD44 variants were differentially expressed between fraction of
CD138+ fraction and CD138- fraction. Expression levels of CD44v6, CD44v9,
and CD44v10, respectively, correlated with bone erosion (p=0.029,
p=0.013, p=0.032), suggesting that CD44 variant molecules are involved in
multiple myeloma progression. Binding studies using CD44 isoform specific
reagents showed that CD44v6 and CD44v9 were involved in binding to bone
marrow stromal cells, but not to in vitro synthesized ECM. In 3D culture,
CD44v6 and CD44v9-mediated plasma cell binding resulted in a significant
induction of HGF secretion by bone marrow stromal cells. CD44v6 and
CD44v9-mediated plasma cell binding significantly induces PI3K/Akt via
activation the Src-kinase Lyn. In bone marrow serum of MM patients, the
expression levels of IL-6, OPN, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF),
respectively, statistically correlated with bone erosion of MM patients
(p=0.021, p=0.001, p=0.036). HGF derived from bone marrow stromal cells
with multiple myeloma cells stimulates CD44 signaling via activation of
HGF-receptor/cMet. Specific CD44 shRNA suppresses HGF-mediated CD44
signaling. Taken together, the role of CD44 variants in adhesion induced
HGF- secretion may explain the previously observed correlation between
CD44 variants expression and adverse prognosis in multiple myeloma.

