Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Axl is required for EMT-induced stem cell traits and metastasis in
breast cancer


Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) endows carcinoma cells with
migratory, survival and stem cell-like attributes that facilitate
metastasis. We have shown that expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase
Axl in primary breast cancer is a strong independent predictor of poor
overall survival and is further enhanced in matched patient metastases.
Axl is upregulated by EMT-induction in mammary epithelial cells and
establishes an autocrine signaling loop with its ligand, Gas6. Axl
signaling is required to maintain the mesenchymal and stem cell-like
phenotype induced by EMT-transcription factors. Axl-inhibition
downregulated mesenchymal and stem cell marker expression, blocked
invasiveness, inhibited mammosphere formation and reversed drug
resistance. Axl knockdown completely prevented the spread of metastatic
breast carcinoma cells from the mammary gland and increased overall
survival in two different orthotopic breast cancer models. Axl was also
required for breast cancer cells to extravasate into the lung following
intravenous injection. These results suggest that Axl signaling is
necessary for metastasis, stem cell and therapy resistance traits in
breast cancer. Hence, Axl-inhibition represents a novel therapeutic
opportunity to target stem-like and drug resistant breast cancer cells.

