Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aneuploid human colonic epithelial cells are sensitive to
AICAR-induced growth inhibition through EGFR degradation


Trisomy for chromosome 7 is frequently observed as an initiating event in
sporadic colorectal cancer. Although unstable chromosome numbers and
recurrent aneuploidies drive a large fraction of human cancers, targeted
therapies selective to pre-neoplastic trisomic cells are non-existent. We
have previously characterized a trisomy 7 cell line (1CT+7) spontaneously
derived from normal diploid human colonic epithelial cells that
aberrantly express the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR, located on
7p11). Recent studies identified AICAR as a pharmacological inhibitor of
aneuploid murine fibroblast proliferation. Here, we report that AICAR
induces profound cytostatic and metabolic effects on 1CT+7 cells but not
their isogenic diploid counterpart. Dose-response assays demonstrate that
1CT+7 cells are four-fold preferentially sensitive to AICAR compared to
diploid cells. Unexpectedly, treatment of 1CT+7 cells with AICAR led to a
reversible 3.5-fold reduction (p=0.0025) in EGFR overexpression.
AICAR-induced depletion of EGFR protein can be abrogated through
inhibition of the proteasome with MG132. AICAR also heavily promoted EGFR
ubiquitination in cell-based immunoprecipitation assays, suggesting
enhanced degradation of EGFR protein mediated by the proteasome.
Moreover, treatment with AICAR reduced EGFR protein levels in a panel of
human colorectal cancer cells in vitro and in xenograft tumors in vivo.
Our data collectively supports the pharmacological compound AICAR as a
novel inhibitor of EGFR protein abundance and as a potential therapeutic
agent for aneuploidy-driven colorectal cancer.

