Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog signaling regulates drug sensitivity by targeting ABC
transporters in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)


A major challenge of successful chemotherapy in treatment of ovarian
cancer is overcoming intrinsic or acquired multi-drug resistance caused
mostly by the active efflux mediated by ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporters. The regulation of these transporters in ovarian cancer is
poorly understood. Our research shows that in ovarian cancer, abnormal
regulation of the hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in
regulation of ABC transporters. Hh is a known regulator of cancer cell
proliferation and differentiation in several other types of invasive and
metastatic malignancies. Our work on Gli1, a key Hh downstream signaling
gene, has shown frequent activation of the Hh pathway in ovarian cancer.
Inhibition of the Hh signaling pathway by inhibitors or Gli1 siRNA
increases ABC gene expression levels and the response of ovarian cancer
cells to certain chemotherapeutic drugs. The mechanism underlying is a
direct association of Gli1 with a specific consensus sequence located in
the promoter region of ABC genes. This study provides new information in
the knowledge of ABC gene regulation and will contribute to generating
new targets/markers to detect and anticipate ovarian cancer patient
chemotherapy drug sensitivity which could lead to more effective
treatments and improved survival.

