Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYP3A4 epoxygenase mediates hypoxia-induced biosynthesis of
epoxyeicosatrienoic acids ()-11,12- and ()-14,15-EET in breast cancer
cells


Introduction: CYP3A4 has recently been implicated in the growth of breast
cancer cell proliferation but whether it promotes cell proliferation
under conditions of hypoxia is unknown. This autocrine/paracrine growth
promoting mechanism is dependent on epoxygenase activity, requires
epoxygenation of arachidonic acid and can be complemented by add back of
()-14,15-EET. Ambient tissue oxygen concentrations in tumors range from
sub-microM to 50 microM. Methods: Human recombinant CYP3A4
SupersomesTM(BD Bioscience)-catalyzed epoxygenation of arachidonic acid
(AA, 100 M) reaction was performed at 37C in the presence of a NADPH
regenerating system. Oxygen concentration of the reaction solution was
varied and rates of oxygen consumption were recorded with an oxygen
electrode. Lineweaver Burke analysis was performed to calculate the
oxygen Michaelis-Menten constant (Km). MCF7 breast cancer lines stably
expressing two different CYP3A4 shRNA expression constructs were exposed
to hypoxic conditions ([O2]=50 M) and EET levels were quantified.
Results: The oxygen Km for CYP3A4 was 21 M. Under hypoxic incubation
([O2]=50 M), ()-8,9-EET levels were unaffected but ()-11,12-EET and
()-14,15-EET levels were induced 1.5 and 1.3-fold (PIntroduction: CYP3A4
has recently been implicated in the growth of breast cancer cell
proliferation but whether it promotes cell proliferation under conditions
of hypoxia is unknown. This autocrine/paracrine growth promoting
mechanism is dependent on epoxygenase activity, requires epoxygenation of
arachidonic acid and can be complemented by add back of ()-14,15-EET.
Ambient tissue oxygen concentrations in tumors range from sub-microM to
50 microM. Methods: Human recombinant CYP3A4 SupersomesTM(BD
Bioscience)-catalyzed epoxygenation of arachidonic acid (AA, 100 M)
reaction was performed at 37C in the presence of a NADPH regenerating
system. Oxygen concentration of the reaction solution was varied and
rates of oxygen consumption were recorded with an oxygen electrode.
Lineweaver Burke analysis was performed to calculate the oxygen
Michaelis-Menten constant (Km). MCF7 breast cancer lines stably
expressing two different CYP3A4 shRNA expression constructs were exposed
to hypoxic conditions ([O2]=50 M) and EET levels were quantified.
Results: The oxygen Km for CYP3A4 was 21 M. Under hypoxic incubation
([O2]=50 M), ()-8,9-EET levels were unaffected but ()-11,12-EET and
()-14,15-EET levels were induced 1.5 and 1.3-fold (P<0.05; Student
t-test). The MCF7 CYP3A4 knock down line 3-18 line, which exhibits 80%
knock down of CYP3A4, exhibited no response to hypoxia compared to the
MCF7 non-target (NT) line, which exhibited 1.25 and 1.33 fold increase of
()-11,12- and ()-14,15-EET respectively. Remarkably, ()-8,9-EET exhibited
no induction under hypoxic conditions. Conclusions: These results
indicate that CYP3A4, which is known to promote breast cancer cell
proliferation, is responsive to oxygen under ambient conditions
comparable to those found in hypoxic tissues, exhibiting a Km of 21 M.
These results also indicate that hypoxia induces EETs in the breast
cancer line, in a fashion dependent on CYP3A4. CYP3A4 therefore provides
the majority of EETs induced in breast cancer cells under conditions of
hypoxia and may contribute to autocrine and paracrine breast cancer
growth signals under these conditions.

