Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput TR-FRET cellular assays for interrogating histone
H3 methylation


Post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation, acetylation and
methylation play important roles in regulating the structures and
functions of histones, which in turn regulate gene expression and DNA
repair and replication. Histone modifying enzymes, such as deacetylases,
methyltransferases and demethylases, have been pursued as therapeutic
targets for various diseases. However, detection of the activities of
these enzymes in high-throughput cell-based formats has remained
challenging. We have developed high-throughput LanthaScreen cellular
assays for histone H3 site-specific modifications. These assays utilize
cells expressing green fluorescence protein (GFP) tagged-histone H3
transiently delivered via BacMam and terbium labeled-anti-histone H3
modification-specific antibodies. Robust time-resolved Foerster resonance
energy transfer signals were detected for H3 lysine-9 di-methylation
(K9me2), lysine-4 di- (K4me2) and tri-methylation (K4me3) and lysine-27
tri-methylation (K27me3). Consistent with previous reports, hypoxic
stress increased K4 methylation levels and methyltransferase G9a
inhibitor UNC-0638 decreased K9me2 levels significantly with little
effects on other modifications. Further validation of these assays using
methyltransferases-specific RNAi oligos demonstrated that EZH2-specific
RNAi reduced the level of K27me3 with little effect on the other three
modifications, whereas G9a RNAi and SMYD3 RNAi reduced K9me2 and K4me2/3,
respectively. The use of BacMam gene delivery system enables the
measurement of these histone methylations in a variety of cell
backgrounds including primary cells. In conclusion, we have developed
homogenous cellular assays that can enable the high-throughput screening
for modulators of histone H3 methylation at various lysine sites.

