Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Curcumin inhibition of the functional interaction between integrin
64 and the epidermal growth factor receptor


The functional interaction between integrin 64 and growth factor
receptors has been implicated in key signaling pathways important for
cancer cell function. However, few attempts have been made to selectively
target this interaction for therapeutic intervention. Previous studies
showed that curcumin, a yellow pigment isolated from tumeric, inhibits
integrin 64 signaling important for breast carcinoma cell motility and
invasion, but the mechanism is not currently known. To address this
issue, we tested the hypothesis that curcumin inhibits the functional
interaction between 64 and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
In this study, we found that curcumin disrupts functional and physical
interactions between 64 and EGFR, and blocks 64/EGFR dependent functions
of carcinoma cells expressing the signaling competent form of 64. We
further demonstrated that curcumin inhibits EGF dependent mobilization of
64 from hemidesmosomes to the leading edges of migrating cells such as
lammelipodia and filopodia, and thereby prevents 64 distribution to lipid
rafts where functional interactions between 64 and EGFR occur. These data
suggest a novel paradigm in which curcumin inhibits 64 signaling and
functions by altering intracellular localization of 64, thus preventing
its association with signaling receptors such as EGFR.

