Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p28, a cell penetrating peptide fragment of azurin, inhibits COP1
mediated ubiquitination of wild type and mutated p53, but does not alter
intracellular levels of c-jun


Amino acids (aa) 50-77 of azurin, p28, a 128 aa member of the cupredoxin
family of copper containing redox proteins, isolated from the
opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a cell penetrating
peptide (CPP) that preferentially penetrates a wide variety of human
cancer cells. Exposure of p53wt, mut cancer cells to p28 produces a post
translational increase in the level of p53, inhibition of the cell cycle
at G2/M and apoptosis (Yamada et. al., Mol. Can. Therap., 8:2947-58,
2009). Computer simulation (ClusPro, GROMACS) and domain specific
antibodies to p53 suggest p28 binds to motifs that span aa 110146 in
flexible L1 loop and 80 and 276 of the p53 DNA binding domain (DBD),
respectively. Western and RT-PCR analyses of human breast cancer, MCF-7
(p53wt), MCF-7 derived MDD2 (p53dom/neg), MDA-MB-231 (p53mut), and
melanoma cells, Mel-29 (p53wt), Mel-23 (p53mut) and Mel-6 (p53null)
exposed to p28 for 72 hrs showed a significant increase in the levels of
p53 and p21 in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, Mel-29 and Mel-23 cells, while
significantly reducing the level of FoxM1 over a 72hr exposure. The level
of STMN1 was not altered suggesting the block at G2/M does not involve
microtubules. p28 significantly decreased the level of the E3 ligase COP1
in p53wt, mut MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, Mel-29 and Mel-23, but not in p53null
Mel-6 cells. In addition, p28 did not significantly decrease the level of
E3 ligases TOPORS, Pirh2 or HDM2 which also ubiquitinate p53. The levels
of p53, p21, FoxM 1, STMN1, COP1, TOPORS and Pirh2 either remained
essentially at control levels (p53, p21) or were elevated (FoxM1, STMN1,
COP1, TOPORS, Pirh2) at some point during a 72 hr exposure of p53dom/neg
MDD2 cells to p28. In contrast, COP1 has also been reported to negatively
regulate cell proliferation in a c-jun-dependent manner and not regulate
intracellular levels of p53 (Migliorini et. al., J. Clin. Invest., 121:
1329-43, 2011). The p28 induced decrease in the level of COP1 in p53wt,
mut cancer cells was not accompanied by a sustained increase in c-jun, in
any cancer cell line, suggesting that COP1 regulates the level of p53 in
cancer cells independent of any effect on c-jun. These data also suggest
that COP1, but not TOPORS or Pirh2, also binds within this region of p53,
and that COP1 is a major regulator of p53 activity. In sum, these data
suggest that p28 binds to a specific motif within the p53 DBD where it
inhibits COP1 mediated binding to and ubiquitination of p53.

