Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High Galectin-1 expression correlates with poor prognosis and is
involved in epithelial ovarian cancer proliferation and invasion


Purpose: Galectin-1 (Gal-1) is a 14-kDa laminin-binding galectin involved
in several biologic events including regulation of tumor proliferation
and metastasis. In this study, we investigated the clinical significance
of Gal-1 expression and its functional role in cell proliferation and
invasion in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Experimental Design: We
evaluated the expression of Gal-1 in 52 serous, 11 endometrioid, and 3
mucinous type EOC tumor samples from 66 patients by immunohistochemistry.
In vitro experiments were performed to determine the function of Gal-1 in
cell survival, proliferation, and invasion in EOC cells using siRNA and
anginex, a Gal-1 inhibitor, as well as recombinant Gal-1 protein.
Results: Patients with strong Gal-1 peritumoral staining had poorer
progression-free survival (PFS) than patients with weak peritumoral
staining (P = 0.03). Inhibition of Gal-1 by siRNA or anginex resulted in
the inhibition of cell growth and proliferation of HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1
cells. Moreover, the ability of cells to migrate was significantly
reduced by treatment of cells with Gal-1 siRNA but was increased by
treatment of cells with recombinant Gal-1. When we evaluated the
interaction between fibroblasts (H HESC) and cancer cells (A2780-CP20),
we found that MMP-2 expression in cancer cells was affected by Gal-1
secreted by fibroblast cells, which suggests that Gal-1 in human
fibroblasts might affect the invasive abilities of tumor cells.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that Gal-1 expression is a potential
prognostic factor for PFS and that Gal-1 could be a novel treatment
target in EOC patients.

