Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hyaluronan mediates interactions between CD44+ MSCs and CD34+
fibrocytes in Desmoid Tumors.


We reported that 16/16 sporadic and familial desmoid tumors (DTs)
contained CD44+CD73+CD90+Bmi1+ mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) and
CD34+CD105+ALK1+ monocyte-derived fibrocytes. Hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) and MSCs reside in the same bone marrow niche, and MSCs regulate
HSC progenitor release into the circulation. Numerous signaling pathways
maintain chemotactic and physical crosstalk between these types of stem
cells (c-Kit/SCF, CXCR4/SDF-1, Notch/Jagged1, etc). HSC and MSC
progenitors are both recruited to sites of tissue injury to aid in wound
healing. We were interested to learn what crosstalk engages these
multipotent cells in DTs. Hyaluronan (HA) is a long charged chain of
repeating glucuronate and N-acteylglucosamine disaccharides that is
synthesized by HA synthases (HAS 1, 2, 3) and degraded by hyaluronidases
(HYAL1, 2). HA binds to receptors CD44, TLR2/4 and Hyaluronan binding
protein (HABP). Immunofluorescent histochemistry was performed on our
tumor collection to determine the expression of both metabolic and
catabolic HA enzymes. All of our DTs contained cells expressing HA,
HYAL2, HAS2, and HABP2. HABP2 attenuates hyaluronan-receptor
interactions. Double staining showed that all MSCs expressed HA and HAS2,
confirming the functional significance of the CD44+ receptor in these
cells. The majority of MSCs co-expressed HABP2. CD34+ fibrocytes but not
CD44+ MSCs co-expressed HYAL2. CD44 expression by MSCs is stimulated by
PDGF-BB, and in DTs, CD44+ MSCs co-expressed PDGFR. These results suggest
that paracrine regulation of HA signaling in these tumors may be another
way in which MSCs and fibrocytes crosstalk.

