Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-mediated apoptotic signaling overcomes the resistance to
oncolytic adenovirus in human osteosarcoma cells


Despite major advances in the treatment of bone and soft tissue sarcomas,
about one fourth of the patients show a poor response to conventional
therapy, resulting in subsequent recurrence and leading to a poor
prognosis. Therefore, the development of a novel therapeutic strategy is
required to cure patients with bone and soft tissue sarcomas. We
previously developed an oncolytic adenovirus, OBP-301, in which human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) gene promoter drives viral E1
gene for replication. OBP-301 induces tumor-specific oncolytic cell death
in a telomerase-dependent manner. Recently, we revealed that OBP-301
shows cytopathic activity in human bone and soft tissue sarcoma cells.
However, some human osteosarcoma cells were less sensitive to cytopathic
activity of OBP-301. To enhance the cytopathic activity of OBP-301, we
recently developed a novel telomerase-specific oncolytic adenovirus,
OBP-702, which expresses tumor suppressor p53 gene. In this study, we
investigated the antitumor effect of OBP-702 in OBP-301-sensitive (OST,
HOS and U2OS) and OBP-301-resistant (MNNG/HOS and SaOS-2) human
osteosarcoma cells. We compared the antitumor effects of OBP-702 and
OBP-301 using XTT assay. The 50% inhibiting dose (ID50) value of OBP-702
and OBP-301 for each cell was calculated using cell viability data
obtained on day 5 after virus infection. We further evaluated the
expression of p53, p21 and cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
proteins using western blot analysis in both OBP-301-sensitive and
OBP-301-resistant osteosarcoma cells after infection with OBP-702 or
Ad-p53, which is a p53-expressing replication-defective adenovirus.
OBP-702 showed more cytopathic activity compared to OBP-301 in both
OBP-301-sensitive and OBP-301-resistant osteosarcoma cells. The ID50
value of OBP-702 was lower than that of OBP-301 in all cell lines.
OBP-702 induced not only oncolysis, but also apoptotic cell death with
the cleavage of PARP. OBP-702 infection induced more profound p53
expression than Ad-p53. However, p53-downstream target p21 proteins were
not activated by OBP-702. Taken together, we demonstrated that the
p53-expressing oncolytic adenovirus OBP-702 has a much stronger antitumor
effect than OBP-301 in human osteosarcoma cells. Oncolytic
adenovirus-mediated p53 gene transduction would induce profound apoptosis
through p53 upregulation without p21 activation, resulting in the
enhancement of antitumor effect by OBP-301. OBP-702 would be a promising
antitumor reagent for the treatment of OBP-301-resistant human
osteosarcoma cells.

