Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of EP-100 in Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma - synergy in
combination


EP-100 is a targeted anti-cancer peptide comprised of Luteinizing Hormone
Releasing Hormone (LHRH) fused to a membrane-disrupting peptide (MDP). It
is currently in Phase 1 clinical trial in tumors that over-express LHRH
receptors. EP-100 kills cancer cells directly via membrane disruption. We
tested a combination of EP-100 and doxorubicin in multi-drug resistant
Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (NHL) cell lines and primary cells from
refractory/relapsed NHL patients. Cells were cultured in the presence of
EP-100 (0.00001-100 M) or unconjugated MDP alone or in combination with
doxorubicin (0.0000056 - 56.5 M) and EP 100 at 0.5, 5, 50 and 500 nM.
Cytotoxicity was determined by membrane integrity and cell viability
assays. LHRH receptor expression was determined by flow cytometry. The
effect of EP-100 on purified human recombinant p-glycoprotein (h-pgp)
pump was measured by ATPase activity. The IC50 values [M] for EP-100
alone were 0.520.13, 0.950.2, 2.80.5, 0.90.13 and values for unconjugated
MDP were 591.5, 25.61.7, 6.10.8 after 5 h of incubation for Daudi, Raji,
Toledo, Hut78 cells, respectively. EP-100 specifically killed NHL patient
cells and unconjugated MDP was ineffective. The IC50 values for EP-100
were 1.2 0.1M for cells obtained from three Mantle Cell Lymphoma patients
(N=3), 2.3 0.1 M for Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma patient (N=1), 1.7 0.3
M for Follicular Lymphoma patients (N=4), and 1.6 0.1 M for one
Waldenstr[[Unable to Display Character: o]]m Macroglobunemia patient.
EP-100 or unconjugated MDP did not kill B-cells from normal subjects
(N=2) after 5 hour incubation. LHRH receptors were over-expressed on cell
lines and patient cells. Combination of EP-100 with doxorubicin resulted
in synergistic responses after 72 hours of incubation and Combination
Index was EP-100 is a targeted anti-cancer peptide comprised of
Luteinizing Hormone Releasing Hormone (LHRH) fused to a
membrane-disrupting peptide (MDP). It is currently in Phase 1 clinical
trial in tumors that over-express LHRH receptors. EP-100 kills cancer
cells directly via membrane disruption. We tested a combination of EP-100
and doxorubicin in multi-drug resistant Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma (NHL) cell
lines and primary cells from refractory/relapsed NHL patients. Cells were
cultured in the presence of EP-100 (0.00001-100 M) or unconjugated MDP
alone or in combination with doxorubicin (0.0000056 - 56.5 M) and EP 100
at 0.5, 5, 50 and 500 nM. Cytotoxicity was determined by membrane
integrity and cell viability assays. LHRH receptor expression was
determined by flow cytometry. The effect of EP-100 on purified human
recombinant p-glycoprotein (h-pgp) pump was measured by ATPase activity.
The IC50 values [M] for EP-100 alone were 0.520.13, 0.950.2, 2.80.5,
0.90.13 and values for unconjugated MDP were 591.5, 25.61.7, 6.10.8 after
5 h of incubation for Daudi, Raji, Toledo, Hut78 cells, respectively.
EP-100 specifically killed NHL patient cells and unconjugated MDP was
ineffective. The IC50 values for EP-100 were 1.2 0.1M for cells obtained
from three Mantle Cell Lymphoma patients (N=3), 2.3 0.1 M for Diffuse
Large B Cell Lymphoma patient (N=1), 1.7 0.3 M for Follicular Lymphoma
patients (N=4), and 1.6 0.1 M for one Waldenstr[[Unable to Display
Character: o]]m Macroglobunemia patient. EP-100 or unconjugated MDP did
not kill B-cells from normal subjects (N=2) after 5 hour incubation. LHRH
receptors were over-expressed on cell lines and patient cells.
Combination of EP-100 with doxorubicin resulted in synergistic responses
after 72 hours of incubation and Combination Index was <1. EP-100
directly inhibited the h-pgp ATPase activity. These results show that
specific killing of NHL cells by EP-100 is mediated via over-expression
of LHRH receptors and the synergy between EP-100 and doxorubicin is due
to direct inhibition of EP-100 on h-pgp pump.

