Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activity of the specific anti-ADAM17 inhibitory IgG antibody (Ab),
D1(A12) in an ovarian cancer model in vivo


ADAM17 (TNF- converting enzyme, TACE) is a membrane-bound
metalloproteinase responsible for ectodomain shedding of TNF-, EGFR
ligands and other pathologically significant proteins. ADAM17
overexpression is reported in many cancers, with roles in cancer cell
proliferation, migration and drug resistance. Small molecule inhibitors
of ADAM17 lack specificity, so we developed a specific human ADAM17
inhibitory IgG Ab, D1(A12), which inhibits the proteolysis of ADAM17
substrates (TNF-, amphiregulin, etc.,) in cancer cells in vitro (C.J.
Tape, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 5578-83, 2011). We have now
assessed the suitability of the D1(A12) Ab for therapeutic use, by
investigating its pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD) and
anti-tumour efficacy in mice. The IGROV1-Luc xenograft model of
intraperitoneal (i.p.) disseminated ovarian carcinoma in nude mice was
used, as IGROV1-Luc cells secrete TNF- and other ADAM17 products and
knockdown of TNF- expression inhibits tumour growth (H. Kulbe, et al.,
Cancer Res., 67: 585- 592, 2007). We investigated the PK of D1(A12) Ab
using a single 10 mg/kg dose i.p., first in non-tumour-bearing (NTB) mice
and then in mice bearing IGROV1-Luc tumours, measuring the concentration
of D1(A12) IgG in plasma and ascitic fluid by ELISA. In NTB mice, plasma
Cmax was 512 nM, half life 8.6 days. The concentrations in tumour-bearing
mice were expected to be lower due to a larger volume of distribution due
to the ascitic fluid, and in tumour-bearing mice the Cmax was 425 nM in
plasma and 391 nM in ascitic fluid. The PK data suggest that weekly
dosing with 10 mg/kg D1(A12) maintains therapeutically active
concentrations of the IgG, so this regimen was used for an efficacy study
comparing D1(A12) with vehicle. D1(A12) showed clear PD effects: Ascitic
fluid concentrations of 3 ADAM17 products were reduced when compared to
vehicle: AREG (55 +/ 19 vs 302 +/ 37 pg/ml, p ADAM17 (TNF- converting
enzyme, TACE) is a membrane-bound metalloproteinase responsible for
ectodomain shedding of TNF-, EGFR ligands and other pathologically
significant proteins. ADAM17 overexpression is reported in many cancers,
with roles in cancer cell proliferation, migration and drug resistance.
Small molecule inhibitors of ADAM17 lack specificity, so we developed a
specific human ADAM17 inhibitory IgG Ab, D1(A12), which inhibits the
proteolysis of ADAM17 substrates (TNF-, amphiregulin, etc.,) in cancer
cells in vitro (C.J. Tape, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 5578-83,
2011). We have now assessed the suitability of the D1(A12) Ab for
therapeutic use, by investigating its pharmacokinetics (PK),
pharmacodynamics (PD) and anti-tumour efficacy in mice. The IGROV1-Luc
xenograft model of intraperitoneal (i.p.) disseminated ovarian carcinoma
in nude mice was used, as IGROV1-Luc cells secrete TNF- and other ADAM17
products and knockdown of TNF- expression inhibits tumour growth (H.
Kulbe, et al., Cancer Res., 67: 585- 592, 2007). We investigated the PK
of D1(A12) Ab using a single 10 mg/kg dose i.p., first in
non-tumour-bearing (NTB) mice and then in mice bearing IGROV1-Luc
tumours, measuring the concentration of D1(A12) IgG in plasma and ascitic
fluid by ELISA. In NTB mice, plasma Cmax was 512 nM, half life 8.6 days.
The concentrations in tumour-bearing mice were expected to be lower due
to a larger volume of distribution due to the ascitic fluid, and in
tumour-bearing mice the Cmax was 425 nM in plasma and 391 nM in ascitic
fluid. The PK data suggest that weekly dosing with 10 mg/kg D1(A12)
maintains therapeutically active concentrations of the IgG, so this
regimen was used for an efficacy study comparing D1(A12) with vehicle.
D1(A12) showed clear PD effects: Ascitic fluid concentrations of 3 ADAM17
products were reduced when compared to vehicle: AREG (55 +/ 19 vs 302 +/
37 pg/ml, p < 0.001), soluble hTNFR1 (479 +/ 100 vs 2108 +/ 204 pg/ml, p
ADAM17 (TNF- converting enzyme, TACE) is a membrane-bound
metalloproteinase responsible for ectodomain shedding of TNF-, EGFR
ligands and other pathologically significant proteins. ADAM17
overexpression is reported in many cancers, with roles in cancer cell
proliferation, migration and drug resistance. Small molecule inhibitors
of ADAM17 lack specificity, so we developed a specific human ADAM17
inhibitory IgG Ab, D1(A12), which inhibits the proteolysis of ADAM17
substrates (TNF-, amphiregulin, etc.,) in cancer cells in vitro (C.J.
Tape, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 5578-83, 2011). We have now
assessed the suitability of the D1(A12) Ab for therapeutic use, by
investigating its pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD) and
anti-tumour efficacy in mice. The IGROV1-Luc xenograft model of
intraperitoneal (i.p.) disseminated ovarian carcinoma in nude mice was
used, as IGROV1-Luc cells secrete TNF- and other ADAM17 products and
knockdown of TNF- expression inhibits tumour growth (H. Kulbe, et al.,
Cancer Res., 67: 585- 592, 2007). We investigated the PK of D1(A12) Ab
using a single 10 mg/kg dose i.p., first in non-tumour-bearing (NTB) mice
and then in mice bearing IGROV1-Luc tumours, measuring the concentration
of D1(A12) IgG in plasma and ascitic fluid by ELISA. In NTB mice, plasma
Cmax was 512 nM, half life 8.6 days. The concentrations in tumour-bearing
mice were expected to be lower due to a larger volume of distribution due
to the ascitic fluid, and in tumour-bearing mice the Cmax was 425 nM in
plasma and 391 nM in ascitic fluid. The PK data suggest that weekly
dosing with 10 mg/kg D1(A12) maintains therapeutically active
concentrations of the IgG, so this regimen was used for an efficacy study
comparing D1(A12) with vehicle. D1(A12) showed clear PD effects: Ascitic
fluid concentrations of 3 ADAM17 products were reduced when compared to
vehicle: AREG (55 +/ 19 vs 302 +/ 37 pg/ml, p < 0.001), soluble hTNFR1
(479 +/ 100 vs 2108 +/ 204 pg/ml, p < 0.001) and TGF- (0.35 +/ 0.67 vs
5.2 +/ 2.2 pg/ml, p = 0.002), indicative of inhibition of ADAM17 activity
in vivo. However, D1(A12) did not significantly reduce the concentration
of TNF- in ascitic fluid (109 +/ 21 vs 134 +/32 pg/ml, p = 0.06),
suggesting that in this system ADAM17 is not the only metalloproteinase
with TACE activity. Tumour burden was quantified using bioluminescence
generated from the luciferase expressing cells, measured using an IVIS
xenogen 200 imager. There was decreased tumour growth in the
D1(A12)-treated group (compared to vehicle), although this did not reach
statistical significance (p=0.09). In conclusion we have shown that the
anti-ADAM17 antibody has PK properties suitable for therapeutic studies
and that it can inhibit shedding of ADAM17-dependent growth factors in
vivo.

