Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical significance of p53 codon 72 polymorphism in
hepatocellular carcinomas


Purpose: We recently demonstrated that, in colorectal carcinomas, the
presence of a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at codon 72 of the p53
gene was associated with a poor outcome for African American (AA)
patients. Since such studies have not been performed for hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCCs), we determined, for AAs and non-Hispanic Caucasians
(NHCAs), the prevalence of p53 SNPs in codon 72 of HCCs and its
association with adverse clinical and pathological features. Methods: DNA
samples extracted from 48 archived, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded HCC
tissues and from matching, uninvolved liver were analyzed for the
mutational status of the p53 gene by sequencing exon 4 through exon 9.
The results obtained were correlated with the demographic and
clinicopathological features of the HCCs and with patient survival.
Results: Overall, the frequency of missense point mutations in p53 of
HCCs was low (6 of 48, 12%). Missense point mutations, however, were
common in NHCAs (4 of 6). Genotyping of codon 72 of p53 demonstrated that
the Arg/Arg phenotype had the highest frequency (27 of 48; 56%), followed
by Arg/Pro (16 of 48; 33%) and Pro/Pro (5 of 48; 11%). Four of five
patients with the Pro/Pro phenotype were AAs (2 p = 0.028). Of these,
three of the four tumors had high proliferative (ki67) indices; two of
the four were poorly differentiated. In contrast, poorly differentiated
tumors were few in Arg/Arg (1 of 27, 4%) and Arg/Pro (1 of 16; 6%) (2p =
0.016) phenotype groups. For all patients, the Pro/Pro phenotype were
associated with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection (2 p = 0.048).
Furthermore, AAs with the Pro/Pro phenotype had lower median survival
(15.5 months) compared to those with the Arg/Arg and Arg/Pro (32 months)
phenotypes. NHCA patients with missense point mutations had shorter
median survival (22.5 months) relative to NHCAs with wild-type p53 (34
months).Conclusion: These preliminary findings suggest that, in AAs, the
Pro/Pro phenotype at codon 72 of the p53 gene is associated with
aggressive tumor behavior, shorter median survival, and HCV infection.
These pilot studies were supported jointly by a Charles Barkley Award
through the UAB Minority Health Disparities Research Center (MHRC) and
the UAB Center for Clinical and Translational Science (5UL1 RR025777-04).

