Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Depletion of unsaturated fatty acids by stearoyl-coA desaturase
inhibition results in endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated tumor cell
death


Over the past few years, a more detailed picture of the importance of
metabolic pathways to the maintenance and progression of human cancers
has begun to emerge. In particular, recent studies have implicated lipid
biosynthesis and desaturation as a requirement for tumor cell survival.
The endoplasmic reticulum-resident Stearoyl CoA Desaturase (SCD) is the
rate limiting enzyme that catalyzes conversion of saturated fatty acids
to monounsaturated fatty acids, a key step in the fatty acid metabolic
network. In the studies reported here, we show that inhibition of SCD1 by
siRNA or a small molecule antagonist results in strong induction of
apoptosis and growth inhibition when tumor cells are cultured in reduced
(2%) serum conditions but has little impact on cells cultured under
normal (10%) serum conditions. Consistent with the observed dependence on
SCD1, levels of SCD1 protein increased in response to decreasing serum
levels. Both induction of SCD1 protein and sensitivity to growth
inhibition by SCD1 inhibition could be reversed by supplementing growth
media with unsaturated fatty acids. Transcription profiling of cells
treated with an SCD inhibitor revealed strong induction of markers of
endoplasmic reticulum stress. This finding was confirmed using siRNA
specifically targeting SCD1. Underscoring its importance in cancer, SCD1
protein was found to be highly expressed in a large percentage of human
cancer specimens. SCD inhibition resulted in tumor growth delay in a
human gastric cancer xenograft model. Altogether, these results suggest
that unsaturated fatty acids are required for tumor cell survival and
that SCD may represent a viable target for the development of novel
agents for cancer therapy.

