Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Developing a public resource for structural biology and cancer
pathway plasmids


Understanding the structure and function of the genes involved in cancer
is crucial to dissecting the underlying mechanisms of cancer development,
progression and treatment. The Protein Structure
Initiative:Biology-Materials Repository (MR; http://psimr.asu.edu)
connects researchers with both the genetic raw materials and the
structural knowledge to better understand the roles of individual genes
in cancer pathways. As a centralized plasmid repository, the MR is
responsible for sequence-verification, archival, and distribution of
plasmids created by the high throughput structural genomics efforts of
the Protein Structure Initiative (PSI). Plasmid annotations such as the
full length sequence, vector information, and associated publications are
stored in a freely available, searchable database called DNASU
(http://dnasu.asu.edu). Each plasmid also links to external resources,
including the PSI Structural Biology Knowledgebase (http://sbkb.org)
facilitating cross-referencing of plasmids to additional protein
annotations and experimental data. In addition to the 50,000 protein
expression plasmids and empty vectors from the PSI, DNASU distributes
over 151,000 plasmids including collections of human kinases, 1,000
breast cancer-related genes, over 10,000 human genes in several cloning
and expression vectors, and over 800 glyco-enzyme plasmids that were
created by or in collaboration with the MR, the ORFeome Collaboration, or
individual laboratories. Furthermore, the MR strives to expedite and
simplify plasmid requests through its expedited material transfer
agreement (EP-MTA) network, where researchers from network institutions
can order and receive PSI plasmids without institutional delays. By
providing these plasmids to the research community, the MR is able to
facilitate and accelerate the study of the biological function of
proteins involved in cancer and whose structures have been solved by the
PSI.

