Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual roles for ganoderic acid A in inducing apoptosis and
enhancing HLA class II presentation in leukemia and lymphoma cells


Ganoderic acid A (GA-A), a natural extract isolated from the medicinal
mushroom Ganoderma lucidum, was found to induce a remarkable cytotoxicity
in various leukemia and lymphoma cell lines and primary tumors, with a
minor toxicity to nonmalignant B-cells. The GA-A cytotoxicity and growth
inhibitory effects resulted from an induction of apoptosis, which was
characterized by a dose-dependent increase in expression and activity of
activated caspases 3, 8, and 9. Mechanistic studies showed that GA-A
treatment upregulated pro-apoptotic protein Bax proteins while
downregulating anti-apototic proteins Bcl-2 and survivin. Data also
demonstrated that cytochrome c and apoptotic protease activating factor-1
(Apaf-1) were significantly elevated in the cytoplasmic fractions of
GA-A-treated cells, which may have activated caspases for cell death.
Despite GA-A's notable cytotoxic effects on leukemia and lymphoma cells,
GA-A treatment enhanced HLA class II antigen (Ag) presentation and CD4+ T
cell recognition of both malignant and nonmalignant B-cells. These data
suggest that GA-A administration may play dual roles in inducing
apoptosis and enhancing HLA class II Ag presentation, and could be used
as novel adjunctive therapy for the treatment of hematological
malignancies.

