Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Large-scale DNA copy number analysis as a biomarker study in the
ACTS-CC trial (TRICC0706), a phase III trial of adjuvant chemotherapy
with S-1 and UFT/LV in stage III colon cancer in Japan


Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a phase III study designed to validate
the non-inferiority of S-1 to UFT/LV, a standard treatment in Japan, as
adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer. The initial safety
results were reported at ASCO 2011. In a biomarker study of the ACTS-CC
trial, DNA copy number was studied using formalin fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens. Methods: Blocks of resected tumor
specimens for this biomarker study were obtained after receiving informed
consent from 779 of 1535 patients enrolled between April 2009 and January
2010. Laser-captured microdissection was performed to extract genomic DNA
(gDNA) from 10-m-thick FFPE specimens of colon cancer. DNA concentrations
were measured by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Inc., Wilmington, DE). DNA quality was assessed and classified into 4
grades according to DNA fragment length by arbitrary primed PCR (AP-PCR)
followed by microfluidic analysis (Bioanalyzer: Agilent Technology, Santa
Clara, CA): grade-a, 700 bp; grade-b, Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a
phase III study designed to validate the non-inferiority of S-1 to
UFT/LV, a standard treatment in Japan, as adjuvant chemotherapy for stage
III colon cancer. The initial safety results were reported at ASCO 2011.
In a biomarker study of the ACTS-CC trial, DNA copy number was studied
using formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens. Methods: Blocks
of resected tumor specimens for this biomarker study were obtained after
receiving informed consent from 779 of 1535 patients enrolled between
April 2009 and January 2010. Laser-captured microdissection was performed
to extract genomic DNA (gDNA) from 10-m-thick FFPE specimens of colon
cancer. DNA concentrations were measured by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop,
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Wilmington, DE). DNA quality was assessed
and classified into 4 grades according to DNA fragment length by
arbitrary primed PCR (AP-PCR) followed by microfluidic analysis
(Bioanalyzer: Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA): grade-a, 700 bp;
grade-b, <700 bp and 400 bp; grade-c, Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a
phase III study designed to validate the non-inferiority of S-1 to
UFT/LV, a standard treatment in Japan, as adjuvant chemotherapy for stage
III colon cancer. The initial safety results were reported at ASCO 2011.
In a biomarker study of the ACTS-CC trial, DNA copy number was studied
using formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens. Methods: Blocks
of resected tumor specimens for this biomarker study were obtained after
receiving informed consent from 779 of 1535 patients enrolled between
April 2009 and January 2010. Laser-captured microdissection was performed
to extract genomic DNA (gDNA) from 10-m-thick FFPE specimens of colon
cancer. DNA concentrations were measured by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop,
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Wilmington, DE). DNA quality was assessed
and classified into 4 grades according to DNA fragment length by
arbitrary primed PCR (AP-PCR) followed by microfluidic analysis
(Bioanalyzer: Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA): grade-a, 700 bp;
grade-b, <700 bp and 400 bp; grade-c, <400 bp and 200 bp; and grade-d,
Background: The ACTS-CC trial is a phase III study designed to validate
the non-inferiority of S-1 to UFT/LV, a standard treatment in Japan, as
adjuvant chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer. The initial safety
results were reported at ASCO 2011. In a biomarker study of the ACTS-CC
trial, DNA copy number was studied using formalin fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens. Methods: Blocks of resected tumor
specimens for this biomarker study were obtained after receiving informed
consent from 779 of 1535 patients enrolled between April 2009 and January
2010. Laser-captured microdissection was performed to extract genomic DNA
(gDNA) from 10-m-thick FFPE specimens of colon cancer. DNA concentrations
were measured by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific
Inc., Wilmington, DE). DNA quality was assessed and classified into 4
grades according to DNA fragment length by arbitrary primed PCR (AP-PCR)
followed by microfluidic analysis (Bioanalyzer: Agilent Technology, Santa
Clara, CA): grade-a, 700 bp; grade-b, <700 bp and 400 bp; grade-c, <400
bp and 200 bp; and grade-d, <200 bp. Genomic copy-number alterations in
cancer were analyzed by high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
arrays (Human 250K StyI array, Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) using samples
of grade-a or grade-b quality. For GeneChip arrays, 250 ng of DNA was
used according to the manufacturer's protocols. Results: Initial DNA
amount was sufficient for GeneChip assays in 647 of 779 samples. DNA
quality assessment after AP-PCR revealed that the proportions of grade-a,
grade-b, grade-c, and grade-d samples were 25.3%, 48.9%, 18.9%, and 6.9%,
respectively. Samples of grade-a or grade-b DNA quality were used for
target preparation. After complexity reduction by restricted enzymatic
digestion followed by adaptor ligation, PCR amplification, and DNA
purification, 162 of 647 purified PCR products were successfully
amplified to 90 g, sufficient for target hybridization. Throughout these
stepwise processes, 162 of 779 samples were successfully analyzed by
GeneChip. Somatic copy-number alterations of stage III colon cancer will
be further investigated. Conclusions: Genome-wide copy number was
successfully analyzed for only 21% of initial samples. However, this
pre-planned study was designed to identify valid biomarkers. Not only 162
carefully selected genome-wide datasets to screen candidate loci
associated with clinical outcomes, but also 617 genomic DNA samples
usable as independent validation sets for real-time PCR-based assay were
obtained.

