Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of p53 codon72 polymorphism, BCCIP & CDKN2A with
melanoma risk. A p53-dependent mechanism


Cancers arise due to accumulation of mutations in genes critical for cell
proliferation, differentiation, and cell death. Direct interaction with
cell cycle regulators characterizes growth suppression by several tumor
suppressor genes. Mutation or polymorphisms that occur in the promoter or
coding regions may affect gene expression and may thus have the potential
to be of phenotypic or even of pathological significance. In our previous
studies, we showed the differential gene expression patterns and gene
interactions/ association of of BCCIP and/or CDKN2A gene1, TNF and/or
CCR52 with respect to genotypes, melanoma types and family history. We
reported a significant interaction between BCCIP and CDKN2A genotypes
among melanoma cases and a significant difference between cases and
controls for the BCCIP/CDKN2A haplotype, when adjusted with age and sex,
possibly confering different levels of susceptibility to melanoma. In the
same report we also had a finding of CDKN2A mutant genotype showing
significant association with Melanoma type 1 followed by type 2
suggesting this gene to be critical only in cases with family history and
/or with other malignancy. Previous reports have shown that BCCIP as an
important component in maintaining the tumor suppression function of wild
type p53.Without BCCIP, p53 fails to form tetramers, cannot bind with its
target promoter sequences, and is defective in transactivation activity.
The p53 pathway responds to cellular stresses that threaten the fidelity
of DNA replication, genome stability, chromosome separation and cell
division. Many of the cellular stresses can be oncogenic in nature and in
skin, the most damaging stresses in carcinogenesis is UV radiation. In
this follow up study we show a strong association of p53 codon72
polymorphism (pCancers arise due to accumulation of mutations in genes
critical for cell proliferation, differentiation, and cell death. Direct
interaction with cell cycle regulators characterizes growth suppression
by several tumor suppressor genes. Mutation or polymorphisms that occur
in the promoter or coding regions may affect gene expression and may thus
have the potential to be of phenotypic or even of pathological
significance. In our previous studies, we showed the differential gene
expression patterns and gene interactions/ association of of BCCIP and/or
CDKN2A gene1, TNF and/or CCR52 with respect to genotypes, melanoma types
and family history. We reported a significant interaction between BCCIP
and CDKN2A genotypes among melanoma cases and a significant difference
between cases and controls for the BCCIP/CDKN2A haplotype, when adjusted
with age and sex, possibly confering different levels of susceptibility
to melanoma. In the same report we also had a finding of CDKN2A mutant
genotype showing significant association with Melanoma type 1 followed by
type 2 suggesting this gene to be critical only in cases with family
history and /or with other malignancy. Previous reports have shown that
BCCIP as an important component in maintaining the tumor suppression
function of wild type p53.Without BCCIP, p53 fails to form tetramers,
cannot bind with its target promoter sequences, and is defective in
transactivation activity. The p53 pathway responds to cellular stresses
that threaten the fidelity of DNA replication, genome stability,
chromosome separation and cell division. Many of the cellular stresses
can be oncogenic in nature and in skin, the most damaging stresses in
carcinogenesis is UV radiation. In this follow up study we show a strong
association of p53 codon72 polymorphism (p<0.003) with melanoma (N=126)
as compared to controls (N=172). Positive correlations of p53 gene with
BCCIP polymorphism (pCancers arise due to accumulation of mutations in
genes critical for cell proliferation, differentiation, and cell death.
Direct interaction with cell cycle regulators characterizes growth
suppression by several tumor suppressor genes. Mutation or polymorphisms
that occur in the promoter or coding regions may affect gene expression
and may thus have the potential to be of phenotypic or even of
pathological significance. In our previous studies, we showed the
differential gene expression patterns and gene interactions/ association
of of BCCIP and/or CDKN2A gene1, TNF and/or CCR52 with respect to
genotypes, melanoma types and family history. We reported a significant
interaction between BCCIP and CDKN2A genotypes among melanoma cases and a
significant difference between cases and controls for the BCCIP/CDKN2A
haplotype, when adjusted with age and sex, possibly confering different
levels of susceptibility to melanoma. In the same report we also had a
finding of CDKN2A mutant genotype showing significant association with
Melanoma type 1 followed by type 2 suggesting this gene to be critical
only in cases with family history and /or with other malignancy. Previous
reports have shown that BCCIP as an important component in maintaining
the tumor suppression function of wild type p53.Without BCCIP, p53 fails
to form tetramers, cannot bind with its target promoter sequences, and is
defective in transactivation activity. The p53 pathway responds to
cellular stresses that threaten the fidelity of DNA replication, genome
stability, chromosome separation and cell division. Many of the cellular
stresses can be oncogenic in nature and in skin, the most damaging
stresses in carcinogenesis is UV radiation. In this follow up study we
show a strong association of p53 codon72 polymorphism (p<0.003) with
melanoma (N=126) as compared to controls (N=172). Positive correlations
of p53 gene with BCCIP polymorphism (p<.013), BCCIP(pCancers arise due to
accumulation of mutations in genes critical for cell proliferation,
differentiation, and cell death. Direct interaction with cell cycle
regulators characterizes growth suppression by several tumor suppressor
genes. Mutation or polymorphisms that occur in the promoter or coding
regions may affect gene expression and may thus have the potential to be
of phenotypic or even of pathological significance. In our previous
studies, we showed the differential gene expression patterns and gene
interactions/ association of of BCCIP and/or CDKN2A gene1, TNF and/or
CCR52 with respect to genotypes, melanoma types and family history. We
reported a significant interaction between BCCIP and CDKN2A genotypes
among melanoma cases and a significant difference between cases and
controls for the BCCIP/CDKN2A haplotype, when adjusted with age and sex,
possibly confering different levels of susceptibility to melanoma. In the
same report we also had a finding of CDKN2A mutant genotype showing
significant association with Melanoma type 1 followed by type 2
suggesting this gene to be critical only in cases with family history and
/or with other malignancy. Previous reports have shown that BCCIP as an
important component in maintaining the tumor suppression function of wild
type p53.Without BCCIP, p53 fails to form tetramers, cannot bind with its
target promoter sequences, and is defective in transactivation activity.
The p53 pathway responds to cellular stresses that threaten the fidelity
of DNA replication, genome stability, chromosome separation and cell
division. Many of the cellular stresses can be oncogenic in nature and in
skin, the most damaging stresses in carcinogenesis is UV radiation. In
this follow up study we show a strong association of p53 codon72
polymorphism (p<0.003) with melanoma (N=126) as compared to controls
(N=172). Positive correlations of p53 gene with BCCIP polymorphism
(p<.013), BCCIP(p<0.010) & CDKN2A(pCancers arise due to accumulation of
mutations in genes critical for cell proliferation, differentiation, and
cell death. Direct interaction with cell cycle regulators characterizes
growth suppression by several tumor suppressor genes. Mutation or
polymorphisms that occur in the promoter or coding regions may affect
gene expression and may thus have the potential to be of phenotypic or
even of pathological significance. In our previous studies, we showed the
differential gene expression patterns and gene interactions/ association
of of BCCIP and/or CDKN2A gene1, TNF and/or CCR52 with respect to
genotypes, melanoma types and family history. We reported a significant
interaction between BCCIP and CDKN2A genotypes among melanoma cases and a
significant difference between cases and controls for the BCCIP/CDKN2A
haplotype, when adjusted with age and sex, possibly confering different
levels of susceptibility to melanoma. In the same report we also had a
finding of CDKN2A mutant genotype showing significant association with
Melanoma type 1 followed by type 2 suggesting this gene to be critical
only in cases with family history and /or with other malignancy. Previous
reports have shown that BCCIP as an important component in maintaining
the tumor suppression function of wild type p53.Without BCCIP, p53 fails
to form tetramers, cannot bind with its target promoter sequences, and is
defective in transactivation activity. The p53 pathway responds to
cellular stresses that threaten the fidelity of DNA replication, genome
stability, chromosome separation and cell division. Many of the cellular
stresses can be oncogenic in nature and in skin, the most damaging
stresses in carcinogenesis is UV radiation. In this follow up study we
show a strong association of p53 codon72 polymorphism (p<0.003) with
melanoma (N=126) as compared to controls (N=172). Positive correlations
of p53 gene with BCCIP polymorphism (p<.013), BCCIP(p<0.010) &
CDKN2A(p<0.032) gene expressions from tumor tissues from melanoma
patients suggest the possible functional role of these reported gene
interactions in causation or in disease progression. A 12 gene panel
(TNF, CCR5 and other CDK pathway genes) and their possible interactions
showing clinical relevance of these markers in melanoma development
and/or progression through p53-dependent mechanism are discussed.

