Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reduced ovarian hormones & reduced mammographic & MRI determined
breast density in BRCA carriers following a hormonal chemo-prevention
regimen of gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist (GnRHA) & low-dose
add-back estrogen & testosterone


Young women at high risk of breast and/or ovarian cancer due to a BRCA
mutation need risk-reducing options that preserve childbearing capacity.
Purpose: Correlate changes in breast tissue determined by magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) & mammography with ovarian hormone levels
following GnRHA treatment. Methods: In this prospective phase 2 biomarker
chemoprevention trial, 10 premenopausal high-risk women, mean age 29.4
(21-43), were treated with intranasal GnRHA (deslorelin), low-dose
add-back estradiol & testosterone once daily for 10 months. MPA was given
for 10 days starting Day 140. Serum hormone levels were measured
pre-administration of study drugs on Day 1, 29, 169 & 300. All
participants underwent mammography, breast MRI & breast biopsy before &
after 300 days of treatment. Mammographic density was measured & compared
to volumetric breast density from MRI at both time points for all
participants & fibroglandular tissue volume was also determined. Results:
Significant decreases (p Young women at high risk of breast and/or
ovarian cancer due to a BRCA mutation need risk-reducing options that
preserve childbearing capacity. Purpose: Correlate changes in breast
tissue determined by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) & mammography with
ovarian hormone levels following GnRHA treatment. Methods: In this
prospective phase 2 biomarker chemoprevention trial, 10 premenopausal
high-risk women, mean age 29.4 (21-43), were treated with intranasal
GnRHA (deslorelin), low-dose add-back estradiol & testosterone once daily
for 10 months. MPA was given for 10 days starting Day 140. Serum hormone
levels were measured pre-administration of study drugs on Day 1, 29, 169
& 300. All participants underwent mammography, breast MRI & breast biopsy
before & after 300 days of treatment. Mammographic density was measured &
compared to volumetric breast density from MRI at both time points for
all participants & fibroglandular tissue volume was also determined.
Results: Significant decreases (p < .05) were shown in estradiol (-61%)
and testosterone (-41%) over time. Nine out of 10 participants showed a
mean reduction in MRI volumetric breast density of 17.3% (p=0.045), a
mean reduction in MRI fibroglandular volume of 15.1% (p=0.041) and a mean
reduction in mammographic density of 31.9% (p=0.0033). Conclusion:
Changes in breast tissue composition were significant after 10 months of
hormonal chemoprevention, validating the proof of principle that density
as a risk biomarker can be manipulated in BRCA carriers. We documented
reduction in breast density by both mammographic and MRI assessment.
While greater quantitative change in density was detected by mammography,
MRI yields additional qualitative structural observations. Our findings
confirm that MRI can be used to measure hormonal chemoprevention effects
in women at high-risk of breast cancer.


