Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular diagnostic tests to augment cytomorphologic diagnosis of
lung cancer


Morphologic analysis of cytology samples obtained by transthoracic needle
aspiration (TTNA) is one of the primary methods for diagnosing
bronchogenic carcinoma. However, across multiple studies the false
negative rate for cytomorphological analysis ranges from 0.2-0.3, and
among those diagnosed with lung cancer, the false positive rate for
diagnosing the sub-class of small cell carcinoma averages 0.09. These
false results lead to additional invasive diagnostic studies and delay
treatment. In an effort to augment accuracy and utility of cytopathologic
evaluation of TTNA lung samples, we measured the previously reported
c-myc x E2F-1/p21WAF1/CIP1 (p21 hereafter) gene expression index in cDNA
samples from 78 non-malignant lung tissues and 57 lung cancer tissues.
Using the optimal cut-off value, this test correctly classified 72/78
non-malignant and 50/57 malignant samples for a correct classification
rate of 90% (95% CI 83.6% - 94.3%), sensitivity of 88%, and specificity
of 92%. A CDKN2C/FOSL1 test for distinguishing non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) from small cell lung cancer (SCLC) had a PPV of 100% with 63%
sensitivity. In order to optimize the robustness and utility of these
tests, we developed qPCR methods that enable simultaneous measurement of
each target gene and reference gene transcript relative to a known number
of internal standard competitive template (CT) molecules using two-color
flurometric analysis on real-time platform. For each gene, the native
template was quantified with a sequence-specific FAM-labeled probe and
the CT was quantified with a sequence-specific Quasar670 labeled probe.
Results for each gene thus far demonstrate excellent linearity (R2 >
0.99, slope 1.0 +/- 0.05), relative accuracy (variance Morphologic
analysis of cytology samples obtained by transthoracic needle aspiration
(TTNA) is one of the primary methods for diagnosing bronchogenic
carcinoma. However, across multiple studies the false negative rate for
cytomorphological analysis ranges from 0.2-0.3, and among those diagnosed
with lung cancer, the false positive rate for diagnosing the sub-class of
small cell carcinoma averages 0.09. These false results lead to
additional invasive diagnostic studies and delay treatment. In an effort
to augment accuracy and utility of cytopathologic evaluation of TTNA lung
samples, we measured the previously reported c-myc x E2F-1/p21WAF1/CIP1
(p21 hereafter) gene expression index in cDNA samples from 78
non-malignant lung tissues and 57 lung cancer tissues. Using the optimal
cut-off value, this test correctly classified 72/78 non-malignant and
50/57 malignant samples for a correct classification rate of 90% (95% CI
83.6% - 94.3%), sensitivity of 88%, and specificity of 92%. A
CDKN2C/FOSL1 test for distinguishing non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
from small cell lung cancer (SCLC) had a PPV of 100% with 63%
sensitivity. In order to optimize the robustness and utility of these
tests, we developed qPCR methods that enable simultaneous measurement of
each target gene and reference gene transcript relative to a known number
of internal standard competitive template (CT) molecules using two-color
flurometric analysis on real-time platform. For each gene, the native
template was quantified with a sequence-specific FAM-labeled probe and
the CT was quantified with a sequence-specific Quasar670 labeled probe.
Results for each gene thus far demonstrate excellent linearity (R2 >
0.99, slope 1.0 +/- 0.05), relative accuracy (variance < 0.2),
signal-to-analyte response (1.0 +/- 0.05) and precision (CV Morphologic
analysis of cytology samples obtained by transthoracic needle aspiration
(TTNA) is one of the primary methods for diagnosing bronchogenic
carcinoma. However, across multiple studies the false negative rate for
cytomorphological analysis ranges from 0.2-0.3, and among those diagnosed
with lung cancer, the false positive rate for diagnosing the sub-class of
small cell carcinoma averages 0.09. These false results lead to
additional invasive diagnostic studies and delay treatment. In an effort
to augment accuracy and utility of cytopathologic evaluation of TTNA lung
samples, we measured the previously reported c-myc x E2F-1/p21WAF1/CIP1
(p21 hereafter) gene expression index in cDNA samples from 78
non-malignant lung tissues and 57 lung cancer tissues. Using the optimal
cut-off value, this test correctly classified 72/78 non-malignant and
50/57 malignant samples for a correct classification rate of 90% (95% CI
83.6% - 94.3%), sensitivity of 88%, and specificity of 92%. A
CDKN2C/FOSL1 test for distinguishing non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
from small cell lung cancer (SCLC) had a PPV of 100% with 63%
sensitivity. In order to optimize the robustness and utility of these
tests, we developed qPCR methods that enable simultaneous measurement of
each target gene and reference gene transcript relative to a known number
of internal standard competitive template (CT) molecules using two-color
flurometric analysis on real-time platform. For each gene, the native
template was quantified with a sequence-specific FAM-labeled probe and
the CT was quantified with a sequence-specific Quasar670 labeled probe.
Results for each gene thus far demonstrate excellent linearity (R2 >
0.99, slope 1.0 +/- 0.05), relative accuracy (variance < 0.2),
signal-to-analyte response (1.0 +/- 0.05) and precision (CV < 30%) over
six orders of magnitude, and reliable detection of as few as 10
molecules. Assessing both the c-myc x E2F-1/p21 index and the
CDKN2C/FOSL1 test promises to augment cytomorphologic diagnosis of
bronchogenic carcinoma in TTNA samples biopsy samples.

