Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in the levels, localization and DNA binding of p53 in
breast cancer cell lines


Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor affect protein accumulation,
localization and DNA binding. We undertook to determine these properties
of p53 in breast cancer cells and to see how those attributes change
following oxidative stress. We analyzed the p53 in 8 different breast
cancer cell lines, with either wild-type or mutant p53 protein. By ELISA
and western blots, we found that the levels of the p53 protein were
generally low for cells carrying wild-type protein and high in cells
having a mutation in the TP53 gene. This was contrasted to the case in
the HCC2157 cell line which has wild-type p53 but accumulates the protein
to high levels. Using biotinylated DNA and streptavidin magnetic beads,
we found that wild-type p53 protein from MCF-7 and ZR-75-1 cells binds
with different affinity to 12 gene sequences covering several pathways
regulated by p53. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with H2O2 caused an increase
in this binding affinity. The p53 from the HCC2157 cells and all of the
mutant p53 proteins had minimal to weak binding to these sequences even
after treatment with H2O2. We also analyzed the phosphorylation of serine
15 on p53 in 4 of the cell lines. The p53 protein from the HCC2157 cells
and two other cell lines showed phosphorylated protein at this site, but
we found no correlation between that modification and the levels,
localization, or binding affinity of the protein. From this and other
work, it appears that the mutation status of the TP53 gene alone can not
predict the activity of this tumor suppressor since cell lines with the
same genetic information do not show the same properties of this protein.
We argue that the analysis of DNA binding or transcription activity must
be done in order to correlate the functionality of p53 with clinical
outcome in tumors.

