Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in epidemiologic risk factors for colorectal adenomas
and serrated polyps by anatomic site and lesion severity


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a heterogeneous disease, and different subsets
of CRC probably have different precursor lesions. Some colorectal polyps
are considered precursors to CRC and are broadly classified into: 1)
adenomas, including tubular, tubulovillous, and villous adenomas, and 2)
serrated polyps, including hyperplasic polyps (HPs), sessile serrated
polyps (SSPs), and traditional serrated adenomas (TSAs). Adenomas are
established CRC precursors, particularly for advanced lesions 10 mm, with
villous components, or high-grade dysplasia. HPs were previously
considered innocuous lesions, but new data suggests that a subset of
these may progress to CRC via advanced serrated lesions, such as SSPs and
TSAs. To gain insight into the factors associated with initiation and
progression for divergent CRC pathways, we tested differences in risk
factors for polyps according to histologic type, anatomic site, and
severity. Participants, aged 20-79, were sampled from enrollees of Group
Health, a large healthcare provider in Washington State, who underwent
colonoscopy for any indication between 1998 and 2007. Participants
completed a structured interview, and all lesions received a standardized
pathology review. We evaluated 1,469 cases, including 628 with adenomas
only, 594 with serrated polyps only, and 247 with both types of polyps,
as well as 1,037 controls who were free of colorectal pathologies during
colonoscopy. We focused on the following risk factors: age, sex, race,
education, body mass index (BMI), NSAID use, family history of CRC,
hormone use among women, endoscopy screening, smoking status, alcohol
use, and physical activity. Multivariable polytomous logistic regression
models were used to compare case groups to controls adjusted for all
factors. Our study confirmed previously described risk factors for
adenomas: age, male sex, obesity, never use of NSAIDs, no previous
endoscopy, and physical inactivity. Risk factors for serrated polyps were
smoking and never use of estrogen-only therapy. There were statistically
significant differences in the association between several risk factors
and polyp type. Male sex (PColorectal cancer (CRC) is a heterogeneous
disease, and different subsets of CRC probably have different precursor
lesions. Some colorectal polyps are considered precursors to CRC and are
broadly classified into: 1) adenomas, including tubular, tubulovillous,
and villous adenomas, and 2) serrated polyps, including hyperplasic
polyps (HPs), sessile serrated polyps (SSPs), and traditional serrated
adenomas (TSAs). Adenomas are established CRC precursors, particularly
for advanced lesions 10 mm, with villous components, or high-grade
dysplasia. HPs were previously considered innocuous lesions, but new data
suggests that a subset of these may progress to CRC via advanced serrated
lesions, such as SSPs and TSAs. To gain insight into the factors
associated with initiation and progression for divergent CRC pathways, we
tested differences in risk factors for polyps according to histologic
type, anatomic site, and severity. Participants, aged 20-79, were sampled
from enrollees of Group Health, a large healthcare provider in Washington
State, who underwent colonoscopy for any indication between 1998 and
2007. Participants completed a structured interview, and all lesions
received a standardized pathology review. We evaluated 1,469 cases,
including 628 with adenomas only, 594 with serrated polyps only, and 247
with both types of polyps, as well as 1,037 controls who were free of
colorectal pathologies during colonoscopy. We focused on the following
risk factors: age, sex, race, education, body mass index (BMI), NSAID
use, family history of CRC, hormone use among women, endoscopy screening,
smoking status, alcohol use, and physical activity. Multivariable
polytomous logistic regression models were used to compare case groups to
controls adjusted for all factors. Our study confirmed previously
described risk factors for adenomas: age, male sex, obesity, never use of
NSAIDs, no previous endoscopy, and physical inactivity. Risk factors for
serrated polyps were smoking and never use of estrogen-only therapy.
There were statistically significant differences in the association
between several risk factors and polyp type. Male sex (P<0.001) and
smoking (PColorectal cancer (CRC) is a heterogeneous disease, and
different subsets of CRC probably have different precursor lesions. Some
colorectal polyps are considered precursors to CRC and are broadly
classified into: 1) adenomas, including tubular, tubulovillous, and
villous adenomas, and 2) serrated polyps, including hyperplasic polyps
(HPs), sessile serrated polyps (SSPs), and traditional serrated adenomas
(TSAs). Adenomas are established CRC precursors, particularly for
advanced lesions 10 mm, with villous components, or high-grade dysplasia.
HPs were previously considered innocuous lesions, but new data suggests
that a subset of these may progress to CRC via advanced serrated lesions,
such as SSPs and TSAs. To gain insight into the factors associated with
initiation and progression for divergent CRC pathways, we tested
differences in risk factors for polyps according to histologic type,
anatomic site, and severity. Participants, aged 20-79, were sampled from
enrollees of Group Health, a large healthcare provider in Washington
State, who underwent colonoscopy for any indication between 1998 and
2007. Participants completed a structured interview, and all lesions
received a standardized pathology review. We evaluated 1,469 cases,
including 628 with adenomas only, 594 with serrated polyps only, and 247
with both types of polyps, as well as 1,037 controls who were free of
colorectal pathologies during colonoscopy. We focused on the following
risk factors: age, sex, race, education, body mass index (BMI), NSAID
use, family history of CRC, hormone use among women, endoscopy screening,
smoking status, alcohol use, and physical activity. Multivariable
polytomous logistic regression models were used to compare case groups to
controls adjusted for all factors. Our study confirmed previously
described risk factors for adenomas: age, male sex, obesity, never use of
NSAIDs, no previous endoscopy, and physical inactivity. Risk factors for
serrated polyps were smoking and never use of estrogen-only therapy.
There were statistically significant differences in the association
between several risk factors and polyp type. Male sex (P<0.001) and
smoking (P<0.001) were stronger risk factors for adenomas than for
serrated polyps. With respect to anatomic site, smoking (P=0.05) and
never use of estrogen-only therapy (P=0.01) were stronger risk factors
for distal/rectal than for proximal adenomas. Smoking (PColorectal cancer
(CRC) is a heterogeneous disease, and different subsets of CRC probably
have different precursor lesions. Some colorectal polyps are considered
precursors to CRC and are broadly classified into: 1) adenomas, including
tubular, tubulovillous, and villous adenomas, and 2) serrated polyps,
including hyperplasic polyps (HPs), sessile serrated polyps (SSPs), and
traditional serrated adenomas (TSAs). Adenomas are established CRC
precursors, particularly for advanced lesions 10 mm, with villous
components, or high-grade dysplasia. HPs were previously considered
innocuous lesions, but new data suggests that a subset of these may
progress to CRC via advanced serrated lesions, such as SSPs and TSAs. To
gain insight into the factors associated with initiation and progression
for divergent CRC pathways, we tested differences in risk factors for
polyps according to histologic type, anatomic site, and severity.
Participants, aged 20-79, were sampled from enrollees of Group Health, a
large healthcare provider in Washington State, who underwent colonoscopy
for any indication between 1998 and 2007. Participants completed a
structured interview, and all lesions received a standardized pathology
review. We evaluated 1,469 cases, including 628 with adenomas only, 594
with serrated polyps only, and 247 with both types of polyps, as well as
1,037 controls who were free of colorectal pathologies during
colonoscopy. We focused on the following risk factors: age, sex, race,
education, body mass index (BMI), NSAID use, family history of CRC,
hormone use among women, endoscopy screening, smoking status, alcohol
use, and physical activity. Multivariable polytomous logistic regression
models were used to compare case groups to controls adjusted for all
factors. Our study confirmed previously described risk factors for
adenomas: age, male sex, obesity, never use of NSAIDs, no previous
endoscopy, and physical inactivity. Risk factors for serrated polyps were
smoking and never use of estrogen-only therapy. There were statistically
significant differences in the association between several risk factors
and polyp type. Male sex (P<0.001) and smoking (P<0.001) were stronger
risk factors for adenomas than for serrated polyps. With respect to
anatomic site, smoking (P=0.05) and never use of estrogen-only therapy
(P=0.01) were stronger risk factors for distal/rectal than for proximal
adenomas. Smoking (P<0.001) and BMI (P=0.01) were stronger risk factors
for distal/rectal than for proximal serrated polyps. With respect to
lesion severity, lack of prior endoscopy was a stronger risk factor for
advanced adenomas (PColorectal cancer (CRC) is a heterogeneous disease,
and different subsets of CRC probably have different precursor lesions.
Some colorectal polyps are considered precursors to CRC and are broadly
classified into: 1) adenomas, including tubular, tubulovillous, and
villous adenomas, and 2) serrated polyps, including hyperplasic polyps
(HPs), sessile serrated polyps (SSPs), and traditional serrated adenomas
(TSAs). Adenomas are established CRC precursors, particularly for
advanced lesions 10 mm, with villous components, or high-grade dysplasia.
HPs were previously considered innocuous lesions, but new data suggests
that a subset of these may progress to CRC via advanced serrated lesions,
such as SSPs and TSAs. To gain insight into the factors associated with
initiation and progression for divergent CRC pathways, we tested
differences in risk factors for polyps according to histologic type,
anatomic site, and severity. Participants, aged 20-79, were sampled from
enrollees of Group Health, a large healthcare provider in Washington
State, who underwent colonoscopy for any indication between 1998 and
2007. Participants completed a structured interview, and all lesions
received a standardized pathology review. We evaluated 1,469 cases,
including 628 with adenomas only, 594 with serrated polyps only, and 247
with both types of polyps, as well as 1,037 controls who were free of
colorectal pathologies during colonoscopy. We focused on the following
risk factors: age, sex, race, education, body mass index (BMI), NSAID
use, family history of CRC, hormone use among women, endoscopy screening,
smoking status, alcohol use, and physical activity. Multivariable
polytomous logistic regression models were used to compare case groups to
controls adjusted for all factors. Our study confirmed previously
described risk factors for adenomas: age, male sex, obesity, never use of
NSAIDs, no previous endoscopy, and physical inactivity. Risk factors for
serrated polyps were smoking and never use of estrogen-only therapy.
There were statistically significant differences in the association
between several risk factors and polyp type. Male sex (P<0.001) and
smoking (P<0.001) were stronger risk factors for adenomas than for
serrated polyps. With respect to anatomic site, smoking (P=0.05) and
never use of estrogen-only therapy (P=0.01) were stronger risk factors
for distal/rectal than for proximal adenomas. Smoking (P<0.001) and BMI
(P=0.01) were stronger risk factors for distal/rectal than for proximal
serrated polyps. With respect to lesion severity, lack of prior endoscopy
was a stronger risk factor for advanced adenomas (P<0.001) than for
non-advanced adenomas, and higher education level was a stronger risk
factor for SSP/TSAs than for HPs (P=0.02). These findings may suggest
carcinogenic mechanisms that distinguish the adenoma-carcinoma pathway
and the serrated pathway to CRC.

