Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oxidative protein modifications in serous epithelia ovarian cancer
tissues


Despite advances in the surgical and chemotherapeutic management of
ovarian cancer over the last decade, survival rates remain low, largely
due to late diagnosis. Up to now very few candidate biomarkers have been
investigated for early detection of ovarian cancer. The implication of
ROS in female reproductive system and ovarian cancer are evidenced.
Enzymatic antioxidants neutralize excessive ROS in cells. Under special
condition, the cellular antioxidants are depleted. The ultimate aim of
this study is to identify a biomarker for early detection of ovarian
cancer. In this study 155 snap-freeze primary serous epithelial ovarian
tissues including, normal, normal surrounding, cystadenoma, borderline
and carcinoma with age range of 6512,(55% Caucasian 45% Africa American),
were analyzed. The objectives are: (a) to evaluate the protein expression
profiles using two dimension gel electrophoresis (2-D SDS-PAGE) and LC/MS
technology, (b) to identify and evaluate the level of oxidative modified
protein, using derivatisation of protein carbonyl group with
2,4-dinitrophenylhyrdozine(DNPH) assay and western blot technique. Our
results showed that the index of carbonyl protein /total protein
increased by onset and progression of the serous ovarian malignancy. The
elevation of oxidized protein among African American was 40 % higher than
Caucasian in advanced stages of diseases. SDS-PAGE profiles showed a
distinct protein pattern among cancerous and non-cancerous tissues. LC/MS
analysis for elucidation of molecular changes of selected proteins bands
is in progress.

