Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular mechanism of WBP-2 coactivation function in estrogen
receptor transactivation


The link between breast cancer and Estrogen Receptor alpha (ER) is well
established. The ER is a ligand-inducible transcription factor that, upon
binding to the hormone estrogen, regulates the expression of a variety of
genes mainly involved in cell proliferation. Coactivators are proteins
recruited by the hormone-activated receptor, which enhance the ER
transactivation functions acting as chromatin remodeling enzymes or
adaptors between ER and the transcriptional machinery. Our laboratory has
previously identified WBP-2 (WW-domain binding protein 2) as bona fide
coactivator of ER. However, the molecular mechanism underlying WBP-2
coactivation function is not clear yet. In this study we investigate the
mechanism by which WBP-2 acts as a coactivators of ER. Our data show that
knockdown of WBP-2 protein is associated with reduced expression of the
ER target gene pS2. Conversely, over-expression of the same protein
results in increased pS2 expression. In order to clarify the mechanism
governing these outcomes, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays under WBP-2 knockdown conditions. We demonstrate here that
WBP-2 binds to the pS2 promoter, and its knockdown is associated with
decreased recruitment of the phosphorylated form of RNA PolII (associated
with active transcription). Under similar conditions, the histone acetyl
transferase p300 also exhibits reduced recruitment to the same promoter.
Accordingly, decreased recruitment of p300 correlates with decreased
histone acetylation. Collectively, our data indicate that WBP-2 enhances
ER transactivation function by facilitating the recruitment of a histone
modifier enzyme that favors a relaxed chromatin structure permissive of
transcription.

