Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 stimulates proliferation of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells by up-regulating Cyclins D1 and E
through the PI3K/Akt- and ERK-dependent AP-1 and E2F activation signaling
pathways


Macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1 (MIC-1) is highly associated with
malignant human cancers and has been suggested to be involved in tumor
angiogenesis. In the present study, we examined the effect of MIC-1 on
proliferation of endothelial cells. MIC-1 treatment accelerated
progression of the G1 stage in cell cycle of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, together with increased cell proliferation. MIC-1
augmented the levels of cyclin D1 and E without affecting the levels of
CDK inhibitors, thereby increasing activity of CDK, which led to Rb
phosphorylation and subsequent E2F-1 nuclear translocation. MIC-1-induced
expression of cyclins D1 and E was found to be mediated by AP-1 and E2F-1
transcription factors, and among the AP-1 members, c-Jun and JunD
appeared to participate in MIC-1-mediated up-regulation of cyclin D1.
Additionally, PI3K/Akt and ERK were found to mediate MIC-1-induced cyclin
D1 expression. Importantly, lung endothelial cells of MIC-1 transgenic
mouse exhibited increased cell proliferation rate and cyclin D1 and E
levels as compared to the wild-type mouse counterparts. These results
suggest that MIC-1 secreted from cancer cells stimulates endothelial cell
proliferation by up-regulating of the G1 cyclins through the PI3K/Akt-
and ERK-dependent AP-1 and E2F activation signaling pathways, potentially
leading to the promotion of tumor angiogenesis.

