Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional characterization of long noncoding RNA SPRY4-IT1 in
human melanomas


Recently, we have reported that long noncoding RNA SPRY4-IT1 (Khaitan et
al., Cancer Research 2011) is highly upregulated in human melanomas
compared to melanocytes and keratinocytes. The elevated expression of
SPRY4-IT1 in melanoma cells compared to melanocytes, its accumulation in
cell cytoplasm, and effects on cell dynamics, including increased rate of
wound closure upon SPRY4-IT1 overexpression, suggest that the higher
expression of SPRY4-IT1 may have an important role in the molecular
etiology of human melanoma. We have now engineered melanocytes to
ectopically express SPRY4-IT1 and engineered cells were assayed to
identify gene and protein expression changes compared to vector only
cells. We observed that engineered cells show higher cell proliferation
rate compared to vector only cells. Melanoma cells were treated with
-amenitin to identify the half-life of both SPRY4 and SPRY4-IT1, and our
results indicate that SPRY4-IT1 has a higher RNA decay compared to its
host gene SPRY4. Isolation of monosome and polysome fractions followed by
qRT-PCR shows that SPRY4-IT1 is primarily transported in to the polysome
fraction. Finally, we have demonstrated that SPRY4-IT1 transcriptional
regulation is independent of SPRY4 gene. SPRY4-IT1 molecular function,
transcriptional regulation, cellular compartmentalization, interaction
with other RNAs and proteins will be discussed.

