Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms responsible for the antitumor effect of metronomic
chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide (Cy) and doxorubicin (Dox) in murine
tumor models of mammary adenocarcinoma


Metronomic chemotherapy (MCT) refers to the chronic, equally spaced,
delivery of low doses of different chemotherapeutic drugs, without
extended interruptions. We have already demonstrated that the
administration, as an intervention strategy, of metronomic CY + DOX in
M-406 and M-234p mammary adenocarcinomas-bearing mice inhibited tumor
growth, increasing the survival rate. Our present aim was to study the
mechanism/s by which that therapeutic effect was achieved. CBi and Balb/c
inbred mice were s.c. challenged on day 0 with M-406 and M-234p mammary
tumors, respectively, and treated from day 9 (M-406) and 10 (M-234p) on
with: I) no further treatment (controls); II) CY in the drinking water
(20mg/kg body weight/day); III) Dox (0.5 mg/kg i.p.), three times/week;
IV) Treated as II + III. Blood samples were taken on days 0 and 20
(M-406) or 30 (M-324p) to evaluate VEGF and IL-10 serum levels determined
by ELISA. Tumors were excised on days 25 and 31 for M-406 and M-234p,
respectively, fixed and paraffin embedded for detection of Ki67 molecule
by immunohistochemistry and apoptosis by the TUNEL technique. In the
M-234p model the VEGF serum concentration of control animals (group I)
was, on day 31, significantly higher than that measured on day 0
(pMetronomic chemotherapy (MCT) refers to the chronic, equally spaced,
delivery of low doses of different chemotherapeutic drugs, without
extended interruptions. We have already demonstrated that the
administration, as an intervention strategy, of metronomic CY + DOX in
M-406 and M-234p mammary adenocarcinomas-bearing mice inhibited tumor
growth, increasing the survival rate. Our present aim was to study the
mechanism/s by which that therapeutic effect was achieved. CBi and Balb/c
inbred mice were s.c. challenged on day 0 with M-406 and M-234p mammary
tumors, respectively, and treated from day 9 (M-406) and 10 (M-234p) on
with: I) no further treatment (controls); II) CY in the drinking water
(20mg/kg body weight/day); III) Dox (0.5 mg/kg i.p.), three times/week;
IV) Treated as II + III. Blood samples were taken on days 0 and 20
(M-406) or 30 (M-324p) to evaluate VEGF and IL-10 serum levels determined
by ELISA. Tumors were excised on days 25 and 31 for M-406 and M-234p,
respectively, fixed and paraffin embedded for detection of Ki67 molecule
by immunohistochemistry and apoptosis by the TUNEL technique. In the
M-234p model the VEGF serum concentration of control animals (group I)
was, on day 31, significantly higher than that measured on day 0
(p<0,005), while on day 31, groups II, III y IV showed lower values than
group I (pMetronomic chemotherapy (MCT) refers to the chronic, equally
spaced, delivery of low doses of different chemotherapeutic drugs,
without extended interruptions. We have already demonstrated that the
administration, as an intervention strategy, of metronomic CY + DOX in
M-406 and M-234p mammary adenocarcinomas-bearing mice inhibited tumor
growth, increasing the survival rate. Our present aim was to study the
mechanism/s by which that therapeutic effect was achieved. CBi and Balb/c
inbred mice were s.c. challenged on day 0 with M-406 and M-234p mammary
tumors, respectively, and treated from day 9 (M-406) and 10 (M-234p) on
with: I) no further treatment (controls); II) CY in the drinking water
(20mg/kg body weight/day); III) Dox (0.5 mg/kg i.p.), three times/week;
IV) Treated as II + III. Blood samples were taken on days 0 and 20
(M-406) or 30 (M-324p) to evaluate VEGF and IL-10 serum levels determined
by ELISA. Tumors were excised on days 25 and 31 for M-406 and M-234p,
respectively, fixed and paraffin embedded for detection of Ki67 molecule
by immunohistochemistry and apoptosis by the TUNEL technique. In the
M-234p model the VEGF serum concentration of control animals (group I)
was, on day 31, significantly higher than that measured on day 0
(p<0,005), while on day 31, groups II, III y IV showed lower values than
group I (p<0.005) in the same day, and similar than those on day 0. The
IL-10 serum levels in group IV were significantly higher than those found
in group I and III. The apoptosis level in tumor cells in group IV was
significantly higher when compared to control group (pMetronomic
chemotherapy (MCT) refers to the chronic, equally spaced, delivery of low
doses of different chemotherapeutic drugs, without extended
interruptions. We have already demonstrated that the administration, as
an intervention strategy, of metronomic CY + DOX in M-406 and M-234p
mammary adenocarcinomas-bearing mice inhibited tumor growth, increasing
the survival rate. Our present aim was to study the mechanism/s by which
that therapeutic effect was achieved. CBi and Balb/c inbred mice were
s.c. challenged on day 0 with M-406 and M-234p mammary tumors,
respectively, and treated from day 9 (M-406) and 10 (M-234p) on with: I)
no further treatment (controls); II) CY in the drinking water (20mg/kg
body weight/day); III) Dox (0.5 mg/kg i.p.), three times/week; IV)
Treated as II + III. Blood samples were taken on days 0 and 20 (M-406) or
30 (M-324p) to evaluate VEGF and IL-10 serum levels determined by ELISA.
Tumors were excised on days 25 and 31 for M-406 and M-234p, respectively,
fixed and paraffin embedded for detection of Ki67 molecule by
immunohistochemistry and apoptosis by the TUNEL technique. In the M-234p
model the VEGF serum concentration of control animals (group I) was, on
day 31, significantly higher than that measured on day 0 (p<0,005), while
on day 31, groups II, III y IV showed lower values than group I (p<0.005)
in the same day, and similar than those on day 0. The IL-10 serum levels
in group IV were significantly higher than those found in group I and
III. The apoptosis level in tumor cells in group IV was significantly
higher when compared to control group (p<0.05). Also, the staining for
the proliferation marker Ki67 showed values significantly lower in the
tumors of animals treated with CY + DOX than those in group I. A similar
behavior was seen in the M-406 tumor model. In conclusion, opposing to
the expected results, the animals with the better therapeutic outcome
showed the highest IL-10 concentration, a result that could indicate a
possible immunostimulatory effect of this cytokine; the antitumor effect
of MCT with CY plus DOX in mammary tumor models would be achieved, at
least in part, by the inhibition of both tumor angiogenesis and
proliferation in addition to the stimulation of tumor cells apoptosis.

