Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of glutamine synthetase attenuates the oncogenicity
of wnt/-catenin signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma


Wnt/-catenin signaling has been known to be involved in many cellular
processes including cell proliferation, migration, and survival. Aberrant
activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling has been widely reported in many
cancers and associated with poor outcome after treatments. However,
activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
has been known to be significantly associated with favorable outcome. In
this study, we identified 82 genes as a -catenin signature by analyzing
expression data from tumor tissues of patients with HCC and liver tissues
from active -catenin mutant transgenic mice. HCC patients with the
-catenin signature have significantly better prognosis in both overall
survival and recurrence-free survival than those without the signature.
Further analysis of -catenin signature revealed over-expression of
glutamine synthetase (GS), liver-specific -catenin target gene, and shift
of glutamine metabolism. Cell growth rate were highly dependent on GS
expression levels. Cell proliferation rate was increased by GS knockdown
using shRNAs but decreased by GS overexpression in HCC cell lines.
Intracellular glutamate concentrations were severely decreased by GS
overexpression. GS overexpression in HCC cells also led to decrease
intracellular -ketoglutarate levels impeding TCA cycle, and intracellular
glutathione levels accumulating high reactive oxygen species (ROS). In
conclusion, we found GS up-regulation in HCC cells inhibited cell growth
by glutamate depletion and thereby lower anaplerotic metabolic activity
and higher ROS levels. Our results present molecular mechanisms for the
favorable outcome in HCC patients with CTNNB1 mutations and importance of
glutamine metabolism in cancer cells.

