Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of phosphatases that regulate growth and tumorigenicity
of ER-negative breast cancers


Background: As the leading cause of cancer-related death in women, there
is an urgent need to identify therapeutic means for breast cancer in
women. 60-70% of breast cancers express the estrogen receptor (ER) and
respond to therapies targeting this receptor. The remaining 30-40% of
breast cancers that do not express this receptor are cannot be treated
with these therapies. To identify novel targets for treatment, we are
investigating growth-regulatory pathways in ER-negative breast cancers.
The goal is to identify phosphatases that are critical for the growth and
tumorigenicity of ER-negative breast cancer. Methods: To identify
signaling pathways important in ER-negative breast cancer, we used
Affymetrix microarray data obtained from profiling 221 ER-negative and 56
ER-positive breast cancers from the Baylor College of Medicine Tumor
Bank. We then performed supervised cluster analysis to identify
phosphatases that were differentially expressed in ER-negative and
ER-positive breast cancers. This analysis identified 20 phosphatases
upregulated (>1.5-fold; FDR=0.05), and 29 phosphatases down-regulated
(Background: As the leading cause of cancer-related death in women, there
is an urgent need to identify therapeutic means for breast cancer in
women. 60-70% of breast cancers express the estrogen receptor (ER) and
respond to therapies targeting this receptor. The remaining 30-40% of
breast cancers that do not express this receptor are cannot be treated
with these therapies. To identify novel targets for treatment, we are
investigating growth-regulatory pathways in ER-negative breast cancers.
The goal is to identify phosphatases that are critical for the growth and
tumorigenicity of ER-negative breast cancer. Methods: To identify
signaling pathways important in ER-negative breast cancer, we used
Affymetrix microarray data obtained from profiling 221 ER-negative and 56
ER-positive breast cancers from the Baylor College of Medicine Tumor
Bank. We then performed supervised cluster analysis to identify
phosphatases that were differentially expressed in ER-negative and
ER-positive breast cancers. This analysis identified 20 phosphatases
upregulated (>1.5-fold; FDR=0.05), and 29 phosphatases down-regulated (<
0.66-fold, FDR=0.05) in ER-negative breast cancers as compared to
ER-positive breast cancers. Specific siRNA were used to knock-down each
of the 20 highly expressed phosphatases in 4 ER-negative, 4 ER-positive
breast cancer cell lines, HMECs immortalized with TERT, and HMECs. Cell
growth was measured by cell count, and anchorage-independent growth was
tested with the soft agar assay. Colonies were counted after 14 days with
the Gelcount software. Results: Of the 20 overexpressed phosphatases, 9
showed significant growth reduction after treatment with siRNA in at
least 2 of the 4 ER-negative breast cancer cell lines. These 9
phosphatases are now being tested in anchorage-independent growth assays.
Based on our results, 3 phosphatases (ACP1, PTP4A3, and CDC25B) have been
selected for further study. These are now being tested for their
transforming capability in in vitro and in vivo transformation and
tumorigenicity assays. Conclusion: We identified a set of phosphatases
highly over-expressed in ER-negative breast cancer, and showed that a
sub-set of these phosphatases are critical for anchorage-dependent and
-independent breast cancer cell growth. These studies have identified
critical growth-regulatory phosphatases in ER-negative breast tumors that
may be novel targets for the treatment of ER-negative breast cancer.
Supported by Komen Promise grant KG081694 (PHB) & Komen SAB grant
SAB08-00006 (PHB).

