Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SGI-110, a novel subcutaneous (SQ) second generation DNA
hypomethylating agent achieves improved pharmacodynamics (PD), safety and
pharmacokinetics (PK) in comparison to IV decitabine in a non-human
primate in vivo study


SGI-110, is a novel second generation DNA methylation inhibitor that is
currently in Phase I/II clinical study for treatment of myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). SGI-110 is a
dinucleotide of DAC and deoxyguanosine designed to be more stable than
decitabine to deamination by cytidine deaminase, thus offering a
promising alternative to current hypomethylating agents approved in MDS.
We report here the results of a preclinical study in which safety, PK,
and PD of different dosing regimens of SGI-110 SQ were compared to the
clinical dose and regimen of DAC IV in 4 groups of male cynomolgus
monkeys (n=4). The treatment groups consisted of: 1) Control group of DAC
IV 1-h infusion at a dose equivalent to the clinically approved regimen
of 20 mg/m2 x 5 (1.7 mg/kg daily x5); 2) 1.7 mg/kg SGI-110 SQ daily x 5
(molar equivalent to 42% of the clinical DAC dose); 3) 3.0 mg/kg SGI-110
SQ daily x 5 (molar equivalent to 75% of the clinical DAC dose); and 4)
3.0 mg/kg of SGI-110 SQ once weekly x3 (molar equivalent to 44% of the
total clinical DAC dose). DAC and SGI-110 plasma levels were measured and
monkeys were monitored for 28 days for hematological changes, and global
DNA methylation (LINE-1). Reversible hematological changes included a
reduction in leukocytes, red blood cells (RBCs), and neutrophil counts
with the nadir counts generally occurring between D8 and D14 and recovery
occurring D21 to D28. The DAC-treated group showed the greatest reduction
and slowest recovery compared to all SGI-110 treated groups. Changes in
methylation patterns of LINE-1 and miRNA-29b were evaluated in DNA
extracted from monkey blood as PD markers of biological efficacy after
treatment with SGI-110 or DAC. All groups achieved a decrease in LINE-1
methylation of approximately 15-20% from baseline between Day 8 and 21
with remethylation back to baseline levels by day 28. Both SGI-110 SQ
dailyx5 regimens achieved slightly more hypomethylation than DAC IV on
days 8 (group 3) and 11 (group 2). Overall, the magnitude and duration of
the decrease in DNA methylation at lower molar equivalent doses of SQ
SGI-110 were similar to or better than DAC IV. SGI-110 appeared to
convert to DAC resulting in similar exposure window compared to IV DAC.
The dose-adjusted plasma DAC exposures, on molar equivalence basis, were
somewhat lower compared to the DAC group. The Cmax ranged 52-163 vs
215-525(DAC) ng/mL, while dose-adjusted AUCs were 21.6-51.6 vs
98.6-221(DAC) ng*hr/mL. In conclusion, these preclinical studies showed
that SQ SGI-110 may represent a more convenient and tolerable option for
delivering DAC where either the weeklyx3 or dailyx5 regimens at a lower
dose achieved DNA hypomethylating effects that were similar to or better
than seen with DAC IV and with less myelosuppressive effects.

