Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Paired-end RNA-sequencing reveals novel fusion genes and SNVs in
osteosarcoma


Osteosarcoma is an aggressive cancer of bone, which typically occurs
during adolescence. The genetic hallmark of osteosarcoma is the presence
of extensive and complex genomic rearrangements. However, few consistent
aberrations have been identified, hampering the development of targeted
therapy for osteosarcoma. Next generation RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) is a
powerful tool for comprehensive characterization of whole transcriptome,
with the unique ability of identifying novel fusion genes. We applied
paired-end RNA-seq to explore the transcriptome of 16 human OS cell lines
and primary osteoblasts from two healthy individuals. On average, about
21.6 million sequencing reads and 10.6 million aligned reads were
obtained for each sample. Several thousand SNVs (single nucleotide
variants) that have not been reported in the dbSNP database were
identified. Bioinformatic analysis identified several fusion genes (e.g.
PAFAH1B2-FOXR1and FAM119B-TSFM), which involved both known cancer related
genes as well as genes previously unrelated to cancer. Fusion transcripts
were validated using RT-PCR, Western blot and capillary sequencing. These
rearrangements tended to occur at copy number transitions on the partner
chromosome regions. Our findings have the potential to provide important
insights into osteosarcoma biology, and potential translational
applications for diagnostic and therapeutic development.

