Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The receptors-independent anti-cancer effect of anandamide in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells


It has been suggested that endocannabinoids, anandamide (AEA) and
2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG), might be the promising anti-cancer agents
in clinical fields of cancer treatment. In this study, we tried to check
the anti-cancer effects of AEA and 2-AG in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines. AEA inhibited effectively cell
proliferation of three HNSCC cells (SNU-1041, 1066 and 1076) but 2-AG did
not. Cannabinoid receptor-1 (CB1) was expressed only in SNU-1066 and
expression of VR1 was observed in all tested cells (no CB2 was detected).
Anti-cancer effect of AEA seemed to be mediated by their
receptors-independent action since the antagonist of CB1 and VR1 (AM251,
cay10448 and capsazepine) did not reverse AEA-inhibited cell
proliferation. From references on cancer-cell killing effect of COX-2
metabolites of AEA in some types of cancer such as colon cancer, we
checked the possibility of COX-2-mediated anti-cancer effect of AEA in
HNSCC cells but COX-2 inhibition (by its inhibitors and siRNA) had no
effect on it. Instead, we observed the increase of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and 8-isoprostane production by AEA and antioxidants (NAC
and ebselen) reversed AEA-inhibited cell proliferation partially. In
addition, AM404 and cay10412 (inhibitors of AEA transporter) reversed
perfectly AEA-inhibited cell proliferation. These findings suggest that
AEA might have anti-cancer effect by their receptors-independent action
in intracellular localization of HNSCC cells (such as increase of ROS).
The investigation on detailed mechanism of anti-cancer action of AEA in
HNSCC cells is ongoing.

