Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Syntenin-1 promotes cell invasion though regulating Slug-dependent
epithelial-mensenchymal transition in non-small cell lung cancer


Slug, a transcriptional repressor, is involved in the regulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during development and can
promote cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Through Yeast-two hybrid
screening, we found that syntenin-1, a tandem PDZ protein, can associate
with Slug. Syntenin-1 is known to involve in many biological functions
such as protein traffics and cytoskeleton remodeling. Recently, it has
been found that overexpression of syntenin-1 may promote cancer cell
invasion by altering defined biochemical and signaling pathways,
including c-Src/ focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and NF-kappaB. Conversely,
knock-down the expression of syntenin-1 can also increase cell
aggregation. All these findings indicate that syntenin-1 may play an
important role in cell adhesion and movement. Whether syntenin-1 is
involved in the process of EMT should be further clarified. In this
study, we showed that syntenin-1 could enhance Slug-dependent cell
invasion and regulate the EMT in lung cancer cells. Syntenin-1 can
interact with Slug through its PDZ-1 domain and increase their nuclear
localization in cells. Overexpression of syntenin-1 increases
Slug-induced cell migration and invasion though regulating the repression
activity of Slug. Knock down the expression of syntenin-1 may also
inhibit the repression activity of Slug on promoter of E-cadherin in
highly invasive lung cancer cell lines. In Sum, Syntenin-1 may promote
cell Invasion though regulating Slug-dependent EMT process in Non-small
cell lung cancer.

