Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elevated CXCR4 expression is clinically correlated with advanced
stage neuroblastoma: examination of its role as a possible therapeutic
target


ABSTRACT Purpose: Recent evidence suggests that expression of CXCR4 is
associated with the growth and progression of neuroblastoma. The purpose
of this study was to determine the value of CXCR4 as in independent
predictive biomarker and evaluate its potential as a therapeutic target
in neuroblastoma. Experimental Design: mRNA Expression profiling was
performed on 101 diagnostic neuroblastoma primary tumor samples using
Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. CXCR4 expression was stratified by
risk and stage, and statistically significant differences in mRNA levels
were determined. Protein expression profiling was performed by conducting
immunohistochemical analysis of CXCR4 expression in 92 neuroblastoma
tumors on a tissue microarray constructed at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia (CHOP); expression levels were stratified by stage and
compared to determine significant correlations. To examine the role of
CXCR4 in neuroblastoma progression, the selective CXCR4 inhibitor AMD3100
was used to observe the effect of CXCR4 inhibition on the growth of
neuroblastoma cells in culture and in mice. Results: CXCR4 expression was
significantly higher in stage 1 vs. ganglioneuroma tumors, as assessed at
the protein level (PABSTRACT Purpose: Recent evidence suggests that
expression of CXCR4 is associated with the growth and progression of
neuroblastoma. The purpose of this study was to determine the value of
CXCR4 as in independent predictive biomarker and evaluate its potential
as a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma. Experimental Design: mRNA
Expression profiling was performed on 101 diagnostic neuroblastoma
primary tumor samples using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. CXCR4
expression was stratified by risk and stage, and statistically
significant differences in mRNA levels were determined. Protein
expression profiling was performed by conducting immunohistochemical
analysis of CXCR4 expression in 92 neuroblastoma tumors on a tissue
microarray constructed at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP);
expression levels were stratified by stage and compared to determine
significant correlations. To examine the role of CXCR4 in neuroblastoma
progression, the selective CXCR4 inhibitor AMD3100 was used to observe
the effect of CXCR4 inhibition on the growth of neuroblastoma cells in
culture and in mice. Results: CXCR4 expression was significantly higher
in stage 1 vs. ganglioneuroma tumors, as assessed at the protein level
(P<0.0001), and in stage 4 tumors vs. stage 1 tumors, at both the mRNA
and protein levels (PABSTRACT Purpose: Recent evidence suggests that
expression of CXCR4 is associated with the growth and progression of
neuroblastoma. The purpose of this study was to determine the value of
CXCR4 as in independent predictive biomarker and evaluate its potential
as a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma. Experimental Design: mRNA
Expression profiling was performed on 101 diagnostic neuroblastoma
primary tumor samples using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. CXCR4
expression was stratified by risk and stage, and statistically
significant differences in mRNA levels were determined. Protein
expression profiling was performed by conducting immunohistochemical
analysis of CXCR4 expression in 92 neuroblastoma tumors on a tissue
microarray constructed at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP);
expression levels were stratified by stage and compared to determine
significant correlations. To examine the role of CXCR4 in neuroblastoma
progression, the selective CXCR4 inhibitor AMD3100 was used to observe
the effect of CXCR4 inhibition on the growth of neuroblastoma cells in
culture and in mice. Results: CXCR4 expression was significantly higher
in stage 1 vs. ganglioneuroma tumors, as assessed at the protein level
(P<0.0001), and in stage 4 tumors vs. stage 1 tumors, at both the mRNA
and protein levels (P<0.01). Additionally, a comparison of CXCR4
transcriptional expression in patient tumors stratified by risk revealed
greater CXCR4 expression in high-risk groups compared to low and
intermediate groups (PABSTRACT Purpose: Recent evidence suggests that
expression of CXCR4 is associated with the growth and progression of
neuroblastoma. The purpose of this study was to determine the value of
CXCR4 as in independent predictive biomarker and evaluate its potential
as a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma. Experimental Design: mRNA
Expression profiling was performed on 101 diagnostic neuroblastoma
primary tumor samples using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. CXCR4
expression was stratified by risk and stage, and statistically
significant differences in mRNA levels were determined. Protein
expression profiling was performed by conducting immunohistochemical
analysis of CXCR4 expression in 92 neuroblastoma tumors on a tissue
microarray constructed at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP);
expression levels were stratified by stage and compared to determine
significant correlations. To examine the role of CXCR4 in neuroblastoma
progression, the selective CXCR4 inhibitor AMD3100 was used to observe
the effect of CXCR4 inhibition on the growth of neuroblastoma cells in
culture and in mice. Results: CXCR4 expression was significantly higher
in stage 1 vs. ganglioneuroma tumors, as assessed at the protein level
(P<0.0001), and in stage 4 tumors vs. stage 1 tumors, at both the mRNA
and protein levels (P<0.01). Additionally, a comparison of CXCR4
transcriptional expression in patient tumors stratified by risk revealed
greater CXCR4 expression in high-risk groups compared to low and
intermediate groups (P<0.002); interestingly, CXCR4 protein expression
was not associated with overall survival or progression-free survival
(PFS). Treatment of neuroblastoma cells with AMD3100 inhibited growth of
these cells in culture and in mouse xenografts. Conclusion: We conclude
that increased levels of CXCR4 expression are associated with advanced
tumor stage and a high risk population in neuroblastoma patients,
demonstrating the clinical value of CXCR4 as an independent biomarker for
risk classification and patient stratification; additionally, CXCR4
should be considered a novel and viable candidate for targeted
therapeutic intervention in neuroblastoma patients.

