Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Colorectal cancer survival by molecular subtypes in a
population-based cohort of older women


Background: Despite recent advances in prevention and therapy, colorectal
cancer (CRC) continues to account for nearly 50,000 deaths per year in
the US. TNM stage is the current CRC prognostic standard, yet
within-stage prognostic heterogeneity is well documented. Microsatellite
instability (MSI), CpG island methylation phenotype (CIMP), and BRAF- and
KRAS-mutation status represent candidate prognostic markers. However,
associations between these markers and CRC survival have not been
described in a population-based setting. Methods: Data and tissue
resources were obtained from the Iowa Women's Health Study (IWHS), which
recruited 41,836 women, ages 55-69 years, at study entry (1986). Incident
CRC cases were ascertained by annual linkage with the Iowa Cancer
Registry. Archived, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens were collected
from 732 representative CRC cases diagnosed through 12/31/2002.
Established laboratory methods were used to characterize CRC cases: MSI-H
or MSS/MSI-L (by instability in 3 vs. Background: Despite recent advances
in prevention and therapy, colorectal cancer (CRC) continues to account
for nearly 50,000 deaths per year in the US. TNM stage is the current CRC
prognostic standard, yet within-stage prognostic heterogeneity is well
documented. Microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG island methylation
phenotype (CIMP), and BRAF- and KRAS-mutation status represent candidate
prognostic markers. However, associations between these markers and CRC
survival have not been described in a population-based setting. Methods:
Data and tissue resources were obtained from the Iowa Women's Health
Study (IWHS), which recruited 41,836 women, ages 55-69 years, at study
entry (1986). Incident CRC cases were ascertained by annual linkage with
the Iowa Cancer Registry. Archived, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens
were collected from 732 representative CRC cases diagnosed through
12/31/2002. Established laboratory methods were used to characterize CRC
cases: MSI-H or MSS/MSI-L (by instability in 3 vs. <3 out of 10 markers,
respectively); CIMP+ or CIMP (by promoter hypermethylation in 3 vs. 0-2
out of 5 genes, respectively); BRAFwt or BRAFmut (by fluorescent allele
specific PCR to detect the V600E point mutation in exon 15); and KRASwt
or KRASmut (by direct sequence analysis of codons 12 and 13 in exon 2).
Cox regression models were fit to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for time to death of any cause adjusted for
age, stage, grade, and treatment status. Results: CRC cases with
informative molecular marker data ranged from 515/732 (70%) for KRAS to
548/732 (75%) for MSI status. Mean follow-up was 4.4 years for deceased
individuals and 11.2 years for women alive at last contact. After
multivariable adjustment, both MSS/MSI-L (p=0.004) and KRASmut (p=0.048)
tumors were associated with poorer survival. Survival did not
significantly differ across levels of CIMP and BRAF status. Conclusions:
MSI and KRAS status may influence CRC survival among older women.


