Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- signaling pathway analysis using MILLIPLEX MAP TGF- multiplex
panel


Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-) is a secreted protein that
controls cellular proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, migration,
adhesion, immune response, and other functions in most cells. The binding
of TGF- to its receptor, TGFRII, can lead to activation of both the
SMAD-dependent canonical pathway as well as the SMAD-independent
non-canonical pathways (such as PI3K/Akt, ERK, JNK, and p38). The TGF-
signaling pathway is coordinately regulated by phosphorylation and
understanding the role of this pathway in normal physiological processes
and in diseases such as cancer and diabetes requires the ability to
simultaneously measure phosphorylation status of multiple protein
targets. In recent years, bead-based assays, such as those using Luminex
xMAP technology, have enabled the measurement of phosphorylation levels
of up to 12 proteins simultaneously. Using the TGF- Signaling Pathway
multiplex panel, we observed increased levels of phosphorylated Smad2 and
Smad3, but not phosphorylated ERK or Akt in TGF- treated cells when
compared to their unstimulated counterparts. Modifications in
phosphorylation levels were confirmed by the treatment of cells with
specific inhibitors against TGFRI, which blocked phosphorylation of Smad2
and Smad3 in TGF- treated HepG2 cells. Furthermore, significant increase
in phosphorylated Smad3 was observed in human breast cancer versus
matched breast normal tissues. The TGF- Signaling Pathway multiplex panel
allowed for simultaneous detection of multiple analytes in both the
SMAD-dependent canonical pathway as well as the SMAD-independent
non-canonical pathways in a specific, sensitive, and reproducible manner.

