Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA methylation status of MLH1, p16, SOCS1, ER and CDH1 in Puerto
Rican patients with acute myeloid leukemia


Background: DNA methylation of gene promoters have been show to play a
role in the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We present in
this study a preliminary report of the methylation status of MLH1, p16,
SOCS1, ER and CDH1 in Puerto Rican patients with AML. Methods: Peripheral
blood was obtained from 24 patients with diagnosis of acute myeloid
leukemia before and after their induction treatments. DNA was isolated
and further modified with sodium bisulfite. Methylation-specific
polymerase (MSP) chain reaction was performed to detect aberrant promoter
methylation of MLH1, p16, SOCS1, ER and CDH1. Results: Samples from a
total of 24 patients were analyzed. The mean age was 47 years (range
22-70) with 21/24 patients younger than 60 years (88%). Most of the
patients were female (13/24, 54%). Ten patients had diploid cytogenetics
(42%), 4 had low risk cytogenetics (17%) and 10 had high risk
cytogenetics (42%). Nineteen patients were de Novo AML (79%). Sixteen
patients (67%) presented with WBC counts higher than 10 x 109/L.
Seventeen patients (71%) achieved a complete response at the end of the
induction therapy. Frequencies of gene methylation before treatment were
as follows: MLH: 3/24 (13%); p16: 6/24 (25%); SOCS1:13/24 (54%); ER:
16/24 (67%) and CDH1: 4/24 (16.7%). Conclusions: No correlation between
methylation status of p16 and MLH1 before treatment and
clinicopathological characteristics was noted. Unmethylated CDH1 was more
common among the novo AML patients. Methylation of SOCS1 was more common
among patients that achieve a CR after induction therapy. This sample is
a small one, so any correlation must be further tested in a more ample
sample. Collection of more patient's samples and correlation with
clinical data and patient's ultimate outcome is ongoing.

