Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Possible role of autophagy inhibition in hypoxia-induced
chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer cells


BACKGROUND: Autophagy is a catabolic process and provides metabolic
support for the cell by degradation of intracellular macromolecules.
Various types of stress, including hypoxia, activate autophagy. Recent
studies have suggested that hypoxia has been shown to associate with
resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy and hence poor prognosis in
pancreatic cancer. This study investigated the role of autophagy in the
treatment of pancreatic cancer with gemcitabine under hypoxic condition.
METHODS: To evaluate the role of autophagy inhibition in hypoxia-induced
chemoresistance, BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer cell line was used under
normoxic and hypoxic conditions. We evaluated the extent of LC3-II, as an
autophagosome marker, by Western blotting to measure the hypoxia- or
chemotherapy-induced autophagy. We then examined the effects of
gemcitabine on induction of apoptosis under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Finally, to determine the effect of 3-MA, a known inhibitor
of autophagy, on overcoming hypoxia-induced chemoresistance, the MTS
assay and flow cytometry were performed.RESULTS: Compared with normoxia,
gemcitabine-induced cell death was significantly decreased under hypoxia,
as a result of the reduced apoptosis. Western blotting analysis
demonstrated that LC3-II was increased under hypoxia, compared with
normoxia. However, we found that 3-MA can enhance the growth inhibition
and apoptotic effect of gemcitabine, even under hypoxia. These findings
mean that autophagy mediates the chemoresistance under hypoxia.
Conclusions: Activated autophagy plays a role in hypoxia-induced
chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer cells. These findings may have
important implications for future therapeutic strategies using
gemcitabine against pancreatic cancer.

