Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acquisition of the invasive phenotype and EMT profile by CXCL7
transfection


Introduction: The expression of CXCL7 is associated with the invasive
phenotype through interaction with the CXCL7/CXCR2 axis and heparan
sulfate. A component of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is
degradation of extracellular matrix and acquisition of migration, both of
which support invasiveness. The purpose of this study is to quantify the
expression of genes associated with EMT by CXCL7-expressing cells with
the invasive phenotype. Methods: Total RNA from CXCL7-transfected breast
cells (MCF10AT) was tested for relative gene expression using RT2
ProfilerTM PCR array for EMT (SABiosciences). Vector transfected cells
were compared. Each result was verified by real time PCR assay. Results:
The expression of GNG11 and TCF4 was upregulated and SPP1 downregulated
as expected for the EMT profile. Specifically, GNG11 (Guanine nucleotide
binding protein (G protein), gamma 11) expression was increased 2.94 fold
and TCF4 (Transcription factor 4) increased 1.89 fold. The expression of
SPP1 (Secreted phosphoprotein 1) was decreased by 6.8 fold. The
expression of ZEB2 (Zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2) was decreased
by 1.96 as a transcription factor. Summary: The CXCL7-transfected cells
with invasive phenotype express genes associated with the EMT expression
profile including G-protein signaling pathway.

