Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of tobacco smoking on the risks of childhood acute
lymphocytic and myeloid leukemias, by phenotypic and cytogenetic subtype


Background: Tobacco smoke contains several myelotropic carcinogens (i.e.,
benzene, 1,3 butadiene and formaldehyde) and is strongly suspected of
damaging pluripotential hematopoietic stem cells. Objective: To examine
the role of tobacco smoking in the etiology of childhood acute
lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) and myeloid leukemia (AML), defined by
phenotypic feature and type of chromosomal aberrations at diagnosis, such
as translocation t(12:21) or high hyperdiploidy (51+ chromosomes).
Method: Children (0-14 years old) newly diagnosed with ALL (n=839) and
AML (n=145) were enrolled in a case-control study in California
(1995-2008). Population-based controls (n=1226) were matched to cases on
age, sex, Hispanic status, and maternal race. Parents provided
information on exposure to tobacco smoking before and after their child's
birth. Conventional karyotype and fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) data were abstracted from the medical reports. Additional FISH
assays using pre-treatment bone marrow specimens were conducted to
complete cytogenetic classification. Unconditional logistic regression
analyses were used to estimate the odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) for developing leukemia, using binary variable for
ever/never smoked (ORbinary) and continuous variable for number of
cigarettes smoked per day (ORcig). All models included the matching
factors and household income. Results: In univariate analyses, elevated
risks of B-cell ALL (n=722) were associated with pre-conception paternal
smoking (PCPS) (ORcig= 1.02; 95% CI:1.00-1.03; p=0.04) and child's
passive smoking (CPS) after birth (ORbinary=1.32; 95% CI:1.21-3.50;
p=0.02). Analyses using mutually exclusive exposure variables (i.e., only
PCPS, only CPS, and both PCPS-CPS, compared to no smoking) showed that
the elevated risk of B-cell ALL was limited to children exposed to both
PCPS-CPS (OR=1.50, 95% CI:1.10-2.04). The magnitude of this association
increased for 133 B-cell ALL cases harboring chromosomal translocation
t(12;21) (OR=2.37; 95% CI:1.41-4.01). Weaker associations were seen
between PCPS and CPS and B-cell ALL harboring other chromosome
translocations (n=82) or deletions (n=63). Tobacco smoking did not appear
to be associated with hyperdiploid B-cell ALL (n=228) and T-cell ALL
(n=70). Child's passive smoking conferred a 1.5-fold increased risk of
AML (95% CI:0.98-2.26; p=0.06), with a higher risk observed for those
with chromosome aberrations linked to a favorable prognosis
(ORbinary=1.94; p=0.07; n=80). No excess risks were seen with maternal
smoking during pregnancy, after accounting for other sources of smoking.
Conclusions: Exposure to tobacco smoking is an important predictor of
childhood ALL, and possibly AML. The observed risks contrast by
phenotypic and cytogenetic subtype, providing insights in the etiology of
the disease.

