Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monitoring inflammation and therapeutic response with clinically
translational 19F MRI


Non- invasive monitoring of inflammation to both diagnose disease and
evaluate treatment is critically needed. V-Sense, a perfluorocarbon
tracer agent that labels circulating inflammatory cells, which are then
recruited out of circulation to sites of inflammation, enables detection
by 19F MRI. Due to negligible 19F background in the host, detection of
19F and thus inflammation is highly-specific. Inflammation is a noted
predecessor to several types of cancer such as colon, ovarian, pancreatic
and prostate cancer and also contributes to the progression of metastatic
disease. Using a collagen-induced arthritis model, where the inflammatory
process is well understood, we demonstrate the ability to monitor
development, progression, and treatment of inflammation. Disease
progression in the rat hind limbs was monitored by caliper measurements
and 19F MRI on days 14, 21 and 28, including the height of clinically
symptomatic disease. Nave rats served as controls. The capacity of
V-Sense to assess the effectiveness of therapy was studied in a cohort of
rats administered oral prednisolone on days 14 to 28. Terminal
histopathological analysis was also performed. Comparison of caliper
measurements to the 19F accumulation, from 19F MRI, validated the
quanitative nature of this approach. This study supports the use of
V-Sense to monitor and quantify the inflammatory process in disease,
including the development of and treatment cancer.

