Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: mS100a7a15 enhances mammary tumor growth and metastasis by
recruiting tumor associated macrophages


mS100a7a15 is the murine ortholog of human S100A7 and S100A15 proteins.
Both S100A7 and S100A15 have been shown to play an important role in
breast cancer. S100A7 has been shown to be highly expressed in high grade
ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive breast cancers. Its expression is
also related to poor prognosis and associated with increased inflammatory
infiltrates and various inflammatory disorders. However, the exact
mechanism by which S100A7 or S100A15 enhances breast cancer growth is not
known. In the present study, we determined the molecular mechanisms by
which mS100a7a15 enhances growth by overexpressing mS100a7a15 in
MDA-MB-231 cells. We showed that mS100a7a15 enhances expression of
proinflammatory molecules CXCL1 and CXCL8. In addition, we observed that
supernatants obtained from mS100a7a15 overexpressing cells enhanced
chemotaxis of murine RAW264.7 macrophages. Further elucidation revealed
that mS100a7/a15 mediates its effects by binding to receptor for advanced
glycation end products (RAGE). We further analyzed the role of mS100a7a15
on modulation of tumor growth and inflammatory pathways in breast cancer
by generating inducible bi-transgenic MMTV-rtTA; mS100a7a15 mice
(MMTV-mS100a7a15). These mice showed enhanced mS100a7a15 protein
expression upon doxycycline treatment. Mammary glands isolated from these
mice showed enhanced hyperplasia upon doxycycline treatment for 3 months
compared to uninduced mice. Further studies revealed enhanced recruitment
of macrophages in mammary glands and activation of STAT3 in induced mice.
Orthotopic implantation of MVT-1 breast tumor cells (derived from
MMTV-c-Myc; MMTV-VEGF mice) into the mammary glands of these mice showed
enhanced tumor growth and metastasis in doxycycline treated mice compared
to the control. Tumors and lung tissues obtained from these mice showed
enhanced pro-metastatic gene expression and recruitment of F4/80 and
CD206 positive M2 tumor-associated macrophages (TAM). However, no
difference was observed in CD3+ and CD4+ T lymphocytes. Further
elucidation of the role of macrophages by in vivo depletion of
macrophages using clodronate liposomes revealed that mS100a7a15-mediated
recruitment of TAM is important for tumor growth, angiogenesis and
metastasis. Furthermore, mice treated with STAT3 inhibitors showed
reduced mS100a7a15-induced hyperplasia. STAT3 has been shown to regulate
expression of various inflammatory molecules. These studies using a novel
mS100a7a15 bi-transgenic model system demonstrate that mS100a7a15
enhances breast tumor growth and metastasis by enhancing inflammatory
signals that result in enhanced recruitment of TAM.

