Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CK2 regulates MRP1 mediated multidrug drug resistance in cancer
via phosphorylation of Thr249


We have previously shown that the function of Ycf1p, yeast ortholog of
MRP1, is regulated by yeast casein kinase 2 (Cka1p) via phosphorylation
at Ser251. In this study we explore whether CK2, the human homolog of
Cka1p, regulates MRP1 by phosphorylation at the semi-conserved site,
Thr249. Knockdown of CK2 in MCF7-derived cells expressing MRP1 (MRP1
CK2()) resulted in increased doxorubicin sensitivity. MRP1-dependent
transport of LTC4 and E217G into vesicles derived from MRP1 CK2() cells
was decreased compared with MRP1 vesicles. Moreover, Thr249 to alanine
mutation (MRP1-T249A) also resulted in decreased MRP1-dependent
transport, while a phosphomimicking mutation (MRP1-T249E) led to dramatic
increase in MRP1-dependent transport. Studies in tissue culture confirmed
these findings showing increased intracellular doxorubicin accumulation
in MRP1 CK2() and MRP1-T249A cells compared to MRP1 cells. Inhibition of
CK2 kinase by DMAT resulted in increased doxorubicin accumulation in MRP1
cells, but not in MRP1 CK2(), MRP1-T249A or MRP1-T249E cells, suggesting
that CK2 regulates MRP1 function via phosphorylation of Thr249. Indeed,
CK2 and MRP1 interact physically and recombinant CK2 phosphorylates MRP1
derived peptide in vitro in Thr249 dependent manner, while knockdown of
CK2 results in decreased phosphorylation at MRP1-T249. The role of CK2 in
regulating MRP1 was confirmed in other cancer cell lines where CK2
inhibition decreased MRP1-mediated efflux of doxorubicin. This study
supports a model in which CK2 potentiates MRP1 function via direct
phosphorylation of Thr249. We believe that addition of CK2 inhibitors to
cancer treatments will improve therapeutic outcome in part due to
reversal of MRP1- mediated drug resistance.

