Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of anoxia/reoxygenation on epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in human colon cancer cell lines


Background and Aim: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered
as crucial events in cancer metastasis. Anoxia/reoxygenation (A/R) is
known to occur in cancer tissues, due to the process of angiogenesis and
the change of the pressure in tissue growth. In this study, we
investigated whether A/R induces EMT in the human colon cancer cells.
Materials and Methods: Colon cancer cells, HT29 cells, were exposed to
anoxia (2 h) followed by reoxygenation (4-22 h). To evaluate EMT,
morphological changes were assessed by light microscopy,
immunofluorescence and Western blot analyses. Moreover, RT-PCR for the
EMT-related transcription factors (Snail and ZEB1) was performed and the
activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-B) was analyzed in the nuclear
extracts using an ELISA method. To determine whether NF-kB was involved
in A/R-induced EMT, HT-29 cells were treated with proteasome inhibitors.
Results: Colon cancer cells exposed to A/R showed phenotypic changes
consistent with EMT: spindle-shape and intercellular separation. The
expression of E-cadherin on the cell surface and the total amount of
E-cadherin protein were reduced after A/R. The EMT-related
transcriptional factors such as Snail and ZEB1 were induced after
exposure to A/R. Furthermore, exposure to A/R caused an activation of
NF-B and pretreatment with proteasome inhibitors significantly attenuated
the effects of exposure to A/R. Conclusions: These results indicate that
A/R induces EMT in human colon cancer cells through partially NF-B
dependent transcriptional pathway.

