Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in leukocyte gene expression after computer tomography in
children


Objective: Computer tomography (CT) involves ionizing X-irradiation which
can lead to DNA damage from free radicals. CT use has risen dramatically
due to its high speed and diagnostic value but it leads to an estimated
lifetime cancer risk of up to 4%, with highest risk for children. We
tested in a pilot project whether expression of genes hypothesized to
change upon ionizing radiation are altered in the leukocytes of young
children undergoing CT exams that involved relatively low X-ray doses.
Methods: 17 children aged 0.25-6 years and scheduled for medically
indicated CT donated blood immediately before and 1 hour after a CT exam
(median 340.9 mGy*cm equivalent to 2.3 mSv). Blood was collected into
PaxGene tubes and RNA was extracted according to the suggested protocol,
labeled and hybridized onto Affymetrix Gene 1.0 ST Arrays. Preliminary
expression analysis was done on 24 genes suggested to fluctuate after
ionizing radiation: GADD45, CDKN1A, ATM, ERP29, TP53, CDKN2A, MUC1, CDH6,
DDB2, XPC, TNFRSF10B, FHL2, CCNG1, PCNA, CCNB1, MDM2, BAX, MAPK8, ALB,
PPP1R14A, FLT3LG, HP, RPA2, NFKB1. Significance was determined by paired
t-tests and stepwise multiple regression using the SAS 9.2 software.
Results: In post versus pre CT leukocytes paired t-tests revealed that
the expression of ERP29 decreased (p=0.002) but that the expression of
the other 23 genes did not change significantly except for possible
suggestive increases of XPC (p=0.11) and MUC1 (p=0.18) and decreases of
PCNA (p=0.16) and PPP1R14A (p=0.16) expression. Stepwise multiple
regression tests for predictors of pre to post changes revealed (i) that
the CT dose (mGy*cm) was positively associated with PCNA expression
(p=0.001), (ii) that the effective dose (mSv) was positively associated
with TP53 (p=0.02) and FLT3LG (p=0.02) expression, and (iii) that the
radiation history was associated with increased MDM2 (p=0.002) but
negatively associated with PPP1R14A (p=0.05) and FLT3LG (p=0.03)
expression. Stepwise multiple regression tests for predictors of baseline
levels showed that the radiation history was associated with higher
baseline expression of XPC (p=0.05), MDM2 (p=0.01), and BAX (p=0.001) but
lower baseline expression of ALB (p=0.04). Conclusions: Few of the
investigated 24 radiosensitive genes with the exception of ERP29 changed
expression levels in the leukocytes of the 17 young children studied
after these subjects received relatively low radiation doses. However,
radiation dose dependent changes after CT were observed (PCNA, TP53, and
FLT3LG expression). In addition, radiation history was found to be
positively associated with baseline expression levels of XPC, MDM2, and
BAX, but negatively with that of ALB. Genome wide analyses are currently
under way to explore expression changes of other genes in these 17
subjects. Larger studies are needed to confirm these preliminary findings.

