Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative characterization of calmodulin and Fas death domain
interactions


The Fas death receptor-activated death inducing signaling complex (DISC)
regulates apoptosis in a variety of cells, including cholangiocarcinoma
and other cancer cells. Qualitative immunoprecipitation experiments
demonstrate that calmodulin (CaM) binds to Fas in a calcium-dependent
manner and the CaM binding site in Fas has been localized in the Fas
death domain (Fas DD) (J Biol Chem 279: 5661-5666, 2004). The interaction
of CaM and Fas regulates DISC formation, and the CaM antagonist,
trifluoperazine modulates the binding of Ca2+-bound CaM to Fas thus
affecting Fas-mediated DISC formation (J Cell Biochem 103(3): 788-799,
2008). Fas mutations that cause an alteration of the structure and/or
function of Fas have been detected in many cancers (J Pathol 193(2),
162-169, 2001; Cancer Res 61(4): 1382-5, 2001). The valine 254 to
asparagine (V254N) mutation of Fas DD is analogous to the identified
mutant allele of Fas in lpr-autoimmune mice that have a deficiency in
Fas-mediated apoptosis (Nature 356(6367):314-317, 1992). This mutation
also results in the decreased binding with CaM based on
immunoprecipitation experiments (J Biol Chem 279: 5661-5666, 2004).
Quantitative characterization of CaM and Fas interaction is important for
designing optimized antagonists to modulate Fas-mediated DISC formation
and thus apoptosis. In this study, we quantitatively characterize the
interactions of CaM with wild type Fas and with the Fas V254N mutant
using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). Recombinant CaM, Fas DD
wild type (WT), and a FasV254N mutant were expressed in Escherichia coli,
purified by ion affinity chromatography followed by size exclusion
chromatography and dialyzed into the buffer for ITC experiments. ITC
results illustrate an endothermic binding characteristic between CaM and
WT Fas DD and an entropy-driven interaction between CaM and WT Fas DD
with binding entropy of 46.7 5.3 cal/mol/deg and a binding constant of
1.6 x105 1.6 x104 M1 at 37oC. The binding of CaM and Fas DD was
significantly decreased by the V254N mutation of Fas DD, showing a
significantly decreased binding entropy (33.2 0.001cal/mol/deg) and a
threefold decrease in binding affinity (5.01 x104 3.4 x103 M1) at 37oC.
The significantly decreased binding affinity of CaM with Fas by the V254N
mutation of Fas DD could result from the change of electrostatic
interactions and van der Waals interactions between CaM and Fas DD and
from the conformational change of Fas DD caused by the V254N mutation,
which was demonstrated in our computational study (Biophys J.
95(12):5913-5921, 2008). Results from this study provide the
thermodynamic basis for further identification of novel strategies
capable of effectively regulating Fas-mediated apoptosis.

