Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) by
dendritic cells leads to genomic instability in human myeloma


Tumor microenvironment (TME) is often implicated in regulating the growth
of tumors, but whether it can directly alter the genetics of tumors is
not known. Myeloma is a plasma cell malignancy characterized by growth of
tumor cells in the bone marrow. Prior studies have shown that genomic
instability and dendritic cell (DC) infiltration are common features of
human myeloma (MM). Mechanisms underlying genomic instability in MM are
largely unknown. Here we show that the interaction between myeloma and
DCs but not monocytes, leads to rapid induction of the genomic mutator
AID and AID-dependent DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in myeloma cell
lines as well as primary MM cells. Both myeloid as well as plasmacytoid
DCs known to infiltrate MM lesions have the capacity to induce AID in MM
tumor cells. The induction of AID and resultant DNA-DSBs in tumor cells
by DCs depends on DC-tumor contact and is inhibited by the blockade of
RANK/RANKL interactions. DC-mediated genomic damage in tumors also leads
to altered tumorigenicity in vivo. These data demonstrate a novel pathway
for the capacity of specific cells in TME such as DCs to regulate genomic
integrity in cancer. These findings also suggest that DC-mediated genomic
instability may be targetable by approaches such as RANKL inhibition that
are already in the clinic.

