Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signal rewiring induced by EWS/FLI-1 in mouse and human
mesenchymal stem cells


Translocations involving members of the Ets family of transcription
factors are common in prostate cancer and sarcomas, yet their effects on
signal rewiring in cancer are unclear. Translocations between EWS and the
Ets transcription factor Fli1 are found in Ewing's sarcoma, an aggressive
tumor found in children and young adults. To elucidate the mechanism of
transformation by EWS-Fli1, we have developed a novel approach that
leverages the advantages of both mouse and human model systems. A
knock-in mouse in which a Fli1-cDNA was introduced downstream of the
endogenous EWS allele was generated. To our knowledge, this is the first
described genetically engineered model in which EWS-Fli1 (EF) can be
expressed conditionally from the native EWS promotor. Expression of EF in
MEFs and MSCs from this model demonstrates that MSCs tolerate EF
expression better than MEFs, consistent with prior data suggesting that
MSCs are the likely cell of origin of Ewing's sarcoma. Ongoing analysis
of well-defined MSC subsets may provide additional information regarding
the cell of origin. In parallel, we have analyzed the consequences of
expression of EF in human MSCs derived from pediatric patients.
Deep-sequencing of these human pediatric MSCs (hpMSCs) has identified
many novel coding and non-coding transcripts that are specifically
upregulated in hpMSCs as a consequence of expression of EF. We have used
functional analysis using hMSC and ES cell lines to validate the role of
these genes in EWS pathogenesis. Some, but not all of these novel
transcripts are also upregulated in mouse MSCs and MEFs that express EF.
In summary, a cross-species approach that combines mouse genetics with
functional genomics has identified novel targets for ES specific
therapeutic development.

