Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cycloxygenase-2 and breast cancer prognosis: The role of gene
polymorphisms in the regulation of COX-2 expression and their association
with histopathological features


Introduction: Cycloxygenase-2 (COX-2) overexpression in breast cancer is
associated with parameters of aggressiveness, including great tumor size,
positive nodal status and lower survival. COX-2 is encoded by a
polymorphic gene, PTGS2, with variant alleles in regulatory sites of the
promoter and of the 3-untranslated regions. Aim: To investigate the
association between the haplotypes formed by the for most frequent PTGS2
SNPs (rs689465, rs689466, rs20417 and rs5275) and: 1) histopathological
parameters with prognostic value on clinical outcome of breast cancer; 2)
COX-2 expression in breast tumors. Methods: The study was conducted at
the Brazilian National Cancer Institute with 606 women with
non-metastatic breast cancer (Protocols #116/07 and #129/08). Recruitment
occurred between Jan/ 2008 and Dec/2010 and all patients were genotyped
using PCR-RFLP or Real Time-PCR. PTGS2 haplotypes were inferred using the
computer software Haploview 4.2, and the individual histopathological
profiles were obtained from data available in electronic medical records.
The expression of PTGS2 gene in breast tumors was evaluated by the
amounts of mRNA transcripts determined with Real Time RT-PCR and by the
amounts of COX-2 determined with immunohistochemistry (IHC) in
paraffin-embedded tissues. Results: A total of 8 PTGS2 haplotypes were
inferred, whose distribution varied as a function of tumor size (P:
0.011), estrogen receptor (ER) status (P: 0.018) and HER2 status (P:
0.025). PTGS2 haplotype *7 (formed by rs689465G, rs689466A, rs20417C,
rs5275T) was positively associated with higher tumor size (OR: 3.72,
95%CI: 1.19-11.22, P: 0.006), ER negativity (OR: 2.43, 95%CI: 0.97-5.98,
P: 0.032), progesterone receptor (PR) negativity (OR: 2.58, 95%CI:
1.05-6.39, P: 0.02), and HER2 positivity (OR: 4.17, 95%CI:1.19-14.44, P:
0.007). The results also indicated positive associations between variant
genotypes of rs689465 and ER negativity (OR: 1.59, 95%CI: 1.04-2.44, P:
0.02) or HER2 positivity (OR: 1.79, 95%CI: 1.00-3.18, P: 0.03), and
between variant genotypes of rs20417 and ER negativity (OR: 1.75, 95%CI:
1.15-2.57, P:0. 005), PR negativity (OR: 1.56, 95%CI: 1.09-2.22, P: 0.01)
or HER2 positivity (OR: 1.80, 95%CI: 1.04-3.13, P: 0.02). In contrast,
variant genotypes of rs689466 were negatively associated with ER
negativity (OR: 0.57, 95%CI: 0.33-0.98, P: 0.03). The analyses of PTGS2
expression in breast tumors are currently under course, with 166 tumor
species submitted to IHC and 100 submitted to Real Time RT-PCR.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that PTGS2 haplotype *7 may contribute to
higher growth of untreated breast cancer. We expect that the results
regarding the regulation of PTGS2 expression may help understanding the
prognostic value of PTGS2 SNPs in breast cancer.

