Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Suppression of WNT1 expression inhibits the maintenance and
expansion of cancer stem cells in a mouse model of breast cancer


Cancer relapse is the most common cause of mortality in breast cancer
patients. The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis proposes that CSCs are
the root of cancer. CSC-targeted therapies may prevent cancer relapse and
provide more effective treatment. It has been known that stem cells can
be enriched in non-adherent sphere culture. To identify molecular targets
in breast CSC, we compared transcription levels of stem cell-related
genes between tumorspheres established from Balb/c mice-derived 4T1
mammary carcinoma and mammospheres from the mammary glands of Balb/c
mice. The most differentially expressed gene was found to be
Wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 1 (WNT1). To determine
whether WNT1 has any relevance in breast carcinoma, we analyzed the
expression of WNT1 in the human matched normal breast and breast cancer
samples. Immunofluorescent staining showed that WNT1 expression was
elevated 17-63-fold in cancerous tissues compared with non-cancerous
tissues from the same breast cancer patients. Functionally, knockdown of
WNT1 in 4T1 cells reduced the Aldefluorpos cell compartment enriched in
CSCs and suppressed the properties of CSCs, including anti-apoptosis,
sphere-forming ability, and tumor initiation ability in vivo.
Collectively, these results show that WNT1 expression gives rise to
properties of CSC in breast cancer. Therefore, the targeting of
WNT1-associated signaling may provide an effective therapeutic approach
in the treatment of advanced breast cancer.

