Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: National survey of malignant mesothelioma and asbestos exposure in
Japan


A newspaper article published in June 2005 reported that 5 residents who
lived near the now-closed asbestos cement pipe plant in Amagasaki
developed pleural mesothelioma. The asbestos-related problems that the
article described caused much social concern resulting in the so-called
Kubota shock. Patients who have a history of occupational asbestos
exposure and have developed malignant mesothelioma are provided worker's
compensation in Japan. However, among 878 cases of death due to
mesothelioma in 2003, only 85 cases were actually compensated. Based on
this, we initiated this retrospective survey and extracted 6,030 cases of
death due to MM between 2003 and 2008 to clarify the clinical features of
MM including the association with asbestos exposure (AE). Among them,
clinical diagnosis of MM was confirmed in 929 cases. The origin of MM
included the pleura in 794 (85.5%) cases, the peritoneum in 123 (13.2%)
cases, the pericardium in 7 (0.8%) cases, and the testicular tunica
vaginalis in 5(0.5%) cases. The histological subtype of MM included 396
(55.9%) epithelioid, 154(21.7%) sarcomatoid, 126 (17.8%) biphasic, and 33
(4.7%) cases classified as other types. AE was indicated in 76.8% and
pleural plaques were detected in 34.2% of all MM cases. Asbestos
particles were determined in 103 MM cases. More than 1,000 asbestos
particles per gram dried lung tissue were detected in 74.8%, and more
than 5,000 particles were detected in 43.7% of the cases. We compared the
patient characteristics and the diagnostic procedures of MM before and
after the Kubota shock. Compared to the early phase of this study
(2003-2005), the median age at diagnosis of MM was higher, the number of
cases without definite diagnosis of MM was lower, the proportion of cases
diagnosed by thoracoscopy was higher, and the percentage of the cases in
which the occupational history was described in the medical record was
significantly higher in the late phase (2006-2008). Our study confirmed
that more than 70% of MM cases in Japan are associated with AE. The
Kubota shock might affect some features pertaining to MM.

