Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF signaling is frequently attenuated in hepatocellular
carcinomas but is retained for malignant phenotypes in some
hepatocellular carcinoma cells


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers in the
world. Its development and progression have been shown to be regulated by
various cytokines including TGF. However, the role of TGF signaling in
the progression of HCC remains controversial. In the current study, we
examined the expression levels of TGF pathway components and the
activation status of Smad2/3 proteins as reflected by phospho-Smad2/3
levels in human and mouse HCC tissues and human HCC cell lines. We also
investigated whether abrogation of TGF signaling in HCC cell lines that
are responsive to TGF affects the growth and metastasis of transplanted
HCC cells in nude mice. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western immune
blotting analyses reveal widespread down-regulation of TGF signaling
pathway components including Smad2/3 and TGF type I and II receptors in
HCC tissues of patients and mice in comparison to adjacent normal
tissues. Treatment of our HCC cell lines (SNU398, SNU423, HepG2, and
Sk-Hep-1) with TGF1 revealed that the SNU398 cell line was refractory
whereas the other three cell lines were sensitive to TGF as determined
with a number of in vitro assays including Smad phosphorylation, gene
transcription, and growth inhibition assays. Knockdown of TGF type II
receptor with shRNA significantly reduced TGF signaling activity in the
Sk-Hep-1 cell line resulting in suppressed growth of its subcutaneous
tumors and reduced metastasis potential when the cells were inoculated
through tail vein injection. Our results suggest that TGF signaling may
play a suppressive role in early stage of HCC development, but a
promoting role in advanced stage, which is represented by the Sk-Hep-1
cell model.

