Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of PITX2, BMP4, FGF4, ERalpha, ERbeta promoter
methylation in the circulating tumor cells (CTCs) can predict metastasis
and survival in primary invasive duct carcinoma (PIDC) patients


Recent studies have focused on hematogenous tumor cell dissemination as
predictive factors of breast cancer metastasis and several methods for
detecting circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral blood were
described. However, in early-stage breast cancer, molecular
characterization of CTCs and their prognostic value is not well
established. We previously found a significant correlation between DNA
promotor methylation (PM) of PITX2, BMP4, FGF4, ERalpha, ERbeta and
breast cancer recurrence and metastasis (unpublished data). Therefore, we
sought to compare the frequency of PM of these genes in the CTC and the
primary breast tumors (PBT) in relation to recurrence, progression free
and overall survival rates (DFS& OS) CTCs were collected from the 10 cm
peripheral blood of 80 primary invasive duct carcinoma (PIDC) patients by
immunomagnetic beads separation. The number of CTCs was determined by
flow cytometry (FCM) and RT-PCR (using CK-19, mammaglobin and CD44) for
confirmation and comparison. Patients were first tested for CTC counts
immediately before surgery, prior to therapy, at first follow-up (4-6
weeks later) and after 6 months. PM of PITX2, BMP4, FGF4, ERalpha, ERbeta
was assessed by methylation specific PCR (MSP) in PBTs and CTCs and
correlated with metastasis and survival. The number of CTCs ranged from
0-500/10 ml blood. The concordance between FCM and RT-PCR was 98%
(p=0.01). At first assessment, 56 patients have 10 CTCs/10 ml blood and
exhibited a significantly shorter progression-free survival (PFS) (12.7
months versus 20.6 months) and overall survival (OS) (28.1 months versus
49.5 months) than women with 10 CTCs was 16.1 months, compared to greater
than 36 months in the cohort with Recent studies have focused on
hematogenous tumor cell dissemination as predictive factors of breast
cancer metastasis and several methods for detecting circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) in peripheral blood were described. However, in early-stage
breast cancer, molecular characterization of CTCs and their prognostic
value is not well established. We previously found a significant
correlation between DNA promotor methylation (PM) of PITX2, BMP4, FGF4,
ERalpha, ERbeta and breast cancer recurrence and metastasis (unpublished
data). Therefore, we sought to compare the frequency of PM of these genes
in the CTC and the primary breast tumors (PBT) in relation to recurrence,
progression free and overall survival rates (DFS& OS) CTCs were collected
from the 10 cm peripheral blood of 80 primary invasive duct carcinoma
(PIDC) patients by immunomagnetic beads separation. The number of CTCs
was determined by flow cytometry (FCM) and RT-PCR (using CK-19,
mammaglobin and CD44) for confirmation and comparison. Patients were
first tested for CTC counts immediately before surgery, prior to therapy,
at first follow-up (4-6 weeks later) and after 6 months. PM of PITX2,
BMP4, FGF4, ERalpha, ERbeta was assessed by methylation specific PCR
(MSP) in PBTs and CTCs and correlated with metastasis and survival. The
number of CTCs ranged from 0-500/10 ml blood. The concordance between FCM
and RT-PCR was 98% (p=0.01). At first assessment, 56 patients have 10
CTCs/10 ml blood and exhibited a significantly shorter progression-free
survival (PFS) (12.7 months versus 20.6 months) and overall survival (OS)
(28.1 months versus 49.5 months) than women with 10 CTCs was 16.1 months,
compared to greater than 36 months in the cohort with <10 CTCs. PM of
PITX2, BMP4, FGF4, ERalpha and ERbeta, was reported in 42.90%, 50.00%,
51.20%, 63.10% and 46.40% compared to 63.15%, 73.75%, 62.5%, 81.2% and
78.75% in CTCs. PM of BMP4, and ERbeta was associated with reduced OS and
PFS. Conclusions: 1) The presence of CTCs in the blood of PIDC patients
can impact standard treatment and future research, 2) FCM provides a
simple and accurate technique for enumerating CTCs in peripheral blood,
3) the significant increase in PM frequency of all studied genes except
FGF4, suggests that aberrant PM may contribute to increased aggression
and more liability to metastasis. More studies are still needed to assess
the impact of CTCs in PIDC patients and how they might contribute to
improving individualized cancer therapies.

