Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hepatocyte growth factor sensitizes brain tumor cells and
xenografts to c-Met kinase inhibition


The receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met and its ligand hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) are frequently deregulated in many cancers, including brain
tumors. c-Met activation induces brain tumor malignancy and is associated
with poor clinical outcome. Consequently, c-Met inhibitors have been
developed by pharmaceutical companies. However, the factors that
determine sensitivity to c-Met inhibitors have not been determined to
date. In the present study, we systematically investigated the factor(s)
that determine sensitivity of brain tumors to c-Met kinase inhibitors and
thereby also uncovered a new strategy for enhancing sensitivity to the
inhibitors. We investigated the effects of a clinically applicable c-Met
kinase inhibitor, PF-2341066, on fifteen different medulloblastoma and
glioma cells and stem cells that possess different molecular
characteristics. We investigated potential correlations between the
effects of PF-2341066 on cell proliferation and death and the levels of
total c-Met, p-Met, HGF, PTEN and EGFR co-expression. PF-2341066
completely inhibited basal and HGF-induced c-Met activation in all cells.
However, the effects of PF-2341066 on cell proliferation and cell death
varied tremendously between the different cell lines. The
anti-proliferative and anti-survival effects of PF-2341066 did not
correlate with c-Met, phospho-Met or PTEN or EGFR expressions in the
cells. However, there was a statistically significant correlation between
HGF expression levels and PF-2341066-induced inhibition of cell
proliferation and cell survival (pThe receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met and
its ligand hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) are frequently deregulated in
many cancers, including brain tumors. c-Met activation induces brain
tumor malignancy and is associated with poor clinical outcome.
Consequently, c-Met inhibitors have been developed by pharmaceutical
companies. However, the factors that determine sensitivity to c-Met
inhibitors have not been determined to date. In the present study, we
systematically investigated the factor(s) that determine sensitivity of
brain tumors to c-Met kinase inhibitors and thereby also uncovered a new
strategy for enhancing sensitivity to the inhibitors. We investigated the
effects of a clinically applicable c-Met kinase inhibitor, PF-2341066, on
fifteen different medulloblastoma and glioma cells and stem cells that
possess different molecular characteristics. We investigated potential
correlations between the effects of PF-2341066 on cell proliferation and
death and the levels of total c-Met, p-Met, HGF, PTEN and EGFR
co-expression. PF-2341066 completely inhibited basal and HGF-induced
c-Met activation in all cells. However, the effects of PF-2341066 on cell
proliferation and cell death varied tremendously between the different
cell lines. The anti-proliferative and anti-survival effects of
PF-2341066 did not correlate with c-Met, phospho-Met or PTEN or EGFR
expressions in the cells. However, there was a statistically significant
correlation between HGF expression levels and PF-2341066-induced
inhibition of cell proliferation and cell survival (p<0.01). Similarly,
orthotopic xenografts derived from cell line with high HGF expression
level were significantly stronger inhibited by oral administration of
PF-2341066 to than xenografts derived from low-expressing HGF cells.
Therefore, HGF co-expression is the best predictor of response to c-Met
kinase inhibitors. Surprisingly, we also found that when glioma cells and
stem cells are pretreated with HGF, PF-2341066 is able to induce
significantly greater (34-79%) cell death than in non-pretreated cells
(pThe receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met and its ligand hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) are frequently deregulated in many cancers, including brain
tumors. c-Met activation induces brain tumor malignancy and is associated
with poor clinical outcome. Consequently, c-Met inhibitors have been
developed by pharmaceutical companies. However, the factors that
determine sensitivity to c-Met inhibitors have not been determined to
date. In the present study, we systematically investigated the factor(s)
that determine sensitivity of brain tumors to c-Met kinase inhibitors and
thereby also uncovered a new strategy for enhancing sensitivity to the
inhibitors. We investigated the effects of a clinically applicable c-Met
kinase inhibitor, PF-2341066, on fifteen different medulloblastoma and
glioma cells and stem cells that possess different molecular
characteristics. We investigated potential correlations between the
effects of PF-2341066 on cell proliferation and death and the levels of
total c-Met, p-Met, HGF, PTEN and EGFR co-expression. PF-2341066
completely inhibited basal and HGF-induced c-Met activation in all cells.
However, the effects of PF-2341066 on cell proliferation and cell death
varied tremendously between the different cell lines. The
anti-proliferative and anti-survival effects of PF-2341066 did not
correlate with c-Met, phospho-Met or PTEN or EGFR expressions in the
cells. However, there was a statistically significant correlation between
HGF expression levels and PF-2341066-induced inhibition of cell
proliferation and cell survival (p<0.01). Similarly, orthotopic
xenografts derived from cell line with high HGF expression level were
significantly stronger inhibited by oral administration of PF-2341066 to
than xenografts derived from low-expressing HGF cells. Therefore, HGF
co-expression is the best predictor of response to c-Met kinase
inhibitors. Surprisingly, we also found that when glioma cells and stem
cells are pretreated with HGF, PF-2341066 is able to induce significantly
greater (34-79%) cell death than in non-pretreated cells (p<0.01). The
optimal time of pre-activation that achieved strongest sensitization to
c-Met inhibitor-induced cell death was 2-4 hours. In vivo experiments
showed that short-term bolus HGF pre-treatment of glioma stem
cell-derived xenografts significantly sensitized the tumors to c-Met
inhibition by PF-2341066. We therefore hypothesize that short-term
exogenous activation of c-Met by HGF is able to trigger fast oncogene
addition and therefore sensitize brain tumors to c-Met inhibitors.
Overall, our data identify for the first time HGF co-expression as the
determining factor in tumor sensitivity to c-Met kinase inhibitors and
uncover HGF pre-treatment as a new strategy for enhancing the effects of
the inhibitors. These findings have important practical implications for
the efficient use of recently developed c-Met kinase inhibitors in cancer.

