Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effects of c-Met inhibitors in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma


Background: c-Met is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that has been shown
to be a potential target of therapy in a variety of human cancers. We
investigated if c-Met served as a potential therapeutic target in
esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC). Methods: Cytotoxicity (MTT)
assay, cell migration assay and cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry
were conducted in KYSE 510 and 170 ESCC cell lines (kindly provided by
Dr. Yutaka Shimada) in response to various concentrations of c-met
inhibitors, SU11274 and PHA665752. Apoptosis of ESCC cell lines was
detected by TUNEL assay. Cell cycle regulatory proteins, cyclin A and B1,
tumor suppressors including Rb, p53 p21 and p27, and intrinsic apoptotic
factors were determined by Western blot analysis. Mice inoculated with
KYSE 170 ESCC cell line were used to test therapeutic response of c-met
inhibitors in vivo. Results: SU11274 and PHA665752 significantly
suppressed viability and migration of KYSE 170 and 510 ESCC cells with
decreased expression of phosphorylated c-Met (p-c-Met). Expression of
p21, p27, p53 and Rb was upregulated in ESCC cell lines treated with
c-Met inhibitors while inducing G1/G2 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Tumor growth in vivo was significantly suppressed in response to
treatment with c-Met inhibitors with decreased expression of p-c-Met
within the mice tumors. Conclusion: c-Met inhibitors exerted significant
anticancer effects in vitro and in vivo for ESCC cell lines, suggesting
that c-Met may serve as a potential therapeutic target for ESCC.

