Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased Fc-FcR interaction of human phosphatidylserine targeting
antibody enhances pro-inflammatory and ADCC anti-tumor mechanisms


Anionic phospholipids, principally phosphatidylserine (PS), become
exposed on the external surface of vascular endothelial cells in tumors,
providing an excellent marker for tumor vascular targeting. Binding of
antibodies targeting PS on the tumor endothelial cells and tumors
recruits immune cells and engages the immune system to destroy tumor
vasculature. The antibodies also enhance anti-tumor immunity by blocking
the immunosuppressive action of PS. A chimeric anti-PS antibody,
bavituximab, is being used in combination with chemotherapy to treat
patients with solid tumors in Phase II trials. We have engineered
mutations in the Fc region of fully human PS-targeting antibody PGN635
that enhance the interaction with FcRgammaIIIa and have characterized
their ability to exert anti-tumor effects through various mechanisms,
including ADCC and cytokine induction. Mutations that enhance Fc-FcR
interaction of PS targeting antibodies enhance production of
pro-inflammatory chemokines such as MCP-1 (CCL2), MIP-1alpha (CCL3) and
MIP-1beta (CCL4). In addition, the same Fc mutations enhance ADCC of PS
expressing tumor targets. Our data indicate that improvement of multiple
immune effector functions via enhanced interaction of Fc-FcR interaction
of PS-targeting antibodies may improve the treatment of cancer.

