Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Folylpoly--glutamate synthetase and thymidylate synthase are
associated with clinical outcome from pemetrexed-based therapy in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Background: The antifolate pemetrexed targets multiple enzymes involved
in pyrimidine and purine synthesis including thymidylate synthase (TS).
After entry into cells, pemetrexed is converted to polyglutamated forms
by folylpoly--glutamate synthetase (FPGS), a critical step to achieve
full target inhibition. We hypothesized that FPGS and TS protein
expression may predict outcome following pemetrexed-treatment of patients
with advanced NSCLC, like in malignant pleural mesotheliomas (Christoph
et al., J Clin Oncol. 2011: 29 suppl.). This is the largest report on
pemetrexed-treatment outcome based on TS and FPGS in Caucasian patients
with advanced NSCLC. Methods: Pretreatment tumor samples from 161
patients (pts) with metastatic NSCLC, treated with PMX (82 pts (51%)), a
combination of PMX with platinum (74 pts (46%)) or within other
combinations (5 pts (3%)), were retrospectively analyzed. FPGS and TS
protein expression levels were evaluated by IHC using the H-Scoring
system (0-300), which relies on the product of intensity (range 0 to 3)
and the percentage of positive tumor cells (0-100%). Radiographic
evaluation of response was performed according to RECIST criteria
(version 1.1). Results: Median pretreatment H-scores were 180 for FPGS
(range: 0-280) and 205 (range: 120-290) for TS. Using the log-rank test
and the median H-score as cut-off, we found a significant association
between low TS protein expression and improved progression-free survival
(PFS) (median PFS of 5.5 months vs 3.4 months; hazard ratio [HR] 0.66,
95% CI, 0.45 to 0.96; P=0.03) or prolonged overall survival (median OS of
33.9 months vs 15.0 months; hazard ratio [HR] 0.52, 95% CI, 0.31 to 0.86;
P=0.01). Moreover, high FPGS protein expression was only associated with
better PFS (median PFS of 5.5 months vs 3.4 months; hazard ratio [HR]
0.58, 95% CI, 0.37 to 0.89; P=0.03). Considering exclusively patients
suffering from adenocarcinomas (110 pts (68%)), TS was associated with
objective response to pemetrexed-based treatment (mean H-score 192 for
responders vs 210 for non-responders, P=0.03). Conclusions: We have
investigated FPGS and TS protein expressions in tumor specimens from the
largest series of PMX-treated Caucasian NSCLC patients. Baseline
determination of TS and FPGS expression by IHC using the H-score system
is associated with clinical outcome from PMX-based therapy in advanced
NSCLC. Further prospective validation studies are warranted.

