Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Accurate measurement of serum total and free PSA using
immunoaffinity depletion coupled to SRM: Correlation with clinical
immunoassays


Accurate and reproducible quantification of proteins at the sub-ng/mL
concentration range is required for the application of protein biomarkers
to clinical assays using blood plasma or serum. The standard technique
used in clinical labs for quantifying protein biomarkers for disease
detection, monitoring and therapeutic intervention is sandwich
immunoassay; although highly sensitive, the development of a specific
immunoassay is time-consuming and associated with high costs due to the
requirement for paired immunoaffinity reagents of high specificity.
Recently, mass spectrometry-based methods, specifically, selected
reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (SRM-MS), have been increasingly
applied to measure low abundance biomarker candidates in tissues and
biofluids, owing to high sensitivity and specificity, simplicity of assay
configuration, and exceptional multiplexing capability. In this study, we
report for the first time the development of immunoaffinity
depletion-based workflows and SRM-MS assays that enable sensitive and
accurate quantification of total and free prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
in serum without the requirement for specific PSA antibodies. With stable
isotope dilution and external calibration, low ng/mL level detection of
both total and free PSA was consistently achieved in both PSA-spiked
female serum samples and actual patient serum samples. Moreover,
comparison of the results obtained when SRM PSA assays and conventional
immunoassays were applied to the same samples showed high levels of
correlation (R2 values ranging from 0.90 to 0.99) in independent clinical
serum sample sets, including a set of 33 samples assayed in a blinded
test. In addition, we developed an ultrasensitive antibody-free strategy
for achieving accurate detection and quantification of proteins at 50
pg/mL level in human plasma/serum using high resolution reversed phase
separations for target enrichment along with intelligent selection of
target fractions via on-line SRM monitoring of internal standards and
fraction multiplexing prior to SRM quantification. These results
demonstrate that the workflows and SRM assays developed here provide an
attractive alternative for reliably measuring total and free PSA in human
blood. Furthermore, the simultaneous measurement of the free and bound
forms of PSA, as well as many other biomarkers that have similar
complexation/binding characteristics, can be performed in a single
multiplexed analysis using high-resolution liquid chromatographic
separation coupled with SRM-MS. This work represents a major
technological advance for achieving pg/mL levels of protein
quantification in blood plasma without the need for specific antibodies
for enrichment and holds great promise for broad applications in
biomarker verification and systems biology applications.

