Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New heat shock protein 90 inhibitors based on the 1,2,3-triazole
structure


Hsp90 (heat shock protein 90) is a component of a molecular chaperone
complex, involved in the folding, maturation and stabilisation of key
signalling proteins which control cell proliferation, survival and
transformation. It works by modulating a set of cancer-associated
proteins, that are often over-expressed and/or mutated in tumor cells,
collectively referred as clients. Inhibition of Hsp90 causes
destabilization and eventual degradation of client proteins involved in
cell cycle, tumor growth, angiogenesis and apoptosis. Therefore, their
modulation results in suppression of tumor growth by multiple parallel
mechanisms. Consequently, inhibition of Hsp90 is believed to be a
potential target for cancer therapy, also supported by a number of
molecules currently under investigation in different phase of clinical
trials. We recently synthesized 1,4,5-trisubstituted-1,2,3-triazole
derivatives and surprisingly found that these new molecules demonstrated
to be extremely active both on the biological target and on human tumor
cell lines, even at nanomolar concentration. 3D QSAR analysis was also
performed in order to rationalize HSP90 binding data. The overall profile
of this new class of 1,2,3-triazoles, including stereoselective synthesis
and a comprehensive pharmacological in vitro characterization, will be
presented.

