Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of prostaglandin E2 and TGF-alpha by linoleic acid
enhances pro-oncogenic signaling in models of human lung and breast cancer


The omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), linoleic acid (LA), has
been reported to have adverse affects in the growth and metastasis of a
variety of cancer cell models. However, there has been some controversy
over how much these models relate to human disease. In the current study,
a novel cascade of actions behind the LA-induced upregulation of cell
proliferation has been identified. It is well established that PUFAs
serves as precursors for eicosanoids, and LA supplementation was found to
significantly increase the levels of Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in a variety
of lung and breast cancer cell lines. These increases in PGE2 are
associated with elevations in the activity of Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2),
increased levels of Tumor Growth Factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) and specific
pro-proliferative signaling pathways. These findings were corroborated in
animal xenografts derived from the same cell lines used for the in vitro
studies, with serum levels of PGE2 showing significant increases in PGE2
in animals fed diets high in LA. Moreover, the omega-3 PUFA,
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), was found to have an opposing affect on PGE2
production by upregulating Thromboxane B2 (TXB2), a stable metabolite of
Thromboxane A2 (TXA2), which inhibits COX-2 activity. These findings
present specific mechanisms behind the upregulation of cancer cell growth
due to LA supplementation that may contribute to a resolution in
determining its role in human disease.

