Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pro-drug forms of triterpenes with anticancer activity


Number of patients with cancer is increasing. Therapy of cancer is still
extremely demanding with side effects of cytotoxic drugs. Therefore, it
is necessary to develop and test new anticancer drugs. One approach, how
to eliminate side effects of chemotherapy, is by using chemotherapeutic
drugs in their prodrug forms, which have more favourable pharmacological
properties in comparison to common drugs. Betulinic acid is one of the
triterpenoid compounds with high cytotoxicity against tumor cells but
with poore pharmacological properties. Therefore, our goal was to develop
derivates of betulinic acid with improved pharmacological properties -
better bioavailability and therapeutic effects. We have synthesised 30
pro-drugs of the betulinic acid and optimised methods to study the
metabolization and possible activation of the pro-drugs by mice
hepatocytes. Subsequently, we determined cytotoxicity of activated
derivatives to the tumor cell line CEM (human lymphoblastic leukaemia) by
MTT assay. Finally, we have identified, that some of the metabolised
pro-drugs of betulinic acid were more (290 x) effective in sub
-micromolar concentrations than non-metabolised. Parts of the work on
this project were supported by grants from the Czech Ministry of
Education (MSM 6198959216, LC07017); and The Grant Agency of Czech
Republic (GACR 301/09/P433, 305/09/1216). Infrastructural part of this
project (Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine) was supported
from the Operational Programme Research and Development for Innovations
(project CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0030).

