Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of the RECK tumor and metastasis suppressor gene in
human breast cancer: a poor prognosis marker


Metastasis is the main cause of mortality in breast cancer human
patients. The organized breakdown of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
compounds by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is the key event in this
metastatic process. Consistent with their role in tumor progression, high
levels of several MMP family members have been shown to be correlated
with poor prognosis. The MMP activities are tightly regulated by their
inhibitors, namely: the metalloproteinases tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and
the membrane-associated inhibitor (RECK - Reversion-inducing
Cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs). Due to RECK's ability to down
modulate MMPs (MMP-2, 9 and 14), it is described as an important
inhibitor of invasion and metastasis in several types of cancer. In order
to investigate possible correlations between the RECK expression profile
and clinical-pathological data in a breast cancer model, we evaluated the
RECK protein in 1,040 tissue samples from invasive breast tumors using
Tissue Microarray Assays (TMA). Associations between RECK expression and
different clinical-pathological parameters and other biomarkers were
evaluated using the Chi-square test. RECK immunoreactivity was
significantly associated with higher SBR grade (pMetastasis is the main
cause of mortality in breast cancer human patients. The organized
breakdown of the extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds by matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) is the key event in this metastatic process.
Consistent with their role in tumor progression, high levels of several
MMP family members have been shown to be correlated with poor prognosis.
The MMP activities are tightly regulated by their inhibitors, namely: the
metalloproteinases tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and the membrane-associated
inhibitor (RECK - Reversion-inducing Cysteine-rich protein with Kazal
motifs). Due to RECK's ability to down modulate MMPs (MMP-2, 9 and 14),
it is described as an important inhibitor of invasion and metastasis in
several types of cancer. In order to investigate possible correlations
between the RECK expression profile and clinical-pathological data in a
breast cancer model, we evaluated the RECK protein in 1,040 tissue
samples from invasive breast tumors using Tissue Microarray Assays (TMA).
Associations between RECK expression and different clinical-pathological
parameters and other biomarkers were evaluated using the Chi-square test.
RECK immunoreactivity was significantly associated with higher SBR grade
(p<0.05) and TNM stage (p=0.002). Moreover, higher RECK expression levels
were correlated with p53 (pMetastasis is the main cause of mortality in
breast cancer human patients. The organized breakdown of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
is the key event in this metastatic process. Consistent with their role
in tumor progression, high levels of several MMP family members have been
shown to be correlated with poor prognosis. The MMP activities are
tightly regulated by their inhibitors, namely: the metalloproteinases
tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and the membrane-associated inhibitor (RECK -
Reversion-inducing Cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs). Due to
RECK's ability to down modulate MMPs (MMP-2, 9 and 14), it is described
as an important inhibitor of invasion and metastasis in several types of
cancer. In order to investigate possible correlations between the RECK
expression profile and clinical-pathological data in a breast cancer
model, we evaluated the RECK protein in 1,040 tissue samples from
invasive breast tumors using Tissue Microarray Assays (TMA). Associations
between RECK expression and different clinical-pathological parameters
and other biomarkers were evaluated using the Chi-square test. RECK
immunoreactivity was significantly associated with higher SBR grade
(p<0.05) and TNM stage (p=0.002). Moreover, higher RECK expression levels
were correlated with p53 (p<0.001), her-2 (p=0.011), CK5,6 (pMetastasis
is the main cause of mortality in breast cancer human patients. The
organized breakdown of the extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds by matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) is the key event in this metastatic process.
Consistent with their role in tumor progression, high levels of several
MMP family members have been shown to be correlated with poor prognosis.
The MMP activities are tightly regulated by their inhibitors, namely: the
metalloproteinases tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and the membrane-associated
inhibitor (RECK - Reversion-inducing Cysteine-rich protein with Kazal
motifs). Due to RECK's ability to down modulate MMPs (MMP-2, 9 and 14),
it is described as an important inhibitor of invasion and metastasis in
several types of cancer. In order to investigate possible correlations
between the RECK expression profile and clinical-pathological data in a
breast cancer model, we evaluated the RECK protein in 1,040 tissue
samples from invasive breast tumors using Tissue Microarray Assays (TMA).
Associations between RECK expression and different clinical-pathological
parameters and other biomarkers were evaluated using the Chi-square test.
RECK immunoreactivity was significantly associated with higher SBR grade
(p<0.05) and TNM stage (p=0.002). Moreover, higher RECK expression levels
were correlated with p53 (p<0.001), her-2 (p=0.011), CK5,6 (p<0.001) and
egfr (pMetastasis is the main cause of mortality in breast cancer human
patients. The organized breakdown of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
compounds by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) is the key event in this
metastatic process. Consistent with their role in tumor progression, high
levels of several MMP family members have been shown to be correlated
with poor prognosis. The MMP activities are tightly regulated by their
inhibitors, namely: the metalloproteinases tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and
the membrane-associated inhibitor (RECK - Reversion-inducing
Cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs). Due to RECK's ability to down
modulate MMPs (MMP-2, 9 and 14), it is described as an important
inhibitor of invasion and metastasis in several types of cancer. In order
to investigate possible correlations between the RECK expression profile
and clinical-pathological data in a breast cancer model, we evaluated the
RECK protein in 1,040 tissue samples from invasive breast tumors using
Tissue Microarray Assays (TMA). Associations between RECK expression and
different clinical-pathological parameters and other biomarkers were
evaluated using the Chi-square test. RECK immunoreactivity was
significantly associated with higher SBR grade (p<0.05) and TNM stage
(p=0.002). Moreover, higher RECK expression levels were correlated with
p53 (p<0.001), her-2 (p=0.011), CK5,6 (p<0.001) and egfr (p<0.001)
positivity. We also analyzed the relationship between RECK expression and
the patient outcome, using Kaplan-Meier curves, demonstrating that
patients with RECK positive tumors display significantly shorter disease
free survival time (p=0.031) than those with RECK negative tumors.
Furthermore, RECK expression was positively correlated with short disease
free survival in five-years in patients diagnosed with tumors: low SBR
grade (p=0.03), her-2 negative (pMetastasis is the main cause of
mortality in breast cancer human patients. The organized breakdown of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) compounds by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
is the key event in this metastatic process. Consistent with their role
in tumor progression, high levels of several MMP family members have been
shown to be correlated with poor prognosis. The MMP activities are
tightly regulated by their inhibitors, namely: the metalloproteinases
tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) and the membrane-associated inhibitor (RECK -
Reversion-inducing Cysteine-rich protein with Kazal motifs). Due to
RECK's ability to down modulate MMPs (MMP-2, 9 and 14), it is described
as an important inhibitor of invasion and metastasis in several types of
cancer. In order to investigate possible correlations between the RECK
expression profile and clinical-pathological data in a breast cancer
model, we evaluated the RECK protein in 1,040 tissue samples from
invasive breast tumors using Tissue Microarray Assays (TMA). Associations
between RECK expression and different clinical-pathological parameters
and other biomarkers were evaluated using the Chi-square test. RECK
immunoreactivity was significantly associated with higher SBR grade
(p<0.05) and TNM stage (p=0.002). Moreover, higher RECK expression levels
were correlated with p53 (p<0.001), her-2 (p=0.011), CK5,6 (p<0.001) and
egfr (p<0.001) positivity. We also analyzed the relationship between RECK
expression and the patient outcome, using Kaplan-Meier curves,
demonstrating that patients with RECK positive tumors display
significantly shorter disease free survival time (p=0.031) than those
with RECK negative tumors. Furthermore, RECK expression was positively
correlated with short disease free survival in five-years in patients
diagnosed with tumors: low SBR grade (p=0.03), her-2 negative (p<0.05)
and luminal markers (CK8/CK18) positive (p=0.02 and p=0.003,
respectively). In addition, RECK was a predictor of poor prognosis for
post-menopause (p=0.011) and patients older than 50 years (p=0.05). All
together, our results indicate that higher RECK expression is associated
with poor prognosis variables, being a predictor of shorter disease-free
survival in five years. Moreover, we verified that RECK is a biomarker of
poor prognosis mainly for patients diagnosed with less aggressive breast
tumor. Therefore, in contrast to other tumor types, our results indicate
that RECK is related to a more aggressive phenotype. Support: FAPESP,
CNPq, FINEP, CAPES, BNDES

