Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glycosylation-dependent effect of CD109 on TGF-beta1 and EGF
signaling in human glioblastoma cells


CD109, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored cell surface glycoprotein,
is a negative regulator of TGF-beta1 signaling, whose expression is
predominantly detected in squamous cell carcinomas of esophagus, lung,
uterus and oral cavity. In the Northern blot analysis using various human
tumor cell lines, we found CD109 expression in cell lines derived from
human glioblastomas, however, the significance of CD109 in glioblastoma
cells has not yet been elucidated. Here, we present the
glycosylation-dependent effect of CD109 on TGF-beta1 and EGF signaling in
glioblastoma cells. SK-MG-1 cells overexpressing CD109 exhibited
downregulation of Smad2 phosphorylation after TGF-beta1 stimulation and
upregulation of EGFR and ERK1/2 phosphorylation after EGF stimulation,
indicating that CD109 is involved in not only negative regulation of
TGF-beta1 signaling but also positive regulation of EGF signaling.
However, in other glioblastoma cell lines, U251MG and MG178, CD109
overexpression showed no significant effect on TGF-beta1 and EGF
signaling. CD109 overexpression also enhanced cell proliferation and
migration in SK-MG-1 cells, but not in the other two cells. Western blot
analysis showed that molecular mass of CD109 of SK-MG-1 cells was a bit
high compared with those of the other two cell lines, and deglycosylation
analysis revealed enhanced glycosylation of CD109 in SK-MG-1 cells.
TGF-beta1 signal in U251MG and MG178 was suppressed when the medium with
hyperglycosylated soluble form of CD109 was used for TGF-beta1
stimulation. Our results suggest the glycosylation-dependent effect of
CD109 on cell biology of glioblastoma cells.

