Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dose-dependent effects of bevacizumab on human HCC xenografts


Introduction: Bevacizumab has demonstrated positive clinical treatment
effect and is currently approved for treatment of colorectal carcinoma
and NSCLC in combination with standard chemotherapy. Preclinical studies
have shown decrease in microvascular density. We aim to determine if
DCE-MRI is a sensitive enough technique to detect changes in fractional
intravascular volume after administration of a single dose of
bevacizumab. Materials and Methods: Mice: Twenty-seven male BALB/c mice
(6 weeks old, 24 2g) formed the study population & were under 1-2 %
isoflurane during the scanning. They were implanted with human-derived
HCC xenograft line, sensitive to bevacizumab therapy. Two dose levels
were investigated: low dose (n = 4) at 1 mg/kg and high dose (n=8) at 10
mg/kg. Mice were scanned at baseline, day 1 and 5 after therapy. Fifteen
control mice were similarly imaged after receiving omalizumab, a human
anti-IgE antibody, at 10 mg/kg. Tumors were sectioned and stained
immunohistochemically to identify CD34 for quantification of MVD.
DCE-MRI: MRI was performed on a 7T scanner (Bruker ClinScan, Bruker
BioSpin MRI GmbH, Germany). A 3D VIBE sequence was used with following
parameters: TR = 3.04 ms, TE = 1.23 ms, FOV = 36 36 mm, 128 128 matrix, 8
slices with thickness of 1 mm, & temporal resolution 2 s. Five sets of
baseline images were acquired with = 6 & 14. It was followed by a dynamic
sequence of 130 sets of images ( = 14). A dose of 100 L of Gd-DOTA
(Dotarem, Guerbet SA, France) at 1 mmol/kg was injected through the tail
vein after the first set of dynamic images. Data Processing: Region of
interests corresponding to the xenograft and major artery were manually
outlined. Blood volume was derived from the standard two-compartment
model. Results: Baseline blood volume for the control group was 7.32 3.47
%. The values were 9.67 1.72 % for the group treated with bevacizumab 1
mg/kg and 10.02 3.85 % for the group dosed with bevacizumab 10 mg/kg. A
reduction of 52.69 24.77 % in blood volume at Day 1 and 75.25 12.58 % at
Day 5 was observed in the higher dose group, while a reduction of 6.10
31.86 % at Day 1 and 56.99 9.18 % at Day 5 was observed in the lower dose
group. An increase of 29.31 66.84 % at Day 1 was observed in the control
group. There is a good correlation between percentage of MVD derived by
CD34 staining with percentage of blood volume derived by the
two-compartment model (r = 0.806, p = 0.0002). Conclusion: The results
showed that the effects of bevacizumab are dose-related. A more gradual
drop of blood volume was observed in group treated with bevacizumab 1
mg/kg. On the other hand, a steep and immediate drop of blood volume was
observed in group treated with bevacizumab 10 mg/kg. The results
suggested potential of DCE-MRI as a sensitive biomarker of MVD and as a
reliable non-destructive testing method for time course observation of
MVD changes in animals. This facilitates translation and clinical
application to early time points after anti-angiogenic therapy.

