Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of novel and effective therapeutic peptide vaccines
against HPV-induced tumors


Our main goal is to generate effective therapeutic peptide-based vaccines
against viral-induced cancers. We are first focusing on human
papillomavirus (HPV) induced malignancies because of their high worldwide
prevalence (e.g., cervical carcinoma and head & neck cancer). We have
used an HPV-induced mouse cancer model to test vaccines composed of a CD8
T cell peptide epitope administered with potent adjuvants designed to
generate vast numbers of high avidity cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific
for the HPV16-E7 antigen. One vaccination strategy (TriVax) consists of
intravenous administration of synthetic peptide HPV16-E749-57
administered together with a Poly-IC (a TLR3 agonist) and anti-CD40
monoclonal antibody (CD40 mAb) while the second more simple strategy
(BiVax) comprises of peptide plus Poly-IC. We assessed both the
immunogenicity and therapeutic anti-tumor effects of both vaccination
strategies. While TriVax was clearly more immunogenic than BiVax, both
vaccines showed remarkable anti tumor effects against the HPV16-E7
expressing tumors TC-1 and C3.43. In addition, we will present results
suggesting that some peptides such as HPV16-E749-57 can be highly
immunogenic in the absence of CD40 costimulation (i.e., in the BiVax
format), due to their capacity to form complexes with Poly-IC. We
hypothesize that peptide/Poly-IC complexes are highly immunogenic because
they are targeted to professional antigen-presenting cells via some type
of scavenger receptor specialized in capturing nucleic acids.

