Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection characteristics in a cohort
of men who have sex with men (MSM) during long-term follow-up


Purpose: To describe sociodemographic, HIV and HPV infection
characteristics in MACS men. Background: HPV-associated invasive anal
cancer (IAC) is a health crisis for gay, bisexual, transgender and other
MSM. MSM show 20-40 fold higher risk for IAC, especially within the
context of HIV and since the introduction of combined antiretroviral
therapy (CART) (1-4). Experts classify high-risk HPVs as having
sufficient (Group 1) or limited (Group 2) evidence of causality for
cervical cancer. The prevalence of these HPVs in MSM may inform risk for
cancer. Methods: For 1262 MACS men evaluated at visits 56-58, Dacron swab
specimens were tested for HPV using the Linear Array assay (Roche
Diagnostic Laboratories, Pleasanton, CA). HPVs were classified as
high-risk Groups 1 (HPV16/18/31/33/35/39/45/51/52/56/58/59) and 2
(HPV26/30/34/53/66/67/68/69/70/73/82), and low-risk HPVs
(HPV6/11/40/42/54/56/61/62/64/70/71/72/82/83/84/IS39/CP6108). Descriptive
and tabular analyses were used to explore the data. Poisson regression
with robust error variance analyses were used to estimate prevalence
ratios (PR, (95% confidence intervals)) comparing HPV groupings in both
univariate and multivariate models using the SAS 9.2 GENMOD procedure
(SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA). Final models included age and
race, period-specific self-reported number of sexual partnerships,
HIV-infection status, and CD4+ count (cell/mm3) among HIV-infected
participants. Results: Participants are best described as older (=55
(9.4), M=55.6), and although Whites comprised >50% of both groups,
HIV-infected men were >2 times as likely as uninfected men to report
being Black, 25% vs. 10%. On average, the prevalence of all HPVs was
1.35-1.91 fold higher among HIV-infected than -uninfected men. Trend
analyses showed CD4+ cell count was inversely associated with HPV Group 2
prevalence alone (pPurpose: To describe sociodemographic, HIV and HPV
infection characteristics in MACS men. Background: HPV-associated
invasive anal cancer (IAC) is a health crisis for gay, bisexual,
transgender and other MSM. MSM show 20-40 fold higher risk for IAC,
especially within the context of HIV and since the introduction of
combined antiretroviral therapy (CART) (1-4). Experts classify high-risk
HPVs as having sufficient (Group 1) or limited (Group 2) evidence of
causality for cervical cancer. The prevalence of these HPVs in MSM may
inform risk for cancer. Methods: For 1262 MACS men evaluated at visits
56-58, Dacron swab specimens were tested for HPV using the Linear Array
assay (Roche Diagnostic Laboratories, Pleasanton, CA). HPVs were
classified as high-risk Groups 1 (HPV16/18/31/33/35/39/45/51/52/56/58/59)
and 2 (HPV26/30/34/53/66/67/68/69/70/73/82), and low-risk HPVs
(HPV6/11/40/42/54/56/61/62/64/70/71/72/82/83/84/IS39/CP6108). Descriptive
and tabular analyses were used to explore the data. Poisson regression
with robust error variance analyses were used to estimate prevalence
ratios (PR, (95% confidence intervals)) comparing HPV groupings in both
univariate and multivariate models using the SAS 9.2 GENMOD procedure
(SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA). Final models included age and
race, period-specific self-reported number of sexual partnerships,
HIV-infection status, and CD4+ count (cell/mm3) among HIV-infected
participants. Results: Participants are best described as older (=55
(9.4), M=55.6), and although Whites comprised >50% of both groups,
HIV-infected men were >2 times as likely as uninfected men to report
being Black, 25% vs. 10%. On average, the prevalence of all HPVs was
1.35-1.91 fold higher among HIV-infected than -uninfected men. Trend
analyses showed CD4+ cell count was inversely associated with HPV Group 2
prevalence alone (p<0.0001). Only the number of receptive anal sex
partners reported in the 24 months preceding the HPV test visit
consistently predicted higher prevalence of Group 1 and 2 HPVs. However,
for low-risk HPVs, the lifetime number of male sex partners reported at
MACS visit 1, partners reported between visit 1 and the visit 24 months
before HPV testing, and those recorded during the last 24 months were all
significantly and positively associated with higher prevalence of
low-risk HPVs (p=Purpose: To describe sociodemographic, HIV and HPV
infection characteristics in MACS men. Background: HPV-associated
invasive anal cancer (IAC) is a health crisis for gay, bisexual,
transgender and other MSM. MSM show 20-40 fold higher risk for IAC,
especially within the context of HIV and since the introduction of
combined antiretroviral therapy (CART) (1-4). Experts classify high-risk
HPVs as having sufficient (Group 1) or limited (Group 2) evidence of
causality for cervical cancer. The prevalence of these HPVs in MSM may
inform risk for cancer. Methods: For 1262 MACS men evaluated at visits
56-58, Dacron swab specimens were tested for HPV using the Linear Array
assay (Roche Diagnostic Laboratories, Pleasanton, CA). HPVs were
classified as high-risk Groups 1 (HPV16/18/31/33/35/39/45/51/52/56/58/59)
and 2 (HPV26/30/34/53/66/67/68/69/70/73/82), and low-risk HPVs
(HPV6/11/40/42/54/56/61/62/64/70/71/72/82/83/84/IS39/CP6108). Descriptive
and tabular analyses were used to explore the data. Poisson regression
with robust error variance analyses were used to estimate prevalence
ratios (PR, (95% confidence intervals)) comparing HPV groupings in both
univariate and multivariate models using the SAS 9.2 GENMOD procedure
(SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA). Final models included age and
race, period-specific self-reported number of sexual partnerships,
HIV-infection status, and CD4+ count (cell/mm3) among HIV-infected
participants. Results: Participants are best described as older (=55
(9.4), M=55.6), and although Whites comprised >50% of both groups,
HIV-infected men were >2 times as likely as uninfected men to report
being Black, 25% vs. 10%. On average, the prevalence of all HPVs was
1.35-1.91 fold higher among HIV-infected than -uninfected men. Trend
analyses showed CD4+ cell count was inversely associated with HPV Group 2
prevalence alone (p<0.0001). Only the number of receptive anal sex
partners reported in the 24 months preceding the HPV test visit
consistently predicted higher prevalence of Group 1 and 2 HPVs. However,
for low-risk HPVs, the lifetime number of male sex partners reported at
MACS visit 1, partners reported between visit 1 and the visit 24 months
before HPV testing, and those recorded during the last 24 months were all
significantly and positively associated with higher prevalence of
low-risk HPVs (p=<0.05), e.g., 30+ vs. 4 vs. 0: PR=1.13 (1.01, 1.26) and
1.16 (1.05, 1.30), respectively. Conclusions: HIV-infected MSM
demonstrated a higher prevalence of all HPV groups evaluated and while
number of sex partners were important for predicting the prevalence of
low-risk HPVs, only the most recent receptive anal intercourse
partnerships predicted prevalence of Group 1 and 2 HPVs.

