Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Histone lysine methyltransferase EHMT2 is involved in
proliferation, apoptosis, and DNA methylation of human neuroblastoma cells


Background: Neuroblastoma (NB), a childhood neoplasm arising from neural
crest cells, is characterized by a diversity of clinical behaviors
ranging from spontaneous remission to rapid tumor progression and death.
In addition to genetic abnormalities, recent studies have indicated that
epigenetic aberrations also contribute to NB pathogenesis. However, the
epigenetic mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of NB are largely
unknown. Methods: Cell proliferation was measured by cell counting and
BrdU incorporation assay in a human NB cell line (LA1-55n). Expression of
MYCN was measured by real-time PCR. Caspase 3/7 activity was measured by
Caspase-Glo 3/7 assay kit. The level of global DNA methylation was
measured by liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy. Results: BIX-01294,
a specific inhibitor of EHMT2 (a key enzyme for histone H3 dimethylation
at lysine-9), decreased proliferation of NB LA1-55n cells and induced
apoptosis via increasing caspase 3 activity. BIX-01294 at a concentration
of 1g/ml inhibited NB cell proliferation, decreased expression of the
MYCN oncogene, and increased global DNA methylation levels. At a
concentration of 5 g/ml and 10 g/ml, BIX-01294 significantly increased
caspase 3/7 activity. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that histone
lysine methylation is involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, and
global DNA methylation in human NB cells. Further understanding of this
mechanism may provide insight into the pathogenesis of NB progression and
lead to novel treatment strategies.

