Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Application of metabolomics to assess serum profiles in
limonene-treated breast cancer patients


Background. Limonene is a highly lipophilic monoterpene found in citrus
peel that has demonstrated anticancer effects in preclinical models.
Limonene likely affects multiple targets with varying potency. Advanced
techniques to obtain metabolomic profiles from biofluids have the
potential to provide a non-invasive means to assess these multiple
effects. This strategy was applied to a clinical trial with women with
early stage breast cancer receiving limonene treatment. Methods. Forty
women with stage 0 - 2 breast cancer received 2 g QD limonene daily for 2
- 6 weeks (21.5 + 8.8 days) before scheduled surgical resection of their
tumor. Pre/post intervention blood draws were taken for metabolomics
analysis. Metabolomics profiling was conducted using ultra performance
liquid chromatography tandem time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(UPLC-QToF). Chromatographic separation was achieved using a gradient of
two mobile phases; A: 0.1% formic acid in water, and B: 0.1% formic acid
in methanol with a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. A Waters Aquity
UltraPerformance LC HSS T3 column was used. Metabolomics data was
preprocessed with XCMS. Preliminary metabolite identification was
conducted by mining the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB). Results. Over
1,000 metabolite features were identified by metabolomic profiling. In
negative ion mode, three metabolites exhibited a 48-fold change or higher
from pre to post-intervention; 183.1 m/z at 9.4 min, 177.0 m/z at 10.0
min, and 345.1 m/z 8.9 min (P's20% (P's20% change by the intervention
(P's20% change by the intervention (P's< 0.05), of these, two exhibited
10-fold change or higher; 312.2 m/z at 8.7 min, and 369.2 m/z at 9.0 min
(P's20% change by the intervention (P's< 0.05), of these, two exhibited
10-fold change or higher; 312.2 m/z at 8.7 min, and 369.2 m/z at 9.0 min
(P's<0.001). Discussion. This study demonstrates that 2 g QD daily oral
limonene results in significant changes in approximately 20 metabolites
in serum. Candidate compounds include limonene metabolites, carnitines
and end products of arachindonic acid metabolism. Efforts are ongoing to
identify these metabolites for analyte specific verification and
quantitation. Further clinical trials with limonene are necessary to
establish its potential role as a chemopreventive agent in breast cancer.

