Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic and functional analysis of Myxofibrosarcoma identifies
novel prognostic markers and promising therapeutic targets


Introduction: Myxofibrosarcoma (MXF), which primarily affects the limbs
of older patients, has few effective systemic therapies. Little is known
about the MXF genome or the genes that drive tumorigenesis. We sought to
identify subgroups and to identify genes that associate with outcome and
could serve as therapeutic targets. Methods: Copy number alterations
(CNAs) and gene expression profiles were measured in 73 MXF, 11 normal
muscle, and 22 normal fat samples using Agilent 1M CGH and Affymetrix
U133A arrays. Profiles were analyzed by unsupervised clustering and
correlated with disease-specific survival (DSS) and distant
recurrence-free survival (DRFS). Associations with disease-specific
survival (DSS) and distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS) were analyzed
for the 68 patients with primary disease; this cohort included 21
patients who had distant recurrence and 15 who died of disease during
follow-up (mean, 2.7 years). [ss1] Genes of interest were assayed using
shRNA knockdown (for ITGA10) or serum ELISA levels (for HGF). Results:
MXF samples had highly complex CNAs, some spanning entire chromosome
arms. Unsupervised clustering based on CGH divided samples into 4 main
groups driven by a loss at 1q and a gain at 5p. Unsupervised clustering
based on U133A profiles divided samples into 3 main groups, 2 of which
had a 3-year DSS of 85% while the third had a DSS of 31% (pIntroduction:
Myxofibrosarcoma (MXF), which primarily affects the limbs of older
patients, has few effective systemic therapies. Little is known about the
MXF genome or the genes that drive tumorigenesis. We sought to identify
subgroups and to identify genes that associate with outcome and could
serve as therapeutic targets. Methods: Copy number alterations (CNAs) and
gene expression profiles were measured in 73 MXF, 11 normal muscle, and
22 normal fat samples using Agilent 1M CGH and Affymetrix U133A arrays.
Profiles were analyzed by unsupervised clustering and correlated with
disease-specific survival (DSS) and distant recurrence-free survival
(DRFS). Associations with disease-specific survival (DSS) and distant
recurrence-free survival (DRFS) were analyzed for the 68 patients with
primary disease; this cohort included 21 patients who had distant
recurrence and 15 who died of disease during follow-up (mean, 2.7 years).
[ss1] Genes of interest were assayed using shRNA knockdown (for ITGA10)
or serum ELISA levels (for HGF). Results: MXF samples had highly complex
CNAs, some spanning entire chromosome arms. Unsupervised clustering based
on CGH divided samples into 4 main groups driven by a loss at 1q and a
gain at 5p. Unsupervised clustering based on U133A profiles divided
samples into 3 main groups, 2 of which had a 3-year DSS of 85% while the
third had a DSS of 31% (p<0.02). This third group was defined in part by
high expression of integrin alpha-10 (ITGA10) and hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF). Expression of ITGA10 was associated with worse DRFS
(HR=2.7, p=0.03), and particularly strongly associated with worse DSS
(HR=8.2, p=0.006). HGF expression was also associated with worse outcomes
for both DRFS (HR=3.2, p=0.01) and DSS (HR=3.5, p=0.01). Knockdown of
ITGA10 inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis in an MXF cell line,
but not in a normal fat cell line. Patients with high expression of both
HGF and its receptor MET had a 3-year DRFS of 25%, vs approximately 60%
for those with low expression of one of these genes and 85% for those
with low expression of both genes (p=0.0016). Serum HGF was elevated in
preoperative patients with MXF (n=38) compared to healthy volunteers
(n=8): mean SD 1626 pg/mL 725 vs. 771 110 (p=0.002). Patients with low
serum HGF (mean +3 SD of normal [1101 pg/mL], n=10) tended to have better
DSS (100% vs. 64%, p=0.14) and better DRFS (83% vs. 55%, p=0.08).
Conclusions: MXF is genomically complex and diverse, but gene expression
profiles cluster patients into groups associated with outcome. Levels of
ITGA10, HGF and MET associate with outcome, and ITGA10 overexpression in
a MXF cell line contributes to cell proliferation and survival. All three
of these genes may be useful as therapeutic targets. Preoperative serum
HGF levels may be a useful prognostic indicator in patients with MXF.

