Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Harvey Ras (HRAS) mutations in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC)


Background: Harvey Ras (HRAS) was recently reported being mutated in head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and likely plays an important
role as an oncogene. The precise role of HRAS mutations for signaling and
carcinogenesis of HNSCC remains to be determined. Methods: We completed
mutational screening (Sanger Sequencing) for tissues and cell lines
focused on the known hotspot mutations G12X and Q61X. Furthermore we
performed viability testing for various cell lines and visualized the
signaling-effects by itself, in presence of PI3K-, EGFR inhibitors and
likewise in combination, by immunoblotting. After suppression of HRAS
using siRNA, we determined the cell-viability. Results: In our study we
sequenced 100 HNSCC tumor tissues and HNSCC cell lines and identified
several canonical HRAS mutations. One cell line contained a G12D HRAS
mutation and was further examined. Additional two cell lines with
atypical HRAS variants were identified and compared to the classic
hotspot mutated cell line. The viability for the mentioned cell lines
were indicative of resistance to EGFR inhibition to different degrees.
The protein activation levels in important signaling pathways (PI3K/MAPK)
confirmed our viability data. HRAS signaling was primarily via PI3K/AKT.
Silencing HRAS showed significantly decreased viability. Conclusions:
Previous studies have shown that EGFR-targeting agents remain
insufficient as single targeted therapy. HRAS appears to contribute to
the EGFR-resistance of HNSCC. The canonical mutation G12D appears to
signal primarily via PI3K and PI3K inhibitors may be effective. The G12D
cell line model indicates a central role of mutated HRAS for signaling
and viability consistent with role as a driver mutation.

