Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic association analysis of the AMP dependent protein kinase
complex and NHL risk


Introduction: AMPK regulates metabolic processes by sensing intracellular
concentrations of ATP and AMP and has been implicated in at least two
important tumor-related pathways: the mTOR pathway and the p53 axis. We
utilize a population-based epidemiologic analysis to investigate the role
of mutations in seven AMPK subunits and lymphomagenesis and analyze
public microarray expression data to determine the expression of AMPK in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) cells. Methods: Our analysis included incident
and histologically confirmed cases of NHL (n=456) and age-matched matched
controls (n=527) from female residents of Connecticut. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified using the Tagger algorithm in the
Haploview interface in HapMap's genome browser 22. A total of 19 SNPs (r2
0.8 and MAF 0.2) were identified across the AMPK subunit genes. For each
gene harboring more than one tagging SNP (PRKAA2, PRKAG2, and PRKAG3),
haplotypes were estimated using the PHASE program. All statistical
analyses were done in SAS 9.2. An unconditional multivariate logistic
model was generated and the adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals were reported. Family history of cancer was found to be an
effect modifier for some SNPs and haplotypes, and stratified analyses
were performed for these associations. We extracted gene expression data
from GEO (GDS3516) and compared median AMPK subunit levels in NHL cells
to the levels in normal follicle B-cells and total peripheral blood
B-cells using a Wilcoxon rank sum test. Results: Individuals with no
family history of cancer and heterozygous for rs293445 in the PRKAG1
subunit had a significantly increased risk of NHL (OR: 2.80, 95% CI:
1.54, 5.07; pIntroduction: AMPK regulates metabolic processes by sensing
intracellular concentrations of ATP and AMP and has been implicated in at
least two important tumor-related pathways: the mTOR pathway and the p53
axis. We utilize a population-based epidemiologic analysis to investigate
the role of mutations in seven AMPK subunits and lymphomagenesis and
analyze public microarray expression data to determine the expression of
AMPK in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) cells. Methods: Our analysis included
incident and histologically confirmed cases of NHL (n=456) and
age-matched matched controls (n=527) from female residents of
Connecticut. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified using
the Tagger algorithm in the Haploview interface in HapMap's genome
browser 22. A total of 19 SNPs (r2 0.8 and MAF 0.2) were identified
across the AMPK subunit genes. For each gene harboring more than one
tagging SNP (PRKAA2, PRKAG2, and PRKAG3), haplotypes were estimated using
the PHASE program. All statistical analyses were done in SAS 9.2. An
unconditional multivariate logistic model was generated and the adjusted
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals were reported. Family
history of cancer was found to be an effect modifier for some SNPs and
haplotypes, and stratified analyses were performed for these
associations. We extracted gene expression data from GEO (GDS3516) and
compared median AMPK subunit levels in NHL cells to the levels in normal
follicle B-cells and total peripheral blood B-cells using a Wilcoxon rank
sum test. Results: Individuals with no family history of cancer and
heterozygous for rs293445 in the PRKAG1 subunit had a significantly
increased risk of NHL (OR: 2.80, 95% CI: 1.54, 5.07; p<0.001). The
strongest association was noted for a haplotype in PRKAA2 among
individuals who reported no family history of cancer (OR: 5.44, 95% CI:
2.15, 13.75; pIntroduction: AMPK regulates metabolic processes by sensing
intracellular concentrations of ATP and AMP and has been implicated in at
least two important tumor-related pathways: the mTOR pathway and the p53
axis. We utilize a population-based epidemiologic analysis to investigate
the role of mutations in seven AMPK subunits and lymphomagenesis and
analyze public microarray expression data to determine the expression of
AMPK in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) cells. Methods: Our analysis included
incident and histologically confirmed cases of NHL (n=456) and
age-matched matched controls (n=527) from female residents of
Connecticut. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified using
the Tagger algorithm in the Haploview interface in HapMap's genome
browser 22. A total of 19 SNPs (r2 0.8 and MAF 0.2) were identified
across the AMPK subunit genes. For each gene harboring more than one
tagging SNP (PRKAA2, PRKAG2, and PRKAG3), haplotypes were estimated using
the PHASE program. All statistical analyses were done in SAS 9.2. An
unconditional multivariate logistic model was generated and the adjusted
odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals were reported. Family
history of cancer was found to be an effect modifier for some SNPs and
haplotypes, and stratified analyses were performed for these
associations. We extracted gene expression data from GEO (GDS3516) and
compared median AMPK subunit levels in NHL cells to the levels in normal
follicle B-cells and total peripheral blood B-cells using a Wilcoxon rank
sum test. Results: Individuals with no family history of cancer and
heterozygous for rs293445 in the PRKAG1 subunit had a significantly
increased risk of NHL (OR: 2.80, 95% CI: 1.54, 5.07; p<0.001). The
strongest association was noted for a haplotype in PRKAA2 among
individuals who reported no family history of cancer (OR: 5.44, 95% CI:
2.15, 13.75; p<0.001). The median gene expression of PRKAA2 was
significantly elevated in follicular lymphoma cells compared to normal
follicle B cells (pIntroduction: AMPK regulates metabolic processes by
sensing intracellular concentrations of ATP and AMP and has been
implicated in at least two important tumor-related pathways: the mTOR
pathway and the p53 axis. We utilize a population-based epidemiologic
analysis to investigate the role of mutations in seven AMPK subunits and
lymphomagenesis and analyze public microarray expression data to
determine the expression of AMPK in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) cells.
Methods: Our analysis included incident and histologically confirmed
cases of NHL (n=456) and age-matched matched controls (n=527) from female
residents of Connecticut. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
identified using the Tagger algorithm in the Haploview interface in
HapMap's genome browser 22. A total of 19 SNPs (r2 0.8 and MAF 0.2) were
identified across the AMPK subunit genes. For each gene harboring more
than one tagging SNP (PRKAA2, PRKAG2, and PRKAG3), haplotypes were
estimated using the PHASE program. All statistical analyses were done in
SAS 9.2. An unconditional multivariate logistic model was generated and
the adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals were
reported. Family history of cancer was found to be an effect modifier for
some SNPs and haplotypes, and stratified analyses were performed for
these associations. We extracted gene expression data from GEO (GDS3516)
and compared median AMPK subunit levels in NHL cells to the levels in
normal follicle B-cells and total peripheral blood B-cells using a
Wilcoxon rank sum test. Results: Individuals with no family history of
cancer and heterozygous for rs293445 in the PRKAG1 subunit had a
significantly increased risk of NHL (OR: 2.80, 95% CI: 1.54, 5.07;
p<0.001). The strongest association was noted for a haplotype in PRKAA2
among individuals who reported no family history of cancer (OR: 5.44, 95%
CI: 2.15, 13.75; p<0.001). The median gene expression of PRKAA2 was
significantly elevated in follicular lymphoma cells compared to normal
follicle B cells (p<0.05). A suggestive association between rare PRKAG3
haplotypes and diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLCBCL) was noted among
individuals with no family history of cancer (OR: 0.36, 95% CI: 0.17,
0.78)), but this association was not significant after correction for
multiple comparisons. PRKAG3 was significantly lower (pIntroduction: AMPK
regulates metabolic processes by sensing intracellular concentrations of
ATP and AMP and has been implicated in at least two important
tumor-related pathways: the mTOR pathway and the p53 axis. We utilize a
population-based epidemiologic analysis to investigate the role of
mutations in seven AMPK subunits and lymphomagenesis and analyze public
microarray expression data to determine the expression of AMPK in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) cells. Methods: Our analysis included incident
and histologically confirmed cases of NHL (n=456) and age-matched matched
controls (n=527) from female residents of Connecticut. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified using the Tagger algorithm in the
Haploview interface in HapMap's genome browser 22. A total of 19 SNPs (r2
0.8 and MAF 0.2) were identified across the AMPK subunit genes. For each
gene harboring more than one tagging SNP (PRKAA2, PRKAG2, and PRKAG3),
haplotypes were estimated using the PHASE program. All statistical
analyses were done in SAS 9.2. An unconditional multivariate logistic
model was generated and the adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals were reported. Family history of cancer was found to be an
effect modifier for some SNPs and haplotypes, and stratified analyses
were performed for these associations. We extracted gene expression data
from GEO (GDS3516) and compared median AMPK subunit levels in NHL cells
to the levels in normal follicle B-cells and total peripheral blood
B-cells using a Wilcoxon rank sum test. Results: Individuals with no
family history of cancer and heterozygous for rs293445 in the PRKAG1
subunit had a significantly increased risk of NHL (OR: 2.80, 95% CI:
1.54, 5.07; p<0.001). The strongest association was noted for a haplotype
in PRKAA2 among individuals who reported no family history of cancer (OR:
5.44, 95% CI: 2.15, 13.75; p<0.001). The median gene expression of PRKAA2
was significantly elevated in follicular lymphoma cells compared to
normal follicle B cells (p<0.05). A suggestive association between rare
PRKAG3 haplotypes and diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLCBCL) was noted
among individuals with no family history of cancer (OR: 0.36, 95% CI:
0.17, 0.78)), but this association was not significant after correction
for multiple comparisons. PRKAG3 was significantly lower (p<0.05) in
DLCBCL cells relative to normal peripheral blood B cells, and in
follicular lymphoma cells relative to follicle center B cells.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that variants in AMPK may influence
NHL risk. Our expression analysis demonstrates differential expression of
some AMPK subunits in lymphoma tissue relative to normal immune cells.
Metabolic dysregulation has been suggested as an emerging hallmark of
cancer, and future studies may focus on understanding the role of AMPK in
tumor metabolism and utilizing this information to develop new strategies
for chemotherapy and prevention.

