Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SUV39H1 promotes HCC tumorigenesis and is targeted by tumor
suppressive miRNA-125b


Epigenetic alternation is a common dysregulated event in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) development. Through interrogating the expression of 90
major epigenetic regulating genes, we identified SUV39H1, the prototype
histone methyltransferase as one of the most frequently up-regulated
epigenetic regulators in human HCC (61%, 23/38). SUV39H1 is responsible
for H3K9 trimethylation establishment and essentially involves in
heterochromatin formation and transcriptional repression. We found that
SUV39H1 up-regulation in human HCC was significantly associated with
increased Ki67 expression (P Epigenetic alternation is a common
dysregulated event in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. Through
interrogating the expression of 90 major epigenetic regulating genes, we
identified SUV39H1, the prototype histone methyltransferase as one of the
most frequently up-regulated epigenetic regulators in human HCC (61%,
23/38). SUV39H1 is responsible for H3K9 trimethylation establishment and
essentially involves in heterochromatin formation and transcriptional
repression. We found that SUV39H1 up-regulation in human HCC was
significantly associated with increased Ki67 expression (P < 0.001) and
the presence of venous invasion (P = 0.020), suggesting the importance of
SUV39H1 in HCC tumor growth and metastasis. To investigate the functions
of SUV39H1 in human HCC, both gain- and loss-of-function models were
established. Ectopic expression of SUV39H1 remarkably enhanced cell
clonogenicity and migratory ability of immortalized hepatocytes.
Conversely, stable knockdown of SUV39H1 by shRNA substantially reduced
cell proliferation, colony formation and migration of HCC cells. In
addition, an elevated lysosomal -galactosidase activity in SUV39H1
knockdown cells was observed and suggested the senescence-suppressive
role of SUV39H1 in cancer progression. Consistent with previous
observations, treatment of SUV39H1 inhibitor (Chaetocin) drastically
suppressed cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in HCC cells. The
oncogenic function of SUV39H1 was further demonstrated by in vivo
experiments, knockdown of SUV39H1 significantly inhibited tumorigenicity
of HCC cells in both subcutaneous and orthotopic mouse model. Most
importantly, SUV39H1 knockdown abolished pulmonary metastasis of HCC
cells in orthotopic tumor implantation model. To further investigate the
underlying mechanism of SUV39H1 up-regulation in HCC, we explored the
potential regulation of SUV39H1 by microRNA. In silico analysis suggested
SUV39H1 as a putative target of miR-125b. Ectopic expression of miR-125b
precursor in HCC cells significantly inhibited SUV39H1 3UTR luciferase
reporter activity and suppressed endogenous SUV39H1 expression at both
mRNA and protein levels. Interestingly, down-regulation of miR-125b was
frequently observed in human HCC (70%, 38/54) and was inversely
correlated with SUV39H1 expression (P = 0.001). Taken together, we
demonstrated that SUV39H1 was frequently up-regulated in human HCC and
functioned as an oncogene in promoting HCC progression and metastasis.
miR-125b negatively regulated SUV39H1 expression and downregulation of
miR-125b may account for SUV39H1 up-regulation in human HCC.

