Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GRK2 negatively regulates IGF-1R signaling pathway and cyclins in
HepG2 cells


G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) plays a central role in the
regulation of a variety of signaling pathways associated with many
important cellular processes. Alternation of GRK2 expression has profound
effects on cell physiological functions and induces diseases such as
heart failure, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancer. In this study, we
investigated the role of GRK2 in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
HepG2 cells. We created a GRK2 knockdown cell line using a lentivirus
containing GRK2 specific shRNA. Under IGF-1 (50 ng/ml) stimulation, HepG2
cells with reduced GRK2 expression showed increased tyrosine
phosphorylation of IRS1 at the residue 612 and increased phosphorylation
of Akt. We then treated the cells with gefitinib, an EGFR inhibitor. We
found HepG2 cells displayed gefitinib sensitiveness with the increase of
drug concentration. Moreover, gefitinib treated cells with reduced
expression of GRK2 showed decreased phosphorylation of Akt in a dose
dependent manner, but had relatively more IGF-1R expression. However,
HepG2 cells with reduced expression of GRK2 did not display any growth
difference in culture as compared with the scramble control cells. We
further detected that reduced expression of GRK2 induced a small G2/M
phase arrest by overexpressing cyclin A, B1, and E. DNA microarray
analysis showed decreased transcription levels of IGF binding protein 1
and 4, which were confirmed by quantitative PCR analysis. Our results
demonstrated that GRK2 has a role in the regulation of IGF-1R signaling
pathway and involves in cell cycle progression in HCC HepG2 cells.

