Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Garcinol, a histone acetyltransferase inhibitor, radiosensitizes
cancer cells by inhibiting non-homologous end joining


Purpose: Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), a major pathway to repair DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs) generated by ionizing radiation (IR),
requires chromatin remodeling at DSB sites through acetylation of
histones by histone acetyltransferases (HATs). However, effects of
compounds with HAT inhibitory activities on DNA damage response (DDR),
including NHEJ and cell cycle checkpoint, as well as on the
radiosensitivity of cancer cells remain largely unclear. Here, we
investigated whether garcinol, an HAT inhibitor found in the rinds of
Garcinia indica fruit (called mangosteens), has effects on DDR and
whether it can be used for radiosensitization. Methods and Materials: The
ability of garcinol to inhibit DSB repair, including NHEJ, was examined
by two assays; the conventional neutral comet assay and a cell-based
assay recently developed by us, in which the activity of NHEJ against
DSBs on chromosomal DNA was evaluated. The effects on cell cycle
checkpoint after IR were assessed by phosphorylation levels of checkpoint
kinases CHK1 and CHK2, and histone H3. The radiosensitizing effect was
assessed by clonogenic survival assay. The effects on apoptosis and
senescence were examined by annexin V and Senescence-associated
-galactosidase (SA--Gal) staining, respectively. Results: Garcinol was
shown to inhibit DSB repair, including NHEJ, without affecting cell cycle
checkpoint. Garcinol radiosensitized A549 lung and HeLa cervical
carcinoma cells with a dose enhancement ratio at 10% surviving fraction
of 1.6 and 1.5, respectively. Cellular senescence induced by IR was
enhanced by garcinol. Conclusion: These results suggest that garcinol is
a radiosensitizer that inhibits NHEJ and facilitates senescence, without
impairing activation of cell cycle checkpoint.

