Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A combined bioinformatics and GWAS approach identifies a
functional 3UTR insertion/deletion in YES1 associated with bladder cancer
risk


Bladder cancer (BC) is diagnosed in over 70,000 individuals each year and
its incidence is rising. There is a need for biomarkers to identify those
at high risk, as well as for early detection. Large genome-wide
association studies have identified multiple susceptibility loci;
however, individually and combined, these variants only explain a small
portion of the variation in BC risk. One possibility to explain the
missing heritability is the effect of small insertions and deletions
(INDELs). Because of the nature of these variations, they have a high
likelihood for functional effects. Therefore, the purpose of study was to
determine whether common INDELs are associated with BC risk. We retrieved
0.73 million INDELs and 7.72 million single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) from the 1000 Genomes Pilot Project. Tagging-SNPs were identified
for 0.48 million of these INDELs with r2 > 0.80 by PLINK. We then
evaluated each tagging-SNP for association with BC risk in 969 BC cases
and 957 controls. Using this approach, 5,110 INDELs were shown to be
associated with BC risk (P Bladder cancer (BC) is diagnosed in over
70,000 individuals each year and its incidence is rising. There is a need
for biomarkers to identify those at high risk, as well as for early
detection. Large genome-wide association studies have identified multiple
susceptibility loci; however, individually and combined, these variants
only explain a small portion of the variation in BC risk. One possibility
to explain the missing heritability is the effect of small insertions and
deletions (INDELs). Because of the nature of these variations, they have
a high likelihood for functional effects. Therefore, the purpose of study
was to determine whether common INDELs are associated with BC risk. We
retrieved 0.73 million INDELs and 7.72 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from the 1000 Genomes Pilot Project. Tagging-SNPs
were identified for 0.48 million of these INDELs with r2 > 0.80 by PLINK.
We then evaluated each tagging-SNP for association with BC risk in 969 BC
cases and 957 controls. Using this approach, 5,110 INDELs were shown to
be associated with BC risk (P < 0.05). We next focused on potentially
functional INDELs located in exons, 3 UTRs, 5 UTRs or promoters.
Approximately 50 INDELs fit this criterion, with a 2 basepair INDEL
rs56342716 (-/AT) located in the 3 UTR of YES1, a src kinase oncogene,
being highly significant. The tagging-SNP for this INDEL, rs3786347, was
associated with a 1.27-fold increase in BC risk (OR 1.27, 95% CI,
1.10-1.43, P = 6.08x104). These results were confirmed by direct
genotyping of the INDEL in 822 BC cases and 802 healthy controls (OR
1.20, 95% CI, 1.04-1.38, P = 0.01). Reporter gene assay results revealed
that the variant allele (AT) of rs56342716 disrupted the inhibitory
effects of three microRNAs (miR-548e, miR-548f, and miR-548a-3p),
providing a potential biological mechanism for the association with BC
risk through increased YES1 levels. Together, these results provide
evidence supporting a connection between a functional INDEL and BC risk
while implicating YES1 in bladder cancer pathogenesis through a
microRNA-mediated mechanism.

