Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoration of Smac-mediated apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia


Defective apoptosis is a fundamental hallmark feature of CLL biology and
is a major target of cancer therapy development. IAPs (Inhibitors of
apoptosis proteins) expressed at high levels inhibit apoptosis by
neutralizing activities of caspases, a family of proteases that act in
concert to execute apoptosis signals. Smac/DIABLO is a pro-apoptotic
mitochondrial protein released into cytosol in response to apoptotic
stimuli. It functions as an endogenous antagonist of IAPs and promotes
apoptosis. One attractive approach to antagonize IAPs is to exploit
smac-mimetics that mimic pro-apoptotic N-terminal AVPI (Ala-Val-Pro-Ile)
sequence as anti-cancer agents. Smac066 is a monomer that has greater
affinity for IAPs and exhibits low nanomolar potency in leukemias and
solid tumor cell lines. Because CLL lymphocytes express high levels of
IAPs, we hypothesized that smac066 could sensitize CLL primary cells,
neutralize anti-apoptotic functions of IAPs, activate caspases and
restore apoptosis. When fresh CLL lymphocytes obtained from patients with
different subsets of prognostic markers were incubated with smac066 (1,
3, 10, 30, 100 M), the IC50 was in a range of 6-10 M at 24 hr, 3-15 M at
48 hr and 4-9 M at 72 hr, respectively (n=5). Though there was
heterogeneity in IC50 values for individual patients, overall there was
restoration of cell-death in all samples tested (two tailed-paired t
test; pDefective apoptosis is a fundamental hallmark feature of CLL
biology and is a major target of cancer therapy development. IAPs
(Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins) expressed at high levels inhibit
apoptosis by neutralizing activities of caspases, a family of proteases
that act in concert to execute apoptosis signals. Smac/DIABLO is a
pro-apoptotic mitochondrial protein released into cytosol in response to
apoptotic stimuli. It functions as an endogenous antagonist of IAPs and
promotes apoptosis. One attractive approach to antagonize IAPs is to
exploit smac-mimetics that mimic pro-apoptotic N-terminal AVPI
(Ala-Val-Pro-Ile) sequence as anti-cancer agents. Smac066 is a monomer
that has greater affinity for IAPs and exhibits low nanomolar potency in
leukemias and solid tumor cell lines. Because CLL lymphocytes express
high levels of IAPs, we hypothesized that smac066 could sensitize CLL
primary cells, neutralize anti-apoptotic functions of IAPs, activate
caspases and restore apoptosis. When fresh CLL lymphocytes obtained from
patients with different subsets of prognostic markers were incubated with
smac066 (1, 3, 10, 30, 100 M), the IC50 was in a range of 6-10 M at 24
hr, 3-15 M at 48 hr and 4-9 M at 72 hr, respectively (n=5). Though there
was heterogeneity in IC50 values for individual patients, overall there
was restoration of cell-death in all samples tested (two tailed-paired t
test; p<0.0001; n=59). Additional trait of CLL biology is the fatal
attraction toward feeder-cells present in tissue microenvironments (ME)
exerting drug-resistance signals. Using validated CLL-stromal model
systems such as Nktert-line, representing bone marrow-ME, CD154-HeLa cell
system and Nurse Like Cells both representing lymph node-ME, we
investigated if smac066 can overcome the pro-survival signals delivered
by diversified-MEs. Our data infer that the perseverance presented by
representative-MEs is potentially strong for attenuation by 10 M smac066
(two tailed-paired t test; pDefective apoptosis is a fundamental hallmark
feature of CLL biology and is a major target of cancer therapy
development. IAPs (Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins) expressed at high
levels inhibit apoptosis by neutralizing activities of caspases, a family
of proteases that act in concert to execute apoptosis signals.
Smac/DIABLO is a pro-apoptotic mitochondrial protein released into
cytosol in response to apoptotic stimuli. It functions as an endogenous
antagonist of IAPs and promotes apoptosis. One attractive approach to
antagonize IAPs is to exploit smac-mimetics that mimic pro-apoptotic
N-terminal AVPI (Ala-Val-Pro-Ile) sequence as anti-cancer agents. Smac066
is a monomer that has greater affinity for IAPs and exhibits low
nanomolar potency in leukemias and solid tumor cell lines. Because CLL
lymphocytes express high levels of IAPs, we hypothesized that smac066
could sensitize CLL primary cells, neutralize anti-apoptotic functions of
IAPs, activate caspases and restore apoptosis. When fresh CLL lymphocytes
obtained from patients with different subsets of prognostic markers were
incubated with smac066 (1, 3, 10, 30, 100 M), the IC50 was in a range of
6-10 M at 24 hr, 3-15 M at 48 hr and 4-9 M at 72 hr, respectively (n=5).
Though there was heterogeneity in IC50 values for individual patients,
overall there was restoration of cell-death in all samples tested (two
tailed-paired t test; p<0.0001; n=59). Additional trait of CLL biology is
the fatal attraction toward feeder-cells present in tissue
microenvironments (ME) exerting drug-resistance signals. Using validated
CLL-stromal model systems such as Nktert-line, representing bone
marrow-ME, CD154-HeLa cell system and Nurse Like Cells both representing
lymph node-ME, we investigated if smac066 can overcome the pro-survival
signals delivered by diversified-MEs. Our data infer that the
perseverance presented by representative-MEs is potentially strong for
attenuation by 10 M smac066 (two tailed-paired t test; p<0.0001 for
NKtert; n=25 and pDefective apoptosis is a fundamental hallmark feature
of CLL biology and is a major target of cancer therapy development. IAPs
(Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins) expressed at high levels inhibit
apoptosis by neutralizing activities of caspases, a family of proteases
that act in concert to execute apoptosis signals. Smac/DIABLO is a
pro-apoptotic mitochondrial protein released into cytosol in response to
apoptotic stimuli. It functions as an endogenous antagonist of IAPs and
promotes apoptosis. One attractive approach to antagonize IAPs is to
exploit smac-mimetics that mimic pro-apoptotic N-terminal AVPI
(Ala-Val-Pro-Ile) sequence as anti-cancer agents. Smac066 is a monomer
that has greater affinity for IAPs and exhibits low nanomolar potency in
leukemias and solid tumor cell lines. Because CLL lymphocytes express
high levels of IAPs, we hypothesized that smac066 could sensitize CLL
primary cells, neutralize anti-apoptotic functions of IAPs, activate
caspases and restore apoptosis. When fresh CLL lymphocytes obtained from
patients with different subsets of prognostic markers were incubated with
smac066 (1, 3, 10, 30, 100 M), the IC50 was in a range of 6-10 M at 24
hr, 3-15 M at 48 hr and 4-9 M at 72 hr, respectively (n=5). Though there
was heterogeneity in IC50 values for individual patients, overall there
was restoration of cell-death in all samples tested (two tailed-paired t
test; p<0.0001; n=59). Additional trait of CLL biology is the fatal
attraction toward feeder-cells present in tissue microenvironments (ME)
exerting drug-resistance signals. Using validated CLL-stromal model
systems such as Nktert-line, representing bone marrow-ME, CD154-HeLa cell
system and Nurse Like Cells both representing lymph node-ME, we
investigated if smac066 can overcome the pro-survival signals delivered
by diversified-MEs. Our data infer that the perseverance presented by
representative-MEs is potentially strong for attenuation by 10 M smac066
(two tailed-paired t test; p<0.0001 for NKtert; n=25 and p<0.0001 for
NLC; n=20). One explanation for this observation is that there could be
mechanisms through which stromal cells concurrently succumb higher levels
of IAPs that eventually could not be encountered by exogenous smac. As a
proof of this notion, when CLL lymphocytes were incubated with
NKTert-stromal cells there was marked increase in XIAP levels measured by
immunoblotting (2-3 fold; n=4). Because smac is a positive regulator of
caspases, we tested if pan-caspase inhibitor Zvad-fmk can abrogate
smac-induced cell death. Consistently, 30 M Zvad-fmk inhibited 10 M
smac-induced apoptosis in CLL lymphoyctes (two tailed paired t test;
p=0.0017; n=13). Further mechanisms of action of smac-066 are under
investigation. Reactivating apoptosis by neutralizing IAPs is a novel
strategy to target CLL cells. The results obtained will provide pertinent
information on fine-tuning the balance between the pro-survival and
pro-death pathways.

