Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel small molecule p53-pathway restoring compound suppresses
colorectal cancer cells via p73


The tumor suppressor p53 regulates gene transcription impacting on cell
cycle, cell death, angiogenesis, cell metabolism, or repair processes.
Mutant p53 is found in approximately 50% of human cancers where it
contributes to tumorigenesis, tumor progression and resistance to
therapy. p53 pathway restoration is an outstanding target for cancer
therapy because mutant p53 provides a basic difference between normal
cells and tumor cells and because two decades ago wild-type p53 was shown
to suppress colon cancer cell colony growth despite numerous other
genetic alterations. More recently the power of p53 as a tumor suppressor
was demonstrated in genetically engineered mouse models. To find novel
drugs targeting p53 for cancer therapy, we set up a functional cell-based
screening assay for tumor cell death-inducing small molecules that
restore p53 pathway dependent transcriptional responses. Using the
Chembridge library of 50,000 compounds we identified CB001 that restores
p53 pathway signaling and induces cancer but not normal cell death. CB001
strongly induces p53-responsive transcriptional activity in a time- and
dose-dependent manner in mutant-p53 containing human cancer cells. p53
target gene expression, including p21 and Puma, was upregulated in
mutant-p53 containing cancer cells treated with CB001. Importantly, CB001
was found to induce cell death at low doses with minimal genotoxicity in
human colorectal cancer cells with no evident toxicity towards normal
cells. We further examined the role of p73, a member of p53 family, in
the mechanism of action of CB001 towards p53 pathway restoration.
Over-expression of p73 enhanced p53-responsive transcriptional activity
induced by CB001, while knock-down of p73 reduced its induction of
p53-responsive transcriptional activity in p53-deficient cancer cells.
Protein lysate analysis showed that treatment with CB001 resulted in a
significant increase in the p73 protein level and the phosphorylation of
p73 in mutant-p53 containing cancer cells. Overexpression of p73
sensitized cancer cells to CB001 induced cell death. These results
suggest that p53-responsive transcriptional activity and cell death
induced by CB001 occur by targeting p73 in tumor suppressor p53-deficient
cancer cells. Combination treatments demonstrate that CB001 can synergize
with classical cytotoxic chemotherapy including 5-FU and CPT11 to induce
cell death in mutant-p53 expressing colorectal cancer cells. Thus, CB001
may be used as a lead compound for the development of new anti-cancer
drugs targeting the p53 pathway via a mechanism involving the p53 family
member p73. This work was supported by the NCI Developmental Therapeutics
Program through NCI Contract N01-CN-43302.

