Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-diagnostic alcohol consumption and breast cancer recurrence
and survival in postmenopausal women


Introduction: Alcohol consumption has been consistently associated with
breast cancer risk. However, studies on its association with breast
cancer survival produced inconsistent results. Methods: We assessed the
association of alcohol consumption (in four categories Introduction:
Alcohol consumption has been consistently associated with breast cancer
risk. However, studies on its association with breast cancer survival
produced inconsistent results. Methods: We assessed the association of
alcohol consumption (in four categories <0.5 g/d, 0.5 to Introduction:
Alcohol consumption has been consistently associated with breast cancer
risk. However, studies on its association with breast cancer survival
produced inconsistent results. Methods: We assessed the association of
alcohol consumption (in four categories <0.5 g/d, 0.5 to <6.0 g/d, 6.0 to
Introduction: Alcohol consumption has been consistently associated with
breast cancer risk. However, studies on its association with breast
cancer survival produced inconsistent results. Methods: We assessed the
association of alcohol consumption (in four categories <0.5 g/d, 0.5 to
<6.0 g/d, 6.0 to <12.0 g/d, 12.0 g/d, and continuous) with survival and
recurrence in a prospective cohort study in Germany of 2,706
postmenopausal breast cancer patients aged 50-74 years after excluding
those with previous cancer and/or missing information on alcohol intake.
Patients were diagnosed between 2001 and 2005 and vital status, causes of
death, and recurrences were verified through the end of 2009.
Delayed-entry Cox proportional hazards models were stratified by age at
diagnosis and study centre and adjusted for other prognostic factors.
Fractional polynomials were used to assess the true dose-response
relation for alcohol consumption. Results: Women were enrolled in the
study a median time of 105 days after diagnosis. Median follow-up times
from recruitment until death/censoring or recurrence/censoring were 5.5
years and 5.6 years, respectively. Overall, 326 deaths occurred, 239
(73.3%) due to breast cancer. Further causes of death were other cancers
(n=41, 12.6%), cardiovascular disease (n=22, 6.7%), and other causes
(n=24, 7.4%). Of the 2,199 patients with stage I to IIIa disease and
available data on recurrence status, 250 had a breast cancer recurrence.
Alcohol consumption 12 g/day compared to Introduction: Alcohol
consumption has been consistently associated with breast cancer risk.
However, studies on its association with breast cancer survival produced
inconsistent results. Methods: We assessed the association of alcohol
consumption (in four categories <0.5 g/d, 0.5 to <6.0 g/d, 6.0 to <12.0
g/d, 12.0 g/d, and continuous) with survival and recurrence in a
prospective cohort study in Germany of 2,706 postmenopausal breast cancer
patients aged 50-74 years after excluding those with previous cancer
and/or missing information on alcohol intake. Patients were diagnosed
between 2001 and 2005 and vital status, causes of death, and recurrences
were verified through the end of 2009. Delayed-entry Cox proportional
hazards models were stratified by age at diagnosis and study centre and
adjusted for other prognostic factors. Fractional polynomials were used
to assess the true dose-response relation for alcohol consumption.
Results: Women were enrolled in the study a median time of 105 days after
diagnosis. Median follow-up times from recruitment until death/censoring
or recurrence/censoring were 5.5 years and 5.6 years, respectively.
Overall, 326 deaths occurred, 239 (73.3%) due to breast cancer. Further
causes of death were other cancers (n=41, 12.6%), cardiovascular disease
(n=22, 6.7%), and other causes (n=24, 7.4%). Of the 2,199 patients with
stage I to IIIa disease and available data on recurrence status, 250 had
a breast cancer recurrence. Alcohol consumption 12 g/day compared to <
0.5 g/day was linearly associated with a statistically significantly
higher breast cancer mortality (HR, 1.71; 95% CI, 1.12 to 2.62; P for
trend = 0.03). Results were no longer statistically significant when
restricted to Stage I-IIIa patients (HR, 1.28; 95% CI, 0.75 to 2.20).
There was no effect modification by body mass index, hormone replacement
therapy use, and estrogen receptor status. Alcohol consumption 12 g/day
was not associated with overall mortality (HR, 1.27; 95% CI, 0.90 to
1.80) and mortality due to other causes (HR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.38 to 1.42).
Also, no association with breast cancer recurrence was found (HR, 1.05;
95% CI, 0.71 to 1.56). Conclusion: Consumption of more than 12 g alcohol
(equivalent to one alcoholic drink) per day is associated with increased
breast cancer mortality but not with breast cancer recurrence.

