Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt activation is implicated in glioblastoma radioresistance


Glioblastoma (GBM) patients have dismal median survival even with the
most rigorous treatments currently available. Radiotherapy is the most
effective non-surgical therapy for GBM patients; however, patients
succumb due to tumor recurrence within a year. To develop a curative
therapeutic approach, we need to better understand the underlying
molecular mechanism of radiation resistance in GBM. Towards this goal, we
developed an in vivo orthotopic GBM model system that mimics the
radiation response of human GBM, using both established-GBM cell line and
patient-derived freshly dissociated GBM specimen. In-vivo ionizing
radiation (IR) treatment prolonged the survival of mice with
intracranical tumor derived from U373MG, but failed to prevent tumor
recurrence. U373MG and GBM578 cells isolated after in-vivo IR (U373-IR
and 578-IR) were more clonogenic and enriched with stem cell-like
characteristics, compared with mock-treated control tumor cells.
Transcriptomic analyses and quantitative real-time reverse-transcription
PCR analyses using these matched GBM cells before and after radiation
treatment revealed that Wnt pathways were preferentially activated in
post-IR GBM cells. U373-IR cells and 578-IR were enriched with cells
positive for both active b-catenin (ABC) and Sox2 population, and this
subpopulation was further increased after additional in-vitro radiation
treatment, suggesting that radiation resistance of GBM is mediated due,
in part, to the activation of stem cell-associated pathways including
Wnt. Finally, pharmacological and siRNA inhibition of Wnt pathway
significantly decreased the survival and clonogenicity of GBM cells and
reduced their ABC/Sox2 population. Together, these data suggest that Wnt
activation is a molecular mechanism to confer GBM radioresistance and an
important therapeutic target.

