Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HYAL4 is a novel potential prognostic and diagnostic biomarker for
bladder cancer


Introduction and Objectives: The Hyaluronidase (HAase) family of enzymes
is responsible for the degradation of hyaluronic acid (HA). There are 6
HAase genes in the human genome, clustered on chromosomes 3p21.3 (HYAL-1,
-2, -3) and 7q31.3 (HYAL-4, PH20, HYALP1). Studies have shown that, while
PH20 and HYAL-2 are basically testicular and lysosomal HAases, HYAL1 is
the tumor-derived HAase, promoting tumor growth, invasion and
angiogenesis. Additionally, HYAL1 is a diagnostic and prognostic marker
for bladder cancer (BCa). The expression of other HAases has not been
investigated in either normal and/or tumor cells and tissues. In this
study we examined the expression of all 6 HAases in bladder tissues,
cells and urine. Methods: Real time RT-PCR was used to examine the mRNA
levels of the 6 HAase genes in BCa cell lines, 59 bladder tissues (normal
(NBL) = 22; tumor (TBL) = 37) and 160 urine specimens (BCa = 52; normal =
18; history of BCa = 30; benign conditions = 59). Transcript levels were
normalized to -actin. HYAL1 and HYAL4 were localized in bladder tissues
by immunohistochemistry using anti-HYAL1 and anti-HYAL4 antibodies,
respectively. The staining was graded for intensity (0 - 3) and area of
staining. HYAL4 function was analyzed by siRNA transfection of HT1376 and
HT5637 cell lines. Results: HYAL1, HYAL4 and HYALP1 mRNA levels were
significantly (6-13-fold) elevated in TBL tissues (12.5 2.7; 29.7 21.9;
26.7 21.9) when compared to NBL tissues (1.2 0.6; 2.2 2.4; 4.2 6.6; P
0.05). cDNA cloning revealed that HYALP1 is a pseudo gene that encodes a
non-functional truncated protein. HYAL1 and HYAL4 staining was
significantly elevated in TBL tissues (188 57; 232 91) when compared to
NBL tissues (68.5 21.3; 93 46; P 0.05). cDNA cloning revealed that HYALP1
is a pseudo gene that encodes a non-functional truncated protein. HYAL1
and HYAL4 staining was significantly elevated in TBL tissues (188 57; 232
91) when compared to NBL tissues (68.5 21.3; 93 46; P < 0.001). The
staining for both HAases was exclusively localized in tumor cells. When
compared to HYAL3, PH20, HYAL2 mRNA levels, HYAL1, HYAL4 and HYALP1 mRNA
levels were significantly elevated in BCa patients urine (P 0.05). cDNA
cloning revealed that HYALP1 is a pseudo gene that encodes a
non-functional truncated protein. HYAL1 and HYAL4 staining was
significantly elevated in TBL tissues (188 57; 232 91) when compared to
NBL tissues (68.5 21.3; 93 46; P < 0.001). The staining for both HAases
was exclusively localized in tumor cells. When compared to HYAL3, PH20,
HYAL2 mRNA levels, HYAL1, HYAL4 and HYALP1 mRNA levels were significantly
elevated in BCa patients urine (P < 001). Urinary HYAL4 mRNA levels had
higher sensitivity (78.9%) and specificity (86.2%) than HYAL1 mRNA levels
(72.3%; 76.2%) to detect BCa. Both HAases detected high-grade BCa with
83% - 86% sensitivity. Down regulation of HYAL4 expression by siRNA
decreased proliferation of HT1376 and HT5637 cells (2.3-fold) and induced
apoptosis (2.6-fold). Conclusion: This is the first study showing that
HYAL4, like HYAL1, is a tumor derived HAase that is exclusively expressed
in BCa cells. HYAL4 may be a potentially accurate marker for BCa
diagnosis and may promote BCa growth and progression. Support: Grant
NCI/NIH R01 CA-72821-09; Bankhead Coley Cancer Research Program Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center and CURED

