Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relationship between microRNA expression and Gleason grading
system in prostate cancer


Background: Recent studies have shown that some microRNA (miRNA)
expression profiles are associated with clinicopathological findings,
including Gleason score (GS) in human prostate cancer (PC). However, the
direct relationship between Gleason pattern (GP) and miRNA expression
remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the miRNA expression
profile in each GP (GP 3, GP 4, and GP 5). Methods: Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples obtained from radical
prostatectomy (patient set 1, n = 43, including [GP 3] n = 22, [GP 4] n =
35, and [GP 5] n = 12) and prostate needle biopsy (patient set 2, n = 9,
[GP 4] n = 9) were used. Cancer tissues and adjacent normal counterparts
were collected separately using laser-captured microdissection with
subsequent isolation of total RNA. Real time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to determine the
relative expression of miRNAs, including miR-31, -34c, -96, -182, -183,
-205, -221, and miR-222, which are currently reported to be involved in
the progression of PC. Results: In the radical prostatectomy samples
(patient set 1), relative expression (mean SE) of miR-31, miR-34c, and
miR-205 in every GP was significantly decreased (miR-31: [GP 3] 0.028
0.007, [GP 4] 0.047 0.017, and [GP 5] 0.071 0.022; miR-34c: 0.208 0.066,
0.419 0.219, and 0.210 0.054; and miR-205: 0.021 0.008, 0.015 0.003, and
0.050 0.023, all p-values Background: Recent studies have shown that some
microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles are associated with
clinicopathological findings, including Gleason score (GS) in human
prostate cancer (PC). However, the direct relationship between Gleason
pattern (GP) and miRNA expression remains unclear. In this study, we
investigated the miRNA expression profile in each GP (GP 3, GP 4, and GP
5). Methods: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples
obtained from radical prostatectomy (patient set 1, n = 43, including [GP
3] n = 22, [GP 4] n = 35, and [GP 5] n = 12) and prostate needle biopsy
(patient set 2, n = 9, [GP 4] n = 9) were used. Cancer tissues and
adjacent normal counterparts were collected separately using
laser-captured microdissection with subsequent isolation of total RNA.
Real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was
performed to determine the relative expression of miRNAs, including
miR-31, -34c, -96, -182, -183, -205, -221, and miR-222, which are
currently reported to be involved in the progression of PC. Results: In
the radical prostatectomy samples (patient set 1), relative expression
(mean SE) of miR-31, miR-34c, and miR-205 in every GP was significantly
decreased (miR-31: [GP 3] 0.028 0.007, [GP 4] 0.047 0.017, and [GP 5]
0.071 0.022; miR-34c: 0.208 0.066, 0.419 0.219, and 0.210 0.054; and
miR-205: 0.021 0.008, 0.015 0.003, and 0.050 0.023, all p-values < 0.01)
compared to normal counterparts. However, there was no significant
difference between GP 3, GP 4, and GP 5. Meanwhile, in GP4, expression of
miR-31, miR-182, and miR-205 in tissues obtained from high-grade cancer
(GS 8 or GS 9) were significantly higher than those in tissues obtained
from intermediate-grade cancer (GS 7) (miR-31: [high grade] 0.071 0.027,
[intermediate grade] 0.011 0.003, p = 0.040; miR-182: 1.745 0.278, 0.864
0.136, p = 0.021; and miR-205: 0.022 0.005, 0.005 0.002, p = 0.002,
respectively). Validation testing of biopsy samples (patient set 2)
revealed that the relative expression of miR-182 was similarly and
significantly higher in high-grade cancer tissue (high grade: 1.863
0.381, intermediate grade: 0.717 0.196, p = 0.043). Conclusion: The
expression of miR-182 differed by cancer grade even in the same GP 4, and
this difference was detected in both biopsy and radical prostatectomy
samples. Our findings suggest that evaluations of miRNA expression with
respect to Gleason grading in biopsy samples may contribute to more
accurate preoperative cancer risk evaluation.

