Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: From gray to pink: Helping older adults with breast cancer
understand and utilize the health care system in the real world


Background: Breast cancer education programs while abundant tend to focus
on young and middle age women. However, the median age of breast cancer
diagnosis is 61 years of age. With increasing debate on when to begin
mammography, the risk of being diagnosed at a later age also increases.
As the senior breast cancer survivor and at-risk population continues to
grow, their need to be educated regarding breast cancer and other health
and legal-related issues of aging is key to reducing risk, finding breast
cancer early, and improving the quality of life for survivors. This pilot
program was designed to educate seniors about breast cancer in relation
to healthy aging and nutrition, elder law, patient advocacy, and
occupational and physical therapy. The intent is to improve senior
confidence and knowledge pertaining to these issues in order to create a
sustainable population of seniors that can help themselves and each
other. Methods and Materials: Two senior centers located in Northwest
Ohio agreed to host the four individual workshops of From Gray to Pink
during September and October 2011, respectively. Senior breast cancer
survivors (age 60), their family and friends, and women at risk were
welcome to attend. The workshops covered breast cancer and issues related
to diet, aging, elder law, patient advocacy and navigation, and physical
therapy and occupational therapy. Participant knowledge and confidence
were assessed using pre- and post-surveys and the Student's paired t-test
was used to compare mean pre- and post-test knowledge and confidence
scores. Results: Among the 25 total participants, there were
statistically significant differences between pre- and post-test
knowledge for the aging and nutrition (p = 0.01), elder law (p
Background: Breast cancer education programs while abundant tend to focus
on young and middle age women. However, the median age of breast cancer
diagnosis is 61 years of age. With increasing debate on when to begin
mammography, the risk of being diagnosed at a later age also increases.
As the senior breast cancer survivor and at-risk population continues to
grow, their need to be educated regarding breast cancer and other health
and legal-related issues of aging is key to reducing risk, finding breast
cancer early, and improving the quality of life for survivors. This pilot
program was designed to educate seniors about breast cancer in relation
to healthy aging and nutrition, elder law, patient advocacy, and
occupational and physical therapy. The intent is to improve senior
confidence and knowledge pertaining to these issues in order to create a
sustainable population of seniors that can help themselves and each
other. Methods and Materials: Two senior centers located in Northwest
Ohio agreed to host the four individual workshops of From Gray to Pink
during September and October 2011, respectively. Senior breast cancer
survivors (age 60), their family and friends, and women at risk were
welcome to attend. The workshops covered breast cancer and issues related
to diet, aging, elder law, patient advocacy and navigation, and physical
therapy and occupational therapy. Participant knowledge and confidence
were assessed using pre- and post-surveys and the Student's paired t-test
was used to compare mean pre- and post-test knowledge and confidence
scores. Results: Among the 25 total participants, there were
statistically significant differences between pre- and post-test
knowledge for the aging and nutrition (p = 0.01), elder law (p < 0.01),
physical and occupational therapy (p = 0.03) workshops. Conclusion:
Senior breast cancer survivors and those at risk scored higher in both
topic knowledge and confidence on post-surveys compared to pre-surveys.
This pilot study has provided sufficient data to apply for funding to
bring this program to additional rural Ohio counties. While improvements
in confidence were not statistically significant, most participants did
have the same level of or greater confidence following each workshop.
Given the aging of our population and increasing health care costs and
needs, breast cancer education for seniors at risk and senior survivors
is crucial. The knowledge and confidence gained by seniors can be shared
among all to provide an ever-growing network of people who can educate
and help each other improve their quality of life. Further implementation
will help in determining if this educational methodology may be useful in
other parts of the country for seniors who have or are at risk for breast
cancer.

