Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miRNA-708 suppresses prostate cancer growth through Akt2 signaling
pathways


MicroRNAs have been implicated in the etiology, progression and
metastasis of various malignancies. We identify miR-708, a little studied
member of a set of microRNAs that have been implicated in stress control,
as an important tumor suppressor in prostate cancer. In this study we
identify that miR-708 expression is significantly attenuated in prostate
cancer cell lines and human prostate clinical specimens. To evaluate the
functional significance of decreased miR-708 expression, miR-708 was
reintroduced in prostate cancer cell lines followed by functional assays.
Restoration of miR-708 expression in prostate cancer cell lines decreased
cell growth, clonability, invasion, migration and elicited a dramatic
increase in apoptosis. Moreover, intratumoral delivery of miR-708 was
sufficient to trigger in vivo regression of established tumors in a
murine xenograft model of human prostate cancer. Further, analysis of
putative miR-708 targets showed that miR-708 targets the serine/threonine
kinase Akt2/PKB, a member of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway that plays a
key role in cellular survival. Phenocopy experiments in prostate cancer
cell lines suggest that Akt2 is a functionally relevant target of miR-708
in prostate cancer. In conclusion, our data suggests that miR-708 is a
tumor suppressor microRNA that inhibits prostate cancer growth both in
vitro and in vivo through targeting Akt2 pathways.

