Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MIR-200 family as EMT related microRNA in renal cell carcinoma


(Background) Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm of
the adult kidney, and clear cell RCC represents the most common renal
cancer histology. However surgical treatment is provided for localized
disease, relapse or metastasis of the patient is caused in a considerable
ratio. At present, metastatic RCC is difficult to treat and the process
of metastasis is not well understood. Therefore, it is crucial to find
molecular mechanisms based on recent genome analysis in RCC oncogenesis
and metastasis. Based on the microRNA (miRNA) expression signature of RCC
revealed that miR-200 family significantly reduced in RCC cells. The
miR-200 family (miR-200b, miR-200a and miR-429 are encoded by single
polycistronic transcript on chromosome 1p36.33 and miR-200c and miR-141
are cluster on chromosome 12 p13.31) of miRNA plays a major role to
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) by targeting transcription
repressors, zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox (ZEB1) and ZEB2. In this
study, we investigated the functional significance of miR-200 family and
identified the novel cancer pathways in RCC. (Methods) Cell proliferation
and invasion assay was performed by restoration of mature miR-200 family
(miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-429 and miR-141) in RCC cell lines.
Genome-wide gene expression analysis was performed to identify the
molecular networks of miR-200 family by microarray analysis. (Results)
The mRNA expression levels of ZEB1 and ZEB2 were significantly decreased
by miR-200 family (miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-429 and miR-141)
transfectantion in RCC cells. Restoration of each miRNAs significantly
inhibited cell proliferation and invasion in RCC cells. Interestingly,
the morphological changes were recognized by miR-200 family transfection
in RCC cell lines. Gene expression analysis showed more than ten
candidate genes were searched for miR-200 family targets and these genes
were up-regulated in RCC clinical specimens. (Conclusions) Our data
suggest that miR-200 family function as tumor suppressors in RCC.
EMT-related tumor suppressive miR-200 family mediates novel molecular
targets provide new insights into the potential mechanisms of RCC
oncogenesis and metastasis.

