Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EMMPRIN mediates VEGF activation of VEGFR-2 in melanoma cells


EMMPRIN's expression in melanoma tissue was reported to be predictive of
poor prognosis. Here we demonstrate that EMMPRIN up-regulated VEGF
receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) in two different primary melanoma cell lines and
consequently increased migration and proliferation of these cells while
inhibiting their apoptosis. SiRNA inhibition of VEGFR-2 expression
abrogated these EMMPRIN effects. EMMPRIN regulation of VEGFR-2 was
mediated through the over-expression of HIF-2 and its translocation to
the nucleus where it forms heterodimers with HIF-1. These results were
supported by an in vivo correlation between the expression of EMMPRIN
with that of VEGFR-2 in human melanoma tissues as well as with the extent
of HIF-2 localization in the nucleus. They demonstrate a novel mechanism
by which EMMPRIN promotes tumor progression through HIF-2/VEGFR-2
mediated mechanism, with an autocrine role in melanoma cell malignancy.
As VEGF/VEGFR2 system has been implicated in regulation of melanoma cells
migration, proliferation and apoptosis, the role of EMMPRIN in the
regulation of these cellular properties was investigated. Blocking
EMMPRIN by siRNA have shown that VEGF enhancement of melanoma cell
migration requires EMMPRIN. The inhibition of EMMPRIN in cancer may thus
simultaneously target both the VEGFR-2/VEGF system and the matrix
degrading proteases to block tumor cell growth and invasion.

