Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MUC1 modulation of E-cadherin through miR-200c and ZEB1


MUC1, a cell-surface glycoprotein implicated in tumorigenesis and
metastasis, has a cytoplasmic tail (MUC1.CT) that is phosphorylated by
different receptor tyrosine kinases and conducts these signals by binding
and altering the function or stability of transcription factors, thereby
influencing gene transcription. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), short RNAs (19-22
nucleotides), regulate gene expression at the transcriptional level and
are differentially regulated in cancer and metastasis. We discovered that
MUC1.CT influences expression of miRNAs that contribute to metastasis,
including miR-200c. MiR-200c is a known regulator of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through regulation of ZEB1, a
transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin. In addition, ZEB1 is a repressor
of miR-200c in a feedback loop. Overexpression of MUC1 results in a
dramatic decrease in miR-200c levels, resulting in increased levels of
ZEB1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was used to demonstrate that
MUC1.CT occupies the ZEB1 binding motif upstream of the miR-200c start
site. In addition, we found that ZEB1 occupancy of the miR-200c promoter
region was enhanced 3.5-fold in MUC1 overexpressing cells, indicating
that MUC1.CT may influence the expression and stability of ZEB1 at the
miR-200c promoter. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments determined that
MUC1.CT directly interacts with ZEB1. We evaluated levels of proteins
affected by the miR-200c pathway in MUC1 overexpressing cells and
observed an increase in ZEB1 levels and a decrease in E-cadherin levels,
consistent with induction of EMT. We also confirmed an increase of ZEB1
occupancy at the E-cadherin promoter in MUC1 overexpressing cells,
further confirming our hypothesis. In addition, MUC1.CT is differentially
phosphorylated by several receptor tyrosine kinases. Antibodies against
different phospho-isoforms were used with ChIP to investigate the
signaling cascades that influence localization of the MUC1.CT to the
miR-200c promoter. The phospho-YEKV form of MUC1.CT, which is
representative of signaling through epidermal growth factor/receptor
(EGF/EGFR), was the only phospho-MUC1.CT detected at the ZEB1 binding
motif of the miR-200c promoter. EGF signaling is linked to a loss of
E-cadherin, and our work is the first to link EGF signaling through the
MUC1.CT as a direct regulator of miR-200c expression. These data portray
a novel pathway of EMT modulation. EGF signaling via MUC1 regulates
levels of miR-200c, altering regulation E-cadherin. Grant support was
provided by grants from the NCI (Training Grant CA09476, R01CA57362, U01
CA111294) and student assistantships from UNMC.

