Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Thymoquinone induces cell killing in glioblastoma cells through
generation of DNA damage and cell cycle arrest


Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive and common type of brain tumor
in humans. Surgical resection followed by radiation and chemotherapy is
the current standard treatment; however, due to the upregulation of
several survival pathways, tumor recurrence is quite common with a median
survival of 12 to 15 months. Therefore, there is an urgent need for more
effective therapeutic strategies for the treatment of glioblastoma.
Naturally occurring phytochemicals have steadily received much scientific
attention, owing to the fact that many of these compounds have potent
action against tumors. Thymoquinone (TQ) is the bioactive compound of the
volatile oil extracted from the black seed, Nigella sativa. TQ has shown
anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-neoplastic actions with a
selective cytotoxicity for human cancer cells compared to several normal
cells. Here, we show that TQ is able to dose-dependently inhibit colony
formation in three distinct glioblastoma cell lines (T98, U87 and Gli36),
with the highly tumorigenic Gli36 being the most sensitive to the
anti-proliferative effects of TQ. We also show that TQ induces persistent
-H2AX activation, a marker of DNA double strand breaks, in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. TQ also causes G2/M cell cycle arrest in GBM cells
to a degree that correlates with the cells relative clonogenic
sensitivity. Moreover, co-treatment with TQ and N-acetyl cysteine, a
simple thiol nucleophile and antioxidant, prevented cell death, DNA
double strand breaks, and cell cycle arrest. Taken together, our findings
demonstrate that TQ is a potent inhibitor of GBM cell proliferation and
growth, and that this effect may be mediated by generation of reactive
oxygen species.

