Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vaccinia virus GLV-1h153 in combination with 131I-iodine shows
increased efficiency in treating triple-negative breast cancer in vivo


BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are aggressive tumors
due to their inherent biology and the lack of receptors for
hormonal/targeted therapy, namely estrogen, progesterone, and Her2/neu.
The human sodium iodide symporter (hNIS) is a naturally occurring protein
in some human breast and thyroid tissue which enables cells to
concentrate iodine, including radioiodide. In this study, we investigated
the therapeutic efficacy of a new oncolytic vaccinia virus, GLV-1h153
carrying the hNIS, in combination with radioiodine in a TNBC murine
model. METHODS: GLV-1h153, a replication-competent vaccinia virus, was
tested against the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, HCC-1937, and
HCC-1143 at multiplicities of infections (MOI) of 0.1, 1.0, and 5.
Cytotoxicity and viral replication were determined. Mammary fat pad
tumors were generated in athymic nude mice with MDA-MB-231 cells. A
subset of xenografts were infected with GLV-1h153 and 150 Ci of
124I-iodine was administered. Serial Focus 120 microPET were obtained for
131I dosimetry calculations. For the combination therapy study, 14 days
after cell implantation, xenografts were treated with intratumoral
injection of GLV-1h153 or PBS. One week after viral injection (day 21),
xenografts were further randomized into 4 treatments groups: GLV-1h153
alone, GLV-1h153 and iodine (5 mCi of 131I), iodine alone, or PBS and
followed for tumor growth. RESULTS: Greater than 90% cell kill was
achieved in all cell lines within 5 days at an MOI of 5.0. GLV-1h153
replicated efficiently in all cell lines with a peak titer of 2.6 x107
viral plaque forming units per ml (>1300-fold increase from the initial
viral dose) by day 4 in cell line MDA-MB-468. Only infected tumors were
identified via PET scanning compared to controls. In vivo, administration
of systemic radioiodine in combination with GLV-1h153 resulted in greater
tumor regression, 24 mm3 compared to 146 mm3 for the viral-treated group
only (pBACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are aggressive
tumors due to their inherent biology and the lack of receptors for
hormonal/targeted therapy, namely estrogen, progesterone, and Her2/neu.
The human sodium iodide symporter (hNIS) is a naturally occurring protein
in some human breast and thyroid tissue which enables cells to
concentrate iodine, including radioiodide. In this study, we investigated
the therapeutic efficacy of a new oncolytic vaccinia virus, GLV-1h153
carrying the hNIS, in combination with radioiodine in a TNBC murine
model. METHODS: GLV-1h153, a replication-competent vaccinia virus, was
tested against the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, HCC-1937, and
HCC-1143 at multiplicities of infections (MOI) of 0.1, 1.0, and 5.
Cytotoxicity and viral replication were determined. Mammary fat pad
tumors were generated in athymic nude mice with MDA-MB-231 cells. A
subset of xenografts were infected with GLV-1h153 and 150 Ci of
124I-iodine was administered. Serial Focus 120 microPET were obtained for
131I dosimetry calculations. For the combination therapy study, 14 days
after cell implantation, xenografts were treated with intratumoral
injection of GLV-1h153 or PBS. One week after viral injection (day 21),
xenografts were further randomized into 4 treatments groups: GLV-1h153
alone, GLV-1h153 and iodine (5 mCi of 131I), iodine alone, or PBS and
followed for tumor growth. RESULTS: Greater than 90% cell kill was
achieved in all cell lines within 5 days at an MOI of 5.0. GLV-1h153
replicated efficiently in all cell lines with a peak titer of 2.6 x107
viral plaque forming units per ml (>1300-fold increase from the initial
viral dose) by day 4 in cell line MDA-MB-468. Only infected tumors were
identified via PET scanning compared to controls. In vivo, administration
of systemic radioiodine in combination with GLV-1h153 resulted in greater
tumor regression, 24 mm3 compared to 146 mm3 for the viral-treated group
only (p<0.05; days 21-40), a six-fold difference. CONCLUSION: GLV-1h153
infected, replicated in, and killed all TNBC cell lines effectively. This
study is the first to our knowledege to demonstrate killing of TNBC by a
novel vaccinia virus in combination with radioactive 131I-iodine in an in
vivo xenograft model. Our results suggest that GLV-1h153 is a promising
therapeutic agent in combination with 131I and merits further testing in
the clinical setting.

