Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Feasibility of Methacetin C13 breath test in assessing liver
function in patient who had liver resection due to HCC


Aim: Our aim was to assess the feasibility of Methacetin breath tests in
decreasing mortality during or after liver resection, predict
complications and liver failure after the resection. Method: Methacetin
C13 breath test was kindly donated by Beijing Richen Science and
Technology Co., Ltd. 10 empty breaths were collected before each
measurement and 75mg/80ml methacetin was orally administered. After
administration 9 breaths at 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 80, 100 and 120
minutes were collected in the bags provided by the manufacturer. Breath
test was performed on the day before operation, post operation days 1 and
10. Patients with projected resection of more than 20% of the liver were
included in the study. Additional parameters like liver enzymes,
Child-Pugh score, platelets, albumin, CT volumetry were assessed. Total
of 42 patients were included in the study, out of which 5 were healthy
controls. 23 patients canceled operation because of insufficient liver
function. 14 patients participated until the last measurement of day 10
at National Cancer Center of Mongolia. Three parameters of the methacetin
breath test: methacetin concentration after 30 min of administration
CUM30, highest concentration of methacetin DOB peak, and calculated liver
function using the software provided by the manufacturer were obtained
after each measurement. Result: 5 healthy controls had the mean DOB peak
value of 29.056, CUM30 of 91.56 and liver function 114. When 20% of the
liver was resected Methacetin concentration was decreased by 47.09% (DOB
peak), 72.1% (CUM30), 63.22% (calc. liver function); when 35% resected
45.33%, 73.35%, and 74.28%; when 40% cut: 39.04%, 99.3%, 99.3%; when 50%
cut 67.38%, 81.97%, 75.2%; when 65% cut: values were 37.51%, 54.27% and
42.97% respectively. All patients were Child-Pugh A, and mean albumin was
3.8 g/dl and platelets were 229X109/L, ALT 179IU/L and AST 162IU/L
respectively. In terms of predicting complications we observed DOB peak
has the most meaningful results with 5 out of 6 patients with post
operative complications had a value of 20. Conclusion: The closest
parameter to the amount of liver resected was the highest concentration
of methacetin DOB peak, whereas CUM 30 and liver function did not match
the amount as that of DOB peak. We suggest the cut off value of DOB peak
at 20. This method is non-invasive, non-toxic, direct method to assess
liver function with high predictive and dynamic range in regard to
residual liver function. The sensitivity of the methacetin test to
predict post-operative complications were 83%, and the specificity stands
at 85% with PPV (Positive Predictive Value)=83%, and NPV (Negative
Predictive Value)=85% respectively. The most common post-operative
complications we encountered were ascitis and wound infections.

