Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subcutaneous administration of PSMA/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody
MT112/BAY 2010112 leads to complete remission of human prostate cancer
xenografts in mice


Blinatumomab, a CD19/CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody has shown high response
rates and durable remissions in patients with relapsed or refractory
acute lymphocytic leukemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. For treatment of
patients with prostate cancer (PCa), we have developed a novel BiTE
antibody, MT112/BAY2010112, that is bispecific for prostate-specific
membrane antigen (PSMA) and the CD3 epsilon subunit of the T cell
receptor complex. MT112/BAY 2010112 binds PSMA and CD3 of human and
macaque origin allowing for assessment of safety, pharmacodynamics and
pharmacokinetics in a relevant animal species. PSMA expressing human PCa
cell lines VCaP, 22Rv1, MDA PCa 2b, C4-2, PC3-PSMA and LNCaP were lysed
by freshly isolated, unstimulated human T cells redirected by
MT112/BAY2010112 at EC50 values ranging between 0.1 and 4 ng/ml (1.8-72
pM). Efficacy of lysis correlated with levels of surface expressed PSMA.
No lysis was observed in PSMA-negative PCa cell lines PC3 and DU145,
showing the target antigen-specific activity of MT112/BAY2010112. The
relevance of cynomolgus monkeys for further nonclinical safety evaluation
of MT112/BAY 2010112 was demonstrated by in vitro side-by-side comparison
of the BiTE antibody's pharmacological characteristics in human and
cynomolgus monkey assay systems. For studying the activity of MT112/BAY
2010112 after subcutaneous (s.c.) administration, human 22Rv1 PCa
xenografts were grown s.c. in mice to sizes of >200 mm3 in the absence of
human T cells. Three days prior to treatment with BiTE, ex-vivo expanded
human T cells were intraperitoneally injected. Animals were treated s.c.
at 2.5 mg/kg/d or intravenously (i.v.) at 0.5 mg/kg/d for 28 consecutive
days. S.c. administration of MT112/BAY 2010112 resulted in a similar drug
exposure, rapid shrinkage and complete remission of established PCa
xenografts as seen upon i.v. administration of the BiTE antibody.
Treatment with human T cells or vehicle alone had no effect on tumor
growth. Compared to i.v. administration, the relative bioavailability of
the PSMA BiTE in serum after s.c. injection in mice was approximately
18%. Initial results will be presented showing that 14C-labeled MT112/BAY
2010112 accumulates in s.c. implanted LNCaP PCa tumors of mice after tail
vein injection. Based on these preclinical in vivo pharmacology results,
treatment of PCa patients with s.c. administered MT112/BAY2010112 appears
to be justified.

