Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caspase-dependent post-translational modulation of Mcl-1 by
ABT-737 in acute lymphoblastic cell lines


Background: ABT-737 is a BH3-mimetic that has a wide spectrum of
single-agent activity against acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell
lines and xenografts. Previously (J Nat Cancer Inst 100:580-595, 2008),
we reported that Mcl-1, an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein that is
not inhibited by ABT-737, decreased in response to ABT-737 in
ABT-737-sensitive ALL cell lines while a reactionary Mcl-1 increase is
observed in ABT-737-resistant cell lines. In the current study, we
investigated the pathways of Mc-1 down-regulation in response to ABT-737
in ALL cell lines. Methods: To identify caspase cleavage sites and to
determine whether the cleavage products are pro-apoptotic or
anti-apoptotic, we transduced into the NALM-6 ALL cell line lentiviral
vectors with several Mcl-1 variants tagged with V5 epitope, including
wild type: Mcl-1 1-350 full length tagged with V5, point mutations at
aspartate 127 and aspartate 157 to alanine: Mcl-1 D127A and Mcl-1 D157A,
and C-terminus fragments of caspase cleavage, deleted: Mcl-1 127 and
Mcl-1 157. Localization of Mcl-1 1-350 and Mcl-1 157 in ALL cells,
cytosol and mitochondria were fractionated from the cells expressing the
proteins, and Mcl-1 and V5 were assayed in the fractions. Results: The
decrease in Mcl-1 by ABT-737 in ABT-737-sensitive cell lines was via
formation of an Mcl-1 fragment which is prevented by a caspase inhibitor
(Boc-d-fmk), but not a proteosome inhibitor (MG-132), indicating that
Mcl-1 cleavage is caspase-dependent. Of the two caspase-dependent Mcl-1
cleavage sites (D127 and D157), D157 is the major site of cleavage in
response to ABT-737 treatment in ALL cells. Localization experiments
revealed that full length Mcl-1 resides in both the cytosol and
mitochondrial fractions, while the Mcl-1_158-350 fragment localizes
mostly to mitochondria. Caspase 3- and caspase 9-activation in response
to ABT-737 was higher in transduced cells expressing the Mcl-1 157
fragment, suggesting that the fragment increases sensitivity to apoptotic
stimuli. Pretreating cells with okadaic acid, a protein phosphatase
inhibitor, resulted in greater fragmentation of Mcl-1 in resistant cell
lines while the effect of okadaric acid was minimal in a
ABT-737-sensitive cell line, suggesting that dephosphorylation makes
Mcl-1 more susceptible to Mcl-1 cleavage in response to ABT-737.
Conclusion: Mcl-1 is cleaved to Mcl-1 157 by caspases in ALL cells that
are treated with ABT-737, and the pro-apopoptotic activity of Mcl-1 157
contributes to a vicious cycle promoting cell death.

