Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deregulated GSK3 sustains gastrointestinal cancer cells by
modulating hTERT and telomerase


Purpose: Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) regulates multiple cell
signaling pathways and has been implicated in glucose intolerance,
neurodegenerative disorders, and inflammation. We investigated the
expression, activity, and putative pathologic role of GSK3 in
gastrointestinal, pancreatic, and liver cancers. Experimental Design:
Colon, stomach, pancreatic, and liver cancer cell lines; nonneoplastic
HEK293 cells; and matched pairs of normal and tumor tissues of stomach
and colon cancer patients were examined for GSK3 expression and its
phosphorylation at serine 9 (inactive form) and tyrosine 216 (active
form) by Western immunoblotting and for GSK3 activity by in vitro kinase
assay. The effects of small-molecule GSK3 inhibitors and of RNA
interference on cell survival, proliferation, and apoptosis were examined
in vitro and on human colon cancer cell xenografts in athymic mice. The
effects of GSK3 inhibition on human telomerase reverse transcriptase
(hTERT) expression and telomerase activity were compared between colon
cancer and HEK293 cells. Results: Cancer cell lines and most cancer
tissues showed increased GSK3 expression and increased tyrosine 216
phosphorylation and activity but decreased serine 9 phosphorylation
compared with HEK293 cells and nonneoplastic tissues. Inhibition of GSK3
resulted in attenuated cell survival and proliferation and increased
apoptosis in most cancer cell lines and in HT-29 xenografts in rodents
but not in HEK293 cells. GSK3 inhibition in colon cancer cells was
associated with decreased hTERT expression and telomerase activity.
Conclusion: The results indicate that deregulated GSK3 sustains
gastrointestinal cancer cells survival through modulation of hTERT and
telomerase.

