Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hypomethylation of Alu repeat sequences permits activation of
microRNAs in human colorectal cancer metastasis


Background: Global hypomethylation of cytosines within CpG dinucleotides
has been reported in various human cancers. Repetitive elements dispersed
throughout the human genome, including Alu and LINE1 sequences, have been
used as global surrogate markers for estimating global DNA methylation
levels. Recent evidence indicates that certain human miRNAs are located
downstream of Alu sequences, and these non-coding RNAs can be transcribed
by the recruitment of RNA polymerase III to the promoter region of Alu
repeats. Primary colorectal cancers (CRC) demonstrate frequent global Alu
hypomethylation; however, it is not clear whether hypomethylation of
these repeat elements may be associated with a metastatic phenotype. Aim:
This study aimed to determine the role of Alu hypomethylation in the
development of CRC metastasis. Materials and Methods: We analyzed a panel
of CRC cells, as well as matched pairs of primary CRCs (PC) and
corresponding liver metastasis (LM) tissues from 59 CRC patients. Alu
methylation levels were measured by quantitative bisulfite
pyrosequencing. In addition, we determined the expression status of
miR-520c and miR-373, which are located immediately downstream of Alu
repeats. Results: All CRC cell lines demonstrated Alu hypomethylation,
which was further exacerbated by treatment with the DNA demethylating
agent, 5-azacytidine. In the clinical specimens, the levels of Alu
methylation were significantly lower in LM compared to the matched PC
(mean methylation value; PC = 83% vs. LM = 80%; P Background: Global
hypomethylation of cytosines within CpG dinucleotides has been reported
in various human cancers. Repetitive elements dispersed throughout the
human genome, including Alu and LINE1 sequences, have been used as global
surrogate markers for estimating global DNA methylation levels. Recent
evidence indicates that certain human miRNAs are located downstream of
Alu sequences, and these non-coding RNAs can be transcribed by the
recruitment of RNA polymerase III to the promoter region of Alu repeats.
Primary colorectal cancers (CRC) demonstrate frequent global Alu
hypomethylation; however, it is not clear whether hypomethylation of
these repeat elements may be associated with a metastatic phenotype. Aim:
This study aimed to determine the role of Alu hypomethylation in the
development of CRC metastasis. Materials and Methods: We analyzed a panel
of CRC cells, as well as matched pairs of primary CRCs (PC) and
corresponding liver metastasis (LM) tissues from 59 CRC patients. Alu
methylation levels were measured by quantitative bisulfite
pyrosequencing. In addition, we determined the expression status of
miR-520c and miR-373, which are located immediately downstream of Alu
repeats. Results: All CRC cell lines demonstrated Alu hypomethylation,
which was further exacerbated by treatment with the DNA demethylating
agent, 5-azacytidine. In the clinical specimens, the levels of Alu
methylation were significantly lower in LM compared to the matched PC
(mean methylation value; PC = 83% vs. LM = 80%; P < 0.001). Moreover,
methylation analysis of surrounding normal liver tissues revealed higher
levels of Alu methylation (mean methylation value; 85%) compared to both
PC and LM. The expression of both miR-520c and miR-373, showed
significantly different expression between PC and LM, which was mediated
by the hypomethylation of Alu-associated promoter region. Conclusion: Our
results provide novel evidence for increased Alu hypomethylation in liver
metastasis tissues from patients with CRC. We speculate that
hypomethylation of Alu repeat elements permits activation of
metastasis-related miRNAs, which in turn may facilitate a more aggressive
malignant phenotype in these advanced stage cancers.

