Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An in vivo functional screen to identify metastasis suppressor
genes


Background When breast carcinomas remain confined to breast tissue, cure
rates exceed 90% (http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2006/). However, if the
cancer disseminates through the body, long-term survival decreases
depending upon the extent of, and the sites of, colonisation Genes that
control the different stages of the metastatic process need to be
identified to better delineate the process, and to aid in the development
of metastatic biomarkers and provide potential targets for the treatment
of metastatic disease. Genetic screens, such as those that exploit RNA
interference (RNAi), provide an unbiased approach to the identification
of genes associated with a phenotype of interest. Although cell-based
screens have been highly informative in identifying genes involved in
tumour cell survival, migration and invasion, these in vitro approaches
are largely unsuitable for interrogating the later stages of the
metastatic process, in particular the processes of cell dissemination,
tumour cell extravasation from the circulation and colonisation of
secondary sites. Method Using the 4T1 mouse model an in vivo functional
metastasis screen that integrates RNAi technology and massively parallel
sequencing was implemented to rapidly discover and validate metastasis
genes. Results Using this approach, 12 hits that suppress tumour cell
colonisation of the lungs were identified. 3 of the top 5 hits have been
validated as novel metastasis suppressor genes in both mouse and human
cell lines and further studies have been undertaken to elucidate the
mechanism of action of the top hit. Critically, these findings are
clinically relevant in primary breast cancers where there is a
significant correlation between elevated expression levels of these
suppressor genes and reduced frequency of metastatic events. Conclusion
This study demonstrates the value of adopting an unbiased methodology to
discover novel metastatic genes and establishes, for the first time, that
an in vivo metastasis screen can be combined with next generation
sequencing to identify novel components of the metastatic process.

