Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The carboxypeptidase inhibitor TIG1 interacts with cathepsin L2
and inhibits cathepsin L2-stimulated cellular invasion


The tazarotene-induced gene 1 (TIG1), also known as retinoic acid
receptor responder 1 (RARRES1), is a putative tumor suppressor gene. The
gene encodes a carboxypeptidase inhibitor for ATP/GTP binding
protein-like 2 (AGBL2). This study identified TIG1 binding proteins and
characterized the activities of TIG1 on cellular invasion of HCT116 colon
cancer cells stimulated by the cathepsin L2 (CTSL2). The cytoplasmic
portion of the TIG1A isoform was used for identification of TIG1 binding
proteins using the yeast two-hybrid screening, and six genes, CTSL2,
DNAJC8, SPATA22, SPINK2, VAC14, and C6orf225, were selected. CTSL2, a
cysteine protease with an increased expression shown in breast and colon
carcinomas, was selected for analysis. Immunoprecipitation analysis using
transiently transfected cytosols confirmed the binding between both TIG1
isoforms and CTSL2. Both TIG1A and CTSL2 were secreted proteins; however,
the interaction of both proteins in culture supernatants was not
detected. Further immunoprecipitation analysis using purified recombinant
proteins demonstrated direct binding between both TIG1 isoforms and
CTSL2. Cellular invasion of HCT116 cells was increased by 52 to 71% in
CTSL2 transiently transfected cells. Both TIG1 isoforms had no effects on
cellular invasion of HCT116 cells. However, TIG1A and TIG1B significantly
inhibited CTSL2-stimulated cellular invasion by 65.1 and 62.9%,
respectively. In conclusion, both TIG1 isoforms interact with CTSL2 and
inhibited CTSL2-stimulated cellular invasion of HCT116 cells. The results
suggest that TIG1 may suppress CTSL2-mediated cellular invasion through
inhibiting the activation of CTSL2 protease, and merit for further
investigation.

