Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of the 58-kDa microspherule protein (MSP58)
triggers cellular senescence via the p53-p21 signaling axis


The nucleolar protein 58-kDa microspherule protein (MSP58) is a candidate
oncogene implicated in modulating cellular proliferation. In our studies,
acute depletion of MSP58 expression using short hairpin (sh)RNA synthesis
led to aneuploidy and apoptosis, whereas ectopic expression of MSP58
regulated cell proliferation in a context-dependent manner. Remarkably,
ectopic expression of MSP58 in HT1080, NIH3T3, normal human fibroblasts,
and mammary epithelial cell lines resulted in induction of premature
senescence, caused large and flattened cell morphology, and increased
senescence-associated -galactosidase activity. This phenotype was
accompanied by hypophosphorylated Rb, elevation of p53 and p21 protein
expressions, activation of p53-mediated transcription, accumulation of
phosphorylated forms of ATM/ATR and Chk1/Chk2 kinases, and formation of
H2AX and RPA70 foci, indicating that MSP58 activates the DNA damage
response (DDR) and p53/p21 signaling pathways. Furthermore, we identified
the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling subunit, BRG1, as a critical mediator of
MSP58-induced senescence. MSP58, BRG1, and p53 form a ternary complex on
the p21 promoter, and collaborate to activate p21. This study revealed
novel links among MSP58, p53, and cellular senescence in human tumors and
normal cells.

