Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protective effect of protein diets on experimentally induced
hepatocellular carcinoma in Swiss albino mice


Introduction: The concept that some dietary proteins may prevent the
onset or spread of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was tested in mice
model in this study. Experimental procedure: The animals were divided
into seven groups, with six mice in each based on diet treatment. Group
I- Control, Group II- Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) alone treated, Group III-
Soy protein treated, Group IV- Garlic protein treated, Group V- Coconut
protein treated, Group VI- Whey protein treated, Group VII- Casein
treated. The animals were acclimatized in their respective diets for 60
days. On the 60th day, DEN was given intraperitoneally as a single dose
(120 mg/kg body weight) in saline, to each animal in groups from II to
VII, and was followed by weekly subcutaneous injections of carbon
tetrachloride for four weeks at individual doses of 3 mL/kg body weight
to induce hepatocellular carcinoma. Group I and II, were continued on the
normal diet and the groups III to VII were fed their respective diets for
120 days. Thus Group II consisted of animals that were HCC-induced with
DEN. Animals belonging to groups III-VII were pre and post treated with
different protein isolates from specific sources. At the end of the
experimental period, ie. on day 120, the mice were sacrificed and blood
for serum separation and liver sample for biochemical analysis were
collected. Alpha-fetoprotein, ornithine decarboxylase, tumor necrosis
factor-, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and antioxidant enzyme activities of
superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase were assayed
both in serum and in liver homogenate. Summary of data: The levels of
alpha-fetoprotein, ornithine decarboxylase, tumor necrosis factor-,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
transaminase and alkaline phosphatase were elevated and the antioxidant
enzymes were significantly (PIntroduction: The concept that some dietary
proteins may prevent the onset or spread of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) was tested in mice model in this study. Experimental procedure: The
animals were divided into seven groups, with six mice in each based on
diet treatment. Group I- Control, Group II- Diethylnitrosamine (DEN)
alone treated, Group III- Soy protein treated, Group IV- Garlic protein
treated, Group V- Coconut protein treated, Group VI- Whey protein
treated, Group VII- Casein treated. The animals were acclimatized in
their respective diets for 60 days. On the 60th day, DEN was given
intraperitoneally as a single dose (120 mg/kg body weight) in saline, to
each animal in groups from II to VII, and was followed by weekly
subcutaneous injections of carbon tetrachloride for four weeks at
individual doses of 3 mL/kg body weight to induce hepatocellular
carcinoma. Group I and II, were continued on the normal diet and the
groups III to VII were fed their respective diets for 120 days. Thus
Group II consisted of animals that were HCC-induced with DEN. Animals
belonging to groups III-VII were pre and post treated with different
protein isolates from specific sources. At the end of the experimental
period, ie. on day 120, the mice were sacrificed and blood for serum
separation and liver sample for biochemical analysis were collected.
Alpha-fetoprotein, ornithine decarboxylase, tumor necrosis factor-,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and antioxidant enzyme activities of
superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase were assayed
both in serum and in liver homogenate. Summary of data: The levels of
alpha-fetoprotein, ornithine decarboxylase, tumor necrosis factor-,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
transaminase and alkaline phosphatase were elevated and the antioxidant
enzymes were significantly (P<0.05) decreased in diethylnitrosamine alone
treated mice. The activities of marker enzymes and antioxidant enzymes
were significantly (PIntroduction: The concept that some dietary proteins
may prevent the onset or spread of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was
tested in mice model in this study. Experimental procedure: The animals
were divided into seven groups, with six mice in each based on diet
treatment. Group I- Control, Group II- Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) alone
treated, Group III- Soy protein treated, Group IV- Garlic protein
treated, Group V- Coconut protein treated, Group VI- Whey protein
treated, Group VII- Casein treated. The animals were acclimatized in
their respective diets for 60 days. On the 60th day, DEN was given
intraperitoneally as a single dose (120 mg/kg body weight) in saline, to
each animal in groups from II to VII, and was followed by weekly
subcutaneous injections of carbon tetrachloride for four weeks at
individual doses of 3 mL/kg body weight to induce hepatocellular
carcinoma. Group I and II, were continued on the normal diet and the
groups III to VII were fed their respective diets for 120 days. Thus
Group II consisted of animals that were HCC-induced with DEN. Animals
belonging to groups III-VII were pre and post treated with different
protein isolates from specific sources. At the end of the experimental
period, ie. on day 120, the mice were sacrificed and blood for serum
separation and liver sample for biochemical analysis were collected.
Alpha-fetoprotein, ornithine decarboxylase, tumor necrosis factor-,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and antioxidant enzyme activities of
superoxide dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase were assayed
both in serum and in liver homogenate. Summary of data: The levels of
alpha-fetoprotein, ornithine decarboxylase, tumor necrosis factor-,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, aspartate transaminase, alanine
transaminase and alkaline phosphatase were elevated and the antioxidant
enzymes were significantly (P<0.05) decreased in diethylnitrosamine alone
treated mice. The activities of marker enzymes and antioxidant enzymes
were significantly (P<0.05) restored in the animals treated with various
protein isolates. Histological sections of liver of DEN
alone-administered group had gross structural alterations in comparision
with control mice. The cytoplasmic material was compact with clear cell
foci in soy protein, garlic protein and coconut protein pre and
post-treated groups. In addition, the level of Immunoglobulin E (IgE)
expression was estimated as a measure of allergic reaction. Garlic
protein treated and whey protein treated animals had high values of IgE.
Conclusions: The overall results confirm the protective role of these
protein isolates. Among them the soy protein, garlic protein and coconut
protein were better than others in preventing hepatocellular carcinoma
like condition.

