Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of miR-4423 as a primate-specific microRNA highly
expressed in airway epithelium and associated with lung cancer


Smoking is a significant risk factor for lung cancer, the leading cause
of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Our group has previously shown that
epithelial gene expression is altered throughout the airway of smokers
and that some of these changes are regulated by microRNAs. Moreover, we
have previously identified gene expression differences in cytologically
normal bronchial airway epithelial cells between smokers with and without
lung cancer that can serve as an early diagnostic biomarker for lung
cancer. Here, we use next-generation sequencing of small RNAs to identify
novel microRNAs expressed in airway epithelium and associated with lung
cancer. We identify miR-4423 as a primate-specific microRNA highly
expressed in the airway epithelium. In vitro, the expression of miR-4423
increases as Normal Human Bronchial Epithelial cells are differentiated
into mucociliary epithelium at an Air Liquid Interface, while its mRNA
targets decrease in expression. Furthermore, the expression of miR-4423
is reduced in lung tumors and in the cytologically normal bronchial
airway epithelium of smokers with lung cancer. In gain-of-function
experiments, ectopic expression of miR-4423 in lung cancer cell lines
resulted in reduced colony formation in soft agar. Taken together, these
data support the power of next-generation sequencing in identifying novel
cell type- specific transcripts and provides evidence that this newly
characterized microRNA may play a role in promoting the differentiation
and/or maintenance of airway epithelium, and can reduce
anchorage-independent lung cancer cell growth.

