Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of Homeobox A5 decreases the invasive and migration
capabilities of lung cancer cells


Homeobox genes are a family of regulatory genes containing a common
homeobox and act as transcription factors. Many cancers exhibit unusual
alteration and expression in homeobox genes, including leukemia, colon,
skin, prostate, breast, and ovary cancers. Recent studies indicated that
homeobox A5 (HOXA5) may behave as a tumor suppressor gene in breast
cells. However, the real roles of HOXA5 in lung cancer remains to be
further clarified. In this study, we investigated the effect of HOXA5 on
the invasive ability of more invasive CL1-5 cells transfected with HOXA5
constitutively expressed system. The results revealed that the excessive
expression of HOXA5 can inhibit tumor cell invasion and migration
capabilities. In addition, the HOXA5 specific siRNA could restore these
effects. The results of metastatic analysis in SCID mice also
demonstrated that HOXA5-overexpressed transfectants could decrease in
vivo tumor nodule numbers. Furthermore, the HOXA5 mRNA expression was
measured by real time RT-PCR in NSCLC surgical specimens and correlated
with the patients clinical outcome. The HOXA5 downstream genes and
HOXA5-regulated pathways were identified by using Affymetrix microarray
and CRSD bioinformatics platform built in-house. Our studies herein
provide a new insight into how HOXA5 may contribute to tumor metastasis
inhibition in lung cancer.

