Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA expression profile of astrocytoma according to its
malignant potential in Puerto Rican brain tumor samples


Astrocytoma, the tumor of astrocytic glial cells, is the most common type
of central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms, accounting for more than 60%
of all primary brain tumors. As histology-based classification is highly
subjective, there is a need for more robust histology-independent
molecular classifiers. Although different gene expression and genome-wide
array-CGH expression profiles have been use for classification, these
expression signatures are yet to be translated to utility in clinical
settings suggesting that these studies require further characterization
and validation. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous, short (19-24
nucleotides) non-protein-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at the
post-transcriptional level. Alterations in the expression profiles of
many miRNAs have been described in numerous human tumors. Recent evident
indicate that the grade types of astrocytoma could be better classified
by using a micro miRNA expression profiles compared with histological or
gene expression analysis. Thus, the aim of this project was to construct
a miRNA expression profile of astrocytoma according to its malignant
potential in Puerto Rican brain tumor samples. Archived formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples were used in this study. Not shown in
previous literature, our preliminary results showed that miR-27b was more
abundant in high grade vs. low grade astrocytoma. Although, miRNA
profiling appears to be a very promising tool, nonetheless, further
validation of these discriminatory miRNAs in a large number of patients
and in independent studies is necessary before clinical application
becomes realistic.

