Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Helicobacter pylori blood biomarkers for gastric cancer risk in
the Shanghai Men's Health Study


Background: Helicobacter pylori is the leading identified risk factor for
distal gastric cancer, yet only a fraction of infected individuals ever
develop neoplasia. To identify potential risk markers in a Chinese
population where over 90% of individuals are infected with H. pylori, we
assessed the association between antibodies to 15 Helicobacter pylori
proteins and gastric cancer risk in a case-control study nested in a
population-based cohort study. Methods: Each incident distal gastric
cancer case (n = 227) identified between 2002 and 2009 among members of
the Shanghai Men's Health Study was matched to two controls based on age,
timing of blood collection, and recent antibiotic use. Serum levels of
antibodies to 15 Helicobacter pylori proteins were assessed using
multiplex serology. Multivariate-adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using conditional logistic
regression. Results: Sero-positivity to three (Omp, HP0305, HyuA) of
fifteen proteins assessed were associated with an approximate two-fold
significantly increased risk for gastric cancer. When excluding cases who
were diagnosed within two years of study enrollment (and their matched
controls), sero-positivity to two additional proteins (HpaA and NapA)
showed significant associations with risk. An association with CagA
sero-positivity was also suggested. Compared to individuals with 3
sero-positive results to the six virulent proteins identified in this
population, individuals with 4-5 sero-positive results were at a two-fold
increased risk (OR=1.93, 95% CI: 1.25-3.00) and individuals sero-positive
to all 6 proteins had an over 3-fold increase in risk (OR=3.31, 95% CI:
1.86-5.89) for distal gastric cancer. Among individuals least likely to
have begun cascade of events leading to gastric cancer, these
associations were even stronger (OR=2.74, 95% CI: 1.58-4.73 and OR=4.72,
95% CI: 2.22-10.03, respectively). Conclusions: In the Chinese
population, among whom H. pylori-infection is highly prevalent,
increasing number of sero-positives to six H. pylori proteins (Omp,
HP0305, HyuA, HpaA, CagA, and VacA) may predict the risk of gastric
cancer.

