Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) exosomes promote angiogenesis in a
Src-dependent fashion in vitro and in vivo


CML is an uncontrolled proliferation of bone marrow myeloid cells driven
by the constitutively active fusion product tyrosine kinase BCR/ABL.
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing
vasculature, is newly recognized as a factor in CML progression.
Exosomes, released by a broad spectrum of cells, are microvesicles that
play an important role in cell-to-cell communication both in
physiological and pathological conditions. The role of exosomes released
by CML cells in angiogenesis is emerging; however, little is known about
the mechanisms involved in this process. We first isolated and
characterized exosomes released by K562 CML cells and we demonstrated
their ability to stimulate human vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) tube
differentiation on Matrigel. K562 exosomes induced an increase of the
cumulative tube length in a dose-dependent manner, with a maximum effect
at 10ug/ml (p=0.003). Next, we evaluated the effect on exosome behavior
of imatinib and dasatinib, two tyrosine kinase inhibitors in use in CML
treatment. K562 CML cell treatment with either imatinib or dasatinib
reduced exosome release by 58% and 56%, respectively (pCML is an
uncontrolled proliferation of bone marrow myeloid cells driven by the
constitutively active fusion product tyrosine kinase BCR/ABL.
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing
vasculature, is newly recognized as a factor in CML progression.
Exosomes, released by a broad spectrum of cells, are microvesicles that
play an important role in cell-to-cell communication both in
physiological and pathological conditions. The role of exosomes released
by CML cells in angiogenesis is emerging; however, little is known about
the mechanisms involved in this process. We first isolated and
characterized exosomes released by K562 CML cells and we demonstrated
their ability to stimulate human vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) tube
differentiation on Matrigel. K562 exosomes induced an increase of the
cumulative tube length in a dose-dependent manner, with a maximum effect
at 10ug/ml (p=0.003). Next, we evaluated the effect on exosome behavior
of imatinib and dasatinib, two tyrosine kinase inhibitors in use in CML
treatment. K562 CML cell treatment with either imatinib or dasatinib
reduced exosome release by 58% and 56%, respectively (p<0.01). Equivalent
exosome concentrations isolated from imatinib or dasatinib treated K562
cells maintained their ability to stimulate HUVEC tube formation,
compared to those isolated from untreated cells. Dasatinib treatment of
HUVECs strongly reduced exosome-induced vascular differentiation
(p=0.0002). On the contrary, little effect was observed following
treatment with imatinib. K562 exosomes stimulated vascularization when
added to Matrigel plug in vivo; angiogenesis was markedly inhibited by
oral administration of dasatinib (pCML is an uncontrolled proliferation
of bone marrow myeloid cells driven by the constitutively active fusion
product tyrosine kinase BCR/ABL. Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood
vessels from pre-existing vasculature, is newly recognized as a factor in
CML progression. Exosomes, released by a broad spectrum of cells, are
microvesicles that play an important role in cell-to-cell communication
both in physiological and pathological conditions. The role of exosomes
released by CML cells in angiogenesis is emerging; however, little is
known about the mechanisms involved in this process. We first isolated
and characterized exosomes released by K562 CML cells and we demonstrated
their ability to stimulate human vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) tube
differentiation on Matrigel. K562 exosomes induced an increase of the
cumulative tube length in a dose-dependent manner, with a maximum effect
at 10ug/ml (p=0.003). Next, we evaluated the effect on exosome behavior
of imatinib and dasatinib, two tyrosine kinase inhibitors in use in CML
treatment. K562 CML cell treatment with either imatinib or dasatinib
reduced exosome release by 58% and 56%, respectively (p<0.01). Equivalent
exosome concentrations isolated from imatinib or dasatinib treated K562
cells maintained their ability to stimulate HUVEC tube formation,
compared to those isolated from untreated cells. Dasatinib treatment of
HUVECs strongly reduced exosome-induced vascular differentiation
(p=0.0002). On the contrary, little effect was observed following
treatment with imatinib. K562 exosomes stimulated vascularization when
added to Matrigel plug in vivo; angiogenesis was markedly inhibited by
oral administration of dasatinib (p<0.01), but not imatinib. Consistent
with the differential effects of dasatinib and imatinib, exosome-induced
HUVEC Src and FAK phosphorylation was only inhibited by dasatinib.
Confocal images showed that both FAK and Src phosphorylation were
increased at points of membrane-matrix contact. Immunoblot analysis
confirmed that K562 exosomes induced a dasatinib-sensitive
phosphorylation of Src and FAK and their downstream effectors, Erk and
Akt. Again, imatinib was minimally active against exosome stimulation of
HUVEC cell signaling. Thus, K562 CML exosomes stimulate angiogenesis in
vitro and in vivo in a dasatinib-sensitive fashion. This credentials
exosomes and angiogenesis as molecular targets in CML via activation of
Src both in leukemia and its microenvironment.

