Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression changes of DNA repair genes in lymphocytes of
breast cancer patients


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women in Puerto
Rico. Previous studies have shown that dysregulation of DNA repair genes
expression is important for carcinogenesis. However, most of the studies
have focused on measuring DNA repair gene expression levels in tumor
samples. Our preliminary studies had shown that women with decreased DNA
repair capacity (DRC) are at increased risk of breast cancer. We
hypothesized that changes in DRC levels may be partly explained by
changes in gene expression of DNA repair genes. Our objective was to
assess the contribution of the expression levels of 43 DNA repair and
damage response genes in lymphocytes of breast cancer cases and controls
of Puerto Rican origin. We measured the gene expression profile of 43 DNA
repair genes in lymphocytes of 6 breast cancer cases with low DRC and 10
controls with high DRC using a custom SuperArray (SABiosciences). Of the
43 genes analyzed through the SuperArray, XPC, CETN2 and CCNH showed the
largest fold-changes. To validate the results, we used a TaqMan-based
gene expression assay in lymphocytes of 30 breast cancer cases and 30
controls. Our results showed that breast cancer cases had a 3.4x less XPC
expression (p=0.002) and 2.2x less CCNH expression (p=0.01) than
controls. Validation of the CETN2 SuperArray results is underway. In
conclusion, we found that the XPC gene and CCNH were expressed less in
breast cancer cases than in controls. Understanding the gene expression
changes that occur prior to tumor development is an important step
towards enhancing cancer prevention and detection strategies.

