Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD151 and cell motility in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
men. CD151 is a member of the tetraspanin family and is associated with
regulation of migration of normal and tumour cells via cell surface
microdomain formation. Previous studies from our laboratory revealed that
expression of CD151 differs across histological grades of PCa and high
levels of expression are linked to shorter survival, independent of
Gleason score1. In vitro motility assays of human PCa cell lines suggest
CD151 is a motility promoter2. We have sought to develop a number of
CD151 inhibitors and examine their ability to modulate prostate cancer
motility and metastasis. The human PCa cell line, LNCaP (low endogenous
level of CD151), transfected with CD151 shows increased motility and
invasion compared to control LNCaP, whilst CD151 siRNA knock-down (KD) of
PC-3 cells (high endogenous level of CD151), reduces motility compared to
control PC-3. We have conducted in silico screening with compounds
predicted to bind a model of the large extracellular domain (EC2) of
CD151 and found that a number of these small molecules possess
bioactivity in vitro and in vivo in inhibiting prostate cancer motility
and progression. LNCaP growth and migration was confirmed by stimulating
with 1 and 10 nM DHT at 24 hrs in charcoal stripped FBS. It was found
that cell proliferation and motility of LNCaP cells was significantly
increased after stimulation by 10 nM DHT at 24 hrs (pProstate cancer
(PCa) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in men. CD151 is a
member of the tetraspanin family and is associated with regulation of
migration of normal and tumour cells via cell surface microdomain
formation. Previous studies from our laboratory revealed that expression
of CD151 differs across histological grades of PCa and high levels of
expression are linked to shorter survival, independent of Gleason score1.
In vitro motility assays of human PCa cell lines suggest CD151 is a
motility promoter2. We have sought to develop a number of CD151
inhibitors and examine their ability to modulate prostate cancer motility
and metastasis. The human PCa cell line, LNCaP (low endogenous level of
CD151), transfected with CD151 shows increased motility and invasion
compared to control LNCaP, whilst CD151 siRNA knock-down (KD) of PC-3
cells (high endogenous level of CD151), reduces motility compared to
control PC-3. We have conducted in silico screening with compounds
predicted to bind a model of the large extracellular domain (EC2) of
CD151 and found that a number of these small molecules possess
bioactivity in vitro and in vivo in inhibiting prostate cancer motility
and progression. LNCaP growth and migration was confirmed by stimulating
with 1 and 10 nM DHT at 24 hrs in charcoal stripped FBS. It was found
that cell proliferation and motility of LNCaP cells was significantly
increased after stimulation by 10 nM DHT at 24 hrs (p<0.01) and 48hrs
(pProstate cancer (PCa) is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
men. CD151 is a member of the tetraspanin family and is associated with
regulation of migration of normal and tumour cells via cell surface
microdomain formation. Previous studies from our laboratory revealed that
expression of CD151 differs across histological grades of PCa and high
levels of expression are linked to shorter survival, independent of
Gleason score1. In vitro motility assays of human PCa cell lines suggest
CD151 is a motility promoter2. We have sought to develop a number of
CD151 inhibitors and examine their ability to modulate prostate cancer
motility and metastasis. The human PCa cell line, LNCaP (low endogenous
level of CD151), transfected with CD151 shows increased motility and
invasion compared to control LNCaP, whilst CD151 siRNA knock-down (KD) of
PC-3 cells (high endogenous level of CD151), reduces motility compared to
control PC-3. We have conducted in silico screening with compounds
predicted to bind a model of the large extracellular domain (EC2) of
CD151 and found that a number of these small molecules possess
bioactivity in vitro and in vivo in inhibiting prostate cancer motility
and progression. LNCaP growth and migration was confirmed by stimulating
with 1 and 10 nM DHT at 24 hrs in charcoal stripped FBS. It was found
that cell proliferation and motility of LNCaP cells was significantly
increased after stimulation by 10 nM DHT at 24 hrs (p<0.01) and 48hrs
(p<0.01), whilst DHT had minimal effect on control PC-3 and DU-145 cells.
We have also analyzed a set of whole genome microarray expression data
from PCa cell lines PC-3 and CD151 KD PC-3, and identified differentially
expressed genes linked to CD151. Significant changes were seen in 172
genes after CD151 KD in PC-3 cells. We examined the protein interaction
networks of our differentially expressed genes using Cytoscape3.
Functional network analysis revealed high level of connectivity
surrounding genes involved in transcriptional regulation,
microtubule-based movement and protein folding and complex formation.
CD151 is an important promoter of cell migration and metastatic disease
in PCa and may serve as a target for a novel class of anti-metastatic
therapeutic agents. A systems biology approach allows for improved
mechanistic interpretation of biological data and may facilitate
identification of other therapeutic targets. 1 Ang J et al. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers & Prevention (2004) 13: 1717-21 2 Ang J et al.
Oncology Reports (2010) 24(6): 1593-1597 3 Shannon P et al. Genome
research (2003) 13: 2498-2504

