Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vitamin D deficiency increases breast cancer risk: A population
based case-control study in the Chinese population


Vitamin D plays an important role in metabolism, cellular function and
reproduction. Vitamin D has also been suggested to have potential
protective effects against many cancers including breast cancer; however,
the data from the epidemiological studies have been inconclusive. Our
previous meta-analysis have found high dietary vitamin D intake
significantly decreased breast cancer risk (RR = 0.91, 95% CI =
0.85-0.97) and women with higher circulating 25(OH)D level showed about
45% (95% CI = 0.38-0.80) decrease in breast cancer risk (Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2010;121(2):469-77). In a population-based case control study
with 593 cases and 580 controls from Shanghai area, we have found that
80% of the normal women with severe vitamin D deficiency (less than
20ng/mL), 15.2% were of deficiency status (20 to 30ng/mL). Only 4.8% of
women had sufficient vitamin D level (> 30ng/mL). However, in the breast
cancer patients, nearly 96.1% were of vitamin D severe deficiency, 3.2%
were of vitamin D deficiency and only 0.7% had sufficient levels. Based
on a logistic regression analysis, compared to those with the lowest
quintile of plasma 25(OH)D level, women with higher level had significant
lower breast risk (Q2 vs. Q1, OR = 0.45, 95% CI = 0.33-0.63; Q3 vs. Q1,
OR = 0.25, 95% CI = 0.17-0.36; Q4 vs.Q1, OR = 0.09, 95% CI = 0.06-0.15)
showing a significant dose-effect relationship (p-trend Vitamin D plays
an important role in metabolism, cellular function and reproduction.
Vitamin D has also been suggested to have potential protective effects
against many cancers including breast cancer; however, the data from the
epidemiological studies have been inconclusive. Our previous
meta-analysis have found high dietary vitamin D intake significantly
decreased breast cancer risk (RR = 0.91, 95% CI = 0.85-0.97) and women
with higher circulating 25(OH)D level showed about 45% (95% CI =
0.38-0.80) decrease in breast cancer risk (Breast Cancer Res Treat.
2010;121(2):469-77). In a population-based case control study with 593
cases and 580 controls from Shanghai area, we have found that 80% of the
normal women with severe vitamin D deficiency (less than 20ng/mL), 15.2%
were of deficiency status (20 to 30ng/mL). Only 4.8% of women had
sufficient vitamin D level (> 30ng/mL). However, in the breast cancer
patients, nearly 96.1% were of vitamin D severe deficiency, 3.2% were of
vitamin D deficiency and only 0.7% had sufficient levels. Based on a
logistic regression analysis, compared to those with the lowest quintile
of plasma 25(OH)D level, women with higher level had significant lower
breast risk (Q2 vs. Q1, OR = 0.45, 95% CI = 0.33-0.63; Q3 vs. Q1, OR =
0.25, 95% CI = 0.17-0.36; Q4 vs.Q1, OR = 0.09, 95% CI = 0.06-0.15)
showing a significant dose-effect relationship (p-trend < 0.001) after
adjusted for the co-variants. We also found a seasonal distribution of
vitamin D. Significantly lower vitamin D levels were found for the cases
and controls in spring and summer (p Vitamin D plays an important role in
metabolism, cellular function and reproduction. Vitamin D has also been
suggested to have potential protective effects against many cancers
including breast cancer; however, the data from the epidemiological
studies have been inconclusive. Our previous meta-analysis have found
high dietary vitamin D intake significantly decreased breast cancer risk
(RR = 0.91, 95% CI = 0.85-0.97) and women with higher circulating 25(OH)D
level showed about 45% (95% CI = 0.38-0.80) decrease in breast cancer
risk (Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010;121(2):469-77). In a population-based
case control study with 593 cases and 580 controls from Shanghai area, we
have found that 80% of the normal women with severe vitamin D deficiency
(less than 20ng/mL), 15.2% were of deficiency status (20 to 30ng/mL).
Only 4.8% of women had sufficient vitamin D level (> 30ng/mL). However,
in the breast cancer patients, nearly 96.1% were of vitamin D severe
deficiency, 3.2% were of vitamin D deficiency and only 0.7% had
sufficient levels. Based on a logistic regression analysis, compared to
those with the lowest quintile of plasma 25(OH)D level, women with higher
level had significant lower breast risk (Q2 vs. Q1, OR = 0.45, 95% CI =
0.33-0.63; Q3 vs. Q1, OR = 0.25, 95% CI = 0.17-0.36; Q4 vs.Q1, OR = 0.09,
95% CI = 0.06-0.15) showing a significant dose-effect relationship
(p-trend < 0.001) after adjusted for the co-variants. We also found a
seasonal distribution of vitamin D. Significantly lower vitamin D levels
were found for the cases and controls in spring and summer (p < 0.01). In
the controls the mean level of vitamin D was higher in the summer
(17.76ng/ml) and autumn (16.25ng/ml), and lower in the spring
(15.67ng/ml) and winter (10.75ng/ml). However, in the breast cancer
patients, the plasma level of vitamin D was highest in the autumn
(14.38ng/ml) and lowest in the spring (10.16ng/ml). These results provide
a strong evidence that vitamin D may have a chemo-preventive effect
against breast cancer.

