Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetics-regulated microRNAs related with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells


Background: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a program in which
biological cells change morphologically and functionally from an
epithelial phenotype to a mesenchymal phenotype. The EMT is involved in
the process of cancer metastasis. On the other hand, accumulated evidence
showed epigenetics and microRNA plays important roles in breast cancer.
However, to date, biological networks between epigenetics and microRNAs
regarding EMT remains largely unclear. Thus, the aim of this study is to
identify epigenetics-regulated microRNAs related with EMT of breast
cancer. Materials / Methods and Results: MicroRNA expression profiles of
11 breast cancer cell lines (8 epithelial-phenotype (E-type) cells and 3
mesenchymal-phenotype (M-type) cells) were obtained by microarray method.
Unsupervised clustering analysis showed that E- and M-type breast cancer
cells had different microRNA expression profiles. On the other hand, we
obtained a genomewide methylation status of these breast cancer cell
lines by a MeDIP-seq method. An integrated in silico analysis identified
microRNAs which microRNA and DNA methylation were inversely correlated.
All of miR-200b/a/429 cluster members were listed in top5 differentially
expressed miRs between E- and M-type cells, and also in top 5
epigenetics-regulated microRNAs. In the further study, we focused upon
the miR-200b/a/429 cluster. A COBRA assay revealed that promoter regions
of miR-200b/a/429 cluster in M-type breast cancer cells were more
frequently methylated than that in E-type cells (65.1% vs 6.8%,
pBackground: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a program in
which biological cells change morphologically and functionally from an
epithelial phenotype to a mesenchymal phenotype. The EMT is involved in
the process of cancer metastasis. On the other hand, accumulated evidence
showed epigenetics and microRNA plays important roles in breast cancer.
However, to date, biological networks between epigenetics and microRNAs
regarding EMT remains largely unclear. Thus, the aim of this study is to
identify epigenetics-regulated microRNAs related with EMT of breast
cancer. Materials / Methods and Results: MicroRNA expression profiles of
11 breast cancer cell lines (8 epithelial-phenotype (E-type) cells and 3
mesenchymal-phenotype (M-type) cells) were obtained by microarray method.
Unsupervised clustering analysis showed that E- and M-type breast cancer
cells had different microRNA expression profiles. On the other hand, we
obtained a genomewide methylation status of these breast cancer cell
lines by a MeDIP-seq method. An integrated in silico analysis identified
microRNAs which microRNA and DNA methylation were inversely correlated.
All of miR-200b/a/429 cluster members were listed in top5 differentially
expressed miRs between E- and M-type cells, and also in top 5
epigenetics-regulated microRNAs. In the further study, we focused upon
the miR-200b/a/429 cluster. A COBRA assay revealed that promoter regions
of miR-200b/a/429 cluster in M-type breast cancer cells were more
frequently methylated than that in E-type cells (65.1% vs 6.8%, p<0.0001,
respectively). The methylation levels were inversely associated with
miR-200b/a/429 cluster expression (Taqman assay, pBackground:
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a program in which biological
cells change morphologically and functionally from an epithelial
phenotype to a mesenchymal phenotype. The EMT is involved in the process
of cancer metastasis. On the other hand, accumulated evidence showed
epigenetics and microRNA plays important roles in breast cancer. However,
to date, biological networks between epigenetics and microRNAs regarding
EMT remains largely unclear. Thus, the aim of this study is to identify
epigenetics-regulated microRNAs related with EMT of breast cancer.
Materials / Methods and Results: MicroRNA expression profiles of 11
breast cancer cell lines (8 epithelial-phenotype (E-type) cells and 3
mesenchymal-phenotype (M-type) cells) were obtained by microarray method.
Unsupervised clustering analysis showed that E- and M-type breast cancer
cells had different microRNA expression profiles. On the other hand, we
obtained a genomewide methylation status of these breast cancer cell
lines by a MeDIP-seq method. An integrated in silico analysis identified
microRNAs which microRNA and DNA methylation were inversely correlated.
All of miR-200b/a/429 cluster members were listed in top5 differentially
expressed miRs between E- and M-type cells, and also in top 5
epigenetics-regulated microRNAs. In the further study, we focused upon
the miR-200b/a/429 cluster. A COBRA assay revealed that promoter regions
of miR-200b/a/429 cluster in M-type breast cancer cells were more
frequently methylated than that in E-type cells (65.1% vs 6.8%, p<0.0001,
respectively). The methylation levels were inversely associated with
miR-200b/a/429 cluster expression (Taqman assay, p<0.01). In addition,
demethylating treatment using 5-aza-dC unmasked miR-200b/a/429 expression
in M-typed breast cancer cell lines. Taken together, the finding
indicated that the expression of miR-200b/a/429 cluster is epigenetically
regulated. Next, we investigated an effect of the miR-200b/a/429 cluster
upon cell motility as a function of the EMT. A transfection of exogenous
miR-200b/429 inhibited 24% of cell migration ability (Transwell assay).
Utilizing microRNA target prediction algorithm, we identified fibronectin
as a target gene of miR-200b/429. Utilizing several prediction algorithms
for microRNA target genes, we identified fibronectin as a target gene of
miR-200b/429. A luciferase-based reporter assay demonstrated that
miR-200b/429 were directly associated with fibronectin-3UTR and repressed
21% (pBackground: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a program in
which biological cells change morphologically and functionally from an
epithelial phenotype to a mesenchymal phenotype. The EMT is involved in
the process of cancer metastasis. On the other hand, accumulated evidence
showed epigenetics and microRNA plays important roles in breast cancer.
However, to date, biological networks between epigenetics and microRNAs
regarding EMT remains largely unclear. Thus, the aim of this study is to
identify epigenetics-regulated microRNAs related with EMT of breast
cancer. Materials / Methods and Results: MicroRNA expression profiles of
11 breast cancer cell lines (8 epithelial-phenotype (E-type) cells and 3
mesenchymal-phenotype (M-type) cells) were obtained by microarray method.
Unsupervised clustering analysis showed that E- and M-type breast cancer
cells had different microRNA expression profiles. On the other hand, we
obtained a genomewide methylation status of these breast cancer cell
lines by a MeDIP-seq method. An integrated in silico analysis identified
microRNAs which microRNA and DNA methylation were inversely correlated.
All of miR-200b/a/429 cluster members were listed in top5 differentially
expressed miRs between E- and M-type cells, and also in top 5
epigenetics-regulated microRNAs. In the further study, we focused upon
the miR-200b/a/429 cluster. A COBRA assay revealed that promoter regions
of miR-200b/a/429 cluster in M-type breast cancer cells were more
frequently methylated than that in E-type cells (65.1% vs 6.8%, p<0.0001,
respectively). The methylation levels were inversely associated with
miR-200b/a/429 cluster expression (Taqman assay, p<0.01). In addition,
demethylating treatment using 5-aza-dC unmasked miR-200b/a/429 expression
in M-typed breast cancer cell lines. Taken together, the finding
indicated that the expression of miR-200b/a/429 cluster is epigenetically
regulated. Next, we investigated an effect of the miR-200b/a/429 cluster
upon cell motility as a function of the EMT. A transfection of exogenous
miR-200b/429 inhibited 24% of cell migration ability (Transwell assay).
Utilizing microRNA target prediction algorithm, we identified fibronectin
as a target gene of miR-200b/429. Utilizing several prediction algorithms
for microRNA target genes, we identified fibronectin as a target gene of
miR-200b/429. A luciferase-based reporter assay demonstrated that
miR-200b/429 were directly associated with fibronectin-3UTR and repressed
21% (p<0.0001) of the reporter gene expression post-transcriptionally.
Conclusion: The promoter hypermethylation of miR-200b cluster is
associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and stimulates cell
motility by upregulating fibronectin expression in mesenchymal-phenotype
breast cancer cells.

