Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Direct interaction between human pancreatic cancer stem cells and
stromal cells remodels extracellular matrix formation for cancer stem
cell niche


Human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas consist of highly heterogeneous
tumor cells that form tumor microenvironment cooperatively with stromal
cells. Pancreatic cancer stem cells are reported to play important roles
in chemotherapy and radiotherapy resistance. However, little is known
about the microenvironment of pancreatic cancer stem cells. To
investigate the microenvironment of pancreatic cancer stem cells with
stromal cells, we isolated and characterized a novel subpopulation of
pancreatic cancer stem cells, tentatively named KMC cells, from seven
disseminated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients. KMC cells
required direct cell-cell contacts to stromal cells for their clonogenic
growth. KMC cells had self-renewal capacity and in vivo tumorigenicity.
In vitro experiments demonstrated that stromal cells induced
extracellular matrix (ECM) formation with thin filament structures and
KMC cells changed the thin filament structures to basic lamina-like thick
and bundled filament structures where laminin proteins were enriched.
Moreover, KMC cells induced mRNA expression of laminin-5 and collagen
type-IV in stromal cells, major components of basic lamina, but reduced
mRNA expression of collagen type-I, collagen type-III, and fibronectin-I
in stromal cells, major components of ECM. Our findings demonstrated that
pancreatic cancer stem cells have the potential to form their
microenvironment with basic lamina-like structures cooperatively with
stromal cells, suggesting that targeting KMC cells and KMC cell-induced
basic lamina-like structures in cancer therapy may improve prognosis of
disseminated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients.

