Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiotensin 1-7 up regulates apoptosis related genes and it
preferentially targets differentiated epithelial breast cells


Introduction: Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) components are not only
related to breast cancer but also to other cancer types.
Angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)] is an endogenous 7-amino acid peptide
hormone of the renin-angiotensin system that has antiproliferative
properties. The aim of this work is to analyze the action of Ang-(1-7)
treatment in MCF-10F (normal) and in SKBR3 (tumoral) epithelial breast
cells in their capacity to be droven to apoptosis, and also to assess the
expression of the membrane receptors CD24 and CD44 in these cells.
Methods: We used the SA Biosciences Human Apoptosis RT*2 Profiler PCR
Array profiles to analyze the expression of 84 key genes involved in
programmed cell death. Furthermore a flow cytometer (GUAVA) was used for
quantification of the membrane proteins CD24 and CD44 in the MCF10F and
in the SKBR3 breast cells after 24 hours of Angiotensin 1-7 stimulation.
Results: Flow cytometric analysis using MCF10F cells showed that a 24h
Ang1-7 stimulation period down regulates CD24 gene expression (about 43%)
and it up regulates CD44 gene expression (about 16%). On the other hand
there was no difference in the expression of both CD24 and CD44 proteins
after Ang1-7 stimulation in SKBR3 tumoral cells. Furthermore, after the
gene expression analysis by PCR Array, we found differential expression
in MCF10F cells after Ang 1-7 treatment and we observed that the genes
had their expression changed about 30% (2.1 to 514 fold increases) and
11% (2.6 to 3.8 fold decreases), respectively on a panel of 84 genes
related to apoptosis. For SKBR3 cells, we found that the genes were
altered in about 5.9% (2.6 to 5.4 fold increases) and 12% (2.1 to 3.3
fold decreases), respectively. Conclusion: Ang 1-7 appears to modulate
the expression of membrane proteins CD24 and CD44 in MCF10F cells, also
this hormone seems to induce apoptosis by inducing the expression of
apoptosis related genes, such as, Abl1, Akt, Bax, Bcl2 (fold change, 3,
12, 6, and 6, respectively). Another important gene is the Hrk (harakiri,
BCL2 interacting protein), that regulates apoptosis through interaction
with death-repressor proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L), it displayed a fold
change of 514. On the other hand in SKBR3 cells, comprised almost
entirely by mammary stem cells, we found no regulation of CD24 and CD44
proteins by Ang1-7. Moreover, it was observed a very low differential
expression in the genes related to the apoptosis pathway in these cells.
However, the peptide Ang 1-7 seems to act preferentially in
differentiated cells of the normal breast epithelium. Financial Support:
FAPESP.

