Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polo-like kinase 1: a potential therapeutic target for the
management of patients with triple negative breast cancer


Breast cancers are composed of molecularly distinct subtypes with
different clinical outcomes and responses to therapy. Our aim is to
discover potential therapeutic targets for triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC), a poor prognosis subgroup with no targeted therapy available yet.
Gene expression profiling on a cohort of 160 breast cancers including 40
TNBC revealed that the polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), a protein kinase, is
specifically over-expressed in TNBC compared to the other breast cancer
subtypes. High PLK1 expression was confirmed at a proteomic level by
reverse phase protein array and tissue microarray. In TNBC cell lines
grown as monolayers, RNAi-mediated PLK1 depletion or small compound
(BI-2536)-mediated PLK1 inhibition induced an increase in phosphorylated
H2AX, G2/M arrest and apoptosis, resulting in a decrease in cell
viability. In addition, a soft-agar colony assay showed that PLK1
silencing impaired tumorigenicity of TNBC cell lines. With cells grown in
extracellular matrix gels (Matrigel), BI-2536 induced apoptosis
specifically in TNBC cancerous versus normal cell lines. The in vivo
anti-tumor effect of BI-2536 was investigated in two TNBC xenografts
derived from patient's biopsies. When administrated as a single agent,
the PLK1 inhibitor significantly impaired the tumor growth. Most
importantly, administration of BI-2536 in combination with adriamycin +
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy led to 100% complete response (9/9 mice).
Altogether, our observations point out that PLK1 may represent an
attractive therapeutic target, in association with conventional
chemotherapy, for the management of patients with TNBC.

