Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a selective focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
inhibitor in a panel of glioblastoma cell lines identify rational
drug-drug combination strategies


Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) is a key regulator of cancer cell migration
and invasion and overexpression of FAK and Src has been associated with
resistance to current anticancer therapies. Thus, inhibition of FAK may
represent a promising therapeutic approach to anti-cancer treatment. We
investigated the anti-cancer activity of the FAK inhibitor (GSK2256098)
in a panel of 26 human glioblastoma (GBM) cell lines. GBM is one of the
most aggressive and lethal forms of cancer, characterized by exponential
growth and diffuse invasiveness. Herein, we report that 8/26 GBM cell
lines displayed sensitivity to FAK inhibition in both migration and
Matrigel invasion assays. GSK2256098 had minimal effect on 2D cell
proliferation. Integrated genomic and proteomic analyses revealed
up-regulation of the PI3K and MAPK pathways in the FAK
inhibitor-resistant GBM cell lines, suggesting possible drug combination
strategies. To test this hypothesis, we assessed the effects of combining
GSK2256098 with a PI3K inhibitor and a MEK inhibitor in the FAK
inhibitor-resistant GBM cell lines. Our results suggest that multi-agent
inhibition of FAK and MEK or PI3K may provide an attractive therapeutic
strategy for GBM.

