Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiotensin I-7 modulates transcriptional (de)activation of
multiple members of steroid hormone receptor superfamily: Possible
mechanisms underlying inhibited proliferation in (T47D) human breast
cancer cells


Introduction: Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) is correlated to breast
cancer and to other types of cancer. Angiotensin I-7 [Ang-(I-7)] is an
endogenous 7-amino acid peptide hormone of this system that has
anti-proliferative properties. Interestingly, there are increasing
evidences that RAS is implicated in the development of breast cancer.
Objectives: We aimed to evaluate the expression of steroid hormone
receptors (progesterone receptors (PR), estrogen receptors (ER), androgen
receptors (AR), apoptosis and proliferation in tumoral (T47D) epithelial
mammary cell line, after Ang-(I-7) treatment. Methods: Tumoral (T47D)
cultured cell line was treated with angiotensin I-7 peptide and cells
were harvested after 2, and 15 days, when expression analysis of steroid
hormone receptors was performed by real time PCR. The same treatment was
used for the apoptosis and cell cycle analyses, done using the 5HT-GUAVA
flow cytometer. Results: Expression of steroid hormone receptors
implicated to breast carcinogenesis such as genomic progesterone
receptors (PR(A+B) and PRB), estrogen receptors (Era and ERb), androgen
receptor (AR) were never investigated together in the sex
hormone-sensitive human breast cancer cell T47D after angiotensin I-7
exposure. When T47D cells were treated with angiontensin I-7 peptide were
all up-regulated of the control level (PRA+B (1.0-fold), PRB (2.3-fold),
Era (7.8-fold), ERb (8.1-fold) and AR (1.9-fold) - p Introduction: Renin
Angiotensin System (RAS) is correlated to breast cancer and to other
types of cancer. Angiotensin I-7 [Ang-(I-7)] is an endogenous 7-amino
acid peptide hormone of this system that has anti-proliferative
properties. Interestingly, there are increasing evidences that RAS is
implicated in the development of breast cancer. Objectives: We aimed to
evaluate the expression of steroid hormone receptors (progesterone
receptors (PR), estrogen receptors (ER), androgen receptors (AR),
apoptosis and proliferation in tumoral (T47D) epithelial mammary cell
line, after Ang-(I-7) treatment. Methods: Tumoral (T47D) cultured cell
line was treated with angiotensin I-7 peptide and cells were harvested
after 2, and 15 days, when expression analysis of steroid hormone
receptors was performed by real time PCR. The same treatment was used for
the apoptosis and cell cycle analyses, done using the 5HT-GUAVA flow
cytometer. Results: Expression of steroid hormone receptors implicated to
breast carcinogenesis such as genomic progesterone receptors (PR(A+B) and
PRB), estrogen receptors (Era and ERb), androgen receptor (AR) were never
investigated together in the sex hormone-sensitive human breast cancer
cell T47D after angiotensin I-7 exposure. When T47D cells were treated
with angiontensin I-7 peptide were all up-regulated of the control level
(PRA+B (1.0-fold), PRB (2.3-fold), Era (7.8-fold), ERb (8.1-fold) and AR
(1.9-fold) - p < 0.01) in early treatment (2 days). However, important
down-regulation of all receptors was observed after 15 days. T47D
responded by down-regulating PRA+B (-3.5-fold), PRB (-3.1-fold), Era
(-4.3-fold), ERb (-4.6-fold) and AR (-6.05-fold), all compared to basal
conditions (p Introduction: Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) is correlated
to breast cancer and to other types of cancer. Angiotensin I-7
[Ang-(I-7)] is an endogenous 7-amino acid peptide hormone of this system
that has anti-proliferative properties. Interestingly, there are
increasing evidences that RAS is implicated in the development of breast
cancer. Objectives: We aimed to evaluate the expression of steroid
hormone receptors (progesterone receptors (PR), estrogen receptors (ER),
androgen receptors (AR), apoptosis and proliferation in tumoral (T47D)
epithelial mammary cell line, after Ang-(I-7) treatment. Methods: Tumoral
(T47D) cultured cell line was treated with angiotensin I-7 peptide and
cells were harvested after 2, and 15 days, when expression analysis of
steroid hormone receptors was performed by real time PCR. The same
treatment was used for the apoptosis and cell cycle analyses, done using
the 5HT-GUAVA flow cytometer. Results: Expression of steroid hormone
receptors implicated to breast carcinogenesis such as genomic
progesterone receptors (PR(A+B) and PRB), estrogen receptors (Era and
ERb), androgen receptor (AR) were never investigated together in the sex
hormone-sensitive human breast cancer cell T47D after angiotensin I-7
exposure. When T47D cells were treated with angiontensin I-7 peptide were
all up-regulated of the control level (PRA+B (1.0-fold), PRB (2.3-fold),
Era (7.8-fold), ERb (8.1-fold) and AR (1.9-fold) - p < 0.01) in early
treatment (2 days). However, important down-regulation of all receptors
was observed after 15 days. T47D responded by down-regulating PRA+B
(-3.5-fold), PRB (-3.1-fold), Era (-4.3-fold), ERb (-4.6-fold) and AR
(-6.05-fold), all compared to basal conditions (p < 0.001). The
functional relevance of steroid hormone receptors inhibition in sensitive
human breast cancer cell line was confirmed by flow cytometry, assaying
cell viability, apoptosis and proliferation by flow cytometry. Ang-(I-7)
2 day treatment significantly increased cell cycle in all phases (G0/G1,
S and G2/M) when compared to control and decreased apoptosis (p
Introduction: Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) is correlated to breast
cancer and to other types of cancer. Angiotensin I-7 [Ang-(I-7)] is an
endogenous 7-amino acid peptide hormone of this system that has
anti-proliferative properties. Interestingly, there are increasing
evidences that RAS is implicated in the development of breast cancer.
Objectives: We aimed to evaluate the expression of steroid hormone
receptors (progesterone receptors (PR), estrogen receptors (ER), androgen
receptors (AR), apoptosis and proliferation in tumoral (T47D) epithelial
mammary cell line, after Ang-(I-7) treatment. Methods: Tumoral (T47D)
cultured cell line was treated with angiotensin I-7 peptide and cells
were harvested after 2, and 15 days, when expression analysis of steroid
hormone receptors was performed by real time PCR. The same treatment was
used for the apoptosis and cell cycle analyses, done using the 5HT-GUAVA
flow cytometer. Results: Expression of steroid hormone receptors
implicated to breast carcinogenesis such as genomic progesterone
receptors (PR(A+B) and PRB), estrogen receptors (Era and ERb), androgen
receptor (AR) were never investigated together in the sex
hormone-sensitive human breast cancer cell T47D after angiotensin I-7
exposure. When T47D cells were treated with angiontensin I-7 peptide were
all up-regulated of the control level (PRA+B (1.0-fold), PRB (2.3-fold),
Era (7.8-fold), ERb (8.1-fold) and AR (1.9-fold) - p < 0.01) in early
treatment (2 days). However, important down-regulation of all receptors
was observed after 15 days. T47D responded by down-regulating PRA+B
(-3.5-fold), PRB (-3.1-fold), Era (-4.3-fold), ERb (-4.6-fold) and AR
(-6.05-fold), all compared to basal conditions (p < 0.001). The
functional relevance of steroid hormone receptors inhibition in sensitive
human breast cancer cell line was confirmed by flow cytometry, assaying
cell viability, apoptosis and proliferation by flow cytometry. Ang-(I-7)
2 day treatment significantly increased cell cycle in all phases (G0/G1,
S and G2/M) when compared to control and decreased apoptosis (p < 0.05),
but after 15 days there was a significant reduction in all cell cycle
phases (p Introduction: Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) is correlated to
breast cancer and to other types of cancer. Angiotensin I-7 [Ang-(I-7)]
is an endogenous 7-amino acid peptide hormone of this system that has
anti-proliferative properties. Interestingly, there are increasing
evidences that RAS is implicated in the development of breast cancer.
Objectives: We aimed to evaluate the expression of steroid hormone
receptors (progesterone receptors (PR), estrogen receptors (ER), androgen
receptors (AR), apoptosis and proliferation in tumoral (T47D) epithelial
mammary cell line, after Ang-(I-7) treatment. Methods: Tumoral (T47D)
cultured cell line was treated with angiotensin I-7 peptide and cells
were harvested after 2, and 15 days, when expression analysis of steroid
hormone receptors was performed by real time PCR. The same treatment was
used for the apoptosis and cell cycle analyses, done using the 5HT-GUAVA
flow cytometer. Results: Expression of steroid hormone receptors
implicated to breast carcinogenesis such as genomic progesterone
receptors (PR(A+B) and PRB), estrogen receptors (Era and ERb), androgen
receptor (AR) were never investigated together in the sex
hormone-sensitive human breast cancer cell T47D after angiotensin I-7
exposure. When T47D cells were treated with angiontensin I-7 peptide were
all up-regulated of the control level (PRA+B (1.0-fold), PRB (2.3-fold),
Era (7.8-fold), ERb (8.1-fold) and AR (1.9-fold) - p < 0.01) in early
treatment (2 days). However, important down-regulation of all receptors
was observed after 15 days. T47D responded by down-regulating PRA+B
(-3.5-fold), PRB (-3.1-fold), Era (-4.3-fold), ERb (-4.6-fold) and AR
(-6.05-fold), all compared to basal conditions (p < 0.001). The
functional relevance of steroid hormone receptors inhibition in sensitive
human breast cancer cell line was confirmed by flow cytometry, assaying
cell viability, apoptosis and proliferation by flow cytometry. Ang-(I-7)
2 day treatment significantly increased cell cycle in all phases (G0/G1,
S and G2/M) when compared to control and decreased apoptosis (p < 0.05),
but after 15 days there was a significant reduction in all cell cycle
phases (p < 0.05) and increased apoptosis indexes were observed (p
Introduction: Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) is correlated to breast
cancer and to other types of cancer. Angiotensin I-7 [Ang-(I-7)] is an
endogenous 7-amino acid peptide hormone of this system that has
anti-proliferative properties. Interestingly, there are increasing
evidences that RAS is implicated in the development of breast cancer.
Objectives: We aimed to evaluate the expression of steroid hormone
receptors (progesterone receptors (PR), estrogen receptors (ER), androgen
receptors (AR), apoptosis and proliferation in tumoral (T47D) epithelial
mammary cell line, after Ang-(I-7) treatment. Methods: Tumoral (T47D)
cultured cell line was treated with angiotensin I-7 peptide and cells
were harvested after 2, and 15 days, when expression analysis of steroid
hormone receptors was performed by real time PCR. The same treatment was
used for the apoptosis and cell cycle analyses, done using the 5HT-GUAVA
flow cytometer. Results: Expression of steroid hormone receptors
implicated to breast carcinogenesis such as genomic progesterone
receptors (PR(A+B) and PRB), estrogen receptors (Era and ERb), androgen
receptor (AR) were never investigated together in the sex
hormone-sensitive human breast cancer cell T47D after angiotensin I-7
exposure. When T47D cells were treated with angiontensin I-7 peptide were
all up-regulated of the control level (PRA+B (1.0-fold), PRB (2.3-fold),
Era (7.8-fold), ERb (8.1-fold) and AR (1.9-fold) - p < 0.01) in early
treatment (2 days). However, important down-regulation of all receptors
was observed after 15 days. T47D responded by down-regulating PRA+B
(-3.5-fold), PRB (-3.1-fold), Era (-4.3-fold), ERb (-4.6-fold) and AR
(-6.05-fold), all compared to basal conditions (p < 0.001). The
functional relevance of steroid hormone receptors inhibition in sensitive
human breast cancer cell line was confirmed by flow cytometry, assaying
cell viability, apoptosis and proliferation by flow cytometry. Ang-(I-7)
2 day treatment significantly increased cell cycle in all phases (G0/G1,
S and G2/M) when compared to control and decreased apoptosis (p < 0.05),
but after 15 days there was a significant reduction in all cell cycle
phases (p < 0.05) and increased apoptosis indexes were observed (p <
0.001). Conclusion: These results suggest anti-proliferative actions of
Ang-(I-7), which has already been demonstrated previously for this
peptide by our research group (Alecrim et al, 2011). Moreover, we could
also observe a pro-apoptotic effect sustained for 15 days in these cells,
and it seems to be correlated to the down-regulated expression of all
steroid hormone receptors studied. In summary, Ang-(1-7) drives T47D
cells to apoptosis and the use of the peptide as a novel therapeutic
compound for breast cancer should be considered. Support: FAPESP

