Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of CX3CR1 in resistance of ovarian carcinoma cells to
radiation therapy


Ovarian carcinoma is a leading cause of death from gynecologic
malignancies. The current standard of care, a combination of chemotherapy
and radiation, fails to keep patients in remission. Thus, modifications
of the therapy and the combinations with the new molecular biological
technologies are crucial for the development of the modernized approaches
to combat this disease. Previous attempts to use radiotherapy as an
additional treatment was not successful mainly due to the dose-related
side effects, as well as radioresistance. Therefore, mechanistical
understanding of the biology of ovarian carcinoma could offer ways to
overcome current problems. Fractalkine receptor (CX3CR1) belongs to a
chemokine family of G protein-coupled receptors, the most frequently and
successfully drug-targeted group of proteins. Interaction of chemokines
with their receptors plays a pivotal role in homing distant metastasis,
as well as promoting migration, adhesion, and proliferation in many types
of cancer. This project is aimed at understanding the role of CX3CR1 in
sensitization of epithelial ovarian cancer cells to radiotherapy. Our
data indicate that downregulation of CX3CR1 in ovarian carcinoma cells
leads to approximately 50% sensitization to x-ray radiation, as
determined by the clonogenic ability assay. Our Western blotting and
immunofluorescence analysis data also show that downregulation of CX3CR1
results in accumulation of DNA damage at lower doses. Thus, our data
indicate that disruption of the CX3CR1 signaling could sensitize ovarian
carcinoma to radiation therapy.

