Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Circulating lipids and fatty acids and non-Hodgkin lymphoma risk
in a nested case-control study: The Multiethnic Cohort


Objective: Dietary fatty acids provide important components of immune
cells, cytokines, and prostaglandins. Intake of n-3 and n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids may influence inflammatory responses that
contribute to the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Because saturated
and polyunsaturated fatty acid (SFA and PUFA) intake has been linked with
NHL, this analysis evaluated biomarkers of dietary fat intake in relation
to risk. Methods: We conducted a nested-case control analysis (275 cases
and 549 controls) within the Multiethnic Cohort Study (Caucasians,
Japanese Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Hawaiians) to
examine NHL risk by tertile of erythrocyte membrane fatty acid
composition and serum lipid concentrations. Cases were matched to 2
controls by sex, year of birth, ethnicity, location (CA or HI), date and
time of blood draw, and fasting hours before blood draw. Fatty acids were
measured as the percentage of total measured erythrocyte membrane fatty
acids using gas chromatography, and absolute serum levels of total, high
density-lipoprotein (HDL), and low density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
and triglycerides were measured using an automated chemical analyzer
(Cobas MiraPlus, Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Conditional logistic
regression was applied to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) with adjustment for potential confounders. Results: The
mean ages at blood draw were 70.17.4 and 70.27.4 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The cases (82 diffuse large B-cell, 52 small
cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49 follicular, 15 T-cell, and 77
others) were diagnosed 3.12.3 years after the blood draw. Higher
prediagnostic serum lipids, in particular total (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [95% CI:
0.4, 0.8]; ptrend Objective: Dietary fatty acids provide important
components of immune cells, cytokines, and prostaglandins. Intake of n-3
and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids may influence inflammatory responses
that contribute to the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Because
saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acid (SFA and PUFA) intake has been
linked with NHL, this analysis evaluated biomarkers of dietary fat intake
in relation to risk. Methods: We conducted a nested-case control analysis
(275 cases and 549 controls) within the Multiethnic Cohort Study
(Caucasians, Japanese Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native
Hawaiians) to examine NHL risk by tertile of erythrocyte membrane fatty
acid composition and serum lipid concentrations. Cases were matched to 2
controls by sex, year of birth, ethnicity, location (CA or HI), date and
time of blood draw, and fasting hours before blood draw. Fatty acids were
measured as the percentage of total measured erythrocyte membrane fatty
acids using gas chromatography, and absolute serum levels of total, high
density-lipoprotein (HDL), and low density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
and triglycerides were measured using an automated chemical analyzer
(Cobas MiraPlus, Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Conditional logistic
regression was applied to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) with adjustment for potential confounders. Results: The
mean ages at blood draw were 70.17.4 and 70.27.4 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The cases (82 diffuse large B-cell, 52 small
cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49 follicular, 15 T-cell, and 77
others) were diagnosed 3.12.3 years after the blood draw. Higher
prediagnostic serum lipids, in particular total (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [95% CI:
0.4, 0.8]; ptrend <0.001) and HDL cholesterol (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [0.3,
0.8]; ptrend Objective: Dietary fatty acids provide important components
of immune cells, cytokines, and prostaglandins. Intake of n-3 and n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids may influence inflammatory responses that
contribute to the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Because saturated
and polyunsaturated fatty acid (SFA and PUFA) intake has been linked with
NHL, this analysis evaluated biomarkers of dietary fat intake in relation
to risk. Methods: We conducted a nested-case control analysis (275 cases
and 549 controls) within the Multiethnic Cohort Study (Caucasians,
Japanese Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Hawaiians) to
examine NHL risk by tertile of erythrocyte membrane fatty acid
composition and serum lipid concentrations. Cases were matched to 2
controls by sex, year of birth, ethnicity, location (CA or HI), date and
time of blood draw, and fasting hours before blood draw. Fatty acids were
measured as the percentage of total measured erythrocyte membrane fatty
acids using gas chromatography, and absolute serum levels of total, high
density-lipoprotein (HDL), and low density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
and triglycerides were measured using an automated chemical analyzer
(Cobas MiraPlus, Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Conditional logistic
regression was applied to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) with adjustment for potential confounders. Results: The
mean ages at blood draw were 70.17.4 and 70.27.4 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The cases (82 diffuse large B-cell, 52 small
cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49 follicular, 15 T-cell, and 77
others) were diagnosed 3.12.3 years after the blood draw. Higher
prediagnostic serum lipids, in particular total (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [95% CI:
0.4, 0.8]; ptrend <0.001) and HDL cholesterol (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [0.3,
0.8]; ptrend <0.01) but not triglycerides were associated with a lower
NHL risk. No significant associations were found for individual fatty
acids, the n-3/n-6 fatty acid or the PUFA/SFA ratio. Stratification by
sex and ethnicity suggested significant heterogeneity. For example, in
women but not in men, n-6 fatty acids were associated with a higher NHL
risk (ptrend =0.09) and the PUFA/SFA ratio with a lower risk (ptrend
=0.05). Monounsaturated fatty acids reduced risk in Caucasians (ptrend
=0.01) while higher risks were observed for stearic acid (C18:0; ptrend
Objective: Dietary fatty acids provide important components of immune
cells, cytokines, and prostaglandins. Intake of n-3 and n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids may influence inflammatory responses that
contribute to the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Because saturated
and polyunsaturated fatty acid (SFA and PUFA) intake has been linked with
NHL, this analysis evaluated biomarkers of dietary fat intake in relation
to risk. Methods: We conducted a nested-case control analysis (275 cases
and 549 controls) within the Multiethnic Cohort Study (Caucasians,
Japanese Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Hawaiians) to
examine NHL risk by tertile of erythrocyte membrane fatty acid
composition and serum lipid concentrations. Cases were matched to 2
controls by sex, year of birth, ethnicity, location (CA or HI), date and
time of blood draw, and fasting hours before blood draw. Fatty acids were
measured as the percentage of total measured erythrocyte membrane fatty
acids using gas chromatography, and absolute serum levels of total, high
density-lipoprotein (HDL), and low density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
and triglycerides were measured using an automated chemical analyzer
(Cobas MiraPlus, Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Conditional logistic
regression was applied to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) with adjustment for potential confounders. Results: The
mean ages at blood draw were 70.17.4 and 70.27.4 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The cases (82 diffuse large B-cell, 52 small
cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49 follicular, 15 T-cell, and 77
others) were diagnosed 3.12.3 years after the blood draw. Higher
prediagnostic serum lipids, in particular total (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [95% CI:
0.4, 0.8]; ptrend <0.001) and HDL cholesterol (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [0.3,
0.8]; ptrend <0.01) but not triglycerides were associated with a lower
NHL risk. No significant associations were found for individual fatty
acids, the n-3/n-6 fatty acid or the PUFA/SFA ratio. Stratification by
sex and ethnicity suggested significant heterogeneity. For example, in
women but not in men, n-6 fatty acids were associated with a higher NHL
risk (ptrend =0.09) and the PUFA/SFA ratio with a lower risk (ptrend
=0.05). Monounsaturated fatty acids reduced risk in Caucasians (ptrend
=0.01) while higher risks were observed for stearic acid (C18:0; ptrend
<0.01) in Japanese Americans and for palmitic acid (C16:0; ptrend
Objective: Dietary fatty acids provide important components of immune
cells, cytokines, and prostaglandins. Intake of n-3 and n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids may influence inflammatory responses that
contribute to the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Because saturated
and polyunsaturated fatty acid (SFA and PUFA) intake has been linked with
NHL, this analysis evaluated biomarkers of dietary fat intake in relation
to risk. Methods: We conducted a nested-case control analysis (275 cases
and 549 controls) within the Multiethnic Cohort Study (Caucasians,
Japanese Americans, Latinos, African Americans, and Native Hawaiians) to
examine NHL risk by tertile of erythrocyte membrane fatty acid
composition and serum lipid concentrations. Cases were matched to 2
controls by sex, year of birth, ethnicity, location (CA or HI), date and
time of blood draw, and fasting hours before blood draw. Fatty acids were
measured as the percentage of total measured erythrocyte membrane fatty
acids using gas chromatography, and absolute serum levels of total, high
density-lipoprotein (HDL), and low density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
and triglycerides were measured using an automated chemical analyzer
(Cobas MiraPlus, Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Conditional logistic
regression was applied to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) with adjustment for potential confounders. Results: The
mean ages at blood draw were 70.17.4 and 70.27.4 years for cases and
controls, respectively. The cases (82 diffuse large B-cell, 52 small
cell/chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 49 follicular, 15 T-cell, and 77
others) were diagnosed 3.12.3 years after the blood draw. Higher
prediagnostic serum lipids, in particular total (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [95% CI:
0.4, 0.8]; ptrend <0.001) and HDL cholesterol (ORT3 vs T1: 0.5 [0.3,
0.8]; ptrend <0.01) but not triglycerides were associated with a lower
NHL risk. No significant associations were found for individual fatty
acids, the n-3/n-6 fatty acid or the PUFA/SFA ratio. Stratification by
sex and ethnicity suggested significant heterogeneity. For example, in
women but not in men, n-6 fatty acids were associated with a higher NHL
risk (ptrend =0.09) and the PUFA/SFA ratio with a lower risk (ptrend
=0.05). Monounsaturated fatty acids reduced risk in Caucasians (ptrend
=0.01) while higher risks were observed for stearic acid (C18:0; ptrend
<0.01) in Japanese Americans and for palmitic acid (C16:0; ptrend <0.01)
in African Americans. Conclusions: Individual fatty acids showed no
relation with overall NHL risk in this multiethnic population, but
possible sex- or ethnicity-specific influences may exist. Total and HDL
cholesterol levels, which reflect dietary and non-dietary factors, were
associated with a reduced risk. Replication of these findings in other
cohort studies is warranted.

