Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Restoring LSAMP expression decreases the proliferation rate in
osteosarcomas


Osteosarcomas are the most common primary malignant tumors of bone. The
tumors are highly aggressive with poor prognosis, and display complex
genomic aberrations. Previously, our group has identified a frequently
deleted region in 3q13.31 in osteosarcoma clinical samples and cell lines
[1]. The deleted region contains non-coding RNA genes, pseudogenes and
the gene encoding the limbic-system associated membrane protein (LSAMP).
The latter has previously been reported to be a candidate tumor
suppressor gene in other cancer types, and more recently in
osteosarcomas. Interestingly, our data show that low expression of LSAMP
is statistically correlated with shorter patient survival. To examine the
possible function of LSAMP in osteosarcomas, the expression was restored
in an osteosarcoma cell line with a homozygous deletion of the gene.
Characterization of the cell line with restored LSAMP expression showed
decreased proliferation rate, which is consistent with its suggested role
as a tumor suppressor gene. The migration rate and colony forming
capability of the cells were unaffected. Interestingly, gene expression
profiling of the restored lines, showed up-regulation of three genes, all
proposed to have a role in cancer biology. The results indicate that the
LSAMP protein might up-regulate the transcription of these three genes,
and that LSAMP alone, or in conjunction with other genes, suppresses
tumors by reducing their proliferation rate. Together, our data
strengthens the hypothesis of LSAMP being a tumor suppressor gene in
osteosarcomas. 1. Kresse, S.H., et al., LSAMP, a Novel Candidate Tumor
Suppressor Gene in Human Osteosarcomas, Identified by Array Comparative
Genomic Hybridization. Genes Chromosomes & Cancer, 2009. 48(8): p.
679-693.

