Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SSB1 is essential for embryogenesis and maintenance of genomic
stability in mice


Single-stranded DNA binding proteins (SSBs) are essential for multiple
DNA transactions, including regulation of DNA damage checkpoints and
repair of DNA damage. Previously, we reported the functional
characterization of these proteins in human cells using specific siRNA
and provided the initial evidence that both SSBs are essential for
efficient repair of DNA double strand breaks by the homologous
recombinational repair pathway, and for efficient initiation of the
ATM/ATR dependent signaling pathway (Richard et al., 2008). However
cellular model systems have inherent limitations. To decipher the role of
these newly identified proteins at the organismal level, we have
generated conditional SSB1 and SSB2 knockout (KO) mouse models. The
constitutive SSB1 KO mice show late embryonic lethality and die
perinatally. The conditional inactivation of SSB1 in adult mice is
associated with testicular atrophy, reduced fertility and increased
genomic instability. We also find compensatory up-regulation of SSB2
protein levels in multiple tissues of conditional SSB1 KO mice. In
addition, we report increased radiosensitiity of SSB1-/- mice in response
to ionizing radiation, and increased genomic instability, which manifests
as a broad spectrum of tumours at approximately 1 year of age. T cells
isolated from these animals exhibited mild G1/S and G2/M checkpoint
defects, and a persistence of DNA damage as seen by increased gamma-H2AX
and 53BP1 foci in response to -irradiation. Collectively, these results
demonstrate an essential role of SSB1 in the maintenance of genomic
stability in-vivo. Reference Richard, DJ., Bolderson, E., et al. Khanna
KK (2008). Single-stranded DNA binding protein is critical for genomic
stability. Nature 453: 677-681

