Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of ribosomal protein L22 promotes transformation by
induction of Lin28B


The molecular basis by which mutations in some ribosomal proteins (RP)
predispose to development of hematologic malignancies remains unclear. We
show here that germline inactivation of the ribosomal protein L22
(Rpl22), which selectively blocks T cell development, also predisposes T
lineage progenitors to transformation. Indeed, RPL22 was found to be
inactivated in 9% of human T-acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL).
Moreover, mono-allelic loss of Rpl22 accelerates development of thymic
lymphoma in a mouse model of T cell malignancy and in acute
transformation assays in vitro. Furthermore, we show that Rpl22
inactivation enhances transformation potential through induction of
Lin28B. These findings represent the first mechanistic insight into how
an RP mutation promotes transformation.Our finding that Rpl22
inactivation promotes transformation by inducing expression of Lin28B
provides insight into the mechanistic basis by which mutations in Rpl22,
and perhaps other RP genes, increase cancer risk. In addition, because we
have determined that Lin28B induction is dependent upon NF-kB activity,
our findings may provide new opportunities for therapeutic intervention
both in aggressive forms of T-ALL, where we have found Rpl22 to be
inactivated, and perhaps in other diseases caused by mutations in RP
genes.

