Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cells redirected against HER2 for the adoptive immunotherapy for
HER2-positive osteosarcoma


INTRODUCTION: The prognosis for patients with advanced osteosarcoma (OS)
has not improved over the last two decades. Hence novel
biologically-based therapies, such as immunotherapy, are needed for these
patients. We have shown in preclinical studies that T cells, genetically
modified with a HER2-specific chimeric antigen receptor (CAR; HER2-CAR T
cells), kill HER2+ OS cells ex vivo and induce regression of HER2+ OS
xenografts in animal models. Based on these findings we developed a Phase
I/II clinical study with HER2-CAR T cells in patients with metastatic
and/or recurrent OS. METHODS: The primary objective of this clinical
trial is to determine the safety of escalating doses of HER2-CAR T cells
in patients with advanced HER2+ OS. The secondary objective is to
determine the expansion, persistence and anti-tumor effects of infused
HER2-CAR T cells. RESULTS: 43 (78%) out of 55 screened OS patients had
HER2+ tumors. Twenty one HER2-CAR T-cell lines have been generated to
date by retroviral transduction. Median HER2-CAR expression was 67.4%
(range 50.7-85.6%) and HER2-CAR T cells killed HER2+ OS cells in contrast
to non-transduced T cells (p INTRODUCTION: The prognosis for patients
with advanced osteosarcoma (OS) has not improved over the last two
decades. Hence novel biologically-based therapies, such as immunotherapy,
are needed for these patients. We have shown in preclinical studies that
T cells, genetically modified with a HER2-specific chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR; HER2-CAR T cells), kill HER2+ OS cells ex vivo and induce
regression of HER2+ OS xenografts in animal models. Based on these
findings we developed a Phase I/II clinical study with HER2-CAR T cells
in patients with metastatic and/or recurrent OS. METHODS: The primary
objective of this clinical trial is to determine the safety of escalating
doses of HER2-CAR T cells in patients with advanced HER2+ OS. The
secondary objective is to determine the expansion, persistence and
anti-tumor effects of infused HER2-CAR T cells. RESULTS: 43 (78%) out of
55 screened OS patients had HER2+ tumors. Twenty one HER2-CAR T-cell
lines have been generated to date by retroviral transduction. Median
HER2-CAR expression was 67.4% (range 50.7-85.6%) and HER2-CAR T cells
killed HER2+ OS cells in contrast to non-transduced T cells (p <0.0001).
The median CD4+:CD8+ T-cell ratio was 1:1.3, and T-cell products
contained nave (CD45RA+; median: 11.8%; range 2.4-33.2%), effector memory
(CD45RO+/CCR7-/CD62L-; median: 29.3%; range: 7.8-67.5%), and central
memory T cells (CD45RO+/CD62L+; median 55.9%; range: 21.9-87.9%). Nine
patients have been infused so far at HER2-CAR T-cell doses between 104/m2
to 1x106/m2. Infusions were well tolerated without systemic side effects,
and no increase of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-2, IFN-, GM-CSF, TNF-)
was observed in the patients plasma post infusion. HER2-CAR T cells were
detectable for up to 3 months post infusion. CONCLUSION: HER2-CAR T cells
have shown promising antitumor activity in preclinical OS animal models.
We are currently evaluating the safety and efficacy of HER2-CAR T cells
in a Phase I/II clinical study. Initial safety data at low T-cell dose
levels are encouraging, warranting further active exploration of HER2-CAR
T-cell based therapies for OS and other HER2+ malignancies.

