Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human Th17 cells have stem cell-like features and promote
long-term tumor immunity


Th17 cells play a role in multiple pathological scenarios. However, their
functional phenotype, survival pattern and the underlying controlling
mechanisms are poorly investigated in humans. This significantly hampers
clinical application of targeting Th17 cells. Now we have studied Th17
cells in the pathological microenvironments of graft-versus-host disease,
ulcerative colitis and cancer in humans. Th17 cells are increased in the
chronic phase of these diseases. Th17 cells phenotypically resemble to
terminally differentiated memory T cells, but are different from central
memory, exhausted and senescent T cells. Despite their phenotypic markers
of terminal differentiation, in vivo adoptive transfusing experiments
demonstrate that Th17 cells mediate and promote long-term anti-tumor
immunity. Furthermore, Th17 cells have important functional features
including high capacity of proliferative self-renewal, potent persistence
and apoptotic resistance in vivo, and the plasticity of converting into
other types of T helper cells. These features are accompanied with
relatively specific gene signature in Th17 cells including abundant
anti-apoptotic genes. Moreover, we investigated the molecular mechanisms
controlling their functional characters. We demonstrate that hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF)1 and Notch collaboratively control key
anti-apoptosis Bcl-2 family gene expression and function in Th17 cells.
Altogether, the data indicate that human Th17 cells may be a long-lived
proliferating effector memory T cell population with unique genetic and
functional characters. These characters may be important determinants in
Th17 cell biology. Targeting Th17-associated signaling pathway would be
therapeutically meaningful for treating patients with autoimmune disease
and advanced tumor.

