Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular basis for the concentration-dependent tumor suppressing
effects of KLK6 in breast cancer


Human kallikrein-related peptidase 6 (KLK6) is a serine protease exerting
versatile (patho)physiological functions (J Biol Chem 284:32989-32994,
2009). Recently, we showed that KLK6 acts as a tumor suppressor in human
breast cancer. Interestingly, the tumor suppressing effects of KLK6
depend on its expression levels (Cancer Res 69:3779-3797, 2009). Namely,
KLK6 re-expression at physiological levels (i.e. levels found in normal
mammary cells and tissues) in KLK6-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells resulted in strong inhibition of tumor cell proliferation,
anchorage-independent growth and cell motility, while it remarkably
abolished their ability to form tumors in SCID mice. Contrary, when KLK6
was highly overexpressed (>50-fold compared to normal cells) in
MDA-MB-231 cells, its tumor suppressor activity in vivo was lost.
Importantly, overexpression of KLK6 is a characteristic of a small
subgroup of breast tumors. Here, we investigated molecular pathways
underlying these concentration-dependent effects of KLK6 in breast
cancer. In addition, we tested whether the enzymatic activity of KLK6 is
required for the observed phenotypes or they may result from
non-proteolysis-related protein-protein interactions. To address these
questions we carried out genome-wide differential transcriptomic
profiling using the Illumina bead microarrays. The profiles of
KLK6-negative MDA-MB-231 parental cells was compared in parallel with
three different MDA-MB-231 clones stably transfected with wt or mutant
KLK6 cDNA, namely C28WT (expresses KLK6 at normal levels), C5WT (highly
overexpresses KLK6) and C22MS (expresses a mutant form of KLK6 with a
point substitution at the active site serine residue, i.e. S192A, that
completely inhibits its protease activity). Detailed proteomic profiles
were determined for all the aforementioned MDA-MB-231 clones using
one-dimensional (1D) SDS-PAGE analysis of cell lysates, combined with in
gel trypsin digestion and LC-ESI-MS/MS (liquid chromatography
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry). In all cases, we were
able to identify in total 3779 cellular proteins with 2487 having 2
peptides distributed as: 1776 in parental, 2020 in C28WT, 1228 in C5WT
and 1593 in C22MS. Hierarchical clustering proteome analysis clustered
C22MS together with parental. Sorting the proteins relative to 4
fold-expression over parental resulted in identification of 377 proteins
differentially expressed in C28WT, 449 in C5WT and 169 C22MS. The derived
datasets were used to infer potential networks using Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA). Important pathways (including NF-kB, TP53 and
apoptosis-related) were found differentially deregulated upon KLK6
expression. For the first time, we describe KLK6-associated gene
expression signatures and proteomes that were integrated in an effort to
derive putative pathways underlying the emerging role(s) of KLK6 in
breast cancer.

