Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Low donor thymic output predicts increased incidence of extensive
chronic GVHD and worse overall survival after TCD-matched sibling SCT


Low CD4+ T cell counts early post-SCT are associated with a greater risk
of developing chronic GVHD (cGVHD). However, the factors affecting post
graft CD4+ T cell recovery are not known. Furthermore, the CD4 T cell
subset correlating best with protection from cGvHD is not defined. We
hypothesized that the donor immune repertoire determines CD4+
reconstitution after SCT. We studied 220 donor-recipient pairs undergoing
a myeloablative matched-sibling T-cell depleted SCT for a variety of
hematological malignancies including AML, ALL, CML, and MDS. Median donor
and patient age was 36 years (range, 9 - 70). Median CD34+ cell dose was
5.56 x106/kg (range, 2.3-14.5), with a fixed T cell dose per protocol of
1-5 x104/kg. Ninety-four patients (43%) developed chronic GvHD (32
limited, 64 extensive). Prior to SCT a cryopreserved mononuclear fraction
(PBMC) was obtained by leukopheresis on all donors. PBMC from 139 donors
were stained with fluorescently conjugated antibodies and acquired on a
custom-built LSR Fortessa (BD) flow cytometer. Regulatory T cells (Tregs)
and Treg subsets were identified within the CD4+ T cell population using
a combination of FOXP3 and Helios. The combination of FOXP3 with Helios
has recently been shown to identify natural, thymus-derived Tregs
(nTregs), whereas CD4+FOXP3+ T cells lacking Helios represent a pool of
induced Tregs (Thornton et al., 2010, J Immunol. 184:3433-3441). Combined
expression of CD31 and CD45RA in the CD4+ and nTreg populations was used
to identify recent thymic emigrants (RTE). Absolute lymphocyte counts in
220 donors were 2.11/l (range 0.89 - 4.12). A low absolute lymphocyte
count was significantly correlated with a higher cumulative probability
for time to incidence of extensive cGVHD (HR 2.38, p = 0.0008). This
relationship between lymphocytes and cGVHD was retained in CD4+ T cell
subsets: CD3+CD4+ (HR 2.48, p = 0.005); CD3+CD4+CD25+ Low CD4+ T cell
counts early post-SCT are associated with a greater risk of developing
chronic GVHD (cGVHD). However, the factors affecting post graft CD4+ T
cell recovery are not known. Furthermore, the CD4 T cell subset
correlating best with protection from cGvHD is not defined. We
hypothesized that the donor immune repertoire determines CD4+
reconstitution after SCT. We studied 220 donor-recipient pairs undergoing
a myeloablative matched-sibling T-cell depleted SCT for a variety of
hematological malignancies including AML, ALL, CML, and MDS. Median donor
and patient age was 36 years (range, 9 - 70). Median CD34+ cell dose was
5.56 x106/kg (range, 2.3-14.5), with a fixed T cell dose per protocol of
1-5 x104/kg. Ninety-four patients (43%) developed chronic GvHD (32
limited, 64 extensive). Prior to SCT a cryopreserved mononuclear fraction
(PBMC) was obtained by leukopheresis on all donors. PBMC from 139 donors
were stained with fluorescently conjugated antibodies and acquired on a
custom-built LSR Fortessa (BD) flow cytometer. Regulatory T cells (Tregs)
and Treg subsets were identified within the CD4+ T cell population using
a combination of FOXP3 and Helios. The combination of FOXP3 with Helios
has recently been shown to identify natural, thymus-derived Tregs
(nTregs), whereas CD4+FOXP3+ T cells lacking Helios represent a pool of
induced Tregs (Thornton et al., 2010, J Immunol. 184:3433-3441). Combined
expression of CD31 and CD45RA in the CD4+ and nTreg populations was used
to identify recent thymic emigrants (RTE). Absolute lymphocyte counts in
220 donors were 2.11/l (range 0.89 - 4.12). A low absolute lymphocyte
count was significantly correlated with a higher cumulative probability
for time to incidence of extensive cGVHD (HR 2.38, p = 0.0008). This
relationship between lymphocytes and cGVHD was retained in CD4+ T cell
subsets: CD3+CD4+ (HR 2.48, p = 0.005); CD3+CD4+CD25+ < 30 cells/L (HR
2.1, p = 0.02); nTregs Low CD4+ T cell counts early post-SCT are
associated with a greater risk of developing chronic GVHD (cGVHD).
However, the factors affecting post graft CD4+ T cell recovery are not
known. Furthermore, the CD4 T cell subset correlating best with
protection from cGvHD is not defined. We hypothesized that the donor
immune repertoire determines CD4+ reconstitution after SCT. We studied
220 donor-recipient pairs undergoing a myeloablative matched-sibling
T-cell depleted SCT for a variety of hematological malignancies including
AML, ALL, CML, and MDS. Median donor and patient age was 36 years (range,
9 - 70). Median CD34+ cell dose was 5.56 x106/kg (range, 2.3-14.5), with
a fixed T cell dose per protocol of 1-5 x104/kg. Ninety-four patients
(43%) developed chronic GvHD (32 limited, 64 extensive). Prior to SCT a
cryopreserved mononuclear fraction (PBMC) was obtained by leukopheresis
on all donors. PBMC from 139 donors were stained with fluorescently
conjugated antibodies and acquired on a custom-built LSR Fortessa (BD)
flow cytometer. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) and Treg subsets were
identified within the CD4+ T cell population using a combination of FOXP3
and Helios. The combination of FOXP3 with Helios has recently been shown
to identify natural, thymus-derived Tregs (nTregs), whereas CD4+FOXP3+ T
cells lacking Helios represent a pool of induced Tregs (Thornton et al.,
2010, J Immunol. 184:3433-3441). Combined expression of CD31 and CD45RA
in the CD4+ and nTreg populations was used to identify recent thymic
emigrants (RTE). Absolute lymphocyte counts in 220 donors were 2.11/l
(range 0.89 - 4.12). A low absolute lymphocyte count was significantly
correlated with a higher cumulative probability for time to incidence of
extensive cGVHD (HR 2.38, p = 0.0008). This relationship between
lymphocytes and cGVHD was retained in CD4+ T cell subsets: CD3+CD4+ (HR
2.48, p = 0.005); CD3+CD4+CD25+ < 30 cells/L (HR 2.1, p = 0.02); nTregs <
8 cells/L (HR 1.97, p = 0.043). RTE of total CD4 did not correlate with
RTE nTregs, indicating that nTreg production varies among donors with
similar levels of thymic activity. Furthermore recipients of donors with
low RTE nTregs relative to overall thymic output had a significantly
higher likelihood of developing extensive chronic GvHD (HR 2.78,
p=0.0014). In multivariate analysis including patient age, acute GvHD
(grade II - IV), graft direction (female donor to male recipient vs.
other combinations), disease and status at transplant, and administration
of post SCT donor lymphocyte infusion, only thymic output of nTregs (HR =
0.8, p = 0.037) and graft direction (HR = 2.1, p = 0.023) remained
significant risk factors for extensive cGvHD. These data show that the
thymic output of nTreg varies inherently among donors. Donors with low
thymic output of nTreg may recreate a less tolerant immune system in the
recipient leading to cGVHD of greater severity.

