Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of some selected tumor markers in people from River Nile
State - Sudan


This study was designed to use some selected tumor markers (TMs) as
screening tool to discover new cancer cases, and to use these TMs as
diagnostic tool for early detection of cancer. The study area is the
River Nile State with an area of 122100 Km2 and population of 1026000
persons. The national cancer control program was initiated in 1982 with
WHO help, and updated in the early 1990s based on the new WHO guidelines.
In 2010 the National Cancer Registry was established but still more
efforts are needed to register all cancer cases in such a poor country
like Sudan. According to Federal Ministry of Health (FMOH) 2008 data;
cancer was ranked as the fourth cause of death in hospitals. Five hundred
and ten blood samples were collected from healthy people living in River
Nile State; 305 samples were males. (PSA) was measured in all males,
(CA125) was used for ovarian cancer in females, (CA15-3) was used for
breast cancer in females, and (CEA) Carcino Embryonic Antigen was used
for colon cancer in both genders. Samples were measured using RIA
technique. Written consent was obtained from all volunteers. There was an
elevation in blood level of CEA in 26 samples (6.37%), two of them died
during the study, 7 (2.29%) males had PSA concentrations above the upper
limit, 5 (2.45%) females showed high CA15-3 concentrations, and increase
in CA125 in 6 samples (2.94%). Out of the 510 subjects there were 56
samples (10.98%) had family history with cancer, and only 6 of them
(10.71%) showed elevated concentrations. Most of these people are very
poor and hospitals are not accessible and the diagnosis and treatment
services are not affordable. Table 1 shows the concentrations for the
selected TMs.The FMOH documented in 2007 that more than 345 cancer
patients came from River Nile State, more cases were reported in other
studies e.g. 2899 cancer incidences in Northern Sudan in 2006. In the
present study, (8.63%) of the studied population showed elevated
concentrations of the selected TMs. Table 1: TMs concentrations.


