Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: VEGF-dependent suppression of prostaglandin transporter (PGT)
expression in Kras mutant human bronchial epithelial cells


Prostaglandin transporters are expressed in cyclooxygenase-positive cells
and provide the dominant mechanisms for transport of prostaglandins (PG)
across the cell membrane. Specifically, the prostaglandin transporter
PGT, expressed in many cell types including lung epithelia, is
responsible for the uptake of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) for intracellular
metabolism and degradation by 15-prostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH).
The regulation of prostaglandin transporters has not been fully explored
in lung cancer. We hypothesize that loss of PGT expression is important
in lung carcinogenesis and its loss may be enhanced in the presence of
common mutations in premalignant bronchial epithelial cells and non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Our preliminary studies show that PGT
expression (protein and mRNA) and 15-PGDH are significantly downregulated
in Kras mutant human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) and in NSCLC. It
is well known that Kras mutant cancers are associated with increased
production of VEGF, an important factor in tumor angiogenesis. In HBEC,
we found significantly higher VEGF levels in Kras mutants compared to
vector controls (2242 versus 628 pg/mg, p = 0.04). We proposed that VEGF
modulates PGT expression and tested our hypothesis by treating HBEC and
NSCLC with human recombinant VEGF. PGT expression is downregulated with
exogenous VEGF treatment and neutralizing VEGF production (neutralizing
VEGF antibody) prevented the loss of PGT expression. The MEK1/2 inhibitor
PD98059 upregulated PGT expression in HBEC Kras. Our results suggest Kras
mutation is associated with loss of PGT expression and may be dependent
on VEGF production. Modulation of PGT expression may be important in lung
carcinogenesis.

