Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Wnt secretion is required for colon cancer cell survival


Aberrant activation of Wnt signalling has an important function in the
onset and progression of colorectal cancer. Sporadic colorectal
carcinomas are associated with mutations in APC or -catenin, leading to a
constitutive activation by preventing the degradation of -catenin,
allowing its accumulation in the nucleus and drive the expression of
transcriptional target for growth and proliferation. While mutations in
APC or -catenin are found in almost all cases of sporadic colon cancer,
the molecular circuits that control Wnt signalling pathways in colon
cancer cells have not been fully resolved. Here we show that colon cancer
cells require Wnt secretion for survival. We combined RNAi-mediated
depletion of signalling factors and transcriptional profiling to map the
topology of Wnt pathways. We demonstrate that Evi/Wls, a protein required
for the secretion of Wnt proteins, impairs the expression of -catenin
dependent transcriptional targets. Blocking Wnt secretion is sufficient
to inhibit Wnt signalling and cell survival of colon cancer cell lines ex
vivo and in vivo, independent of their APC and -catenin mutational
status. We conclude that mutations in APC and -catenin in colon cancer do
not render colon cancers independent of autocrine activation through Wnt
ligands. These results may open new avenues for therapeutic interventions
in colon cancer by antagonists of Wnt signalling that act at or upstream
of the receptor level.

