Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CBL enhances breast tumor formation by inhibiting tumor
suppressive activity of TGF-beta signaling


CBL protein family functions as multifunctional adaptor proteins and E3
ubiquitin ligases that are implicated as regulators of signaling in
various cell types. Recent discovery revealed mutations of
proto-oncogenic CBL in the linker region and RING finger domain in human
acute myeloid neoplasm and these transforming mutations induced
carcinogenesis. However, the adaptor function of CBL mediated signaling
pathway during tumorigenesis has not been well characterized. Here, we
show that CBL highly expresses in breast cancer cells and significantly
inhibits TGF- tumor suppressive activity. Knockdown of CBL expression
resulted in the increased expression of TGF- target genes, SERPINE1 and
CDK inhibitors such as p15INK4b and p21Cip1. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that CBL is frequently overexpressed in human breast cancer tissues and
the loss of CBL decreases a tumorigenic activity of breast cancer cells
in vivo. CBL directly binds to Smad3 through its proline-rich motif,
thereby preventing Smad3 from interacting with Smad4 and blocking nuclear
translocation of Smad3. CBL-b, one of CBL protein family, also interacted
with Smad3 and knockdown of both CBL and CBL-b further enhanced TGF-
transcriptional activity. Our findings provide evidence for a previously
undescribed mechanism by which oncogenic CBL can block TGF- tumor
suppressor activity.

