Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of TGF beta receptor II and pSmad2 expression with
clinico-pathological factors in human breast cancer: An
immunohistochemical observation from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study


Loss of transforming growth factor (TGF)- expression occurs in the early
stages of breast carcinogenesis, which contributes to tumor progression.
The loss of TGF- responsiveness frequently occurs at the level of the
TGF- receptor II (TGF-RII) in breast cancer. Smad2 is a major
receptor-activated Smad downstream of TGF- signaling. Phosphorylated
Smad2 (pSmad2) is translocated into the nucleus to modulate transcription
of target genes involved in many cell functions. We evaluated the
correlation of TGF-RII and pSmad2 protein expression with
clinico-pathological factors in human breast cancer tissue from 435
breast cancer cases from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study, a
population-based, case-control study. Expression of the TGF-RII and
pSmad2 proteins was detected using a double immunofluorescence staining
method, which was validated with standard single immunostains.
Lab-constructed tissue microarray samples were used as positive and
negative controls. The immunofluorescence signals were designated as
negative, positive, or strong-positive based on a modified Allred scoring
system. Staining patterns of TGF-RII were classified into membranous or
cytoplasmic predominant. TGF-RII expression intensity was significantly
higher in normal and early-stage breast cancers (in situ carcinoma) than
that in later stages (in situ carcinoma adjacent to invasive carcinoma,
and invasive carcinoma) (PLoss of transforming growth factor (TGF)-
expression occurs in the early stages of breast carcinogenesis, which
contributes to tumor progression. The loss of TGF- responsiveness
frequently occurs at the level of the TGF- receptor II (TGF-RII) in
breast cancer. Smad2 is a major receptor-activated Smad downstream of
TGF- signaling. Phosphorylated Smad2 (pSmad2) is translocated into the
nucleus to modulate transcription of target genes involved in many cell
functions. We evaluated the correlation of TGF-RII and pSmad2 protein
expression with clinico-pathological factors in human breast cancer
tissue from 435 breast cancer cases from the Shanghai Breast Cancer
Study, a population-based, case-control study. Expression of the TGF-RII
and pSmad2 proteins was detected using a double immunofluorescence
staining method, which was validated with standard single immunostains.
Lab-constructed tissue microarray samples were used as positive and
negative controls. The immunofluorescence signals were designated as
negative, positive, or strong-positive based on a modified Allred scoring
system. Staining patterns of TGF-RII were classified into membranous or
cytoplasmic predominant. TGF-RII expression intensity was significantly
higher in normal and early-stage breast cancers (in situ carcinoma) than
that in later stages (in situ carcinoma adjacent to invasive carcinoma,
and invasive carcinoma) (P<0.001). The cytoplasmic predominant expression
pattern of TGF-RII was more frequently observed in breast cancer than
that in normal breast epithelium on the same tissue section (PLoss of
transforming growth factor (TGF)- expression occurs in the early stages
of breast carcinogenesis, which contributes to tumor progression. The
loss of TGF- responsiveness frequently occurs at the level of the TGF-
receptor II (TGF-RII) in breast cancer. Smad2 is a major
receptor-activated Smad downstream of TGF- signaling. Phosphorylated
Smad2 (pSmad2) is translocated into the nucleus to modulate transcription
of target genes involved in many cell functions. We evaluated the
correlation of TGF-RII and pSmad2 protein expression with
clinico-pathological factors in human breast cancer tissue from 435
breast cancer cases from the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study, a
population-based, case-control study. Expression of the TGF-RII and
pSmad2 proteins was detected using a double immunofluorescence staining
method, which was validated with standard single immunostains.
Lab-constructed tissue microarray samples were used as positive and
negative controls. The immunofluorescence signals were designated as
negative, positive, or strong-positive based on a modified Allred scoring
system. Staining patterns of TGF-RII were classified into membranous or
cytoplasmic predominant. TGF-RII expression intensity was significantly
higher in normal and early-stage breast cancers (in situ carcinoma) than
that in later stages (in situ carcinoma adjacent to invasive carcinoma,
and invasive carcinoma) (P<0.001). The cytoplasmic predominant expression
pattern of TGF-RII was more frequently observed in breast cancer than
that in normal breast epithelium on the same tissue section (P<0.001).
pSmad2 expression was significantly increased in breast cancer compared
with adjacent normal breast epithelium. In addition, the increased pSmad2
expression was significantly associated with higher breast cancer grade
(P=0.004). No significant correlations between TGF-RII/pSmad2 protein
expression and other prognostic factors, such as age at diagnosis,
menopause status, history of breast cancer, TNM stage, and ER/PR/HER2
status, was found. The results of this study suggest that reduced TGF-RII
expression and its cytoplasmic predominant expression pattern may be
associated with the progression of breast cancer, and increased pSmad2
expression may be associated with carcinogenesis and poor differentiation
of breast cancer cells. Additional samples are being analyzed to validate
these findings and to evaluate the expression of TGF-RII and pSmad2 in
relation to breast cancer survival.

