Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Toll-like receptor-4 mediated cutaneous immune responses augment
ultraviolet radiation-induced DNA damage and tumor development


UV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a critical role in
development of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this biologic
activity resides at least in part from the demonstrated ability of this
form of radiant energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form of
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to
determine whether toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced
DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and
wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage
regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (pUV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a critical role
in development of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this biologic
activity resides at least in part from the demonstrated ability of this
form of radiant energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form of
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to
determine whether toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced
DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and
wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage
regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (pUV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a critical role in
development of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this biologic
activity resides at least in part from the demonstrated ability of this
form of radiant energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form of
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to
determine whether toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced
DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and
wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage
regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The
expression of DNA repair gene XPA was significantly less (pUV
(ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a critical role in development
of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this biologic activity resides at
least in part from the demonstrated ability of this form of radiant
energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to determine whether
toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced DNA damage
responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and wild type
(WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage regimen
consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The
expression of DNA repair gene XPA was significantly less (p<0.05) in skin
and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4 deficient mice after UVB exposure. When
cytokine levels were compared in these two strains after UVB exposure,
BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4 deficient mice produced significantly more
IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines (pUV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a
critical role in development of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this
biologic activity resides at least in part from the demonstrated ability
of this form of radiant energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form
of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to
determine whether toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced
DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and
wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage
regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The
expression of DNA repair gene XPA was significantly less (p<0.05) in skin
and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4 deficient mice after UVB exposure. When
cytokine levels were compared in these two strains after UVB exposure,
BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4 deficient mice produced significantly more
IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines (p<0.05) than BMDC from WT mice. Furthermore,
we found that Toll like receptor-4 (TLR4) promoted UVB induced tumor
development. We observed that UVB induced skin carcinogenesis was
retarded in terms of tumor incidence, and tumor latency, in mice
deficient in TLR4 compared to WT mice, whereas significantly greater (pUV
(ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a critical role in development
of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this biologic activity resides at
least in part from the demonstrated ability of this form of radiant
energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to determine whether
toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced DNA damage
responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and wild type
(WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage regimen
consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The
expression of DNA repair gene XPA was significantly less (p<0.05) in skin
and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4 deficient mice after UVB exposure. When
cytokine levels were compared in these two strains after UVB exposure,
BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4 deficient mice produced significantly more
IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines (p<0.05) than BMDC from WT mice. Furthermore,
we found that Toll like receptor-4 (TLR4) promoted UVB induced tumor
development. We observed that UVB induced skin carcinogenesis was
retarded in terms of tumor incidence, and tumor latency, in mice
deficient in TLR4 compared to WT mice, whereas significantly greater
(p<0.05) numbers of tumors occurred in WT mice. Further, we found that
tumor-bearing WT mice produced more IL-17 and IL-10 (pUV (ultraviolet) B
induced DNA damage plays a critical role in development of skin cancer.
The molecular basis for this biologic activity resides at least in part
from the demonstrated ability of this form of radiant energy to damage
DNA, predominantly in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD).
The purpose of this study was to determine whether toll-like receptor-4
(TLR4) contributed to UV-induced DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor
development. TLR4 deficient and wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a
local UVB induced DNA damage regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB
radiation. Wild type mice exhibited significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in
the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient
mice developed significantly fewer CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone
marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The expression of DNA repair gene XPA was
significantly less (p<0.05) in skin and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4
deficient mice after UVB exposure. When cytokine levels were compared in
these two strains after UVB exposure, BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4
deficient mice produced significantly more IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines
(p<0.05) than BMDC from WT mice. Furthermore, we found that Toll like
receptor-4 (TLR4) promoted UVB induced tumor development. We observed
that UVB induced skin carcinogenesis was retarded in terms of tumor
incidence, and tumor latency, in mice deficient in TLR4 compared to WT
mice, whereas significantly greater (p<0.05) numbers of tumors occurred
in WT mice. Further, we found that tumor-bearing WT mice produced more
IL-17 and IL-10 (p<0.05), whereas TLR4 deficient mice produced more IFN-
(pUV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a critical role in
development of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this biologic
activity resides at least in part from the demonstrated ability of this
form of radiant energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form of
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to
determine whether toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced
DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and
wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage
regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The
expression of DNA repair gene XPA was significantly less (p<0.05) in skin
and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4 deficient mice after UVB exposure. When
cytokine levels were compared in these two strains after UVB exposure,
BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4 deficient mice produced significantly more
IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines (p<0.05) than BMDC from WT mice. Furthermore,
we found that Toll like receptor-4 (TLR4) promoted UVB induced tumor
development. We observed that UVB induced skin carcinogenesis was
retarded in terms of tumor incidence, and tumor latency, in mice
deficient in TLR4 compared to WT mice, whereas significantly greater
(p<0.05) numbers of tumors occurred in WT mice. Further, we found that
tumor-bearing WT mice produced more IL-17 and IL-10 (p<0.05), whereas
TLR4 deficient mice produced more IFN- (p<0.05). CD4+CD25+ regulatory
T-cells from WT mice produced more IL-10 (pUV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA
damage plays a critical role in development of skin cancer. The molecular
basis for this biologic activity resides at least in part from the
demonstrated ability of this form of radiant energy to damage DNA,
predominantly in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The
purpose of this study was to determine whether toll-like receptor-4
(TLR4) contributed to UV-induced DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor
development. TLR4 deficient and wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a
local UVB induced DNA damage regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB
radiation. Wild type mice exhibited significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in
the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient
mice developed significantly fewer CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone
marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The expression of DNA repair gene XPA was
significantly less (p<0.05) in skin and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4
deficient mice after UVB exposure. When cytokine levels were compared in
these two strains after UVB exposure, BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4
deficient mice produced significantly more IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines
(p<0.05) than BMDC from WT mice. Furthermore, we found that Toll like
receptor-4 (TLR4) promoted UVB induced tumor development. We observed
that UVB induced skin carcinogenesis was retarded in terms of tumor
incidence, and tumor latency, in mice deficient in TLR4 compared to WT
mice, whereas significantly greater (p<0.05) numbers of tumors occurred
in WT mice. Further, we found that tumor-bearing WT mice produced more
IL-17 and IL-10 (p<0.05), whereas TLR4 deficient mice produced more IFN-
(p<0.05). CD4+CD25+ regulatory T-cells from WT mice produced more IL-10
(p<0.05) than regulatory T-cells from TLR4 deficient mice. There was a
significant increase (pUV (ultraviolet) B induced DNA damage plays a
critical role in development of skin cancer. The molecular basis for this
biologic activity resides at least in part from the demonstrated ability
of this form of radiant energy to damage DNA, predominantly in the form
of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD). The purpose of this study was to
determine whether toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) contributed to UV-induced
DNA damage responses and cutaneous tumor development. TLR4 deficient and
wild type (WT) mice were subjected to a local UVB induced DNA damage
regimen consisting of 90 mJ/cm2 UVB radiation. Wild type mice exhibited
significant (p<0.05) DNA damage in the form of cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPD), whereas TLR4 deficient mice developed significantly fewer
CPD (p<0.05) in their skin and bone marrow dendritic cells (BMDC). The
expression of DNA repair gene XPA was significantly less (p<0.05) in skin
and BMDC from WT mice than TLR4 deficient mice after UVB exposure. When
cytokine levels were compared in these two strains after UVB exposure,
BMDC from UV-irradiated TLR4 deficient mice produced significantly more
IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines (p<0.05) than BMDC from WT mice. Furthermore,
we found that Toll like receptor-4 (TLR4) promoted UVB induced tumor
development. We observed that UVB induced skin carcinogenesis was
retarded in terms of tumor incidence, and tumor latency, in mice
deficient in TLR4 compared to WT mice, whereas significantly greater
(p<0.05) numbers of tumors occurred in WT mice. Further, we found that
tumor-bearing WT mice produced more IL-17 and IL-10 (p<0.05), whereas
TLR4 deficient mice produced more IFN- (p<0.05). CD4+CD25+ regulatory
T-cells from WT mice produced more IL-10 (p<0.05) than regulatory T-cells
from TLR4 deficient mice. There was a significant increase (p<0.05) in
Foxp3 expression in skin of WT mice than TLR4 deficient mice. Thus,
strategies to inhibit TLR4 may allow us to develop immunopreventive and
immunotherapeutic approaches for management of UVB induced cutaneous DNA
damage and skin cancer.

