Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting Stat3 induces senescence in breast cancer cells and
elicits an immune response inhibiting tumor growth and metastasis


Having in mind that Stat3 inhibition in tumor cells induces the
expression of chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, we proposed the
use of Stat3-inhibited breast cancer cells as a source of immunogens to
induce an anti-tumor immune response. We have demonstrated that the
administration of irradiated breast cancer cells that express a dominant
negative (DN) form of Stat3 (Stat3Y705F-breast cancer cells) provides
protection against the murine progestin-dependent C4HD tumor, through the
activation of CD4+ T cells and cytotoxic natural killer (NK) cells. To
extend our results to different breast cancer models, we worked with the
hormone independent 4T1 mammary carcinoma cell line that displays
constitutive activation of Stat3. Immunization with irradiated
Stat3Y705F-4T1 cells prevented wild-type 4T1 tumor development in 50% of
the challenged mice (PHaving in mind that Stat3 inhibition in tumor cells
induces the expression of chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, we
proposed the use of Stat3-inhibited breast cancer cells as a source of
immunogens to induce an anti-tumor immune response. We have demonstrated
that the administration of irradiated breast cancer cells that express a
dominant negative (DN) form of Stat3 (Stat3Y705F-breast cancer cells)
provides protection against the murine progestin-dependent C4HD tumor,
through the activation of CD4+ T cells and cytotoxic natural killer (NK)
cells. To extend our results to different breast cancer models, we worked
with the hormone independent 4T1 mammary carcinoma cell line that
displays constitutive activation of Stat3. Immunization with irradiated
Stat3Y705F-4T1 cells prevented wild-type 4T1 tumor development in 50% of
the challenged mice (P<0.001), and the tumor-bearing mice displayed
tumors of smaller size (81% decrease in tumor volume, PHaving in mind
that Stat3 inhibition in tumor cells induces the expression of chemokines
and pro-inflammatory cytokines, we proposed the use of Stat3-inhibited
breast cancer cells as a source of immunogens to induce an anti-tumor
immune response. We have demonstrated that the administration of
irradiated breast cancer cells that express a dominant negative (DN) form
of Stat3 (Stat3Y705F-breast cancer cells) provides protection against the
murine progestin-dependent C4HD tumor, through the activation of CD4+ T
cells and cytotoxic natural killer (NK) cells. To extend our results to
different breast cancer models, we worked with the hormone independent
4T1 mammary carcinoma cell line that displays constitutive activation of
Stat3. Immunization with irradiated Stat3Y705F-4T1 cells prevented
wild-type 4T1 tumor development in 50% of the challenged mice (P<0.001),
and the tumor-bearing mice displayed tumors of smaller size (81% decrease
in tumor volume, P<0.001) when compared to mice injected with
pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells. Moreover, the number of metastasis per lung decreased
by 90% in Stat3Y705F-4T1-immunized animals (PHaving in mind that Stat3
inhibition in tumor cells induces the expression of chemokines and
pro-inflammatory cytokines, we proposed the use of Stat3-inhibited breast
cancer cells as a source of immunogens to induce an anti-tumor immune
response. We have demonstrated that the administration of irradiated
breast cancer cells that express a dominant negative (DN) form of Stat3
(Stat3Y705F-breast cancer cells) provides protection against the murine
progestin-dependent C4HD tumor, through the activation of CD4+ T cells
and cytotoxic natural killer (NK) cells. To extend our results to
different breast cancer models, we worked with the hormone independent
4T1 mammary carcinoma cell line that displays constitutive activation of
Stat3. Immunization with irradiated Stat3Y705F-4T1 cells prevented
wild-type 4T1 tumor development in 50% of the challenged mice (P<0.001),
and the tumor-bearing mice displayed tumors of smaller size (81% decrease
in tumor volume, P<0.001) when compared to mice injected with
pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells. Moreover, the number of metastasis per lung decreased
by 90% in Stat3Y705F-4T1-immunized animals (P<0.05). When we analyzed the
tumor milieu composition by flow cytometry, we observed that
Stat3Y705F-4T1 immunized animals displayed an increase in the percentage
of tumor infiltrating NK cells (CD3-DX5+) and a decrease in tumor
infiltrating T regulatory lymphocytes (CD4+CD25+FoxP3+), compared to
pcDNA3.1-4T1-immunized mice. In order to evaluate if this vaccination may
be effective in a therapeutic setting, we immunized mice with irradiated
Stat3Y705F-4T1 or pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells, 4, 11 and 18 days after challenging
with 4T1 cells. On day 35, we observed a significant decrease on tumor
volume and growth rate in Stat3Y705F-4T1 cell-immunized animals, when
compared to mice immunized with pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells (37.5%, PHaving in
mind that Stat3 inhibition in tumor cells induces the expression of
chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, we proposed the use of
Stat3-inhibited breast cancer cells as a source of immunogens to induce
an anti-tumor immune response. We have demonstrated that the
administration of irradiated breast cancer cells that express a dominant
negative (DN) form of Stat3 (Stat3Y705F-breast cancer cells) provides
protection against the murine progestin-dependent C4HD tumor, through the
activation of CD4+ T cells and cytotoxic natural killer (NK) cells. To
extend our results to different breast cancer models, we worked with the
hormone independent 4T1 mammary carcinoma cell line that displays
constitutive activation of Stat3. Immunization with irradiated
Stat3Y705F-4T1 cells prevented wild-type 4T1 tumor development in 50% of
the challenged mice (P<0.001), and the tumor-bearing mice displayed
tumors of smaller size (81% decrease in tumor volume, P<0.001) when
compared to mice injected with pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells. Moreover, the number
of metastasis per lung decreased by 90% in Stat3Y705F-4T1-immunized
animals (P<0.05). When we analyzed the tumor milieu composition by flow
cytometry, we observed that Stat3Y705F-4T1 immunized animals displayed an
increase in the percentage of tumor infiltrating NK cells (CD3-DX5+) and
a decrease in tumor infiltrating T regulatory lymphocytes
(CD4+CD25+FoxP3+), compared to pcDNA3.1-4T1-immunized mice. In order to
evaluate if this vaccination may be effective in a therapeutic setting,
we immunized mice with irradiated Stat3Y705F-4T1 or pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells,
4, 11 and 18 days after challenging with 4T1 cells. On day 35, we
observed a significant decrease on tumor volume and growth rate in
Stat3Y705F-4T1 cell-immunized animals, when compared to mice immunized
with pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells (37.5%, P<0.05) and a decrease in the number of
metastasis per lung (PHaving in mind that Stat3 inhibition in tumor cells
induces the expression of chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, we
proposed the use of Stat3-inhibited breast cancer cells as a source of
immunogens to induce an anti-tumor immune response. We have demonstrated
that the administration of irradiated breast cancer cells that express a
dominant negative (DN) form of Stat3 (Stat3Y705F-breast cancer cells)
provides protection against the murine progestin-dependent C4HD tumor,
through the activation of CD4+ T cells and cytotoxic natural killer (NK)
cells. To extend our results to different breast cancer models, we worked
with the hormone independent 4T1 mammary carcinoma cell line that
displays constitutive activation of Stat3. Immunization with irradiated
Stat3Y705F-4T1 cells prevented wild-type 4T1 tumor development in 50% of
the challenged mice (P<0.001), and the tumor-bearing mice displayed
tumors of smaller size (81% decrease in tumor volume, P<0.001) when
compared to mice injected with pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells. Moreover, the number
of metastasis per lung decreased by 90% in Stat3Y705F-4T1-immunized
animals (P<0.05). When we analyzed the tumor milieu composition by flow
cytometry, we observed that Stat3Y705F-4T1 immunized animals displayed an
increase in the percentage of tumor infiltrating NK cells (CD3-DX5+) and
a decrease in tumor infiltrating T regulatory lymphocytes
(CD4+CD25+FoxP3+), compared to pcDNA3.1-4T1-immunized mice. In order to
evaluate if this vaccination may be effective in a therapeutic setting,
we immunized mice with irradiated Stat3Y705F-4T1 or pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells,
4, 11 and 18 days after challenging with 4T1 cells. On day 35, we
observed a significant decrease on tumor volume and growth rate in
Stat3Y705F-4T1 cell-immunized animals, when compared to mice immunized
with pcDNA3.1-4T1 cells (37.5%, P<0.05) and a decrease in the number of
metastasis per lung (P<0.05). On the other hand, cellular senescence is
an important mechanism of tumor regression upon oncogene inactivation
that leads to the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines that resemble
the ones we found after blocking Stat3. Therefore, we wondered whether
Stat3 inhibition could drive a senescence program. Inhibition of Stat3 in
murine C4HD and 4T1 cells by transfection with Stat3Y705F, or Stat3
silencing by siRNA, resulted in increased
senescence-associated--galactosidase (SA--gal) accumulation and increased
expression of the senescence-associated markers p15INK4b and p16INK4a. As
cellular senescence is associated to chromatin changes, we studied
heterochromatin formation and observed an increase of trimethyl-K4
histone H3 upon Stat3 inhibition. As a whole, our findings indicate that
Stat3 inhibition in breast cancer cells induce an increase in
immunogenicity capable of eliciting an anti tumor immune response,
presumably through the activation of a senescence program.

