Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pancreatic cancer cell type specific oxygen dependent growth and
drug sensitivity


Most cell are cultured at 37C, in 4% CO2 and 20% O2. Studies have shown
that changing the temperature of the cell culture will lead to either
cold shock or heat shock. Others have also shown that level of CO2 is
crucial for pH balance in cell growth. Although cultured cells are
exposed to 20% O2, oxygen tension in vivo is significantly lower in
normal tissues ranging from 5 to 8% O2. Furthermore cancer tissues tend
to be more hypoxic because of the poorly developed neo-vasculature.
Hence, we sought to determine if pancreas cancer cells will grow and/or
respond to drugs differently under 20% vs. 6% oxygen tension. Methods:
Six pancreatic cancer cell lines were cultured in DMEM media with 10% FBS
and 5% Penicillin in 4% CO2, 37C with variable O2 conditions: 20% and 6%.
Cells are plated onto 6-well plates. Triplicates of cells were
trypsinized daily for 4 days for cell counts which was done by using
hematocytometer. To test drug sensitivity, we used a known Lactate
Dehydrogenase A (LDHA) inhibitor, FX11. LDHA inhibition has been shown to
suppress tumor growth both in vitro and in vivo. Some cells were treated
with an LDHA inhibitor, FX11 in varying concentrations: 5mM, 10mM and
20mM, while the controls were exposed to DMSO. Results: 1. Pancreas
cancer cell lines E3, P215 and A6L grow better in 6% than in 20% oxygen
level. 2. Pancreas cancer cell line A6L shows higher sensitivity to FX11
in 6% compared to 20% oxygen. 3. Pancreas cell line P215 shows lower
sensitivity to FX11 in 6% compared to in 20% oxygen. Conclusion: The
artificial nature of standard culture condition does not account for the
significantly lower oxygen tension in vivo. Because cancer cell lines are
established from tumors which tend to be hypoxic, measurements of cell
growth rates and respond to therapeutic agents at 20% O2 may not reflect
responses at 6% O2 and specifically not to in vivo conditions.

