Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Simultaneous targeting of ER-stress and PI3K/AKT pathways as novel
anticancer and chemosensitization approach against castration resistant
prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths among men in the United States. The recurrence of castration
resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is a therapeutic challenge. Docetaxel
(DTX) - based chemotherapy is the preferred first-line treatment for men
with CRPC. However, DTX extends life expectancy by an average of only 2
months and manifests significant systemic toxicities. Hence, there is a
need to evaluate safer agents for CRPC, either as an adjunct treatment to
decrease DTX doses or as a chronic regimen following DTX treatment to
prevent tumor recurrence. Enhanced tumor-specific killing may be achieved
by targeting multiple metabolic pathways that are critical to tumor
growth and survival. The inherent Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress and
PI3K/AKT pathways are crucial survival mechanisms in aggressive tumors,
such as CRPCs. We hypothesize that simultaneous induction of ER-stress
and suppression of PI3K/AKT pathway by clinically approved drugs, such as
Nelfinavir (NFR) and Curcumin (CUR), will be a very effective antitumor
and chemosensitization strategy against CRPCs. NFR is a clinically
approved HIV-1 protease inhibitor and CUR is a phytochemical used as a
safe dietary supplement. Individually, both drugs possess
antiproliferative properties against cancer cells and induce severe
ER-stress and suppress PI3K/AKT pathways; however, the doses needed are
supra-physiological. Therefore, we have investigated whether coexposure
to NFR and CUR at physiologically achievable concentrations (Prostate
cancer (PCa) is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths among
men in the United States. The recurrence of castration resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) is a therapeutic challenge. Docetaxel (DTX) - based
chemotherapy is the preferred first-line treatment for men with CRPC.
However, DTX extends life expectancy by an average of only 2 months and
manifests significant systemic toxicities. Hence, there is a need to
evaluate safer agents for CRPC, either as an adjunct treatment to
decrease DTX doses or as a chronic regimen following DTX treatment to
prevent tumor recurrence. Enhanced tumor-specific killing may be achieved
by targeting multiple metabolic pathways that are critical to tumor
growth and survival. The inherent Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress and
PI3K/AKT pathways are crucial survival mechanisms in aggressive tumors,
such as CRPCs. We hypothesize that simultaneous induction of ER-stress
and suppression of PI3K/AKT pathway by clinically approved drugs, such as
Nelfinavir (NFR) and Curcumin (CUR), will be a very effective antitumor
and chemosensitization strategy against CRPCs. NFR is a clinically
approved HIV-1 protease inhibitor and CUR is a phytochemical used as a
safe dietary supplement. Individually, both drugs possess
antiproliferative properties against cancer cells and induce severe
ER-stress and suppress PI3K/AKT pathways; however, the doses needed are
supra-physiological. Therefore, we have investigated whether coexposure
to NFR and CUR at physiologically achievable concentrations (<10 M) will
manifest anticancer and chemosensitizing effects in CRPCs. Two well-known
CRPC cell lines, C4-2B and PC-3, were used in this study. Following 72 hr
exposure, MTT-assays showed a 79% decrease in cell viability when C4-2B
cells were exposed to NFR (5M) and CUR (5M) in combination with DTX
(10nM), as compared to the drugs alone (NFR - 25%, CUR - 26%, DTX - 44%).
A decrease in activated AKT (phosphorylated) was also observed in
presence of these drug combinations. Western blot analyses for ER stress
markers, e. g. CHOP and phospho-PERK, showed that cells exposed to NFR
and CUR combinations had a 2.42 and 6.3 fold increase, respectively.
Colony Forming Units (CFU) assay showed a 79% reduction in percent
colonies in C4-2B cells chronically (2 wks) exposed to the NFR (5M) and
CUR (5M) combinations, as compared to the drugs alone (NFR - 37%, CUR -
23%), suggesting long-term antitumor effect following chemotherapy.
Combined treatment with NFR and CUR showed a much lower toxicity towards
Mesenchymal Stem cells (MSCs) and primary endothelial cells, implicating
their safety profiles. Taken together, our investigations suggest an
antitumor regimen using two clinically approved agents, NFR and CUR,
which can be used as an adjunct to DTX to sensitize CRPCs and as a safe
chronic regimen to suppress tumor recurrence following chemotherapy.

