Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BreastDefend suppresses growth and breast-to-lung cancer
metastasis in an orthotopic model of human breast cancer


We have recently demonstrated that a natural dietary supplement
BreastDefend (BD), which contains extracts from medicinal mushrooms
(Coriolus versicolor, Ganoderma lucidum, Phellinus linteus), medicinal
herbs (Scutellaria barbata, Astragalus membranaceus, Curcuma longa), and
purified biologically active nutritional compounds (diindolylmethane and
quercetin), inhibits proliferation and metastatic behavior of invasive
human breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 in vitro. In the present study we
have evaluated whether BD suppresses growth and breast-to lung cancer
metastasis in an orthotopic model of human breast cancer cells implanted
in mice. An oral application of BD (100 mg/kg of body weight for 4 weeks)
by intragastrical gavage did not affect body weight or activity of liver
enzymes and did not show any sign of toxicity in liver spleen, kidney,
lung and heart tissues in mice. Moreover, BD significantly decreased the
change in tumor volume over time when compared to the control group
(p=0.002). BD treatment also markedly decreased the incidence of
breast-to-lung cancer metastasis from 67 % (control) to 20% (BD) (pWe
have recently demonstrated that a natural dietary supplement BreastDefend
(BD), which contains extracts from medicinal mushrooms (Coriolus
versicolor, Ganoderma lucidum, Phellinus linteus), medicinal herbs
(Scutellaria barbata, Astragalus membranaceus, Curcuma longa), and
purified biologically active nutritional compounds (diindolylmethane and
quercetin), inhibits proliferation and metastatic behavior of invasive
human breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 in vitro. In the present study we
have evaluated whether BD suppresses growth and breast-to lung cancer
metastasis in an orthotopic model of human breast cancer cells implanted
in mice. An oral application of BD (100 mg/kg of body weight for 4 weeks)
by intragastrical gavage did not affect body weight or activity of liver
enzymes and did not show any sign of toxicity in liver spleen, kidney,
lung and heart tissues in mice. Moreover, BD significantly decreased the
change in tumor volume over time when compared to the control group
(p=0.002). BD treatment also markedly decreased the incidence of
breast-to-lung cancer metastasis from 67 % (control) to 20% (BD) (p<0.05)
and number of metastasis from 2.8 [0.0, 48.0] in the control group to 0.0
[0.0, 14.2] in the BD treatment group (pWe have recently demonstrated
that a natural dietary supplement BreastDefend (BD), which contains
extracts from medicinal mushrooms (Coriolus versicolor, Ganoderma
lucidum, Phellinus linteus), medicinal herbs (Scutellaria barbata,
Astragalus membranaceus, Curcuma longa), and purified biologically active
nutritional compounds (diindolylmethane and quercetin), inhibits
proliferation and metastatic behavior of invasive human breast cancer
cells MDA-MB-231 in vitro. In the present study we have evaluated whether
BD suppresses growth and breast-to lung cancer metastasis in an
orthotopic model of human breast cancer cells implanted in mice. An oral
application of BD (100 mg/kg of body weight for 4 weeks) by
intragastrical gavage did not affect body weight or activity of liver
enzymes and did not show any sign of toxicity in liver spleen, kidney,
lung and heart tissues in mice. Moreover, BD significantly decreased the
change in tumor volume over time when compared to the control group
(p=0.002). BD treatment also markedly decreased the incidence of
breast-to-lung cancer metastasis from 67 % (control) to 20% (BD) (p<0.05)
and number of metastasis from 2.8 [0.0, 48.0] in the control group to 0.0
[0.0, 14.2] in the BD treatment group (p<0.05). Finally, anti-metastatic
activity of BD in vivo was further confirmed by the down-regulation of
expression of PLAU (urokinase plasminogen activator, uPA) and CXCR4
(C-X-C chemokine receptor-4) genes in breast tumors. In conclusion, BD
may be considered as a biological therapeutic agent against invasive
breast cancers.

