Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20) enhances
Nab-Paclitaxel efficacy in BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer xenografts


Hyaluronan (HA) accumulates in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of many
solid tumors, including those of the prostate, colon, breast, stomach,
ovary, and pancreas. This accumulation is associated with tumor
progression and a negative clinical outcome. Accordingly, an HA-degrading
enzyme, pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), was
developed to target tumor-associated HA in the ECM. Preclinical studies
demonstrated that PEGPH20-mediated removal of HA from HA-rich xenograft
tumors in mice decreased tumor interstitial fluid pressure and tumor
water content resulting in a decompression of tumor vasculature,
increased tumor vascular perfusion, tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and
enhanced chemotherapeutic activity (Thompson 2010). We further
characterized HA expression across multiple human tumor types and
identified pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) as the cancer type with
the most HA (87% express high levels). These observations coupled with a
lack of curative therapy for PDA led us to evaluate alternative treatment
strategies for PDA. Specifically, using the peritibial BxPC-3 human
pancreatic cancer xenograft model, we investigated whether the antitumor
activity of Nab-Paclitaxel was significantly enhanced with PEGPH20
treatment. Nude mice were inoculated with human PDA BxPC-3 cells adjacent
to the right tibial periosteum, and tumor growth was monitored with
ultrasonography. When tumors reached 400 mm3 (n8/group), mice were staged
into 8 treatment groups: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 monotherapy,
4.5 mg/kg; (3) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg; (4) Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg; (5)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg; (6) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; (7)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; or (8) Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg,
plus PEGPH20. Vehicle or PEGPH20 Nab-Paclitaxel was administered
intravenously starting on study day 0, and then dosed every third day for
15 days. At study termination, the average TGIs from animals treated with
either PEGPH20 alone (12.2%), low dose (3 mg/kg) Nab-Paclitaxel (20.3%),
or low dose Nab-Paclitaxel (3 mg/kg) plus PEGPH20 (25%) were not
significantly different from vehicle-treated animals. However,
Nab-Paclitaxel alone at both 10 mg/kg (61.5%, pHyaluronan (HA)
accumulates in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of many solid tumors,
including those of the prostate, colon, breast, stomach, ovary, and
pancreas. This accumulation is associated with tumor progression and a
negative clinical outcome. Accordingly, an HA-degrading enzyme, pegylated
recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), was developed to target
tumor-associated HA in the ECM. Preclinical studies demonstrated that
PEGPH20-mediated removal of HA from HA-rich xenograft tumors in mice
decreased tumor interstitial fluid pressure and tumor water content
resulting in a decompression of tumor vasculature, increased tumor
vascular perfusion, tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and enhanced
chemotherapeutic activity (Thompson 2010). We further characterized HA
expression across multiple human tumor types and identified pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) as the cancer type with the most HA (87%
express high levels). These observations coupled with a lack of curative
therapy for PDA led us to evaluate alternative treatment strategies for
PDA. Specifically, using the peritibial BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer
xenograft model, we investigated whether the antitumor activity of
Nab-Paclitaxel was significantly enhanced with PEGPH20 treatment. Nude
mice were inoculated with human PDA BxPC-3 cells adjacent to the right
tibial periosteum, and tumor growth was monitored with ultrasonography.
When tumors reached 400 mm3 (n8/group), mice were staged into 8 treatment
groups: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 monotherapy, 4.5 mg/kg; (3)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg; (4) Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg; (5)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg; (6) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; (7)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; or (8) Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg,
plus PEGPH20. Vehicle or PEGPH20 Nab-Paclitaxel was administered
intravenously starting on study day 0, and then dosed every third day for
15 days. At study termination, the average TGIs from animals treated with
either PEGPH20 alone (12.2%), low dose (3 mg/kg) Nab-Paclitaxel (20.3%),
or low dose Nab-Paclitaxel (3 mg/kg) plus PEGPH20 (25%) were not
significantly different from vehicle-treated animals. However,
Nab-Paclitaxel alone at both 10 mg/kg (61.5%, p<0.01) and 30 mg/kg
(73.6%, pHyaluronan (HA) accumulates in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of
many solid tumors, including those of the prostate, colon, breast,
stomach, ovary, and pancreas. This accumulation is associated with tumor
progression and a negative clinical outcome. Accordingly, an HA-degrading
enzyme, pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), was
developed to target tumor-associated HA in the ECM. Preclinical studies
demonstrated that PEGPH20-mediated removal of HA from HA-rich xenograft
tumors in mice decreased tumor interstitial fluid pressure and tumor
water content resulting in a decompression of tumor vasculature,
increased tumor vascular perfusion, tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and
enhanced chemotherapeutic activity (Thompson 2010). We further
characterized HA expression across multiple human tumor types and
identified pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) as the cancer type with
the most HA (87% express high levels). These observations coupled with a
lack of curative therapy for PDA led us to evaluate alternative treatment
strategies for PDA. Specifically, using the peritibial BxPC-3 human
pancreatic cancer xenograft model, we investigated whether the antitumor
activity of Nab-Paclitaxel was significantly enhanced with PEGPH20
treatment. Nude mice were inoculated with human PDA BxPC-3 cells adjacent
to the right tibial periosteum, and tumor growth was monitored with
ultrasonography. When tumors reached 400 mm3 (n8/group), mice were staged
into 8 treatment groups: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 monotherapy,
4.5 mg/kg; (3) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg; (4) Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg; (5)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg; (6) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; (7)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; or (8) Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg,
plus PEGPH20. Vehicle or PEGPH20 Nab-Paclitaxel was administered
intravenously starting on study day 0, and then dosed every third day for
15 days. At study termination, the average TGIs from animals treated with
either PEGPH20 alone (12.2%), low dose (3 mg/kg) Nab-Paclitaxel (20.3%),
or low dose Nab-Paclitaxel (3 mg/kg) plus PEGPH20 (25%) were not
significantly different from vehicle-treated animals. However,
Nab-Paclitaxel alone at both 10 mg/kg (61.5%, p<0.01) and 30 mg/kg
(73.6%, p<0.01) inhibited tumor growth. High doses of Nab-Paclitaxel (30
mg/kg) PEGPH20 was associated with dose-related toxicity. The addition of
PEGPH20 to the 10 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg Nab-Paclitaxel groups increased TGI
to 71.7% (pHyaluronan (HA) accumulates in the extracellular matrix (ECM)
of many solid tumors, including those of the prostate, colon, breast,
stomach, ovary, and pancreas. This accumulation is associated with tumor
progression and a negative clinical outcome. Accordingly, an HA-degrading
enzyme, pegylated recombinant human hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), was
developed to target tumor-associated HA in the ECM. Preclinical studies
demonstrated that PEGPH20-mediated removal of HA from HA-rich xenograft
tumors in mice decreased tumor interstitial fluid pressure and tumor
water content resulting in a decompression of tumor vasculature,
increased tumor vascular perfusion, tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and
enhanced chemotherapeutic activity (Thompson 2010). We further
characterized HA expression across multiple human tumor types and
identified pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) as the cancer type with
the most HA (87% express high levels). These observations coupled with a
lack of curative therapy for PDA led us to evaluate alternative treatment
strategies for PDA. Specifically, using the peritibial BxPC-3 human
pancreatic cancer xenograft model, we investigated whether the antitumor
activity of Nab-Paclitaxel was significantly enhanced with PEGPH20
treatment. Nude mice were inoculated with human PDA BxPC-3 cells adjacent
to the right tibial periosteum, and tumor growth was monitored with
ultrasonography. When tumors reached 400 mm3 (n8/group), mice were staged
into 8 treatment groups: (1) vehicle control; (2) PEGPH20 monotherapy,
4.5 mg/kg; (3) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg; (4) Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg; (5)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg; (6) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; (7)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; or (8) Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg,
plus PEGPH20. Vehicle or PEGPH20 Nab-Paclitaxel was administered
intravenously starting on study day 0, and then dosed every third day for
15 days. At study termination, the average TGIs from animals treated with
either PEGPH20 alone (12.2%), low dose (3 mg/kg) Nab-Paclitaxel (20.3%),
or low dose Nab-Paclitaxel (3 mg/kg) plus PEGPH20 (25%) were not
significantly different from vehicle-treated animals. However,
Nab-Paclitaxel alone at both 10 mg/kg (61.5%, p<0.01) and 30 mg/kg
(73.6%, p<0.01) inhibited tumor growth. High doses of Nab-Paclitaxel (30
mg/kg) PEGPH20 was associated with dose-related toxicity. The addition of
PEGPH20 to the 10 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg Nab-Paclitaxel groups increased TGI
to 71.7% (p<0.01), and 90.8% (pHyaluronan (HA) accumulates in the
extracellular matrix (ECM) of many solid tumors, including those of the
prostate, colon, breast, stomach, ovary, and pancreas. This accumulation
is associated with tumor progression and a negative clinical outcome.
Accordingly, an HA-degrading enzyme, pegylated recombinant human
hyaluronidase PH20 (PEGPH20), was developed to target tumor-associated HA
in the ECM. Preclinical studies demonstrated that PEGPH20-mediated
removal of HA from HA-rich xenograft tumors in mice decreased tumor
interstitial fluid pressure and tumor water content resulting in a
decompression of tumor vasculature, increased tumor vascular perfusion,
tumor growth inhibition (TGI) and enhanced chemotherapeutic activity
(Thompson 2010). We further characterized HA expression across multiple
human tumor types and identified pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA)
as the cancer type with the most HA (87% express high levels). These
observations coupled with a lack of curative therapy for PDA led us to
evaluate alternative treatment strategies for PDA. Specifically, using
the peritibial BxPC-3 human pancreatic cancer xenograft model, we
investigated whether the antitumor activity of Nab-Paclitaxel was
significantly enhanced with PEGPH20 treatment. Nude mice were inoculated
with human PDA BxPC-3 cells adjacent to the right tibial periosteum, and
tumor growth was monitored with ultrasonography. When tumors reached 400
mm3 (n8/group), mice were staged into 8 treatment groups: (1) vehicle
control; (2) PEGPH20 monotherapy, 4.5 mg/kg; (3) Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg;
(4) Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg; (5) Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg; (6)
Nab-Paclitaxel, 3 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20; (7) Nab-Paclitaxel, 10 mg/kg, plus
PEGPH20; or (8) Nab-Paclitaxel, 30 mg/kg, plus PEGPH20. Vehicle or
PEGPH20 Nab-Paclitaxel was administered intravenously starting on study
day 0, and then dosed every third day for 15 days. At study termination,
the average TGIs from animals treated with either PEGPH20 alone (12.2%),
low dose (3 mg/kg) Nab-Paclitaxel (20.3%), or low dose Nab-Paclitaxel (3
mg/kg) plus PEGPH20 (25%) were not significantly different from
vehicle-treated animals. However, Nab-Paclitaxel alone at both 10 mg/kg
(61.5%, p<0.01) and 30 mg/kg (73.6%, p<0.01) inhibited tumor growth. High
doses of Nab-Paclitaxel (30 mg/kg) PEGPH20 was associated with
dose-related toxicity. The addition of PEGPH20 to the 10 mg/kg and 30
mg/kg Nab-Paclitaxel groups increased TGI to 71.7% (p<0.01), and 90.8%
(p<0.01), respectively, relative to vehicle. These findings suggest that
PEGPH20 significantly increases the anti-tumor efficacy of Nab-Paclitaxel
in HA-rich PDA tumors at moderate to high Nab-Paclitaxel doses (10 and 30
mg/kg).

