Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Establishment and characterization of fresh primary human
colorectal tumor implants


A personalized approach towards the therapy of colorectal carcinoma is
critical for a successful outcome. In recent years, direct transfer
xenograft models (or the tumor graft) have proven to be highly predictive
and are being adapted in clinical practice. However, direct drug
evaluation in tumor graft models for each individual patient is not
feasible due to time and cost constraints. Predictive biomarker discovery
is an extremely promising application of the tumor graft model, since the
discovered biomarker signatures will direct therapy choice in a much
broader patient population. In collaboration with the Catholic Health
Initiatives Center for Translational Research we at Caliper Life Sciences
have established a collection of tumor graft samples of primary human
colorectal carcinomas. All samples were collected fresh from consenting
patients following an IRB-approved protocol and implanted in vivo on the
day of surgical tumor resection. Tumors were grafted either
orthotopically or subcutaneously in female NIH-III mice. We present here
the results of a comparative study of gene and protein expression
profiles for the primary tumor (clinical samples) and the direct transfer
xenografts. These data will be correlated with drug sensitivity profiles
generated by using the same samples. The resulting data sets will be used
to characterize predictive biomarker signatures that will be a valuable
tool for selection of the most effective therapy tailored to the
individual patient.

