Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting cysteine-mediated dimerization of the MUC1-C oncoprotein
in human cancer cells


The MUC1 heterodimeric protein is aberrantly overexpressed in diverse
human carcinomas and contributes to the malignant phenotype. The MUC1-C
transmembrane subunit contains a CQC motif in the cytoplasmic domain that
has been implicated in the formation of dimers and in its oncogenic
function. The present studies demonstrate that MUC1-C forms dimers in
human breast and lung cancer cells. MUC1-C dimerization was detectable in
the cytoplasm and was independent of MUC1-N, the N-terminal mucin subunit
that extends outside the cell. We show that the MUC1-C cytoplasmic domain
forms dimers in vitro that are disrupted by reducing agents. Moreover,
dimerization of the MUC1-C subunit in cancer cells was blocked by
reducing agents and increased by oxidative stress, supporting involvement
of the CQC motif in forming disulfide bonds. In support of these
observations, mutation of the MUC1-C CQC motif to AQA completely blocked
MUC1-C dimerization. Importantly, these studies were performed with
MUC1-C devoid of fluorescent proteins, such as GFP, CFP and YFP. In this
regard, we show that GFP, CFP and YFP themselves form dimers that are
readily detectable with cross-linking agents. The present results further
demonstrate that a cell-penetrating peptide that targets the MUC1-C CQC
cysteines blocks MUC1-C dimerization in cancer cells. These findings
provide definitive evidence that (i) the MUC1-C cytoplasmic domain
cysteines are necessary and sufficient for MUC1-C dimerization and (ii)
these CQC motif cysteine represent an Achilles heel for targeting MUC1-C
function.

