Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of folate receptor positive drug-resistant cell lines
and strategies to overcome drug resistance


In support of our clinical strategy to treat folate receptor
(FR)-positive platinum resistant ovarian cancer patients with the folate
desacetylvinblastine (DAVLBH) conjugate, EC145, we created two
FR-expressing DAVLBH resistant cell lines (named KB-DR and NCI/ADR-FR).
Results from a calcein efflux assay confirmed that the KB-DR and
NCI/ADR-FR cell lines both express high levels of an efflux pump, and
subsequent flow cytometry analysis using an anti-p-glycoprotein (pgp)
antibody (MRK-16) confirmed pgp overexpression. As predicted, these
DAVLBH-resistant cell lines were also less sensitive to single agent
EC145. However, when tested in combination with known pgp inhibitors,
such as lapatinib or verapamil, substantially enhanced cell killing
activity was observed. Furthermore, folate conjugates of non-pgp
substrates, such as folate-tubulysin and a folate-epothilone, were also
found to be highly active against these drug-resistant cell lines. In
subsequent studies, we created a cisplatin resistant cell line (named
KB-CR) and found that it remained just as susceptible to EC145 as the
parent KB cells, suggesting that cisplatin-resistance did not affect FR
function or sensitivity to folate-targeted microtubule inhibitors. Since
the development of drug resistance did not appear to alter the function
or exploitability of the FR, these new models will be useful for testing
novel folate-targeted strategies for the treatment of difficult-to-treat
cancers.

