Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Taxifolin suppresses UV-induced skin carcinogenesis by targeting
EGFR and PI3-K


Skin cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers in United
States. Taxifolin (3, 3, 4, 5, 7-pentahydroxy-flavanone,
(2R,3R)-dihydroquercetin), which is found in many citrus fruits such as
grapefruits and oranges, has been studied for multiple biological
effects. However, the molecular mechanisms and direct target of taxifolin
in skin cancer chemoprevention are unclear. Here we show that taxifolin
suppresses UV-induced skin carcinogenesis by directly targeting epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K). In
silico computer screening results suggest that EGFR and PI3-K are
potential targets for taxifolin. In vitro and ex vivo pull-down assay
data revealed that taxifolin indeed directly interacts with EGFR and
PI3-K at the ATP-binding pocket, and inhibited their kinase activities in
vitro. UVB-induced phosphorylation of EGFR and Akt were substantially
suppressed by taxifolin in mouse skin epidermal JB6 P+ cells. Taxifolin
also suppressed UVB-induced phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression. Importantly,
topical treatment with taxifolin to the dorsal skin significantly
suppressed tumor incidence, multiplicity and volume in a solar UV-induced
skin carcinogenesis mouse model. Further analysis of the solar UV-exposed
mouse skin showed that the taxifolin-treated group had a substantial
reduction in solar UV-induced phosphorylation of EGFR and Akt. These
results suggest that taxifolin exerts potent chemopreventive activity
against UV-induced skin carcinogenesis by targeting EGFR and PI3-K.

