Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of somatic retrotransposon insertions across cancer
types using RetroSeq


Retrotransposons comprise over 40% of the human genome and represent an
important class of genetic variation. Though most elements are stationary
ancient relics, it has recently been shown that some 100 elements remain
highly active, copying and pasting themselves throughout the genome with
each generation. Retrotransposon insertions can disrupt gene function,
modulate gene expression, and lead to genomic rearrangement. These events
have previously been implicated in cancer, including an account of
insertional mutagenesis in APC as an early event in colon cancer
progression. Due to the inherent difficulty in localizing repeat
elements, however, an extensive investigation of retrotransposons role in
cancer has not yet been performed. We developed RetroSeq, a computational
framework to identify novel insertions of retrotransposons from
paired-end sequencing data. In simulated data, RetroSeq identifies
retrotransposon insertions with 99% sensitivity and 99% specificity. We
ran RetroSeq on whole-genome sequencing data from a panel of tumors
(including 9 colorectal, 20 non-small cell lung, 24 prostate and 22
breast tumors) and matched normal samples to determine the extent of
somatic retrotransposon activity. We find a broad range of novel
retrotransposon insertion events specific to each tumor, with some
insertions falling in exonic as well as intronic and intergenic regions.
These events were validated experimentally and integrated with expression
and methylation data to provide a global view of retrotransposon activity
in these samples. In sum, using RetroSeq we are able to localize novel
retrotransposon insertions in paired-end sequencing data and provide
evidence for the reactivation of retrotransposons in cancer.

