Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of new genes for hereditary breast cancer


Major hereditary breast cancer (BC) genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, contribute to
no more than 20-25% of familial BC clustering; therefore the majority of
BC-predisposing mutations remain to be identified. We have selected for
the study 95 BC cases, which showed accumulation of clinical signs of the
genetic disease (e.g., occurrence of BC among multiple relatives and/or
bilaterality and/or young age at onset), but could not be explained
either by BRCA1/2 sequence alterations or by Russian founder mutations in
CHEK2 (c.1100delC, c.444+1G>A, del5395) or NBN (657del5) genes. The
entire coding regions of DNA repair genes were examined using high
resolution melting (HRM) analysis and DNA sequencing. Three of 16 genes
selected for the study (CHEK2, NBN, PALB2, BRIP1, BARD1, RAD51C, BLM,
FANCG, CHEK1, PARP1, PARP2, ERCC1, XPE, BRD7, RNF8, RAD51A) contained
potentially deleterious mutations. Two patients carried inactivating
lesion in the PALB2 gene (p.R414X and p.Q921X); both these carriers had
the bilateral form of BC disease. 1 woman harbored mutation in the FANCG
gene (c.520_524delTCTAinsC), which resulted in the loss of serine at
position 174 and lysine to glutamine substitution at position 175. The
analysis of the BLM gene revealed two heterozygous carriers of the c.1642
C>T (Q548X) allele. This mutation was subjected to the extended study,
which confirmed its recurrent character and strong association with BC
risk: BLM c.1642 C>T (Q548X) heterozygotes were detected in 17/1,498
(1.1%) BC patients as compared to 2/1,093 (0.2%) healthy females (p =
0.004). As expected for BC-predisposing gene, the BLM 1670 C>T allele
tended to be associated with first-degree family history of BC, early
onset and bilateral appearance of the disease. This is the first
demonstration of the role of the BLM heterozygosity in the determination
of BC risk. The impact of constitutional BLM mutations in hereditary
cancer predisposition deserves to be tested in other ethnic groups as
well as in other tumor types.

