Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p21 as a predictive marker of pathologic complete response after
5-FU based chemoradiotherapy for patients with rectal cancer


Purpose: Pre-operative chemoradiation therapy (CRT) is standard treatment
in clinical stage T3/4 or node positive rectal cancer, however, there are
no established biomarker that can predict pathological response and
clinical outcome to CRT. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
correlation between expression of molecular markers and pathological
response and clinical outcomes in patients with rectal cancer who
received 5-FU based chemoradiotherapy. Experiment design:
Immunohistochemical stain was performed in tissue arrays constructed from
core tissue specimens taken before treatment and from operative specimens
from 120 patients who received 5-FU based pre-operative CRT and surgery
between June 2003 and Dec. 2008. Expression of Ki67, TS, BAX, EpCAM, p53,
p21, EGFR, CD44, CD133, CD166, HIF1a and ALDH1 were assessed and
correlated with tumor regression grades and disease free survival.
Results Of 120 patients (M/F 77/43, median age:63), 23 (19.2%) patients
achieved pathologic complete remission; Dworak grade 1: 18 (15%), grade
2: 51 (42.5%); Grade 3: 28 (23.3%), and Grade 4: 23 (19.2%). In the
analysis of association between marker expressions and tumor regression
grades, low p21 expression at pretreatment biopsy was significantly
associated with grade 4 (total regression) (p=0.039) and better disease
free survival (5yr DFS rate - low vs high p21: 89% vs 54%, p=0.001). In
the multivariate analysis, low p21 expression level in pre-treatment
biopsy was significantly associated with better DFS (p=0.003, HR 0.20;
95% CI 0.72, 0.57) and the score difference of p21 expression between
pre- and post treatment tissue was also significant (p=0.002, HR 0.09;
95% CI 0.02, 0.39). Low CD166 expression level at pretreatment biopsy was
associated with better DFS (p=0.003; HR 0.19; 95% CI 0.07, 0.58). Low ypN
stage and high tumor regression grade also have significantly a good
effect on DFS as well (p= 0.001, 0.018 respectively). Conclusion Our
results showed low p21 and CD166 expression at pretreatment biopsy was
associated with tumor regression and good prognosis in patients treated
with 5-FU based chemoradioatherapy. Larger, prospective trials and
functional studies are warranted to determine the role of p21 and CD166
as predictive biomarker of response to chemoradiotherapy.

