Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA repair single nucleotide polymorphisms interact with indoor
tanning and melanoma


Development of melanoma has previously been associated with compromised
DNA repair which can be analyzed by genotyping SNPs in DNA repair genes.
The Minnesota Skin Health Study collected DNA samples to investigate the
hypothesis that DNA repair SNPs are associated with increased risk for
melanoma among tanning bed users. 92 SNPs, with minor allele frequencies
greater than 0.05, were analyzed in 20 genes for 1659 samples_893
melanoma cases and 766 controls. The SNPs were genotyped on the Illumina
BeadExpress GoldenGate platform. The SNPs were then analyzed for
individual SNP associations with melanoma, haplotype associations with
melanoma, individual SNP interactions with ever/never indoor tanning, and
haplotype interactions with ever/never indoor tanning after adjustments
for age, gender, and phenotypic index. There were several SNPs that had
an association with melanoma including: six SNPs in three nucleotide
excision repair genes ERCC4, ERCC6 (rs4253190, adjusted OR=1.19, 95%CI:
1.04-1.37; rs4838518, adjusted OR=0.86, 95%CI: 0.75-0.99; rs4253121,
adjusted OR=0.84, 95%CI:0.71-0.99), and XPC, one SNP in base excision
repair gene RFC1, one SNP in direct reversal DNA repair gene MGMT, and
one SNP in a novel gene FBRSL1(rs4883571, adjusted OR=0.87, 95%CI:
0.75-1.00). There were four haplotype associations with melanoma
including one ERCC6 block (rs10745261, rs6537537, rs4253121: GGA,
adjusted OR: 0.84, 95%CI: 0.71-0.99), two MGMT blocks, and one XPC block.
Additionally, there was one SNP in FBRSL1 (rs4883557, p=0.0056) and one
SNP in ERCC6 (rs10745261, p=0.025) that had an interaction with indoor
tanning along with two haplotypes including one block in ERCC6
(rs10745261, rs6537537, rs4253121: AAG, p=0.0355) and one block in MGMT.
While the interaction analyses were suggestive, the study is limited
because none of the SNPs or haplotypes were only significant
(pDevelopment of melanoma has previously been associated with compromised
DNA repair which can be analyzed by genotyping SNPs in DNA repair genes.
The Minnesota Skin Health Study collected DNA samples to investigate the
hypothesis that DNA repair SNPs are associated with increased risk for
melanoma among tanning bed users. 92 SNPs, with minor allele frequencies
greater than 0.05, were analyzed in 20 genes for 1659 samples_893
melanoma cases and 766 controls. The SNPs were genotyped on the Illumina
BeadExpress GoldenGate platform. The SNPs were then analyzed for
individual SNP associations with melanoma, haplotype associations with
melanoma, individual SNP interactions with ever/never indoor tanning, and
haplotype interactions with ever/never indoor tanning after adjustments
for age, gender, and phenotypic index. There were several SNPs that had
an association with melanoma including: six SNPs in three nucleotide
excision repair genes ERCC4, ERCC6 (rs4253190, adjusted OR=1.19, 95%CI:
1.04-1.37; rs4838518, adjusted OR=0.86, 95%CI: 0.75-0.99; rs4253121,
adjusted OR=0.84, 95%CI:0.71-0.99), and XPC, one SNP in base excision
repair gene RFC1, one SNP in direct reversal DNA repair gene MGMT, and
one SNP in a novel gene FBRSL1(rs4883571, adjusted OR=0.87, 95%CI:
0.75-1.00). There were four haplotype associations with melanoma
including one ERCC6 block (rs10745261, rs6537537, rs4253121: GGA,
adjusted OR: 0.84, 95%CI: 0.71-0.99), two MGMT blocks, and one XPC block.
Additionally, there was one SNP in FBRSL1 (rs4883557, p=0.0056) and one
SNP in ERCC6 (rs10745261, p=0.025) that had an interaction with indoor
tanning along with two haplotypes including one block in ERCC6
(rs10745261, rs6537537, rs4253121: AAG, p=0.0355) and one block in MGMT.
While the interaction analyses were suggestive, the study is limited
because none of the SNPs or haplotypes were only significant (p<0.05)
before Bonferroni correction. Further analyses of the function of these
SNPs will be necessary, particularly for ERCC6, which had SNPs that were
significant in every analysis, and FBRSL1, which is a novel gene whose
function is unknown.

