Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Perifosine induces in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity in
gastric cancer cells


Perifosine, a novel phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling
inhibitor is currently being tested in several phase II/III trials for
treatment of major human cancers. However, the efficacy of perifosine in
human gastric cancer has not been established. As Akt is known to be
highly activated in gastric cancer, we investigated the antitumor effect
and gene expression patterns of perifosine on gastric cancer cells. The
antitumor efficacy was examined in 25 gastric cancer cell lines (4 from
ATCC, 4 from JCRB, 8 from KCBL, and 9 cell lines established from Korean
gastric cancer patients at the Cancer Metastasis Research Center, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea). Several in vitro assays
{MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphnyltetrazolium bromide] assay,
western blotting for Akt pathway, apoptosis, cell cycle and microarray
analysis} were used to assess the cytotoxic effect of 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) and perifosine. In vivo response study of human gastric cancer
cell line was measured after perifosine treatment. Perifosine inhibited
gastric cancer cell growth as a dose and time-dependent manner with the
median 1.09 mol/L of IC50 (range 0.2-5.8 mol/L). 5-FU alone inhibited
cell growth with the median 11.1 mol/L of IC50 (range 2.6 to 380 mol/L).
For the combination effect, perifosine and 5-FU were synergistic in 14
(56%) cell lines and antagonistic in 8 (32%) cell lines. To clarify the
different mechanism of synergistic and antagonistic effect, we selected
one synergistic (YCC2, 5-FU IC 50= 11.1) and antagonistic cell lines (SNU
628, 5-FU IC 50=57.2) among those relatively 5-FU insensitive cell lines.
In terms of signal pathway, perifosine inhibited pAkt and pERK1/2
expression and it activated pJNK expression. However, this change was not
seen in the antagonistic cell line (SNU 638). In addition, for the
perifosine and 5-FU combination, these patterns were also similarly
demonstrated. Apoptotic molecule, cleaved PARP was also increased as a
dose and time dependent manner. Then, we compared gene expression
patterns between 6 perifosine-sensitive and 3 perifosine-resistant cell
lines and identified 122 genes related to perifosine sensitivity (by
4-folds, PPerifosine, a novel phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
signaling inhibitor is currently being tested in several phase II/III
trials for treatment of major human cancers. However, the efficacy of
perifosine in human gastric cancer has not been established. As Akt is
known to be highly activated in gastric cancer, we investigated the
antitumor effect and gene expression patterns of perifosine on gastric
cancer cells. The antitumor efficacy was examined in 25 gastric cancer
cell lines (4 from ATCC, 4 from JCRB, 8 from KCBL, and 9 cell lines
established from Korean gastric cancer patients at the Cancer Metastasis
Research Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea).
Several in vitro assays {MTT
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphnyltetrazolium bromide] assay,
western blotting for Akt pathway, apoptosis, cell cycle and microarray
analysis} were used to assess the cytotoxic effect of 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) and perifosine. In vivo response study of human gastric cancer
cell line was measured after perifosine treatment. Perifosine inhibited
gastric cancer cell growth as a dose and time-dependent manner with the
median 1.09 mol/L of IC50 (range 0.2-5.8 mol/L). 5-FU alone inhibited
cell growth with the median 11.1 mol/L of IC50 (range 2.6 to 380 mol/L).
For the combination effect, perifosine and 5-FU were synergistic in 14
(56%) cell lines and antagonistic in 8 (32%) cell lines. To clarify the
different mechanism of synergistic and antagonistic effect, we selected
one synergistic (YCC2, 5-FU IC 50= 11.1) and antagonistic cell lines (SNU
628, 5-FU IC 50=57.2) among those relatively 5-FU insensitive cell lines.
In terms of signal pathway, perifosine inhibited pAkt and pERK1/2
expression and it activated pJNK expression. However, this change was not
seen in the antagonistic cell line (SNU 638). In addition, for the
perifosine and 5-FU combination, these patterns were also similarly
demonstrated. Apoptotic molecule, cleaved PARP was also increased as a
dose and time dependent manner. Then, we compared gene expression
patterns between 6 perifosine-sensitive and 3 perifosine-resistant cell
lines and identified 122 genes related to perifosine sensitivity (by
4-folds, P<0.05) including 49 up-regulated and 48 down-regulated known
genes in the resistant cells. Antitumor efficacy of perifosine
monotherapy and combination with 5-FU derivative (capecitabine) were
treated for YCC2 tumor bearing xenograft mice. Perifosine monotherapy
demonstrated moderate antitumor activity. The combination of both agents
produced a more prominent antitumor response as compared to monotherapy.
Taken together, in gastric cancer cells, perifosine demonstrated
antitumor activity and enhances the efficacy of 5-FU even in
taxane-resistant cancer cell lines. Current data provide strong support
for further development of this combination in clinical trials.

