Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antiangiogenic activity of honokiol through inhibition of vascular
vessel formation in the mouse embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial
cells


Embryonic stem (ES) cells, which are characterized by pluripotency and
self-renewal, have recently been highlighted in several aspects of drug
discovery. In particular, the potential of ES cells to differentiate into
specific-cell types make them an extremely useful tool in the evaluation
of the biological activity of test compounds. In the present study, we
employed mouse embryonic stem (mES) cell-derived embryoid bodies (EBs) to
evaluate the antiangiogenic activity of natural compounds. Honokiol, a
major neolignan derived from the bark of Magnolia obovata Thunberg
(Magnoliaceae), was capable of inhibiting differentiation and vascular
vessel formation in mES cell models. EBs were formed using hanging drop
cultures. The induction of vascular formation was carried out on
gelatin-coated plates in EGM-2 medium. Cell proliferation was measured by
MTT assay. RT-PCR, immunocytochemistry, and Western blotting were used to
measure differentiation of EBs into endothelial cells and vessel
formation. The growth inhibition of honokiol in EB-derived endothelial
cells was found that honokiol is more sensitive in the differentiated
cells (on day 8) compared to the undifferentiated EB-derived endothelial
cells (on day 1) with the IC50 values of 6.0 and 17.8 M, respectively.
Honokiol also dramatically decreased the expressions of an endothelial
biomarker PECAM in the differentiated EB-derived endothelial cells (on
day 11). Honokiol also suppressed the activation of p38 MAPK, Akt, ERK1/2
and SAPK/JNK in EB-derived endothelial cells. The antiangiogenic activity
of honokiol is associated with the suppression of PECAM and the MAPK
pathway in EB-derived endothelial cells.

