Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of osteosarcoma driver genes by integrative
analysis of copy number and gene expression data


High-grade osteosarcoma is a tumor with a complex genomic profile,
occurring primarily in adolescents. The extensive genomic alterations
obscure the identification of genes driving tumorigenesis in osteosarcoma
progenitor cells. In order to identify such driver genes, we integrated
DNA copy number profiles (Affymetrix SNP 6.0) of 32 diagnostic biopsies
with 84 expression profiles (Illumina Human-6 v2.0) of osteosarcoma as
compared with its putative progenitor cells, i.e. mesenchymal stem cells
(n=12) or osteoblasts (n=3). In addition, we performed paired analyses
between copy number and expression profiles of a subset of 29 patients
for which we had both DNA and mRNA profiles. Integrative analyses were
performed in Nexus Copy Number Software and statistical language R.
Paired analyses were performed on all probes which were significantly
differentially expressed in corresponding LIMMA analyses. For both
non-paired and paired analyses, copy number aberration frequency was set
to >35%. Non-paired integrative analyses resulted in 45 genes that were
present in both analyses using different control sets, i.e. MSCs and
osteoblasts. 101 genes overlapped between the two paired integrative
analyses. Paired analyses detected >90% of all genes found with the
corresponding non-paired analyses. Remarkably, approximately twice as
many genes as found in the corresponding non-paired analyses were
detected. Affected genes were compared with differential expression in
osteosarcoma cell lines. An overrepresentation of altered cell division
related genes was found, such as MCM4 and LATS2, suggesting that
deregulation of the cell cycle is an initial driver of
osteosarcomagenesis.

