Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of c-met radio-sensitizes in breast cancer brain
metastatic cancer


Ionizing radiation (IR) is a critical component in the treatments of
breast cancer patients with all stages of the disease and a gold standard
modality in patients with multiple brain metastasis, demonstrating
improved overall survival (OS) in recent meta-analysis. However, the
problem of recurrent or persistent disease exists due to tumor
radio-resistance, and the development of distant metastasis after IR has
presented a major obstacle to treatment. We investigated which molecule
could be targeted for radio-sensitization. We found that c-Met
over-expression and activation of downstream-signaling were induced in
response to IR in a panel of human breast cancer cells by q-PCR, FACS,
and Western blot analysis. The radio-sensitizing effect of c-Met
silencing in vitro showed that increased c-Met activity is required for
radio-resistance. In addition, c-Met inhibition combined with IR showed
synergistic antitumor response including improved tumor regression and
lengthened overall survival in breast cancer orthotopic and experimental
brain metastasis xenograft models. Our preclinical findings establish a
basis for a novel strategy to target the HGF/c-Met pathway with radiation
when treating primary and brain metastatic breast cancer and possibly
other c-Met pathway dependent cancers.

