Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The novel phospholipid ether analog CLR1404 decreases glioblastoma
stem cell proliferation, suppresses GBM growth, and improves survival


Most patients treated for glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common
primary brain malignancy, have less than 2 years survival due to rapid
recurrence. The GBM stem cell (GSC) sub-population exhibits therapeutic
resistance and is hypothesized to drive tumor recurrence. Therefore,
GSC-specific targeting is likely critical for improving outcome.
Phospholipid ether analog, CLR1404 and its radioiodinated isosteres,
exhibit cancer cell-specific uptake and prolonged retention in 57/61
cancer cell lines and xenografts (including GBM) due to affinity for
cancer cell lipid rafts. In this study, we investigated the therapeutic
potential of CLR1404 against GBM and its GSC subpopulation. Multiple
sphere-forming GSC lines were isolated from patient specimens with IRB
approval, and rigorously validated for self-renewal, multi-lineage
potential, and high efficiency orthotopic tumor initiation in NOD-SCID
mice. Proliferation assays were performed by addition of CLR1404 in
serum-free medium for 24 hours. To test effects on stem cell properties,
GSCs were treated with CLR1404, dissociated to single cells, plated at
500 cells in a 96-well plate, and allowed to form spheres (2-4 weeks).
CLR1404 inhibition of the AKT oncogenic signaling pathway in GSCs was
assayed with immunoblot analysis. In vivo, GSCs were pre-treated for 24
hours with CLR1404 prior to orthotopic injection of 200,000 live cells
into immunodeficient mice. Subsequent survival curves were then
constructed. CLR1404 anti-proliferative effects were seen on all 7
different GSC and GBM lines tested with IC50 values ranging between 5-10
M using MTS assay; control normal differentiated neural cells exhibited
an IC50 of approximately 40 M. CLR1404 treatment also decreased
sphere-forming ability of multiple GSC lines with IC50 values between
5-10 M. CLR1404 inhibition of AKT activation was observed using
immunoblot analysis. CLR1404 pre-treatment of GSCs significantly
increased survival time in an orthotopic mouse model (Control: 596.1
days; CLR1404: 944.4 days), suggesting CLR1404 treatment of the GSC tumor
initiating cells improves outcome. This data of CLR1404's therapeutic
potential against GBM and its GSCs, combined with previously demonstrated
tumor cell targeting specificity of CLR1404 and its radioactive
isosteres, provides strong evidence for the potential of novel
CLR1404-based therapies to improve GBM outcomes.

