Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anticancer effects and mechanisms of action of novel flavonoid
didymin in neuroblastomas


Neuroblastomas arise from the neural crest cells and represent the most
common solid tumors outside the nervous system in children. The
amplification of N-Myc plays a primary role in the pathogenesis of
neuroblastomas whereas acquired mutations of p53 lead to refractory and
relapsed cases of neuroblastomas. In this regard, dietary compounds which
can target N-Myc and exert anti-cancer effects independent of p53 status
acquire significance in the management of neuroblastomas. Hence, we
investigated the anti-cancer properties of the flavonoid didymin in
neuroblastomas. Didymin effectively inhibited proliferation and induced
apoptosis irrespective of p53 status in neuroblastomas. Didymin down
regulated PI3K, pAkt, Akt, vimentin and up regulated RKIP levels. Didymin
induced G2/M arrest along with decreasing the levels of cyclin D1, CDK4
and cyclin B1. Importantly, didymin inhibited N-Myc as confirmed at
protein, mRNA and transcriptional level by promoter-reporter assays. HPLC
analysis of didymin (2 mg/kg b.w.) treated mice serum revealed effective
oral absorption with free didymin concentration of 2.1 M. Further in vivo
mice xenografts studies revealed that didymin (2 mg/kg b.w.) treated
animals had significant reductions in tumors size compared to controls.
Didymin strongly inhibited the proliferation (Ki67) and angiogenesis
(CD31) markers as well as N-Myc expression as revealed by the
histopathological examination of paraffin embedded section of resected
tumors. Collectively, our in vitro and in vivo studies elucidated the
anti-cancer properties and mechanisms of action of a novel, orally active
and palatable flavonoid didymin which makes it a potential new approach
for neuroblastoma therapy (NANT) to target pediatric neuroblastomas.
(Supported in part by NIH grant CA 77495)

