Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tobacco smoking women are not at higher risk than men for lung
cancer


Background. Worldwide lung cancer incidence is decreasing or leveling off
among men, but rising among women. Gender differences in the effect of
tobacco carcinogens on lung cancer risk have been hypothesized, but the
epidemiologic evidence is conflicting. Objective. To test gender-smoking
interaction in the association with lung cancer risk within the large
Environment And Genetics in Lung cancer Etiology (EAGLE) population-based
case-control study, conducted in Italy between 2002-2005. The study
collected detailed lifetime smoking histories by personal interview.
Methods. Separately for males and females, we estimated odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for cumulative exposure to smoking
(pack-years) by logistic regression, adjusted for age, residence area,
and time since quitting smoking. We evaluated several potential
confounders and effect-modifiers, including tobacco type, inhalation
depth, percentage of each cigarette smoked, and visualized the tobacco
dose-response relationship across genders through floating trends. We
tested gender-smoking interaction (female versus male effect) by
including their product term in the models. Results. When the model
included never smoker cases and controls, ORs for categories of
pack-years were higher in men, with a negative female-smoking interaction
(P=0.0009). Within ever smokers, ORs estimates were somewhat higher in
women, but the test for interaction was not significant (P=0.55). We
obtained similar results for pack-years as a continuous (log-transformed)
variable. Among smokers, no gender-smoking interaction was found by
histology. Conclusion. Our findings do not support a higher female
susceptibility to tobacco-related lung cancer. Equally vigorous health
policy interventions should continue to fight smoking habits in both
genders.

