Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR1288 in colorectal cancers: Altered expression and its
clinicopathological significance


Introduction: MicroRNA-1288 (miR-1288) is a non-coding RNA located in
17p11.2 and not been studied solely in cancer. We aim to examine the
miR-1288 expression in a large cohort of patients with colorectal
carcinoma, adenoma and non-neoplastic colorectal tissues. The
implications of miR-1288 expression and clinicopathological features were
also studied. Methods: Tissues from 102 patients with surgical resection
of colorectum (82 adenocarcinomas, 10 adenomas and 10 non-neoplastic
tissues), two colon cancer cell lines (SW480 and SW48) and one normal
colonic epithelial cell line (FHC) were recruited. miRNA was extracted
from all these samples and were converted in to cDNA. Quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed for the
detection of miR-1288 expression. The results were correlated with the
clinical and pathological data. Results: miR-1288 expression was
decreased in majority of colorectal adenocarcinoma when compared to
colorectal adenoma and non-neoplastic tissues. Reduced or absence
expression of miR-1288 was noted in 78% (n=64) of the cancers. The colon
cancer cell lines showed reduced expression of miR-1288 compared to
normal colonic epithelial cell line. Distal colorectal cancers showed
higher expression levels of miR-1288 than proximal cancers (p= 0.007).
The expression levels of miR-1288 were significantly altered in different
levels of cancer invasion (T staging) (p= 0.023). Conclusions: Altered
expression pattern of miR-1288 in colorectal cancers compare to
non-neoplastic tissues was identified. Also, differential regulation of
miR-1288 was found to be related to location and pathological staging of
colorectal cancers.

