Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Papillary thyroid carcinomas with and without lymph node
metastasis show differences in tumor-infiltrating leukocytes


Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most common endocrine malignancy with
approximately 48,000 new cases expected in 2011. Additionally, the
incidence has doubled over the last three decades. While 20-year survival
rates are extremely high with usual therapy, 15% will have recurrence and
5-10% will die from their disease. If refractory to standard treatment,
no sufficient adjuvant therapies are available. Cancer immunotherapy uses
a patient's own immune system to recognize and eliminate malignant cells.
The potential advantages of this approach over conventional treatments
include the systemic trafficking of immune cells to treat primary and
metastatic disease, inherent antigen-specificity of adaptive immunity to
minimize collateral damage, and most importantly, the induction of
immunological memory to prevent recurrent disease. The degree and type of
immune response are poorly understood in thyroid cancer. In this study,
papillary thyroid cancer samples, with normal tissue matched to the same
specimen, from de-identified patients were obtained retrospectively from
the Norris Cancer Center Tumor Bank and stained using
immunohistochemistry with antibodies specific for CD8 and CD16. Sections
were evaluated for tumor-infiltrating leukocyte location, intra-tumor
versus invading margin, and percentage of CD8 or CD16 positive
lymphocytes, respectively. The results were analyzed for correlation
between immune infiltrate and clinical parameters. Nineteen cases of
papillary thyroid cancer were studied. The mean patient age was 40 years
(range 22-55). Seven of nineteen patients had lymph node metastasis. An
organized lymphocytic infiltration was seen in seven samples and was
significantly correlated with the presence with CD8+ and CD16+ cells, at
the invading margin and tumor parenchyma, respectively. Age Papillary
thyroid carcinoma is the most common endocrine malignancy with
approximately 48,000 new cases expected in 2011. Additionally, the
incidence has doubled over the last three decades. While 20-year survival
rates are extremely high with usual therapy, 15% will have recurrence and
5-10% will die from their disease. If refractory to standard treatment,
no sufficient adjuvant therapies are available. Cancer immunotherapy uses
a patient's own immune system to recognize and eliminate malignant cells.
The potential advantages of this approach over conventional treatments
include the systemic trafficking of immune cells to treat primary and
metastatic disease, inherent antigen-specificity of adaptive immunity to
minimize collateral damage, and most importantly, the induction of
immunological memory to prevent recurrent disease. The degree and type of
immune response are poorly understood in thyroid cancer. In this study,
papillary thyroid cancer samples, with normal tissue matched to the same
specimen, from de-identified patients were obtained retrospectively from
the Norris Cancer Center Tumor Bank and stained using
immunohistochemistry with antibodies specific for CD8 and CD16. Sections
were evaluated for tumor-infiltrating leukocyte location, intra-tumor
versus invading margin, and percentage of CD8 or CD16 positive
lymphocytes, respectively. The results were analyzed for correlation
between immune infiltrate and clinical parameters. Nineteen cases of
papillary thyroid cancer were studied. The mean patient age was 40 years
(range 22-55). Seven of nineteen patients had lymph node metastasis. An
organized lymphocytic infiltration was seen in seven samples and was
significantly correlated with the presence with CD8+ and CD16+ cells, at
the invading margin and tumor parenchyma, respectively. Age <40 years was
significantly associated with this pattern of CD8+ and CD16+ cells
compared to those older than 40. Lymph node metastasis was significantly
association with an increased level of intra-tumoral CD8+ cell
infiltration and there was a non-significant trend towards a positive
association between nodal metastasis and intra-tumoral CD16+ cell
infiltration. The present study demonstrates an increase in cell-mediated
immune infiltration in samples that have nodal metastases versus those
that do not, suggesting that immune therapy may be utilized in the future
treatment of aggressive thyroid carcinoma to improve disease response.

