Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smac mimetic TL32711 and TRAIL synergistically induce apoptosis of
germinal center B lymphoma cells


TL32711, a Smac mimetic in clinical testing, potently targets Inhibitor
of Apoptosis Proteins (IAPs, including cIAPs and XIAP) to unblock
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways, enabling caspase-dependent apoptosis
via multiple signals including TRAIL (Tumor Necrosis Factor-Related
Apoptosis Inducing Ligand). TL32711 also inactivates canonical and
activates non-canonical NF-B signaling through cIAPs. We investigated the
pro-apoptotic effects of TL32711, alone and in combination with TRAIL to
activate the extrinsic pathway, in a panel of B cell lymphoma cell lines
representing germinal center/follicular (GC) vs activated B cell (ABC)
histologies. We hypothesized that the efficacy of this potential
combination therapeutic strategy might differ between GC and ABC lymphoma
types, as ABC are reported to be NF-kB dependent. We used the following
EBV negative cell lines: WSU- FSCCL t(14:18)+ follicular lymphoma (FL),
FC-TxFL2 t(14:18)+ transformed FL and SU-DHL4 GC-type diffuse large B
cell lymphoma (DLBCL) as examples of GC origin lymphomas. U2932 and TMD8
served as ABC-type DLBCL. Apoptosis was determined by annexin V staining
after 48 hr incubation (TL32711 added 2-3 hr after TRAIL). The
contribution of the different apoptotic pathways was determined by
caspase-3 (common), -8 (extrinsic), and-9 (intrinsic) activity, assessed
by flow cytometric methods and Western blot. TL32711 had little effect as
a single agent on any of these B cell lymphoma cell lines at 100nM,
though apoptosis was induced at 10-20 M in GC types. TRAIL alone (10-25
ng/ml) induced apoptosis in the 3 GC lines, but had little effect on the
2 ABC lines. Combination of TL32711 and TRAIL at low concentrations
showed marked apoptosis in GC lines, with minimal to no effect for each
agent alone. In the combination-treated GC types, caspases -3, -8 and -9
were significantly induced, confirming activation of both pathways. We
had previously shown in FSCCL and TxFL2 that caspase-8 induction also
cleaved tBID, activating the intrinsic apoptotic pathway via caspase-9.
GC subtypes, including FL, transformed FL and GC-DLBCL were sensitive to
TRAIL and TL32711 at clinically achievable concentrations for TL32711,
with supra-additive combination effects. ABC-type DLBCL were not
sensitive to either agent alone or in combination. We are investigating
whether ABC-DLBCL are truly dependent on canonical NF-B activation for
survival or have other mechanisms of resistance to TRAIL and IAP
inhibition. These data suggest that clinical trials of TL32711 may focus
on FL and GC lymphoma in combination with TRAIL or TRAIL-agonists.

