Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p120ctn is a key effector of Ras-PKC-mediated oncogenic signaling


Within the family of protein kinase C (PKC) molecules only the novel
isoform member PRKCE (PKC) acts as a bona fide oncogene in in-vitro and
in-vivo models of tumorigenesis. Previous studies have reported
cancer-specific misexpression of PKC at levels well above that of normal
adjacent tissue in breast, prostate and lung tumors. We find that
oncogenic Ras signaling promotes PKC expression and results in
hyperphosphorylation of CTNND1/p120-catenin (p120ctn). In this context,
loss of PKC by genetic or pharmacological means results in normalization
of morphology and signaling responses. In a KRasD13-dependent breast
cancer model loss of PKC function results in growth inhibition in
2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) culture systems as well as in
orthotopic xenografts concomitant with the normalization of a subset of
Ras-induced signaling responses. Using phospho-proteomic profiling
analysis we observe that CTNND1 (p120ctn) phosphorylation at serine 268
(S268) occurs in a strictly PKC dependent manner. Treatment with a
specific PKC inhibitor, PF-5263555, recapitulates the genetic loss of
function phenotype and interferes with breast cancer cell growth in-vitro
and in-vivo. We also show that PKC-mediated phosphorylation at S268
further stabilizes additional p120ctn phosphorylation sites and total
protein levels of -catenin. We demonstrate that p120ctn phosphorylation
at S268 represents a specific readout for PKC activity and as such can
serve as a suitable biomarker for PKC dysregulation in human cancer and
for monitoring therapeutic response.

