Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chondroitin sulfate-mediated regulation of Wnt/-catenin signaling
in breast cancer


Breast cancer is among the leading causes of cancer related deaths in
women in the U.S. Aberrant activation of the Wnt/-catenin signaling
pathway plays a critical role in breast cancer progression; however,
activating mutations in core pathway components are not frequently
observed. Molecules that reside in the cellular microenvironment,
including glycosaminoglycans, are known to regulate tumor progression.
The glycosaminoglycan chondroitin sulfate, as part of proteoglycan
molecules, resides at the cell surface or in the extracellular matrix,
and has been proposed to regulate the activities of several signaling
pathways. We show here that the balance of chondroitin sulfation is a
critical regulator of Wnt/-catenin signaling in breast cancer cells.
Overexpression of the chondroitin sulfotransferase C4ST-1 in vitro can
significantly reduce several parameters of Wnt/-catenin signaling
activity, including Wnt3a-stimulated total -catenin levels, TOPFLASH
reporter activity, and proliferation, suggesting that the specific
chondroitin sulfation pattern conferred by C4ST-1 can negatively regulate
Wnt/-catenin signaling in breast cancer cells. Interestingly, we show
that Wnt3a stimulation increases C4ST-1 mRNA and protein levels, thus
forming a negative feedback loop to attenuate Wnt/-catenin signaling
output. Accordingly, treatment with the C4ST-1 product CS-E interferes
with Wnt/-catenin signaling activity, LRP6 phosphorylation, -catenin
nuclear localization, and Wnt3a-mediated biological events in vitro.
These data identify a novel chondroitin sulfate-based control mechanism
for the Wnt/-catenin pathway, and provide evidence for a potential
therapeutic use of CS-E as an inhibitor of Wnt/-catenin signaling in
breast cancer.

