Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p300 targeting impairs treg function and promotes host anti-tumor
immunity


The long-held view that tumors were not sufficiently immunogenic to
promote host immune responses has now been revised to the assessment that
at least for some tumors, Foxp3+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells actively
suppress anti-tumor immunity. Seeking to build on our ongoing assessment
of the regulation of Foxp3+ Treg biology by HDAC and HAT enzymes, we have
begun to use combined genetic and pharmacologic approaches to identify
and modulate key mechanism within Tregs that limit host immunity.
Microarray studies of gene expression in WT, p300-/- and CBP-/- Tregs
showed that p300 or CBP deletion led to down-regulation of Foxp3
expression, as well as that of a number of signature Treg genes. Cells
co-transfected with Foxp3 and increasing amounts of p300 expression
vectors showed that Foxp3 acetylation was enhanced by increasing levels
of p300 levels, whereas a p300 small molecule inhibitor, C646 (p300i),
impaired Foxp3 acetylation and inhibited Treg function using in vitro
suppression assays. In vivo use of C646 showed negligible effects on CD4,
CD8 or Treg cell numbers, but qPCR studies showed C646 decreased Treg
expression of CTLA-4, GITR, IL-10 and TGF-b, in vitro assays again showed
impaired Treg suppression. Additional studies showed, critically, that
use of the p300i impaired Treg but not T effector cells in allograft
recipients. Thus, parent-to-F1 assays involving alloactivation and
proliferation of CD4 an dCD8 T cells were unaffected by C646, and this
p300i restored allograft rejection in Treg-dependent models of allograft
survival. Turning to tumor models, TC1 lung cancer cells were injected in
the flanks of WT B6 mice, B6 mice in which p300 was deleted in CD4+ T
cells (Treg plus Teff using CD4-Cre) or just in Tregs (Foxp3-Cre)
(n=10/grp), p300 was inhibited using C646 (Alzet pumps, 14 d, 0.9
mg/kg/d) from day 6 post-tumor injection; in both genetic and
pharmacologic approaches, p300 targeting suppressed tumor cell growth.
qPCR analysis of tumors in C646-treated mice showed increased CD4 and
granzyme B mRNA but decreased Foxp3; these data were confirmed by
immunohistology, along with increased IFN-g production by purified CD8
cells (ELISPOT), along with reductions in tumor volumes and weights in
these C646-treated mice. C646 use did not impair tumor growth in
immunodeficient (RAG-/-) mice, in which tumors were exposed to drug in
RAG-/- mice as seen by decreased acetylation of histone 3 in tumor
extracts (Western blot); no effects on acetylation of certain
p300-independent targets within tumor extracts was seen (e.g. acetylation
of alpha-tubulin was unimpaired). The p300i also had no direct effect on
tumor cell proliferation in vitro. We conclude that our comprehensive
genetic and pharmacologic studies show that p300 is an important target
for modulation of host Foxp3+ Treg functions, such that Treg suppression
can be incrementally reduced and host anti-tumor responses promoted
without inducing concomitant autoimmunity.

