Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD73 as a target in cancer immunotherapy


It is increasingly being recognised that the tumor microenvironment
modulates the effector functions of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and
consequently suppresses anti-tumor immunity. One immunosuppressive
component of the tumor microenvironment is elevated levels of adenosine.
The conversion of ATP into adenosine occurs in a stepwise manner
essentially through the enzymatic activity of CD39 (NTPDase I) (ATP>AMP)
and CD73 (ecto-5-nucleotidase- AMP>adenosine). CD73 is a
glycosylphosphatidyl-inositol (GPI)-linked cell surface enzyme
constitutively expressed on endothelial cells, foxp3+ Tregs and subsets
of leukocytes, and is considered as the rate-limiting enzyme in the
production of extracellular adenosine. We have recently demonstrated that
one of the mechanisms contributing to the immunosuppressive accumulation
of extracellular adenosine in tumors is the expression of CD73 by tumor
cells, but CD73 expression on foxp3+ Tregs is also important for their
suppression of anti-tumor immunity. We now report on the role of
host-derived CD73 in de novo tumor development in mice. Combinations of
anti-CD73 with agonist and T cell checkpoint blockade antibodies
demonstrate significant beneficial effects in experimental and de novo
models of tumorigenesis. In humans using large cohorts we have shown that
CD73 is highest in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and expression
correlates with an invasion marker and the lack of ER signalling. CD73
expression is also associated with a worse prognosis in TNBC irrespective
of treatment and predicts response to anthracycline therapy. The
development of CD73 as a target for cancer immunotherapy will be further
discussed.

