Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pre-neoplastic lesion, mucin-depleted foci, reveals as de novo
high-grade dysplasia in rat colon carcinogenesis


Aberrant crypt foci (ACF) and mucin-depleted foci (MDF) have recently
been recognized as the pre-neoplastic lesions in the colon of
carcinogen-treated rodents. In the present study, we analyzed the
sequential development of ACF and MDF histopathologically in the colon of
rats from 5 to 40 weeks after DMH treatment. The number of ACF per colon
increased over time during the experiment, and was much more than the
numbers of tumor, while the number of MDF per colon remained unchanged
from the early stage (the 5th week after carcinogen exposure), and
approximate to that of tumor. The incidence of ACF, which was much higher
than that of tumor, also increased gradually in a time-dependent way. The
incidence of MDF, however, was similar to that of tumor and did not have
significant change during the whole experiment. No the lesion as
dysplasia with high-grade (DHG) or adenocarcinoma (AC) was found in any
large ACF from the 5th to 40th week histopathologically, whereas all of
the large MDF showed DHG or AC. Even at 5 weeks, MDF shows the appearance
as DHG. We classified to two forms of MDF, a flat and a protruded MDF. At
the 40 weeks, the number of a flat MDF per colon decreased significantly
compared with that in the 20 weeks (pAberrant crypt foci (ACF) and
mucin-depleted foci (MDF) have recently been recognized as the
pre-neoplastic lesions in the colon of carcinogen-treated rodents. In the
present study, we analyzed the sequential development of ACF and MDF
histopathologically in the colon of rats from 5 to 40 weeks after DMH
treatment. The number of ACF per colon increased over time during the
experiment, and was much more than the numbers of tumor, while the number
of MDF per colon remained unchanged from the early stage (the 5th week
after carcinogen exposure), and approximate to that of tumor. The
incidence of ACF, which was much higher than that of tumor, also
increased gradually in a time-dependent way. The incidence of MDF,
however, was similar to that of tumor and did not have significant change
during the whole experiment. No the lesion as dysplasia with high-grade
(DHG) or adenocarcinoma (AC) was found in any large ACF from the 5th to
40th week histopathologically, whereas all of the large MDF showed DHG or
AC. Even at 5 weeks, MDF shows the appearance as DHG. We classified to
two forms of MDF, a flat and a protruded MDF. At the 40 weeks, the number
of a flat MDF per colon decreased significantly compared with that in the
20 weeks (p<0.05), but number of a protruded MDF per colon increased
(pAberrant crypt foci (ACF) and mucin-depleted foci (MDF) have recently
been recognized as the pre-neoplastic lesions in the colon of
carcinogen-treated rodents. In the present study, we analyzed the
sequential development of ACF and MDF histopathologically in the colon of
rats from 5 to 40 weeks after DMH treatment. The number of ACF per colon
increased over time during the experiment, and was much more than the
numbers of tumor, while the number of MDF per colon remained unchanged
from the early stage (the 5th week after carcinogen exposure), and
approximate to that of tumor. The incidence of ACF, which was much higher
than that of tumor, also increased gradually in a time-dependent way. The
incidence of MDF, however, was similar to that of tumor and did not have
significant change during the whole experiment. No the lesion as
dysplasia with high-grade (DHG) or adenocarcinoma (AC) was found in any
large ACF from the 5th to 40th week histopathologically, whereas all of
the large MDF showed DHG or AC. Even at 5 weeks, MDF shows the appearance
as DHG. We classified to two forms of MDF, a flat and a protruded MDF. At
the 40 weeks, the number of a flat MDF per colon decreased significantly
compared with that in the 20 weeks (p<0.05), but number of a protruded
MDF per colon increased (p<0.01), and the percentage of DHG in a
protruded MDF decreased but that of AC increased remarkably. In
conclusion, MDF might develop into cancer through the so-called de novo
cancer pathway.

