Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: FAK activity regulates v5 integrin and osteopontin expression to
control breast and ovarian cancer anchorage-independent growth


Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that
controls cell motility and survival downstream of integrin receptors. FAK
expression and activity are elevated during breast and ovarian cancer
progression and this is associated with a poor clinical prognosis. Small
molecule FAK inhibitors (FAK-I) block breast and ovarian tumor
progression through a novel mechanism that is associated with the
apoptosis under anchorage-deprived conditions. Metastatic cells can grow
as anchorage-independent spheroids and we hypothesize that a spheroid
micro-environment remains dependent on integrin- and FAK-associated
signaling for survival. Here we show that intraperitoneal (ip) injection
of murine ID8 ovarian carcinoma cells into mice, recovery of
ascites-associated tumor cells (ID8ip) and growth ex vivo, yielded tumor
cells with elevated levels of phosphorylated FAK (Y397 and Y576
phosphorylation), v5 integrin, and osteopontin (OPN) matrix protein
expression compared to parental ID8 cells. Analyses of paraffin-embedded
breast and ovarian tumor sections revealed significantly higher pY397 FAK
(pFocal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that
controls cell motility and survival downstream of integrin receptors. FAK
expression and activity are elevated during breast and ovarian cancer
progression and this is associated with a poor clinical prognosis. Small
molecule FAK inhibitors (FAK-I) block breast and ovarian tumor
progression through a novel mechanism that is associated with the
apoptosis under anchorage-deprived conditions. Metastatic cells can grow
as anchorage-independent spheroids and we hypothesize that a spheroid
micro-environment remains dependent on integrin- and FAK-associated
signaling for survival. Here we show that intraperitoneal (ip) injection
of murine ID8 ovarian carcinoma cells into mice, recovery of
ascites-associated tumor cells (ID8ip) and growth ex vivo, yielded tumor
cells with elevated levels of phosphorylated FAK (Y397 and Y576
phosphorylation), v5 integrin, and osteopontin (OPN) matrix protein
expression compared to parental ID8 cells. Analyses of paraffin-embedded
breast and ovarian tumor sections revealed significantly higher pY397 FAK
(p<0.05), 5 integrin (pFocal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic
tyrosine kinase that controls cell motility and survival downstream of
integrin receptors. FAK expression and activity are elevated during
breast and ovarian cancer progression and this is associated with a poor
clinical prognosis. Small molecule FAK inhibitors (FAK-I) block breast
and ovarian tumor progression through a novel mechanism that is
associated with the apoptosis under anchorage-deprived conditions.
Metastatic cells can grow as anchorage-independent spheroids and we
hypothesize that a spheroid micro-environment remains dependent on
integrin- and FAK-associated signaling for survival. Here we show that
intraperitoneal (ip) injection of murine ID8 ovarian carcinoma cells into
mice, recovery of ascites-associated tumor cells (ID8ip) and growth ex
vivo, yielded tumor cells with elevated levels of phosphorylated FAK
(Y397 and Y576 phosphorylation), v5 integrin, and osteopontin (OPN)
matrix protein expression compared to parental ID8 cells. Analyses of
paraffin-embedded breast and ovarian tumor sections revealed
significantly higher pY397 FAK (p<0.05), 5 integrin (p<0.0001), and OPN
expression (pFocal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase
that controls cell motility and survival downstream of integrin
receptors. FAK expression and activity are elevated during breast and
ovarian cancer progression and this is associated with a poor clinical
prognosis. Small molecule FAK inhibitors (FAK-I) block breast and ovarian
tumor progression through a novel mechanism that is associated with the
apoptosis under anchorage-deprived conditions. Metastatic cells can grow
as anchorage-independent spheroids and we hypothesize that a spheroid
micro-environment remains dependent on integrin- and FAK-associated
signaling for survival. Here we show that intraperitoneal (ip) injection
of murine ID8 ovarian carcinoma cells into mice, recovery of
ascites-associated tumor cells (ID8ip) and growth ex vivo, yielded tumor
cells with elevated levels of phosphorylated FAK (Y397 and Y576
phosphorylation), v5 integrin, and osteopontin (OPN) matrix protein
expression compared to parental ID8 cells. Analyses of paraffin-embedded
breast and ovarian tumor sections revealed significantly higher pY397 FAK
(p<0.05), 5 integrin (p<0.0001), and OPN expression (p<0.005) in stage
II-III compared to stage I tumors. Treatment of ovarian ID8ip, human
ovarian HEY carcinoma, or human MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells with
FAK-I inhibited cell growth, prevented FAK Y397 phosphorylation, reduced
5 integrin and OPN levels independent of effects on 1 or 3 integrins or
changes in matrix proteins such as fibronectin. FAK-I impairs anchorage
independent cell growth and orthotopic tumor growth but not growth of
cells in plastic-adherent cell culture. Stable knockdown of either FAK or
5 integrin in HEY cells prevented anchorage-independent growth.
Re-expression of wildtype or kinase-dead FAK within HEY cells verified
the importance of FAK activity in promoting 5 integrin and OPN expression
associated with enhanced tumor growth. Ongoing studies are focused on
determining the molecular connections of FAK to the regulation of v5 and
OPN expression. Together, our studies support a novel role for a
signaling loop involving OPN and v5 integrin leading to FAK activation
and reinforcement of OPN and 5 integrin expression within the spheroid
and tumor micro-environment enhancing breast and ovarian cancer cell
survival and tumor progression. Supported by Susan G. Komen for the Cure
(KG111237) and NIH grant CA102310

