Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of thymidylate synthase gene polymorphisms with
efficacy and toxicity of oral fluoropyrimidine based chemotherapy in
advanced gastric cancer


Purpose: Oral fluoropyrimidines (S-1 or capecitabine) are metabolized by
different enzymes. We evaluated the association between polymorphisms of
cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6), carboxylesterase 2(CES 2), thymidylate
synthase (TS), and excision repair cross complementation group 1 (ERCC1)
and toxicity of advanced gastric cancer patients treated with oral
fluoropyrimidine based chemotherapy. Methods: A total of 123 patients
received S-1 80mg/m2 or capecitabine 2000 mg/m2 plus oxaliplatin 130
mg/m2 for advanced gastric cancer. We analyzed polymorphisms of CYP2A6,
CES 2, TS and ERCC1 by using genomic DNA extracted from prospectively
collected peripheral blood sample. Associations between polymorphisms and
toxicity of these patients treated with oral fluoropyrimidines based
chemotherapy were evaluated individually. Results: Patients who were
2R/3R for the double repeat in the TS promoter region had more toxicity
of oral fluoropyrimidines. Patients with a 2R/3R and 2R/2R or 3R/3R
genotype had a grade 2 or more gastrointestinal toxicity rate of 50 and
22%, respectively (P = .049). Response rate was higher in patients with a
2R/3R than those with a 2R/2R or 3R/3R (50% vs. 32%, P = .082).
Polymorphisms of CYP2A6, CES 2, and ERCC1 were not associated with
efficacy and toxicity of oral fluoropyrimidine based chemotherapy for
advanced gastric cancer. Conclusion. This study demonstrated that TS
genotyping could be of help in predicting toxicity to oral
fluoropyrimidine based chemotherapy in advanced gastric cancer patients.

