Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of cancer stem-like properties in malignant glioma by
delivery of microRNA145 with cationic polyurethanes-PEI


Malignant glioma, including Glioblastoma (GBM), is the most common
primary brain tumor bearing dismal prognosis. CD133 has been considered a
putative marker of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in malignant cancers,
including GBM. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), highly conserved small RNA molecules,
may target oncogenes and become a therapeutic strategy against cancer.
However, the involvement of miRNAs in GBM-associated CSCs remained mostly
unclear. Using miRNA/mRNA microarray analysis, we identified that miR145
(a tumor-suppressive miRNA) expression is inversely correlated with the
levels of Oct4 and Sox2 in GBM-CD133+ cells and specimens of malignant
glioma. Consistently, we demonstrated that miR145 negatively regulates
tumor growth of GBM by directly targeting Oct4 and Sox2 in GBM-CD133+
cells. We therefore evaluated the treatment effect of polyurethane-short
branch polyethylenimine-mediated miR145 (PU-PEI-miR145) on GBM-CSCs.
PU-PEI-miR145 delivery in GBM-CD133+ significantly inhibited their
tumorigenic and CSC-like abilities, and facilitated their differentiation
into CD133 non-CSCs. Furthermore, PU-PEI-miR145 delivery in GBM-CD133+
effectively suppressed their expressions of drug-resistance and
anti-apoptotic genes, and dramatically increased the sensitivity to
radiation and chemotherapeutic drugs, including temozolomide. Finally, in
vivo alone delivery of PU-PEI-miR145 significantly suppressed
tumorigenesis, and synergistically improved survivals in orthotopic
GBM-CD133+-transplanted immunocompromised mice, combined with
radiotherapy and temozolomide. Therefore, PU-PEI-miR145 is potential
therapeutic approach for malignant brain tumors.

