Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tolcapone inhibits catechol-O-methyl transferase-mediated
methylation of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate in vivo


Green tea polyphenols (GTP) have been shown to exert anti-cancer effects
in vitro and in vivo. Studies suggest that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG) is largely responsible for these anti-cancer effects. EGCG reduces
lung cancer cell viability in vitro and reduces tumor incidence,
multiplicity, and size in vivo. EGCG, however, is rapidly methylated by
catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT), a transformation that may limit its
effectiveness in lung cancer prevention. The nitrocatechol drug tolcapone
is a potent inhibitor of COMT and is used to mitigate the symptoms of
Parkinson's disease. In this study, we examined the effect of tolcapone
on the bioavailability of EGCG in male CF-1 mice. Plasma and tissue
levels of EGCG and its major methyl metabolites in mice (n = 6) were
determined by LC-MS following oral administration of EGCG (100 mg/kg
b.w.), tolcapone (30 mg/kg b.w.), or the combination (100 mg/kg b.w. + 30
mg/kg b.w., respectively). In mice treated with EGCG for 720 min, plasma
EGCG accounted for 34.6 % of the total (EGCG + methylated metabolites),
whereas in mice treated with EGCG plus tolcapone this increased to 65.7
%. In urine, EGCG accounted for 9.4 % of the total, whereas in mice
treated with EGCG plus tolcapone this increased to 100 % (metabolites not
detected). Similar effects were observed in the organ samples. For
example, tolcapone extensively inhibited COMT- mediated methylation of
EGCG in the lungs of mice. In conclusion, tolcapone effectively increased
the bioavailability of unmethylated EGCG in vivo. The combination, may
therefore increase the cancer preventive effects of EGCG. Future work
will test the effect of tolcapone on the bioavailability of other GTP,
and also determine the effect of tolcapone/GTP combination in animal
models of cancer. Funded by NIH grant AT004678.

