Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Therapeutic effect of cilengitide in combination with CKD-602, a
campothecin derivative, against experimental glioblastoma


The prognosis and the clinical course for glioblastoma patients remain
dismal in spite of various multidisciplinary approaches of treatment,
such as concurrent chemoradiotherapy with temozolomide. Especially, the
resistance to temozolomide of primary or recurrent glioblastoma is the
significant obstacle to the cure of this tumor. In the present study, we
evaluated the in vitro and in vivo antitumor effect of cilengitide in
combination with CKD-602, a camptothecin derivate, for experimental
glioblastoma. The combination treatment with cilengitide and CKD-602
enhanced the cytotoxic effects to the glioblastoma cell lines, including
U87MG and U251MG and increased the proportion of apoptosis of the tumor
cells, compared with the monotherapy with either drug. Nude mice with
established U87MG glioblastoma were assigned to the 4 groups; control
group (injection with saline only), 2 cilengitide group (injection with a
dose of cilengitide at 2 mg/mL), CKD-602 group (injection with a dose of
CKD-602 at 2 mg/mL), and combination group. In animals with combination
therapy, the significant reduction of tumor volume was demonstrated (p
The prognosis and the clinical course for glioblastoma patients remain
dismal in spite of various multidisciplinary approaches of treatment,
such as concurrent chemoradiotherapy with temozolomide. Especially, the
resistance to temozolomide of primary or recurrent glioblastoma is the
significant obstacle to the cure of this tumor. In the present study, we
evaluated the in vitro and in vivo antitumor effect of cilengitide in
combination with CKD-602, a camptothecin derivate, for experimental
glioblastoma. The combination treatment with cilengitide and CKD-602
enhanced the cytotoxic effects to the glioblastoma cell lines, including
U87MG and U251MG and increased the proportion of apoptosis of the tumor
cells, compared with the monotherapy with either drug. Nude mice with
established U87MG glioblastoma were assigned to the 4 groups; control
group (injection with saline only), 2 cilengitide group (injection with a
dose of cilengitide at 2 mg/mL), CKD-602 group (injection with a dose of
CKD-602 at 2 mg/mL), and combination group. In animals with combination
therapy, the significant reduction of tumor volume was demonstrated (p <
0.05). The immunohistochemistry with CD31 and Annexin-V showed that this
synergistic effect was caused by the decrease of angiogenesis by
cilengitide and the increase of apoptosis by CKD-602. Cilengitide in
combination with CKD-602 could be an alternative treatment option for
glioblastoma. Keywords; glioblastoma; cilengitide; CKD-602; angiogenesis;
apoptosis

