Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nicotine and the alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in the
regulation of response to radiotherapy


Purpose: Nicotine is a systemically available component of tobacco known
to decrease the effectiveness of chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy (RT)
however, the mechanisms of decreased RT response are not well
characterized. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effects of
nicotine and activation of the alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(a7-nAChR) on regulating cell survival following RT and to identify
potential mechanisms of regulation. Methods: Human lung cancer (A549,
H460) and oropharyngeal cancer (FaDu) cell lines were treated with
nicotine alone or in combination with nAChR inhibitors, MEK inhibitors,
PI3K inhibitors, or mTOR inhibitors followed by treatment with RT to
evaluate cell survival using clonogenic assays. The effects of a7-nAChR
agonists on RT were also evaluated. Western blots were performed to
evaluate nAChR subunit expression profiles in a broad spectrum of cancer
cell lines and to evaluate the effects of nicotine (alone or with
inhibitors listed above) or agonists on downstream signal transduction.
Results: Nicotine administration 2 hours prior to RT increased survival
in all cell lines. nAChR expression was confirmed in several cell lines
including A549 and H460 cells. Inhibition of specific nAChRs in A549 and
H460 cells demonstrated that the a7-nAChR prevented the effects of
nicotine on RT in both cell lines. Nicotine administration increased
p-ERK 1/2, p-Akt (Ser-473), mTOR (S2448), activated matrix
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2), and hypoxia inducible factor 1-alpha
(HIF-1a). Inhibition of MEK prevented ERK 1/2 phosphorylation, but did
not prevent the effects of nicotine on RT. Inhibition of PI3K prevented
Akt phosphorylation, MMP2 activation, and HIF-1a induction with
concomitant inhibition of the effects of nicotine on RT. Administration
of an mTOR inhibitor (rapamycin) significantly sensitized cells to RT,
but did not prevent the pro-survival effects of nicotine. Administration
of selective a7-nAChR agonists (LY 2087101, PHA 54613, PNU 282987, TC
1698) demonstrated that all increased p-ERK 1/2 and p-Akt; however, only
LY 2087101 and PHA 54613 increased cell survival with RT. Further
analysis demonstrates that only LY 2087101 and PHA 54613 increased mTOR
(S2448) while there was no change in mTOR (S2448) with PNU 282987 or TC
1698. Conclusions: Data demonstrates that activation of the a7-nAChR can
decrease the effectiveness of RT. Results suggest that PI3K and mTOR may
play a central role in conferring resistance to radiation by nicotine or
during a7-nAChR activation. Further analyses of critical mechanisms are
required to understand the adverse systemic effects of tobacco on cancer
treatment.

