Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrated molecular profiles of primary breast tumors reveal
differential interleukin signaling and improved prognostic power


The accumulation of high throughput molecular profiles of tumors at
various levels has been a long and costly process worldwide. Combined
analysis of gene regulation at various levels may point to specific
biological functions and molecular pathways that are deregulated in
multiple epithelial cancers and reveal novel subgroups of patients for
tailored therapy and monitoring. We have collected high throughput data
at several molecular levels derived from fresh frozen samples from
primary tumors and matched blood from approximately 110 breast cancer
patients (the MicMa dataset) with information about presence of
disseminated tumor cells (DTC) and long term follow-up. The MicMa set has
been used in parallel pilot studies of whole-genome mRNA expression (1),
arrayCGH (2), DNA-methylation (3), whole genome SNP-CGH array (4),
whole-genome miRNA expression analyses (5), TP53 mutation status
dependent pathways (6) and high throughput paired-end sequencing (7). We
have explored the extent to which these new profiles, acquired by
molecular analyses at various levels recapitulate the initially
discovered expression subclasses and their prognostic potential. Further,
we attempted to integrate these by modeling mRNA, CNAs, miRNAs, and
methylation in a pathway context using Paradigm (Pathway Recognition
Algorithm using Data integration on Genomic Models) (8). We were able to
show that combining mRNA expression and DNA copy-number leads to better
discrimination of patients with respect to prognosis than any of the
molecular levels studied separately. The pathways whose perturbations
most strongly contributed to this classification were ERBB4, also
previously found deregulated in breast and ovarian cancers, FoxM1
transcription, deregulated also in the ovarian and glioblastoma TCGA
datasets, Angiopoientin receptor Tie2-mediated signaling and most notably
the immune response (TCR) and interleukin signaling, IL4, IL6, IL12 and
IL23 signaling. Massive interleukin signaling and similar
sub-classification was observed also in DCIS (ductal carcinoma in situ)
together with extracellular matrix and cell-cell adhesion regulating
pathways. 1. Naume B et al. (2007) Mol. Oncol. 1, 160-171. 2. Russnes HG
and Vollan HK et al. (2010) Sci. Transl. Med. 2, 38ra47. 3. Ronneberg J A
et al. (2011) Mol. Oncol. 5, 61-76. 4. Van LP et al. (2010) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 16910-16915. 5. Enerly E and Steinfeld I et al.
(2011) PLoS. One. 6, e16915. 6. Joshi H et al. submitted (2011). 7.
Stephens P et al. (2009) Nature. 462, 1005-1010. 8. Kristensen V et al
(2011)PNAS, 2001, Epub ahead

