Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the medulloblastoma splice-ome reveals
subgroup-specific changes in alternative splicing and isoform expression
patterns


Medulloblastoma candidate gene approaches have previously identified
alternative splicing and isoform expression changes affecting genes
critical for cerebellar development and medulloblastoma pathogenesis.
Here we present a bioinformatic characterization of the medulloblastoma
splice-ome in 103 primary tumors and 14 normal cerebella samples.
Medulloblastomas display a statistically significant increase in
alternative splicing relative to normal fetal cerebella (2.3-times;
PMedulloblastoma candidate gene approaches have previously identified
alternative splicing and isoform expression changes affecting genes
critical for cerebellar development and medulloblastoma pathogenesis.
Here we present a bioinformatic characterization of the medulloblastoma
splice-ome in 103 primary tumors and 14 normal cerebella samples.
Medulloblastomas display a statistically significant increase in
alternative splicing relative to normal fetal cerebella (2.3-times;
P<6.47E-8), with splicing patterns that are specific to each molecular
subgroup. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of alternatively spliced
genes accurately assigns medulloblastomas to their correct subgroup.
One-third of all medulloblastomas (n=26) display a hyper-spliced
phenotype, with median splicing levels four-times greater than
non-hyperspliced tumors. Hyperspliced medulloblastomas show a relatively
worse overall survival (PMedulloblastoma candidate gene approaches have
previously identified alternative splicing and isoform expression changes
affecting genes critical for cerebellar development and medulloblastoma
pathogenesis. Here we present a bioinformatic characterization of the
medulloblastoma splice-ome in 103 primary tumors and 14 normal cerebella
samples. Medulloblastomas display a statistically significant increase in
alternative splicing relative to normal fetal cerebella (2.3-times;
P<6.47E-8), with splicing patterns that are specific to each molecular
subgroup. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of alternatively spliced
genes accurately assigns medulloblastomas to their correct subgroup.
One-third of all medulloblastomas (n=26) display a hyper-spliced
phenotype, with median splicing levels four-times greater than
non-hyperspliced tumors. Hyperspliced medulloblastomas show a relatively
worse overall survival (P<3.08E-2), and are seen across all molecular
subgroups. Our analysis identifies previously reported splicing events
targeting ERBB4 (mixed MB), GLI1 (SHH) and PTCH1 (SHH), supporting our
approach. Subgroup-specific pathway analysis of alternatively spliced
genes reveals extensive deregulation of neuronal pathways in non-WNT
medulloblastomas, with the specific targeting of genes important for
axonal guidance, synaptic transmission and neuronal differentiation.
Finally, we present evidence for putative regulation of alternative
splicing by antisense transcription. These data further demonstrate the
differences between medulloblastoma subgroups, and highlight alternative
splicing and isoform expression as a mechanism contributing to the
transcriptional heterogeneity between subgroups, and perhaps to subgroup
specific pathogenic mechanisms.

