Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of IGF-1 suppress genomic instability and epithelial
lineage aberrations in the mammary gland of BRCA1 deficient mice


Women carriers of mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1, have an
up to 80% risk of developing breast cancer, as well as a 40% risk of
ovarian cancer. Men who develop breast cancer are frequently BRCA1
mutation carriers. Moreover, cancers associated with BRCA1 mutations are
frequently triple-negative (negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor and HER2 amplification), which have a very poor prognosis.
Experimental data have shown that BRCA1 has a dual role in the mammary
epithelium in both DNA damage repair and in epithelial lineage commitment
that contribute to the high frequency of triple-negative breast cancer.
Brca1 deficiency in experimental models is also associated with increased
phosphorylation of the IGF-1 receptor which in turns, leads to the MAPK
signaling activation and results in increased proliferation. We evaluated
a novel IGF-1 inhibitor in the Brca1 loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mouse that
develops an early mammary gland hyper-proliferative phenotype
characterized by aberrant ductal morphogenesis and DCIS around 9 months
of age. Centrosome aberrations, defined cells with more than 2
centrosomes, were significantly increased the mammary epithelium of these
mice compared to C57bl/6 control mice (19.8%0.8%, n=13 vs 8.4%0.9%, n=6,
pWomen carriers of mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1, have an
up to 80% risk of developing breast cancer, as well as a 40% risk of
ovarian cancer. Men who develop breast cancer are frequently BRCA1
mutation carriers. Moreover, cancers associated with BRCA1 mutations are
frequently triple-negative (negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor and HER2 amplification), which have a very poor prognosis.
Experimental data have shown that BRCA1 has a dual role in the mammary
epithelium in both DNA damage repair and in epithelial lineage commitment
that contribute to the high frequency of triple-negative breast cancer.
Brca1 deficiency in experimental models is also associated with increased
phosphorylation of the IGF-1 receptor which in turns, leads to the MAPK
signaling activation and results in increased proliferation. We evaluated
a novel IGF-1 inhibitor in the Brca1 loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mouse that
develops an early mammary gland hyper-proliferative phenotype
characterized by aberrant ductal morphogenesis and DCIS around 9 months
of age. Centrosome aberrations, defined cells with more than 2
centrosomes, were significantly increased the mammary epithelium of these
mice compared to C57bl/6 control mice (19.8%0.8%, n=13 vs 8.4%0.9%, n=6,
p<0.001). We also identified a novel population of cells expressing both
a luminal and myoepithelial lineage markers present in the Brca1
loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mice that were rare in control mice (22.5%0.9%, n=5 vs
3.9%0.4%, n=7, pWomen carriers of mutations in the tumor suppressor gene,
BRCA1, have an up to 80% risk of developing breast cancer, as well as a
40% risk of ovarian cancer. Men who develop breast cancer are frequently
BRCA1 mutation carriers. Moreover, cancers associated with BRCA1
mutations are frequently triple-negative (negative for estrogen receptor,
progesterone receptor and HER2 amplification), which have a very poor
prognosis. Experimental data have shown that BRCA1 has a dual role in the
mammary epithelium in both DNA damage repair and in epithelial lineage
commitment that contribute to the high frequency of triple-negative
breast cancer. Brca1 deficiency in experimental models is also associated
with increased phosphorylation of the IGF-1 receptor which in turns,
leads to the MAPK signaling activation and results in increased
proliferation. We evaluated a novel IGF-1 inhibitor in the Brca1
loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mouse that develops an early mammary gland
hyper-proliferative phenotype characterized by aberrant ductal
morphogenesis and DCIS around 9 months of age. Centrosome aberrations,
defined cells with more than 2 centrosomes, were significantly increased
the mammary epithelium of these mice compared to C57bl/6 control mice
(19.8%0.8%, n=13 vs 8.4%0.9%, n=6, p<0.001). We also identified a novel
population of cells expressing both a luminal and myoepithelial lineage
markers present in the Brca1 loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mice that were rare in
control mice (22.5%0.9%, n=5 vs 3.9%0.4%, n=7, p<0.001). Four month old
Brca1 loxP/loxP and C57bl/6 mice were treated with either pasireotide
(aka SOM230), a multiligand somatostatin analog that directly blocks
IGF-1 action in the mammary gland or PQ401, a IGF-IR small molecule
inhibitor, administered for 7 days by subcutaneous Alzet pumps
Pasireotide and PQ401 inhibited IGF-1 mediated phosphorylation of target
proteins, IGF-IR, ERK and AKT in the Brca1 mammary glands. Both
treatments resulted in rapid reversion of the Brca1 mutant gross
morphological phenotype. Remarkably, inhibiting IGF-I action also rescued
the abnormal composition of the epithelium. The frequency centrosome
aberration was significantly reduced (9.3%1.6%, n=6, p=0.01) by
pasireotide. Moreover, the frequency of atypical cells expressing both
luminal and myoepithelial markers was significantly decreased (4.8%1.3%,
n=2, pWomen carriers of mutations in the tumor suppressor gene, BRCA1,
have an up to 80% risk of developing breast cancer, as well as a 40% risk
of ovarian cancer. Men who develop breast cancer are frequently BRCA1
mutation carriers. Moreover, cancers associated with BRCA1 mutations are
frequently triple-negative (negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor and HER2 amplification), which have a very poor prognosis.
Experimental data have shown that BRCA1 has a dual role in the mammary
epithelium in both DNA damage repair and in epithelial lineage commitment
that contribute to the high frequency of triple-negative breast cancer.
Brca1 deficiency in experimental models is also associated with increased
phosphorylation of the IGF-1 receptor which in turns, leads to the MAPK
signaling activation and results in increased proliferation. We evaluated
a novel IGF-1 inhibitor in the Brca1 loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mouse that
develops an early mammary gland hyper-proliferative phenotype
characterized by aberrant ductal morphogenesis and DCIS around 9 months
of age. Centrosome aberrations, defined cells with more than 2
centrosomes, were significantly increased the mammary epithelium of these
mice compared to C57bl/6 control mice (19.8%0.8%, n=13 vs 8.4%0.9%, n=6,
p<0.001). We also identified a novel population of cells expressing both
a luminal and myoepithelial lineage markers present in the Brca1
loxP/loxP C57bl/6 mice that were rare in control mice (22.5%0.9%, n=5 vs
3.9%0.4%, n=7, p<0.001). Four month old Brca1 loxP/loxP and C57bl/6 mice
were treated with either pasireotide (aka SOM230), a multiligand
somatostatin analog that directly blocks IGF-1 action in the mammary
gland or PQ401, a IGF-IR small molecule inhibitor, administered for 7
days by subcutaneous Alzet pumps Pasireotide and PQ401 inhibited IGF-1
mediated phosphorylation of target proteins, IGF-IR, ERK and AKT in the
Brca1 mammary glands. Both treatments resulted in rapid reversion of the
Brca1 mutant gross morphological phenotype. Remarkably, inhibiting IGF-I
action also rescued the abnormal composition of the epithelium. The
frequency centrosome aberration was significantly reduced (9.3%1.6%, n=6,
p=0.01) by pasireotide. Moreover, the frequency of atypical cells
expressing both luminal and myoepithelial markers was significantly
decreased (4.8%1.3%, n=2, p<0.001). Thus IGF-1 inhibition not only
normalizes the tissue architecture of Brca1 deficient mammary gland, but
also eliminates aberrant cells that are likely susceptible to malignant
transformation. In summary, these results open the possibility of
normalizing the breast epithelium through the inhibition of IGF-1 in
women who have BRCA1 mutations. Supported by DOD-BCRP IDEA Expansion
award.

