Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic driver mutations among never smoking female lung cancer
cases in China identify unique mutation pattern that may be associated
with household coal burning


Globally, about 53% of lung cancer cases in women and 15% of lung cancer
cases in men are not attributable to active tobacco use, making lung
cancer in never smokers the seventh leading cause of cancer death.
Experimental and epidemiological evidence suggest that lung cancer in
never smokers has unique risk factors, clinical features, and
histological distributions as compared to those lung cancer cases
attributed to tobacco smoking. In general, lung cancer in never smokers
presents predominately as adenocarcinoma and in females. The lung cancer
rate among females in Xuanwei, China is among the highest in the world
for nonsmoking females, and has been attributed to indoor air pollution
from domestic fuel combustion, particularly from bituminous coal. To
further explore the clinical and histological aspects of lung cancer in
Xuanwei, we collected formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue
samples from a series of 76 female lung cancer cases. The mean age of the
patients was 47.7 years old (9.2 years). Expert consensus review found 54
(71%) of the female lung cancer cases were adenocarcinomas (ADCs), 11
(14.5%) were squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), 1 (1.3%) was an
adenosquamous carcinoma (ADSC), 8 (10.5%) were large cell carcinomas, and
2 (2.7%) were other subtypes. We then used two multiplexed assays to
detect in DNA from FFPE tissue more than 40 recurrent mutations in nine
genes relevant to existing and emerging targeted lung cancer therapies
among subjects who were confirmed never smoking female lung cancer cases
(32 ADCs, 7 SCCs, 1 ADSC). These assays include amplification of DNA
through Applied Biosystem's SNaPshot technology to detect 38 different
recurrent somatic point mutations in 8 driver genes (EGFR, KRAS, BRAF,
NRAS, PIK3CA, MEK1, AKT1, and PTEN) and a PCR-based sizing assay that
assesses for EGFR exon 19 deletions, EGFR exon 20 insertions, and HER2
exon 20 insertions. We detected 15 EGFR mutations [E20-6bp-ins. (n=1);
EGFR_19-15bpDel (n=4); EGFR_G719A_2156G>C (n=2); EGFR_G719C_2155G>T
(n=3); EGFR_G719S _2155G>T (n=1); EGFR_G719S_2155G>A (n=1);
EGFR_L858R_2573T>G (n=2); EGFR L861Q_2582T>A (n=1)] in 12 ADCs and 2
SCCs. Six KRAS mutations, all of which were KRAS G12C_34G>T, were
detected in 5 ADCs and 1 SCC. EGFR and KRAS mutations were mutually
exclusive and no mutations were observed for BRAF, NRAS, PIK3CA, MEK1,
HER2, AKT1, or PTEN. The high percentage of samples with KRAS mutations
(15.0% overall; 15.6% ADCs; 14.3% SCCs) in our series is of interest,
primarily because KRAS mutations are reportedly more rare in other
populations from Asia (5%) and populations of never smokers from Asia
(2%). Given that all subjects with KRAS mutations burned coal indoors for
heating and cooking, our findings may provide new insights into the
pathogenesis of lung cancer among never smoking females exposed to indoor
air pollution from coal.

