Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number is associated with colorectal cancer
risk


Background: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number variation is common in
colorectal tumors and one case control study showed mtDNA copy number to
be associated with increased colorectal cancer risk. Data on mtDNA copy
number and colorectal cancer risk in prospective cohorts is lacking.
Objectives: We evaluated the association between mtDNA copy number in
peripheral blood and colorectal cancer risk among participants of the
Singapore Chinese Health Study. Methods: We conducted a nested
case-cohort study of 422 colorectal cancer cases (168 incident cases with
pre-diagnostic blood and 254 prevalent cases with post-diagnostic blood)
and 880 controls who were free of colorectal cancer at blood draw. The
relative mtDNA copy number was measured using real time PCR. Analysis of
covariance and logistic regression methods were employed to examine the
association between mtDNA copy number and colorectal cancer risk.
Results: mtDNA copy number was significantly higher among colorectal
cancer cases than controls (geometric mean: 0.62 vs. 0.50, pBackground:
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number variation is common in colorectal
tumors and one case control study showed mtDNA copy number to be
associated with increased colorectal cancer risk. Data on mtDNA copy
number and colorectal cancer risk in prospective cohorts is lacking.
Objectives: We evaluated the association between mtDNA copy number in
peripheral blood and colorectal cancer risk among participants of the
Singapore Chinese Health Study. Methods: We conducted a nested
case-cohort study of 422 colorectal cancer cases (168 incident cases with
pre-diagnostic blood and 254 prevalent cases with post-diagnostic blood)
and 880 controls who were free of colorectal cancer at blood draw. The
relative mtDNA copy number was measured using real time PCR. Analysis of
covariance and logistic regression methods were employed to examine the
association between mtDNA copy number and colorectal cancer risk.
Results: mtDNA copy number was significantly higher among colorectal
cancer cases than controls (geometric mean: 0.62 vs. 0.50, p<0.0001).
There was a U shaped relationship between the mtDNA copy number and
colorectal cancer risk. Individuals in the low and high mtDNA copy
numbers were at increased risk of colorectal cancer; odds ratios (95%
confidence interval) for developing colorectal cancer for the lowest and
highest quartile of mtDNA copy numbers were 1.83 (1.16-2.90) and 3.54
(2.25-5.55), respectively, compared to those in the second quartile of
mtDNA after adjustment for potential confounders (p for curvilinear trend
Background: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number variation is common in
colorectal tumors and one case control study showed mtDNA copy number to
be associated with increased colorectal cancer risk. Data on mtDNA copy
number and colorectal cancer risk in prospective cohorts is lacking.
Objectives: We evaluated the association between mtDNA copy number in
peripheral blood and colorectal cancer risk among participants of the
Singapore Chinese Health Study. Methods: We conducted a nested
case-cohort study of 422 colorectal cancer cases (168 incident cases with
pre-diagnostic blood and 254 prevalent cases with post-diagnostic blood)
and 880 controls who were free of colorectal cancer at blood draw. The
relative mtDNA copy number was measured using real time PCR. Analysis of
covariance and logistic regression methods were employed to examine the
association between mtDNA copy number and colorectal cancer risk.
Results: mtDNA copy number was significantly higher among colorectal
cancer cases than controls (geometric mean: 0.62 vs. 0.50, p<0.0001).
There was a U shaped relationship between the mtDNA copy number and
colorectal cancer risk. Individuals in the low and high mtDNA copy
numbers were at increased risk of colorectal cancer; odds ratios (95%
confidence interval) for developing colorectal cancer for the lowest and
highest quartile of mtDNA copy numbers were 1.83 (1.16-2.90) and 3.54
(2.25-5.55), respectively, compared to those in the second quartile of
mtDNA after adjustment for potential confounders (p for curvilinear trend
<0.001). The lowest mtDNA copy number quartile was associated with
colorectal cancer only in the pre-diagnostic blood samples (OR=3.22, 95%
CI:1.51-6.85) but not in the post-diagnostic blood samples (OR=1.36, 95%
CI:0.80-2.32), implying that cancer status impacts the mtDNA copy
number-colorectal cancer risk association. Conclusions: This is the first
study to show a prospective association between mtDNA copy number and
colorectal cancer risk. Further studies are needed to confirm this
association and understand the biological significance of these
observations.

