Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Design, synthesis and biological evaluation of two chemical
classes as novel small molecule Mcl-1 inhibitors


The anti-apoptotic myeloid cell leukemia protein Mcl-1, a member of the
Bcl-2 family proteins, has a critical and distinct role(s) in maintaining
cell survival and is emerging as an independent and promising therapeutic
target. Using structure-based design, two classes of small molecule Mcl-1
inhibitors were developed with IC50 values ranging from 50 nM to 75 M,
based on the lead compounds identified from high throughput screening.
The structure-activity relationships (SAR) of these compounds were
analyzed and chemical features of both series that are important for
potency and selectivity on Mcl-1 were identified. The HSQC-NMR
spectroscopy studies combined with molecular docking and dynamics
simulations demonstrated that both classes of compounds occupy the BH3
binding site in Mcl-1 protein mimicking two conserved hydrophobic
residues from BH3 binding motif. The most potent analogues antagonize
Mcl-1 on the functional level and they induce release of cytochrome c,
inhibit cell growth and induce apoptosis in Bax/Bak-dependent manner in
pancreatic and melanoma cancer cells with high levels of Mcl-1. The
knowledge gained through these studies provides promise for future design
and expansion of these series towards development of potent
small-molecule Mcl-1 inhibitors.

