Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Salinomycin reduces stem cell properties and induces apoptosis in
mammary epithelial cell


Tumor initiating cells or cancer stem cells (CSCs) were characterized as
a unique subpopulation with stem cell features in many types of cancer.
Although there has been a number of studies on breast cancer stem cells,
inhibitory mechanisms of tumor initiation, progression, and resistance to
therapy are unknown. Salinomycin is a chemical isolated from Streptomyces
albus and a potassium ionophore. It has been used for many years to
control coccidiosis. Recently, salinomycin has been reported to act as
selective breast cancer stem cell inhibitor because of its property of
reducing the cancer stem cell and inducing the apoptosis in cancer cell.
Thus, we investigated the anti-cancer property of salinomycin in mouse
mammary epithelial cell. With CDgeo (mouse mammary epithelial cell), MTT
assay was used to confirm cell viability after salinomycin treatment (0,
0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10 m/ml) upon anchorage-dependent state. We observed that
salinomycin reduced the cell proliferation dose-dependently. Also,
mammosphere formation assay was performed to observe stem cell-like
property after salinomycin treatment in anchorage-independent state. We
confirmed salinomycin reduced the number and the size of mammosphere in
72, 144, and 216 hours. We performed salinomycin pre-treatment (0, 0.5,
1, 2, 5 m/ml) for 12-48 hours upon anchorage-dependent state. Results by
western blotting revealed that salinomycin promoted apoptosis of mouse
mammary epithelial cells by activating both caspase-3 and -9 and inducing
PARP cleavage. To confirm the reduction of the side population level, we
performed FACS analysis using CD49+, CD29+, and CD24+ markers. Based on
our findings, we concluded that anti-cancer effect of salinomycin reduced
stemness and induced apoptosis in mouse mammary epithelial cell.

