Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of cytochrome P450 1B1 missense polymorphisms in renal cell
carcinoma


In male kidney, 4-hydroxy-estradiol has been shown to play a role in the
carcinogenesis process. This metabolite is formed from estradiol and due
to the hydroxylation activity of the cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) enzyme.
Prior reports show polymorphisms of CYP1B1 to result in higher catalytic
activity and thus, we hypothesize that single nucleotide polymorphisms of
the CYP1B1 gene are involved in the malignant transformation of the renal
cell. To test this hypothesis, the genetic distributions of four missense
CYP1B1 polymorphisms were analyzed in 383 normal healthy subjects and 384
sporadic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) cases by sequence-specific PCR and
sequencing. All subjects were men and from a Caucasian population. The
polymorphic sites evaluated were at codons 48 (ArgGly, rs10012), 119
(AlaSer, rs1056827), 432 (LeuVal, rs1056836), and 453 (AsnSer,
rs1800440). Results of these experiments demonstrate a trend for the
codon 119 Ser/Ser genotype to be a risk for RCC (2, P=0.09). Odds ratio
for the Ser/Ser genotype was calculated as 1.85 with 95% confidence
interval of 1.07-3.20 as compared to the Ala/Ala genotype. The Leu allele
on codon 432 was also found to approach significance as a risk for RCC as
compared to Val (2, P=0.09). Codons 119 and 432 were observed to be
linked (R2=0.25) and haplotype analyses show Ala and Val, representing
non-risk alleles at these sites, respectively, to be significantly
reduced in RCC cases (P=0.06). No association was found however, when
analyzing polymorphic sites with clinical stage of RCC. These results
demonstrate missense polymorphisms of CYP1B1 to be associated with renal
carcinogenesis and are of importance in understanding their role in the
pathogenesis of RCC.

