Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing of CDO1 sustains viability of breast cancer
cells via the reduction of cellular ROS


Approaches to analyze genome-wide methylation changes have become an
extraordinary useful tool to identify thousands of new candidate
hypermethylated genes in cancer. Numerous comprehensive approaches have
been initiated to begin to understand the biological significance of the
vast amount of methylation data generated and by this, novel tumor
suppressor genes, biomarkers for early detection and prognosis prediction
of cancer, and molecular mechanisms underlying tumor growth control have
been discovered. In this study, we explore the candidate hypermethylated
gene Cysteine Dioxygenase Type 1 (CDO1), which was recently identified in
breast cancer using a functionally proven genome-wide gene expression
approach. Here, we show that the epigenetic inactivation of CDO1 enhances
tumor growth and sustains viability of breast cancer cells via the
reduction of cellular ROS. Moreover, we observed a cancer stage-dependent
increase in CDO1 methylation frequency (DCIS: 50%, stage 1-2: 65% and
stage 3-4: 90%) that coincides with elevated oxidative stress levels in
advanced cancers. These findings support the hypothesis that cancer cells
upregulate their antioxidant capacity in adaptation to intrinsic
oxidative stress. Lastly, we correlated CDO1 methylation status with
clinicopathologic patient characteristics in a cohort of 186 patients.
Methylation of CDO1 is significantly associated with prognostic
parameters such as tumor stage, lymphovascular and perinodal invasion and
predicts worse patient outcome.

