Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The protein ps20 increases resistance to docetaxel in PC3 and
LNCAP prostate cancer cell lines


Introduction The protein ps20 encoded by the WFDC1 gene, is a member of a
protein family containing conserved whey-4-disulphide-core (WFDC)
domains. Ps20 is upregulated in prostate cancer epithelium and expression
is thought to correlate with disease progression. The aim of this study
was to determine whether ps20 expressed by prostate cancer cells also
increases docetaxel resistance. Methods The cell-lines LNCaP and PC3
express low endogenous ps20, but were transfected with empty vector (EV)
or WFDC1 gene vectors that increase WFDC1 RNA and ps20 protein expression
by over 100% as measured by qPCR and ELISA. Docetaxel was added from
0.001nM 1M with or without ps20 antibody (1G7) and cell-killing was
assessed by MTT after 48 hours. Results EV-transfected PC3 and LNCaP
cells have docetaxel IC50s of 0.223+/-0.05 and 0.16+/- 0.09nM
respectively. In WFDC1-transfected PC3 and LNCAP, IC50s are increased to
0.677+/-0.11 and 0.326+/-0.05nM respectively (pIntroduction The protein
ps20 encoded by the WFDC1 gene, is a member of a protein family
containing conserved whey-4-disulphide-core (WFDC) domains. Ps20 is
upregulated in prostate cancer epithelium and expression is thought to
correlate with disease progression. The aim of this study was to
determine whether ps20 expressed by prostate cancer cells also increases
docetaxel resistance. Methods The cell-lines LNCaP and PC3 express low
endogenous ps20, but were transfected with empty vector (EV) or WFDC1
gene vectors that increase WFDC1 RNA and ps20 protein expression by over
100% as measured by qPCR and ELISA. Docetaxel was added from 0.001nM 1M
with or without ps20 antibody (1G7) and cell-killing was assessed by MTT
after 48 hours. Results EV-transfected PC3 and LNCaP cells have docetaxel
IC50s of 0.223+/-0.05 and 0.16+/- 0.09nM respectively. In
WFDC1-transfected PC3 and LNCAP, IC50s are increased to 0.677+/-0.11 and
0.326+/-0.05nM respectively (p<0.001 by paired t-test). Therefore there
is a 303% and 203% increase in docetaxel IC50s in PC3 and LNCaP
respectively. However, when WFDC1-cells are incubated with docetaxel and
ps20 antibody, IC50s are lower than those with EV cells (0.04+/-0.03 and
0.07+/-0.02nM for PC3 and LNCaP respectively, pIntroduction The protein
ps20 encoded by the WFDC1 gene, is a member of a protein family
containing conserved whey-4-disulphide-core (WFDC) domains. Ps20 is
upregulated in prostate cancer epithelium and expression is thought to
correlate with disease progression. The aim of this study was to
determine whether ps20 expressed by prostate cancer cells also increases
docetaxel resistance. Methods The cell-lines LNCaP and PC3 express low
endogenous ps20, but were transfected with empty vector (EV) or WFDC1
gene vectors that increase WFDC1 RNA and ps20 protein expression by over
100% as measured by qPCR and ELISA. Docetaxel was added from 0.001nM 1M
with or without ps20 antibody (1G7) and cell-killing was assessed by MTT
after 48 hours. Results EV-transfected PC3 and LNCaP cells have docetaxel
IC50s of 0.223+/-0.05 and 0.16+/- 0.09nM respectively. In
WFDC1-transfected PC3 and LNCAP, IC50s are increased to 0.677+/-0.11 and
0.326+/-0.05nM respectively (p<0.001 by paired t-test). Therefore there
is a 303% and 203% increase in docetaxel IC50s in PC3 and LNCaP
respectively. However, when WFDC1-cells are incubated with docetaxel and
ps20 antibody, IC50s are lower than those with EV cells (0.04+/-0.03 and
0.07+/-0.02nM for PC3 and LNCaP respectively, p<0.01 by paired t-test).
Therefore, endogenous WFDC1/ps20 on PC3 and LNCaP cells may contribute to
docetaxel resistance. Conclusions Ps20 expression by prostate cancer
cells is associated with increased resistance to docetaxel- a
gold-standard chemotherapy for castrate-resistant prostate cancer.
Inhibition of WFDC1/ps20 expression on prostate cancer cells may
therefore represent one mechanism of restoring sensitivity in patients
that are refractory to docetaxel.

