Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Absolute bioavailability of BRAF inhibitor GSK2118436: Use of a
microtracer study in patients with cancer


Background. Absolute bioavailability (BA) studies in oncology are
logistically and technically challenging. Use of an intravenous (IV)
microtracer offers an attractive alternative to conventional cross-over
design studies. This method involves concomitant administration of a
non-labeled oral therapeutic dose with a radiolabeled IV microtracer
dose. Advantages include: 1) fewer subjects required as comparisons are
within-subject and within-period, yielding reduced variability; 2) easier
development of IV formulation for drugs with low solubility (microtracer
doses are 100 g); 3) radioactivity doses are low and do not require
special handling (usually 270 nCi of 14C) and 4) negligible toxicity, as
the contribution of the microtracer dose to overall exposure is typically
Background. Absolute bioavailability (BA) studies in oncology are
logistically and technically challenging. Use of an intravenous (IV)
microtracer offers an attractive alternative to conventional cross-over
design studies. This method involves concomitant administration of a
non-labeled oral therapeutic dose with a radiolabeled IV microtracer
dose. Advantages include: 1) fewer subjects required as comparisons are
within-subject and within-period, yielding reduced variability; 2) easier
development of IV formulation for drugs with low solubility (microtracer
doses are 100 g); 3) radioactivity doses are low and do not require
special handling (usually 270 nCi of 14C) and 4) negligible toxicity, as
the contribution of the microtracer dose to overall exposure is typically
< 0.5% of the oral dose. The approach required development of an
ultra-sensitive assay using accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) to
determine pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters from IV dosing. The purpose of
this study was to determine absolute BA for the BRAF inhibitor GSK2118436
in cancer patients. Methods. Patients with BRAF-mutant solid tumors were
enrolled in an open-label, non-randomized study. Patients received a
single oral dose of GSK2118436 (150 mg capsule) followed by a 15-min
microtracer infusion (50 g [14C] GSK2118436), started 1.75 h after the
oral dose to coincide with oral Tmax. Plasma samples were collected at
timed intervals up to 72 h post-oral dose. Total radioactivity and [14C]
GSK2118436 were measured by AMS. Non-labeled GSK2118436 was measured by
LC-MS/MS. PK parameters were calculated using standard non-compartmental
methods. Results. Preliminary PK parameters were determined in 4 subjects
(Table). Absolute BA, expressed as least squares mean (90% CI), was 84.2%
(72.3-98.1). Conclusions. The absolute BA of oral GSK2118436 was high.
This innovative IV microtracer study was an efficient and accurate way to
determine absolute BA of GSK2118436 in patients with advanced cancer.


