Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined Tbet and IL-12 gene therapy elicits and recruits superior
anti-tumor immunity in vivo


We have recently shown that intra-tumor (i.t.) injection of syngenic
dendritic cells (DC) engineered to express the transcription factor Tbet
(TBX21) promotes protective Type-1 T cell-mediated immunity via a
mechanism that is largely interleukin (IL)-12p70-independent. Since IL-12
is a classical promoter of Type-1 immunity, the current study was
undertaken to determine whether gene therapy using combined Tbet and
IL-12 cDNA would yield improved anti-tumor efficacy based on the
complementary/synergistic action of these biologic modifiers. Mice
bearing established s.c. tumors injected with DC concomitantly expressing
ectopic Tbet and IL-12 (i.e. DC.Tbet/IL12) displayed superior i.) rates
of tumor rejection and extended overall survival, ii.) cross-priming of
Tc1 reactive against antigens expressed within the tumor
microenvironment, and iii.) infiltration of CD8+ T cells into treated
tumors in association with elevated locoregional production of CXCR3
ligand chemokines. In established bilateral tumor models, i.t. delivery
of DC.Tbet/IL12 into a single lesion led to slowed growth or regression
at both tumor sites. Furthermore, DC.Tbet/IL12 pulsed with tumor
antigen-derived peptides and injected as a therapy distal to the tumor
site prevented tumor growth and activated robust antigen-specific Tc1
responses. These data support the translational use of combined Tbet and
IL-12p70 gene therapy in the cancer setting. In order to target multiple
gene pathways which should provide a more beneficial clinical outcome, we
have begun combinational immunotherapy with DC.Tbet/IL12 and
chemotherapeutic drugs targeting multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (i.e.
sunitinib).

