Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unbiased quantitative assessment of Her-2 expression of
circulating tumor cells in patients with metastatic and non metastatic
breast cancer


Circulating tumor cells (CTC) can provide the basis for a real-time
liquid biopsy and may guide the use of targeted therapies. We report on
unbiased quantification of Her-2 protein expression of CTC. Her-2
assessment of CTC was performed using the CellSearch system in 103
metastatic (M1) and 88 non metastatic (M0) breast-cancer patients.
Digital images of Cytokeratin-PE, DAPI, CD45-APC, and Her-2-FITC from
these samples were stored. Expression of Her-2 on CTC was determined by
manual review and an automated algorithm using Her-2-FITC fluorescence of
leukocytes to determine the Her-2-expression threshold in each sample.
Her-2 expression of CTC varied greatly within and between patients
compared to Her-2 expression of leukocytes. In M1 patients, a threshold
of 75% of Her-2 positive CTC in patients with >5 CTC showed a relatively
low discrepancy rate between the primary tumor and CTC Her-2 status.
Applying this threshold, 9% of M1 patients with Her-2 negative primary
tumors had Her-2 positive CTC status and 29% of M1 patients with Her-2
positive primary tumors had Her-2 negative CTC status. No Her-2
discrepancy was observed between CTC and primary tumor in M0 patients.
Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of real-time quantitative and
reproducible assessment of treatment targets on CTC, opening a path
towards personalized treatment. Her-2 expression is heterogeneous among
CTC within each patient. Overall, M1 patients with Her-2 positive primary
tumors exhibited Her-2 negative CTC frequently, whereas discrepancies in
Her-2 status were limited in other clinical settings.

