Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of Champions Tumorgraft models in rare cancer types
for preclinical investigation and drug discovery


Little progress has been achieved in the treatment of the rare cancers
such as Ewing Sarcoma (ES), Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC), and
osteosarcoma. ES is a rare bone malignancy that affects children and
young adults and there has been little improvement in survival rates for
patients with metastatic or recurrent disease despite aggressive
treatment. MCC is a rare malignant cutaneous tumor of the elderly and
optimal treatment strategies remains unclear for these patients. Poor
clinical outcome is seen especially those MCC patients with regional
lymph node metastases and distant metastases. Osteosarcoma arises in bone
and affects adolescents and young adults. There has been no significant
improvement in prognosis since the advent of multi-agent chemotherapy. A
significant limitation in sorting out the complexities of these rare
tumors and evaluating therapeutic strategies is the lack of preclinical
models. To overcome this challenge, we have embarked on a mission to
establish and characterize Champions TumorgraftTM models within these
rare tumor indications. The Champions Tumorgraft utilizes the
implantation of primary human tumors in immune-deficient mice in a manner
that preserves the biological properties of the original human tumor. In
this preliminary work, we reveal several new Champion TumorgraftTM models
of ES, MCC, and osteosarcoma along with their tumor histology, mutational
status, and chemosensitivity profiles to several standard of care
compounds. These rare Champion TumorgraftTM models represent invaluable
tools for preclinical research and drug discovery to find promising new
therapies for this high unmet clinical need.

