Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Impact of the TGF-1 isoform on p53 signalling in ovarian cancer
cell lines in response to cisplatin


Transforming growth factor is a pleiotropic cytokine which inhibits cell
growth, induces cellular differentiation, and can lead to cellular
apoptosis under certain conditions. TGF- is also involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a phenomenon by which cells
acquire a dedifferentiated phenotype and gain motility and invasive
properties. In the present study, we investigated the impact of TGF-1 on
p53 mediated cellular signalling in ovarian cancer cell lines in response
to cisplatin. Four cell lines with different p53 status: A2780 (wild-type
p53), A2780CP (derived from A2780, resistant to cisplatin, one p53 allele
mutated V172F and one p53 allele wild-type), OVCAR-3 (p53 mutated R248Q)
and SKOV-3 (p53 negative) were used in the present study. Cells were
co-treated with TGF-1 (10ng/mL) and cisplatin (10M) for 24 hours and
protein levels were analysed by western blotting. Our results show that
TGF-1 inhibits cisplatin-induced apoptosis in SKOV-3 cells as
demonstrated by reduced PARP cleavage and caspase-3 activation. However,
the inhibition of cisplatin-induced apoptosis was not observed in cells
with wild type or mutated p53. Co-treatment of TGF-1 and cisplatin
decreased the levels of phosphorylated/active Akt compared to cisplatin
alone, suggesting that TGF-1 promotes cisplatin-induced apoptosis in
A2780 cells in part through p53. In addition, Mdm2 was cleaved in
response to cisplatin treatment only in p53 wild-type expressing A2780
cells. The levels of the caspase inhibitor XIAP were also decreased in
A2780 cells when treated with cisplatin. Together, these results suggest
that TGF-1 promotes apoptosis when used in combination with cisplatin in
p53 wild-type ovarian cancer cells.

