Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identifying transcriptional start sites of human microRNAs based
on high-throughput sequencing data


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are critical small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression by hybridizing to the 3-untranslated regions (3 UTR) of target
mRNAs, subsequently controlling diverse biological processes at
posttranscriptional level. How miRNA genes are regulated receives
considerable attention because it directly affects miRNA-mediated gene
regulatory networks. Although numerous prediction models were developed
for identifying miRNA promoters or transcriptional start sites (TSSs),
most of them lack experimental validation and are inadequate to elucidate
relationships between miRNA genes and transcription factors (TFs). Here,
we integrate three experimental datasets, including Cap analysis of gene
expression (CAGE) tags, TSS Seq libraries, and H3K4me3 chromatin
signature derived from high-throughput sequencing analysis of gene
initiation, to provide direct evidence of miRNA TSSs, thus establishing
an experimental-based resource of human miRNA TSSs, named miRStart.
Moreover, a machine learning based Support Vector Machine (SVM) model is
developed to systematically identify representative TSSs for each miRNA
gene. Finally, to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed resource,
an important human intergenic miRNA, hsa-miR-122, is selected to
experimentally validate putative TSS owing to its high expression in a
normal liver. In conclusion, this work successfully identify 847 human
miRNA TSSs (292 of them are clustered to 70 TSSs of miRNA clusters) based
on the utilization of high-throughput sequencing data from TSS-relevant
experiments, and establish a valuable resource for biologists in advanced
research in miRNA-mediated regulatory networks.

