Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Obinutuzumab (GA101): A novel type II glycoengineered CD20
antibody exhibits enhanced cell death against Rituximab-resistant and
-sensitive cell lines in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma


Background: Rituximab (RTX), an antibody targeting the B-cell antigen
CD20, in combination with chemotherapy, is safe, well tolerated and
associated with > 90% EFS in children with advanced mature B-Cell NHL
(Cairo M.S. et al, ASCO 2010). However, RTX resistance has evolved as one
of the limiting factors of such therapy and the exact cause of this
resistance is not well understood. C-terminal deletion mutations of CD20
may be one possible reason such resistance or for relapse (Mishima Y. et
al, Blood Cancer Journal 2011). Obinutuzumab (GA101), a novel type II
glycoengineered CD20 antibody of the IgG1 isotype, demonstrates superior
cell death induction and its glyco-engineered Fc region has shown to
cause significant enhanced ADCC (Mssner et al, Blood 2010; Niederfellner
G. et al, Blood 2011). The objective of this study was to evaluate the
efficacy of GA101 as compared to RTX against RTX resistant cell lines
(Raji-2R and Raji-4RH, generously supplied by M. Barth, MD, Roswell Park
Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY) in-vitro. Methods: We evaluated the efficacy
of GA101 against Raji (Burkitt Lymphoma), a RTX sensitive cell line
(RSCL) and RTX resistant cell lines (RRCL), Raji-2R and Raji-4R (Barth M.
et al, ASH 2010). All cell lines were cultured in RPMI with 10% FBS and
incubated with dose escalation of GA101 (1-100 g/ml) for 24 hrs. Cell
death was evaluated by staining with AnnexinV/7AAD using a standard kit
(BD Biosciences) and flow-cytometry. B-Cell Leukemia-Lymphoma (BLL)
U-698-M cells (CD20+) (DSMZ, Germany) were used as the positive control;
whereas, Loucy cells (CD20) (T-ALL) (ATCC, Manhass, VA) were used as the
negative control. Results: At 100 g/ml of GA101 when incubated for 24
hrs, Raji and U-698-M demonstrated 26.50.42% and 32.41.9% cell death,
respectively. Cell death of the RRCL, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH, was 16.33.4%
and 17.50.07% respectively, at 100 g/ml of GA101 at 24 hrs. Significant
cell death was demonstrated with RSCL as compared to the RRCL, Raji vs
Raji-2R (pBackground: Rituximab (RTX), an antibody targeting the B-cell
antigen CD20, in combination with chemotherapy, is safe, well tolerated
and associated with > 90% EFS in children with advanced mature B-Cell NHL
(Cairo M.S. et al, ASCO 2010). However, RTX resistance has evolved as one
of the limiting factors of such therapy and the exact cause of this
resistance is not well understood. C-terminal deletion mutations of CD20
may be one possible reason such resistance or for relapse (Mishima Y. et
al, Blood Cancer Journal 2011). Obinutuzumab (GA101), a novel type II
glycoengineered CD20 antibody of the IgG1 isotype, demonstrates superior
cell death induction and its glyco-engineered Fc region has shown to
cause significant enhanced ADCC (Mssner et al, Blood 2010; Niederfellner
G. et al, Blood 2011). The objective of this study was to evaluate the
efficacy of GA101 as compared to RTX against RTX resistant cell lines
(Raji-2R and Raji-4RH, generously supplied by M. Barth, MD, Roswell Park
Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY) in-vitro. Methods: We evaluated the efficacy
of GA101 against Raji (Burkitt Lymphoma), a RTX sensitive cell line
(RSCL) and RTX resistant cell lines (RRCL), Raji-2R and Raji-4R (Barth M.
et al, ASH 2010). All cell lines were cultured in RPMI with 10% FBS and
incubated with dose escalation of GA101 (1-100 g/ml) for 24 hrs. Cell
death was evaluated by staining with AnnexinV/7AAD using a standard kit
(BD Biosciences) and flow-cytometry. B-Cell Leukemia-Lymphoma (BLL)
U-698-M cells (CD20+) (DSMZ, Germany) were used as the positive control;
whereas, Loucy cells (CD20) (T-ALL) (ATCC, Manhass, VA) were used as the
negative control. Results: At 100 g/ml of GA101 when incubated for 24
hrs, Raji and U-698-M demonstrated 26.50.42% and 32.41.9% cell death,
respectively. Cell death of the RRCL, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH, was 16.33.4%
and 17.50.07% respectively, at 100 g/ml of GA101 at 24 hrs. Significant
cell death was demonstrated with RSCL as compared to the RRCL, Raji vs
Raji-2R (p<0.05) and Raji vs Raji-4RH (pBackground: Rituximab (RTX), an
antibody targeting the B-cell antigen CD20, in combination with
chemotherapy, is safe, well tolerated and associated with > 90% EFS in
children with advanced mature B-Cell NHL (Cairo M.S. et al, ASCO 2010).
However, RTX resistance has evolved as one of the limiting factors of
such therapy and the exact cause of this resistance is not well
understood. C-terminal deletion mutations of CD20 may be one possible
reason such resistance or for relapse (Mishima Y. et al, Blood Cancer
Journal 2011). Obinutuzumab (GA101), a novel type II glycoengineered CD20
antibody of the IgG1 isotype, demonstrates superior cell death induction
and its glyco-engineered Fc region has shown to cause significant
enhanced ADCC (Mssner et al, Blood 2010; Niederfellner G. et al, Blood
2011). The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of GA101
as compared to RTX against RTX resistant cell lines (Raji-2R and
Raji-4RH, generously supplied by M. Barth, MD, Roswell Park Cancer
Center, Buffalo, NY) in-vitro. Methods: We evaluated the efficacy of
GA101 against Raji (Burkitt Lymphoma), a RTX sensitive cell line (RSCL)
and RTX resistant cell lines (RRCL), Raji-2R and Raji-4R (Barth M. et al,
ASH 2010). All cell lines were cultured in RPMI with 10% FBS and
incubated with dose escalation of GA101 (1-100 g/ml) for 24 hrs. Cell
death was evaluated by staining with AnnexinV/7AAD using a standard kit
(BD Biosciences) and flow-cytometry. B-Cell Leukemia-Lymphoma (BLL)
U-698-M cells (CD20+) (DSMZ, Germany) were used as the positive control;
whereas, Loucy cells (CD20) (T-ALL) (ATCC, Manhass, VA) were used as the
negative control. Results: At 100 g/ml of GA101 when incubated for 24
hrs, Raji and U-698-M demonstrated 26.50.42% and 32.41.9% cell death,
respectively. Cell death of the RRCL, Raji-2R and Raji-4RH, was 16.33.4%
and 17.50.07% respectively, at 100 g/ml of GA101 at 24 hrs. Significant
cell death was demonstrated with RSCL as compared to the RRCL, Raji vs
Raji-2R (p<0.05) and Raji vs Raji-4RH (p<0.01). There was no significant
change in cell death with any concentration of GA101 with the Loucy cell
line. Conclusion: Based on these findings, GA101 is a promising novel
CD20 antibody for the treatment of RTX resistant B-Cell Lymphomas and
related B-Cell malignancies. Further studies are aimed to identify novel
candidates that may increase the efficacy of GA101 against RTX resistant
cell lines in-vitro and in-vivo. One such approach is to combine GA101
with activated NK cells or a chemotherapeutic agent.

