Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Air pollution and DNA methylation in tumor suppressor genes


Ambient and occupational exposure to particular matter (PM) has been
associated with increased risk of lung cancer. Although the carcinogenic
potential of several toxic metals in PM was well-recognized, the
molecular mechanisms underlying their association with lung cancer risk
remain poorly understood. Aberrant tumor suppressor gene promoter
methylation has emerged as one of the most important epigenetic
mechanisms in the development of human cancers, including lung cancer.
However, whether exposure to PM is associated with peripheral blood
leukocyte (PBL) DNA methylation in tumor suppressor genes has not been
examined. Foundry workers, even in modern foundry facilities, are still
exposed to substantially higher levels of airborne PM compared to those
found outdoors, and have been associated with increased risk of lung
cancer. In the present study of 63 foundry workers with
well-characterized exposure to metal-rich particles nearby Brescia,
Italy, we evaluated whether exposure to PM and metal components was
associated with PBL DNA methylation in 4 tumor suppressor genes (i.e.,
APC, p16, p53 and RASSF1A). Air pollution measures included
concentrations of airborne PM with aerodynamic diametersAmbient and
occupational exposure to particular matter (PM) has been associated with
increased risk of lung cancer. Although the carcinogenic potential of
several toxic metals in PM was well-recognized, the molecular mechanisms
underlying their association with lung cancer risk remain poorly
understood. Aberrant tumor suppressor gene promoter methylation has
emerged as one of the most important epigenetic mechanisms in the
development of human cancers, including lung cancer. However, whether
exposure to PM is associated with peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA
methylation in tumor suppressor genes has not been examined. Foundry
workers, even in modern foundry facilities, are still exposed to
substantially higher levels of airborne PM compared to those found
outdoors, and have been associated with increased risk of lung cancer. In
the present study of 63 foundry workers with well-characterized exposure
to metal-rich particles nearby Brescia, Italy, we evaluated whether
exposure to PM and metal components was associated with PBL DNA
methylation in 4 tumor suppressor genes (i.e., APC, p16, p53 and
RASSF1A). Air pollution measures included concentrations of airborne PM
with aerodynamic diameters<10 m (PM10), Ambient and occupational exposure
to particular matter (PM) has been associated with increased risk of lung
cancer. Although the carcinogenic potential of several toxic metals in PM
was well-recognized, the molecular mechanisms underlying their
association with lung cancer risk remain poorly understood. Aberrant
tumor suppressor gene promoter methylation has emerged as one of the most
important epigenetic mechanisms in the development of human cancers,
including lung cancer. However, whether exposure to PM is associated with
peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA methylation in tumor suppressor
genes has not been examined. Foundry workers, even in modern foundry
facilities, are still exposed to substantially higher levels of airborne
PM compared to those found outdoors, and have been associated with
increased risk of lung cancer. In the present study of 63 foundry workers
with well-characterized exposure to metal-rich particles nearby Brescia,
Italy, we evaluated whether exposure to PM and metal components was
associated with PBL DNA methylation in 4 tumor suppressor genes (i.e.,
APC, p16, p53 and RASSF1A). Air pollution measures included
concentrations of airborne PM with aerodynamic diameters<10 m (PM10), <1
m (PM1), and individual metal particle components in PM10. Blood samples
were obtained on the 1st (baseline) and 4th day (post-exposure) of the
same work week. DNA methylation was measured using pyrosequencing. A
linear mixed model was used to examine the correlations of the exposure
with promoter methylation levels. Mean promoter DNA methylation levels of
APC or p16 were significantly higher in post-exposure samples compared to
that in baseline samples (from 4.65 %5mC to 4.89 %5mC, p-value=0.005 for
APC; from 2.20 %5mC to 2.34 %5mC, p-value=0.006 for p16). By contrast,
the mean levels of p53 or RASSF1A promoter methylation was decreased in
post-exposure samples compared to that in baseline samples (from 6.36
%5mC to 6.16 %5mC, p-value=0.015 for p53; from 8.17 %5mC to 7.08 %5mC,
p-valueAmbient and occupational exposure to particular matter (PM) has
been associated with increased risk of lung cancer. Although the
carcinogenic potential of several toxic metals in PM was well-recognized,
the molecular mechanisms underlying their association with lung cancer
risk remain poorly understood. Aberrant tumor suppressor gene promoter
methylation has emerged as one of the most important epigenetic
mechanisms in the development of human cancers, including lung cancer.
However, whether exposure to PM is associated with peripheral blood
leukocyte (PBL) DNA methylation in tumor suppressor genes has not been
examined. Foundry workers, even in modern foundry facilities, are still
exposed to substantially higher levels of airborne PM compared to those
found outdoors, and have been associated with increased risk of lung
cancer. In the present study of 63 foundry workers with
well-characterized exposure to metal-rich particles nearby Brescia,
Italy, we evaluated whether exposure to PM and metal components was
associated with PBL DNA methylation in 4 tumor suppressor genes (i.e.,
APC, p16, p53 and RASSF1A). Air pollution measures included
concentrations of airborne PM with aerodynamic diameters<10 m (PM10), <1
m (PM1), and individual metal particle components in PM10. Blood samples
were obtained on the 1st (baseline) and 4th day (post-exposure) of the
same work week. DNA methylation was measured using pyrosequencing. A
linear mixed model was used to examine the correlations of the exposure
with promoter methylation levels. Mean promoter DNA methylation levels of
APC or p16 were significantly higher in post-exposure samples compared to
that in baseline samples (from 4.65 %5mC to 4.89 %5mC, p-value=0.005 for
APC; from 2.20 %5mC to 2.34 %5mC, p-value=0.006 for p16). By contrast,
the mean levels of p53 or RASSF1A promoter methylation was decreased in
post-exposure samples compared to that in baseline samples (from 6.36
%5mC to 6.16 %5mC, p-value=0.015 for p53; from 8.17 %5mC to 7.08 %5mC,
p-value<0.001 for RASSF1A). In post-exposure samples, APC methylation was
positively associated with PM10 (=0.27, 95% CI: 0.13-0.40) and PM1
(=0.23, 95% CI: 0.09-0.38). The mean methylation level of p16 or RASSF1A
promoter region showed positive (=0.19, 95% CI: 0.02-0.37) or negative
(=0.21, 95% CI: 0.370.05) association with the level of zinc exposure. We
observed hypermethylation of p16 and APC, and hypomethylation of RASSF1A
and p53 in a group of healthy foundry workers. Our results suggest that
methylation alterations in tumor suppressor genes may be involved in
PM-induced lung carcinogenesis. Further studies in larger populations
with lung cancer outcomes are required before any firm conclusion can be
reached on whether PM exposed individuals with such DNA methylation
alterations are at higher risk for lung cancer.

