Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NVP-BYL719, a novel PI3Kalpha selective inhibitor with all the
characteristics required for clinical development as an anti-cancer agent


Most of the current oncology drug discovery and development work has
shifted towards molecularly targeted therapies. A key focus has been on
identifying inhibitors against components of pathways that drive tumor
cell proliferation, survival, and metastasis such as the PI3K/mTOR
pathway, reported to be implicated in many human cancers through various
mechanisms, such as, somatic PIK3CA missense mutations that occur at high
frequency. These mutations are largely point mutations predominantly
clustered within three hotspots in the helical and kinase domains of
p110: E542K, E545K and H1047R, which represent about 80% of the mutations
observed, and confirmed to be oncogenic gain-of-function mutations. Based
on these findings cancer-specific mutants of p110 appear to be ideal
targets for drug development and p110 specific inhibitors, such as
NVP-BYL719, could then have potential anti-cancer activity without
causing the potential side effects that could be expected from
interference with other Class I PI3K isoforms or other members of the
PIKK family. NVP-BYL719 is best described as a PI3Kalpha inhibitor as in
biochemical assays, it inhibits p110 as well as p110 most common somatic
mutations (IC50=5 nM) much more potently than p110 and and has weak or no
activity against p110, Vps34 and mTOR and is selective against a wide
range of protein kinases (> 50-fold). The potency and selectivity profile
of NVP-BYL719 is confirmed at the cellular level, is correlated with
inhibition of various PI3K/Akt downstream signaling pathway components
and is associated with anti-proliferation of breast cancer cell lines
harboring PIK3CA mutations. In vivo, NVP-BYL719 shows dose and
time-dependent inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway which correlates with
compound exposure and is associated with good tolerability and
significant dose-dependent anti-tumor efficacy in PIK3CA mutant tumor
xenograft models in rodents. Moreover, plasma insulin levels are
significantly increased while blood glucose levels remained normal at all
tested doses and time points indicating on-target effects of NVP-BYL719
on the regulation of metabolism. Overall, as a PI3Kalpha inhibitor,
NVP-BYL719 has good drug-like and pharmacological properties and presents
all the characteristics required for its ongoing Phase I clinical
development in adult patients with advanced solid malignancies whose
tumors have an alteration of the PIK3CA gene.

