Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nucleosome occupancy at unmethylated promoter CpG islands
represents a novel mechanism of epigenetic gene silencing in cancer


Promoter CpG island (CGI) hypermethylation is an established mechanism of
silencing gene expression in cancer. Although the silenced state is
thought to be consolidated by the recruitment of nucleosomes across the
promoter, this has been observed in only a limited number of genes. Here
we performed genome-wide MBD-Seq, MNase-Seq and RNA-Seq to investigate
the relationship between CGI methylation, nucleosome occupancy around the
transcription start site (TSS) and gene expression in a premalignant
colorectal adenoma and matched normal mucosa. Analysis of RNA-seq data
identified 1987 silent genes that were not expressed in the normal or
adenoma tissues. Of these 1987 genes, 1401 (70.51%) showed either
methylation in both the normal and adenoma tissues or nucleosome
occupancy across the TSS, with 524 (26.37%) of genes showing both,
suggestive of a consolidated silenced state. Our RNA-Seq data also
revealed that 2010 genes were downregulated >2-fold in the adenoma when
compared to paired normal mucosa. Of these 2010 genes, only 67 (3.33%)
genes showed aberrant CGI hypermethylation, and of these 67 genes, only
six (8.96%) showed nucleosome occupancy across the TSS. Therefore, the
presence of both CGI hypermethylation and nucleosome occupancy across the
TSS of downregulated genes is significantly lower than at silent genes
(pPromoter CpG island (CGI) hypermethylation is an established mechanism
of silencing gene expression in cancer. Although the silenced state is
thought to be consolidated by the recruitment of nucleosomes across the
promoter, this has been observed in only a limited number of genes. Here
we performed genome-wide MBD-Seq, MNase-Seq and RNA-Seq to investigate
the relationship between CGI methylation, nucleosome occupancy around the
transcription start site (TSS) and gene expression in a premalignant
colorectal adenoma and matched normal mucosa. Analysis of RNA-seq data
identified 1987 silent genes that were not expressed in the normal or
adenoma tissues. Of these 1987 genes, 1401 (70.51%) showed either
methylation in both the normal and adenoma tissues or nucleosome
occupancy across the TSS, with 524 (26.37%) of genes showing both,
suggestive of a consolidated silenced state. Our RNA-Seq data also
revealed that 2010 genes were downregulated >2-fold in the adenoma when
compared to paired normal mucosa. Of these 2010 genes, only 67 (3.33%)
genes showed aberrant CGI hypermethylation, and of these 67 genes, only
six (8.96%) showed nucleosome occupancy across the TSS. Therefore, the
presence of both CGI hypermethylation and nucleosome occupancy across the
TSS of downregulated genes is significantly lower than at silent genes
(p<0.0001). Interestingly, 272 of the remaining 1966 (13.84%) genes that
were downregulated in the absence of aberrant CGI hypermethylation showed
clear evidence of nucleosome occupancy across the TSS, including the
important cancer-related genes CDH1 and CDKN2B. Only seven of these 272
genes (2.57%) have previously been described as frequent targets of
hypermethylation in cancer, suggesting nucleosome recruitment represents
an alternative mechanism of inactivation of these genes. In summary, we
identified some of the earliest epigenetic events in colorectal neoplasia
by profiling the transcriptome and epigenetic landscape of a premalignant
colorectal adenoma. Our data show that for the majority of genes showing
adenoma-specific downregulation and aberrant CGI hypermethylation,
nucleosomes are not recruited to the promoter. Moreover, our data reveals
a potential novel mechanism of epigenetic gene inactivation in the
absence of promoter hypermethylation, through physical occlusion of
transcription by nucleosome occupancy at the TSS.

