Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer cell interactions


In this study, a cell culture approach is employed to identify patterns
of pair-wise interaction between cancer cells over a panel of 20
established epithelial breast cancer cell lines. It is our hypothesis
that different clones within a tumor, as well as different cell lines in
cultured conditions, interact in one of two ways: a) by competitive
growth or, b) by synergistic growth. We investigate this by culturing
cell lines in serum-free conditioned medium (CM), i.e. medium which has
already been used on other cell lines. Cell population growth is
monitored by incubating cultures with 5-Ethyl-2-deoxyuridine (EdU). Cell
apoptosis is obtained by labeling fixed cultures with a cleaved Poly ADP
Ribose Polymerase (c-PARP) monoclonal antibody. Results yield two 20x20
matrices of cell to CM interaction, and confirm that cancer cells
interact through secreted substances in the medium. In an effort to trace
these phenomenological interactions back to specific biochemical
pathways, the interaction matrices are correlated to gene expression data
available for these cell lines. Furthermore, the experiment reveals two
cell lines, HCC38 and BT20, whose media produce a strong apoptotic and
strong anti-proliferative effect respectively. By employing molecular
weight fractionation, we attempt to isolate specific components from the
media retaining the strong interaction activity.

