Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BAY 1082439, a highly selective and balanced PI3K/ inhibitor
demonstrated potent activity in tumors with activated PI3K and
loss-of-function of PTEN


The PI3K pathway plays critical roles in cancer cell growth and survival,
as well as in intrinsic and acquired resistance to both chemotherapy and
targeted agents. These essential roles have led to the clinical
development of PI3K pathway inhibitors. Due to the complexity derived
from the existence of various PI3K isoforms (,,,), and their differential
roles in signal transduction, as well as cancer pathology, development of
PI3K inhibitors with differential pharmacological profiles would allow
exploration in different indications, combinations and dosing regimens.
Having identified BAY 80-6946, an intravenously dosed, highly potent and
selective PI3K inhibitor which is particularly effective in PIK3CAmut
and/or Her2+ tumors, we sought to develop a novel oral PI3K inhibitor
particularly effective in PTEN-loss tumors with coexisting mutation or
amplification of PIK3CA and/or activation of PI3K (e.g., through RTKs).
Herein we report the pharmacological profile of a highly selective
PI3K/-balanced inhibitor, BAY 1082439. BAY 1082439 has an IC50 ratio of
1:3 in biochemical assays of PI3K (4.9 nM) vs. PI3K (15.0 nM), and
>1000-fold selectivity against mTOR kinase. The balanced PI3K and PI3K
activity of BAY 1082439 is also reflected in cellular mechanistic
(p-AKT473) and proliferation assays in PI3K- (KPL4, BT474) vs.
PI3K-driven (PC3, LNCaP) tumor cells. In vivo, BAY 1082439 showed clear
advantages over the strong PI3K inhibitor BAY 80-6946 in PTEN/PI3K-driven
tumor models (e.g., PC3 and HEC-1B), when the two compounds were compared
at their MTDs. Furthermore, BAY 1082439 has unique pharmacokinetic (PK)
properties with very high plasma free fractions across all species tested
(33-50%), large Vss, high clearance and intermediate T1/2. The
relationship of PK vs. PD and the efficacy vs. dosing regimens were
investigated. BAY 1082439 showed strong p-AKT inhibition at 2 and 5 hours
post-treatment while p-AKT returned to levels comparable to the vehicle
group at 24 hours in all 4 tumor models tested. Interestingly, with once
daily dosing, BAY 1082439 could induce tumor regression in KPL4
(PIK3CAmut and HER2+), and tumor stasis in HEC-1B (PTENdel) and in HEC-1A
(PIK3CAmut) tumor models, suggesting that continuous inhibition of p-AKT
may not be required for anti-tumor efficacy. In addition, comparison of
different dosing regimens (QD, Q2D, D1-2/W, D1-3/W, D1-4/W to QW) at MTD
indicated that QD and QW dosing produced optimal anti-tumor efficacy.
These results support the hypothesis that strong pathway inhibition for a
certain time period, rather than maintaining constant inhibition might
lead to optimal anti-tumor efficacy along with a maximal therapeutic
window. In conclusion, BAY 1082439 represents a new type of PI3K
inhibitor with unique pharmacological and pharmacodynamic properties to
be further explored in clinical development.

