Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A functional polymorphism on chromosome 15q25 associated with
survival of early stage non-small cell lung cancer


Introduction: The 15q25 region was associated with lung cancer risk and
might be associated with prognosis of lung cancer. This study was
conducted to determine the impact of a functional polymorphism in the
CHRNA3 gene on chromosome 15q25 on the survival of patients with early
stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Methods: Five hundred
eighty-three consecutive patients with surgically-resected NSCLC were
enrolled. The rs6495309C>T polymorphism in the promoter of the CHRNA3
gene was investigated. The association between genotype and overall
survival and disease-free survival was analyzed. Results: Patients with
the rs6495309 CT or TT genotype had a significantly better OS and DFS
than the rs6495309 CC genotype (adjusted hazard ratio for overall
survival = 0.56, 95% confidence interval = 0.41-0.75, P = 0.0001; and
adjusted hazard ratio for disease-free survival = 0.61, 95% confidence
interval = 0.48-0.79, P = 0.0001). An association between the
rs6495309C>T polymorphism and survival outcome was demonstrated in
smokers and never-smokers, and in squamous cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas. Conclusion: The CHRNA3 rs6495309C>T polymorphism may
affect survival in patients with early-stage NSCLC. Analysis of the
rs6495309C>T polymorphism can help identify patients at high risk of a
poor disease outcome. Key words: CHRNA3, polymorphism, non-small cell
lung cancer, survival

