Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative study of p95-HER2 carboxy terminal fragment (CTF)
detected by immunohistochemistry and VeraTag assays in human breast tumors


C-terminally truncated forms of HER2 (HER2-CTF) have been reported to be
highly oncogenic and correlate with node-positive breast cancer, poor
prognosis, and attenuated response to trastuzumab in patients with HER2+
metastatic breast cancer (MBC). A quantitative, sensitive and specific
immunoassay using the VeraTag technology has been developed to detect the
active Met611-HER2 CTF (p95) in FFPE tumor samples and has been used to
identify HER2+ MBC patients who have a reduced response to trastuzumab in
two independent cohorts. Recently, an IHC assay using an antibody
directed to a similar p95 epitope was reported to detect a high
percentage of HER2+ samples (79%) as p95 positive (#530, ASCO 2011). To
verify the cellular specificity and accuracy of the VeraTag p95 assay,
and evaluate the prevalence of p95 in breast tumors, an IHC assay was
developed which utilizes the same p95 antibody as the VeraTag assay. The
IHC and VeraTag assay formats were compared in 120 human breast tumor
excisional and core biopsy samples submitted to central clinical
reference lab testing, and having different levels of HER2 measured by
HercepTest IHC: 0 (n=20); 1+ (n=20), 2+ (n=20), and 3+ (n=60). Replicate
slides were run in both VeraTag and IHC assays to demonstrate
reproducibility. Nearly all p95 IHC signal was associated with tumor
cells only. Consistent with earlier VeraTag p95 data, a general
correlation was observed between p95 and HER2 levels, with tumors
expressing normal levels of HER2 rarely expressing high p95 levels.
However, within the subset of HER2+ samples (IHC 3+ or FISH > 2.2; n=63),
a 30-fold range of p95 VeraTag signal was observed, with 44% having p95
expression above the level of a previously determined clinical cutoff for
trastuzumab response (Clin Cancer Res 16: 4226 2010). A similar
relationship was observed for samples assayed by p95 IHC. All samples
measured as p95 IHC 3+ (>10% cells with 3+ membranous staining) were
HER2+ by central lab testing and represented nearly a third of the HER2+
samples. The VeraTag p95 assay generally agreed with p95 IHC scored by
test category 0-3+ (r=0.54; pC-terminally truncated forms of HER2
(HER2-CTF) have been reported to be highly oncogenic and correlate with
node-positive breast cancer, poor prognosis, and attenuated response to
trastuzumab in patients with HER2+ metastatic breast cancer (MBC). A
quantitative, sensitive and specific immunoassay using the VeraTag
technology has been developed to detect the active Met611-HER2 CTF (p95)
in FFPE tumor samples and has been used to identify HER2+ MBC patients
who have a reduced response to trastuzumab in two independent cohorts.
Recently, an IHC assay using an antibody directed to a similar p95
epitope was reported to detect a high percentage of HER2+ samples (79%)
as p95 positive (#530, ASCO 2011). To verify the cellular specificity and
accuracy of the VeraTag p95 assay, and evaluate the prevalence of p95 in
breast tumors, an IHC assay was developed which utilizes the same p95
antibody as the VeraTag assay. The IHC and VeraTag assay formats were
compared in 120 human breast tumor excisional and core biopsy samples
submitted to central clinical reference lab testing, and having different
levels of HER2 measured by HercepTest IHC: 0 (n=20); 1+ (n=20), 2+
(n=20), and 3+ (n=60). Replicate slides were run in both VeraTag and IHC
assays to demonstrate reproducibility. Nearly all p95 IHC signal was
associated with tumor cells only. Consistent with earlier VeraTag p95
data, a general correlation was observed between p95 and HER2 levels,
with tumors expressing normal levels of HER2 rarely expressing high p95
levels. However, within the subset of HER2+ samples (IHC 3+ or FISH >
2.2; n=63), a 30-fold range of p95 VeraTag signal was observed, with 44%
having p95 expression above the level of a previously determined clinical
cutoff for trastuzumab response (Clin Cancer Res 16: 4226 2010). A
similar relationship was observed for samples assayed by p95 IHC. All
samples measured as p95 IHC 3+ (>10% cells with 3+ membranous staining)
were HER2+ by central lab testing and represented nearly a third of the
HER2+ samples. The VeraTag p95 assay generally agreed with p95 IHC scored
by test category 0-3+ (r=0.54; p<0.0001) or histoscore (r=0.54;
pC-terminally truncated forms of HER2 (HER2-CTF) have been reported to be
highly oncogenic and correlate with node-positive breast cancer, poor
prognosis, and attenuated response to trastuzumab in patients with HER2+
metastatic breast cancer (MBC). A quantitative, sensitive and specific
immunoassay using the VeraTag technology has been developed to detect the
active Met611-HER2 CTF (p95) in FFPE tumor samples and has been used to
identify HER2+ MBC patients who have a reduced response to trastuzumab in
two independent cohorts. Recently, an IHC assay using an antibody
directed to a similar p95 epitope was reported to detect a high
percentage of HER2+ samples (79%) as p95 positive (#530, ASCO 2011). To
verify the cellular specificity and accuracy of the VeraTag p95 assay,
and evaluate the prevalence of p95 in breast tumors, an IHC assay was
developed which utilizes the same p95 antibody as the VeraTag assay. The
IHC and VeraTag assay formats were compared in 120 human breast tumor
excisional and core biopsy samples submitted to central clinical
reference lab testing, and having different levels of HER2 measured by
HercepTest IHC: 0 (n=20); 1+ (n=20), 2+ (n=20), and 3+ (n=60). Replicate
slides were run in both VeraTag and IHC assays to demonstrate
reproducibility. Nearly all p95 IHC signal was associated with tumor
cells only. Consistent with earlier VeraTag p95 data, a general
correlation was observed between p95 and HER2 levels, with tumors
expressing normal levels of HER2 rarely expressing high p95 levels.
However, within the subset of HER2+ samples (IHC 3+ or FISH > 2.2; n=63),
a 30-fold range of p95 VeraTag signal was observed, with 44% having p95
expression above the level of a previously determined clinical cutoff for
trastuzumab response (Clin Cancer Res 16: 4226 2010). A similar
relationship was observed for samples assayed by p95 IHC. All samples
measured as p95 IHC 3+ (>10% cells with 3+ membranous staining) were
HER2+ by central lab testing and represented nearly a third of the HER2+
samples. The VeraTag p95 assay generally agreed with p95 IHC scored by
test category 0-3+ (r=0.54; p<0.0001) or histoscore (r=0.54; p<0.0001)
with 79% of the p95 IHC 3+ samples falling above the p95 VeraTag assay
clinical cutoff. Fewer p95 VeraTag positive samples were represented in
p95 IHC 2+ and 1+ categories. These results indicate that the
tumor-specific p95 signal detected by the p95 VeraTag assay is in general
agreement with an IHC assay using the same antibody; however a number of
cases with p95 VeraTag scores above the clinical cutoff do not fall into
the p95 IHC 3+ category. Additionally, the prevalence of p95 positivity
by VeraTag assay and by IHC 3+ scores is consistent with earlier
peer-reviewed studies and lower than recently reported using a different
IHC assay. The clinical significance of using the p95 IHC assay to
complement the VeraTag p95 score is being evaluated.

