Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Determining the proteomic changes that define progressor and
non-progressor clear cell renal cell carcinoma


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer, is
increasing in incidence and is the most lethal genitourinary cancer. Due
to the increased use of abdominal imaging, small renal masses (SRMs),
mostly RCC, are now commonly detected in asymptomatic individuals and are
the most common presentation of kidney cancer. Many of these SRMs grow
slowly or not at all, while about 30% progress to advanced stages.
However, in the absence of factors distinguishing masses that need
treatment from those that can be managed by surveillance alone, most SRMs
are treated by surgery. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) is the most common form of
RCC, has the worst prognosis and is characterized by inactivation of von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene (VHL). Systemic therapies developed
to treat patients at advanced stages have targeted pVHL regulated genes
particularly hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) downstream targets. However,
these drugs rarely achieve cures suggesting that other pathways are
implicated in ccRCC initiation and progression. Our national clinical
trial, Active Surveillance of Small Renal Masses provides a unique
opportunity to study the genetics and biology of the early stage ccRCC
and characterize the genomic and proteomic signatures distinguishing
non-progressor from progressor ccRCC-SRMs. Patients with ccRCC-SRMs
(Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancer, is
increasing in incidence and is the most lethal genitourinary cancer. Due
to the increased use of abdominal imaging, small renal masses (SRMs),
mostly RCC, are now commonly detected in asymptomatic individuals and are
the most common presentation of kidney cancer. Many of these SRMs grow
slowly or not at all, while about 30% progress to advanced stages.
However, in the absence of factors distinguishing masses that need
treatment from those that can be managed by surveillance alone, most SRMs
are treated by surgery. Clear cell RCC (ccRCC) is the most common form of
RCC, has the worst prognosis and is characterized by inactivation of von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene (VHL). Systemic therapies developed
to treat patients at advanced stages have targeted pVHL regulated genes
particularly hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) downstream targets. However,
these drugs rarely achieve cures suggesting that other pathways are
implicated in ccRCC initiation and progression. Our national clinical
trial, Active Surveillance of Small Renal Masses provides a unique
opportunity to study the genetics and biology of the early stage ccRCC
and characterize the genomic and proteomic signatures distinguishing
non-progressor from progressor ccRCC-SRMs. Patients with ccRCC-SRMs (<4cm
in size) are followed with time and if their mass progresses, they
undergo surgical or other forms of intervention as appropriate. In this
study, we determine the proteomic differences between a) non-progressor
and progressor ccRCC-SRMs by characterizing biopsies taken at the time of
diagnosis and recruitment into the surveillance protocol from both
groups, and b) progressor ccRCC-SRM (at time of recruitment) and advanced
ccRCC by comparing the initial, diagnostic biopsy of ccRCC-SRMs that
subsequently progress to the surgical specimen at the time of treatment
for progression (advanced stage). Using reverse phase protein array
(RPPA), we identify proteomic signatures that distinguish progressor and
non-progressor groups. We observed changes mostly in the PI3 kinase and
ERK pathways as well as alterations in apoptotic pathways. Our results
provide important insight for management of ccRCC-SRMs and define
pathways involved in their initiation and progression. This could
furthermore identify potential therapeutic targets that would lead to
better management of ccRCC patients.

