Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interferon- induced TLR4 is indispensable for the synergistic
induction of Duox2/DuoxA2 by lipopolysacharide (LPS) and IFN- in human
pancreatic cancer cells


Several bacterial cell wall components, including lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), muramyldipeptide (MDP), and flagellin, have been shown to engage
their corresponding receptors and mediate NADPH oxidase (NOX)-dependent
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation that may be involved in wound
healing, host defense, and the inflammatory response in airway and
gastrointestinal epithelial cells. Previously, we reported that two human
pancreatic cancer cell lines, BxPC-3 and AsPC-1, respond to the
pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN- by upregulating the expression of both
Dual oxidase 2 and its cognate cofactor DuoxA2 resulting in enhanced ROS
production. It has also been reported that human pancreatic cancer cells
express TLR4/MyD88, and that signaling downstream of the TLR receptor may
be responsible for LPS-induced invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells.
In our studies, we have demonstrated that IFN- up-regulates TLR4 and its
adaptor protein MyD88 expression in BxPc-3 cells and augments the
response of these cells to LPS, resulting in the activation of NFkB
signaling, enhancing p65 subunit accumulation in the nucleus. Moreover,
we found that p65 binds to the Duox2 promoter, and cooperates with the
IFN-- induced Stat1 expression to synergistically enhance Duox2/DuoxA2
expression, leading to persistent intra- and extracellular ROS
accumulation. TLR4 silencing by RNAi and two independent NF-kB inhibitors
(PDTC and BAY11-70829) specifically attenuate LPS- and IFN--mediated
Duox2 expression in BxPc-3 cells, underscoring the importance of TLR4
engagement and the activation of NF-kB signaling in regulating Duox2
expression and subsequent ROS generation by LPS and IFN-. Our data
suggest that sustained extracellular H2O2 accumulation, mediated by LPS-
and IFN-- induced Duox2/DuoxA2 expression, may contribute to the
deleterious effects of cytokine-mediated pancreatic inflammation.

