Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-angiogenic effects of zoledronic acid on osteotropic breast
cancer cells


Emerging data suggest the bisphosphonate, zoledronic acid (ZOL), exerts
both indirect and direct anti-tumor effects by decreasing tumor cell
proliferation, increasing apoptosis, and inhibiting angiogenesis. Recent
data indicate that anti-angiogenic factors exert cellular effects via
suppression of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation/respiration and
elevation of intracellular ROS levels. This project intended to define
proteins involved in response to ZOL-treatment of an osteotropic breast
cancer cell line, MDA-231BO. Results demonstrate that MDA-231BO cells are
more sensitive to ZOL cytotoxicity and salutary effects are both media-
and calcium-dependent. To investigate pro-apoptotic mechanisms of ZOL,
total RNA, whole cell protein lysates, or mitochondrial-enriched
fractions were isolated from MDA-231BO cells and using a combination of
RT-PCR, 1D/2D-PAGE separation and MALDI-MS/MS, we identified several
angiogenesis inhibitors that were upregulated and pro-angiogenic factors
that were downregulated after ZOL treatment. Functional studies
demonstrate the improved efficacy of ZOL on MDA-231BO compared to
MDA-MB-231 controls. Taken together, these results further support a
model that ZOL tips the angiogenic switch in favor of anti-angiogenic
factors in cancer cells with a propensity for bone metastases.

