Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The putative DNA/RNA Helicase Schlafen-11 sensitizes cancer cells
to topoisomerase I inhibitors


It is critically important to identify the molecular determinants and
predictive molecular markers of cancer sensitivity to topoisomerase I
(TOP1) inhibitors to personalize treatments and rationalize combination
therapies. The NCI Anticancer Tumor Cell Line panel (NCI-60) encompasses
60 cancer cell lines from nine different tissues of origin, which have
been tested since the 1980s for more than 400,000 compounds of natural
and synthetic origin. Moreover, the NCI-60 have been extensively
characterized for gene expression and miRNA with six different array
platforms, copy number variation by aCGH, and are currently being
sequenced for the entire exome and transcriptome at the NCI. To identify
genes that, at the expression level, could predict the in vitro
cytotoxicity profiles of TOP1 inhibitors in the NCI-60, we correlated the
expression profile of more than 17,000 genes, finding 294 genes that
correlated with camptothecin (CPT), 217 with topotecan, 699 with
irinotecan, and 734 with a new non-CPT indenoisoquinoline derivative in
clinical trial NSC724998, at a P + 0.613 with all the four compounds
(uncorrected P + 0.613 with all the four compounds (uncorrected P < 2.5 x
107, two-tailed), as well as with several other CPT analogs. To test the
causal relationship between SLFN11 expression and sensitivity to TOP1
inhibitors in cancer cell lines, we silenced SLFN11 expression in two
different human lines: DU-145 (prostate) and HOP-62 (non-small cell lung
cancer), both expressing SLFN11 and showing high sensitivities to TOP1
inhibitors. In both cell lines, siRNA-mediated silencing of SLFN11
induced a remarkable resistance to CPT. While SLFN11 expression was
strongly positively correlated to the response to TOP1 inhibitors and
other DNA damaging agents in the NCI-60, it did not correlate with other
classes of chemotherapeutic agents such as microtubule-targeting
compounds or kinase inhibitors. Accordingly, SLFN11 siRNA-induced
depletion did not affect the cellular response to paclitaxel or the
apoptosis inducer staurosporine. In conclusion, the identification of
SLFN11 modulating effects towards in vitro response to TOP1 inhibitors
lays the ground for the study of a previously unexplored player of cancer
cell response to that class of agents. Moreover, SLFN11 expression could
be tested in human tumor samples as a biomarker in response prediction to
TOP1 inhibitor-based chemotherapeutical regimens, such as those used in
colorectal and ovarian cancer.

