Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Withaferin A inhibits the malignant pleural mesothelioma growth in
vitro and in vivo


The medicinal plant Withania somnifera has been used for over centuries
in Indian Ayurvedic medicine to treat a wide spectrum of disorders.
Withaferin A (WA), a bioactive compound that is isolated from this plant,
has recently been found to have anti-inflammatory, immuno-modulatory,
anti-angiogenic, and anti-cancer properties. Here we investigated
malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) suppressive effects of WA and the
molecular mechanisms involved. WA inhibited growth of the murine as well
as patient-derived MPM cells in part by decreasing the chymotryptic
activity of the proteasome that resulted in accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins. WA suppression of MPM growth also involved elevated apoptosis
as evidenced by activation of caspase-3, elevated levels of pro-apoptotic
Bax protein and cleavage of poly-(ADP-ribose)-polymerase. Our studies
including gene-array based analyses further revealed that WA suppressed a
number of cell growth and metastasis-promoting genes including c-myc. WA
treatments also promoted cleavage of vimentin as well as stimulated
expression of CARP-1/CCAR1, a novel transducer of cell growth signaling.
Knock-down of CARP-1, on the other hand, interfered with vimentin
cleavage and MPM growth inhibitory effects of WA. Administration of
5mg/kg WA by daily i.p injections inhibited growth of murine MPM
cell-derived tumors in vivo in part by inhibiting proteasome activity and
stimulating apoptosis. Together our in vitro and in vivo studies suggest
that WA suppresses MPM growth by targeting multiple pathways that include
blockage of proteasome activity and stimulation of apoptosis, and thus
holds promise as an anti-MPM agent.

