Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of an up-regulated ATR-CHEK1 pathway in head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas


Background: The ATR-CHEK1 pathway is upregulated in a subset of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines with loss of the G1 cell
cycle checkpoint. We hypothesized that the upregulated ATR-CHEK1 pathway
protects HNSCC from mitotic catastrophe (cell death) by enhancing the G2M
phase checkpoint and that inhibition of this pathway may sensitize HNSCC
to DNA damaging agents. Methods and Results: In HNSCC, we observed gain,
amplification or translocation of the ATR gene in 8 of 20 cell lines
studied; whereas the CHEK1 gene is partially lost in 12 of 20 cell lines.
ATR and CHEK1 FISH in paraffin sections of primary head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas confirmed our findings in HNSCC cell lines. We observed
that both ATR and CHEK1 are overexpressed by quantitative PCR in five of
eight HNSCC cell lines with loss of the G1 cell cycle checkpoint.
Inhibition of ATR and CHEK1 with caffeine or specific inhibition with the
respective siRNAs results in increased susceptibility of HNSCC to
ionizing radiation by clonogenic cell survival assay. siRNA-mediated ATR
or CHEK1 knockdown leads to loss of G2M checkpoint accumulation and
increased sub-G0 apoptotic population by flow cytometric analysis. The
mechanism of cell death after ATR and CHEK1 knockdown is by mitotic
catastrophe, as evidenced by increased premature chromatin condensation.
Conclusions: The ATR-CHEK1 pathway is up-regulated in a subset of HNSCC
with loss of G1 phase cell cycle checkpoint. The up-regulated ATR-CHEK1
pathway protects these HNSCC from mitotic catastrophe by enhancing the
G2M phase cell cycle checkpoints and inhibition of ATR and/or CHEK1
increase the sensitivity of the HNSCC to ionizing radiation. We conclude
that inhibition of the up-regulated ATR-CHEK1 pathway in HNSCC may
potentiate or increase the efficacy of the current therapeutic modalities
for HNSCC.

