Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumorigenic and migratory potential of Ral GTPases in non-small
cell lung cancers


The Ral GTPase family, consisting of the Ral A and B isoforms contributes
to tumor formation, invasion and metastasis, however their role in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is yet to be validated. Recently, we
investigated the role of Ral GTPases in NSCLC by in vitro expression,
colony formation and migration assay, in vivo tumor formation
experiments, and analysis of microarray data from NSCLC patients. In
vitro, Ral A and Ral B was expressed in all NSCLC cell lines studied (14)
to varying levels. Increased expression of Ral A or Ral B was more
frequent in Ras mutant cell lines (Ral A elevated in 2/8 cell lines with
mutant KRas vs. 0/6 cell lines with WT KRas, Ral B elevated in 5/8 cell
lines with mutant KRas vs. 2/6 WT KRas). Soft agar experiments with
transient knockdown of Ral A, Ral B and Ral A+B in these cell lines
demonstrated significant decrease (pThe Ral GTPase family, consisting of
the Ral A and B isoforms contributes to tumor formation, invasion and
metastasis, however their role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
yet to be validated. Recently, we investigated the role of Ral GTPases in
NSCLC by in vitro expression, colony formation and migration assay, in
vivo tumor formation experiments, and analysis of microarray data from
NSCLC patients. In vitro, Ral A and Ral B was expressed in all NSCLC cell
lines studied (14) to varying levels. Increased expression of Ral A or
Ral B was more frequent in Ras mutant cell lines (Ral A elevated in 2/8
cell lines with mutant KRas vs. 0/6 cell lines with WT KRas, Ral B
elevated in 5/8 cell lines with mutant KRas vs. 2/6 WT KRas). Soft agar
experiments with transient knockdown of Ral A, Ral B and Ral A+B in these
cell lines demonstrated significant decrease (p<0.05) in colony
formation. Dual knockdown of Ral A and B had a 2 to 3 fold decrease (pThe
Ral GTPase family, consisting of the Ral A and B isoforms contributes to
tumor formation, invasion and metastasis, however their role in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is yet to be validated. Recently, we
investigated the role of Ral GTPases in NSCLC by in vitro expression,
colony formation and migration assay, in vivo tumor formation
experiments, and analysis of microarray data from NSCLC patients. In
vitro, Ral A and Ral B was expressed in all NSCLC cell lines studied (14)
to varying levels. Increased expression of Ral A or Ral B was more
frequent in Ras mutant cell lines (Ral A elevated in 2/8 cell lines with
mutant KRas vs. 0/6 cell lines with WT KRas, Ral B elevated in 5/8 cell
lines with mutant KRas vs. 2/6 WT KRas). Soft agar experiments with
transient knockdown of Ral A, Ral B and Ral A+B in these cell lines
demonstrated significant decrease (p<0.05) in colony formation. Dual
knockdown of Ral A and B had a 2 to 3 fold decrease (p<0.05) in NSCLC
cell motility in wound healing assays. In vivo, knockdown of Ral GTPases
resulted in reduced subcutaneous tumor growth (pThe Ral GTPase family,
consisting of the Ral A and B isoforms contributes to tumor formation,
invasion and metastasis, however their role in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is yet to be validated. Recently, we investigated the role of Ral
GTPases in NSCLC by in vitro expression, colony formation and migration
assay, in vivo tumor formation experiments, and analysis of microarray
data from NSCLC patients. In vitro, Ral A and Ral B was expressed in all
NSCLC cell lines studied (14) to varying levels. Increased expression of
Ral A or Ral B was more frequent in Ras mutant cell lines (Ral A elevated
in 2/8 cell lines with mutant KRas vs. 0/6 cell lines with WT KRas, Ral B
elevated in 5/8 cell lines with mutant KRas vs. 2/6 WT KRas). Soft agar
experiments with transient knockdown of Ral A, Ral B and Ral A+B in these
cell lines demonstrated significant decrease (p<0.05) in colony
formation. Dual knockdown of Ral A and B had a 2 to 3 fold decrease
(p<0.05) in NSCLC cell motility in wound healing assays. In vivo,
knockdown of Ral GTPases resulted in reduced subcutaneous tumor growth
(p<0.05) in mice injected with the knockdown cells. Microarray data from
NSCLC patients was analyzed to study the correlation between Ral A and B
expression with overall patient survival. High Ral A expression was
associated with poor patient survival in these microarray datasets (pThe
Ral GTPase family, consisting of the Ral A and B isoforms contributes to
tumor formation, invasion and metastasis, however their role in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is yet to be validated. Recently, we
investigated the role of Ral GTPases in NSCLC by in vitro expression,
colony formation and migration assay, in vivo tumor formation
experiments, and analysis of microarray data from NSCLC patients. In
vitro, Ral A and Ral B was expressed in all NSCLC cell lines studied (14)
to varying levels. Increased expression of Ral A or Ral B was more
frequent in Ras mutant cell lines (Ral A elevated in 2/8 cell lines with
mutant KRas vs. 0/6 cell lines with WT KRas, Ral B elevated in 5/8 cell
lines with mutant KRas vs. 2/6 WT KRas). Soft agar experiments with
transient knockdown of Ral A, Ral B and Ral A+B in these cell lines
demonstrated significant decrease (p<0.05) in colony formation. Dual
knockdown of Ral A and B had a 2 to 3 fold decrease (p<0.05) in NSCLC
cell motility in wound healing assays. In vivo, knockdown of Ral GTPases
resulted in reduced subcutaneous tumor growth (p<0.05) in mice injected
with the knockdown cells. Microarray data from NSCLC patients was
analyzed to study the correlation between Ral A and B expression with
overall patient survival. High Ral A expression was associated with poor
patient survival in these microarray datasets (p<0.05). The above
observations demonstrate that Ral GTPases play a role in lung cancer
tumorigenesis and migration. In the Ras signaling cascade, Ral GTPases
are downstream of Ras along with PI3K and MAPK signaling pathways. KRas
mutations in NSCLC carry a poor patient prognosis. Based on our
observations, we posit that Ral GTPases can be a valid target for drug
development against KRas mutated lung cancers along with PI3K and MEK
inhibitors.

