Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging of the interaction of pancreatic cancer and stellate cells
during liver metastasis


Pancreatic stellate cells are involved in fibrosis of pancreatic cancer.
An understanding of pancreatic cancer-cell interactions with stellate
cells is critical to our ability to develop effective anti-tumor
therapeutics for pancreatic cancer. We report here imaging of the
interaction of pancreatic cancer cells and pancreatic stellate cells in
liver metastasis. Human pancreatic cancer cell lines (XPA1 and MiaPaCa-2)
were engineered to express green fluorescent protein (GFP) in the nucleus
and red fluorescent protein (RFP) in the cytoplasm. Pancreatic stellate
cells, engineered to express RFP, were co-injected with the cancer cells
into the spleen of transgenic cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) nude mice.
Three hours after splenic injection dual-color pancreatic cancer cells
and pancreatic stellate cells were found distributed in the host liver.
Seven days after cancer cell-stellate cell co-injection, most pancreatic
cancer cells and stellate cells were dead. However, by 28 days after
injection, liver metastases were observed in the host CFP nude mice. With
the high-resolution intravital imaging afforded by the Olympus FV1000
confocal microscope, the interaction of the dual-colored pancreatic
cancer cells and the RFP-expressing pancreatic stellate cells could be
clearly imaged in the liver metastasis, suggesting that stellate cells
participate in metastasis formation. Our hypothesis is that pancreatic
stellate cells form a niche for liver metastasis of pancreatic cancer.

