Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53-miR-dependent post-transcriptional circuits: mechanisms,
targets and inter-individual variation


Using bioinformatics approaches, we identified a group of candidate
microRNAs (miRs) for direct p53 transcriptional control. To validate p53
family-mediated control of the newly predicted target miRs we evaluated
the potential for wild type p53, p63 and p73 to transactivate from p53
response elements (REs) mapped at the miR promoters. Results obtained
with an established yeast-based assay indicated that the REs found at
miR-10b, -23b, -106a, -151, -191, -198, -202, -221, -320, -1204, -1026
genes were responsive to p53 of which 8 were also responsive to p63 or
p73. ChIP assays in doxorubicin-treated HCT116 cells -p53+/+ vs p53-/
revealed moderate p53 occupancy at the miR-202, -1206 sites, and weak
occupancy at miR-10b, -191. RT-qPCR analyses in HCT116 and MCF7 cells
showed modest doxorubicin- and/or p53-dependent regulation for miR-23b,
-151, -191. We then focused on miR-191 and its potential impact on MDM4,
an important modulator of p53. The A>C SNP (rs4245739) in the proximal
portion of the MDM4 3UTR occurs in a predicted binding site for miR-191,
with the A allele resulting in a mismatch at the predicted miR-191 seed.
This SNP is in strong association with the tag-SNP (rs2369244) within the
MDM4 haplotype that was reported to impact on cancer risk. Using MCF7 and
HCT116 cells that are heterozygous for rs4245739, we examined at the
endogenous MDM4 gene level the impact of varying the expression of
miR-191. A slight allelic imbalance was observed by allele-specific qPCR
when miR-191 was over-expressed, and the co-transfection of miR-34a, for
which seed sequences are predicted in the distal portion of the
MDM4-3UTR, had an additive effect, leading to 20% reduction of the
C-allele. Western blot analyses indicated that steady-state MDM4 protein
levels were reduced by miR-191 and/or miR-34a overexpression. Our study
reveals additional miRs that could be directly regulated by the
p53-family of transcription factors and could contribute to the tuning of
p53-induced responses with the possibility of inter-individual variations
due to functional SNPs.

