Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting oncoprotein stability overcomes lapatinib-resistance due
to ERBB2 kinase domain mutations


ERBB2 kinase domain mutations were recently reported in some solid
cancers. Moreover, certain ERBB2 mutations were shown to cause lapatinib
resistance in vitro thus predicting their emergence in treated patients.
We have recently shown that ERBB2-L755S, ERBB2-L755P and ERBB2-T798M
mutants cause lapatinib resistance by stabilizing the active kinase
conformation (DFG-in), which is incompatible with lapatinib binding
(DFG-out). Using an in vitro cell-based drug resistance screen we also
showed that these lapatinib resistant mutations might cause secondary
resistance in patients treated with lapatinb. Thus, it is important to
search for alternate treatment strategies to overcome lapatinib
resistance. ERBB2 kinase is a client for HSP90 and is degraded by HSP90
inhibitor treatment. We thus tested if targeting ERBB2 mutant stability
by inhibiting HSP90 overcomes lapatinib resistance. Since the kinase
domain is important for the ERBB2 interaction with HSP90, we tested
whether ERBB2 kinase domain mutants retained their interaction with the
chaperone. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the interaction of
ERBB2 mutants with HSP90 is intact. Importantly, HSP90 inhibitor
treatment resulted in the degradation of lapatinib-resistant ERBB2
mutants as observed with the wild type ERBB2 kinase. Thus, HSP90
inhibitors may offer an alternative treatment option to overcome primary
or secondary lapatinib resistance in patients harbouring ERBB2 mutations.
Moreover, combined targeting of different physiological aspects (enzyme
activity and protein stability) may prevent the emergence of secondary
drug resistance due to kinase domain mutations.

