Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA profiling for the detection of melanoma


Background: Numerous reports have suggested a link between aberrant
expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) and various forms of cancer, including
melanoma. We examined miRNA expression patterns in melanoma and nevi to
identify candidate biomarkers for differentiating between these
melanocytic lesions. Method: The study used formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues from 78 patients with melanoma and 98
with nevi (18 compound nevi, 20 intradermal nevi, 20 junctional nevi, 20
blue nevi, and 20 spitz nevi). All lesions were confirmed by at least 2
pathologists. Total RNA was extracted from the FFPE tissue and hybridized
onto the Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA),
which measure 850 human microRNAs. After determining an optimal set of
miRNAs for differentiation using random forest algorithm, we retested
specimens for this set using quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) on a
TaqMan miRNA system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Results:
Expression levels of 257 miRNAs differed significantly between melanomas
and nevi (p values 0.75 for distinguishing melanomas from nevi, and 74
exhibited more than a two-fold difference. An optimized set of 7 miRNAs
provided good differentiation of melanomas from nevi, with an AUORC of
0.94 and 87.7% concordance with pathology-determined tissue type. miRNA
array data were further validated by qPCR: for 5 of the 7 miRNAs
identified above, qPCR results showed significant correlation with the
miRNA array results (average Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.95).
Conclusions: These data suggest that the miRNA expression pattern from
FFPE tissue holds promise for distinguishing melanomas from nevi. Use of
this miRNA set as a diagnostic marker requires further validation and
exploration in a large-scale study.

