Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MiR-34c has an anti-apoptotic role in non-small-cell lung carcinoma


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a class of small non-coding RNAs that
negatively regulate the expression of their target genes. They are
involved in many biological processes, including cell proliferation,
apoptosis and differentiation, and are considered as promising new
therapeutic targets for cancer. However, the identity of miRNAs involved
in apoptosis and their respective targets remain largely unknown. Given
the elevated complexity of miRNA regulation of gene expression, we
performed a functional screening as an alternative strategy to identify
those miRNAs that in lung cancer cells may interfere with the apoptotic
process. To this aim we generated a derivative of the non-small cell lung
carcinoma A549 cell line in which caspase-8, a critical upstream
initiator of apoptosis, can be activated by the administration of the
small dimerizer drug AP20187. We found a number of miRNAs that may rescue
cell viability from caspase-8 activation. They included miRNAs already
described as oncogenic such as miR-17, miR-135, miR-520, but also some
miRNAs such as miR-124a and miR-34c for which a tumor suppressive role
has been instead described or expected. Among them, miR-34c-5p markedly
increased resistance to paclitaxel induced apoptosis. We demonstrate that
Bmf (Bcl-2 modifying factor) is a target of miR-34c-5p and that its
silencing, together with that of c-myc, a known target of miR-34c-5p,
contributes to resistance to apoptosis induced by paclitaxel via p53
downregulation.

