Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the PI3K pathway potentiates temozolomide effects in
pediatric glioblastoma and results in alterations in glucose and choline
metabolism detected by MRS


Introduction: Children with high grade-glioma have a poor outcome with a
5-year survival rate of less than 20%. The use of adjuvant temozolomide
(TMZ) has now been well accepted as a standard of care in glioblastoma.
However, it does not seem to improve survival in children. We have
recently shown that resistance to TMZ in pediatric glioma cell lines can
be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition. The aim of this study was to
identify whether combination of PI3K pathway inhibition with TMZ would
result in metabolic changes detectable by magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS), and potentially can be used as a noninvasive method of monitoring
response in early stage clinical trials in children with glioma. Methods:
The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant pediatric glioblastoma cell line KNS42
was treated for 48h with dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ
(2xGI50) or with the combination of both (each at 2xGI50). Control and
treated cells were extracted and the aqueous fractions were analyzed by
1H MRS. Results and Discussion: The number of treated KNS42 cells was
significantly reduced relative to their controls, to 798% and 6510%
(PIntroduction: Children with high grade-glioma have a poor outcome with
a 5-year survival rate of less than 20%. The use of adjuvant temozolomide
(TMZ) has now been well accepted as a standard of care in glioblastoma.
However, it does not seem to improve survival in children. We have
recently shown that resistance to TMZ in pediatric glioma cell lines can
be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition. The aim of this study was to
identify whether combination of PI3K pathway inhibition with TMZ would
result in metabolic changes detectable by magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS), and potentially can be used as a noninvasive method of monitoring
response in early stage clinical trials in children with glioma. Methods:
The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant pediatric glioblastoma cell line KNS42
was treated for 48h with dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ
(2xGI50) or with the combination of both (each at 2xGI50). Control and
treated cells were extracted and the aqueous fractions were analyzed by
1H MRS. Results and Discussion: The number of treated KNS42 cells was
significantly reduced relative to their controls, to 798% and 6510%
(P<0.02) following treatment with PI-103 and TMZ respectively.
Combination of PI-103 and TMZ further reduced the number of treated vs.
control cells (down to 546%, PIntroduction: Children with high
grade-glioma have a poor outcome with a 5-year survival rate of less than
20%. The use of adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ) has now been well accepted as
a standard of care in glioblastoma. However, it does not seem to improve
survival in children. We have recently shown that resistance to TMZ in
pediatric glioma cell lines can be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition.
The aim of this study was to identify whether combination of PI3K pathway
inhibition with TMZ would result in metabolic changes detectable by
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and potentially can be used as a
noninvasive method of monitoring response in early stage clinical trials
in children with glioma. Methods: The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant
pediatric glioblastoma cell line KNS42 was treated for 48h with dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ (2xGI50) or with the combination
of both (each at 2xGI50). Control and treated cells were extracted and
the aqueous fractions were analyzed by 1H MRS. Results and Discussion:
The number of treated KNS42 cells was significantly reduced relative to
their controls, to 798% and 6510% (P<0.02) following treatment with
PI-103 and TMZ respectively. Combination of PI-103 and TMZ further
reduced the number of treated vs. control cells (down to 546%, P<0.01).
1H MRS analysis showed that PI-103 treatment caused a decrease in
lactate, phosphocholine (PC) and total choline (tCho) levels down to
4817%, 5211%, 6414% (PIntroduction: Children with high grade-glioma have
a poor outcome with a 5-year survival rate of less than 20%. The use of
adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ) has now been well accepted as a standard of
care in glioblastoma. However, it does not seem to improve survival in
children. We have recently shown that resistance to TMZ in pediatric
glioma cell lines can be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition. The aim of
this study was to identify whether combination of PI3K pathway inhibition
with TMZ would result in metabolic changes detectable by magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (MRS), and potentially can be used as a
noninvasive method of monitoring response in early stage clinical trials
in children with glioma. Methods: The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant
pediatric glioblastoma cell line KNS42 was treated for 48h with dual
PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ (2xGI50) or with the combination
of both (each at 2xGI50). Control and treated cells were extracted and
the aqueous fractions were analyzed by 1H MRS. Results and Discussion:
The number of treated KNS42 cells was significantly reduced relative to
their controls, to 798% and 6510% (P<0.02) following treatment with
PI-103 and TMZ respectively. Combination of PI-103 and TMZ further
reduced the number of treated vs. control cells (down to 546%, P<0.01).
1H MRS analysis showed that PI-103 treatment caused a decrease in
lactate, phosphocholine (PC) and total choline (tCho) levels down to
4817%, 5211%, 6414% (P<0.02) respectively. In contrast, treament with TMZ
resulted in an increase in glycerolphosphocholine (GPC) up to 17643%
(P=0.05). Combination of PI-103 with TMZ retained the combined metabolic
effects of both agents including a decrease in the levels of lactate
(4912%, PIntroduction: Children with high grade-glioma have a poor
outcome with a 5-year survival rate of less than 20%. The use of adjuvant
temozolomide (TMZ) has now been well accepted as a standard of care in
glioblastoma. However, it does not seem to improve survival in children.
We have recently shown that resistance to TMZ in pediatric glioma cell
lines can be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition. The aim of this study
was to identify whether combination of PI3K pathway inhibition with TMZ
would result in metabolic changes detectable by magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS), and potentially can be used as a noninvasive method
of monitoring response in early stage clinical trials in children with
glioma. Methods: The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant pediatric
glioblastoma cell line KNS42 was treated for 48h with dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ (2xGI50) or with the combination of both
(each at 2xGI50). Control and treated cells were extracted and the
aqueous fractions were analyzed by 1H MRS. Results and Discussion: The
number of treated KNS42 cells was significantly reduced relative to their
controls, to 798% and 6510% (P<0.02) following treatment with PI-103 and
TMZ respectively. Combination of PI-103 and TMZ further reduced the
number of treated vs. control cells (down to 546%, P<0.01). 1H MRS
analysis showed that PI-103 treatment caused a decrease in lactate,
phosphocholine (PC) and total choline (tCho) levels down to 4817%, 5211%,
6414% (P<0.02) respectively. In contrast, treament with TMZ resulted in
an increase in glycerolphosphocholine (GPC) up to 17643% (P=0.05).
Combination of PI-103 with TMZ retained the combined metabolic effects of
both agents including a decrease in the levels of lactate (4912%, P<0.01)
and PC (7111%, PIntroduction: Children with high grade-glioma have a poor
outcome with a 5-year survival rate of less than 20%. The use of adjuvant
temozolomide (TMZ) has now been well accepted as a standard of care in
glioblastoma. However, it does not seem to improve survival in children.
We have recently shown that resistance to TMZ in pediatric glioma cell
lines can be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition. The aim of this study
was to identify whether combination of PI3K pathway inhibition with TMZ
would result in metabolic changes detectable by magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS), and potentially can be used as a noninvasive method
of monitoring response in early stage clinical trials in children with
glioma. Methods: The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant pediatric
glioblastoma cell line KNS42 was treated for 48h with dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ (2xGI50) or with the combination of both
(each at 2xGI50). Control and treated cells were extracted and the
aqueous fractions were analyzed by 1H MRS. Results and Discussion: The
number of treated KNS42 cells was significantly reduced relative to their
controls, to 798% and 6510% (P<0.02) following treatment with PI-103 and
TMZ respectively. Combination of PI-103 and TMZ further reduced the
number of treated vs. control cells (down to 546%, P<0.01). 1H MRS
analysis showed that PI-103 treatment caused a decrease in lactate,
phosphocholine (PC) and total choline (tCho) levels down to 4817%, 5211%,
6414% (P<0.02) respectively. In contrast, treament with TMZ resulted in
an increase in glycerolphosphocholine (GPC) up to 17643% (P=0.05).
Combination of PI-103 with TMZ retained the combined metabolic effects of
both agents including a decrease in the levels of lactate (4912%, P<0.01)
and PC (7111%, P<0.02) while an increase in GPC (19040%, PIntroduction:
Children with high grade-glioma have a poor outcome with a 5-year
survival rate of less than 20%. The use of adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ)
has now been well accepted as a standard of care in glioblastoma.
However, it does not seem to improve survival in children. We have
recently shown that resistance to TMZ in pediatric glioma cell lines can
be reversed by PI3K pathway inhibition. The aim of this study was to
identify whether combination of PI3K pathway inhibition with TMZ would
result in metabolic changes detectable by magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS), and potentially can be used as a noninvasive method of monitoring
response in early stage clinical trials in children with glioma. Methods:
The MGMT-independent TMZ-resistant pediatric glioblastoma cell line KNS42
was treated for 48h with dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PI-103 (2xGI50), TMZ
(2xGI50) or with the combination of both (each at 2xGI50). Control and
treated cells were extracted and the aqueous fractions were analyzed by
1H MRS. Results and Discussion: The number of treated KNS42 cells was
significantly reduced relative to their controls, to 798% and 6510%
(P<0.02) following treatment with PI-103 and TMZ respectively.
Combination of PI-103 and TMZ further reduced the number of treated vs.
control cells (down to 546%, P<0.01). 1H MRS analysis showed that PI-103
treatment caused a decrease in lactate, phosphocholine (PC) and total
choline (tCho) levels down to 4817%, 5211%, 6414% (P<0.02) respectively.
In contrast, treament with TMZ resulted in an increase in
glycerolphosphocholine (GPC) up to 17643% (P=0.05). Combination of PI-103
with TMZ retained the combined metabolic effects of both agents including
a decrease in the levels of lactate (4912%, P<0.01) and PC (7111%,
P<0.02) while an increase in GPC (19040%, P<0.03) levels. tCho was
normalized by the opposing changes in PC and GPC and hence was similar to
controls. To explore potential mechanisms underlying the detected
metabolic changes, immunoblotting was used to assess treatment effects on
protein levels of enzymes involved in glycolysis and choline metabolism.
The decrease in PC levels was associated with a decrease in the protein
levels of Choline kinase (ChoK), the enzyme responsible for choline
phosphorylation into PC. ChoK was not affected by TMZ single treatment
leading to no change in PC levels. Furthermore, a decrease in hexokinase
II protein was detected following PI-103 treatment and the combination,
but not with TMZ alone, suggesting a mechanism for depletion of lactate.
Conclusions: Our results show that using MRS we can detect distinct
biomarkers following treatment with PI-103 compared to TMZ. Choline
metabolites and lactate are potential noninvasive biomarkers for
monitoring response to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors both as single agents and in
combination with cytotoxic therapy in children with glioma.

