Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of lapatinib in combination with the dual
mTORC1/2 inhibitor INK-128 in breast tumors resistant to anti-HER2 therapy


Purpose: The PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is an attractive target in HER2
positive breast cancer refractory to anti-HER2 therapy. The hypothesis is
that suppression of this pathway results in sensitization to anti-HER2
agents. However, this combinatorial strategy has not been comprehensively
tested in models of trastuzumab and lapatinib resistance. Experimental
Design: We analyzed in vitro cell viability and induction of apoptosis in
five different cell lines resistant to trastuzumab and lapatinib.
Inhibition of HER2/HER3 phosphorylation, PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK signaling
pathways was evaluated by western blot. Tumor growth inhibition following
treatment with lapatinib, INK-128 or the combination of both agents was
evaluated in three different animal models: two cell-based xenograft
models refractory to both trastuzumab and lapatinib and a xenograft
derived from a patient who relapsed to trastuzumab-based therapy.
Results: The addition of lapatinib to INK-128 prevented both HER2 and
HER3 phosphorylation induced by INK-128, resulting in inhibition of both
PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK pathways. This dual blockade synergistically
enhanced cell death in five different HER2 positive cell lines resistant
to trastuzumab and lapatinib. In vivo, both cell line-based and
patient-derived xenografts showed exquisite sensitivity to the antitumor
activity of the combination of lapatinib and INK-128, causing durable
tumor shrinkage in the absence of any sign of toxicity. Conclusions: The
simultaneous blockade of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and ERK pathways achieved by
combining lapatinib with INK-128 acts synergistically in inducing cell
death and tumor regression in breast cancer refractory to anti-HER2
therapy.

