Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: T cells are activated by protein-bound polysaccharide krestin
(PSK) and contribute to the antitumor effect of PSK


Gamma delta () T cells play an important role in anti-tumor immunity, and
novel methods to augment T cell function are highly desired. It has
recently been shown that toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists may modulate
the function of T cells, so we questioned whether protein-bound
polysaccharide krestin (PSK), a mushroom extract with TLR2 agonist
activity, can activate T cell. Using splenocytes from neu-transgenic
mice, we found that T cells produce IFN- after PSK treatment and have
up-regulated expression of CD25 and CD69. The expression of CD107a in T
cells was also enhanced by PSK. To investigate whether the effect of PSK
on T cells is direct or indirect via activation of dendritic cells (DC),
purified T cells were cultured either alone or together with bone marrow
derived DC (BMDC) in a co-culture or trans-well system and then
stimulated with PSK. Results showed that direct cell-to-cell contact
between T cells and DC is required for optimal activation of T cells. In
the absence of DC, PSK can co-stimulate T cells with anti- TCR or
anti-CD3 mAb. Oral administration of PSK in neu-transgenic mice with
implanted breast tumors resulted in increased percentage of T cells among
splenocytes and increased expression of NKG2D on T cells. Depleting T
cells during PSK treatment decreased the anti-tumor effect of PSK. All
together, these results demonstrated that T cells are activated by PSK
and contribute to the anti-tumor effect of PSK.

