Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer immunosuppression: The role of human leukocyte antigen G
expression


Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is an immunotolerant nonclassical major
histocompatibility complex class Ib molecule. During pregnancy it is
expressed by trophoblastic placental cells to protect the fetus from
maternal alloreactivity. HLA-G is involved in cancer immune evasion and
is overexpressed by many tumors. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry were used to examine HLA-G expression
in human normal breast and breast cancer cell lines, and human normal
breast and breast cancer tissues. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction confirmed that normal epithelial MCF-12A cells had no HLA-G
mRNA, but cancer cell lines MCF-7, T47D, and MDA-MB-231 and NCI/Adr-Res
had various levels of HLA-G mRNA expression. Thirty-eight breast cancers
and 12 normal breast tissues were examined by immunohistochemistry.
Fifty-eight percent (22/38) of cancers had medium to strong staining for
HLA-G, whereas only 8% (1/12) of normal breast tissues had medium to
strong staining, and the difference was statistically significant (pHuman
leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G) is an immunotolerant nonclassical major
histocompatibility complex class Ib molecule. During pregnancy it is
expressed by trophoblastic placental cells to protect the fetus from
maternal alloreactivity. HLA-G is involved in cancer immune evasion and
is overexpressed by many tumors. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry were used to examine HLA-G expression
in human normal breast and breast cancer cell lines, and human normal
breast and breast cancer tissues. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction confirmed that normal epithelial MCF-12A cells had no HLA-G
mRNA, but cancer cell lines MCF-7, T47D, and MDA-MB-231 and NCI/Adr-Res
had various levels of HLA-G mRNA expression. Thirty-eight breast cancers
and 12 normal breast tissues were examined by immunohistochemistry.
Fifty-eight percent (22/38) of cancers had medium to strong staining for
HLA-G, whereas only 8% (1/12) of normal breast tissues had medium to
strong staining, and the difference was statistically significant
(p<0.05). HLA-G staining was found in the cytoplasm and membranes of
cancer cells. In conclusion breast cancer cells overexpress HLA-G mRNA
and protein, which probably contributes to immune evasion and treatment
resistance. We believe HLA-G should be monitored in breast and other
epithelial cancers as it may be both a prognostic indicator and a
therapeutic target.

