Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High throughput RNAi screening of synthetic lethal genes
interacting with the common TP53 mutation R175H


The R175H mutation of p53 which account for approximately 6% of the
missense mutations of identified in human cancer is one of the most
common mutations, and cancer cells with this mutation stably express the
R175H protein in the nucleus. Targeting R175H overexpressing cells by
synthetic lethality is one of the extremely effective strategies for
cancer therapy. To identify the synthetic lethal gene interacting with
R175H, we conducted high throughput screening using a
tetracycline-inducible R175H expression system in SF126 cells and
comprehensive shRNA library carried by lentivirus. We identified 906
candidate gene suppressions that may lead to accelerated cell growth
inhibition in the presence of R175H (pThe R175H mutation of p53 which
account for approximately 6% of the missense mutations of identified in
human cancer is one of the most common mutations, and cancer cells with
this mutation stably express the R175H protein in the nucleus. Targeting
R175H overexpressing cells by synthetic lethality is one of the extremely
effective strategies for cancer therapy. To identify the synthetic lethal
gene interacting with R175H, we conducted high throughput screening using
a tetracycline-inducible R175H expression system in SF126 cells and
comprehensive shRNA library carried by lentivirus. We identified 906
candidate gene suppressions that may lead to accelerated cell growth
inhibition in the presence of R175H (p<0.05, n=3). Among these, we
selected 50 genes (21 genes from the group with the smallest p-values, 20
genes from the group with the largest fold change, and 9 genes reproduced
by different siRNA sequences) for further validation testing. By
transfection of siRNA of these candidate genes into five R175H expressing
cell lines and four TP53-null cell lines, we selected five candidate
genes that significantly lead R175H expressing cells to strong cell
growth inhibition. Inhibitor of differentiation 1 (ID1) was one of the
five candidate genes, and its suppression by siRNA resulted in the
acceleration of growth inhibition in cell lines expressing endogenous
R175H; however, this was not observed in TP53-null cell lines. The
transient expression of R175H in TP53-null cell lines (PC3) and
suppression of ID1 and/or TP53 R175H in cell lines with endogenous R175H
revealed that cell growth inhibition by ID1 suppression depended on the
expression of R175H, and not that of other common p53 mutants (e.g.,
R273H). Flow cytometric analysis exhibited that ID1 suppression resulted
in G1 arrest, and the arrest was accelerated by the expression of R175H.
In conclusion, ID1 is a synthetic lethal gene that interacts with R175H
and is considered to be a novel molecular target for cancer therapy in
R175H expressing cells.

