Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: New neuroblastoma susceptibility loci at 6q21 within HACE1 and
LIN28B


Neuroblastoma is a cancer of the sympathetic nervous system that most
commonly affects young children and accounts for approximately 10% of all
pediatric oncology deaths. We have reported common SNPs associated with
neuroblastoma within LINC00340 at 6p22 (NEJM 2008), BARD1 at 2q35 (Nature
Genetics, 2009), LMO1 at 11p15 (Nature, 2010), DUSP12 at 1q23 (PLoS
Genetics, 2011), and HSD17B12 at 11p11 (PLoS Genetics, 2011), and one
common CNV at 1q21.1 within NBPF23 (Nature, 2009). We have further
demonstrated that germline variation in LMO1 and BARD1 not only
predisposes to neuroblastoma, but also plays an important role in tumor
progression. To identify additional genetic risk factors for
neuroblastoma, we expanded our previous genome-wide association study
(GWAS) to include 2,841 patients and 7,482 control subjects from three
independent case series including two cohorts of European ancestry and
one African American cohort. Here, we report two new associations at
6q21, the first within the HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3
ubiquitin protein ligase 1 gene (HACE1; rs4336470 combined P = 3.4 x
1012; Odds Ratio: 1.27, 95% CI: 1.19-1.36), and the second within lin-28
homolog B (LIN28B; rs17065417 combined P = 8.4 x 109; Odds Ratio 1.38,
95% CI: 1.23-1.54). HACE1 is implicated in multiple human cancers as a
critical tumor suppressor gene (Nature Genetics, 2009). LIN28B, on the
other hand, acts as a repressor of the let-7 family of miRNA, is
over-expressed in many human cancers, and promotes cellular
transformation (Nature Genetics, 2009). More recently, LIN28B has also
been identified as a key regulator of glucose homeostasis (Cell, 2011).
Neuroblastoma cell lines homozygous for the LIN28B risk allele showed
increased LIN28B mRNA and protein expression and down regulation of the
let-7 family of micro RNAs, consistent with the risk allele conferring a
growth advantage through increased LIN28B expression. Transcriptome
analysis of 251 primary tumors showed that HACE1 is down regulated (p =
3.5 x 104) and LIN28B is up-regulated (P = 0.017) in high-risk
neuroblastomas compared to more benign forms of the disease. Tumors
over-expressing LIN28B showed increased activation of DNA damage response
(P = 2.5 x 1019) and metabolism (P = 3.5 x 1025) pathways, independent of
MYCN amplification. Taken together, we show that common DNA variants in
HACE1 and LIN28B influence neuroblastoma susceptibility and our
expression analyses suggest that both genes may play an important role in
disease progression. Efforts are ongoing to understand the mechanism by
which LIN28B and HACE1 influence neuroblastoma tumorigenesis.

