Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variations in epidermal growth factor receptor pathway
predict recurrence and response to chemotherapy in early stage non-small
cell lung cancer


Purpose: We hypothesized that genetic variants within EGFR pathway would
have significant predictive value for recurrence and response to
chemotherapy after curative resection in early-stage NSCLC. Methods: This
study included 467 patients with histologically confirmed NSCLC who were
enrolled from 1995 to 2008 in an ongoing, prospective epidemiologic lung
cancer study at MD Anderson Cancer Center. A total of 387 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 26 genes from EGFR pathway were
genotyped in patients who were treated with surgery only (N=340) or
surgery plus chemotherapy (N=127). The risk of recurrence was estimated
as hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) using a
multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression model. Results: We
identified 5 top SNPs that significantly (PPurpose: We hypothesized that
genetic variants within EGFR pathway would have significant predictive
value for recurrence and response to chemotherapy after curative
resection in early-stage NSCLC. Methods: This study included 467 patients
with histologically confirmed NSCLC who were enrolled from 1995 to 2008
in an ongoing, prospective epidemiologic lung cancer study at MD Anderson
Cancer Center. A total of 387 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
within 26 genes from EGFR pathway were genotyped in patients who were
treated with surgery only (N=340) or surgery plus chemotherapy (N=127).
The risk of recurrence was estimated as hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) using a multivariate Cox proportional hazard
regression model. Results: We identified 5 top SNPs that significantly
(P<0.05) predicted risk of recurrence in both surgery only and surgery
plus chemotherapy groups. To identify a subgroup of patients who may
benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy, we divided these 5 SNPs into two
different groups according to varying hazard ratios for the analysis
performed in surgery only or surgery plus chemotherapy group; A (2
SNPs)=should receive surgery only (HR1 in surgery+chemotherapy); B (3
SNPs)=should receive chemotherapy in addition to surgery (HR>1 in surgery
only and HR1 in surgery+chemotherapy); B (3 SNPs)=should receive
chemotherapy in addition to surgery (HR>1 in surgery only and HR<1 in
surgery+chemotherapy). Cumulative genotype analysis reveals that patients
with 1 or 2 SNPs from Group A had risk of recurrence that was 0.57-fold
that of the reference group without any of these two SNPs (HR=0.57; 95%
CI=0.34-0.96; P=0.035). However, if patients with the same 1 or 2 SNPs
undergo chemotherapy, the risk of recurrence increases to 3.3-fold that
of the reference group (HR=3.28; 95% CI=1.51-7.12; P=0.003). On the other
hand, patients with one or greater number of SNPs from Group B after
surgery only had 2.3-fold increased risk of recurrence compared to the
reference group without any of these SNPs (HR=2.30; 95% CI=1.36-3.88;
P=0.002). However, with addition of chemotherapy the risk of recurrence
in patients with the same SNPs decreased significantly to 0.24-fold that
of the reference group (HR=0.24; 95% CI=0.12-0.51; P=0.001). Conclusions:
Our proposed SNPs from EGFR pathway may help identify a subgroup of
patients at high risk of recurrence after resection and guide decision
for adjuvant chemotherapy in early-stage NSCLC.

