Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-214 /hepatoma-derived growth factor paracrine pathway
contributes to hypervascularity of human hepatoma


Background & Aims: Unusual hypervascularity is a hallmark of human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Angiogenesis is essential for
tumorigenesis and metastasis. While microRNA (miRNA) deregulation is
implicated in carcinogenesis, the role of miRNAs in tumor angiogenesis
remains unknown. Methods: MiRNAs deregulated in HCC were identified using
array-based miRNA profiling. A luciferase reporter assay was used to
confirm target association between miR-214 and hepatoma-derived growth
factor (HDGF). Tube formation and in vivo angiogenesis assays were
performed to validate the roles of miR-214 and HDGF in angiogenesis.
Results: Downregulation of miR-214 was associated with HCC progression
and poor clinical outcome. Ectopic expression of miR-214 suppressed cell
proliferation and xenograft tumor growth and depressed the vascularity of
the tumor and its surrounding tissues. The genes downregulated by ectopic
expression of miR-214 were involved in the regulation of apoptosis, cell
cycle, and angiogenesis. Integrated analysis implicated HDGF as a
downstream target of miR-214. Conditioned medium of HCC cells contained
bioactivity to stimulate tube formation of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, which was abolished by pretreatment of the conditioned
media with HDGF antibodies, and silencing of HDGF expression or ectopic
expression of miR-214 of the donor HCC cells. The angiogenic activity of
the conditioned media lost by ectopic expression of miR-214 in the donor
cells was restored by supplementation with recombinant HDGF. In vivo
tumor angiogenesis assays showed significant suppression of tumor
vascularity by ectopic expression of miR-214. Conclusions: A novel
miR-214/HDGF paracrine pathway contributes to hypervascularity of HCC and
is a candidate target for anti-HCC therapy.

