Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of t-Darpp in a shift to EGFR signaling in
trastuzumab-resistant cells


Elucidating the molecular mechanism of both primary and acquired
resistance to trastuzumab is vital to gaining insight into ways to
improve therapeutic outcomes in breast cancer patients. We have
previously shown that levels of the 32kDa dopamine and cAMP-regulated
phosphoprotein Darpp-32 (Dp32) and its amino-truncated isoform t-Darpp
(tDp) are altered in trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells. Specifically, tDp
is upregulated in models of trastuzumab resistance and over-expression of
the protein is sufficient to confer resistance. We have further
demonstrated that trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells are more sensitive to
the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), AG1478, in the presence of
trastuzumab than in its absence (1), suggesting that these cells gain a
dependence on EGFR when HER2 signaling is shut down. We have now examined
the mechanism by which tDp confers resistance in HER2+ breast cancer
cells. We used SK-Br-3 cells stably expressing an empty vector, tDp or
flag-tDp, as well as two trastuzumab-resistant BT474 clones, BT1.0C and
BT1.0E, that endogenously over-express moderate and very high levels of
tDp, respectively. Cells with elevated tDp levels had a higher basal
level of p-EGFR (Y1068) and we observed an increase in p-EGFR upon
trastuzumab treatment in all of the HER2+ cells. To further investigate
if EGFR signaling plays a role in tDp's resistance mechanism, we
performed SRB assays to test the sensitivity of tDp over-expressing cells
to EGFR TKIs, AG1478 and Gefitinib. We found that cells expressing high
tDp are 2.5- to 7.5-fold more sensitive to EGFR inhibition compared to
controls (pElucidating the molecular mechanism of both primary and
acquired resistance to trastuzumab is vital to gaining insight into ways
to improve therapeutic outcomes in breast cancer patients. We have
previously shown that levels of the 32kDa dopamine and cAMP-regulated
phosphoprotein Darpp-32 (Dp32) and its amino-truncated isoform t-Darpp
(tDp) are altered in trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells. Specifically, tDp
is upregulated in models of trastuzumab resistance and over-expression of
the protein is sufficient to confer resistance. We have further
demonstrated that trastuzumab-resistant BT474 cells are more sensitive to
the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), AG1478, in the presence of
trastuzumab than in its absence (1), suggesting that these cells gain a
dependence on EGFR when HER2 signaling is shut down. We have now examined
the mechanism by which tDp confers resistance in HER2+ breast cancer
cells. We used SK-Br-3 cells stably expressing an empty vector, tDp or
flag-tDp, as well as two trastuzumab-resistant BT474 clones, BT1.0C and
BT1.0E, that endogenously over-express moderate and very high levels of
tDp, respectively. Cells with elevated tDp levels had a higher basal
level of p-EGFR (Y1068) and we observed an increase in p-EGFR upon
trastuzumab treatment in all of the HER2+ cells. To further investigate
if EGFR signaling plays a role in tDp's resistance mechanism, we
performed SRB assays to test the sensitivity of tDp over-expressing cells
to EGFR TKIs, AG1478 and Gefitinib. We found that cells expressing high
tDp are 2.5- to 7.5-fold more sensitive to EGFR inhibition compared to
controls (p<0.01). Furthermore, the combination treatment of AG1478 and
trastuzumab was synergistic in inhibiting the trastuzumab-resistant
BT1.0E cell line that highly over-expresses tDp at an ED50, ED75 and ED90
CI of 0.61, 0.46, and 0.35, respectively. The parental BT474 cells and
BT1.0C clone, which expresses lower levels of tDp, showed antagonism at
the ED50 but synergism at the ED75 and ED90. Using siRNA knock-down of
tDp, we will show whether tDp is required in causing an increased
dependence on EGFR signaling. We will also report on similar combination
experiments using tDp-transfected SK-Br-3 cells, to determine if tDp
expression is sufficient for conferring synergism, and with a HER2 TKI in
combination with EGFR TKI. Taken together, our results suggest that tDp
is a novel molecular target that can mediate resistance to trastuzumab by
inducing a compensatory shift to EGFR signaling when HER2 is inhibited.
1. Chan CT, Metz MZ, & Kane SE (2005) Differential sensitivities of
trastuzumab (Herceptin)-resistant human breast cancer cells to
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI-3K) and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) kinase inhibitors. Breast Cancer Res Treat 91(2):187-201.

