Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mercapturic acid excretion and N7-GA-Gua DNA adduct formation
after low dose oral application of acrylamide to rats


Acrylamide (AA), a genotoxic carcinogen (IARC class 2A), is a food
contaminant formed by thermal treatment of food. The margin of exposure
(MOE) of AA, representing the distance between the bench mark dose
associated with 10% tumor incidence in rats and the estimated average
human exposure, is considered to be low and of human health concern.
After uptake, AA is partly converted by CYP450 2E1 into the genotoxic
epoxide glycidamide (GA). GA forms DNA adducts, primarily at N7 of
guanine (N7-GA-Gua). AA and its genotoxic metabolite GA are conjugated to
glutathione and excreted via urine as mercapturic acids (MA), namely
N-acetyl-S-(2-carbamoylethyl)-cysteine (AAMA), and
N-acetyl-S-(2-hydroxy-2-carbamoylethyl)-cysteine (GAMA) which are used as
biomarkers for exposure. Female Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were kept on an
AA free diet. AA was given by gavage in a broad dosage range, covering
single doses of 0.1-10,000 g/kg bw. Formation of urinary MAs and of
N7-GA-Gua DNA adducts in liver, kidney and lung was measured 16 h after
application. The lowest dosage of 0.1 g AA/kg bw did not result in
significantly enhanced MA excretion, as compared to untreated controls,
found to excrete about 0.8 nmol MA. Since the animals may have ingested
at best 0.4 nmol AA/d with the diet, this findings suggests a background
level of endogenously formed AA. At the lowest dosage (0.1 g AA/kg bw),
N7-GA-Gua adducts above the limit of detection (LOD, 0.2 adducts/10exp8
nucleotides) were not detected in any organ tested. At 1 g/kg bw,
enhanced adduct levels were found in kidney (around 1 adduct/10exp8
nucleotides) and lung (Acrylamide (AA), a genotoxic carcinogen (IARC
class 2A), is a food contaminant formed by thermal treatment of food. The
margin of exposure (MOE) of AA, representing the distance between the
bench mark dose associated with 10% tumor incidence in rats and the
estimated average human exposure, is considered to be low and of human
health concern. After uptake, AA is partly converted by CYP450 2E1 into
the genotoxic epoxide glycidamide (GA). GA forms DNA adducts, primarily
at N7 of guanine (N7-GA-Gua). AA and its genotoxic metabolite GA are
conjugated to glutathione and excreted via urine as mercapturic acids
(MA), namely N-acetyl-S-(2-carbamoylethyl)-cysteine (AAMA), and
N-acetyl-S-(2-hydroxy-2-carbamoylethyl)-cysteine (GAMA) which are used as
biomarkers for exposure. Female Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were kept on an
AA free diet. AA was given by gavage in a broad dosage range, covering
single doses of 0.1-10,000 g/kg bw. Formation of urinary MAs and of
N7-GA-Gua DNA adducts in liver, kidney and lung was measured 16 h after
application. The lowest dosage of 0.1 g AA/kg bw did not result in
significantly enhanced MA excretion, as compared to untreated controls,
found to excrete about 0.8 nmol MA. Since the animals may have ingested
at best 0.4 nmol AA/d with the diet, this findings suggests a background
level of endogenously formed AA. At the lowest dosage (0.1 g AA/kg bw),
N7-GA-Gua adducts above the limit of detection (LOD, 0.2 adducts/10exp8
nucleotides) were not detected in any organ tested. At 1 g/kg bw,
enhanced adduct levels were found in kidney (around 1 adduct/10exp8
nucleotides) and lung (< 1 adduct/10exp8 nucleotides), but not in liver.
At 10 and 100 g/kg bw, adducts were found in all three organs, at levels
not significantly different to those found at 1 g AA/kg bw (about 1-2
adducts/10exp8 nucleotides). Taken together, the results of this in vivo
study allow to conclude that exposure to single doses of AA in the range
of human dietary exposure leads to N7-GA-Gua adduct levels in tissues of
SD rats at the low end of steady state background DNA lesions of various
origin in human and rat tissues. This study was supported by ISIC, the
Institute for Scientific Information on Coffee.

