Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of breast cancer susceptibility loci in Chinese women
from Singapore


Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several breast
cancer susceptibility loci associated with European populations, some of
which were also found to be associated with breast cancer among women in
China. Women in Singapore are predominantly of Chinese ancestry with an
urbanized lifestyle, with breast cancer rates approaching those of the
West. To explore the role of these breast cancer susceptibility variants,
a Taqman-based microfluidics strategy was established to carry out fast
track replication of 22 SNPs for 1,146 cases and 1,534 controls to
identify significant risk variants for breast cancer. Interestingly, the
most significant SNP [rs2046210; odds ratio (OR), 1.4; 95% confidence
interval, 1.2-1.6; P=7x106], residing in 6q25.1, had been initially
identified in a Chinese population, suggesting a strong and consistent
association of this SNP with Chinese ancestry. SNPs in FGFR2 (rs2981579,
rs1219648, rs2981582, rs112000014), 8q24 (rs13281615), and MAP3K1
(rs16886165) showed significant associations similar to those observed in
women of European ancestry, with ORs ranging from 1.1 to 1.7 (P=5x105 to
0.04). Ranking of the SNPs in terms of their ORs for Singaporean Chinese
women was compared to that from Western and Chinese studies. The ranking
for Singaporean Chinese women resembled, but was not identical to, that
of women in China, reflecting the effect of ethnicity. Comprehensive
annotation of the genotyping data with associated clinicopathological
features enabled the identification of significant SNPs associated with
tumour size, lymph node metastasis, and estrogen/progesterone receptor
status. Findings from this study implicate 6q25.1 and FGFR2 as the most
important susceptibility loci for Asian women of Chinese ancestry and may
guide future fine-mapping studies to identify causal variants.

