Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HER2 signaling affects SRC-3 phosphorylation and gene regulatory
potential within the cistrome


Steroid Receptor Coactivator-3 (SRC-3/AIB1) is a potent transcriptional
coregulator for nuclear receptors and other transcription factors and is
often amplified or overexpressed in tumors. The growth promoting effects
of SRC-3 involve its ability to integrate extracellular signals into
discrete patterns of gene expression. SRC-3 is regulated by various
post-translational modifications, including multiple phosphorylations
that define a combinatorial code that tailors SRC-3 activity in response
to specific signaling stimuli. HER2 is a member of the ErbB receptor
tyrosine kinase family of growth factor receptors and is often associated
with cancer. Clinical studies show that breast cancer patients with
tumors expressing high levels of both HER2 and SRC-3 have reduced
disease-free survival, and SRC-3 phosphorylation is influenced by HER2.
The current study seeks to define the effect of HER2 signaling events on
SRC-3 activity in breast cancer cells. HER2 knock down using siRNA
affects multiple kinase pathways, as evidenced by decreased AKT and c-Raf
phosphorylation. HER2 knockdown causes the isoelectric point of SRC-3 to
shift, suggesting that post-translational modification of SRC-3 is
actively altered by HER2 signaling. Reduction of SRC-3 phosphorylation in
HER2-depleted cells also was evident using a phospho-specific antibody to
SRC-3. Expression microarray analysis revealed that many genes are
altered by HER2 knockdown. Parsing the microarray with SRC-3 ChIP-seq
data identified genes that are coordinately regulated by a HER2/SRC-3
signaling axis. Collectively, this work describes transcriptomic and
cistromic mechanisms for oncogenic cooperation between HER2 and SRC-3 and
identifies key genes that contribute to proliferation of breast cancer
cells.

