Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cannabinoids inhibit epidermal growth factor receptor
transactivation in lung cancer cells


The cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2 are present on non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) biopsy specimens (Preet et al., 2011, Cancer Prev. Res.
4:65). CP55,940 and Win55,212-2 are mixed agonists which stimulate CB1
and CB2 cannabinoid receptors. G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) for
pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) regulate
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine phosphorylation in NSCLC
cells. Here the ability of cannabinoids to alter EGFR transactivation was
investigated. PACAP stimulated EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation (PY1068)
4-fold using NCI-H838 and H1299 cells. CP55,940 and Win55,212-2 inhibited
the ability of PACAP to increase EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation in lung
cancer cells. By Western blot, cell lines NCI-H838 and NCI-H1299 had both
CB1 and CB2 receptors. PACAP increased cAMP levels in NCI-H838 cells and
CP55,940 inhibited the increase in cAMP caused by PACAP. In contrast,
PACAP increased cytosolic Ca2+ in lung cancer cells, but CP55,940 did not
alter the ability of PACAP to increase calcium in lung cancer cells.
These results suggest that CP55,940 may inhibit adenylyl cyclase activity
but not phosphatidylinositol turnover caused by addition of PACAP to lung
cancer cells. Previously we found that PACAP increased tyrosine
phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase, paxillin and ERK in lung cancer
cells (Moody et al., 2002, Reg. Peptides 109:135). CP55,940 inhibited the
increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase, paxillin
and ERK caused by PACAP addition to lung cancer cells. Also, CP55.940 and
Win55,212-2 inhibited the growth of NCI-H1299 and NCI-H838 cells.
CP55,940 potentiated the growth inhibitory effects of gefitinib, an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor. These results indicate that cannabinoids
inhibit EGFR transactivation in lung cancer cells and potentiate
gefitinib cytotoxicity.

