Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid induces autophagy through reactive oxygen
species /mTOR pathway in p53 mutant cancer cells


Our previous studies reported that docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) induces
autophagy through p53 inhibition in the wild-type p53 cancer cells. This
study attempts to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying
DHA-induced autophagy in PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cells harboring
mutant p53. DHA increased both the level of microtubule-associated
protein light-chain 3 (LC3) and the number of autophagic vacuoles.
Autophagic flux assay confirmed that DHA-induced increase in LC3-II and
autophagic vesicles was an outcome of autophagic process activation,
indicating that DHA also induces autophagy in p53 mutant cancer cells.
DHA treatment also increased the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
as measured by dihydroethidine staining, and pretreatment of an
antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (NAC), significantly inhibited the ROS
production as well as autophagy induced by DHA, suggesting that ROS
regulates the autophagic process triggered by DHA. Further experiments
showed that the mechanism of DHA-induced autophagy associated with ROS
production was related to a decrease in the activity of mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR). NAC remarkably restored the decreases in the levels
of phospho-mTOR and 4EBP, an mTOR downstream molecule, induced by DHA as
analyzed by the Western blot assay. Furthermore, the level of
phospho-AMPK, which negatively regulates mTOR was increased, while
phospho-Akt was reduced during the DHA-induced autophagy, indicating the
involvement of AMPK and Akt signalings. Collectively, our results
demonstrate that DHA induces autophagy through the ROS-mediated mTOR
inactivation in p53 mutant prostate cancer cells. This work was supported
by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korea government (MEST) (No. 2011-0006232].

