Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inactivation of p53 in HPV-infected lung cancer is correlated with
p53 codon 72 genotypes and HPV 16/18 E6 protein expression but not with
HPV 16/18 DNA


Background. A polymorphism at codon 72 of the p53 tumor suppressor gene
is a possible determinant for cancer risk, particularly for carcinomas
associated with HPV infection. We recently reported that high-risk HPV
16/18 E6 protein was associated with p53 protein degradation in lung
cancer. The present study addressed the relationship between the
different p53 genotypes and HPV oncoprotein expression with respect to
p53 protein degradation in 319 primary lung cancer patients. Methods. The
p53 codon 72 polymorphisms, HPV 16/18 infection, HPV 16/18 E6 and p53
protein expression were determined for all patients by PCR-RFLP,
nested-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis. Results. The presence of HPV
16/18 DNA and E6 protein was inversely correlated with p53 expression.
The frequency of p53 protein degradation in HPV 16/18 E6-positive/Arg/Arg
lung cancer tumours was also much higher than in the HPV 16/18
E6-negative/Arg/Arg, HPV 16/18 E6-positive/Arg/pro+pro/pro, and HPV 16/18
E6-negative/Arg/pro+pro/pro groups. After adjusting for polymorphism, HPV
16/18 E6 protein, HPV 16/18 DNA, gender, smoking habit and tumor type,
the major contributors to p53 degradation in lung cancer patients were
p53 codon72 polymorphism and HPV 16/18 E6 oncoprotein expression. This
correlation was not found for HPV 16/18 DNA infection. Conclusion. These
results suggested that the involvement of HPV 16/18 E6 protein in the p53
inactivation that contributes to HPV-infected lung tumourigenesis is
correlated with the p53 codon 72 genotype.

