Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cellular characterization of chromatin state via high throughput
ChIP assay


Expression of eukaryotic genes during development requires complex
spatial-temporal regulation. This complex regulation is often achieved
through the coordinated interaction of transcription regulatory elements
in the promoters of the target genes. The identification and mapping of
regulatory elements in genome scale is crucial to understand how gene
expression is regulated. Chromatin immunoprecipitation is a standard
method for assessing the occupancy of DNA binding proteins in vivo in
their native chromatin context using antibodies. However, standard
chromatin immunoprecipitation procedure is time consuming, labor
intensive and not suited for analyzing many samples simultaneously.
Recently, we have developed a simple high throughput chromatin
immunoprecipitation protocol that utilizes high capacity protein A/G
coated magnetic beads and 96 well plates. This protocol requires fewer
steps and less hands-on time, has higher sensitivity and more reliable
performance as compared to conventional approaches. The method is also
compatible with multi-channel pipetting and liquid handling systems. We
have successfully used this protocol to map various clinically relevant
chromatin marks and controls across several cell types to quantitatively
measure chromatin states. This analysis included a variety of marks
corresponding to repressed, poised and active promoters, strong and weak
enhancers, putative insulators, transcribed regions, as well as
large-scale repressed and inactive domains. This study demonstrates the
utility of this approach for the characterization of model cellular
systems in perturbation studies with chemical probes.

