Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of ATM gene is associated with worse prognosis in
sporadic breast carcinomas


Background: Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encodes a protein
associated with DNA damage repair that plays an important role in the
maintenance of genome integrity. ATM mutations have been associated with
moderate risk of breast cancer (BC), however, this association in
sporadic cancers is controversial. Decreased ATM expression in sporadic
breast tumors has been reported, but the mechanisms involved in the ATM
deregulation are not well established. Recent reports suggests that ATM
gene can be regulated by microRNA (miRNA). Aim: The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate ATM gene and protein expression in BC
samples, correlate the expression levels with its predicted putative
miRNA regulators and associate the findings with clinical data. Patients
and methods: Fresh ductal invasive BC samples (n=52) and normal breast
samples obtained from breast reduction surgery were evaluated for ATM and
miR-26a, miR-26b, miR-203, miR-421, miR-664 and miR-576-5p expression by
RT-qPCR. ATM protein expression detected by immunohistochemistry was
assessed in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) ductal invasive BC
samples arranged in four tissue microarrays from an independent cohort
with long-term follow-up (n=815) and two normal breast samples. Results:
Down expression of ATM transcripts was detected in 33% of tumors compared
with normal samples (median relative expression=0.63). Additionally,
absence of ATM protein expression was detected in 61% (502 out of 820) of
tumor tissues. miRNA analysis showed a significant negative correlation
between miR-664 with ATM gene expression (P=0.035 and r=0.293),
suggesting that this miRNA might regulate ATM expression. Marginally
significant lower ATM mRNA levels were detected in HER2-positive tumors
(P=0.048). Moreover, significant decrease of ATM expression was
associated with increasing tumor grade, both in transcript and protein
levels (P=0.005 and P=0.022, respectively). Absence of ATM protein
expression was significantly associated distant metastasis (PBackground:
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encodes a protein associated
with DNA damage repair that plays an important role in the maintenance of
genome integrity. ATM mutations have been associated with moderate risk
of breast cancer (BC), however, this association in sporadic cancers is
controversial. Decreased ATM expression in sporadic breast tumors has
been reported, but the mechanisms involved in the ATM deregulation are
not well established. Recent reports suggests that ATM gene can be
regulated by microRNA (miRNA). Aim: The purpose of the present study was
to evaluate ATM gene and protein expression in BC samples, correlate the
expression levels with its predicted putative miRNA regulators and
associate the findings with clinical data. Patients and methods: Fresh
ductal invasive BC samples (n=52) and normal breast samples obtained from
breast reduction surgery were evaluated for ATM and miR-26a, miR-26b,
miR-203, miR-421, miR-664 and miR-576-5p expression by RT-qPCR. ATM
protein expression detected by immunohistochemistry was assessed in
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) ductal invasive BC samples
arranged in four tissue microarrays from an independent cohort with
long-term follow-up (n=815) and two normal breast samples. Results: Down
expression of ATM transcripts was detected in 33% of tumors compared with
normal samples (median relative expression=0.63). Additionally, absence
of ATM protein expression was detected in 61% (502 out of 820) of tumor
tissues. miRNA analysis showed a significant negative correlation between
miR-664 with ATM gene expression (P=0.035 and r=0.293), suggesting that
this miRNA might regulate ATM expression. Marginally significant lower
ATM mRNA levels were detected in HER2-positive tumors (P=0.048).
Moreover, significant decrease of ATM expression was associated with
increasing tumor grade, both in transcript and protein levels (P=0.005
and P=0.022, respectively). Absence of ATM protein expression was
significantly associated distant metastasis (P<0.001, RR=1.279) and with
reduced disease-free survival (DFS, PBackground: Ataxia telangiectasia
mutated (ATM) gene encodes a protein associated with DNA damage repair
that plays an important role in the maintenance of genome integrity. ATM
mutations have been associated with moderate risk of breast cancer (BC),
however, this association in sporadic cancers is controversial. Decreased
ATM expression in sporadic breast tumors has been reported, but the
mechanisms involved in the ATM deregulation are not well established.
Recent reports suggests that ATM gene can be regulated by microRNA
(miRNA). Aim: The purpose of the present study was to evaluate ATM gene
and protein expression in BC samples, correlate the expression levels
with its predicted putative miRNA regulators and associate the findings
with clinical data. Patients and methods: Fresh ductal invasive BC
samples (n=52) and normal breast samples obtained from breast reduction
surgery were evaluated for ATM and miR-26a, miR-26b, miR-203, miR-421,
miR-664 and miR-576-5p expression by RT-qPCR. ATM protein expression
detected by immunohistochemistry was assessed in formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) ductal invasive BC samples arranged in four
tissue microarrays from an independent cohort with long-term follow-up
(n=815) and two normal breast samples. Results: Down expression of ATM
transcripts was detected in 33% of tumors compared with normal samples
(median relative expression=0.63). Additionally, absence of ATM protein
expression was detected in 61% (502 out of 820) of tumor tissues. miRNA
analysis showed a significant negative correlation between miR-664 with
ATM gene expression (P=0.035 and r=0.293), suggesting that this miRNA
might regulate ATM expression. Marginally significant lower ATM mRNA
levels were detected in HER2-positive tumors (P=0.048). Moreover,
significant decrease of ATM expression was associated with increasing
tumor grade, both in transcript and protein levels (P=0.005 and P=0.022,
respectively). Absence of ATM protein expression was significantly
associated distant metastasis (P<0.001, RR=1.279) and with reduced
disease-free survival (DFS, P<0.0001) and cancer-specific survival (CSF,
PBackground: Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene encodes a protein
associated with DNA damage repair that plays an important role in the
maintenance of genome integrity. ATM mutations have been associated with
moderate risk of breast cancer (BC), however, this association in
sporadic cancers is controversial. Decreased ATM expression in sporadic
breast tumors has been reported, but the mechanisms involved in the ATM
deregulation are not well established. Recent reports suggests that ATM
gene can be regulated by microRNA (miRNA). Aim: The purpose of the
present study was to evaluate ATM gene and protein expression in BC
samples, correlate the expression levels with its predicted putative
miRNA regulators and associate the findings with clinical data. Patients
and methods: Fresh ductal invasive BC samples (n=52) and normal breast
samples obtained from breast reduction surgery were evaluated for ATM and
miR-26a, miR-26b, miR-203, miR-421, miR-664 and miR-576-5p expression by
RT-qPCR. ATM protein expression detected by immunohistochemistry was
assessed in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) ductal invasive BC
samples arranged in four tissue microarrays from an independent cohort
with long-term follow-up (n=815) and two normal breast samples. Results:
Down expression of ATM transcripts was detected in 33% of tumors compared
with normal samples (median relative expression=0.63). Additionally,
absence of ATM protein expression was detected in 61% (502 out of 820) of
tumor tissues. miRNA analysis showed a significant negative correlation
between miR-664 with ATM gene expression (P=0.035 and r=0.293),
suggesting that this miRNA might regulate ATM expression. Marginally
significant lower ATM mRNA levels were detected in HER2-positive tumors
(P=0.048). Moreover, significant decrease of ATM expression was
associated with increasing tumor grade, both in transcript and protein
levels (P=0.005 and P=0.022, respectively). Absence of ATM protein
expression was significantly associated distant metastasis (P<0.001,
RR=1.279) and with reduced disease-free survival (DFS, P<0.0001) and
cancer-specific survival (CSF, P<0.0001). Further multivariate analysis
showed that ATM expression is an independent prognostic factor for DFS
and CSF in breast carcinomas (P=0.001, HR=0.567, CI95%=0.410-0.785 and
P=0.001, HR=0.567, CI95%=0.404-0.705). Conclusions: Decreased expression
of ATM was associated with worse outcome and could be considered a
prognostic marker in invasive ductal breast carcinomas. Our data also
suggest that ATM aberrant expression can be in part explained by
deregulated miRNAs in these tumors, including miR-664, by direct
transcripts degradation or translation inhibition. Further functional
analyses, including evaluation of other microRNAs, are necessary to
confirm these findings.

