Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitation of HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279 complexes on the DC surface
improves anticancer vaccine designs


Background: Dendritic cells (DC) loaded with tumor antigen (TA)-derived
peptides are used as vehicles for anti-cancer vaccines. HLA class-I
restricted short synthetic peptides are commonly used to load DC for
therapy. However, randomized clinical trials have failed to confirm the
efficacy of DC-based therapies. We hypothesized that new methods for the
quantification of peptide loading of DC are needed to improve the overall
response rate to anti-tumor vaccines. Methods: An unlabeled monoclonal
antibody (Ab), 12B6 Ab, recognizing HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279 complexes was
generated by S. Ferrone. Monocyte-derived DC were generated from HLA-A2+
buffy coats of healthy donors in media containing IL-4 and GM-CSF. DC
harvested on day 5 of culture were matured by further 48-h exposure to
LPS or Interferon- (IFN-). The HLA-A2+ cell line (T2) deficient for LMP2,
TAP1 and TAP2 was maintained in a complete RPMI medium. Peptides were
synthesized at the University of Pittsburgh Peptide Synthesis facility.
An HLA-A2+ CTL clone specific for MAGE3271-279 was used in ELISPOT
assays. Cells were stained with 12B6 Ab followed by a PE-labeled
secondary Ab. Flow cytometry was used to measure mean fluorescence
intensity (MFI) of the HLA class-I-peptide complexes and the loading
kinetics. HLA class-I-peptide complexes were dissociated by treatment of
cells with citric acid, pH 3.0. Results: The 12B6 Ab reacted with
HLA-A2+DC or T2 cells loaded with MAGE3271-279 but not with HLA-A2 DC
loaded with MAGE3271-279 or cells loaded with irrelevant peptides. The
MFI obtained for the complexes positively correlated with the
concentration of MAGE3271-279 used for loading. Maximum levels of
HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279 were detectable on DC after 30min loading, while
optimal loading of T2 cells required 4h incubation. The levels of
detectable complexes correlated with the total expression levels of
HLA-A2 molecules on the DC surface. However, donors with comparable
levels HLA-A2 expression showed different levels HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279
expression after loading with the same peptide concentration. The MFI for
HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279 on DC, but not on T2 cells, was increased when
peptide loading was performed after low pH treatment. This treatment did
not affect expression of co-stimulatory molecules on DC. Importantly, the
peptide-specific stimulation of CTL generated with mDC loaded after low
pH treatment resulted in a significantly increased percentage of IFN-
secreting T cells. Conclusion: The 12B6 Ab is specific for
HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279 complexes and allows for their quantification on the
surface of DC. Loading of DC was increased by the removal of HLA
class-I-self antigen complexes prior to the addition of the TA-derived
exogenous peptide. The treated DC showed a higher density of
HLA-A2-MAGE3271-279 by flow cytometry and were more effective in priming
MAGE3271-279 specific CTL.

