Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of endpoints and data analysis methods for exposure of
human tumor cells to dasatinib (NSC732517) and 6-MP (NSC755) in culture


Previous research using the NCI60 cell line combination screen suggested
that dasatinib (NSC732517) and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP; NSC755) may have
greater than additive cytotoxicity in selected cell lines. We have
conducted a detailed combination study using 6-MP and dasatinib in p53
wild type (MCF-7, H460, A498) and p53 mutant (MDA-MB-468, H23, 786-O)
breast, lung and renal cell lines. These studies were performed measuring
ATP as the endpoint using Cell Titer Glo after 72h exposure to 6-MP and
dasatinib alone or in combination and measuring survival using colony
formation after 72hr exposure to the compounds alone or in combination.
As a single agent, the lung and renal mutant cell lines (H23, 786-O) were
2-10 fold more sensitive to 6-MP than wild type (H460, A498) with the
exception of MDA-MD-468 (mutant), which was more resistant to 6-MP than
MCF-7 (wild type). On the other hand all cell lines were sensitive to
dasatinib with the IC50 ranging from 0.2-2 M. For the combination
studies, additivity/synergy was calculated using CompuSyn Software (Chou
and Martin) or MacSynergy (Prichard and Shipman). Combination index (CI)
analysis of the single agent and combination data for 6-MP and dasatinib
was additive or antagonist in most of the cell lines. In A498, 786-0,
MCF-7 and H460 cell lines a synergistic effect was observed at >10 fold
the clinical plasma levels of 6-MP (0.59 M) or dasatinib (0.19 M).
NCI-H23 cell line demonstrated an additive effect at 0.3 M of 6-MP and
0.2 M of dasatinib (CI = 0.94). MDA-MB-468 cell lines demonstrated a
strong synergy (CI = 0.2-0.4) for 6-MP (0.03-1 M) and dasatinib (0.05 M)
at concentrations less than the clinical plasma levels. In a single agent
colony formation assay, the H460 cells were sensitive to 6-MP (IC50= 0.21
M) and resistant to dasatinib (IC50= >10 M). In a combination study, a
synergistic effect (CI = 0.59-0.8) was observed in H460 cell line at
concentrations below the clinical plasma level of 6-MP (0.2 M-0.6 M) and
dasatinib (0.1 M). These drug effects will be further evaluated in all
cell lines by the determination of survival using colony formation assay.

