Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of lumican expression profiles in prostate cancer


The transcription factor, Stat3, has been implicated in the growth and
progression of several cancer types including lung skin, liver, ovarian,
kidney, colon cancer and prostate. Stat3 has also been shown to induce
the metastatic behavior of prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
Activation of Stat3 occurs by the binding of various cytokines to its
receptors leading to the activation of the JAK/Stat3 signaling pathway.
Of these cytokines, interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been implicated in
regulating growth of various malignant tumors and activated IL-6 has been
shown to be elevated in the sera from patients with metastatic prostate
cancer. In the present study we examined the IL6-induced Stat3
transcriptional activation in the development and progression of prostate
cancer and its possible role as a target for the treatment of prostate
cancer using the prostate-specific conditional targeting PTEN knockout
mouse model. Homozygous PTEN-mutants develop prostate cancer in a
stage-specific manner and have the ability to grow and develop
castration-resistant prostate cancer after total androgen ablation by
castration. ELISA assays revealed increased expression of soluble IL-6
receptor (IL-6R) in tissue lysates from prostate tumors in non-castrated
and castrated mice (77.0 6.17 vs. 23.75 5.17 ng/g of tissue, pThe
transcription factor, Stat3, has been implicated in the growth and
progression of several cancer types including lung skin, liver, ovarian,
kidney, colon cancer and prostate. Stat3 has also been shown to induce
the metastatic behavior of prostate cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
Activation of Stat3 occurs by the binding of various cytokines to its
receptors leading to the activation of the JAK/Stat3 signaling pathway.
Of these cytokines, interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been implicated in
regulating growth of various malignant tumors and activated IL-6 has been
shown to be elevated in the sera from patients with metastatic prostate
cancer. In the present study we examined the IL6-induced Stat3
transcriptional activation in the development and progression of prostate
cancer and its possible role as a target for the treatment of prostate
cancer using the prostate-specific conditional targeting PTEN knockout
mouse model. Homozygous PTEN-mutants develop prostate cancer in a
stage-specific manner and have the ability to grow and develop
castration-resistant prostate cancer after total androgen ablation by
castration. ELISA assays revealed increased expression of soluble IL-6
receptor (IL-6R) in tissue lysates from prostate tumors in non-castrated
and castrated mice (77.0 6.17 vs. 23.75 5.17 ng/g of tissue, p<0.001,
respectively) at 32 weeks of age. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed
correlated expression of with Stat3 transcriptional activation,
proliferation and androgen receptor in tumors from castrated mice. To
determine the role of IL-6R induced transcriptional activation of Stat3,
non-castrated and castrated tumor bearing mice were treated with an
anti-mouse IL-6R antibody (MR-16). Mice treated with MR-16 showed
downregulation of phosphorylated Stat3, however, treatment failed to
inhibit tumor development and cellular proliferation. However, it was
discovered that therapeutic doses of MR16 treatment resulted in increased
phosphorylation of Erk1/2. Our data suggests that inhibition of
IL-6R-induced Stat3 activation alone is insufficient to suppress tumor
growth; however, further studies need to be conducted to evaluate the
efficacy of horizontal combination strategies targeting Stat3 and MAP
kinase signaling cascades

