Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer biomarker research using castPCR technology


Cancer Biomarkers have applications in the diagnosis, staging, prognosis
and monitoring of disease progression, as well as in the predication and
monitoring of drug response. Profiling and validation research tools are
needed that exhibit the combined features of high sensitivity and high
specificity for cancers. However, the sensitivity of molecular methods
such as DNA sequencing and conventional genotyping in tumor samples is
limited, typically ranging from 5-20%. We have recently developed TaqMan
Mutation Detection Assays using our competitive allele specific TaqMan
PCR (castPCR) technology for cancer biomarker research. castPCR assays
were tested with >300 tumor research samples (either fresh/frozen or
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples) and cell lines to assess
mutation status. The results showed that castPCR technology can robustly
detect mutations as low as 0.1% and has >99% concordance to other
technologies including PCR-based technology and sequencing. In this
study, a large panel of castPCR assays for AKT1, APC, BRAF, CTNNB1, HRAS,
KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA, PTEN and TP53 genes were used for investigating
somatic mutations in breast tumor research samples. Initially, 4 model
FFPE cell lines were used to validate the assays. Mutant DNAs were
titrated in the wild type DNAs from 50% to 0.1%. Mutations were
identified down to 0.1% titration with high reproducibility. No false
positives were found in non-tumor samples. The results obtained by
castPCR assays for 20 breast tumor samples were concordant to those
reported by other methods. Our data showed that castPCR technology
provides an excellent tool for identifying cancer biomarkers or
confirming potential cancer markers such as those obtained by
next-generation sequencing and other technologies.

