Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERCC1 gene copy number variations in resected non-small cell lung
cancer


Introduction: ERCC1 allows removal of branched DNA structures at
essential steps in DNA repair pathways such as Nucleotide Excision Repair
(NER), Fanconia-dependent Interstrand Cross-Link Repair (ICL-R),
long-patch base excision repair (BER), and Single Strand Annealing (SSA).
ERCC1 expression is a prognostic and predictive biomarker of chemotherapy
effect in NSCLC. The most frequent method to determine ERCC1 status is
the evaluation of gene expression (IHC or RT-PCR). Here, we studied the
prevalence of ERCC1 copy number variation (CNV) using FISH. Methods: FISH
was performed with Poseidon dual color probe set, ERCC1 (19q13) and
ZNF443 (19p13) on a panel of 17 NSCLC cell lines and 324 FFPE tumor
samples from resected NSCLC patients (103 from IGR, Villejuif, France,
221 from MDACC, Houston, USA). Gene amplification (GA) and high polysomy
(HP) were defined following actual consensus rules for EGFR assessment.
Results: ERCC1 copy number was increased (>2) in a large majority of cell
lines (13/17) of which three displayed gene amplification (GA) (H2342,
CN=5; H1299, CN>12; HOP62, CN>15). In human samples, overall ERCC1 gene
abnormalities were detected in 65 cases (20.1%) including 31 GA (6.9%,
the majority with clusters) and 34 HP (13.7%, more frequent in squamous
cell carcinomas). In patients with ERCC1 expression status available
(immunohistochemistry) we found a non-significant trend for higher ERCC1
expression in HP patients compared to GA and low CNV patients (P=0.06).
Despite a 3-fold increase in IC50 of cisplatin in cell lines with ERCC1
gene amplification compared to normal cells (with no CNV) the ERCC1 FISH
status seemed unable to predict chemosensitivity in resected NSCLC
patients. In patients not treated with chemotherapy, DFS was
significantly longer in patients with normal ERCC1 FISH status of the
tumor compared to patients with ERCC1 gene amplification (P=0.02).
Conclusion: ERCC1 copy number variation is a frequent event in NSCLC and
could reflect genomic instability, but the clinical relevance of this
observation needs further investigation.

