Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial/Ethnic specific polygenic models of breast cancer risk


Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer death in American women. Earlier family linkage
studies have identified high-penetrance breast cancer genes, such as
BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes involved in DNA repair, such as
CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been associated with moderate breast
cancer risk. Recent Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have
identified multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with breast cancer risk. We evaluated whether breast cancer risk is
associated with multiple SNPs in DNA damage signaling and repair and
immune and inflammatory responses in addition to SNPs identified from
GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting critical candidate pathways may yield
important information regarding SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer
risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage signaling and cell cycle control,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, double-strand break
repair, mismatch repair, and immune and inflammatory responses. We have
genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910 controls (763 Whites and 147
African Americans) and 793 breast cancer cases (667 Whites and 116
African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls and cases (respectively)
had a first degree relative with breast cancer. 48% and 55.7% of the
controls and cases (respectively) had their first child before or at the
age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and cases (respectively) had a
history of smoking. Our study results suggest that 6 SNPs were associated
with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs from GWAS - rs3817198 in
LSP1 (pBreast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second leading cause of cancer death in American women. Earlier family
linkage studies have identified high-penetrance breast cancer genes, such
as BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes involved in DNA repair, such
as CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been associated with moderate breast
cancer risk. Recent Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have
identified multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with breast cancer risk. We evaluated whether breast cancer risk is
associated with multiple SNPs in DNA damage signaling and repair and
immune and inflammatory responses in addition to SNPs identified from
GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting critical candidate pathways may yield
important information regarding SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer
risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage signaling and cell cycle control,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, double-strand break
repair, mismatch repair, and immune and inflammatory responses. We have
genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910 controls (763 Whites and 147
African Americans) and 793 breast cancer cases (667 Whites and 116
African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls and cases (respectively)
had a first degree relative with breast cancer. 48% and 55.7% of the
controls and cases (respectively) had their first child before or at the
age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and cases (respectively) had a
history of smoking. Our study results suggest that 6 SNPs were associated
with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs from GWAS - rs3817198 in
LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (pBreast cancer is the most
frequently diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death
in American women. Earlier family linkage studies have identified
high-penetrance breast cancer genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53.
Moreover, genes involved in DNA repair, such as CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and
PALB2, have been associated with moderate breast cancer risk. Recent
Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have identified multiple single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with breast cancer risk. We
evaluated whether breast cancer risk is associated with multiple SNPs in
DNA damage signaling and repair and immune and inflammatory responses in
addition to SNPs identified from GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting
critical candidate pathways may yield important information regarding
SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer risk. We selected SNPs from DNA
damage signaling and cell cycle control, base excision repair, nucleotide
excision repair, double-strand break repair, mismatch repair, and immune
and inflammatory responses. We have genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910
controls (763 Whites and 147 African Americans) and 793 breast cancer
cases (667 Whites and 116 African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls
and cases (respectively) had a first degree relative with breast cancer.
48% and 55.7% of the controls and cases (respectively) had their first
child before or at the age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and
cases (respectively) had a history of smoking. Our study results suggest
that 6 SNPs were associated with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs
from GWAS - rs3817198 in LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001);
(2) 2 SNPs from inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (pBreast cancer is the
most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer
death in American women. Earlier family linkage studies have identified
high-penetrance breast cancer genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53.
Moreover, genes involved in DNA repair, such as CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and
PALB2, have been associated with moderate breast cancer risk. Recent
Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have identified multiple single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with breast cancer risk. We
evaluated whether breast cancer risk is associated with multiple SNPs in
DNA damage signaling and repair and immune and inflammatory responses in
addition to SNPs identified from GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting
critical candidate pathways may yield important information regarding
SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer risk. We selected SNPs from DNA
damage signaling and cell cycle control, base excision repair, nucleotide
excision repair, double-strand break repair, mismatch repair, and immune
and inflammatory responses. We have genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910
controls (763 Whites and 147 African Americans) and 793 breast cancer
cases (667 Whites and 116 African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls
and cases (respectively) had a first degree relative with breast cancer.
48% and 55.7% of the controls and cases (respectively) had their first
child before or at the age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and
cases (respectively) had a history of smoking. Our study results suggest
that 6 SNPs were associated with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs
from GWAS - rs3817198 in LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001);
(2) 2 SNPs from inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (p<0.001) and
rs12720356 in Tyk2 (pBreast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death in American women.
Earlier family linkage studies have identified high-penetrance breast
cancer genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes involved in
DNA repair, such as CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been associated with
moderate breast cancer risk. Recent Genome-wide Association Studies
(GWAS) have identified multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with breast cancer risk. We evaluated whether breast cancer
risk is associated with multiple SNPs in DNA damage signaling and repair
and immune and inflammatory responses in addition to SNPs identified from
GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting critical candidate pathways may yield
important information regarding SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer
risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage signaling and cell cycle control,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, double-strand break
repair, mismatch repair, and immune and inflammatory responses. We have
genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910 controls (763 Whites and 147
African Americans) and 793 breast cancer cases (667 Whites and 116
African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls and cases (respectively)
had a first degree relative with breast cancer. 48% and 55.7% of the
controls and cases (respectively) had their first child before or at the
age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and cases (respectively) had a
history of smoking. Our study results suggest that 6 SNPs were associated
with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs from GWAS - rs3817198 in
LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001); (2) 2 SNPs from
inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (p<0.001) and rs12720356 in Tyk2
(p<0.001) and (3) 2 SNPs from DNA repair and apoptosis - rs2992 in CHAF1A
(pBreast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer death in American women. Earlier family linkage
studies have identified high-penetrance breast cancer genes, such as
BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes involved in DNA repair, such as
CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been associated with moderate breast
cancer risk. Recent Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have
identified multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with breast cancer risk. We evaluated whether breast cancer risk is
associated with multiple SNPs in DNA damage signaling and repair and
immune and inflammatory responses in addition to SNPs identified from
GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting critical candidate pathways may yield
important information regarding SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer
risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage signaling and cell cycle control,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, double-strand break
repair, mismatch repair, and immune and inflammatory responses. We have
genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910 controls (763 Whites and 147
African Americans) and 793 breast cancer cases (667 Whites and 116
African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls and cases (respectively)
had a first degree relative with breast cancer. 48% and 55.7% of the
controls and cases (respectively) had their first child before or at the
age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and cases (respectively) had a
history of smoking. Our study results suggest that 6 SNPs were associated
with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs from GWAS - rs3817198 in
LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001); (2) 2 SNPs from
inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (p<0.001) and rs12720356 in Tyk2
(p<0.001) and (3) 2 SNPs from DNA repair and apoptosis - rs2992 in CHAF1A
(p<0.0001) and rs2231301 in BCL2l2 (pBreast cancer is the most frequently
diagnosed cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death in American
women. Earlier family linkage studies have identified high-penetrance
breast cancer genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes
involved in DNA repair, such as CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been
associated with moderate breast cancer risk. Recent Genome-wide
Association Studies (GWAS) have identified multiple single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with breast cancer risk. We evaluated
whether breast cancer risk is associated with multiple SNPs in DNA damage
signaling and repair and immune and inflammatory responses in addition to
SNPs identified from GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting critical
candidate pathways may yield important information regarding SNP-SNP
interactions in breast cancer risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage
signaling and cell cycle control, base excision repair, nucleotide
excision repair, double-strand break repair, mismatch repair, and immune
and inflammatory responses. We have genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910
controls (763 Whites and 147 African Americans) and 793 breast cancer
cases (667 Whites and 116 African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls
and cases (respectively) had a first degree relative with breast cancer.
48% and 55.7% of the controls and cases (respectively) had their first
child before or at the age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and
cases (respectively) had a history of smoking. Our study results suggest
that 6 SNPs were associated with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs
from GWAS - rs3817198 in LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001);
(2) 2 SNPs from inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (p<0.001) and
rs12720356 in Tyk2 (p<0.001) and (3) 2 SNPs from DNA repair and apoptosis
- rs2992 in CHAF1A (p<0.0001) and rs2231301 in BCL2l2 (p<0.001). Only 1
SNP, rs1990760 in IFIH1 (pBreast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death in American women.
Earlier family linkage studies have identified high-penetrance breast
cancer genes, such as BRCA1, BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes involved in
DNA repair, such as CHEK2, ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been associated with
moderate breast cancer risk. Recent Genome-wide Association Studies
(GWAS) have identified multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with breast cancer risk. We evaluated whether breast cancer
risk is associated with multiple SNPs in DNA damage signaling and repair
and immune and inflammatory responses in addition to SNPs identified from
GWAS. We hypothesize that targeting critical candidate pathways may yield
important information regarding SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer
risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage signaling and cell cycle control,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, double-strand break
repair, mismatch repair, and immune and inflammatory responses. We have
genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910 controls (763 Whites and 147
African Americans) and 793 breast cancer cases (667 Whites and 116
African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls and cases (respectively)
had a first degree relative with breast cancer. 48% and 55.7% of the
controls and cases (respectively) had their first child before or at the
age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and cases (respectively) had a
history of smoking. Our study results suggest that 6 SNPs were associated
with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs from GWAS - rs3817198 in
LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001); (2) 2 SNPs from
inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (p<0.001) and rs12720356 in Tyk2
(p<0.001) and (3) 2 SNPs from DNA repair and apoptosis - rs2992 in CHAF1A
(p<0.0001) and rs2231301 in BCL2l2 (p<0.001). Only 1 SNP, rs1990760 in
IFIH1 (p<0.01) was associated with breast cancer risk in African
Americans. The IFIH1 gene was previously linked to Type 1 diabetes but
not in cancer risk. There was significant trend in breast cancer risk
with increasing numbers of risk genotypes for rs3817198, rs3803662,
rs1801157, rs12720356, rs2992, and rs2231301 (p test for trend Breast
cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer death in American women. Earlier family linkage studies
have identified high-penetrance breast cancer genes, such as BRCA1,
BRCA2, and TP53. Moreover, genes involved in DNA repair, such as CHEK2,
ATM, BRIP and PALB2, have been associated with moderate breast cancer
risk. Recent Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have identified
multiple single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with breast
cancer risk. We evaluated whether breast cancer risk is associated with
multiple SNPs in DNA damage signaling and repair and immune and
inflammatory responses in addition to SNPs identified from GWAS. We
hypothesize that targeting critical candidate pathways may yield
important information regarding SNP-SNP interactions in breast cancer
risk. We selected SNPs from DNA damage signaling and cell cycle control,
base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, double-strand break
repair, mismatch repair, and immune and inflammatory responses. We have
genotype results of 3,754 SNPs in 910 controls (763 Whites and 147
African Americans) and 793 breast cancer cases (667 Whites and 116
African Americans). 16.2% and 20.6% of controls and cases (respectively)
had a first degree relative with breast cancer. 48% and 55.7% of the
controls and cases (respectively) had their first child before or at the
age of 24. 40.5% and 42.2% of the controls and cases (respectively) had a
history of smoking. Our study results suggest that 6 SNPs were associated
with breast cancer risk in Whites: (1) 2 SNPs from GWAS - rs3817198 in
LSP1 (p<0.001) and rs3803662 in TNRC9 (p<0.001); (2) 2 SNPs from
inflammation - rs1801157 in SDF-1 (p<0.001) and rs12720356 in Tyk2
(p<0.001) and (3) 2 SNPs from DNA repair and apoptosis - rs2992 in CHAF1A
(p<0.0001) and rs2231301 in BCL2l2 (p<0.001). Only 1 SNP, rs1990760 in
IFIH1 (p<0.01) was associated with breast cancer risk in African
Americans. The IFIH1 gene was previously linked to Type 1 diabetes but
not in cancer risk. There was significant trend in breast cancer risk
with increasing numbers of risk genotypes for rs3817198, rs3803662,
rs1801157, rs12720356, rs2992, and rs2231301 (p test for trend <0.0001)
in Whites after adjustment for potential confounders. Our results suggest
that multiple SNPs contribute to breast cancer risk in a racial/ethnic
specific manner and larger studies are warranted to further evaluate our
findings. More importantly, functional analysis is under way to
corroborate the association of multiple SNPs with breast cancer risk.

