Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prodigiosin and its structural analogue rescue deficient p53
pathway signaling and anti-tumor effects via p73 upregulation in p53
mutant and null colorectal cancer cells


The tumor suppressor p53 gene is mutated in over 50% of human cancers,
and this is associated with resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy
as well as tumor progression. Therefore, p53 pathway functional
reactivation in p53-deficient cancers is an attractive strategy for
cancer therapy and may address an unmet need in the clinic for
progressive therapy-refractory human tumors. We previously showed that
Prodigiosin and its structure analogue can reactivate the p53 pathway in
p53 mutant and null colorectal cancer cells (Hong et al. AACR 2011,
abstract 607). Here, we examined the mechanism of p53 pathway
reactivation by Prodigiosin and its structural analogue in colorectal
cancer cells. p73, a p53 family protein, shares a high degree of sequence
homology with p53 and regulates the expression of similar genes by
binding to p53 responsive elements within gene promoters and performs
similar functions to p53. However, unlike p53, p73 is not a target for
mutational inactivation in human cancer. In the study, we hypothesized
that Prodigiosin and its structural analogue induce p73 expression to
activate the p53 pathway and further induce cellular apoptosis in
p53-deficient cancer cells. We showed that Prodigiosin and its structural
analogue induced p73 expression in p53 mutant SW480 and p53/ HCT116
cells. We also showed that the induction of p53-responsive
transcriptional activities by Prodigiosin and its structural analogue was
reduced in SW480 cells with p73 stable knockdown, as compared with
parental SW480 cells. Western blot analysis indicated that the induction
of a p53 target protein DR5 by Prodigiosin and its structural analogue
was decreased in SW480 cells with p73 stable knockdown, as compared with
parental SW480 cells. The sub-G1 analysis demonstrated that Prodigiosin
and its structural analogue induced less apoptosis in SW480 cells with
p73 stable knockdown than parental SW480 cells. Together, these findings
indicate that p73 upregulation is involved in the mechanism of p53
pathway activation and apoptotic induction by Prodigiosin and its
structural analogue. The study suggests that p73 induction may be a
useful alternative way to reactivate p53 pathway in p53 mutant and null
cancer cells and provides important mechanistic insights into the
activity of a potent p53 pathway function restoring small molecule that
is a candidate therapeutic for human cancer. This work was supported by
the NCI Developmental Therapeutics Program through NCI Contract
N01-CN-43302.

