Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of 14-3-3 in cancer cells activates PI3K via
binding the p85 regulatory subunit


The ubiquitously expressed 14-3-3 proteins regulate many pathways
involved in transformation. Previously, we found that 14-3-3
overexpression increased Akt phosphorylation in human mammary epithelial
cells. Here, we investigated the clinical relevance and molecular
mechanism of 14-3-3 overexpression-mediated Akt phosphorylation and the
potential impact on breast cancer progression. We found that 14-3-3
overexpression was significantly (P = 0.005) associated with increased
Akt phosphorylation in human breast tumors. Additionally, 14-3-3
overexpression combined with strong Akt phosphorylation was significantly
(P=0.01) associated with increased cancer recurrence in patients. In
contrast, knockdown of 14-3-3 expression by siRNA in cancer cell lines
and tumor xenografts reduced Akt phosphorylation. Furthermore, 14-3-3
enhanced Akt phosphorylation through activation of PI3K. Mechanistically,
14-3-3 bound to the p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K and increased PI3K
translocation to the cell membrane. A single 14-3-3 binding motif
encompassing serine 83 on p85 is largely responsible for 14-3-3-mediated
p85 binding and PI3K/Akt activation. Mutation of serine 83 to alanine on
p85 inhibited 14-3-3 binding to the p85 subunit of PI3K, reduced PI3K
membrane localization and activation, impeded anchorage independent
growth and enhanced stress induced apoptosis. These findings revealed a
novel mechanism by which 14-3-3 overexpression activates PI3K, a key node
in the mitogenic signaling network known to promote malignancies in many
cell types.

