Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased efficacy with use of combination therapy of API 31510
and gemcitabine in the treatment of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic Carcinoma is one of the deadliest types of cancers and
certainly one that is most clinically difficult to manage given that most
diagnoses occur in late-stage disease. Gemcitabine is among the few FDA
approved drugs used alone and in combination with other antineoplastic
agents for pancreatic cancer. API 31510, a novel intravenous formulation
of Ubidecarone, induced superior cell death kinetics in pancreatic
carcinoma cell line, MiaPaca alone or in combination with gemcitabine. In
addition, the study employed an in vivo model of pancreatic cancer to
assess the translation of the cell-based data of combination gemcitabine
and API 31510. Animals were randomized into 4 groups of 30 rats each;
group 1 received no treatment, group 2 received gemcitabine (150 mg/kg
weekly for 3 weeks with one week rest), group 3 were injected with API
31510 (50 mg/kg daily), and group 4 received a combination of daily API
31510 (50kg/mg) and gemcitabine at the aforementioned regimen. The
untreated group exhibited steep death rates, whereas in API 31510,
gemcitabine alone and the combination of API 31510 resulted in
prolongation of life. API 31510 alone had significantly greater impact
than gemcitabine alone. Animals treated with gemcitabine + API 31510
exhibited prolonged survival and elicited long-term remission that was
statistically significant compared to other groups. In addition, palpable
tumors were decreased in the groups treated with API 31510, and to a
greater degree, in those treated with gemcitabine in combination with API
31510. It is noteworthy that tumor histology demonstrated a hallmark
disruption in tumor vasculature with use if API 31510. Taken together,
these findings suggest that API 31510 offers a new approach to treatment
and management of pancreatic cancer alone and combination with
established chemotherapy regimens that include gemcitabine.

