Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA double-strand break imaging with anti-H2AX antibodies does not
alter DNA repair kinetics


Introduction: DNA double-strand breaks (dsb) are caused by exposure to
radiotherapy and various anticancer drugs and are very deleterious. Upon
dsb formation, histone H2AX is phosphorylated to form H2AX foci at the
break site. We have reported the development of a non-invasive in vivo
DNA dsb imaging agent, based on anti-H2AX IgG, modified by addition of
the cell penetrating and nuclear localizing peptide, TAT. It was
demonstrated that fluorescent and radiolabelled anti-H2AX-TAT was
internalized into cancer cells, and retained specifically in cells
expressing H2AX foci, through binding to H2AX. Using in vivo fluorescence
and SPECT imaging, we showed tumour uptake correlates with the extent of
DNA dsb damage after radiation therapy (Cornelissen et al. Cancer Res
2011 71:4539). Ideally, imaging H2AX in this way should not alter the
physiology/ biology of the imaged organism. Therefore, we investigated
the influence of anti-H2AX-Tat on DNA dsb repair kinetics using comet
assays and H2AX and 53BP1 foci kinetics. These data were applied using a
published mathematical model of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) by
Cucinotta et al. (Rad Res 2008 169, 214-222). Methods: A panel of four
carcinoma cells (MCF7, MDA-MB-231/H2N, MDA-MB-468, MCF7) was exposed to a
range of concentrations of anti-H2AX-Tat (0 - 0.5 g/mL) and irradiated 1
h later (IR; 137Cs, 0.95 Gy/min, 0-4 Gy). At selected time points, cells
were analysed using H2AX and 53BP1 foci staining and counting and comet
assays. Foci counting was performed automatically using an InCell
analyser. Comet assay results were analysed using software developed in
house and expressed as Olive Tail Moment. H2AX foci kinetics data were
modelled in silico using a concatenary model or an extended version of
the NHEJ model, allowing for anti-H2AX-Tat binding to H2AX. The kinetics
of dsb formation and resolution were calculated from the model (dsbcal),
and validated using comet assay data. Results: The number of H2AX
foci/cell was maximal at 0.5-1 h post IR. The affinity (KD) of
anti-H2AX-Tat for H2AX was 25 nM. There was a trend towards a
dose-dependent increase of the maximum number of foci. The concatenary
model revealed no significant differences between treated and non-treated
cells. However, using the NHEJ model, a dose-dependent decrease in the
rate of phosphorylation of H2AX was demonstrated (in MCF7 cells exposed
to 0-0.5 g/mL anti-H2AX-Tat, P = 2507-1462 copy1 h1; pIntroduction: DNA
double-strand breaks (dsb) are caused by exposure to radiotherapy and
various anticancer drugs and are very deleterious. Upon dsb formation,
histone H2AX is phosphorylated to form H2AX foci at the break site. We
have reported the development of a non-invasive in vivo DNA dsb imaging
agent, based on anti-H2AX IgG, modified by addition of the cell
penetrating and nuclear localizing peptide, TAT. It was demonstrated that
fluorescent and radiolabelled anti-H2AX-TAT was internalized into cancer
cells, and retained specifically in cells expressing H2AX foci, through
binding to H2AX. Using in vivo fluorescence and SPECT imaging, we showed
tumour uptake correlates with the extent of DNA dsb damage after
radiation therapy (Cornelissen et al. Cancer Res 2011 71:4539). Ideally,
imaging H2AX in this way should not alter the physiology/ biology of the
imaged organism. Therefore, we investigated the influence of
anti-H2AX-Tat on DNA dsb repair kinetics using comet assays and H2AX and
53BP1 foci kinetics. These data were applied using a published
mathematical model of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) by Cucinotta et
al. (Rad Res 2008 169, 214-222). Methods: A panel of four carcinoma cells
(MCF7, MDA-MB-231/H2N, MDA-MB-468, MCF7) was exposed to a range of
concentrations of anti-H2AX-Tat (0 - 0.5 g/mL) and irradiated 1 h later
(IR; 137Cs, 0.95 Gy/min, 0-4 Gy). At selected time points, cells were
analysed using H2AX and 53BP1 foci staining and counting and comet
assays. Foci counting was performed automatically using an InCell
analyser. Comet assay results were analysed using software developed in
house and expressed as Olive Tail Moment. H2AX foci kinetics data were
modelled in silico using a concatenary model or an extended version of
the NHEJ model, allowing for anti-H2AX-Tat binding to H2AX. The kinetics
of dsb formation and resolution were calculated from the model (dsbcal),
and validated using comet assay data. Results: The number of H2AX
foci/cell was maximal at 0.5-1 h post IR. The affinity (KD) of
anti-H2AX-Tat for H2AX was 25 nM. There was a trend towards a
dose-dependent increase of the maximum number of foci. The concatenary
model revealed no significant differences between treated and non-treated
cells. However, using the NHEJ model, a dose-dependent decrease in the
rate of phosphorylation of H2AX was demonstrated (in MCF7 cells exposed
to 0-0.5 g/mL anti-H2AX-Tat, P = 2507-1462 copy1 h1; p<0.01), as well as
a lower affinity of DNA-PKcs for H2AX (M = 0.03 - 0.10 in MCF7 cells; p
0.05). This was confirmed by comet assays. Conclusion: Anti-H2AX-TAT
binding to H2AX reduces the rate of formation of new H2AX foci, but has
no significant influence on DNA dsb repair. Therefore, the use of
H2AX-Tat for imaging DNA dsbs does not alter DNA dsb status.

