Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smoking, alcohol consumption and body size measures and risk of
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma among women in Los Angeles


Background: There are few known causes for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
The aim of this study is to identify if previous suggested modifiable
risk factors (smoking, alcohol consumption and body size measures) are
associated with B-cell NHL risk among women. Methods: We conducted a
population-based case-control study among women in Los Angeles County
consisting of 998 histologically confirmed B-cell NHL patients and 998
individually matched controls (matched on age, race and socioeconomic
status). Conditional logistic regression was used to evaluate these
associations. Results: Compared to never smokers, current smokers had 51%
increased risk of B-cell NHL (odds ratio [OR] =1.51, 95% confidence
interval [CI] =1.10-2.09). The risk of B-cell NHL increased with
increasing smoking years (P-trend=0.03) and pack-years (P-trend=0.02).
This risk pattern was observed for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL),
follicular lymphoma, and mantle cell lymphoma although these associations
were not statistically significant. Current alcohol consumption decreased
B-cell NHL risk (OR=0.75, 95% CI=0.60-0.94) with risk most pronounced
among women with moderate lifetime consumption (1-Background: There are
few known causes for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). The aim of this study is
to identify if previous suggested modifiable risk factors (smoking,
alcohol consumption and body size measures) are associated with B-cell
NHL risk among women. Methods: We conducted a population-based
case-control study among women in Los Angeles County consisting of 998
histologically confirmed B-cell NHL patients and 998 individually matched
controls (matched on age, race and socioeconomic status). Conditional
logistic regression was used to evaluate these associations. Results:
Compared to never smokers, current smokers had 51% increased risk of
B-cell NHL (odds ratio [OR] =1.51, 95% confidence interval [CI]
=1.10-2.09). The risk of B-cell NHL increased with increasing smoking
years (P-trend=0.03) and pack-years (P-trend=0.02). This risk pattern was
observed for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), follicular lymphoma,
and mantle cell lymphoma although these associations were not
statistically significant. Current alcohol consumption decreased B-cell
NHL risk (OR=0.75, 95% CI=0.60-0.94) with risk most pronounced among
women with moderate lifetime consumption (1-<7 drinks/week). Women who
were obese at 5 years before diagnosis had an increased risk of B-cell
NHL (OR=1.70, 95% CI=1.28-2.26). Among NHL subtypes, the increased risk
was most pronounced for B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) (OR=1.94, 95% CI=1.07-3.52). Conclusions:
These findings add to the literature regarding the potential importance
of modifiable risk factors and NHL risk. Our results suggest that smoking
and obesity may increase NHL risk, but moderate alcohol consumption may
reduce NHL risk.

