Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Aurora B inhibitor ABT-348 is not susceptible to known
resistance mechanisms of other Aurora B inhibitors


The Aurora kinases (Aurora A, B, and C) play essential roles in
regulating cell division in mammalian cells and their over-expression in
diverse tumor types makes them appealing oncology targets. ABT-348 is a
novel, ATP-competitive, multi-targeted kinase inhibitor that exhibits
potent activity in multiple solid tumor-derived and leukemia cell lines.
ABT-348 is active against Aurora B (IC50 7 nM) and Aurora C (IC50 1 nM),
Aurora A (IC50 120 nM). The activity against Aurora B is demonstrated by
inhibition of histone H3 phosphorylation and induction of polyploidy.
ABT-348 is also active against Aurora-B Y156H, a mutant resistant to
other Aurora-B inhibitors. In addition, ABT-348 potently inhibits most
members of the VEGFR and PDGFR family of receptor tyrosine kinases, which
play a critical role in stromal angiogenesis. In contrast to other Aurora
kinase inhibitors, the cellular efficacy of ABT-348 is retained in cells
over-expressing P-glycoprotein (Pgp) or breast cancer resistant protein
(BCRP), indicating that ABT-348 is not a substrate for these commonly
upregulated ATP-binding cassette drug transporters. Consistent with these
in vitro studies, ABT-348 was broadly efficacious as a single agent
against a wide range of tumor types in vivo, including 3 multi-drug
resistant xenograft models. In summary, the potent activity and unique
kinase selectivity of ABT-348 against the Aurora kinases and VEGF and
PDGF receptor tyrosine kinases, engender its ability to block multiple
mechanisms of tumor progression. In addition, our data provide evidence
that ABT-348 may be active in tumors resistant to other
well-characterized inhibitors targeting Aurora-B. ABT-348 is presently
under clinical evaluation in adult patients with advanced solid and
hematological neoplasms.

