Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-tumor efficacy of Dll4 blockade in combination with sunitinib
or aflibercept in primary human renal cell carcinoma models


Background: The Notch ligand Delta-like 4 (Dll4) is highly expressed in
vascular endothelium and has been shown to play a pivotal role in
regulating tumor angiogenesis, particularly angiogenic sprouting.
Blockade of the Dll4-Notch pathway leads to an excessive production of
aberrant non-functional tumor vascular structures and is associated with
reduced tumor growth. REGN1035, an antibody that selectively binds and
blocks murine Dll4, has demonstrated potent inhibition of tumor growth in
a broad spectrum of xenograft models. The aim of this study was to assess
the effect of REGN1035 alone and in combination with anti-VEGF therapy in
two preclinical models of primary RCC. We hypothesized that combining
REGN1035 with sunitinib or the VEGF blocker aflibercept would provide
greater anti-tumor and anti-angiogenesis efficacy compared to single
agent treatments. Methods: Two human RCC models isolated from skin
metastases from a patient with sporadic ccRCC (RP-01) and a patient with
hereditary ccRCC (RP-02), respectively, were bilaterally implanted
subcutaneously into the flank area of three sets of 32 SCID mice (8
mice/group). When tumor volume reached 25 mm2, mice were treated with
vehicle (human Fc control protein, 4.89 mg/kg, 1x/wk, s.q.), REGN1035 (5
mg/kg, 1x/wk, s.q.), sunitinib (40 mg/kg, 5x/wk, oral gavage),
aflibercept (10 mg/kg, 2x/wk, s.q.) or REGN1035 plus sunitinib or
aflibercept. Tumor growth was assessed with serial caliper measurements.
Once tumor volume of vehicle mice reached 200 mm2, mice were sacrificed
and tumor tissue was excised and analyzed. Results: In the RP-01 and
RP-02 models, sunitinib and REGN1035 induced 60-69% and 71-81% inhibition
(p Background: The Notch ligand Delta-like 4 (Dll4) is highly expressed
in vascular endothelium and has been shown to play a pivotal role in
regulating tumor angiogenesis, particularly angiogenic sprouting.
Blockade of the Dll4-Notch pathway leads to an excessive production of
aberrant non-functional tumor vascular structures and is associated with
reduced tumor growth. REGN1035, an antibody that selectively binds and
blocks murine Dll4, has demonstrated potent inhibition of tumor growth in
a broad spectrum of xenograft models. The aim of this study was to assess
the effect of REGN1035 alone and in combination with anti-VEGF therapy in
two preclinical models of primary RCC. We hypothesized that combining
REGN1035 with sunitinib or the VEGF blocker aflibercept would provide
greater anti-tumor and anti-angiogenesis efficacy compared to single
agent treatments. Methods: Two human RCC models isolated from skin
metastases from a patient with sporadic ccRCC (RP-01) and a patient with
hereditary ccRCC (RP-02), respectively, were bilaterally implanted
subcutaneously into the flank area of three sets of 32 SCID mice (8
mice/group). When tumor volume reached 25 mm2, mice were treated with
vehicle (human Fc control protein, 4.89 mg/kg, 1x/wk, s.q.), REGN1035 (5
mg/kg, 1x/wk, s.q.), sunitinib (40 mg/kg, 5x/wk, oral gavage),
aflibercept (10 mg/kg, 2x/wk, s.q.) or REGN1035 plus sunitinib or
aflibercept. Tumor growth was assessed with serial caliper measurements.
Once tumor volume of vehicle mice reached 200 mm2, mice were sacrificed
and tumor tissue was excised and analyzed. Results: In the RP-01 and
RP-02 models, sunitinib and REGN1035 induced 60-69% and 71-81% inhibition
(p < .01 vs. control), respectively, while the combination group showed
89-114% inhibition (p Background: The Notch ligand Delta-like 4 (Dll4) is
highly expressed in vascular endothelium and has been shown to play a
pivotal role in regulating tumor angiogenesis, particularly angiogenic
sprouting. Blockade of the Dll4-Notch pathway leads to an excessive
production of aberrant non-functional tumor vascular structures and is
associated with reduced tumor growth. REGN1035, an antibody that
selectively binds and blocks murine Dll4, has demonstrated potent
inhibition of tumor growth in a broad spectrum of xenograft models. The
aim of this study was to assess the effect of REGN1035 alone and in
combination with anti-VEGF therapy in two preclinical models of primary
RCC. We hypothesized that combining REGN1035 with sunitinib or the VEGF
blocker aflibercept would provide greater anti-tumor and
anti-angiogenesis efficacy compared to single agent treatments. Methods:
Two human RCC models isolated from skin metastases from a patient with
sporadic ccRCC (RP-01) and a patient with hereditary ccRCC (RP-02),
respectively, were bilaterally implanted subcutaneously into the flank
area of three sets of 32 SCID mice (8 mice/group). When tumor volume
reached 25 mm2, mice were treated with vehicle (human Fc control protein,
4.89 mg/kg, 1x/wk, s.q.), REGN1035 (5 mg/kg, 1x/wk, s.q.), sunitinib (40
mg/kg, 5x/wk, oral gavage), aflibercept (10 mg/kg, 2x/wk, s.q.) or
REGN1035 plus sunitinib or aflibercept. Tumor growth was assessed with
serial caliper measurements. Once tumor volume of vehicle mice reached
200 mm2, mice were sacrificed and tumor tissue was excised and analyzed.
Results: In the RP-01 and RP-02 models, sunitinib and REGN1035 induced
60-69% and 71-81% inhibition (p < .01 vs. control), respectively, while
the combination group showed 89-114% inhibition (p < .001 vs. single
agents), respectively. No overt signs of toxicity (i.e., weight loss,
diarrhea) were observed in any of the experimental groups. Similar
results were observed by combining the VEGF blocker aflibercept with
REGN1035. HIF-1 and HIF-2 protein levels in the tumor were both found to
be downregulated in the combination treated mice, as compared to the
single agent treated mice as monitored by Western blotting analysis. A
reduction in microvessel density, as measured by CD31 and VEGF
immunohistochemistry, was observed in the sunitinib treated group,
whereas an increase in abnormal vascular structures was seen in the
REGN1035 group. Summary: Overall, the data demonstrate that combination
therapy with REGN1035 and sunitinib or aflibercept resulted in
significant anti-tumor efficacy including tumor regression in primary
human RCC xenografts and highlights the potential therapeutic application
of combined VEGF and Dll4 blockade for the treatment of RCC.

