Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overcoming DDP resistance using folic acid-heparin-DDP
nanoparticles


Cisplatin (DDP) has been widely used in the treatment of different
cancers. However, resistance to DDP limits its clinical application.
Since reduced intracellular DDP accumulation is one of the main causes
for DDP resistance, increasing the accumulation of DDP may overcome drug
resistance. The folate receptor (FR) is overexpressed on the surface of
many human tumors including breast, ovarian and lung cancer, but is found
at low levels in normal tissues. In this study, folic acid (FA) was
conjugated to heparin-DDP (FHDDP) nanoparticles to target FR. In vitro
cellular uptake experiments showed that the accumulation of FHDDP
nanoparticles in FR-expressing DDP-resistant KB-CP.5 cancer cells
(selected from KB3-1 cells, and showing a 36-fold increase in resistance
to DDP compared with KB3-1) was significantly higher than that of free
DDP (9.312.2 ng Pt/106 cells vs 0.980.25 ng Pt/106 cells, Pt:0.5ug/ml, 4
hrs at 37C). Further, the level of platinum DNA-adducts in the resistant
cells treated with FHDDP nanoparticles was about 4-fold greater than in
cells treated with free DDP (24.215.32 pg Pt/ug DNA vs 97.922.5 pg Pt/ug
DNA). Nude mice bearing KB-CP.5 cell tumors receiving FHDDP nanoparticles
(2.5mg/kg, tail vein injection, twice weekly, 5 times) showed enhanced
antitumor effects as compared with mice treated with free DDP (tumor
volume: 823221mm3 vs 1450392mm3, 21 days after treatment), while
non-targeted heparin-DDP nanoparticles did not show significant
difference compared with free DDP. Our results suggest that FHDDP
nanoparticles have the potential to be used for overcoming DDP
resistance.(This research was supported by the National Cancer Institute
award 5 P50 CA128613)

