Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular markers of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and combined
chemoradiotherapy response in patients with oropharynx squamous cell
carcinoma


The treatment currently considered standard for advanced oropharyngeal
tumors involves concomitant chemo- and radiotherapy or surgery followed
by adjuvant chemo- and radiotherapy. However, only 30 to 50% of patients
with locally advanced disease survive more than three years, even with
the advances in surgical techniques and the recognized benefits of
therapy combined with radio- and chemotherapy. Treatment with induction
TPF (docetaxel plus cisplatin and fluorouracil) chemotherapy followed by
chemoradiotherapy was associated with a trend toward improved survival
(Posner et al., 2007. N Engl J Med. 357:1705). The aim of this study was
to investigate biological markers as potential predictors of response to
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy according to HPV infection in
oropharyngeal carcinomas (OC). Thirty-two OC were evaluated by array CGH
(4x180k, Agilent). A total of 35% of cases were HPV positives; HPV16
subtype was the most frequently detected (8/37), followed by subtype 18
(2/37). In general, HPV- cases showed a large number of copy number
alterations (117 CNAs) in comparison with HPV+ samples. Losses on 7q22.1
and 14q12 were found exclusively in HPV+ tumors (p=0.044). Comparative
analysis of genomic alterations among the patients which received
combined chemoradiotherapy (22 cases) was done aiming to identify
molecular markers that could predict the complete response (CR), partial
response (PR) to treatment or progressive disease (PD). Tumors with CR
showed a lower number of genomic alterations (90 CNAs versus 110 per
cases in PR and PD). Losses at 1p21.3-p21.1 and gains on 10p13-p12.33 and
10p12.31-p12.1(p0.017) were exclusively found in patients with PD and PR.
Overall survival (OS) analysis between HPV- and HPV+ cases demonstrated
no significant differences (p>0.05). HPV- tumors showed more complexity
and genomic instability than HPV+ tumors. Genomic losses or gains at
different loci have been reported in HPV- compared to few or no
alterations in HPV+ cases. In this study, it was detected specific
chromosomal imbalances associated with therapy response and consequently,
putative candidates to be validated in a large series of cases.

