Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in hepatocellular carcinoma


Alterations in DNA methylation frequently occur in hepatocellular cancer
(HCC). We have previously demonstrated that hypermethylation in candidate
genes can be detected in plasma DNA prior to HCC diagnosis. To identify
with a genome-wide approach additional genes hypermethylated in HCC that
could be used for more accurate analysis of plasma DNA for early
diagnosis, we analyzed tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues from 62
Taiwanese HCC cases using Illumina methylation arrays that screen 26,486
autosomal CpG sites. After Bonferroni adjustment, a total of 2,324 CpG
sites significantly differed in methylation level, with 684 CpG sites
significantly hypermethylated and 1,640 hypomethylated in tumor compared
to non-tumor tissues. Array data were validated with pyrosequencing in a
subset of 5 of these genes; correlation coefficients ranged from 0.92 to
0.97. Analysis of plasma DNA from 38 cases demonstrated that 37% to 63%
of cases had detectable hypermethylated DNA (5% methylation) for these 5
genes individually. At least one of these genes was hypermethylated in
87% of cases, suggesting that measurement of DNA methylation in plasma
samples is feasible. The panel of methylated genes indentified in the
current study will be further tested in large cohort of prospectively
collected samples to determine their utility as early biomarkers of
hepatocellular carcinoma.

