Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 homologue p63 trans-activates epidermal growth factor (EGF)
receptor and 14-3-3 and thus promotes tumorigenesis and chemoresistance
in pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer-related mortality in
the United States. Despite these statistics, progress in therapy of
pancreatic cancer has been slow. p53 tumor suppressor pathway is altered
in 50-75% of pancreatic cancer tumors. However, the role of p53 homologs
p63 and p73 has not been well studied. We previously reported that p63 is
expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and contributes to their
motility and invasion. Here we tested expression of p63 in resected
tumors and investigated its role as a transcription factor in pancreatic
cancer. Expression of p63 was determined by immunohistochemistry in 20
resected tumor samples (15 - adenocarcinoma, 5 - squamous) using pan-p63
(clone 4A4) and Np63-specific antibodies; and by immunoblotting,
real-time quantitative and semi-quantitative PCR in 5 pancreatic cancer
cell lines. p63 levels were manipulated employing transient
overexpression and lentiviral approaches. We studied cell doubling times,
motility in a wound assay and invasiveness in Matrigel chambers in the
presence or absence of epidermal growth factor (EGF). Functional reporter
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were performed to study the
effects of p63 on selected promoters. We found that the p53 homolog p63
was expressed in resected pancreatic cancer samples. Pancreatic tumors
with squamous differentiation showed strong diffuse expression of p63,
whereas adenocarcinomas without squamous component had a focal expression
of p63 (Np63). In pancreatic cancer cell lines, p63 protein levels were
high in 3/5 tested cell lines and Np63 was the predominantly expressed
variant. By contrast, TAp63 was not detected while p73 was barely
detectable in 2/5 cell lines. Ectopic expression of Np63 in PANC-1 cells
(which had low endogenous p63) and shRNA-mediated knockdown in T3M4 cells
(with high endogenous p63) indicated that Np63 promoted
anchorage-dependent and independent growth, motility and invasion, and
enhanced resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Motogenic effects of
Np63 were augmented in presence of EGF. Np63 augmented the EGF receptor
expression in pancreatic cancer cells via transcriptional regulation and
potentiated EGF-mediated activation of ERK, Akt and JNK signaling. 14-3-3
transcription was also positively regulated by Np63 and we have
previously shown that 14-3-3 contributes to chemoresistance in pancreatic
cancer. Thus, p53 homolog Np63 is expressed in pancreatic cancer, where
it enhances tumor progression and chemoresistance via trans-activation of
EGF receptor and 14-3-3.

