Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Alteration of microRNA expression profiles in HPV-associated
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN)


Background High-risk type of human papillomavirus (HPV) has recently been
found to be etiologically associated with 20 to 25% of SCCHN,
particularly common in or pharyngeal tumors. We investigated the protein
expression of PTEN/PI3K/AKT/mTOR signal pathway on HPV 16 +/ tonsillar
squamous cell carcinomas. And, we analyzed microRNA expression profile in
tongue cancer cell line transfected with HPV 16 E6/E7 oncogene. Method
Tonsil cancer patients who had been treated at Seoul St. Mary's Hospital
between 2000 and 2009 were reviewed. Tissue microarrays were prepared
from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues of 65 surgical
specimens, and stained with antibodies against PTEN, PIK3CA,
phosphorylated AktSer473, and phosphorylated mTORSer2448. High-risk HPV
infection status was determined by in situ hybridization. The protein
expression of EGFR, PIK3CA, pAkt, mTOR, and PTEN was assessed by
immunohistochemistry. MicroRNA expression was studied using microarrays
(PANArray miRNA expression profiling kit) in two tongue cancer cell lines
(YD8 and YD10B) transfected with HPV 16 E6/E7 oncogene. Results Of the 65
pts, 26 (40%) pts were HPV positive. Overall survival and relapse-free
survival were significantly different between two groups (P = 0.05 and P
= 0.036, respectively). PTEN expression was significantly higher in
HPV-positive- than in HPV-negative patients (P = 0.02). PIK3CA,
phosphorylated AktSer473, and phosphorylated mTORSer2448 expression was
negatively correlated with HPV status, yet not significantly. HPV status
(P = 0.03) and nodal stage (P = 0.05) were found to significantly affect
overall survival, as determined by multivariate analysis. The expression
profile of miRNAs was different in HPV 16 E6/E7 transformed cells
compared with vector alone cells. In the final round, 8 of 158 miRNAs
were selected to be most differently expressed miRNAs; let-7b, miR-1,
miR-107, miR-122, miR-127-5p, miR-95, miR-23b and miR-370 (>1.2-fold).
Conclusion We observed the higher expression of PTEN in HPV 16 positive
tonsil tumor than HPV 16 negative tumor. Our data suggest that some
microRNAs induced by E6/E7 oncogene might directly affect PTEN expression
level independent of p53. We are underway on the experiments confirming
that PTEN is regulated by which among these miRNAs.

