Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Childhood cancer incidence trends in association with folic acid
fortification in the United States (1986-2008)


Folic acid plays a critical role in embryonic development and sufficient
maternal prenatal folic acid consumption significantly reduces the
incidence of congenital abnormalities in offspring. Epidemiological
evidence supports the hypothesis that maternal prenatal folic acid
supplementation lowers the risk of childhood cancer in offspring; however
a systematic evaluation of population-based childhood cancer incidence
trends following fortification of enriched grain products with folic acid
in the U.S. in 1996-1998 has not been previously reported. Here we
describe temporal trends in childhood cancer incidence in association
with U.S. folic acid fortification. Using Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results program data (1986-2008) we calculated incidence rate ratios
(IRRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) to compare pre- and
post-fortification incidence rates in children aged 0-4 years. Using
joinpoint and loess regression models, we looked for inflection points
during this period where the incidence trend changed in magnitude and/or
direction. From 1986-2008, 8,829 children aged 0-4 years were diagnosed
with malignancies, including 3,790 and 3,299 in utero during the pre- and
post-fortification periods, respectively. Pre- and post-fortification
incidence rates were similar for all cancers combined (IRR=1.01, 95% CI:
0.96-1.06) and for most specific cancer types examined. Rates of
ependymomas (IRR=0.70, 95% CI: 0.51-0.97), primitive neuroectodermal
tumors (PNETs) (IRR=0.56, 95% CI: 0.37-0.84) and Wilms tumor (WT)
(IRR=0.80, 95% CI: 0.68-0.95) were significantly lower
post-fortification. Notably, a greater reduction in post-fortification
incidence was observed for the latter two subtypes upon restricting the
analysis to infants, in whom any true effect of folic acid is expected to
be greater. Joinpoint regression models detected increasing PNET
incidence from 1986-1993 (annual percent change, APC=11.5, 95% CI:
-5.0-31.0) followed by a sharp decrease from 1993-2008 (APC=7.4%, 95% CI:
-12.1- -2.4), and increasing WT incidence from 1986-1997 (APC=2.2, 95%
CI: -1.2-5.8) followed by a sizable decline from 1997-2008 (APC=4.0%, 95%
CI: -7.3- -0.6). Loess curves indicated similar patterns. These results
provide support for decreases in PNET and WT incidence, but not other
childhood cancers, following U.S. folic acid fortification. Ten years of
data are now available post-fortification and any substantial changes in
childhood cancer rates attributable to fortification should be evident.
Drawing firm conclusions regarding the isolated effects of folic acid is
difficult, however, as other temporal trends occurred during the time
period examined. Alternative study designs are required to rule out other
explanations and confirm causal relationships. Supported by NIH Grants
T32 CA099936 and K05 CA157439, and Children's Cancer Research Fund,
Minneapolis, MN. A.M. Linabery and K.J. Johnson contributed equally to
this work.

