Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Divergence of activin and TGF-induced SMAD-independent signaling
in colon cancer


Introduction: Activin and TGF are members of the TGF superfamily with
growth suppressive and pro-migratory properties. While growth suppressive
SMAD 2/3/4 signaling is shared, we have evidence of diverging
SMAD-independent migratory signaling involving the CDK inhibitor p21.
Here, we dissect the participation of respective mitogenic pathways in
activin and TGF-specific SMAD-independent signaling in colon cancer.
Methods: Colon cancer cell lines with and without SMAD4 were assessed for
SMAD, PI3K and MEK pathway influences on activin or TGF signaling and
associated effects using pharmacologic inhibition, knock-down,
co-immunoprecipitation, Western blotting, and functional assays of
migration. Results: Irrespective of SMAD4 status, activin-induced
migration was PI3K-dependent and associated with PI3K-induced p21
downregulation, while TGF-induced migration was MEK1/2-dependent. Activin
but not TGF lead to colocalization of ACVR1, ACVR2's primary binding
partner, with p85, the regulatory subunit of PI3K, in an ACVR1-dependent
SMAD-independent manner. Further, activin-induced p21 downregulation was
PI3K dependent and associated with proteasomal degradation, while TGF
stabilized p21 via MEK/ERK. Inhibition of proteasomal degradation of p21
lead to a decrease in migration with activin implicating p21
downregulation in activin-induced migration but not in TGF-induced
migration. Conclusion: Activin and TGF diverge in their pro-migratory
SMAD-independent signaling in colon cancer affecting distinct targets to
include p21 and employing diverse mitogenic signals. Dissecting
ligand-specific functions in colon cancer may be exploited for risk
stratification or therapeutic intervention in the near future.

