Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An investigation of risk factors for renal cell carcinoma by
histologic subtype in two case-control studies


BACKGROUND: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is made up of several histological
subtypes, the most common of which include clear cell, papillary and
chromophobe RCC. These subtypes possess distinct genetic and clinical
characteristics, and may also differ in etiology. To better understand
whether the associations with established RCC risk factors [body mass
index (BMI), smoking, hypertension, family history of kidney cancer]
differ across subtypes, we conducted analyses in two large case-control
studies conducted in the U.S. (1,217 cases, 1,235 controls) and Central
and Eastern Europe (1,097 cases, 1,476 controls). METHODS: Histology was
ascertained for 706 U.S. cases (58% of participating cases) and 891
European cases (81%) through a central pathology review conducted by a
single pathologist. For cases not included in the central review,
histology was abstracted from the original diagnostic pathology report.
Case-only analyses were performed to compute odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) summarizing subtype differences by age, sex,
and race. Case-control analyses were performed to compute
subtype-specific ORs for other risk factors using polytomous regression.
RESULTS: In case-only analyses, papillary cases (N=237) were older
(OR=1.2, 95% CI=1.1-1.4 per 10-year increase), less likely to be female
(OR=0.5, 95 % CI=0.4-0.8) and more likely to be black (OR=2.6, 95%
CI=1.8-3.9) compared to clear cell cases (N=1,524). In case-control
analyses, BMI was associated with clear cell (OR=1.5, 95% CI=1.3-1.7 per
10 kg/m2 increase) and chromophobe RCC (N=80; OR=1.5, 95% CI=1.1-2.0),
but not papillary RCC (OR=1.1, 95% CI 0.9-1.5; heterogeneity test vs.
clear cell, P=0.006). No differences across subtypes were observed for
other risk factors. Analyses stratified by study and restricted to cases
included in the central pathology review yielded virtually identical
findings. CONCLUSIONS: Our results from this analysis, to our knowledge
the most comprehensive investigation of etiologic heterogeneity across
RCC histologic subtypes conducted to date, support the existence of
distinct age, sex and racial distributions for RCC subtypes, and suggest
that the obesity-RCC association differs by histology. These findings
underscore the importance of accounting for histologic subtype in
investigations of RCC etiology.

