Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen independent promotion of prostate cancer cell invasion by
HOXB13-mediated zinc regulation


A healthy prostate maintains the high level of zinc while intracellular
zinc is diminished during prostate cancer (PCa) developments. However,
down-regulation of intracellular zinc in PCa are not fully understood,
particularly in development of hormone refractory PCa (HRPC). Our
previous studies showed that HOXB13 was overexpressed in HRPC. In our
attempt to profile androgen-independent HOXB13 target genes in LNCaP PCa
cells by DNA microarray, most strikingly regulated gene was ZnTs, a group
of zinc output transporters. HOXB13 drove PCa cells to decrease
intracellular zinc concentration. In the absence of androgen, HOXB13
dramatically promoted NF-B-mediated signaling by reduction of inhibitor
of NF-B alpha (IB) and correspondingly stimulated nuclear translocation
of RelA/p65. HOXB13-mediated NF-B activation was nearly eliminated by
suppression of ZnT4. At the same time, prostate tumors strongly indicated
inverse correlation of HOXB13 and IB expression. Correspondingly, HOXB13
stimulated an invasive property of LNCaP cells, which can be negated by
suppression of ZnT4 in an androgen-free environment. Taken together,
these results demonstrate that HOXB13 promoted PCa cell invasion in an
androgen-deprived condition by decreasing intracellular zinc
concentration to further stimulate NF-B-mediated transactivation,
indicating that HOXB13 overexpression contributes to the malignant
biological behavior of HRPC.

