Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional regulation of gp170 by YY1 and prognostic
significance in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)


Leukemia is the most common cancer among children under the age of 15
years in the United States and many developed countries. In recent years,
there has been the emergence of novel therapeutic drugs for this disease.
However, the development of drug resistance by the tumor cells remains
the most important obstacle in the treatment of leukemia. A widely
studied mechanism of tumor resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs is
through the expression of the multi-drug resistance (MDR) genes.
P-glycoprotein 170 (gp170) is an MDR1 gene product which serves as an
ATP-dependent cell membrane transporter; it facilitates the efflux of
xenobiotics from the cells to prevent damage for prolonged drug activity,
including chemotherapeutics agents. In addition to MDR1, several reports
in different cancers have indicated that the transcription factor Yin
Yang 1 (YY1) is over-expressed and regulates tumor cell response to
chemotherapeutic drugs. TESS analysis demonstrated that the gp170
proximal promoter contains four putative binding sites for the YY-1
protein. We also hypothesized that the YY1 may too be over-expressed in
ALL and that its expression may be correlated with the expression of
gp170. These hypotheses were examined first by reporter systems analyze,
the gp170 protein was cloned and we developed a luciferase reporter
assay. Examination of the putative YY1 binding sites that were
individually mutated (deleted), showed revealed that mutation at the site
1860 abolished the activity. Mutation at the site 1920 abolished
approximately 50% and mutation at 1230 site abolished approximately 25%.
Further, CHIP analysis demonstrated that YY1 transcription factor binds
directly to the gp170 gene MDR1 promoter. In addition, we examined the
expression of YY1 and gp170 in childhood ALL (n= 84). The expression of
YY1 and gp170 was determined evaluated by IHC in tumor tissues and the
frequency of positive cells was determined. For comparison, normal
controls were also analyzed (n=53). The findings demonstrate that were a
significant increase in the frequency of positive cells in ALL compared
to controls for both YY1 (38% vs. 8%, p=0.001) and for gp170 (42% vs.
12%, p=0.001). There was a good correlation between the expression of YY1
and gp170 (Pearson's test, r=0.4, p=0.001). The findings suggest that YY1
transcriptionally regulates the mdr1 and may be a therapeutic target in
MDR positive ALL and its inhibition may reverse resistance to
chemotherapeutic drugs.

