Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: UHRF1 is highly expressed in childhood liver tumors and interacts
with DNMT1 and USP7 to guide tumor suppressor gene silencing


Embryonal tumors are thought to arise from immature tissue during
intrauterine or early postnatal development and display apart from
specific genetic changes in developmental signaling pathways a relatively
normal genomic background. Instead, epigenetic events appear to be
involved in key steps of the earliest phases of neoplastic evolution.
However, the mechanistic basis responsible for epigenetic alterations in
these early-onset tumors and the role of the DNA methylation machinery
therein is still not known. In order to define the impact of epigenetic
factors in embryonal tumor development we made use of hepatoblastoma
(HB), the most common liver tumor of early childhood, as a model for a
pristine and genetically clean tumor. In this study we identified
ubiquitin-like with PHD and ring finger domains 1 (UHRF1) to be highly
overexpressed in HB tumors compared to normal liver tissue, a protein
known to preferentially bind to hemi-methylated DNA. Using
immunoprecipitation, we furthermore show that UHRF1 binds in concert with
DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and ubiquitin specific peptidase 7 (USP7)
as a trimeric complex to promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes
relevant in HB, such as hedgehog interacting protein (HHIP), insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), and secreted frizzled-related
protein 1 (SFRP1). These genes are epigenetically silenced in HB, as
evidenced by heavy DNA methylation and enrichment of the repressive
H4K27me3 chromatin mark. Interestingly, knockdown of UHRF1 expression via
RNA interference resulted in promoter demethylation and a shift towards
the active H3K4me2 chromatin mark of the three tumor suppressor genes.
Altogether, these data suggest that aberrant expression of the epigenetic
regulator UHRF1 and excessive binding of a trimeric complex consisting of
UHRF1/DNMT1/USP7 results in silencing of tumor suppressor genes in HB and
may display an important mechanism in the initial phases of embryonal
tumorigenesis in general.

