Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER-negative breast cancer survive mitochondrial IMS-stress via
SIRT3 activation


Mitochondrial dysfunction is central in carcinogenesis and has been
associated with elevated levels of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS). While
moderate levels of ROS activate signaling cascade promoting tumor
progression, high levels of ROS can lead to cell death. We previously
demonstrated that Estrogen Receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cells
activate ER to overcome the mitochondrial impairment and reduce high
levels of ROS induced by stress in the inter-mitochondrial membrane space
(IMS). The ultimate outcome of ER activation is induction of a novel
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) that involves up-regulation of NRF-1, a
major regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis as well as induction of OMI
and proteasome, two critical elements of protein quality control required
to monitor the quality of IMS proteins. In the present work, we have
evidence that ER-negative breast cancer cells trigger a distinct
mechanism to cope up with IMS-stress. Due to the lack of ER, the stress
from the IMS is extended into the matrix of mitochondria leading to
activation of the matrix deacetylase, SIRT3. SIRT3 is required to
increase the antioxidant capacity by up-regulating the antioxidant
enzyme, MnSOD and therefore reducing ROS. In addition, our results reveal
that SIRT3 is essential for removal of the irreversible impaired
mitochondria through mitophagy. Overall, our data indicate that
ER-positive and ER-negative breast cancer induce different mechanism to
conquer mitochondrial malfunction coupled with ROS overproduction and
maintain their cellular integrity.

