Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sweet wormwood-derived artesunate causes cell cycle arrest in
ovarian cancer cell lines


Introduction: Artesunate is a semi-synthetic derivative of artemisinin, a
natural compound from the herb sweet wormwood (Artemisia annua L).
Artemisinin has been used for centuries in traditional Chinese medicine
while artesunate has recently been used as an anti-malarial drug.
Artesunate is also cytotoxic to human cancer cells. Since the use of
artesunate as an anti-malarial agent is associated with few adverse
effects, artesunate may represent a less toxic alternative to
conventional chemotherapy. This study investigates the effects of
artesunate on ovarian cancer cell lines and the mechanism(s) underlying
its activity. Methods and Results: Artesunate had a time- and
dose-dependent growth inhibitory effect on all ovarian carcinoma cell
lines examined (SKOV3, OVCAR3, IG-OV-1, HEY) using an MTT assay. Further
examination of artesunate-treated SKOV3 and HEY cells using Oregon
Green-488 and Annexin-V-FLUOS/propidium iodide staining indicated that
artesunate had a strong anti-proliferative effect but was not cytotoxic
towards the ovarian cancer cells. Cell cycle arrest occurred in the G1
and G2 phases of the cell cycle, and western blot analysis showed
artesunate-induced changes in the expression and phosphorylation of a
range of cell cycle proteins including the retinoblastoma protein, p21,
and cyclin B1. Pretreatment with holotransferrin increased artesunate's
anti-proliferative activity. Conclusions: These data show that artesunate
possess a strong anti-proliferative activity in ovarian cancer cell
cultures and therefore warrants further investigation as a possible
treatment for ovarian cancer. Research supported by NSERC.

