Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metronomic oral prodrug of gemcitabine (LY2334737) causes
antitumor effects with concomitant increase in intratumoral blood flow


Metronomic chemotherapy is the regular administration of chemotherapy
drugs at relatively low minimally toxic doses without prolonged break
periods; it is currently undergoing phase III trial evaluation.
Metronomic chemotherapy is thought to cause anti-tumor effects primarily
by antiangiogenic mechanisms, both locally by targeting endothelial cells
of the tumor neovasculature and systemically by effects on bone marrow
derived cells, including circulating endothelial progenitor cells (CEPs).
Previous studies have shown reduction of CEPs by metronomic
administration of a number of different chemotherapeutic drugs, including
cyclophosphamide, paclitaxel, topotecan, and tegafur plus uracil. Here we
report results evaluating the properties of metronomic administration of
an oral prodrug of gemcitabine LY2334737 (LY) in non tumor-bearing mice,
and in preclinical models of human ovarian (SKOV3-13) and breast cancer
(LM2-4) xenografts. Through daily gavage (at 6mg/kg/day) the schedules
tested were devoid of toxicity and caused anti-tumor effects; however, a
suppressive effect on CEPs was not detected. Human SKOV3-13 ovarian
cancer cells were grown as ascites in SCID mice; LY monotherapy
(6mg/kg/day), as well as LY in combination with metronomic
cyclophosphamide (CTX, 20mg/kg/day), caused a significant increase in
survival (n=5 mice per group, pMetronomic chemotherapy is the regular
administration of chemotherapy drugs at relatively low minimally toxic
doses without prolonged break periods; it is currently undergoing phase
III trial evaluation. Metronomic chemotherapy is thought to cause
anti-tumor effects primarily by antiangiogenic mechanisms, both locally
by targeting endothelial cells of the tumor neovasculature and
systemically by effects on bone marrow derived cells, including
circulating endothelial progenitor cells (CEPs). Previous studies have
shown reduction of CEPs by metronomic administration of a number of
different chemotherapeutic drugs, including cyclophosphamide, paclitaxel,
topotecan, and tegafur plus uracil. Here we report results evaluating the
properties of metronomic administration of an oral prodrug of gemcitabine
LY2334737 (LY) in non tumor-bearing mice, and in preclinical models of
human ovarian (SKOV3-13) and breast cancer (LM2-4) xenografts. Through
daily gavage (at 6mg/kg/day) the schedules tested were devoid of toxicity
and caused anti-tumor effects; however, a suppressive effect on CEPs was
not detected. Human SKOV3-13 ovarian cancer cells were grown as ascites
in SCID mice; LY monotherapy (6mg/kg/day), as well as LY in combination
with metronomic cyclophosphamide (CTX, 20mg/kg/day), caused a significant
increase in survival (n=5 mice per group, p<0.05) compared to controls.
Human LM2-4 breast cancer cells, implanted orthotopically into SCID mice,
were growth inhibited by LY monotherapy (at 6mg/kg/day as well as at
8mg/kg/day; n=5 mice per group, pMetronomic chemotherapy is the regular
administration of chemotherapy drugs at relatively low minimally toxic
doses without prolonged break periods; it is currently undergoing phase
III trial evaluation. Metronomic chemotherapy is thought to cause
anti-tumor effects primarily by antiangiogenic mechanisms, both locally
by targeting endothelial cells of the tumor neovasculature and
systemically by effects on bone marrow derived cells, including
circulating endothelial progenitor cells (CEPs). Previous studies have
shown reduction of CEPs by metronomic administration of a number of
different chemotherapeutic drugs, including cyclophosphamide, paclitaxel,
topotecan, and tegafur plus uracil. Here we report results evaluating the
properties of metronomic administration of an oral prodrug of gemcitabine
LY2334737 (LY) in non tumor-bearing mice, and in preclinical models of
human ovarian (SKOV3-13) and breast cancer (LM2-4) xenografts. Through
daily gavage (at 6mg/kg/day) the schedules tested were devoid of toxicity
and caused anti-tumor effects; however, a suppressive effect on CEPs was
not detected. Human SKOV3-13 ovarian cancer cells were grown as ascites
in SCID mice; LY monotherapy (6mg/kg/day), as well as LY in combination
with metronomic cyclophosphamide (CTX, 20mg/kg/day), caused a significant
increase in survival (n=5 mice per group, p<0.05) compared to controls.
Human LM2-4 breast cancer cells, implanted orthotopically into SCID mice,
were growth inhibited by LY monotherapy (at 6mg/kg/day as well as at
8mg/kg/day; n=5 mice per group, p<0.05). LM2-4 tumors were also growth
inhibited by the combination of LY (6mg/kg/day) plus a bolus of CTX
(100mg/kg, single dose) followed immediately by a maintenance regimen of
metronomic CTX (20mg/kg/day); this combination did not produce any overt
toxicity. Unexpectedly metronomic LY administration caused increased
intratumoral blood flow, as measured by ultrasound after 1 week and after
4 weeks of continuous treatment, in luciferase-tagged LM2-4 tumor
xenografts; and the increase in blood flow coincided with a relative
increase in tumor bioluminescence. Paraffin embedded LM2-4 tumor sections
from the therapy experiments were further analyzed by Angiogenesis and by
Tumor Health Panel analyses; LY monotherapy did not caused any
significant changes in tumor hypoxia, or in intratumoral vessel density,
compared to controls. These results highlight the possibility of
significant anti-tumor effects mediated by metronomic administration of
some chemotherapy drugs without a concomitant inhibition of systemic
angiogenesis.

