Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cinnamoyl quinolines are novel autophagy inhibitors and enhance
antitumor activity of 2-deoxyglucose


Cinnamides exhibit a variety of biological properties including
antineoplastic, antiallergic, and anti-infective activities etc.
Modifications of the amide function of cinnamides by linking with
aliphatic or heterocyclic moieties results in the formation of cinnamoyl
derivatives with anticancer activities. In the present study, we prepared
a series of cinnamoyl quinolines and evaluated their antitumor activity
in a panel of cancer cell lines. These derivatives reduced cancer cell
viability by inducing apoptosis and showed little to no cross-resistance
to vinblastine- or cisplatin-induced multidrug resistance. Interestingly,
the cinnamoyl-quinoline-6-yl derivatives (BO-2110 and BO-2112) induced
cytoplasmic vacuolization and the processing and recruitment of
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) to autophagosomes.
However, these agents caused the accumulation and aggregation of
p62/SQSTM1. Co-treatment of cinnamoyl-quinoline-6-yl derivatives with
bafilomycin A1 did not induced a further increase in p62/SQSTM1
accumulation. These results indicated that cinnamoyl-quinoline-6-yl
derivatives blocked autophagy. Since autophagy enables cancer cells to
temporarily avoid cell death when nutrient deprivation or exposing to
chemotherapeutic agents, cinnamoyl quinolines may sensitize cancer cells
to death and augment chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Co-treatment of
these derivatives with 2-deoxyglucose (2DG, glycolysis inhibitor), but
not cisplatin (DNA alkylating agent), camptothecin (Topo I inhibitor),
doxorubicin or etoposide (Topo II inhibitor), significantly enhanced cell
death in the tested tumor cell lines. Collectively, these results suggest
that BO-2110 and BO-2112 are effective autophagy inhibitors and promising
candidates that may be used in combination with 2DG for treating cancers.

