Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical development of RFF-1, a novel rational designed CXCL12
mimetic drug


The interaction between the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and its ligand,
CXCL12, has been shown in pre-clinical models to facilitate tumour
metastasis and to be involved in tissue repair and in recruitment of
hematopoietic precursors. AMD3100, a potent CXCR4 antagonist, has been
approved by FDA for stem cell mobilization in patients with multiple
myeloma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Several other CXCR4 inhibitors are in
clinical development (BTK140, CTCE-9908, MDX-1338 and POL6326), with the
aim of inhibiting the development and progression of metastasis. In the
rational design of CXCR4 inhibitors, a new class of cyclic peptide
CXCL12-based CXCR4 inhibitors was discovered (IT Patent M12010A 000096;
PCT WO2011/092575 A1) and validated for efficacy in in vitro and in vivo
models. Among the tested peptides RFF-1 showed potent and specific
inhibitory effects on CXCR4-mediated functions in multiple in vitro
assays (P-ERK induction, migration and calcium mobilization
CXCL12-induced and binding to CXCR4). C57/BL mice were injected with B16
melanoma cells transfected with human CXCR4. A 4,5 fold reduction in lung
metastases was observed after 10 days treatment with 2 mg/kg
intraperitoneally (i.p.) RFF-1 compared to the CXCR4 inhibitor AMD3100
(1.25mg/kg i.p), the powerful CXCR4 inhibitor not suitable for prolonged
administration, that reduced lung metastases of about 4 fold. In another
model of mouse osteosarcoma, K7M2 murine cells, were injected in Balb/C
mice. A 3 fold reduction in lung metastases was observed after 15 days
treatment with 10 mg/kg i.p. RFF-1 whereas AMD3100 treatment (2.5mg/kg
i.p.) lead to 1.8 fold increase in lung metastases. Additionally, a 30%
reduction in primary cell growth was achieved in a subcutaneous model of
human renal cancer SN12C cells when i.p. treated with 2 mg/kg RFF-1. With
the aim to evaluate RFF-1 efficacy in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
mobilization DBA/2 healthy mice were injected with a single s.c. RFF-1
dose and peripheral blood HSC mobilization was evaluated by colony
forming unit assay. Treatment with 30 mg/kg RFF-1 results in rapid,
potent and durable mobilization of HSC reaching faster the peak compared
to 20 mg/kg AMD3100. These results have prompted us to pursue the
clinical development of peptide RFF-1. A first in human Phase I trial is
planned to determine the maximal tolerated dose and recommended Phase 2
dose, toxicity profile, pharmacokinetics and antitumor activity of RFF-1
in patients with refractory solid tumors. The Phase I-II study of a novel
CXCR4 antagonist provides the opportunity to develop settings in diseases
where there is increasing evidence of a role for CXCR4 in the development
and progression of metastases such as relapsed glioblastoma, neoadjuvant
colorectal and breast cancer, and advanced prostate cancer.

