Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel multimeric protein scaffold stimulates apoptotic signaling
through TRAILR2


TRAILR2 (DR5, TNFRSF10B) is a member of the TNF-receptor superfamily that
mediates programmed cell death following stimulation with its ligand.
Binding of homotrimeric ligand TRAIL to TRAILR2 induces oligomerization
of the receptors and triggers the apoptotic pathway through induction of
caspases. Although TRAILR2 is found to be expressed in a number of normal
cell types it is routinely found at high levels in many cancer types.
Since TRAIL has been shown to preferentially induce apoptosis in cancer
cells versus normal cells, several TRAIL receptor agonists including
monoclonal antibodies as well as the ligand itself, are currently in
clinical development. Here, we describe a novel protein scaffold (Tn3)
based on a fibronectin type-III domain from the protein Tenascin that was
engineered to specifically agonize TRAILR2. Connecting TRAILR2-binding
Tn3 domains together significantly improved the in vitro potency of the
molecule in several cancer cell models. For example, a hexameric
TRAILR2-binding Tn3 construct has an EC50 of 0.5 pM in a 72 hour cell
viability assay with Colo-205 cells. This is approximately 2 logs better
than TRAIL. Furthermore, a subset of TRAIL-resistant cancer cell lines
derived from multiple tissues of origin is sensitive to the multimeric
Tn3. The improved potency over TRAIL was demonstrated in colorectal
cancer xenograft models. In addition, tumor regression was also observed
at doses as low as 0.3 mg/kg. These results suggest that a multimeric Tn3
protein scaffold targeting TRAILR2 has more potent anti-tumor activity in
vitro and in vivo compared than the natural ligand.

