Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inferring mutational chronology in breast cancer by
deep-sequencing tumor subpopulations


Heterogeneous breast carcinomas often contain nuclei with multiple
distributions of ploidy, each representing a distinct genomic
subpopulation. We present an approach called Ploidy-Seq that combines
flow-sorting and next-generation sequencing to isolate tumor
subpopulations and deep-sequence the nuclei at high coverage (80-100X) to
identify somatic mutations. We applied Ploidy-Seq to a triple-negative
(ER-, PR-, Her2-) ductal carcinoma that showed three major tumor
subpopulations and one stromal subpopulation. In order to distinguish
germline from somatic mutations, we first identified all of the SNPs in
the 2N stromal cells. We then studied the evolution of different
molecular clocks within the breast tumor, including single nucleotide
variations (SNVs), indels, structural rearrangements, copy number changes
and translocations. By applying set theory operations, we compared the
three tumor subpopulations to identify early mutations (present in all
subpopulations), intermediate events (shared between two subpopulations)
and late mutations (exclusive to each subpopulation). Overall we
identified 101 nonsynonymous point mutations of which 31 had occurred
early and were present in all tumor subpopulations. Many of the early
mutations occurred in cancer genes including THSD7B involved in TGF
signaling, the CDH26 cadherin-like 26 gene, and the kinesin gene KIF2B.
Early mutations were further studied by single-cell sequencing, which
showed evidence of clonal expansions within the tumor, suggesting that
they provided a major selective advantage. These early mutations are of
considerable interest for therapeutic targeting since they are present in
all of the tumor subpopulations, and are likely to be driving the growth
of the cancer.

