Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative analysis of miRNA in hormonal refractory prostate
cancer


Background: Nucleotides 2-7 within mature miRNAs, short RNA molecule of
between 19 and 22, create the seed region that specifies the specific
mRNA. To date, miRNAs have been linked to the etiology, progression and
prognosis of cancer. The gain or loss of specific miRNAs can function as
an oncogene or tumor suppressor. Design: By using recently developed
miRNA 14K array (Agilent), we designed to compare miRNA expression
between HRPCa cell line (PC3) and sensitive cell line (LNCaP). As
validation for target mRNA following bioinformatics, candidates were
applied on the neoadjuvant bicalutamide treated radical prostatectomized
specimens using immunohistochemistry. Results: Amongst 57 upregulated
miRNAs (ratio >2.0), oncomirs-miRNAs that are amplified or overexpressed
in PC3, includes miR-31, -27a, -23a, -9, -100, -29a, -24, let 7i, -21,
-221, 29b, -222, -181a. Probable candidates for target mRNAs to each
oncomir are tumor suppressor gene family, including p27, PTEN, apoptosis
related genes (DAXX, PDCD4, caspase recruitment domain 10/11), ECM
adhesion genes (Integrin 4, ADAMTS 7/8), SOCS 6. In 23 downregulated
miRNAs (ratio>2.0), tumor suppressor miRNAs that are downregualted or
deleted from chromosomes acting as tumor suppressor genes, include
miR-141, -200 a/b/c, -148a, -429, -34a, -195, -99a, -203, -125b-2.
Possible candidates for target mRNAs are oncogeneic family are
EMT-related genes including ZEB1, cell cycle related genes (Wee1, cyclin
E1, CDK6), prostate specific proteins (STEAP1, prostein), RTK family
(AXL, Rab-38, Rab-9A), transcriptional factor promotion (EIF2, SOX6),
mitogen activator (MAP p38), secretory protein (SDF2). Among the
top-listed candidates, STEAP1, prostein, ZEB1, and cyclin E1 were
relatively overexpressed in the refractory PCa to compare with regressing
cancer cells. Conclusion: Complicated networks of miRNA play substantial
and crucial roles in the regulation of hormonal refractory prostate
cancer, predominantly by virtue of STEAP1, prostein, ZEB1, cyclin E1
overexpression, and suppression of apoptosis-related genes.

