Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Signaling from lysosomes to mitochondria sensitizes head and neck
cancer cells to photodynamic treatment: Role of mitoferrin 2


Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves activation by light of a
photosensitizer in a tissue, resulting in singlet oxygen formation and
cell death. The aim of this study was to investigate the interactions
between lysosomes and mitochondria in promoting PDT killing of head and
neck cancer cells. Three head and neck cancer cell lines (UMSCC1, UMSCC14
and UMSCC22) were subjected to PDT with Pc 4, a mitochondria-targeted
photosensitizer. After comparable Pc 4-PDT, cell killing was greater in
UMSCC22 than UMSCC1 or UMSCC14 cells. Pc 4-PDT caused 85% cell killing in
UMSCC22 cells compared to 20% killing in UMSCC1 or UMSCC14 cells. In
non-erythroid cells, mitoferrin 2 (Mfrn2) is an iron transporter in the
mitochondrial inner membrane, and PDT-sensitive UMSCC22 cells expressed
>5 times higher Mfrn2 protein levels compared to PDT-resistant UMSCC1 and
UMSCC14 cells as determined by Western blotting. Bafilomycin, an
inhibitor of the vacuolar proton pump of lysosomes and endosomes enhanced
Pc 4-PDTcytoxicity. Mfrn2 protein overexpression in low Mfrn2 expressing
cells enhanced sensitivity to Pc 4-PDT plus bafilomycin. Conversely,
knocking down (90% knock down) Mfrn2 by siRNA decreased cells sensitivity
to the Pc 4-PDT plus bafilomycin treatment. Iron chelators
(desferrioxamine and starch-desferrioxamine) and the inhibitor of the
mitochondrial calcium (and ferrous iron) uniporter, Ru360, protected
against PDT plus bafilomycin treatment from Pc 4- mitochondria-mediated
cell killing. In conclusion, the data suggest that lysosomal iron release
and mitochondrial iron uptake through Mfrn2 act synergistically to induce
PDT-induced cell killing. Furthermore, Mfrn2 represents a possible
biomarker in predicting efficacy of the PDT treatment.

