Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cholesterol and breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed type of cancer among women
with an incidence rate five times greater in the Western world than
elsewhere. Relocation studies have ruled out genetics as the sole factor
in this discrepancy, since immigrant populations develop breast cancer at
rates similar to indigenous Western populations, thus indicating an
environmental effect on breast cancer incidence. Amongst possible
environmental factors, diet and obesity have long been considered likely
risk factors for cancer development. Despite this probability, a specific
role of cholesterol in breast cancer has not yet been specifically
examined. Cholesterol is an integral component of the plasma membrane and
is the precursor to biomolecules such as steroid hormones and vitamins.
Epidemiologic evidence indicates that cancer patients display abnormal
levels of the cholesterol carrying lipoproteins, high density lipoprotein
(HDL) and low density lipoprotein (LDL), thus suggesting a role for
cholesterol in breast cancer. Recent research in our laboratory shows
that when fed a high fat, high cholesterol diet, PyMT Tg mice, a model of
breast cancer, develop larger, more advanced tumor lesions. These mice
also develop a significant increase in HDL-cholesterol levels and an
increase in the expression of the HDL-C receptor, SR-BI compared to PyMT
Tg mice fed a control chow diet. In the present study, we aim to
elucidate the role of SR-BI in breast cancer. To do so we manipulate
cellular levels of SR-BI in human breast cancer cell lines. In vitro, we
show that ablation of SR-BI in human breast cancer cells leads to a
decrease in cellular proliferation, migration, and invasion. Xenograft
mouse models indicate that SR-BI depletion confers protection against
tumor growth in vivo with concomitant dysregulation of key mitogenic
signaling pathways. These results suggest a role for SR-BI in breast
cancer.

