Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Investigating human herpesvirus 8 infection among adults in
Uganda: A factor analysis approach


Objective: Human Herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) is highly prevalent in Uganda, and
it is a necessary agent for Kaposi Sarcoma (KS). During the AIDS era, KS
became epidemic. There is some evidence but limited information on sexual
transmission, and prevalence varies by age, sex and region. However,
current knowledge about HHV8 is based on selected populations including
hospital-based samples and high-risk cohort groups, which may be biased.
Methods: We analyzed a subset of the Uganda HIV/AIDS serobehavioral
survey (UHSBS) 04/05 to estimate the association with risk factors and
HHV8 seropositivity. HHV8 seropositivity was determined using HHV8 K8.1
and orf65 glycoproteins. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
were determined and components were obtained by Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). Results: Among 2,681 individuals tested, HHV8
seropositivity was 55.4% (95% CI, 53.0%-57.8%). Three components were
identified by PCA: sexual behavioral, socioeconomic, and cultural
components. In bivariate analysis, HHV8 seropositivity was positively
associated with sexual behavioral (ORquartile2=1.39, ORquartile3=1.37,
ORquartile4=1.27, and Ptrend=0.1085) and cultural components
(ORquartile2=1.29, ORquartile3=1.39, ORquartile4=1.59, and
Ptrend=0.0024), but inversely associated with socioeconomic component
(ORquartile2=0.77, ORquartile3=0.65, ORquartile4=0.59, and
PtrendObjective: Human Herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) is highly prevalent in
Uganda, and it is a necessary agent for Kaposi Sarcoma (KS). During the
AIDS era, KS became epidemic. There is some evidence but limited
information on sexual transmission, and prevalence varies by age, sex and
region. However, current knowledge about HHV8 is based on selected
populations including hospital-based samples and high-risk cohort groups,
which may be biased. Methods: We analyzed a subset of the Uganda HIV/AIDS
serobehavioral survey (UHSBS) 04/05 to estimate the association with risk
factors and HHV8 seropositivity. HHV8 seropositivity was determined using
HHV8 K8.1 and orf65 glycoproteins. Odds ratios and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were determined and components were obtained by Principal
Component Analysis (PCA). Results: Among 2,681 individuals tested, HHV8
seropositivity was 55.4% (95% CI, 53.0%-57.8%). Three components were
identified by PCA: sexual behavioral, socioeconomic, and cultural
components. In bivariate analysis, HHV8 seropositivity was positively
associated with sexual behavioral (ORquartile2=1.39, ORquartile3=1.37,
ORquartile4=1.27, and Ptrend=0.1085) and cultural components
(ORquartile2=1.29, ORquartile3=1.39, ORquartile4=1.59, and
Ptrend=0.0024), but inversely associated with socioeconomic component
(ORquartile2=0.77, ORquartile3=0.65, ORquartile4=0.59, and
Ptrend<0.0001). Multivariable analysis showed that HHV8 seropositivity
was strongly associated with the socioeconomic component but not the
other when adjusted by age, sex and region (Ptrend=0.0137). Conclusions:
HHV8 infection in Uganda adults was strongly associated with lower
socioeconomic status with age, sex and region adjusted but weakly
associated with sexual behavioral and cultural characteristics. Lower
socioeconomic class can be an indicator of having less education, poorer
nutrition, and worse sanitation, which might enhance HHV8 transmission.
As socioeconomic status improves over time, HHV8 seroprevalence might
decline in this population.

