Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRD4 is a novel therapeutic target in melanoma


The incidence of melanoma is increasing faster than that of any other
cancer, and predicted to double every 10-20 years. Surgery can be
curative in Stage I, II, or III disease, but 75% of patients with deep
primary lesions develop extensive recurrence or distant metastases and
have dismal prognosis. In fact, there is no curative treatment for stage
IV melanoma. Although novel targeted therapies, such as BRAF inhibitors
and anti-CTLA4 antibodies are showing promising results in melanoma
clinical trials, resistance to these agents and patient relapse rapidly
ensue. Therapeutic resistance has been commonly attributed to functional
redundancy between intimately hardwired cellular pathways responsible for
tumor cell maintenance and survival. In order to avoid redundancy, we
propose to directly inhibit the transcription of multiple genes required
for the establishment or maintenance of tumors. First, we analyzed the
expression of Bromodomain (BrD)-containing proteins, a family of
epigenetic readers that bind acetylated lysine. BrDs are present in
histone acetyl transferases (i.e. CBP/p300, PCAF, GCN5) and
transcriptional regulators (i.e. BET family members: BRD2, 3, and 4).
mRNA expression arrays showed several BrD-containing genes as upregulated
in primary and metastatic melanoma cell lines compared to normal
melanocytes. Analysis of available expression profiles also revealed
higher levels of BRD2 and BRD4 in melanoma tissues relative to nevi or
normal skin (PThe incidence of melanoma is increasing faster than that of
any other cancer, and predicted to double every 10-20 years. Surgery can
be curative in Stage I, II, or III disease, but 75% of patients with deep
primary lesions develop extensive recurrence or distant metastases and
have dismal prognosis. In fact, there is no curative treatment for stage
IV melanoma. Although novel targeted therapies, such as BRAF inhibitors
and anti-CTLA4 antibodies are showing promising results in melanoma
clinical trials, resistance to these agents and patient relapse rapidly
ensue. Therapeutic resistance has been commonly attributed to functional
redundancy between intimately hardwired cellular pathways responsible for
tumor cell maintenance and survival. In order to avoid redundancy, we
propose to directly inhibit the transcription of multiple genes required
for the establishment or maintenance of tumors. First, we analyzed the
expression of Bromodomain (BrD)-containing proteins, a family of
epigenetic readers that bind acetylated lysine. BrDs are present in
histone acetyl transferases (i.e. CBP/p300, PCAF, GCN5) and
transcriptional regulators (i.e. BET family members: BRD2, 3, and 4).
mRNA expression arrays showed several BrD-containing genes as upregulated
in primary and metastatic melanoma cell lines compared to normal
melanocytes. Analysis of available expression profiles also revealed
higher levels of BRD2 and BRD4 in melanoma tissues relative to nevi or
normal skin (P<0.001). Furthermore, immunohistochemistry staining of a
melanoma tissue microarray confirmed overexpression of BRD4 protein in
primary (PThe incidence of melanoma is increasing faster than that of any
other cancer, and predicted to double every 10-20 years. Surgery can be
curative in Stage I, II, or III disease, but 75% of patients with deep
primary lesions develop extensive recurrence or distant metastases and
have dismal prognosis. In fact, there is no curative treatment for stage
IV melanoma. Although novel targeted therapies, such as BRAF inhibitors
and anti-CTLA4 antibodies are showing promising results in melanoma
clinical trials, resistance to these agents and patient relapse rapidly
ensue. Therapeutic resistance has been commonly attributed to functional
redundancy between intimately hardwired cellular pathways responsible for
tumor cell maintenance and survival. In order to avoid redundancy, we
propose to directly inhibit the transcription of multiple genes required
for the establishment or maintenance of tumors. First, we analyzed the
expression of Bromodomain (BrD)-containing proteins, a family of
epigenetic readers that bind acetylated lysine. BrDs are present in
histone acetyl transferases (i.e. CBP/p300, PCAF, GCN5) and
transcriptional regulators (i.e. BET family members: BRD2, 3, and 4).
mRNA expression arrays showed several BrD-containing genes as upregulated
in primary and metastatic melanoma cell lines compared to normal
melanocytes. Analysis of available expression profiles also revealed
higher levels of BRD2 and BRD4 in melanoma tissues relative to nevi or
normal skin (P<0.001). Furthermore, immunohistochemistry staining of a
melanoma tissue microarray confirmed overexpression of BRD4 protein in
primary (P<0.001) and metastatic tumors (PThe incidence of melanoma is
increasing faster than that of any other cancer, and predicted to double
every 10-20 years. Surgery can be curative in Stage I, II, or III
disease, but 75% of patients with deep primary lesions develop extensive
recurrence or distant metastases and have dismal prognosis. In fact,
there is no curative treatment for stage IV melanoma. Although novel
targeted therapies, such as BRAF inhibitors and anti-CTLA4 antibodies are
showing promising results in melanoma clinical trials, resistance to
these agents and patient relapse rapidly ensue. Therapeutic resistance
has been commonly attributed to functional redundancy between intimately
hardwired cellular pathways responsible for tumor cell maintenance and
survival. In order to avoid redundancy, we propose to directly inhibit
the transcription of multiple genes required for the establishment or
maintenance of tumors. First, we analyzed the expression of Bromodomain
(BrD)-containing proteins, a family of epigenetic readers that bind
acetylated lysine. BrDs are present in histone acetyl transferases (i.e.
CBP/p300, PCAF, GCN5) and transcriptional regulators (i.e. BET family
members: BRD2, 3, and 4). mRNA expression arrays showed several
BrD-containing genes as upregulated in primary and metastatic melanoma
cell lines compared to normal melanocytes. Analysis of available
expression profiles also revealed higher levels of BRD2 and BRD4 in
melanoma tissues relative to nevi or normal skin (P<0.001). Furthermore,
immunohistochemistry staining of a melanoma tissue microarray confirmed
overexpression of BRD4 protein in primary (P<0.001) and metastatic tumors
(P<0.001) compared to nevi. BRD4 knockdown using siRNA or shRNA
suppressed the proliferation and colony formation capacity of several
metastatic melanoma cell lines. Moreover, melanoma cells stably infected
with shBRD4 carrying lentivirus displayed reduced tumor growth in vivo
compared with their counterpart infected with a non-silencing control. To
identify cellular pathways modulated by BrD inhibition and to investigate
the mechanism(s) that might mediate its anti-proliferative effects, we
conducted a global transcriptome analysis (RNA sequencing) of 6 melanoma
cell lines treated with specific BrD inhibitors or vehicle. Gene ontology
analysis of these data revealed enrichment in genes controlling cell
cycle, growth and proliferation. Accordingly, cell cycle analysis
demonstrated a specific G1 phase arrest upon BRD4 silencing. In
conclusion, we have demonstrated that expression of several BrD
containing proteins is dysregulated in melanoma and that BRD4 represents
a promising therapeutic target in these tumors. Our data provides a
rationale for testing the efficacy of newly developed, specific and
potent BET inhibitors against melanoma.

