Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Akt and AMPK modulate UPR activity and determine ER stress-induced
cell death in response to 2-DG in ALL


Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most common hematological
malignancy and the main cause of cancer-related death in children. In
search for novel treatment strategies, we investigated the mechanism of
cell death induced by the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG)
in ALL cell models. We found that 2-DG induced significant cell death
under normoxia in Bp-ALL and T-ALL cells. Similar treatments with 2-FDG,
a more selective glycolytic inhibitor, failed to induce equivalent
degrees of cell death in ALL, suggesting that 2-DG induces apoptosis
through pathways independent of glycolysis, such as inhibition of
N-linked glycosylation (N-LG). Co-treatment with mannose, a sugar
essential for N-LG, rescued 2-DG induced cell death in ALL cells (p Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most common hematological malignancy
and the main cause of cancer-related death in children. In search for
novel treatment strategies, we investigated the mechanism of cell death
induced by the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) in ALL cell
models. We found that 2-DG induced significant cell death under normoxia
in Bp-ALL and T-ALL cells. Similar treatments with 2-FDG, a more
selective glycolytic inhibitor, failed to induce equivalent degrees of
cell death in ALL, suggesting that 2-DG induces apoptosis through
pathways independent of glycolysis, such as inhibition of N-linked
glycosylation (N-LG). Co-treatment with mannose, a sugar essential for
N-LG, rescued 2-DG induced cell death in ALL cells (p < 0.01), indicating
that inhibition of N-LG leads to apoptosis in ALL. Western blot analysis
of 2-DG treated cells showed sustained activation of P-AMPK (T172) and
transient up-regulation of P-Akt (S473). More important, treatment with
2-DG resulted in up-regulation of the UPR markers GRP78, GRP94, IRE1,
P-eIF2, and CHOP, and correlated with increased cleavage of PARP and
apoptosis in CCRF-CEM (T-ALL) and NALM6 (Bp-ALL). Therefore, inhibition
of the N-LG by 2-DG leads to ER stress/UPR mediated cell death in ALL. We
then evaluated the role of Akt using the Akt inhibitor X (AIX) and shRNA
against Akt (shAkt). Inhibition of Akt synergistically sensitized
CCRF-CEM and NALM6 cells to 2-DG (CI = 0.15; p Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia (ALL) is the most common hematological malignancy and the main
cause of cancer-related death in children. In search for novel treatment
strategies, we investigated the mechanism of cell death induced by the
glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) in ALL cell models. We
found that 2-DG induced significant cell death under normoxia in Bp-ALL
and T-ALL cells. Similar treatments with 2-FDG, a more selective
glycolytic inhibitor, failed to induce equivalent degrees of cell death
in ALL, suggesting that 2-DG induces apoptosis through pathways
independent of glycolysis, such as inhibition of N-linked glycosylation
(N-LG). Co-treatment with mannose, a sugar essential for N-LG, rescued
2-DG induced cell death in ALL cells (p < 0.01), indicating that
inhibition of N-LG leads to apoptosis in ALL. Western blot analysis of
2-DG treated cells showed sustained activation of P-AMPK (T172) and
transient up-regulation of P-Akt (S473). More important, treatment with
2-DG resulted in up-regulation of the UPR markers GRP78, GRP94, IRE1,
P-eIF2, and CHOP, and correlated with increased cleavage of PARP and
apoptosis in CCRF-CEM (T-ALL) and NALM6 (Bp-ALL). Therefore, inhibition
of the N-LG by 2-DG leads to ER stress/UPR mediated cell death in ALL. We
then evaluated the role of Akt using the Akt inhibitor X (AIX) and shRNA
against Akt (shAkt). Inhibition of Akt synergistically sensitized
CCRF-CEM and NALM6 cells to 2-DG (CI = 0.15; p < 0.05 for AIX vs. each
drug alone; p Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most common
hematological malignancy and the main cause of cancer-related death in
children. In search for novel treatment strategies, we investigated the
mechanism of cell death induced by the glycolytic inhibitor
2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) in ALL cell models. We found that 2-DG induced
significant cell death under normoxia in Bp-ALL and T-ALL cells. Similar
treatments with 2-FDG, a more selective glycolytic inhibitor, failed to
induce equivalent degrees of cell death in ALL, suggesting that 2-DG
induces apoptosis through pathways independent of glycolysis, such as
inhibition of N-linked glycosylation (N-LG). Co-treatment with mannose, a
sugar essential for N-LG, rescued 2-DG induced cell death in ALL cells (p
< 0.01), indicating that inhibition of N-LG leads to apoptosis in ALL.
Western blot analysis of 2-DG treated cells showed sustained activation
of P-AMPK (T172) and transient up-regulation of P-Akt (S473). More
important, treatment with 2-DG resulted in up-regulation of the UPR
markers GRP78, GRP94, IRE1, P-eIF2, and CHOP, and correlated with
increased cleavage of PARP and apoptosis in CCRF-CEM (T-ALL) and NALM6
(Bp-ALL). Therefore, inhibition of the N-LG by 2-DG leads to ER
stress/UPR mediated cell death in ALL. We then evaluated the role of Akt
using the Akt inhibitor X (AIX) and shRNA against Akt (shAkt). Inhibition
of Akt synergistically sensitized CCRF-CEM and NALM6 cells to 2-DG (CI =
0.15; p < 0.05 for AIX vs. each drug alone; p < 0.01 for shAkt vs.
scramble shRNA). Western blots showed that P-AMPK was increased in shAkt
vs. scramble shRNA expressing cells, whereas P-mTOR, IRE1, GRP78, P-eIF2,
and CHOP were down-regulated. Again, mannose completely reversed 2-DG+AIX
induced cytotoxicity (p Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most
common hematological malignancy and the main cause of cancer-related
death in children. In search for novel treatment strategies, we
investigated the mechanism of cell death induced by the glycolytic
inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) in ALL cell models. We found that 2-DG
induced significant cell death under normoxia in Bp-ALL and T-ALL cells.
Similar treatments with 2-FDG, a more selective glycolytic inhibitor,
failed to induce equivalent degrees of cell death in ALL, suggesting that
2-DG induces apoptosis through pathways independent of glycolysis, such
as inhibition of N-linked glycosylation (N-LG). Co-treatment with
mannose, a sugar essential for N-LG, rescued 2-DG induced cell death in
ALL cells (p < 0.01), indicating that inhibition of N-LG leads to
apoptosis in ALL. Western blot analysis of 2-DG treated cells showed
sustained activation of P-AMPK (T172) and transient up-regulation of
P-Akt (S473). More important, treatment with 2-DG resulted in
up-regulation of the UPR markers GRP78, GRP94, IRE1, P-eIF2, and CHOP,
and correlated with increased cleavage of PARP and apoptosis in CCRF-CEM
(T-ALL) and NALM6 (Bp-ALL). Therefore, inhibition of the N-LG by 2-DG
leads to ER stress/UPR mediated cell death in ALL. We then evaluated the
role of Akt using the Akt inhibitor X (AIX) and shRNA against Akt
(shAkt). Inhibition of Akt synergistically sensitized CCRF-CEM and NALM6
cells to 2-DG (CI = 0.15; p < 0.05 for AIX vs. each drug alone; p < 0.01
for shAkt vs. scramble shRNA). Western blots showed that P-AMPK was
increased in shAkt vs. scramble shRNA expressing cells, whereas P-mTOR,
IRE1, GRP78, P-eIF2, and CHOP were down-regulated. Again, mannose
completely reversed 2-DG+AIX induced cytotoxicity (p < 0.0001, 7%
apoptosis for 2DG+AIX+MAN vs. 85% for 2DG+AIX), and correlated with
down-regulation of UPR markers, confirming that inhibition of N-LG is the
main mechanism by which 2-DG induces apoptosis in ALL. Next, we examined
the role of AMPK using shRNA and found that inhibition of AMPK rescued
2-DG+AIX induced cell death and growth inhibition (p Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia (ALL) is the most common hematological malignancy and the main
cause of cancer-related death in children. In search for novel treatment
strategies, we investigated the mechanism of cell death induced by the
glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) in ALL cell models. We
found that 2-DG induced significant cell death under normoxia in Bp-ALL
and T-ALL cells. Similar treatments with 2-FDG, a more selective
glycolytic inhibitor, failed to induce equivalent degrees of cell death
in ALL, suggesting that 2-DG induces apoptosis through pathways
independent of glycolysis, such as inhibition of N-linked glycosylation
(N-LG). Co-treatment with mannose, a sugar essential for N-LG, rescued
2-DG induced cell death in ALL cells (p < 0.01), indicating that
inhibition of N-LG leads to apoptosis in ALL. Western blot analysis of
2-DG treated cells showed sustained activation of P-AMPK (T172) and
transient up-regulation of P-Akt (S473). More important, treatment with
2-DG resulted in up-regulation of the UPR markers GRP78, GRP94, IRE1,
P-eIF2, and CHOP, and correlated with increased cleavage of PARP and
apoptosis in CCRF-CEM (T-ALL) and NALM6 (Bp-ALL). Therefore, inhibition
of the N-LG by 2-DG leads to ER stress/UPR mediated cell death in ALL. We
then evaluated the role of Akt using the Akt inhibitor X (AIX) and shRNA
against Akt (shAkt). Inhibition of Akt synergistically sensitized
CCRF-CEM and NALM6 cells to 2-DG (CI = 0.15; p < 0.05 for AIX vs. each
drug alone; p < 0.01 for shAkt vs. scramble shRNA). Western blots showed
that P-AMPK was increased in shAkt vs. scramble shRNA expressing cells,
whereas P-mTOR, IRE1, GRP78, P-eIF2, and CHOP were down-regulated. Again,
mannose completely reversed 2-DG+AIX induced cytotoxicity (p < 0.0001, 7%
apoptosis for 2DG+AIX+MAN vs. 85% for 2DG+AIX), and correlated with
down-regulation of UPR markers, confirming that inhibition of N-LG is the
main mechanism by which 2-DG induces apoptosis in ALL. Next, we examined
the role of AMPK using shRNA and found that inhibition of AMPK rescued
2-DG+AIX induced cell death and growth inhibition (p < 0.001), and led to
up-regulation of P-Akt, P-mTOR, and UPR markers, suggesting that
functional UPR activity is critical for ALL cell survival following
treatment with 2-DG. Indeed, inhibition of UPR via down-regulation of
GRP78 increased cell death in both CCRF-CEM and NALM6 cells treated with
2-DG (p Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) is the most common
hematological malignancy and the main cause of cancer-related death in
children. In search for novel treatment strategies, we investigated the
mechanism of cell death induced by the glycolytic inhibitor
2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) in ALL cell models. We found that 2-DG induced
significant cell death under normoxia in Bp-ALL and T-ALL cells. Similar
treatments with 2-FDG, a more selective glycolytic inhibitor, failed to
induce equivalent degrees of cell death in ALL, suggesting that 2-DG
induces apoptosis through pathways independent of glycolysis, such as
inhibition of N-linked glycosylation (N-LG). Co-treatment with mannose, a
sugar essential for N-LG, rescued 2-DG induced cell death in ALL cells (p
< 0.01), indicating that inhibition of N-LG leads to apoptosis in ALL.
Western blot analysis of 2-DG treated cells showed sustained activation
of P-AMPK (T172) and transient up-regulation of P-Akt (S473). More
important, treatment with 2-DG resulted in up-regulation of the UPR
markers GRP78, GRP94, IRE1, P-eIF2, and CHOP, and correlated with
increased cleavage of PARP and apoptosis in CCRF-CEM (T-ALL) and NALM6
(Bp-ALL). Therefore, inhibition of the N-LG by 2-DG leads to ER
stress/UPR mediated cell death in ALL. We then evaluated the role of Akt
using the Akt inhibitor X (AIX) and shRNA against Akt (shAkt). Inhibition
of Akt synergistically sensitized CCRF-CEM and NALM6 cells to 2-DG (CI =
0.15; p < 0.05 for AIX vs. each drug alone; p < 0.01 for shAkt vs.
scramble shRNA). Western blots showed that P-AMPK was increased in shAkt
vs. scramble shRNA expressing cells, whereas P-mTOR, IRE1, GRP78, P-eIF2,
and CHOP were down-regulated. Again, mannose completely reversed 2-DG+AIX
induced cytotoxicity (p < 0.0001, 7% apoptosis for 2DG+AIX+MAN vs. 85%
for 2DG+AIX), and correlated with down-regulation of UPR markers,
confirming that inhibition of N-LG is the main mechanism by which 2-DG
induces apoptosis in ALL. Next, we examined the role of AMPK using shRNA
and found that inhibition of AMPK rescued 2-DG+AIX induced cell death and
growth inhibition (p < 0.001), and led to up-regulation of P-Akt, P-mTOR,
and UPR markers, suggesting that functional UPR activity is critical for
ALL cell survival following treatment with 2-DG. Indeed, inhibition of
UPR via down-regulation of GRP78 increased cell death in both CCRF-CEM
and NALM6 cells treated with 2-DG (p < 0.01). Taken together, we
demonstrate that 2-DG induces ER-stress mediated cell death in ALL cells
by inhibiting N-LG, and that the ability of ALL cells to effectively
engage UPR determines ALL cell fate (survival vs. death). Our data also
demonstrate that Akt and AMPK differentially modulate UPR activity in
response to 2-DG in ALL. These findings provide a rationale to develop
novel strategies for ALL therapy using glycolytic inhibitors alone or in
combination with agents targeting these metabolic and oncogenic pathways.

