Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TGF- enforces genomic instability in liver cancers


Background: Over 90% of liver cancers, from viral hepatitis to alcohol
injury, occur against a background of chronic liver disease and
cirrhosis. Genomic stability, G1/S cell cycle arrest through c-Myc and
CDK suppression, have been some of the mechanisms proposed in tumor
suppression by TGF-. The Smad3/4 adaptor protein, 2SP, is emerging as
potent regulator of tumor genesis by its ability to affect TGF- tumor
suppressor function. Deletion of 2SP results in a dramatic and
spontaneous formation of liver cancer and gastrointestinal cancers.
Moreover, 2SP+/ and 2SP+/ /Smad3+/ mutant mice phenocopy human
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), a hereditary human cancer stem cell
syndrome imprinting disorder with loss of p57, increase in IGF2, and an
association with 800 fold increase of cancers that include those of the
liver. Delayed liver regeneration and extensive DNA damage was observed
in 2SP heterozygote mice. In addition, spectrins have been observed to
associate with FANC G and D, DNA interstrand cross links, and Smad3/4 to
transcriptionally regulate FANC genes. Hypothesis: We therefore
hypothesised that TGF- is a crucial enforcer of genomic stability, and
that 2SP and/or Smad3/4 are key mediators in suppressing liver injury and
cancer through modulation of the DNA repair pathway. Materials & Methods:
To determine the role of 2SP and Smad3 in the DNA damage response, and
whether 2SP and 2SP/Smad3 loss plays a causal role in the downregulation
of the Fanc/Brca pathway, we used our mouse models as well as the mouse
embryonic fibroblasts. Oxidative DNA damage was induced by H2O2 treatment
and assayed tail length analysis. Irradiation was induced by 8Gy IR and
DNA was studied by immunofluorescence of DNA damage sensors H2AX, 532BP1,
and pChk2. DNA repair was assayed by Mdc1, NBS1, and Rad51 foci formation
at different time points after irradiation. Results: 2SP+/ and
2SP+//Smad3+/ mice exhibited an increased prevalence of HCC and GI cancer
and many phenotypic characteristics observed in BWS patients. Loss of 2SP
results in premature replicative senescence with spontaneous DNA damage.
2SP deficiency results in increased sensitivity to exogenous DNA damage
and insufficient DNA repair. Depletion of TGF- adaptor protein 2SP
impairs the loading of repair proteins and repair of DNA double-strand
breaks. Loss of FancD2 expression in HCC and GI cancer cell lines
correlates with loss of 2SP. Moreover, 2SP/ and 2SP+//Smad3+/ cell lines
accumulate DNA damage that is further exacerbated by DNA cross-linking
agents such as mitomycin C similar to P57 null cells and Fanconi anemia
cell lines. Conclusions: TGF- confers genomic stability through
regulation of DNA impairment of the Fanc/Brca DNA damage response and
interstrand link repair and inactivation of TGF- pathway results in
alcohol toxicity, cirrhosis and liver cancers.

