Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy inhibition sensitizes the growth inhibitory effects of
propolin C but not propolin G on human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells


Propolins, prenylflavanones are isolated and characterized from Taiwanese
propolis, have been shown inhibits certain cancer cell lines growth and
induced apoptosis. In our previous study, Taiwanese propolis, propolin C
and porpolin G, could promote LC3B increased within 6 hours treatment,
moreover, and AVOs (acidic vesicular organelles) significantly increased
by AO (Acridine orange) staining. The autophagy induced by propolin C or
propolin G is accompanied by the inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway. Flow cytometry assay showed that sub-G1 phase
increased significantly in propolin G treatment but not in propolin C
treatment. Autophagy pharmacological inhibitors, 3-methyladenine and
Chloroquine were used to test whether autophagy blockade could lead to
enhance cell death. The results showed that only autophagy inhibitor
chloroquine effectively enhanced apoptosis induced by propolin C but not
propolin G in A549 cells. The expression of pERK and pAkt was suppressed
dramatically by autophagy inhibitor in combination with propolin C.
Ectopic expression of mutant Akt (constitutive active) in A549 cells
abolished chloroquine sensitization effect of propolin C. Together,
autophagy serves a protective role in propolin C-mediated cytotoxicity,
and autophagy modulators may be used as adjunctive therapeutic agents for
propolin.

