Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The host cell reactivation (HCR) assay for measuring DNA repair
capacity (DRC) in cancer research after 20 years; re-evaluation and
lessons learned


The HCR assay was developed by Athas et al. 1991 to measure DRC. DNA can
be transiently transfected when introduced into a cell. When damaged, its
expression will depend on the repair capacity of the host cell. A
non-replicating plasmid expression vector (pCMVluc, 4,863 bp) containing
a luciferase reporter gene is used and damaged by UVC exposure. It level
of expression is a direct measure of the total repair capacity of
lymphocytes, primarily of their nucleotide excision repair. The HCR assay
has been used in molecular epidemiological studies of cancer (e.g. Wei et
al. 1993, Spitz et al. 2001, Matta et al. 2003, Ramos et al. 2004). Qiao
et al. 2002 published a thorough discussion of the development and
extensive validation of this assay. We present a critical evaluation of
this assay based on 12 years of experience conducting large scale skin
and breast cancer (BC) population studies. This includes the appraisal of
the validity and reliability or reproducibility of the assay,
transfection efficiencies using data from a BC case control study and
commercial cell lines. When 100 women (i.e., 50 BC cases and 50 controls
combined) were compared, a calculation of a Pearson's correlation of
0.983 and 0.980 Spearman's rho correlation coefficient (97% determination
coefficient) were both significant (p The HCR assay was developed by
Athas et al. 1991 to measure DRC. DNA can be transiently transfected when
introduced into a cell. When damaged, its expression will depend on the
repair capacity of the host cell. A non-replicating plasmid expression
vector (pCMVluc, 4,863 bp) containing a luciferase reporter gene is used
and damaged by UVC exposure. It level of expression is a direct measure
of the total repair capacity of lymphocytes, primarily of their
nucleotide excision repair. The HCR assay has been used in molecular
epidemiological studies of cancer (e.g. Wei et al. 1993, Spitz et al.
2001, Matta et al. 2003, Ramos et al. 2004). Qiao et al. 2002 published a
thorough discussion of the development and extensive validation of this
assay. We present a critical evaluation of this assay based on 12 years
of experience conducting large scale skin and breast cancer (BC)
population studies. This includes the appraisal of the validity and
reliability or reproducibility of the assay, transfection efficiencies
using data from a BC case control study and commercial cell lines. When
100 women (i.e., 50 BC cases and 50 controls combined) were compared, a
calculation of a Pearson's correlation of 0.983 and 0.980 Spearman's rho
correlation coefficient (97% determination coefficient) were both
significant (p <0.001). The fitted regression line showed a high
predictability with a narrow 95% mean prediction confidence interval.
Duplicates from the 50 cases had values of 0.995 and 0.981 for the
Pearson's and Spearman's correlation respectively with a 99%
determination coefficient (p The HCR assay was developed by Athas et al.
1991 to measure DRC. DNA can be transiently transfected when introduced
into a cell. When damaged, its expression will depend on the repair
capacity of the host cell. A non-replicating plasmid expression vector
(pCMVluc, 4,863 bp) containing a luciferase reporter gene is used and
damaged by UVC exposure. It level of expression is a direct measure of
the total repair capacity of lymphocytes, primarily of their nucleotide
excision repair. The HCR assay has been used in molecular epidemiological
studies of cancer (e.g. Wei et al. 1993, Spitz et al. 2001, Matta et al.
2003, Ramos et al. 2004). Qiao et al. 2002 published a thorough
discussion of the development and extensive validation of this assay. We
present a critical evaluation of this assay based on 12 years of
experience conducting large scale skin and breast cancer (BC) population
studies. This includes the appraisal of the validity and reliability or
reproducibility of the assay, transfection efficiencies using data from a
BC case control study and commercial cell lines. When 100 women (i.e., 50
BC cases and 50 controls combined) were compared, a calculation of a
Pearson's correlation of 0.983 and 0.980 Spearman's rho correlation
coefficient (97% determination coefficient) were both significant (p
<0.001). The fitted regression line showed a high predictability with a
narrow 95% mean prediction confidence interval. Duplicates from the 50
cases had values of 0.995 and 0.981 for the Pearson's and Spearman's
correlation respectively with a 99% determination coefficient (p <
0.001). The fitted regression line showed the same high predictability.
Similar results were obtained for the duplicates from the 50 controls
(0.975 and 0.969 for the Pearson's and Spearman's correlation
respectively (95% determination coefficient and mean prediction
confidence interval, p The HCR assay was developed by Athas et al. 1991
to measure DRC. DNA can be transiently transfected when introduced into a
cell. When damaged, its expression will depend on the repair capacity of
the host cell. A non-replicating plasmid expression vector (pCMVluc,
4,863 bp) containing a luciferase reporter gene is used and damaged by
UVC exposure. It level of expression is a direct measure of the total
repair capacity of lymphocytes, primarily of their nucleotide excision
repair. The HCR assay has been used in molecular epidemiological studies
of cancer (e.g. Wei et al. 1993, Spitz et al. 2001, Matta et al. 2003,
Ramos et al. 2004). Qiao et al. 2002 published a thorough discussion of
the development and extensive validation of this assay. We present a
critical evaluation of this assay based on 12 years of experience
conducting large scale skin and breast cancer (BC) population studies.
This includes the appraisal of the validity and reliability or
reproducibility of the assay, transfection efficiencies using data from a
BC case control study and commercial cell lines. When 100 women (i.e., 50
BC cases and 50 controls combined) were compared, a calculation of a
Pearson's correlation of 0.983 and 0.980 Spearman's rho correlation
coefficient (97% determination coefficient) were both significant (p
<0.001). The fitted regression line showed a high predictability with a
narrow 95% mean prediction confidence interval. Duplicates from the 50
cases had values of 0.995 and 0.981 for the Pearson's and Spearman's
correlation respectively with a 99% determination coefficient (p <
0.001). The fitted regression line showed the same high predictability.
Similar results were obtained for the duplicates from the 50 controls
(0.975 and 0.969 for the Pearson's and Spearman's correlation
respectively (95% determination coefficient and mean prediction
confidence interval, p < 0.001). The 90 duplicates from the commercial
cell lines were 0.989 and 0.994 for the Pearson's and Spearman's
correlation respectively (98% determination coefficient, p The HCR assay
was developed by Athas et al. 1991 to measure DRC. DNA can be transiently
transfected when introduced into a cell. When damaged, its expression
will depend on the repair capacity of the host cell. A non-replicating
plasmid expression vector (pCMVluc, 4,863 bp) containing a luciferase
reporter gene is used and damaged by UVC exposure. It level of expression
is a direct measure of the total repair capacity of lymphocytes,
primarily of their nucleotide excision repair. The HCR assay has been
used in molecular epidemiological studies of cancer (e.g. Wei et al.
1993, Spitz et al. 2001, Matta et al. 2003, Ramos et al. 2004). Qiao et
al. 2002 published a thorough discussion of the development and extensive
validation of this assay. We present a critical evaluation of this assay
based on 12 years of experience conducting large scale skin and breast
cancer (BC) population studies. This includes the appraisal of the
validity and reliability or reproducibility of the assay, transfection
efficiencies using data from a BC case control study and commercial cell
lines. When 100 women (i.e., 50 BC cases and 50 controls combined) were
compared, a calculation of a Pearson's correlation of 0.983 and 0.980
Spearman's rho correlation coefficient (97% determination coefficient)
were both significant (p <0.001). The fitted regression line showed a
high predictability with a narrow 95% mean prediction confidence
interval. Duplicates from the 50 cases had values of 0.995 and 0.981 for
the Pearson's and Spearman's correlation respectively with a 99%
determination coefficient (p < 0.001). The fitted regression line showed
the same high predictability. Similar results were obtained for the
duplicates from the 50 controls (0.975 and 0.969 for the Pearson's and
Spearman's correlation respectively (95% determination coefficient and
mean prediction confidence interval, p < 0.001). The 90 duplicates from
the commercial cell lines were 0.989 and 0.994 for the Pearson's and
Spearman's correlation respectively (98% determination coefficient, p <
0.001, 95% mean prediction confidence interval). This assay is highly
reliable and has little variation or minimal random error as it was found
during an assessment of the reliability or repeatability. Recently the
HCR assay has been substantially modified (Mendez et al. 2011) in order
to improve some of its limitations. We found stable transfection
efficiencies using an assay (Dual-GloR) based on the combined use of the
Firefly and Renilla luciferases as co-reporters. The high coefficient of
variation (C.V.23%) obtained in over 1,000 assays is due to the inherent
multi-step nature of the HCR as well as due to biological variability.
Grossman and Wei (1994) concluded that the HCR assay can distinguish the
intra-assay variation and inter-assay variation by being able to maintain
the ranks of samples measured in triplicate from multiple cancer patients.

