Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mibefradil increases paclitaxel's effect on MCF-7 cell
proliferation in vitro and in vivo


T-type Ca2+ channel mediated Ca2+ influx is important for tumor cell
proliferation. In order to understand the role of this influx in tumor
cell cycling, we conducted experiments to block T-type calcium channels
in MCF7 breast cancer cells using pharmacological inhibitors, mibefradil
or its more T-type calcium channel specific derivative NNC-55-0396, and
examined the effects of this blockade on the passage through the cell
cycle of MCF7 cells and whether T-type calcium channel inhibition can be
used in conjunction with paclitaxel chemotherapy to increase the efficacy
of the chemotherapy. Flow cytometry shows that blocking T-type calcium
channels with the specific inhibitor NNC-55-0396 resulted in an increase
in MCF7 cells in the G1 phase and a decrease in cells in the S phase of
the cell cycle. Treatment with paclitaxel for 72 hours in vitro yielded
lower MCF7 cell numbers than treatment with NNC-55-0396, as measured by a
cell proliferation assay. However, a treatment regimen alternating
NNC-55-0396 with paclitaxel over 72 hours was found to reduce MCF7 cell
number to a larger degree than either agent alone for the same time
period. For in vivo modeling, MCF7 xenografts were implanted in the
mammary fat pads of nude mice, with tumor size monitored via caliper
measurements. Similar to the in vitro findings, a treatment regiment that
alternated paclitaxel chemotherapy with the calcium channel inhibitor
mibefradil reduced tumor size to a larger degree than either agent alone,
though that difference did not rise to a statistically significant level.
These results indicate that blocking T-type calcium channels halts
proliferating MCF7 cells at the G1/S checkpoint, and that this phenomenon
may lead to an increased sensitivity to paclitaxel chemotherapy.

