Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dasatinib induces apoptosis in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma cells through down-regulation of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) in vitro and in vivo


Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a worldwide
disease with aggressive course and dismal outcome. Dasatinib, a bcr-abl
inhibitor, has been approved clinically for the treatment of chronic
myeloid leukemia and demonstrated to be effective against solid tumors in
vitro through Src inhibition. Here, we disclose that dasatinib induced
apoptosis of HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo through down-regulation of
EGFR. Methods: HNSCC cells, including Ca9-22, FaDu, HSC3, SAS, SCC-25,
and UMSCC1 were treated with dasatinib. Cell viability, apoptosis, and
underlying signal transduction were evaluated. Results: Dasatinib
exhibited differential sensitivities against HNSCC cells. The growth
inhibition and apoptosis were correlated with its inhibition on Akt, Erk,
and bcl-2, but irrespective of Src inhibition. Accordingly, we found that
down-regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) was a
determinant of dasatinib sensitivity. Dasatinib inhibited EGFR through
lysosome degradation. Increased EGFR activation by ligand administration
rescued cells from dasatinib-induced apoptosis, whereas inhibition of
EGFR enhanced its apoptotic effect. Estrogen receptor (ER) was
demonstrated to play a role in bcl-2 expression, and dasatinib inhibited
ER at pre-translational level. ER worked in concert with EGFR to regulate
dasatinib-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, xenograft model showed that
dasatinib inhibited HSC3 tumor growth through in vivo down-regulation of
EGFR and ER. Conclusion: Down-regulation of EGFR is a novel mechanism
responsible for dasatinib-induced apoptosis in HNSCC.

