Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combined actions of DHT and MPA lead to altered AR signaling
in normal and malignant post-menopausal breast epithelial cells


Consistent with several observational studies examining combined hormone
replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine estrogen in conjunction with
the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate, MPA) in
postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the placebo-controlled randomized
Women's Health Initiative clinical trial demonstrated a markedly
increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal women following 5 years
of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence Interval, 1.62-5.70) [1]. We
have previously demonstrated that androgen receptor (AR)-mediated effects
of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-induced AR signaling in normal
and malignant breast epithelial cells (AACR abstract 2010). The current
study aimed to further investigate the biological actions of DHT and/or
MPA on steroid receptor expression and cancer-related intracellular
signaling pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of estrogen receptor
alpha (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and AR expression was performed on
histologically normal human post-menopausal breast tissues and measured
by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo with vehicle (0.1% ethanol
control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR antagonist, bicalutamide
(Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in combination. Microarray analysis
and qRT-PCR validation were performed using the ER positive breast cancer
cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine changes in gene expression in key
intracellular signaling pathways. The microarray data was analyzed with
Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and Gene Ontology software. Statistical
tests included both Wilcoxon matched pairs test and one-way ANOVA
(pConsistent with several observational studies examining combined
hormone replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine estrogen in
conjunction with the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate,
MPA) in postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the placebo-controlled
randomized Women's Health Initiative clinical trial demonstrated a
markedly increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal women following
5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence Interval, 1.62-5.70)
[1]. We have previously demonstrated that androgen receptor (AR)-mediated
effects of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-induced AR signaling in
normal and malignant breast epithelial cells (AACR abstract 2010). The
current study aimed to further investigate the biological actions of DHT
and/or MPA on steroid receptor expression and cancer-related
intracellular signaling pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of
estrogen receptor alpha (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and AR
expression was performed on histologically normal human post-menopausal
breast tissues and measured by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo
with vehicle (0.1% ethanol control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR
antagonist, bicalutamide (Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in
combination. Microarray analysis and qRT-PCR validation were performed
using the ER positive breast cancer cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine
changes in gene expression in key intracellular signaling pathways. The
microarray data was analyzed with Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and
Gene Ontology software. Statistical tests included both Wilcoxon matched
pairs test and one-way ANOVA (p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR
expression in cultured breast tissues compared to vehicle control
(pConsistent with several observational studies examining combined
hormone replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine estrogen in
conjunction with the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate,
MPA) in postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the placebo-controlled
randomized Women's Health Initiative clinical trial demonstrated a
markedly increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal women following
5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence Interval, 1.62-5.70)
[1]. We have previously demonstrated that androgen receptor (AR)-mediated
effects of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-induced AR signaling in
normal and malignant breast epithelial cells (AACR abstract 2010). The
current study aimed to further investigate the biological actions of DHT
and/or MPA on steroid receptor expression and cancer-related
intracellular signaling pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of
estrogen receptor alpha (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and AR
expression was performed on histologically normal human post-menopausal
breast tissues and measured by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo
with vehicle (0.1% ethanol control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR
antagonist, bicalutamide (Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in
combination. Microarray analysis and qRT-PCR validation were performed
using the ER positive breast cancer cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine
changes in gene expression in key intracellular signaling pathways. The
microarray data was analyzed with Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and
Gene Ontology software. Statistical tests included both Wilcoxon matched
pairs test and one-way ANOVA (p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR
expression in cultured breast tissues compared to vehicle control
(p<0.05), and co-treatment with either MPA or Bic impeded this effect. No
change in ER or PR protein levels was induced by the hormone treatments.
Microarray studies revealed that DHT or MPA treatment for 6 hr altered
the expression of 439 and 858 genes, respectively, whereas co-treatment
altered 1494 genes (pConsistent with several observational studies
examining combined hormone replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine
estrogen in conjunction with the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone
acetate, MPA) in postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the
placebo-controlled randomized Women's Health Initiative clinical trial
demonstrated a markedly increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal
women following 5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence
Interval, 1.62-5.70) [1]. We have previously demonstrated that androgen
receptor (AR)-mediated effects of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone
(DHT)-induced AR signaling in normal and malignant breast epithelial
cells (AACR abstract 2010). The current study aimed to further
investigate the biological actions of DHT and/or MPA on steroid receptor
expression and cancer-related intracellular signaling pathways.
Immunohistochemical analysis of estrogen receptor alpha (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and AR expression was performed on
histologically normal human post-menopausal breast tissues and measured
by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo with vehicle (0.1% ethanol
control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR antagonist, bicalutamide
(Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in combination. Microarray analysis
and qRT-PCR validation were performed using the ER positive breast cancer
cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine changes in gene expression in key
intracellular signaling pathways. The microarray data was analyzed with
Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and Gene Ontology software. Statistical
tests included both Wilcoxon matched pairs test and one-way ANOVA
(p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR expression in cultured breast
tissues compared to vehicle control (p<0.05), and co-treatment with
either MPA or Bic impeded this effect. No change in ER or PR protein
levels was induced by the hormone treatments. Microarray studies revealed
that DHT or MPA treatment for 6 hr altered the expression of 439 and 858
genes, respectively, whereas co-treatment altered 1494 genes (p<0.05).
Only 114 genes were uniquely regulated by DHT, and the expression of 32%
(41% induced and 27% repressed) of these genes was abrogated by MPA.
Similarly, the expression of 38% (51% induced and 24% repressed) of the
690 genes uniquely regulated by co-treatment with DHT and MPA was altered
compared to DHT alone (pConsistent with several observational studies
examining combined hormone replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine
estrogen in conjunction with the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone
acetate, MPA) in postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the
placebo-controlled randomized Women's Health Initiative clinical trial
demonstrated a markedly increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal
women following 5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence
Interval, 1.62-5.70) [1]. We have previously demonstrated that androgen
receptor (AR)-mediated effects of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone
(DHT)-induced AR signaling in normal and malignant breast epithelial
cells (AACR abstract 2010). The current study aimed to further
investigate the biological actions of DHT and/or MPA on steroid receptor
expression and cancer-related intracellular signaling pathways.
Immunohistochemical analysis of estrogen receptor alpha (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and AR expression was performed on
histologically normal human post-menopausal breast tissues and measured
by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo with vehicle (0.1% ethanol
control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR antagonist, bicalutamide
(Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in combination. Microarray analysis
and qRT-PCR validation were performed using the ER positive breast cancer
cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine changes in gene expression in key
intracellular signaling pathways. The microarray data was analyzed with
Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and Gene Ontology software. Statistical
tests included both Wilcoxon matched pairs test and one-way ANOVA
(p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR expression in cultured breast
tissues compared to vehicle control (p<0.05), and co-treatment with
either MPA or Bic impeded this effect. No change in ER or PR protein
levels was induced by the hormone treatments. Microarray studies revealed
that DHT or MPA treatment for 6 hr altered the expression of 439 and 858
genes, respectively, whereas co-treatment altered 1494 genes (p<0.05).
Only 114 genes were uniquely regulated by DHT, and the expression of 32%
(41% induced and 27% repressed) of these genes was abrogated by MPA.
Similarly, the expression of 38% (51% induced and 24% repressed) of the
690 genes uniquely regulated by co-treatment with DHT and MPA was altered
compared to DHT alone (p<0.05). Examples of genes that were regulated by
DHT (pConsistent with several observational studies examining combined
hormone replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine estrogen in
conjunction with the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate,
MPA) in postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the placebo-controlled
randomized Women's Health Initiative clinical trial demonstrated a
markedly increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal women following
5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence Interval, 1.62-5.70)
[1]. We have previously demonstrated that androgen receptor (AR)-mediated
effects of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-induced AR signaling in
normal and malignant breast epithelial cells (AACR abstract 2010). The
current study aimed to further investigate the biological actions of DHT
and/or MPA on steroid receptor expression and cancer-related
intracellular signaling pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of
estrogen receptor alpha (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and AR
expression was performed on histologically normal human post-menopausal
breast tissues and measured by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo
with vehicle (0.1% ethanol control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR
antagonist, bicalutamide (Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in
combination. Microarray analysis and qRT-PCR validation were performed
using the ER positive breast cancer cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine
changes in gene expression in key intracellular signaling pathways. The
microarray data was analyzed with Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and
Gene Ontology software. Statistical tests included both Wilcoxon matched
pairs test and one-way ANOVA (p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR
expression in cultured breast tissues compared to vehicle control
(p<0.05), and co-treatment with either MPA or Bic impeded this effect. No
change in ER or PR protein levels was induced by the hormone treatments.
Microarray studies revealed that DHT or MPA treatment for 6 hr altered
the expression of 439 and 858 genes, respectively, whereas co-treatment
altered 1494 genes (p<0.05). Only 114 genes were uniquely regulated by
DHT, and the expression of 32% (41% induced and 27% repressed) of these
genes was abrogated by MPA. Similarly, the expression of 38% (51% induced
and 24% repressed) of the 690 genes uniquely regulated by co-treatment
with DHT and MPA was altered compared to DHT alone (p<0.05). Examples of
genes that were regulated by DHT (p<0.05) and this effect of DHT was
antagonised by co-treatment with DHT and MPA (pConsistent with several
observational studies examining combined hormone replacement therapy
(cHRT: conjugated equine estrogen in conjunction with the synthetic
progestin medroxyprogesterone acetate, MPA) in postmenopausal women, a
re-analysis of the placebo-controlled randomized Women's Health
Initiative clinical trial demonstrated a markedly increased breast cancer
risk in newly menopausal women following 5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio,
3.05; 95% Confidence Interval, 1.62-5.70) [1]. We have previously
demonstrated that androgen receptor (AR)-mediated effects of MPA impede
5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-induced AR signaling in normal and malignant
breast epithelial cells (AACR abstract 2010). The current study aimed to
further investigate the biological actions of DHT and/or MPA on steroid
receptor expression and cancer-related intracellular signaling pathways.
Immunohistochemical analysis of estrogen receptor alpha (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and AR expression was performed on
histologically normal human post-menopausal breast tissues and measured
by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo with vehicle (0.1% ethanol
control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR antagonist, bicalutamide
(Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in combination. Microarray analysis
and qRT-PCR validation were performed using the ER positive breast cancer
cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine changes in gene expression in key
intracellular signaling pathways. The microarray data was analyzed with
Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and Gene Ontology software. Statistical
tests included both Wilcoxon matched pairs test and one-way ANOVA
(p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR expression in cultured breast
tissues compared to vehicle control (p<0.05), and co-treatment with
either MPA or Bic impeded this effect. No change in ER or PR protein
levels was induced by the hormone treatments. Microarray studies revealed
that DHT or MPA treatment for 6 hr altered the expression of 439 and 858
genes, respectively, whereas co-treatment altered 1494 genes (p<0.05).
Only 114 genes were uniquely regulated by DHT, and the expression of 32%
(41% induced and 27% repressed) of these genes was abrogated by MPA.
Similarly, the expression of 38% (51% induced and 24% repressed) of the
690 genes uniquely regulated by co-treatment with DHT and MPA was altered
compared to DHT alone (p<0.05). Examples of genes that were regulated by
DHT (p<0.05) and this effect of DHT was antagonised by co-treatment with
DHT and MPA (p<0.05) are FGFR2, OLR1 and C1ORF116. Co-treatment with DHT
and MPA altered the expression of genes involved in cell growth, cell
cycle, cell death, cancer and intracellular signaling pathways compared
to individual treatments (pConsistent with several observational studies
examining combined hormone replacement therapy (cHRT: conjugated equine
estrogen in conjunction with the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone
acetate, MPA) in postmenopausal women, a re-analysis of the
placebo-controlled randomized Women's Health Initiative clinical trial
demonstrated a markedly increased breast cancer risk in newly menopausal
women following 5 years of cHRT (Hazard Ratio, 3.05; 95% Confidence
Interval, 1.62-5.70) [1]. We have previously demonstrated that androgen
receptor (AR)-mediated effects of MPA impede 5-dihydrotestosterone
(DHT)-induced AR signaling in normal and malignant breast epithelial
cells (AACR abstract 2010). The current study aimed to further
investigate the biological actions of DHT and/or MPA on steroid receptor
expression and cancer-related intracellular signaling pathways.
Immunohistochemical analysis of estrogen receptor alpha (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR) and AR expression was performed on
histologically normal human post-menopausal breast tissues and measured
by image analysis in tissues cultured ex vivo with vehicle (0.1% ethanol
control), DHT (1nM), MPA (1nM) or the AR antagonist, bicalutamide
(Bic;1uM) for 48 hr, either alone or in combination. Microarray analysis
and qRT-PCR validation were performed using the ER positive breast cancer
cell line, ZR-75-1 to determine changes in gene expression in key
intracellular signaling pathways. The microarray data was analyzed with
Ingenuity Gene Pathway Analysis and Gene Ontology software. Statistical
tests included both Wilcoxon matched pairs test and one-way ANOVA
(p<0.05). DHT treatment increased AR expression in cultured breast
tissues compared to vehicle control (p<0.05), and co-treatment with
either MPA or Bic impeded this effect. No change in ER or PR protein
levels was induced by the hormone treatments. Microarray studies revealed
that DHT or MPA treatment for 6 hr altered the expression of 439 and 858
genes, respectively, whereas co-treatment altered 1494 genes (p<0.05).
Only 114 genes were uniquely regulated by DHT, and the expression of 32%
(41% induced and 27% repressed) of these genes was abrogated by MPA.
Similarly, the expression of 38% (51% induced and 24% repressed) of the
690 genes uniquely regulated by co-treatment with DHT and MPA was altered
compared to DHT alone (p<0.05). Examples of genes that were regulated by
DHT (p<0.05) and this effect of DHT was antagonised by co-treatment with
DHT and MPA (p<0.05) are FGFR2, OLR1 and C1ORF116. Co-treatment with DHT
and MPA altered the expression of genes involved in cell growth, cell
cycle, cell death, cancer and intracellular signaling pathways compared
to individual treatments (p<0.05). Collectively, these findings suggest
an AR-mediated mechanism for the action of MPA in breast cancer.
1.Prentice, R.L., et al. Am J Epidemiol, 2009 170(1): 12-23.

