Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator is associated with
cisplatin resistance in cancer cells


The (ARNT) belongs to the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factors containing Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain. In addition to forming
heterodimers with many other bHLH-PAS proteins, including the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and hypoxia-inducible factor 1, ARNT can also
form homodimers. Our previous study had shown that ARNT is a new factor
involved in EGF regulated COX-2 gene expression under normoxia involving
tumorigenesis in cervical cancer tissues. Resistence to cisplatin is
often observed in cervical cancer therapy. Here we showed that ARNT
expression is critical for cisplatin resistance. Specifically, we showed
that in HeLa cervical cancer lines, cisplatin decreased ARNT expression
level. Over-expression of ARNT rendered HeLa cells resistant to
cisplatin. In addition, inhibition of ARNT by small interfering RNA
silencing increased cisplatin induced cell death by activation of caspase
3 and sensitized drug resistant cells to cisplatin. Using ARNT deficient
and ARNT fully expressed cell lines showed that induction of apoptosis by
cisplatin correlates with ARNT. Importantly down regulation of ARNT
decreased drug efflux pump protein MDR1 expression, suggesting that MDR1
gene expression depends on ARNT activity. In conclusion, ARNT mediates
the efflux of cisplatin and has a functional role in cervical cancer cell
sensitivity to cisplatin. In a xenograft analysis of SCID mice, cisplatin
also efficiently inhibited ARNT-deficient tumor formation. These results
suggest that targeting ARNT could overcome cisplatin resistance in human
cervical cancer.

