Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Glioblastoma derived exosomes induce apoptosis in T cells


Intro: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary brain
tumor in adults and is associated with an average lifespan of 15 months
after diagnosis. One contributing factor to this poor prognosis is the
immune protection afforded by the tumor microenvironment. One method of
immune evasion poorly characterized is the effect of tumor released
exosomes. Methods: FasL gene expression was determined using reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in three GBM cells
lines: LN-229, U-138 MG and T98G. Exosomes were isolated from serum free
supernatants by differential ultracentrifugation. Exosomes were
quantified using a protein concentration assay. A3 Jurkat T cells were
treated with quantified exosomes, recombinant FasL or untreated. After 24
hours a TUNEL assay was performed to investigate the potential apoptotic
effects of GBM-derived exosomes. Results: FasL is expressed in LN-229,
U-138 MG and T98G cell lines as determined by RT-PCR. After treating A3
Jurkat T cells with exosomes it appeared apoptosis was induced as
compared to an untreated control as determined by DNA fragmentation.
Discussion: Studies using prostate and colon cancer cell lines showed
that FasL was expressed in tumor derived exosomes. When T cells were
co-cultured with exosomes apoptosis was induced in a FasL-dependant
manner. Our lab previously demonstrated that GBM-derived exosomes are
able to inhibit T cell proliferation. These current data suggests that
GBM-derived exosomes induce apoptosis in T cells.

