Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel synthetic alkylating agent inducing DNA damages is
associated with distinct DNA repair pathways


Alkylating agents are a commonly used category of chemotherapy drugs for
a verity type of malignancy. They kill cells by forming DNA adducts and
interfering DNA processes if not to being removed. In respect to the
types of mono- or bi-functional DNA alkylation, different classes of DNA
repair processes are involved. In this study, a new DNA-directed
alkylating agent BO738 was investigated. We emphasized to confirming its
ability of DNA damage, and revealing which kinds of DNA repair mechanisms
to be involved in BO738-induced damage. Our results proved BO738 is a
bi-functional alkylating DNA damage agent, evidences including BO738 was
able to induce phosphorylation of Chk1, Chk2 and p53, and elevated more
potent of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, a hallmark of DNA-crosslink damage,
than induced by BCNU. Followed with the finding of DNA damage response,
as expected, cells that abolish in removal of BO738-induced DNA damage
are link to at least base excision repair, double strand break repair and
MGMT-mediate direct repair machineries. In conclusion, we provide a
foundation to understand the molecular action of BO738 in subcellular
environment, and according that BO738 displays comparable ability in
tumor cytotoxicity than BCNU, our study highlighting a therapeutic
potential in cancer chemosensitization.

