Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased risk of persistent human papillomavirus infection and
abnormal Pap tests in African American compared to European American
women in a college-age cohort


Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the causative agent of genital warts,
cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer and is also associated with
oropharyngeal and ano-rectal cancers. While HPV is necessary for these
malignancies to develop, infection with HPV is not predictive of which
women will develop cervical dysplasia or cancer. Most high-risk HPV
(HR-HPV) infections resolve within 12-24 months. Persistence of HR-HPV
infection is a risk factor for the development of pre-cancerous cervical
lesions and cervical cancer. A disparity exists in the incidence and
mortality rates for cervical cancer, with African American (AA) women
being more likely to develop cervical cancer and about twice as likely to
die of the disease, as compared to European American (EA) women. The
Carolina Women's Care Study (CWCS) was initiated in 2004 to assess HPV
infection and persistence in a college-age cohort from the University of
South Carolina. In this longitudinal study, 467 study participants (70%
EA and 24% AA) underwent biannual pelvic exams during the duration of
their college experience. Exfoliated cervical cells were collected at
each visit and screened for HPV using PCR and the Inno-LiPA assay was
subsequently used to determine HPV types. The AA and EA participants in
the CWCS were similar upon comparison of several demographic
characteristics, including those often associated with increased risk of
cervical lesions, such as age at sexual debut and average number of
sexual partners. While the incidence of new HR-HPV infections in AA and
EA participants was similar, at any visit AA participants were about
1.5-fold more likely to test HR-HPV positive than EA participants (p
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the causative agent of genital warts,
cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer and is also associated with
oropharyngeal and ano-rectal cancers. While HPV is necessary for these
malignancies to develop, infection with HPV is not predictive of which
women will develop cervical dysplasia or cancer. Most high-risk HPV
(HR-HPV) infections resolve within 12-24 months. Persistence of HR-HPV
infection is a risk factor for the development of pre-cancerous cervical
lesions and cervical cancer. A disparity exists in the incidence and
mortality rates for cervical cancer, with African American (AA) women
being more likely to develop cervical cancer and about twice as likely to
die of the disease, as compared to European American (EA) women. The
Carolina Women's Care Study (CWCS) was initiated in 2004 to assess HPV
infection and persistence in a college-age cohort from the University of
South Carolina. In this longitudinal study, 467 study participants (70%
EA and 24% AA) underwent biannual pelvic exams during the duration of
their college experience. Exfoliated cervical cells were collected at
each visit and screened for HPV using PCR and the Inno-LiPA assay was
subsequently used to determine HPV types. The AA and EA participants in
the CWCS were similar upon comparison of several demographic
characteristics, including those often associated with increased risk of
cervical lesions, such as age at sexual debut and average number of
sexual partners. While the incidence of new HR-HPV infections in AA and
EA participants was similar, at any visit AA participants were about
1.5-fold more likely to test HR-HPV positive than EA participants (p
<0.0001). In HPV positive individuals, the average number of HPV types
(2.28) was similar between AA and EA participants. The most prevalent
HR-HPV types detected in the CWCS at enrollment were HPV16 (13.2% of all
HPV infections), 51 (9.2%), and 66 (11.3%). Strikingly, when exploring
rates of HPV clearance, AA women clear the virus much slower than EA
women. At 24 months after incident HR-HPV infection, 56% of AA
participants remain infected with HR-HPV, while only 24% of EA
participants were still infected (p Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the
causative agent of genital warts, cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer
and is also associated with oropharyngeal and ano-rectal cancers. While
HPV is necessary for these malignancies to develop, infection with HPV is
not predictive of which women will develop cervical dysplasia or cancer.
Most high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) infections resolve within 12-24 months.
Persistence of HR-HPV infection is a risk factor for the development of
pre-cancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer. A disparity exists in
the incidence and mortality rates for cervical cancer, with African
American (AA) women being more likely to develop cervical cancer and
about twice as likely to die of the disease, as compared to European
American (EA) women. The Carolina Women's Care Study (CWCS) was initiated
in 2004 to assess HPV infection and persistence in a college-age cohort
from the University of South Carolina. In this longitudinal study, 467
study participants (70% EA and 24% AA) underwent biannual pelvic exams
during the duration of their college experience. Exfoliated cervical
cells were collected at each visit and screened for HPV using PCR and the
Inno-LiPA assay was subsequently used to determine HPV types. The AA and
EA participants in the CWCS were similar upon comparison of several
demographic characteristics, including those often associated with
increased risk of cervical lesions, such as age at sexual debut and
average number of sexual partners. While the incidence of new HR-HPV
infections in AA and EA participants was similar, at any visit AA
participants were about 1.5-fold more likely to test HR-HPV positive than
EA participants (p <0.0001). In HPV positive individuals, the average
number of HPV types (2.28) was similar between AA and EA participants.
The most prevalent HR-HPV types detected in the CWCS at enrollment were
HPV16 (13.2% of all HPV infections), 51 (9.2%), and 66 (11.3%).
Strikingly, when exploring rates of HPV clearance, AA women clear the
virus much slower than EA women. At 24 months after incident HR-HPV
infection, 56% of AA participants remain infected with HR-HPV, while only
24% of EA participants were still infected (p <0.01). Furthermore, AA
participants were about 1.7-fold more likely to have an abnormal (LSIL
plus HSIL) Pap test than EA participants (pHuman papillomavirus (HPV) is
the causative agent of genital warts, cervical dysplasia and cervical
cancer and is also associated with oropharyngeal and ano-rectal cancers.
While HPV is necessary for these malignancies to develop, infection with
HPV is not predictive of which women will develop cervical dysplasia or
cancer. Most high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) infections resolve within 12-24
months. Persistence of HR-HPV infection is a risk factor for the
development of pre-cancerous cervical lesions and cervical cancer. A
disparity exists in the incidence and mortality rates for cervical
cancer, with African American (AA) women being more likely to develop
cervical cancer and about twice as likely to die of the disease, as
compared to European American (EA) women. The Carolina Women's Care Study
(CWCS) was initiated in 2004 to assess HPV infection and persistence in a
college-age cohort from the University of South Carolina. In this
longitudinal study, 467 study participants (70% EA and 24% AA) underwent
biannual pelvic exams during the duration of their college experience.
Exfoliated cervical cells were collected at each visit and screened for
HPV using PCR and the Inno-LiPA assay was subsequently used to determine
HPV types. The AA and EA participants in the CWCS were similar upon
comparison of several demographic characteristics, including those often
associated with increased risk of cervical lesions, such as age at sexual
debut and average number of sexual partners. While the incidence of new
HR-HPV infections in AA and EA participants was similar, at any visit AA
participants were about 1.5-fold more likely to test HR-HPV positive than
EA participants (p <0.0001). In HPV positive individuals, the average
number of HPV types (2.28) was similar between AA and EA participants.
The most prevalent HR-HPV types detected in the CWCS at enrollment were
HPV16 (13.2% of all HPV infections), 51 (9.2%), and 66 (11.3%).
Strikingly, when exploring rates of HPV clearance, AA women clear the
virus much slower than EA women. At 24 months after incident HR-HPV
infection, 56% of AA participants remain infected with HR-HPV, while only
24% of EA participants were still infected (p <0.01). Furthermore, AA
participants were about 1.7-fold more likely to have an abnormal (LSIL
plus HSIL) Pap test than EA participants (p<0.005). Overall, these
results suggest that AA women have more difficulty than EA women clearing
a HR-HPV infection, which may provide a biological basis for the
increased risk of cervical cancer observed in AA women. This work was
supported by grant P20MD001770 from the National Institute on Minority
Health and Health Disparities.

