Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The mechanism of UV-induced and prohibitin-mediated apoptosis


Ultraviolet B (UVB) light is a potential environmental carcinogen, which
has been shown to cause various skin cancers. Normally, UV-damaged cells
are eliminated by the self-protective apoptosis response. UVB-induced
apoptosis can be regulated by modification of major lipid raft
components, such as cholesterol and ceramide. Upon UVB irradiation, an
alteration of lipid raft composition leads to the recruitment/activation
of raft-associated proteins and initiates downstream apoptotic signaling
pathways. To identify potential regulators of UVB-induced apoptosis, we
used 2D gel electrophoresis to identify the raft proteins that are
altered after UVB-irradiation. Our data shows that levels of several raft
proteins, including prohibitin (PHB), were changed after UVB-irradiation.
PHB plays a critical role in many cell functions, such as cell-cycle
control, cell proliferation, senescence, development, apoptosis, and
tumor suppression. However, no reports implicate PHB-mediated apoptosis
upon UVB irradiation. We now demonstrate that while the total PHB
expression does not change, PHB is enriched in lipid rafts after UVB
irradiation. Immunoprecipitation analysis shows that UVB alters the
binding ability of PHB, Raf, and Akt, and decrease PHB phosphorylation.
PHB siRNA knockdown cells exhibited an increased phosphorylation of Akt
and ERK, and increased cell apoptosis after UVB irradiation. Based on
these results, we propose that PHB regulates UVB-induced apoptosis
through lipid raft translocation and alteration of Akt and Raf/ERK
signaling pathways.

