Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rapid unbiased enrichment (negative selection) of circulating
non-hematopoietic tumor cells directly from whole blood


There is increasing interest in analyzing circulating non-hematopoietic
tumor cells (CTC) in peripheral blood to evaluate disease progression or
response to treatment; however, CTC enrichment is required prior to most
analytic procedures. The ideal enrichment method would be rapid, permit a
high recovery of viable CTC, and would be independent of the expression
of specific epithelial cell surface markers, since CTCs in the peripheral
blood may be undergoing EMT (epithelial mesenchymal transition) and may
not express epithelial markers. RosetteSep CD45 depletion of
hematopoietic cells directly from whole blood meets these criteria.
However, RosetteSep enrichment of CTC involves density gradient
centrifugation, which entails careful layering of the sample over the
density gradient medium and careful pipetting to remove the enriched
cells after centrifugation. Centrifugation must be performed with the
brake off to avoid disturbing the enriched cell layer, further
lengthening the process. SepMate, a centrifugation tube with a
specialized insert, was developed to minimize mixing of the sample with
the density gradient medium, thus allowing rapid layering of the sample
on the density gradient medium and easy pouring off of the enriched cells
after centrifugation. We compared CTC enrichment using RosetteSep and the
standard tubes and protocol with RosetteSep using SepMate tubes and
reduced cocktail incubation and spin times on 5 donor whole blood samples
seeded with 1% CAMA cells. Purity of viable (PI negative) CTC obtained
with SepMate with RosetteSep was 85 7%; purity of CTC obtained with
RosetteSep alone was 91 5% (no significant difference, paired t test,
p=0.050). Purity of CTC obtained with density gradient centrifugation
only (no RosetteSep), either with or without SepMate, was 4 2%. There was
no significant difference in the recovery of enriched CTC under any of
the conditions tested (RosetteSep SepMate, SepMate alone, density
gradient separation alone, Tukey-Kramer test, p>0.05). CTC enrichment was
accomplished in There is increasing interest in analyzing circulating
non-hematopoietic tumor cells (CTC) in peripheral blood to evaluate
disease progression or response to treatment; however, CTC enrichment is
required prior to most analytic procedures. The ideal enrichment method
would be rapid, permit a high recovery of viable CTC, and would be
independent of the expression of specific epithelial cell surface
markers, since CTCs in the peripheral blood may be undergoing EMT
(epithelial mesenchymal transition) and may not express epithelial
markers. RosetteSep CD45 depletion of hematopoietic cells directly from
whole blood meets these criteria. However, RosetteSep enrichment of CTC
involves density gradient centrifugation, which entails careful layering
of the sample over the density gradient medium and careful pipetting to
remove the enriched cells after centrifugation. Centrifugation must be
performed with the brake off to avoid disturbing the enriched cell layer,
further lengthening the process. SepMate, a centrifugation tube with a
specialized insert, was developed to minimize mixing of the sample with
the density gradient medium, thus allowing rapid layering of the sample
on the density gradient medium and easy pouring off of the enriched cells
after centrifugation. We compared CTC enrichment using RosetteSep and the
standard tubes and protocol with RosetteSep using SepMate tubes and
reduced cocktail incubation and spin times on 5 donor whole blood samples
seeded with 1% CAMA cells. Purity of viable (PI negative) CTC obtained
with SepMate with RosetteSep was 85 7%; purity of CTC obtained with
RosetteSep alone was 91 5% (no significant difference, paired t test,
p=0.050). Purity of CTC obtained with density gradient centrifugation
only (no RosetteSep), either with or without SepMate, was 4 2%. There was
no significant difference in the recovery of enriched CTC under any of
the conditions tested (RosetteSep SepMate, SepMate alone, density
gradient separation alone, Tukey-Kramer test, p>0.05). CTC enrichment was
accomplished in <40 min using SepMate with RosetteSep. Simplifying the
layering and layer removal step makes the entire process easily scalable
to processing multiple samples simultaneously. Utilizing this method,
CTCs can be enriched directly from whole blood without bias regarding
their surface antigen expression. Large samples can be rapidly
volume-reduced in preparation for detailed examination in a microfluidic
device. Finally, enriched CTC are not labeled with antibodies or beads;
there is nothing to interfere with subsequent further enrichment,
culture, or evaluation.

