Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Somatic mutations to identify tumors for highly selective
chemosensitization by Nrf2 depletion


Therapeutic resistance remains a critical challenge in cancer treatment.
Effective chemosensitizers must target more than a single mechanism of
resistance and must also selectively sensitize only tumor and not normal
tissue. Nrf2 is a transcription factor that regulates a battery of
cytoprotective genes, and is shown in multiple experimental systems to
have a significant impact on sensitivity to cytotoxic treatments.
Regulation of Nrf2 levels is largely post-translationally, as a result of
its physical interaction with adapter protein Keap1, which targets it for
proteosomal degradation. An increasing number of human tumors and cancer
cell lines are found to have loss of function mutations in Keap1 that
results in constitutively elevated Nrf2 and drug resistance. In such
circumstances alternative pathways for Nrf2 degradation may predominate,
including the PI3kinase pathway protein GSK-3, which exports Nrf2 from
the nucleus to the proteosome. When relatively common somatic mutations
in the PI3kinase pathway result in phosphorylation of GSK-3 at Ser9, it
is inactivated. However, the addition of a PI3kinase pathway inhibitors
increases GSK-3, depletes Nrf2 and significantly sensitizes these cells.
We are further exploring mechanisms, and at the same time screening
biobanks of various tumors to determine the incidence of somatic loss of
function mutations in Keap1 and mutations in the Pi3K pathway that
activate it. This would represent a molecular signature of tumors that
would be highly selectively sensitized by this strategy.

