Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 2-Aminothiazoles as potent and selective PI3Kalpha inhibitors:
Discovery of NVP-BYL719 and structural basis for the isoform selectivity


PI3Ks are lipid kinases that control signaling pathways involved in cell
proliferation, motility, cell death and cell invasion. Class I PI3K
contains four isoforms, p110, p110, p110 and p110 which carry out non
redundant signaling functions. The and isoforms are ubiquitously
expressed, whereas the and isoforms are expressed primarily in
lymphocytes and engaged in the regulation of immune responses. A gain of
function in PI3K signaling is common to many types of human cancer,
specifically mutations in PIK3CA which are found in more than 30% of
various solid tumor types, including, breast, endometrium, bladder,
colorectal cancers as well as lung cancers. As these mutations
constitutively activate the lipid kinase activity of the protein, the
cancer-specific mutants of p110 appear to be ideal therapeutic targets
for anticancer drug development. p110 isoform specific low molecular
weight inhibitors could be efficacious against tumors harboring p110alpha
mutations and provide an improved safety profile compared to current
pan-PI3K modulators. The 2-aminothiazole scaffold proved to be an
excellent starting point for the development of potent PI3K inhibitors.
Depending on the substitution pattern good PI3Kalpha selectivity can be
achieved. Systematic modification of key residues and further
optimization of the drug-like and PK properties have led to the
identification of NVP-BYL719, a potent and selective PI3Kalpha inhibitor
with a promising biological activity. SAR leading to the discovery of
NVP-BYL719 and the structural basis for the PI3Kalpha selectivity will be
discussed.

