Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intragenic ATM methylation in peripheral blood DNA as a biomarker
of breast cancer risk


DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification that could affect
cancer risk through direct effects on disease, and/or mediating effects
of genetic and environmental factors. Global and gene-specific DNA
methylation levels in white blood cells (WBC) have been related to risk
of breast and other cancers, however, evidence is generally weak. We
analysed WBC DNA methylation of two ATM intragenic loci (ATMmvp2a and
ATMmvp2b) and genome-wide DNA methylation in LINE1 repetitive elements in
three breast cancer studies with pre-diagnostic blood samples. Studies
included a case-control study with cases derived from a prospective
cohort of high-risk breast cancer families (KConFab), and nested
case-control studies in two prospective cohorts: the Breakthrough
Generations Study (BGS) and the European Prospective Investigation into
Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Total sample size was 640 incident cases of
invasive breast cancer and 741 controls. Bisulphite pyrosequencing was
used to quantify methylation in WBC DNA. Quintile analyses of the
combined data for ATMmvp2a showed an increased risk of breast cancer
limited to women in the highest quintile of methylation (OR =1.89
(1.36-2.64), p= 1.64x10-4). We found no significant differences in
estimates across studies, however, the largest differences in ATMmvp2a
methylation levels were observed for familial cases in KConFab compared
to controls. We observed no significant differences in LINE1 or ATMmvp2b
methylation levels between cases and controls. These results indicate
that WBC DNA methylation levels at ATM could be a marker of breast cancer
risk and further support the pursuit of epigenome-wide association
studies in peripheral blood DNA methylation. Funding: Breast Cancer
Campaign Fellowship and Cancer Research UK Program C536/A6689.

