Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: AP26113 is a dual ALK/EGFR inhibitor: Characterization against
EGFR T790M in cell and mouse models of NSCLC


Background: The EGFR T790M gatekeeper mutation accounts for 50% of
resistance observed in patients treated with first generation inhibitors
that target activated variants of EGFR. Multiple irreversible T790M
inhibitors are in development but can exhibit skin and GI toxicity due to
co-inhibition of native (endogenous) EGFR, suggesting that
T790M-selective agents will be required. Previously, we have identified
AP26113 as a potent ALK inhibitor that maintains activity against
crizotinib-resistant variants, including the L1196M gatekeeper mutant.
Here we further characterize AP26113's activity as a reversible inhibitor
of activated and T790M-mutant EGFR. Methods: The activity of AP26113
against native EGFR, or activated forms (delE746_A750 [DEL]) with or
without a T790M resistance mutation, was examined in NSCLC as well as
engineered Ba/F3 cell lines. EGFR activity was assessed by measuring
levels of phosphorylated EGFR, in vitro proliferation measured by MTS
assay, and in vivo tumor growth measured in mouse xenografts following
daily oral dosing. Results: AP26113 did not inhibit native EGFR
phosphorylation in a NSCLC cell line (H358) or in engineered Ba/F3 cells
(IC50s >3000 nM). In contrast, potent activity was observed against
activated forms of EGFR, with or without the T790M mutation. In Ba/F3
cells expressing EGFR-DEL, AP26113 inhibited EGFR phosphorylation and
viability with IC50s of 75 and 114 nM, respectively. In Ba/F3 cells
expressing EGFR-DEL/T790M, AP26113 inhibited EGFR phosphorylation and
viability with IC50s of 15 and 281 nM, respectively. In a NSCLC line
expressing EGFR-DEL (HCC827), AP26113 inhibited EGFR phosphorylation with
an IC50 of 62 nM and cell growth with a GI50 of 165 nM. In HCC827 cells
expressing EGFR-DEL/T790M AP26113 inhibited EGFR phosphorylation with an
IC50 of 59 nM and cell growth with a GI50 of 245 nM. AP26113 also
exhibited similar potency against HCC827 cells expressing either EGFR-DEL
or EGFR-DEL/T790M in a xenograft model, with daily oral doses of 25 mg/kg
or greater leading to tumor regression in both models. Anti-tumor
activity that was associated with inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation was
also seen in a Ba/F3 EGFR-DEL/T790M tumor model. Conclusions: AP26113 is
a potent, reversible inhibitor of activated and T790M-mutant EGFR that
does not inhibit the native enzyme. Importantly, orally efficacious doses
in mice against activated and T790M-mutant EGFR are similar to those
active against crizotinib-resistant ALK variants, suggesting that AP26113
is a dual ALK/mutant EGFR inhibitor with potential to target these two
well-defined and important subsets of NSCLC. Based on these data, we
recently initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of AP26113 (NCT01449461,
www.clinicaltrials.gov) in ALK and EGFR+ NSCLC patients.

