Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of GNG7 as an epigenetically silenced gene in head
and neck cancer by gene expression profiling


Silencing of tumor suppressor genes plays a vital role in head and neck
carcinogenesis. Aberrant hypermethylation in the promoter region of some
known or putative tumor suppressor genes occurs frequently during the
development of various cancers including head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). In this study we used an expanded mRNA expression
profiling approach followed by microarray expression analysis to identify
epigenetically inactivated genes in HNSCC. Two HNSCC cell lines were
treated with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine followed by microarray analysis to
identify epigenetically silenced genes in HNSCC. 1960, 614, and 427 genes
were upregulated in HNSCC cell lines JHU-012, JHU-011 and the combination
of both cell lines, respectively. HNSCC tumor and normal mucosal samples
were used for gene profiling by a 47K mRNA gene expression array and we
found, 7140 genes were downregulated in HNSCC tumors compared to normal
mucosa as determined by microarray analysis and were integrated with cell
line data. Integrative analysis defined 126 candidate genes, of which
only seven genes showed differentially methylation in tumors and no
methylation in normal mucosa after bisulfite sequencing. After validation
by QMSP, one gene, GNG7, was confirmed as being highly methylated in
tumors and unmethylated in normal mucosal and salivary rinse samples
demonstrating cancer-specific methylation in HNSCC tissues. TXNIP and
TUSC2 were partially methylated in tumors and normal salivary rinses but
unmethylated in normal mucosa. We concluded GNG7 as a highly specific
promoter methylated gene associated with HNSCC. In addition, TXNIP and
TUSC2 are also potential biomarkers for HNSCC.

