Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: [6]-Shogaol inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells by regulating multiple targets


Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer
mortality worldwide. Despite substantial progress in developing
chemotherapeutics for the treatment of NSCLC, primary and secondary
resistance limits the success of these therapies. NSCLC cells exhibit
different EGFR mutations and EGFR has extensive cross-talk with other
cell signaling pathways. Therefore, suppression of the inappropriate
expression of multiple targets is considered to be a rational therapeutic
and preventive strategy for the management of NSCLC. Our initial
molecular-target oriented virtual screening revealed that the ingredients
of ginger, including [6]-gingerol, [6]-shogaol and [6]-paradol appeared
to be potential candidates for the prevention and therapy of NSCLC cells.
Among the three compounds, [6]-shogaol showed the greatest inhibitory
effect on growth and soft agar colony formation of NSCLC cells.
[6]-Shogaol induced cell cycle arrest (G1 or G2/M) and apoptosis.
Furthermore, [6]-shogaol interacted with PI3-K and AKT and inhibited AKT
kinase activity. Finally, [6]-shogaol increased the expression of p27,
which is one of the target proteins in the AKT signaling pathway. The
present results clearly indicate that [6]-shogaol exerted a strong
anti-cancer effect and can be regarded as useful tool for the treatment
of NSCLC.

