Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonclinical tumor efficacy studies of [18F]AH113804, a novel PET
imaging agent with high affinity for the human c-Met receptor


c-Met, the tyrosine-kinase receptor for hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)/scatter factor, is involved in tumour growth, invasion and
metastasis in many human cancers of epithelial origin. Various tumour
types are reported to overexpress c-Met, whilst expression in most normal
tissues is relatively low. [18F]AH113804 is a peptide-based molecular
imaging agent being developed by GE Healthcare for the in vivo evaluation
of tumour and metastatic c-Met expression by PET imaging. In vitro
affinity studies with fluorescently labelled analogues confirmed that
whilst the AH113804 peptide had high affinity for human c-Met (hc-Met),
there was limited or no affinity for dog or rodent c-Met, respectively.
In mice, relatively high uptake of [18F]AH113804 was observed in human
xenograft tumours known to express high levels of hc-Met, with rapid
clearance from key background tissues such as muscle (tumour to muscle
ratio of >5 achieved by 30 minutes post-injection). This biodistribution
profile allowed the tumour to be clearly visualised by micro-PET imaging.
Tumour uptake was significantly reduced by co-administration of excess
non-radioactive peptide, confirming tumour uptake was specific. Tumour
uptake of [18F]AH113804 was also shown to correlate with expression of
hcMet, with a relative retention of 2.00.1, 1.20.2 and 0.70.2% retained
dose per gram normalised for body weight (% rd/g/100g bw) 60 minutes
post-injection in xenograft tumours with relatively high (HT-29 tumours),
lower (U87 tumours) and no (LLC tumours) expression of hc-Met
respectively (as assayed by ELISA). Finally, 111InCl3 was used in a dual
tumour model as a non-specific marker of blood pool to confirm
differences in tumour uptake were not related to differences in tumour
blood pool or delivery. There was a significant difference in
[18F]AH113804 uptake between HT-29 (2.20.8% rd/g/100 g bw) and LLC
(0.90.2% rd/g/100 g bw) tumours (pc-Met, the tyrosine-kinase receptor for
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/scatter factor, is involved in tumour
growth, invasion and metastasis in many human cancers of epithelial
origin. Various tumour types are reported to overexpress c-Met, whilst
expression in most normal tissues is relatively low. [18F]AH113804 is a
peptide-based molecular imaging agent being developed by GE Healthcare
for the in vivo evaluation of tumour and metastatic c-Met expression by
PET imaging. In vitro affinity studies with fluorescently labelled
analogues confirmed that whilst the AH113804 peptide had high affinity
for human c-Met (hc-Met), there was limited or no affinity for dog or
rodent c-Met, respectively. In mice, relatively high uptake of
[18F]AH113804 was observed in human xenograft tumours known to express
high levels of hc-Met, with rapid clearance from key background tissues
such as muscle (tumour to muscle ratio of >5 achieved by 30 minutes
post-injection). This biodistribution profile allowed the tumour to be
clearly visualised by micro-PET imaging. Tumour uptake was significantly
reduced by co-administration of excess non-radioactive peptide,
confirming tumour uptake was specific. Tumour uptake of [18F]AH113804 was
also shown to correlate with expression of hcMet, with a relative
retention of 2.00.1, 1.20.2 and 0.70.2% retained dose per gram normalised
for body weight (% rd/g/100g bw) 60 minutes post-injection in xenograft
tumours with relatively high (HT-29 tumours), lower (U87 tumours) and no
(LLC tumours) expression of hc-Met respectively (as assayed by ELISA).
Finally, 111InCl3 was used in a dual tumour model as a non-specific
marker of blood pool to confirm differences in tumour uptake were not
related to differences in tumour blood pool or delivery. There was a
significant difference in [18F]AH113804 uptake between HT-29 (2.20.8%
rd/g/100 g bw) and LLC (0.90.2% rd/g/100 g bw) tumours (p<0.001) 30
minutes post-injection, whilst uptake of 111InCl3 was similar for the two
tumour types (HT-29; 0.90.2% rd/g/100 g bw, LLC; 1.10.2% rd/g/100 g bw).
Overall, these results confirmed that [18F]AH113804 has desirable
properties for a c-Met targeted molecular imaging agent. Since there are
a number of anti-c-Met therapies in clinical development, [18F]AH113804
has potential to be used as an aid in therapy selection and/or
monitoring. Furthermore, [18F]AH113804 may be of use in patient
stratification and prediction of patient outcome for specific cancers.

