Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NOTCH1 signaling is essential for leukemia initiating cell
self-renewal in T-ALL


Leukemia initiating cells (LIC) contribute to therapeutic resistance
through mutations in cellular self-renewal and survival pathways. NOTCH1
mutations are common in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL).
However, the role of NOTCH1 activation in human LIC propagation has not
been established. Pediatric T-ALL serially transplantable LIC were found
to be enriched in the CD34+CD4 and CD34+CD7 fractions of newly diagnosed
patient samples. More recently, a CD7+CD1a glucocorticoid resistant LIC
population, capable of engrafting leukemia in NOD/SCID IL2R gamma null
(NSG) mice, was identified in primary adult T-ALL. To identify the
molecularly characterized potential LIC populations in pediatric T-ALL
without proceeding in vitro culture and examine the role of NOTCH1
activation in LIC propagation. 12 pediatric T-ALL samples were sequenced
for NOTCH1 mutation examination. Humanized LIC mouse models were
established and dosed with either NOTCH1 mAb or IgG1 mAb control at 10
mg/kg intraperitoneally every 4 days for 6 doses. Mice were sacrificed
one day after the last dose, and hematopoietic organs were collected for
FACS analysis. To further define the LIC populations in pediatric T-ALL,
CD34+CD38+CD2+CD7+Lin and CD34+CD38+CD2+CD7Lin cells were isolated from
T-ALL primary patients blood by FACS sorting and transplanted into
neonatal RAG2/c/ mice to determine their leukemic engraftment potential.
Serial transplantations were done for testing the LIC self-renewal
capacity. Mouse hematopoietic organs were collected for FACS analysis,
mouse brains were sectioned for human cells examination by
immunohistochemistry. NOTCH1 and its downstream gene expressions were
examined by q-RT-PCR between the T-ALL CD34+ and CD34 populations. Six of
12 pediatric T-ALL patient samples were found NOTCH1 mutation. Mice
transplanted with CD34+ and CD34+CD2+CD7+ or CD34+CD2+CD7 cells developed
a T-ALL-like disease characterized by pale BM and enlarged spleen, thymus
and liver. Human CD34+ enriched cells from NOTCH1 mutated T-ALL
maintained leukemic engraftment while an equivalent number of CD34+ cells
from NOTCH1 wild type T-ALL did not. T-ALL CD34+ progenitors from NOTCH1
mutated T-ALL have a significant higher engraftment in BM when compared
with those from NOTCH1 wild type T-ALL. CD34+CD2+CD7+ and CD34+CD2+CD7
populations are more prominent in NOTCH1 mutated samples. Both the human
CD34+ and CD34+CD2+CD7+ populations were significantly reduced in BM when
treated with hN1 mAb in vivo. NOTCH1 and its downstream genes expression
were significantly reduced in NOTCH1 mutated CD34+ cells when compared
with CD34 cells. Human T-ALL LIC have enhanced NOTCH1 expression;
CD34+CD2+CD7+ and CD34+CD2+CD7 subpopulations are enriched for LIC
activity in pediatric T-ALL; A selective hN1 mAb inhibits human T-ALL LIC
survival and self-renewal in vivo.

