Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TNFRSF10B polymorphisms and haplotypes predicts survival in
non-small cell lung cancer patients


Introduction: Inflammation is regulated through a balance between
pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), a pro-inflammatory cytokine, is a central mediator of inflammation
and is involved in both cancer development and progression. The TNF
family inhibits tumorigenesis via apoptosis, but deregulation of TNFs
promotes tumor cell tissue invasion, migration, and metastasis. Germline
variations in TNF-related genes may influence expression levels and thus
influence lung cancer prognosis. We tested this hypothesis in a large
series of non-small cell lung cancer patients (NSCLC) treated at the
Moffitt Cancer Center. Methods: Using the Illumina GoldenGate Assay we
genotyped 305 SNPs from 53 different inflammation-related genes in 651
NSCLC patients. Using multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression
all SNPs were analyzed by an additive model for overall survival and were
ranked by P-value. Correction for multiple comparisons, haplotype, and
stratified analyses were also performed. Results: The overall median
survival time was 25 months. Fourteen of the inflammation-related SNPs
were significantly associated with NSCLC survival and 4 of the fourteen
were located in the TNF-receptor superfamily member 10b gene. The linkage
disequilibrium map for the 4 loci revealed r^2 values ranging from 0.36
to 0.66. When compared to the C/C genotype, the T-allele genotypes of the
top ranked SNP (TNFRSF10B:rs11785599) were associated with a 41%
increased risk of death (95% CI 1.16-1.70) after adjusting for age,
gender, smoking, histology, stage, and first course treatment. The risk
genotypes for the other three statistically significant TNF loci
(rs1047275, rs4460370, and rs883429) exhibited a 35% (95% CI 1.11-1.65),
29% (95% CI 1.06-1.57), and 23% (95% CI 1.00-1.53) increased risk of
death, respectively. Haplotype analyses of all four loci revealed that
the risk haplotype (TCTT) was associated with a 77% increased risk of
death (95% CI 1.25-2.52) when compared to the referent wildtype haplotype
(CGCC). Stratified analyses demonstrated that the top ranked SNP
(rs11785599) remained significantly associated with survival for both:
men and women, early (I + II) and late stage patients (III + IV), and
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma tumors. When the data were
analyzed by chemotherapy regimen, the risk genotypes of rs11785599 were
consistently associated with an increased risk of death but the only
significant finding was among patients treated with platinum agents plus
taxanes (HR = 1.81; 95% CI 1.29-2.52). Conclusions: Although the
functional significance of this SNP needs to be elucidated, these data
suggest a possible role of TNFRSF10B:rs11785599 in the prognosis of
NSCLC. If validated, these data have potential translational implications
by optimizing patient-specific therapy based on germline genetics.

