Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOX17 promoter methylation in CTC and cell free DNA isolated from
plasma of breast cancer patients


Introduction: Molecular characterization of Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC)
is a hot topic nowadays. SOX17 plays a very critical role in the
regulation of development and stem/precursor cell function, at least
partly through repression of Wnt pathway activity. Silencing of SOX17 due
to its promoter methylation is a frequent event and may contribute to
aberrant activation of Wnt signaling in breast cancer. We have recently
shown that the promoter of this gene is methylated in CTC (Chimonidou et
al, Clin Chem 2011). The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether
SOX17 promoter methylation in CTC, is associated with the methylation
pattern of this gene in matched cell free DNA isolated from plasma of
breast cancer patients. Patients and methods: We firstly developed a
highly sensitive and specific Methylation Specific Real-time PCR method
for SOX17. The methylation status of SOX17 was examined in paired
specimens of DNA isolated from CTC and cell free DNA (cfDNA) circulating
in plasma of the same individuals. 58 patients with operable breast
cancer, 21 patients with verified metastasis, and 12 healthy individuals
used as controls were enrolled in our study. For CTC analysis, DNA was
extracted from EpCAM positive immunomagnetically isolated CTC fraction,
while cfDNA was isolated from 200L of plasma from the same individuals.
DNA extracted from isolated CTC and cfDNA was modified by a Sodium
Bisulfite (SB) conversion reaction and subjected to methylation specific
real time PCR. Results: In CTC, promoter methylation of SOX17 was
observed in 22/58 (37.9%) of patients with operable breast cancer, 12/21
(57.1%) of patients with verified metastasis and 1/12 (8.3%) of healthy
individuals. In the matched plasma samples, promoter methylation of SOX17
was observed in 23/58 (39.6%) of patients with operable breast cancer,
11/21 (52.4%) of patients with verified metastasis and 1/12 (8.3%) in
healthy individuals. By comparing these results we found that promoter
methylation of SOX17 in CTC was significantly correlated with promoter
methylation of SOX17 in cell free DNA isolated from plasma of the same
patients (PIntroduction: Molecular characterization of Circulating Tumor
Cells (CTC) is a hot topic nowadays. SOX17 plays a very critical role in
the regulation of development and stem/precursor cell function, at least
partly through repression of Wnt pathway activity. Silencing of SOX17 due
to its promoter methylation is a frequent event and may contribute to
aberrant activation of Wnt signaling in breast cancer. We have recently
shown that the promoter of this gene is methylated in CTC (Chimonidou et
al, Clin Chem 2011). The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether
SOX17 promoter methylation in CTC, is associated with the methylation
pattern of this gene in matched cell free DNA isolated from plasma of
breast cancer patients. Patients and methods: We firstly developed a
highly sensitive and specific Methylation Specific Real-time PCR method
for SOX17. The methylation status of SOX17 was examined in paired
specimens of DNA isolated from CTC and cell free DNA (cfDNA) circulating
in plasma of the same individuals. 58 patients with operable breast
cancer, 21 patients with verified metastasis, and 12 healthy individuals
used as controls were enrolled in our study. For CTC analysis, DNA was
extracted from EpCAM positive immunomagnetically isolated CTC fraction,
while cfDNA was isolated from 200L of plasma from the same individuals.
DNA extracted from isolated CTC and cfDNA was modified by a Sodium
Bisulfite (SB) conversion reaction and subjected to methylation specific
real time PCR. Results: In CTC, promoter methylation of SOX17 was
observed in 22/58 (37.9%) of patients with operable breast cancer, 12/21
(57.1%) of patients with verified metastasis and 1/12 (8.3%) of healthy
individuals. In the matched plasma samples, promoter methylation of SOX17
was observed in 23/58 (39.6%) of patients with operable breast cancer,
11/21 (52.4%) of patients with verified metastasis and 1/12 (8.3%) in
healthy individuals. By comparing these results we found that promoter
methylation of SOX17 in CTC was significantly correlated with promoter
methylation of SOX17 in cell free DNA isolated from plasma of the same
patients (P<0.005). Conclusion: We show for the first time that promoter
methylation of SOX17 in CTC, is associated with the methylation pattern
of this gene in matched cell free DNA isolated from plasma of breast
cancer patients. Our findings suggest a new dimension to the origin of
cell free DNA and indicate a correlation between cell free DNA and CTC.

