Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) in paclitaxel resistant
ovarian cancer


The development of resistance to paclitaxel represents a general
challenge in clinical oncology, particularly in ovarian serous carcinomas
(OSCs), the most common and lethal form of ovarian cancer. Initial
treatment with a taxane and platinum combination regimen is standard and
while the majority of women will achieve a major response to this
treatment, the mortality of ovarian cancer is directly related to the
tumor's development of chemoresistance. Using a proteomic approach to
comprehensively compare the protein expression profiles of primary and
recurrent OSC clinical samples, our laboratory previously identified
several novel candidate proteins associated with the development of
recurrent OSC. In this study, we focus on evaluating one of these
proteins, spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK), a non-receptor tyrosine kinase,
and its role in the maintenance of paclitaxel resistance in OSC. We have
determined that increased expression of SYK in OSC tumor cells obtained
from ascites and/or pleural effusion fluid is associated with a poorer
response to chemotherapy. Using a cell culture system, we found that two
OSC cell lines show an increased expression of SYK after development of
in vitro resistance to paclitaxel treatment. More importantly, we
demonstrate that SYK small compound inhibitors significantly resensitize
the tumor cells to paclitaxel. Our results suggest that SYK plays a role
in maintaining paclitaxel resistance in OSC. Recently an oral SYK
inhibitor was found to be safe and effective in treating rheumatoid
arthritis and non-Hodgkin lymphoma; our results suggest a potential
translational use for this inhibitor as a chemosensitizing agent in
patients with OSC.

