Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of the UV-inducible RNA binding protein hnRNP A18
as a new target for melanoma progression


Melanoma is the most dangerous form of skin cancer. If recognized and
treated early, it is nearly 100 percent curable. However, invasive
melanoma is hard to treat and consequently presents an extremely poor
prognosis with a 5-year survival of about 6% and a median survival
duration of 7.5 months. We have identified the UV-inducible RNA binding
protein hnRNP A18 as a new target for melanoma progression and responses
to anticancer drugs treatments. hnRNP A18 basal levels are up-regulated
in melanoma cells as compared to normal melanocytes and UV radiation
increases hnRNP A18 levels in 5 of the 6 melanoma cell lines we studied.
More over, down regulation of hnRNP A18 reduced by more than 80% melanoma
tumor growth in mice xenograft and sensitized melanoma cells to
Temozolimide (TMZ) and the hypoxic mimetic agent CoCl2. In addition,
levels of hnRNP A18 expression in response to UV radiation are
proportional to melanoma cells capacity to survive UV-induced cellular
damage. We have identified an hnRNP A18 RNA binding signature motif in
the 3 UTR of key regulatory proteins such as HDAC 8, 9, 11, HIF-1 and ATR
that can confer resistance to UV induced DNA damage and hypoxic
conditions. Therefore by targeting of a single molecule, hnRNP A18, it
may be possible to shut down an entire network of protective proteins
conferring melanoma cells, and potentially other solid tumors, growth
advantage and resistance to conventional therapies.

