Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ERK1/2 regulation of CD44 modulates aggressiveness in a new mouse
model of oral cancer


Carcinogen-induced oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) causes
significant morbidity and mortality and constitutes a global health
challenge. To gain further insight into this disease, six unique C57BL/6
mouse OSCC cell lines were generated from 7,12-dimethylbenz()anthracene
(DMBA) induced murine primary OSCCs. The cell lines were designated as
mouse oral cancer (MOC1, 2, 7, 10, 22 and 23) and 5/6 (excluding MOC23)
formed tumors when transplanted into immunocompetent wild-type (WT) mice.
Analyses of tumor growth in mice showed that MOC2, MOC7 and MOC10 grew
more rapidly and metastasized to regional lymph nodes, while MOC1 and
MOC22 grew much slower and did not metastasize. This aggressive growth
was correlated with ERK1/2 activation, which in addition, was found to
induce CD44 expression- a molecule whose expression is associated with
EMT and putative cancer stem cells. Inhibiting MEK, the upstream
activator of ERK1/2, led to decreased CD44 expression and promoter
activity and also decreased cellular migration and invasion. Conversely,
enforced activation of MEK1 led to enhanced CD44 expression and promoter
activity. CD44 was required for the aggressive growth since reduction of
CD44 levels significantly attenuated in vitro migration and in vivo tumor
formation of MOC2 and MOC10 cell lines. These results in the mouse model
were extended to freshly resected human OSCC where a strict relationship
between ERK1/2 phosphorylation and CD44 expression was also identified.
Thus, using a novel immunocompetent mouse model, we identify CD44 as an
essential mediator of the aggressive tumor-promoting effects of ERK1/2,
which highlight the potential efficacy of targeting this molecular
pathway in head and neck cancers.

