Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of combination of oncolytic herpes virus hrR3 and
Bevacizumab in the treatment of experimental model of human gastric cancer


Gastric cancer is still one of the leading causes of cancer death
worldwide. Even with the modern standard therapy, the prognosis of
locally advanced or metastatic cases remains poor. Moreover, 50% of the
patients with curative resection will suffer from local recurrence.
Therapeutic multimodality with a more specific and effective strategy is
urgently needed. Oncolytic herpes viruses are good candidates because of
broad host range and tumor selective viral distribution. Bevacizumab is a
monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor subtype A
(VEGFA) which inhibits angiogenesis and therefore tumor growth. Our study
evaluated the combination of these two novel strategies in the treatment
of experimental model of human gastric cancer. The VEGFA gene and protein
expression was measured in various cancer cell line(AZ521, MKN45,
Capan-1, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, WiDr and SKOV-3)by RT-PCR and western blot.
The MTT analysis was performed to evaluate efficiency of combination
therapy in vitro. The effect on viral replication was evaluated by PCR
and tittering of the virus replicating under various doses of
Bevacizumab. The in vivo study consisted of 24 BALB/c nude mice which
were injected 106 cells into the right flank region. Control group
received no treatment. hrR3 group received 107 pfu virus intratumorally.
Bevacizumab group received 5mg/kg Bevacizumab intraperitoneally twice a
week. Combination group received both intratumoral hrR3 and
intraperitoneally bevacizumab at the same dose. Tumor diameters were
measured twice a week. 2 days following the last dose of the treatment
tumors were collected. Histopathologically CD31 driven microvascular
density was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was evaluated by
apoptag immunoperoxidase staining. Viral replication in tissue was
evaluated by -Galactosidase (LacZ) histochemistry. VEGFA gene and protein
expression of MKN45 and SKOV3 cell line were the highest. In the in vivo
study, the tumor volume of the combination group was smallest among all
groups(PGastric cancer is still one of the leading causes of cancer death
worldwide. Even with the modern standard therapy, the prognosis of
locally advanced or metastatic cases remains poor. Moreover, 50% of the
patients with curative resection will suffer from local recurrence.
Therapeutic multimodality with a more specific and effective strategy is
urgently needed. Oncolytic herpes viruses are good candidates because of
broad host range and tumor selective viral distribution. Bevacizumab is a
monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor subtype A
(VEGFA) which inhibits angiogenesis and therefore tumor growth. Our study
evaluated the combination of these two novel strategies in the treatment
of experimental model of human gastric cancer. The VEGFA gene and protein
expression was measured in various cancer cell line(AZ521, MKN45,
Capan-1, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, WiDr and SKOV-3)by RT-PCR and western blot.
The MTT analysis was performed to evaluate efficiency of combination
therapy in vitro. The effect on viral replication was evaluated by PCR
and tittering of the virus replicating under various doses of
Bevacizumab. The in vivo study consisted of 24 BALB/c nude mice which
were injected 106 cells into the right flank region. Control group
received no treatment. hrR3 group received 107 pfu virus intratumorally.
Bevacizumab group received 5mg/kg Bevacizumab intraperitoneally twice a
week. Combination group received both intratumoral hrR3 and
intraperitoneally bevacizumab at the same dose. Tumor diameters were
measured twice a week. 2 days following the last dose of the treatment
tumors were collected. Histopathologically CD31 driven microvascular
density was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was evaluated by
apoptag immunoperoxidase staining. Viral replication in tissue was
evaluated by -Galactosidase (LacZ) histochemistry. VEGFA gene and protein
expression of MKN45 and SKOV3 cell line were the highest. In the in vivo
study, the tumor volume of the combination group was smallest among all
groups(P<0.05). hrR3 group had the highest Microvascular density
(PGastric cancer is still one of the leading causes of cancer death
worldwide. Even with the modern standard therapy, the prognosis of
locally advanced or metastatic cases remains poor. Moreover, 50% of the
patients with curative resection will suffer from local recurrence.
Therapeutic multimodality with a more specific and effective strategy is
urgently needed. Oncolytic herpes viruses are good candidates because of
broad host range and tumor selective viral distribution. Bevacizumab is a
monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor subtype A
(VEGFA) which inhibits angiogenesis and therefore tumor growth. Our study
evaluated the combination of these two novel strategies in the treatment
of experimental model of human gastric cancer. The VEGFA gene and protein
expression was measured in various cancer cell line(AZ521, MKN45,
Capan-1, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, WiDr and SKOV-3)by RT-PCR and western blot.
The MTT analysis was performed to evaluate efficiency of combination
therapy in vitro. The effect on viral replication was evaluated by PCR
and tittering of the virus replicating under various doses of
Bevacizumab. The in vivo study consisted of 24 BALB/c nude mice which
were injected 106 cells into the right flank region. Control group
received no treatment. hrR3 group received 107 pfu virus intratumorally.
Bevacizumab group received 5mg/kg Bevacizumab intraperitoneally twice a
week. Combination group received both intratumoral hrR3 and
intraperitoneally bevacizumab at the same dose. Tumor diameters were
measured twice a week. 2 days following the last dose of the treatment
tumors were collected. Histopathologically CD31 driven microvascular
density was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was evaluated by
apoptag immunoperoxidase staining. Viral replication in tissue was
evaluated by -Galactosidase (LacZ) histochemistry. VEGFA gene and protein
expression of MKN45 and SKOV3 cell line were the highest. In the in vivo
study, the tumor volume of the combination group was smallest among all
groups(P<0.05). hrR3 group had the highest Microvascular density
(P<0.05). Combination group had higher angiogenesis when compared to
Bevacizumab and control groups. LacZ induction was highest in the
combination group when compared to hrR3 group (PGastric cancer is still
one of the leading causes of cancer death worldwide. Even with the modern
standard therapy, the prognosis of locally advanced or metastatic cases
remains poor. Moreover, 50% of the patients with curative resection will
suffer from local recurrence. Therapeutic multimodality with a more
specific and effective strategy is urgently needed. Oncolytic herpes
viruses are good candidates because of broad host range and tumor
selective viral distribution. Bevacizumab is a monoclonal antibody
against vascular endothelial growth factor subtype A (VEGFA) which
inhibits angiogenesis and therefore tumor growth. Our study evaluated the
combination of these two novel strategies in the treatment of
experimental model of human gastric cancer. The VEGFA gene and protein
expression was measured in various cancer cell line(AZ521, MKN45,
Capan-1, Hep3B, PLC/PRF/5, WiDr and SKOV-3)by RT-PCR and western blot.
The MTT analysis was performed to evaluate efficiency of combination
therapy in vitro. The effect on viral replication was evaluated by PCR
and tittering of the virus replicating under various doses of
Bevacizumab. The in vivo study consisted of 24 BALB/c nude mice which
were injected 106 cells into the right flank region. Control group
received no treatment. hrR3 group received 107 pfu virus intratumorally.
Bevacizumab group received 5mg/kg Bevacizumab intraperitoneally twice a
week. Combination group received both intratumoral hrR3 and
intraperitoneally bevacizumab at the same dose. Tumor diameters were
measured twice a week. 2 days following the last dose of the treatment
tumors were collected. Histopathologically CD31 driven microvascular
density was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was evaluated by
apoptag immunoperoxidase staining. Viral replication in tissue was
evaluated by -Galactosidase (LacZ) histochemistry. VEGFA gene and protein
expression of MKN45 and SKOV3 cell line were the highest. In the in vivo
study, the tumor volume of the combination group was smallest among all
groups(P<0.05). hrR3 group had the highest Microvascular density
(P<0.05). Combination group had higher angiogenesis when compared to
Bevacizumab and control groups. LacZ induction was highest in the
combination group when compared to hrR3 group (P<0.05). Oncolytic herpes
viruses are promising agents for future cancer therapeutics due to wide
host range and tumor selective viral distribution. However, penetration
of the oncolytic virus in the tumor remains a obstacle for genetically
engineered viruses.Virus-associated agent is needed to enhance the
antitumor effect of the oncolytic virus. The results of our study show
that Bevacizumab increased the viral distribution in the tumor tissue and
therefore potent oncolysis resulted in reduction of the tumor. It can be
a ideal virus-associated agent in the antitumor therapy.

