Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Off-target effects of the putative G-protein coupled estrogen
receptor 1 (GPER) agonist G1 in ovarian and breast cancer cells


G-protein coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER or GPR30) plays important
roles in mediating estrogen action in many different tissues and organs
under both physiological and pathological conditions. G-1
(1-[4-(6-bromobenzo[1,3]dioxol-5yl)-3a,4,5,9b-tetrahydro-3H-cyclopenta[c]qu
inolin-8-yl]-ethanone), the putative selective GPER agonist, has been
reported to activate GPER, trigger several signaling pathways, and
stimulate cell proliferation in ER-negative breast cancer, endometrial
and ovarian cancer. More recently, reports showed that activation of GPER
by estrogen or G1 can suppress certain cell proliferation. This study was
initiated to clarify the function of GPER and its agonist on the
granulosa cell tumor (GCT) cell proliferation using KGN cell as a
cellular model. Well characterized epithelial ovarian cancer and breast
cancer cell lines were used for comparison. GPER siRNA was used to knock
down GPER. Western blot and immunohistochemistry were used to detect
protein expression. We found that knockdown of GPER significantly (P
G-protein coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER or GPR30) plays important
roles in mediating estrogen action in many different tissues and organs
under both physiological and pathological conditions. G-1
(1-[4-(6-bromobenzo[1,3]dioxol-5yl)-3a,4,5,9b-tetrahydro-3H-cyclopenta[c]qu
inolin-8-yl]-ethanone), the putative selective GPER agonist, has been
reported to activate GPER, trigger several signaling pathways, and
stimulate cell proliferation in ER-negative breast cancer, endometrial
and ovarian cancer. More recently, reports showed that activation of GPER
by estrogen or G1 can suppress certain cell proliferation. This study was
initiated to clarify the function of GPER and its agonist on the
granulosa cell tumor (GCT) cell proliferation using KGN cell as a
cellular model. Well characterized epithelial ovarian cancer and breast
cancer cell lines were used for comparison. GPER siRNA was used to knock
down GPER. Western blot and immunohistochemistry were used to detect
protein expression. We found that knockdown of GPER significantly (P <
0.05) suppressed KGN cell proliferation, suggesting that GPER may play
positive roles on KGN cell proliferation. Low concentrations of G1 (1M)
of G1 significantly suppressed KGN cell proliferation and arrested KGN
cells in G2/M phase. These results indicated that G1 may suppress KGN
cell proliferation in a GPER-independent manner. Supporting our
hypothesis, knockdown of GPER did not block the inhibitory effect of G1on
KGN cell proliferation. Moreover, G15, a potent GPER antagonist, failed
to block G1-induced suppression of cell proliferation and G1-induced cell
cycle arrest in KGN cells. In IGROV-1 epithelial ovarian cancer cells, G1
suppressed cell proliferation, a response which was not blocked by G15,
even at concentrations 8-fold higher than that of G1. G1 treatment also
suppressed the proliferation of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, a cell
line which reportedly expresses very low amounts of GPER. In HEK-293
cells, which are reported to have no expression of GPER, G1 also
significantly suppressed the cell proliferation and induced cell cycle
arrest. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that G1 is able to
suppress ovarian and breast cancer cell proliferation in a
GPER-independent manner. G1 may be a candidate for the development of
drugs against ovarian and breast cancer.

