Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparative pharmacokinetics for 4-demethyl-4-cholesteryloxy-
carbonylpenclomedine (DM-CHOC-PEN) in humans


4-Demethyl-4-cholesteryloxycarbonylpenclomedine (DM-CHOC-PEN) is a
polychlorinated pyridine cholesteryl carbonate, which is active vs.
intracranially (IC) implanted human xenograft models - U251 and D54
glioblastoma and MX-1 breast cancer (%LTS/CR): +29/25 and +20/17, resp.
and has a MOA via alkylation of DNA @ N7 - guanine (CCP, 64, 829, 2009).
DM-CHOC-PEN's preclinical rodent single IV dose toxicity studies
documented the following landmark values: for mice - LD10/50 136/385
mg/kg; & for rats - LD10 100 mg/kg. DM-CHOC-PEN is metabolized to
4-demethyl-PEN (DM-PEN) and cholesterol. The DLT in rats was
hypercholesteremia - 2nd to release of cholesterol from the oxycarbonate
moiety. The LDL-cholesterol was increased 30 fold at doses of 200 and 300
mg/kg, which returned to normal values - predominantly as the
HDL-cholesterol by Day 15. Plasma and erythrocyte DM-CHOC-PEN and
metabolites DM-PEN/cholesterol were assayed vs. time by HPLC. Overall, PK
values in rats revealed the following profile for DM-CHOC-PEN @ 100
mg/kg: AUC o-t = 1.05 mg (h/L), T1/2 = 0.51 (h), T1/2 = 2.48 (h) & CL =
3.04 (L/h) [a two compartment model]. The AUC was linear for 100, 200,
300 mg/kg doses. There were no differences between males and females. For
the Phase I clinical trial (IND 68,876), the calculated (from mice)
initial single dose for DM-CHOC-PEN was 39 mg/m2 administrated IV q
21-days with 40% dose escalations q 3-cycles until SLTs were identified.
To date, doses of 39, 55, 70 mg/m2 have been administered to patients
without toxicity. DM-CHOC-PEN PK modeling revealed a central compartment
(cpt) which released the drug into a peripheral compartment (pct) with CL
- 0.141L/h, T1/2 - 0.63 h & T - 24.1 h. DM-CHOC-PEN & DM-PEN showed an
important rebound phenomenon @ 50 hours post-infusion with Trelease 26.7h
(for both).Same phenomenon is observed in rbcs (estimation using Monolix
3.2). DM-CHOC-PEN and DM-PEN were detected for 3 and 15 days, resp.,
bound to rbcs (after 70 mg/m2); DM-CHOC-PEN was also detected in the
urine (Cmax=17.5 g/mL) until day 15. Similar to rats, the total lipid
profiles (cholesterol and triglycerides) for the patients were erratic
during the 3-h IV infusion period (2o to the lipid emulsion vehicle) and
then returned to pre-treatment values after 24 h; triglycerides most
significantly affected. In 1-patient, DM-CHOC-PEN could be identified in
sarcoma tissue metastatic to the spine in 190 ng/g quantities, which was
obtained 21-days post IV infusion with 39 mg/m2. Five (5) patients have
been treated to date; no hematological, neurotoxic or psychological
alterations have been identified. Thus, DM-CHOC-PEN is well tolerated
with manageable toxicities to date; the trial continues. An update on
patient responses/toxicities will be presented. Comparative PK profiles
of DM-CHOC PEN and metabolite in plasma, RBC and urine are analyzed and
will be presented here. Supported by NCI/SBIR grant - 1R43CA132257.

