Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The pivotal role of p53 in doxorubicin-induced acute versus
chronic cardiotoxicity


Introduction: Doxorubicin (DOX) is an effective anticancer
chemotherapeutic which also induces acute and chronic cardiotoxicities.
Inhibition of p53 activity is cardioprotective against acute
cardiotoxicity in adult mice receiving high doses of DOX. However,
functional p53 also reduces DOX-induced mitochondrial DNA oxidation. To
explain these paradoxical results, we examined the role of p53 in
DOX-induced acute and chronic cardiotoxicity with a clinically relevant
juvenile mouse model. Methods: Two week old MHC-CB7 mice (which express
dominant-interfering p53 in cardiomyocytes, CMs) and their non-transgenic
(NON-TXG) littermates were given weekly DOX injections for 5 weeks (25
mg/kg total dose). Animals were studied 1 week (acute stage) or 13 weeks
(late stage) after the last DOX injection. Cardiac function was measured
with echocardiography. CM apoptosis was quantified using anti-active
caspase-3 staining. The level of p53, Akt (an anti-apoptotic protein),
and ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM, a marker for DNA-damage response)
was measured by western blot using whole cell and mitochondrial
fractions. Results: During acute stage, left ventricular (LV) systolic
function was preserved (Fractional Shortening, FS, 58 2.0% vs. 45 1.3%,
pIntroduction: Doxorubicin (DOX) is an effective anticancer
chemotherapeutic which also induces acute and chronic cardiotoxicities.
Inhibition of p53 activity is cardioprotective against acute
cardiotoxicity in adult mice receiving high doses of DOX. However,
functional p53 also reduces DOX-induced mitochondrial DNA oxidation. To
explain these paradoxical results, we examined the role of p53 in
DOX-induced acute and chronic cardiotoxicity with a clinically relevant
juvenile mouse model. Methods: Two week old MHC-CB7 mice (which express
dominant-interfering p53 in cardiomyocytes, CMs) and their non-transgenic
(NON-TXG) littermates were given weekly DOX injections for 5 weeks (25
mg/kg total dose). Animals were studied 1 week (acute stage) or 13 weeks
(late stage) after the last DOX injection. Cardiac function was measured
with echocardiography. CM apoptosis was quantified using anti-active
caspase-3 staining. The level of p53, Akt (an anti-apoptotic protein),
and ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM, a marker for DNA-damage response)
was measured by western blot using whole cell and mitochondrial
fractions. Results: During acute stage, left ventricular (LV) systolic
function was preserved (Fractional Shortening, FS, 58 2.0% vs. 45 1.3%,
p<0.008) and CM apoptosis was reduced (0.003 0.002/mm2 vs. 0.011
0.002/mm2, p0.05). CM apoptosis was elevated in MHC-CB7 mice as compared
to NON-TXG mice (0.076 0.007 mm2 vs. 0.042 0.008 mm2, p0.05). CM
apoptosis was elevated in MHC-CB7 mice as compared to NON-TXG mice (0.076
0.007 mm2 vs. 0.042 0.008 mm2, p<0.008). Phosphorylated Akt and ATM were
normalized during late stage. Conclusions: Although inhibition of p53
activity protects against DOX-induced CM apoptosis and preserves cardiac
function during acute stage, it exacerbates CM apoptosis and cardiac
dysfunction during late stage. Ongoing experiments will determine the
correlation between mitochondrial DNA damage during acute stage and CM
apoptosis during late stage in DOX-treated MHC-CB7 mice. Acknowledgement:
This work was supported by a grant (HL85098) from National Institutes of
Health (to L.J.F.). Wuqiang Zhu was supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship (121101) from American Cancer Society.

