Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging the various mechanisms of cancer-cell killing by
Salmonella typhimurium A1-R


We have developed a genetically-modified bacterial strain of Salmonella
typhimurium, auxotrophic for leucine and arginine, which also expresses
green fluorescent protein (GFP), termed S. typhimurium A1-R. S.
typhimurium A1-R was found to be effective against metastatic human
prostate, breast, and pancreatic cancer cell lines as well as
osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma and glioma cell lines in clinically-relevant
nude mouse models. To understand the tumor-killing mechanism of S.
typhimurium A1-R-GFP, we have studied their interaction with
fluorescence-labeled cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. S.
typhimurium-GFP invasion, proliferation, and virulence in the cancer
cells were visualized by confocal fluorescence microscopy with the
Olympus FV1000. We found that A1-R-induced cancer cell death had
different mechanisms in different cancer cell lines. Some S. typhimurium
A1-R-treated cancer cell lines became apoptotic and necrotic, and other
cell lines burst after extensive intracellular bacterial growth. The time
for S. typhimurium A1-R-GFP to kill the majority of the cancer cells
varied from line to line, ranging from 2 hours to 72 hours. The
understanding of the various mechanisms of cell killing by S. typhimurium
A1-R will be important for its use as a general therapeutic for cancer.

