Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Flavokawain A inhibits urinary bladder carcinogenesis in the
UPII-SV40T transgenic mouse bladder cancer model.


The UPII-SV40T transgenic model of the mouse bladder reproduces a
precursor to recurrent and invasive Transitional Cell Carcinoma (TCC):
carcinoma in situ (CIS). This model therefore is useful for testing the
potential of agents for preventing bladder cancer recurrence. Flavokawain
A is the predominant chalcone identified from the kava plant. We have
recently shown that flavokawain A exhibited strong growth inhibitory
effects on human bladder cancer cell lines both in vitro in cell cultures
and in vivo in a xenograft mouse model. In this study, we examine whether
flavokawain A can also inhibit bladder cancer development in the
UPII-SV40T transgenic model. The transgenic mice were identified through
genotyping using Southern blotting analysis. Both heterozygous and
homozygous UPII-SV40T mice were fed orally with vehicle control or 6 g
flavokawain A /kg food for 9 months starting at 6 weeks of age. More than
54% control food- fed male mice died of ureter obstruction and
nephrohydrosis within 10.5 months of age, while more than 67% of mice fed
with 6g flavokawain A /kg food survived beyond 10.5 months of age. The
mean bladder weight of male transgenic mice that were fed with 6g
flavokawain /kg food for 9 months decreased by about 46% compared to
those fed with vehicle control diet (mean bladder weights for vehicle
control versus flavokawain A treatments are 0.20310.016 versus
0.11080.02565, P=0.0037). The mean bladder weights of female transgenic
mice that were fed with 6g flavokawain /kg food for 9 months decreased by
31% compared to those fed with vehicle control diet (mean bladder weights
for vehicle control versus flavokawain A treatments are 0.04660.0052
versus 0.032250.004689, p=0.0556). Mouse pathology analysis revealed that
vehicle control treated mice exhibited poorly differentiated transitional
cell carcinoma in the bladder, while that flavokawain A treated mice
presented well differentiated tumors in the bladder. The bladder tissues
from flavokawain A treated mice showed a decreased number of Ki67
positive cells compared to those in vehicle control treated mice, which
suggested that flavokawain A inhibited cell proliferation in vivo in
bladder tumors. These results suggested a potential of flavokawain A in
preventing the recurrence of non-muscle invasive urinary bladder cancer
by treating CIS.

