Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subtype-specific ovarian cancer risk associated with SNPs in IL1A


As pathways of the immune system play an important role in multiple
malignancies, we assessed the association between single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in inflammation-related genes and risk of ovarian
cancer in a multi-site case-control study. Using a custom array, we
genotyped 930 epithelial ovarian cancer cases and 1,037 controls for SNPs
in ALOX12, ALOX15, ALOX5, CCL11, CCL2, CCL3, CCR3, CRP, CXCL16, IL10,
IL15RA, IL18, IL1A, IL1B, IL1RN, IL4R, IL6, IL6R, IL7R, IL8RA, IL8RB,
IL9, NOS3, PTGS1, PTGS2, TLR2, and TNF. After analysis by logistic
regression, SNPs with pAs pathways of the immune system play an important
role in multiple malignancies, we assessed the association between
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in inflammation-related genes and
risk of ovarian cancer in a multi-site case-control study. Using a custom
array, we genotyped 930 epithelial ovarian cancer cases and 1,037
controls for SNPs in ALOX12, ALOX15, ALOX5, CCL11, CCL2, CCL3, CCR3, CRP,
CXCL16, IL10, IL15RA, IL18, IL1A, IL1B, IL1RN, IL4R, IL6, IL6R, IL7R,
IL8RA, IL8RB, IL9, NOS3, PTGS1, PTGS2, TLR2, and TNF. After analysis by
logistic regression, SNPs with p<0.10 were evaluated in an independent
data set of 3,143 cases and 2,102 controls from the Follow-up of Ovarian
Cancer Genetic Association and Interaction Studies (FOCI) collaboration.
Combined analysis revealed association with interleukin 1, alpha (IL1A)
SNPs (rs17561 and rs4848300, r2=0.990, p=0.005) which varied by
histological subtype (heterogeneity p=0.03). For example, IL1A rs17561,
which results in a missense change in amino acid at position 114 and
correlates with multiple inflammatory phenotypes, was inversely
associated with risk of clear cell, mucinous, and endometrioid subtypes,
but not with the serous subtype (Table 1). Additional data on IL1A
rs17561 in an even larger collection of ovarian cancer cases and controls
are pending and will be analyzed soon. We also found that genotype at
rs1864414 in ALOX5 (arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase) was associated with
decreased risk combined across subtypes (OR 0.86, 95% CI 0.78-0.95;
p=0.002). Thus, inherited variation in IL1A and ALOX5 appears to have a
role in ovarian cancer risk, though it is limited to rarer subtypes for
IL1A. These data add to existing literature on the importance of
inflammation in tumorigenesis and growing evidence of subtype-specific
traits in ovarian cancer and may provide important clues on prevention.


