Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Managing the cross talk: BRCA1 and its regulation of the p53
family, E2f1/Rb and apoptosis


Under constant assault from internal and external stresses, the cell
constantly monitors cellular damage, repairing damage when it is able. If
the cell deems the damage too great to repair, it activates the pathways
that induce programmed cell death. This life or death decision is
controlled, in part, by the activation of the tumor suppressor, p53. Upon
stabilization and activation, p53 activates a variety of genes including
those genes capable of inducing apoptosis. Our lab has previously
demonstrated that the tumor suppressor, BRCA1, is capable of stabilizing
p53 and directing it to cell cycle arrest genes at the expense of
apoptotic genes. In our efforts to understand the mechanism by which
BRCA1 is able to prevent expression of apoptotic genes, we have
discovered that BRCA1 also stabilizes E2F1, an oncogene that is able to
induce p53-dependent and p53-independent apoptosis. Interestingly, we
have found that BRCA1 also induces DNp73, a pro-survival member of the
p53 family. We hypothesize that BRCA1 may be interfering with the
interaction between E2F1 and Rb that has been shown to be important for
the apoptotic response to DNA damage. Furthermore, we are currently using
siRNA to inhibit expression of these genes to determine the relative
contribution of DNp63, DNp73 and E2F1/Rb signaling to control the cell's
decision to undergo apoptosis in response to BRCA1 expression.

