Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MCL1 and glycolysis synergistically induce prednisolone
resistance, which can be therapeutically reversed


Although cure rates for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have greatly
improved, contemporary treatment is still ineffective in 20% of patients.
Unsuccessful treatment can be mainly ascribed to resistance towards
antileukemic drugs. In particular prednisolone is highly associated with
poor prognosis. Overcoming drug resistance is therefore necessary to
increase current survival rates. Microarray analysis of precursor B-ALL
patients revealed MCL1 as an important gene involved in prednisolone
resistance (Holleman, N Engl J Med 2004). We demonstrated sensitization
towards prednisolone after lentiviral silencing of MCL1 in prednisolone
resistant leukemic cell lines (Stam, Blood 2009). These results point to
MCL1 as an interesting candidate for targeted therapy. We also discovered
that cells upregulate their glucose consumption level to protect from
prednisolone induced apoptosis. 2-Deoxyglucose (2DG), an inhibitor of
glycolysis, sensitized for prednisolone in leukemic cell lines and
patients cells (Hulleman, Blood 2009). We here provide evidence for an
inter-connection between MCL1, glycolysis and prednisolone resistance. A
clear increase in glucose consumption was observed after targeting MCL1
in leukemic cells by both lentiviral silencing and mRNA antagonists. This
suggests that cells upregulate glycolysis to prevent apoptosis induced
upon MCL1 knockdown. Indeed, co-exposure to 2DG substantially decreased
the proliferation rate of MCL1-silenced cells, and most importantly,
synergized with silencing of MCL1 in reversing resistance to
prednisolone. Altogether these data provide evidence for concomitant
causes of resistance and indicate that MCL1 silencing and glycolysis
inhibition can serve as potent ways to reverse resistance to prednisolone
in acute leukemia.

