Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The prognostic value of a cell cycle proliferation gene signature
in bladder cancer


An important aspect of personalized medicine involves the identification
of high risk patients likely to benefit from neoadjuvant or adjuvant
therapy. In the case of bladder cancer, this entails identifying the
20-30% of patients with non-muscle invasive (NMI) tumors that will
progress to muscle-invasive (MI) disease, and the approximately 50% of
patients diagnosed with MI tumors who do not survive past 5 years. In
breast cancer, independently derived prognostic gene signatures are
enriched with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes. Recently, a CCP score
obtained from the average expression level of 31 genes was found to
predict recurrence free and disease specific survival (DSS) in prostate
cancer. Here, we assess the importance of CCP correlated genes for
prognosis in bladder cancer and the prognostic value of the CCP score in
8 publicly available and heterogeneous microarray datasets (N = 762),
with samples obtained from both cystectomy and transurethral resection of
the bladder (TURBT) and profiled on 7 microarray platforms. Clusters of
correlated and predictive genes for stage, grade, and DSS were identified
using an iterative subtractive method. A gene set enrichment analysis on
the predictive clusters found that CCP was the only consistently enriched
class of genes (P An important aspect of personalized medicine involves
the identification of high risk patients likely to benefit from
neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the case of bladder cancer, this
entails identifying the 20-30% of patients with non-muscle invasive (NMI)
tumors that will progress to muscle-invasive (MI) disease, and the
approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with MI tumors who do not survive
past 5 years. In breast cancer, independently derived prognostic gene
signatures are enriched with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes.
Recently, a CCP score obtained from the average expression level of 31
genes was found to predict recurrence free and disease specific survival
(DSS) in prostate cancer. Here, we assess the importance of CCP
correlated genes for prognosis in bladder cancer and the prognostic value
of the CCP score in 8 publicly available and heterogeneous microarray
datasets (N = 762), with samples obtained from both cystectomy and
transurethral resection of the bladder (TURBT) and profiled on 7
microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated and predictive genes for
stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an iterative subtractive
method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the predictive clusters found
that CCP was the only consistently enriched class of genes (P < 0.05) for
each clinical variable. We then analyzed the extent in which the
performance of predictive gene signatures, composed of the top 10-100
genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes that correlated with the CCP
gene signature. When the gene expression data was adjusted for the 31 CCP
genes, the predictive ability of the gene signatures was significantly
and negatively impaired in most datasets. We next evaluated the CCP score
for its prognostic value. Without optimizing the CCP signature for
bladder cancer, we found the CCP score to be significantly higher in MI
compared to NMI tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P An important aspect
of personalized medicine involves the identification of high risk
patients likely to benefit from neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the
case of bladder cancer, this entails identifying the 20-30% of patients
with non-muscle invasive (NMI) tumors that will progress to
muscle-invasive (MI) disease, and the approximately 50% of patients
diagnosed with MI tumors who do not survive past 5 years. In breast
cancer, independently derived prognostic gene signatures are enriched
with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes. Recently, a CCP score obtained
from the average expression level of 31 genes was found to predict
recurrence free and disease specific survival (DSS) in prostate cancer.
Here, we assess the importance of CCP correlated genes for prognosis in
bladder cancer and the prognostic value of the CCP score in 8 publicly
available and heterogeneous microarray datasets (N = 762), with samples
obtained from both cystectomy and transurethral resection of the bladder
(TURBT) and profiled on 7 microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated
and predictive genes for stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an
iterative subtractive method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the
predictive clusters found that CCP was the only consistently enriched
class of genes (P < 0.05) for each clinical variable. We then analyzed
the extent in which the performance of predictive gene signatures,
composed of the top 10-100 genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes
that correlated with the CCP gene signature. When the gene expression
data was adjusted for the 31 CCP genes, the predictive ability of the
gene signatures was significantly and negatively impaired in most
datasets. We next evaluated the CCP score for its prognostic value.
Without optimizing the CCP signature for bladder cancer, we found the CCP
score to be significantly higher in MI compared to NMI tumors in 3/4
cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and
in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P An important aspect of personalized medicine
involves the identification of high risk patients likely to benefit from
neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the case of bladder cancer, this
entails identifying the 20-30% of patients with non-muscle invasive (NMI)
tumors that will progress to muscle-invasive (MI) disease, and the
approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with MI tumors who do not survive
past 5 years. In breast cancer, independently derived prognostic gene
signatures are enriched with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes.
Recently, a CCP score obtained from the average expression level of 31
genes was found to predict recurrence free and disease specific survival
(DSS) in prostate cancer. Here, we assess the importance of CCP
correlated genes for prognosis in bladder cancer and the prognostic value
of the CCP score in 8 publicly available and heterogeneous microarray
datasets (N = 762), with samples obtained from both cystectomy and
transurethral resection of the bladder (TURBT) and profiled on 7
microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated and predictive genes for
stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an iterative subtractive
method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the predictive clusters found
that CCP was the only consistently enriched class of genes (P < 0.05) for
each clinical variable. We then analyzed the extent in which the
performance of predictive gene signatures, composed of the top 10-100
genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes that correlated with the CCP
gene signature. When the gene expression data was adjusted for the 31 CCP
genes, the predictive ability of the gene signatures was significantly
and negatively impaired in most datasets. We next evaluated the CCP score
for its prognostic value. Without optimizing the CCP signature for
bladder cancer, we found the CCP score to be significantly higher in MI
compared to NMI tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC
ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P < 0.05) with AUC
ranging from 0.60 to 0.75. CCP score was significantly higher in high
grade tumors compared to low grade tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P
An important aspect of personalized medicine involves the identification
of high risk patients likely to benefit from neoadjuvant or adjuvant
therapy. In the case of bladder cancer, this entails identifying the
20-30% of patients with non-muscle invasive (NMI) tumors that will
progress to muscle-invasive (MI) disease, and the approximately 50% of
patients diagnosed with MI tumors who do not survive past 5 years. In
breast cancer, independently derived prognostic gene signatures are
enriched with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes. Recently, a CCP score
obtained from the average expression level of 31 genes was found to
predict recurrence free and disease specific survival (DSS) in prostate
cancer. Here, we assess the importance of CCP correlated genes for
prognosis in bladder cancer and the prognostic value of the CCP score in
8 publicly available and heterogeneous microarray datasets (N = 762),
with samples obtained from both cystectomy and transurethral resection of
the bladder (TURBT) and profiled on 7 microarray platforms. Clusters of
correlated and predictive genes for stage, grade, and DSS were identified
using an iterative subtractive method. A gene set enrichment analysis on
the predictive clusters found that CCP was the only consistently enriched
class of genes (P < 0.05) for each clinical variable. We then analyzed
the extent in which the performance of predictive gene signatures,
composed of the top 10-100 genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes
that correlated with the CCP gene signature. When the gene expression
data was adjusted for the 31 CCP genes, the predictive ability of the
gene signatures was significantly and negatively impaired in most
datasets. We next evaluated the CCP score for its prognostic value.
Without optimizing the CCP signature for bladder cancer, we found the CCP
score to be significantly higher in MI compared to NMI tumors in 3/4
cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and
in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P < 0.05) with AUC ranging from 0.60 to 0.75. CCP
score was significantly higher in high grade tumors compared to low grade
tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.63
to 0.88, and in all 5 TURBT datasets (P An important aspect of
personalized medicine involves the identification of high risk patients
likely to benefit from neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the case of
bladder cancer, this entails identifying the 20-30% of patients with
non-muscle invasive (NMI) tumors that will progress to muscle-invasive
(MI) disease, and the approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with MI
tumors who do not survive past 5 years. In breast cancer, independently
derived prognostic gene signatures are enriched with cell cycle
proliferation (CCP) genes. Recently, a CCP score obtained from the
average expression level of 31 genes was found to predict recurrence free
and disease specific survival (DSS) in prostate cancer. Here, we assess
the importance of CCP correlated genes for prognosis in bladder cancer
and the prognostic value of the CCP score in 8 publicly available and
heterogeneous microarray datasets (N = 762), with samples obtained from
both cystectomy and transurethral resection of the bladder (TURBT) and
profiled on 7 microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated and predictive
genes for stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an iterative
subtractive method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the predictive
clusters found that CCP was the only consistently enriched class of genes
(P < 0.05) for each clinical variable. We then analyzed the extent in
which the performance of predictive gene signatures, composed of the top
10-100 genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes that correlated with
the CCP gene signature. When the gene expression data was adjusted for
the 31 CCP genes, the predictive ability of the gene signatures was
significantly and negatively impaired in most datasets. We next evaluated
the CCP score for its prognostic value. Without optimizing the CCP
signature for bladder cancer, we found the CCP score to be significantly
higher in MI compared to NMI tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P <
0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P <
0.05) with AUC ranging from 0.60 to 0.75. CCP score was significantly
higher in high grade tumors compared to low grade tumors in 3/4
cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.63 to 0.88, and
in all 5 TURBT datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.76 to 0.91.
Most notably, although nodal staging was the most consistent predictor of
DSS in cystectomy datasets (P An important aspect of personalized
medicine involves the identification of high risk patients likely to
benefit from neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the case of bladder
cancer, this entails identifying the 20-30% of patients with non-muscle
invasive (NMI) tumors that will progress to muscle-invasive (MI) disease,
and the approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with MI tumors who do not
survive past 5 years. In breast cancer, independently derived prognostic
gene signatures are enriched with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes.
Recently, a CCP score obtained from the average expression level of 31
genes was found to predict recurrence free and disease specific survival
(DSS) in prostate cancer. Here, we assess the importance of CCP
correlated genes for prognosis in bladder cancer and the prognostic value
of the CCP score in 8 publicly available and heterogeneous microarray
datasets (N = 762), with samples obtained from both cystectomy and
transurethral resection of the bladder (TURBT) and profiled on 7
microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated and predictive genes for
stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an iterative subtractive
method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the predictive clusters found
that CCP was the only consistently enriched class of genes (P < 0.05) for
each clinical variable. We then analyzed the extent in which the
performance of predictive gene signatures, composed of the top 10-100
genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes that correlated with the CCP
gene signature. When the gene expression data was adjusted for the 31 CCP
genes, the predictive ability of the gene signatures was significantly
and negatively impaired in most datasets. We next evaluated the CCP score
for its prognostic value. Without optimizing the CCP signature for
bladder cancer, we found the CCP score to be significantly higher in MI
compared to NMI tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC
ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P < 0.05) with AUC
ranging from 0.60 to 0.75. CCP score was significantly higher in high
grade tumors compared to low grade tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P <
0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.63 to 0.88, and in all 5 TURBT datasets (P
< 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.76 to 0.91. Most notably, although nodal
staging was the most consistent predictor of DSS in cystectomy datasets
(P < 0.05), CCP score was the only clinical variable marginally
predictive of DSS (P An important aspect of personalized medicine
involves the identification of high risk patients likely to benefit from
neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the case of bladder cancer, this
entails identifying the 20-30% of patients with non-muscle invasive (NMI)
tumors that will progress to muscle-invasive (MI) disease, and the
approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with MI tumors who do not survive
past 5 years. In breast cancer, independently derived prognostic gene
signatures are enriched with cell cycle proliferation (CCP) genes.
Recently, a CCP score obtained from the average expression level of 31
genes was found to predict recurrence free and disease specific survival
(DSS) in prostate cancer. Here, we assess the importance of CCP
correlated genes for prognosis in bladder cancer and the prognostic value
of the CCP score in 8 publicly available and heterogeneous microarray
datasets (N = 762), with samples obtained from both cystectomy and
transurethral resection of the bladder (TURBT) and profiled on 7
microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated and predictive genes for
stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an iterative subtractive
method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the predictive clusters found
that CCP was the only consistently enriched class of genes (P < 0.05) for
each clinical variable. We then analyzed the extent in which the
performance of predictive gene signatures, composed of the top 10-100
genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes that correlated with the CCP
gene signature. When the gene expression data was adjusted for the 31 CCP
genes, the predictive ability of the gene signatures was significantly
and negatively impaired in most datasets. We next evaluated the CCP score
for its prognostic value. Without optimizing the CCP signature for
bladder cancer, we found the CCP score to be significantly higher in MI
compared to NMI tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC
ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P < 0.05) with AUC
ranging from 0.60 to 0.75. CCP score was significantly higher in high
grade tumors compared to low grade tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P <
0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.63 to 0.88, and in all 5 TURBT datasets (P
< 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.76 to 0.91. Most notably, although nodal
staging was the most consistent predictor of DSS in cystectomy datasets
(P < 0.05), CCP score was the only clinical variable marginally
predictive of DSS (P < 0.10) in multiple cystectomy datasets when only
preoperative variables were considered. In TURBT datasets, CCP score was
the only variable predictive of DSS (P An important aspect of
personalized medicine involves the identification of high risk patients
likely to benefit from neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. In the case of
bladder cancer, this entails identifying the 20-30% of patients with
non-muscle invasive (NMI) tumors that will progress to muscle-invasive
(MI) disease, and the approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with MI
tumors who do not survive past 5 years. In breast cancer, independently
derived prognostic gene signatures are enriched with cell cycle
proliferation (CCP) genes. Recently, a CCP score obtained from the
average expression level of 31 genes was found to predict recurrence free
and disease specific survival (DSS) in prostate cancer. Here, we assess
the importance of CCP correlated genes for prognosis in bladder cancer
and the prognostic value of the CCP score in 8 publicly available and
heterogeneous microarray datasets (N = 762), with samples obtained from
both cystectomy and transurethral resection of the bladder (TURBT) and
profiled on 7 microarray platforms. Clusters of correlated and predictive
genes for stage, grade, and DSS were identified using an iterative
subtractive method. A gene set enrichment analysis on the predictive
clusters found that CCP was the only consistently enriched class of genes
(P < 0.05) for each clinical variable. We then analyzed the extent in
which the performance of predictive gene signatures, composed of the top
10-100 genes in step sizes of 10, depended on genes that correlated with
the CCP gene signature. When the gene expression data was adjusted for
the 31 CCP genes, the predictive ability of the gene signatures was
significantly and negatively impaired in most datasets. We next evaluated
the CCP score for its prognostic value. Without optimizing the CCP
signature for bladder cancer, we found the CCP score to be significantly
higher in MI compared to NMI tumors in 3/4 cystectomy datasets (P <
0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.62 to 0.84, and in 2/4 TURBT datasets (P <
0.05) with AUC ranging from 0.60 to 0.75. CCP score was significantly
higher in high grade tumors compared to low grade tumors in 3/4
cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.63 to 0.88, and
in all 5 TURBT datasets (P < 0.05), with AUC ranging from 0.76 to 0.91.
Most notably, although nodal staging was the most consistent predictor of
DSS in cystectomy datasets (P < 0.05), CCP score was the only clinical
variable marginally predictive of DSS (P < 0.10) in multiple cystectomy
datasets when only preoperative variables were considered. In TURBT
datasets, CCP score was the only variable predictive of DSS (P < 0.05) in
multiple datasets. Finally, CCP score was predictive of NMI to MI
progression in low grade tumors (AUC = 0.73, P = 0.020). Altogether,
these results indicate that the prognostic value of gene signatures in
bladder cancer depend on genes that correlate with CCP and that
optimization of the CCP signature may yield clinically relevant
prognostic markers in bladder cancer.

