Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Subsquamous extension of Barrett epithelium is a regular event


Endoscopic resection and/or ablation of Barrett esophagus (BE) is
directed by the endoscopic visual impression of pinkish Barrett versus
whitish esophageal mucosa; microscopically however, BE may extend
underneath squamous epithelium. Aim of the present study is to evaluate
subsquamous BE extension in a large cohort of patients with
endoscopically resected neoplastic BE. Resection specimens of 97 patients
treated by endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) for suspected or confirmed
neoplastic BE (83 men, 14 women, mean age 65 years) were retrospective
reanalyzed by two experienced GI histopathologists. Orientation of
resected specimens pinned on cork was done prior to histopathological
workup with squamous epithelium oriented proximally. Subsquamous
extension was measured in all specimens containing squamous epithelium.
Endoscopic and other histopathologic data were also analyzed. 442
specimens of the 97 study cases were analyzed and subsquamous BE was
found in 42.5% of specimens or 97.9% of patients. Mean length of
subsquamous BE extension was 3.5 mm (0.0-9.6 mm) with 27.8% of cases
measuring 5 mm or more. In 56 cases (57.7%), subsquamous BE consisted
entirely or partially of neoplasia (42 cancers, 12 HGIN, 2 LGIN) with a
mean subsquamous tumor extension of 1.2 mm mm (range 0.0-5.2 mm).
Subsquamous extension of BE including all forms of neoplasia is a regular
event. A minimal safety margin of 1 cm has to be kept with Barrett
ablation techniques in order to avoid BE and/or tumor recurrence.

