Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MEK-ERK pathway inhibition reduces mucin production in a murine
xenograft model of pseudomyxoma peritonei


Introduction: Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is characterized by
compressive organ dysfunction from progressive intra-peritoneal
accumulation of mucinous ascites. MUC2 is the primary secreted mucin in
PMP and the MAPK signaling pathway is involved in MUC2 promoter
regulation. We hypothesized that targeted inhibition of the MAPK pathway
using small molecule drugs would be a novel, effective and safe
therapeutic strategy in this malignancy by reducing mucinous tumor
burden. Methods: The therapeutic effect of RDEA119 (BAY 86-9766), a
specific MEK 1/2 inhibitor, was assessed in mucin-secreting human colon
cancer LS174T cells in vitro and murine xenograft models of LS174T and
human appendiceal PMP in vivo, by serial parametric measurements, MUC2
transcripts via real time RT-PCR and MUC2 protein expression via
immunofluorescence assays. Results: MUC2 mRNA accounted for approximately
98% of the overall message encoding for secreted gel-forming mucins, with
a relatively small contribution from other known gel-forming mucins
(MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC6 and MUC19) in LS174T cells and in the murine
xenograft models. RDEA119 significantly inhibited basal MUC2 mRNA levels
(DMEM: 0.02 0.0007 vs. RDEA119 5x106M: 0.007 0.0003; 48 hr;
pIntroduction: Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is characterized by
compressive organ dysfunction from progressive intra-peritoneal
accumulation of mucinous ascites. MUC2 is the primary secreted mucin in
PMP and the MAPK signaling pathway is involved in MUC2 promoter
regulation. We hypothesized that targeted inhibition of the MAPK pathway
using small molecule drugs would be a novel, effective and safe
therapeutic strategy in this malignancy by reducing mucinous tumor
burden. Methods: The therapeutic effect of RDEA119 (BAY 86-9766), a
specific MEK 1/2 inhibitor, was assessed in mucin-secreting human colon
cancer LS174T cells in vitro and murine xenograft models of LS174T and
human appendiceal PMP in vivo, by serial parametric measurements, MUC2
transcripts via real time RT-PCR and MUC2 protein expression via
immunofluorescence assays. Results: MUC2 mRNA accounted for approximately
98% of the overall message encoding for secreted gel-forming mucins, with
a relatively small contribution from other known gel-forming mucins
(MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC6 and MUC19) in LS174T cells and in the murine
xenograft models. RDEA119 significantly inhibited basal MUC2 mRNA levels
(DMEM: 0.02 0.0007 vs. RDEA119 5x106M: 0.007 0.0003; 48 hr; p<0.0001) and
sodium butyrate-stimulated MUC2 mRNA levels (NaB 2.5 mM: 0.06 0.004 vs.
RDEA119 5x106M + NaB 2.5 mM: 0.004 0.0001; 48 hr; p 43 days; p=0.02). In
the intra-peritoneal PMP murine xenograft model treated with chronic oral
RDEA119, MUC2 protein analysis by immunofluorescence demonstrated
non-significant gross reduction in MUC2 protein volume (PBS-PO: 41695993
13154727 m2 vs. RDEA-PO: 35447861 6079224 m2; p>0.05) and tumor cell
count (PBS-PO: 79889 25654 cells vs. RDEA-PO: 52093 15433 cells; p>0.05),
suggesting a dual inhibitory effect of RDEA119 on mucin production and
tumor cell proliferation. Conclusions: MEK-ERK pathway inhibitor RDEA119
demonstrated effective inhibition of MUC2 production in vitro and in vivo
and improved survival in a subcutaneous murine xenograft model of PMP.
Reduced mucinous tumor burden by targeted inhibition of the MAPK pathway
may be a novel and effective strategy to reduce tumor-specific symptoms,
improve overall survival and reduce the need for morbid cytoreductive
surgical procedures in patients with recurrent PMP.

