Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Significance of thymidylate synthase copy numbers for resistance
to pemetrexed in lung cancer


Pemetrexed is a multitargeted antifolate with promising clinical activity
in non-squamous lung cancer. It targets the folate-dependent enzymes
thymidylate synthase (TS), reduced folate carrier, and
folylpolygamma-glutamate synthetas, all of which are involved in the de
novo biosynthesis of thymidine and purine nucleotides.The primary
mechanism of the action of pemetrexed is inhibition of TS, which results
in a decrease in the available thymidine necessary for DNA synthesis. We
have previously established pemetrexed -resistant lung cancer cell line,
and have shown that overexpression of TS resulted in increased pemetrexed
resistance. We have also examined that TS copy numbers by quantitative
real-time PCR, were increased in pemetrexed-resistant cells. Therefore we
investigated TS copy numbers in lung cancer cell lines and clinical
samples to examine whether TS copy numbers are the biomarker for
pemetrexed sensitivity. First, we examined the correlation of TS copy
numbers and 50% cell survival of pemetrexed for 14 lung adenocarcinoma
cell lines, and a meaningful relationship was accepted. In addition, we
examined TS copy number in 20 bronchoscopic specimens of non-squamous
lung cancers, and found that the correlation was also confirmed between
TS copy numbers and clinical response. Our study suggests that TS copy
number may be a predictive marker for pemetrexed sensitivity in lung
cancer.

