Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IDH1057, A novel, synthetic, small molecule inhibitor of heat
shock protein 90(Hsp90)


Backgroud: The molecular chaperone Heat shock protein 90(Hsp90) governs
the stabilization and activity of an array of over 100 client proteins,
many of which are key signaling molecules involved in cell proliferation,
survival, and transformation. A significant number of these client
proteins are oncogenic in nature, including the protein kinases Her2,
C-Raf, B-Raf, and AKT. We report here that IDH1057 is structurally
distinct from a geldanamycin derivative, tanespimycin(17-AAG) as a novel
and potent small molecule Hsp90 inhibitor that binds to the NH2-terminal
ATP-binding pocket of Hsp90. Results: IDH1057 exhibited superior binding
affinity for the ATPase domain of Hsp90(IDH1057, human Hsp90 FP
IC50Backgroud: The molecular chaperone Heat shock protein 90(Hsp90)
governs the stabilization and activity of an array of over 100 client
proteins, many of which are key signaling molecules involved in cell
proliferation, survival, and transformation. A significant number of
these client proteins are oncogenic in nature, including the protein
kinases Her2, C-Raf, B-Raf, and AKT. We report here that IDH1057 is
structurally distinct from a geldanamycin derivative,
tanespimycin(17-AAG) as a novel and potent small molecule Hsp90 inhibitor
that binds to the NH2-terminal ATP-binding pocket of Hsp90. Results:
IDH1057 exhibited superior binding affinity for the ATPase domain of
Hsp90(IDH1057, human Hsp90 FP IC50<150 nM) compared to 17-AAG(IC50 =456.3
nM) in vitro. IDH1057 also markedly inhibited proliferation in a broad
panel of human tumor cell lines(IC50100 nM) and depleted Her2 in SKBR3
breast cancer cells(IC50Backgroud: The molecular chaperone Heat shock
protein 90(Hsp90) governs the stabilization and activity of an array of
over 100 client proteins, many of which are key signaling molecules
involved in cell proliferation, survival, and transformation. A
significant number of these client proteins are oncogenic in nature,
including the protein kinases Her2, C-Raf, B-Raf, and AKT. We report here
that IDH1057 is structurally distinct from a geldanamycin derivative,
tanespimycin(17-AAG) as a novel and potent small molecule Hsp90 inhibitor
that binds to the NH2-terminal ATP-binding pocket of Hsp90. Results:
IDH1057 exhibited superior binding affinity for the ATPase domain of
Hsp90(IDH1057, human Hsp90 FP IC50<150 nM) compared to 17-AAG(IC50 =456.3
nM) in vitro. IDH1057 also markedly inhibited proliferation in a broad
panel of human tumor cell lines(IC50100 nM) and depleted Her2 in SKBR3
breast cancer cells(IC50<50 nM). 10 NSCLC cell lines were relatively
sensitive to IDH1057, irrespective of EGFR, Her2 or KRAS mutational
status. IDH1057 was also highly effective against cell lines that
displayed resistance to erlotinib. IDH1057 efficiently inhibited cell
proliferation in 8 breast cancer cell lines including triple-negative
breast cancer(TNBC) cell lines such as BT-20, Hs578T and MDA-MB-231.
Exposure to IDH1057 led to a rapid and dramatic degradation of key
signaling molecules in BT474 cells. Based on these results, we examined
in vivo anti-tumor activity of IDH1057 in BT474 breast cancer xenografts.
Following once daily oral dosing of IDH1057 at 200mg/kg on a weekly
5-day-on and 2-day-off schedule for 4 weeks, this compound showed
statistically significant tumor growth inhibition(TGI=84.5%) and was
well-tolerated with no observable body weight loss. A2780 ovarian cancer
xenografts in mice treated orally with IDH1057 also resulted in potent
tumor growth inhibition. More importantly, IDH1057 displayed favorable
oral PK profiles in mice. Additionally, we performed in vitro ADME assays
to characterize a new series of small molecule inhibitors. IDH1057
exhibited high metabolic stability in liver microsomes from human, mouse
and beagle(60%). Five human CYP isoforms were not significantly inhibited
by IDH1057 at 10uM. IDH1057 had moderate permeability in MDCK
permeability assay(Papp=4.7x106 cm/sec). Conclusion: Our results indicate
that IDH1057 is a novel and fully synthetic Hsp90 inhibitor with strong
anti-tumor activity in vitro and in vivo. IDH1057 is a promising and
orally active drug candidate for cancer therapy.

