Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Black raspberries suppress phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway in
carcinogen-induced esophageal cancer in rats


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most common
malignant neoplasms worldwide. The overall 5-year survival rate of
esophageal SCC in the United States is only 13%, which is close to the
observed rates in high-risk countries including China and other global
regions. To decrease the incidence of esophageal cancer, cancer
chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical intervention would be a
logical and practical approach. Our laboratory and others have used the
N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat preclinical model of
esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of esophageal
carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential chemopreventive
agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black raspberries (BRBs)
significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development in rat esophagus,
at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays important
roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The principal objective of
this study is to assess the roles of this signaling cascade in
preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the mechanistic actions
of BRBs against this disease. In the present study, F344 rats were
treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week for 5 weeks.
After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A diet containing
5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal tumors were
counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the expression
levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our data show
that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly decreased
expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and p-mTORSer2448 from
3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed control diet to
0.9-fold (P Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most
common malignant neoplasms worldwide. The overall 5-year survival rate of
esophageal SCC in the United States is only 13%, which is close to the
observed rates in high-risk countries including China and other global
regions. To decrease the incidence of esophageal cancer, cancer
chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical intervention would be a
logical and practical approach. Our laboratory and others have used the
N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat preclinical model of
esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of esophageal
carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential chemopreventive
agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black raspberries (BRBs)
significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development in rat esophagus,
at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays important
roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The principal objective of
this study is to assess the roles of this signaling cascade in
preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the mechanistic actions
of BRBs against this disease. In the present study, F344 rats were
treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week for 5 weeks.
After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A diet containing
5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal tumors were
counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the expression
levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our data show
that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly decreased
expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and p-mTORSer2448 from
3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed control diet to
0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) is one of the most common malignant neoplasms worldwide. The
overall 5-year survival rate of esophageal SCC in the United States is
only 13%, which is close to the observed rates in high-risk countries
including China and other global regions. To decrease the incidence of
esophageal cancer, cancer chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical
intervention would be a logical and practical approach. Our laboratory
and others have used the N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat
preclinical model of esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of
esophageal carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential
chemopreventive agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black
raspberries (BRBs) significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development
in rat esophagus, at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway plays important roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The
principal objective of this study is to assess the roles of this
signaling cascade in preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the
mechanistic actions of BRBs against this disease. In the present study,
F344 rats were treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week
for 5 weeks. After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A
diet containing 5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal
tumors were counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the
expression levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our
data show that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly
decreased expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and
p-mTORSer2448 from 3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed
control diet to 0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most common
malignant neoplasms worldwide. The overall 5-year survival rate of
esophageal SCC in the United States is only 13%, which is close to the
observed rates in high-risk countries including China and other global
regions. To decrease the incidence of esophageal cancer, cancer
chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical intervention would be a
logical and practical approach. Our laboratory and others have used the
N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat preclinical model of
esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of esophageal
carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential chemopreventive
agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black raspberries (BRBs)
significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development in rat esophagus,
at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays important
roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The principal objective of
this study is to assess the roles of this signaling cascade in
preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the mechanistic actions
of BRBs against this disease. In the present study, F344 rats were
treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week for 5 weeks.
After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A diet containing
5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal tumors were
counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the expression
levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our data show
that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly decreased
expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and p-mTORSer2448 from
3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed control diet to
0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P < 0.001) and
1.3-fold (P Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most
common malignant neoplasms worldwide. The overall 5-year survival rate of
esophageal SCC in the United States is only 13%, which is close to the
observed rates in high-risk countries including China and other global
regions. To decrease the incidence of esophageal cancer, cancer
chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical intervention would be a
logical and practical approach. Our laboratory and others have used the
N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat preclinical model of
esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of esophageal
carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential chemopreventive
agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black raspberries (BRBs)
significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development in rat esophagus,
at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays important
roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The principal objective of
this study is to assess the roles of this signaling cascade in
preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the mechanistic actions
of BRBs against this disease. In the present study, F344 rats were
treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week for 5 weeks.
After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A diet containing
5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal tumors were
counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the expression
levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our data show
that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly decreased
expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and p-mTORSer2448 from
3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed control diet to
0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P < 0.001) and
1.3-fold (P < 0.001), in rats fed 5% BRBs, respectively. In papillomatous
lesions, the expression levels of the above proteins were also reduced by
BRBs from 5.3-fold to 1.5-fold (p-AKTSer478; P Esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most common malignant neoplasms worldwide.
The overall 5-year survival rate of esophageal SCC in the United States
is only 13%, which is close to the observed rates in high-risk countries
including China and other global regions. To decrease the incidence of
esophageal cancer, cancer chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical
intervention would be a logical and practical approach. Our laboratory
and others have used the N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat
preclinical model of esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of
esophageal carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential
chemopreventive agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black
raspberries (BRBs) significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development
in rat esophagus, at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway plays important roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The
principal objective of this study is to assess the roles of this
signaling cascade in preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the
mechanistic actions of BRBs against this disease. In the present study,
F344 rats were treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week
for 5 weeks. After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A
diet containing 5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal
tumors were counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the
expression levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our
data show that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly
decreased expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and
p-mTORSer2448 from 3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed
control diet to 0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P <
0.001) and 1.3-fold (P < 0.001), in rats fed 5% BRBs, respectively. In
papillomatous lesions, the expression levels of the above proteins were
also reduced by BRBs from 5.3-fold to 1.5-fold (p-AKTSer478; P < 0.001),
6.7-fold to 1.7-fold (p-PI3K-p83, P Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) is one of the most common malignant neoplasms worldwide. The
overall 5-year survival rate of esophageal SCC in the United States is
only 13%, which is close to the observed rates in high-risk countries
including China and other global regions. To decrease the incidence of
esophageal cancer, cancer chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical
intervention would be a logical and practical approach. Our laboratory
and others have used the N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat
preclinical model of esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of
esophageal carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential
chemopreventive agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black
raspberries (BRBs) significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development
in rat esophagus, at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway plays important roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The
principal objective of this study is to assess the roles of this
signaling cascade in preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the
mechanistic actions of BRBs against this disease. In the present study,
F344 rats were treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week
for 5 weeks. After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A
diet containing 5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal
tumors were counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the
expression levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our
data show that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly
decreased expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and
p-mTORSer2448 from 3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed
control diet to 0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P <
0.001) and 1.3-fold (P < 0.001), in rats fed 5% BRBs, respectively. In
papillomatous lesions, the expression levels of the above proteins were
also reduced by BRBs from 5.3-fold to 1.5-fold (p-AKTSer478; P < 0.001),
6.7-fold to 1.7-fold (p-PI3K-p83, P < 0.001), 8.4-fold to 1.5-fold (p-S6,
P Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most common
malignant neoplasms worldwide. The overall 5-year survival rate of
esophageal SCC in the United States is only 13%, which is close to the
observed rates in high-risk countries including China and other global
regions. To decrease the incidence of esophageal cancer, cancer
chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical intervention would be a
logical and practical approach. Our laboratory and others have used the
N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat preclinical model of
esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of esophageal
carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential chemopreventive
agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black raspberries (BRBs)
significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development in rat esophagus,
at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS),
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway plays important
roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The principal objective of
this study is to assess the roles of this signaling cascade in
preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the mechanistic actions
of BRBs against this disease. In the present study, F344 rats were
treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week for 5 weeks.
After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A diet containing
5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal tumors were
counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the expression
levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our data show
that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly decreased
expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and p-mTORSer2448 from
3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed control diet to
0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P < 0.001) and
1.3-fold (P < 0.001), in rats fed 5% BRBs, respectively. In papillomatous
lesions, the expression levels of the above proteins were also reduced by
BRBs from 5.3-fold to 1.5-fold (p-AKTSer478; P < 0.001), 6.7-fold to
1.7-fold (p-PI3K-p83, P < 0.001), 8.4-fold to 1.5-fold (p-S6, P < 0.001)
and 7.9-fold to 1.7-fold (p-mTORSer2448, P Esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) is one of the most common malignant neoplasms worldwide.
The overall 5-year survival rate of esophageal SCC in the United States
is only 13%, which is close to the observed rates in high-risk countries
including China and other global regions. To decrease the incidence of
esophageal cancer, cancer chemoprevention through dietary and/or chemical
intervention would be a logical and practical approach. Our laboratory
and others have used the N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat
preclinical model of esophageal cancer to investigate the mechanisms of
esophageal carcinogenesis and to evaluate the efficacy of potential
chemopreventive agents. Studies found that dietary freeze-dried black
raspberries (BRBs) significantly inhibited NMBA-induced tumor development
in rat esophagus, at least in part by inhibition of inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)), c-Jun, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factorB (NFB) pathways. The
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway plays important roles in certain aspects of carcinogenesis. The
principal objective of this study is to assess the roles of this
signaling cascade in preclinical esophageal cancer model and examine the
mechanistic actions of BRBs against this disease. In the present study,
F344 rats were treated with NMBA (0.30 mg/kg b.w.) three times per week
for 5 weeks. After 72 hours, animals were fed AIN-76A diet or AIN-76A
diet containing 5% BRBs. At week 29, rats were sacrificed and esophageal
tumors were counted. Western blot assays were conducted to detect the
expression levels of some proteins involved in PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Our
data show that in esophageal preneoplastic lesions, BRBs significantly
decreased expression levels of p-AKTSer478, p-PI3K-p83, p-S6 and
p-mTORSer2448 from 3.2-fold, 5.9-fold, 5.4-fold and 4.4-fold in rats fed
control diet to 0.9-fold (P < 0.005), 1.1-fold (P < 0.001), 1.2-fold (P <
0.001) and 1.3-fold (P < 0.001), in rats fed 5% BRBs, respectively. In
papillomatous lesions, the expression levels of the above proteins were
also reduced by BRBs from 5.3-fold to 1.5-fold (p-AKTSer478; P < 0.001),
6.7-fold to 1.7-fold (p-PI3K-p83, P < 0.001), 8.4-fold to 1.5-fold (p-S6,
P < 0.001) and 7.9-fold to 1.7-fold (p-mTORSer2448, P < 0.001). Our
results indicated that the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway was activated
in NMBA-induced tumor development in rats and the activation was
significantly suppressed by BRBs. Further investigation of this signaling
cascade in esophageal carcinogenesis is underway in our laboratory.
(Supported by NCI RO1 CA131073-01A1).

