Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of DAB2IP promotes colorectal cancer progression by inducing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem-like cell signatures


Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers and the second
leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States. Approximately
50% of patients diagnosed with CRC will die because of tumor recurrence
and distant metastases. The aberrant activation of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is known to play a critical role in triggering malignant
tumor progression not only in tumor metastasis but also in tumor
recurrence. Moreover, EMT is believed to promote the onset of cancer stem
cell (CSC). Unveiling the genes regulating CRC EMT and cell stemness
should lead to novel therapeutic approaches. Previously, we reported that
DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family,
functions a scaffold protein to balance proliferation and apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells. DAB2IP is down-regulated in various human cancers
and functions as a bona fide tumor suppressor in cancer development;
however, in CRC, the role and mechanism of DAB2IP contributes to EMT and
CSC has not been elucidated. In this study, firstly, we examined the
expression of the DAB2IP in clinical colorectal neoplasms (N=162
patients) using immunohistochemistry. The clinicopathologic (age, sex,
tumor site, and grade) factors were also examined. Our data showed that
DAB2IP expression levels were down-regulated in CRC tissues and lymphatic
metastasis tissues (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common
cancers and the second leading cause of cancer-related death in the
United States. Approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with CRC will die
because of tumor recurrence and distant metastases. The aberrant
activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to play a
critical role in triggering malignant tumor progression not only in tumor
metastasis but also in tumor recurrence. Moreover, EMT is believed to
promote the onset of cancer stem cell (CSC). Unveiling the genes
regulating CRC EMT and cell stemness should lead to novel therapeutic
approaches. Previously, we reported that DAB2IP, a novel member of the
Ras GTPase-activating protein family, functions a scaffold protein to
balance proliferation and apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. DAB2IP is
down-regulated in various human cancers and functions as a bona fide
tumor suppressor in cancer development; however, in CRC, the role and
mechanism of DAB2IP contributes to EMT and CSC has not been elucidated.
In this study, firstly, we examined the expression of the DAB2IP in
clinical colorectal neoplasms (N=162 patients) using
immunohistochemistry. The clinicopathologic (age, sex, tumor site, and
grade) factors were also examined. Our data showed that DAB2IP expression
levels were down-regulated in CRC tissues and lymphatic metastasis
tissues (p<0.01). Loss of DAB2IP expression was correlated with tumor
differentiation (p=0.004), distal metastasis (p=0.034) and Duke's stage
(pColorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States.
Approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with CRC will die because of
tumor recurrence and distant metastases. The aberrant activation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to play a critical role
in triggering malignant tumor progression not only in tumor metastasis
but also in tumor recurrence. Moreover, EMT is believed to promote the
onset of cancer stem cell (CSC). Unveiling the genes regulating CRC EMT
and cell stemness should lead to novel therapeutic approaches.
Previously, we reported that DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras
GTPase-activating protein family, functions a scaffold protein to balance
proliferation and apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. DAB2IP is
down-regulated in various human cancers and functions as a bona fide
tumor suppressor in cancer development; however, in CRC, the role and
mechanism of DAB2IP contributes to EMT and CSC has not been elucidated.
In this study, firstly, we examined the expression of the DAB2IP in
clinical colorectal neoplasms (N=162 patients) using
immunohistochemistry. The clinicopathologic (age, sex, tumor site, and
grade) factors were also examined. Our data showed that DAB2IP expression
levels were down-regulated in CRC tissues and lymphatic metastasis
tissues (p<0.01). Loss of DAB2IP expression was correlated with tumor
differentiation (p=0.004), distal metastasis (p=0.034) and Duke's stage
(p<0.01). Multivariate analyses indicated that DAB2IP expression level
was an independently prognostic marker for survival of patients with CRC
(pColorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States.
Approximately 50% of patients diagnosed with CRC will die because of
tumor recurrence and distant metastases. The aberrant activation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to play a critical role
in triggering malignant tumor progression not only in tumor metastasis
but also in tumor recurrence. Moreover, EMT is believed to promote the
onset of cancer stem cell (CSC). Unveiling the genes regulating CRC EMT
and cell stemness should lead to novel therapeutic approaches.
Previously, we reported that DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras
GTPase-activating protein family, functions a scaffold protein to balance
proliferation and apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. DAB2IP is
down-regulated in various human cancers and functions as a bona fide
tumor suppressor in cancer development; however, in CRC, the role and
mechanism of DAB2IP contributes to EMT and CSC has not been elucidated.
In this study, firstly, we examined the expression of the DAB2IP in
clinical colorectal neoplasms (N=162 patients) using
immunohistochemistry. The clinicopathologic (age, sex, tumor site, and
grade) factors were also examined. Our data showed that DAB2IP expression
levels were down-regulated in CRC tissues and lymphatic metastasis
tissues (p<0.01). Loss of DAB2IP expression was correlated with tumor
differentiation (p=0.004), distal metastasis (p=0.034) and Duke's stage
(p<0.01). Multivariate analyses indicated that DAB2IP expression level
was an independently prognostic marker for survival of patients with CRC
(p<0.05). Patients with lower expression of DAB2IP had worse overall
survival than higher expression of DAB2IP (pColorectal cancer (CRC) is
one of the most common cancers and the second leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States. Approximately 50% of patients
diagnosed with CRC will die because of tumor recurrence and distant
metastases. The aberrant activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) is known to play a critical role in triggering malignant tumor
progression not only in tumor metastasis but also in tumor recurrence.
Moreover, EMT is believed to promote the onset of cancer stem cell (CSC).
Unveiling the genes regulating CRC EMT and cell stemness should lead to
novel therapeutic approaches. Previously, we reported that DAB2IP, a
novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating protein family, functions a
scaffold protein to balance proliferation and apoptosis in prostate
cancer cells. DAB2IP is down-regulated in various human cancers and
functions as a bona fide tumor suppressor in cancer development; however,
in CRC, the role and mechanism of DAB2IP contributes to EMT and CSC has
not been elucidated. In this study, firstly, we examined the expression
of the DAB2IP in clinical colorectal neoplasms (N=162 patients) using
immunohistochemistry. The clinicopathologic (age, sex, tumor site, and
grade) factors were also examined. Our data showed that DAB2IP expression
levels were down-regulated in CRC tissues and lymphatic metastasis
tissues (p<0.01). Loss of DAB2IP expression was correlated with tumor
differentiation (p=0.004), distal metastasis (p=0.034) and Duke's stage
(p<0.01). Multivariate analyses indicated that DAB2IP expression level
was an independently prognostic marker for survival of patients with CRC
(p<0.05). Patients with lower expression of DAB2IP had worse overall
survival than higher expression of DAB2IP (p<0.01). Then, we determined
the biological function of DAB2IP by knocking down endogenous DAB2IP
protein in cultured CRC cells. Our results showed that loss of DAB2IP in
CRC elicits EMT phenotype as demonstrated by morphological
transformation, down-regulation of epithelial markers (e.g., E-cadherin)
and upregulation of mesenchymal markers (e.g., vimentin). Moreover, loss
of DAB2IP enhances the migration and colony-forming abilities of CRC
cells in vitro and promotes tumor growth in vivo. Furthermore, knocking
down endogenous DAB2IP in CRC cells increases the number of
CD44high/Epcamhigh stem-like cell sub-populations, promotes the
expression of stem cell markers and enhances the self-renewal
capabilities of stem-like cells (sphere formation). In addition, DAB2IP
could prevent translocation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) into
nucleus and suppress its target genes (e.g., Twist, Snail) transcription.
Taken together, our data provides strong evidence that loss of DAB2IP may
contribute to CRC progression by activating EMT and enhancing the
self-renewal of CSCs.

