Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of glioblastoma cell growth with the isoprenoids
perillyl alcohol, farnesol, and geraniol


The naturally occurring isoprenoid perillyl alcohol has chemotherapeutic
activity toward many solid tumor types. Early phase human clinical trials
have shown low toxicity but only limited efficacy. In glioblastoma,
perillyl alcohol has antitumor activity toward cultured cells and has
shown some survival benefit in a Phase I/II clinical trial. More potent
compounds are needed in order to make more significant impacts on patient
survival from glioblastoma and other chemoresistant cancers. Isoprenoids
may be especially useful in glioblastoma given their lipophilic nature
and potential to cross the blood-brain barrier. Here, we compared the
chemotherapeutic effects of perillyl alcohol with the related isoprenoids
farnesol and geraniol on cell survival in cultured U87 human glioblastoma
cells. Cells were treated for 72 h with isoprenoids, and cell survival
was measured by the MTT assay. In U87 cells, each of the isoprenoids
exhibited a dose-dependent effect on cell survival in the range of 0-2
mM. The relative potency was farnesol>perillyl alcohol>geraniol, with
52%, 38% and 23% inhibition at 1500 uM, respectively. We then tested the
effects of isoprenoids on mitogenic signaling via ERK, phosphoERK, AKT
and phosphAKT Western blots in U87 cells. Farnesol decreased phosphoERK
at doses as low as 50 uM, whereas perillyl alcohol and geraniol had no
effect. None of the isoprenoids affected phosphoAKT, total AKT, or total
ERK. Together, these data suggest that farnesol may be a more effective
agent than perillyl alcohol in the chemotherapy of glioblastoma, and its
effects may be due in part to inhibition of ERK phosphorylation.

