Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ER-36 plays an important role in estrogen-dependent growth of
gastric cancer cell line BGC823


Aims: We aimed to investigate the role of estrogen-development signal in
growth of gastric cancer cell, and the expression and location change of
new estrogen receptor ER-36 in gastric cancer cell when dealt with
estrogen. Methods: Gastric cancer BGC823 was chosen as research model and
17- estradiol (E2) was used to deal with cell. Cell growth was examined
by WST-1 method and assayed by microplate reader. ER-36 expression in
mRNA and protein level was assayed by RT-PCR and Western-blot methods and
was quantitated. The location of ER-36 in cell was examined by
immunofluorenscence methods. Result: The cell numbers significantly
increased in all E2 treatment groups compared with control group and the
number of the cell was more at 48h than 24h in E2 treatment groups
(pAims: We aimed to investigate the role of estrogen-development signal
in growth of gastric cancer cell, and the expression and location change
of new estrogen receptor ER-36 in gastric cancer cell when dealt with
estrogen. Methods: Gastric cancer BGC823 was chosen as research model and
17- estradiol (E2) was used to deal with cell. Cell growth was examined
by WST-1 method and assayed by microplate reader. ER-36 expression in
mRNA and protein level was assayed by RT-PCR and Western-blot methods and
was quantitated. The location of ER-36 in cell was examined by
immunofluorenscence methods. Result: The cell numbers significantly
increased in all E2 treatment groups compared with control group and the
number of the cell was more at 48h than 24h in E2 treatment groups
(p<0.05), but with E2 concentration increased, cell growth rate slowed
down. ER-36 mRNA expressions of all E2 treatment groups were more than
that of control group at 24h and 48h, and had a concentration-dependent
of E2 (pAims: We aimed to investigate the role of estrogen-development
signal in growth of gastric cancer cell, and the expression and location
change of new estrogen receptor ER-36 in gastric cancer cell when dealt
with estrogen. Methods: Gastric cancer BGC823 was chosen as research
model and 17- estradiol (E2) was used to deal with cell. Cell growth was
examined by WST-1 method and assayed by microplate reader. ER-36
expression in mRNA and protein level was assayed by RT-PCR and
Western-blot methods and was quantitated. The location of ER-36 in cell
was examined by immunofluorenscence methods. Result: The cell numbers
significantly increased in all E2 treatment groups compared with control
group and the number of the cell was more at 48h than 24h in E2 treatment
groups (p<0.05), but with E2 concentration increased, cell growth rate
slowed down. ER-36 mRNA expressions of all E2 treatment groups were more
than that of control group at 24h and 48h, and had a
concentration-dependent of E2 (p<0.05). ER-36 protein expression had a
concentration-dependent of E2 and was less at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (pAims: We aimed to investigate the role of
estrogen-development signal in growth of gastric cancer cell, and the
expression and location change of new estrogen receptor ER-36 in gastric
cancer cell when dealt with estrogen. Methods: Gastric cancer BGC823 was
chosen as research model and 17- estradiol (E2) was used to deal with
cell. Cell growth was examined by WST-1 method and assayed by microplate
reader. ER-36 expression in mRNA and protein level was assayed by RT-PCR
and Western-blot methods and was quantitated. The location of ER-36 in
cell was examined by immunofluorenscence methods. Result: The cell
numbers significantly increased in all E2 treatment groups compared with
control group and the number of the cell was more at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (p<0.05), but with E2 concentration increased, cell
growth rate slowed down. ER-36 mRNA expressions of all E2 treatment
groups were more than that of control group at 24h and 48h, and had a
concentration-dependent of E2 (p<0.05). ER-36 protein expression had a
concentration-dependent of E2 and was less at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (p<0.05). E2 treatment groups protein expression were
more than control group's at 24h (pAims: We aimed to investigate the role
of estrogen-development signal in growth of gastric cancer cell, and the
expression and location change of new estrogen receptor ER-36 in gastric
cancer cell when dealt with estrogen. Methods: Gastric cancer BGC823 was
chosen as research model and 17- estradiol (E2) was used to deal with
cell. Cell growth was examined by WST-1 method and assayed by microplate
reader. ER-36 expression in mRNA and protein level was assayed by RT-PCR
and Western-blot methods and was quantitated. The location of ER-36 in
cell was examined by immunofluorenscence methods. Result: The cell
numbers significantly increased in all E2 treatment groups compared with
control group and the number of the cell was more at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (p<0.05), but with E2 concentration increased, cell
growth rate slowed down. ER-36 mRNA expressions of all E2 treatment
groups were more than that of control group at 24h and 48h, and had a
concentration-dependent of E2 (p<0.05). ER-36 protein expression had a
concentration-dependent of E2 and was less at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (p<0.05). E2 treatment groups protein expression were
more than control group's at 24h (p<0.05), and were less than control
group's at 48h (pAims: We aimed to investigate the role of
estrogen-development signal in growth of gastric cancer cell, and the
expression and location change of new estrogen receptor ER-36 in gastric
cancer cell when dealt with estrogen. Methods: Gastric cancer BGC823 was
chosen as research model and 17- estradiol (E2) was used to deal with
cell. Cell growth was examined by WST-1 method and assayed by microplate
reader. ER-36 expression in mRNA and protein level was assayed by RT-PCR
and Western-blot methods and was quantitated. The location of ER-36 in
cell was examined by immunofluorenscence methods. Result: The cell
numbers significantly increased in all E2 treatment groups compared with
control group and the number of the cell was more at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (p<0.05), but with E2 concentration increased, cell
growth rate slowed down. ER-36 mRNA expressions of all E2 treatment
groups were more than that of control group at 24h and 48h, and had a
concentration-dependent of E2 (p<0.05). ER-36 protein expression had a
concentration-dependent of E2 and was less at 48h than 24h in E2
treatment groups (p<0.05). E2 treatment groups protein expression were
more than control group's at 24h (p<0.05), and were less than control
group's at 48h (p<0.05). ER-36 is localized on the membrane and cytoplasm
of BGC823 cell, and its location did not change dealt with E2.
Conclusion: E2 could promote the growth of BGC823 cell, and estrogen in
different concentration may play different role in the growth regulation
of gastric cancer. ER-36 could response to estrogen-dependent signaling
of growth and may transmit it through a membrane-based pathway in gastric
cancer. There were regulations in transcription and translation of ER-36
in gastric cancer. ER-36 was an important estrogen receptor in gastric
cancer and may be a potential predicted marker of gastric cancer.

