Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive analysis of the microRNA-128 function in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma


MicroRNAs are 22nucleotide-long endogenously expressed, highly conserved
noncoding RNAs with important regulatory functions in proliferation,
apoptosis, and metastasis. miR-128 a brain-enriched, which is transcribes
from two gene copies (miR-128-1 and miR-128-2) on chromosome 2 and
chromosome 3 which produce identical mature forms. miR-128 is most
commonly in gliomas that have shown to function as a tumor suppressor
which inhibits cell proliferation. Proteomic alterations of prostate
cancer show miR-128 to down regulate cell invasiveness. Here we evaluated
the role of miRNA-128 in HNSCC, to identify its putative targets and
elucidate the possible mechanisms underlining the function of miR-128 in
HNSCC. We established HNSCC cell lines that stably expressed individual
members of the miR-128 using a lentiviral delivery system. The levels of
miR-128 and their targeted proteins were analyzed by qRT-PCR and Western
blot. miR-128 affinity was elucidated by MTT, colony formation, flow
cytometry, and a tumor xenograft model. Two kinds of stably transfected
HNSCC cell lines, including JHU-22miR-128 transfected with miR-128 and a
vector control cell line JHU-22vector, were generated as a testing
system. The miR-128 level in the JHU-22miR-128 cells was eleven fold
higher than in JHU-22vector cells. We found that overexpression of
miR-128 enable to effectively suppress cell viability (30%), decrease of
proliferation (55%), and significantly reduced solid tumor growth in
tumor xenografts models compared to the control groups. Transfected
miR-128 cells exhibited astrocyte morphology. The inhibition mechanism of
miR-128 was determined by evaluating five putative targets (BMI-1, BAG2,
BAX, H3f3b, and Paip2) of miR-128. Overall, miR-128 enables to directly
inhibit all these targets, but the binding affinity of miR-128 is
dominantly towards to BMI-1 and BAG-2 targets. Conclusions: miR-128
exhibits anti-proliferative effects and phenotypic alteration in HNSCC by
targeting multiple predicted conserved targets activity function in
apoptosis, cell cycle, transcription, and translation. Our results
provide a better understanding of miR-128 function in HNSCC and the
potential targets to develop novel diagnostic markers and targeted
therapy.

