Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Distinct antioxidant profiles of human prostate carcinoma cell
lines and tissues: Implications for rational design of redox therapy


Several cancer chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation mediate their
effects, at least in part, by generation of reactive oxygen/nitrogen
species. Therefore, the levels of antioxidants and status of cellular
redox state have tremendous influence on the outcome of these therapies.
We analyzed antioxidant proteins in normal prostate epithelial cells and
tissues as well as prostate cancer cell lines and tissues. Highly
aggressive androgen-independent prostate cancer PC3 and LNCAP-C42B cells
demonstrated significantly higher levels of superoxide dismutase (SOD) 2,
peroxyredoxin (Prx) 1, 2, 3, and 4, thioredoxin (Trx) 1 and 2, and
thioredoxin reductase (TR) 1 and 2, relative to normal prostate
epithelial PrEC cells and immortalized RWPE1 human prostate epithelial
cells. Similarity, the highly aggressive human prostate cancer tissues
(Gleason scores 4+4 and 4+5) demonstrated significantly higher levels of
SOD1 and 2, Prx 3 and 4, Trx 1 and 2, and TR 1 and 2 relative to adjacent
normal prostate tissues. In contrast, the expression levels of these
antioxidant proteins were lower or were not altered in less aggressive
human prostate cancer tissues (Gleason score 3+3) relative to adjacent
normal prostate tissues. Utilizing Trx1 redox western as a marker of
cellular redox states, we found more oxidized form of Trx1 in PC3 and
LNCAP-C42B cells and human prostate cancer tissues (Gleason scores 4+4
and 4+5) despite their higher levels of Trx1 protein expression. Our data
suggest that alteration in antioxidant proteins and cellular redox state
may differentiate cancers from non-cancer tissues. Additionally,
knowledge of redox state profiles can help to predict the response of
each cancer cell type to chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation.

