Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of IDH1 mutation in the plasma of glioma patients


Background IDH1 mutation is both a diagnostic and a strong prognostic
factor in gliomas. In this work, we investigated the feasibility of
detecting the IDH1 mutation in plasma of glioma patients. Patients and
Methods The study was conducted in 31 controls and 80 glioma patients
with known IDH1 status, and confronted with MRI data. Small Size DNA
(ssDNA) was extracted from 4mL plasma and the IDH1R132H mutation was
detected by a combination of COLD (co-amplification at lower denaturation
temperature) and digital PCR. Results ssDNA concentration (150pb to
200pb) ranged from 0.1 to 6.6 ng/mL (median 1.2 ng/mL) in controls and
0.1 to 50.3 ng/mL (median 1.2 ng/mL) in patients. ssDNA concentration did
not correlate with tumor volume in low grade glioma. In contrast, ssDNA
concentration in high grade gliomas patients was significantly higher
than in healthy controls and correlated with the enhancing volume V (V=0:
0.9 ng/ml [0.1-3.5]; V10 cm3: 14.0 ng/ml [0.6-50.3]). We then analyzed 39
patients (25 with R132H IDH1 mutated glioma, 14 with IDH1 wild type
glioma) for the detection of IDH1 mutation on the ssDNA extracted from
plasma. The mutation was detected in plasma DNA of 15 out of 25 patients
(60%) with IDH1 mutated tumor, and in none of the 14 patients with IDH1
wild type tumor. The detection rate of IDH1 mutation in plasma was higher
in high grade (12/17 patients (70.6%) and was correlated with the
enhancing tumor volume. Interestingly all the mutant tumors with an
enhancing tumor volume higher than 3.5 cm3 (9/9) were detected by digital
PCR in plasma. Conclusions Our study shows that (i) tumor DNA is released
in glioma patients; (ii) ssDNA concentration is correlated with enhancing
tumor volume, and (iii) IDH1 mutation is detectable in plasma DNA. This
represents the first step for developing a quantitative plasma biomarker
that could be used to monitor glioma status.

