Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BMS-777607, a small molecule RON/MET kinase inhibitor induces
polyploidy in breast cancer cells: molecular mechanism and therapeutic
implication


Aberrant RON expression contributes significantly to breast cancer
tumorigenic progression. This observation has provided the basis for
targeting RON in potential breast cancer treatment. In the study of
breast cancer tumorigenesis, we discovered that inhibition of RON by
small molecule inhibitor BMS-777607 causes polyploidy followed by
apoptosis in various breast cancer cells including T-47D and ZR-75-1.
BMS-777607 is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor specific to RON and MET
receptor tyrosine kinases and blocks cancer cell proliferation in vitro
and tumor growth in xenograft model in vivo. Using breast cancer cells as
the model, we observed that BMS-777607 at experimental doses induces
extensive polyploidy and apoptosis in breast cancer cells. The effect of
BMS-777607 has the following features. First, BMS-777607 treatment
dramatically altered cell morphology, increased cell size, and created
multinucleate structures. Chromosome spreading at metaphase and flow
cytometric analysis confirmed polyploid cells with 6N to 16N chromosome
content, indicating that abortive mitosis and endoreduplication are
responsible for the observed polyploidy. Second, the effect of BMS-777607
was highly specific and dependent on RON or MET expression. MCF-7 cells
that do not express RON/MET showed only low levels of polyploidy,
suggesting that RON and MET expression are required for the observed
polyploid activity. Third, the effect of BMS-777607 is time and
dose-dependent. A substantial polyploid population of cells accumulated
within 24 h of drug treatment. Continuous cycle of abortive mitosis
further increased cell ploidy with increased 16N cell fractions.
Moreover, an experimental dose of 500 nM is sufficient to induce
polyploidy. The maximal effect occurred when BMS-777607 was used at 5.0 M
for 72 h. Fourth, polyploidy induction promoted apoptosis and senescence
of breast cancer cells, which led to significant changes in cellular
sensitivity towards cytotoxic activity of chemoagents. Finally, we
demonstrated that Aurora B kinase is the major signaling molecule
responsible for BMS-777607-induced cancer cell polyploidy. BMS-777607
inhibited Aurora B kinase activity, which affected mitosis leading to
polyploidy. In summary, BMS-777607 is a potent inducer of polyploidy in
breast cancer cells. By blocking RON/MET-mediated signaling events,
BMS-777607 impaired Aurora B kinase activity leading to polyploidy and
apoptosis. Such observations provide mechanistic and therapeutic insight
in BMS-777607 targeted cancer therapy (*supported in part by NIH grant
R01 CA91980 and funds from Amarillo Area Foundation).

