Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of brain tumor initiating cells using the stem cell
marker aldehyde dehydrogenase 1


Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) has been identified in stem cells from
both normal and cancerous tissue. This study aimed to evaluate the
potential of ALDH1 as a universal brain tumor initiating cell (BTIC)
marker applicable to primary brain tumors and their biological role in
maintaining stem cell status. Cells from various primary brain tumors (24
pediatric and 6 adult brain tumors) were stained with Aldefluor and
sorted by flow cytometry. We investigated the impact of ALDH1 expression
on BTIC characteristics in vitro and on tumorigenic potential in vivo.
Primary cultured brain tumor cells showed universal expression of ALDH1,
with 0.3 to 28.9% of the cells in various tumors identified as ALDH1+.
ALDH1+ cells generate neurospheres with high proliferative potential,
express neural stem cell markers (nestin and musashi) and differentiate
into multiple nervous system lineages. ALDH1+ cells are phenotypically
distinct from CD133+ cells, and they show high expression of induced
pluripotent stem cell-related genes. Notably, targeted knockdown of ALDH1
by shRNA interference in BTICs potently disturbed their self-renewing
ability. After three months, ALDH1+ cells gave rise to tumors in 93% of
mice whereas ALDH1- cells did not. The characteristic pathology of mice
brain tumors from ALDH1+ cells was similar to that of human brain tumors,
and these cells are highly proliferative in vivo. Our data suggest that
primary brain tumors contain distinct subpopulations of cells that have
high expression levels of ALDH1 and BTIC characteristics. ALDH1 might be
a potential therapeutic target applicable to primary brain tumors.

