Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE) induce multiple
tumor suppressor proteins (TSP) activity and show single agent antitumor
effect and synergy with Bcl-2 antagonist in non-small cell lung cancer


Neoplastic cells must inactivate their tumor suppressor proteins (TSP) in
order to perpetuate their growth. Oncogene and growth factor driven
nuclear export of TSPs is an increasingly recognized mechanism for TSP
inactivation. We have developed orally active, small molecule SINE that
irreversibly block the major nuclear export protein CRM1 (exportin 1,
XPO1) and selectively induce the death of cancer cells. Forced nuclear
accumulation of TSPs is believed to initiate a genome survey leading to
the death of cancer cells, whereas normal cells undergo transient,
reversible cell cycle arrest. We show that the small molecule SINE CRM1
inhibitor KPT-185 potently kills many types of tumor cells in vitro (IC50
20-500nM, IC80 1M at 72 hours) including 75% of NSCLC lines with diverse
genetic signatures (EGFR wt & mut, p53 wt & mut, K-ras wt & mut). In
contrast, 25% of NSCLC lines with similar genotypes show cytotoxicity
IC50s 1.5M and IC80 is not reached. Treatment of the SINE-resistant A549
NSCLC (adenocarcinoma, EGFR wt, p53 wt, K-ras mut, KPT-185 IC50 = 1.75M)
leads to nuclear localization of p53, p21, FOXO, E2F4, IkB,
underphosphorylated pRb and other CRM1 cargoes at concentrations similar
to that of sensitive NSCLC cell lines, but apoptosis is not readily
induced. To test whether the resistance to CRM1 inhibition-mediated
cytotoxicity is due to activation of anti-apoptotic (or inactivation of
pro-apoptotic) BCL-2 family proteins, we combined SINE with ABT-737, a
small-molecule BCL-2 inhibitor currently in Phase 2 clinical trials, and
examined the molecular mechanisms leading to tumor cell death. We show
that combination of low doses (500nM, the IC20) of KPT-185 with
non-cytotoxic doses of the Bcl-2 inhibitor ( 100M) induces synergistic
cytotoxicity. Moreover, the antitumor effects of the combination therapy
are manifested within 48 hours, whereas significant cytotoxicity by
higher doses of SINE alone requires at least 72 hours. Similar results
have been obtained with another SINE resistant cell line, HCC-2935 (EGFR
mut, p53 mut, K-ras mut). We noted that in the resistant A549 line,
levels of the pro-apoptotic BCL2 member, Bax, were reduced by 50% with
SINE treatment, but that addition of the BCL2 inhibitor reversed this
effect and induced significant synergistic cytotoxicity. The sensitive
NSCLC cell line H-226 (EGFR wt, p53wt, K-ras wt; IC50 12nM) showed
nuclear localization of CRM1 cargoes when treated with KPT-185 (100nM),
but only modest additional killing by the addition of the Bcl-2
inhibitor. We conclude that mechanism of resistance to SINE mediated
cytotoxicity can be overcome by antagonism of Bcl-2. In vivo studies
using A-549 xenografts comparing the effects of KPT-SINE and ABT-737
alone or in combination are ongoing and will be reported at the meeting.

