Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of therapeutic targets for HPV-positive and
HPV-negative head and neck cancers using high throughput RNAi screening


Cancers of the head and neck account for three percent of all
malignancies in the United States and is the sixth most common type of
cancer worldwide. Historically, the two most common risk factors for head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) were tobacco use and/or heavy
alcohol consumption. Recent growing evidence strongly supports a role for
human papillomavirus (HPV) in a subset (15-30%) of HNSCC and there is
currently a rise in HPV-related head and neck cancers. In order to
improve treatment of head and neck cancers and identify etiology-specific
therapeutic targets, we applied a functional genomics based approach
utilizing high-throughput RNAi (HT-RNAi) to identify genes specifically
involved in growth of either HPV-positive or HPV-negative HNSCC cells. A
HT-RNAi assay was developed to quantify the effects of gene specific
siRNA on growth inhibition of two HPV-positive (SCC-090 and UMSCC-047)
and two HPV-negative (SCC-25 and CAL-27) HNSCC cell lines. For HT-RNAi
screening, the four cell lines were reverse-transfected with siRNA from a
library targeting 7000 druggable genes with four siRNA per gene and
assessed for growth modulation at 96 hours post transfection. The data
was normalized using Z-score analysis and statistical cut-offs were set.
Following data analysis, we generated a hit list of gene targets that are
involved in growth of HPV-positive or HPV-negative HNSCC cells.
Validation of these genes will identify potential therapeutic targets for
head and neck tumors depending on their HPV status. Furthermore, these
findings demonstrate the effectiveness of using HT-RNAi as a tool for the
identification of etiologic-specific targets.

