Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-cancer activity of the tumor-selective, hypoxia-inducing,
agent BNC105 in platinum resistant ovarian cancer


BNC105 is a small molecule that exerts anti-cancer activity through
disruption of tubulin polymerization. BNC105 is unique in its ability to
selectively block tumor blood flow resulting in hypoxia and cancer cell
necrosis. A prodrug formulation, BNC105P, is under evaluation in a phase
I/II clinical trial for metastatic renal cell carcinoma in combination
with the mTOR inhibitor Everolimus. With the aim of expanding the
development of BNC105 in the clinic, we investigated its activity in
preclinical models of ovarian cancer. Despite modest improvements in
patient outcomes as a result of surgery or platinum based chemotherapy,
the majority of ovarian cancer patients relapse and die of their disease.
There is a clear unmet medical need for more effective systemic therapy.
The activity of BNC105 on the human ovarian carcinoma cell line A2780 and
a derived cisplatin-resistant sub-line, A2780cis, was investigated using
in vitro proliferation assays. BNC105 was a potent inhibitor of
proliferation in both the A2780 and A2780cis cell lines with an IC50 of
0.3 and 0.1 nM respectively. In comparison, cisplatin and carboplatin
were considerably less potent against A2780 with an IC50 of 330 nM and
7822 nM respectively. Both cisplatin and carboplatin were inactive
against the sub-line A2780cis (IC50 >5 uM). BNC105 was also a potent
disruptor of tumoral blood flow in A2780cis solid tumors grown
subcutaneously in Balbc nu/nu mice. Tumors in mice treated with BNC105P
exhibited a clear pattern of cavitation, with the center being completely
deprived of blood perfusion. A small amount of blood perfusion was
evident in the periphery of these tumors. In contrast, tumors obtained
from animals treated with the vehicle control displayed dense blood
perfusion throughout. Based on the observation of direct proliferative
activity against A2780cis cells and the disruption of blood circulation
in A2780cis tumors, it was reasoned that BNC105P treatment should induce
tumor growth inhibition and increase survival in animals bearing A2780cis
tumors. Mice bearing A2780cis solid tumors were treated with two weekly
doses of BNC105P at 24mg/kg. For comparison purposes, separate animal
groups bearing A2780cis tumors were treated with either cisplatin at
4mg/kg or carboplatin at 50mg/kg. Consistent with the lack of activity
exhibited by platinum agents for these cells in vitro, there was no
therapeutic benefit seen in animals treated with either platinum agent.
In contrast, BNC105P treatment resulted in a robust inhibition of tumor
growth (81% reduction compared to control) and improved overall survival.
Our data demonstrate the potential therapeutic utility of BNC105 in
suppressing the growth of ovarian tumors that respond poorly to platinum
based therapy.

