Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dysregulated p15 in urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary tract


OBJECTIVE: To investigate tumorigenic characteristics of upper urinary
tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) by evaluating genomic alterations and
protein expression of p15, located in 9p21, in primary tumors and in the
morphologically normal pelvis of UTUC patients. METHODS: 10 pairs of
tumor and pelvis tissues were submitted for comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) to examine chromosome abberations. Western blotting
assays were performed to compare the fold change of p15 expression
between another 16 pairs of tumor and normal tissues.
Immunohistochemistry was conducted to determine the presence of
p15-positive tumor cells and staining intensity in 53 tumor tissues,
including 26 superficial and 27 invasive tumors. The Student's t-test and
Chi-square test were applied to explore the correlation between the p15
expression and clinicopathologic parameters of UTUC patients. RESULTS AND
CONCLUSIONS: CGH revealed incomplete 9p21 in 70% of UTUC tumors,
including 3 low-grade and 7 high-grade cases. Results of Western blotting
assays showed high frequencies (75%) of p15 downregulation (fold change >
1.5) in UTUC tissues compared to their normal pelvis control.
Immunohistochemistry results indicated that superficial tumors had lower
p15 expression than invasive tumors (p=0.002). In patients with tumor
metastases, local recurrence or distal recurrence, the p15 expression
level was significantly increased in UTUC tissues (p=0.038, 0.01 and
0.017, respectively). Taken together, our data suggest that the decreased
expression of p15 may be an important step in early neoplastic
transformation of the urothelium of upper urinary tract and, during tumor
progression, p15 may be up-regulated by other molecules, such as SP-1.

