Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of PI3K pathway by P-Rex2 is inhibited by GNMT


Glycine N-methyltransferase (GNMT) is a tumor suppressor for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Previously, we reported that GNMT
regulates mTOR signaling pathway through interacting with an mTOR binding
protein-DEPTOR. Sequence blasting and phylogenetic analysis demonstrated
that the first DEP domain of DEPTOR clustered with P-Rex2, a regulator of
the small guanosine triphosphatase Rac. Since P-Rex2 has been showed to
be able to antagonize PTEN in PI3K pathway, the aims of this study was to
analyze the interaction between GNMT and P-Rex2 and their association in
PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. Gel filtration assay demonstrated that GNMT
and P-Rex2 were eluted in the same fractions. Reciprocal
co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that GNMT interacts with
different domains of P-Rex2 including DH, PH, PDZ and InsPx4-Phosphatase.
Overexpression of P-Rex2 enhanced Akt activation in HCC cell line as well
as in breast cancer cell lines and such effect was blocked by
over-expression of GNMT. Pulse-chase experiments showed that
overexpression of GNMT caused significant reduction of the half-life of
P-Rex2 from 15 hr to 9.5 hr. Finally, overexpression of GNMT in HuH-7
cells resulted in a proteasome-dependent degradation of P-Rex2.
Therefore, GNMT affects PI3K-Akt pathway via direct binding with P-Rex2
and enhance its degradation.

