Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CXCL12 (SDF-1) and its truncation products in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) receiving
ON 01910.Na (Rigosertib) in phase I trials


CXCL12 (stromal cell-derived factor, SDF-1), is an 8 kDa peptide
chemokine. The interaction between CXCL12 and its receptor, CXCR4, plays
a pivotal role in the trafficking of hematopoietic stem cells between
bone marrow and peripheral blood. The CXCL12/CXCR4 axis may play a role
in the pathogenesis of myeloid neoplasms. We developed a technique for
the determination of intact (full length) CXCL12 and its
protease(s)-induced truncation products in plasma from patients with
myeloproliferative neoplasms (Cancer Res., 70, 3402, 2010). In the
present work, we are extending our observations to the myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). CXCL12 concentrations in
normal subjects were 16.6 9.4 ng/mL (n=10). In primary myelofibrosis
(PMF), the concentrations were 5.8 4.0 ng/mL (n=15), and in polycythemia
vera (PV) 7.9 3.6 ng/mL (n=21). Now we report that in MDS/AML, the
concentrations are 2.2 2.1 ng/mL (n=8). In normal subjects, truncation
products, due to proteolysis, were not detectable ( 1.0 ng/mL). The loss
of 2, 3, 4, and 5 amino acids (aa) from CXCL12 were confirmed by
molecular masses measured using electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry. Quantification was completed with synthetic standards. In
MDS/AML patients the concentration of the truncation product
corresponding to 2 aa (KP removed),-3 aa (KPV removed), 4 aa (KPVS
removed) and 5 aa (KPVSL removed) were 2.7 3.2 ng/mL, 2.4 2.1 ng/mL, 3.8
3.0 ng/mL, and 2.5 2.4 ng/mL, respectively. The total concentration of
all truncation products was 11.3 5.8 ng/mL. For comparison, the
concentration of total truncation products was 28.7 19.9 for PMF, and
31.1 7.8 for PV. Patients with these myeloid malignancies have lower
CXCL12 concentrations compared to normal controls and high concentrations
of proteolytic truncation products which are absent in normal plasma. Of
the 8 patients with MDS (n=3) and AML (n=5), treated with continuous
infusion of ON 01910.Na (rigosertib), 650 - 1,700 mg/m2, in a Phase I
dose escalation study, 4 patients attained a partial or complete bone
marrow remission according to International Working Group criteria. The
concentration of intact CXCL12 rose at 72 h in responding patients,
whereas those who failed to respond had a decrease. These data suggest
that monitoring intact CXCL12 and its truncation products may provide a
marker of response to treatment with ON 01910.Na, as well as insight into
the role of the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis in the pathobiology of these bone
marrow diseases.

