Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a single Listeria monocytogene-based vaccine
simultaneously targeting two antigens


Previously published studies reported that recombinant Listeria
monocytogenes (Lm-LLO)-based vaccines expressing either tumor associated
antigens (TAA) or angiogenesis associated antigens fused to an
immunogenic fragment of listeriolysin O (LLO) have demonstrated efficacy
in mouse models with several types of tumors such as lung, breast,
prostate or melanoma. Therefore, we hypothesized that an Lm-LLO vaccine
capable of delivering two disparate antigens with two different
therapeutic mechanisms would likely have a synergistic effect on
decreasing tumor growth by 1) targeting blood vessels, which may enhance
effector T cell infiltration into the tumor and 2) improving the
therapeutic efficacy of the vaccine. In addition, a dual vaccine
construct creates a flexible platform for future use. The Lm-LLO-cHER2
vaccine was developed using a chimeric HER2/neu (cHER2) construct, and
was found to regress tumors, elicit a strong T cell immune response and
break immune tolerance towards the HER2/neu self-antigen in experimental
animals. The Lm-LLO-VEGR2 vaccine has been shown to eradicate established
breast tumors, reduce microvascular density, protect against tumor
rechallange and metastases, and induce epitope spreading to various
regions of the TAA such as HER2/neu. A dual Lm-LLO vaccine was developed
that expresses and secretes both the VEGFR2 and cHER2 antigens as
LLO-based proteins and is based on a highly attenuated Listeria
monocytogenes backbone Lm dal dat actA, which is cleared 48 hours
post-injection in interferon gamma knock-out mice. Initial
characterization of the dual vaccine indicates that the two antigens
cHER2 and VEGFR2 are stably expressed and secreted after two in vivo
mouse passages. Currently, we are evaluating the anti-tumor effects and
antigen specific immune responses generated by the dual vaccine in mouse
models. If successful, this dual vaccine may offer a new immunotherapy
for the treatment of cancer in humans.

