Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) and CRP genetic
risk score with cancer risk in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
(ARIC) study


Background: Chronic inflammation is related to carcinogenesis. Many
studies reported a positive association between plasma CRP - a
non-specific marker of systemic inflammation - and colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk. In the ARIC study, hazard ratio (HR) for CRC was 1.97 (95%
CI,1.13; 3.43) for the highest versus lowest CRP quartile, although it is
unclear if the association is causal. The associations of CRP with other
cancer types are inconsistent. Our goals were to prospectively 1) examine
associations of plasma CRP with other cancer types and total cancer and
2) examine associations of a genetic risk score based on single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), affecting CRP levels, with cancer risk.
Methods: The ARIC cohort aged 45-64 y at Visit 1 in 1987-89 (55% women,
28% African-American and 72% Caucasian) was followed until 2006. Among
8,657 Caucasians, we examined the incidence of total (n=1,929), CRC
(n=205), breast (n=371), lung (n=274), and prostate (n=395) cancers in
relation to a weighted genetic CRP risk score (CRPRS) composed of 20 SNPs
located in/near CRP, APOC1, GCKR, HNF1A, IL6R and 15 other genes. These
SNPs were associated with CRP levels in a previous meta-analysis of
genome-wide association studies. The CRPRS was created as a sum of risk
alleles for each person by multiplying each SNP by the beta coefficient
from the meta-analysis. Plasma CRP was measured at Visit 4 (1996-98). We
examined associations of plasma CRP with the risk of total (n=1,481),
breast (n=235), lung (n=185), and prostate (n=352) cancers among 9,857
Caucasians and African-Americans, followed from Visit 4 until 2006. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to estimate HRs of cancers in
relation to plasma CRP and the genetic score. Results: CRPRS was
positively associated with CRC risk HR =1.18 (1.03; 1.36) per one
standard deviation of the score but not with total or any other cancer in
a multivariate analysis. Additional adjustment for plasma CRP only
slightly attenuated the association. The HRs were similar for colon and
rectal cancer. After multivariate adjustment, plasma CRP was associated
positively with the risk of breast and lung cancers: 2.40 (95%CI, 1.25;
4.61) (p-trend=0.004) and 1.90 (95%CI, 1.12; 3.22)(p-trend=0.03),
respectively, for the highest versus lowest quartiles. The association
for breast cancer did not markedly change after excluding subjects with
10mg/L, whereas for lung cancer both exclusions resulted in weaker
associations. Conclusions: This study provides the first evidence of a
significant association of CRP polymorphisms with CRC risk suggesting a
role of CRP and inflammation in colorectal carcinogenesis. CRP
polymorphisms may be linked with CRC risk through plasma CRP or other
mechanisms. We also found that not only colorectal but also breast and
lung cancers are positively associated with plasma CRP in the ARIC study.

