Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intestinal tumorigenesis increased by obesity caused by leptin
deficiency and/or high fat diet in ApcMin x Lepob mice involves blood
glucose dysregulation


Our objective was to study how obesity affects intestinal cancer in a
double mutant mouse model obtained by intercrossing of C57BL/6J-ApcMin
(multiple intestinal neoplasia)/+ and C57BL/6J-Lepob (obese)/+ mice. The
Min mouse has a mutated tumor suppressor gene adenomatous polyposis coli
(Apc), involved in both inherited and sporadic colorectal cancer. The
obesity (ob) gene is coding for leptin, a hormone that regulates food
intake and energy expenditure, leading to obesity if mutated. The
offspring were given one s.c. injection of 25 mg/kg body weight (bw) of
the food mutagen 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP)
or the vehicle 0.9% NaCl on day 3-6 after birth, and were given a 10 or
45 % fat diet from weaning to termination at 11 weeks. To test the
hypothesis that obesity affects intestinal cancer via dysregulation of
glucose, we measured blood glucose levels at weeks 6 and 11 and did a
glucose tolerance test (GTT) at week 6. Colon and small intestine were
fixed in formalin and stained with methylene blue. The number, diameter
and localization of spontaneous (0.9% NaCl group) and PhIP-induced tumors
were scored by transillumination in an inverse light microscope. Terminal
bw was significantly higher in ob/ob mice compared with both ob/wt and
wt/wt mice, and in mice on 45 vs on 10% fat diet. The incidence of small
intestinal tumors was 100% in all mice of Min/+ background independent of
treatment, diet or ob background. PhIP significantly increased the number
of colonic and small intestinal tumors. The number of small intestinal
tumors was significantly higher in ob/ob mice compared with ob/wt and
wt/wt mice of both genders, and increased even further in mice on 45 vs
10% fat diet. The majority of the tumors were located in the distal half
of the small intestine, but in ob/ob mice additional tumors were observed
in the proximal part, again increased on 45 vs 10% fat diet. The
incidence, number, size or localization of the few colonic tumors present
was not affected by either ob genotype or diet. The blood sugar levels at
both week 6 and 11 were significantly higher in ob/ob mice compared with
ob/wt and wt/wt mice of both genders, and increased even further in mice
on 45 vs 10% fat diet. The GTT test showed that ob/ob mice had a much
slower decrease in blood glucose seen as higher area under the curve
(AUC) after challenge than ob/wt and wt/wt mice. AUC was increased
further in all ob genotypes by 45% fat. For all end points, ob/wt and
wt/wt mice were essentially similar. Conclusions: Obesity induced by lack
of leptin hormone significantly increased small intestinal tumorigenesis
in Min/+ mice, which was increased further with a high fat diet. These
obese mice also had significantly increased blood sugar levels and showed
slower decrease after challenge in GTT, indicating a dysregulation of
glucose as a possible cause of the increased intestinal tumorigenesis.

