Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activated signaling mechanism of glioblastoma recurrence derived
from genetics, epigenetics, and genomics abnormalities


Recurrence or progession happens to certain glioblastoma (GBM) patients
after given surgeries and complex treatment regimens. This implies that
the pathways related to cell growth or apoptosis resistance have been
activated. However, it lacks an efficient model to identify the activated
pathways from a variety of data generated by the platforms on genetics,
epigenetics, and genomics. Here, we develop a new computational model,
called as CSB-MOO (Cancer Signaling Bridges - Multiple Objective
Optimization), to address signaling mechanism associated with the
recurrence or progression of GBM. We used a pathway-driven method to
address the activated pathways. In the model of CSB-MOO, a new type of
network elements, Cancer Signaling Bridge (CSB), was used to expand the
known signaling pathways to the cancer genes (with genetic disorders) of
GBM. Facilitated by CSBs, more than 60 known signaling pathways are found
to be connected with the cancer genes for GBM. Then, a well-established
mathematical method, Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO), was applied to
identify activated pathways from multiple-type data. We used Pareto
optimal to solve this MOO problem. We applied the CSB-MOO to the
multiple-type data of GBM in TCGA (n=595). 15 proteins are activated in
the 7 common pathways for both of the patients with and without
recurrence/progression. These proteins include EGFR and JAK proteins. The
patients without recurrence or progression activate another 11 activated
proteins related to metabolic of amino acids (Tryptophan and
Phenylalanine). Specifically, the patients with recurrence or progression
activate another seventeen proteins, e.g., PIK3R1, and 2 protein
complexes, i.e., [PLCG2/PLCG1] and [ITPR3/ITPR2/ITPR1], in which the SH2
domain of PIK3R1 acts an adaptor between the kinases [PLCG2/PLCG1] and
the targeted proteins. In addition, these proteins facilitate the signal
transduction from EGFR to downstream proteins through mediating
phosphorylation. This is consistent with the fact that the
recurrence/progression patients can activate the progession of GMB. The
identified activated pathways classify the GBM patients with and without
recurrence/progression in an accuracy of 80.89% (P Recurrence or
progession happens to certain glioblastoma (GBM) patients after given
surgeries and complex treatment regimens. This implies that the pathways
related to cell growth or apoptosis resistance have been activated.
However, it lacks an efficient model to identify the activated pathways
from a variety of data generated by the platforms on genetics,
epigenetics, and genomics. Here, we develop a new computational model,
called as CSB-MOO (Cancer Signaling Bridges - Multiple Objective
Optimization), to address signaling mechanism associated with the
recurrence or progression of GBM. We used a pathway-driven method to
address the activated pathways. In the model of CSB-MOO, a new type of
network elements, Cancer Signaling Bridge (CSB), was used to expand the
known signaling pathways to the cancer genes (with genetic disorders) of
GBM. Facilitated by CSBs, more than 60 known signaling pathways are found
to be connected with the cancer genes for GBM. Then, a well-established
mathematical method, Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO), was applied to
identify activated pathways from multiple-type data. We used Pareto
optimal to solve this MOO problem. We applied the CSB-MOO to the
multiple-type data of GBM in TCGA (n=595). 15 proteins are activated in
the 7 common pathways for both of the patients with and without
recurrence/progression. These proteins include EGFR and JAK proteins. The
patients without recurrence or progression activate another 11 activated
proteins related to metabolic of amino acids (Tryptophan and
Phenylalanine). Specifically, the patients with recurrence or progression
activate another seventeen proteins, e.g., PIK3R1, and 2 protein
complexes, i.e., [PLCG2/PLCG1] and [ITPR3/ITPR2/ITPR1], in which the SH2
domain of PIK3R1 acts an adaptor between the kinases [PLCG2/PLCG1] and
the targeted proteins. In addition, these proteins facilitate the signal
transduction from EGFR to downstream proteins through mediating
phosphorylation. This is consistent with the fact that the
recurrence/progression patients can activate the progession of GMB. The
identified activated pathways classify the GBM patients with and without
recurrence/progression in an accuracy of 80.89% (P < 104, Fisher exact
test). Survival analysis indicates that the activated pathways with
genetics, epigenetics, and genomics patterns accurately predict the
patients lifespan (P = 0.0007, Chi-squared test). Acknowledgements: This
work was supported by NIH grant U54CA149196 to STCW.

