Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of NQO1 knockdown on prostate carcinogenesis


NAD(P)H-Quinone Oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) is a key antioxidant enzyme that
protects against quinone derived reactive intermediates and maintains a
cellular pool of antioxidants. Recent studies from our laboratory and
others have been found that the expression levels of NQO1 and several GST
family genes are significantly suppressed in prostate tumors in
preclinical mouse models. In this study, we investigated the role of NQO1
in prostate carcinogenesis. First, we characterized basal NQO1 expression
in normal prostate cells (RWPE-1), initiated prostatic epithelium (BPH-1)
and prostate cancer cells (LNCaP, C42B, PC-3 and DU145). Unlike in
hormone-induced tumors in vivo, in-vitro study showed increased NQO1
expression in cancer cells compared to normal cells, and that finding was
consistent with other cancer cell lines such as bladder, pancreatic and
melanoma cells. Stable RNAi-mediated knockdown of NQO1 in prostate cancer
cells increased cell proliferation and susceptibility to oxidant
treatment. Furthermore, whole genome microarray revealed that NQO1
knockdown in LNCaP cells resulted in 1603 signature genes being
deregulated. COL12A1, MCP-1/CCL2, IL-8, IL1R2 mRNA were among those that
showed most highly significant increase (>6 fold; p12 fold; p12 fold;
p<0.01). Investigations are under way to determine whether these genes
are direct or indirect targets of NQO1. Thus, antioxidant NQO1 plays a
significant but paradoxical role acting as a double-edged sword to
regulate cellular processes. However, the mechanism by which the
differential expression of these genes is regulated through NQO1 still
remains to be elucidated. Blocking NQO1 may regulate ARE-related
transcription factors, which in turn, possibly control antioxidant and
pro-inflammatory pathways.

