Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endothelin-1 induces activation of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-3 and modulates cell migration and vasculogenic mimicry
in melanoma cells


Phenotypic and genotypic analyses of cutaneous melanoma have identified
endothelin B receptor (ETBR) as tumor progression marker, thus
representing a potential therapeutic target. We previously reported that
the binding of ET-1 to ETBR stimulates angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis
directly and by stimulating vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A
and VEGF-C production. In this study we investigated as to whether in
melanoma cells ET-1 axis may interact with VEGF-A and VEGF-C signaling
pathways to heighten cellular responsiveness. We found that in primary
and metastatic melanoma cell lines, ET-1 increased VEGF-A, VEGF-C and its
selective receptor VEGFR-3, at mRNA and protein level. Following ET-1
stimulation, VEGF-A and VEGF-C were upregulated, VEGFR-3 was rapidly
phosphorylated and downstream signaling intermediates, such as p42/44
MAPK and Akt, were activated through ETBR. Inhibition of c-Src activity
by PP2, reduced ET-1-induced VEGFR-3 phosphorylation, demonstrating that
ET-1 transactivates VEGFR-3 through an intracellular mechanism mediated
by c-Src. Stimulation with ET-1 in combination with VEGF-A or VEGF-C
increased p42/44 MAPK and AKT phosphorylation, and resulted in a greater
degree of melanoma cell migration compared to a single factor.
Furthermore, this combination significantly enhanced the ET-1-induced
vasculogenic differentiation of melanoma cells in capillary-like
structures, vasculogenic mimicry, indicating that crosstalk between
ET-1/ETBR axis with VEGFR-3/VEGF-C system may enhance cancer cell
motility and invasiveness and contributes to the promotion of cancer
metastasis. Finally, in melanoma xenografts, ETBR antagonist suppressed
tumor growth and neovascularization-related effectors, indicating that
targeting ETBR related signalling cascade may represent a novel treatment
of melanoma by impairing the crosstalk between ET-1 axis and VEGF in
melanoma. Supported by AIRC

