Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of novel RhoC inhibitor on breast cancer progression and
metastasis in vivo


Introduction: The oncogene RhoC GTPase is overexpressed in highly
aggressive inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) and increases cellular
motility and invasiveness in mammary tissue by interacting with
downstream effectors to reorganize cytoskeletal elements in the cell. A
small molecule inhibitor of RhoC-effector interaction has been
identified. This antagonist decreases proliferation and inhibits motility
of IBC cells in vitro. Here we evaluate the in vivo effects of the novel
RhoC antagonist in a transgenic mouse model of breast cancer. Methods:
The PyMT-RhoC transgenic mouse model was used in this study. This double
transgenic strain was created by crossing the polyoma middle T antigen
(PyMT) breast cancer model to a RhoC-overexpressing strain driven by the
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. The RhoC inhibitor was
administered by intraperitoneal injection beginning at 50 days of age.
Tumor size was monitored throughout treatment. At the end of the
treatment, mammary glands, tumors, and lungs were extracted, fixed,
sectioned, and stained with H&E. Results: PyMT-RhoC mice treated with the
RhoC inhibitor showed a statistically significant delay in time of onset
of the primary tumor and exhibited slower growth of the primary tumor
compared to the control group. Western blot showed decreased RhoC protein
levels in the treated PyMT-RhoC group relative to control, suggesting
that the drug's in vivo activity includes reducing RhoC protein
expression. Finally, as determined through H&E staining of lung sections,
tumor metastasis to the lungs was decreased in the treated group compared
to age-matched controls. Conclusions: We conclude that this novel RhoC
antagonist shows promise in vivo as an inhibitor of mammary tumor
proliferation and metastasis, and has the potential to be a clinically
relevant treatment for inflammatory breast cancer.

