Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Function and regulation of Polo-like Kinase 3 in human pancreatic
cancer


Pancreatic cancer is currently the fourth leading cause of cancer death
in the United States. Despite the recent advances in pancreatic cancer
research, patients with this devastating disease still have a poor
prognosis. Therefore, deciphering pancreatic cancer-related gene
expression and defining the individual gene's specific functions will
make a significant impact on the diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic
cancer. Recently, our lab has demonstrated the tumorigenic transformation
in an immortalized pancreatic cell line, HPNE/hTERT by sequential
introduction of multiple genetic alterations. We found that Polo-like
kinase 3 (Plk3) is significantly down-regulated in transformed tumor cell
lines. Plk3 belongs to the Polo-like kinase family and is a
multi-functional kinase. We previously reported that Plk3 played a
pro-apoptotic role in pancreatic cancer lines when it was overexpressed.
Plk3 down-regulation in transformed HPNE cells suggests that Plk3 may
have tumor suppression function during pancreatic tumor development. In
addition, we found Plk3 expression is regulated by Pten. In Pten-knockout
MEF cells, Plk3 expression was significantly down-regulated. So Plk3 may
be downstream of Pten in the tumor suppression pathway. These data
suggest that Plk3 play an important role in pancreatic cancer development.

