Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: On using textural information from longitudinal PET scans for
predicting tumor response


Purpose: Early therapy response prediction, employing biomarkers such as
[F-18]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) followed with positron emission
tomography (PET) for imaging the tumor metabolic activity, is a very
actively researched topic. Traditionally, only the first order intensity
based feature estimates extracted from the longitudinal scans are used
for the response evaluations. Nonetheless, lesion heterogeneity computed
from the higher order textures of the baseline scan prior to treatment
has been recently found to be correlating well with the final outcome.
The aim of this study is to establish the significance of tumor texture
in follow up evaluations. Methods: 15 patients suffering from metastatic
colorectal cancer and treated with cetuximab were selected for the study.
Baseline FDG PET scans were acquired prior to treatment and the follow up
scanned at 1 week after 1st dose of treatment was investigated for early
response. One to five lesions were identified per patient. Intensity
based features (IF) computed from the standardized uptake value (SUV)
image include SUVmax (maximum activity), SUVmean (mean activity), SUVpeak
(highest mean activity in 1mL sphere within tumor), tumor lesion volume
(TLV) in mL, total lesion activity (TLA), TLA = SUVmean x TLV in SUVmL
and total lesion energy (TLE), TLE = SUVmean^2 x TLV in SUV^2mL. Texture
covariates (TF) estimated include 11 activity level run length matrix
(ALRL) features, 11 activity level size zone matrix (ALSZ) features, 7
activity level co occurrence matrix (ALCM) features, 5 activity level
difference matrix (ALDC) features and 19 activity level histogram (ALHS)
features. Response indices (RI) were computed as the % change with
respect to baseline after adding up covariates over all lesions per
patient under study. The dynamic range of IF was investigated in
baseline. A Cox proportional hazards regression model was fit with RIs
and the time dependent receiver operating characteristics (ROC) was
determined. Leave one-out cross validation (LOCV) was performed to
investigate the fitting of the model. The concordance measure with the
time to progression (TTP) was determined in each of the scenarios.
Results: The baseline IF dynamic ranges are listed below representing
(Median Standard Deviation, Minimum - Maximum) the respective covariates.
SUVmax(6.33 2.34, 2.40 - 12.28). SUVpeak(4.86 2.01, 1.64 - 10.52).
SUVmean(4.05 1.52, 1.61 - 8.39). TLV(5.71 155.91, 0.48 - 1182.42). TLA
(29.58 872.80, 2.11 - 6620.88). TLE (152.79 5138.32, 3.55 - 38963.30).
Cox model on LOCV with the IF only covariate set and the IF+TF set
resulted in concordance of 0.6570 and 0.6764 resp. Conclusion: The
results with the current data denote an added value in using textural
information for therapy response evaluation. Moreover, therapy response
could be predicted as early as 1 week after 1st dose of treatment from
the feature estimates. Acknowledgements: This work is financially
supported by KU Leuven's Concerted Research Action GOA/11/006, Research
Foundation - Flanders (FWO), IWT Agency for Innovation by Science and
Technology - Applied Biomedical Research (TBM) project 070717 and IBBT-KU
Leuven Future Health Department.

