Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of autophagosome formation in primary cells by
lentiviral delivery of fluorescent protein-tagged LC3


Assessment of autophagosome formation has been greatly facilitated by
monitoring redistribution of LC3-fluorescent protein fusions. The
sensitivity of the technique and capability for real-time analysis of
autophagosome formation are advantageous over detection of endogenous LC3
redistribution in many experimental settings. However, the necessity for
transfection can be an impediment to analysis of autophagosome formation
in difficult-to-transfect cells, particularly primary cultures. We have
developed lentiviral vectors (employing 3rd generation technology for
optimal biosafety) encoding monomeric TagGFP2 and TagRFP fused at the
N-termini of wild-type LC3 and LC3G120A as tools for analysis of
autophagy in a wide variety of cell types. In immortalized cell lines and
in primary cells (HUVEC and human mesenchymal stem cells) transduced with
the GFP- and RFP-LC3 lentiviruses, amino acid deprivation in the presence
of a lysosome inhibitor induced redistribution of the fluorescence from a
diffuse cytoplasmic pattern to a punctate distribution. Minimal
background of punctae in fed cells was observed. 3-Methyladenine blocked
the starvation-induced redistribution, and the G120A mutant did not
undergo detectable redistribution upon amino acid deprivation. In
addition, we demonstrate effectiveness of lentiviral GFP-LC3 in HUVECs by
flow cytometry, in which the plasma membrane is selectively permeabilized
such that free cytosolic fluorescent protein-tagged LC3 is released while
autophagosome-bound LC3 fusion protein is retained. We anticipate that
these lentiviral autophagy biosensors will facilitate analysis of
autophagosome formation in physiologically relevant primary cells.

