Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of gene expression profile and signaling networks
potentially involved in lymph node metastasis in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma


Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the 8th most common cancer
worldwide and the 6th tumor in frequency in Brazil. Most of cases are
diagnosed at an advanced stage and despite the improvement of various
treatment modalities the overall survival rates still remain low. The aim
of this study was to analyze the gene expression profile to identify the
genes related to lymph node metastasis in ESCC samples. Genome-wide
expression profiling was carried out in total RNA extracted from 17
frozen tissue samples using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray 44K
following the manufacturer's protocol. Data were extracted and flagged
with Feature Extraction and processed using TMEV Software. A supervised
hierarchical clustering was performed using the Pearson distance metric.
Paired t-test analysis with 1000 permutations was performed to generate a
list of differentially expressed genes from the comparison between the
different groups. Only genes showing a false discovery rate (Q value)
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the 8th most common cancer
worldwide and the 6th tumor in frequency in Brazil. Most of cases are
diagnosed at an advanced stage and despite the improvement of various
treatment modalities the overall survival rates still remain low. The aim
of this study was to analyze the gene expression profile to identify the
genes related to lymph node metastasis in ESCC samples. Genome-wide
expression profiling was carried out in total RNA extracted from 17
frozen tissue samples using the Agilent Whole Human Genome Microarray 44K
following the manufacturer's protocol. Data were extracted and flagged
with Feature Extraction and processed using TMEV Software. A supervised
hierarchical clustering was performed using the Pearson distance metric.
Paired t-test analysis with 1000 permutations was performed to generate a
list of differentially expressed genes from the comparison between the
different groups. Only genes showing a false discovery rate (Q value) <5%
were accepted as differentially expressed. The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
(IPA) Software was used to assess the involvement of significantly
differentially expressed genes in known pathways and networks.
Hierarchical clustering showed two distinct groups according to lymph
node metastasis: Group 1 comprised 6 node-negative cases and Group 2 with
11 node-positive cases. The gene expression profiling revealed 338 genes
differentially expressed between the two groups, of which 321 showed
lower expression and 17 showed a higher expression in cases of Group 2
when compared to those of Group 1. According to IPA analysis five
significant networks could be defined comprising the genes differentially
expressed between the two groups. The first network with a score of 43
comprised 21 of the differentially expressed genes and was associated to
functions as cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, lipid metabolism and
molecular transport. The second network (score 22, 13 genes) was related
to nucleic acid metabolism, small molecules biochemistry and energy
production. The third network (score 21, 14 genes) was associated to
cellular signaling, molecular transport and small molecular biochemistry.
The network 4 (score of 21, 12 genes) was associated to cancer, DNA
replication, recombination and repair and gene expression. The fifth
network (score 21, 12 genes) was related to cellular movement,
cardiovascular system development and function and neurological disease.
In this study, it was detected genes differentially expressed between
cases with and without lymph node metastasis involved in important
signaling networks that could have an impact on tumor development or
progression in ESCC. The identified genes might be useful as a first step
to identify molecular markers to predict lymph node metastasis for
improved diagnostic and therapeutic modalities in this tumor.

