Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44+CD24low+ progenitors in ER negative breast cancer have higher
Notch1 activation, self-renewal, and chemo resistance and generate
CD44+CD24neg cells and tumors that metastasize


CD44 surface expression is associated with self renewal in several
cancers. While CD44+/CD24neg/low/ESA+ breast cancer subpopulations are
enriched for cancer stem cells (CSC), the relative contributions of CD24
negative versus low subpopulations to stemness and metastasis is poorly
defined. Here we show that CD44+/CD24low+ CSC give rise to CD44+/CD24neg
progeny with reduced tumorigenicity and altered drug sensitivities.
CD44+/CD24low+ subpopulations in MDA-MB-231 and in primary dissociated ER
negative breast cancers show greater sphere and soft agar colony
formation, Notch1 activation, Sox2 and Nanog expression and chemo
resistance compared to CD44+/CD24neg. CD44+/CD24low+ can self-renew and
give rise to CD44+/CD24neg cells, while CD44+/CD24neg progeny are
exclusively CD44+/CD24neg. Tumorigenicity was increased and metastasis
arose exclusively from orthotopic CD44+CD24low+ xenografts.
CD44+/CD24low+ had greater expression of metastasis- and embryonic stem
cell- associated and Notch pathway activated genes than CD44+/CD24neg
cells. Moreover, MDA-MB-231 cells overexpressing Notch1 intracellular
domain (N1-ICD) had higher Sox2 expression, and higher indices of CSC
self-renewal (higher % CD44+/CD24low+, ALDH1 activity, sphere and soft
agar colony formation), all of which were abrogated by Sox2 knockdown.
Gamma secretase inhibition reduced ES-TFs and self-renewal in
CD44+CD24low+ progenitors, but had no effect on proliferation or survival
of CD44+CD24neg cells supporting further clinical development of Notch
targeting drugs for cancer treatment in humans. Thus, CD44+CD24low+ and
CD44+CD24neg CSC in ER negative breast cancer have distinct properties.
CD44+CD24low+ can self-renew and generate CD44+CD24neg progeny.
Orthotopic xenograft CD44+CD24low+ tumors arose with reduced latency with
higher frequent, were larger, and the sole source of metastasis. Notch1
activation of Sox2 drives CD44+CD24low+ self-renewal and is blocked by
GSI providing a strong rationale for use of GSI as CSC targeting agents
in ER negative breast cancer.

