Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic impact of autophagic markers LC3, Beclin 1 and
p62/sequestosome 1 in colon carcinomas from patients treated in
5-FU-based adjuvant therapy trials


Background. Autophagy maintains energy metabolism and enables tumor cell
survival during cellular stress. Beclin 1 is involved in autophagosome
formation during which membrane-bound LC3 binds to p62/sequestosome 1. We
reported that ectopic p62 can promote 5-fluorouracil-induced cell death
(JBC 286:40002-12, 2011). It is unknown whether these autophagy markers
can predict clinical outcome. Materials & Methods. Beclin 1, LC3B, and
p62 proteins were analyzed by immunohistochemistry in tissue microarrays
containing stage II and III colon carcinomas (N=151) from patients
receiving 5-FU or surgery alone. The mean weighted score (intensity x
extent) was dichotomized for survival analysis using Cox models. Results.
Increased levels of cytoplasmic LC3, Beclin 1, and p62 expression were
detected in 21%, 14%, and 68% of cancers, respectively, and were not
associated with tumor site, stage or grade. By multivariable analysis,
increased LC3 was significantly associated with worse disease-free
survival (DFS) (p=0.022), but not overall survival (OS) [p=0.069](Table).
Beclin 1 was not prognostic, but increased p62 was significantly
associated with improved DFS (p=0.038), but not OS (p= 0.176)[Table].
When restricted to 5-FU-treated patients, increased LC3 was associated
with worse DFS [HR= 2.38 (1.19, 4.75, p=0.020), elevated Beclin 1
predicted worse OS [HR=2.83 (1.27, 6.34), p = 0.019], and p62 was not
prognostic. Conclusion. LC3 and Beclin 1 overexpression were
independently associated with adverse outcome. Increased p62 was
associated with better outcome consistent with its ability to promote
cell death. These data support strategies to inhibit autophagy for
therapeutic advantage.


