Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo PET imaging of HER2 expression with GE226: An 18F-labelled
affibody molecule


Background: The assessment of HER2 expression in biopsies from primary
lesions of breast cancer patients is a standard procedure to select
patients for HER2-targeted therapies. However, in metastatic disease in
which HER2 status can change, determination of HER2 expression is not
standard procedure, which complicates patient management. Herein we
report evidence for GE226 ([18F]FBA-ZHER2:2891), a highly specific HER2
targeted imaging agent that can determine HER2 expression levels in
preclinical tumour models. We propose that GE226 can be progressed to
clinical development for non-invasive determination of the HER2 status in
recurrent breast cancer patients to improve the clinical management and
therapy selection. Methods: The highly selective HER2 targeted
18F-labelled Affibody molecule GE226 was characterized in a murine dual
tumour breast cancer model bearing NCI-N87 (high HER2 status) and A431
(low HER2 status) xenografts in separate flanks. Tumour-bearing mice were
injected with 3 to 10 MBq of GE226, followed by biodistribution or
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging analysis. Results:
Biodistribution analysis demonstrated good differentiation of GE226
retention between high and low HER2 expressing tumours (8.4% ID/g and
3.4% ID/g respectively, 30 min post injection). GE226 cleared quickly
from background tissue, including kidneys, with excellent ratios for
tumour-to-muscle (8.9 for high HER2 status tumours and 3.6 for low HER2
status tumours, 30 min post injection) and tumour-to-blood (2.5 for high
HER2 status tumours and 1.0 for low HER2 status tumours, 30 min post
injection). PET imaging of GE226 in the dual tumour mouse model showed a
marked difference in signal intensity between the two tumour types.
Conclusions: The highly selective HER2 targeted Affibody molecule GE226
can image different levels of HER2 expression in a dual-tumour
preclinical model of breast cancer with good target-to-background ratios.
These data compare favourably with previous patient SPECT and PET studies
using the 111In- or 68Ga-labelled HER2-binding Affibody molecule ABY-002
(Baum et al., J Nucl Med. 2010;51(6):892-7) which supports the efficacy
of this class of Affibody tracer for visualization of HER2 expressing
metastases. We plan to progress GE226 further to assess HER2 status in
metastatic breast cancer patients in clinical PET studies.

