Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergistic inhibition of bioenergetic pathways in pancreatic
cancer cells by mitochondria-targeted nitroxide and glycolytic inhibitors


Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive cancers with a
high fatality rate. Currently available chemotherapy for treating
pancreatic cancers is ineffective. Emerging research is focused on drugs
targeting bioenergetic pathways in tumor cells. Despite decades of
evidence that cancer cells have increased aerobic glycolysis, glycolytic
inhibition has failed as a chemotherapeutic approach, due in part to
enhanced systemic toxicity of antiglycolytic agents. We hypothesized that
a combined inhibition of glycolysis and mitochondrial function may
represent an alternate therapeutic approach that can potentially overcome
the insufficiency of glycolytic inhibition alone. In this study we
investigated the chemotherapeutic efficacy of combining
mitochondria-targeted nitroxide, Mito-CP (a nitroxide, carboxy proxyl
conjugated to a triphenylphosphonium (TPP+) moiety), and inhibitors of
glycolysis, 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) or 3-bromopyruvate (3-BP) in
pancreatic cancer cell lines, PANC-1 and MiaPaCa-2. The relative
cytotoxicity and mitochondrial bioenergetic changes in pancreatic cancer
cells were assessed. We observed that Mito-CP synergized with glycolytic
inhibitors (2-DG or 3-BP) in inducing cell death. Using a Seahorse XF24
extracellular flux analyzer, we determined the combined effects of
Mito-CP and 2-DG or 3-BP on cellular mitochondrial function and
glycolytic function. The combined treatments induced fast and
irreversible inhibition of mitochondrial functions and intracellular ATP
depletion. Collectively, these results suggest that targeting
mitochondrial bioenergetic metabolism with Mito-CP and glycolytic
inhibitors such as 2-DG and 3-BP may be a promising chemotherapeutic
strategy in pancreatic cancer.

