Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stabilization of PARP-DNA complexes plays a critical role for the
cytotoxic effects of the PARP inhibitors, veliparib and oliparib


Poly(ADPribose) (PAR) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are in clinical trials
with alkylating agents such as temozolomide and topoisomerase I (Top1)
inhibitors such as camptothecin derivatives (topotecan and irinotecan).
To elucidate the mechanism of action of PARP inhibitors and how they
synergize with alkylating agents and Top1 inhibitors, we compared genetic
PARP knockout versus chemical inhibition with the PARP inhibitor. DNA
alkylation damage was assayed by treating wild type (WT) and PARP
knockout chicken DT40 cells with methyl methane sulfonate (MMS) in the
presence of oliparib or veliparib. Notably, PARP inhibitors produced a
much greater cytotoxicity than knocking out the PARP gene in cells
treated with low MMS concentrations that are not cytotoxic in WT cells.
Moreover, knocking out PARP eliminated the cytotoxicity of the PARP
inhibitors even in the absence of MMS treatment. These results suggested
that PARP inhibitors not only act by abrogating the catalytic activity of
PARP and blocking PAR polymer formation but also by poisoning PARP. To
further investigate this possibility, we measured PARP binding to DNA.
Accordingly, we found that both oliparib and veliparib trap PARP on
cellular DNA. By contrast, in the case of Top1 inhibitors, the
potentiation by PARP inhibitors was no greater than knocking out PARP.
Together, these results demonstrate that oliparib and veliparib act
primarily as catalytic PARP inhibitors for Top1-linked DNA damage,
whereas, in the case of base damage, oliparib and veliparib also act by
preventing the removal of PARP complexes from DNA, probably as a result
of defective PARP auto-PARylation, thereby converting base damage and DNA
nicks into tight PARP-DNA complexes.

