Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer stem cell-like cells are sensitive to ionizing
radiation: Role of ATM


The aim of this study was to determine the radiosensitivity of cancer
stem (tumor-initiating) cells (CSC), which are known to be responsible
for tumorogenicity and metastasis. We used breast cancer stem cell
(CSC)-like MDA-MB231 and MDA-MB453 cell lines which were established by
Dr. Edward V. Prochownik (Sajithlal et al., Stem Cells, 28:1008, 2010).
Interestingly, these cells can proliferate without differentiation and
have characteristics of tumor-initiating cells. CSC-like cells and their
alternate subset non-CSC cells were exposed to -rays (1.25-8.75Gy) and
survival curves were determined by colony formation. A final slope, D0,
of the survival curve for each cell line was determined to measure
radiosensitivity. D0 of CSC-like MDA-MB453 cells and that of non-CSC
MDA-MB453 cells were 1.16 Gy and 1.55 Gy, respectively. Similar results
were observed in MDA-MB231 cells. We further examined whether CSC-like
cells are relatively radiosensitive owing to different intrinsic factors
including cell cycle distribution, free-radical scavengers and DNA
repair. We observed that, unlike non-CSC cells, CSC-like cells have
little/no sublethal damage repair and a low intracellular level of ATM.
These results suggest that low DNA repair capability is responsible for
the high radiosensitivity of these CSC-like cells.

