Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel small molecule inhibitors of MDM2/4-p53 interaction, YH264
and its ethyl ester YH263: preclinical evaluation


Introduction: In p53+/+ cells, expression of MDM2/4 leads to turnover of
p53 and inhibition of downstream gene transcription decreasing cell cycle
arrest or apoptosis. Prevention of MDM2/4-p53 interaction is a promising
therapeutic strategy. Two in-house developed small molecule inhibitors of
MDM2/4-p53 binding, YH264 and YH263, had nM activity in protein binding
assays, were characterized by co-crystal structures, and had low M
activity in the NCI 60 cell screen. We evaluated in vitro cytotoxicity in
HCT 116, human p53+/+ colon cancer cells as well as efficacy,
pharmacokinetics, and metabolism in mice bearing HCT 116 xenografts.
Methods: Cytotoxicity against HCT 116 cells was assessed by 72 h MTT
assay. C.B-17 SCID mice bearing HCT 116 xenografts (5 mice/group) were
dosed with either YH264 or YH263 (150 mg/kg IV or PO), or vehicle QDx5
and tumors were measured twice weekly for at least 1 week post dosing.
For pharmacokinetic studies, mice bearing HCT 116 xenografts were treated
with 150 mg/kg YH264 or YH263 IV and PO. Plasma and tumor were collected
between 5 min and 24 h. Urine was collected between 0-6 h and 6-24 h.
YH264 and YH263 in cells from the in vitro study and tissues were
quantitated with an LC-MS/MS assay. Pharmacokinetic parameters were
calculated non-compartmentally. Results: IC50 values of YH264 and YH263
were 18.6 (9 g/ml) and 8.9 M (4 g/ml), respectively. When mice were dosed
IV or PO for QDx5 with YH264 or YH263, no decrease in body weights or
significant decrease in xenograft volume was observed when compared to
vehicle treated mice. Plasma elimination of IV YH264 was biphasic. Plasma
and tumor parameters were respectively: Cmax 1,451 g/ml and 44 g/g;
AUC0-t 125,000 gmin/ml and 38,000 gmin/g. Tumor concentrations remained
above 17 g/g out to 24 h. Plasma t1/2 was 147 min and clearance was 1.2
ml/min/kg. Metabolites included hydroxylated and glucuronidated products.
After PO dosing, bioavailability was 18% and YH264 was undetectable in
tumor. IV plasma elimination of the ethyl-ester YH263 was biphasic as
well. Plasma and tumor parameters were respectively: Cmax 995 g/ml and 21
g/g; AUC0-t 45,477 gmin/ml and 18,950 gmin/g. Tumor concentrations
remained above 7 g/g for 24 h. Plasma t1/2 was 263 min and clearance was
3.3 ml/min/kg. 2% of the YH263 dose was converted to YH264 and there were
multiple hydroxylated and glucuronidated metabolites. After PO dosing,
bioavailability was 4.8%. In culture YH264 and YH263 cellular
concentrations were 60- and 200-fold higher than medium concentrations.
Conclusions: At the IC50 medium concentration, the cells accumulated
200-fold higher concentrations: of YH263 than medium. Despite dosing the
mice at the maximum soluble dose, we could not achieve tumor
concentrations (800 g/g) equivalent to those required to inhibit cells in
vitro. This may explain the absence of efficacy on the current schedule.
P30-CA47904, Dept. of Pharm.Sci.

