Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The PSP94prostasin pathway and early detection of ovarian cancer


Objective: Our long-term goal is to better understand the mechanism of
tumor development in human epithelial ovarian cancer. The short-term goal
is to identify a biomarker for early detection of this malignancy.
Methods: qPCR was performed for PSP94 expression using SYBR Green
reagents kit in 3 pairs of tumor and normal samples of ovarian cancer
patients and 4 ovarian cancer cell lines on ABI 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR
System. Overexpression of PSP94 or prostasin by cDNA transfection was
performed in ovarian cancer cell lines. The expression levels of PSP94
and prostasin after cDNA transfection were determined by western blot
analysis. Results: In gene expression analysis by qPCR, we found that
PSP94 expresses in tumor tissues of ovarian cancer patients and cancer
cell lines but not in normal ovarian specimens. Our investigation of the
relationship between PSP94 and prostasin by cDNA transfection assay
demonstrated that expression of prostasin was increased in the PSP94
overexpressed cells. In contrast, PSP94 expression did not change in the
prostasin-forced-expression cells. This suggests that the two genes most
likely share part of a regulation network and that PSP94 appears to be an
upstream regulator of prostasin. Conclusions: We conclude that PSP94
expression occurs only in tumor samples and PSP94 and prostasin share a
signaling pathway. We hypothesize that alteration of PSP94-prostasin
pathway may be an early event in the development of epithelial ovarian
cancer; PSP94 appears to be an upstream regulator that modulates
prostasin expression. Thus, PSP94 seems to play an important role in
tumorigenesis and may hold great promise as a biomarker for early
detection of human epithelial ovarian cancer.

