Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A synthetic lethality combination with chloroquine and rapamycin
on chemosensitization


Chemoresistance is the main obstacle of successful cancer therapy.
Autophagy may either enhance cancer cell death or activate
chemoresistance. Simultaneous pushing and blocking of autophagy may be a
valid strategy for overcoming drug resistance and improving responses. We
hypothesized that simultaneous forcing hepatoma cells synchronized in a
pro-autophagic status by rapamycin while blocking the final autophagic
pathway by chloroquine is an example of synthetic lethality in synergism.
Co-administration of the chemotherapeutic agents with rapamycin and
chloroquine in 3 hepatoma cell lines have all demonstrated synergistic
effects including 5-fluorouracil, navelbine, taxotere or cisplatin.
Increasing doses of rapamycin and chloroquine resulted in a significant
decrease of ED50 of different chemodrugs. Althrough hepatoma cell lines
expressed difference status of autophage during various chemodrug
treatments, co-administration of rapamycin and chloroquine could
synchronize them on the pro-autophagic status while preveting them
ensuring to the final autophagic status in all cell line tested. The
combination of rapamycin and chloroquine and chemotherapeutic agents
resulted in increased apoptotic cell death compared to chemotherapeutic
agents alone. All of the observed synergistic chemosensitization effect
from combination of chloroquine and rapamycin is more obvious than either
agent alone. In vivo experiments are underway. If these synergistic
effects can be reproduced in vivo, the combination of rapamycin and
chloroquine may provide a valid reversing resistance strategy in
treatment refractory cancer patients.

