Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Potential loss of p53/p21 function in a murine lung adenocarcinoma
cell line prevents TGF1-induced dormancy despite p38/ activation and DEC2
and p27 induction


Disseminated tumor cells can reside in target organs in a state of
dormancy (growth arrest) for prolonged periods before developing into
overt lesions. Studies using the HEp3 model of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) showed that a low ERK:p38 signaling ratio predicts
for cellular dormancy while the opposite prompts active proliferation.
Further, p38 activation induces the expression of p53 and the
tumor/metastasis suppressor BHLHB3/DEC2, while inhibiting c-jun and FoxM1
expression. Also, at least p53 and DEC2 are positively regulated by
transforming growth factor beta (TGF). Preliminary data studying the
murine lung adenocarcinoma cell line LP07 suggested that TGF1 can only
delay primary tumor growth with no effect on spontaneous metastasis
development. These studies motivated us to test whether the effects of
TGF1 signaling in the LP07 model might be short-circuited to prevent the
activation of a tumor cell dormancy program as that described in HNSCC.
Flow cytometry analysis showed that TGF1 treatment mediated arrest in
G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle in LP07 cells, which was consistent with
p27 upregulation observed by Western blot. Concomitantly, TGF1 activated
the transcriptions factors Smad2/3 and inhibited proliferation, all these
events blocked by an inhibitor of TGF-receptor serine kinase activity.
Consistent with these data, LP07 cells exhibited a high ERK:p38 ratio
that was lowered by TGF1, primarily due to a strong p38 activation.
Accordingly, we observed in vivo growth inhibition of TGF1-pretreated
cells upon subcutaneous implantation in syngeneic BALB/c mice. However,
sustained in vivo growth arrest was not observed. We also found by qPCR
an increased level of DEC2 mRNA in TGF1-treated cells. LP07 cells
overexpressing DEC2 or a constitutive active mutant of p38 had increased
p27 expression as assessed by Western blot, suggesting that the p38->DEC2
pathway can be re-activated. Upon treatment of the cells with a MEK1/2
inhibitor, p27 was also upregulated and phospho-histone H3 was
downregulated. p53 and p21 were refractory to modulation by these
treatments, even following overexpression of wild type p53. This suggests
that p53 function might be disrupted and/or that p21 may be
epigenetically silenced in this cell line. In conclusion, we have found
that the metastatic LP07 cell line displays an ERK/p38 ratio and
downstream signaling that predict for an efficient escape from dormancy.
While the p38->DEC2-p27 pathway could be restored by establishing a low
ERK/p38 signaling ratio, absence of functional p53 and p21 induction most
likely explains why TGF1 only attenuates tumor growth. If p53 and p21
(also a target of DEC2) are silenced by DNA promoter methylation it is
possible that restoration of p21 promoter sensitivity to DEC2 using
5-Aza-C may allow for reprogramming LP07 cells into a prolonged dormant
state.

