Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of resveratrol combined with DFMO or DenSpm on MCF-7
breast cancer cells and MCF-10a non-cancerous cells


Resveratrol, (3,5,49-trihydroxy-trans-stilbene), was first reported to
act as a chemo-preventative anticancer compound in mice by Jang et al. in
1997. Resveratrol has been shown to induce apoptosis and reduce both cell
viability and mitotic index in many cancer cell lines, including MCF-7.
The current work extends these studies to determine its effects on
glucose utilization and enzymes involved in polyamine metabolism. Glucose
uptake was found to be reduced in MCF-7 cells treated with resveratrol.
Work in other labs has shown resveratrol to sensitize cancer cells to
other chemotherapeutic compounds. In the present study, the effects of
combinations of resveratrol with compounds that affect polyamine
metabolism, DFMO (difluoromethylornithine) and DenSpm (N1,
N11-diethylnorspermine), were tested. Both DFMO and DenSpm were found to
reduce cell proliferation and mitotic index in MCF-7 cell lines and more
importantly, a synergistic effect was observed when these compounds were
used in combination with resveratrol. In this investigation resveratrol
was also found to induce apoptosis and reduce cell viability, mitotic
index, and glucose uptake in non-cancerous, transformed mammary
epithelial cells (MCF-10a). Similar findings have been reported with
other non-cancerous cells including intestinal smooth muscle cells
(Garcia et al., 2011). The combination of resveratrol and DFMO also
reduced glucose uptake, proliferation, and mitotic index in this
non-cancerous cell line (MCF-10a). These compounds were found to affect
the expression of ODC (ornithine decarboxylase) and SSAT
(spermidine/spermine acetyl transferase), enzymes involved in polyamine
metabolism, and other proteins involved in cell cycle regulation.

