Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prediction of esophageal cancer risk through quantification of
gamma-H2AX levels in peripheral blood lymphocytes


Increased susceptibility to DNA damage has been shown to be associated
with increased risk of many cancers. Accumulation of gamma-H2AX (-H2AX)
in cultured cells after stimulation by ionizing radiation or other
genotoxic agents is a sensitive indicator of DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs) induction. We hypothesize that higher level of DSBs, as measured
by -H2AX levels in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs), may be able to
predict higher cancer risk. We first developed an objective,
high-throughput, and image-based method to quantify immunofluorescence
intensities of -H2AX in cultured PBLs. To test this hypothesis, using an
ongoing esophageal cancer case control study, we measured the -H2AX
levels at baseline and after gamma-radiation in the PBLs from 245 newly
diagnosed, previously untreated esophageal cancer patients and 400
healthy control subjects, and calculated the ratio of radiation-induced
to the baseline -H2AX levels as a parameter of DSBs. The mean -H2AX ratio
was significantly higher in cases (1.480.14) than controls (1.390.11) (P
=1.4710-14). When dichotomized at the median level of the -H2AX ratio in
control subjects, individuals in the high -H2AX ratio group exhibited a
significantly increased risk of esophageal cancer (odds ratio [OR]=2.83,
95% confidence intervals [CI]: 2.00-4.00). When subjects were categorized
into tertiles defined by the distribution of the relative -H2AX ratio in
control subjects, a significant dose-response relationship was observed
between -H2AX ratio and risk of esophageal cancer. Compared to subjects
in the lowest tertile of -H2AX ratio, those in the middle and the highest
tertiles exhibited increased risks of esophageal cancer with ORs of 1.60
(95% CI: 1.00-2.55) and 3.72 (95% CI: 2.43-5.70), respectively (P for
trend =2.2410-10). Quartile analysis also showed similar dose-response
relationship. Our data suggest that higher ratio of
gamma-radiation-induced to baseline -H2AX is significantly associated
with an increased risk of esophageal cancer. This study supports that
measurement of this ratio may be used as a novel phenotypic assay to
identify individuals at high risk for esophageal cancer.

