Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a red fluorescent labeled agent for assessing HER2
expression in vitro and in vivo


Upregulation of tumor HER2 occurs in approximately 25% women with breast
cancer and is often associated with poor prognosis. We developed a red
fluorescent imaging agent to non-invasively image and quantify
tumor-associated HER2 expression in vivo. A red fluorescent dye (VivoTag
645; =210,000 /cm; abs/em max 643/660 nm) was used to label trastuzumab,
which is currently used to treat breast and stomach cancer. The
red-labeled trastuzumab (VM4003) preferentially labeled HER2+ SKOV-3
human ovarian adenocarcinoma cells over HER2 human colorectal
adenocarcinoma Colo-205 cells (10 fold), and the specificity of binding
was confirmed by control experiments using free dye, labeled non-specific
IgG, and competitive blockade with unlabeled excess trastuzumab.
Fluorescence microscopy confirmed the expected membrane localization of
fluorescence. In vivo and ex vivo imaging by fluorescence molecular
tomography (FMT), showed significantly higher signal within the tumors,
peaking at 6-72 hours following intravenous injection of 2 mg/kg VM4003,
decreasing thereafter with a tissue half-life of 3 days. In vivo
quantification of tumor signal in nude mice showed significantly higher
tumor signal in HER2+ than in HER2 tumors (14.36 + 4 versus 2.39+ 0.74
pmol, at 6h imaging time, p=0.007; 18.77 + 4.45 versus 3.50+ 0.98 pmol,
at 24h, p=0.001). Specificity of targeting was confirmed by competition
with excess intravenous unlabeled trastuzumab, which achieved 70% signal
inhibition in the tumors (tumor signal 16.12 + 3.03 versus 4.72 + 1.96
pmol, p=0.022 at 24h). Tumor volumes, as determined by direct
measurements of tumor size, were comparable between both groups of mice
(p=0.193). Fluorescence microscopy of ex vivo frozen tissue sections
confirmed tumor fluorescence and signal localization associated to cell
membranes and cytoplasm. In summary, red fluorescent-labeled trastuzumab
selectively targets ER2, allowing both imaging in vitro and the
non-invasive real-time tomographic imaging and quantification in vivo of
HER-2 expression.

