Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The obligate role of microglia in tumorigenesis in a mouse model
of neurofibromatosis-1 optic glioma


Brain tumors (gliomas) are composed of heterogeneous populations of
neoplastic and non-neoplastic cells. While the neoplastic cells have
classically been the target of therapeutic drug design, recent studies
have demonstrated a critical role for non-neoplastic cells in brain tumor
growth. The importance of non-neoplastic (stromal) cells is underscored
by genetically-engineered mouse (GEM) models of Neurofibromatosis type 1
(NF1)-associated optic glioma. Whereas mice lacking Nf1 gene expression
in GFAP+ glial cells do not develop brain tumors, nearly 100% of Nf1+/
mice with GFAP+ cell Nf1 inactivation form optic gliomas. These
observations establish an obligate role for Nf1+/ non-neoplastic cells in
gliomagenesis. One of the non-neoplastic cell types found in both mouse
and human NF1-associated gliomas is microglia, a resident population of
macrophage-like cells. To prove that microglia are essential drivers of
glioma formation, we generated Nf1 optic glioma mice with reduced
expression of the microglial chemokine receptor CX3CR1
(Nf1+/GFAPCKO-cx3cr1+/GFP mice). Consistent with the critical role of
CX3CR1 in microglial function, Nf1+/GFAPCKO-cx3cr1+/GFP mice had reduced
numbers of Iba1+ microglia in the optic nerve. Moreover,
Nf1+/GFAPCKO-cx3cr1+/GFP mice had optic glioma proliferative indices and
optic nerve volumes comparable to those found in wild-type mice,
demonstrating that microglia are necessary for optic nerve gliomagenesis.
Collectively, these findings establish an obligate role for microglia in
glioma formation and suggest that CX3CR1 is a potential target for future
therapeutic drug design.

