Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acute activation of beta2-adrenergic receptor inhibits in vitro
renal carcinoma cell migration through betaArrestin2-mediated regulation
of p115RhoGEF


Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is fatal with no current effective
treatment. Molecular mechanisms underlying progression to metastatic RCC
are not fully understood, and gene array studies have revealed increased
expression of beta2-adrenergic receptors (beta2AR) and betaArrestin2
genes in RCC. We examined the regulation of RCC migration and invasion,
two critical steps in the progression to the metastatic disease,
following beta2AR activation using scratch assays and Boyden chamber
assays in cultured RCC cell lines Caki-1, SN12C and RCC7. Acute treatment
with the selective beta2AR agonist formoterol inhibited migration of the
three cell lines by 40% to 70% with an IC50 of 2.5 nM or less. We further
examined contribution of G protein and betaArrestin signaling. Using the
betaAR-inverse agonist carvedilol that is biased for[[Unsupported
Character - ?]]betaArrestin signaling, combined with transient knockdown
of Gs or betaArrestin2 by siRNA, or mouse embryonic fibroblasts from
betaArrestin1 or betaArrestin2 knockout mice, we identified betaArrestin2
as a mediator of beta2AR-induced inhibition of cell migration.
betaArrestin2 forms a complex with p115RhoGEF (guanine nucleotide
exchange factor) that was previously shown to be regulated by Gq and
G12/13. Activation of beta2AR promoted the translocation of p115RhoGEF to
the plasma membrane, with consequent activation of RhoA which enhances
formation of focal adhesions that restrain the cell migration. These
results suggest that betaArrestin2 exerts cell compartment-specific
effects on the cell migration. In the absence of acute beta2AR
activation, betaArrestin2 sequesters p115RhoGEF in the cytosol, leading
to relatively lower RhoA activity at the cell periphery and higher cell
migration rate. Upon acute beta2AR activation, betaArrestin2 translocates
to the plasma membrane with concomitant enrichment of p115RhoGEF at the
plasma membrane, resulting in the activation of RhoA and decreased cell
motility. Our results imply that betaArrestin2 and its effectors impact
RCC metastasis and suggest its utility as a drug target to limit
progression of the disease.

