Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MICA variation and soluble MICA are possible prognostic biomarkers
for HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection still remains to be one of the dominant
risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Both genetic as well as
environmental factors influence the progression of chronic hepatitis B
(CHB) to HCC. MHC class I polypeptide-related chain A and B (MICA and
MICB) molecules are induced in response to viral infection as well as
various stresses. We have recently revealed that SNP in MICA promoter was
significantly associated with HCV-induced HCC risk as well as lower sMICA
level in serum. To investigate the possible involvement of MICA in
hepatocellular carcinogenesis caused by HBV-infection, we analyzed MICA
gene polymorphisms and the levels of soluble MICA (sMICA) in HBV-induced
HCC patients. The genetic association analysis revealed a nominal
association at rs2596542 in which G allele was associated with
susceptibility to HBV-induced HCC (P=0.029 with odds ratio of 1.19). We
also found a significant elevation of sMICA in HBV-induced HCC cases.
Moreover, genotypes at SNP rs2596542 located in the upstream of MICA
promoter, was significantly associated with sMICA levels (P = 0.009).
Interestingly. HCC patients with high sMICA (> 5 pg/ml) exhibited poor
prognosis compared with patients with low sMICA (P = 0.008). Thus, our
results highlight the importance of MICA genetic variations and sMICA as
predictive biomarkers for HBV-induced HCC.

