Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tetrac (tetraiidothyroacetic acid) decreases in vitro x-ray
survival of a human medullary thyroid cancer cell line under oxic and
hypoxic conditions


In 2009 we showed that 2 M tetrac given for 1 hour at 37oC prior to 250
kVP x-irradiation sensitized GL261 murine brain tumor cells.
Radiosensitization was accomplished by increasing the alpha component in
the linear-quadratic equation of cell survival (Cell Cycle, 8:2586-91).
In 2011, we showed that tetrac also sensitized U87MG human brain tumor
cells to 250 kVp x-rays (Cell Cycle, 10: 352-57). Again
radiosensitization was accomplished by an increase in the x-ray
component. Tetrac also inhibited the repair of DNA double strand breaks
in U87MG cells. However, tetrac which binds to the v3 integrin receptor
and inhibitssignaling from the v3 receptor, penetrates the cell and has a
thyromimetic effect which offsets radiosensitization. In this regard, we
synthesized a nanoparticle tetrac formulation termed Nano-T. Nano-T also
binds to the v3 receptor but does notpenetrate the cell. Nano-T causes
radiosensitization in vitro in H522 lung cancer cells, producing an added
benefit compared to tetrac. We have also shown that daily treatment of in
vivo human-MTC (h-MTC) solid tumors in mice with Nano-T for 20 days
produced significant growth inhibition. It is our intent to combine
Nano-T with ionizing radiation in vivo, and we have begun by studying the
effects of tetrac on h-MTC cells in vitro. These h-MTC cells are show an
in vitro cell culture doubling time of 96.2 hours and a clonogenicity of
3.16%. We irradiated cells in exponential growth with 250 kVp X-rays.
Below we give the LQ survival parameters, and the surviving fraction at 2
Gy (SF2). Table 1. Initial Results of 250 kVp Single Dose X-irradiation
on h-MTC CellsIn Vitro without and with Tetrac SF2 Tetrac Oxygen (Gy-1 x
10-1) (Gy-2 x 10-2) Enhancment Enhancement Factor Factor Without Tetrac
Oxic Cells - 0.033 0.0256 0.901 2.55 Hypoxic Cells 0.030 0.0023 0.922
With Tetrac Oxic Cells 0.472 0.0495 0.330 2.84 2.60 Hypoxic Cells 0.013
0.0256 0.803 2.84 First, h-MTC cells irradiated as oxic or hypoxic,
exponentially growing cells are very radioresistant suggesting a large
capacity to repair radiation damage. Second, tetrac sensitized both oxic
and hypoxic h-MTC cells. These characteristics speak to our proposed
Nano-T in treatment of h-MTC tumors in vivo. Nano-T should increase the
radiosensitivity of both oxic and hypoxic cells and should also decrease
the repair of radiation damage in conventional fractionated radiation
therapy.

