Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Progesterone and calcitriol attenuate inflammatory cytokines CXCL1
and -2 in endometrial and ovarian cancer cells


Chronic inflammation has been shown to play a critical role in growth of
cancers. NF-B is a transcriptional factor that regulates diverse
biological processes, including cell proliferation, survival and
inflammation. We have previously shown inhibition of endometrial and
ovarian cancer cell growth with progesterone and calcitriol. In the
present study, we evaluated the effect of progesterone and calcitriol on
the expression of inflammatory genes. Using RT-PCR array of inflammatory
cytokine and receptor genes, we found two inflammatory cytokines, CXCL1
and -2 (GRO-A and -B), downregulated by both treatments. PCR array
results were validated by Western blotting. Knockdown of NF-kB resulted
in a reduced expression of CXCL1 and -2 and the inhibitory effect of
progesterone and calcitriol on the expression of cytokines was abrogated
in NF-kB-silenced cancer cells. Silencing of IkB increased the expression
of CXCL1 and -2 in cancer cells, which can be attributed to the increased
activation of NF-kB-p65, caused by the lack of its inhibitor.
Progesterone and calcitriol-induced inhibition was abolished in
IkB-knockdown cells. Our results demonstrate that suppression of IkB
phosphorylation by progesterone and calcitriol contributes to the reduced
expression of CXCL1 and -2. We investigated the effect of CXCL1 and -2
downregulation on metastasis-promoting genes and found a marked
inhibition of CXCR4, COX2 and matrix metalloproteinases (MMP2 and MPP-9).
Overall, our results indicate that progesterone and calcitriol
downregulate NF-kB in cancer cells, leading to the suppression of
metastasis, thus providing the molecular basis for the treatment of
endometrial and ovarian cancer patients with progesterone and calcitriol.

