Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel potent inhibitor of Bcr-Abl mutated imatinib resistant
chronic myeloid leukemia cell lines


The hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is the presence of Bcr-Abl
oncoprotein that is essential for leukemogenesis and accumulation of
neoplastic cells. The Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate
(Gleevec) represents the standard treatment for CML. However, a number of
CML patients develop imatinib resistance and several mechanisms of
resistance have been described. While most mutant forms are sensitive to
second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the T315I mutation remains
completely refractory to imatinib, as well as to these agents. Treatment
of CML patients harboring T315I mutation is still an unmet medical need
in the imatinib and post-imatinib era. We have identified P2745, a novel
orally bioavailable small molecule that is effective in imatinib
resistant mutations and particularly T315I mutation form to address this
unmet medical need. In vitro P2745 showed potent cytotoxicity (IC50 0.8-5
M) in twelve Bcr-Abl mutated imatinib resistant cell lines including
T315I compared to wild type Bcr-Abl cell lines. P2745 did not show
cytotoxicity upto 30 M in normal fibroblasts (MRC-5 and WI-38) and normal
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells thus indicating specificity
towards cancerous cells. P2745 inhibited pCrkLTyr207 in
imatinib-resistant CML cell lines accompanied with down regulation of
Bcr-Abl protein levels. Additionally, it up regulated tumor suppressor
protein SMAR-1 which resulted in negative regulation TGF-/SMAD-dependent
pathway as demonstrated by low phosphorylated levels of SMAD2 and SMAD3,
two key players implicated in the preservation of the malignant
progenitor population, and partly responsible for the resistance to
treatments targeting Bcr-Abl. P2745 also induced significant apoptosis in
imatinib resistant cell lines (Y253F, T315I and E255V) but not in normal
MRC-5 cell line. In addition, like imatinib it induced 80-90 % apoptosis
in cells derived from CML patients. In vivo studies demonstrated
significant (pThe hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is the
presence of Bcr-Abl oncoprotein that is essential for leukemogenesis and
accumulation of neoplastic cells. The Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor
imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) represents the standard treatment for CML.
However, a number of CML patients develop imatinib resistance and several
mechanisms of resistance have been described. While most mutant forms are
sensitive to second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the T315I
mutation remains completely refractory to imatinib, as well as to these
agents. Treatment of CML patients harboring T315I mutation is still an
unmet medical need in the imatinib and post-imatinib era. We have
identified P2745, a novel orally bioavailable small molecule that is
effective in imatinib resistant mutations and particularly T315I mutation
form to address this unmet medical need. In vitro P2745 showed potent
cytotoxicity (IC50 0.8-5 M) in twelve Bcr-Abl mutated imatinib resistant
cell lines including T315I compared to wild type Bcr-Abl cell lines.
P2745 did not show cytotoxicity upto 30 M in normal fibroblasts (MRC-5
and WI-38) and normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells thus
indicating specificity towards cancerous cells. P2745 inhibited
pCrkLTyr207 in imatinib-resistant CML cell lines accompanied with down
regulation of Bcr-Abl protein levels. Additionally, it up regulated tumor
suppressor protein SMAR-1 which resulted in negative regulation
TGF-/SMAD-dependent pathway as demonstrated by low phosphorylated levels
of SMAD2 and SMAD3, two key players implicated in the preservation of the
malignant progenitor population, and partly responsible for the
resistance to treatments targeting Bcr-Abl. P2745 also induced
significant apoptosis in imatinib resistant cell lines (Y253F, T315I and
E255V) but not in normal MRC-5 cell line. In addition, like imatinib it
induced 80-90 % apoptosis in cells derived from CML patients. In vivo
studies demonstrated significant (p<0.001), dose dependent efficacy in
imatinib resistant T315I cells xenograft in SCID mice. It also
demonstrated significant in vivo efficacy in Bcr-Abl wild type imatinib
sensitive K-562 (pThe hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is the
presence of Bcr-Abl oncoprotein that is essential for leukemogenesis and
accumulation of neoplastic cells. The Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor
imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) represents the standard treatment for CML.
However, a number of CML patients develop imatinib resistance and several
mechanisms of resistance have been described. While most mutant forms are
sensitive to second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the T315I
mutation remains completely refractory to imatinib, as well as to these
agents. Treatment of CML patients harboring T315I mutation is still an
unmet medical need in the imatinib and post-imatinib era. We have
identified P2745, a novel orally bioavailable small molecule that is
effective in imatinib resistant mutations and particularly T315I mutation
form to address this unmet medical need. In vitro P2745 showed potent
cytotoxicity (IC50 0.8-5 M) in twelve Bcr-Abl mutated imatinib resistant
cell lines including T315I compared to wild type Bcr-Abl cell lines.
P2745 did not show cytotoxicity upto 30 M in normal fibroblasts (MRC-5
and WI-38) and normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells thus
indicating specificity towards cancerous cells. P2745 inhibited
pCrkLTyr207 in imatinib-resistant CML cell lines accompanied with down
regulation of Bcr-Abl protein levels. Additionally, it up regulated tumor
suppressor protein SMAR-1 which resulted in negative regulation
TGF-/SMAD-dependent pathway as demonstrated by low phosphorylated levels
of SMAD2 and SMAD3, two key players implicated in the preservation of the
malignant progenitor population, and partly responsible for the
resistance to treatments targeting Bcr-Abl. P2745 also induced
significant apoptosis in imatinib resistant cell lines (Y253F, T315I and
E255V) but not in normal MRC-5 cell line. In addition, like imatinib it
induced 80-90 % apoptosis in cells derived from CML patients. In vivo
studies demonstrated significant (p<0.001), dose dependent efficacy in
imatinib resistant T315I cells xenograft in SCID mice. It also
demonstrated significant in vivo efficacy in Bcr-Abl wild type imatinib
sensitive K-562 (p<0.05) and Ba/F3 (pThe hallmark of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) is the presence of Bcr-Abl oncoprotein that is essential
for leukemogenesis and accumulation of neoplastic cells. The Abl tyrosine
kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) represents the standard
treatment for CML. However, a number of CML patients develop imatinib
resistance and several mechanisms of resistance have been described.
While most mutant forms are sensitive to second-generation tyrosine
kinase inhibitors, the T315I mutation remains completely refractory to
imatinib, as well as to these agents. Treatment of CML patients harboring
T315I mutation is still an unmet medical need in the imatinib and
post-imatinib era. We have identified P2745, a novel orally bioavailable
small molecule that is effective in imatinib resistant mutations and
particularly T315I mutation form to address this unmet medical need. In
vitro P2745 showed potent cytotoxicity (IC50 0.8-5 M) in twelve Bcr-Abl
mutated imatinib resistant cell lines including T315I compared to wild
type Bcr-Abl cell lines. P2745 did not show cytotoxicity upto 30 M in
normal fibroblasts (MRC-5 and WI-38) and normal human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells thus indicating specificity towards cancerous cells.
P2745 inhibited pCrkLTyr207 in imatinib-resistant CML cell lines
accompanied with down regulation of Bcr-Abl protein levels. Additionally,
it up regulated tumor suppressor protein SMAR-1 which resulted in
negative regulation TGF-/SMAD-dependent pathway as demonstrated by low
phosphorylated levels of SMAD2 and SMAD3, two key players implicated in
the preservation of the malignant progenitor population, and partly
responsible for the resistance to treatments targeting Bcr-Abl. P2745
also induced significant apoptosis in imatinib resistant cell lines
(Y253F, T315I and E255V) but not in normal MRC-5 cell line. In addition,
like imatinib it induced 80-90 % apoptosis in cells derived from CML
patients. In vivo studies demonstrated significant (p<0.001), dose
dependent efficacy in imatinib resistant T315I cells xenograft in SCID
mice. It also demonstrated significant in vivo efficacy in Bcr-Abl wild
type imatinib sensitive K-562 (p<0.05) and Ba/F3 (p<0.001) xenografts in
SCID mice. PK-PD evaluation in imatinib resistant xenograft experiments
indicated that at the efficacious dose, P2745 modulated proteins
responsible for CML pathogenesis (60-80 %), which correlates with the
levels of P2745 in the tumors. This unique mechanism of action makes
P2745 a promising clinical candidate for CML patients harboring T315I
mutation.

