Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Appropriate crosslinking is required for co-stimulatory activity
of human CD27 antibody in a transgenic mouse model


CD27 is a member of TNFR superfamily. It constitutively expresses on the
majority of T cell and a subset of NK cells, playing key roles in T cell
activation and survival and in NK cell proliferation and cytotoxicity
upon interaction with ligand CD70. Some antibodies to mouse CD27 have
been reported that display agonistic and anti-tumor activities while
other mAbs had less anti-tumor activity and were depleting. We
hypothesized that differences in these antibodies may be due to Fc
receptor engagement, as has recently been shown for the adjuvant and
anti-tumor activities of agonistic mouse CD40 mAbs, which is also member
of TNFR superfamily. We have developed and previously described a human
anti-human CD27 antibody (1F5) and a human CD27 transgenic mouse model
(hCD27-Tg) to explore the therapeutic potential of targeting CD27. In
this study, we examined the effect of modifying the constant regions of
the 1F5 mAb on its ability to enhance antigen specific T cell responses.
With the original 1F5 hIgG1 as template, a panel of 1F5 variants was made
including 1F5 mIgG1, 1F5 mIgG2a, 1F5 mIgG1D265A and 1F5 hIgG1N297S using
molecular cloning techniques. All of the variants retained equal binding
to hCD27 as shown by ELISA and flow cytometry studies. In addition,
Biacore analysis confirmed the expected pattern of binding to human and
mouse FcRs. Co-injection of 1F5 or its variants with ovalbumin enhanced
antigen-specific CD8 T cell response to different extents, as detected by
SIINFEKL-specific IFN-ELISPOT and ICS. The 1F5 mIgG1 induced the highest
number of IFN-producing CD8+ cells, whereas 1F5 mIgG2a was very weak at
enhancing the CD8 T cell response. The hIgG1 version of 1F5 was
intermediate in activity. Introduction of the D265A mutation that
disrupts FcRs binding into the mIgG1 eliminated the co-stimulatory
function of 1F5. Similarly, the 1F5 hIgG1N297S also showed reduced
activity compared to the original 1F5 hIgG1. The isotype-specific effects
on our anti-hCD27 mAb are surprisingly consistent with the findings
described for the agonistic anti-mCD40 mAbs, and imply that engagement of
the inhibitory Fc receptors (FcRIIb) is driving the co-stimulatory
activity in this model. Interestingly, the 1F5 hIgG1 triggered a
significant T cell response, despite the lack of FcRIIb binding by
Biacore analysis. The effect of these variants on anti-tumor activity in
hCD27 transgenic mice is currently being investigated. The 1F5 hIgG1 mAb
(CDX-1127) is currently undergoing clinical evaluation in a phase 1 trial
of patients with advanced cancers.

