Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 5F203-induced reactive oxidative species, DNA damage and apoptosis
involves aryl hydrocarbon activation in ovarian cancer cells


Ovarian cancer is the 2nd cause of death by gynecological malignancies
after breast cancer. These tumors have poor prognoses because they are
detected at advanced stages of disease and show acquired or intrinsic
resistance to therapy.Benzothiazoles, agents with preclinical antitumor
activity against ovarian and breast cancer models, belong to a novel
mechanistic class which bind to the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR).
Phortress the lysylamide prodrug of 2-(4-amino-3-methylphenyl)-5-
fluorobenzothiazole (5F203) is currently under phase I clinical
evaluation. We previously demonstrated that these compounds activate AhR
signaling in sensitive breast cancer cells, the goal of this project was
to evaluate the role of AhR in 5F203 activity in two human ovarian cell
lines: IGROV-1 sensitive to 5F203 and SKOV-3 resistant to this agent. We
observed by MTS assay IGROV-1 cell growth inhibition of 31.912.2% by 0.01
M 5F203 and almost total growth inhibition (91.93.4%) after treatment of
IGROV-1 cells with 1 M 5F203. Pre-incubation with the AhR inhibitor NF (1
M), partially blocked the effect of 5F203 (inhibition of 21.64.7% and
27.75.3% respectively). In contrast, 5F203 failed to inhibit growth of
SKOV-3 cells.5F203 (1 M) induced AhR translocation from cytosolic to
nuclear fractions evaluated by Western blot and confocal microscopy in
IGROV-1 cells only. Moreover, activation of CYP1A1 related promoter
sequences and EROD activity further indicated activation of AhR
signaling. 5F203 treatment for 1h increased ROS and induced NFB nuclear
translocation only in IGROV-1 cells, effects which were attenuated by
pre-treatment with NF. Detection of H2AX revealed DNA double strand
breaks 2h post 5F203 treatment of IGROV-1 cells only. After 24h exposure,
5F203 resulted in increased IGROV-1 cell apoptosis, evaluated by DAPI
staining of apoptotic bodies, increased pP53, caspase 3 and PARP
cleavage. We also observed G1 cell cycle arrest, increased P21 expression
and decreased cyclin D1 expression induced by 5F 203. We conclude that
the antitumor/pro-apoptotic effects of 5F203 observed in IGROV-1 cells is
mediated by AhR which may be a new molecular target in the treatment of
ovarian tumors and that this agent may represent a potential novel
treatment for ovarian cancer.

