Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical relevance of miR-200 family members in various cancers


Introduction: Low expression of miR-200 family members in some cancers
has been linked to epithelial-mesenchymal transition and subsequent
metastatic spread. Thus, low expression of miR-200 members would be
expected to reduce survival. We investigated whether expression levels of
miR-200 family members are associated with clinical outcome in several
cancer types. Methods: We used clinically annotated data from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA). Our preliminary analysis focused on nine different
cancer types, subsequently reduced to four that had a large number of
samples (>200). Expression data for all five miR-200 members (miR-141,
-200a, -200b, -200c, and -429) were obtained from either Agilent miRNA
microarrays (8x15K; glioblastoma multiforme and ovarian cancers) or
miR-Seq (Illumina GA and HiSeq; breast and clear cell renal cancers).
Approximately 2/3 of the samples for each tumor type were used as a
training cohort to obtain the miRNA expression thresholds yielding the
most significant log rank test p-values (one-tailed test), thus dividing
the data into good and poor prognosis groups. These thresholds were then
used to divide the data in the remaining 1/3 of the samples that
functioned as independent validation cohorts, and p-values were computed
for those cohorts. The same procedure was repeated again to look for
significant differences in progression free survival. Kaplan-Meier curves
were also plotted for all datasets, with a p-value 3500 days for low
versus high miR-200a expression, respectively (p=0.005). However, in
breast cancer (n=325) and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM, n=487), low
expression of a miR-200 member was associated with an improved clinical
outcome. In the breast cancer validation set (113 samples), median
overall survival was > 7000 versus 3100 days for low versus high miR-141
expression, respectively (p=0.036). In the GBM validation set (174
samples), median progression free survival was 290 versus 150 days for
low versus high miR-429 expression, respectively (p=0.009). Discussion:
Here we show that altered expression levels of miR-200 members may have
clinical relevance in common cancers. Interestingly, depending on the
cancer type, low miR-200 member levels may either portend a better or
worse prognosis. This study highlights the need to further elucidate
novel mechanisms of the miR-200 family and perhaps exploit their diverse
functions for therapeutic intent.

