Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Defining the contribution of the extracellular domain of ICAM-2 to
the non metastatic phenotype of neuroblastoma cells using chimeric fusion
proteins


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric cancer,
accounting for 15% of all childhood cancer deaths. Recently, our lab
reported the novel finding of ICAM-2 expression in NB cell lines and
primary NB tumor cells. Interestingly, ICAM-2-expressing NB cells
exhibited decreased motility in vitro and decreased metastatic potential
in vivo. In these ICAM-2-expressing non-metastatic NB cells, the
cytoplasmic domain of ICAM-2 interacted with -actinin, which in turn
interacted with actin, leading to subsequent redistribution of actin
fibers to a non-motile state. The goal of the current study is
determining the potential role of the ICAM-2 extracellular domain in NB
metastasis development. Therefore, we constructed a series of chimeric
fusion proteins, one of which consists of the extra cellular domain of
CD89 with the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of ICAM-2 (CD89ED).
CD89 is the receptor for IgA, and bears striking similarity to ICAM-2 in
terms of size (287AA vs. 275AA, respectively) and structure. Both are
immunoglobulin superfamily members with two Ig-like domains, six
extracellular N-glycosylation sites, and short cytoplasmic domains.
Furthermore, there is no literature implicating CD89 in cancer
progression. This construct was stably transfected into a non-ICAM-2
expressing SK-N-AS NB cell line, and protein expression was confirmed by
flow cytometry and western blot. Our preliminary data showed distinct
phenotypic differences between NB cells stably transfected with the
CD89ED construct compared to wild type ICAM-2. In scratch assays, CD89ED
cells showed faster migration ability than ICAM-2 wt (75% vs. 50% wound
closure) at 72 hour time points. Furthermore, in anchorage-independent
colony growth in soft agar, CD89ED cells formed a significantly (P
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric cancer,
accounting for 15% of all childhood cancer deaths. Recently, our lab
reported the novel finding of ICAM-2 expression in NB cell lines and
primary NB tumor cells. Interestingly, ICAM-2-expressing NB cells
exhibited decreased motility in vitro and decreased metastatic potential
in vivo. In these ICAM-2-expressing non-metastatic NB cells, the
cytoplasmic domain of ICAM-2 interacted with -actinin, which in turn
interacted with actin, leading to subsequent redistribution of actin
fibers to a non-motile state. The goal of the current study is
determining the potential role of the ICAM-2 extracellular domain in NB
metastasis development. Therefore, we constructed a series of chimeric
fusion proteins, one of which consists of the extra cellular domain of
CD89 with the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of ICAM-2 (CD89ED).
CD89 is the receptor for IgA, and bears striking similarity to ICAM-2 in
terms of size (287AA vs. 275AA, respectively) and structure. Both are
immunoglobulin superfamily members with two Ig-like domains, six
extracellular N-glycosylation sites, and short cytoplasmic domains.
Furthermore, there is no literature implicating CD89 in cancer
progression. This construct was stably transfected into a non-ICAM-2
expressing SK-N-AS NB cell line, and protein expression was confirmed by
flow cytometry and western blot. Our preliminary data showed distinct
phenotypic differences between NB cells stably transfected with the
CD89ED construct compared to wild type ICAM-2. In scratch assays, CD89ED
cells showed faster migration ability than ICAM-2 wt (75% vs. 50% wound
closure) at 72 hour time points. Furthermore, in anchorage-independent
colony growth in soft agar, CD89ED cells formed a significantly (P <
0.001) higher number of colonies compared to ICAM-2 wt. Ongoing work
focuses on determining the effect of CD89ED on F-actin modification and
regulation of potential downstream signaling pathways. This work was
supported by the UAB Comprehensive Cancer Center Young Supporters Board -
New Faculty Development Award 2010

