Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA microarray and connectivity map analysis reveals estrogen-like
activity of Chinese medicinal formula Si-Wu-Tang


To pursue a systematic approach for discovery of potential mechanisms of
action and new therapeutic use of traditional herbal medicines, we used
DNA microarray, bioinformatics and the Connectivity Map (CMAP) analysis
to investigate the gene expression profiling of Chinese herbal medicines.
We demonstrated that this approach can be used to elucidate novel
molecular mechanisms for the Chinese medicinal formula Si-Wu-Tang (SWT)
which is widely used for women's health in Asian countries. The human
breast cancer MCF-7 cells treated with beta-estradiol (E2, 0.1 M) or SWT
extract (0.0256, 0.256, and 2.56 mg/ml) for six hours showed significant
gene expression changes. The differentially expressed genes related to
SWT treatment were used to compare with the gene expression profiles of
1,309 compounds in the CMAP database. Such comparison revealed that the
CMAP profile of E2-treated MCF-7 cells showed an excellent match with SWT
treatment (permutation p 6.0 mg/ml), it inhibited the growth of MCF-7.
The combination of SWT with tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor
modulator, demonstrated enhanced growth inhibitory effects on MCF-7
cells. The results our study suggest that SWT may possess a non-toxic
chemopreventive effect for human breast cancer. This study also
demonstrated the feasibility of using microarray gene expression
profiling in combination with the CMAP data mining to discover new
molecular signature that are present in natural products.

