Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination therapy of dendritic cells and cytokine-induced killer
cells prolong survival after the removal of tumor in gastrointestinal
cancer


Heterogeneity of cancer cells with expression of MHC-I is a major concern
for insufficiency of immunotherapy. Targeting either cancer cells with
MHC-I, such as cytotoxic T cells (CTL) initiated by dendritic cells (DCs)
stimulated with tumor antigens, or cells without MHC-I, such as
cytokine-induced killer cells (CIK), have been believed to kill all type
of cancer cells. In present study, we recruited 26 cases of
gastrointestinal tract cancers registered in our center during 2005-2010
including 12 gastric cancer, 13 colorectal cancers and 1 esophagus
cancer. Subjects were administrated with 1X105 unites of IL-2 for 5 days
before mononuclear cells and CIKs were isolated from peripheral blood.
After original tumor were removed by surgery, 1-3 dose of DCs and CIKs
were perfused via peripheral veins. Our results show that 84% patient's
symptoms were improved, 8 cases got relapse in 5 year after surgery, 3
were died. Total survival rates in 1, 3 years are 98%, 93.5%, while
control group are only 35%, 33%. Location of tumor in gastrointestinal
tract did not show significant difference in 1,3,5 years survival rate,
gastric cancer (96%, 95%, 95%) and colorectal cancers (100%, 100%, 100%),
but tumor free survival rate in gastric cancer (92%, 88%,88%) was lower
than colorectal cancer (100%, 91%, 91%). Our results suggested that the
combination of multiple approaches, particularly DC-CIK, significantly
improve the efficacy of immunotherapy in gastrointestinal tract cancers.

