Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput profiling of miRNA expression in plasma and
cerebrospinal fluid using OpenArray platform for biomarker discovery


OpenArray platform can be used for expression profiling using TaqMan
assays that enables higher throughput, less assay consumption, and lower
sample input than other low-density assay platforms. One OpenArray plate
has 3,072 through-holes, each of which requires only 33nl of reaction
volume. We combined the workflow of Megaplex RT primer pools and
pre-amplification with TaqMan MicroRNA assays on OpenArray plates. Each
OpenArray plate provides the capacity of 3 samples, and each run can take
up to 3 plates with a run time about 2.5 hours. Therefore, each typical
work day can have 4 instrument runs generating expression data of 754
miRNAs from 36 samples. This platform is ideal to identify potential
miRNA biomarkers within a short period of time by screening a large
cohort of clinical specimens that might have limitations in sample size,
contamination of PCR inhibitors, or low abundance of target miRNAs. We
optimized the original workflow of Megaplex RT primer pools and
pre-amplification before applying to the OpenArray plates to ensure
increasing detection sensitivity while maintaining the linearity in
plasma samples. In a proof-of-principle investigation, we applied the new
protocol to a small panel of plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
specimens derived from pediatric patients diagnosed with either germinoma
or non-germinoma germ cell tumors of the brain, and benchmarked with
another miRNA expression profiling platform, TaqMan Array Card (TAC), and
OpenArray plates demonstrated good concordance with the TAC. Expression
patterns of miRNAs detected in our CSF samples are largely consistent
with previously published miRNAs differentially expressed in primary
cancerous tissues between these two types of intracranial germ cell
tumors. (For Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.)

