Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A quantitative integrated systems biology approach for modeling
cell cycle pathways in normal and tumor cells


We have developed a novel biological system for quantitative analysis of
biochemical pathways in normal and tumour human cells. The system is
based on cells growing in tissue culture media where the concentrations
of growth factors, hormones and other components of the media are
precisely defined and continuously monitored. Quantitative immunoblotting
and luminescence-based reporter assays are then used to measure the
cellular concentration of key cell cycle regulatory proteins and their
activity in real time in live cells. This technology resulted in accurate
measurement of cellular concentration of a number of key cell cycle
regulatory proteins such as Cyclins, CDKs and CDK inhibitors during the
cell cycle. The data are being utilized in the development of a
quantitative integrated systems biology approach to the cell cycle. The
approach consists of a comprehensive network of the molecular interaction
pathways regulating cell cycle in normal and tumor cells and a model
which incorporates the activity of key molecular species in a single
dynamical system which can be solved using genetic algorithms designed to
match experimental data, both qualitative and quantitative, to the model
kinetics. The model could be utilized for the development of new drug
targets and would be capable of consistently measuring the effects of
existing drugs (either single or in combination) and opens up a
methodology for establishing the effectiveness of these drugs with clear
implications for cost/benefit assessment. Major impact is expected on
clinical research where the model can be a tool in determining
intervention strategies in the molecular pathways concerned. Apart from
the development of new drug targets the model will be capable of
consistently measuring the effects of existing drugs (either single or in
combination) and opens up a methodology for establishing the
effectiveness of anti-cancer drugs.

