Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exposure to ionizing radiation causes long-term increase in serum
estradiol and activation of PI3K-Akt signaling pathway in mouse mammary
gland


Purpose: Exposure to ionizing radiation is an established risk factor for
breast cancer. Radiation exposure during infancy, childhood and
adolescence confer the highest risk. Although radiation is a proven
mammary carcinogen, it remains unclear where it acts in the complex
multi-stage process of breast cancer development. In this study, we
investigated the long-term pathophysiological effects of ionizing
radiation at a dose (2Gy) relevant to fractionated radiotherapy. Methods
and Materials: Adolescent (6 to 8 weeks old; n=10) female C57BL/6J mice
were exposed to 2 Gy of total body radiation and the mammary glands were
harvested and serum and urine samples were collected 2 and 12 months
post-exposure. Molecular pathways involving estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K)-Akt signaling were
investigated by immunohistochemistry and western blot. Results: Serum
estrogen and urinary levels of the oncogenic estrogen metabolite
(16alphaOHE1) were significantly increased in irradiated animals.
Immunostaining for the cellular proliferative marker Ki-67 and cyclin-D1
showed increased nuclear accumulation in sections of mammary glands from
irradiated versus control mice. Marked increase in p85alpha, a regulatory
sub-unit of the PI3K was associated with increase in Akt, phospho-Akt,
phospho-BAD, phospho-mTOR, and c-Myc in irradiated samples. Persistent
increase in nuclear ERalpha in mammary tissues at 2- and 12-month after
radiation exposure was also observed. Conclusions: Taken together our
data not only supports epidemiological observations associating radiation
and breast cancer but it also for the first time specifies molecular
events that could be involved in radiation-induced breast cancer.

