Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Final results of a phase 2 trial using a novel, non-anthracycline
neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen in Her2-positive breast cancer


Background: The addition of trastuzumab to preoperative chemotherapy for
Her2-positive breast cancers has been shown to increase pCR rate, which
correlates with improved outcome. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the efficacy of trastuzumab in combination with dose-dense
nab-paclitaxel followed by weekly vinorelbine. Methods: Patients with
Stage I (>1.0 cm), II, or IIIA Her2-positive (defined as either
immunohistochemical 3+ of fluorescence in situ hybridization-positive)
breast cancer received nab-paclitaxel 260 mg/m2 iv every 2 weeks for 4
cycles in combination followed by vinorelbine 25 mg/m2 iv weekly with
simultaneous trastuzumab (4 mg/kg loading dose then 2 mg/kg weekly) for
20 weeks. Tissue was collected at baseline, at optional midway biopsy,
and post-therapy. Primary endpoint was pCR rate; secondary endpoints
included response rate and toxicity. Cardiac evaluation was performed at
baseline, after 4 cycles of nab-paclitaxel, after 12 weeks of vinorelbine
and every 3 months thereafter per standard practice guidelines. Results:
To date, 27 patients have been accrued (3/2008 to 6/2011). 24 patients
are currently evaluable for primary endpoint. Patients were accrued from
a university center (48.2%), county hospital (11.1%), and community sites
(40.7%). Median age was 49.5 years (34-64). Median tumor size was 4.0 cm
(1.5-7cm). 14 of 27 patients (51.9%) were clinically node-positive at
study entry. 11 patients were African American (40.7%), 16 were Caucasian
(59.3%). The regimen was well-tolerated: 3 patients experienced grade 3
neuropathy; 6 patients had grade 3 neutropenia; 1 patient had trastuzumab
held for asymptomatic decrease in left ventricular ejection fraction. 18
of 24 patients (75%) had complete clinical response rate. 6 of 24
patients (25%) had partial clinical response. 11 of 24 patients (45.8%)
had pCR. Conclusions: The combination of preoperative trastuzumab with
dose-dense nab-paclitaxel followed by vinorelbine was well-tolerated and
resulted in a high rate of pCR in Her2-positive, early-stage breast
cancer. Final results and correlative studies will be reported.

