Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultrasensitive detection of mutations in the androgen receptor
gene by ICE COLD-PCR


The Androgen Receptor plays an important role in prostate cancer,
androgen-dependent (AD) and androgen-independent (AI) disease
progression. Anti-androgen therapies are the hallmark of prostate cancer
treatment; however spontaneous AR mutations are often detected in
hormone-refractory, androgen-ablated and metastatic tumors. ICE COLD-PCR
(Improved & Complete Enrichment CO-amplification at Lower Denaturation
temperature) is a technology that preferentially enriches mutant DNA
sequences in an excess of wild-type DNA through selective amplification
of the mutant DNA population using an oligonucleotide complementary to
wild-type sequence (RS-oligo). This RS-oligo prevents PCR amplification
of wild-type sequences while allowing amplification of DNA containing any
mutation covered in the RS-oligo region. We have developed an ICE
COLD-PCR assay for the enrichment of mutations in the Androgen Receptor
including the AR H875R, H875Y and T878A mutations. The mutant-enriched
DNA was then analyzed by standard Sanger DNA sequencing. The analytical
sensitivity for the ICE COLD-PCR assay was 1 in 10,000 (0.01%) for all
the mutations, compared to 20% limit of detection by standard Sanger
sequencing. The ICE COLD-PCR assay developed here provides a means to
detect low level mutations in the Androgen Receptor and thus will provide
a valuable methodology for the early diagnosis, treatment guidance,
outcome prediction and relapse monitoring of prostate cancer.

