Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High mobility of triple-negative breast cancer cells is due to
repression of plakoglobin gene by SLUG


One of highly pathogenic breast cancer cell types are the SLUG-high
claudin-low triple negative (negative in the expression of estrogen,
progesterone and ERBB2 receptors) breast cancer (TNBC) cells. These cells
are highly metastatic and have low levels of the motility regulatory
catenin plakoglobin. In order to link high levels of the transcriptional
repressor SLUG in the TNBC cells with low levels of plakoglobin we found
that SLUG inhibits the expression of plakoglobin gene directly in these
cells and thus, among other downstream effects, help disseminating these
tumor cells. Overexpression of SLUG in the SLUG-deficient cancer cells
significantly decreased the levels of mRNA and protein of plakoglobin. On
the contrary, knockdown of SLUG in SLUG-high cancer cells elevated the
levels of plakoglobin. Overexpression of SLUG in the SLUG-deficient cells
elevated the invasiveness and motility of these cells. On the other hand,
knockdown of plakoglobin in these low motility non-invasive breast cancer
cells did not affect the ability of the cancer cells to penetrate
Matrigel matrix but increase the growth and migration rates of these
cells. This study thus implicates high levels of SLUG and low levels of
plakoglobin as determinants in the progression of highly disseminating
breast cancer. Supported in parts by the DOD-CDMRP grants BC050641,
BC086542 and BC103645 to GC.

