Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Membrane-Type 1 Matrix Metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP): A predictive
biomarker of chemotherapy response in osteosarcoma


INTRODUCTION: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common primary bone sarcoma
and affects mainly teenagers & young adults. Although OS survival 70%
when patients are treated with both chemotherapy and surgery, the
improvement in cure rates over the last 25 years has been slow. Given
that OS frequently present with lung micrometastasis, proteins which
regulate OS cell invasion would be important to identify as putative
prognostic/predictive biomarkers, as well as possible drug targets.
Membrane-Type 1 Matrix Metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) is one such protein.
MT1-MMP is a membrane tethered MMP that is involved in the regulation of
cell invasion since it is a collagenase and regulates MAPK/ERK dependent
cell motility. Given that MT1-MMP expression can be upregulated by
hypoxia, we investigated the expression of MT1-MMP, as well as
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) isoforms in 76 primary tumor biopsies from
patients who received standard MAP chemotherapy. In vitro, we
investigated the effects of hypoxia on MT1-MMP. MATERIALS & METHODS: OS
tumors were immunostained for MT1-MMP, HIF-1 and HIF-2. U2OS & SJSA-1
cell lines were used for in vitro studies. Immunoblotting &
immunofluoroscence confocal microscopy were performed for MT1-MMP and
HIFs at 1% O2 for 8, 12, 24 and 48 hours, compared with normoxia.
RESULTS: 71/76 tumors were evaluable for MT1-MMP expression. MT1-MMP was
identified in the cytoplasm and nuclei of OS tumors. Only 10/85 tumors
demonstrated membrane expression. High expression of cytoplasmic
(HR:0.32(95%CI:0.07-0.49);p=0.005) and nuclear
(HR:0.21(95%CI:0.09-0.42);p24 hours. In U2OS cells, confocal microscopy &
subcellular fractionation immunoblots demonstrated that MT1-MMP and HIF-2
protein translocated to the nucleus from the cytoplasm at 1%O2. HIF-2
co-localized with MT1-MMP in nuclei, but HIF-1 did not. CONCLUSION:
Nuclear MT1-MMP is a prognostic and predictive biomarker in OS patients
treated with MAP chemotherapy. Since MT1-MMP does not contain a nuclear
localization signal (NLS), the in vitro data points to the possibility
that HIF-2 might have a novel function as a MT1-MMP nuclear transporter
and that MT1-MMP nuclear migration, but not expression, is hypoxia
dependent in vitro and might have pro-survival effects on OS cells in
vivo.

