Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of tanapox virus for oncolytic therapy


Vaccinia virus has been included in the many viruses that have been used
to target cancer cells. However, vaccinia virus has some drawbacks in
that it infects both tumor and non-tumor cells (Guo, Z. S. etal. 2005
Cancer Research 65: 9991-9998), and hosts often have a pre-existing
immunity to it (Hu, Y. etal. 2001 J. Virol. 75, 10300-10308). Due to
these drawbacks with vaccinia virus we are developing a poxvirus family
member, tanapox virus (TPV), for use as an oncolytic therapy. TPV does
not cross-react with vaccinia virus antibodies, replicates in human
cells, and results in a relatively mild infection under normal conditions
making it safer to work with (Paulose, M. etal. 1998 Microbial
Pathogenesis 25, 33-41). Tumor suppressor protein p53 is mutated in over
half of all cancers making it a promising target for virotherapy. In this
study we characterized the 142R protein of TPV, demonstrating its
potential as a conditionally replicating oncolytic virus. By analyzing
the sequence of 142R it was determined that the protein has a
serine-threonine kinase domain that is homologous to the vaccinia virus
B1R gene that has been shown to phosphorylate p53. Viral tropism towards
cancer can be enhanced by engineering the virus to be conditionally
replicating (Vh-Koskela, M. J. V. etal. 2007 Cancer Letters 254,
178-216), such as the adenovirus ONYX-015 in which the E1B gene has been
deleted, restricting its replication to cells not containing a wild-type
p53. When comparing the sequence of 142R to B1R we showed that 142R had
50% identity to B1R. 142R also has the same nucleotide binding,
phosphotransfer and proton transfer, ATP binding and catalytic domain
indicator regions as B1R. We then created a plasmid with 142R that was
transfected into COS-7 cells, harvested and the protein eluted from a
cobalt column. This protein was then used in a protein kinase assay
against p53. This indicates that the 142R protein of TPV is capable of
interacting with p53 so is a good candidate for creating a conditionally
replicating virus.

