Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 suppresses type II endometrial carcinomas in mice and governs
endometrial tumour aggressiveness in humans


Type II endometrial carcinomas are a highly aggressive group of tumour
subtypes that are frequently associated with inactivation of the TP53
tumour suppressor gene. We show that mice with endometrium-specific
deletion of Trp53 initially exhibited histological changes that are
identical to known precursor lesions of type II endometrial carcinomas in
humans and later developed carcinomas representing all type II carcinoma
subtypes. The PI3K-Akt-mTOR signalling pathway was frequently activated
in these precursor lesions and tumours, suggesting a genetic cooperation
between this pathway and Trp53 deficiency in tumour initiation.
Consistent with this idea, immunohistochemical analyses of 521 human
endometrial carcinomas identified frequent mTOR pathway activation in
type I as well as type II endometrial carcinoma subtypes and mTOR pathway
activation and p53 expression each independently predicted poor patient
survival. We suggest that molecular alterations in p53 and the PI3K-mTOR
pathway play different roles in the initiation of the different
endometrial cancer subtypes, but that combined p53 inactivation and
PI3K-mTOR pathway activation are unifying pathogenic features among
histologically diverse subtypes of late stage aggressive endometrial
tumours.

