Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The stress response controls the interorgan
glutathione/interleukin-6 cycling activity: A systemic signaling
mechanism promoting metastases growth.


B16 melanoma F10 (B16-F10) cells with high glutathione (GSH) content show
very high metastatic activity in vivo. An intertissue flow of GSH, where
the liver is the main reservoir, increases GSH content in metastatic
cells and promote their growth. We studied possible tumor-derived
molecular signals that could activate GSH release from hepatocytes. GSH
efflux increases in hepatocytes isolated from mice bearing liver or lung
metastases, thus suggesting a systemic mechanism. Fractionation of
serum-free conditioned medium from cultured B16-F10 cells and monoclonal
antibody-induced neutralization techniques facilitated identification of
interleukin (IL)-6 as a tumor-derived molecule promoting GSH efflux in
hepatocytes. IL-6 activates GSH release through a
methionine-sensitive/organic anion transporter polypeptide 1- and
multidrug resistance protein 1-independent channel located on the
sinusoidal site of hepatocytes. Specific siRNAs were used to knock down
key factors in the main signaling pathways activated by IL-6, which
revealed a STAT3-dependent mechanism. Our results show that IL-6 (mainly
of tumor origin) facilitates GSH release from hepatocytes and its
interorgan transport to metastatic growing foci. Metastatic tumor
activated the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, thus increasing
expression of hypothalamic corticotropin releasing factor and plasma
levels of adrenocorticotropin hormone, corticosterone, and
cathecolamines. Corticosterone and norepinephrine increased IL-6
expression and synthesis in metastatic cells, thus promoting the
interorgan GSH/IL-6 cycling activity. Our results suggest possible
mechanisms of cross-talk between metastases and the central nervous
system of the host.

