Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A neural origin for intracranial germ cell tumors


Intracranial germ cell tumours (GCTs) are thought to arise from germ
cells that aberrantly migrate to the brain during embryogenesis. In
normal development, germ cells migrate from the hindgut towards the
gonads. GCTs are found in several regions outside of the gonads and all
of these are all thought to be midline structures. Therefore, the
observation that GCTs occur in midline structures, and that normal germ
cells migrate along the midline forms the basis of the current hypothesis
for their formation. All GCTs regardless of location also share similar
histology. Intracranial GCTs often occur in the ventral midline, such as
the pineal and suprasellar regions. However, we challenge this model. We
suggest that intracranial GCTs arise from endogenous neural progenitors
in the brain rather than from misplaced germ cell progenitors. Neural
stem cells have the potential to become pluripotent when Oct4 is
activated. When these cells are transplanted into SCID mice they form
teratomas, a type of GCT. We postulate that if only one gene is required
to trigger formation of a GCT from a brain cell, that it is reasonable to
suggest this as a more likely mechanism for GCT development. Oct4 is
expressed in the brain until E13.5, so a delay in Oct4 silencing may
allow pluripotent cells to form these tumours. Using
doxycycline-dependent Oct4-expressing transgenic mice, we have shown that
expression of Oct4 allows neural tissue to form teratomas. We have also
surveyed the current literature which reveals that many GCTs also occur
in all regions of the brain.

