Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a cytotoxic peptide based on the C-terminal domain
of Bax


The Bcl-2 family proteins maintain the balance of life and death in a
cell. Bax, a pro-apoptotic member, translocates to the mitochondrial
membrane in response to diverse death stimuli, initiating a cascade of
programmed events that lead to cell death. Tumor progression involves
deregulation of this process, in part, through mutations that cause
aberrant expression of anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family that
normally sequester and inhibit Bax. This study seeks to identify
functional domains of Bax that can be developed into therapeutic peptides
to promote the death of cancer cells resistant to existing
chemotherapeutics. Our goal was to generate a peptide, much like
antimicrobial peptides, that could target and disrupt mitochondrial
membranes. To this end, we discovered that the C-terminal, alpha-9 helix
of Bax (CT20), when tagged to EGFP or a destabilization domain (DD),
could bind mitochondria and cause cell death, mimicking the activity of
full-length Bax. Cell death was measured by morphological changes, such
as membrane blebbing, as well as DNA fragmentation. Targeted mutagenesis
of two adjacent lysines at the carboxyl end of the CT20 peptide
demonstrated that these residues enabled mitochondrial membrane
association. Expression of the CT20 peptide in the presence or absence of
endogenous Bax resulted in cytotoxicity, indicating that the death
mechanism engaged could function independently of the Bcl-2 family. These
findings suggest the CT20 peptide has the potential to be developed into
a viable therapeutic agent in the treatment of a broad range of cancer
types.

