Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serous ovarian carcinoma patients with high alpha-folate receptor
had poorer outcome by reducing cytotoxic chemo-response through
anti-apoptotic pathway


The alpha-folate receptor (-FR) is highly expressed in various
non-mucinous tumors of epithelial origin, including ovarian carcinoma.
Semi-quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reactions for
-FR expression were performed in 91 specimens of serous ovarian
carcinomas. Furthermore, in vitro apoptotic experiments were tested in
the original OVCAR-3 tumor cells and various OVCAR-3 -FR-transfectants.
In our study, the serous ovarian cancer patients with advanced stages
(stage I: 0.451, stage II: 0.415, stage III: 0.652, stage IV: 0.768,
p=0.004) had a significantly higher -FR expression compared to those with
early stages. Patients with an increased -FR expression level had poorer
responses to chemotherapy (odds ratio (OR): 8.97 (95% confidence interval
(CI): 1.40-57.36), p=0.021). An increased -FR expression level was an
independently poor prognostic factor for DFI (Hazard ratio (HR): 2.45
(95% CI: 1.16-5.18), p=0.02) and had a negative impact on OS of these
serous ovarian cancer patients (HR: 3.6 (95% CI: 0.93-13.29), p =0.03) by
multivariate analyses. -FR inhibited cytotoxic drug-induced apoptosis in
our in vitro apoptotic assays. -FR could induce chemo-resistance via
regulating the expression of apoptosis-related molecules, Bcl-2 and Bax.
Therefore, -FR can be a potential biomarker for the prediction of
chemotherapeutic responses and clinical prognosis. It also could be the
target of treating ovarian cancer.

