Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA-190, regulated by estrogen receptor signaling, suppresses
expression of the metastasis-promoting gene PAR-1 and is associated with
breast cancer progression


Cancer metastasis contributes to mortality of breast cancer patients. The
present study, based on the fundamental concept that dissociation of the
extracellular matrix is the driving force for tumor metastasis, was
performed to examine the hypothesis that microRNA-190 (miR-190) is
important in regulating breast cancer metastasis by decreasing the
expression of protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1), a gene encoding a
receptor for matrix metalloproteinase1 and thrombin that is associated
with tumor metastasis. This hypothesis was initially suggested by the
observations that the expression of a reporter gene could be regulated by
a specific sequence in the 3-untranslated region of PAR-1 and that
miR-190 was complementary to this sequence. Support for our hypothesis
came from the findings that (a) PAR-1 expression was directly inhibited
by miR-190, (b) increased miR-190 expression suppressed cell migration
and invasiveness, and (c) the level of miR-190 expression in primary
breast carcinomas correlated with overall survival. Interestingly, we
defined the promoter region of miR-190 and noted that it contained half
of an estrogen receptor (ER) response element, supporting the breast
tumorigenic contribution of miR-190. This was further confirmed by the
findings that miR-190 expression was activated by 17-estradiol and that
the ER bound directly to this promoter and regulated miR-190 expression.
The findings of the present study may explain why ER-positive patients
usually have a favorable progression and how ER regulates cancer
metastasis, i.e. ER signaling regulates miR-190 expression, thus causing
suppression of PAR-1 expression, resulting in inhibition of breast cancer
metastasis.

