Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metaplastic columnar lined esophagus without goblet cells show
phenotypic similarities to Barrett's Esophagus


Aim: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is a premalignant condition, predisposing
to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). However, some EAC arise in columnar
lined esophageal mucosa devoid of goblet cells. Therefore, the purpose of
this study was to evaluate the biological properties of non-goblet
columnar lined esophagus (CLE) and elucidate the relationship between BE
and high grade dysplasia of esophagus (HGD). Material and Methods:
Endoscopic biopsies from esophagus of 47 patients with columnar
metaplasia with goblet cells (BE; n=28), columnar metaplasia with
non-goblet cell (CLE; n=10), BE associated high grade dysplasia (HGD;
n=9) and cardia with intestinal metaplasia (CIM; n=5) were included in
the study. These groups were immunostained for, Villin (intestinal
marker), CK7 (columnar epithelium marker), Claudin 3 (epithelial
tight-junction marker) and MUC4 (membranous mucin). Statistical analysis
between different groups was performed using the paired or unpaired t-
test using SPSS v 15.0. A p value 0.05). Patients with CLE without goblet
cells showed immunopositive results for these markers, statistically
similar to those of HGD group and also revealed significantly higher
values compared to those of controls (cardia with intestinal metaplasia).
MUC4 was expressed higher in 96% of BE cases as compared to 67% of HGD
cases (mean, 81.8527.74 vs 48.8945.12). CLE without goblet cells did not
express MUC4. Conclusion: Our results indicate that metaplastic columnar
lined epithelium without goblet cells suggest biological properties of
intestinal differentiation. It also shows that apart from BE, CLE without
goblet cells may also have neoplastic potential.

