Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted inactivation of EZH2 by CDF inhibits pancreatic tumor
growth mediated by re-expression of lost miRNAs in tumors


EZH2 plays a critical role in the regulation of cell survival,
proliferation and cancer stem cell (CSC) function, contributing to tumor
aggressiveness. Increased expression of EZH2 has been found in human
pancreatic cancer (PC); however, the mechanism(s) by which EZH2 mediates
its biological effects is not known, and there is no avenue for
inactivation of EZH2. In this study, we examined the effect of CDF, a
novel Curcumin analogue, on tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo and
assessed whether the effect of CDF is due to inactivation of EZH2 and CSC
function mediated by deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs). We found that
CDF decreased cell survival, clonogenicity, formation of
pancreatospheres, cell migration and invasion, and attenuated CSC
function in human PC cells, which was associated with inactivation of
EZH2 expression and NF-B activity, and increased expression of miRNAs
such as let-7a, b, c, d, miR-26a, miR-101, miR-146a, and miR-200b, c.
Further mechanistic studies showed that the re-expression of miR-101 led
to decreased expression of EZH2 and EpCAM. Moreover, CDF inhibited tumor
growth in a mouse orthotopic model of PC, which was associated with
decreased expression of EZH2, Notch-1, CD44, EpCAM and Nanog, and
increased expression of let-7, miR-26a and miR-101 in tumor remnant. From
these results, we conclude that the inhibition of tumor growth and tumor
cell aggressiveness by CDF is in part due to down-regulation of EZH2,
which was mediated by up-regulation of specific miRNAs, suggesting that
CDF could be useful for the prevention of tumor progression and/or
treatment of PC.

