Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Isorhamnetin suppresses skin cancer through direct inhibition of
MEK1 and PI3-K


Isorhamnetin is a plant flavonoid that is found in fruits and medicinal
herbs and exerts anticancer effects. However, the underlying molecular
mechanism of the chemopreventive potential of isorhamnetin remains
unknown. Here, we report anti-skin cancer effects of isorhamnetin. In an
in vivo mouse xenograft model injected with A431 human skin epithelial
carcinoma cells, isorhamnetin reduced tumor growth and COX-2 expression.
Isorhamnetin inhibited epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced neoplastic
cell transformation of JB6 mouse epidermis cells and anchorage-dependent
and -independent growth of A431 cells. Isorhamnetin attenuated
EGF-induced cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression in JB6 cells and A431
cells. The EGF-induced phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinases, p90 and p70 ribosomal S6 kinases, and Akt was suppressed by
isorhamnetin. In vitro and ex vivo kinase assay data demonstrated that
isorhamnetin inhibited the kinase activity of MEK1 and PI3-K and the
inhibition was due to direct binding with isorhamnetin. Notably,
isorhamnetin bound directly to MEK1 in an ATP-noncompetitive manner and
to PI3-K in an ATP-competitive manner. Overall, these results indicate
that isorhamnetin has potent anti-cancer activity and it primarily
targets MEK and PI3-K, which might contribute to the chemopreventive
potential of certain foods.

