Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting ligands and nanotherapeutics against acute myeloid
leukemia stem cell


Background: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) stem cells (LSC) can survive the
conventional-dose chemotherapy, generate more differentiated leukemic
cells and cause recurrence. In order to cure AML, LSC must be eradicated.
This project was to develop targeting therapeutics to overcome
chemoresistance and eradicate LSC. Materials and Methods: The
phage-display library was panned to identify ligands targeting C-type
lectin-like molecule-1 (CLL1) expressed on LSC, but not on normal
hematopoietic stem cells. A CLL1-targeting ligand was used to decorate
the surface of micelle nanocarrier developed by our group to deliver
chemotherapeutic drugs to LSC. Target-specific drug delivery was
determined using A549 adherent cells expressing CLL1 and CD34+CD38-
leukemia cells freshly isolated from clinical specimens. Toxicology study
was performed in Balb/c mice. Results: After three rounds of panning
against A549 cells expressing CLL1, 35 out of 36 clones contained the
same amino acid motif LR(S/T). These ligands did not bind to any
peripheral blood cells and normal hematopoietic stem cells. One ligand
named CLL1-L1 was used to decorate the surface of nanomicelles loaded
with chemotherapeutic drug daunorubicin (DNR). These targeting
nanomicelles were approximately 15 nm in diameter. The loading capacity
was around 5 mg of daunorubicin per 20 mg of nanomicelle, a clinically
useful degree of drug loading. High-resolution tomography showed that
targeting nanomicelles delivered the drug load directly to the
intracellular space including nucleus much more efficiently than the
non-targeting nanomicelles (pBackground: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
stem cells (LSC) can survive the conventional-dose chemotherapy, generate
more differentiated leukemic cells and cause recurrence. In order to cure
AML, LSC must be eradicated. This project was to develop targeting
therapeutics to overcome chemoresistance and eradicate LSC. Materials and
Methods: The phage-display library was panned to identify ligands
targeting C-type lectin-like molecule-1 (CLL1) expressed on LSC, but not
on normal hematopoietic stem cells. A CLL1-targeting ligand was used to
decorate the surface of micelle nanocarrier developed by our group to
deliver chemotherapeutic drugs to LSC. Target-specific drug delivery was
determined using A549 adherent cells expressing CLL1 and CD34+CD38-
leukemia cells freshly isolated from clinical specimens. Toxicology study
was performed in Balb/c mice. Results: After three rounds of panning
against A549 cells expressing CLL1, 35 out of 36 clones contained the
same amino acid motif LR(S/T). These ligands did not bind to any
peripheral blood cells and normal hematopoietic stem cells. One ligand
named CLL1-L1 was used to decorate the surface of nanomicelles loaded
with chemotherapeutic drug daunorubicin (DNR). These targeting
nanomicelles were approximately 15 nm in diameter. The loading capacity
was around 5 mg of daunorubicin per 20 mg of nanomicelle, a clinically
useful degree of drug loading. High-resolution tomography showed that
targeting nanomicelles delivered the drug load directly to the
intracellular space including nucleus much more efficiently than the
non-targeting nanomicelles (p<0.05). These targeting nanomicelles could
deliver the drug load to CD34+CD38- leukemic cells (containing LSC)
isolated from clinical specimens, but did not bind to normal blood or
normal hematopoietic stem cells. Chemotheapeutic drug formulated in these
nanomicelles is about three times less toxic than the parental free drug,
suggesting this nanoformulation may allow administration of high-dose
chemotherapy without the associated severe toxicity. Conclusion: This is
the first report on the development of targeting ligands and
nanotherapeutics against AML stem cells. Nanomicelles decorated with
CLL1-targeting peptides can potentially deliver high-dose
chemotherapeutic drugs directly into LSC and eradicate this cell
population, in addition to treating leukemic cells throughout the body
and decreasing toxicity.

