Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD95/Fas protects cancer cells from cell death


CD95 (also called Fas and APO-1) is a prototypical death receptor that
regulates tissue homeostasis mainly in the immune system through the
induction of apoptosis. During cancer progression CD95 is frequently
downregulated or cells are rendered apoptosis resistant, raising the
possibility that loss of CD95 is part of a mechanism for tumor evasion.
However, complete loss of CD95 is rarely seen in human cancer and many
cancer cells express large quantities of CD95 and are highly sensitive to
CD95-mediated apoptosis in vitro. Furthermore, cancer patients frequently
have raised levels of the physiological ligand for CD95, CD95L. These
data raise the possibility that CD95 could actually promote the growth of
tumors through its non-apoptotic activities. We have recently shown that
cancer cells in general, regardless of their CD95 apoptosis sensitivity,
depend on constitutive activity of CD95, stimulated by cancer-produced
CD95L, for optimal growth (1). Consistently, loss of CD95 in mouse models
of ovarian cancer and liver cancer reduces cancer incidence as well as
the size of the tumors. We have now generated inducible CD95 and CD95L
knock down cell lines to characterize the molecular mechanisms of the
dependency of cancer cells on CD95. In all cancer cells knocking down
CD95 or CD95L slows down growth and in many cells causes cell cycle
arrest and even cell death. In CT26L cells knock down of CD95L causes all
cells to die within 2 days. This form of cell death cannot be inhibited
by inhibitors of apoptosis or necroptosis and has features of mitotic
catastrophe. The data suggest that CD95 maintains viability of cancer
cells by preventing DNA damage. 1. Chen et al (2010) CD95 promotes tumor
growth. Nature, 465, 492-496.

