Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TIMP-2 inhibits angiogenesis induced by tumor associated
myeloid-suppressor cells


Among the mechanisms of resistance to cancer treatment is the recruitment
by tumors of inflammatory myeloid (CD11b+, Gr-1+) suppressor cells,
promoting angiogenesis and tumor progression. Here, we report the effects
of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases(TIMP)-2 on the recruitment of
CD11b+, Gr-1+ cells and subsequent suppression of tumor angiogenesis.
Previously, we showed that xenografts of A549 cells with up-regulated
TIMP-2 demonstrated significant reduction in the number of CD11b+, Gr-1+
cells, expression of VEGF-R2, and v3 as well as reduced angiogenesis.
Here, the effect of TIMP-2 on the growth of Luciferase-tagged-A549 cells
was tested in vivo using the direct in vivo angiogenesis (DIVA) assay
implanted subcutaneously containing 400 nM TIMP-2 or PBS. TIMP-2
decreased A549-cell proliferation in vivo as determined by quantitating
bioluminescence emission. Immuno-histochemistry analysis of the tissue in
TIMP-2 treated DIVAs demonstrated a drastic reduction in inflammation,
fewer CD11b+, Gr-1+ cells were recruited into the TIMP-2 DIVA compared
with untreated DIVA controls, as well as significant lower number of
angiogenic vessels and invading endothelial cells were seen. Moreover,
bone marrow from mice carrying DIVA with TIMP-2-treated A549 cells
demonstrated a relative decrease in cell progenitors as compared with PBS
treated tumor cells, suggesting that TIMP-2 blocked the release of tumor
factors affecting the mobilization of bone marrow progenitors. These
findings support TIMP-2 as anti-angiogenesis and anti-inflammatory
factor. By targeting tumor-myeloid suppressors cells, TIMP-2 may have a
therapeutic utility in the resistance of tumors to angiogenesis
inhibitors.

