Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sorafenib and its derivatives induce apoptosis and autophagy in
canine mammary tumor cells


Canine mammary tumors (CMTs) are the most common neoplasms in intact
female dogs. Radiation treatment, chemotherapy and surgical removal are
conventionally applied for treating CMTs; however, the efficacy is
limited and a study showed around 48% of dogs died or were euthanized
within one year due to recurrence or metastasis of the tumor after
surgical removal. Recently, Sorafenib (Nexavar), a multiple kinase
inhibitor, has shown survival benefits in human patients with human
hepatocellualr carcinoma (HCC) and is the first clinically approved drug
for treating HCC. Except HCC, Sorafenib also showed certain effect on the
treatment of human renal cell carcinoma, thyroid cancer, and, also,
breast cancer. In this study, derivatives of sorafenib (SC-1 & CY-13)
made by depleting the kinase inhibitory activities were investigated for
their therapeutic efficacy in canine mammary tumors. Three CMT cell lines
including CMT-1, CF41.mg and MPG were treated with sorafenib, SC-1 and
CY-13. The results showed SC-1 owned stronger potency than other two
compounds in suppressing tumor cell growth. Lower LD50 and earlier onset
of cell death were found in SC-1-treated groups. The SC-1-mediated CMT
cell death was through both apoptosis and autophagy since DNA
fragmentation and autophagosome were observed in treated cells. These
sorafenib derivatives were previously reported as novel inhibitors for
STAT3. Here we also found that SC-1 down-regulated phospho-STAT3
(p-STAT3) at tyrosine 705 in all tested CMT cells. Expression of
STAT3-driven genes, including cylcin D1 and survivin, was also repressed
by SC-1. Although the in vivo anti-tumor efficacy of SC-1 will be soon
evaluated, our preliminary results have provided a lead for drug
development of canine mammary tumors.

