Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CZ48 activation by human tumor cytosol inhibited in the presence
of NADPH


CZ48, the 20-O-propionate ester of Camptothecin (CPT), is a non-toxic
prodrug of CPT first described by Cao et al. (1998). The propionate
side-chain is enzymatically cleaved in target tissues. This gives rise to
CPT, an inhibitor of Topoisomerase I, which then blocks cell division
causing selective tumor toxicity. We have previously established the
preferential activation of CZ48 in tumor tissues compared to normal
tissues and an ultra-sensitive assay to detect it (2009). The present
studies explore the specifics of that activation in vitro using both
cells in culture and surgically removed xenografted tumors from nude
mice. DOY lung adenocarcinoma was grown subcutaneously in nude mice and
then surgically excised, homogenized and serially centrifuged to produce
specific subcellular fractions. The bulk of esterase activity was found
to be concentrated in the cytosol, while the microsomal fraction showed
minimal activity. All other fractions tested were below the limit of
detection. Microsomes showed only a fraction of the esterase activity of
the cytosol (99.78 14.89 ng/ml versus 487.48 16.69 ng/ml CPT produced
overnight), but even that little activity was eradicated in the presence
of an NADPH redux regeneration system (10.0 7.26 ng/ml). This inhibition
was also observed in the cytosolic fractions. Deconstructing the redux
system led to the conclusion that NADPH was inhibiting the activation of
CZ48: when incubating cytosol with CZ48 in the presence of 26.1 mM NADPH,
66mM MgCl2, or 66mM Glucose-6-phosphate, only NADPH exhibited any effect
on the esterase activity of CZ48, resulting in only 106.00 15.49 ng/ml
CPT produced overnight. These data reinforce the notion that CZ48 is
metabolized to CPT by a non-microsomal, non CYP450 enzymatic process in
tumor tissues.

