Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic amplification and drug-resistance roles of the KDM5A
histone demethylase gene in breast cancer


Interconnected genetic and epigenetic events control both the initiation
and progression of cancer. Specifically, genetic alterations, such as
amplification, and the subsequent over-expression of genes encoding
epigenetic modifying enzymes can directly lead to histone code changes
that may be critical for cancer progression. KDM5A (lysine (K)-specific
demethylase 5A, also known as RBP2 and JARID1A) was originally identified
as the retinoblastoma-binding protein (RBP) implicated in the regulation
of retinoblastoma target genes. Recently, several groups discovered that
KDM5A is a member of a set of newly identified histone demethylases that
control the chromatin-mediated regulation of gene expression.
Specifically, KDM5A can function as a transcriptional repressor through
the demethylation of tri- and dimethylated histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4)
active marks. In this study, we observed a significant amplification and
over-expression of the KDM5A gene in various tumors, including breast
cancer. We found that breast cancer cells with KDM5A gene amplification
had intrinsic drug resistance properties and knocking down KDM5A with
shRNAs improved the efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
inhibitors against these breast cancer cells. Further, up-regulation of
KDM5A modified the histone methylation status and altered the expression
of a subset of key genes, including the tumor suppressor p21 and the
apoptotic effector BAK1, in breast cancer. Our findings suggest that
alteration of the KDM5A gene may have a critical role in the pathogenesis
of breast cancer.

