Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling of colon adenocarcinomas reveals six
prototypic molecular subtypes with distinct clinical and molecular
characteristics


Purpose: The purpose of our study was to build up a molecular
classification of colon cancers (CC) and to further identify a molecular
signature that correlated with disease outcome through a genome-wide DNA
and mRNA expression analysis. Material: Fresh frozen tumor tissues from
750 patients with stage I to IV CC were analyzed for anatomo-clinical
characteristics and common DNA alterations including KRAS, BRAF, TP53
mutations, MMR (Mismatch Repair system) and CIMP (CpG island methylator
phenotype) status. Among the 750 tumors, 443 were screened for pangenomic
alteration and expression profiles using Affymetrix U133P2 chips and CGH
arrays. Results: A robust approach based on unsupervised hierarchical
clusterings of the 443 tumors revealed six main prototypic molecular
subtypes with distinct clinical/molecular correlations and outcomes. The
first (C1), fifth (C5) and sixth (C6) subtypes were more frequently CIN+
(chromosomal instability assessed by CGHa), TP53 mutant and left-sided
tumors, without any molecular or clinical annotation able to clearly
discriminate these three subgroups except the low relapse rate observed
in the C5 subgroup (21.6% versus 30.9% and 39.3% in C1 and C6 subgroups,
respectively). C2 was enriched for patients with deficient MMR (80.7%),
CIMP+ (62.5%), BRAF mutant (37.3%) and right-sided (71%) CC with low
relapsing rate (19.7%). C3 was enriched for KRAS mutant (76.2%) and
right-sided tumors (57.8%). C4 included more CIMP+ (35.4%), BRAF mutant
(25%), right-sided (64.2%) and relapsing (47.2%) CC. Of those 6 subtypes,
C4 and C2 (dMMR) appeared to be the most segregated subtypes, others
being less distant to each other. Although not significant, there was a
trend in favor of a prognostic value of the six-subgroup classification,
with C1, C4 and C6 subgroups having a relative poor outcome, and C2 and
C5 a relative good outcome (65%, 64%, 63%, 77% and 83% 5-year
disease-free survival, respectively; p=0.12). Using the limited number of
molecular features available from 6 public datasets, we validated the
molecular and clinical characteristics of C2, as well as the higher rate
of relapse observed in C4. The prognostic value of the six-subtype
classification was significant when applied to one independent dataset of
304 CC (p=0.012), with a worse prognosis confirmed for C1 and C4, and a
better prognosis for C2 and C5. Conclusion: Our results suggest that CC
develop as distinct molecular entities evolving through multiple pathways
on the basis of several molecular features that may not result in a
single but in several prognostic signatures according to each molecular
subtype.

