Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docetaxel pretreatment is associated with increased incidence of
CNS-metastases in a murine model of HER2-positive breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most frequent neoplasm in females as it affects 1:10
women. In populations of early breast cancer subsequent brain metastases
develop in 5%, while in metastatic breast cancer (mBC), the incidence of
CNS-metastases reaches 10-16% [Ann Oncol 2006; 17:935]. The incidence is
particularly high (30%-50%) in patients (pts) with HER2-positive mBC [Ann
Oncol 2008; 19:1837]. Similarly, the incidence of CNS-metastases is high
in pts treated with taxanes for mBC [Ann Oncol 2001; 12:353]. Therefore,
we aimed to investigate the role of taxanes on CNS metastases in a murine
breast cancer model using the MDA-MB-231BR cell line which has a tropism
to metastasize into the CNS upon intracardiac injection [J Natl Ca Inst
2008;100:1092]. Groups of Balb/c nude mice were injected intravenously
with docetaxel at a dose of 10mg/kg every 2 weeks for 5 injections (long
tax, N=17) or with only 2 similar injections (short tax, N=16) or no
injection (control, N=14). Two weeks later MDA-MB-231 BR tumor cells
(500000 cells in 0.1mL PBS) were injected into the left ventricle. Four
weeks after that, animals were sacrificed for collection of organs and
analysis by histology. The main finding was that metastatic foci were
significantly increased in long-tax mice (median number of foci 52, range
0-76) compared to control mice (median number of foci 20, range 0-52;
p=0.015). In short-tax animals an intermediate incidence of foci was
found (median 30, range 0-79), with a trend, but not a significant
difference compared to untreated animals (p=0.7) Histologically we
observed a mainly perivascular intraparenchymal infiltration pattern
while superficial metastases or a spread to the cerebrospinal fluid was
only rarely seen. We therefore assessed changes of the blood-brain
barrier (BBB) by ultrastructural approaches. However, we have not found
obvious differences in the BBB configuration after taxane treatment. In
summary, our results provide evidence that taxane treatment might
facilitate spread of breast cancer cells into the CNS, however underlying
mechanisms remain to be determined.

