Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemotherapeutic sensitization of drug-resistant lung cancer cells
by doxorubicin and leptomycin B


The development of novel targeted therapies has become an important
research focus for lung cancer treatment. Our previous study has shown
leptomycin B (LMB) significantly inhibited proliferation of lung cancer
cells; however, p53 wild type lung cancer cells were resistant to LMB.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to develop and evaluate a
novel therapeutic strategy to sensitize LMB-resistant lung cancer cells
by combining LMB and doxorubicin (DOX). Among the different treatment
regimens, pre-treatment with DOX (pre-DOX) and subsequent treatment with
LMB to A549 cells significantly decreased the 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) as compared to that of LMB alone (4.4 nM vs. 10.6
nM, P The development of novel targeted therapies has become an important
research focus for lung cancer treatment. Our previous study has shown
leptomycin B (LMB) significantly inhibited proliferation of lung cancer
cells; however, p53 wild type lung cancer cells were resistant to LMB.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to develop and evaluate a
novel therapeutic strategy to sensitize LMB-resistant lung cancer cells
by combining LMB and doxorubicin (DOX). Among the different treatment
regimens, pre-treatment with DOX (pre-DOX) and subsequent treatment with
LMB to A549 cells significantly decreased the 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) as compared to that of LMB alone (4.4 nM vs. 10.6
nM, P < 0.05). Analysis of cell cycle and apoptosis by flow cytometry
further confirmed the cytotoxic data. To investigate molecular mechanisms
for this drug combination effects, p53 pathways were analyzed by Western
blot, and nuclear proteome was evaluated by two dimensional difference
gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and mass spectrometry (MS). In comparison
with control groups, the levels of p53, phospho-p53 (ser15), and p21
proteins were significantly increased while phospho-p53 (Thr55) and
survivin were significantly decreased after treatments of pre-DOX and LMB
(P The development of novel targeted therapies has become an important
research focus for lung cancer treatment. Our previous study has shown
leptomycin B (LMB) significantly inhibited proliferation of lung cancer
cells; however, p53 wild type lung cancer cells were resistant to LMB.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to develop and evaluate a
novel therapeutic strategy to sensitize LMB-resistant lung cancer cells
by combining LMB and doxorubicin (DOX). Among the different treatment
regimens, pre-treatment with DOX (pre-DOX) and subsequent treatment with
LMB to A549 cells significantly decreased the 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) as compared to that of LMB alone (4.4 nM vs. 10.6
nM, P < 0.05). Analysis of cell cycle and apoptosis by flow cytometry
further confirmed the cytotoxic data. To investigate molecular mechanisms
for this drug combination effects, p53 pathways were analyzed by Western
blot, and nuclear proteome was evaluated by two dimensional difference
gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and mass spectrometry (MS). In comparison
with control groups, the levels of p53, phospho-p53 (ser15), and p21
proteins were significantly increased while phospho-p53 (Thr55) and
survivin were significantly decreased after treatments of pre-DOX and LMB
(P < 0.05). The 2D-DIGE/MS analysis identified that sequestosome 1
(SQSTM1/p62) had a significant increase in pre-DOX and LMB-treated cells
(P The development of novel targeted therapies has become an important
research focus for lung cancer treatment. Our previous study has shown
leptomycin B (LMB) significantly inhibited proliferation of lung cancer
cells; however, p53 wild type lung cancer cells were resistant to LMB.
Therefore, the objective of this study was to develop and evaluate a
novel therapeutic strategy to sensitize LMB-resistant lung cancer cells
by combining LMB and doxorubicin (DOX). Among the different treatment
regimens, pre-treatment with DOX (pre-DOX) and subsequent treatment with
LMB to A549 cells significantly decreased the 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) as compared to that of LMB alone (4.4 nM vs. 10.6
nM, P < 0.05). Analysis of cell cycle and apoptosis by flow cytometry
further confirmed the cytotoxic data. To investigate molecular mechanisms
for this drug combination effects, p53 pathways were analyzed by Western
blot, and nuclear proteome was evaluated by two dimensional difference
gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and mass spectrometry (MS). In comparison
with control groups, the levels of p53, phospho-p53 (ser15), and p21
proteins were significantly increased while phospho-p53 (Thr55) and
survivin were significantly decreased after treatments of pre-DOX and LMB
(P < 0.05). The 2D-DIGE/MS analysis identified that sequestosome 1
(SQSTM1/p62) had a significant increase in pre-DOX and LMB-treated cells
(P < 0.05). In conclusion, our results suggest that drug-resistant lung
cancer cells with p53 wild type could be sensitized to cell death by
scheduled combination treatment of DOX and LMB through activating and
restoring p53 as well as potentially other protein(s)/pathway(s).

