Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Global miRNA expression changes induced by HDAC-42 and 5-azaCdr in
lung cancer cells


Introduction: Epigenetic alterations are universally seen in lung and
other cancers. These include DNA methylation and histone modifications,
both pharmacologically targetable abnormalities by DNA methyltransferase
(DNMT) inhibitors and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. Despite
preclinical evidence, epigenetic modifiers have, to date, been
ineffective in the treatment of most solid tumors. MicroRNAs are small
non-coding RNAs that impact RNA and protein expression through imperfect
base pairing in the 3UTRs of transcribed genes. We investigated the
ability of epigenetic drugs to affect the miRNA expression from four lung
cancer cell lines, A549, H1299, H719, H520 (representing adeno, large
cell, small cell and squamous carcinomas respectively). Materials and
Methods: MTT was used to evaluate cell growth, while Western immunoblot
and immunofluorescence was used to detect histone H3 acetylation.
Annexin-V by flow cytometry was used for apoptosis detection. NanoString
was used for the global profiling of miRNAs and corresponding statistical
methods was performed by the Biostatistical Core of OSU-CCC. Results: We
evaluated the impact of 6 HDAC inhibitors on cell growth of A549 and
H1299 cell lines. HDAC-42 was among the most potent drugs and inhibited
growth at nM concentrations. Both HDAC-42 and 5-azaCdr increased
apoptosis in all 4 cell lines. The most significant synergy between
HDAC-42 and 5-azaCdr was in H719 in which apoptosis increased from 4.9 to
38.0% at 500 nM. As expected, synergistic histone H3 acetylation was also
seen. Following 72 hour treatment, RNA was harvested and global miRNA
expression by NanoString showed that the expression patterns of miRNAs
are different among the 4 cell lines after treatment with 200 nM HDAC-42
and 3 M 5-azaCdr. 5-azaCdr caused more miRNA difference than HDAC-42
(19/3 differential expressed miRNAs in 5-azaCdr treated and HDAC-42
treated H520 cells, 21/6 in H719, 29/9 in H1299, 9/8 in A549). We found
that some miRNA changes were common across cell lines in the HDAC-42
treated group, (increased miR129-3p in HDAC-42 treated H1299, H719 and
H520 and increased miR148a in HDAC-42 treated H1299, A549 and H719
cells). We also found that 5-azaCdr induced changes in miRNA expression
patterns were similar between H520, H719 and H1299 (16 out of 20 miRNAs
in H520, 16 out of 21 in H719, 11 out of 29 in H1299). The synergistic
activity of 5-azaCdr and HDAC-42 was observed with several individual
miRNAs like miR-129-3p and miR-515-5p. Conclusion: Both HDAC-42 and
5-azaCdr could regulate the expression of certain miRNAs in lung cancer
cells. The effect of HDAC-42 and 5-azaCdr on four different lung cancer
cell lines showed distinct miRNA expression patterns. The role of several
candidate miRNAs such as miR-129-3p, miR-515-5p, miR-148a and miR-200c
related to acetylation and methylation requires further study.

