Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Embelin induces autophagy in ovarian cancer cells


Embelin is an active ingredient of traditional herbal medicine that
exhibits cytotoxic effect and inhibits cell proliferation in various
cancer cell types. It is a small molecular inhibitor of XIAP undergoing
preclinical testing for its anticancer effects in many different cancer
types. In this study we have investigated its role as a chemotherapeutic
agent in a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines. Utilising the MTT assay
and annexin staining we demonstrate that embelin exhibits a potent, dose
dependent cytotoxic effect in human ovarian cancer cells. Surprisingly in
contrast to the previously reported cytotoxicity of embelin in many other
cancer cell types, treatment of ovarian cancer cells with embelin
promoted autophagy and not apoptosis as evidenced by the death without
caspase 3 activation and induces cellular swelling and cytoplasmic
vacuolization with evident features of necrotic cell death. Treatment of
ovarian cancer cells with embelin demonsrnstrated autophagic hallmarks,
including an increased number of autophagosomes were observed through
acridine orange staining. Embelin also induced cell autophagy, as
demonstrated by the punctuate distribution of GFP-LC3, as well as the LC3
cleavage and beclin1 activation. Red green fluorescence in acridine
orange stained cells by flowcyometry further confirmed the autophagy
action by embelin treatment. Our findings demonstrate a new death pathway
underlying the cytotoxic effect of embelin, but also suggest that
targeting autophagy could augment the anticancer activity, providing the
framework for further development of embelin as a new chemotherapeutic
agent for ovarian cancer treatment.

