Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bcl-2 selective antagonists show antitumor activity without dose
limiting platelet toxicity


Proteins of the Bcl-2 family are central regulators of programmed cell
death. Pro-survival Bcl-2 proteins, such as Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 are
often over-expressed in human tumours and participate in tumour
initiation, progression and chemo-resistance. Therefore drugs targeting
these pro-survival Bcl-2 proteins represent a promising therapeutic
approach for cancer treatment. The most advanced drug targeting this
protein family is ABT-263, a potent Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL inhibitor showing
anti-tumour efficacy in preclinical models of leukaemia and small cell
lung carcinoma. Survival of circulating platelets has been shown to be
highly Bcl-xL dependent; consequently the dose-limiting toxicity of
ABT-263 is an on-target peripheral thrombocytopenia. We have used a range
of biophysical methods to guide the structure-based generation of a
significant number of small molecules,* which bind with high affinity (MW
Proteins of the Bcl-2 family are central regulators of programmed cell
death. Pro-survival Bcl-2 proteins, such as Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 are
often over-expressed in human tumours and participate in tumour
initiation, progression and chemo-resistance. Therefore drugs targeting
these pro-survival Bcl-2 proteins represent a promising therapeutic
approach for cancer treatment. The most advanced drug targeting this
protein family is ABT-263, a potent Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL inhibitor showing
anti-tumour efficacy in preclinical models of leukaemia and small cell
lung carcinoma. Survival of circulating platelets has been shown to be
highly Bcl-xL dependent; consequently the dose-limiting toxicity of
ABT-263 is an on-target peripheral thrombocytopenia. We have used a range
of biophysical methods to guide the structure-based generation of a
significant number of small molecules,* which bind with high affinity (MW
< 780; KD 100 fold). In cellular assays, our lead compounds efficiently
displace Bax from Bcl-2 with near complete inhibition of Bcl-2 / Bax
co-immunoprecipitation at 100 nM. These compounds are strong inducers of
cell death in Bcl-2 dependent cellular models such as the acute
myeloblastic leukaemia (AML) cell line RS4;11, affording sub-10 nM IC50's
for the most potent compounds. In vivo, in agreement with their mechanism
of action, these Bcl-2 selective inhibitors, given either intravenously
or orally, elicit a rapid (30 min iv, and 2 hours po) and strong
apoptotic response in mouse xenografts of the RS4:11 cell line. When the
most potent compounds are given orally to RS4;11 xenograft-bearing mice,
apoptosis in tumor cells is induced more than 15 fold (at 25 mg/kg) and
more than 20 fold (at 50 mg/kg) compared to untreated mice. Importantly,
in agreement with the selectivity of the compounds for Bcl-2 versus
Bcl-xL, no platelet loss was observed in mice treated with our compounds,
in sharp contrast to ABT-263. Finally, we observe very robust anti-tumor
activity when a lead compound is given orally at 50 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg
(with complete regression at 100 mg/kg) in an RS4;11 mouse xenograft
model. This anti-tumor activity was similar whether the compound was
dosed daily or twice a week over two weeks. Altogether our data
demonstrate that highly Bcl-2 selective antagonists show anti-tumor
activity and no platelet toxicity, in contrast to Bcl-2 / Bcl-xL dual
inhibitors. Such compounds represent promising drug candidates for the
treatment of Bcl-2 dependent malignancies such as chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia (CLL) and other leukaemias and lymphomas. * Chemical structures
of compounds will not be disclosed.

