Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: COUP-TFII suppresses NFB activation in endocrine-resistant breast
cancer cells


COUP-TFII is an orphan nuclear receptor that can function as either a
transcriptional activator or repressor. We have previously shown that
COUP-TFII expression is reduced in tamoxifen-resistant LCC9 breast cancer
cells and that overexpression of COUP-TFII restored the ability of
tamoxifen to inhibit cell proliferation. An increase in NFB activity and
p65/RELA level has been reported in endocrine-resistant breast cancer
cells. Because NFB activation results in increased expression of
anti-apoptotic and pro-proliferative genes, increased NFB signaling
promotes the survival of cancer cells. The goal of the current study was
to further elucidate the mechanism by which COUP-TFII enables cells to
maintain endocrine sensitivity and to determine if COUP-TFII modulates
NFB activity in tamoxifen-resistance. To examine whether COUP-TFII can
suppress NFB activity, MCF-7 (tamoxifen-sensitive, TAM-S) and LCC9
(tamoxifen-resistant, TAM-R) breast cancer cells were transfected with a
NFB luciferase reporter and treated with TNF to activate NFB.
Cotransfection with COUP-TFII reduced NFB activity in both TAM-S and
TAM-R cell lines. Knockdown of COUP-TFII with siRNA led to an increase in
p65 expression; conversely, COUP-TFII overexpression led to a suppression
of p65 expression. COUP-TFII overexpression also reduced TNF-induced
endogenous NFB target gene expression. Preliminary data also suggests
that suppression of NFB activation by COUP-TFII leads to a reduction in
cell viability in MCF-7 and LCC9 cells in response to tamoxifen and TNF
treatment. This indicates a novel role for COUP-TFII in suppression of
NFB activity which may explain the ability of COUP-TFII to promote
tamoxifen-sensitivity. COUP-TFII may be both a useful biomarker to
predict tamoxifen-sensitivity as well as a target to restore endocrine
sensitivity to resistant cells.

