Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Np63 is a regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human
keratinocytes


p63 is a p53 family protein required for morphogenesis and postnatal
regeneration of epithelial tissues. Here we demonstrate that Np63, a p63
isoform lacking N-terminal transactivation domain, induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in primary human keratinocytes in
TGF--dependent manner. Rapidly proliferating normal human epidermal
keratinocytes (NHEK) were infected with retroviral vector expressing
Np63, Np63, Np63, or empty vector, and serially subcultured until
replicative senescence. No phenotypic changes were observed until the
culture reached senescence. Then, cells transduced with Np63 and Np63
demonostrated morphological changes resembling mesenchymal cells, while
Np63 did not trigger such change in phenotype. Treatment with exogenous
TGF- accelerated EMT in pre-senescent Np63-transduced cells, and
inhibition of TGF- signaling reversed the EMT phenotype. Molecular
markers of EMT, such as loss of E-Cadherin and cytokeratin 14 expression,
were observed in cells expressing Np63 but not those expressing Np63.
TGF- treatment alone led to growth arrest in control NHEK with no
evidence of EMT, indicating that Np63 altered the cellular response to
TGF- treatment. Np63-transduced cells acquiring EMT gained ability to be
differentiated to osteo/odontogenic and adipogenic pathways, resembling
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Furthermore, these cells expressed
enhanced levels of Nanog and Lin28, which are transcription factors
associated with pluripotency. These data indicate that Np63 triggered EMT
in TGF--dependent manner, while Np63 only caused morphologically changes
resembling mesenchymal cells. The current study suggests that mesenchymal
transition of normal skin keratinocytes might be a novel approach to
generate induced MSCs (iMSCs), which may be useful for regenerative
therapies.

