Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HB-EGF and PDGF mediate reciprocal interactions of carcinoma cells
with cancer-associated fibroblasts to support progression of uterine
cervical cancers


Tumor stroma drives the growth and progression of cancers. A
heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor, HB-EGF, is an
EGF receptor ligand that stimulates cell growth in an autocrine or
paracrine fashion. While elevated expression of HB-EGF in cancer cells
and its contribution to tumor progression are well documented, the
effects of HB-EGF expression in the tumor stroma have not been clarified.
Here, we show that HB-EGF is expressed in stromal fibroblasts where it
promotes tumor cell proliferation. In uterine cervical cancers, HB-EGF
was detected immunohistochemically in the stroma proximal to the cancer
epithelium. Proliferation of cervical cancer cells in vitro was enhanced
by coculture with fibroblasts isolated from tumor tissues of patients
with cervical cancer. Inhibition of HB-EGF function or treatment with
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) inhibitors abrogated cancer cell
growth enhanced by cervical cancer-associated fibroblast (CCF) coculture.
Furthermore, tumor formation in a mouse xenograft model was enhanced by
cotransplantation of CCF or mouse embryonic fibroblasts but not with
embryonic fibroblasts from HB-EGF-deficient mice. Conversely, conditioned
medium from cancer cells induced HB-EGF expression in CCF and mechanistic
investigations established that PDGF was the primary factor responsible.
Together, our findings indicate that HB-EGF and PDGF reciprocally mediate
the interaction of cancer cells with cancer-associated fibroblasts,
promoting cancer cell proliferation in a paracrine manner that has
implications for novel combinatorial cancer.

