Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel approach to targeting mutated colorectal adenocarcinomas
with T cell-engaging CEA/CD3-bispecific BiTE investigational antibody
MEDI-565


Colorectal cancer (CRC) cells can harbor somatic mutations with strong
impact on cancer cell signaling that limit the effectiveness of both
chemotherapy and targeted therapies including monoclonal antibodies and
kinase inhibitors. Therefore, novel therapeutic modalities are needed
that are not impacted by the presence of such genetic mutations. We have
here evaluated a CEA/ CD3-bispecific BiTE antibody termed MEDI-565 (also
known as MT111) for its ability to redirect cytotoxic T cells for lysis
in co-cultures and in xenograft models of human CRC lines harboring
oncogenic mutations. Redirected lysis of CEA-positive tumor cells by
MEDI-565 occurred in a manner dependent on CEA surface antigen density
but independent of exogenously added soluble CEA. Importantly, the
potency of lysis was independent of the mutational status of genes
commonly mutated or lost in colorectal and other cancers, including
frequent mutations in KRAS, BRAF, PI3KCA, PTEN and TP53 genes. In mouse
xenograft models, the ability of MEDI-565 to inhibit tumor growth was
likewise independent of the mutational status of the human tumor
xenograft models. Our findings suggest that MEDI-565 warrants further
clinical investigation as a potential treatment option for patients with
CEA-positive tumors harboring somatic mutations that are less responsive
to traditional chemotherapy or targeted agents.

