Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of functional polymorphisms in folate metabolism on
6-mercaptopurine-mediated hematological toxicity in children with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia


Purpose: Defective S-methylation of 6-mercarptopurine (6-MP) either due
to reduced activity of thiopurine s-methyltransferase (TPMT) or due to
reduced synthesis of S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) induces hematological
toxicity in children undergoing 6-MP treatment for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL). Recently, we have demonstrated the genetic variants of
TMPT results in hematological toxicity when on 6-MP. In the current
study, we have aimed to explore the role of seven functional
polymorphisms in folate metabolism as pharmacogenomic determinants of
6-MP mediated toxicity. Experimental Procedures: In 126 children with ALL
being treated with 6-MP, Glutamate carboxypeptidase II (GCPII) C1561T,
Reduced folate carrier 1 (RFC1) G80A, cytosolic serine hydroxymethyl
transferase (cSHMT) C1420T, Thymidylate synthase (TYMS) 3-UTR ins6/del6,
Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T, Methionine synthase
(MTR) A2756G polymorphisms were analysed by PCR-RFLP method while TYMS
5-UTR 28 bp tandem repeat analysis was done by PCR-AFLP method. Summary:
Univariate analysis showed positive association of GCPII C1561T (r= 0.23)
and cSHMT C1420T (r=0.15) variants with hematological toxicity. Multi
dimensionality reduction analysis confirmed synergetic gene-gene
interaction between these two loci (2=5.9, p=0.02) apart from showing an
interesting tri-variate interaction i.e, RFC1 G80A/cSHMT C1420T/TYMS
5-2R3R. RFC1 G80A showed additive interaction with cSHMT while TYMS 2R
alleles showed counteracting interaction. Toxicity grade prediction model
was developed using multiple linear regression approach, which showed
moderate predictability of aberrations in folate metabolism and TPMT*3C
(Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve=0.69) thus
explaining 36% variation in toxicity. Conclusion: Aberrations in folate
metabolism and TPMT*3C contribute to 36% 6-MP mediated toxicity.

