Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of UGT2B17 gene copy number variation with breast
cancer risk: The Nashville Breast Health Study


UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 (UGT2B17) catalyzes the transfer of
glucuronic acid from uridine diphosphoglucuronic acid to a variety of
substrates, including estrogen, a hormone that plays an important role in
the etiology of breast cancer. Glucuronidated estrogens are more polar
and water soluble; thus, they are more easily excreted in the bile and
urine. The UGT2B17 gene displays variations in copy number (0 copies, 1
copy, and 2 copies), and the null genotype (0 copies) is associated with
lower glucuronidating activity in human liver microsomes. In this study,
we evaluated the association of UGT2B17 gene copy number variation with
breast cancer risk. Included in the study were 1,536 breast cancer cases
and 1,205 matched controls recruited into the Nashville Breast Health
Study, a population-based, case-control study based in Nashville,
Tennessee. Copy number of the UGT2B17 gene was evaluated by real-time PCR
by using ABI's TaqMan Copy Number Assays reagents. UGT2B17 gene copy
number variation was associated with breast cancer risk with odds ratios
of 1.17 (95% CI: 1.00-1.38) and 1.33 (95% CI: 1.02-1.74), respectively,
for 1 and 0 copies of the UGT2B17 gene, compared with 2 copies of the
gene. The association varied little by menopausal status. The association
was consistent in both whites and African Americans. Our study suggests
that UGT2B17 gene copy number variation may play a role in the etiology
of breast cancer.

