Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Directing combinatorial therapy of breast cancer using signaling
pathway predictors


Heterogeneity in human breast cancers reflects the complexity of cancer,
and has been characterized in both histology and gene expression
patterns. In addition, heterogeneity is observed in the differential
response to therapy. Indeed, the response of molecular-based target
therapies, such as Herceptin, in specific populations of patients points
out the importance of characterizing heterogeneity prior to therapy.
However, only 35-50% of HER2+ patients are responsive to Herceptin and
among those, some also developed drug resistance. Taken together, this
indicates that combination targeted therapy in conjunction with an
accurate diagnosis of they type of breast cancer is critical for
development of effective breast cancer treatment. Here we develop a new
strategy to develop combination therapies for subtypes of breast cancer.
Using bioinformatic methods to analyze gene expression profiles of
heterogeneous mammary tumors in MMTV-myc mice, we have developed
combinatorial therapeutic treatment plans specific to the cell signaling
pathways that have been activated. The activity of the cell signaling
pathways was determined through a gene expression analysis coupled with
training data for key signaling pathways. Our initial data shows that the
individualized therapeutic combinations for certain histological subtypes
of Myc tumors are safe for mice. The therapeutic efficacy will be
evaluated first in immune-competent wild-type mice bearing with tumors
from the heterogeneous MMTV-myc mice. The results will demonstrate a
proof of principle in an effective, approach to rationalize breast cancer
therapy using a limited number of available drugs after predicting the
response to therapy. These results will also be expected to facilitate
our understanding in roles of heterogeneity in breast cancer in response
to therapy.

