Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dual inhibition of PI3K and Erk1/2 shows synergy and efficacy in
human tumor cells, either by using drug combinations or novel dual
PI3K/Erk inhibitors


The Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and the PI3K/Akt signaling pathways are frequently
deregulated in cancer due to activation of upstream receptors, decreased
expression of tumor suppressors like PTEN or activating mutations of Ras,
B-Raf or PI3K. Several clinical studies with kinase inhibitors targeting
single members of the Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk or the PI3K/Akt pathway are
ongoing. However, preclinical and clinical trials indicated limited
success by single pathway inhibition and different resistance mechanisms
were defined. Further clinical trials with drug combinations of
Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and PI3K/Akt suppressors have been initiated, suggesting
a more favorable outcome than targeting only one single pathway,
Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk or PI3K/Akt. We performed in-vitro combination
experiments with Raf, Mek or Erk inhibitors and PI3K or Akt inhibitors in
several human tumor cell lines. Strong synergy was achieved with various
combinations including the Mek inhibitor CI-1040 and the PI3K inhibitor
GDC-0941 (CI = 0.17) or the Erk inhibitor AEZS-131 and the PI3K inhibitor
D-117073 (CI = 0.23) in A549 cells. Also Raf inhibitors like Sorafenib
and Zelboraf were combined with different PI3K inhibitors, resulting in
synergistic anti-proliferative activity. Due to the attractiveness of
parallel inhibition of the Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and PI3K/Akt pathways, we
developed AEZS-136 that concurrently inhibits Erk1/2 (IC50 50nM) and PI3K
(IC50 100nM) by an ATP competitive mode of action. Derivatives of the
dual PI3K/Erk inhibitor were co-crystallized with Erk2 and PI3K enabling
an optimization process by SAR driven medicinal chemistry. The
anti-proliferative efficacy of AEZS-136 was evaluated in more than 40
human tumor cell lines and physico-chemical as well as in-vitro ADMET
properties were widely assessed. Furthermore, the in-vivo
pharmacokinetics and anti-tumor efficacy was explored. AEZS-136 was well
tolerated and showed dose dependent inhibition of human colon tumor
growth of up to 74% in a Hct116 mouse model. Here we present the concept
of dual targeting of the Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and the PI3K/Akt pathways,
either by using drug combinations or our novel dual PI3K/Erk inhibitor.
AEZS-136 is a small molecule in preclinical development showing a
uniquely advantageous kinase inhibition profile. Broad clinical
anti-tumor activity is expected for AEZS-136 in tumors with deregulated
Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and PI3K-Akt signaling.

