Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The interaction of ZSCAN4 with TRF1: Effects on regulation of
telomere elongation in cancer cells


Telomeres are repetitive sequences at the ends of chromosomes protected
by DNA binding proteins of shelterin complex that form capping
structures. One of these proteins, TRF1, plays a role in the regulation
of telomere length through its interaction with other proteins in the
shelterin complex. High levels of TRF1 expression have been shown to
accelerate telomere shortening, whereas dominant-negative inhibition of
TRF1 leads to telomere elongation. Recently, the newly identified Zinc
finger and SCAN domain containing4 gene (ZSCAN4) plays a key role in
genomic stability by regulating telomere elongation and was shown to
co-localize with TRF1 foci. Here, we show that ZSCAN4 is a TRF1
association protein. We hypothesized that ZSCAN4 would affect levels of
TRF1expression and correspondingly control the function of TRF1 through
negative regulation and dominant-negative inhibition. Using
Co-immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate that ZSCAN4 binds with TRF1 in
vitro. Pull-down assay results show that ZSCAN4 directly interacts with
TRF1. Using PCR mutagenesis, we have identified the binding site between
ZSCAN4 and TRF1. Furthermore, over-expression of ZSCAN4 expression acts
as an activator of telomere elongation. The ZSCAN4 mediated cooperative
binding of TRF1 to telomeric DNA has important implications for
understanding the mechanism of telomere extension.

