Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of dovitinib on fibroblast growth factor receptor-2
(FGFR2) expressing pancreatic cancer


Introduction. FGF signaling has been implicated in pancreatic cancer (PC)
tumorigenesis and tumor-stromal interactions. Dovitinib is a potent
inhibitor of the FGF receptors. We examined the effect of dovitinib in
pancreatic cancer in relation to tumor FGFR2 expression using cell lines
and patient-derived primary PC models. Methods. FGFR2 expression in 6 PC
cell lines (L3.6PL, Panc4.30, AsPC1, Panc2.13, SU86.86, Panc02.03) and 13
patient-derived primary PC tumors was assessed using immunoblotting and
RT-PCR. Dovitinib efficacy was assessed in vitro following FGF2
stimulation (IC50 Introduction. FGF signaling has been implicated in
pancreatic cancer (PC) tumorigenesis and tumor-stromal interactions.
Dovitinib is a potent inhibitor of the FGF receptors. We examined the
effect of dovitinib in pancreatic cancer in relation to tumor FGFR2
expression using cell lines and patient-derived primary PC models.
Methods. FGFR2 expression in 6 PC cell lines (L3.6PL, Panc4.30, AsPC1,
Panc2.13, SU86.86, Panc02.03) and 13 patient-derived primary PC tumors
was assessed using immunoblotting and RT-PCR. Dovitinib efficacy was
assessed in vitro following FGF2 stimulation (IC50 < 10 M). Contribution
by FGF signaling inhibition was evaluated by knockdown and constitutive
activation of FRS2, Mcl-1 and Akt. Effects on downstream signaling
pathways were evaluated by immunoblotting. Tumor-bearing mice were
treated with dovitinib 40mg/kg (daily oral gavage) and tumor growth was
measured. Effects of dovitinib in tumors were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (H&E, ki67, TUNEL, CD34, aSMA, collagen IV).
Results. Dovitinib and FRS2 shRNA induced significant in vitro cell kill
in bFGF-stimulated PC cell lines that had elevated FGFR2 mRNA expression.
This was associated with inhibition of p-Akt and decreased Mcl-1 level in
sensitive PC cells. Ectopic Mcl-1 and constitutively active Akt1
overexpression reversed the sensitivity whereas Mcl-1 knockdown
sensitized resistant PC cells to dovitinib-induced apoptosis. In in vivo
xenograft studies, compared to controls, dovitinib caused significant
growth inhibition in high FGFR2 mRNA expressing PC (L3.6PL; T/C=0 after
10 days) but not low expressing PC (SU86.86; T/C=0.8 after 28 days). We
then selected a primary tumor with high FGFR2 mRNA expression (#12424),
which dovitinib exerted anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects,
causing significant growth inhibition (T/C=0.1 after 28 days), with
reduced tumor-associated stroma and microvessel density at 20 mg/kg in a
dose-dependent manner. Dovitinib caused only moderate tumor growth
inhibition in #10978 (T/C= 0.78), a low FGFR2 mRNA expressing primary
tumor. Conclusions. Dovitinib demonstrated significant anti-tumor
efficacy that was mediated via the Akt/Mcl-1 pathway, and this effect was
dependent on FGFR2 activity. We propose that FGFR2 mRNA level may be a
predictive marker for efficacy of dovitinib in PC, and will be evaluated
in an on-going clinical trial using a dovitinib-containing regimen.

