Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High mobility group box 1 secretion supports tumor progression of
human malignant mesothelioma


Human malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive and highly lethal
cancer, often associated with exposure to asbestos and erionite.
Prognosis is poor, due to late-stage diagnosis and resistance to current
conventional therapies. We previously showed that high-mobility group
box-1 protein (HMGB1), a damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP)
protein, is involved in the early stages of mesothelial cell
transformation. Here we show that HMGB1 establishes an autocrine circuit
in MM cells influencing tumor cell proliferation and survival. MM cells
express HMGB1 at high levels and secrete HMGB1 into the extracellular
space. Accordingly, HMGB1 levels in MM patients sera are significantly
higher than in those of healthy individuals. In addition, motility,
survival and anchorage-independent growth of HMGB1-secreting MM cells
were inhibited in vitro by a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against HMGB1, by
the recombinant HMGB1 competitive antagonist BoxA and by antibodies
against the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE).
Inhibition of HMGB1 reduced the growth of MM xenografts in SCID mice and
extended survival. Our findings indicate that MM cells become addicted to
HMGB1 and that targeting HMGB1 can be a promising novel therapeutic
approach for MM.

