Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TMPRSS2:ERG overexpression limits vitamin D receptor action in
prostate cancer cells


Treatment with the active metabolite of vitamin D (1,25D), or the less
calcemic analog of 1,25D (EB1089) decreases growth of many prostate
cancer (PCa) cell lines. The actions of 1,25D are mediated by the vitamin
D receptor (VDR), a hormone activated transcription factor. A recent
study showed that the prostates of mice fed with a low vitamin D diet
produced levels of metabolites similar to those found in humans with low
normal levels, exhibited a significant increase in proliferation, and
decrease in apoptosis compared to mice fed a diet supplemented to achieve
higher levels of vitamin D metabolites. This suggests that 1,25D plays a
role in limiting proliferation of normal prostate cells. 1,25D is
inactivated by the enzyme CYP24. 1,25D dependent induction of CYP24
provides a negative feedback mechanism to limit VDR signaling. VDR
dependent induction of CYP24 requires an ETS transcription factor. The
majority of PCa contain a TMPRSS2:ETS factor fusion gene linking the
promoter of the androgen regulated TMPRSS2 gene with the coding regions
of ETS transcription factors. The most common fusion gene is TMPRSS2:ERG
(T/E). This fusion promotes growth and invasiveness. We speculated that
T/E might also cause hyperinduction of CYP24 limiting the beneficial
anti-proliferative actions of 1,25D. To test this, we used siRNA
targeting ERG to reduce expression of T/E in VCaP cells. Depletion of ERG
reduced 1,25D induction of CYP24 by 95%. We have generated an LNCaP cell
line that expresses a T/E isoform in response to doxycycline. Induction
of ERG caused an increase in both potency and efficacy of 1,25D dependent
CYP24 induction. In the presence of increased ERG expression, 1 nM 1,25D
caused an induction of CYP24 equivalent to 100 nM 1,25D in control cells.
This increase in CYP24 in ERG over-expressing cells suggests that
physiological levels of 1,25D (typically Treatment with the active
metabolite of vitamin D (1,25D), or the less calcemic analog of 1,25D
(EB1089) decreases growth of many prostate cancer (PCa) cell lines. The
actions of 1,25D are mediated by the vitamin D receptor (VDR), a hormone
activated transcription factor. A recent study showed that the prostates
of mice fed with a low vitamin D diet produced levels of metabolites
similar to those found in humans with low normal levels, exhibited a
significant increase in proliferation, and decrease in apoptosis compared
to mice fed a diet supplemented to achieve higher levels of vitamin D
metabolites. This suggests that 1,25D plays a role in limiting
proliferation of normal prostate cells. 1,25D is inactivated by the
enzyme CYP24. 1,25D dependent induction of CYP24 provides a negative
feedback mechanism to limit VDR signaling. VDR dependent induction of
CYP24 requires an ETS transcription factor. The majority of PCa contain a
TMPRSS2:ETS factor fusion gene linking the promoter of the androgen
regulated TMPRSS2 gene with the coding regions of ETS transcription
factors. The most common fusion gene is TMPRSS2:ERG (T/E). This fusion
promotes growth and invasiveness. We speculated that T/E might also cause
hyperinduction of CYP24 limiting the beneficial anti-proliferative
actions of 1,25D. To test this, we used siRNA targeting ERG to reduce
expression of T/E in VCaP cells. Depletion of ERG reduced 1,25D induction
of CYP24 by 95%. We have generated an LNCaP cell line that expresses a
T/E isoform in response to doxycycline. Induction of ERG caused an
increase in both potency and efficacy of 1,25D dependent CYP24 induction.
In the presence of increased ERG expression, 1 nM 1,25D caused an
induction of CYP24 equivalent to 100 nM 1,25D in control cells. This
increase in CYP24 in ERG over-expressing cells suggests that
physiological levels of 1,25D (typically <1 nM) would be rapidly
metabolized in T/E expressing cells limiting the beneficial
differentiating effects of 1,25D. We had previously shown that 1,25D
induces TMPRSS2 and found that both 1,25D and EB1089 induced T/E
expression in VCaP PCa cells in vitro. Although both 1,25D and the
synthetic androgen, R1881, induced expression of T/E, the combination
yielded little additional increase. EB1089 inhibited growth of VCaP cells
in vitro. To test the effects of elevated VDR agonist in vivo, VCaP cells
stably expressing luciferase were injected into SCID mouse prostate, and
mice were treated with vehicle or EB1089 for five weeks. EB1089 increased
tumor T/E expression 2-fold, and also induced T/E target gene expression.
However, EB1089 did not alter overall tumor growth in vivo. Our previous
studies showed that EB1089 inhibits growth of T/E negative LNCaP
xenografts. These new findings suggest that induction of T/E may
counteract other beneficial actions of EB1089. Thus, 1,25D or EB1089 may
be more beneficial for T/E negative patients than for patients with T/E
positive tumors.

