Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inducing apoptosis in mantle cell lymphoma using inhibitors of
cyclin-dependent kinases and the Bcl-2 inhibitor ABT-737


Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a cyclin D1 over-expressing B cell lymphoma
which displays unregulated cell cycle progression driven by increased
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity. We are investigating selective
small molecule CDK inhibitors as potential therapeutics in MCL. AZD5438,
flavopiridol, PD-0332991 and SNS-032 have distinct efficacies against
different groups of CDKs. We hypothesize that inhibiting CDK-7 and -9
will be more effective in causing cell death in MCL than inhibiting
CDK-1,-2,-4 and- 6. In Jeko-1 cells, AZD5438 and flavopiridol displayed
time- and dose-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation, inhibition of
the phosphorylation of CDK substrates, and G1 cell cycle arrest; while
PD-0332991 showed a strong cytostatic effect by inhibiting cell
proliferation and arresting cells at the G1 phase, but not inducing
apoptosis to the same extent as flavopiridol and AZD5438. In addition,
AZD5438, flavopiridol and SNS-032 induced caspase-3 activation and down
regulation of Mcl-1, but no apoptotic effect was shown in PD-0332991
treated cells. These differential effects may be associated with
essential survival functions conferred by genes regulated by CDK7/9
including the pro-survival protein Mcl-1. However, there were no
apoptotic effects observed with any of these CDK inhibitors in Granta-519
cells, which may due to high Bcl-2 levels. We are now exploring
combinations of CDK7/9 inhibitors with a small molecule inhibitor of
Bcl-2 function. We expect CDK7/9 inhibition will reduce Mcl-1 expression
at the transcriptional level and thereby sensitize both Jeko-1 and
Granta-519 cells to Bcl-2 inhibition. We will also investigate Mcl-1 and
Bcl-2 levels in clinical samples to see if there is a correlation with
outcomes. Our expectation is that Mcl-1/Bcl-2 levels may ultimately
become a useful prognostic and predictive biomarker in MCL.

