Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Influence of quercetin-rich foods intake on microRNA expression in
EAGLE lung cancer tissues


Background: Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide and
has the highest cancer-related mortality rate. Dietary factors may
contribute to lung carcinogenesis. Epidemiologic studies, including the
Environment and Genetics in Lung Cancer Etiology (EAGLE) study, have
reported increased consumption of quercetin-rich foods to be inversely
associated with lung cancer incidence. Although experimental studies
suggest that quercetin might affect microRNA (miRNA) expression, this
mechanism has not been fully examined. We investigated this hypothesis in
quercetin-related lung carcinogenesis using lung cancer tissues. Methods:
miRNA expression data were derived from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue samples in 264 lung (144 adenocarcinoma and 120 squamous cell
carcinoma) cases from EAGLE using a custom-made, two-channel oligo array.
Quercetin-rich foods were derived from food frequency questionnaire.
Individuals were categorized into high and low consumers based on
sex-specific tertiles of quercetin-rich food intake. We compared the
expression of miRNAs (n=198) between lung cancer cases consuming
high-versus-low quercetin-rich food intake using multivariate ANOVA test.
We identified miRNAs whose expression differentiated high and low
consumption (p-valueBackground: Lung cancer is one of the most common
cancers worldwide and has the highest cancer-related mortality rate.
Dietary factors may contribute to lung carcinogenesis. Epidemiologic
studies, including the Environment and Genetics in Lung Cancer Etiology
(EAGLE) study, have reported increased consumption of quercetin-rich
foods to be inversely associated with lung cancer incidence. Although
experimental studies suggest that quercetin might affect microRNA (miRNA)
expression, this mechanism has not been fully examined. We investigated
this hypothesis in quercetin-related lung carcinogenesis using lung
cancer tissues. Methods: miRNA expression data were derived from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples in 264 lung (144
adenocarcinoma and 120 squamous cell carcinoma) cases from EAGLE using a
custom-made, two-channel oligo array. Quercetin-rich foods were derived
from food frequency questionnaire. Individuals were categorized into high
and low consumers based on sex-specific tertiles of quercetin-rich food
intake. We compared the expression of miRNAs (n=198) between lung cancer
cases consuming high-versus-low quercetin-rich food intake using
multivariate ANOVA test. We identified miRNAs whose expression
differentiated high and low consumption (p-value<0.05), and further
grouped them based on their biological function using MiRBase release
17.0. miRNA families were analyzed using Functional Class Scoring (FCS).
All analyses were conducted for adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma separately. Further analyses included stratification by smoking
status (former and current smokers only). Results: We found that miRNA
expression of 56 miRNAs significantly distinguished lung cancer cases who
consumed high-versus-low quercetin-rich foods in tumor tissue within
smoking-specific histological subtypes (p-valueBackground: Lung cancer is
one of the most common cancers worldwide and has the highest
cancer-related mortality rate. Dietary factors may contribute to lung
carcinogenesis. Epidemiologic studies, including the Environment and
Genetics in Lung Cancer Etiology (EAGLE) study, have reported increased
consumption of quercetin-rich foods to be inversely associated with lung
cancer incidence. Although experimental studies suggest that quercetin
might affect microRNA (miRNA) expression, this mechanism has not been
fully examined. We investigated this hypothesis in quercetin-related lung
carcinogenesis using lung cancer tissues. Methods: miRNA expression data
were derived from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples in 264
lung (144 adenocarcinoma and 120 squamous cell carcinoma) cases from
EAGLE using a custom-made, two-channel oligo array. Quercetin-rich foods
were derived from food frequency questionnaire. Individuals were
categorized into high and low consumers based on sex-specific tertiles of
quercetin-rich food intake. We compared the expression of miRNAs (n=198)
between lung cancer cases consuming high-versus-low quercetin-rich food
intake using multivariate ANOVA test. We identified miRNAs whose
expression differentiated high and low consumption (p-value<0.05), and
further grouped them based on their biological function using MiRBase
release 17.0. miRNA families were analyzed using Functional Class Scoring
(FCS). All analyses were conducted for adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma separately. Further analyses included stratification by smoking
status (former and current smokers only). Results: We found that miRNA
expression of 56 miRNAs significantly distinguished lung cancer cases who
consumed high-versus-low quercetin-rich foods in tumor tissue within
smoking-specific histological subtypes (p-value<0.05). FCS analyses of
these miRNAs identified the let-7 family to strongly differentiate
between high-versus-low quercetin-rich cases (p-valueBackground: Lung
cancer is one of the most common cancers worldwide and has the highest
cancer-related mortality rate. Dietary factors may contribute to lung
carcinogenesis. Epidemiologic studies, including the Environment and
Genetics in Lung Cancer Etiology (EAGLE) study, have reported increased
consumption of quercetin-rich foods to be inversely associated with lung
cancer incidence. Although experimental studies suggest that quercetin
might affect microRNA (miRNA) expression, this mechanism has not been
fully examined. We investigated this hypothesis in quercetin-related lung
carcinogenesis using lung cancer tissues. Methods: miRNA expression data
were derived from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples in 264
lung (144 adenocarcinoma and 120 squamous cell carcinoma) cases from
EAGLE using a custom-made, two-channel oligo array. Quercetin-rich foods
were derived from food frequency questionnaire. Individuals were
categorized into high and low consumers based on sex-specific tertiles of
quercetin-rich food intake. We compared the expression of miRNAs (n=198)
between lung cancer cases consuming high-versus-low quercetin-rich food
intake using multivariate ANOVA test. We identified miRNAs whose
expression differentiated high and low consumption (p-value<0.05), and
further grouped them based on their biological function using MiRBase
release 17.0. miRNA families were analyzed using Functional Class Scoring
(FCS). All analyses were conducted for adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma separately. Further analyses included stratification by smoking
status (former and current smokers only). Results: We found that miRNA
expression of 56 miRNAs significantly distinguished lung cancer cases who
consumed high-versus-low quercetin-rich foods in tumor tissue within
smoking-specific histological subtypes (p-value<0.05). FCS analyses of
these miRNAs identified the let-7 family to strongly differentiate
between high-versus-low quercetin-rich cases (p-value<0.001), followed by
miR-146, miR-125, miR-26, and miR-17 (p-valueBackground: Lung cancer is
one of the most common cancers worldwide and has the highest
cancer-related mortality rate. Dietary factors may contribute to lung
carcinogenesis. Epidemiologic studies, including the Environment and
Genetics in Lung Cancer Etiology (EAGLE) study, have reported increased
consumption of quercetin-rich foods to be inversely associated with lung
cancer incidence. Although experimental studies suggest that quercetin
might affect microRNA (miRNA) expression, this mechanism has not been
fully examined. We investigated this hypothesis in quercetin-related lung
carcinogenesis using lung cancer tissues. Methods: miRNA expression data
were derived from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples in 264
lung (144 adenocarcinoma and 120 squamous cell carcinoma) cases from
EAGLE using a custom-made, two-channel oligo array. Quercetin-rich foods
were derived from food frequency questionnaire. Individuals were
categorized into high and low consumers based on sex-specific tertiles of
quercetin-rich food intake. We compared the expression of miRNAs (n=198)
between lung cancer cases consuming high-versus-low quercetin-rich food
intake using multivariate ANOVA test. We identified miRNAs whose
expression differentiated high and low consumption (p-value<0.05), and
further grouped them based on their biological function using MiRBase
release 17.0. miRNA families were analyzed using Functional Class Scoring
(FCS). All analyses were conducted for adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma separately. Further analyses included stratification by smoking
status (former and current smokers only). Results: We found that miRNA
expression of 56 miRNAs significantly distinguished lung cancer cases who
consumed high-versus-low quercetin-rich foods in tumor tissue within
smoking-specific histological subtypes (p-value<0.05). FCS analyses of
these miRNAs identified the let-7 family to strongly differentiate
between high-versus-low quercetin-rich cases (p-value<0.001), followed by
miR-146, miR-125, miR-26, and miR-17 (p-value<0.05). Conclusions: We
observed differential expression of key biologically functional miRNAs
between high-versus-low consumers of quercetin-rich foods. Our findings,
the first of this kind, warrant confirmation from larger studies.

