Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dissecting the requirements for astrocytoma and invasion using
genetically-engineered mouse models


Astrocytomas are characterized by diffuse invasion, precluding their
complete surgical resection. PTEN, a negative PI3 kinase (PI3K) pathway
regulator, is altered in 40-80% of high-grade astrocytomas (HGA),
including glioblastoma (GBM). However, its role in astrocytoma invasion
remains unclear. Primary astrocytes from six genetically-engineered mouse
(GEM) models, with conditional alleles that inactivate Rb (T) and/or Pten
(P) and/or constitutively activate Kras (R, KrasG12D) upon Cre
recombination, were used to analyze PI3K pathway signaling,
proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro by immunoblot, cell
counting, wound healing and time-lapse video microscopy, and collagen
invasion, respectively. Gene expression microarrays were used to compare
the transcriptomes of GEM astrocytes to human HGA. Tumorigenicity and
survival were determined in vivo in orthotopic allograft models. Invasion
was assessed by morphometric analysis. Pten ablation increased levels of
phospho-Akt and phospho-S6. In cells with both Rb inactivation and Kras
activation (TR), complete inactivation of Pten shortened doubling time
(DT) by 42% (PAstrocytomas are characterized by diffuse invasion,
precluding their complete surgical resection. PTEN, a negative PI3 kinase
(PI3K) pathway regulator, is altered in 40-80% of high-grade astrocytomas
(HGA), including glioblastoma (GBM). However, its role in astrocytoma
invasion remains unclear. Primary astrocytes from six
genetically-engineered mouse (GEM) models, with conditional alleles that
inactivate Rb (T) and/or Pten (P) and/or constitutively activate Kras (R,
KrasG12D) upon Cre recombination, were used to analyze PI3K pathway
signaling, proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro by immunoblot,
cell counting, wound healing and time-lapse video microscopy, and
collagen invasion, respectively. Gene expression microarrays were used to
compare the transcriptomes of GEM astrocytes to human HGA. Tumorigenicity
and survival were determined in vivo in orthotopic allograft models.
Invasion was assessed by morphometric analysis. Pten ablation increased
levels of phospho-Akt and phospho-S6. In cells with both Rb inactivation
and Kras activation (TR), complete inactivation of Pten shortened
doubling time (DT) by 42% (P<0.01), increased single cell migration
velocity and wound healing closure 42% and 84%, respectively
(PAstrocytomas are characterized by diffuse invasion, precluding their
complete surgical resection. PTEN, a negative PI3 kinase (PI3K) pathway
regulator, is altered in 40-80% of high-grade astrocytomas (HGA),
including glioblastoma (GBM). However, its role in astrocytoma invasion
remains unclear. Primary astrocytes from six genetically-engineered mouse
(GEM) models, with conditional alleles that inactivate Rb (T) and/or Pten
(P) and/or constitutively activate Kras (R, KrasG12D) upon Cre
recombination, were used to analyze PI3K pathway signaling,
proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro by immunoblot, cell
counting, wound healing and time-lapse video microscopy, and collagen
invasion, respectively. Gene expression microarrays were used to compare
the transcriptomes of GEM astrocytes to human HGA. Tumorigenicity and
survival were determined in vivo in orthotopic allograft models. Invasion
was assessed by morphometric analysis. Pten ablation increased levels of
phospho-Akt and phospho-S6. In cells with both Rb inactivation and Kras
activation (TR), complete inactivation of Pten shortened doubling time
(DT) by 42% (P<0.01), increased single cell migration velocity and wound
healing closure 42% and 84%, respectively (P<0.0001), and increased
collagen invasion 68-fold (P0.0001). Both the proliferation and migration
effects were rescued by transient transfection with wild-type murine
Pten. In cells lacking both Rb and Pten (TP), activated Kras shortened DT
73% (PAstrocytomas are characterized by diffuse invasion, precluding
their complete surgical resection. PTEN, a negative PI3 kinase (PI3K)
pathway regulator, is altered in 40-80% of high-grade astrocytomas (HGA),
including glioblastoma (GBM). However, its role in astrocytoma invasion
remains unclear. Primary astrocytes from six genetically-engineered mouse
(GEM) models, with conditional alleles that inactivate Rb (T) and/or Pten
(P) and/or constitutively activate Kras (R, KrasG12D) upon Cre
recombination, were used to analyze PI3K pathway signaling,
proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro by immunoblot, cell
counting, wound healing and time-lapse video microscopy, and collagen
invasion, respectively. Gene expression microarrays were used to compare
the transcriptomes of GEM astrocytes to human HGA. Tumorigenicity and
survival were determined in vivo in orthotopic allograft models. Invasion
was assessed by morphometric analysis. Pten ablation increased levels of
phospho-Akt and phospho-S6. In cells with both Rb inactivation and Kras
activation (TR), complete inactivation of Pten shortened doubling time
(DT) by 42% (P<0.01), increased single cell migration velocity and wound
healing closure 42% and 84%, respectively (P<0.0001), and increased
collagen invasion 68-fold (P0.0001). Both the proliferation and migration
effects were rescued by transient transfection with wild-type murine
Pten. In cells lacking both Rb and Pten (TP), activated Kras shortened DT
73% (P<0.01), increased velocity 44% and wound closure 94% (PAstrocytomas
are characterized by diffuse invasion, precluding their complete surgical
resection. PTEN, a negative PI3 kinase (PI3K) pathway regulator, is
altered in 40-80% of high-grade astrocytomas (HGA), including
glioblastoma (GBM). However, its role in astrocytoma invasion remains
unclear. Primary astrocytes from six genetically-engineered mouse (GEM)
models, with conditional alleles that inactivate Rb (T) and/or Pten (P)
and/or constitutively activate Kras (R, KrasG12D) upon Cre recombination,
were used to analyze PI3K pathway signaling, proliferation, migration,
and invasion in vitro by immunoblot, cell counting, wound healing and
time-lapse video microscopy, and collagen invasion, respectively. Gene
expression microarrays were used to compare the transcriptomes of GEM
astrocytes to human HGA. Tumorigenicity and survival were determined in
vivo in orthotopic allograft models. Invasion was assessed by
morphometric analysis. Pten ablation increased levels of phospho-Akt and
phospho-S6. In cells with both Rb inactivation and Kras activation (TR),
complete inactivation of Pten shortened doubling time (DT) by 42%
(P<0.01), increased single cell migration velocity and wound healing
closure 42% and 84%, respectively (P<0.0001), and increased collagen
invasion 68-fold (P0.0001). Both the proliferation and migration effects
were rescued by transient transfection with wild-type murine Pten. In
cells lacking both Rb and Pten (TP), activated Kras shortened DT 73%
(P<0.01), increased velocity 44% and wound closure 94% (P<0.0005), and
had no significant effect on invasion. Unsupervised gene expression
analysis showed that transformed astrocytes (n3 unique isolates per
genotype) primarily cluster into three groups consisting of TR; TRP+/ and
TRP-/-; and T, TP+/ and TP-/-. TRP+/ - TRP-/- astrocytes were similar to
human mesenchymal HGA based on gene set analysis (P=0.043). In vivo, 105
TRP-/-, TRP+/, TP-/-, and TR cells produced HGA in 9/19, 6/10, 14/18, and
6/10 animals, respectively. Median survivals were 31, 78, 75, and 207 d,
respectively. TRP-/- tumors were 202% more invasive than TR tumors
(P=0.0062) and 42% more invasive than TP-/- tumors (P=0.315). We conclude
that Pten ablation significantly affects proliferation and migration of
astrocytoma cells, both in vitro and in vivo. Tumor incidence and
survival in the allograft is correlated with in vitro invasiveness. In
future studies, the orthotopic allograft model system and morphometric
analyses described herein can facilitate analysis of the genetics of
mesenchymal HGA invasion in vivo. Use of alternative initiating genetic
events in this model system well help define the requirements for
development of other HGA human subtypes and provide a facile platform for
use in preclinical studies.

