Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cancer stem-like cell markers in stage I and II breast cancer


Background: The number of stem-like cells (SLCs) within the primary tumor
is variable. The activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and the
expression of ABCG2 have been reported as potential breast cancer
stem-like cell markers. The association between the quantity of SLCs and
prognosis remains unclear. Patients and Methods: We prospectively
analyzed the expression of ALDH and ABCG2 in 30 patients with invasive
ductal carcinomas of the breast. Patients mean age was 55.9 14.2 yo.
According to clinical stage (CS), three patients were CS I, 19 CS IIa and
8 CS IIb. The mean pathological tumor diameter was 2.2 0.8cm. Eleven
patients (39%) had positive lymph node metastasis confirmed by standard
histological evaluation (the ALDH expression was analyzed in three
macroscopically lymph node metastases from patients #5, #26 and #27 and
compared with their matched primary tumors). The ER, PgR and HER2 (IHQ 3+
or 2+ with positive CISH) positive expression rates were 64%, 57% and
35%, respectively. The median percentage of ALDH1+ (ALDEFLUOR) and ABCG2+
cells within ESA+/Lin- cells were determined by flow cytometry in fresh
sampled tumors after tissue digestion. The mammosphere assay (Mammocult@)
was studied in 27 samples. The relationship between flow cytometry
analyses and clinical and pathological features was analyzed. Results:
the median percentage of ESA+/Lin-/ALDH+ cells within the tumor was 5.1
(range 0.2 - 31.6). We found an inverse correlation between the
percentage of ESA+/ALDH+ cells within the tumor and the pathological
tumor diameter (r= 0.4; p= 0.04). No association between the ALDH
expression and all the others clinical and pathological features was
observed. The analysis of ALDH expression in three lymph node metastasis
demonstrated that the percentage of ALDH+ cells is very similar to their
matched primary tumors (case #5 0.8% and 1.7%; case 26 0.3% and 0.7%;
case 27 5.9% and 5.9%). The median percentage of ESA+/Lin-/ABCG2+ cells
within the primary tumor was 7.4% (range 1.5 - 61.1). We did not observe
any association between ABCG2 expression and all the clinical and
pathological parameters observed. The median number of mammospheres
formed was 12/104 cells (range 3 - 60). There was no correlation between
ALDH and ABCG2 expression and the ability to form mammosphere. Discussion
and Conclusion: we demonstrated the percentage of ALDH positive cells is
inversely correlated to tumor diameter in stage I and II breast
carcinomas. The lymph node metastasis is similar to the primary tumor in
terms of ALDH expression. Although it has been demonstrated that this
subpopulation of cells has stem-like properties the intrinsically
variation and its relationship with other prognostic factors remains
unclear.

