Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG hypermethylation of p16 and BDNF associate with distant
metastasis and survival of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common
cancer in the world, and is highly mortal due to tumor recurrence and
metastasis. Invasion of tumor cells into lymph nodes is one of the
characters of regional metastasis and DNA hypermethylation is
characterized in all types of human cancers. We therefore assessed
whether epigenetic modification of DNA methylation is correlated to HNSCC
metastasis, and evaluated the potential clinical implications of DNA
methylation-based biomarker. Methylation array (Illumina infinium
beadsarray) was applied to profile aberrant methylated CpG loci in HNSCC
with lymph node invasiveness. Fourteen HNSCC tumors and two normal oral
tissues were included. value, the indicator of methylation status of each
tested CpG locus, was derived with normalization. A cluster of 111 CpG
loci was selected based on the difference between the mean value of HNSCC
tumors with and without regional metastasis (metz minus non-metz 0.2 or
0.2). Hierarchical diagram revealed distinct methylation signature was
observed between tumors with or without regional metastasis. Ingenuity
pathway analysis showed that the major diseases associated were
neurological disorder and endocrine system disorder; and the top
canonical pathway was Huntington's disease signaling. Of the top aberrant
hypermethylated alleles, p16 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
were selected for further investigation on clinical implication. The
methylation status of p16 (n=107) and BDNF (n=88) in HNSCC tumors was
assayed by methylation-specific PCR. The primer sequences of both alleles
were adopted from published report. Statistic analysis (t-test, 2 or
Fisher's exact, logistic regress, Kaplan-Meier survival, and Cox
regression) was performed using SPSS. Hypermethylation of p16 or BDNF
were not associated with stage, metastasis at diagnosis, and
differentiation. Hypermethylation of p16 was significantly associated
with age (p=0.008, t-test) and lymph node invasion (p=0.021, 2-test), in
contrast to distant metastasis of follow-up (p=0.061, 2-test). However,
hypermethylation of BDNF was associated with distant metastasis of
follow-up (odds ratio: 4.96, 95% CI: 1.28-18.87, p=0.002), and
combination with p16 improved the prediction (odds ratio: 10.31, 95% CI:
1.68-62.5, p=0.012). Hypermethylation of BDNF was associated with poor
survival of patients (odds ratio: 2.80, 95% CI: 1.17-6.71, p=0.021), and
hypermethylation of both alleles increased the risk (odds ratio: 3.81,
95% CI: 1.71-8.49, p=0.001). Together, our data suggest hypermethylation
of p16 and BDNF may be potential biomarker associate with poor prognosis
of HNSCC. The results also show the association of p16 and BDNF in gain
of metastatic properties, which warrants further investigation.

