Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sensitization of chemoresistant H1650 lung cancer stem cells to
chemotherapy by combination treatment with novel diindolylmethane
compounds


Introduction Effective cancer therapy is hampered by the development of
multidrug resistance by most cancer types. Cancer Stem Cells (CSCs) which
are Side Population (SP) cells from tumors are attributed to the drug
resistance phenotype. Efficient therapies for the successful eradication
of tumor would have to employ agent(s) capable of inhibiting the
self-renewal pathways and blocking or avoiding the drug-efflux property
of these CSCs. Experimental Procedures Cell culture: The H1650 mixed
population cells were maintained in DMEM:F12 (50:50) containing 2% PSN
and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in the presence of 5%
CO2 at 37[[Unsupported Character - °]]C. The H1650 SP cells were cultured
in DMEM:F12 (50:50) containing, 1x Nitrogen supplement, 10 g/mL each of
bFGF and EGF. In vitro cytotoxicity studies: The crystal violet dye assay
was used to determine the viability of both cell types 72 hours after
treatment with test compounds. Cell invasion assay: The invasion of cells
through a basement membrane matrix was assessed using the Cultrex 96-well
collagen I cell invasion assay from Trevigen according to manufacturer's
protocol. Cell migration assay: Migration of cells was determined using
the wound healing assay before and after 24 hours of incubation
post-treatment. Results The H1650 mixed population cells produced IC50
values of 11.03 M, 2.68 M, 8.70 M, 2.63 M, 6.48 M, 5.06 M, and 6.82 M
after treatment with Cisplatin, Gemcitabine, Doxorubicin, Fluorouracil,
Camptothecin, DIM-5 and DIM-8, respectively. Significantly higher IC50
values were observed after similar treatments with Cisplatin (142.01 M),
Gemcitabine (42.68 M), Doxorubicin (133.76 M), Fluorouracil (81.01 M),
Camptothecin (48.51 M), DIM-5 (15.67 M) and DIM-8(19.69 M). The
invasiveness of the side population cells was seen to be generally
diminished following treatment with 25 M of test compound with percentage
invasion ranging between 13.07% and 66.63% and a mean invasion of 37.92%.
Further, the side population cells exhibited a much greater migratory
index relative to the mixed population cells. Conclusions The resistance
of the H1650 stem cells to chemotherapy is evident from the comparatively
high IC50 values.; the exception being DIM-5 and DIM-8 exhibiting about 2
to 7 times more anticancer effect. These two agents act on the TR3/Nur77
nuclear receptor as activators and deactivators of the receptor,
respectively, with resultant apoptotic events occurring downstream. With
such demonstrable anticancer activities, the DIM compound may be
potentially useful in sensitizing H1650 stem cells to chemotherapy when
given in combination.

