Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulforaphane protects melanocytes and skin from individuals at
increased risk for melanoma from the effects of UV radiation: Role of
thioredoxin reductase 1.


Our interest in the natural product sulforaphane (SF) began with studies
of patients at high risk for melanoma. Germline loss-of-function (LOF)
mutations in the highly polymorphic melanocortin-1 receptor gene (MC1R),
confers a 4-fold increased risk for melanoma. Much of this increase
arises from the loss of MC1R-mediated upregulation of antioxidant,
pigment synthesis, DNA repair and anti-apoptotic pathways that protect
epidermal melanocytes from the mutagenic effects of UV radiation. We have
found that SF (likely due to its antioxidant activity) protects both
normal human melanocytes, and the skin of human subjects with LOF MC1R
mutations, from the harmful effects of UV light. Shave biopsies were
harvested from donors with either wild-type MC1R or two LOF alleles. The
epidermal tissues were treated ex vivo with UV and/or SF then analyzed
histologically and by qPCR. Our results showed that SF provides
significant protection from UV to both melanocytes and skin. We found
also that the antioxidant protein thioredoxin reductase 1 (TR1) was
significantly induced by SF. In order to explore the role of TR1 in
protecting melanocytes from UV-induced damage, we have created a human
melanocyte cell line that expresses a micro RNA which targets TR1. These
cells display increased sensitivity to the effects of UV and differential
processing of the pigment synthesis protein tyrosinase. This study
demonstrates the promise of SF as an agent for protection of human skin
in individuals with high-risk MC1R genotypes from the effects of UV
light, and highlights the role of TR1 in this process.

