Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid-induced apoptosis is directly linked to
mitochondria-mediated reactive oxygen species production in human
cervical cancer cells


Reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) have
an important function in cancer cell death. However, the exact mechanism
of ROS production, after DHA stimulation, is not clearly understood.
Here, we determined that elevated levels of ROS generated by
mitochondrial respiration is directly associated with DHA-induced
cervical cancer cell death. The levels of caspase 3 activity,
TUNEL-positive staining cells and Sub-G1 portion were markedly increased
in DHA-treated cancer cells, suggesting that apoptosis is responsible for
the DHA-induced cervical cancer cell death. Furthermore, DHA was able to
induce both mitochondrial complex I substrate- and complex II
substrate-supported mitochondrial ROS production in isolated mitochondria
from rodent liver. Meanwhile, a reduction in oxygen consumption rate and
an increase in mitochondrial ROS production as measured by MitoSOX, were
also observed in DHA-treated cancer cells, indicating that DHA can
directly act on mitochondrial respiration and enhance ROS generation. The
role of DHA-induced mitochondrial ROS production in apoptosis was further
identified by the findings that DHA reduced the mitochondrial membrane
potential, resulting in cardiolipin oxidation and cytochrome c release
from mitochondria, and that N-acetylcysteine, an antioxidant almost
completely blocked these processes as well as ROS production occurred in
mitochondria and remarkably reversed the apoptotic cell death triggered
by DHA. From the results presented here, we conclude that mitochondria
actively participate in the DHA-induced apoptotic cell death by the
generation of mitochondrial ROS. (This work was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ministry of
Education, Science and Technology (2011-0006232 and 2011-0003060)).

