Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of combinations of RNA-dependent protein
kinase and EphA2 biomarkers for NSCLC


RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is an independent prognostic variable
in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the present
study, we investigated the correlation between PKR and 25 other
biomarkers for NSCLC, identified the markers that could further improve
the prognostic significance of PKR, and elucidated the mechanisms of
interaction between these markers and PKR. Tissue microarray samples
obtained from 218 lung cancer patients were stained with an anti-PKR
antibody and antibodies against 25 biomarkers. Immunohistochemical
expression was scored and used for Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. The
interaction between PKR and EphA2 in NSCLC cell lines was examined. We
found that PKR was associated with EphA2 and that the prognostic
information regarding NSCLC provided by the combination of PKR and EphA2
(P/E) was significantly more accurate than that provided by either marker
alone. The 5-year overall survival rate in PKRlow/EphA2high patients
(20%) was significantly lower than that of PKRhigh/EphA2low patients
(74%), PKRhigh/EphA2high patients (55%), and PKRlow/EphA2low patients
(55%) (P RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is an independent prognostic
variable in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the
present study, we investigated the correlation between PKR and 25 other
biomarkers for NSCLC, identified the markers that could further improve
the prognostic significance of PKR, and elucidated the mechanisms of
interaction between these markers and PKR. Tissue microarray samples
obtained from 218 lung cancer patients were stained with an anti-PKR
antibody and antibodies against 25 biomarkers. Immunohistochemical
expression was scored and used for Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. The
interaction between PKR and EphA2 in NSCLC cell lines was examined. We
found that PKR was associated with EphA2 and that the prognostic
information regarding NSCLC provided by the combination of PKR and EphA2
(P/E) was significantly more accurate than that provided by either marker
alone. The 5-year overall survival rate in PKRlow/EphA2high patients
(20%) was significantly lower than that of PKRhigh/EphA2low patients
(74%), PKRhigh/EphA2high patients (55%), and PKRlow/EphA2low patients
(55%) (P < 0.0001). We also found that the PKR:EphA2 (P/E) ratio was
significantly associated with prognosis (P RNA-dependent protein kinase
(PKR) is an independent prognostic variable in patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the present study, we investigated the
correlation between PKR and 25 other biomarkers for NSCLC, identified the
markers that could further improve the prognostic significance of PKR,
and elucidated the mechanisms of interaction between these markers and
PKR. Tissue microarray samples obtained from 218 lung cancer patients
were stained with an anti-PKR antibody and antibodies against 25
biomarkers. Immunohistochemical expression was scored and used for
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. The interaction between PKR and EphA2 in
NSCLC cell lines was examined. We found that PKR was associated with
EphA2 and that the prognostic information regarding NSCLC provided by the
combination of PKR and EphA2 (P/E) was significantly more accurate than
that provided by either marker alone. The 5-year overall survival rate in
PKRlow/EphA2high patients (20%) was significantly lower than that of
PKRhigh/EphA2low patients (74%), PKRhigh/EphA2high patients (55%), and
PKRlow/EphA2low patients (55%) (P < 0.0001). We also found that the
PKR:EphA2 (P/E) ratio was significantly associated with prognosis (P <
0.0001). Univariate and multivariate Cox analyses revealed that this P/E
combination or ratio was an independent predictor of overall survival. In
addition, induction of PKR expression reduced EphA2 protein expression
levels in NSCLC cell lines. PKR/EphA2 is a significant predictor of
prognosis for NSCLC. PKR/EphA2 may be a promising approach to improving
screening efficiency and predicting prognosis in NSCLC patients.

