Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IKBKE is induced by STAT3 and tobacco carcinogen and determines
chemosensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer


Serine/threonine kinase IKBKE is a newly identified oncogene, however,
its regulation remains elusive. Here, we provide evidence that IKBKE is a
downstream target of STAT3 and that tobacco induces IKBKE expression
through STAT3. Ectopic expression of constitutively active STAT3 led to
increase of IKBKE mRNA and protein levels, whereas inhibition of STAT3
reduced IKBKE expression. Further, ex-pression levels of IKBKE are
significantly associated with STAT3 activation and tobacco use history in
NSCLC patients examined. In addition, we show induction IKBKE by two
components of cigarette smoke, nicotine and the NNK. Upon exposure of
nicotine or NNK, cells express high levels of IKBKE protein and mRNA,
which are largely abrogated by inhibition of STAT3. Characterization of
the IKBKE promoter revealed 2 STAT3 response elements that directly bind
to STAT3 and respond to nicotine and NNK stimulation. Notably, knockdown
of IKBKE not only selectively sensitizes NSCLC cells to chemotherapy but
also abrogates the protective effects of constitutively activate STAT3
and nicotine on gemcitabine and cisplatin-induced apoptosis. These data
indicate for first time that IKBKE is a direct target of the STAT3 and is
induced by tobacco carcinogen through STAT3 pathway. In addition, our
study also suggests that IKBKE is an important therapeutic target and
could play a pivotal role in tobacco-associated lung carcinogenesis.

