Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of TBK1 induces an epithelial-mesenchymal transition through
upregulation of Slug in the breast cancer cell lines


Estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) is a key regulator of proliferation
and differentiation in mammary epithelium through their well-documented
effects on transcription and represents a crucial prognostic indicator
and therapeutic target in breast cancer. Here, we show that loss of TBK1
in ER alpha positive breast cancer cells causes an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). We found that TBK1 is downregulated in ER alpha
negative breast tumors by analyzing published microarray data sets,
suggesting that TBK1 might regulate ER alpha expression. To investigate
this hypothesis, we made the ER alpha positive breast cancer cell lines
stably expressing TBK1-specific shRNA. Knockdown of TBK1 decreased
E-cadhrein expression (epithelial marker) and increased N-cadherin,
vimentin, fibronectin expression (mesenchymal marker). Additionally, loss
of TBK1 in ER alpha positive breast cancer cell lines leads to the
downregulation of ER alpha expression. Interestingly, ER alpha repression
by knockdown of TBK1 induced the upregulation of transcriptional
repressor Slug, a master regulator of EMT. Because ER alpha expression is
suppressed by loss of TBK1, it is suggested that TBK1 plays a role in the
inverse correlation between Slug and ER alpha. Our findings indicate that
loss of TBK1 expression is associated in between ER alpha expression
status and invasive growth of breast cancer.

