Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SIX1 protein expression selectively identifies blastemal elements
in Wilms tumor


Background. Wilms tumour (WT) is the most common renal neoplasm in
children. Histologically, most WTs consist of three tissue elements:
blastema, epithelium, and stroma. Some cases also show diffuse or focal
anaplastic features. Previous studies have shown that a predominance of
blastemal cells in post-chemotherapy WT specimens is associated with a
poor clinical course. However, there is currently no molecular marker for
blastemal cells, and risk stratification for post-nephrectomy treatment
is therefore often based on clinico-histological parameters alone.
Procedure. In the present study, three public gene expression microarray
datasets, including 82 WTs and 8 normal foetal kidneys, were used to
establish a consensus gene expression profile of WT. By bioinformatic
analyses, 17 genes overexpressed in WT compared to foetal kidney were
then selected for evaluation of their protein expression in WT cell lines
and in the different histological components in paraffin-embedded WT
tissue sections by immunofluorescence. Results. Most of the evaluated
proteins were expressed in all three common histological components. A
prominent exception was SIX1, being expressed predominantly in blastemal
elements in 24/25 paediatric cases containing blastema. Anaplastic
elements exhibited highly variable SIX1-positivity. The SIX2 protein,
known to be co-expressed with SIX1 during nephrogenesis, only exhibited
blastemal-predominant expression in half of the SIX2 evaluated cases.
Conclusions. Genes highly expressed in WT compared to foetal kidney are
generally overexpressed in all of the three common WT tissue elements. An
exception is the predominant expression of SIX1 in blastemal cells,
hereby identifying this protein as a candidate marker for blastema.

