Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sun exposure and prostate cancer risk in New South Wales,
Australia: A case control study


Background Ultraviolet-B radiation in sunlight may influence risk of
developing prostate cancer. Method We examined the relationship between
individual solar UV exposure and risk for prostate cancer in a case
control study combining the New South Wales (Australia) Prostate Cancer
Care and Outcome (cases) and Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (controls) studies.
Results There was evidence that increasing solar UV exposure increased
prostate cancer risk (adjusted OR for highest vs. lowest quartiles of
average weekly, warmer months sun exposure 2.07 95% CI: 1.36-3.16) and
that this increased risk was most evident with weekend sun exposure
(adjusted OR 5.54 95%CI: 2.94-10.43). Increased sun sensitivity was also
associated with increased risk of prostate cancer (adjusted OR 1.63 95%
CI: 1.09-2.44 for very high sun sensitivity). Conclusion Our results
suggest that increasing solar UV exposure increases prostate cancer risk
in a high ambient solar UV environment. Impact Given that previous
studies conducted mainly in low solar UV environments found either no
evidence of an association or evidence of a negative association; our
findings suggest the possibility of a U-shaped dose effect relationship
between exposure to solar UV and prostate cancer. Further studies are
needed to test the hypothesis that high solar UV exposure is a risk
factor for prostate cancer and to explore possible mechanisms for such an
association.

