Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Phase I interaction study of docetaxel with supplementation of St.
John's wort


Introduction St. John's wort (SJW, Hypericum perforatum) is a herbal
antidepressant, which is often used by cancer patients. In healthy
volunteers, SJW has previously been shown to induce hepatic CYP3A4 using
the selective CYP3A4 substrate midazolam (Wang et al., 2001). In cancer
patients, CYP3A4 induction by SJW could result in a decreased exposure to
anticancer drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 (e.g. docetaxel), possibly
resulting in a decreased therapeutic effect. Induction of docetaxel
metabolism by the SJW constituent hyperforin has already been established
in vitro (Komoroski et al., 2005). This pharmacokinetic interaction,
however, has never been studied before in a clinical setting. Therefore,
the aim of this study was to assess the effects of SJW on the
pharmacokinetics of docetaxel in cancer patients. Methods In a
one-sequence crossover study performed at the Netherlands Cancer
Institute and approved by the Institute's Medical Ethical Committee, ten
cancer patients received two cycles of docetaxel (135 mg, 60 min IV
infusion). Seven days after cycle 1 (docetaxel alone), a commercial SJW
extract in a recommended dose of one tablet (containing 300 mg SJW
extract) three times daily was supplemented for fourteen days. After this
supplementation period, cycle 2 of docetaxel was administered. During
cycle 1 and cycle 2, blood samples were collected from 0-48 h after the
start of the docetaxel infusion for pharmacokinetic analysis of
docetaxel. Docetaxel plasma concentrations were determined by a validated
LC-MS/MS assay (Kuppens et al., 2005). The pharmacokinetic endpoint for
docetaxel was the area under the plasma concentration-time curve from
time 0 to 48 h (AUC0-48), reflecting systemic exposure to docetaxel. By
comparing the AUC0-48 of docetaxel in cycle 1 and 2, the effect of SJW on
docetaxel pharmacokinetics was determined. Statistical analysis was
performed with a paired Student's t test ( = 0.05). Differences in
AUC0-48 between cycle 1 and 2 were considered clinically relevant if the
90% CI of the geometric mean ratio was not completely within no-effect
limits of 0.80-1.25. Results (preliminary) In eight evaluable patients,
supplementation of SJW decreased the mean docetaxel AUC0-48 from 2745 650
to 2364 483 ng/mL*h (p = 0.048, geometric mean ratio 0.86 (90% CI:
0.81-0.92)). Conclusion In this study, the observed decrease of docetaxel
AUC0-48 after SJW administration was statistically significant, possibly
even clinically relevant. This result indicates that concomitant use of
the present SJW formulation in the recommended dose may decrease the
therapeutic efficacy of docetaxel and presumably also other anticancer
drugs primarily metabolized by CYP3A4. Acknowledgements This study was
supported by the Dutch Cancer Society grant UU 2007-3795.

