Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effect of sorafenib in combination with cytostatic agents on
hepatoblastoma in vitro and in vivo


Background: Hepatoblastoma (HB) represents the most common malignant
liver tumour in childhood. For patients with high risk or recurrent HB
treatment results remain still poor due to a developing multidrug
resistance during chemotherapy. Therefore new therapy strategies have to
be evaluated. The primary objective was to investigate the combined
therapy of cytotoxic agents with sorafenib. Sorafenib has been shown to
reduce tumour progression and angiogenesis. In order to investigate a
treatment close to a clinical setting the effect of the combined
administration of cytotoxic agents with sorafenib on HB cell lines and
xenotransplanted HB tumours was determined. Methods: Cell viability of
two HB cell lines (HUH6 and HepT1) was evaluated in using MTT assays
after treatment with sorafenib and different cytostatic agents (cisplatin
(CDDP), doxorubicin, irinotecan, topotecan). ERK signalling was
investigated by Western blot analysis. NMRI mice (nu/nu) bearing
subcutaneous HUH6 derived tumours were treated with Sorafenib orally (30
mg/kg, on days 4-13 and 17-24) alone or in combination with CDDP i.p. (3
mg/kg, on days 1-3 and 14-16). Tumor progression and viability were
monitored by tumour volume and AFP levels. Apoptosis was assessed by
TUNEL assay. Angiogenesis was determined by CD31 staining and mean
vascular density (MVD) was calculated. Results: In vitro the combination
of sorafenib with CDDP showed a remarkable decrease in cell viability
compared to the other agents tested. However with increasing
concentrations of CDDP this additive effect disappeared. CDDP alone
showed an enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which is a common pathway
for apoptosis induction through NOXA. CDDP in combination with sorafenib
led to an overall reduced phosphorylation level of ERK1/2, which also
resulted in a low HB cell viability. Since CDDP and sorafenib have an
opposing effect on phosphorylation of ERK1/2, we avoid the concomitant
administration of both drugs in vivo. In HB xenografts both sorafenib
alone or in alternating combination with CDDP reduced tumour growth
compared to the control untreated group (p Background: Hepatoblastoma
(HB) represents the most common malignant liver tumour in childhood. For
patients with high risk or recurrent HB treatment results remain still
poor due to a developing multidrug resistance during chemotherapy.
Therefore new therapy strategies have to be evaluated. The primary
objective was to investigate the combined therapy of cytotoxic agents
with sorafenib. Sorafenib has been shown to reduce tumour progression and
angiogenesis. In order to investigate a treatment close to a clinical
setting the effect of the combined administration of cytotoxic agents
with sorafenib on HB cell lines and xenotransplanted HB tumours was
determined. Methods: Cell viability of two HB cell lines (HUH6 and HepT1)
was evaluated in using MTT assays after treatment with sorafenib and
different cytostatic agents (cisplatin (CDDP), doxorubicin, irinotecan,
topotecan). ERK signalling was investigated by Western blot analysis.
NMRI mice (nu/nu) bearing subcutaneous HUH6 derived tumours were treated
with Sorafenib orally (30 mg/kg, on days 4-13 and 17-24) alone or in
combination with CDDP i.p. (3 mg/kg, on days 1-3 and 14-16). Tumor
progression and viability were monitored by tumour volume and AFP levels.
Apoptosis was assessed by TUNEL assay. Angiogenesis was determined by
CD31 staining and mean vascular density (MVD) was calculated. Results: In
vitro the combination of sorafenib with CDDP showed a remarkable decrease
in cell viability compared to the other agents tested. However with
increasing concentrations of CDDP this additive effect disappeared. CDDP
alone showed an enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which is a common
pathway for apoptosis induction through NOXA. CDDP in combination with
sorafenib led to an overall reduced phosphorylation level of ERK1/2,
which also resulted in a low HB cell viability. Since CDDP and sorafenib
have an opposing effect on phosphorylation of ERK1/2, we avoid the
concomitant administration of both drugs in vivo. In HB xenografts both
sorafenib alone or in alternating combination with CDDP reduced tumour
growth compared to the control untreated group (p < 0.05). The
combination treatment showed a higher and earlier reduction of tumor
volume than sorafenib alone. In addition AFP levels did not significantly
change in the treatment groups. Apoptotic areas as determined by TUNEL
analysis increased significantly after administration of sorafenib or
sorafenib and CDDP (p Background: Hepatoblastoma (HB) represents the most
common malignant liver tumour in childhood. For patients with high risk
or recurrent HB treatment results remain still poor due to a developing
multidrug resistance during chemotherapy. Therefore new therapy
strategies have to be evaluated. The primary objective was to investigate
the combined therapy of cytotoxic agents with sorafenib. Sorafenib has
been shown to reduce tumour progression and angiogenesis. In order to
investigate a treatment close to a clinical setting the effect of the
combined administration of cytotoxic agents with sorafenib on HB cell
lines and xenotransplanted HB tumours was determined. Methods: Cell
viability of two HB cell lines (HUH6 and HepT1) was evaluated in using
MTT assays after treatment with sorafenib and different cytostatic agents
(cisplatin (CDDP), doxorubicin, irinotecan, topotecan). ERK signalling
was investigated by Western blot analysis. NMRI mice (nu/nu) bearing
subcutaneous HUH6 derived tumours were treated with Sorafenib orally (30
mg/kg, on days 4-13 and 17-24) alone or in combination with CDDP i.p. (3
mg/kg, on days 1-3 and 14-16). Tumor progression and viability were
monitored by tumour volume and AFP levels. Apoptosis was assessed by
TUNEL assay. Angiogenesis was determined by CD31 staining and mean
vascular density (MVD) was calculated. Results: In vitro the combination
of sorafenib with CDDP showed a remarkable decrease in cell viability
compared to the other agents tested. However with increasing
concentrations of CDDP this additive effect disappeared. CDDP alone
showed an enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which is a common pathway
for apoptosis induction through NOXA. CDDP in combination with sorafenib
led to an overall reduced phosphorylation level of ERK1/2, which also
resulted in a low HB cell viability. Since CDDP and sorafenib have an
opposing effect on phosphorylation of ERK1/2, we avoid the concomitant
administration of both drugs in vivo. In HB xenografts both sorafenib
alone or in alternating combination with CDDP reduced tumour growth
compared to the control untreated group (p < 0.05). The combination
treatment showed a higher and earlier reduction of tumor volume than
sorafenib alone. In addition AFP levels did not significantly change in
the treatment groups. Apoptotic areas as determined by TUNEL analysis
increased significantly after administration of sorafenib or sorafenib
and CDDP (p < 0.08). Furthermore CD31 staining showed a significant
inhibition of angiogenesis as revealed by determination of the MVD in
both treatment groups (p Background: Hepatoblastoma (HB) represents the
most common malignant liver tumour in childhood. For patients with high
risk or recurrent HB treatment results remain still poor due to a
developing multidrug resistance during chemotherapy. Therefore new
therapy strategies have to be evaluated. The primary objective was to
investigate the combined therapy of cytotoxic agents with sorafenib.
Sorafenib has been shown to reduce tumour progression and angiogenesis.
In order to investigate a treatment close to a clinical setting the
effect of the combined administration of cytotoxic agents with sorafenib
on HB cell lines and xenotransplanted HB tumours was determined. Methods:
Cell viability of two HB cell lines (HUH6 and HepT1) was evaluated in
using MTT assays after treatment with sorafenib and different cytostatic
agents (cisplatin (CDDP), doxorubicin, irinotecan, topotecan). ERK
signalling was investigated by Western blot analysis. NMRI mice (nu/nu)
bearing subcutaneous HUH6 derived tumours were treated with Sorafenib
orally (30 mg/kg, on days 4-13 and 17-24) alone or in combination with
CDDP i.p. (3 mg/kg, on days 1-3 and 14-16). Tumor progression and
viability were monitored by tumour volume and AFP levels. Apoptosis was
assessed by TUNEL assay. Angiogenesis was determined by CD31 staining and
mean vascular density (MVD) was calculated. Results: In vitro the
combination of sorafenib with CDDP showed a remarkable decrease in cell
viability compared to the other agents tested. However with increasing
concentrations of CDDP this additive effect disappeared. CDDP alone
showed an enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which is a common pathway
for apoptosis induction through NOXA. CDDP in combination with sorafenib
led to an overall reduced phosphorylation level of ERK1/2, which also
resulted in a low HB cell viability. Since CDDP and sorafenib have an
opposing effect on phosphorylation of ERK1/2, we avoid the concomitant
administration of both drugs in vivo. In HB xenografts both sorafenib
alone or in alternating combination with CDDP reduced tumour growth
compared to the control untreated group (p < 0.05). The combination
treatment showed a higher and earlier reduction of tumor volume than
sorafenib alone. In addition AFP levels did not significantly change in
the treatment groups. Apoptotic areas as determined by TUNEL analysis
increased significantly after administration of sorafenib or sorafenib
and CDDP (p < 0.08). Furthermore CD31 staining showed a significant
inhibition of angiogenesis as revealed by determination of the MVD in
both treatment groups (p < 0.02). Discussion: Taken together the
combination therapy of Sorafenib and CDDP led to an enhanced decrease in
cell viability as well as in tumour progression and angiogenesis than
sorafenib alone. Therefore a combined therapy might be a promising option
in the treatment of high risk or recurrent hepatoblastoma.

