Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cetuximab resistance is associated with increased dependence on
lipogenesis


Sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs) are key
transcriptional regulators of cellular lipid homeostasis. By regulating
the maturation of SREBPs through the PI3K/Akt and MEK/Erk signaling
pathways, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates de novo
lipogenesis, which is essential for the structural needs of proliferation
of cancer cells. The objective of current study is to determine the role
of inhibition of lipogenesis by cetuximab, an FDA-approved EGFR-blocking
antibody, in cetuximab-induced antiproliferative/antisurvival effects in
cancer cells and to identify new combinations of cetuximab with
approaches interfering with lipid metabolism for improved therapy. We
found that addition of cetuximab into culture medium inhibited the
activation of SREBP-1 (appearance of a nuclear form through cleavage of
SREBP-1 precursor) in HN5 head and neck cancer cells but not in a
cetuximab-resistant subline of HN5 cells (HN5R). Compared with parental
HN5 cells, HN5R cells exhibit remarkably increased sensitivity to
treatment with two pharmacological lipogenesis inhibitors, C75 (a fatty
acid synthase inhibitor) and TOFA (an acetyl-CoA carboxylase inhibitor),
suggesting that the cetuximab-resistant cells are more dependent on de
novo fatty acid synthesis for survival, and combination of cetuximab with
lipogenesis inhibitors may be a novel combination therapy. On the other
hand, the increased dependence of cancer cells on lipogenesis suggests
that cetuximab-resistant cells might also be sensitive to agents that
promote fatty acid -oxidation. We found treatment of HN5R cells with
fenofibrate, an agonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha that transcriptionally activates the genes for inducing fatty acid
-oxidation, disrupted the redox balance in the cetuximab-resistant cells,
leading to increased production of ROS and depolarization of the
mitochondrial membrane potential that resulted in apoptosis. In summary,
our data indicate that the antiproliferative/antisurvival effects of
cetuximab in cancer cells depend on effective inhibition of lipogenesis.
Pharmacological approaches that forcibly switch cancer cell metabolism
from aerobic glycolysis to fatty acid -oxidation may overcome cetuximab
resistance.

