Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An association study between AGTR2 and MAS1 gene polymorphisms
with breast cancer among Brazilian women


Background: Many different types of cancer (renal, lung, colorectal,
prostate, uterus, breast and pancreatic) have already been associated to
polymorphisms of the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) genes. Angiotensin II
(Ang II) is a vasoconstrictor, a mitogen and a angiogenic factor, whereas
the angiotensin-(1-7) [Ang-(1-7)] has vasodilator, antiproliferative and
anti-angiogenic properties. Classically, Ang II and Ang-(1-7) exert their
effects through the AGTR 1-2 and the MAS1 oncogene receptors
respectively. The MAS1 receptor expression is associated to lung cancer
and the hormone Ang-(1-7) inhibits proliferation in these neoplasias.
Moreover, some studies have correlated the MAS1 receptor gene expression
to breast cancer. To further test the hypothesis that Ang II and
Ang-(1-7) participate in breast carcinogenesis through AGTR2 and MAS1
oncogene receptors respectivelly, we assessed genetic polymorphisms in
the 5-region of the AGTR2 gene (T1247G and A5235G) and in the MAS1
oncogene (C647T) in two groups: breast cancer patients and normal women
and their possible associations to breast cancer among Brazilian women.
Methods: The genotyping assay was performed through the Custom TaqMan SNP
Genotyping assays, probes and primers Assay-by-Design were used for the
end-point collection qPCR human SNPs genotyping. Genomic DNA samples were
extracted from blood cells of patients with (case) or without breast
cancer (control), aged between 26 and 90 years. In the polymorphism
T1247G, 428 samples were processed: 263 cases and 165 controls; 429
samples for polymorphism A5235G: 257 cases and 172 controls and 429
samples in polymorphism C647T: 269 cases and 167 controls. Results: The
following distribution of genotypes (%)were obtained for the three
polymorphisms: T1247G - TT, TG, GG = 84, 13, 03 in case and 81, 18, 1 in
control (p = 0,0025); A5235G - AA, AG, GG = 21, 44, 35 in case and 20,
27, 35 in control (p = 0,36); C647T - CC, CT, TT = 64.0, 0.4, 35.6 in
case and 52.0, 0.6, 47.4 in control (p = 0,039). Therefore, T1247G and
C647T polymorphisms are associated with breast cancer. Conclusions: Our
results suggest an association between T1247G AGTR2 and C647T MAS1
oncogene polymorphisms with breast cancer in the Brazilian population.
Both polymorphisms are found in the promoter region of these genes,
making of these regions possible targets to change the binding of
transcription factors that will eventually transcribe these genes and
might result in a different cellular behavior when exposed to the same
agonist molecule. This being the case, the T1247G and C647T are possible
targets for assessing breast cancer risk, while the A5235G is not.

