Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High levels of hexadeca-4,7,10,13-tetraenoic acid (16:4(n-3)) in
fish oil induce resistance to chemotherapy in vivo


Environment-mediated resistance to chemotherapy is emerging as a cause of
treatment failure. We recently discovered that two fatty acids,
12-oxo-5,8,10-heptadecatrienoic acid (KHT) and
hexadeca-4,7,10,13-tetraenoic acid (16:4(n-3)), induced resistance to a
broad spectrum of chemotherapeutics in mice. These fatty acids were
produced by mesenchymal stem cells upon platinum stimulation, and were
therefore called platinum-induced fatty acids (PIFAs; Roodhart et al,
Cancer Cell 2011). Fish oil, a complex, non-standardized mixture of fatty
acids, was also shown to contain high levels of these PIFAs. Fish oil
supplements are commonly used by cancer patients due to their perceived
positive health effects. First, to determine the percentage of cancer
patients taking fish oil supplements, a questionnaire was handed out at
the UMC Utrecht medical oncology department. In an interim analysis, 12%
of responders (11/90) were found to use fish oil supplements, the
majority of whom continued supplementation during chemotherapy (82%).
Second, we analyzed 5 commercially available fish oils for 16:4(n-3)
content by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography coupled to Orbitrap
mass spectrometry. Even though 16:4(n-3) values differed, all tested fish
oils contained significant amounts of the resistance-inducing PIFA.
Concentrations ranged between 0.1 - 6.5 M 16:4(n-3). We previously
determined that as little as 25 nM purified 16:4(n-3) was sufficient to
induce chemoresistance in mice. Here, we show that fish oils abundant in
16:4(n-3) interfered with chemotherapy actions in BALB/c mice bearing
subcutaneous C26 tumors. Fish oil alone, administered by oral gavage, did
not alter tumor volume compared to untreated mice. However, a single oral
administration of each of three different fish oils together with
intraperitoneal cisplatin therapy induced potent chemoresistance (tumor
volume on day 4 after fish oil and chemotherapy was 222%, 223% and 246%
compared to tumor volume after cisplatin alone). These results were
confirmed in LLC-bearing C57Bl/6 mice. Finally, the fish oil containing
the highest 16:4(n-3) level (6.5 M) was tested for dose dependency by
oral administration of 100, 10, 1 and 0.1 l. As little as 1 l of this
fish oil was sufficient to induce resistance to cisplatin. On day 4,
tumor volumes were 11844 mm3 for vehicle-treated mice, 4116 mm3 for
cisplatin-treated and 9463 mm3 for mice treated with cisplatin + 1 l of
fish oil (p 0.02). Concluding, commercially available fish oils contained
variable levels of resistance-inducing PIFA 16:4(n-3). In clinically
relevant doses, fish oil induced resistance to chemotherapy in mice. This
implicates that fish oil use can interfere with chemotherapy outcome. 12%
of cancer patients use fish oil, urging the need for clinical studies to
determine the effects of fish oil intake on PIFA concentrations in human
plasma, and on response to chemotherapy.

