Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activities of yuanhuadine, a daphnane diterpene from
Daphne genkwa, via epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in
non-small cell lung cancer cells


The growth inhibition and antitumor activities of yuanhuadine (1), a
daphnane diterpenoid from the flowers of Daphne genkwa, were investigated
in human lung cancer cells. Compound 1 exhibited a relatively selective
growth inhibition against human lung cancer cells compared to other solid
human cancer cell lines. The potent antiproliferative activity by 1 was
associated with cell-cycle arrest and modulation of cell signaling
pathways. Cell-cycle arrest in the G0/G1 and G2/M phase was induced by 1
in A549 human non-small cell lung cancer cells, and these events were
correlated with the expression of checkpoint proteins including the
up-regulation of p21, and down-regulation of cyclins, cyclin-dependent
kinases 2 (CDK2) and 4 (CDK4), and c-Myc. Compound 1 also suppressed the
expression of the Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and its
downstream effector molecules including p70 S6 kinase (p70S6K) and
eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4EBP1). The
ligand-induced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and c-Met
signalings were also inhibited by 1. The oral administration of 1 (0.5
mg/kg body weight, daily) for 14 days inhibited tumor growth in athymic
xenograft nude mouse model bearing human lung A549 cells significantly,
without any overt toxicity. Synergistic antiproliferative effects of
compound 1 were also found in combination with the EGFR inhibitor
gefitinib. Cell-cycle arrest and suppression of Akt/mTOR and EGFR
signaling pathways might be plausible mechanisms of actions for the
antiproliferative and antitumor activity of 1 in human non-small cell
lung cancer cells

