Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P53-dependent thrombocytopenia induced by the histone deacetylase
inhibitor S78454


S78454 (also called PCI-24781) is an orally bioavailable,
hydroxamate-based pan-HDACi currently being tested in clinical trials in
the US and EU. Like many other HDACi, this drug induces a reversible
thrombocytopenia. This thrombocytopenia, which was associated with a
decrease in either GATA1 transcriptional activity or the expression of
proteins of the Rho GTPase family (RhoA, Cdc42 or Rac), remains poorly
understood. Given that the S78454 plasma level is above 100nM in treated
patients, we performed a dose-response analysis (from 10 to 100 nM) of
the drug effects on CFU-MK growth and cell proliferation. CFU-MKs were
generated by ex vivo culture of CD34-positive cells and their
differentiation was dose-dependently decreased after either a 24-hour
treatment or a continuous exposure to S78454. This effect was associated
with a dose-dependent decrease in MK proliferation. When added at day 8
of the culture, at a time-point when MK have nearly finished their
endomitotic process and are entering in the cytoplasmic maturation step,
S78454 induced a dose-dependent decrease (ten- to- two fold at 100nM and
20nM, respectively) in proplatelet formation, even when secondarily
removed from the culture medium. The decreased proliferation was
associated with an increased apoptosis, as demonstrated by the presence
of a sub-G1 peak after propidium iodide staining, Annexin V binding, and
caspase-3 proteolysis. We did not observed any blockade in the
TPO/MPL/JAK2 signaling since ERK, Stat3 and Stat5 phosphorylation
remained unaffected. Interestingly, MK exposed to S78454 displayed an
increase in H2AX foci formation and a decrease in Rad51 expression, a
major mediator of homologous recombination, indicating a defective repair
of DNA double-strand breaks. Consequently, P53 became phosphorylated in
MKs, and the expression of its target genes BAX and P21 was increased.
Altogether, these results suggest that S78454-induced thrombocytopenia
may be mediated by induction of apoptosis in MK due to DNA-double-strand
breaks and p53 activation.

