Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Her2/Neu has an essential role for the gamma-irradiation-induced
ERK1/2 signaling activation and G2/M checkpoint response


Gamma-irradiation (IR)-induced double strand DNA breaks frequently
results in G2/M cell cycle arrest, allowing time for DNA repair prior to
re-entering cell cycle. Previous studies from our laboratory have shown
that the G2/M checkpoint activation following exposure of MCF-7 breast
cancer cells to IR is dependent on the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) signaling. Studies
presented in this report indicate that IR exposure of several breast
cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, SKBR3 and T47D) is associated with
a marked increase in HER2/neu phosphorylation and that the inhibition of
HER2/neu using specific inhibitors abrogates the IR-induced activation of
both MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 in these cells. Furthermore, the HER2/neu
inhibition also results in attenuation of IR-induced G2/M arrest and
concomitant diminution of IR-induced activation of ATM, ATR, Chk1 and
Chk2 kinases. In contrast, inhibition of HER1/EGFR using specific
inhibitors has no detectable effect on IR-induced increase of ERK1/2
phosphorylation as well as the induction of G2/M arrest following IR
exposure. Collectively, results in this report suggest that HER2/neu
plays an essential role in the activation of IR-induced of MEK/ERK
signaling and subsequent G2/M checkpoint response.

