Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative proteomic analysis of tumor growth associated
proteins in cutaneous malignant melanoma


BACKGROUND: The identification of proteins responsible for tumor
development and regulation is of great value. In this study, we aimed to
identify novel functional proteins associated with tumor progression in
malignant melanoma. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The proteins extracted from
malignant melanoma and normal skin tissue were labeled with iTRAQ reagent
and performed a quantitative mass spectrometric analysis using nano
LC-MS/MS system. The detected protein expression and localization in
cutaneous malignant melanoma tissue was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. Human melanoma cell line (Mewo) was subcutaneously
injected into Rag2-/- mice and POSTN-/-Rag2-/-mice, thereafter implanted
tumor growth was compared. RESULTS: Among 1314 identified proteins, 118
proteins were increased more than 5.0-fold and 37 proteins were decreased
BACKGROUND: The identification of proteins responsible for tumor
development and regulation is of great value. In this study, we aimed to
identify novel functional proteins associated with tumor progression in
malignant melanoma. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The proteins extracted from
malignant melanoma and normal skin tissue were labeled with iTRAQ reagent
and performed a quantitative mass spectrometric analysis using nano
LC-MS/MS system. The detected protein expression and localization in
cutaneous malignant melanoma tissue was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. Human melanoma cell line (Mewo) was subcutaneously
injected into Rag2-/- mice and POSTN-/-Rag2-/-mice, thereafter implanted
tumor growth was compared. RESULTS: Among 1314 identified proteins, 118
proteins were increased more than 5.0-fold and 37 proteins were decreased
<0.5-fold in malignant melanoma compared to normal tissue. In these
proteins, we found significant upregulation of an extracellular matrix
protein, periostin (POSTN). POSTN expression was robustly induced in
fibroblast cultured with Mewo and evident on the stroma of advanced
melanoma tissue, suggesting the importance of interaction of these cells.
As an assessment of functional implication in POSTN in malignant
melanoma, we observed significant increase in melanoma cell number in the
treatment with recombinant POSTN. Moreover, tumor growth in
POSTN-/-Rag2-/- mice was significantly suppressed compared with that in
Rag2-/- mice.CONCLUSIONS: We newly identified upregulation of POSTN
expression in malignant melanoma tissue. POSTN was induced in the
co-culture of fibroblast with melanoma cell and showed the growth
promoting effect. These results indicate that periostin might be a
potential therapeutic target in malignant melanoma.

