Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P7170, a novel inhibitor of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)-mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) and activin receptor-like
kinase 1 (ALK1) as a new therapeutic option for Kras mutated non small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Major breakthroughs in targeted cancer treatment have been achieved in
last decade, but still some patient populations such as Kras mutated non
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), have no therapeutic options other than
cytotoxic therapies. Therefore, development of targeted therapeutics is
warranted in order to provide improved survival benefit for NSCLC
patients with Kras mutation. P7170 is a small molecule inhibitor of PI3K
(IC50 = 2.2 nM) and mTOR (IC50 = 4.4 nM). It also inhibits ALK1 and
DNA-PK, two important enzymes involved in angiogenesis and DNA repair
with IC50 of 47 and 1.5 nM, respectively. The structure, other in vitro,
and in vivo efficacy of P7170 has been reported in the accompanying
abstract submitted for AACR 2012. P7170 inhibited PI3K-mTOR pathway
proteins pAKT, pS6 and p4EBP1 by 90 to 100 % in Kras mutated NSCLC cell
line (H460) in a western blot assay. P7170 also exhibited potent
cytotoxicity activity against two Kras mutated NSCLC (H460 and A549) cell
lines with IC50 values of 7 and 5 nM. P7170 inhibited anchorage
independent colony formation of tumor cells isolated from 10 different
human tumor xenografts derived from NSCLC patient's tumors (Seven out of
10 samples had wild type Kras, and three had mutations in Kras).
Moreover, P7170 induced apoptosis in H460 cell lines by inducing PARP
cleavage. More interestingly, P7170 inhibited pAKT and pS6 in a dose
dependent fashion in stem-like cells isolated from tumor samples of a
Kras mutated NSCLC patient. P7170 demonstrated significant (pMajor
breakthroughs in targeted cancer treatment have been achieved in last
decade, but still some patient populations such as Kras mutated non small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC), have no therapeutic options other than
cytotoxic therapies. Therefore, development of targeted therapeutics is
warranted in order to provide improved survival benefit for NSCLC
patients with Kras mutation. P7170 is a small molecule inhibitor of PI3K
(IC50 = 2.2 nM) and mTOR (IC50 = 4.4 nM). It also inhibits ALK1 and
DNA-PK, two important enzymes involved in angiogenesis and DNA repair
with IC50 of 47 and 1.5 nM, respectively. The structure, other in vitro,
and in vivo efficacy of P7170 has been reported in the accompanying
abstract submitted for AACR 2012. P7170 inhibited PI3K-mTOR pathway
proteins pAKT, pS6 and p4EBP1 by 90 to 100 % in Kras mutated NSCLC cell
line (H460) in a western blot assay. P7170 also exhibited potent
cytotoxicity activity against two Kras mutated NSCLC (H460 and A549) cell
lines with IC50 values of 7 and 5 nM. P7170 inhibited anchorage
independent colony formation of tumor cells isolated from 10 different
human tumor xenografts derived from NSCLC patient's tumors (Seven out of
10 samples had wild type Kras, and three had mutations in Kras).
Moreover, P7170 induced apoptosis in H460 cell lines by inducing PARP
cleavage. More interestingly, P7170 inhibited pAKT and pS6 in a dose
dependent fashion in stem-like cells isolated from tumor samples of a
Kras mutated NSCLC patient. P7170 demonstrated significant (p<0.01) in
vivo efficacy following oral administration, in NSCLC xenograft studies
using Kras mutated H460 cancer cell line. P7170 treatment resulted in 66%
tumor growth inhibition at a dose of 5 mg/kg, and stabilization of tumor
growth (89% tumor growth inhibition) at a dose of 20 mg/kg. Evaluation of
mechanism of action of P7170 in H460 xenografted tumors confirmed the
inhibition of PI3K-mTOR (pAKT and p4EBP) and Ras-Raf (pERK) pathways. In
addition, inhibition of ALK1 and DNA-PK activity with the treatment of
P7170 was also confirmed in xenografts. Conclusion: P7170 by virtue of
its unique profile represents an opportunity to deliver a first-in-class
therapeutic option for patients saddled with Kras mutated non small cell
lung cancer.

