Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of SHP2 in HER2+ breast cancer


Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and the second most common
cause of cancer related death in women. HER2+ over-expressing (HER2+)
tumors comprise 20% to 25% of all cases and are associated with a poor
prognosis. The discovery of HER2 monoclonal antibody-based therapeutics
has greatly improved patient prognosis. However, patients suffer relapse
and de novo resistance. Thus it is important to determine additional
therapeutic targets in HER2+ breast cancer that might be used in
combination with current therapies to improve patient survival. SHP2
(PTPN11) is a non-receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) that
contains two SH2 domains at its N-terminus, a central PTP domain and a
C-terminal proline-rich tail. Previous studies suggest that Shp2 is
required for Ras/Erk signaling downstream of most growth factor receptors
and integrins. Heterozygous germ-line PTPN11 mutations cause Noonan
Syndrome and LEOPARD syndrome, which are associated with leukemia and
cancer predisposition. Somatic PTPN11 mutations cause juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) and several other neoplasms. We have
discovered that Shp2 is required in Neu-mediated tumorigenesis in the
MMTV-NIC mouse model; furthermore, SHP2-depleted human HER2+ BT-474 has
defective tumorigenesis in nude mice. SHP2 is required in
anchorage-independent growth in 4 HER2+ breast cancer cell lines, though
its effect on growth on plastics appears minimal. I hypothesize that SHP2
is required for HER2+ breast tumor initiation and maintenance. I further
hypothesize that SHP2 functions through specific substrates/interacting
proteins in HER2+ breast cancer cells, possibly molecules that are
involved in anchorage-independent proliferation.

