Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Close association between subsided inflammation and the
development of histologically less malignant HCC in HCV-associated LC


Aim: We recently demonstrated that severe inflammation in the background
cirrhotic tissue correlate with the development of histologically more
malignant hepatocellular carcinoma (Edmondson III HCC) in HCV-associated
liver cirrhosis (LC), and that histology activity index (HAI) was the
only one significant contributor to the development of Edmondson III (Ed
III) HCC in small nodular HCC. There is a possibility, in the contrary of
this phenomenon, that subsided inflammation correlates with the
development of histologically less malignant HCC (Ed I type HCC) and that
long-term subsided inflammation correlates with the development of large
Ed I HCC. We examined the possibility. Methods: Curative hepatic
resection for HCC with LC was performed in 264 patients during the past
10 years in Kanagawa Cancer Center hospital. Of 264 patients 197 patients
were anti-HCV-positive or HCV-RNA positive. Out of the 197 patients, 32
patients whose HCC revealed only one small HCC nodule ( 3 cm) were
selected for this study. Furthermore, the cases whose HCC nodules were
large (> 3 cm), but consisted of predominantly Ed I component, were also
examined. For the evaluation of inflammation in the background LC,
modified Knodell's histology activity index (HAI) was used. (for the
evaluation of pure inflammation, items of fibrosis was omitted); piece
meal necrosis (1-4), intra lobular cellular degeneration and focal
necrosis (1-4), portal cellular inflammation (1-4), were estimated by two
well experienced pathologist. In each case, the HAI score was estimated
in five field and average HAI score was calculated. All the sections of
resected HCC tissue was examined pathologically in all patients for
determining the grade of malignancy according to Edmondson Steiner's
classification; Ed I (well differentiated), Ed II (moderately diff.), Ed
III (poorly diff.). Results: The average HAI score in 7 Ed I HCC patients
was as low as 3.61 0.70 (mean SD), and was significantly lower than that
in 17 Ed III HCC patients (5.21 1.15, P Aim: We recently demonstrated
that severe inflammation in the background cirrhotic tissue correlate
with the development of histologically more malignant hepatocellular
carcinoma (Edmondson III HCC) in HCV-associated liver cirrhosis (LC), and
that histology activity index (HAI) was the only one significant
contributor to the development of Edmondson III (Ed III) HCC in small
nodular HCC. There is a possibility, in the contrary of this phenomenon,
that subsided inflammation correlates with the development of
histologically less malignant HCC (Ed I type HCC) and that long-term
subsided inflammation correlates with the development of large Ed I HCC.
We examined the possibility. Methods: Curative hepatic resection for HCC
with LC was performed in 264 patients during the past 10 years in
Kanagawa Cancer Center hospital. Of 264 patients 197 patients were
anti-HCV-positive or HCV-RNA positive. Out of the 197 patients, 32
patients whose HCC revealed only one small HCC nodule ( 3 cm) were
selected for this study. Furthermore, the cases whose HCC nodules were
large (> 3 cm), but consisted of predominantly Ed I component, were also
examined. For the evaluation of inflammation in the background LC,
modified Knodell's histology activity index (HAI) was used. (for the
evaluation of pure inflammation, items of fibrosis was omitted); piece
meal necrosis (1-4), intra lobular cellular degeneration and focal
necrosis (1-4), portal cellular inflammation (1-4), were estimated by two
well experienced pathologist. In each case, the HAI score was estimated
in five field and average HAI score was calculated. All the sections of
resected HCC tissue was examined pathologically in all patients for
determining the grade of malignancy according to Edmondson Steiner's
classification; Ed I (well differentiated), Ed II (moderately diff.), Ed
III (poorly diff.). Results: The average HAI score in 7 Ed I HCC patients
was as low as 3.61 0.70 (mean SD), and was significantly lower than that
in 17 Ed III HCC patients (5.21 1.15, P <0.001). Furthermore, the average
HAI in the 5 cases whose HCC nodules were more than 3 cm and whose major
component of HCC nodules were Ed I, was also as low as 3.55 0.74.
Conclusions: It is suggested that subsiding inflammation in the
background non-cancerous cirrhotic portion might correlate with the
development of histologically less malignant HCC.

