Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of targeted imaging agents for Cholecystokinin 2
receptor expressing cancers


The use of conventional chemotherapeutics is limited by their
indiscriminate accumulation in both cancer and healthy cells.
Ligand-targeted therapies that can deliver cytotoxic agents selectively
to malignant cells, avoiding uptake by healthy cells, constitute
attractive alternatives to non targeted therapies. Indeed,
folate-targeted therapies have shown great promise for treatment of
ovarian and lung cancers.1 The Cholecystokinin 2 Receptor (Gastrin /
CCK2R) is reported to be ectopically expressed or over expressed in a
variety of cancers, including medullary thyroid and hepatocellular
carcinomas, and gastric, colorectal, pancreatic and small cell lung
cancers2-6. In order to selectively target these pathologic cells, we
elected to use a small molecule antagonist that has a sub-nanomolar
affinity to the CCCK2R and excellent selectivity over CCK1R7 as a
targeting ligand. A ligation site on the antagonist that could be
chemically modified without altering its binding affinity to the
receptor, was then identified and several linkers attached. The optimal
linker, a peptidoglycan spacer found to improve the conjugate's water
solubility, was then attached to a Technetium99m chelating moiety. The
radio imaging conjugate (CW1809-99mTc) was found to bind CCK2R expressing
cells (HEK-293 CCK2R cell line) with nanomolar affinity (KD =30 nM).
Binding was quantitatively inhibited by competition with 100 fold excess
of the unlabeled conjugate. We evaluated the specificity of the
CW1809-99mTc in vivo by intravenous injection into athymic nu/nu mice
bearing CCK2R tumors. Imaging and biodistribution studies revealed that
CW1809-99mTc localizes primarily to HEK-293 CCK2R tumor cell xenografts
in nu/nu mice (14.25% Injected dose/gram of tissue at 2hrs post
injection; tumor: muscle ratio of 35:1). Similar specificity was observed
with a targeted Near Infra red dye conjugated to this antagonist.
Blockade of tumor targeting upon administration of excess unlabelled
conjugate and the absence of targeting to CCK2R-negative tumors confirmed
the specificity of each of the above targeted reagents for CCK2R. The
data from these studies are designed to lead to new targeted therapeutic
and companion diagnostic agents for radio imaging, fluorescence-guided
surgery and treatment of CCK2R expressing cancers. This tandem use of an
imaging and therapeutic agent targeted to the same receptor could allow
for detection, staging, monitoring and treatment of CCK2R cancers with
improved accuracy and efficacy. References 1. Curr. Opin. Invest. Drugs
2010, 11, 1423-33 2.J. Cell Mol. Med. 2010, 14, 4, 933-943 3. Cancer Res.
1997, 57, 1377-1387 4. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 2006, 132, 85-91 5.
Eur. J. of Clin. Investig. 2001, 31, 812-820 6. J. of Surg. Res. 2005,
129, 313-321 7. Reg. Peptides 2008, 146, 46-57

