Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting autotaxin to reduce chemotherapy resistance in ovarian
cancer


Development of resistance to chemotherapy presents the biggest challenge
in the treatment of ovarian cancer. Autotaxin (ATX) is a secreted enzyme
that catalyzes lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) production and is responsible
for the up-regulation of LPA in ovarian cancer. The ATX-LPA axis has been
identified to be one of the mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance in
ovarian cancer. Thus, inhibition of autotaxin may be a potential strategy
to increase the chemotherapy efficacy in this disease context. At
Southern Research, we previously identified a known anti-parasitic small
molecule, Bithionol as a potent antiangiogenic agent, which inhibits
endothelial cell proliferation, migration and tubular morphogenesis in
vitro and directly inhibits autotaxin enzyme activity. Our recent results
have shown that Bithionol not only directly inhibits the enzyme activity;
it also reduces autotaxin secretion from human endothelial and ovarian
cancer cells. Recently, using a human ovarian cancer xenograft mouse
model, Biothionol was shown to have in vivo anti-tumor activity as a
single drug treatment. In addition, in combination therapy studies in
mice, Bithionol significantly increased the efficacy of Paclitaxel and
Cisplatin against ovarian tumor growth. These results suggest that
Bithionol may provide a promising approach for reducing chemotherapy
associated resistance in ovarian cancer. Additional preclinical studies
are in progress to assess the potential clinical utility of Bithionol in
combination with current ovarian cancer therapy. (This work is supported
by a pilot grant from Norma Livingston Foundation and SRI SIP fund).

