Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Microvessel proliferation by co-expression of endothelial nestin
and Ki-67 is associated with a basal-like phenotype and aggressive
features in breast cancer


Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing ones,
is essential in tumour growth and metastasis. Microvessel density (MVD)
is the most widely used method for quantification of tumour angiogenesis.
We here present a novel angiogenesis marker, microvessel proliferation
(MVP) based on a dual immunohistochemical stain of nestin and Ki-67.
Nestin is an intermediate filament protein expressed in a variety of
undifferentiated cells, including newly synthesized endothelial cells
(1-3), and used in this study to stain the vasculature. Proliferating
cells were recognized by their Ki-67 positivity, and immature
microvessels were recognized by their nestin positivity combined with
their morphology. Proliferating microvessels contains endothelial cells
co-expressing nestin and Ki-67. Microvessel proliferation was estimated
by vascular proliferation index (VPI), the ratio of vessels containing
immature proliferating endothelial cells, and the total number of
immature vessels. VPI was evaluated in 178 breast cancer tissue sections.
High VPI showed significant association to several markers of aggressive
breast cancer, including negative estrogen receptor (ER) status
(p=0.003), high tumour cell proliferation by Ki-67 (p=0.004), high p53
expression (p=0.001), five immunohistochemical profiles for the
basal-like phenotype (odds ratios (OR); range 2.8-6.3), and the triple
negative phenotype (TNP)(p=0.040). Concerning the mode of detection, high
VPI was three times more likely to be presented in an interval detected
breast cancer compared with a screening detected (OR: 3.0, pAngiogenesis,
the formation of new blood vessels from pre-existing ones, is essential
in tumour growth and metastasis. Microvessel density (MVD) is the most
widely used method for quantification of tumour angiogenesis. We here
present a novel angiogenesis marker, microvessel proliferation (MVP)
based on a dual immunohistochemical stain of nestin and Ki-67. Nestin is
an intermediate filament protein expressed in a variety of
undifferentiated cells, including newly synthesized endothelial cells
(1-3), and used in this study to stain the vasculature. Proliferating
cells were recognized by their Ki-67 positivity, and immature
microvessels were recognized by their nestin positivity combined with
their morphology. Proliferating microvessels contains endothelial cells
co-expressing nestin and Ki-67. Microvessel proliferation was estimated
by vascular proliferation index (VPI), the ratio of vessels containing
immature proliferating endothelial cells, and the total number of
immature vessels. VPI was evaluated in 178 breast cancer tissue sections.
High VPI showed significant association to several markers of aggressive
breast cancer, including negative estrogen receptor (ER) status
(p=0.003), high tumour cell proliferation by Ki-67 (p=0.004), high p53
expression (p=0.001), five immunohistochemical profiles for the
basal-like phenotype (odds ratios (OR); range 2.8-6.3), and the triple
negative phenotype (TNP)(p=0.040). Concerning the mode of detection, high
VPI was three times more likely to be presented in an interval detected
breast cancer compared with a screening detected (OR: 3.0, p<0.0005).
Both in univariate and multivariate analysis, high VPI was significantly
associated with poor survival (p=0.034 and p=0.022, respectively). In
conclusion, activated angiogenesis, estimated by microvessel
proliferation, is associated with several markers of aggressive breast
cancer phenotype, basal-like breast cancer, interval detection, and a
significant predictor of prognosis in this series of breast cancer. 1.
Lendahl U, Zimmerman LB, McKay RD. CNS stem cells express a new class of
intermediate filament protein. Cell. 1990 Feb 23;60(4):585-95. 2. Mokry
J, Cizkova D, Filip S, Ehrmann J, Osterreicher J, Kolar Z, et al. Nestin
expression by newly formed human blood vessels. Stem Cells Dev. 2004
Dec;13(6):658-64. 3. Mokry J, Ehrmann J, Karbanova J, Cizkova D, Soukup
T, Suchanek J, et al. Expression of intermediate filament nestin in blood
vessels of neural and non-neural tissues. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove).
2008;51(3):173-9.

