Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: p53 dimers associate with a head-to-head element to repress cyclin
B transcription


DNA damage activates cell cycle checkpoints to promote cell cycle arrest.
p53 is a major player in checkpoints by activating expression of the cdk
inhibitor p21 and repressing expression of cyclin B. DNA damage-induced S
and G2 arrest following treatment with the topoisomerase I inhibitor SN38
is abrogated in p53-defective cells by treatment with the Chk1 inhibitor
7-hydroxystaurosporine (UCN-01). Previously, we compared p53 wildtype
MCF10A cells with derivatives whose p53 function is inhibited by
overexpression of the tetramerization domain (MCF10A/OD) or
overexpression of shRNA against p53 (MCF10A/p53) (Levesque et al,
Oncogene 24, 3786, 2005). Treatment of MCF10A/OD with SN38 followed by
UCN-01 results in abrogation of S, but not G2, arrest, while the
MCF10A/p53 abrogated both S and G2 arrest. The S abrogation correlated
with reduced p21, consistent with the requirement of p53 tetramerization
for activation of p21 expression. Failure of G2 abrogation correlated
with reduced cyclin B, suggesting that tetramerization of p53 is not
required for repression of cyclin B expression. In the present study, we
confirmed that the p53-dependent repression of cyclin B in response to
DNA damage occurs at the transcriptional level by analyzing cyclin B mRNA
levels. Treatment of MCF10A and MCF10A/OD with SN38 resulted in reduction
of cyclin B mRNA levels whereas treatment of MCF10A/p53 with SN38 did
not. This reflects the change in protein levels following SN38 treatment.
We next analyzed p53 oligomerization using glutaraldehyde crosslinking.
Following SN38 treatment, MCF10A contained oligomeric forms of p53 with
molecular weights approximating monomers, dimers, trimers, and tetramers.
MCF10A/OD, however, possessed monomers and dimers, but lacked trimers and
tetramers. These results suggest that p53 monomers or dimers are involved
in repression of cyclin B. One model to explain the p53-mediated
repression of cyclin B in MCF10A/OD is that p53 dimers, rather than
tetramers, bind to a p53 response element in the cyclin B promoter. While
genes transcriptionally activated by p53 contain a consensus sequence
with elements repeated in a head-to-tail orientation, the cyclin B
promoter contains similar elements oriented head-to-head. We performed
both chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) to determine whether p53 binds to this
head-to-head element. ChIP assays revealed that p53 associates with this
element in MCF10A and MCF10A/OD but not in MCF10A/p53. We performed EMSA
using a biotin-labeled probe containing the head-to-head element and
observed shifts in mobility consistent with the molecular weight of
tetramers and dimers using MCF10A nuclear extract (NE), but observed only
the dimeric shift with MCF10A/OD NE, and no shift with MCF10A/p53 NE.
Taken together, these results suggest p53 dimers associate with the
head-to-head element to repress cyclin B transcription.

