Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer risk assessment model (PCRAM): a scoring model
based on the Swedish Family-Cancer Database


Background: Many prostate cancer (PC) risk assessment models have been
developed, however almost none include familial history. We aimed to
produce a risk assessment model for PC based on familial background of
related cancers. Method: 976,859 independent index men aged >=30 in year
1998 and their family members in the Swedish Family-Cancer Database (FCD
2010) were randomly divided into the development (60%) and the validation
(40%) datasets (follow-up=10 years). The hazard ratio from Cox model for
personal and family history was used to extrapolate risk scores. Results:
Specified scores were for PC in situ at ageBackground: Many prostate
cancer (PC) risk assessment models have been developed, however almost
none include familial history. We aimed to produce a risk assessment
model for PC based on familial background of related cancers. Method:
976,859 independent index men aged >=30 in year 1998 and their family
members in the Swedish Family-Cancer Database (FCD 2010) were randomly
divided into the development (60%) and the validation (40%) datasets
(follow-up=10 years). The hazard ratio from Cox model for personal and
family history was used to extrapolate risk scores. Results: Specified
scores were for PC in situ at age<60 years in index man, 5; PC at age=60
in each FDR, 10; PC at age=60 in each FDR, 10; PC at age<60 in each
second-degree relative, 5; breast cancer in each FDR, 2; oesophageal
carcinoma in situ in index man, 2; and oesophagus cancer in each FDR, 2.
The curve for score-group 26+ showed a sharp increasing slope from age
60-65 onward. The score-group 21-25 showed 15-40 times higher risk than
the general population at age 38-45; ratio decreased to four-folds by age
60, and stayed about 3.5-times thereafter. The score-group 16-20 showed
10-fold increased risk at age=60 in each FDR, 10; PC at age<60 in each
second-degree relative, 5; breast cancer in each FDR, 2; oesophageal
carcinoma in situ in index man, 2; and oesophagus cancer in each FDR, 2.
The curve for score-group 26+ showed a sharp increasing slope from age
60-65 onward. The score-group 21-25 showed 15-40 times higher risk than
the general population at age 38-45; ratio decreased to four-folds by age
60, and stayed about 3.5-times thereafter. The score-group 16-20 showed
10-fold increased risk at age<=41; risk ratio 4-6 at age 42-54; and
2.5-3.5-fold thereafter. The curves for score 0-5 and population risk
almost overlapped. Based on our findings, if the milestone age for a
prostate cancer screening program was 60 years or more, the recommended
starting age for the men with the score-group 6-10 would be 54 years;
score-group 11-15, 52 years; score-group 16-20, 50 years; score-group
21-25, 44 years; and for the score-group 26+ it should start before age
40. The concordance index in both the development and the validation sets
was 0.885 (95% CI=0.883-0.888). No significant difference was found
between curves from the development and the validation datasets
(internally-validated using two-fold validation and bootstrapping).
Conclusion: Familial history of relevant malignancies can be used as risk
factors to estimate a man's prior risk of developing prostate cancer.
PCRAM could satisfactorily assess risk of developing prostate cancer.

