Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intracellular dissociation of polymer coating from nanoparticles


Polymer-coated nanoparticles are widely used for drug delivery in cancer
therapy. However, it is not known whether the polymer coating will be
disrupted in the lipid bilayer or intracellular space. Our current work
suggests that the polymer coating of inorganic nanoparticles is disrupted
after internalization by cancer cells. Single dispersed red quantum dots
(QDs) labeled with 5-FAM (green) (D = 28 nm) were incubated with cancer
cells (PC-3) and imaged via fluorescence microscopy. Initially the
5-FAM-labeled polymer coating was attached to the QDs and its green
fluorescence was quenched when the nanoparticles were internalized from 2
to 4 hrs, but 5-FAM-labeled polymer became separated from the QDs once
they are inside lysosome of cells and its fluorescence suddenly visible
from 8 hrs. The fluorescence ratio (5-FAM/QDs) were increased by 29-fold
after 8 h incubation compared to 2 h. The fluorescence quenching effect
was compared to free PEG-5-FAM mixed with QDs, which only exhibited a 44%
decrease in 5-FAM quenching. In addition, the intracellular dissociation
of polymer coating from QD loaded micelles (D = 300 nm) was also
observed. Furthermore, when labeled amphiphilic polymeric micelles
encapsulate hydrophobic iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) with the
hydrophobic dye BODIPY-TMR (red), double quenching was observed by
encapsulated nanoparticles and the hydrophobic region inside the micelles
by 8-fold fluorescence reduction. The BODIPY-TMR-labeled nanoparticles
also showed polymer dissociation inside of cancer cells after 24 h
incubation. These results suggest that polymer coating is stable in the
lipid bilayer and it is dissociated from nanoparticles in the lysosome of
cancer cells. These data will provide guidance for intracellular drug
delivery using polymer coated nanoparticles.

