Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Analysis of a new chemopreventative agent SHetA2 and its
metabolites in Beagle dog liver and plasma


Flexible heteroarotinoid SHetA2
{[(4-nitrophenyl)amino][2,2,4,4-tetramethylthiochroman-6-yl)amino]
methanethione]} is a new candidate anticancer compound which is effective
against a number of different types of tumors. We conducted preclinical
safety and toxicity testing of SHetA2 in Beagle dogs with emphasis on
determination of SHetA2 and its metabolites (especially GSH-conjugates)
in liver. SHetA2 (in 30% aqueous Solutol HS 15 to improve
bioavailability) was administered orally to male and female Beagle dogs
for 29 consecutive days. The dose levels of SHetA2 were 0 (control group
1), 100 (group 2), 400 (group 3), and 1500 (group 4) mg/kg/day. The liver
and plasma samples were collected on day 29 at 2 hours after drug
administration. SHetA2 and its metabolites levels were measured by high
performance liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS)
on Micromass Quattro micro API triple quadrupole mass-spectrometer.
Metabolites formation was also confirmed by high-resolution accurate mass
analysis on Waters SYNAPT time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer. The
following known metabolites of SHetA2 were quantified in liver (using the
parent compound calibration curve): monohydroxy SHetA2 [SHetA2(O1)],
dihydroxy SHetA2 [SHetA2(O2)], and GSH-conjugates of SHetA2 [SHetA2-GSH],
monohydroxy SHetA2 [SHetA2(O1)-GSH], and dihydroxy SHetA2
[SHetA2(O2)-GSH]. Trihydroxy SHetA2 and its GSH-conjugate were below
quantification level or not detected. The GSH-metabolites were of
particular interest since conjugation with GSH may serve as a potential
indicator of a compound toxicity. However, despite the relatively high
levels of SHetA2-GSH-conjugate in dog liver, no drug-related mortality or
clinical signs of toxicity were seen in any dose groups. We also found
significant levels of several previously unknown metabolites -
glucuronide conjugates of SHetA2, SHetA2(O1), and SHetA2(O2). These
glucuronides were not reported in mouse and rat liver, in contrast to our
dog study. The exact position of glucuronidation was not determined. It
may represent a common N- or a rare case of S-glucuronidation for SHetA2,
and, in addition, O-glucuronidation for oxidation products of SHetA2. The
most abundant metabolites in liver were: glucuronide of SHetA2,
SHetA2(O1) and its glucuronide, and GSH-conjugate of SHetA2 whose levels
were at 29-80%, 16-31%, 14-39%, and 9-20%, respectively, of SHetA2 levels
(2,600-14,000 ng/g; based on average values). Dihydroxy SHetA2 showed two
major peaks: SHetA2(O2)a (mixture of SHetA2(O2) and its glucuronide
conjugate) and SHetA2(O2)b (identity was not confirmed; requires
additional experiments for its structure elucidation). In plasma,
SHetA2(O1) was a major metabolite - 52-86 % of SHetA2 level (600-1,600
ng/mL). Glucuronide of SHetA2 was only at 7-13% of the parent compound.
All GSH-conjugates were below quantification level or not detected in
plasma.

