Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Unravelling the complexity of individual cancer genomes


Ovarian cancer affects 204,000 women each year, and it is one of the
leading causes of cancer-related death among women world-wide, as most
patients present with advanced stage (III/IV) tumours, and only 40%
survive 5 years after diagnosis. Improvement in the clinical management
of ovarian patients is likely to derive from a better understanding of
the molecular aberrations which initiate and maintain tumour growth as
well as from the discovery of novel drug-able targets for the development
of personalised targeted therapies. In this study, we comprehensively
characterised the cancer genome of a patient diagnosed with grade III
serous ovarian carcinoma, using a combination of massive-parallel
sequencing technologies, including long distance DNA Paired-End-Tag
(DNA-PET) sequencing, RNA-sequencing and exome-capture sequencing. This
approach ensures deep coverage (from 50-180X) of critical mutational
elements in a cancer genome. By comparing the genomic abnormalities
identified in the tumour sample with those found in its normal
counterpart (peripheral blood lymphocytes), we were able to compile a
catalogue of all of the somatic events which occurred during oncogenesis
and to define the overall complexity of this specific cancer genome.
Interestingly, chromosomal arm loss appeared to be the predominant
feature of this tumour, with more than 30% of the haploid genome being
affected by a decrease in copy number. This associated with a prevalence
of inter-chromosomal rearrangements, suggesting chromosomal
translocations as a preferred consequence of genomic instability. Here we
describe some examples of somatic translocation events causing the loss
of tumour suppressor genes. Using this genotype as a possible model of
ovarian carcinoma evolution, we aim to explain a subset of ovarian
cancers displaying a similar chromosomal profile by applying an analysis
of copy number variations, and to define common mechanisms of cancer gene
loss.

