Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nanoparticles delivery of a novel AKT/PDK1 inhibitor inhibits
pancreatic cancer tumor growth


AKT (protein kinase B), a pleckstrin homology (PH) lipid binding domain
and a serine/threonine kinase containing protein is a key component of
the phophatidylinositol-3-kinase (PtdIns3-K) cell survival signaling
pathway which is activated in pancreatic cancers. In this study, we
describe the effects of a novel inhibitor of AKT/PDK1 (PH-427) that binds
to the PH domain of AKT (Ki = 2.67 0.37 M) and PDK1 (Ki = 5.20 0.45 M)
[1] thus preventing its binding to PtIns-(3,4,5)P3 at the plasma membrane
and subsequent activation of both kinases. PH-427 inhibits AKT/PDK1
activities at low micromolar concentrations in BxPC-3 (wt-KRAS) and not
in MiaPaCa2 (mt-KRAS) human pancreatic cancer cell lines. Accordingly, we
have shown that in vivo, PH-427 is poorly efficient in MiaPaCa2
xenografts as compared to BxPC-3 xenografts. In order to increase the
potency and delivery of PH-427 to the tumor, we have encapsulated the
compound (>10% of the compound) into (poly-d, l-lactide-co-glycolide)
(PLGA) nanoparticles (PNP). We demonstrate that PH-427 incorporates well
in the nanoparticles (PH-427-PNP) (AKT (protein kinase B), a pleckstrin
homology (PH) lipid binding domain and a serine/threonine kinase
containing protein is a key component of the phophatidylinositol-3-kinase
(PtdIns3-K) cell survival signaling pathway which is activated in
pancreatic cancers. In this study, we describe the effects of a novel
inhibitor of AKT/PDK1 (PH-427) that binds to the PH domain of AKT (Ki =
2.67 0.37 M) and PDK1 (Ki = 5.20 0.45 M) [1] thus preventing its binding
to PtIns-(3,4,5)P3 at the plasma membrane and subsequent activation of
both kinases. PH-427 inhibits AKT/PDK1 activities at low micromolar
concentrations in BxPC-3 (wt-KRAS) and not in MiaPaCa2 (mt-KRAS) human
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Accordingly, we have shown that in vivo,
PH-427 is poorly efficient in MiaPaCa2 xenografts as compared to BxPC-3
xenografts. In order to increase the potency and delivery of PH-427 to
the tumor, we have encapsulated the compound (>10% of the compound) into
(poly-d, l-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) nanoparticles (PNP). We
demonstrate that PH-427 incorporates well in the nanoparticles
(PH-427-PNP) (<200 nm in size) and is slowly released from the polymer
with a 90% released over a period of 30 days. We show that PH-427-PNP
were very efficient in reducing MiaPaCa-2-Luc orthotopic pancreatic tumor
growth as evaluated by luminescence using an AMI-1000 scanner.
MiaPaCa2-Luc pancreas tumor volume was significantly reduced in animals
treated with PH-427-PNP as compared to animal treated with PH-427 alone
or the PNP alone (41.429.9 versus 2051387 and 63145 mm3). In conclusion,
PH-427 alone did not alter tumor growth in MiaPaCa-2-Luc but was able to
reduce tumor growth significantly when encapsulated in PNP. Finally and
interestingly, metastasis to the liver and other organs was also
significantly inhibited by PH-427-PNP as compared to PNP or PH-427 alone.
[1]. Meuillet EJ, Ihle N, Lemos R, Moses SA, Song Z, Zhang S, Mash EA,
Powis G (2010). Mol Cancer Ther 9(3):706-717.

