Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mammary adipocyte-specific metabolic alterations are associated
with paracrine effects on mammary tumorigenesis


In rodent models of breast cancer, chronic social stress from isolated
housing is associated with increased mammary tumor growth. Interestingly,
in several diverse mouse strains, social isolation is also associated
with increased expression of the key metabolic genes Acaca, Hk2 and Acly
in the adipocyte fraction of the mammary gland. We hypothesized that
these gene expression changes would be associated with increased mammary
fat glucose metabolism, lipid synthesis, and secretion of paracrine
growth promoting adipokines. We found that increased metabolic gene
expression in mammary fat did indeed increase both lipid metabolism and
leptin secretion from the mammary adipocytes of isolated mice.
Surprisingly, visceral fat metabolism and systemic metabolic parameters
were unchanged in social isolates, suggesting an effect of social stress
that is specific to the mammary fat depot. When mouse mammary cancer
cells were treated with culture media derived from the incubation of
isolated versus group-housed mouse mammary adipose tissue, the mammary
fat secretome of social isolates resulted in significantly increased
cancer cell proliferation compared to mammary fat from grouped mice.
Current experiments are designed to elucidate the metabolic factors
promoting tumor cell proliferation in the mammary fat derived from the
stressed animals. We propose a model wherein social isolation and the
ensuing heightened neuroendocrine response significantly alters mammary
adipocyte metabolism and associated adipokine secretion, thereby
potentiating estrogen-independent mammary tumor growth. These studies
have implications for understanding the environmental, endocrine, and
molecular risk factors associated with estrogen receptor-negative breast
cancer. DOD W81XWH-11-1-014901, NIH/NIDDK T32 DK087703, NIH R01CA148814

