Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma miRNAs as potential predictive/prognostic biomarker for
ovarian cancer


Background: Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in
women worldwide. While the survival rates of women with early stage
ovarian cancer are high, most cases are diagnosed late. Due to
asymptomatic development and few screening options, almost 70% of women
present at late stages of carcinogenesis. Sensitive, non-invasive
biomarkers that can facilitate disease detection, staging and prediction
of therapeutic outcome are highly desirable to improve survival rate and
help to determine optimized treatment for ovarian cancer. The small
non-coding RNAs, microRNAs (miRNAs), have recently been identified as
critical regulators for various diseases including cancer and may
represent a novel class of cancer biomarkers. The purpose of this study
was to identify and validate circulating microRNAs in human plasma for
use as such biomarkers in ovarian cancer. Methods/ Principle findings: We
scan the circulating plasma miRNAs by Taqman Low Density Array, then
identify and validated 30 markers in plasma samples among 70 cases and 70
controls by real-time PCR assay. Promising associations were evaluated in
a second stage, comprising 150 cases and 150 controls. We found that
compared with normal, there are 9 miRNAs (miR-205, miR-200a, miR-184,
miR-34a*, miR-141, miR-483-5p, miR-193b*, let-7e*, miR-363*) expressed
higher in ovarian cancer group, while the miR-98 and let-7f have the
lower levels in ovarian cancer. Compared with early stage cases (stage
I), there is only miR-483-5p expressed higher in advanced stages (stage
II-IV). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to
evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of candidate plasma microRNA
markers. We observed that combination of these identified miRNAs and
CA-125, a widely used marker for ovarian cancer, further improved the
accuracy of detection. Furthermore, our analysis showed that high levels
of plasma miR-483-5p or low levels of let-7f predicted poor prognosis of
ovarian cancer patients, consistent with the expression of miRNAs in
ovarian cancer tissues. Conclusions/Significance: We propose that plasma
miRNAs (miR-205, miR-200a, miR-184, miR-34a*, miR-141, miR-483-5p,
miR-193b*, let-7e*, miR-363*) are potential biomarkers that complements
CA-125 in detecting ovarian cancer; miR-483-5p and let-7f may predict the
prognosis of ovarian cancer. It may provide new avenues for the
detection, diagnosis, and therapy of this deadly disease.

