Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo targeting of CD44+ ovarian cancer stem cells (CSC) by
Clostridium Perfringens Enterotoxin binding domain (CPE-peptide)
conjugated to poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles (NP)


Recent evidence strongly supports the hypothesis that the capability to
sustain tumor formation, growth and resistance to chemotherapy in ovarian
cancer exclusively resides in a small proportion of tumor cells termed
cancer stem cells (CSC) overexpressing the CD44 marker. If this
hypothesis is correct, development of novel, more specific approaches to
target and eradicate the CD44+ ovarian CSC population remains a high
priority. Our group has recently reported high expression of claudin-4
tight junction protein in CD44+ ovarian CSC. Because this protein is the
natural high affinity receptor for Clostridium Perfringens Enterotoxin
(CPE), we have evaluated the in vitro targeting potential of fluorescent
(i.e. Coumarin 6 loaded) poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
nanoparticles (NP) conjugated with the C-terminus binding domain of CPE
(CPE-peptide) against ovarian CSC and the in vivo biodistribution of
these NP after intravenous (IV) injection in SCID mice harboring
intraperitoneal CD44+ ovarian CSC tumor. Using flow cytometry, we report
a higher time and dose-dependent in vitro uptake of fluorescent PLGA NP
conjugated to CPE peptide (CPE-peptide NP) in CD44+ ovarian CSC when
compared to unconjugated NP (i.e., control NP,
Mean-Fluorescence-Intensity = MFI of 37.1 and 15.0 respectively;
p=0.037). Of interest, confocal microcopy images clearly show
internalization of CPE-peptide NP within tumor cells after NP exposure.
More importantly, when SCID mice harboring claudin-4 overexpressing CD44+
ovarian CSC tumors were injected via the tail vein (IV) with 25 g/g of
CPE-peptide NP or the same concentration of unconjugated NP, a 4 fold
increase in fluorescence was detected in tumors excised from mice
injected with CPE-peptide NP compared to controls 48 hours after NP
administration (mean STDV 33159.6 2707 and 6655.8 1391 respectively;
pRecent evidence strongly supports the hypothesis that the capability to
sustain tumor formation, growth and resistance to chemotherapy in ovarian
cancer exclusively resides in a small proportion of tumor cells termed
cancer stem cells (CSC) overexpressing the CD44 marker. If this
hypothesis is correct, development of novel, more specific approaches to
target and eradicate the CD44+ ovarian CSC population remains a high
priority. Our group has recently reported high expression of claudin-4
tight junction protein in CD44+ ovarian CSC. Because this protein is the
natural high affinity receptor for Clostridium Perfringens Enterotoxin
(CPE), we have evaluated the in vitro targeting potential of fluorescent
(i.e. Coumarin 6 loaded) poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)
nanoparticles (NP) conjugated with the C-terminus binding domain of CPE
(CPE-peptide) against ovarian CSC and the in vivo biodistribution of
these NP after intravenous (IV) injection in SCID mice harboring
intraperitoneal CD44+ ovarian CSC tumor. Using flow cytometry, we report
a higher time and dose-dependent in vitro uptake of fluorescent PLGA NP
conjugated to CPE peptide (CPE-peptide NP) in CD44+ ovarian CSC when
compared to unconjugated NP (i.e., control NP,
Mean-Fluorescence-Intensity = MFI of 37.1 and 15.0 respectively;
p=0.037). Of interest, confocal microcopy images clearly show
internalization of CPE-peptide NP within tumor cells after NP exposure.
More importantly, when SCID mice harboring claudin-4 overexpressing CD44+
ovarian CSC tumors were injected via the tail vein (IV) with 25 g/g of
CPE-peptide NP or the same concentration of unconjugated NP, a 4 fold
increase in fluorescence was detected in tumors excised from mice
injected with CPE-peptide NP compared to controls 48 hours after NP
administration (mean STDV 33159.6 2707 and 6655.8 1391 respectively;
p<0.01). Finally, non specific NP uptake in healthy organs calculated as
the ratio between organs and tumor fluorescence was found to be
significantly lower after injection of CPE-peptide NP than the
unconjugated control NP. Taken together these results suggest that the
CPE-peptide, when conjugated to NP, may confer high specificity in
targeting claudin-4 overexpressing CD44+ ovarian CSC tumors in vivo.
CPE-peptide NP may represent an unconventional, potentially highly
effective strategy to specifically target chemotherapy-resistant CD44+
ovarian CSC for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes.

