Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Knockdown of CD24 prevents colorectal polyp formation in
APCmin/CD24 double knockout transgenic mice


Background: Previous studies in our lab have shown that CD24 is a
potential oncogene in the colon. CD24, a mucin-like glycoprotein, is
overexpressed in 90% of colorectal cancer (CRC) tumors at a fairly early
stage in the multistep process of CR carcinogenesis (Sagiv et al.,
Gastroenterology, 2006). We have also shown that CD24 downregulation by
shRNA interference (Sagiv et al., Can Res, 2008) or anti-CD24 mAb
targeting (Shapira et al., Gastroenterology, 2011) retarded
tumorigenicity of human CRC cell lines and/or reduced tumor volume in
nude mice. The APCmin/+ is a popular animal model for studies of human
colon carcinogenesis and the molecular changes associated with neoplasia
in this system have been partially characterized. These mice have a
germline nonsense mutation at codon 850 of the APC gene and spontaneously
develop hundreds of polyps, mostly in the small intestine at the age of
10-12 weeks. Aim: To validate the importance of CD24 in intestinal
carcinogenesis using a transgenic mouse model with a double knockout (KO)
of CD24/+ /CD24+/ and APCMin/+ alleles. Methods: We generated the
CD24/+/APCMin/+ double KO by crossing the mice with each of the single
gene knockouts, in order to obtain both CD24+//APCMin/+ and CD24/+
APCMin/+ genotypes. The double KO mice were followed up thrice a week and
sacrificed at 12 weeks of age. Tumors from the entire small and large
intestine were counted and verified by histological analysis Results:
There was almost a complete absence of polyps in the small intestine in
APCMin/+/CD24+/ double heterozygotes compared to that of the parental
APCMin/+, CD24+/+ animals: 27355.4 vs. 61.7 polyps, respectively
(P=0.0001). APCMin/+and CD24/+ homozygotes showed a striking lack of
polyps (PBackground: Previous studies in our lab have shown that CD24 is
a potential oncogene in the colon. CD24, a mucin-like glycoprotein, is
overexpressed in 90% of colorectal cancer (CRC) tumors at a fairly early
stage in the multistep process of CR carcinogenesis (Sagiv et al.,
Gastroenterology, 2006). We have also shown that CD24 downregulation by
shRNA interference (Sagiv et al., Can Res, 2008) or anti-CD24 mAb
targeting (Shapira et al., Gastroenterology, 2011) retarded
tumorigenicity of human CRC cell lines and/or reduced tumor volume in
nude mice. The APCmin/+ is a popular animal model for studies of human
colon carcinogenesis and the molecular changes associated with neoplasia
in this system have been partially characterized. These mice have a
germline nonsense mutation at codon 850 of the APC gene and spontaneously
develop hundreds of polyps, mostly in the small intestine at the age of
10-12 weeks. Aim: To validate the importance of CD24 in intestinal
carcinogenesis using a transgenic mouse model with a double knockout (KO)
of CD24/+ /CD24+/ and APCMin/+ alleles. Methods: We generated the
CD24/+/APCMin/+ double KO by crossing the mice with each of the single
gene knockouts, in order to obtain both CD24+//APCMin/+ and CD24/+
APCMin/+ genotypes. The double KO mice were followed up thrice a week and
sacrificed at 12 weeks of age. Tumors from the entire small and large
intestine were counted and verified by histological analysis Results:
There was almost a complete absence of polyps in the small intestine in
APCMin/+/CD24+/ double heterozygotes compared to that of the parental
APCMin/+, CD24+/+ animals: 27355.4 vs. 61.7 polyps, respectively
(P=0.0001). APCMin/+and CD24/+ homozygotes showed a striking lack of
polyps (P< 0.0001). This reduction occurred in all sections of the small
intestine. Histophatological analysis confirmed the absence of malignant
lesions in the double KO mice as compared to the parental mice.
Conclusions: 1. A deficiency of only one CD24 allele is sufficient to
suppress almost completely polyp formation in the APCMin/+ mice that
normally develop hundreds of polyps. 2. Although the mechanism/s
underlying the pathophysiologic role of CD24 in the development of CRC
are still unknown, these studies suggest that CD24 plays a critical role
in the proliferation and progression of CRC and is a potential important
target for the prevention and treatment of intestinal neoplasia.

