Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Hedgehog pathway is a novel therapeutic target in tamoxifen
resistant breast cancer that protects from autophagic cell death and is
aberrantly activated by PI3K/AKT signaling


Aims: Approximately 30-40% of patients with estrogen receptor positive
(ER+) invasive breast cancer relapse despite targeted endocrine therapy
with tamoxifen (TAM). Alternative cell survival mechanisms aberrantly
activated over time supports tumor growth, upon blockade of estrogen
dependent pathways by TAM. We have earlier identified Hedgehog (Hhg)
signaling pathway as an alternative survival pathway activated in TAM
resistant ER+ tumors (SABC Abst# 851859, 2011; S-9, 2010). We sought to
determine if activation of Hhg pathway is critical for survival of the
resistant cells, the mechanism underlying activation of this pathway, and
determine if targeting such tumors with Hhg inhibitor would improve
outcomes. Methods: SMO and GLI1 were depleted from TAM-resistant MCF7
(OHTR) and T47D cells using siRNA. These cells were tested in presence
and absence of TAM for i) viability by MTT assay, ii) clonogenic
survival, iii) apoptosis and autophagy by Western Blotting of respective
markers. Pathway specific inhibitors were used to determine cross talk
between Hhg pathway and different signaling pathways. Effect of GDC-0449,
a small molecule inhibitor of SMO was tested on OHTR cell induced
xenografts in athymic nude mice by monitoring tumor growth. Correlation
of GLI1 expression in primary breast tumor tissues (assessed by IHC) and
disease-free survival (DFS) was studied in women with ER+ breast cancer
(N=230). Results: A. Depletion of SMO or GLI1 resulted in reduced cell
proliferation, clonogenic survival and increased autophagy in
TAM-resistant cells. We observed loss of p53 in SMO and GLI1 depleted
cells as well as in Myc depleted cells. Expression of Myc, a Hhg target
is reduced in SMO/GLI1 depleted cells, resulting in loss of p53. B. PI3K
inhibitor Ly294002, inhibited GLI1 driven promoter activity, with
simultaneous loss of SMO and GLI1 protein. Treatment with LiCl (GSK3B
inhibitor) and/or MG132 (proteasome inhibitor) rescued these proteins
from degradation. C. Proliferation of OHTR cells was significantly
inhibited with GDC-0449 alone or TAM both in vitro and in vivo. D.
Further, primary human ER+ breast tumors with high expression of GLI1
were associated with poor DFS in node-positive patients (pAims:
Approximately 30-40% of patients with estrogen receptor positive (ER+)
invasive breast cancer relapse despite targeted endocrine therapy with
tamoxifen (TAM). Alternative cell survival mechanisms aberrantly
activated over time supports tumor growth, upon blockade of estrogen
dependent pathways by TAM. We have earlier identified Hedgehog (Hhg)
signaling pathway as an alternative survival pathway activated in TAM
resistant ER+ tumors (SABC Abst# 851859, 2011; S-9, 2010). We sought to
determine if activation of Hhg pathway is critical for survival of the
resistant cells, the mechanism underlying activation of this pathway, and
determine if targeting such tumors with Hhg inhibitor would improve
outcomes. Methods: SMO and GLI1 were depleted from TAM-resistant MCF7
(OHTR) and T47D cells using siRNA. These cells were tested in presence
and absence of TAM for i) viability by MTT assay, ii) clonogenic
survival, iii) apoptosis and autophagy by Western Blotting of respective
markers. Pathway specific inhibitors were used to determine cross talk
between Hhg pathway and different signaling pathways. Effect of GDC-0449,
a small molecule inhibitor of SMO was tested on OHTR cell induced
xenografts in athymic nude mice by monitoring tumor growth. Correlation
of GLI1 expression in primary breast tumor tissues (assessed by IHC) and
disease-free survival (DFS) was studied in women with ER+ breast cancer
(N=230). Results: A. Depletion of SMO or GLI1 resulted in reduced cell
proliferation, clonogenic survival and increased autophagy in
TAM-resistant cells. We observed loss of p53 in SMO and GLI1 depleted
cells as well as in Myc depleted cells. Expression of Myc, a Hhg target
is reduced in SMO/GLI1 depleted cells, resulting in loss of p53. B. PI3K
inhibitor Ly294002, inhibited GLI1 driven promoter activity, with
simultaneous loss of SMO and GLI1 protein. Treatment with LiCl (GSK3B
inhibitor) and/or MG132 (proteasome inhibitor) rescued these proteins
from degradation. C. Proliferation of OHTR cells was significantly
inhibited with GDC-0449 alone or TAM both in vitro and in vivo. D.
Further, primary human ER+ breast tumors with high expression of GLI1
were associated with poor DFS in node-positive patients (p<0.01).
Conclusions: Our work has demonstrated for the first time that activated
Hhg signaling is an alternate survival mechanism for TAM resistant breast
cancer. A cross talk between Hhg pathway, MYC and p53 protects
TAM-resistant cells from autophagy related cell death. PI3K/AKT signaling
pathway plays a key role in activating this pathway in TAM-resistant
cells. Furthermore, targeting these tumors with anti-Hhg therapy
inhibited tumor growth and could be combined with PI3K inhibitor for
additional benefit. Clinical trials using this combination in patients
with advanced ER+ breast cancer are warranted and are under development.

