Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide molecular profiles of undifferentiated pleomorphic
sarcoma and leiomyosarcomas


Malignant soft-tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of mesenchymal
cancers accounting for 1% of all malignant tumors in adult. These tumors
are classified according their differentiation status. Undifferentiated
high-grade spindle/pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) presents a clinically
aggressive behavior with frequent development of distant metastases and
recurrence after surgery. The genome profile of 20 UPS and 17
leiomyossarcomas (LMS) was evaluated by array CGH and correlated with the
clinical course and histopathological findings. Array CGH was done using
the Human 44K Agilent oligoarrays according to manufacturer's
instructions. Data were extracted using the Feature Extraction software,
version 10.7, and analyzed by Nexus Software v 6.0 (BioDiscovery), with a
FASST2 (Fast Adaptive States Segmentation Technique 2) algorithm. DNA
copy number alterations were compared with a reference dataset of healthy
Brazilian individuals and with Database of Genomic Variants. DNA from UPS
presented 1406 CNAs and from LMS showed 625 CNAs. However, the genomic
profile revealed striking similarities between both tumors that were
indistinguishable by unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis. In UPS
samples, genomic gains were mainly found on chromosomes 1 and 7 (79 and
65 events, respectively), while recurrent losses encompassing chromosomes
1 and 12 (49 and 43 events, respectively). Recurrent gains on chromosomes
5 and 17 (28 and 30 events, respectively) and losses on chromosomes 2 and
10 (29 and 28 events, respectively) were frequently found in LMS. Gains
on 2q11.1-q11.2 (P=0.031) and losses on 21p11.1 (P=0.001) were
significantly detected in patients with UPS alive with the disease and
alive without the disease, respectively. In LMS, gains in 1q and 11q
(P=0.02 and P=0.043), as well as losses in 17q25 (P=0.05) were associated
with tumor recurrence. Non-supervised hierarchical clustering revealed
three groups. Cluster 2 was characterized by retroperitoneal tumors
(P=0.04) and cluster 3 included both, LMS and UPS, from extremities
(P=0.032). None exclusive alteration was verified for cluster 1. In
addition, losses on 3p12.1-p11.2 found in UPS and gains on 1q21.3 and
11q13.2-q13.3 in LMS were associated significantly with reduced patient
survival (PMalignant soft-tissue sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of
mesenchymal cancers accounting for 1% of all malignant tumors in adult.
These tumors are classified according their differentiation status.
Undifferentiated high-grade spindle/pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) presents a
clinically aggressive behavior with frequent development of distant
metastases and recurrence after surgery. The genome profile of 20 UPS and
17 leiomyossarcomas (LMS) was evaluated by array CGH and correlated with
the clinical course and histopathological findings. Array CGH was done
using the Human 44K Agilent oligoarrays according to manufacturer's
instructions. Data were extracted using the Feature Extraction software,
version 10.7, and analyzed by Nexus Software v 6.0 (BioDiscovery), with a
FASST2 (Fast Adaptive States Segmentation Technique 2) algorithm. DNA
copy number alterations were compared with a reference dataset of healthy
Brazilian individuals and with Database of Genomic Variants. DNA from UPS
presented 1406 CNAs and from LMS showed 625 CNAs. However, the genomic
profile revealed striking similarities between both tumors that were
indistinguishable by unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis. In UPS
samples, genomic gains were mainly found on chromosomes 1 and 7 (79 and
65 events, respectively), while recurrent losses encompassing chromosomes
1 and 12 (49 and 43 events, respectively). Recurrent gains on chromosomes
5 and 17 (28 and 30 events, respectively) and losses on chromosomes 2 and
10 (29 and 28 events, respectively) were frequently found in LMS. Gains
on 2q11.1-q11.2 (P=0.031) and losses on 21p11.1 (P=0.001) were
significantly detected in patients with UPS alive with the disease and
alive without the disease, respectively. In LMS, gains in 1q and 11q
(P=0.02 and P=0.043), as well as losses in 17q25 (P=0.05) were associated
with tumor recurrence. Non-supervised hierarchical clustering revealed
three groups. Cluster 2 was characterized by retroperitoneal tumors
(P=0.04) and cluster 3 included both, LMS and UPS, from extremities
(P=0.032). None exclusive alteration was verified for cluster 1. In
addition, losses on 3p12.1-p11.2 found in UPS and gains on 1q21.3 and
11q13.2-q13.3 in LMS were associated significantly with reduced patient
survival (P<0.05). These data suggest a very complex interplay between
UPS and LMS, providing new hints about the pathobiology of these tumors.

