Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In-vivo imaging of lung cancer using tumor homing peptide coated
nanoparticles


Purpose: Lung cancer is one of the leading cause of death (1.3 million
deaths annually) worldwide and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
accounts for 85 % of all lung cancers. Vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) over-expression (61% to 92% of NSCLC) is associated with poor
survival. Recently, new approaches in the treatment of lung cancer with
novel drugs that selectively inhibit tumor blood supply thus controlling
cancer cell survival, proliferation and/or metastasis in combination with
conventional anticancer or antiangiogenic drugs have generated clinical
interest, e.g. DIM-C-pPhC6H5 (DIM-P); a c-substituted diindolylmethanes
which is novel anti-cancer agent. Objective of this study are: 1) to
formulate tumor homing pegylated CREKA peptide coated nanoparticle of
DIM-P (PCNCs-D)/ D-luciferin (PCNCs-DL)/ XenolightDiR (PCNCs-Di), 2)
In-vivo imaging of tumor progression / tumor vasculature and tracking of
PCNCs-Di. Methods: Nanoparticles were prepared with DIM-P (NCs-D)/
D-luciferin (NCs-DL)/XenolightDiR(NCs-Di), Compritol, Miglyol,
DOGS-NTA-Ni and sodium taurocholate using high pressure homogenizer
(Nano-DeBEE). PCNCs-D and PCNCs-DL/PCNCs-Di were prepared by conjugating
NCs-D and NCs-DL/ NCs-Di with 6His-PEG2K-CREKA peptide and characterized
for physical properties, clot binding assay and tube formation assay.
Pharmacokinetic parameters of formulations were evaluated in BALB/c mice.
In-vivo imaging of tumor and tracking of nanoparticles was carried out
with IVIS Spectrum CT (Caliper life Sciences) by using fluorescent dye
(Xenolight DIR) and bioluminescence (luciferin) following intravenous and
inhalation delivery of nanoparticles. Results: Particle size of PCNCs-D
was 190-210 nm. The PCNCs-D formulation showed an initial burst release
followed by a slow release up to 72 hr (90%) of DIM-P. PCNCs-D showed
(pPurpose: Lung cancer is one of the leading cause of death (1.3 million
deaths annually) worldwide and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
accounts for 85 % of all lung cancers. Vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) over-expression (61% to 92% of NSCLC) is associated with poor
survival. Recently, new approaches in the treatment of lung cancer with
novel drugs that selectively inhibit tumor blood supply thus controlling
cancer cell survival, proliferation and/or metastasis in combination with
conventional anticancer or antiangiogenic drugs have generated clinical
interest, e.g. DIM-C-pPhC6H5 (DIM-P); a c-substituted diindolylmethanes
which is novel anti-cancer agent. Objective of this study are: 1) to
formulate tumor homing pegylated CREKA peptide coated nanoparticle of
DIM-P (PCNCs-D)/ D-luciferin (PCNCs-DL)/ XenolightDiR (PCNCs-Di), 2)
In-vivo imaging of tumor progression / tumor vasculature and tracking of
PCNCs-Di. Methods: Nanoparticles were prepared with DIM-P (NCs-D)/
D-luciferin (NCs-DL)/XenolightDiR(NCs-Di), Compritol, Miglyol,
DOGS-NTA-Ni and sodium taurocholate using high pressure homogenizer
(Nano-DeBEE). PCNCs-D and PCNCs-DL/PCNCs-Di were prepared by conjugating
NCs-D and NCs-DL/ NCs-Di with 6His-PEG2K-CREKA peptide and characterized
for physical properties, clot binding assay and tube formation assay.
Pharmacokinetic parameters of formulations were evaluated in BALB/c mice.
In-vivo imaging of tumor and tracking of nanoparticles was carried out
with IVIS Spectrum CT (Caliper life Sciences) by using fluorescent dye
(Xenolight DIR) and bioluminescence (luciferin) following intravenous and
inhalation delivery of nanoparticles. Results: Particle size of PCNCs-D
was 190-210 nm. The PCNCs-D formulation showed an initial burst release
followed by a slow release up to 72 hr (90%) of DIM-P. PCNCs-D showed
(p<0.001) 3 fold higher binding to the clotted plasma proteins compared
to NCs-D. PCNCs-D decreased average branching point by 68 5 percent
compared to 39 4 percent by DIM-P alone in a tube formation assay
suggesting anti-angiogenic activity. Pharmacokinetic parameters showed
that PCNCs-D increased plasma half life of DIM-P from 0.83 0.26 hr to
2.34 0.39 hr. In-vivo imaging following exposure of PCNCs-DL/PCNCs-Di
demonstrated their targeting to the tumor vasculature, where the PCNCs-Di
were found to migrate more in newly formed blood vessels and total
radiant efficiency [p/s] / [W/cm*2] was 2.1*1012 0.5*1012 over the period
of 0.5 hr to 3hr. NCs-Di didn't show any specific migration to tumor
vasculature confirming the specific targeting of PCNCs-Di and total
radiant efficiency [p/s] / [W/cm*2] was 0.6*1012 0.18*1012. Conclusion:
The results emanating from these studies demonstrate an anti-angiogenic
potential of DIM-P and the role of PCNCs-D as an effective tumor homing
drug delivery systems for lung cancer treatment.

