Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intake of fiber and fiber-rich plant foods associated with lower
risk of renal cell carcinoma in a large U.S. cohort


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for nearly all adult kidney
malignancies. The age-adjusted incidence of RCC has more than doubled
over the last three decades in the U.S., mirroring the growing epidemic
of obesity, which along with smoking comprise the most well-established
RCC risk factors. Plant-based and fiber-rich diets high in vegetables,
fruits, and whole grains are recommended for the prevention of cancer, as
well as chronic conditions positively associated with RCC incidence, such
as hypertension and diabetes. Thus, diet may play a role in RCC etiology
directly and/or indirectly. In a large prospective cohort of U.S. men and
women, we comprehensively investigated dietary intake of a range of plant
foods and their nutritional components in relation to RCC risk. We
further examined whether associations varied by history of hypertension
or diabetes, body mass index, smoking status, or alcohol intake. At
baseline (1995-1996), 492,186 participants of the National Institutes of
Health-AARP Diet and Health Study completed a self-administered
questionnaire of demographics, diet, lifestyle, and medical history. Over
9 (mean) years of follow-up we identified 1,814 incident cases of RCC.
Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated
within quintiles (Q) using multivariable Cox proportional hazards
regression. Intake of legumes, whole grains, and cruciferous vegetables
were associated with a statistically significant 16-18% reduced risk of
RCC. Conversely, refined grain intake was positively associated with RCC
risk [Q5 vs. Q1, HR and 95% CI: 1.19 (1.02-1.39); P-trend =0.04] and we
found no association with fruit intake. These findings were consistent
with the strong inverse association we observed for total dietary fiber
intake [Q5 vs. Q1, HR and 95% CI: 0.81 (0.69-0.95); Ptrend =0.005], as
well as fiber derived from various dietary sources. The association
between fiber intake and RCC did not vary substantially by smoking status
[Q5 vs. Q1, HR and 95% CI: 0.65 (0.49-0.87) and 0.50 (0.25-1.02) in never
vs. current smokers, respectively], history of hypertension [0.73
(0.52-1.02) and 0.75(0.57-1.00) in negative vs. positive history,
respectively], or other major risk factors. In conclusion, intake of
fiber and fiber-rich plant foods was associated with a significantly
lower risk of renal cell carcinoma in this large U.S. cohort.

