Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Down-regulation of miR-181b contributes to the poor prognosis of
adverse cytogenetically abnormal acute myeloid leukemia by targeting PBX3


Altered expression of microRNAs (miRNAs, a class of small regulatory
RNAs) is associated with various types of cancers, including acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). In our previous bead-based miRNA expression
profiling assay, we observed that miR-181a, b, c, and d were all
expressed at a higher level in the favorable prognosis subtypes of
cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML) carrying t(8;21), inv(16), or
t(15;17) than in an intermediate- to poor-risk subtype of CA-AML
harboring MLL rearrangements. Indeed, we found that increased expression
of miR-181a or miR-181b was significantly (PAltered expression of
microRNAs (miRNAs, a class of small regulatory RNAs) is associated with
various types of cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In our
previous bead-based miRNA expression profiling assay, we observed that
miR-181a, b, c, and d were all expressed at a higher level in the
favorable prognosis subtypes of cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML)
carrying t(8;21), inv(16), or t(15;17) than in an intermediate- to
poor-risk subtype of CA-AML harboring MLL rearrangements. Indeed, we
found that increased expression of miR-181a or miR-181b was significantly
(P<0.05) associated with longer OS in univariable testing, whereas only
that of miR-181b remained significant (PAltered expression of microRNAs
(miRNAs, a class of small regulatory RNAs) is associated with various
types of cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In our previous
bead-based miRNA expression profiling assay, we observed that miR-181a,
b, c, and d were all expressed at a higher level in the favorable
prognosis subtypes of cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML) carrying
t(8;21), inv(16), or t(15;17) than in an intermediate- to poor-risk
subtype of CA-AML harboring MLL rearrangements. Indeed, we found that
increased expression of miR-181a or miR-181b was significantly (P<0.05)
associated with longer OS in univariable testing, whereas only that of
miR-181b remained significant (P<0.05) upon multivariable testing, after
adjusting for other clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular variables.
Through correlating expression of miR-181b with those of miR-181 putative
target genes in 35 CA-AML patient samples, we identified 159 genes that
exhibited a significantly inverse (PAltered expression of microRNAs
(miRNAs, a class of small regulatory RNAs) is associated with various
types of cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In our previous
bead-based miRNA expression profiling assay, we observed that miR-181a,
b, c, and d were all expressed at a higher level in the favorable
prognosis subtypes of cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML) carrying
t(8;21), inv(16), or t(15;17) than in an intermediate- to poor-risk
subtype of CA-AML harboring MLL rearrangements. Indeed, we found that
increased expression of miR-181a or miR-181b was significantly (P<0.05)
associated with longer OS in univariable testing, whereas only that of
miR-181b remained significant (P<0.05) upon multivariable testing, after
adjusting for other clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular variables.
Through correlating expression of miR-181b with those of miR-181 putative
target genes in 35 CA-AML patient samples, we identified 159 genes that
exhibited a significantly inverse (P<0.05; Pearson Correlation)
correlation of expression with miR-181b. PBX3 has the most significant
inverse correlation with the expression of miR-181b, so we chose PBX3 as
an important candidate target of miR-181 for further studies. We
conducted luciferase reporter and mutagenesis assays and showed that PBX3
is a direct target of miR-181a/b. We also showed that forced expression
of miR-181a/b significantly down-regulated endogenous expression of PBX3
in MLL-rearranged leukemic cells at both the RNA and protein levels.
Ectopic expression of miR-181b significantly (PAltered expression of
microRNAs (miRNAs, a class of small regulatory RNAs) is associated with
various types of cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In our
previous bead-based miRNA expression profiling assay, we observed that
miR-181a, b, c, and d were all expressed at a higher level in the
favorable prognosis subtypes of cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML)
carrying t(8;21), inv(16), or t(15;17) than in an intermediate- to
poor-risk subtype of CA-AML harboring MLL rearrangements. Indeed, we
found that increased expression of miR-181a or miR-181b was significantly
(P<0.05) associated with longer OS in univariable testing, whereas only
that of miR-181b remained significant (P<0.05) upon multivariable
testing, after adjusting for other clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular
variables. Through correlating expression of miR-181b with those of
miR-181 putative target genes in 35 CA-AML patient samples, we identified
159 genes that exhibited a significantly inverse (P<0.05; Pearson
Correlation) correlation of expression with miR-181b. PBX3 has the most
significant inverse correlation with the expression of miR-181b, so we
chose PBX3 as an important candidate target of miR-181 for further
studies. We conducted luciferase reporter and mutagenesis assays and
showed that PBX3 is a direct target of miR-181a/b. We also showed that
forced expression of miR-181a/b significantly down-regulated endogenous
expression of PBX3 in MLL-rearranged leukemic cells at both the RNA and
protein levels. Ectopic expression of miR-181b significantly (P<.05)
promoted apoptosis and decreased viability of MONOMAC-6/t(9;11),
THP-1/t(9;11), and KOCL-48/t(4;11), and delayed leukemogenesis in
MLL-fusion-mediated mouse leukemia model; such effects could be reversed
by forced expression of PBX3 coding region. Our data suggest that the
silencing of miR-181b and thereby the activation of the target genes,
such as PBX3, likely contributes to the poor prognosis of adverse CA-AML
patients. Thus, restoring expression of miR-181b and/or targeting the
PBX3 pathways in poor prognosis AML patients may provide new strategies
to improve outcome substantially.

