Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autophagy inhibitor quinacrine synergistically enhances
anti-angiogenic efficacy of Cediranib in intracranial mouse glioma


Despite robust vascularity of malignant gliomas, anti-angiogenic therapy
(AAT), largely fails to induce durable responses. We hypothesized that
AAT efficacy in treating glioma could be increased by disrupting adaptive
mechanisms that enable tumors to survive AAT alone. Hypoxic/nutrient
stress conditions, such as those induced by AAT, can activate autophagy
in tumor cells, a degradative catabolic pathway that promotes cellular
survival during metabolic stress. The anti-malarial agent quinacrine
induces late-stage autophagic inhibition, which can induce cell death. We
determined whether the angiogenic/anti-tumor efficacy of Cediranib, a
VEGF/PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be synergistically
enhanced through combined administration of quinacrine. A noninvasive,
dual bolus perfusion MRI approach was used to assess tumor growth and
vascular parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse model of intracranial
glioma. Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI, provided high resolution
maps of Ktrans, an index of vascular permeability. At the same time,
dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI determined cerebral blood flow
(CBF). Once tumor growth was documented by MRI, mice were randomized to
untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily), quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg
daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups. Tumor growth rate
(days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C (0.170.01) in comparison
to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (pDespite robust vascularity of
malignant gliomas, anti-angiogenic therapy (AAT), largely fails to induce
durable responses. We hypothesized that AAT efficacy in treating glioma
could be increased by disrupting adaptive mechanisms that enable tumors
to survive AAT alone. Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions, such as those
induced by AAT, can activate autophagy in tumor cells, a degradative
catabolic pathway that promotes cellular survival during metabolic
stress. The anti-malarial agent quinacrine induces late-stage autophagic
inhibition, which can induce cell death. We determined whether the
angiogenic/anti-tumor efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be synergistically enhanced through
combined administration of quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus
perfusion MRI approach was used to assess tumor growth and vascular
parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse model of intracranial glioma.
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI, provided high resolution maps of
Ktrans, an index of vascular permeability. At the same time, dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI determined cerebral blood flow (CBF).
Once tumor growth was documented by MRI, mice were randomized to
untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily), quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg
daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups. Tumor growth rate
(days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C (0.170.01) in comparison
to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor growth rate was reduced
substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (pDespite robust vascularity of
malignant gliomas, anti-angiogenic therapy (AAT), largely fails to induce
durable responses. We hypothesized that AAT efficacy in treating glioma
could be increased by disrupting adaptive mechanisms that enable tumors
to survive AAT alone. Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions, such as those
induced by AAT, can activate autophagy in tumor cells, a degradative
catabolic pathway that promotes cellular survival during metabolic
stress. The anti-malarial agent quinacrine induces late-stage autophagic
inhibition, which can induce cell death. We determined whether the
angiogenic/anti-tumor efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be synergistically enhanced through
combined administration of quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus
perfusion MRI approach was used to assess tumor growth and vascular
parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse model of intracranial glioma.
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI, provided high resolution maps of
Ktrans, an index of vascular permeability. At the same time, dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI determined cerebral blood flow (CBF).
Once tumor growth was documented by MRI, mice were randomized to
untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily), quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg
daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups. Tumor growth rate
(days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C (0.170.01) in comparison
to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor growth rate was reduced
substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (p<0.01 versus other groups).
Consistent with this, survival (days from tumor growth initiation) was
greatly increased for C+Q, 25.31.8, versus other groups (pDespite robust
vascularity of malignant gliomas, anti-angiogenic therapy (AAT), largely
fails to induce durable responses. We hypothesized that AAT efficacy in
treating glioma could be increased by disrupting adaptive mechanisms that
enable tumors to survive AAT alone. Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions,
such as those induced by AAT, can activate autophagy in tumor cells, a
degradative catabolic pathway that promotes cellular survival during
metabolic stress. The anti-malarial agent quinacrine induces late-stage
autophagic inhibition, which can induce cell death. We determined whether
the angiogenic/anti-tumor efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be synergistically enhanced through
combined administration of quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus
perfusion MRI approach was used to assess tumor growth and vascular
parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse model of intracranial glioma.
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI, provided high resolution maps of
Ktrans, an index of vascular permeability. At the same time, dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI determined cerebral blood flow (CBF).
Once tumor growth was documented by MRI, mice were randomized to
untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily), quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg
daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups. Tumor growth rate
(days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C (0.170.01) in comparison
to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor growth rate was reduced
substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (p<0.01 versus other groups).
Consistent with this, survival (days from tumor growth initiation) was
greatly increased for C+Q, 25.31.8, versus other groups (p<0.01): 11.0
1.6 (U), 11.5 1.2 (Q), and, 14.3 0.7 (C). Perfusion MRI indicated that
mean tumor Ktrans for C (0.130.01 min1) was moderately reduced in
comparison to U (0.210.04) and Q (0.200.2), during the 2nd treatment week
(PDespite robust vascularity of malignant gliomas, anti-angiogenic
therapy (AAT), largely fails to induce durable responses. We hypothesized
that AAT efficacy in treating glioma could be increased by disrupting
adaptive mechanisms that enable tumors to survive AAT alone.
Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions, such as those induced by AAT, can
activate autophagy in tumor cells, a degradative catabolic pathway that
promotes cellular survival during metabolic stress. The anti-malarial
agent quinacrine induces late-stage autophagic inhibition, which can
induce cell death. We determined whether the angiogenic/anti-tumor
efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
could be synergistically enhanced through combined administration of
quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus perfusion MRI approach was used to
assess tumor growth and vascular parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse
model of intracranial glioma. Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI,
provided high resolution maps of Ktrans, an index of vascular
permeability. At the same time, dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI
determined cerebral blood flow (CBF). Once tumor growth was documented by
MRI, mice were randomized to untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily),
quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups.
Tumor growth rate (days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C
(0.170.01) in comparison to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor
growth rate was reduced substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (p<0.01
versus other groups). Consistent with this, survival (days from tumor
growth initiation) was greatly increased for C+Q, 25.31.8, versus other
groups (p<0.01): 11.0 1.6 (U), 11.5 1.2 (Q), and, 14.3 0.7 (C). Perfusion
MRI indicated that mean tumor Ktrans for C (0.130.01 min1) was moderately
reduced in comparison to U (0.210.04) and Q (0.200.2), during the 2nd
treatment week (P<0.05). Dramatically reduced Ktrans was observed with
C+Q (0.070.01; pDespite robust vascularity of malignant gliomas,
anti-angiogenic therapy (AAT), largely fails to induce durable responses.
We hypothesized that AAT efficacy in treating glioma could be increased
by disrupting adaptive mechanisms that enable tumors to survive AAT
alone. Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions, such as those induced by AAT,
can activate autophagy in tumor cells, a degradative catabolic pathway
that promotes cellular survival during metabolic stress. The
anti-malarial agent quinacrine induces late-stage autophagic inhibition,
which can induce cell death. We determined whether the
angiogenic/anti-tumor efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be synergistically enhanced through
combined administration of quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus
perfusion MRI approach was used to assess tumor growth and vascular
parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse model of intracranial glioma.
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI, provided high resolution maps of
Ktrans, an index of vascular permeability. At the same time, dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI determined cerebral blood flow (CBF).
Once tumor growth was documented by MRI, mice were randomized to
untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily), quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg
daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups. Tumor growth rate
(days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C (0.170.01) in comparison
to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor growth rate was reduced
substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (p<0.01 versus other groups).
Consistent with this, survival (days from tumor growth initiation) was
greatly increased for C+Q, 25.31.8, versus other groups (p<0.01): 11.0
1.6 (U), 11.5 1.2 (Q), and, 14.3 0.7 (C). Perfusion MRI indicated that
mean tumor Ktrans for C (0.130.01 min1) was moderately reduced in
comparison to U (0.210.04) and Q (0.200.2), during the 2nd treatment week
(P<0.05). Dramatically reduced Ktrans was observed with C+Q (0.070.01;
p<0.05 vs U, C, and Q). Consistent with this, mean tumor CBF relative to
contralateral brain CBF during the 2nd treatment week, was dramatically
lower for C+Q, 1.610.06 (pDespite robust vascularity of malignant
gliomas, anti-angiogenic therapy (AAT), largely fails to induce durable
responses. We hypothesized that AAT efficacy in treating glioma could be
increased by disrupting adaptive mechanisms that enable tumors to survive
AAT alone. Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions, such as those induced by
AAT, can activate autophagy in tumor cells, a degradative catabolic
pathway that promotes cellular survival during metabolic stress. The
anti-malarial agent quinacrine induces late-stage autophagic inhibition,
which can induce cell death. We determined whether the
angiogenic/anti-tumor efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, could be synergistically enhanced through
combined administration of quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus
perfusion MRI approach was used to assess tumor growth and vascular
parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse model of intracranial glioma.
Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI, provided high resolution maps of
Ktrans, an index of vascular permeability. At the same time, dynamic
susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI determined cerebral blood flow (CBF).
Once tumor growth was documented by MRI, mice were randomized to
untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily), quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg
daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups. Tumor growth rate
(days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C (0.170.01) in comparison
to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor growth rate was reduced
substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (p<0.01 versus other groups).
Consistent with this, survival (days from tumor growth initiation) was
greatly increased for C+Q, 25.31.8, versus other groups (p<0.01): 11.0
1.6 (U), 11.5 1.2 (Q), and, 14.3 0.7 (C). Perfusion MRI indicated that
mean tumor Ktrans for C (0.130.01 min1) was moderately reduced in
comparison to U (0.210.04) and Q (0.200.2), during the 2nd treatment week
(P<0.05). Dramatically reduced Ktrans was observed with C+Q (0.070.01;
p<0.05 vs U, C, and Q). Consistent with this, mean tumor CBF relative to
contralateral brain CBF during the 2nd treatment week, was dramatically
lower for C+Q, 1.610.06 (p<0.05) compared to other groups: 3.06 0.15 (U),
2.550.24 (Q), 3.070.47 (C). In vitro MTS cell viability assays of 4C8
glioma cells indicated markedly increased efficacy for combined C+Q under
hypoxic conditions: 1M C/2.5M Q decreased cell viability by 766% and 331%
with 0.5 and 21% O2, respectively. Combination indices (CI) indicated
less than additive effects for C and Q with normal O2, while synergism
(CIDespite robust vascularity of malignant gliomas, anti-angiogenic
therapy (AAT), largely fails to induce durable responses. We hypothesized
that AAT efficacy in treating glioma could be increased by disrupting
adaptive mechanisms that enable tumors to survive AAT alone.
Hypoxic/nutrient stress conditions, such as those induced by AAT, can
activate autophagy in tumor cells, a degradative catabolic pathway that
promotes cellular survival during metabolic stress. The anti-malarial
agent quinacrine induces late-stage autophagic inhibition, which can
induce cell death. We determined whether the angiogenic/anti-tumor
efficacy of Cediranib, a VEGF/PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
could be synergistically enhanced through combined administration of
quinacrine. A noninvasive, dual bolus perfusion MRI approach was used to
assess tumor growth and vascular parameters in the syngeneic 4C8 mouse
model of intracranial glioma. Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE) MRI,
provided high resolution maps of Ktrans, an index of vascular
permeability. At the same time, dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI
determined cerebral blood flow (CBF). Once tumor growth was documented by
MRI, mice were randomized to untreated (U), Cediranib (C, 6 mg/kg daily),
quinacrine (Q, 50mg/kg daily), or Cediranib plus quinacrine (C+Q) groups.
Tumor growth rate (days1, meanSE) was moderately decreased for C
(0.170.01) in comparison to U (0.220.01) and Q (0.210.01) (p<0.05). Tumor
growth rate was reduced substantially, with C+Q (0.110.004) (p<0.01
versus other groups). Consistent with this, survival (days from tumor
growth initiation) was greatly increased for C+Q, 25.31.8, versus other
groups (p<0.01): 11.0 1.6 (U), 11.5 1.2 (Q), and, 14.3 0.7 (C). Perfusion
MRI indicated that mean tumor Ktrans for C (0.130.01 min1) was moderately
reduced in comparison to U (0.210.04) and Q (0.200.2), during the 2nd
treatment week (P<0.05). Dramatically reduced Ktrans was observed with
C+Q (0.070.01; p<0.05 vs U, C, and Q). Consistent with this, mean tumor
CBF relative to contralateral brain CBF during the 2nd treatment week,
was dramatically lower for C+Q, 1.610.06 (p<0.05) compared to other
groups: 3.06 0.15 (U), 2.550.24 (Q), 3.070.47 (C). In vitro MTS cell
viability assays of 4C8 glioma cells indicated markedly increased
efficacy for combined C+Q under hypoxic conditions: 1M C/2.5M Q decreased
cell viability by 766% and 331% with 0.5 and 21% O2, respectively.
Combination indices (CI) indicated less than additive effects for C and Q
with normal O2, while synergism (CI<1) was observed under hypoxic
conditions (CI=0.58, 0.75M C/1M Q). In conclusion, the autophagy
inhibitor quinacrine synergistically increases the
anti-angiogenic/anti-tumor effect of Cediranib in 4C8 mouse glioma. Tumor
microenvironment conditions such as hypoxia may play a role in the
synergistic interaction.

