Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Generation of MAGE-C2/CT10-specific T cell clones for
immunotherapy of multiple myeloma


Objective Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable neoplasm derived from
bone marrow-residing malignant plasma cells. The median life expectancy
of MM patients ranges between 3 and 5 years despite the application of
conventional chemotherapy including novel agents as well as stem cell
transplantation (SCT). Cancer-testis (CT) antigens such as MAGE-C2/CT10
are commonly and specifically expressed in myeloma and, therefore,
represent attractive target structures for T cell-based immunotherapies.
Methods We screened sera of MM-patients for MAGE-C2/CT10-specific IgG
antibodies in an ELISA using recombinant full-length protein. In
sera-positive patients frequencies of MAGE-C2/CT10-specific CD4+ and CD8+
T cells were determined following a single cycle of in vitro
presensitization of peripheral T cells using a panel of overlapping 20mer
peptides spanning the complete sequence of MAGE-C2/CT10. In an
IFN-gamma-ELISPOT, which served as a read-out assay, presensitized T
cells were re-exposed to MAGE-C2/CT10 peptides pulsed on autologous APC
(PHA-stimulated CD4+ T cells [T-APC] or EBV-transformed B-lymphocytes).
Stimulated T cells responding to MAGE-C2/CT10 underwent single-cell
FACS-sorting of live IFN-gamma secreting T cells using a cytokine
secretion assay. After generation of MAGE-C2/CT10-specific CD4+ and CD8+
T cell-clones we identified the composition of the specific
T-cell-receptors (TCR) and amplified the receptor chains via PCR.
Jurkat-cells were transduced with the specific TCR and specifity and
affinity of the resulting genetically modified T cells was evaluated.
Results In all 5 of 7 MM-patients with an antibody response against
MAGE-C2/CT10 we also detected significant T cell responses against the
same antigen. All of these patients evidenced MAGE-C2/CT10 CD4+ T cells
and 3/5 patients also showed concomitant CD8+ T cell responses against
MAGE-C2/CT10. Overall, CD8+ T cell responses were directed against a
total number of 5 different epitopes of MAGE-C2/CT10 whereas CD4+ T cells
recognized a total of 13 single peptide sequences. Interestingly, in one
patient CD4+ and CD8+ T cells recognized the same MAGE-C2/CT10 20mer
peptide. From those myeloma patients evidencing T cell responses against
MAGE-C2/CT10 we were able to generate a total number of 44 T cell-clones
specific for 8 different epitopes of the CT antigen. Until now, we have
identified and cloned the specific TCR of 7 T cell clones. Preliminary
experiments suggest that Jurkat cells transduced with the specific TCR
recognize naturally processed MAGE-C2/CT10 and are of high avidity.
Conclusions Our results demonstrate that the CT antigen MAGE-C2/CT10
induces spontaneous antibody as well as CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses in
myeloma patients. Cloning of these spontaneously occurring T cells seems
to be an efficient way to generate TCR-transduced T cells for the
MAGE-C2/CT10-specific immunotherapy of MM.

