Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High-throughput proteomics reveals that enzymes of the ketogenic
pathway are upregulated during prostate cancer progression


Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy and the second leading
cause of cancer related deaths in men. One common treatment is
androgen-deprivation therapy, which reduces symptoms in most patients.
However, over time, patients develop tumours that are
androgen-independent and ultimately fatal. The mechanisms that cause this
transition remain largely unknown, and as a result, there are no
effective treatments against androgen-independent prostate cancer. As a
model platform, we used the LNCaP cell line, and its androgen independent
derivative, LNCaP-SF. By using stable isotope labelling with amino acids
in cell culture (SILAC) coupled to mass spectrometry, we assessed the
differential global protein expression between the two cell lines. Our
proteomic analysis resulted in the quantification of 3355 proteins, in
total. Bioinformatic prioritization resulted in 42 up-regulated and 46
down-regulated proteins in LNCaP-SF cells, compared to LNCaP cells. Our
top candidate was HMGCS2, an enzyme involved in ketogenesis, was found to
be 9-fold elevated in LNCaP-SF cells, based on peptide ratios. After
analyzing the remaining enzymes of this pathway (ACAT1, BDH1, HMGCL,
OXCT1), we observed increased expression of these proteins in the
LNCaP-SF cells. This was further verified using western blotting,
indicating the importance of this pathway during the progression of
prostate cancer to androgen-independence. To determine whether these
enzymes are up-regulated in clinical samples, we performed qPCR analysis
on human prostate cancer tissues, from which we observed significantly
increased transcript levels of HMGCS2 (pProstate cancer is the most
common malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer related deaths
in men. One common treatment is androgen-deprivation therapy, which
reduces symptoms in most patients. However, over time, patients develop
tumours that are androgen-independent and ultimately fatal. The
mechanisms that cause this transition remain largely unknown, and as a
result, there are no effective treatments against androgen-independent
prostate cancer. As a model platform, we used the LNCaP cell line, and
its androgen independent derivative, LNCaP-SF. By using stable isotope
labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled to mass
spectrometry, we assessed the differential global protein expression
between the two cell lines. Our proteomic analysis resulted in the
quantification of 3355 proteins, in total. Bioinformatic prioritization
resulted in 42 up-regulated and 46 down-regulated proteins in LNCaP-SF
cells, compared to LNCaP cells. Our top candidate was HMGCS2, an enzyme
involved in ketogenesis, was found to be 9-fold elevated in LNCaP-SF
cells, based on peptide ratios. After analyzing the remaining enzymes of
this pathway (ACAT1, BDH1, HMGCL, OXCT1), we observed increased
expression of these proteins in the LNCaP-SF cells. This was further
verified using western blotting, indicating the importance of this
pathway during the progression of prostate cancer to
androgen-independence. To determine whether these enzymes are
up-regulated in clinical samples, we performed qPCR analysis on human
prostate cancer tissues, from which we observed significantly increased
transcript levels of HMGCS2 (p<0.05), OXCT1 (PProstate cancer is the most
common malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer related deaths
in men. One common treatment is androgen-deprivation therapy, which
reduces symptoms in most patients. However, over time, patients develop
tumours that are androgen-independent and ultimately fatal. The
mechanisms that cause this transition remain largely unknown, and as a
result, there are no effective treatments against androgen-independent
prostate cancer. As a model platform, we used the LNCaP cell line, and
its androgen independent derivative, LNCaP-SF. By using stable isotope
labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled to mass
spectrometry, we assessed the differential global protein expression
between the two cell lines. Our proteomic analysis resulted in the
quantification of 3355 proteins, in total. Bioinformatic prioritization
resulted in 42 up-regulated and 46 down-regulated proteins in LNCaP-SF
cells, compared to LNCaP cells. Our top candidate was HMGCS2, an enzyme
involved in ketogenesis, was found to be 9-fold elevated in LNCaP-SF
cells, based on peptide ratios. After analyzing the remaining enzymes of
this pathway (ACAT1, BDH1, HMGCL, OXCT1), we observed increased
expression of these proteins in the LNCaP-SF cells. This was further
verified using western blotting, indicating the importance of this
pathway during the progression of prostate cancer to
androgen-independence. To determine whether these enzymes are
up-regulated in clinical samples, we performed qPCR analysis on human
prostate cancer tissues, from which we observed significantly increased
transcript levels of HMGCS2 (p<0.05), OXCT1 (P<0.05), ACAT1 (pProstate
cancer is the most common malignancy and the second leading cause of
cancer related deaths in men. One common treatment is
androgen-deprivation therapy, which reduces symptoms in most patients.
However, over time, patients develop tumours that are
androgen-independent and ultimately fatal. The mechanisms that cause this
transition remain largely unknown, and as a result, there are no
effective treatments against androgen-independent prostate cancer. As a
model platform, we used the LNCaP cell line, and its androgen independent
derivative, LNCaP-SF. By using stable isotope labelling with amino acids
in cell culture (SILAC) coupled to mass spectrometry, we assessed the
differential global protein expression between the two cell lines. Our
proteomic analysis resulted in the quantification of 3355 proteins, in
total. Bioinformatic prioritization resulted in 42 up-regulated and 46
down-regulated proteins in LNCaP-SF cells, compared to LNCaP cells. Our
top candidate was HMGCS2, an enzyme involved in ketogenesis, was found to
be 9-fold elevated in LNCaP-SF cells, based on peptide ratios. After
analyzing the remaining enzymes of this pathway (ACAT1, BDH1, HMGCL,
OXCT1), we observed increased expression of these proteins in the
LNCaP-SF cells. This was further verified using western blotting,
indicating the importance of this pathway during the progression of
prostate cancer to androgen-independence. To determine whether these
enzymes are up-regulated in clinical samples, we performed qPCR analysis
on human prostate cancer tissues, from which we observed significantly
increased transcript levels of HMGCS2 (p<0.05), OXCT1 (P<0.05), ACAT1
(p<0.001), and BDH1 (p8) based on immunohistochemistry analysis. ACAT1
displayed the most prominent protein expression patterns, as it exhibited
very minimal staining in normal samples, moderate levels in low grade
cancer, and high expression during high grade disease. Further assessment
of ACAT1 expression demonstrated significantly greater ACAT1 expression
in bone metastatic lesions (P8) based on immunohistochemistry analysis.
ACAT1 displayed the most prominent protein expression patterns, as it
exhibited very minimal staining in normal samples, moderate levels in low
grade cancer, and high expression during high grade disease. Further
assessment of ACAT1 expression demonstrated significantly greater ACAT1
expression in bone metastatic lesions (P<0.001). Altogether, our results
indicate that enzymes belonging to the ketogenic pathway become
up-regulated during high grade prostate cancer, and could serve as
potential biomarkers for diagnosis of high grade disease.

