Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Induction of estrogen receptor alpha by GW9662 sensitizes mammary
glands to tamoxifen treatment in organ culture


Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR) are ligand
activated nuclear receptor and binds to natural and synthetic ligands.
Earlier we had reported that PPAR agonist troglitazone inhibited the
development of precancerous lesions induced by DMBA in mouse mammary
gland organ culture (MMOC). In the present study we evaluated the effects
of PPAR agonist GW7845 and antagonist GW9662 on the development of 7,12
dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)-induced mammary alveolar lesions (MAL)
in ER negative mammary glands in MMOC. The results showed that both
GW7845 and GW9662 inhibited development of ER- MAL in MMOC. Since PPAR
and ER cross talk has been reported in the literature, we determined the
effects of GW9662 on the induction of ER and PR in this model. Real-time
PCR studies and immunohistochemical analyses showed that GW9662 induced
ER in the absence of estradiol, whereas GW7845 did not induce ER under
these conditions. Both GW7845 and GW9662 failed to suppress mRNA
expression of PPAR in the mammary glands that are otherwise ER negative.
However GW9662 suppressed the expression of PPAR response genes adipsin
and aP2. Conversely, GW7845 an agonist of PPAR enhanced the expression of
aP2 and adipsin. These results suggested that the effects of these agents
are mediated by PPAR in MMOC. Finally, Tamoxifen does not inhibit MAL in
MMOC, however sequential treatments with GW9662 followed by Tamoxifen
suppressed development of DMBA-induced MAL in these glands. Since the ER
negative breast cancer patients are generally not treated with SERM,
inducing ER in the mammary cells by GW9662 possibly could make them
responsive to Tamoxifen or other SERM. [This work was supported by N01
CN433303]

