Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of PRPF4 as a novel cancer promoter through AKT
signaling in lung cancer


We recently constructed a large-scale gene expression database containing
more than 33,000 tumors samples by applying cancer outlier profile
analysis, and identified many candidate genes as therapeutic targets
(Shin G et al., 2011). One of potential target candidates is PRPF4, which
is over-expressed in a variety of human cancer, particularly in the
breast, colon, ovary, skin and lung cancer patients. PRPF4 (PRP4 pre-mRNA
processing factor 4 homolog), also called PRP4, HPRP4, Prp4p, or HPRP4P,
is involved in pre-mRNA splicing and interacts with U4/U6-U5 tri-snRNP
complex. Moreover, there have been a few studies on the roles of PRPF4 in
diseases including cancer. In one study, PRPF4, along with MDR1 (ABCB1)
and survivins, was involved in drug resistance in ovarian cancer patients
(Duan Z et al., 2008), but its role in cancer is mostly unknown. In this
study, we found that PRPF4 was over-expressed in breast, colon, and lung
cancers, and involved in cancer progression, invasion, and migration, and
interacted with AKT. Knock-down of PRPF4 by small interfering RNA in both
lung and breast cancer cell lines dramatically reduced invasion,
migration, and cell proliferation in vitro. We confirmed the
up-regulation of PRPF4 in about 30% of lung and breast cancer specimens
by RT-PCR. We also found that PRPF4 interacts with AKT and thus activates
PI3K/AKT signaling pathway and increases proliferation, invasion, and
migration of lung cancer cells. Collectively, we suggest PRPF4 is a novel
up-regulated gene involved in various cancer progression and propose it
as a novel cancer biomarker for targeted therapeutics.

