Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitor
AT13387 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma


Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) has been shown to be overexpressed in a
wide range of cancers, and plays a critical role in tumor cell growth and
survival by stabilizing aberrant signaling proteins and by interfering
with apoptosis. Several natural and synthetic inhibitors of HSP90 have
been shown to have antitumor effects, but single agent development has
been limited by poor solubility, poor availability and off-target
toxicities (hepatotoxicity, retinal toxicity). The aim of this study is
to investigate the biological activity of the small-molecule HSP90
inhibitor, AT13387 (Astex Pharmaceuticals) for antitumor activity in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Human HNSCC cell lines, UMSCC 1
(wild-type p53) and 46 (mutant p53) were treated with AT13387. The
inhibitory concentrations (IC[[Unsupported Character - Codename ­]]50) of
AT13387 on HNSCC cell lines were determined using MTT proliferation
assay. AT13387 (55 mg/kg two consecutive days every week) antitumor
activity, toxicity and survival were evaluated in the UMSCC 1 and 46
xenograft model in BALB/c SCID mice. AT13387 inhibited the proliferation
of both UMSCC cell lines in vitro with IC50 levels of 0.05-.10 M by MTT
assay. In vivo, AT13387, at 55 mg/kg showed significant antitumor effect
and improved survival in both wtTP53 UMSCC-1 and mtTP53 UMSCC-46
xenograft models. The treatment was well-tolerated and no significant
body weight loss observed. These data suggest that AT13387 may possess
potent antitumor activity in human HNSCC, regardless of the p53 mutation
status. The potential of AT13387 as a chemosensitizer for radiotherapy is
being investigated. These preclinical data suggest that AT13387 holds
promise as a potential chemotherapeutic agent for HNSCC clinical trials.
(Supported by NIDCD project ZIA-DC-000073 and AT13387 provided to NCI by
Astex Pharmaceuticals)

