Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Incorporating protein levels with genetic variation and gene
expression in sensitivity to chemotherapy


Genome-wide studies of genes important in chemotherapeutic sensitivity or
disease susceptibility and progression have primarily relied on mRNA
expression levels; however, mRNA expression levels do not always
accurately reflect downstream protein abundances. We have applied a novel
technology, microwestern arrays, along with reverse phase lysate arrays,
to evaluate the role that over 400 transcription factor and signaling
proteins play in mediating cellular sensitivity to ten chemotherapeutic
agents. Utilizing unrelated International HapMap lymphoblastoid cell
lines derived from the Yoruba population, we evaluated the relationship
between protein abundances, genetic variation, microRNA and mRNA
expression, and chemotherapeutic-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis.
Using 12 million single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) imputed from the
1000 Genomes Project, we identified SNPs associated with protein
abundance (protein quantitative trait loci, pQTLs) and SNPs associated
with chemotherapeutic sensitivity (drug quantitative trait loci, dQTLs).
Chemotherapeutic agents included platinating agents, antimetabolites and
microtubule inhibitors. For cytarabine there was a significant
(pGenome-wide studies of genes important in chemotherapeutic sensitivity
or disease susceptibility and progression have primarily relied on mRNA
expression levels; however, mRNA expression levels do not always
accurately reflect downstream protein abundances. We have applied a novel
technology, microwestern arrays, along with reverse phase lysate arrays,
to evaluate the role that over 400 transcription factor and signaling
proteins play in mediating cellular sensitivity to ten chemotherapeutic
agents. Utilizing unrelated International HapMap lymphoblastoid cell
lines derived from the Yoruba population, we evaluated the relationship
between protein abundances, genetic variation, microRNA and mRNA
expression, and chemotherapeutic-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis.
Using 12 million single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) imputed from the
1000 Genomes Project, we identified SNPs associated with protein
abundance (protein quantitative trait loci, pQTLs) and SNPs associated
with chemotherapeutic sensitivity (drug quantitative trait loci, dQTLs).
Chemotherapeutic agents included platinating agents, antimetabolites and
microtubule inhibitors. For cytarabine there was a significant (p<0.0001)
enrichment of pQTLs in the SNPs associated with cytotoxicity and
apoptosis. We also identified 71 protein levels associated with
cytarabine-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis at pGenome-wide studies of
genes important in chemotherapeutic sensitivity or disease susceptibility
and progression have primarily relied on mRNA expression levels; however,
mRNA expression levels do not always accurately reflect downstream
protein abundances. We have applied a novel technology, microwestern
arrays, along with reverse phase lysate arrays, to evaluate the role that
over 400 transcription factor and signaling proteins play in mediating
cellular sensitivity to ten chemotherapeutic agents. Utilizing unrelated
International HapMap lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from the Yoruba
population, we evaluated the relationship between protein abundances,
genetic variation, microRNA and mRNA expression, and
chemotherapeutic-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis. Using 12 million
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) imputed from the 1000 Genomes
Project, we identified SNPs associated with protein abundance (protein
quantitative trait loci, pQTLs) and SNPs associated with chemotherapeutic
sensitivity (drug quantitative trait loci, dQTLs). Chemotherapeutic
agents included platinating agents, antimetabolites and microtubule
inhibitors. For cytarabine there was a significant (p<0.0001) enrichment
of pQTLs in the SNPs associated with cytotoxicity and apoptosis. We also
identified 71 protein levels associated with cytarabine-induced
cytotoxicity and apoptosis at p<0.05. One protein, ATF2, was associated
(pGenome-wide studies of genes important in chemotherapeutic sensitivity
or disease susceptibility and progression have primarily relied on mRNA
expression levels; however, mRNA expression levels do not always
accurately reflect downstream protein abundances. We have applied a novel
technology, microwestern arrays, along with reverse phase lysate arrays,
to evaluate the role that over 400 transcription factor and signaling
proteins play in mediating cellular sensitivity to ten chemotherapeutic
agents. Utilizing unrelated International HapMap lymphoblastoid cell
lines derived from the Yoruba population, we evaluated the relationship
between protein abundances, genetic variation, microRNA and mRNA
expression, and chemotherapeutic-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis.
Using 12 million single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) imputed from the
1000 Genomes Project, we identified SNPs associated with protein
abundance (protein quantitative trait loci, pQTLs) and SNPs associated
with chemotherapeutic sensitivity (drug quantitative trait loci, dQTLs).
Chemotherapeutic agents included platinating agents, antimetabolites and
microtubule inhibitors. For cytarabine there was a significant (p<0.0001)
enrichment of pQTLs in the SNPs associated with cytotoxicity and
apoptosis. We also identified 71 protein levels associated with
cytarabine-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis at p<0.05. One protein,
ATF2, was associated (p<0.006) with both high (40 M) and low (5 M) dose
cytarabine-induced apoptosis and there were six SNPs associated with
apoptosis phenotypes (pGenome-wide studies of genes important in
chemotherapeutic sensitivity or disease susceptibility and progression
have primarily relied on mRNA expression levels; however, mRNA expression
levels do not always accurately reflect downstream protein abundances. We
have applied a novel technology, microwestern arrays, along with reverse
phase lysate arrays, to evaluate the role that over 400 transcription
factor and signaling proteins play in mediating cellular sensitivity to
ten chemotherapeutic agents. Utilizing unrelated International HapMap
lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from the Yoruba population, we
evaluated the relationship between protein abundances, genetic variation,
microRNA and mRNA expression, and chemotherapeutic-induced cytotoxicity
and apoptosis. Using 12 million single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)
imputed from the 1000 Genomes Project, we identified SNPs associated with
protein abundance (protein quantitative trait loci, pQTLs) and SNPs
associated with chemotherapeutic sensitivity (drug quantitative trait
loci, dQTLs). Chemotherapeutic agents included platinating agents,
antimetabolites and microtubule inhibitors. For cytarabine there was a
significant (p<0.0001) enrichment of pQTLs in the SNPs associated with
cytotoxicity and apoptosis. We also identified 71 protein levels
associated with cytarabine-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis at p<0.05.
One protein, ATF2, was associated (p<0.006) with both high (40 M) and low
(5 M) dose cytarabine-induced apoptosis and there were six SNPs
associated with apoptosis phenotypes (p<0.00007) that also associated
with the protein level (pGenome-wide studies of genes important in
chemotherapeutic sensitivity or disease susceptibility and progression
have primarily relied on mRNA expression levels; however, mRNA expression
levels do not always accurately reflect downstream protein abundances. We
have applied a novel technology, microwestern arrays, along with reverse
phase lysate arrays, to evaluate the role that over 400 transcription
factor and signaling proteins play in mediating cellular sensitivity to
ten chemotherapeutic agents. Utilizing unrelated International HapMap
lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from the Yoruba population, we
evaluated the relationship between protein abundances, genetic variation,
microRNA and mRNA expression, and chemotherapeutic-induced cytotoxicity
and apoptosis. Using 12 million single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)
imputed from the 1000 Genomes Project, we identified SNPs associated with
protein abundance (protein quantitative trait loci, pQTLs) and SNPs
associated with chemotherapeutic sensitivity (drug quantitative trait
loci, dQTLs). Chemotherapeutic agents included platinating agents,
antimetabolites and microtubule inhibitors. For cytarabine there was a
significant (p<0.0001) enrichment of pQTLs in the SNPs associated with
cytotoxicity and apoptosis. We also identified 71 protein levels
associated with cytarabine-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis at p<0.05.
One protein, ATF2, was associated (p<0.006) with both high (40 M) and low
(5 M) dose cytarabine-induced apoptosis and there were six SNPs
associated with apoptosis phenotypes (p<0.00007) that also associated
with the protein level (p<0.00009). Knockdown of ATF2 protein with siRNA
resulted in 40-51% of endogenous levels concomitant with a significant
increase in apoptosis induced by cytarabine at both doses (p=0.001). This
relationship was not identified in analyses correlating mRNA with
phenotypes thus demonstrating the importance of incorporating protein
levels into studies that aim to identify potential biomarkers. By
incorporating genetic variation, mRNA, protein, and microRNA levels with
chemotherapeutic sensitivity, the complex role of the genetic
architecture in cellular chemotherapy response through its effects on
expression and protein can be better understood. This study has broad
potential for application to other chemotherapeutic drugs and complex
traits.

