Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ICAD deficiency in human colon cancer and predisposition to colon
tumorigenesis in mice: Linkage to resistance to apoptosis and
susceptibility to genomic instability


We previously showed that DNA fragmentation factor, which comprises a
caspase-3-activated DNase (CAD) and its inhibitor (ICAD), may influence
the rate of cell death by generating PARP-1-activating DNA breaks. Here
we tested the hypothesis that ICAD-deficient colon epithelial cells
(CECs) exhibiting resistance to death stimuli may accumulate additional
genetic modifications, leading to a tumorigenic phenotype. We show that
ICAD deficiency is highly associated with colon malignancy in humans.
Upon DNA damage caused by a low dose of irradiation, ICAD-/- cells
acquire a tumorigenic phenotype. CECs derived from ICAD-/- mice showed a
marked resistance to death induced by the colon carcinogen
dimethylhydrazine (DMH) in vitro and in mice. Such resistance was
associated with a decrease in PARP-1 activation. In an animal model of
DMH-induced colon tumorigenesis, ICAD-/- mice developed significantly
higher numbers of tumors with markedly larger sizes than the wild-type
counterparts. Interestingly, the phenotype of the ICAD-/- mice was not
associated with a significant increase in the precancerous aberrant crypt
foci suggesting a link to tumor progression rather than initiation. More
importantly, ICAD deficiency was associated with severe genomic
instability, constituting most prominently of amplifications but with
sizable deletions as compared to the wild-type counterparts affecting
several cancer-related genes including RAF-1, GSN, LMO3, and Fzd6
independently of p53. Our results present a strong case for involvement
of ICAD deficiency in colon carcinogenesis and show that apoptosis and
genomic instability may comprise the means by which such deficiency may
contribute to the process of increasing susceptibility to
carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis.

