Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of circulating regulatory T-cells and MDSCs in high
risk melanoma patients treated with neoadjuvant ipilimumab


Background: Melanoma regional lymph node and in-transit metastases (stage
IIIB-C) carry a high relapse and mortality risk. Neoadjuvant ipilimumab
may modulate the host suppressor immune response, enhance antitumor
immunity and improve the clinical outcome. Methods: Patients with
clinically palpable stage IIIB-C melanoma were treated with induction
ipilimumab (10 mg/kg IV q3weeks x2doses) preoperatively and had
definitive lymphadenectomy (week 6), followed by 2 maintenance doses of
ipilimumab (q3 weeks). Tissue samples were obtained at baseline and at
definitive surgery (after 2 doses of ipilimumab) and blood (serum/PBMC)
collected at baseline, 6 weeks, then at 3, 6, 9, 12 months and/or
progression. Circulating T-regulatory cells (T-regs) and myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) were monitored utilizing multicolor flow
cytometry comparing preoperative (6 weeks) and baseline samples. Results:
Twenty nine patients (20 male, 9 female), age 40-87 (median 54) have been
enrolled since February/2010 (24 cutaneous primary, 1 unknown and 4
mucosal). Five had AJCC stage IIIB (N2b, N2c) and 24 had IIIC (N3)
melanoma. Ninety one cycles have been delivered (median 4). Grade 3
(worst) toxicities include diarrhea/colitis (5 patients; 17%), hepatic
enzyme elevations (2; 7%), rash (2; 7%), lipase (1; 3%), all manageable.
Median follow-up is 9.7 months and 18 patients (62%) continue disease
free. Median PFS is 15.5 months, 95% CI = (8.1, -). The probability of 6
and 12 months PFS is 84.2% (95% CI=0.63, 0.94) and 54.1% (95% CI=0.31,
0.73) respectively. There is a significant increase in the frequency of
circulating T-regs (CD4+CD25hi+ Foxp3+; p=0.023 CD4+CD25hi+CD39+;
p=0.001) from baseline to 6 weeks. In parallel there is a significant
decrease in circulating MDSCs: (1) monocytic: HLA-DR+/low/CD14+;
p=Background: Melanoma regional lymph node and in-transit metastases
(stage IIIB-C) carry a high relapse and mortality risk. Neoadjuvant
ipilimumab may modulate the host suppressor immune response, enhance
antitumor immunity and improve the clinical outcome. Methods: Patients
with clinically palpable stage IIIB-C melanoma were treated with
induction ipilimumab (10 mg/kg IV q3weeks x2doses) preoperatively and had
definitive lymphadenectomy (week 6), followed by 2 maintenance doses of
ipilimumab (q3 weeks). Tissue samples were obtained at baseline and at
definitive surgery (after 2 doses of ipilimumab) and blood (serum/PBMC)
collected at baseline, 6 weeks, then at 3, 6, 9, 12 months and/or
progression. Circulating T-regulatory cells (T-regs) and myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) were monitored utilizing multicolor flow
cytometry comparing preoperative (6 weeks) and baseline samples. Results:
Twenty nine patients (20 male, 9 female), age 40-87 (median 54) have been
enrolled since February/2010 (24 cutaneous primary, 1 unknown and 4
mucosal). Five had AJCC stage IIIB (N2b, N2c) and 24 had IIIC (N3)
melanoma. Ninety one cycles have been delivered (median 4). Grade 3
(worst) toxicities include diarrhea/colitis (5 patients; 17%), hepatic
enzyme elevations (2; 7%), rash (2; 7%), lipase (1; 3%), all manageable.
Median follow-up is 9.7 months and 18 patients (62%) continue disease
free. Median PFS is 15.5 months, 95% CI = (8.1, -). The probability of 6
and 12 months PFS is 84.2% (95% CI=0.63, 0.94) and 54.1% (95% CI=0.31,
0.73) respectively. There is a significant increase in the frequency of
circulating T-regs (CD4+CD25hi+ Foxp3+; p=0.023 CD4+CD25hi+CD39+;
p=0.001) from baseline to 6 weeks. In parallel there is a significant
decrease in circulating MDSCs: (1) monocytic: HLA-DR+/low/CD14+; p=<.0001
and less significantly for (2) other monocytic:
lin1neg/HLA-DRneg/CD33+/CD11b+; p=0.198 and (3) lymphoid:
Lin1neg/HLA-DR-/CD33+/CD11b+; p=0.338. Conclusions: Neoadjuvant
ipilimumab is clinically promising and significantly downregulates MDSCs
which appear to play a significant role in the clinical activity of
ipilimumab. T-regs are upregulated as part of the overall CD4+ T-cell
population, and functional studies of this population are ongoing.

