Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Captopril inhibits colorectal cancer liver metastases following
70% partial hepatectomy in a mouse model


Background: Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) with the
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, Captopril, has been shown to
inhibit CRCLM. Partial hepatectomy (PH) for colorectal cancer liver
metastases (CRCLM) can stimulate tumour recurrence. Aim: This study
investigated the effects of Captopril on liver regeneration (LR), as well
as on CRCLM in the regenerating liver. Methods: Male CBA mice were used
for 70% PH as well as 70% PH following CRCLM induction. Mice were
randomly assigned to control or Captopril-treated groups. Liver and
tumour samples were collected on days 1, 2, 4, 6 and 8, 16 and 21
post-surgery. The rate of LR was measured by liver-to-body weight (LBW)
ratio. The percentage of liver metastases was quantified using
quantitative stereology and immunohistochemistry was performed to
quantify hepatocyte and tumour cell proliferation (anti-Ki67) and
apoptosis (anti-caspase-3). Results: Captopril increased LBW (0.57 0.02
Captopril, 0.49 0.02 control, p = 0.027) compared to controls on day 2
following 70% PH. At day 6, Captopril had decreased LBW (0.5 0.03, 0.73
0.06, p = 0.006). However, by day 8, LBW was not different between the
control and Captopril groups. At day 21, Captopril decreased the
percentage of liver metastases compared to controls (24.4 6.2%; 48.7
4.7%, p = 0.008) in the regenerating liver. Tumour volume (388.3 150.4;
1046.2 200.2mm3, p = 0.02) and tumour nodule count per image field (68
17.6; 181.1 28.5, p = 0.005) were also decreased by Captopril. In
contrary, Captopril did not significantly alter liver volume compared to
controls (886.1 65.2; 1044.1 115.8, p = 0.254). Furthermore, LBW during
LR in the presence of CRCLM at day 2 (0.53 0.01; 0.51 0.02, p = 0.449)
and day 6 (0.71 0.01; 0.73 0.03, p = 0.51) were not different between
Captopril and control groups. Conclusion: Captopril enhanced the early
stage of LR following 70% PH. Captopril inhibits CRCLM in the
regenerating liver without inhibiting LR. Understanding the mechanisms of
actions of Captopril is required to improve CRCLM patient outcomes.

