Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of the p53-HDMX interaction sensitizes melanoma to
chemotherapy


Melanoma is the leading cause of death from skin disease worldwide. It is
an aggressive cancer that is often resistant to conventional chemotherapy
and radiation-based therapy. The combination of a low survival rate in
metastatic disease and lack of successful treatment options underscores
the need to elucidate novel methods to target melanoma. More than 95% of
human melanomas retain wild type p53, the protein responsible for
maintaining genomic integrity; and HDMX, a negative regulator of p53 that
neutralizes p53, has recently been found to be overexpressed in 65% of
human cutaneous melanoma. These features suggest that targeting the
p53-HDMX interaction in melanoma could not only restore the tumor
suppressor function of p53, but also sensitize melanoma cells to
treatment with conventional chemotherapeutic agents which rely on an
intact p53 response. We have previously demonstrated that a
hydrocarbon-stapled -helix based on the transactivation domain of p53
(SAH-p53-8) efficiently disrupts p53-HDM2 and p53-HDMX complexes allowing
for p53 to induce apoptotic cell death. Here, we show that SAH-p53-8
treatment is cytotoxic to metastatic melanoma cells by a p53-dependent
mechanism. Additionally, SAH-p53-8 sensitizes melanoma to treatment with
either cisplatin or the HDM2-specific inhibitor Nutlin-3. Importantly,
the inhibition of the p53-HDMX complex arrests the growth of human
metastatic melanoma in vivo. The restoration of functional p53 activity
provides a basis for a previously unrecognized targeted therapy for
metastatic melanoma.

