Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting MLCK expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts
disrupts tumor-stromal interactions in gastric cancer


Aim: Accumulating evidence has indicated that microenvironment consisting
of stromal affects cancer progression. However, the mechanism by which
cancer cells and fibroblasts, the major cell type in stromal, interact
with each other during tumor development remains to be elucidated. Our
aim is to identify the molecular mechanism involved in tumor-stromal cell
interactions in human gastric cancer. Methods: The expression of Myosin
Light Chain Kinase (MLCK) in gastric cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF)
was detected by quantitative RT-PCR. The effects of CAF, which was
interfered with MLCK, on cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration and
invasion in vitro were measured. Results: Primary fibroblast cultures
were established from human gastric cancer. MLCK was upregulated in CAF
compared with NF (fibroblasts from patient matching non-cancerous
tissues). Small interfering RNA knockdown of MLCK in CAF impaired the
augmenting effect of CAF on gastric cancer cell proliferation, and
induced the apoptosis of gastric cancer cells (9.1+0.8 vs 22.3+1.4, pAim:
Accumulating evidence has indicated that microenvironment consisting of
stromal affects cancer progression. However, the mechanism by which
cancer cells and fibroblasts, the major cell type in stromal, interact
with each other during tumor development remains to be elucidated. Our
aim is to identify the molecular mechanism involved in tumor-stromal cell
interactions in human gastric cancer. Methods: The expression of Myosin
Light Chain Kinase (MLCK) in gastric cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF)
was detected by quantitative RT-PCR. The effects of CAF, which was
interfered with MLCK, on cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration and
invasion in vitro were measured. Results: Primary fibroblast cultures
were established from human gastric cancer. MLCK was upregulated in CAF
compared with NF (fibroblasts from patient matching non-cancerous
tissues). Small interfering RNA knockdown of MLCK in CAF impaired the
augmenting effect of CAF on gastric cancer cell proliferation, and
induced the apoptosis of gastric cancer cells (9.1+0.8 vs 22.3+1.4,
p<0.05). Moreover, the ability of stimulating gastric cancer cells
migration (77.7+4.3 vs 61+4.2, pAim: Accumulating evidence has indicated
that microenvironment consisting of stromal affects cancer progression.
However, the mechanism by which cancer cells and fibroblasts, the major
cell type in stromal, interact with each other during tumor development
remains to be elucidated. Our aim is to identify the molecular mechanism
involved in tumor-stromal cell interactions in human gastric cancer.
Methods: The expression of Myosin Light Chain Kinase (MLCK) in gastric
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) was detected by quantitative RT-PCR.
The effects of CAF, which was interfered with MLCK, on cell
proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion in vitro were measured.
Results: Primary fibroblast cultures were established from human gastric
cancer. MLCK was upregulated in CAF compared with NF (fibroblasts from
patient matching non-cancerous tissues). Small interfering RNA knockdown
of MLCK in CAF impaired the augmenting effect of CAF on gastric cancer
cell proliferation, and induced the apoptosis of gastric cancer cells
(9.1+0.8 vs 22.3+1.4, p<0.05). Moreover, the ability of stimulating
gastric cancer cells migration (77.7+4.3 vs 61+4.2, p<0.05) and invasion
(60.9+1.5 vs 48.3+1.4, pAim: Accumulating evidence has indicated that
microenvironment consisting of stromal affects cancer progression.
However, the mechanism by which cancer cells and fibroblasts, the major
cell type in stromal, interact with each other during tumor development
remains to be elucidated. Our aim is to identify the molecular mechanism
involved in tumor-stromal cell interactions in human gastric cancer.
Methods: The expression of Myosin Light Chain Kinase (MLCK) in gastric
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) was detected by quantitative RT-PCR.
The effects of CAF, which was interfered with MLCK, on cell
proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion in vitro were measured.
Results: Primary fibroblast cultures were established from human gastric
cancer. MLCK was upregulated in CAF compared with NF (fibroblasts from
patient matching non-cancerous tissues). Small interfering RNA knockdown
of MLCK in CAF impaired the augmenting effect of CAF on gastric cancer
cell proliferation, and induced the apoptosis of gastric cancer cells
(9.1+0.8 vs 22.3+1.4, p<0.05). Moreover, the ability of stimulating
gastric cancer cells migration (77.7+4.3 vs 61+4.2, p<0.05) and invasion
(60.9+1.5 vs 48.3+1.4, p<0.05) in vitro by CAF was also inhibited when
MLCK was knocked down. Furthermore, gastric cancer cells can also
activate CAF in a MLCK-dependent manner. Conclusions: These findings
indicate that MLCK mediates the cross-talk between tumor and stromal in
gastric cancer, and suggest that targeting stromal cells for MLCK
interference may be a therapeutic target in human gastric cancer.

