Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk factors of prostate cancer in African American men


Background. African American men have 1.6 times the incidence and 2.4
times the mortality rate of prostate cancer, compared to Caucasian men.
Thus, prostate cancer constitutes one of the most striking racial health
disparities, the causation of which is not well understood. Main
hypothesis. We hypothesized that select clinical and/or bio-behavioral
risk factors are associated with prostate cancer in African American men.
Participants and Methods. 105 African American men aged 34-80 (35 cases
and 70 controls) were recruited. Univariable and multivariable logistic
regression models were built to test the marginal and joint effects of
the variables when predicting the cancer status. Results. In the
univariable regression models, PSA (ng/ml; pBackground. African American
men have 1.6 times the incidence and 2.4 times the mortality rate of
prostate cancer, compared to Caucasian men. Thus, prostate cancer
constitutes one of the most striking racial health disparities, the
causation of which is not well understood. Main hypothesis. We
hypothesized that select clinical and/or bio-behavioral risk factors are
associated with prostate cancer in African American men. Participants and
Methods. 105 African American men aged 34-80 (35 cases and 70 controls)
were recruited. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression models
were built to test the marginal and joint effects of the variables when
predicting the cancer status. Results. In the univariable regression
models, PSA (ng/ml; p<.001), smoking (cigarettes/day; p=0.011), diagnosis
of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH, yes/no; pBackground. African
American men have 1.6 times the incidence and 2.4 times the mortality
rate of prostate cancer, compared to Caucasian men. Thus, prostate cancer
constitutes one of the most striking racial health disparities, the
causation of which is not well understood. Main hypothesis. We
hypothesized that select clinical and/or bio-behavioral risk factors are
associated with prostate cancer in African American men. Participants and
Methods. 105 African American men aged 34-80 (35 cases and 70 controls)
were recruited. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression models
were built to test the marginal and joint effects of the variables when
predicting the cancer status. Results. In the univariable regression
models, PSA (ng/ml; p<.001), smoking (cigarettes/day; p=0.011), diagnosis
of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH, yes/no; p<.001), diagnosis of
prostatitis (yes/no; pBackground. African American men have 1.6 times the
incidence and 2.4 times the mortality rate of prostate cancer, compared
to Caucasian men. Thus, prostate cancer constitutes one of the most
striking racial health disparities, the causation of which is not well
understood. Main hypothesis. We hypothesized that select clinical and/or
bio-behavioral risk factors are associated with prostate cancer in
African American men. Participants and Methods. 105 African American men
aged 34-80 (35 cases and 70 controls) were recruited. Univariable and
multivariable logistic regression models were built to test the marginal
and joint effects of the variables when predicting the cancer status.
Results. In the univariable regression models, PSA (ng/ml; p<.001),
smoking (cigarettes/day; p=0.011), diagnosis of benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH, yes/no; p<.001), diagnosis of prostatitis (yes/no;
p<.001) and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN, yes/no;
p=Background. African American men have 1.6 times the incidence and 2.4
times the mortality rate of prostate cancer, compared to Caucasian men.
Thus, prostate cancer constitutes one of the most striking racial health
disparities, the causation of which is not well understood. Main
hypothesis. We hypothesized that select clinical and/or bio-behavioral
risk factors are associated with prostate cancer in African American men.
Participants and Methods. 105 African American men aged 34-80 (35 cases
and 70 controls) were recruited. Univariable and multivariable logistic
regression models were built to test the marginal and joint effects of
the variables when predicting the cancer status. Results. In the
univariable regression models, PSA (ng/ml; p<.001), smoking
(cigarettes/day; p=0.011), diagnosis of benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH, yes/no; p<.001), diagnosis of prostatitis (yes/no; p<.001) and
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN, yes/no; p=<.001) were
independently associated with the prostate cancer diagnosis. However,
only PSA (4.340; (1.484, 12.689)) and diagnosis of BPH (14.248; (1.132,
179.310)) remained significant in the age-adjusted multivariable logistic
regression model. Conclusions. Our results suggest that, as expected, PSA
levels are associated with prostate cancer in African American men.
Interestingly, a history of BPH is also associated with prostate cancer
in African American men. Despite the limitation of a small sample size,
our data is in agreement to a recent report (Pettaway et al, 2011) in
which African Americans with BPH were observed to have a much greater
risk of developing prostate cancer than similar Caucasian men,
highlighting differences in the biology of prostate cancer between
populations. References Curtis A. Pettaway, Lois E. Lamerato, Michael T.
Eaddy et al. Benign prostatic hyperplasia: racial differences in
treatment patterns and prostate cancer prevalence. BJU International (1 0
8) 1 3 0 2 - 8, 2011

