Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Vascular endothelial growth factor gene polymorphisms and clinical
outcome in advanced gastric cancer treated with FOLFOX


Background: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene may have an impact on tumor
progression, and response to chemotherapy. The aim of this study is to
evaluate the associations between VEGF SNPs and clinical outcome in
advanced gastric cancer patients treated with oxaliplatin,
5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX). Methods: One hundred ninety
recurrent or metastatic gastric cancer patients were enrolled in this
study and treated with FOLFOX regimen. Genomic DNA was isolated from
whole blood, and six VEGF (-2578C/A, 2489C/T, 1498T/C, 634G/C, 936C/T,
and 1612G/A) gene polymorphisms were analyzed by PCR. Results: Patients
genotyped G/G for 634G/C gene polymorphism had lower response rate
(22.2%) than those G/C or C/C (32.3%, 51.1%; p = 0.034). The median serum
levels of VEGF was higher in G/G genotypes than G/C + C/C (724.1 pg/ml
vs. 462.4 pg/ml, p = 0.041). Patients with the VEGF 634CG/C polymorphism
G/C + C/C genotype had a longer time to progression (TTP) of 4.9 months,
compared with the TTP of 3.5 months for those with the G/G (p = 0.012,
log-rank test). By multivariate analysis, this G/G genotype of 634G/C
polymorphism was identified as an independent prognostic factor (Hazard
ratio 1.497, p = 0.017). No significant influence on overall survival
(OS) was observed by the 634 G/C. However, other SNPs were not related to
response rate, TTP, or OS. Conclusion: Our data suggest that G/G genotype
of 634G/C polymorphism is related to the higher serum levels of VEGF, and
poor clinical outcome in advanced gastric cancer patients. It may help to
identify patients who are more sensitive to FOLFOX regimen.

