Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined effect of linalool as component of Humulus lupulus on
doxorubicin-induced antitumor activity


[Purpose] Cancer chemotherapy has been applied to advanced tumors and
intractable tumors, playing an important role in their treatments.
However, there are many problems including the appearance of adverse
reactions and acquirement of drug resistance. The increased numbers of
medications resulted in a decreased quality of life for the patients.
However, food and food components can be used to increase the activity of
antitumor agents without increasing the number of medicines. In this
study, the effects of some components in Humulus lupulus (Hop) were
examined on the doxorubicin (DOX) induced antitumor activity in vitro and
in vivo. [Methods] The effects of Hop components (linalool, myrcene,
-humulene, -caryophyllene) on DOX permeability and DOX cytotoxicity in
P388 leukemia cells in vitro were examined. P388 leukemia cells (5 x 105
cells per animal) were transplanted onto the backs of BDF1 mice, and DOX
(2.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, i.p.) and linalool (1.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, p.o.)
were administered. The solid tumor and normal tissues were removed and
measured DOX concentrations in each tissue. [Results and Discussion] In
vitro, myrcene, -humulene and -caryophyllene did not have beneficial
effects on DOX permeability in tumor cells. In contrast, the addition of
linalool was shown to significantly promote on DOX influx and increased
DOX concentration in tumor cells. The combination of DOX with linalool
(0.1 M) showed 3.5-fold (P[Purpose] Cancer chemotherapy has been applied
to advanced tumors and intractable tumors, playing an important role in
their treatments. However, there are many problems including the
appearance of adverse reactions and acquirement of drug resistance. The
increased numbers of medications resulted in a decreased quality of life
for the patients. However, food and food components can be used to
increase the activity of antitumor agents without increasing the number
of medicines. In this study, the effects of some components in Humulus
lupulus (Hop) were examined on the doxorubicin (DOX) induced antitumor
activity in vitro and in vivo. [Methods] The effects of Hop components
(linalool, myrcene, -humulene, -caryophyllene) on DOX permeability and
DOX cytotoxicity in P388 leukemia cells in vitro were examined. P388
leukemia cells (5 x 105 cells per animal) were transplanted onto the
backs of BDF1 mice, and DOX (2.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, i.p.) and linalool
(1.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, p.o.) were administered. The solid tumor and
normal tissues were removed and measured DOX concentrations in each
tissue. [Results and Discussion] In vitro, myrcene, -humulene and
-caryophyllene did not have beneficial effects on DOX permeability in
tumor cells. In contrast, the addition of linalool was shown to
significantly promote on DOX influx and increased DOX concentration in
tumor cells. The combination of DOX with linalool (0.1 M) showed 3.5-fold
(P<0.05) cytotoxicity, compared to treatment with DOX alone. Therefore,
the combined linalool with DOX enhanced DOX cytotoxicity by the increase
of DOX concentration in tumor cells. In vivo, the tumor weight in the DOX
alone group decreased to 77% of the control level, whereas the
combination of linalool with DOX decreased the tumor weight by 53%
(P[Purpose] Cancer chemotherapy has been applied to advanced tumors and
intractable tumors, playing an important role in their treatments.
However, there are many problems including the appearance of adverse
reactions and acquirement of drug resistance. The increased numbers of
medications resulted in a decreased quality of life for the patients.
However, food and food components can be used to increase the activity of
antitumor agents without increasing the number of medicines. In this
study, the effects of some components in Humulus lupulus (Hop) were
examined on the doxorubicin (DOX) induced antitumor activity in vitro and
in vivo. [Methods] The effects of Hop components (linalool, myrcene,
-humulene, -caryophyllene) on DOX permeability and DOX cytotoxicity in
P388 leukemia cells in vitro were examined. P388 leukemia cells (5 x 105
cells per animal) were transplanted onto the backs of BDF1 mice, and DOX
(2.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, i.p.) and linalool (1.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, p.o.)
were administered. The solid tumor and normal tissues were removed and
measured DOX concentrations in each tissue. [Results and Discussion] In
vitro, myrcene, -humulene and -caryophyllene did not have beneficial
effects on DOX permeability in tumor cells. In contrast, the addition of
linalool was shown to significantly promote on DOX influx and increased
DOX concentration in tumor cells. The combination of DOX with linalool
(0.1 M) showed 3.5-fold (P<0.05) cytotoxicity, compared to treatment with
DOX alone. Therefore, the combined linalool with DOX enhanced DOX
cytotoxicity by the increase of DOX concentration in tumor cells. In
vivo, the tumor weight in the DOX alone group decreased to 77% of the
control level, whereas the combination of linalool with DOX decreased the
tumor weight by 53% (P<0.05) of that in DOX alone group. In the tumor,
the DOX concentration in the linalool combined group increased by
1.8-fold (P[Purpose] Cancer chemotherapy has been applied to advanced
tumors and intractable tumors, playing an important role in their
treatments. However, there are many problems including the appearance of
adverse reactions and acquirement of drug resistance. The increased
numbers of medications resulted in a decreased quality of life for the
patients. However, food and food components can be used to increase the
activity of antitumor agents without increasing the number of medicines.
In this study, the effects of some components in Humulus lupulus (Hop)
were examined on the doxorubicin (DOX) induced antitumor activity in
vitro and in vivo. [Methods] The effects of Hop components (linalool,
myrcene, -humulene, -caryophyllene) on DOX permeability and DOX
cytotoxicity in P388 leukemia cells in vitro were examined. P388 leukemia
cells (5 x 105 cells per animal) were transplanted onto the backs of BDF1
mice, and DOX (2.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, i.p.) and linalool (1.0mg/kg/day x
4 days, p.o.) were administered. The solid tumor and normal tissues were
removed and measured DOX concentrations in each tissue. [Results and
Discussion] In vitro, myrcene, -humulene and -caryophyllene did not have
beneficial effects on DOX permeability in tumor cells. In contrast, the
addition of linalool was shown to significantly promote on DOX influx and
increased DOX concentration in tumor cells. The combination of DOX with
linalool (0.1 M) showed 3.5-fold (P<0.05) cytotoxicity, compared to
treatment with DOX alone. Therefore, the combined linalool with DOX
enhanced DOX cytotoxicity by the increase of DOX concentration in tumor
cells. In vivo, the tumor weight in the DOX alone group decreased to 77%
of the control level, whereas the combination of linalool with DOX
decreased the tumor weight by 53% (P<0.05) of that in DOX alone group. In
the tumor, the DOX concentration in the linalool combined group increased
by 1.8-fold (P<0.05) compared to DOX alone group. In the normal tissue,
the DOX concentration after combined linalool and DOX treatment tended to
decrease. In particular, the DOX concentration in the heart decreased by
49% (P[Purpose] Cancer chemotherapy has been applied to advanced tumors
and intractable tumors, playing an important role in their treatments.
However, there are many problems including the appearance of adverse
reactions and acquirement of drug resistance. The increased numbers of
medications resulted in a decreased quality of life for the patients.
However, food and food components can be used to increase the activity of
antitumor agents without increasing the number of medicines. In this
study, the effects of some components in Humulus lupulus (Hop) were
examined on the doxorubicin (DOX) induced antitumor activity in vitro and
in vivo. [Methods] The effects of Hop components (linalool, myrcene,
-humulene, -caryophyllene) on DOX permeability and DOX cytotoxicity in
P388 leukemia cells in vitro were examined. P388 leukemia cells (5 x 105
cells per animal) were transplanted onto the backs of BDF1 mice, and DOX
(2.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, i.p.) and linalool (1.0mg/kg/day x 4 days, p.o.)
were administered. The solid tumor and normal tissues were removed and
measured DOX concentrations in each tissue. [Results and Discussion] In
vitro, myrcene, -humulene and -caryophyllene did not have beneficial
effects on DOX permeability in tumor cells. In contrast, the addition of
linalool was shown to significantly promote on DOX influx and increased
DOX concentration in tumor cells. The combination of DOX with linalool
(0.1 M) showed 3.5-fold (P<0.05) cytotoxicity, compared to treatment with
DOX alone. Therefore, the combined linalool with DOX enhanced DOX
cytotoxicity by the increase of DOX concentration in tumor cells. In
vivo, the tumor weight in the DOX alone group decreased to 77% of the
control level, whereas the combination of linalool with DOX decreased the
tumor weight by 53% (P<0.05) of that in DOX alone group. In the tumor,
the DOX concentration in the linalool combined group increased by
1.8-fold (P<0.05) compared to DOX alone group. In the normal tissue, the
DOX concentration after combined linalool and DOX treatment tended to
decrease. In particular, the DOX concentration in the heart decreased by
49% (P<0.05) of that in DOX alone group, expecting that linalool may
decrease DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. Thus, the combination of linalool
with DOX increased DOX concentration in the tumor, consequently enhanced
antitumor activity of DOX. In conclusion, linalool is expected
effectiveness as DOX modulator.

