Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ADAM10: A new player in breast cancer progression


Background: The ADAMs are a family of proteases, best known for their
role in releasing the extracellular domain of transmembrane proteins. One
of the ADAMs, i.e., ADAM10, is involved in the activation of 2 important
signaling systems controlling cell growth, invasion and metastasis, i.e.
the EGFR and NOTCH signaling systems. Because of its ability to activate
both EGFR and NOTCH, ADAM10 is likely to play a role in cancer formation
or progression. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the
role of ADAM10 in breast cancer and test its therapeutic potential,
especially in patients with the triple-negative form of this disease.
Materials and Methods: ADAM10 mRNA expression was examined in a pooled
collection of publically available databases (n 4000). ADAM10 protein was
examined in a cohort of 120 breast tumor extracts by ELISA. In addition,
ADAM10 expression was decreased by RNAi and the effects of this on cell
proliferation, invasion and migration were determined. Using the novel
ADAM10 inhibitor GI254023X (GSK), we examined the effect of ADAM10
inhibition on a panel of 13 breast cancer cell lines. Results: Using the
pooled collection of databases, ADAM10 mRNA was found to be significantly
elevated in HER2+ breast cancer compared to other subtypes (p Background:
The ADAMs are a family of proteases, best known for their role in
releasing the extracellular domain of transmembrane proteins. One of the
ADAMs, i.e., ADAM10, is involved in the activation of 2 important
signaling systems controlling cell growth, invasion and metastasis, i.e.
the EGFR and NOTCH signaling systems. Because of its ability to activate
both EGFR and NOTCH, ADAM10 is likely to play a role in cancer formation
or progression. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the
role of ADAM10 in breast cancer and test its therapeutic potential,
especially in patients with the triple-negative form of this disease.
Materials and Methods: ADAM10 mRNA expression was examined in a pooled
collection of publically available databases (n 4000). ADAM10 protein was
examined in a cohort of 120 breast tumor extracts by ELISA. In addition,
ADAM10 expression was decreased by RNAi and the effects of this on cell
proliferation, invasion and migration were determined. Using the novel
ADAM10 inhibitor GI254023X (GSK), we examined the effect of ADAM10
inhibition on a panel of 13 breast cancer cell lines. Results: Using the
pooled collection of databases, ADAM10 mRNA was found to be significantly
elevated in HER2+ breast cancer compared to other subtypes (p < 0.0001).
High ADAM10 mRNA expression was also observed in basal like breast cancer
and was associated with poorer overall survival in this subgroup (p =
0.0196). In a cohort of 120 breast tumor extracts, ADAM10 protein was
found to be significantly higher in ER-negative compared to ER-positive
tumors (p = 0.005), in high grade versus low grade tumors (p Background:
The ADAMs are a family of proteases, best known for their role in
releasing the extracellular domain of transmembrane proteins. One of the
ADAMs, i.e., ADAM10, is involved in the activation of 2 important
signaling systems controlling cell growth, invasion and metastasis, i.e.
the EGFR and NOTCH signaling systems. Because of its ability to activate
both EGFR and NOTCH, ADAM10 is likely to play a role in cancer formation
or progression. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the
role of ADAM10 in breast cancer and test its therapeutic potential,
especially in patients with the triple-negative form of this disease.
Materials and Methods: ADAM10 mRNA expression was examined in a pooled
collection of publically available databases (n 4000). ADAM10 protein was
examined in a cohort of 120 breast tumor extracts by ELISA. In addition,
ADAM10 expression was decreased by RNAi and the effects of this on cell
proliferation, invasion and migration were determined. Using the novel
ADAM10 inhibitor GI254023X (GSK), we examined the effect of ADAM10
inhibition on a panel of 13 breast cancer cell lines. Results: Using the
pooled collection of databases, ADAM10 mRNA was found to be significantly
elevated in HER2+ breast cancer compared to other subtypes (p < 0.0001).
High ADAM10 mRNA expression was also observed in basal like breast cancer
and was associated with poorer overall survival in this subgroup (p =
0.0196). In a cohort of 120 breast tumor extracts, ADAM10 protein was
found to be significantly higher in ER-negative compared to ER-positive
tumors (p = 0.005), in high grade versus low grade tumors (p < 0.0001),
and in younger than older women (p = 0.018). Downregulation of ADAM10 in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells resulted in a significant reduction in
invasion (p = 0.0006) and cellular migration (p = 0.0002). Treatment of
13 breast cancer cell lines with GI254023X resulted in variable growth
inhibition (from 0 to 52%). Furthermore, GI254023X significantly
decreased invasion in the MDA-MB-231 cell line (p = 0.001). Conclusions:
Our findings of a correlation between ADAM10 and features of aggressive
disease and the fact that its downregulation/inhibition decreased growth,
invasion and migration suggests that this ADAM10 protease is involved in
the progression of breast cancer. Inhibition of ADAM10 with GI254023X may
be a new treatment for breast cancer. Acknowledgements: The authors thank
SFI and the Molecular Therapeutics for Cancer Ireland (SRC award,
08/SRC/B1410 to MTCI) for funding this work.

