Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interference with repair of sub-lethal radiation damage by
ABT-888, an inhibitor of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), and
theobromine


BACKGROUND: Upon DNA damage, PARP-1 and -2 use NAD to build a polymer of
ADP-ribose on themselves, histones, and other proteins, altering
chromatin and recruiting repair complexes to the damage. Inhibition of
PARP activity sensitizes cancer cells or tumor xenografts to radiation
therapy (RT) and inhibits DNA repair. RT is usually delivered as
fractionated daily doses, allowing sub-lethal damage (SLD) to be repaired
between doses. We asked if ABT-888, a specific PARP inhibitor, or
theobromine (TB), which radiosensitizes via a PARP-independent mechanism,
could inhibit SLD repair. METHODS: Human lung cancer cells A549 and H460
were plated at a range of cell densities, exposed to Cs-137 -radiation
(0-8 Gy), as single doses or as multiples of 2 Gy/day, with or without
drugs, then allowed to form colonies. DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) were
estimated as H2AX foci. RESULTS: In agreement with literature data, 2.5 M
ABT-888 produced a dose enhancement factor (DEF) of 1.4 at 10% survival
for single radiation doses, and 10 M was only modestly better (DEF 1.5).
A549 cells showed marked repair of SLD (Table), such that the surviving
fraction (SF) after 6 Gy was lower (0.13) than for 3 x 2 Gy (0.52). When
ABT-888 or TB was added 1 h before the first irradiation, cells were
sensitized to 6 Gy single dose or 3 x 2 Gy. The combination was more
effective. ABT-888-sensitized cells responded to 3 x 2 Gy with similar
killing as unsensitized cells to a single 6 Gy dose (p = 0.93). The
combined effects are reflected in a decrease in mean inactivation dose
(MID). Higher levels of H2AX foci in drug-treated cells indicate
inhibition of damage processing. CONCLUSIONS: Radiosensitization of human
lung cancer cells by ABT-888 is at least partially via inhibition of SLD
repair. Although more ABT-888 produces little additional benefit,
addition of TB, which acts through a complementary mechanism, further
improves the response.


