Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fatty acids mediated regulation of cancer metabolism


Although fatty acids have been shown to modulate progression, growth and
invasiveness of cancer cells, it remains unclear how saturated and
unsaturated fatty acids affect metabolic reprogramming of aggressive and
nonaggressive cancer metabolism. In this study, we tested the hypothesis
that fatty acids induce differential competitive effects on glucose
oxidation in aggressive and nonaggressive ovarian cancer cells. Normal
cells rely mainly on mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation for their
required energy supply, however, cancer cells utilize aerobic glycolysis
pathway for their energetic need. We hypothesized that high fat diet
could deregulate this metabolic alteration in cancer cells. Such as
glucose, fatty acids are an influential source of ATP, energy currency,
within a cell. In our study, using metabolic footprinting we studied the
affect of both saturated (stearic and palmitic acid) and unsaturated
fatty acids (linoleic and oleic) on glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway
and TCA cycle. Moreover, we also studied the effect of glucose on fatty
acid oxidation, uptake and endogenous fatty acid synthesis. Metabolic
flux analysis was done for comparative metabolic profiling under various
nutritional conditions. We observed that fatty acids differentially
regulate highly invasive ovarian cancer (SKOV3 and SKOV3ip) cells than
less invasive ovarian cancer (OVCAR3) cells. Interestingly, we found
strong effect of fatty acids on glycolysis in less invasive cancer cells.
In contrast, our study showed that glucose has dominant effect on
aggressive cells compared to less aggressive cells. Our studies emphasize
the role of fatty acids in ovarian cancer growth, invasion and migration
and underlie the need to develop therapy based on high fat diet
synergistically with existing chemotherapeutics and cancer drugs.

