Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of RPS25-MDM2/MDMX-p53 regulatory feedback loop


There is an increasing interest in elucidation of ribosomal proteins
(RPs) in cancer development and progression. Ribosomal proteins have
extraribosomal functions and participate in a surveillance network for
cell growth, division, and apoptosis. Accumulating evidence suggests that
the p53 protein, together with ribosomal proteins, takes part in a
surveillance mechanism for genome integrity and protein translation, and
is activated by nucleolar stress. We herein identified a regulatory role
of RPS25 in p53-mediated cellular response to ribosomal stress. We
demonstrated that RPS25 bound to MDM2 by using immunoprecipitation and
GST pull-down assays. RPS25 inhibited the E3 ligase activity of MDM2,
resulting in the stabilization and activation of p53. Overexpression of
RPS25 induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis through p53. The
MDM2-binding and nucleolar location domains of RPS25 were critical for
regulating p53 stability and activity. Knockdown of RPS25 by siRNA
attenuated the activation of p53 induced by ribosomal stress.
Furthermore, we found that MDMX was involved in the regulation of the E3
ligase activity of MDM2 by RPS25, suggesting that RPS25 modulates p53 in
an MDM2 and MDMX-dependent manner. Finally, RPS25 was identified to be a
transcriptional target of p53. Ribosomal stress-induced p53 activation
inhibited RPS25 protein level, while knockdown of p53 restored RPS25
expression. In conclusion, these results demonstrate that RPS25 is a
novel regulator of p53 in ribosomal stress and define a unique
S25-MDM2/MDMX-p53 regulatory feedback loop in ribosomal stress. (This
work was supported by NIH/NCI grants R01 CA112029 and R01 CA121211 and a
Susan G Komen Foundation grant BCTR0707731.)

