Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Consumption of Lake Ontario sport fish and the incidence of
melanoma in the New York State Angler Cohort Study (NYSACS)


Exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and other persistent organic
pollutants (e.g., toxaphene) has been linked to an increased risk for
melanoma in occupational settings. Great Lakes fish bioaccumulate PCBs
and organochlorine pesticides, thus consumption is thought to be an
important non-occupational exposure route. We investigated the
consumption of sport-caught fish from Lake Ontario and the incidence of
melanoma in the New York State Angler Cohort Study (NYSACS), a
prospective cohort of 17,097 anglers and their spouses aged 18 to 40
years old at enrollment. Participants completed a mailed
self-administered questionnaire upon enrollment in 1991. The
questionnaire queried for the number of years that fish from L. Ontario
were consumed, frequency of species specific fish consumption as well as
demographic factors, smoking history and other selected potential
confounders. As of December 31, 2008, fifty-one histologically confirmed,
first primary, incident melanoma cases were identified via the New York
State Cancer Registry. Vital status was determined by linkage with the
Social Security Administration Death file. Prevalent cancer cases (n =
196) were excluded. Of the remaining 16,901cohort members, 10% (n=1,672)
were lost to follow-up and censored in the year they left New York State.
Analyses were restricted to Caucasians (n= 16,326). Fish consumption was
dichotomized into never vs. ever. Duration of consumption was categorized
into tertiles based on the distribution among the cases reporting eating
Lake Ontario sport-caught fish. Poisson regression was used to calculate
rate ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals, adjusting for age, income,
years of education and number of years fishing in New York State. Lake
Ontario sport-caught fish consumption was weakly associated with melanoma
risk RR=1.33(0.6-2.99) as compared with non-consumers. Duration of Lake
Ontario fish consumption was not convincingly associated with melanoma
incidence (non-eaters RR = 1.0 (ref); 1st tertile RR = 1.07 (95% CI =
0.38-3.06); 2nd tertile RR = 1.41 (95% CI = 0.49-4.03); 3rd tertile RR =
2.16 (95% CI = 0.79-5.89); p-for trend =0.10. Although interpretation of
our preliminary results is complicated by a small number of cases (n=52)
and inability to control for potential confounding from sun exposure,
they suggest that consumption of Great Lakes fish contaminated with PCBs
and other organochlorine compounds was not associated with incidence of
melanoma.

