Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Assessment of glioma recurrence following radiotherapy using the
parametric response map: A preclinical study


Heterogeneity of the glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) response to standard
therapies can be due to spatially varying phenotypes within an individual
tumor due to genomic instability. The goal of this study was to evaluate
the parametric response map PRM, a voxel-based analytical approach, as a
biomarker of tumor recurrence on an animal-by-animal basis in a radiation
dose escalation protocol. Twenty-four genetically engineered murine GBM
model [Ink4a/Arf-/- PtenloxP/loxp/ Ntv-a RCAS/PDGF(+)/Cre(+)] were imaged
by MRI (contrast-enhanced (CE-T1w) and diffusion-weighted MRI) daily for
a week and then every two days thereafter. Tumor bearing animals were
introduced to the study (D0) when the tumors reached a volume of 20 mm3.
Mice were randomized in 4 groups (n=6 per group): 0G and daily doses of
1G, 2G and 4G delivered daily for 5 days. Tumor volumes of interest (VOI)
were manually contoured on the CE-T1w images and reported on the
diffusion map. The relative ADC (rADC) maps were computed by normalized
values using a VOI defined within the contralateral striatum. PRM was
performed by calculating the difference in mid-treatment from
pre-treatment rADC values for each voxel in the tumor. Voxels were
classified, based on a user-defined threshold set at 337 rADC units, as
significantly increasing (PRMrADC+), significantly decreasing (PRMrADC-),
and unchanged (PRMrADC0) rADC values following therapy. The volume
fraction of each classification was calculated by summing the class
specific voxels and normalizing by the tumor volume. Finally, for each
animal the maximum PRMrADC+ value (maxPRMrADC+) was determined within the
first 5 days following therapy initiation. The maxPRMrADC+ was correlated
to time to recurrence using a linear regression (TTR; was defined as the
time for the tumor to triple its initial volume at baseline (D0)). We
observed a large inter- and intra-group variability of TTR (intra-group
variability in day: [min-max] = [3-5], [3-9], [13-21] and [19-25] for the
0G, 1G, 2G and 4G groups; respectively). The day of the maxPRMrADC+ value
measured animal by animal was somewhat variable over the week of
treatment administration. We observed a linear increase of maxPRMrADC+
value which correlated with the dose of radiation received (from 4.52.7 %
to 33.911.3 %; for control and 4G groups; respectively). We also found
excellent correlation between TTR and the maxPRMrADC+ metric value of
individual animals during the week of treatment (R2 = 0.85). This study
demonstrates the efficacy of PRM as an imaging biomarker of tumor
recurrence following radiotherapy. The maxPRMrADC+ values measured during
radiation therapy were correlated strongly with TTR. PRMrADC technique
may serve as a biomarker of tumor recurrence that is insensitive to the
response heterogeneity typically observed in GBM.

