Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein and glycan biomarkers of malignant potential in pancreatic
cyst fluid


The early detection of a portion of pancreatic cancer precursors_cystic
neoplasms of the pancreas_is possible through high-resolution abdominal
imaging, providing an opportunity to successfully treat these lesions
before they become invasive. The increased use of abdominal imaging has
led to a higher rate of identifying pancreatic cysts, but currently it is
not possible to accurately determine which cysts have high malignant
potential and should be removed. Our previous work showed that the
glycosylation and abundance of specific proteins in the cyst fluid was
significantly different between potentially malignant cysts and benign
cysts, providing leads for biomarkers to guide patient management. In
this work we tested the hypothesis that a panel of specific protein
glycoforms forms an accurate biomarker for pancreatic cysts with high
malignant potential. Using antibody-lectin sandwich arrays, screens of
nearly 100 different candidate markers and multiple glycoforms of each
marker confirmed previous results and also showed that two distinct
glycan structures are present on several proteins at high levels in the
cyst fluid of cancer precursors (intraductal pancreatic mucinous
neoplasms (IPMN) and mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCN)) but not in benign
cysts (serous cystadenomas (SC) and pseudocysts (PC)). The glycans,
N-acetyl glucosamine and the blood group H structure, previously have not
been recognized as cancer biomarkers. A six-marker panel comprising the
measurement of one of these glycans on MUC5AC, MUC16, endorepellin, and
fibronectin correctly detected 37 of 39 (95%) potential cancer precursors
and 16 of 18 (89%) of the benign cysts. This performance significantly
surpasses current diagnostic accuracy. The validation of this biomarker
panel could lead to more accurate treatment decisions for patients with
potentially malignant cysts while sparing patients with benign cysts from
unnecessary procedures.

