Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sonic hedgehog-associated medulloblastoma arising from the
cochlear nuclei of the brainstem


Medulloblastoma is a malignant brain tumor of childhood that comprises at
least four molecularly distinct subgroups. We have previously described
that cerebellar granule neuron precursors may give rise to the subgroup
with a molecular fingerprint of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Other
recent data indicate that precursor cells within the dorsal brain stem
may serve as cellular origins for Wnt-associated medulloblastomas. In
order to see whether Shh-associated medulloblastomas are also able to
develop in the dorsal brainstem, we analyzed two lines of transgenic mice
with constitutive Shh signaling in hGFAP- and Math1-positive brainstem
precursor populations, respectively. Our results show that in both of
these lines, medulloblastomas arise from granule neuron precursors of the
cochlear nuclei, a derivative of the auditory lower rhombic lip. This
region is distinct from derivatives of precerebellar lower rhombic lip
where medulloblastoma arise in mice with constitutive-active Wnt
signaling. With respect to their histology and the expression of
appropriate markers, Shh tumors perfectly resemble the human
counterparts. Moreover, we find that in a series of 63 human desmoplastic
medulloblastomas, 19 (30%) have a very close contact to the cochlear
nuclei on MRI imaging. In conclusion, we suggest that precursors of the
rhombic lip which may either develop into cerebellar or into cochlear
granule neurons, may give rise to Shh-associated medulloblastoma.

