Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent downregulation of the transcription factor Foxa2 in lung
cancer through epigenetic silencing


PURPOSE: We sought to determine the mechanisms of downregulation of the
airway transcription factor Foxa2 in lung cancer and the expression
status of Foxa2 in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: A series
of 25 lung cancer cell lines were evaluated for Foxa2 protein expression,
FOXA2 mRNA levels, FOXA2 mutations, FOXA2 copy number changes and for
evidence of FOXA2 promoter hypermethylation. In addition, 32 NSCLCs were
sequenced for FOXA2 mutations and 173 primary NSCLC tumors evaluated for
Foxa2 expression using an immunohistochemical assay. RESULTS: Out of the
25 cell lines, 13 (52%) had undetectable FOXA2 mRNA. The expression of
FOXA2 mRNA and Foxa2 protein were congruent in 19/22 cells (p=0.001).
FOXA2 mutations were not identified in primary NSCLCs and were infrequent
in cell lines. Focal or broad chromosomal deletions involving FOXA2 were
not present. The promoter region of FOXA2 had evidence of
hypermethylation, with an inverse correlation between FOXA2 mRNA
expression and presence of CpG dinucleotide methylation (pPURPOSE: We
sought to determine the mechanisms of downregulation of the airway
transcription factor Foxa2 in lung cancer and the expression status of
Foxa2 in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). METHODS: A series of 25 lung
cancer cell lines were evaluated for Foxa2 protein expression, FOXA2 mRNA
levels, FOXA2 mutations, FOXA2 copy number changes and for evidence of
FOXA2 promoter hypermethylation. In addition, 32 NSCLCs were sequenced
for FOXA2 mutations and 173 primary NSCLC tumors evaluated for Foxa2
expression using an immunohistochemical assay. RESULTS: Out of the 25
cell lines, 13 (52%) had undetectable FOXA2 mRNA. The expression of FOXA2
mRNA and Foxa2 protein were congruent in 19/22 cells (p=0.001). FOXA2
mutations were not identified in primary NSCLCs and were infrequent in
cell lines. Focal or broad chromosomal deletions involving FOXA2 were not
present. The promoter region of FOXA2 had evidence of hypermethylation,
with an inverse correlation between FOXA2 mRNA expression and presence of
CpG dinucleotide methylation (p<0.0001). In primary NSCLC tumor
specimens, there was a high frequency of either absence (42/173, 24.2%)
or no/low expression (96/173, 55.4%) of Foxa2. In 130 patients with stage
I NSCLC there was a trend towards decreased survival in tumors with
no/low expression of Foxa2 (HR of 1.6, 95%CI 0.9-3.1;
p=0.122).CONCLUSIONS: Loss of expression of Foxa2 is frequent in lung
cancer cell lines and NSCLCs. The main mechanism of downregulation of
Foxa2 is epigenetic silencing through promoter hypermethylation. Further
elucidation of the involvement of Foxa2 and other airway transcription
factors in the pathogenesis of lung cancer may identify novel therapeutic
targets.

