Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The fallopian tube is the origin of high-grade serous ovarian
carcinomas in a mouse model


Ovarian cancer is a lethal disease primarily because it is often not
detected until it spreads beyond the female reproductive tract. Early
detection is thus the key to successful intervention in ovarian cancer.
Yet it is not known how this cancer arises and metastasizes. In the last
decade, new evidence has challenged the dogma that the ovary is the main
source of these cancers. The fallopian tube has been proposed instead as
the primary origin of high-grade serous ovarian cancer _ the subtype
causing 70% of ovarian cancer deaths. To understand the origin and early
progression of this serous cancer, we have generated double knockout
(DKO) mice by conditionally disabling in the reproductive tract two
critical genes _ Dicer, an essential gene for microRNA synthesis, and
Pten, a tumor suppressor that negatively regulates the PI3K pathway.
These DKO mice develop high-grade serous carcinomas that arise from the
fallopian tube. These high-grade serous cancers spread to engulf the
ovary and then extensively metastasize throughout the abdominal cavity,
causing ascites and killing 100% of the mice by 13 months. This is the
first mouse model demonstrating that the fallopian tube is capable of
initiating and developing high-grade serous carcinomas with similar
clinical manifestations shown in the human serous ovarian carcinomas.
Intriguingly, analyzing these DKO tumors at early time points also
reveals that these epithelial cancers begin in the stroma of the
fallopian tube, suggesting that the cancers arise through a
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) _ a novel mechanism of
carcinoma initiation. This study thus presents a new paradigm for the
origin and initiation of deadly high-grade serous ovarian cancer.

