Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Anti-invasive potential of alginate microcapsule encapsulating
TIMP 2-engineered cells against malignant glioma cells


Objectives. 293T was genetically modified to secrete tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) (abbreviated as 293TIMP2 cells) and 293TIMP2
cells were encapsulated into alginate microcapsules to produce TIMP-2
protien continuously. Since TIMP-2 is known to inhibit matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) expression of tumor cells, it could be
inhibit invasion of tumor cells through extracellular matrix. The
anti-invasive potential of the microcapsules was studied in vitro against
U87MG glioma cells. Experimental. The TIMP-2 gene was transfected to 293T
cells and the genetically engineered 293TIMP2 cells were encapsulted into
alginate microcapsules. The released TIMP-2 protein was examined with
Western blot analysis and the anti-invasive potential against U86MG
glioma cells was tested with gelatin zymography for matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and a Matrigel assay for invasion. Results.
Cell viability within the alginate microcapsules was properly maintained
at a cell density of 5106 cell density. Since polycationic polymers are
helpful to maintain mechanical strength of microcapsules with good cell
viability, alginate microcapsules were reinforced with chitosan (0.1 %
wt/vol). Expression of TIMP-2 protein in cell lysate and the secreted
TIMP-2 into conditioned media were confirmed with Western blot analysis.
Alginate microcapsules encapsulating 293TIMP2 cells properly released
TIMP-2 protein into the medium and the released TIMP-2 protein was
effective in inhibiting MMP-2 expression and invasion of U87MG glioma
cells. Conclusion. These results indicated that alginate microcapsules
encapsulating 293TIMP2 cells are superior candidates for anti-invasive
therapy of glioma.

