Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A fast solution to NGS library preparation with low nanogram DNA
input


Next generation sequencing (NGS) has significantly impacted cancer
genetics, enabling a comprehensive characterization of genomic
abnormalities in the cancer genome at very high resolution. By delivering
massive DNA sequences at unprecedented speed and cost, NGS promises to
make personalized genome-based diagnosis and targeted cancer therapy a
reality in the foreseeable future. To date, library construction with
clinical samples has been a challenge, primarily due to the limited
quantities of sample DNA available. To overcome this challenge, we have
developed a fast library preparation method using novel NEBNext reagents
and adaptors. This method enables library construction from a minimal
quantity of DNA (Next generation sequencing (NGS) has significantly
impacted cancer genetics, enabling a comprehensive characterization of
genomic abnormalities in the cancer genome at very high resolution. By
delivering massive DNA sequences at unprecedented speed and cost, NGS
promises to make personalized genome-based diagnosis and targeted cancer
therapy a reality in the foreseeable future. To date, library
construction with clinical samples has been a challenge, primarily due to
the limited quantities of sample DNA available. To overcome this
challenge, we have developed a fast library preparation method using
novel NEBNext reagents and adaptors. This method enables library
construction from a minimal quantity of DNA (< 5 ng), and can be used for
both intact and fragmented DNA. Moreover, the workflow is compatible with
multiple NGS platforms.

