Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A genetically engineered mouse for imaging of apoptosis in a
tissue specific manner


The importance of the apoptotic machinery is exemplified in a number of
disease processes. For example, inhibition of apoptosis can result in a
number of cancers, autoimmune diseases, inflammatory diseases, and viral
infections. Cancer is characterized by dysregulated cell proliferation
and altered cell death, which constitutes a common basis for neoplastic
evolution. The most implicit and clinically attractive anticancer
strategies, therefore, consist of eliminating tumor cells by preventing
their expansion and ultimately inducing apoptotic cell death. We have
developed a transgenic mouse model wherein Caspase 3 mediated cell death
can be imaged in real time and non-invasively utilizing a luciferase
based biosensor. Upon Cre-mediated recombination, transgene expression
containing the Caspase 3 biosensor is achieved in a cell or tissue
specific manner. Here we show that expression of the Caspase 3 biosensor
can be achieved in several tissues. In addition, we demonstrate in mouse
models of cancer, that the ability to dynamically and sensitively image
the activation of the Caspase 3 provides an opportunity to understand the
dynamics of cell death in response to specific drugs or combination
therapies. We also provide results demonstrating the utility of the
technology in evaluating the efficacy of cancer therapeutics in cancer
stem cells, a population that is rare and transient.

