Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo monitoring of metabolic inhibition in anaplastic thyroid
carcinoma


Purpose/Objective(s): Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) accounts for
over half of thyroid cancer related deaths and is generally refractory to
conventional treatment. Development of novel therapeutic options is
critical for the management of this deadly disease. Since tumor cells
fulfill energy requirements primarily through aerobic glycolysis rather
than mitochondrial respiration, metabolic inhibition represents an
attractive treatment modality. In vivo real time imaging may be useful
for evaluating the effectiveness of targeting tumor metabolism.
Materials/Methods: A panel of ATC cell lines was evaluated for dependence
on glucose and glutamine for cell proliferation and survival.
Intracellular ATP levels and cellular reducing potential were measured in
cells treated with 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). Enhancement of the cytotoxic
effects of cisplatin and radiation therapy (XRT) with 2-DG was evaluated.
In a murine orthotopic xenograft model of ATC, real-time hyperpolarized
magnetic resonance imaging (HP-MRI) was employed to assess the effects of
2-DG on tumor metabolism. Results: Glucose, but not glutamine starvation,
resulted in significant ATC cell death, suggesting that glucose is the
primary nutrient for ATC in vitro. Alterations in extracellular glucose
levels affected ATP and cellular reducing potential and both were
inhibited by 2-DG. Treatment of ATC cells with 2-DG potentiated the
cytotoxic effects of cisplatin alone, XRT alone or cisplatin with XRT.
Dynamic spectroscopy of HP-[1-13C]-pyruvate revealed differences in the
rate of conversion of pyruvate to lactate in 2-DG treated animals
compared to their controls (p=0.504). Analysis with a kinetic model
accounting for chemical and physical exchange highlighted this difference
(pPurpose/Objective(s): Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) accounts for
over half of thyroid cancer related deaths and is generally refractory to
conventional treatment. Development of novel therapeutic options is
critical for the management of this deadly disease. Since tumor cells
fulfill energy requirements primarily through aerobic glycolysis rather
than mitochondrial respiration, metabolic inhibition represents an
attractive treatment modality. In vivo real time imaging may be useful
for evaluating the effectiveness of targeting tumor metabolism.
Materials/Methods: A panel of ATC cell lines was evaluated for dependence
on glucose and glutamine for cell proliferation and survival.
Intracellular ATP levels and cellular reducing potential were measured in
cells treated with 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). Enhancement of the cytotoxic
effects of cisplatin and radiation therapy (XRT) with 2-DG was evaluated.
In a murine orthotopic xenograft model of ATC, real-time hyperpolarized
magnetic resonance imaging (HP-MRI) was employed to assess the effects of
2-DG on tumor metabolism. Results: Glucose, but not glutamine starvation,
resulted in significant ATC cell death, suggesting that glucose is the
primary nutrient for ATC in vitro. Alterations in extracellular glucose
levels affected ATP and cellular reducing potential and both were
inhibited by 2-DG. Treatment of ATC cells with 2-DG potentiated the
cytotoxic effects of cisplatin alone, XRT alone or cisplatin with XRT.
Dynamic spectroscopy of HP-[1-13C]-pyruvate revealed differences in the
rate of conversion of pyruvate to lactate in 2-DG treated animals
compared to their controls (p=0.504). Analysis with a kinetic model
accounting for chemical and physical exchange highlighted this difference
(p<0.001). Conclusions: Generalized dependence of ATC cells on glucose
catabolism provides an opportunity to utilize metabolic inhibition to
enhance sensitivity to radiation therapy and chemotherapy. HP-MRI may
represent an effective means to assess metabolic targeting in vivo.
Continued refinement of the kinetic parameters that relate the observed
signal to multiple physical and chemical pools is necessary to facilitate
interpretation of the observed changes. The synchronized optimization of
metabolic inhibitors with complementary imaging agents in a preclinical
platform may facilitate translation of these therapeutic options for ATC
to the clinical setting.

