Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic repression of RARRES1 is mediated by methylation of a
critical proximal promoter and a loss of CTCF binding


Background: The critical promoter element responsible for epigenetic
silencing of retinoic acid receptor responder 1 (RARRES1) by methylation
is unclear. Likewise, how aberrant methylation interplays effectors and
thus affects breast neoplastic features remains largely unknown.
Methodology/Principal Findings: We first compared methylation occurring
at the sequences flanking the RARRES1 promoter in primary breast
carcinomas to that in adjacent benign tissues. Surprisingly, tumor cores
displayed significantly elevated methylation occurring solely at the
upstream region, while the downstream element proximal to the
transcription start site (+1) remained largely unchanged. Yet,
hypermethylation at the former did not result in appreciable silencing
effect. In contrast, the proximal sequence displayed full promoter
activity and methylation of which remarkably silenced RARRES1
transcription. This phenomenon was recapitulated in breast cancer cell
lines, in which methylation at the proximal region strikingly coincided
with downregulation. We also discovered that CTCF occupancy was enriched
at the unmethylayed promoter enriched with transcription-active histone
markings. Furthermore, knocking-down CTCF expression hampered RARRES1
expression, suggesting CTCF positively regulated RARRES1 transcription
presumably by binding to unmethylated promoter poised at
transcription-ready state. Moreover, RARRES1 restoration not only impeded
cell invasion but also promoted death induced by chemotherapeutic agents,
denoting its tumor suppressive effects. Its role of attenuating invasion
agreed with data generated from clinical specimens revealing that RARRES1
was generally downregulated in metastatic lymph nodes compared to the
tumor cores. Conclusion/Significance: For the first time, this report
delineated that silencing of RARRES1 by hypermethylation is occurring at
a crucial proximal promoter element and is associated with a loss of
binding to CTCF, an activator for RARRES1 expression. We also revealed
the tumor suppressive roles exerted by RARRES1 in part by promoting
breast epithelial cell death and by impeding cell invasion that is an
important property for metastatic spread.

