Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced chemosensitivity of estrogen receptor- (ER)-negative
breast cancer through soybean genistein-induced epigenetic reactivation
of ER


Estrogen receptor- (ER)-negative breast cancer is clinically aggressive
and has a poor prognosis due to the lack of estrogen target-directed
therapies. The soybean isoflavone, genistein (GE), has been shown to
prevent and inhibit breast cancer and recent studies have suggested that
GE can enhance the anticancer capacity of an estrogen antagonist,
tamoxifen (TAM), especially in ER-positive breast cancer cells. However,
the role of GE in ER-negative breast cancer remains unknown. In our
current studies, we found that GE can reactivate ER expression and this
effect was synergistically enhanced when combined with a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), in ER-negative
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. GE treatment also re-sensitized
ER-dependent cellular responses to activator 17-estradiol (E2) and
antagonist TAM. Further studies revealed that GE can lead to remodeling
of the chromatin structure in the ER promoter thereby contributing to ER
reactivation. The global enzymatic activities for HDACs and DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) mediated by GE were altered to favor ER
up-regulation. Consistently, dietary GE significantly reduced the growth
of ER-negative mouse xenograft tumors due at least in part to ER
reactivation. The combination of GE with TAM had more prominent effects
on delaying tumor growth than either treatment alone. Collectively, our
studies suggest that soybean genistein can epigenetically restore ER
expression, which in turn increases TAM-dependent anti-estrogen
chemosensitivity. The results from our studies revealed a novel
chemotherapeutic combination approach using bioactive soybean product and
anti-hormone therapy in refractory ER-negative breast cancer which will
provide more effective options in breast cancer therapy.

