Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contribution of malignant thrombocytosis to ovarian cancer
proliferation and resistance to chemotherapy-induced-apoptosis through
Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptor-Alpha (PDGFRA) signaling


Background: Thrombocytosis at the time of ovarian cancer diagnosis is
correlated with decreased interval to progression and decreased overall
survival, but the mechanisms for these outcomes are poorly understood. We
considered the possible role of Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF)
signaling through PDGFRA as a mechanism for platelet-driven increases in
tumor cell growth and progression. Methods: In vitro (co-culture
experiments with multiple ovarian cancer cell lines and platelets) and in
vivo (orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer) experiments were
performed to assess the functional and biological effects of platelets on
ovarian cancer with regard to invasion, proliferation, and apoptotic
response to chemotherapy. In vitro assays queried whether PDGFRA may be
implicated in the observed effects. Results: Co-culture assays of ovarian
cancer cells with and without platelets showed increased ovarian cancer
cell migration (pBackground: Thrombocytosis at the time of ovarian cancer
diagnosis is correlated with decreased interval to progression and
decreased overall survival, but the mechanisms for these outcomes are
poorly understood. We considered the possible role of Platelet-Derived
Growth Factor (PDGF) signaling through PDGFRA as a mechanism for
platelet-driven increases in tumor cell growth and progression. Methods:
In vitro (co-culture experiments with multiple ovarian cancer cell lines
and platelets) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer)
experiments were performed to assess the functional and biological
effects of platelets on ovarian cancer with regard to invasion,
proliferation, and apoptotic response to chemotherapy. In vitro assays
queried whether PDGFRA may be implicated in the observed effects.
Results: Co-culture assays of ovarian cancer cells with and without
platelets showed increased ovarian cancer cell migration (p<0.05 for all
cell lines) and proliferation (pBackground: Thrombocytosis at the time of
ovarian cancer diagnosis is correlated with decreased interval to
progression and decreased overall survival, but the mechanisms for these
outcomes are poorly understood. We considered the possible role of
Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF) signaling through PDGFRA as a
mechanism for platelet-driven increases in tumor cell growth and
progression. Methods: In vitro (co-culture experiments with multiple
ovarian cancer cell lines and platelets) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse
model of ovarian cancer) experiments were performed to assess the
functional and biological effects of platelets on ovarian cancer with
regard to invasion, proliferation, and apoptotic response to
chemotherapy. In vitro assays queried whether PDGFRA may be implicated in
the observed effects. Results: Co-culture assays of ovarian cancer cells
with and without platelets showed increased ovarian cancer cell migration
(p<0.05 for all cell lines) and proliferation (p<0.05 for all cell lines)
in the presence of platelets. Co-culture assays including docetaxel
showed ovarian cancer cells had a decreased apoptotic response in the
presence of platelets (pBackground: Thrombocytosis at the time of ovarian
cancer diagnosis is correlated with decreased interval to progression and
decreased overall survival, but the mechanisms for these outcomes are
poorly understood. We considered the possible role of Platelet-Derived
Growth Factor (PDGF) signaling through PDGFRA as a mechanism for
platelet-driven increases in tumor cell growth and progression. Methods:
In vitro (co-culture experiments with multiple ovarian cancer cell lines
and platelets) and in vivo (orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer)
experiments were performed to assess the functional and biological
effects of platelets on ovarian cancer with regard to invasion,
proliferation, and apoptotic response to chemotherapy. In vitro assays
queried whether PDGFRA may be implicated in the observed effects.
Results: Co-culture assays of ovarian cancer cells with and without
platelets showed increased ovarian cancer cell migration (p<0.05 for all
cell lines) and proliferation (p<0.05 for all cell lines) in the presence
of platelets. Co-culture assays including docetaxel showed ovarian cancer
cells had a decreased apoptotic response in the presence of platelets
(p<0.05 for all lines). Proliferative and anti-apoptotic effects did not
require direct platelet-to-cell contact. Blocking PDGFRA using a
monoclonal antibody and/or siRNA reversed, in part, the protective
effects that platelets had in decreasing docetaxel-mediated apoptosis
(pBackground: Thrombocytosis at the time of ovarian cancer diagnosis is
correlated with decreased interval to progression and decreased overall
survival, but the mechanisms for these outcomes are poorly understood. We
considered the possible role of Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF)
signaling through PDGFRA as a mechanism for platelet-driven increases in
tumor cell growth and progression. Methods: In vitro (co-culture
experiments with multiple ovarian cancer cell lines and platelets) and in
vivo (orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer) experiments were
performed to assess the functional and biological effects of platelets on
ovarian cancer with regard to invasion, proliferation, and apoptotic
response to chemotherapy. In vitro assays queried whether PDGFRA may be
implicated in the observed effects. Results: Co-culture assays of ovarian
cancer cells with and without platelets showed increased ovarian cancer
cell migration (p<0.05 for all cell lines) and proliferation (p<0.05 for
all cell lines) in the presence of platelets. Co-culture assays including
docetaxel showed ovarian cancer cells had a decreased apoptotic response
in the presence of platelets (p<0.05 for all lines). Proliferative and
anti-apoptotic effects did not require direct platelet-to-cell contact.
Blocking PDGFRA using a monoclonal antibody and/or siRNA reversed, in
part, the protective effects that platelets had in decreasing
docetaxel-mediated apoptosis (p<0.05). In an orthotopic mouse model of
ovarian cancer, platelet transfusions resulted in increased mean tumor
weight (4.1g v 2.1g, p=0.03) and increased mean number of tumor nodules
(62 v 20, p=0.004). These effects were abrogated by platelet
pre-treatment with aspirin and by mouse treatment with aspirin.
Immunohistochemistry of tumor specimens showed increased proliferation in
the platelet transfused-mice compared to control (82.5% v 66.3%,
pBackground: Thrombocytosis at the time of ovarian cancer diagnosis is
correlated with decreased interval to progression and decreased overall
survival, but the mechanisms for these outcomes are poorly understood. We
considered the possible role of Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF)
signaling through PDGFRA as a mechanism for platelet-driven increases in
tumor cell growth and progression. Methods: In vitro (co-culture
experiments with multiple ovarian cancer cell lines and platelets) and in
vivo (orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer) experiments were
performed to assess the functional and biological effects of platelets on
ovarian cancer with regard to invasion, proliferation, and apoptotic
response to chemotherapy. In vitro assays queried whether PDGFRA may be
implicated in the observed effects. Results: Co-culture assays of ovarian
cancer cells with and without platelets showed increased ovarian cancer
cell migration (p<0.05 for all cell lines) and proliferation (p<0.05 for
all cell lines) in the presence of platelets. Co-culture assays including
docetaxel showed ovarian cancer cells had a decreased apoptotic response
in the presence of platelets (p<0.05 for all lines). Proliferative and
anti-apoptotic effects did not require direct platelet-to-cell contact.
Blocking PDGFRA using a monoclonal antibody and/or siRNA reversed, in
part, the protective effects that platelets had in decreasing
docetaxel-mediated apoptosis (p<0.05). In an orthotopic mouse model of
ovarian cancer, platelet transfusions resulted in increased mean tumor
weight (4.1g v 2.1g, p=0.03) and increased mean number of tumor nodules
(62 v 20, p=0.004). These effects were abrogated by platelet
pre-treatment with aspirin and by mouse treatment with aspirin.
Immunohistochemistry of tumor specimens showed increased proliferation in
the platelet transfused-mice compared to control (82.5% v 66.3%, p<0.001)
and decreased apoptosis in transfused-mice compared to control (37.5%
decrease, p=0.009). CD31 suggested greater blood vessel maturation in
platelet-transfused mice; the ratio of lumen-containing to total vessels
was greater in the platelet transfused mice (1.23 v 0.679, p=0.03).
Immunofluorescence studies demonstrated platelet extravasation into
tumor, confirming the potential for direct platelet-tumor cell
interaction. Conclusions: Adverse cancer outcomes correlated to
thrombocytosis are partially explained by PDGF-mediated taxane resistance
in vitro. We confirmed in vivo that thrombocytosis contributes to
increased aggressiveness of malignancy, suggesting that the clinical and
mechanistic implications of malignant thrombocytosis warrant further
study in order to identify clinically relevant biomarkers and therapeutic
targets.

