Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Constitutive and regulated expression of GPR109A by DNA
methylation and IFN- in human colon carcinoma cells


Butyrate, one of the short chain fatty acids generated in the colon by
microbiota from dietary fiber, has shown both preventative and
therapeutic potential to counteract inflammatory disease and
inflammation-mediated colorectal cancer. GPR109A, a recently identified
receptor for butyrate, is highly expressed in normal colonic tissue, but
is often down-regulated in human colon carcinoma cells. The molecular
mechanisms underlying regulation of GPR109A expression in human colon
carcinoma cells is unknown. Here we demonstrated that although there is
no CpG island in the human GPR109A promoter region, the GPR109A promoter
is hypermethylated in human colon carcinoma cell lines and in colon
carcinoma tissue specimens. Interestingly, despite the hypermethylation
of the promoter, IFN-, a cytokine secreted by activated cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL), effectively up-regulated GPR109A expression in human
colon carcinoma cells, and this regulation is mediated at the
transcriptional level. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the
IFN--activated pSTAT1 regulates GPR109A expression by directly binding to
the Gamma Activation Site (GAS) elements in the GPR109A promoter region
in human colon carcinoma cells. At the functional level, IFN--mediated
up-regulation of GPR109A resulted in increased sensitivity of the tumor
cells to butyrate-induced cell death and increased level of histone
acetylation in human colon carcinoma cells. In summary, our data
demonstrated that although GPR109A can be constitutively silenced by DNA
methylation in human colon carcinoma cells, tumor-infiltrating CTLs might
use secretion of IFN- to up-regulate GPR109A as a mechanism to
re-activate GPR109A, thereby restoring functional response of colon
carcinoma cells to butyrate in the tumor microenvironment.

