Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposite effects of arsenic trioxide on the Nrf2 pathway in oral
squamous cell carcinoma in vitro and in vivo


Nuclear factor erythroid derived like 2 (Nrf2) is a critical
transcriptional factor in mediating cellular defense mechanisms against
oxidative stress or electrophiles. Arsenic has been reported to induce
malignant transformation of human cells through Nrf2-dependent signaling
pathway. However, arsenic is also a promising cancer therapeutic drug for
solid tumors, including oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). It is still
unclear how Nrf2 may mediate cellular response of OSCC cells when treated
with arsenic. In order to fully understand the impact of Nrf2 signaling
in human OSCC, we examined expression of Nrf2 and Nrf2-regulated genes in
arsenic trioxide (ATO) treated OSCC cells in vitro and in ATO-treated
OSCC xenografts. ATO exerted its anti-tumor effects on both cultured OSCC
cells and OSCC xenografts by inhibiting cell growth, suppressing
angiogenesis and inducing apoptosis. ATO activated a silent Nrf2 pathway
in cultured OSCC cells as shown by induction of Nrf2 and Nrf2-regulated
genes, NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) and heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1), in a dose-dependent manner. On the contrary, Nrf2 pathway became
active in OSCC xenograft tumors, and ATO treatment down-regulated
expression of Nrf2 and Nrf2-regulated genes. Our study clearly
demonstrated opposite effects of ATO on Nrf2 pathway in OSCC in vitro and
in vivo.

