Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Racial/ethnic disparities in breast cancer radiosensitivity


Purpose: To evaluate radiotherapy (RT)-related skin toxicity and its
relationship to quality of life (QOL) outcomes in a tri-racial/ethnic
cohort. Methods: We evaluated the first 172 patients in an ongoing
prospective study of conservatively managed breast cancer patients using
the validated Breast Cancer Treatment Outcome Scale (BCTOS) questionnaire
to assess RT-related QOL, and NCI CTCAE v3.0 criteria to assess skin
toxicity (ST). BCTOS was completed prior to and at RT completion, and
skin toxicity was assessed at week 3 and RT completion. We recorded
patient demographics, body mass index (BMI), disease and treatment
characteristics and used Student's t-test and regression for statistical
analysis. We divided BCTOS parameters into 3 domains: physical
appearance/function, personal reaction to RT, and worst pain in the last
4 weeks. Results: Completed BCTOS questionnaires were available for 145
patients (84%) included in this analysis. Patients were 17.2%
non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7% Hispanic white (HW), 19.3% black (B), and
2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS, 52.4% stage I, and 29% stage II-III invasive
breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI Purpose: To evaluate radiotherapy
(RT)-related skin toxicity and its relationship to quality of life (QOL)
outcomes in a tri-racial/ethnic cohort. Methods: We evaluated the first
172 patients in an ongoing prospective study of conservatively managed
breast cancer patients using the validated Breast Cancer Treatment
Outcome Scale (BCTOS) questionnaire to assess RT-related QOL, and NCI
CTCAE v3.0 criteria to assess skin toxicity (ST). BCTOS was completed
prior to and at RT completion, and skin toxicity was assessed at week 3
and RT completion. We recorded patient demographics, body mass index
(BMI), disease and treatment characteristics and used Student's t-test
and regression for statistical analysis. We divided BCTOS parameters into
3 domains: physical appearance/function, personal reaction to RT, and
worst pain in the last 4 weeks. Results: Completed BCTOS questionnaires
were available for 145 patients (84%) included in this analysis. Patients
were 17.2% non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7% Hispanic white (HW), 19.3%
black (B), and 2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS, 52.4% stage I, and 29% stage
II-III invasive breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI <25, 28.3% 25-29.99, and
41.4% 30. All patients had BCS followed by RT +/ systemic therapy; median
breast dose 50 Gy + 10 Gy boost. At RT completion, all patients had ST:
46.2% Grade (Gr) 1, 50.3% Gr 2, and 3.4% Gr 3. In the entire cohort,
there was a significant increase from baseline to RT completion in all
QOL domains: Post minus baseline mean difference in physical
appearance/function was 7.7 points (pPurpose: To evaluate radiotherapy
(RT)-related skin toxicity and its relationship to quality of life (QOL)
outcomes in a tri-racial/ethnic cohort. Methods: We evaluated the first
172 patients in an ongoing prospective study of conservatively managed
breast cancer patients using the validated Breast Cancer Treatment
Outcome Scale (BCTOS) questionnaire to assess RT-related QOL, and NCI
CTCAE v3.0 criteria to assess skin toxicity (ST). BCTOS was completed
prior to and at RT completion, and skin toxicity was assessed at week 3
and RT completion. We recorded patient demographics, body mass index
(BMI), disease and treatment characteristics and used Student's t-test
and regression for statistical analysis. We divided BCTOS parameters into
3 domains: physical appearance/function, personal reaction to RT, and
worst pain in the last 4 weeks. Results: Completed BCTOS questionnaires
were available for 145 patients (84%) included in this analysis. Patients
were 17.2% non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7% Hispanic white (HW), 19.3%
black (B), and 2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS, 52.4% stage I, and 29% stage
II-III invasive breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI <25, 28.3% 25-29.99, and
41.4% 30. All patients had BCS followed by RT +/ systemic therapy; median
breast dose 50 Gy + 10 Gy boost. At RT completion, all patients had ST:
46.2% Grade (Gr) 1, 50.3% Gr 2, and 3.4% Gr 3. In the entire cohort,
there was a significant increase from baseline to RT completion in all
QOL domains: Post minus baseline mean difference in physical
appearance/function was 7.7 points (p<0.001), personal reaction to RT 8.1
points (pPurpose: To evaluate radiotherapy (RT)-related skin toxicity and
its relationship to quality of life (QOL) outcomes in a tri-racial/ethnic
cohort. Methods: We evaluated the first 172 patients in an ongoing
prospective study of conservatively managed breast cancer patients using
the validated Breast Cancer Treatment Outcome Scale (BCTOS) questionnaire
to assess RT-related QOL, and NCI CTCAE v3.0 criteria to assess skin
toxicity (ST). BCTOS was completed prior to and at RT completion, and
skin toxicity was assessed at week 3 and RT completion. We recorded
patient demographics, body mass index (BMI), disease and treatment
characteristics and used Student's t-test and regression for statistical
analysis. We divided BCTOS parameters into 3 domains: physical
appearance/function, personal reaction to RT, and worst pain in the last
4 weeks. Results: Completed BCTOS questionnaires were available for 145
patients (84%) included in this analysis. Patients were 17.2%
non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7% Hispanic white (HW), 19.3% black (B), and
2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS, 52.4% stage I, and 29% stage II-III invasive
breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI <25, 28.3% 25-29.99, and 41.4% 30. All
patients had BCS followed by RT +/ systemic therapy; median breast dose
50 Gy + 10 Gy boost. At RT completion, all patients had ST: 46.2% Grade
(Gr) 1, 50.3% Gr 2, and 3.4% Gr 3. In the entire cohort, there was a
significant increase from baseline to RT completion in all QOL domains:
Post minus baseline mean difference in physical appearance/function was
7.7 points (p<0.001), personal reaction to RT 8.1 points (p<0.0001), and
pain 3.9 points (pPurpose: To evaluate radiotherapy (RT)-related skin
toxicity and its relationship to quality of life (QOL) outcomes in a
tri-racial/ethnic cohort. Methods: We evaluated the first 172 patients in
an ongoing prospective study of conservatively managed breast cancer
patients using the validated Breast Cancer Treatment Outcome Scale
(BCTOS) questionnaire to assess RT-related QOL, and NCI CTCAE v3.0
criteria to assess skin toxicity (ST). BCTOS was completed prior to and
at RT completion, and skin toxicity was assessed at week 3 and RT
completion. We recorded patient demographics, body mass index (BMI),
disease and treatment characteristics and used Student's t-test and
regression for statistical analysis. We divided BCTOS parameters into 3
domains: physical appearance/function, personal reaction to RT, and worst
pain in the last 4 weeks. Results: Completed BCTOS questionnaires were
available for 145 patients (84%) included in this analysis. Patients were
17.2% non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7% Hispanic white (HW), 19.3% black
(B), and 2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS, 52.4% stage I, and 29% stage II-III
invasive breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI <25, 28.3% 25-29.99, and 41.4% 30.
All patients had BCS followed by RT +/ systemic therapy; median breast
dose 50 Gy + 10 Gy boost. At RT completion, all patients had ST: 46.2%
Grade (Gr) 1, 50.3% Gr 2, and 3.4% Gr 3. In the entire cohort, there was
a significant increase from baseline to RT completion in all QOL domains:
Post minus baseline mean difference in physical appearance/function was
7.7 points (p<0.001), personal reaction to RT 8.1 points (p<0.0001), and
pain 3.9 points (p<0.001). For physical appearance/function, greater
differences were found with higher ST grade (10.4 for Gr 2/3 vs. 4.5 for
Gr 1, p=0.01), by race (15.6 points for B vs. 5.9 points for HW and 5.3
points for NHW/other, p=0.003), and increasing BMI (3.6 for Purpose: To
evaluate radiotherapy (RT)-related skin toxicity and its relationship to
quality of life (QOL) outcomes in a tri-racial/ethnic cohort. Methods: We
evaluated the first 172 patients in an ongoing prospective study of
conservatively managed breast cancer patients using the validated Breast
Cancer Treatment Outcome Scale (BCTOS) questionnaire to assess RT-related
QOL, and NCI CTCAE v3.0 criteria to assess skin toxicity (ST). BCTOS was
completed prior to and at RT completion, and skin toxicity was assessed
at week 3 and RT completion. We recorded patient demographics, body mass
index (BMI), disease and treatment characteristics and used Student's
t-test and regression for statistical analysis. We divided BCTOS
parameters into 3 domains: physical appearance/function, personal
reaction to RT, and worst pain in the last 4 weeks. Results: Completed
BCTOS questionnaires were available for 145 patients (84%) included in
this analysis. Patients were 17.2% non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7%
Hispanic white (HW), 19.3% black (B), and 2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS,
52.4% stage I, and 29% stage II-III invasive breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI
<25, 28.3% 25-29.99, and 41.4% 30. All patients had BCS followed by RT +/
systemic therapy; median breast dose 50 Gy + 10 Gy boost. At RT
completion, all patients had ST: 46.2% Grade (Gr) 1, 50.3% Gr 2, and 3.4%
Gr 3. In the entire cohort, there was a significant increase from
baseline to RT completion in all QOL domains: Post minus baseline mean
difference in physical appearance/function was 7.7 points (p<0.001),
personal reaction to RT 8.1 points (p<0.0001), and pain 3.9 points
(p<0.001). For physical appearance/function, greater differences were
found with higher ST grade (10.4 for Gr 2/3 vs. 4.5 for Gr 1, p=0.01), by
race (15.6 points for B vs. 5.9 points for HW and 5.3 points for
NHW/other, p=0.003), and increasing BMI (3.6 for <25, 6.8 for 25-29.99,
and 11.2 for 30, p=0.019). For worst pain in last 4 weeks, greater
differences were found with increasing BMI (1.8 for Purpose: To evaluate
radiotherapy (RT)-related skin toxicity and its relationship to quality
of life (QOL) outcomes in a tri-racial/ethnic cohort. Methods: We
evaluated the first 172 patients in an ongoing prospective study of
conservatively managed breast cancer patients using the validated Breast
Cancer Treatment Outcome Scale (BCTOS) questionnaire to assess RT-related
QOL, and NCI CTCAE v3.0 criteria to assess skin toxicity (ST). BCTOS was
completed prior to and at RT completion, and skin toxicity was assessed
at week 3 and RT completion. We recorded patient demographics, body mass
index (BMI), disease and treatment characteristics and used Student's
t-test and regression for statistical analysis. We divided BCTOS
parameters into 3 domains: physical appearance/function, personal
reaction to RT, and worst pain in the last 4 weeks. Results: Completed
BCTOS questionnaires were available for 145 patients (84%) included in
this analysis. Patients were 17.2% non-Hispanic white (NHW), 60.7%
Hispanic white (HW), 19.3% black (B), and 2.8% other. 18.6% had DCIS,
52.4% stage I, and 29% stage II-III invasive breast cancer. 30.3% had BMI
<25, 28.3% 25-29.99, and 41.4% 30. All patients had BCS followed by RT +/
systemic therapy; median breast dose 50 Gy + 10 Gy boost. At RT
completion, all patients had ST: 46.2% Grade (Gr) 1, 50.3% Gr 2, and 3.4%
Gr 3. In the entire cohort, there was a significant increase from
baseline to RT completion in all QOL domains: Post minus baseline mean
difference in physical appearance/function was 7.7 points (p<0.001),
personal reaction to RT 8.1 points (p<0.0001), and pain 3.9 points
(p<0.001). For physical appearance/function, greater differences were
found with higher ST grade (10.4 for Gr 2/3 vs. 4.5 for Gr 1, p=0.01), by
race (15.6 points for B vs. 5.9 points for HW and 5.3 points for
NHW/other, p=0.003), and increasing BMI (3.6 for <25, 6.8 for 25-29.99,
and 11.2 for 30, p=0.019). For worst pain in last 4 weeks, greater
differences were found with increasing BMI (1.8 for <25, 2.8 for
25-29.99, and 6.1 for 30, p=0.037) and borderline significant increase
with ST grade (2.3 for Gr 1 vs. 5.2 for Gr 2/3, p=0.057). There were no
significant differences in personal reaction to RT. With respect to
physical appearance/function, there was significant interaction between
race/ethnicity and BMI (p=0.015). Among women with BMI 30, there were
significant effect of B race (p=0.010) and worst toxicity grade (p=0.02).
Conclusion: In a diverse cohort of breast cancer patients, RT affected
all QOL domains of the BCTOS. RT-induced ST was more common among B
patients and those with higher BMI and correlated with physical
appearance/function and pain. Underlying etiology for variation in
RT-related breast symptoms is unknown and may relate to genetic,
biologic, and/or environmental factors. Our ongoing study with a targeted
sample size of 1,000 may shed light on the mechanisms of racial/ethnic
disparities in RT outcomes of breast cancer patients.

