Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P73 regulates the expression of KAI1, metastasis suppressor gene


KAI1, a metastasis suppressor gene of various cancers, has been known to
inhibit tumor metastasis without affecting primary tumor growth.
Identification of transcription factor regulating KAI1 is important for
understanding tumor metastasis mechanism. P73 binding site within the
KAI1 promoter were characterized by luciferase assay using reporter
plasmids containing serial deletion promoter regions of KAI1 gene and
chromatin-IP assay. To confirm whether the over-expressed KAI1 gene
regulated by p73 in the transcriptional level was active, cell motility
was analysed by using an adhesion and invasion assay. Here, we first
identified that KAI1 is transcriptionally regulated by p73, a p53 family
member, in various cancer cell lines. In p53-deficient cell lines, p73
had highest promoter binding activity in the KAI1 promoter regions
between 903 and 846 bp, known as a p53-binding site. Human colon cancer
cells stably overexpressing p73 showed that in vitro extracellular matrix
adhesion and invasive potential was decreased compared with parental
cells. These data explain that p73 regulate the KAI1 gene expression in
the transcription level by binding on the specific region of the KAI1
promoter. In addition, it could be suggested that decreased invasion
suppressive effect of KAI1 in invasive tumor and tumor cell lines caused
by weak expression of KAI1 could be restored by increasing the p73 level.
P73 might contribute the metastasis suppressive effect through
upregulating KAI1 gene expression in invasive tumor and tumor cell lines.
Taken together, our present results suggest that p73 contributes to KAI1
promoter activity in cells and plays an important role in the repression
of tumor metastasis function via regulation of KAI1 expression in
invasive tumor and tumor cell lines.

