Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PAK1 kinase promotes cell motility through CRK serine
phosphorylation in non-small cell lung cancer cells


The role of c-Crk (CRK) in promoting metastasis is well described but the
role of CRK phosphorylation and the corresponding signaling events are
not well explained. We have noticed that CRK serine 41 phosphorylation is
inversely correlated with p120-catenin and E-cadherin expressions in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Therefore, we investigated the
role of CRK serine 41 phosphorylation in the down-regulation of
p120-catenin and cell motility in NSCLC cells. We prepared A549 cell
lines stably expressing phosphomimetic and phosphodeficient CRK serine 41
constructs. A549 cells expressing phosphomimetic CRK seine 41
demonstrated a more aggressive behavior in would healing assay and on the
contrary, expression of phosphodeficient CRK serine 41 in A549 cells
reduced cell motility. A549 cells expressing phosphomimetic CRK serine 41
had lower p120-catenin mRNA and promoter activity and vice versa. In
addition, we provide evidence that PAK1 mediates CRK serine 41
phosphorylation. RNAi mediated silencing of PAK1 increased p120-catenin
level and also decreased cell motility in A549 and H157 cells. These
effects were abrogated in A549 cells expressing phosphomimetic CRK serine
41. In summary, our data provide evidence for the role of PAK1 in
promotion of cell motility and down regulation of p120-catenin through
CRK serine 41 phosphorylation in NSCLC cells.

