Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of CC chemokine ligand-2 (CCL2/MCP-1) and CC chemokine
ligand-5 (CCL5/RANTES) on the pharmacokinetics (PK) and the
pharmacodynamics (PD) of pegylated liposomal CKD602 (S-CKD602) in
patients with advanced solid tumors


Introduction: S-CKD602, pegylated liposomal formulation of CKD-602, a
camptothecin analog, is cleared by the mononuclear phagocyte system
(MPS). A phase I study of S-CKD602 reported high interpatient variability
in the PK of encapsulated and released CKD-602. In addition, there was a
bi-directional interaction between S-CKD602 and monocytes (MO), primary
cells of MPS. The exact mechanisms underlying these interactions are
unknown. Chemokine ligands play essential roles in migration and
activation of MO. These factors may have important effects on
nanoparticle PK and PD but have not been evaluated. Thus, we assessed the
relationship of chemokines on the PK and PD of S-CKD602 in patients with
refractory solid tumor. Methods: S-CKD602 was given IV over 1 h q 3
weeks. The doses ranged from 0.10 to 2.5 mg/m2. PK studies of
encapsulated and released CKD-602 in plasma were performed on cycle 1.
Blood was collected prior to dose, at the end of the infusion, and from 3
h to 336 h post infusion. The % decrease in MO at their nadir was
calculated. The concentrations of CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5 in plasma at
baseline, 48 h and 96 h post infusion were determined using the Bio-Plex
system and analyzed using Bio-Plex software. Quartile distribution was
assessed and used for Spearman's correlation coefficient to determine the
association between chemokine baseline level and area under the
concentration versus time curve (AUC) of chemokines with S-CKD602 PK and
PD. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used for comparison among chemokines and
cancer types. Results: The CCL5 baseline concentration [CCL5: 10,457
11,549; CCL2: 182.44 104.70; CCL3: 53.00 19.60; CCL4: 42.88 18.64 pg/ml
(PIntroduction: S-CKD602, pegylated liposomal formulation of CKD-602, a
camptothecin analog, is cleared by the mononuclear phagocyte system
(MPS). A phase I study of S-CKD602 reported high interpatient variability
in the PK of encapsulated and released CKD-602. In addition, there was a
bi-directional interaction between S-CKD602 and monocytes (MO), primary
cells of MPS. The exact mechanisms underlying these interactions are
unknown. Chemokine ligands play essential roles in migration and
activation of MO. These factors may have important effects on
nanoparticle PK and PD but have not been evaluated. Thus, we assessed the
relationship of chemokines on the PK and PD of S-CKD602 in patients with
refractory solid tumor. Methods: S-CKD602 was given IV over 1 h q 3
weeks. The doses ranged from 0.10 to 2.5 mg/m2. PK studies of
encapsulated and released CKD-602 in plasma were performed on cycle 1.
Blood was collected prior to dose, at the end of the infusion, and from 3
h to 336 h post infusion. The % decrease in MO at their nadir was
calculated. The concentrations of CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5 in plasma at
baseline, 48 h and 96 h post infusion were determined using the Bio-Plex
system and analyzed using Bio-Plex software. Quartile distribution was
assessed and used for Spearman's correlation coefficient to determine the
association between chemokine baseline level and area under the
concentration versus time curve (AUC) of chemokines with S-CKD602 PK and
PD. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used for comparison among chemokines and
cancer types. Results: The CCL5 baseline concentration [CCL5: 10,457
11,549; CCL2: 182.44 104.70; CCL3: 53.00 19.60; CCL4: 42.88 18.64 pg/ml
(P<0.0001)] and the CCL5 AUC [CCL5: 770,880 516,880; CCL2: 19,195 9,407;
CCL3: 5,388 2,454; CCL4: 3,804 1,476 pg/mlh (PIntroduction: S-CKD602,
pegylated liposomal formulation of CKD-602, a camptothecin analog, is
cleared by the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS). A phase I study of
S-CKD602 reported high interpatient variability in the PK of encapsulated
and released CKD-602. In addition, there was a bi-directional interaction
between S-CKD602 and monocytes (MO), primary cells of MPS. The exact
mechanisms underlying these interactions are unknown. Chemokine ligands
play essential roles in migration and activation of MO. These factors may
have important effects on nanoparticle PK and PD but have not been
evaluated. Thus, we assessed the relationship of chemokines on the PK and
PD of S-CKD602 in patients with refractory solid tumor. Methods: S-CKD602
was given IV over 1 h q 3 weeks. The doses ranged from 0.10 to 2.5 mg/m2.
PK studies of encapsulated and released CKD-602 in plasma were performed
on cycle 1. Blood was collected prior to dose, at the end of the
infusion, and from 3 h to 336 h post infusion. The % decrease in MO at
their nadir was calculated. The concentrations of CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, and
CCL5 in plasma at baseline, 48 h and 96 h post infusion were determined
using the Bio-Plex system and analyzed using Bio-Plex software. Quartile
distribution was assessed and used for Spearman's correlation coefficient
to determine the association between chemokine baseline level and area
under the concentration versus time curve (AUC) of chemokines with
S-CKD602 PK and PD. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used for comparison among
chemokines and cancer types. Results: The CCL5 baseline concentration
[CCL5: 10,457 11,549; CCL2: 182.44 104.70; CCL3: 53.00 19.60; CCL4: 42.88
18.64 pg/ml (P<0.0001)] and the CCL5 AUC [CCL5: 770,880 516,880; CCL2:
19,195 9,407; CCL3: 5,388 2,454; CCL4: 3,804 1,476 pg/mlh (P<0.0001)]
were elevated in patients compared with other chemokines. The CCL5
baseline and the CCL5 AUC were elevated in patients with sarcoma [24,267
15,108 pg/ml (P=0.0097)] and colon cancer [1,227,720 486,142 pg/mlh
(P=0.0082)], respectively, compared to other types of solid tumors. The
CCL5 AUC was shown to be inversely correlated with the CCL2 AUC
(P=0.028). The encapsulated CKD-602 AUC was correlated with the CCL5
baseline level (P=0.0121), the CCL2 AUC (P=0.0324), the CCL4 AUC
(PIntroduction: S-CKD602, pegylated liposomal formulation of CKD-602, a
camptothecin analog, is cleared by the mononuclear phagocyte system
(MPS). A phase I study of S-CKD602 reported high interpatient variability
in the PK of encapsulated and released CKD-602. In addition, there was a
bi-directional interaction between S-CKD602 and monocytes (MO), primary
cells of MPS. The exact mechanisms underlying these interactions are
unknown. Chemokine ligands play essential roles in migration and
activation of MO. These factors may have important effects on
nanoparticle PK and PD but have not been evaluated. Thus, we assessed the
relationship of chemokines on the PK and PD of S-CKD602 in patients with
refractory solid tumor. Methods: S-CKD602 was given IV over 1 h q 3
weeks. The doses ranged from 0.10 to 2.5 mg/m2. PK studies of
encapsulated and released CKD-602 in plasma were performed on cycle 1.
Blood was collected prior to dose, at the end of the infusion, and from 3
h to 336 h post infusion. The % decrease in MO at their nadir was
calculated. The concentrations of CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5 in plasma at
baseline, 48 h and 96 h post infusion were determined using the Bio-Plex
system and analyzed using Bio-Plex software. Quartile distribution was
assessed and used for Spearman's correlation coefficient to determine the
association between chemokine baseline level and area under the
concentration versus time curve (AUC) of chemokines with S-CKD602 PK and
PD. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used for comparison among chemokines and
cancer types. Results: The CCL5 baseline concentration [CCL5: 10,457
11,549; CCL2: 182.44 104.70; CCL3: 53.00 19.60; CCL4: 42.88 18.64 pg/ml
(P<0.0001)] and the CCL5 AUC [CCL5: 770,880 516,880; CCL2: 19,195 9,407;
CCL3: 5,388 2,454; CCL4: 3,804 1,476 pg/mlh (P<0.0001)] were elevated in
patients compared with other chemokines. The CCL5 baseline and the CCL5
AUC were elevated in patients with sarcoma [24,267 15,108 pg/ml
(P=0.0097)] and colon cancer [1,227,720 486,142 pg/mlh (P=0.0082)],
respectively, compared to other types of solid tumors. The CCL5 AUC was
shown to be inversely correlated with the CCL2 AUC (P=0.028). The
encapsulated CKD-602 AUC was correlated with the CCL5 baseline level
(P=0.0121), the CCL2 AUC (P=0.0324), the CCL4 AUC (P<0.0001), and the
CCL5 AUC (P=0.0012). The % decrease in MO was correlated with released
CKD-602 AUC (P=0.0004) and clearance of encapsulated CKD-602 (P=0.0223).
Conclusions: This is the first report that CCL2 and CCL5 are associated
with the PK and PD of a pegylated liposomal drug. These results suggest
that chemokine production may have a significant impact on the PK and PD
of pegylated liposomal formulation of anticancer agents. In addition, the
type of solid tumor may influence the interaction.

