Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of anoikis by DBC1 (Deleted-In-Breast Cancer 1) through
NF-kB


Cancer cells that undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
evade anoikis, apoptosis induced by detachment from extracellular matrix.
The mechanism of anoikis-resistance is an area of ongoing research. The
gene Deleted in Breast Cancer 1, DBC1, is found in chromosomal region
8p21, which is deleted in some breast cancers, while several other
cancers show DBC1 overexpression. DBC1 interacts with various proteins,
such as SIRT1, ER, RAR and SUV39H1 in a cancer context dependent manner.
We found that depletion of DBC1 sensitized MCF10-A mammary epithelial
cells to anoikis both in two-dimensional and three dimensional culture
models. This effect was also observed in several breast cancer cell
lines. Microarray analysis showed that DBC1 regulates the level of the
c-FLIP in MCF10a cells, which was confirmed by RT-PCR. In addition, real
time PCR studies showed that DBC1 induces other NF-kB transcription
factor target genes such as Bcl2 and XIAP, some of which are known
suppressors of anoikis. Luciferase assays demonstrated that DBC1 induces
NF-kB transcriptional activity. NF-KB is a transcription factor that
regulates genes involved in inflammatory response, cell survival and
death. We found, through the use of the NF-kB inhibitors BAY 117082 and
curcumin, that NF-kB suppressed anoikis. Conversely, SIRT1 a deacetylase
that inhibits NF-kB and that is itself inhibited by DBC1 promoted
anoikis. The pathway in which DBC1 regulates anoikis through NF-B will be
further investigated in the future, with a view toward understanding the
role of DBC1 in modulating the inflammatory signaling pathways that
control anoikis.

