Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An integrated cross-species transcriptional network analysis of
metastatic susceptibility


Metastatic disease is the proximal cause of mortality for most cancers
and remains a significant problem for the clinical management of
neoplastic disease. Recent advances in global transcriptional analysis
have enabled better prediction of individuals likely to progress to
metastatic disease. However, minimal overlap between predictive
signatures has precluded easy identification of key biological processes
contributing to the pro-metastatic transcriptional state. To overcome
this limitation, we have applied network analysis to two independent
human breast cancer data sets and three different mouse populations
developed for quantitative analysis of metastasis. Analysis of these data
sets revealed that the gene membership of the networks is highly
conserved within and between species, and that these networks predicted
distant metastasis free survival. Furthermore these results suggest that
inherited susceptibility to metastatic disease is cell autonomous in ER+
tumors and associated with the mitotic spindle checkpoint. In contrast,
susceptibility to metastasis is tumor non-autonomous in ER- patients and
associated with an inherited difference in immune infiltration of the
primary tumor. These results suggest that the application of network
analysis across species may provide a robust method to identify key
biological programs associated with human cancer progression.

