Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Performance of a new generation antibody-independent ApoStream
platform for the enrichment of circulating tumor cells (CTCs)


Background: Isolation and molecular analysis of Circulating Tumor Cells
(CTCs) is technically challenging, but may replace tumor biopsy by
providing a minimally-invasive, blood-based, liquid biopsy method to
monitor metastatic disease progression and guide cancer therapy. The use
of currently available EpCAM-based enrichment platforms limits the type
of tumor cells that can be recovered. We have developed the first robust
CTC isolation device, ApoStream, which does not rely on specific surface
proteins or the size of CTCs. Specific Aims: We demonstrate the
performance of a novel antibody-independent dielectrophoretic field-flow
fractionation (DEP-FFF) based CTC isolation platform: ApoStream. Methods:
In the ApoStream device, DEP-FFF is used to differentially drive cell
movement based on different biophysical properties of cells in a
continuous flow microfluidic chamber to isolate CTCs from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). To demonstrate performance, pre-labeled
SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells (low EpCAM expressing) were spiked into buffer
or PBMCs and isolated through ApoStream device. Cancer cell recovery,
system linearity, and precision were demonstrated. Viability of cancer
cells isolated through the ApoStream platform, as well as their ability
to be propagated in culture, was confirmed. Results: On three different
days, the ApoStream breadboard device recovered 83.0 3.0% (mean SD), 76.3
2.6%, and 81.5 1.0% of SKOV3 cells spiked into buffer (average interday
recovery of 80.3 3.5%, CV% = 4.3). Additionally, 79.0 1.5%, 81.2 7.8% and
75.2 4.3% of SKOV3 cells spiked into 10 million normal PBMCs (average
interday recovery 78.5 3.0%, CV% = 3.3) were recovered. When SKOV3
spiking recovery was measured on two different ApoStream devices, the CV%
was 0.1%. System linearity was evaluated by spiking a range of 4 - 2,600
SKOV3 cells into 10 million PBMCs. The regression analysis for the
linearity resulted in a correlation coefficient (R2) of 1.00. Cell
viability was not affected by the ApoStream device, and was 98.2, 98.8
and 100% of initial viability at 0, 16 and 24 hours after ApoStream
separation, respectively, as measured by Trypan blue exclusion test
conducted on cells propagated in tissue culture. Conclusion: We developed
the first antigen-independent and cell size independent device for
isolation of CTCs from patient blood with a wide variety of cancers.
ApoStream technology performance characterization demonstrated high
recovery of EpCAM-negative cultured cancer cells over a significant range
of spiked cell numbers, as well as excellent linearity performance.
Isolation of large numbers of live and unfixed CTCs with the ApoStream
platform enables downstream molecular characterization of CTCs for the
development of personalized treatment options for cancer patients.
Acknowledgments: Funded by NCI Contract No. HHSN261200800001E.

