Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of MED12 exon 2 mutations in histopathological variants
of uterine leiomyoma


Uterine leiomyomas, or fibroids, are benign tumors affecting millions of
women worldwide. They arise from the overgrowth of smooth muscle and
connective tissue. Regardless of their benign nature, leiomyomas can
cause considerable morbidity, such as abdominal pain, excessive bleeding,
pregnancy complications and even infertility. They also pose a
considerable socio-economic impact and are the most common cause for
hysterectomy. Based on histopathology, uterine leiomyomas can be divided
into various subtypes. Cellular, atypical and mitotically active fibroids
are examples of relatively rare variants of common leiomyomas. Rarely,
fibroids may undergo malignant transformation and develop into a
leiomyosarcoma. We recently showed that MED12 (mediator complex subunit
12) exon 2 is mutated in approximately 70% of uterine leiomyomas (ref 1).
The mutation hot spot affects an evolutionary conserved region of the
MED12 protein. MED12 is part of a 26-subunit protein complex, which is
thought to regulate global as well as gene-specific transcription by
bridging DNA regulatory elements to the RNA polymerase II initiation
complex. To study the frequency of MED12 exon 2 mutations in different
histopathological variants of uterine leiomyoma, we analyzed 105 fibroids
and 61 leiomyosarcomas by direct sequencing. Both rare histopathological
variants and leiomyosarcomas harbored significantly less MED12 exon 2
mutations than common leiomyomas. The driver mutations underlying these
lesions remain to be characterized. (1) N Mkinen et al. (2011) MED12, the
mediator complex subunit 12 gene, is mutated at high frequency in uterine
leiomyomas. Science 14, 252-255.

