Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Manipulation of autophagy during tumor cell killing regulates the
growth of neighboring tumor cells


Many anti-cancer agents induce macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy) and
it is widely thought that autophagy can regulate tumor chemosensitivity.
Most work in this area asks if autophagy increases or decreases tumor
cell killing. Using a targeted anti-cancer agent (DT-EGF, an EGF
receptor-targeted diphtheria toxin), we demonstrated that autophagy can
also control the characteristics of dying glioma cells. DT-EGF induces
autophagy in glioma cells, however this autophagy has little impact on
whether or not the cells die. Instead its major effect is to determine
how the cells die. When autophagy is allowed, the cells die by a
non-apoptotic mechanism that has little caspase activation, whereas if
autophagy is inhibited, the glioma cells die by inducing
caspase-dependent apoptosis. Here, we present data showing that the
effects of this switch in death mechanism change the growth of other
tumor cells that did not die in response to the drug. By mixing
DT-EGF-sensitive and DT-EGF-resistant cells such that 99% of the tumor
cells in the population die, we found that manipulation of autophagy in
the dying cells affects the growth rates of the surviving 1% of tumor
cells. If caspase-dependent apoptosis is allowed by inhibiting autophagy,
the surviving tumor cells grow faster to repopulate the tumor. Conversely
if autophagy is allowed in the dying cells, the resistant cells grow more
slowly. We propose that cancer therapy should take account not just of
how many tumor cells are killed but also the way that they are killed and
that manipulating autophagy during cancer treatment could be used to
improve outcomes by regulating the mechanism of tumor cell death as well
as the amount of tumor cell death.

