Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epidermal growth factor signaling alterations in uterine papillary
serous carcinoma (UPSC) associate with survival


Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy and the
majority of patients are cured with surgery alone. A substantial subset
of patients, however, present with high grade uterine papillary serous
carcinoma (UPSC) and these patients account for a disproportionate degree
of the recurrence, chemoresistance and death associated with endometrial
cancer. Novel treatment strategies incorporating molecularly targeted
therapies would be of great value in effective clinical management of
these tumors. HER2 (ErbB2) hyperactivity has been associated with 10-20%
of UPSC, though efforts to target this signature with trastuzumab have
yielded no response in a recent prospective trial. In breast cancer,
HER2/HER3 (ErbB2/ErbB3) dimerization has been associated with trastuzumab
resistance. The expression profile of HER3 in UPSC is currently unknown.
The objective of this investigation was to characterize HER2 and HER3
expression in a UPSC series and correlate these findings with clinical
outcomes including survival. Under an IRB approved protocol, we
identified 33 patients who underwent initial surgical staging at our
institution between 2000 and 2009 with archival formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded blocks and complete clinical follow up data. These tumor samples
were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for HER2 and HER3 as well as
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to assess the amplification
status of the HER2 gene. Non-parametric tests were utilized to test
correlation between detected levels of HER2 or HER3 protein expression
and HER2 gene amplification and survival analysis was performed using the
Kaplan-Meier method. HER2 gene amplification was observed in 34% of the
cohort while HER2 protein over-expression, defined as 2+ or 3+ staining,
was found in 59% of samples tested. HER2 gene amplification was
associated with high HER2 protein expression (p Endometrial cancer is the
most common gynecologic malignancy and the majority of patients are cured
with surgery alone. A substantial subset of patients, however, present
with high grade uterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC) and these
patients account for a disproportionate degree of the recurrence,
chemoresistance and death associated with endometrial cancer. Novel
treatment strategies incorporating molecularly targeted therapies would
be of great value in effective clinical management of these tumors. HER2
(ErbB2) hyperactivity has been associated with 10-20% of UPSC, though
efforts to target this signature with trastuzumab have yielded no
response in a recent prospective trial. In breast cancer, HER2/HER3
(ErbB2/ErbB3) dimerization has been associated with trastuzumab
resistance. The expression profile of HER3 in UPSC is currently unknown.
The objective of this investigation was to characterize HER2 and HER3
expression in a UPSC series and correlate these findings with clinical
outcomes including survival. Under an IRB approved protocol, we
identified 33 patients who underwent initial surgical staging at our
institution between 2000 and 2009 with archival formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded blocks and complete clinical follow up data. These tumor samples
were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for HER2 and HER3 as well as
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to assess the amplification
status of the HER2 gene. Non-parametric tests were utilized to test
correlation between detected levels of HER2 or HER3 protein expression
and HER2 gene amplification and survival analysis was performed using the
Kaplan-Meier method. HER2 gene amplification was observed in 34% of the
cohort while HER2 protein over-expression, defined as 2+ or 3+ staining,
was found in 59% of samples tested. HER2 gene amplification was
associated with high HER2 protein expression (p < 0.05). Moreover, HER2
gene amplification was significantly associated with a decreased overall
survival (p Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy
and the majority of patients are cured with surgery alone. A substantial
subset of patients, however, present with high grade uterine papillary
serous carcinoma (UPSC) and these patients account for a disproportionate
degree of the recurrence, chemoresistance and death associated with
endometrial cancer. Novel treatment strategies incorporating molecularly
targeted therapies would be of great value in effective clinical
management of these tumors. HER2 (ErbB2) hyperactivity has been
associated with 10-20% of UPSC, though efforts to target this signature
with trastuzumab have yielded no response in a recent prospective trial.
In breast cancer, HER2/HER3 (ErbB2/ErbB3) dimerization has been
associated with trastuzumab resistance. The expression profile of HER3 in
UPSC is currently unknown. The objective of this investigation was to
characterize HER2 and HER3 expression in a UPSC series and correlate
these findings with clinical outcomes including survival. Under an IRB
approved protocol, we identified 33 patients who underwent initial
surgical staging at our institution between 2000 and 2009 with archival
formalin fixed, paraffin embedded blocks and complete clinical follow up
data. These tumor samples were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC)
for HER2 and HER3 as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to
assess the amplification status of the HER2 gene. Non-parametric tests
were utilized to test correlation between detected levels of HER2 or HER3
protein expression and HER2 gene amplification and survival analysis was
performed using the Kaplan-Meier method. HER2 gene amplification was
observed in 34% of the cohort while HER2 protein over-expression, defined
as 2+ or 3+ staining, was found in 59% of samples tested. HER2 gene
amplification was associated with high HER2 protein expression (p <
0.05). Moreover, HER2 gene amplification was significantly associated
with a decreased overall survival (p < 0.05). Finally, HER3
over-expression, defined as 2+ or 3+ staining, was observed in 52% of the
entire cohort and HER3 protein levels exhibited a significant inverse
relationship to HER2 protein expression and HER2 gene amplification (p
Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecologic malignancy and the
majority of patients are cured with surgery alone. A substantial subset
of patients, however, present with high grade uterine papillary serous
carcinoma (UPSC) and these patients account for a disproportionate degree
of the recurrence, chemoresistance and death associated with endometrial
cancer. Novel treatment strategies incorporating molecularly targeted
therapies would be of great value in effective clinical management of
these tumors. HER2 (ErbB2) hyperactivity has been associated with 10-20%
of UPSC, though efforts to target this signature with trastuzumab have
yielded no response in a recent prospective trial. In breast cancer,
HER2/HER3 (ErbB2/ErbB3) dimerization has been associated with trastuzumab
resistance. The expression profile of HER3 in UPSC is currently unknown.
The objective of this investigation was to characterize HER2 and HER3
expression in a UPSC series and correlate these findings with clinical
outcomes including survival. Under an IRB approved protocol, we
identified 33 patients who underwent initial surgical staging at our
institution between 2000 and 2009 with archival formalin fixed, paraffin
embedded blocks and complete clinical follow up data. These tumor samples
were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for HER2 and HER3 as well as
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) to assess the amplification
status of the HER2 gene. Non-parametric tests were utilized to test
correlation between detected levels of HER2 or HER3 protein expression
and HER2 gene amplification and survival analysis was performed using the
Kaplan-Meier method. HER2 gene amplification was observed in 34% of the
cohort while HER2 protein over-expression, defined as 2+ or 3+ staining,
was found in 59% of samples tested. HER2 gene amplification was
associated with high HER2 protein expression (p < 0.05). Moreover, HER2
gene amplification was significantly associated with a decreased overall
survival (p < 0.05). Finally, HER3 over-expression, defined as 2+ or 3+
staining, was observed in 52% of the entire cohort and HER3 protein
levels exhibited a significant inverse relationship to HER2 protein
expression and HER2 gene amplification (p < 0.05). These findings suggest
that HER2 and HER3 signaling may function independently of one another in
UPSC. The observed alterations in HER2 and HER3 expression levels
constitute clinically relevant and prevalent signatures in UPSC that
merit further investigation to determine the potential benefits of
therapies targeting the epidermal growth receptor pathways.

