Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chemoprevention of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced
hamster cheek pouch carcinogenesis by topical garcinol through inhibition
of 5-lipoxygenase


Oral cancer is a common malignancy occurring in developing countries, and
remains problematic due to lack of effective strategies of prevention and
treatment. Our previous studies have shown that aberrant arachidonic acid
metabolism, especially the 5-lipoxygenase (5-Lox) pathway, is involved in
oral carcinogenesis, and can be targeted for cancer prevention. In order
to develop potent topical agents for oral cancer chemoprevention, five
known 5-Lox inhibitors from dietary and synthetic sources were evaluated
for their potential efficacy when topically applied on the oral
epithelium. Garcinol, a polyisoprenylated benzophenone from the fruit
rind of Garcinia spp., was found to be the most promising agent based on
our calculation of a theoretical activity index. In a short-term study on
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-treated hamster cheek pouch,
topical garcinol suppressed leukotriene B4 (LTB4) biosynthesis and
inhibited inflammation and cell proliferation in the oral epithelium. In
a long-term carcinogenesis study, topical garcinol significantly reduced
the size of visible tumors, the number of cancer lesions, cell
proliferation, and LTB4 biosynthesis. Furthermore, computer modeling
showed that garcinol well fit the active site of 5-Lox, and inhibited
enzyme activity through possible interactions between the phenolic
hydroxyl groups and the non-heme catalytic iron. These results
demonstrated that topical garcinol exerts its chemopreventive effect on
DMBA-induced hamster cheek pouch carcinogenesis by inhibiting 5-Lox,
inflammation and cell. Chemical modifications of garcinol may produce
more potent 5-Lox inhibitors for topical use in oral cancer
chemoprevention.

