Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BubR1 function is required for the antiproliferative activity of
the novel microtubule-targeting drug BAL27862 (active moiety of the
prodrug BAL101553)


Background: BAL27862 is a novel small molecule that induces apoptosis in
cancer cells through microtubule destabilization associated with a
distinct microtubule phenotype. BAL27862 has broad antitumor activity in
preclinical models of human cancer, and has recently entered Phase I
clinical trials in advanced cancer patients administered as a highly
soluble lysine prodrug (BAL101553). Methods: Combinatorial RNAi screening
using HeLa cervical carcinoma cells and a siRNA library targeting the
human kinome/phosphatome was followed by image analysis of cell number
and fraction with normal morphology after optimal BAL27862 treatment
(50nM, 24h). BubR1 siRNA effects were also assessed by immunoblotting
(IB) and 48h crystal violet proliferation assays. Drug-resistant tumor
lines were selected in vitro by incubation with increasing BAL27862
concentrations. Patient-derived tumors were maintained in mice and
analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Results: Combinatorial RNAi
screening identified BubR1 (BUB1B gene) as a protein required for the
antiproliferative and phenotypic effect of BAL27862. This finding was
confirmed using single independent siRNAs. BubR1, an evolutionary
conserved protein kinase controlling cell division, is a core component
of the spindle assembly checkpoint. Consistent with this, a more detailed
siRNA analysis across a panel of lines derived from different
histological backgrounds (breast, colon, lung, brain) confirmed the
essential role of BubR1 in the in vitro response of diverse tumor lines
to BAL27862 treatment. For example, non-targeting control siRNA
(NTC)-treated MDA-MB-453 breast carcinoma and H460 NSCLC cells entered a
cell death program following BAL27862 treatment (60 % & 40 % cell death
resp. vs. starting cell number); a response clearly attenuated by BubR1
down regulation (80% cell proliferation. vs. DMSO controls). Further IB
analysis of tumor cell variants selected for stable drug resistance to
BAL27862 (3-24-fold resistant), indicated that BubR1 protein expression
was down regulated in 3 of 5 variants as compared to parental lines
(SKOV3 ovarian, A549 & H460 non-small cell lung cancer [NSCLC]). Hence,
reduced BubR1 expression may modulate development of resistance to
BAL27862 under treatment. Strikingly, IHC analysis of paired
patient-derived tumors derived from gastric and NSCLC carcinomas,
demonstrated that intrinsic resistance to BAL27862 treatment ex vivo can
also be associated with reduced BubR1 tumor expression. Conclusions:
Reduced BubR1 expression correlates with resistance to BAL27862 treatment
in a number of experimental models. Further work to understand the
functional significance of BubR1 to the mechanism of action of BAL27862
is ongoing to explore the potential of using this biomarker to support
patient stratification efforts during the clinical development of
BAL101553.

