Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IKK inactivation predisposes to spontaneous lung squamous cell
carcinomas


Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. To advance
the understanding of this disease, various genetically engineered and
chemical induced mouse models have been established. However, most animal
models resemble human lung adenocarcinoma, and spontaneous lung squamous
cell carcinomas (SCCs) mouse models are very rare. Here, we generated
Ikk-KA/KA knock-in mice (KA/KA) in which an ATP binding site of IKK, Lys
44 was replaced by alanine. The knock-in mice develop severe skin lesions
and begin to die after 6 months. We found lung SCCs in some of the mice.
To study lung SCC development, we decided to stabilize the skin condition
by reintroducing transgenic IKK by crossing KA/KA with Lori.IKK
transgenic mice to generate KA/KA/Lori.IKK (KA/KAL) mice. Almost all the
KA/KAL (100%) mice at 4 to 6 months of age developed spontaneous lethal
lung SCCs. The endogenous IKK protein level generally markedly declined
in an age dependent manner in these IKK mutant mice. Progenitor cell
related markers Sox2, OCT3/4 and Nanog were only increased in the lung
SCC tissue but not in the tumor adjacent tissues, implying the
involvement of cancer stem cells in lung SCC. Furthermore, we detected
substantial increases in Ras and CyclinD1 levels and EGFR, ERK and p38
activities in lung SCCs. On the other hand, we detected reduction in
tumor suppressor gene Rb and IB accompanying with reduced IKK levels in
KA/KAL lungs as well as in lung SCCs. Importantly, we observed a similar
alteration pattern in mouse and human lung SCCs. Finally, reintroducing
IKK into lung epithelial cells prevented lung SCC development in mice.
Collectively, our study supports the tumor suppressing role of IKK in
lung tumorigenesis. This novel lung SCC mouse model may facilitate
investigations in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of human lung
SCC disease.

