Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Concurrent Snail expression and Kras mutation promote pancreatic
fibrosis


One of the hallmarks of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the 4th
leading cause of cancer related death in the US, is a pronounced
collagen-rich stromal reaction. We recently published that type I
collagen induces expression of Snail, a key regulator of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, to promote invasion and scattering of
PDAC cells (Shields MA, et al. JBC 2011). To further understand the role
of Snail in PDAC progression we generated transgenic mice expressing
Snail in the pancreas. While there was robust Snail expression in the
mouse pancreas, no phenotypic changes were observed. Since inflammation
can promote Snail-mediated invasion and metastasis, we treated the
Snail-expressing mice with cerulein to induce chronic pancreatitis.
Although there was significant inflammation associated with
vacuolization, no difference in the pancreatitis response was observed
between control and Snail-expressing mice. Since Kras mutation has been
shown to be necessary for tumor development in mouse models of pancreatic
cancer, we generated mice expressing both mutant KrasG12D and Snail
(Kras+/Snail+). Compared to control mice (Kras+/Snail-), Kras+/Snail+
mice developed significantly more acinar to ductal metaplasia, cystic
papillary lesions that were associated with increased fibrosis, increased
Smad2 and Stat3 phosphorylation. Experiments are underway characterizing
the mechanism by which Snail promotes pancreatic fibrosis in
Kras-expressing mice.

