Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activities of 2-fluorofucose, an orally active agent
that inhibits cell-surface fucosylation


Fucose is a component of many carbohydrates that are found on the outer
membranes of cancer cells. There is evidence that loss of this sugar from
cell-surface glycoproteins can change cancer cell behavior, including
growth and metastasis. We have previously demonstrated that
2-fluorofucose (SGD-2083) blocks the fucosylation of antibodies in vitro
and in vivo due to the depletion of GDP-activated fucose inside cells.
These findings provide the basis for evaluating the antitumor activities
of SGD-2083, since alterations of the fucose content on cell surfaces
could potentially impact tumor growth and adhesion. To explore this,
SGD-2083 was given orally to mice with carcinoma and hematologic tumor
xenografts. Significant antitumor activities were obtained in prostate,
renal cell and colorectal carcinomas, but not in the two hematologic
cancer models tested. The doses used to achieve efficacy were
well-tolerated. FACS analysis was used to detect alterations in tumor
cell surface fucosylation in animals that responded to treatment with
SGD-2083. Signal reduction was observed on E-selectin ligand and several
other cell surface fucose linkages, while little or no response to the
treatment was observed in the fucosylation of cell surface P-selectin
ligand. These results show that oral administration of SGD-2083 leads to
the alteration of tumor cell surface fucosylation in a well-defined
manner, and this may account for the observed activities of this novel
antitumor agent.

