Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 4, 4-Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and Triclosan (TCS)
decrease tumor-cell-binding capacity and cell-surface protein expression
of human natural killer cells


4, 4-Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and Triclosan (TCS) are
organochlorine compounds that contaminate the environment, are found in
human blood, and have been shown to decrease the tumor-cell killing
(lytic) function of human natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells defend
against tumor cells and virally infected cells. This study examined
concentrations of DDT and PCP that decrease lytic function for alteration
of NK binding to tumor targets. Levels of either compound that caused
loss of binding function were then examined for effects on expression of
cell-surface proteins needed for binding. CD16 is an Fc receptor and CD56
is a cognate of neural cell adhesion molecules, both of which are present
on NK cells and involved in recognition and lysis of NK target. NK cells
exposed to 2.5 M DDT for 24 h (which caused a greater than 55% loss of
lytic function) showed a decrease in NK binding function of about 23%,
and a decrease in CD16 of 20%. NK cells exposed to 5 M TCS for 24 h
showed a decrease in ability to bind tumor cells of 44% and a decrease in
expression of CD56 of about 34%. This same treatment caused a decrease in
lytic function of greater than 87%These results indicated that only a
portion of the loss of NK lytic function seen with exposures to these
compounds could be accounted for by loss of binding function and also
accompanied by loss of cell-surface protein expression. Supported by NIH
grant 1U54CA163066-01 and S06 GM008092-35

