Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Altered efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in chronic myeloid
leukemia cells expressing wild type or polymorphic ABCG2


The tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) imatinib is, despite the introduction
of second generation TKI's, the standard first-line therapy in chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML). Early response to therapy is correlated to
long-term therapeutic effect in CML; therefore it would be advantageous
to identify predictive markers for failure on imatinib in order to enable
a change of therapeutic strategy in an early stage of CML. Imatinib is
metabolized by hepatic CYP3A and we have previously reported that high
CYP3A activity is associated with a better therapeutic response,
indicating a clinical significance of imatinib metabolites (Gren et al.
2010). Furthermore, imatinib and the second generation TKI's (dasatinib
and nilotinib) are substrates for the efflux transporter ABCG2 which
might be of importance for the elimination and resistance to TKIs.
Several ABCG2 polymorphisms have been reported and some have been
suggested to influence imatinib therapeutic outcome. In this study, we
aimed to investigate the effects of expressing wild type (wt) or
polymorphic ABCG2 on the in vitro resistance to imatinib, dasatinib,
nilotinib, bosutinib (currently in clinical trials) and the most abundant
CYP3A imatinib metabolite, CGP74588. The ABCG2 polymorphisms 34G>A,
421C>A, 623T>C, 886G>C, 1574T>G and 1582G>A were constructed from wt
human ABCG2 cDNA. ABCG2 wt or variant cDNA was retrovirally infected to
the CML cell line K562. Cell-surface ABCG2 expression was evaluated using
FACS. In addition, K562/ABCG2/623T>C and K562/ABCG2/1574T>G were
permeabilized to detect cytoplasmic ABCG2 protein. The influence of wt
and variant ABCG2 on the cytotoxic effect of imatinib, CGP74588,
dasatinib, nilotinib and bosutinib was assessed using MTT assays.
Over-expression of ABCG2 wt in K562 cells conferred resistance to all
TKI's except bosutinib. The most striking effect was seen in cells
treated with CGP74588 where ABCG2 wt expression induced a 7.8-fold
increase in resistance compared to a moderate 2-fold increase in cells
treated with imatinib. ABCG2 polymorphisms affected the cytotoxicity of
imatinib, CGP74588, dasatinib and nilotinib in a similar way and did not
seem to alter substrate specificity of the transporter. Polymorphisms
623T>C, 886G>C and 1574T>G completely sensitized cells to the level of
non-ABCG2 expressing cells. In accordance, FACS analysis revealed that
623T>C and 1574T>G caused a failure of ABCG2 protein to localize to the
cell surface but was yet detected in the cytoplasm. We conclude that
CGP74588 cytotoxicity is more affected by ABCG2 expression than imatinib
itself, indicating that ABCG2 activity might affect CGP74588 to a greater
extent than imatinib in terms of plasma and target cell concentrations in
vivo. ABCG2 with the polymorphisms 623T>C and 1574T>G does not
incorporate into the cell membrane, affecting not only TKI transport but
most likely all ABCG2 substrates.

