Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib induces autophagy in hepatocellular carcinoma through
the inhibition of CIP2A independent of proteasome inhibition.


Previously, we have reported that cancerous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) mediates the apoptotic effect of bortezomib in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Oncogene, 2010). Here, we report the
mechanism by which bortezomib induces autophagy in HCC. Our data
indicated that bortezomib activated autophagy in a dose- and time-
dependent manner in HCC cell lines, including Huh-7, Sk-Hep1, and Hep3B.
Bortezomib down-regulated CIP2A, phospho-Akt (P-Akt) and phospho-4EBP1
(P-4EBP1) in a dose- and time- dependent manner in all tested HCC cells.
Ectopic expression of CIP2A abolished the effect of bortezomib on
autophagy. Cotreatment of bortezomib and calculin A, a PP2A inhibitor,
reduced the effect of bortezomib on P-Akt, P-4EBP1, and autophagy.
Over-expression of either Akt or 4EBP1 protected cells from
bortezomib-induced autophagy. Moreover, we examined the effect of Btz, a
bortezomib derivative that closely resembles bortezomib structurally but
with no proteasome activity, in HCC. Interestingly, Btz demonstrated
similar effects to bortezomib on autophagy, CIP2A, P-Akt and P-4EBP1.
Furthermore, our in vivo data showed that both bortezomib and Btz
inhibited tumor growth, down-regulated CIP2A, P-Akt and induced autophagy
in Huh-7 tumors, suggesting that bortezomib activates autophagy in HCC
and this effect is independent to its effect on proteasome. In
conclusion, bortezomib induces autophagy in HCC through
CIP2A-PP2A-Akt-4EBP1 pathway. Supported by NTUH100P04,
NSC99-2314-B-002-017-MY2, NSC100-3112-B-002-013, and
NSC100-2325-B-002-036.

