Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer and B-vitamins


BACKGROUND. Recent reports suggest that excess of nutrients involved in
the one-carbon metabolism pathway increases PC risk, however empirical
data are lacking. Our hypothesis was to examine whether excessive intake
of one carbon nutrients was associated with PC risk and whether this
association was similar in LG vs. HG prostate cancer. METHODS. Veteran
American men (272 controls and 144 PC cases) who attended the Durham
Veteran American Medical Center, between 2004-2011, were enrolled into a
case-control study. Intake of folate, vitamin B12, B6 and methionine were
measured using a food frequency questionnaire. Regression models were
used to evaluate the association among one-carbon cycle nutrients, MTHFR
genetic variants and prostate cancer. RESULTS. Higher methionine intake
was positively associated with PC risk, OR=2.1 95%CI 1.1-3.9, p=0.02; a
risk which increased for low grade PC or Gleason BACKGROUND. Recent
reports suggest that excess of nutrients involved in the one-carbon
metabolism pathway increases PC risk, however empirical data are lacking.
Our hypothesis was to examine whether excessive intake of one carbon
nutrients was associated with PC risk and whether this association was
similar in LG vs. HG prostate cancer. METHODS. Veteran American men (272
controls and 144 PC cases) who attended the Durham Veteran American
Medical Center, between 2004-2011, were enrolled into a case-control
study. Intake of folate, vitamin B12, B6 and methionine were measured
using a food frequency questionnaire. Regression models were used to
evaluate the association among one-carbon cycle nutrients, MTHFR genetic
variants and prostate cancer. RESULTS. Higher methionine intake was
positively associated with PC risk, OR=2.1 95%CI 1.1-3.9, p=0.02; a risk
which increased for low grade PC or Gleason <7, OR=2.75 (95%CI
1.32-5.73), p=0.007. These associations did not vary by MTHFR C677T
genotype, however the cross-product term for the association of MTHFR
A1298C variant and methionine was statistically significant, compared to
non-carriers (p=0.045). Evidence for associations between B vitamins
(folate, B12 and B6) and PC risk were less clear. CONCLUSIONS. Our
results suggest that high methionine intake increases PC risk. Higher
intakes of folate and vitamin B6 may be protective against advanced
prostate cancer- however the associations were weak, while vitamin B12
higher intakes showed a trend for significance for higher PC risk.
Individuals carrying MTHFR A1298C variants, and consuming more than the
recommended levels of methionine, may be at higher risk for PC. Key
words: Prostate cancer (PC), folate, vitamins B6, B12, methionine,
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR).

