Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a novel therapeutic agent for breast cancer based
on a new pathway analysis of triple-negative breast cancer


We developed a novel method for drug discovery using active compounds as
pharmacodynamic biomarkers in triple-negative breast cancer cell lines.
[Materials and Methods] Compounds that selectively inhibit proliferation
of triple-negative breast cancer were screened in triple-negative breast
cancer cell lines (MDA-MB231, MDA-MB468 and HCC-38) and control MCF7 and
HeLa cell lines. A small molecule library was designed to seek structural
diversity by chemical informatics and a total of 30,000 synthetic
compounds were assessed considering drug similarities. The differences in
gene expression profiles in the cell lines between before and after the
addition of the selected compounds were analyzed and compared with the
control cells. [Results] Seven compounds that exhibited inhibitory
effects on the triple-negative breast cancer cell lines were found in the
compound library. These compounds exhibited inhibitory activity with
IC50-values ranging from 1.2 to 10.8 M. The results of the microarray
analysis indicated several pathways including the irinotecan pathway that
changed specifically in the triple-negative breast cancer cell lines by
the addition of the compounds.[Conclusion] A research strategy to screen
a compound library with structural diversity and develop a drug discovery
system using active compounds as pharmacodynamic biomarkers can be widely
applied as a new approach for developing innovative personalized medicine.

