Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relative telomere length in circulating serum DNA as a novel
non-invasive biomarker in hepatocarcinogenesis


Background: Abnormal telomere maintenance has been significantly
implicated in tumor development and progression. Telomere length has
recently emerged as a promising predictor for the risk of various cancers
including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Nonetheless, no studies have
been reported on measuring telomere length in circulating cell-free DNA
samples as a non-invasive biomarker of cancer risk. Method: In this
nested case-control study, we used real-time quantitative PCR to
determine the relative telomere length (RTL) in serum DNA samples from
140 hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC (HBV-HCC) cases and 280
frequency-matched cancer-free HBV controls, and evaluated the
associations between RTL and HBV-HCC risk, as well as RTL and
HBV-cirrhosis risk in a sub-population of 100 HBV-cirrhosis cases and 100
matched HBV controls. Results: We found that HBV-HCC cases had a
significantly longer RTL (median, 0.31; range, 0.02-2.31) versus HBV
controls (median, 0.20; range, 0.01-1.60) (P=0.003). Using the median RTL
value in controls as the cutoff point, individuals with longer RTLs
exhibited a significantly increased risk of HCC compared to those with
short RTLs in an univariate logistic regression analysis (odds ratio
[OR]=1.55, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02-2.33, P=0.038). However, the
strength of this association attenuated after multivariate adjustment
(OR=1.40, 95% CI 0.90-2.19, P=0.132). In a quartile analysis, a
significant dose-response relationship was noted in the univariate
analysis (P trend=0.017) which was attenuated in the multivariate
analysis (P trend=0.079). Further analyses revealed that the significant
association between serum RTL and HCC risk was only evident in
non-cirrhotic (OR=3.54, 95% CI 1.58-7.93 P=0.002), but not in cirrhotic
(OR=0.95, 95% CI 0.55-1.64, P=0.860) HBV patients. Additionally, a
significant difference (P=0.004) of RTL distribution was observed between
cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic HBV controls. We further analyzed the
association of RTL with liver cirrhosis risk. Using patients with short
RTL as reference, we found long RTL conferred a significantly increased
risk of HBV-related cirrhosis in univariate and multivariate analyses
with unadjusted OR of 2.70 (95% CI 1.50-4.88, P=0.001) and 2.73 (95% CI
1.51-4.93, P=0.001), respectively. Further tertile and quartile analysis
showed a significant dose-response relationship (P trend Background:
Abnormal telomere maintenance has been significantly implicated in tumor
development and progression. Telomere length has recently emerged as a
promising predictor for the risk of various cancers including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Nonetheless, no studies have been
reported on measuring telomere length in circulating cell-free DNA
samples as a non-invasive biomarker of cancer risk. Method: In this
nested case-control study, we used real-time quantitative PCR to
determine the relative telomere length (RTL) in serum DNA samples from
140 hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC (HBV-HCC) cases and 280
frequency-matched cancer-free HBV controls, and evaluated the
associations between RTL and HBV-HCC risk, as well as RTL and
HBV-cirrhosis risk in a sub-population of 100 HBV-cirrhosis cases and 100
matched HBV controls. Results: We found that HBV-HCC cases had a
significantly longer RTL (median, 0.31; range, 0.02-2.31) versus HBV
controls (median, 0.20; range, 0.01-1.60) (P=0.003). Using the median RTL
value in controls as the cutoff point, individuals with longer RTLs
exhibited a significantly increased risk of HCC compared to those with
short RTLs in an univariate logistic regression analysis (odds ratio
[OR]=1.55, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02-2.33, P=0.038). However, the
strength of this association attenuated after multivariate adjustment
(OR=1.40, 95% CI 0.90-2.19, P=0.132). In a quartile analysis, a
significant dose-response relationship was noted in the univariate
analysis (P trend=0.017) which was attenuated in the multivariate
analysis (P trend=0.079). Further analyses revealed that the significant
association between serum RTL and HCC risk was only evident in
non-cirrhotic (OR=3.54, 95% CI 1.58-7.93 P=0.002), but not in cirrhotic
(OR=0.95, 95% CI 0.55-1.64, P=0.860) HBV patients. Additionally, a
significant difference (P=0.004) of RTL distribution was observed between
cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic HBV controls. We further analyzed the
association of RTL with liver cirrhosis risk. Using patients with short
RTL as reference, we found long RTL conferred a significantly increased
risk of HBV-related cirrhosis in univariate and multivariate analyses
with unadjusted OR of 2.70 (95% CI 1.50-4.88, P=0.001) and 2.73 (95% CI
1.51-4.93, P=0.001), respectively. Further tertile and quartile analysis
showed a significant dose-response relationship (P trend <0.001 for both)
in both univariate and multivariate analysis. Conclusions: Collectively,
our data suggested that RTL in circulating cell-free serum DNA could
potentially be used as a novel non-invasive biomarker for non-cirrhotic
HBV-HCC and HBV-related cirrhosis. Prospective cohort studies are
warranted to further validate this finding and assess its clinical
significance in HCC prevention.

