Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-627 and histone demethylase JMJD1A as new therapeutic targets
in colon cancer


Vitamin D has excellent antitumor activities against various types of
cancers, but it cannot be used for cancer therapy due to its side effect
of causing hypercalcemia. To understand its mechanism of action in tumor
suppression, we investigated the effects of calcitriol
(1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, the active form of vitamin D) on microRNA
expression in colon cancer cells. We identified miR-627 as the sole
microRNA whose expression was stimulated by calcitriol. Furthermore,
JMJD1A (jumonji domain containing 1A), the gene encoding a histone
demethylase, was identified as the target of miR-627. By downregulating
JMJD1A, miR-627 mediated the effects of calcitriol to increase histone
H3K9 methylation and to suppress the expression of growth-promoting
genes, such as GDF15. Calcitriol also induced miR-627 and downregulated
JMJD1A in colon cancer xenografts in nude mice. Overexpression of miR-627
decreased JMJD1A and suppressed colon cancer growth both in vitro and in
vivo in the nude mice. In addition, we found that miR-627 expression was
decreased in human colon cancer specimens when compared to its levels in
the normal colon tissues. Thus, miR-627 plays an important role in the
epigenetic action of vitamin D in tumor suppression. miR-627 and JMJD1A
may serve as potential targets to exploit the antitumor activity of
vitamin D without eliciting its hypercalcemic side effect.

