Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effect of lung cancer screening awareness on smoking behavior
among U.S. adults


Background: Emphasizing the risk of lung cancer can encourage smoking
cessation, but use of spiral low-dose CT scans reduced lung cancer
mortality in a recent randomized screening trial. It is unknown if
awareness of lung cancer screening will influence smoking behavior. Aim:
To evaluate the awareness of lung cancer screening and to determine if
awareness of lung cancer screening affects smoking cessation-related
behavior among current smokers. Methods: We identified 7,282 adult
respondents who answered questions concerning their smoking-related
behavior in the 2007 Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS).
We used logistic regression models to evaluate the association of smoking
status with awareness of lung cancer screening and we also investigated
the association of lung cancer screening awareness with smoking cessation
behaviors among current smokers. Results: The mean age of responders was
54.1 years and 61.2% were females. There were 3,813 (52.4%) never
smokers; 2,222 (30.5%) former smokers; and 1,247 (17.2%) current smokers.
Overall, 2,183 (30.6%) of respondents had heard of a lung cancer
screening test (29.6% never smokers, 33.4% former smokers, and 28.5%
current smokers; P value = 0.002). Chest X-ray (64.4%) and CT scan (5.7%)
were among the screening tests that they have heard of. Among current
smokers, awareness of lung cancer screening had no effect on smoking
cessation behavior after adjusting for age, sex, race, education, income
and marital status (Table). Conclusion: Awareness of lung cancer
screening tests did not affect smoking cessation behavior of current
smokers. However, smoking cessation should be recommended for all current
smokers and those with a history of smoking should be informed about lung
cancer screening with CT scan.


