Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CENP-E and c-Myc expression identifies a sensitive population of
gastric cancer


Centromere-associated protein E (CENP-E) is expressed during mitosis and
plays an essential role in establishing and maintaining stable
connections between mitotic chromosomes and the microtubules of the
spindle. Previous preclinical studies have shown that inhibition of
CENP-E function by small interfering RNA, blocking antibodies or small
molecule inhibitors arrested cell cycle before metaphase, and could lead
to cell death. In a number of cancers, CENP-E is frequently overexpressed
in tumor tissues compared with their normal counterparts. In this study,
we showed that CENP-E is overexpressed in about 60% of gastric cancer
(intestinal and diffuse-type) tissues. In addition, c-Myc up-regulation
was observed in more than 50% of the same samples. Overall, about 40% of
all gastric tumor samples harbor both CENP-E and c-Myc upregulation.
Using a panel of small molecule inhibitors of CENP-E, we evaluated in
vitro anti-proliferation effect in a panel of gastric cancer cell lines.
Our data suggested that cells with higher levels of c-Myc transcript were
more sensitive to CENP-E inhibition. This preliminary study indicated
that c-Myc amplification and/or over-expression could be a potential
biomarker for selecting gastric cancer patients more likely to respond to
CENP-E inhibition.

