Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genome-wide microarray expression and array-CGH analysis in
neuroblastoma stem-like cells by use of the neurosphere-formation assay


In this work, we aimed at analyzing genome-wide gene expression and DNA
gains and losses in neuroblastoma cell lines and in neurospheres
containing stem-like cells. SKNDZ and SIMA neuroblastoma cell lines were
grown in DMEM cell culture medium, and in DMEM-F12 selective serum free
medium (with EGF, bFGF and B27; to induce the neurosphere-forming
phenotype). After RNA and genomic DNA extractions from the 4 cell lines
(2 standard, 2 neurosphere-forming cell lines), expression microarrays
and array-CGH analyses were performed (Aligent Technologies). Array-CGH
did not show any significant differences between standard and
neurosphere-forming cell lines, both in SKNDZ and in SIMA. Microarray
expression analysis demonstrated a total of 425 upregulated and 170
downregulated genes in neurosphere-forming cell lines. The differentially
expressed genes were classified using the PANTHER classification system
(www.pantherdb.org). As a result, apoptosis, cell adhesion, cell
communication, cell cycle, and immune system processes appeared
upregulated and downregulated in neurospheres. Some of those genes
participate in pathways related with cancer (Table 1). In conclusion, the
stem-like phenotype does not seem to be linked to anatomic changes at the
level of deletions/gains of DNA, but to changes in expression of genes,
like those of the TGF-beta, Notch and Sonic Hedgehog pathways. Those
pathways, specially TGF-beta, widely described as an important
therapeutic target against cancer, should be further studied to determine
their real implication in the neurosphere-formation process in
neuroblastoma, and therefore, as candidate targets for the treatment of
neuroblastoma stem-like cells.


