Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Bortezomib induces G2-M arrest through ROS-inducible
phosphorylation of ATM independent on genotypes of KRAS in human colon
cancer cells


The use of cetuximab (CET) as an inhibitor of EGFR for treatment of
colorectal cancer (CRC) has revolutionized. However, a number of CRC
patients exhibits resistance to CET. In this report, we suggest the
possibility of using bortezomib as a proteasome inhibitor in human colon
cancer cells. Although bortezomib has been known to induce apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest in various human cancer cells, the inhibitory mechanism
of it was not clear. First, bortezomib induced G2-M arrest independent on
genotype of KRAS in all of tested human colon cancer cells. Its treatment
causes an increase of intracellular ROS levels and activation of ATM-CHK1
pathway, but not ATR. Also, activation of that pathway led to
inactivation of cdc2. Moreover, treatment with NAC, Reactive Oxygen
Species (ROS)scavenger, inhibited phosphorylation of ATM and subsequent
to decrease of cell number at G2-M phase in response to bortezomib
indicating that the increased level of ROS after exposure to bortezomib
is a result of ATM phosphorylation. In addition, knockdown of endogenous
ATM by RNA interference induced the decreased sensitivity to bortezomib.
Therefore, these results suggest that bortezomib induces G2-M arrest
through ROS-inducible ATM phosphorylation and responses to colon cancer
cells independent on genotype of KRAS, implying a potential possibility
of it in the treatment of CRC patients.

