Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prostate cancer-infiltrating mast cells suppress anti-tumor
immunity through a TGF and IL-13 dependent mechanism


Immune suppression is a major obstacle in the design of successful
immune-based therapies for cancer. Using an experimental model of
prostate cancer, we previously demonstrated the rapid induction of
tolerance and suppressive activity in adoptively transferred tumor
antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells. The mechanism of this tolerance
induction involved T cell interactions with tumor-associated dendritic
cells (TADCs) which express elevated levels of the forkhead box protein,
FOXO3. We now propose a mechanism by which tumor-infiltrating mast cells
exert immune suppressive activity on both T cells and DCs. Mast cells
were identified as approximately 30% of the total CD45+
tumor-infiltrating leukocytes and were capable of degranulation and
promoting immune suppression. Purified tumor-associated mast cells
(TA-MC) spontaneously secreted IL-13 and TGF- which were further
increased by FcR cross-linking or LPS stimulation. The suppression of
Ag-specific T cells and the development of tolerogenic DC were found to
be dependent on TA-MC secretion of TGF- and IL-13 during in vitro
co-culture. Further, blocking IL-13 and TGF- in vivo prevented the
induction of DC tolerogenicity and the induction of T cell tolerance,
which, in turn, resulted in reduced tumor burden. Our findings reveal
novel mast cell-mediated mechanisms that favor immune tolerance over
anti-tumor immunity and therefore provide promising targets for the
enhancement of cancer immunotherapy.

