Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical profile of novel and potent c-Met kinase inhibitors


Background: c-Met is a proto-oncogene that encodes the protein Met with
intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. Aberrant Met kinase activity triggers
a series of unwarranted phosphorylation events and signalling processes
that ultimately lead to the development of cancer. Alteration of the Met
kinase signalling cascade represents an attractive approach aimed at
blocking invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. Herein, we describe the
biological and pharmacokinetic properties of representative molecules
from a series of novel and small molecule inhibitors with scope to be
further developed as clinical candidates for cancers mediated by
dysregulated Met kinase activity. Methods: Met Kinase activity of test
compounds was determined using an HTRF KinEASE assay kit (Cisbio,
Bedford, MA) with modifications. Met-dependent anti-proliferative effect
was determined in MKN-45 cells. Inhibition of constitutive Met kinase
phosphorylation in MKN-45 and NCI-H441 cells was measured in an ELISA
assay. Subsequently, effect of the compounds on Akt phosphorylation, a
downstream marker in the Met signalling cascade, was determined.
Metabolic stability of the compounds was evaluated in microsomes obtained
from mouse, rat, dog, monkey, and human. Results: Among the compounds
evaluated, RP1269 and RP1316 demonstrated remarkable potency against the
purified Met kinase enzyme (20.17 & 40.5 nM) as well as in an MKN-45 cell
proliferation assay (18.0 & 2.3 nM). In addition, the compounds caused a
significant reduction in constitutive Met kinase phosphorylation in
MKN-45 (11.5 & 33.3 nM) and NCI-H441 (2.2 & 4.1 nM) cells. As a
consequence, Akt phosphorylation was inhibited at half-maximally in
MKN-45 and NCI-H441 cells at Background: c-Met is a proto-oncogene that
encodes the protein Met with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. Aberrant
Met kinase activity triggers a series of unwarranted phosphorylation
events and signalling processes that ultimately lead to the development
of cancer. Alteration of the Met kinase signalling cascade represents an
attractive approach aimed at blocking invasion and metastasis of cancer
cells. Herein, we describe the biological and pharmacokinetic properties
of representative molecules from a series of novel and small molecule
inhibitors with scope to be further developed as clinical candidates for
cancers mediated by dysregulated Met kinase activity. Methods: Met Kinase
activity of test compounds was determined using an HTRF KinEASE assay kit
(Cisbio, Bedford, MA) with modifications. Met-dependent
anti-proliferative effect was determined in MKN-45 cells. Inhibition of
constitutive Met kinase phosphorylation in MKN-45 and NCI-H441 cells was
measured in an ELISA assay. Subsequently, effect of the compounds on Akt
phosphorylation, a downstream marker in the Met signalling cascade, was
determined. Metabolic stability of the compounds was evaluated in
microsomes obtained from mouse, rat, dog, monkey, and human. Results:
Among the compounds evaluated, RP1269 and RP1316 demonstrated remarkable
potency against the purified Met kinase enzyme (20.17 & 40.5 nM) as well
as in an MKN-45 cell proliferation assay (18.0 & 2.3 nM). In addition,
the compounds caused a significant reduction in constitutive Met kinase
phosphorylation in MKN-45 (11.5 & 33.3 nM) and NCI-H441 (2.2 & 4.1 nM)
cells. As a consequence, Akt phosphorylation was inhibited at
half-maximally in MKN-45 and NCI-H441 cells at <100 nM and Background:
c-Met is a proto-oncogene that encodes the protein Met with intrinsic
tyrosine kinase activity. Aberrant Met kinase activity triggers a series
of unwarranted phosphorylation events and signalling processes that
ultimately lead to the development of cancer. Alteration of the Met
kinase signalling cascade represents an attractive approach aimed at
blocking invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. Herein, we describe the
biological and pharmacokinetic properties of representative molecules
from a series of novel and small molecule inhibitors with scope to be
further developed as clinical candidates for cancers mediated by
dysregulated Met kinase activity. Methods: Met Kinase activity of test
compounds was determined using an HTRF KinEASE assay kit (Cisbio,
Bedford, MA) with modifications. Met-dependent anti-proliferative effect
was determined in MKN-45 cells. Inhibition of constitutive Met kinase
phosphorylation in MKN-45 and NCI-H441 cells was measured in an ELISA
assay. Subsequently, effect of the compounds on Akt phosphorylation, a
downstream marker in the Met signalling cascade, was determined.
Metabolic stability of the compounds was evaluated in microsomes obtained
from mouse, rat, dog, monkey, and human. Results: Among the compounds
evaluated, RP1269 and RP1316 demonstrated remarkable potency against the
purified Met kinase enzyme (20.17 & 40.5 nM) as well as in an MKN-45 cell
proliferation assay (18.0 & 2.3 nM). In addition, the compounds caused a
significant reduction in constitutive Met kinase phosphorylation in
MKN-45 (11.5 & 33.3 nM) and NCI-H441 (2.2 & 4.1 nM) cells. As a
consequence, Akt phosphorylation was inhibited at half-maximally in
MKN-45 and NCI-H441 cells at <100 nM and <50 nM respectively. Further,
the compounds exhibited a favourable ADME profile across the species
studied. Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate that RP1269 and RP1316 are
potent Met kinase inhibitors with efficacy values comparable to existing
Met kinase inhibitors in development. On lines with selective inhibitors,
the compounds display anti-proliferative effect only in cells with
amplification of the Met kinase gene. The compounds are currently being
tested for efficacy and target inhibition in various xenograft models.
Clinical candidate shall be nominated by 2012.

