Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: BRAF and MEK inhibitor profiling across 240 tumor cell lines to
correlate with sensitivity and resistant biomarkers


Activated kinases that induce cell proliferation have been attractive
targets for targeted cancer therapy development. Cancer cells could
become dependent on tumor-specific activated kinases and this tendency
has been coined oncogene addiction. Here, we investigated three activated
kinase inhibitors: BRAF inhibitor, PLX-4032 analog, and the MEK
inhibitors, CI1040 and PD0325901. We established a high throughput
cellular approach to profile 240 human tumor cell lines identifying
genotype-correlated sensitivity or resistance. Proliferative, apoptotic
and cell cycle arrest responses were measured using multiplexed high
content screening with automated fluorescence microscopy and image
analysis based technology. Growth index was measured using nuclear dye.
Activated caspase 3 antibodies were used for the apoptosis induction
detection. Phospho-histone H3 antibodies were used to measure the cell
cycle block. We generated cell line profiles to reveal drug sensitivity
and resistance patterns that may correlate with the clinical genotype
responses. Cell lines with BRAFV600E mutations showed overlapping
sensitivity to all three MEK and BRAF inhibitors. RAS mutations confer
resistance to the BRAF inhibitor and confer sensitivity to both MEK
inhibitors. In addition, we used Alphascreen technology to measure
phosphoERK across the 240 non-treated tumor cell line panel. We found
that the majority of PLX-4032 sensitive cell lines expressed high levels
of phosphoERK. In addition, we investigated BRAF, MEK and EGFR inhibitor
combinations to evaluate potential synergies. This preclinical approach
can be used to predict mechanisms of susceptibility or resistance to
these agents which in turn could be used for the optimization of targeted
cancer therapeutics.

