Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs) in gastrointestinal stromal tumors


Introduction Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are characterized by
gain-of-function-mutations of c-KIT or PDGFRA. Despite long-lasting
remissions with the KIT inhibitor imatinib (IM) most patients eventually
progress. While inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) may confer
resistance in other cancers little is known about the role of IAPs in
GIST. Material and Methods IAP expression (cIAPs, XIAP, survivin) in
patient samples (TMA, n=163), IM-sensitive (GIST-T1, GIST882, GIST430)
and IM-resistant (GIST48B, GIST48) GIST cell lines (RT-PCR, western blot)
was analyzed. The impact of KIT and growth inhibitory drugs on IAP
expression (24h of treatment) was determined by western blot. Biological
consequences of IAP modulation (YM155: transcriptional repressor of
survivin; Embelin: biochemical XIAP inhibitor; lentiviral shRNA knockdown
[KD] of survivin, XIAP) were investigated alone and in combination with
KIT-related pathway inhibitors (IM, LY294002, 17-AAG). Results cIAPs,
XIAP and survivin were expressed at various levels in all KIT-positive
and negative GIST cell lines. Resistant cell lines did not exhibit higher
levels of IAPs. Survivin expression was found to vary over time in
GIST-T1 and 48B (2- and 4-fold within 5 days. Survivin expression
(immunoreactivity score 3) was found in 40% of GIST patients. PI3K
inhibition led to survivin downregulation of 20 to 65% (24h) in all
tested cell lines whereas KIT inhibition (IM, 24h) reduced survivin and
XIAP expression only in GIST-T1 (52%). The protein levels of both XIAP
and survivin were decreased following HDAC (SAHA: 44-71%, except GIST430)
and MDM2 inhibition (survivin: 40 - 90%). YM155 downregulated survivin
and exhibited proapoptotic and antiproliferative effects in all cell
lines at low nM levels (IC50: GIST-T1: 4nM, GIST48P: 40nM, GIST48B, GIST
882: 80nM) except GIST430 (IC50>1M). No antagonistic effects were seen
with combinational treatment. Embelin treatment resulted in IC50 levels
of 40M - 300M while lacking a specific XIAP inhibition. A stable XIAP KD
was established in GIST-T1 resulting in slower growth (25% in 3d).
Conclusion IAPs are commonly expressed in GIST cell lines regardless of
resistance to IM. Expression levels are mostly independent from KIT
inhibition but proapoptotic effects from HDAC and MDM2 inhibitors may in
part be conferred by IAPs. The survivin repressor YM155 showed
antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects at levels that are
therapeutically achievable suggesting a potential therapeutic role in
GIST.

