Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor cell cross-talk with tumor-associated leukocytes leads to
induction of tumor exosomal fibronectin and promotes tumor progression


Exosomes play an important role in intercellular communication. However,
most data published are based on exosomes released from in vitro cultured
cells that do not exhibit communication with neighboring cells located in
the same microenvironment as the exosomal producing cells, and therefore
in vitro culture experiments do not represent what occurs in vivo. In
this study, our data show that co-culture of leukocytes isolated from
breast tumor tissue leads to uptake of fibronectin on/in the tumor
exosomes (Exofib+). The induction of fibronectin and exosomal uptake is
tumor tissue derived, leukocyte specific, as leukocytes isolated from
peripheral blood of nave mice failed to induce fibronectin uptaken by
tumor exosomes. Furthermore, depletion of both CD25+ cells and Gr-1+
cells from tumor-associated leukocytes causes a reduction of Exofib+
suggesting that tumor-associated CD25+ cells and Gr-1+ cells play a role
in fibronectin production and uptake by tumor exosomes resulting in
Exofib+. As a result of tumor cells taking up Exofib+ two major events
are induced: FAK/Src-dependent signaling pathways are activated, and the
production of proinflammatory cytokines and metalloproteinase 9 is
enhanced in response to taking up exosomes and this in turn enhances
tumor cell invasion in vitro as well as in vivo. Collectively, our
findings provide evidence that exosomes released from freshly excised
tumor tissue cells that have communicated/interacted with immune cells
gain new immune evasion capacity.

