Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between early life factors and childhood
rhabdomyosarcoma


Background: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common type of soft-tissue
sarcoma among 0-19 year olds, with the incidence rate highest among
children of ages 0-4. Since, childhood cancers tend to have relatively
shorter lag time between exposure and disease, early childhood cancer
such as RMS could be due to exposures during pregnancy or early infancy.
Very little is known about environmental factors that may increase the
susceptibility to RMS. Two major subtypes_embryonal and alveolar_have
been linked with overexpression of the gene encoding insulin-like growth
factor 2 (IFG2), which is also associated with fetal overgrowth syndrome.
A couple of studies have suggested accelerated fetal growth as a risk
factor, but needs to be confirmed. We examined associations between fetal
growth measures and all RMS, and separately for the two major subtypes.
We also examined other prenatal/perinatal factors including prenatal
care, parental age, and parity. Methods: We conducted a population based
case-control study in California by linking California Cancer registry
and birth certificate data. Incident cases in children 0-5 ages (overall
n=359, embryonal RMS=218, alveolar RMS=81) diagnosed in 1988-2008 and
controls, frequency matched on birth year (1986-2007, n=205,230) were
included. Logistic regression was applied to examine the associations of
interest in crude and adjusted models. Results: The point estimates in
adjusted models suggested an increased risk for embryonal RMS for all
fetal growth measures employed, i.e., high birthweight (4000-5250 gms) at
term births only, for high birth weight (4000-5250 gms) adjusted for
gestational age, and large for gestational age births (OR (95%CI): 1.28
(0.85, 1.92); 1.21 (0.81, 1.81); 1.13 (0.73, 1.75) respectively), but not
for alveolar RMS or overall RMS cases. We found increased risk for
alveolar RMS among those with prenatal care starting after the first
trimester or no care at all compared to prenatal care in the first
trimester (OR(95%CI): 1.68 (1.01, 2.80)). Findings for other factors
including higher risk among male and higher parental age at child birth
were consistent with findings from existing studies. Conclusion: We did
not find a convincingly positive association between fetal growth and
RMS, although our data suggested small risk increases particularly for
embryonal RMS. However, our findings on starting time of prenatal care
and parental age at childbirth further support the notion that the early
fetal/embryonic environment may be important for developing RMS in early
childhood. Larger studies examining well-measured early life environment
that may cause genetic and epigenetic alteration observed in RMS cases
are needed to improve our understanding of the RMS etiology.

