Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: S100P/RAGE signaling activates AP1 and NF-kB in miR-21/RECK
regulation


The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) plays a role in
different pathological diseases including cancer. Several ligands
activate RAGE, among them are AGEs (advance glycation end-products),
HMGB1 (amphoterin), amyloid- peptide, and the S100 Ca2+ binding family.
Activation of RAGE by S100P stimulates many cell processes in cancer
mediated by AP1, NF-kB and ERK1/2. Recently, these transcription factors
were shown to induce expression of the oncogene, miR-21. Our data show
that S100P over-expression in LS174T and SW480 colon cancer cells induces
miR-21 expression. It is well known that S100P has an intracellular and
an extracellular function when it interacts with Ezrin and RAGE
respectively. To decipher if the extracellular function of S100P mediated
by its interaction with RAGE induces miR-21, we treated SW480 normally
expressing RAGE and not S100P with exogenous human recombinant
(hr)-S100P. These results show that S100P/RAGE signaling induces miR-21
expression. To determine if the induction of miR-21 by S100P/RAGE
signaling is mediated by AP1 and NF-kB, we performed luciferase studies
with wild type, and mutated AP1 and NF-kB pri-miR-21 promoter constructs
in cells expressing only the RAGE receptor. These data show that
S100P/RAGE signaling mediates miR-21 induction by the activation of AP1
and NF-kB. Additionally, LS174T cells expressing RAGE and S100P rendered
similar results when they ectopically over-express S100P. However,
ectopic S100P expression in SW480 cells induced miR-21 independent of AP1
and NF-kB. These results suggest that S100P has another mechanism of
regulating miR-21. Our previous data indicated that over-expression of
S100P down regulates the reversion-inducing cysteine-rich protein with
Kazal motifs (RECK). RECK is an anti metastatic gene, inhibitor of
metalloproteinases and a target of miR-21. Our data shows that RAGE
expressing cells treated with exogenous hr-S100P down regulate RECK
expression, suggesting that miR-21 induction by S100P/RAGE signaling
represses RECK. To determine if there is a correlation in expression
levels of miR-21 with RECK, RAGE, and S100P, we used the combined method
of in situ hybridization (ISH) and immunohistochemical (IHC) techniques
on human colorectal cancer tissues. We found that there are three groups
of cells in the malignant epithelium as well as in the surrounding
tissue. One group of cells expresses high levels of miR-21, another group
expresses high levels of RECK while the third group expresses both.
Together, these data show that S100P/RAGE regulates miR-21/RECK
expression mediated by AP1 and NF-kB and suggest that in cancer this
signaling pathway remodels the extracellular matrix by the activation of
metalloproteinases inducing epithelial mesenchymal transition to allow
cell migration/invasion in colon cancer progression.

