Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chloroquine-induced inhibition of Arginase-1 promotes the nuclear
localization of p53 in colon cancer cell lines


Emerging studies have identified the overexpression of Arginase-1 (ARG-1)
in a variety of human malignancies, including cancer of the colon,
leading to the promotion of tumor cell growth and invasion. Inactivation
of the p53 tumor suppressor protein is known to involve somatic mutation
or binding of viral oncoproteins to the p53 protein. However, several
types of malignant and premalignant tissues harbor a genetically
wild-type, but transcriptionally inactive, form of p53, often localized
in the cytoplasm. The transactivation of the inactive p53 gene is thought
to lead to its tumor suppressor function. The present report showed that
the treatment of cultured human colon cancer cell lines (HT-29 and
HCT-116) with 10 or 20 M chloroquine (CQ), a known
anti-rheumatoid/antimalarial drug, inhibited arginase activity with a
concomitant nuclear accumulation of the p53 protein. By using specific
antibodies it was demonstrated that the decreased in arginase activity
correlated with the reduction of arg-1 levels in the cells. Upon
treatment of cells with 20 M CQ, the levels of arginase activity or arg-1
decreased by 43.5 % or 38.3 % in HT-29 cells and 40.9 or 39.4 % in
HCT-116 respectively. Further the treatment of cells with 20 M CQ for 48
h led to an increased level of p53 in the nucleus in comparison with the
control samples (p Emerging studies have identified the overexpression of
Arginase-1 (ARG-1) in a variety of human malignancies, including cancer
of the colon, leading to the promotion of tumor cell growth and invasion.
Inactivation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein is known to involve
somatic mutation or binding of viral oncoproteins to the p53 protein.
However, several types of malignant and premalignant tissues harbor a
genetically wild-type, but transcriptionally inactive, form of p53, often
localized in the cytoplasm. The transactivation of the inactive p53 gene
is thought to lead to its tumor suppressor function. The present report
showed that the treatment of cultured human colon cancer cell lines
(HT-29 and HCT-116) with 10 or 20 M chloroquine (CQ), a known
anti-rheumatoid/antimalarial drug, inhibited arginase activity with a
concomitant nuclear accumulation of the p53 protein. By using specific
antibodies it was demonstrated that the decreased in arginase activity
correlated with the reduction of arg-1 levels in the cells. Upon
treatment of cells with 20 M CQ, the levels of arginase activity or arg-1
decreased by 43.5 % or 38.3 % in HT-29 cells and 40.9 or 39.4 % in
HCT-116 respectively. Further the treatment of cells with 20 M CQ for 48
h led to an increased level of p53 in the nucleus in comparison with the
control samples (p <0.01). The nuclear:cytosol ratios of p53 levels were
5.3 (control) and 83 (20 M CQ) in HCT-116 (wild type) cells and 2.6
(control) and 40.9 (20 M CQ) in the HT-29 (mutant type) cells. These
results indicate that the CQ-induced inhibition of arg-1 led to the
nuclear accumulation of p53 in colon cancer cells. Thus the inhibition of
arg-1 by CQ appears to protect the p53 tumor suppressor function.In an
effort to expand our understanding of the molecular link between -catenin
levels, increased nuclear accumulation of p53 and CQ-mediated inhibition
of arginase activity, HT-29 cells were co-incubated with CQ (0-50 M) for
48 h and the level of -catenin were determined by western blot assay. The
results of this study indicate that CQ inhibited the -catenin protein in
a dose dependent manner. This decrease in the -catenin level corresponded
to an increase in the nuclear accumulation of p53 and corresponding
diminution of intracellular Arg-1. In conclusion, the data presented
herein represent a new and important improvement in understanding the
pleiotropic effects of CQ on arg-1, with specific reference to its
participation in the enhancement of the nuclear accumulation of p53 with
the resultant down regulation of -catenin protein. Thus this observation
that CQ may inhibit the initial step of the arginine-polyamine pathway
that results in the enhanced nuclear accumulation of p53 and a
concomitant down regulation of -catenin protein may provide a paradigm
for targeted therapy in colorectal cancer chemoprevention and other
malignancies.

