Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation of NF-kB and MAP kinases by TNF Family Receptors is
regulated by cellular IAPs


Activation of NF-kB, JNK and p38 MAPK signaling pathways is innermost
activity of TNF receptor protein signaling complexes that is important
for proper function of the immune system. However, excessive activation
of these signaling pathways may result in tumor development and
progression. Therefore, elucidation of the detailed molecular mechanisms
of TNF receptor signaling should gain advantage in our understanding of
the tumor biology and invention of the novel anticancer therapies. The
formation of TNF receptor complexes, as well structural and functional
associations between different signaling molecules is regulated by
ubiquitination in TRAF-dependent fashion. TNF receptors employ several
proteins possessing ubiquitin E3 ligase activities including cellular
Inhibitor of Apoptosis, c-IAP1 and c-IAP2 proteins. We demonstrate that
c-IAPs are required for canonical NF-kB and MAPK activation by TNF
receptors. By regulating the recruitment of Nemo, IKK2 and HOIP to TNFR
signaling complexes c-IAPs promote induction of gene expression by TNF
ligands. We also found that TNF receptors that stimulate the noncanonical
NF-kB pathway trigger c-IAPs, TRAF2 and TRAF3 intracellular translocation
followed by their proteasomal and lysosomal degradation. Finally, we
establish that BR3-induced cytosolic depletion of TRAF3 results in
noncanonical NF-B activation.

