Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Fishing for artemisinin-interacting proteins from human
nasopharyngeal cancer cells


Determining cellular target molecules of drugs by chemical proteomic
techniques is complex and tedious. Most approaches rely on activity-based
probe profiling and compound-centric chemical proteomics. The
antimalarial artemisinin also exerts profound anti-cancer activity, but
the mechanisms of action are incompletely understood. In the present
study, we have identified artemisinin-interacting target proteins from
human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell line CNE1. Thereby, our approach
overcomes usual problems in traditional fishing procedures, because the
drug was attached to a polystyrene surface without further chemical
modification. Using mass spectrometry we have identified 20 proteins
which effect cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, inhibition of angiogenesis,
disruption of cell migration, and modulation of nuclear receptor
responsiveness. One protein out of the twenty was further investigated in
vitro for direct ligand binding. Furthermore, a blind-docking based
approach confirmed experimentally identified proteins and suggested
further interacting proteins. Theoretically predicted interaction
partners may serve as a starting point to complete the whole set of
proteins binding artemisinin. In our investigations, we have comprised
artemisinins role in cancer treatment in a greater shape through a
systematic biological strategy and thus, are able to show novel insights
into its mode of action.

