Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Novel synthetic berbamine derivatives inhibit Jak2/Stat3 signaling
and induce apoptosis of human melanoma cells


Persistent Jak/Stat3 signal transduction plays a crucial role in
tumorigenesis and immune development. Activated Jak/Stat3 signaling has
been validated as a promising molecular target for cancer therapeutics
discovery and development. Berbamine (BBM), a natural
bis-benzylisoquinoline alkaloid, was identified from the traditional
Chinese herbal medicine Berberis amurensis used for treatment of cancer
patients. While BBM has been shown to have potent antitumor activities
with low toxicity in various cancer types, the molecular mechanism of
action of BBM remains largely unknown. Here, we determine the antitumor
activities of thirteen synthetic berbamine derivatives (BBMDs) against
human solid tumor cells. BBMD3, which is the most potent in this series
of novel BBMDs, exhibits over 6-fold increase in biological activity
compared to natural BBM. Moreover, BBMD3, directly inhibits Jak2
autophosphorylation kinase activity in vitro with IC50 = 0.69 M.
Autophosphorylation of Jak2 kinase at Tyr1007/1008 sites also was
strongly inhibited in the range of 1 M to 5 M of BBMD3 in human melanoma
cells 4 h after treatment. Following inhibition of autophosphorylation of
Jak2, BBMD3 blocked constitutive activation of downstream Stat3 signaling
in melanoma cells. BBMD3 also down-regulated expression of Stat3 target
proteins Mcl-1and Bcl-xL, associated with induction of apoptosis. In sum,
our findings demonstrate that the novel berbamine derivative BBMD3 is an
inhibitor of the Jak2/Stat3 signaling pathway, suggesting evidence for a
molecular mechanism whereby BBMD3 exerts at least part of apoptosis of
human melanoma cells. In addition, BBMD3 represents a promising lead
compound for development of new therapeutics for cancer treatment.

