Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the mechanism of action of a novel small
molecule inhibitor of HSP70


The stress-induced heat shock protein HSP70 is an ATP dependent molecular
chaperone that plays a role in the folding of nascent peptides, assembly
of multi-protein complexes, and transport of proteins across membranes
and overall. Additionally, HSP70 has significant cytoprotective and
anti-apoptotic functions. High levels of HSP70 can be found in many
cancers, and are associated with poor therapeutic response and poor
patient prognosis. These findings suggest that HSP70 may be a desirable
molecular therapeutic target, in addition to being a useful tumor
prognostic marker. Previously we demonstrated that the compound
2-phenylethynesulfonamide (PES) interacts with HSP70 and antagonizes
HSP70 function by disrupting the interaction between HSP70 and its
co-chaperones and client proteins. We showed that PES is toxic to cancer
cells but not non-transformed cells. Moreover, PES was able to
significantly extend the lifespan of mice in a Myc-driven model of
lymphoma (pThe stress-induced heat shock protein HSP70 is an ATP
dependent molecular chaperone that plays a role in the folding of nascent
peptides, assembly of multi-protein complexes, and transport of proteins
across membranes and overall. Additionally, HSP70 has significant
cytoprotective and anti-apoptotic functions. High levels of HSP70 can be
found in many cancers, and are associated with poor therapeutic response
and poor patient prognosis. These findings suggest that HSP70 may be a
desirable molecular therapeutic target, in addition to being a useful
tumor prognostic marker. Previously we demonstrated that the compound
2-phenylethynesulfonamide (PES) interacts with HSP70 and antagonizes
HSP70 function by disrupting the interaction between HSP70 and its
co-chaperones and client proteins. We showed that PES is toxic to cancer
cells but not non-transformed cells. Moreover, PES was able to
significantly extend the lifespan of mice in a Myc-driven model of
lymphoma (p<0.02; Leu et al., Mol Cell 36:15-27, 2009; Leu et al, Mol Can
Res 9:936-47, 2011). Here we utilized binding assays, molecular modeling
and in silico docking in order to predict the binding site for PES with
HSP70. We were able to verify this binding site by identifying point
mutants of HSP70 that fail to bind to PES. We used this information in
order to predict potentially superior analogues, and we report that a
novel analogue, 2-(3-chlorophenyl) ethynesulfonamide (PES-Cl) shows
superior toxicity to tumor cells, and greater efficacy as an anti-cancer
agent in Myc-driven lymphoma, compared to the parent compound (pThe
stress-induced heat shock protein HSP70 is an ATP dependent molecular
chaperone that plays a role in the folding of nascent peptides, assembly
of multi-protein complexes, and transport of proteins across membranes
and overall. Additionally, HSP70 has significant cytoprotective and
anti-apoptotic functions. High levels of HSP70 can be found in many
cancers, and are associated with poor therapeutic response and poor
patient prognosis. These findings suggest that HSP70 may be a desirable
molecular therapeutic target, in addition to being a useful tumor
prognostic marker. Previously we demonstrated that the compound
2-phenylethynesulfonamide (PES) interacts with HSP70 and antagonizes
HSP70 function by disrupting the interaction between HSP70 and its
co-chaperones and client proteins. We showed that PES is toxic to cancer
cells but not non-transformed cells. Moreover, PES was able to
significantly extend the lifespan of mice in a Myc-driven model of
lymphoma (p<0.02; Leu et al., Mol Cell 36:15-27, 2009; Leu et al, Mol Can
Res 9:936-47, 2011). Here we utilized binding assays, molecular modeling
and in silico docking in order to predict the binding site for PES with
HSP70. We were able to verify this binding site by identifying point
mutants of HSP70 that fail to bind to PES. We used this information in
order to predict potentially superior analogues, and we report that a
novel analogue, 2-(3-chlorophenyl) ethynesulfonamide (PES-Cl) shows
superior toxicity to tumor cells, and greater efficacy as an anti-cancer
agent in Myc-driven lymphoma, compared to the parent compound (p<0.0006).
Moreover, we report that treatment with PES-Cl causes cell cycle arrest
in G2/M, and that a significant fraction of tumor cells escape this
checkpoint and die by apoptosis. These data implicate HSP70 in G2/M
progression, and identify PES-Cl as a promising anti-cancer therapeutic.

