Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: RNF126 E3 ubiquitin ligase targets p21cip for ubiquitin-mediated
degradation


Many E3 ubiquitin ligases, such as Mdm2 and Skp2, are potential
therapeutic targets for cancers. To identify novel oncogenic E3 ubiquitin
ligases as anti-cancer targets, we screened an E3 ubiquitin ligase siRNA
library containing siRNA pools against 555 individual E3s using the SRB
assay in the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line and the PC3 prostate
cancer cell line. RNF126 was identified and validated as a promising
candidate from this screening. Depletion of RNF126 dramatically decreased
cell viability in these cancer cell lines. Consistently, RNF126 depletion
delayed cell cycle G1/S progression and decreased cell proliferation. By
a protein array analysis, we found that RNF126 depletion increased the
cell cycle dependent kinase inhibitor p21cip protein levels in both
MDA-MB-231 and PC3. Knockdown of RNF126 stabilized the p21 protein rather
than increased the p21 mRNA levels. We demonstrated that RNF126 interacts
with p21 in cells and in vitro, and the protein-protein interaction
depended on the N-terminal and middle parts of RNF126. RNF126
over-expression increased the p21 protein ubiquitination in an E3 ligase
activity dependent manner. RNF126 knockdown induced loss of cell
viability in MDA-MB-231 and PC-3 can be partially rescued by depletion of
p21. RNF126 stable knockdown in SW527 inhibited tumor growth in SCID
mice. Finally, we found that RNF126 is highly expressed in ER negative
breast cancer cell lines and negatively correlated with the p21
expression levels. These findings suggest that RNF126 promotes cancer
cell proliferation through targeting p21 for ubiquitin-mediated
degradation. RNF126 could be a novel therapeutic target in breast and
prostate cancers. This study was partially supported by a grant from the
American Cancer Society (RSG-08-199-01), grants from National Nature
Science Foundation of China (81072162, 81120108019, and U1132605), and a
grant from Yunnan Province High-Profile Talents Program (2010CI114).

