Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitative changes in endogenous DNA adducts correlate with
conazole mutagenicity and tumorigenicity in mouse liver


We have previously shown that the conazole fungicides triadimefon and
propiconazole, which are tumorigenic in mouse liver, are in vivo mouse
liver mutagens in the Big Blue transgenic mutation assay when
administered in feed at tumorigenic doses. The nontumorigenic conazole
myclobutanil was not mutagenic under the same conditions. DNA sequencing
of the mutants recovered from each treatment group and from untreated
control animals revealed that the mutations induced by propiconazole and
triadimefon do not result from clonal expansion of background mutations.
We hypothesized that these mutations arise from the accumulation of
reactive electrophilic metabolic byproducts within the liver in vivo. We
therefore measured the spectra of endogenous DNA adducts in the livers of
mice from these studies in order to determine if quantitative or
qualitative differences in DNA adducts correlated with mutagenicity and
tumorigenicity. We resolved and quantitated 16 individual adduct spots by
32P postlabeling and thin layer chromatography using 3 solvent systems.
Qualitatively, we observed the same DNA adducts in control mice as in
mice receiving conazoles. However, the 13 adducts with the highest
chromatographic mobility were, as a group, present at significantly
higher amounts in the livers of mice treated with propiconazole and
triadimefon than in their concurrent controls, whereas this same group of
DNA adducts in the myclobutanil-treated mice was not different from
controls. We hypothesize that this treatment-related increase in
endogenous DNA adducts may explain the observed increased in vivo
mutation frequencies previously reported to be induced by treatment with
propiconazole and triadimefon. This abstract does not necessarily reflect
EPA policy.

