Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral dihydrotestosterone regulation by conversion of
androstanediol to dihydrotestosterone in prostate cancer


Purpose It has become apparent that resurgent androgen receptor activity
in castration-resistant prostate cancer can be accounted for in part
through intratumoral androgen synthesis. The potent androgen
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) yields an inactive androgen
5-androstane-317-diol (androstanediol/3-diol) in the prostate. The
metabolism of 3-diol and relationships among other androgens have not
been elucidated. Therefore, we studied the metabolism of 3-diol in
prostate cancer cells, as well as the expression of 17-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase 6 (17-HSD6), a key enzyme of oxidative 3-HSD that converts
3-diol into DHT, in prostate cancer cells and tissues using real time-PCR
and immunohistochemistry. Finally, we studied the correlation between
serum 3-diol G levels and androgens in localized prostate cancer
patients. Methods LNCaP and VCaP cells were cultured in the
hormone-depleted medium with presence/absence of 3-diol, and the
intracellular levels of androstenedione, testosterone and DHT were
concurrently determined by liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry. LNCaP and VCaP cells were exposed to 3-diol and
bicalutamide in various concentrations. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
levels in media were assayed. To examine the long term effect of androgen
deprivation, LNCaP was cultured in hormone-depleted medium with 1nM DHEA.
Transcriptome expression was analyzed to detect expression levels of
17-HSD6. Expression scores for 17-HSD6 in radical prostatectomy specimens
treated with or without androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) were evaluated
using immunohistochemistry. Seventy-two patients with localized prostate
cancer patients were prospectively studied based on blood samples before
and after ADT for 6 months. Results DHT was synthesized from 3-diol in
prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells produced PSA in a
dose-dependent manner with 3-diol. Prostate cancer cells pretreated with
3-diol showed a dose-dependent decrease in PSA production with
bicalutamide. In the lower passages LNCaP cells treated with DHEA,
expression of 17-HSD6 showed much less striking change. However, in the
higher passage LNCaP cells, 17-HSD6 was up-regulated. The score for
17-HSD6 in prostate cancer tissues treated with ADT was significantly
higher than that without ADT (pPurpose It has become apparent that
resurgent androgen receptor activity in castration-resistant prostate
cancer can be accounted for in part through intratumoral androgen
synthesis. The potent androgen dihydrotestosterone (DHT) yields an
inactive androgen 5-androstane-317-diol (androstanediol/3-diol) in the
prostate. The metabolism of 3-diol and relationships among other
androgens have not been elucidated. Therefore, we studied the metabolism
of 3-diol in prostate cancer cells, as well as the expression of
17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 6 (17-HSD6), a key enzyme of oxidative
3-HSD that converts 3-diol into DHT, in prostate cancer cells and tissues
using real time-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Finally, we studied the
correlation between serum 3-diol G levels and androgens in localized
prostate cancer patients. Methods LNCaP and VCaP cells were cultured in
the hormone-depleted medium with presence/absence of 3-diol, and the
intracellular levels of androstenedione, testosterone and DHT were
concurrently determined by liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry. LNCaP and VCaP cells were exposed to 3-diol and
bicalutamide in various concentrations. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
levels in media were assayed. To examine the long term effect of androgen
deprivation, LNCaP was cultured in hormone-depleted medium with 1nM DHEA.
Transcriptome expression was analyzed to detect expression levels of
17-HSD6. Expression scores for 17-HSD6 in radical prostatectomy specimens
treated with or without androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) were evaluated
using immunohistochemistry. Seventy-two patients with localized prostate
cancer patients were prospectively studied based on blood samples before
and after ADT for 6 months. Results DHT was synthesized from 3-diol in
prostate cancer cells. Prostate cancer cells produced PSA in a
dose-dependent manner with 3-diol. Prostate cancer cells pretreated with
3-diol showed a dose-dependent decrease in PSA production with
bicalutamide. In the lower passages LNCaP cells treated with DHEA,
expression of 17-HSD6 showed much less striking change. However, in the
higher passage LNCaP cells, 17-HSD6 was up-regulated. The score for
17-HSD6 in prostate cancer tissues treated with ADT was significantly
higher than that without ADT (p<0.001). There were significant positive
relationships between serum DHEA-S and 3-diol G levels before and after
ADT. Conclusion We verified the synthesis of DHT from 3-diol in prostate
cancer cells in this study and elucidated that the serum 3-diol G level
well reflects the adrenal androgen milieu in localized prostate cancer
patients. Therefore, 3-diol can be a potential precursor of the most
active androgen DHT in prostate cancer. Our data suggest that the adrenal
androgen-DHT axis can be a potential therapeutic target for treating
prostate cancer.

