Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Drugging the undrugable DNA-binding domain of STAT3 for inhibition
of cancer cell migration and invasion


Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is
constitutively activated in malignant tumors, and its activation is
associated with high histological grade and advanced cancer stage. STAT3
has been shown to play important roles in multiple aspects of cancer
aggressiveness including migration, invasion, survival, self-renewal,
angiogenesis, and tumor-cell immune evasion by regulating the expression
of multiple downstream target genes. Thus, inhibiting STAT3 promises an
attracting strategy for treatment of advanced tumors with metastatic
potential. Recently, using in-silico screening of a virtual compound
database by docking onto the DNA-binding site of human STAT3, our
laboratory identified specific STAT3 inhibitors that can disrupt DNA
binding activity of STAT3 and inhibit STAT3-dependent cancer cell
proliferation. In this study, we further characterized these STAT3
inhibitors and demonstrated that these inhibitors suppressed migration
and invasion of both breast and lung cancer cells by inhibiting
STAT3-dependent expression of metalloproteinase-2, -9 and vascular
endothelial growth factor which are known to promote and enhance tumor
metastasis. Taken together, we conclude that it is possible to inhibit
STAT3 by targeting its DNA binding domain for discovery of anticancer
therapeutics and for treatment of metastatic cancers.

