Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of TBK1 as a novel cancer target in the K-Ras pathway


TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1) is a serine/threonine kinase best known for
its role in mediating the innate immune response through modulation of
the interferon and NF-kB pathways. TBK1 has also been implicated in
supporting cancer cell survival and transformation as the downstream
effector of the small GTPase RalB, and is overexpressed in lung, breast
and colon tumors. Recently, a high-throughput RNAi screen identified TBK1
as a synthetic lethal partner of oncogenic K-Ras, suggesting that small
molecule inhibition of TBK1 may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for
K-Ras mutant tumors. Given the high tractability of kinases as drug
targets, we sought to confirm that kinase inhibition recapitulated the
synthetic lethal effects observed with shRNA silencing. We examined two
small molecule inhibitors of TBK1, BX795 (6 nM) and GSK2292978A (4 nM),
in a panel of lung, pancreas and colon cancer cell lines. We found only a
small subset of lines that were sensitive to TBK1 inhibition and this
sensitivity did not correlate with K-Ras dependence. We then used K-Ras
and TBK1 siRNA in a similar panel of cell lines. As anticipated,
knockdown of K-Ras using siRNA produced significant growth and signaling
defects in K-Ras dependent cell lines. In contrast, knockdown of TBK1 did
not result in a significant alteration of growth in any of our cell
lines. Neither TBK1 siRNA nor TBK1 inhibitors revealed a sensitivity that
correlated with K-Ras dependence in our lung, pancreatic, or colorectal
cancer cell lines. Our data disputes the proposed synthetic lethal
relationship of oncogenic K-Ras and TBK1 and does not support development
of TBK1 inhibitors for treatment of K-Ras driven tumors.

