Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs inhibit breast canncer metastasis via targeting CXC
chemokine receptor 4


Overexpressed CXC chemokine receptor (CXCR4) strongly contributes to
breast cancer metastasis. However, the underlying mechanisms of CXCR4
overexpression need still to be explored. MicroRNAs (miRNA) have been
implicated as a class of critical regulators controlling diverse
biological processes. In the present study, we investigated whether
miR-302 and miR-588 are involved in the regulation of CXCR4 and play a
functional role in breast cancer metastasis. We have shown that miR-302
and miR-588 were downregulated in highly metastatic breast cancer cell
lines and tissue specimens compared to low metastatic cell lines and
breast cancer tissues. The decreased expression levels were inversely
consistent with overexpression of CXCR4 in highly breast cancer cell
lines and tissues. In addition, we found that restoration of miR-302 and
miR-588 resulted in a dramatic reduction of CXCR4 expression at protein
levels by directly targeting its 3 untranslated region. Furthermore, the
elevated expression of miR-302 and miR-588 significantly inhibited the
invasion of breast cancer cells. More promisingly, our data have
demonstrated that overexpression of miR-302 reduced metastasis and growth
of breast cancer in vivo. Our findings describe a new mechanism for the
regulation of CXCR4 and metastasis of breast cancer. The newly
characterized miR-302/588/CXCR4 link provides potential molecular markers
for predicting breast cancer metastasis. MiR-302 and miR-588 may have a
therapeutic potential to suppress breast cancer metastasis.

