Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Androgen receptor activation changes chromatin structure and
transcriptional activation


Epigenetic mechanisms such as chromatin accessibility and histone
modifications impact transcription factor binding to DNA and
transcriptional specificity. The androgen receptor (AR), a master
regulator of prostate cancer initiation and progression, acts primarily
through ligand-activated transcription of target genes. By combining deep
sequencing with DNase I hypersensitivity analysis (DNase-seq) and RNA
analysis (RNA-seq) we assessed genome-wide chromatin structure and
transcription and combined this data with publicly available AR chromatin
immunoprecipitation data (AR Chip-seq). We find that 64% of DNase I
hypersensitive sites (DHS) overlap each other before and after androgen
in LNCaP cells. Interestingly, in regions with increased chromatin
accessibility following androgen induction, the canonical AR DNA
recognition motif is enriched. Comparing identified DHS to AR binding
sites from three different data sets consistently reveals that 50% of AR
binding overlaps a DHS in induced cells. Of those sites with both DHS and
AR binding, approximately half are available prior to androgen induction
(i.e. primed) and half open in response to androgen stimulation. This
contrasts with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which was recently
reported to bind to DNA primarily in regions that are accessible to
nuclease cleavage prior to ligand activation. Our RNA-seq analysis
discovered 367 genes regulated by AR activation (FDR Epigenetic
mechanisms such as chromatin accessibility and histone modifications
impact transcription factor binding to DNA and transcriptional
specificity. The androgen receptor (AR), a master regulator of prostate
cancer initiation and progression, acts primarily through
ligand-activated transcription of target genes. By combining deep
sequencing with DNase I hypersensitivity analysis (DNase-seq) and RNA
analysis (RNA-seq) we assessed genome-wide chromatin structure and
transcription and combined this data with publicly available AR chromatin
immunoprecipitation data (AR Chip-seq). We find that 64% of DNase I
hypersensitive sites (DHS) overlap each other before and after androgen
in LNCaP cells. Interestingly, in regions with increased chromatin
accessibility following androgen induction, the canonical AR DNA
recognition motif is enriched. Comparing identified DHS to AR binding
sites from three different data sets consistently reveals that 50% of AR
binding overlaps a DHS in induced cells. Of those sites with both DHS and
AR binding, approximately half are available prior to androgen induction
(i.e. primed) and half open in response to androgen stimulation. This
contrasts with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which was recently
reported to bind to DNA primarily in regions that are accessible to
nuclease cleavage prior to ligand activation. Our RNA-seq analysis
discovered 367 genes regulated by AR activation (FDR < 0.05), including
16 of the 19 most commonly identified AR-mediated genes in several other
studies. Importantly, we find that regions of increased chromatin
accessibility are significantly associated with genes identified as
AR-regulated by RNA-seq. Finally, base pair resolution of the DNase-seq
signal reveals distinct footprinting patterns associated with the AR-DNA
interaction. Analysis of chromatin structure, AR binding, and
transcription prior to and following androgen induction demonstrates that
AR activation by ligand induces genome-wide changes in chromatin
accessibility, these changes correspond to AR binding to the genome, and
they impact AR-mediated transcriptional response. These findings suggest
that interaction between the AR and DNA alters chromatin structure and
transcriptional specificity.

