Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of radiation-enhanced cell adhesion in breast cancer
cells by ROS scanvenger


Ionizing radiation (IR) therapy is one of the main therapies to treat
breast cancer, but accumulating evidence suggests that IR is potentially
associated with increased invasion and metastasis. A great increase in
breast cancer cell adhesion to fibronectin after high dose -radiation was
observed in our group, and it accompanied with ROS boost. However it is
not known whether ROS increase related to the cell adhesion increase
after -radiation. In this report, we showed that the increased cell
adhesion to fibronectin was reduced by ROS scavenger L-NAC by 21.8% after
-radiation, but was not affected by H2O2 scavenger, catalase or by cNOS
inhibitor, L-NAME with 24 h treatment. We then determined that the cell
adhesion inhibition after -radiation involve reduced ROS, and reduced
vinculin expression and integrin activation after treating with L-NAC for
24 h. However, a short-term, 1 h pre-IR followed by 2 h post-IR,
treatment of L-NAC promotes ROS production and has no effect on cell
adhesion at 24 h post-IR. These results suggest that L-NAC long-term
treatment could potentially have an impact on breast cancer metastasis by
inhibiting the ROS and cell adhesion. These results suggest that to
inhibit IR-induced breast cancer adhesion, an uninterrupted treatment of
L-NAC may be required.

