Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetics and functions of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(KSHV) glycoproteins in virion egress, infectivity and tumorigenesis


Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV), or human herpes virus 8,
is a lymphotropic oncogenic virus that has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of Kaposi's sarcoma; body cavity-based B-cell lymphoma
(BCBL), or primary lymphoma; and some forms of Multicentric Castleman's
disease. We have developed a conditional silencing system for partial
inhibition of KSHV viral glycoprotein synthesized genes that are not
susceptible to siRNA inhibition. We have successfully used this system to
demonstrate that KHSV glycoprotein B (gB) is necessary for virion egress
from BCBL-1 cells and virus infectivity (Subramanian, D'Auvergne, et al.
J. Virol. 2008, 82:7144-54). To investigate the potential role of gB in
tumorigenesis, BCBL-1 cells were transiently transfected with anti-gB
siRNAs and codon optimized gB were mixed with matrigel and injected
subcutaneously in nude mice. Direct measurement of tumors revealed that
BCBL-1 cells transfected with anti-gB siRNAs produced tumors
significantly smaller than mock-transfected BCBL-1 cells. Co-transfection
of codon optimized gB appeared to abrogate the inhibition of tumor
formation by siRNAs. These results show that gB is important for
infectivity, virion egress and pleural effusion lymphoma (PEL) formation
in mice.

