Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cytotoxic versus cytostatic effects in tumor models by
spiro-oxindole-based modulators of the MDM2-p53 interaction


Two spiro-oxindole-based modulators -compounds A and B - of the MDM2-p53
protein-protein interaction display suitable pharmacological properties
and are currently under advanced preclinical development (1). In vitro,
these compounds induce massive cell death in a subset of relevant tumor
models such as MDM2-amplified SJSA-1, while they can significantly block
cell proliferation without detectable cytotoxic effect in other human
cell lines (e.g. HCT116). To better characterize in vivo the different
tumor cell sensitivity of these novel MDM2 antagonists, quantitative and
longitudinal pharmacodynamic effects have been determined in several
preclinical settings: i) anti-tumor efficacy, ii) activation of
p53-dependent molecular biomarkers such as p53 itself, p21, MDM2, PUMA,
Noxa, Bax and MIC-1 and iii) downstream biological effects monitored by
immuno-assays as well as by in vivo fluorescence tomography and PET
imaging. The results obtained from these studies have revealed striking
differences in the biological read-outs associated with the observed
cytotoxic versus cytostatic effects and provide guidance for the use of
certain biomarkers in the clinical development of this new generation of
anti-cancer agents. 1. Wang S. et al., AACR, Orlando FL, 2011, Abstract
LB-204

