Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Azadirachta indica leaf extract attenuates angiogenesis in
endothelial cells


Azadirachta indica (common name: neem) leaves have been found to possess
immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory and anti-carcinogenic properties.
Neem leaves contain multiple bioactive compounds that could target
multiple signaling pathways dysregulated in cancer. The present study
evaluates anti-angiogenic potential of ethanol extract of neem leaves
(EENL) in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Treatment of
HUVECs with EENL inhibited VEGF induced angiogenic response, assessed by
the formation of tubes in vitro and the formation of vascular structure
in the angioreactor in vivo. The in vitro proliferation, invasion and
migration of HUVECs were suppressed with EENL. Nuclear fragmentation and
abnormally small mitochondria with dilated cristae were observed in EENL
treated HUVECs by transmission electron microscopy. Genome-wide mRNA
expression profiling after treatment with EENL revealed differentially
regulated genes. Expression changes for the 30 up-regulated and 30
down-regulated genes were validated by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction. Additionally, increase in the expression of HMOX1, ATF3
and EGR1 proteins were determined by immunoblotting. Analysis of the
compounds in the EENL by mass spectrometry with mobile phase containing
sodium acetate suggests the presence of nimbolide, 2, 3-dehydrosalannol,
6-desacetyl nimbinene and nimolinone. We further confirmed
antiproliferative activity of nimbolide and 2, 3-dehydrosalannol in
HUVECs. Our results suggest that EENL by regulating the genes involved in
cellular development and cell death functions could control cell
proliferation, attenuate the stimulatory effects of VEGF and exert
antiangiogenic effects. EENL treatment could have a potential therapeutic
role during cancer progression.

