Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A non-replicating adenovirus expressing Hey1 is cytotoxic to
prostate cancer cells


Androgen receptor (AR) signalling is active in most hormone-refractory
prostate cancers (PCa) and suppression of its activity impedes cell
proliferation. We demonstrate that Hey1, a co-repressor of AR, is a
potential therapeutic transgene for treatment of PCa. A
replication-defective adenovirus expressing Hey1 under control of the CMV
promoter was generated (Ad5Hey1; E1 and E3 deleted) and found to be
cytotoxic to human PCa cells, both AR-positive 22Rv1 and LNCaP and
AR-negative DU145. The doses required to kill 50% of cells (EC50) were
comparable to the cytotoxic E1A12S gene expressed from an identical
vector (AdE1A12S). Ad5Hey1 repressed AR activity in a dose dependent
manner in 22Rv1 cells both with and without mibolerone stimulation as
determined by luciferase reporter assays. In 22Rv1 cells, the G2/M
population increased in an Ad5Hey1 but not AdE1A12S dependent manner 48h
after infection to 37.65.4% at 1000 particles per cell (ppc). An increase
in cyclin B1 expression reflected the Ad5Hey1-dependent increase in G2/M
phase. Expression of p53 increased with increasing doses of Ad5Hey1
whereas p21 levels increased at low doses but decreased at higher doses
in 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells. At 1000ppc, a larger proportion of cells were
in sub-G1 (38.57.5%) indicating that Ad5Hey1 induced apoptotic cell
death. Apoptotic death was confirmed by caspase 3 activation in both
Ad5Hey1 and AdE1A12S-infected cells by flow cytometry. Efficacy of
Ad5Hey1 was also evaluated in vivo in combination with docetaxel,
currently used in the clinic for treatment of PCa. In LNCaP xenograft in
vivo models, Ad5Hey1 alone caused significant tumour growth inhibition
with median time to tumour progression of 92d compared with 54d for
animals with mock-treated tumours. Time to progression was further
increased when Ad5Hey1 was combined with a sub-optimal dose of docetaxel
with 75% of animals surviving at 110d compared with 40% of animals with
Ad5Hey1 alone and none of the docetaxel treated animals surviving.
Similar tumour growth inhibition was observed in models using DU145
xenografts; the combination of Ad5Hey1 with docetaxel significantly
prolonged time to progression from 62d (single agents) to 96d when
combined (5-8 animals/group). Furthermore, the antiandrogen bicalutamide,
used as a therapy for hormone-dependent PCa, enhanced Ad5Hey1
cytotoxicity and decreased the EC50 of Ad5Hey1 alone by 14.510.5% and
33.52.5% for 5 and 10M bicalutamide respectively in 22Rv1 cells. These
data indicate that Hey1 can act as a cell death enhancer if
over-expressed. Data is presented to suggest Hey1 can be expressed from a
replication selective adenovirus to improve oncolytic anti-tumour
efficacy in vitro and in PCa xenograft models.

