Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Non-homologues end joining mediates fatty acid
synthase(FASN)-associated resistance to DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics


Fatty acid synthase (FASN) is the sole mammalian enzyme capable of de
novo lipid synthesis. Except in lipogenic tissues, FASN expression and
activity is largely repressed by dietary fat. In contrast, abnormally
elevated FASN expression and activity have been found in many types of
human cancers. In vivo and in vitro studies showed that inhibition of
FASN led to selective cytostatic and cytotoxic effect in cancer tissues
and cells, with minimal adverse effect towards normal tissues. Clearly,
FASN is no longer just an anabolic protein, but also provides growth and
survival advantages to tumor cells. It has also been found that ectopic
overexpression of FASN causes resistance to DNA-damaging drugs including
doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and etoposide as well as to ionizing radiation
(IR), but not to non-genotoxic drugs such as vinblastine and paclitaxel.
This finding suggests that FASN overexpression may regulate the DNA
damage/repair pathway to help breast cancer cells survive DNA-damaging
treatments. In this study, we tested this hypothesis. We found that FASN
expression had profound effect on the rate of -H2AX clearance after
exposure to IR or doxorubucin. While knocking down FASN delayed -H2AX
clearance, FASN overexpression increased -H2AX clearance. Using neutral
comet assay, we also found that double strand DNA break (DSB) induced by
doxorubicin was increased by knocking down FASN expression but attenuated
by increasing FASN expression. Furthermore, using a host-cell
reactivation based assay, we showed that FASN overexpression
significantly increased Non-homologous End Joining DNA repair activity.
Together, we conclude that FASN likely plays an important role in
regulating DSB repair in cancer cells.

