Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Over-expression of EGFRviii induces an angiogenic switch in
infiltrative human glioblastomas


Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and most aggressive
primary brain tumor where local cancer cell invasion into the normal
brain represents a major obstacle preventing successful therapeutic
interventions. A well known mediator of invasion, proliferation and
survival, is the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Amplification
and subsequent over-expression of EGFR protein is the most common genetic
alteration in primary GBM, with a frequency of about 40%. Of the GBMs
that have an amplification of EGFR, 63-75% also show genetic
rearrangements of the gene, resulting in tumors that express both the
wild type, as well as mutated forms of EGFR. The most common mutation in
EGFR, is the EGFRviii, were the ligand binding part of the protein is
missing (del exon 2-7). This mutation leads to a constitutive activation
of the protein. In patients with amplified EGFR, 50-60% also express the
EGFRviii. In this work we determined a functional role of EGFRviii within
invasive human GBM cells in vivo. We cultured human GBM cells, lacking
EGFR amplification and EGFRviii expression, in serum-free neuro-basal
(NB) medium. By orthotopic transplantation into the brains of
immunodeficient rats, tumors developed that showed a highly infiltrative
non-angiogenic phenotype. By over-expressing EGFRviii in these tumors, we
demonstrate a robust switch towards angiogenesis as shown by
dynamic-contrast enhanced MRI and by histologic verification of
angiogenic vessels. Molecular analysis confirmed an up-regulation of
HIF1A as well as a panel of angiogenic factors. Our results demonstrate a
distinct role of EGFRviii as a vital driver of angiogenic tumor growth
within human GBMs in vivo. Thus, the presented observations should have
important implications for therapeutic strategies targeting EGFRviii in
patients.

