Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Younger age correlates with depression but not adaptive maturity
in adult cancer patients


Background: In a previous study, we found that Immature adaptive
mechanism (ego defense mechanism) endorsement independently predicted
5-year survival in adult cancer patients. Depression symptom severity,
however, did not predict survival in the same sample. While empirical
evidence suggests that adaptive maturity increases with age in the
general population, the influence of age on depression in cancer patients
remains unclear. In this investigation, we hypothesized that increased
age would be associated with 1) mature adaption and with 2) fewer
depression symptoms. Methods: Participants in this IRB approved study
included adult cancer outpatients at the University of Colorado Cancer
Center (N=293). All participants provided informed consent and
demographic data, and completed the Defense Style Questionnaire (DSQ) and
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Exclusion criteria were extreme pain,
delirium, and neuroendocrine neoplasm that could mimic depression.
Additional data collected included gender, cancer type and stage, time
since diagnosis, treatment modality, psychiatric history, current
medications, and current antidepressant use. For analysis, we used
Spearman's correlation statistic with probability set at pBackground: In
a previous study, we found that Immature adaptive mechanism (ego defense
mechanism) endorsement independently predicted 5-year survival in adult
cancer patients. Depression symptom severity, however, did not predict
survival in the same sample. While empirical evidence suggests that
adaptive maturity increases with age in the general population, the
influence of age on depression in cancer patients remains unclear. In
this investigation, we hypothesized that increased age would be
associated with 1) mature adaption and with 2) fewer depression symptoms.
Methods: Participants in this IRB approved study included adult cancer
outpatients at the University of Colorado Cancer Center (N=293). All
participants provided informed consent and demographic data, and
completed the Defense Style Questionnaire (DSQ) and Beck Depression
Inventory (BDI). Exclusion criteria were extreme pain, delirium, and
neuroendocrine neoplasm that could mimic depression. Additional data
collected included gender, cancer type and stage, time since diagnosis,
treatment modality, psychiatric history, current medications, and current
antidepressant use. For analysis, we used Spearman's correlation
statistic with probability set at p<0.05. Results: Data analysis
indicated no statistical association between age and adaptive maturity.
By contrast, age correlated significantly and negatively with total BDI
scores (r= 0.23, pBackground: In a previous study, we found that Immature
adaptive mechanism (ego defense mechanism) endorsement independently
predicted 5-year survival in adult cancer patients. Depression symptom
severity, however, did not predict survival in the same sample. While
empirical evidence suggests that adaptive maturity increases with age in
the general population, the influence of age on depression in cancer
patients remains unclear. In this investigation, we hypothesized that
increased age would be associated with 1) mature adaption and with 2)
fewer depression symptoms. Methods: Participants in this IRB approved
study included adult cancer outpatients at the University of Colorado
Cancer Center (N=293). All participants provided informed consent and
demographic data, and completed the Defense Style Questionnaire (DSQ) and
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Exclusion criteria were extreme pain,
delirium, and neuroendocrine neoplasm that could mimic depression.
Additional data collected included gender, cancer type and stage, time
since diagnosis, treatment modality, psychiatric history, current
medications, and current antidepressant use. For analysis, we used
Spearman's correlation statistic with probability set at p<0.05. Results:
Data analysis indicated no statistical association between age and
adaptive maturity. By contrast, age correlated significantly and
negatively with total BDI scores (r= 0.23, p<0.0001), as well as BDI
sub-scale mood symptom scores (r= 0.26, pBackground: In a previous study,
we found that Immature adaptive mechanism (ego defense mechanism)
endorsement independently predicted 5-year survival in adult cancer
patients. Depression symptom severity, however, did not predict survival
in the same sample. While empirical evidence suggests that adaptive
maturity increases with age in the general population, the influence of
age on depression in cancer patients remains unclear. In this
investigation, we hypothesized that increased age would be associated
with 1) mature adaption and with 2) fewer depression symptoms. Methods:
Participants in this IRB approved study included adult cancer outpatients
at the University of Colorado Cancer Center (N=293). All participants
provided informed consent and demographic data, and completed the Defense
Style Questionnaire (DSQ) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Exclusion
criteria were extreme pain, delirium, and neuroendocrine neoplasm that
could mimic depression. Additional data collected included gender, cancer
type and stage, time since diagnosis, treatment modality, psychiatric
history, current medications, and current antidepressant use. For
analysis, we used Spearman's correlation statistic with probability set
at p<0.05. Results: Data analysis indicated no statistical association
between age and adaptive maturity. By contrast, age correlated
significantly and negatively with total BDI scores (r= 0.23, p<0.0001),
as well as BDI sub-scale mood symptom scores (r= 0.26, p<0.0001), and
somatic symptom scores (r= 0.12, p=0.037). Factors associated with BDI
mood symptom scores included self-reported current medications that
affect mood (r= 0.21, pBackground: In a previous study, we found that
Immature adaptive mechanism (ego defense mechanism) endorsement
independently predicted 5-year survival in adult cancer patients.
Depression symptom severity, however, did not predict survival in the
same sample. While empirical evidence suggests that adaptive maturity
increases with age in the general population, the influence of age on
depression in cancer patients remains unclear. In this investigation, we
hypothesized that increased age would be associated with 1) mature
adaption and with 2) fewer depression symptoms. Methods: Participants in
this IRB approved study included adult cancer outpatients at the
University of Colorado Cancer Center (N=293). All participants provided
informed consent and demographic data, and completed the Defense Style
Questionnaire (DSQ) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Exclusion
criteria were extreme pain, delirium, and neuroendocrine neoplasm that
could mimic depression. Additional data collected included gender, cancer
type and stage, time since diagnosis, treatment modality, psychiatric
history, current medications, and current antidepressant use. For
analysis, we used Spearman's correlation statistic with probability set
at p<0.05. Results: Data analysis indicated no statistical association
between age and adaptive maturity. By contrast, age correlated
significantly and negatively with total BDI scores (r= 0.23, p<0.0001),
as well as BDI sub-scale mood symptom scores (r= 0.26, p<0.0001), and
somatic symptom scores (r= 0.12, p=0.037). Factors associated with BDI
mood symptom scores included self-reported current medications that
affect mood (r= 0.21, p<0.001), psychiatric history (r= 0.15, p=0.009),
current antidepressants (r= 0.14, p=0.02), and ratio of Mature/Immature
DSQ scores (r= 0.24, pBackground: In a previous study, we found that
Immature adaptive mechanism (ego defense mechanism) endorsement
independently predicted 5-year survival in adult cancer patients.
Depression symptom severity, however, did not predict survival in the
same sample. While empirical evidence suggests that adaptive maturity
increases with age in the general population, the influence of age on
depression in cancer patients remains unclear. In this investigation, we
hypothesized that increased age would be associated with 1) mature
adaption and with 2) fewer depression symptoms. Methods: Participants in
this IRB approved study included adult cancer outpatients at the
University of Colorado Cancer Center (N=293). All participants provided
informed consent and demographic data, and completed the Defense Style
Questionnaire (DSQ) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Exclusion
criteria were extreme pain, delirium, and neuroendocrine neoplasm that
could mimic depression. Additional data collected included gender, cancer
type and stage, time since diagnosis, treatment modality, psychiatric
history, current medications, and current antidepressant use. For
analysis, we used Spearman's correlation statistic with probability set
at p<0.05. Results: Data analysis indicated no statistical association
between age and adaptive maturity. By contrast, age correlated
significantly and negatively with total BDI scores (r= 0.23, p<0.0001),
as well as BDI sub-scale mood symptom scores (r= 0.26, p<0.0001), and
somatic symptom scores (r= 0.12, p=0.037). Factors associated with BDI
mood symptom scores included self-reported current medications that
affect mood (r= 0.21, p<0.001), psychiatric history (r= 0.15, p=0.009),
current antidepressants (r= 0.14, p=0.02), and ratio of Mature/Immature
DSQ scores (r= 0.24, p<0.0001). Gender, cancer stage, time since
diagnosis, and treatment modality did not reach correlation significance
with age, adaptive maturity, or BDI score. Conclusion: These data suggest
that depression symptoms may occur more frequently in younger rather than
older cancer patients, and that age does not appear associated with
adaptive maturity in this clinical sample. Mood symptoms of depression
stood out as highly and inversely correlated with age. Possible variables
that may affect this relationship include medications that affect mood,
as well as measured adaptive maturity level, with probable contributions
from previous psychiatric history and current antidepressant use.
Unexpectedly, antidepressant use appeared associated with more, rather
than fewer, depressive mood symptoms. Further prospective research should
focus on investigating the factors that affect depression in younger
adult cancer patients. For example, antidepressant treatment in this age
group will require trials to establish an age specific clinical
improvement.

