Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of metastasis of circulating tumor cells by
extracellular matrix secreted by human embryonic cells


We have previously demonstrated the increased metastatic potential of
human prostate cancer PC-3 CTCs compared to their parental counterparts
in both chick embryo and mouse models. In the present study, we tested
the effects of human embryonic extracellular matrix (ECM), secreted by
human embryonic cells including conditioned medium (CM) and a semi-solid
form (hECM), on metastasis of PC-3 CTC in the chick embryo model. The
chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) of 18 chicken embryos were inoculated with
either 106 PC-3 human prostate cancer cells or PC-3 CTCs, both stably
expressing GFP. Twelve hours later, embryos were divided into 6 groups
each containing three embryos: PC-3 parental control; PC-3 + CM; PC-3 +
hECM; CTC control; CTC + CM; and CTC+ hECM. Twelve hours following
inoculation of the cells, a single dose of 100 L of either treatment was
given to the appropriate group. Embryo brains were removed on day 8
post-inoculations, and processed for cryo-sectioning, generating 3 slides
of brain tissue per embryo taken at various depths. Imaging was performed
using the IV-100 scanning laser microscope (Olympus Corp, Tokyo, Japan)
in order to count metastatic foci. PC-3 controls had an average of 11.1
metastatic foci compared to 2.55 in the PC-3 + hECM group (pWe have
previously demonstrated the increased metastatic potential of human
prostate cancer PC-3 CTCs compared to their parental counterparts in both
chick embryo and mouse models. In the present study, we tested the
effects of human embryonic extracellular matrix (ECM), secreted by human
embryonic cells including conditioned medium (CM) and a semi-solid form
(hECM), on metastasis of PC-3 CTC in the chick embryo model. The
chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) of 18 chicken embryos were inoculated with
either 106 PC-3 human prostate cancer cells or PC-3 CTCs, both stably
expressing GFP. Twelve hours later, embryos were divided into 6 groups
each containing three embryos: PC-3 parental control; PC-3 + CM; PC-3 +
hECM; CTC control; CTC + CM; and CTC+ hECM. Twelve hours following
inoculation of the cells, a single dose of 100 L of either treatment was
given to the appropriate group. Embryo brains were removed on day 8
post-inoculations, and processed for cryo-sectioning, generating 3 slides
of brain tissue per embryo taken at various depths. Imaging was performed
using the IV-100 scanning laser microscope (Olympus Corp, Tokyo, Japan)
in order to count metastatic foci. PC-3 controls had an average of 11.1
metastatic foci compared to 2.55 in the PC-3 + hECM group (p< 0.0001) and
2.76 in the PC-3 + CM group (pWe have previously demonstrated the
increased metastatic potential of human prostate cancer PC-3 CTCs
compared to their parental counterparts in both chick embryo and mouse
models. In the present study, we tested the effects of human embryonic
extracellular matrix (ECM), secreted by human embryonic cells including
conditioned medium (CM) and a semi-solid form (hECM), on metastasis of
PC-3 CTC in the chick embryo model. The chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) of
18 chicken embryos were inoculated with either 106 PC-3 human prostate
cancer cells or PC-3 CTCs, both stably expressing GFP. Twelve hours
later, embryos were divided into 6 groups each containing three embryos:
PC-3 parental control; PC-3 + CM; PC-3 + hECM; CTC control; CTC + CM; and
CTC+ hECM. Twelve hours following inoculation of the cells, a single dose
of 100 L of either treatment was given to the appropriate group. Embryo
brains were removed on day 8 post-inoculations, and processed for
cryo-sectioning, generating 3 slides of brain tissue per embryo taken at
various depths. Imaging was performed using the IV-100 scanning laser
microscope (Olympus Corp, Tokyo, Japan) in order to count metastatic
foci. PC-3 controls had an average of 11.1 metastatic foci compared to
2.55 in the PC-3 + hECM group (p< 0.0001) and 2.76 in the PC-3 + CM group
(p< 0.0001) The treatment showed even greater response on the CTC cells
which an average of 30.9 metastatic foci in the CTC controls compared to
4.38 in the CTC + hECM group (pWe have previously demonstrated the
increased metastatic potential of human prostate cancer PC-3 CTCs
compared to their parental counterparts in both chick embryo and mouse
models. In the present study, we tested the effects of human embryonic
extracellular matrix (ECM), secreted by human embryonic cells including
conditioned medium (CM) and a semi-solid form (hECM), on metastasis of
PC-3 CTC in the chick embryo model. The chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) of
18 chicken embryos were inoculated with either 106 PC-3 human prostate
cancer cells or PC-3 CTCs, both stably expressing GFP. Twelve hours
later, embryos were divided into 6 groups each containing three embryos:
PC-3 parental control; PC-3 + CM; PC-3 + hECM; CTC control; CTC + CM; and
CTC+ hECM. Twelve hours following inoculation of the cells, a single dose
of 100 L of either treatment was given to the appropriate group. Embryo
brains were removed on day 8 post-inoculations, and processed for
cryo-sectioning, generating 3 slides of brain tissue per embryo taken at
various depths. Imaging was performed using the IV-100 scanning laser
microscope (Olympus Corp, Tokyo, Japan) in order to count metastatic
foci. PC-3 controls had an average of 11.1 metastatic foci compared to
2.55 in the PC-3 + hECM group (p< 0.0001) and 2.76 in the PC-3 + CM group
(p< 0.0001) The treatment showed even greater response on the CTC cells
which an average of 30.9 metastatic foci in the CTC controls compared to
4.38 in the CTC + hECM group (p< 0.0001) and 4.18 in the CTC + CM group
(pWe have previously demonstrated the increased metastatic potential of
human prostate cancer PC-3 CTCs compared to their parental counterparts
in both chick embryo and mouse models. In the present study, we tested
the effects of human embryonic extracellular matrix (ECM), secreted by
human embryonic cells including conditioned medium (CM) and a semi-solid
form (hECM), on metastasis of PC-3 CTC in the chick embryo model. The
chorioallentoic membrane (CAM) of 18 chicken embryos were inoculated with
either 106 PC-3 human prostate cancer cells or PC-3 CTCs, both stably
expressing GFP. Twelve hours later, embryos were divided into 6 groups
each containing three embryos: PC-3 parental control; PC-3 + CM; PC-3 +
hECM; CTC control; CTC + CM; and CTC+ hECM. Twelve hours following
inoculation of the cells, a single dose of 100 L of either treatment was
given to the appropriate group. Embryo brains were removed on day 8
post-inoculations, and processed for cryo-sectioning, generating 3 slides
of brain tissue per embryo taken at various depths. Imaging was performed
using the IV-100 scanning laser microscope (Olympus Corp, Tokyo, Japan)
in order to count metastatic foci. PC-3 controls had an average of 11.1
metastatic foci compared to 2.55 in the PC-3 + hECM group (p< 0.0001) and
2.76 in the PC-3 + CM group (p< 0.0001) The treatment showed even greater
response on the CTC cells which an average of 30.9 metastatic foci in the
CTC controls compared to 4.38 in the CTC + hECM group (p< 0.0001) and
4.18 in the CTC + CM group (p< 0.0001). Thus, human embryonic secreted
ECM compound drastically decreased the metastatic potential of human
prostate cancer CTCs in the chick embryo model.

