Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Menopause-associated symptoms, HRT use and risk of young-onset
breast cancer: Results from the Two Sister Study


Background Peri-menopausal women commonly experience hot flashes and
night sweats. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) containing estrogen only
or estrogen plus progesterone can alleviate these symptoms. Women with
menopausal symptoms have been found to have reduced risk of breast
cancer, possibly reflecting low endogenous hormone levels. However, use
of estrogen plus progesterone is associated with increased risk of breast
cancer in postmenopausal women. The effects of HRT on breast cancer may
vary according to timing of exposure relative to menopause. We examined
the associations between menopausal symptoms, HRT and young-onset breast
cancer. Methods Women with breast cancer (n=1422), whose
breast-cancer-free sister (n=1669) had previously enrolled in the
prospective Sister Study, were eligible if they were under 50 at
diagnosis and still within 4 years of diagnosis at enrollment. Use of HRT
and menopause-associated symptoms (hot flashes, poor sleeping, night
sweats, etc) were assessed using computer-assisted telephone interviews.
Conditional logistic regression was used to account for sister matching.
To ensure comparable opportunity for exposures, we assessed them in
relation to an index age, defined as the minimum of the age at diagnosis
of the case and the age at interview of her sister(s). Analyses adjusted
for birth order and menopausal status at index age. Results Women who had
experienced menopause-associated symptoms (n=706) prior to the index age
were less likely to have young-onset breast cancer (odds ratio (OR),
0.49; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.40 to 0.61). Compared to never-use
of HRT, history of use of estrogen only was associated with reduced risk,
after adjustment for birth order, menopausal status and
menopause-associated symptoms (OR=0.55; 95% CI 0.35 to 0.87); the
reduction was more pronounced in current users (use within the year
preceding index age), long-term users ( 3 years) and users with first use
after menopause. Women using estrogen plus progesterone had
non-statistically significantly reduced risk, and the association was
statistically significant for women who had used both for more than 3
years (OR=0.34; 95% CI 0.12 to 0.95). There was no evidence of effect
measure modification by current use or age at first use. Associations
with menopause-associated symptoms remained strong but the association
with HRT was attenuated when analysis was limited to invasive,
estrogen-positive cancers. Conclusions Menopause-associated symptoms and
use of estrogen only were associated with reduced risk of young-onset
breast cancer. Use of both estrogen and progesterone was not associated
with increased risk. These results provide some reassurance regarding HRT
use in women Background Peri-menopausal women commonly experience hot
flashes and night sweats. Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) containing
estrogen only or estrogen plus progesterone can alleviate these symptoms.
Women with menopausal symptoms have been found to have reduced risk of
breast cancer, possibly reflecting low endogenous hormone levels.
However, use of estrogen plus progesterone is associated with increased
risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. The effects of HRT on
breast cancer may vary according to timing of exposure relative to
menopause. We examined the associations between menopausal symptoms, HRT
and young-onset breast cancer. Methods Women with breast cancer (n=1422),
whose breast-cancer-free sister (n=1669) had previously enrolled in the
prospective Sister Study, were eligible if they were under 50 at
diagnosis and still within 4 years of diagnosis at enrollment. Use of HRT
and menopause-associated symptoms (hot flashes, poor sleeping, night
sweats, etc) were assessed using computer-assisted telephone interviews.
Conditional logistic regression was used to account for sister matching.
To ensure comparable opportunity for exposures, we assessed them in
relation to an index age, defined as the minimum of the age at diagnosis
of the case and the age at interview of her sister(s). Analyses adjusted
for birth order and menopausal status at index age. Results Women who had
experienced menopause-associated symptoms (n=706) prior to the index age
were less likely to have young-onset breast cancer (odds ratio (OR),
0.49; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.40 to 0.61). Compared to never-use
of HRT, history of use of estrogen only was associated with reduced risk,
after adjustment for birth order, menopausal status and
menopause-associated symptoms (OR=0.55; 95% CI 0.35 to 0.87); the
reduction was more pronounced in current users (use within the year
preceding index age), long-term users ( 3 years) and users with first use
after menopause. Women using estrogen plus progesterone had
non-statistically significantly reduced risk, and the association was
statistically significant for women who had used both for more than 3
years (OR=0.34; 95% CI 0.12 to 0.95). There was no evidence of effect
measure modification by current use or age at first use. Associations
with menopause-associated symptoms remained strong but the association
with HRT was attenuated when analysis was limited to invasive,
estrogen-positive cancers. Conclusions Menopause-associated symptoms and
use of estrogen only were associated with reduced risk of young-onset
breast cancer. Use of both estrogen and progesterone was not associated
with increased risk. These results provide some reassurance regarding HRT
use in women < 50 years and the risk of young-onset breast cancer, but
further investigations and follow-up studies are needed.

