Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Essential roles of ATM in GM-CSF-induced bone marrow
differentiation to dendritic cells


The gene mutated in ataxia telangiectasia (ATM) encodes 370-kD protein,
belonging to a family of PI-3 protein kinases (PIKKs). ATM has been
implicated in cellular responses under conditions of DNA damage that
causes DNA lesions, playing crucial roles in activating DNA repair
machinery and cell-cycle checkpoints. Recent studies have also
illustrated that ATM regulates cellular growth, development, and stem
cell renewal. Although mice model has demonstrated that ATM deficiency
results in both multiple defects in DNA repair in response to ionizing
radiation and severe developmental abnormality in T/B cells development
as well as weight-loss, it remains unclear whether ATM is involved in
development of other cell lineage. We found that levels of ATM are
significantly low in primary bone marrow cells (BMs), and that they are
increased when BMs are differentiated to dendritic cells (DCs) when
stimulated with granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, GM-CSF.
BMs derived from ATM mice (ATM-/- BMs) demonstrate decreased cell
proliferation, and their differentiation to DCs is markedly impaired,
suggesting that ATM is essential for development of DCs. ATM-deficiency
is also associated with a decreased capability of BMs to activate T
cells. We also found that an ATM specific inhibitor, KU-55933, abrogated
GM-CSF-induced DCs development in BMs cell culture. ATM-deficiency in BMs
also resulted in reduced expression of Akt compared with control cells,
and inhibited Ser493 phosphorylation of Akt by GM-CSF. Levels of
expression and phosphorylation of STAT5 were differentially regulated in
ATM-/- BMs, and ectopic expression of STAT5 restored DCs differentiation
of ATM-/- BMs. Together, our findings reveal that ATM plays a
physiological role in BMs differentiation to DCs by regulating Akt/STAT5
pathways.

