Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Irradiation-induced uPAR promotes stemness via Wnt/-catenin
signaling in medulloblastoma cells


Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) is known to promote
invasion, migration and metastasis in cancer cells. In this study, we
show that ionizing radiation (IR) induced uPAR has a role in Wnt/-catenin
signaling and mediates induction of cancer stem cells (CSC)-like
properties in medulloblastoma cell lines UW228 and D283. We observed that
IR induced the expression of uPAR, CSC markers such as CD44 and Msi-1,
and activates Wnt/-catenin signaling molecules. Overexpression of uPAR
after IR treatment led to the activation of Wnt signaling, which was
demonstrated by an increase in nuclear translocation of -catenin and
-catenin-Lef/Tcf-mediated transactivation, thereby promoting cancer
stemness. Quercetin, a potent Wnt/-catenin inhibitor suppressed uPAR and
uPAR-mediated Wnt/-catenin activation. Treatment with shRNA specific for
uPAR (pU) suppressed the -catenin-Tcf/Lef-mediated transactivation both
in vitro and in vivo. Further, we show that uPAR is physically associated
with the Wnt effector molecule -catenin using immunocytochemistry and
immunohistochemistry; these results were confirmed by immunoprecipitation
analysis. Most interestingly, we demonstrate for the first time that the
localization of uPAR in the nucleus is associated with transcription
factors (TF) and their specific response elements. The association of
uPAR with -catenin-Tcf/Lef complex and various other TF involved in
neurogenesis during embryonic development and cancer demonstrates the
receptor's possible role at generating CSC-like properties in primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) cells of medulloblastoma. Considering all of
the data, we conclude that uPAR is a potent activator of stemness, and
the targeting of uPAR in combination with radiation has significant
therapeutic implications.

