Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Growth inhibition and antitumor activity of chikusetsusaponin IVa
methyl ester, an oleanane-type triterpenoid from the root of Acyranthes
japonica, in HCT 116 human colon cancer cells


Chikusetsusaponin IVa methyl ester (CSME) is an oleanane-type
triterpenoid isolated from the root of Acyranthes japonica
(Amaranthaceae). In the present study, the growth inhibition and
antitumor activity of CSME were investigated in cultured human colon
cancer cell HCT 116. CSME inhibited the proliferation of cancer cells
with an IC50 value of 22.4 M. Flow cytometric analysis indicated that
CSME markedly induced the accumulation of cells in the G0/G1 phase and
the increase of cell population in sub-G1 phase. G0/G1 cell cycle arrest
by CSME was associated with the down-regulation of the expression of
cyclin D1, cyclin A, CDK4, CDK2, c-myc and Rb phosphorylation. The
increase of sub-G1 peak by CSME was closely correlated with the induction
of apoptosis, which was evidenced by the induction of cleaved poly-(ADP
ribose) polymerase, activation of caspases, and suppression of Bid and
Bcl-2 expression. Treatment of CSME (0.25, 1.0, or 3.0 mg/kg, i.p) also
effectively suppressed tumor growth in the HCT 116 implanted xenograft
nude mouse model without any overt toxicity. Taken together, these
findings suggest that CSME might be a potential candidate for the
development of cancer chemotherapeutic agents derived from natural
products. (Acknowledgement; this study was supported by a grant Studies
on the Identification of the Efficacy of Biologically Active Components
from Oriental Herbal Medicines from the Korea Food and Drug
Administration (2010)).

