Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Telomerase activity in relation to RET mutation status in
medullary thyroid carcinoma


Background: Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) originates from
parafollicular C cells of the thyroid gland, and are associated with
activating constitutional or somatic mutations in the RET proto-oncogene.
The common somatic mutation of codon 918 is associated with a less
favorable clinical outcome. The catalytic component of telomerase, human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) has been found to be reactivated
in most human tumors. Objective: In this study, we aimed to investigate
telomerase involvement in relation the RET mutational status in MTC.
Design: Our study includes 43 cases of MTC from the Karolinska University
Hospital. RET mutations were identified by sequencing of the hot spots in
exons 10,_11-,_15-, and 16. Expression of the TERT gene, telomerase
activity and telomere length were quantified. Result: Among the 43 cases,
18 carried a RET point mutation in exon15 or exon16 (Group I), 5/43 had a
point mutation in exon 10 or 11 (Group II), and 20 were wild-type (Group
III). Telomerase activity and TERT expression were closely associated.
The TERT gene was expressed in 13/18 cases in Group I, in 0/5 in Group II
and in 10/20 of Group III. The median telomerase activity was higher in
Group I as compared to Groups II and III. Group I tumors showed the
shortest relative telomere length. With regard to follow-up, cases with
high telomerase activity and TERT gene expression in Group I had less
favorable outcome. Conclusion: The findings suggest that TERT/telomerase
activity may contribute to aggressive MTC in addition to, or as a
consequence of, RET codon 918 mutations. The very low telomerase activity
and TERT expression revealed in several of the MTC cases suggest the
involvement of alternative mechanisms for telomere stabilization in the
MTC entity.

