Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immunohistochemical characterization of a novel, highly sensitive
monoclonal antibody to folate receptor


Background: Folate receptor (FR) has restricted expression in normal
tissues but high-level expression in a subset of epithelial-derived
tumors, including non-mucinous ovarian carcinomas and non-small cell lung
(NSCL) adenocarcinomas. FR has shown significant potential for targeted
cancer therapy and several promising agents are in late-stage clinical
development. As such, robust reagents are needed that can be used across
diverse diagnostic platforms to identify patients who have FR-expressing
tumors. The immunohistochemical (IHC) characterization of a novel,
high-affinity monoclonal antibody (MAb) against FR is described. Methods:
MAbs were generated to modified full-length FR protein using standard
methods. One MAb, 26B3.F2, displayed high affinity and the ability to
bind FR on both fresh/frozen and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
sections. An optimized IHC protocol was developed and FR expression was
assessed on commercial tissue microarrays (US Biomax). Data were analyzed
using an M-score, a newly introduced, weighted-intensity score that
incorporates both the proportion of FR-positive cells and the staining
intensity. A board-certified pathologist scored the level of FR
expression. Results: Normal tissue staining for MAb 26B3.F2 demonstrated
a limited distribution on focal epithelial surfaces of pancreas, lung,
salivary gland, kidney, hypophysis, thyroid, and breast samples. Staining
was mainly located in the lumen. The tissue distribution is consistent
with the published literature. Strong staining was observed in 100% of
serous ovarian samples and a significant proportion of ovarian
endometrioid adenocarcinoma samples. FR expression, as determined by MAb
26B3.F2 in NSCL cancer samples, demonstrated high discrimination between
adenocarcinoma (positive) and squamous cell carcinomas (negative) (P
Background: Folate receptor (FR) has restricted expression in normal
tissues but high-level expression in a subset of epithelial-derived
tumors, including non-mucinous ovarian carcinomas and non-small cell lung
(NSCL) adenocarcinomas. FR has shown significant potential for targeted
cancer therapy and several promising agents are in late-stage clinical
development. As such, robust reagents are needed that can be used across
diverse diagnostic platforms to identify patients who have FR-expressing
tumors. The immunohistochemical (IHC) characterization of a novel,
high-affinity monoclonal antibody (MAb) against FR is described. Methods:
MAbs were generated to modified full-length FR protein using standard
methods. One MAb, 26B3.F2, displayed high affinity and the ability to
bind FR on both fresh/frozen and formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
sections. An optimized IHC protocol was developed and FR expression was
assessed on commercial tissue microarrays (US Biomax). Data were analyzed
using an M-score, a newly introduced, weighted-intensity score that
incorporates both the proportion of FR-positive cells and the staining
intensity. A board-certified pathologist scored the level of FR
expression. Results: Normal tissue staining for MAb 26B3.F2 demonstrated
a limited distribution on focal epithelial surfaces of pancreas, lung,
salivary gland, kidney, hypophysis, thyroid, and breast samples. Staining
was mainly located in the lumen. The tissue distribution is consistent
with the published literature. Strong staining was observed in 100% of
serous ovarian samples and a significant proportion of ovarian
endometrioid adenocarcinoma samples. FR expression, as determined by MAb
26B3.F2 in NSCL cancer samples, demonstrated high discrimination between
adenocarcinoma (positive) and squamous cell carcinomas (negative) (P <
0.001). Conclusion: MAb 26B3.F2 is a highly sensitive, robust agent
suitable for identifying FR expression by IHC and other diagnostic
platforms. In addition to the expected distribution in normal tissue, MAb
26B3.F2 revealed high-level expression of FR in ovarian cancer and NSCL
adenocarcinoma samples, and the ability to discriminate differential
expression between two NSCL cancer subtypes, squamous cell carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma. Preliminary evidence therefore suggests that MAb 26B3.F2
IHC will be a useful tool to support further development of FR-targeted
therapeutics.

