Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The roles of TMCC3 in breast cancer cells


There is growing evidence showing that cancer stem cells are more likely
to metastasize and are more frequently detected in the circulation. Thus,
it will be important to understand the molecular characteristics of
breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) which may lead to the development of
novel targets for CSC-directed therapy. Through phosphoproteomic analysis
of BCSC and non-BCSC, we identified differential expression of the
transmembrane and coiled-coil domain family 3 (TMCC3). TMCC3 belongs to
TEX28 family and is predicted to be an integral membrane protein. The
function of TMCC3 is unknown. We found higher expression of TMCC3 in
invasive breast cancer cell line and BCSCs than less-invasive breast
cancer cell lines, and non-BCSCs, respectively. In addition, TMCC3
expression was greater in distant lymph node metastasis than in primary
tumor of human breast cancer xenograft in mouse. Silencing of TMCC3 led
to G1 phase arrest with increased apoptotic cells, along with decreased
mammosphere formation and ALDH activity which are important features of
cancer stem cell. In our previous investigation, the IGF-1R/PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway was shown to be important for BCSCs survival and maintenance. To
explore the possible involvement of TMCC3 in this pathway, we further
examined the Akt and mTOR activation in TMCC3-slienced BCSCs. We found
the Akt phosphorylation was lost in BCSCs upon TMCC3 knocked down. These
findings suggest that TMCC3 is essential for breast cancer cell survival,
self-renewal and metastasis. Thus, inhibition of TMCC3 may provide a new
therapeutic strategy targeting stem cells.

