Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a candidate tumor suppressor gene DIRAS1 in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma


Loss of 19p is one of the most frequent alterations in many malignancies
including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), suggesting the
existence of a tumor suppressor gene (TSG) within the frequently deleted
region. In this study we describe the identification and characterization
of one candidate TSG, DIRAS family, GTP-binding RAS-like 1 (DIRAS1), at
19p13.3. DIRAS1 downregulation occurred in 34 of 75 (43.33%) primary
ESCCs and 5/9 (55.6%) of the ESCC cell lines. Immunohistochemistry
detection demonstrated that the down-regulation DIRAS1 expression was an
independent prognostic factor of ESCC and associated with poor survival
in ESCC. Functional studies showed that Ectopic expression of DIRAS1 in
ESCC cells inhibited cell proliferation, foci formation, and tumor
formation in nude mice. The tumor-suppressive mechanism of DIRAS1 was
associated with its proapoptotic role in a mitochondrial-dependent manner
by down-regulation of phosphorylated BAD and activating caspase-9,
caspase3 and PARP via ERK- and p38-dependent signaling pathway. In
addition, down-regulation of DIRAS1 protein was significantly correlated
with ESCC lymph node metastasis (P = 0.003), which was associated with
its function in inhibiting cell migration and invasion by down-regulation
of MMP-2 and MMP-9 via ERK- and p38-dependent signaling pathway. In
conclusion, our findings suggest that DIRAS1 plays an important
suppressive role in the development and progression of ESCC.

