Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of Tip60 in human melanoma cell migration, melanoma
metastasis and patient survival


The tumor suppressor Tip60 plays a major role in transcription, DNA
damage response, apoptosis and cancer development, but its role in
melanoma is unknown. In this study, we investigated the role of Tip60 in
melanoma pathogenesis and assessed its prognostic value. Using tissue
microarrays consisting of 448 cases of melanomas (201 for the training
set and 247 for the validation set) and 105 cases of nevi, we found that
Tip60 expression was significantly reduced in metastatic melanoma
compared to normal nevi (P = 0.045), dysplastic nevi (P = 0.047) and
primary melanoma (P = 0.001). Kaplan-Meier survival curve and univariate
Cox regression analyses showed that reduced Tip60 expression was
associated with a poorer five-year disease-specific survival in primary
melanoma (P = 0.016) and metastatic melanoma patients (P = 0.027).
Multivariate Cox regression analyses indicated that Tip60 expression was
an independent prognostic marker for primary (P = 0.002) and metastatic
melanomas (P = 0.035). In vitro wound healing assay showed that enforced
Tip60 expression inhibited melanoma cell migration suggesting that Tip60
might regulate melanoma metastasis. Finally, we showed that
overexpression of Tip60 in melanoma cells resulted in significantly
increased chemosensitivity. Our data indicate that Tip60 may serve as a
potential biomarker for melanoma patient outcome as well as a potential
therapeutic target.

