Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Quantitation of the HDAC inhibitor belinostat (PXD-101) and
metabolites in human plasma by a novel LC-MS/MS assay.


Introduction: Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are frequently deregulated in
human cancers and their inhibition allows re-expression of silenced
genes. Belinostat is an HDAC inhibitor with in vitro and in vivo activity
in multiple malignancies, currently in phase II trials. To date, the
pharmacokinetics and metabolism of belinostat have not been adequately
characterized. To support an organ dysfunction study and clinical
development of belinostat, we developed and validated an LC-MS/MS assay
for the sensitive, accurate, and precise quantitation of belinostat and
its metabolites belinostat-glucuronide, methylated-belinostat, belinostat
amide, 3-ASBA, and belinostat acid in human plasma. Methods: The assay
used 50 L of plasma, [13C6]-belinostat and [D5]-3-ASBA as internal
standards and acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) for protein precipitation. A UPLC
C18 column was used with a gradient elution from 90:10 to 10:90
water-acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over the course of 4 min followed
by re-equilibration for 3 min (7 min total run time). Flow rate was 0.5
mL/min. An ABI 4000 tandem MS/MS with ESI positive and negative
ionization in MRM mode was used to detect the analytes. Bioanalytical
method validation was performed based on FDA guidelines. The
applicability of the assay was demonstrated by quantitating belinostat
and its metabolites in plasma of a human patient sampled over the course
of 24 h. Results: Belinostat eluted at 2.9 min, while all metabolites
eluted between 2.7 and 3.6 min. The assay was linear and accurate between
30 and 5000 ng/mL for all analytes; 3 triplicate standard curves assayed
on 3 separate days displayed a CV Introduction: Histone deacetylases
(HDAC) are frequently deregulated in human cancers and their inhibition
allows re-expression of silenced genes. Belinostat is an HDAC inhibitor
with in vitro and in vivo activity in multiple malignancies, currently in
phase II trials. To date, the pharmacokinetics and metabolism of
belinostat have not been adequately characterized. To support an organ
dysfunction study and clinical development of belinostat, we developed
and validated an LC-MS/MS assay for the sensitive, accurate, and precise
quantitation of belinostat and its metabolites belinostat-glucuronide,
methylated-belinostat, belinostat amide, 3-ASBA, and belinostat acid in
human plasma. Methods: The assay used 50 L of plasma, [13C6]-belinostat
and [D5]-3-ASBA as internal standards and acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) for
protein precipitation. A UPLC C18 column was used with a gradient elution
from 90:10 to 10:90 water-acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over the course
of 4 min followed by re-equilibration for 3 min (7 min total run time).
Flow rate was 0.5 mL/min. An ABI 4000 tandem MS/MS with ESI positive and
negative ionization in MRM mode was used to detect the analytes.
Bioanalytical method validation was performed based on FDA guidelines.
The applicability of the assay was demonstrated by quantitating
belinostat and its metabolites in plasma of a human patient sampled over
the course of 24 h. Results: Belinostat eluted at 2.9 min, while all
metabolites eluted between 2.7 and 3.6 min. The assay was linear and
accurate between 30 and 5000 ng/mL for all analytes; 3 triplicate
standard curves assayed on 3 separate days displayed a CV <19% at each of
6 different calibration points (30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000, 5000 ng/mL) for
belinostat and CV Introduction: Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are
frequently deregulated in human cancers and their inhibition allows
re-expression of silenced genes. Belinostat is an HDAC inhibitor with in
vitro and in vivo activity in multiple malignancies, currently in phase
II trials. To date, the pharmacokinetics and metabolism of belinostat
have not been adequately characterized. To support an organ dysfunction
study and clinical development of belinostat, we developed and validated
an LC-MS/MS assay for the sensitive, accurate, and precise quantitation
of belinostat and its metabolites belinostat-glucuronide,
methylated-belinostat, belinostat amide, 3-ASBA, and belinostat acid in
human plasma. Methods: The assay used 50 L of plasma, [13C6]-belinostat
and [D5]-3-ASBA as internal standards and acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) for
protein precipitation. A UPLC C18 column was used with a gradient elution
from 90:10 to 10:90 water-acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over the course
of 4 min followed by re-equilibration for 3 min (7 min total run time).
Flow rate was 0.5 mL/min. An ABI 4000 tandem MS/MS with ESI positive and
negative ionization in MRM mode was used to detect the analytes.
Bioanalytical method validation was performed based on FDA guidelines.
The applicability of the assay was demonstrated by quantitating
belinostat and its metabolites in plasma of a human patient sampled over
the course of 24 h. Results: Belinostat eluted at 2.9 min, while all
metabolites eluted between 2.7 and 3.6 min. The assay was linear and
accurate between 30 and 5000 ng/mL for all analytes; 3 triplicate
standard curves assayed on 3 separate days displayed a CV <19% at each of
6 different calibration points (30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000, 5000 ng/mL) for
belinostat and CV <29% for the metabolites. The accuracy of the assay was
between 101% and 106% at 4 different QC levels (30, 100, 2500, and 4000
ng/mL) for belinostat and between 96% and 117% for metabolites, while the
precision was Introduction: Histone deacetylases (HDAC) are frequently
deregulated in human cancers and their inhibition allows re-expression of
silenced genes. Belinostat is an HDAC inhibitor with in vitro and in vivo
activity in multiple malignancies, currently in phase II trials. To date,
the pharmacokinetics and metabolism of belinostat have not been
adequately characterized. To support an organ dysfunction study and
clinical development of belinostat, we developed and validated an
LC-MS/MS assay for the sensitive, accurate, and precise quantitation of
belinostat and its metabolites belinostat-glucuronide,
methylated-belinostat, belinostat amide, 3-ASBA, and belinostat acid in
human plasma. Methods: The assay used 50 L of plasma, [13C6]-belinostat
and [D5]-3-ASBA as internal standards and acetonitrile (0.1% TFA) for
protein precipitation. A UPLC C18 column was used with a gradient elution
from 90:10 to 10:90 water-acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over the course
of 4 min followed by re-equilibration for 3 min (7 min total run time).
Flow rate was 0.5 mL/min. An ABI 4000 tandem MS/MS with ESI positive and
negative ionization in MRM mode was used to detect the analytes.
Bioanalytical method validation was performed based on FDA guidelines.
The applicability of the assay was demonstrated by quantitating
belinostat and its metabolites in plasma of a human patient sampled over
the course of 24 h. Results: Belinostat eluted at 2.9 min, while all
metabolites eluted between 2.7 and 3.6 min. The assay was linear and
accurate between 30 and 5000 ng/mL for all analytes; 3 triplicate
standard curves assayed on 3 separate days displayed a CV <19% at each of
6 different calibration points (30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000, 5000 ng/mL) for
belinostat and CV <29% for the metabolites. The accuracy of the assay was
between 101% and 106% at 4 different QC levels (30, 100, 2500, and 4000
ng/mL) for belinostat and between 96% and 117% for metabolites, while the
precision was <17% at each concentration for belinostat and 69% for
belinostat and >64% for metabolites. Belinostat and all metabolites could
be quantitated in human plasma after IV administration of belinostat over
30 min. Belinostat glucuronide appeared to be the major metabolite with
up to 10-fold exposure relative to belinostat. Conclusion: We have
developed a sensitive, accurate and precise LC-MS/MS assay that allows
quantitation of belinostat and its 5 metabolites in human plasma. UGT1A1
is responsible for glucuronidation, which appears to be a major metabolic
route. This assay will be a valuable tool to assess the pharmacokinetics
and metabolism of belinostat in humans, and it is being used to support
clinical studies employing belinostat in multiple clinical trials.
Supported by Grants U01-CA099168 and N01-CM62209, P30-CA47904 from the
NCI, and Spectrum Pharmaceuticals Inc and Topotarget A/S

