Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Orexin and their 7-membrane spanning receptors OX1R: a new colon
cancer therapeutic target


Orexins are hypothalamic peptides involved in sleep/wake control.
Unexpectedly, we have shown that orexins promote robust apoptosis in
various colorectal cancer cells1. The cell death is mediated by the
orexin 1 receptor (OX1R) through an original mechanism. OX1R, a G
protein-coupled receptor class I (GPCR), is aberrantly expressed in
primary colorectal tumors and liver metastases2. We next investigated the
molecular mechanism of OX1Rmediated cell death. OX1R makes use of
tyrosine-based motifs ITIM (Immunoreceptor Tyrosine-based Inhibitory
Motif)3 and ITSM (Immunoreceptor Tyrosine-based Switch Motif)4 to drive
apoptosis. These tyrosine-based motifs are mandatory for recruitment and
activation of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, leading to apoptosis.
Orexins promote cell death through Mitogen-/Stress-activated Protein
Kinase (MAPK/SAPK) p38 activation in a SHP-2 dependent manner. The
present work is original for two reasons: 1) OX1R is the first example of
the involvement of both ITSM and ITIM in GPCR signal transduction. ITIM
and ITSM sequences are more frequent than initially thought in GPCRs.
This emphasizes the need to explore this mechanism of signal transduction
in various GPCRs for regulating cellular processes including at least
cell apoptosis and proliferation; 2) we provide evidence that OX1R is
aberrantly expressed in all primary colorectal tumors and liver
metastases and that its activation by exogenous orexins result in robust
apoptosis of colon cancer cells in culture and strong decrease of tumor
development in mice xenografted with colon cancer cells in vivo. OX1R
represent a new promising target in colorectal cancer therapy and/or for
metastases imaging. 1 J.Biol.Chem, 279: 45875 (2004) 2 Can. Res. 71: 3341
(2011) 3 FASEB J. 22: 1993 (2008) 4 FASEB J. 23: 4069 (2009)

