Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Normal stem cells exhibit hypersensitivity and cell death in
response to ionizing radiation


Radiotherapy is an efficient method of treating cancer. Several decades
of clinical observation in patients treated with radiation/ radiomimetic
drugs has, however, revealed undesirable consequences to the normal
tissue. Ionizing radiation induced normal tissue injury manifests through
symptoms such as hair loss, skin regeneration defects, erosion of
intestinal epithelium, hematopoietic anomalies, diminished sperm counts,
infertility, neuro-cognitive impairments etc. The phenomenon of stem cell
drop-out can be attributed as the underlying cause for these side
effects. However, insufficient research has been conducted for
investigating the relative radiosensitivity of undifferentiated stem/
progenitor cells compared to their differentiated progenies and the
underlying molecular mechanisms of this differential radiation response
(DNA damage response and IR induced apoptotic response). We demonstrate
stem cell specific apoptosis and hypersensitivity to low dose IR in
various stem cell niches in vivo. Further, this stem cell
hypersensitivity observed in the mouse tissue niches, is recapitulated in
multiple primary cell culture models of undifferentiated stem cells and
isogenic differentiated cells grown in appropriate stem cell culture/
differentiation conditions. Cell cycle parameters, checkpoint response
and radiosensitive phases of these cells have been studied. Towards
characterizing the novel associations between cellular differentiation,
DNA damage response and apoptotic response, we have studied alterations
in transcription profiles of stem and isogenic differentiated cells with
and without radiation. Our investigation has uncovered transcriptional
induction and suppression of genes that are unique to differentiation
states. Results of our studies will be presented.

