Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel mechanism of p21 induction by oxaliplatin in p53 deficient
cancer cells


p21(CDKN1A) is a well known cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) inhibitor. As a
critical cell cycle checkpoint of p53 mediated DNA damage response, p21
interferes with cyclin-CDK2 complex, blocking cell cycle at the G1/S
interface, thus reducing the risk of DNA damaged cells transforming to
cancer cells. Activation of p21 checkpoint by therapeutic agent is often
associated with cancer cell cycle arrest and effective tumor suppression.
However, many cancer lost wild type p53 while p21 in these cells
maintains at a low level. In these cells p21 transcription is mainly
controlled by p53-independent mechanisms through various cis-acting
elements and these type of cancer are often more likely to resist chemo
treatment. In search of effective therapeutic agents against p53 negative
and drug resistant cancers we used SKOV3, a p53 deficient cancer cell
line, to assess the ability of common therapeutic drugs to induce p21
expression. Promoter-reporter assays suggest p21 promoter is
significantly stimulated by Oxaliplatin in SKOV3 cells compared with most
common drugs used in chemotherapy. Through the promoter deletion analysis
we identified a previously unreported Oxaliplatin responsive cis-acting
element located between 237 to 220bp in the p21 promoter. Genomic DNA
functional element analysis using ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA Elements)
Consortium suggests that a vertebrate-conserved element overlaps well
with the newly discovered Oxaliplatin responsive element. This conserved
promoter element is required for the effective induction of p21 promoter
activity by Oxaliplatin and such induction is positively related to drug
induced S-phase cell cycle arrest. Finally, the ability of p21 induction
of chemotherapy drugs is well correlated with their effectiveness of
reducing SKOV3 xenograft tumors in nude mice.

