Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) as a
strategy for targeted therapy in Ewing's sarcoma


The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFTs) are aggressive malignancies
which frequently harbor EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG genomic fusions. Here, we
demonstrate that these fusion products interact with, and depend on, poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1), a DNA damage response protein and
transcriptional co-regulator. This interaction occurs in a
DNA-independent manner. ESFT cell lines and xenografts are preferentially
sensitive to PARP1 inhibition, and the addition of a PARP1 inhibitor to
the second-line chemotherapeutic agent temozolamide resulted in complete
response of all treated tumors in an EWS-FLI1 ESFT xenograft model. PARP
inhibition blocked Ewing's cell line, but not control osteosarcoma or
rhabdomyosarcoma cell line invasion, as well as the formation of lung
metastasis in a xenograft model of ESFT. Mechanistically, the EWS-FLI1
and EWS-ERG fusions induce DNA damage, which is potentiated by PARP1
inhibition in ESFT cell lines. In a positive feedback loop, EWS-FLI1
fusions maintain the expression of PARP1 by direct regulation of the
PARP1 promoter. This regulation is independently supported by a gene
expression array data set of 20 ESFT patient tumors (Spearman r =
0.8165). Finally, because front-line therapy for this disease includes an
intense regimen of five cytotoxic chemotherapy agents from which patients
can quickly relapse with even more aggressive disease, we studied the
effect of PARP inhibition in two Ewing's sarcoma cell line models derived
after patient relapse. Importantly, these two cell lines maintained a
preferential sensitivity to PARP1 inhibition despite their general
chemoresistance. These findings suggest that targeting the EWS-FLI1:
PARP1 interaction axis is a promising therapeutic strategy for the
Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors.

