Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Patient AML cells and AML cell lines are highly sensitive to
CNDAC, the active form of sapacitabine


Introduction: Achieving improvements in survival and reducing relapse
remains a challenge in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) patients. This
study evaluated the in vitro efficacy of the active form of novel agent
sapacitabine, 2-C-Cyano-2-deoxy-1--d-arabino-pentofuranosylcytosine
(CNDAC, Cyclacel Ltd, Dundee, UK), as compared to current
chemotherapeutic drugs Ara-C (Cytarabine) and Mitoxantrone (Mit,
synthetic anthracenedione) using two AML cell lines, HL-60
(promyelocytic) and THP-1 (monocytic), as well as bone marrow (BM) and
peripheral blood (PB) cells collected from 5 AML patients. Methods: Cells
lines and AML patient cells were treated in vitro with Ara-C (1-100 M),
CNDAC (1-100 M) or Mit (0.005-0.5 M) for 4 days. During treatment, HL-60,
THP-1, and PB AML cells were cultured in suspension. BM AML cells were
co-cultured with M2-10B4 mouse stromal cells. Cell lines were assessed
immediately. BM and PB AML cells were assessed after an additional 3, 7,
or 31 days of co-culture on M2-10B4 cells. Treated cells were assessed
for sensitivity (cell death by trypan blue and apoptosis by 7AAD/Annexin
V) as compared to untreated cells and IC50 values (50% of maximum
possible effective response) were calculated. Results: In HL-60 cells,
the amount of cell death was greater with CNDAC compared to Ara-C at all
doses tested (p0.05, n=3). In THP-1 cells, CNDAC and Mit, but not Ara-C,
induced a significant apoptotic response. At a 10-fold lower seeding
density, which correlates to higher proliferation rates, the response of
THP-1 cells to Ara-C, CNDAC and Mit reached significance compared to
untreated cells (p0.05, n=3). However, the IC50 values for the 3 drugs in
THP-1 cells reflect the observation that this cell line is in essence
resistant to AraC (IC50 = 7.77 M) but sensitive to CNDAC (IC50 = 0.929 M)
and Mit (IC50 = 0.003 M). Using PB AML cells, a significant response to 1
M CNDAC and 0.005 M Mit but not 1 M Ara-C was observed, as compared to
untreated cells at all days post drug removal (p0.05, n=5). A
significantly greater apoptotic response to CNDAC was observed compared
to Ara-C at low doses (p0.05, n=5). At higher doses, all 3 drugs induced
significant cell death (p0.05, n=5). In BM AML cells, overall survival
with 1 M CNDAC or 0.005 M Mit, but not 1 M Ara-C, was significantly less
than untreated cells 31 days post-treatment (p0.05, n=5). Higher doses
induced cell death (p0.05, n=5) with all 3 drugs. Conclusion: Low dose
CNDAC and Mitoxantrone induce a greater response than low dose Ara-C in
patient AML cells and AML cell lines. CNDAC also exhibits a greater
activity in cell lines (THP-1) that are less sensitive to Ara-C. The in
vitro sensitivity of AML cells to CNDAC supports the ongoing clinical
evaluation of sapacitabine in AML patients. Future studies are warranted
to assess the potential for combining sapacitabine with Ara-C and/or
Mitoxantrone, with an emphasis on cells and patients insensitive to Ara-C
treatment.

