Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Olfactomedin 4 gene is associated with progression of prostate
cancer: Evidence from an OLFM4 knockout mouse model


The olfactomedin 4 gene (OLFM4) encodes an olfactomedin-related
glycoprotein whose physiological and pathological functions are largely
unknown. We have previously reported that expression of OLFM4 is down
regulated during the progression of human prostate cancer, and that
reduced expression is due to gene deletions of OLFM4 (36.7%) and/or
hyper-methlytion of CpG sites in the promoter region. We also
demonstrated that ectopic expression of OLFM4 in several human prostate
cancer cell lines inhibits proliferation, invasion and metastatic
potential. In this study, we further investigated the potential role of
OLFM4 in the carcinogenesis of prostate cancer utilizing an OLFM4 knock
out mouse model. Histopathological analysis revealed that homozygous
OLFM4 mutant mice develop prostatic epithelial lesions in an
age-dependent manner. The prostatic epithelial hyperplasia was seen at 6
months of age, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) was found at
10-12 months of age, and prostate adenoma was observed from 18-24 months
of ages in the both anterior prostate (AP) and dorsal-lateral prostate
(DLP) of OLFM4-null mice. The frequency of PIN lesions at the AP and DLP
was 0 % (0/20) at 3-6 months, 38% (5/13) at 10-12 months and 44% (11/25)
at 18-24 months. The frequency of prostatic adenoma was 28% (7/25), and
8% (2/25) of OLFM4-null mice developed lung metastases at 18-24 months of
age. To determine whether OLFM4 affects proliferation or apoptosis of
prostatic epithelial cells in the OLFM4-null mice, we carried out Ki-67
immunohistochemical staining and TUNEL assays. The ratio of Ki-67
positive cells was significantly higher at 3-6 months (p=0.04180), 10-12
months (P=0.002) and 18-20 months (p=0.0038) compared to age-matched
controls, OLFM4 wild type mice, or heterozygous mice, thus indicating an
increase in proliferation in OLFM4-null prostate tissues. There was no
difference in the number of apoptotic cells in the control versus null
mice. Since we have previously found that OLFM4 blocks CXCL12 induced AKT
activity in the human prostate cancer cell PC-3, and inhibits cell
invasion, we studied the phosphorylation of AKT and downstream signaling
pathway components by Western blot analysis of prostate samples from 3-4
month old mice. Compared with OLFM4 wild type mice, pAKT, pGSK3,
-catenin, cyclin D1 and c-Myc were increased in the OLFM4-null mice
tissue even in the absence of morphological abnormalities. Elevated
-catenin protein in OLFM4-null mice prostate epithelial cells was also
observed in PIN and tumor cells at 18 months of age, and positive
staining with Cyclin D1 in OLFM4-null tumor was also detected. Taken
together, the data show OLFM4-null prostatic epithelial cells exhibit
higher levels of AKT and -catenin, suggesting this is the mechanism
leading to their enhanced cellular proliferation and carcinogenetic
potential.

