Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo safety and efficacy of a novel dendritic cell based
Ad-GMCAIX vaccine with activity against renal cell carcinoma


Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression is constitutively up-regulated in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) due to loss of the VHL gene. Its
up-regulation in ccRCC and low expression levels in normal tissues led us
to develop an immunotherapeutic approach targeting the CAIX tumor
antigen. We previously reported the successful generation and ex vivo
priming of CAIX-specific, MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
by adenoviral (Ad) transduction of the GM-CAIX fusion protein in
dendritic cells (DCs). Our current study tests, for the first time, the
in vivo anti-tumor activity of DC-Ad-GMCAIX in preventing and intervening
in the growth of RCC in immunocompetent mouse models. Tumor growth was
studied in BALB/c mice transplanted s.c. with either the syngeneic
CAIX-expressing RCC cell line RENCA-CAIX (PRCAIX) or the
non-CAIX-expressing parental RENCA line. In the preventative model,
cohorts of mice were s.c. immunized twice 6 days apart with either
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, DC-Ad-null, or no DC transplantation, followed by s.c.
challenge with PRCAIX or RENCA lines 12 days later. In the interventional
model, tumors were first established and then immunotherapy was employed.
At the end of each study, tumors were harvested, and partial necropsy,
immunohistochemistry, and complete blood count were performed.
DC-Ad-GMCAIX expressed in vivo the hCAIX protein that primed CTLs to
specifically target hCAIX expressed by the PRCAIX line. In the
preventative model, PRCAIX tumor growth was specifically and
significantly inhibited by DC-Ad-GMCAIX for 15 days (all pCarbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression is constitutively up-regulated in clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) due to loss of the VHL gene. Its
up-regulation in ccRCC and low expression levels in normal tissues led us
to develop an immunotherapeutic approach targeting the CAIX tumor
antigen. We previously reported the successful generation and ex vivo
priming of CAIX-specific, MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
by adenoviral (Ad) transduction of the GM-CAIX fusion protein in
dendritic cells (DCs). Our current study tests, for the first time, the
in vivo anti-tumor activity of DC-Ad-GMCAIX in preventing and intervening
in the growth of RCC in immunocompetent mouse models. Tumor growth was
studied in BALB/c mice transplanted s.c. with either the syngeneic
CAIX-expressing RCC cell line RENCA-CAIX (PRCAIX) or the
non-CAIX-expressing parental RENCA line. In the preventative model,
cohorts of mice were s.c. immunized twice 6 days apart with either
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, DC-Ad-null, or no DC transplantation, followed by s.c.
challenge with PRCAIX or RENCA lines 12 days later. In the interventional
model, tumors were first established and then immunotherapy was employed.
At the end of each study, tumors were harvested, and partial necropsy,
immunohistochemistry, and complete blood count were performed.
DC-Ad-GMCAIX expressed in vivo the hCAIX protein that primed CTLs to
specifically target hCAIX expressed by the PRCAIX line. In the
preventative model, PRCAIX tumor growth was specifically and
significantly inhibited by DC-Ad-GMCAIX for 15 days (all p<0.0001),
reaching 79% median growth inhibition at termination (113 vs. 531 mm3).
In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was significantly
delayed (log-rank test pCarbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression is
constitutively up-regulated in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC)
due to loss of the VHL gene. Its up-regulation in ccRCC and low
expression levels in normal tissues led us to develop an
immunotherapeutic approach targeting the CAIX tumor antigen. We
previously reported the successful generation and ex vivo priming of
CAIX-specific, MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) by
adenoviral (Ad) transduction of the GM-CAIX fusion protein in dendritic
cells (DCs). Our current study tests, for the first time, the in vivo
anti-tumor activity of DC-Ad-GMCAIX in preventing and intervening in the
growth of RCC in immunocompetent mouse models. Tumor growth was studied
in BALB/c mice transplanted s.c. with either the syngeneic
CAIX-expressing RCC cell line RENCA-CAIX (PRCAIX) or the
non-CAIX-expressing parental RENCA line. In the preventative model,
cohorts of mice were s.c. immunized twice 6 days apart with either
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, DC-Ad-null, or no DC transplantation, followed by s.c.
challenge with PRCAIX or RENCA lines 12 days later. In the interventional
model, tumors were first established and then immunotherapy was employed.
At the end of each study, tumors were harvested, and partial necropsy,
immunohistochemistry, and complete blood count were performed.
DC-Ad-GMCAIX expressed in vivo the hCAIX protein that primed CTLs to
specifically target hCAIX expressed by the PRCAIX line. In the
preventative model, PRCAIX tumor growth was specifically and
significantly inhibited by DC-Ad-GMCAIX for 15 days (all p<0.0001),
reaching 79% median growth inhibition at termination (113 vs. 531 mm3).
In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was significantly
delayed (log-rank test p<0.001). Half of the mice in the treatment cohort
did not develop tumors. The results were confirmed by a repeated study
(inhibition for 15 days; all pCarbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression is
constitutively up-regulated in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC)
due to loss of the VHL gene. Its up-regulation in ccRCC and low
expression levels in normal tissues led us to develop an
immunotherapeutic approach targeting the CAIX tumor antigen. We
previously reported the successful generation and ex vivo priming of
CAIX-specific, MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) by
adenoviral (Ad) transduction of the GM-CAIX fusion protein in dendritic
cells (DCs). Our current study tests, for the first time, the in vivo
anti-tumor activity of DC-Ad-GMCAIX in preventing and intervening in the
growth of RCC in immunocompetent mouse models. Tumor growth was studied
in BALB/c mice transplanted s.c. with either the syngeneic
CAIX-expressing RCC cell line RENCA-CAIX (PRCAIX) or the
non-CAIX-expressing parental RENCA line. In the preventative model,
cohorts of mice were s.c. immunized twice 6 days apart with either
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, DC-Ad-null, or no DC transplantation, followed by s.c.
challenge with PRCAIX or RENCA lines 12 days later. In the interventional
model, tumors were first established and then immunotherapy was employed.
At the end of each study, tumors were harvested, and partial necropsy,
immunohistochemistry, and complete blood count were performed.
DC-Ad-GMCAIX expressed in vivo the hCAIX protein that primed CTLs to
specifically target hCAIX expressed by the PRCAIX line. In the
preventative model, PRCAIX tumor growth was specifically and
significantly inhibited by DC-Ad-GMCAIX for 15 days (all p<0.0001),
reaching 79% median growth inhibition at termination (113 vs. 531 mm3).
In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was significantly
delayed (log-rank test p<0.001). Half of the mice in the treatment cohort
did not develop tumors. The results were confirmed by a repeated study
(inhibition for 15 days; all p<0.0001; 7/8 mice without tumor). In the
interventional model, DC-Ad-GMCAIX-vaccinated mice demonstrated a
specific and significant growth inhibition of PRCAIX-tumors for 8 days,
with 60% median growth inhibition at termination (all pCarbonic anhydrase
IX (CAIX) expression is constitutively up-regulated in clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC) due to loss of the VHL gene. Its up-regulation in
ccRCC and low expression levels in normal tissues led us to develop an
immunotherapeutic approach targeting the CAIX tumor antigen. We
previously reported the successful generation and ex vivo priming of
CAIX-specific, MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) by
adenoviral (Ad) transduction of the GM-CAIX fusion protein in dendritic
cells (DCs). Our current study tests, for the first time, the in vivo
anti-tumor activity of DC-Ad-GMCAIX in preventing and intervening in the
growth of RCC in immunocompetent mouse models. Tumor growth was studied
in BALB/c mice transplanted s.c. with either the syngeneic
CAIX-expressing RCC cell line RENCA-CAIX (PRCAIX) or the
non-CAIX-expressing parental RENCA line. In the preventative model,
cohorts of mice were s.c. immunized twice 6 days apart with either
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, DC-Ad-null, or no DC transplantation, followed by s.c.
challenge with PRCAIX or RENCA lines 12 days later. In the interventional
model, tumors were first established and then immunotherapy was employed.
At the end of each study, tumors were harvested, and partial necropsy,
immunohistochemistry, and complete blood count were performed.
DC-Ad-GMCAIX expressed in vivo the hCAIX protein that primed CTLs to
specifically target hCAIX expressed by the PRCAIX line. In the
preventative model, PRCAIX tumor growth was specifically and
significantly inhibited by DC-Ad-GMCAIX for 15 days (all p<0.0001),
reaching 79% median growth inhibition at termination (113 vs. 531 mm3).
In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was significantly
delayed (log-rank test p<0.001). Half of the mice in the treatment cohort
did not develop tumors. The results were confirmed by a repeated study
(inhibition for 15 days; all p<0.0001; 7/8 mice without tumor). In the
interventional model, DC-Ad-GMCAIX-vaccinated mice demonstrated a
specific and significant growth inhibition of PRCAIX-tumors for 8 days,
with 60% median growth inhibition at termination (all p<0.0018; 487 vs.
1,205 mm3). In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was
significantly delayed (log-rank test pCarbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX)
expression is constitutively up-regulated in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC) due to loss of the VHL gene. Its up-regulation in ccRCC
and low expression levels in normal tissues led us to develop an
immunotherapeutic approach targeting the CAIX tumor antigen. We
previously reported the successful generation and ex vivo priming of
CAIX-specific, MHC restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) by
adenoviral (Ad) transduction of the GM-CAIX fusion protein in dendritic
cells (DCs). Our current study tests, for the first time, the in vivo
anti-tumor activity of DC-Ad-GMCAIX in preventing and intervening in the
growth of RCC in immunocompetent mouse models. Tumor growth was studied
in BALB/c mice transplanted s.c. with either the syngeneic
CAIX-expressing RCC cell line RENCA-CAIX (PRCAIX) or the
non-CAIX-expressing parental RENCA line. In the preventative model,
cohorts of mice were s.c. immunized twice 6 days apart with either
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, DC-Ad-null, or no DC transplantation, followed by s.c.
challenge with PRCAIX or RENCA lines 12 days later. In the interventional
model, tumors were first established and then immunotherapy was employed.
At the end of each study, tumors were harvested, and partial necropsy,
immunohistochemistry, and complete blood count were performed.
DC-Ad-GMCAIX expressed in vivo the hCAIX protein that primed CTLs to
specifically target hCAIX expressed by the PRCAIX line. In the
preventative model, PRCAIX tumor growth was specifically and
significantly inhibited by DC-Ad-GMCAIX for 15 days (all p<0.0001),
reaching 79% median growth inhibition at termination (113 vs. 531 mm3).
In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was significantly
delayed (log-rank test p<0.001). Half of the mice in the treatment cohort
did not develop tumors. The results were confirmed by a repeated study
(inhibition for 15 days; all p<0.0001; 7/8 mice without tumor). In the
interventional model, DC-Ad-GMCAIX-vaccinated mice demonstrated a
specific and significant growth inhibition of PRCAIX-tumors for 8 days,
with 60% median growth inhibition at termination (all p<0.0018; 487 vs.
1,205 mm3). In the therapeutic cohort, time to 15% weight loss was
significantly delayed (log-rank test p<0.0167). No vaccine-related weight
loss or organ toxicity was observed. hCAIX staining was absent or only
minimally present in PRCAIX-tumors that grew despite therapy with
DC-Ad-GMCAIX, compared to strong staining in the negative control groups.
In conclusion, DC-Ad-GMCAIX therapy is capable of in vivo generation of
CAIX specific CTLs in immunocompetent mice, leading to a significant
inhibition of RCC tumor growth without systemic toxicity. Additional
studies are being done to analyze the immune response, and the
differential global gene and miRNA expression of tumor cells resistant to
CAIX-based therapy. NCI RAID Initiative NSC 740833. co-corresponding.

