Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NADPH Oxidase 1 over-expression enhances invasion via matrix
metalloproteinase-2 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in melanoma
cells


Nox1 is a member of the NADPH Oxidase family which has not been well
characterized in the melanocytic cell lineage. Here we demonstrated that
Nox1 and Nox4 were detected in melanocytic lineage, with only Nox1
detected in normal human melanocytes and Nox4 in a subset of metastatic
melanoma cell lines. The protein level and enzymatic activity of Nox1 was
elevated in all melanoma cells as compared to normal melanocytes.
Over-expression of GFP-Nox1 protein in Wm3211 primary melanoma cells
increased invasion rate by 4-6 fold as measured by Matrigel invasion
assay, while knocking down or inhibiting Nox1 decreased invasion by
approximately 40 to 60%. MMP-2 was increased by Nox1 over-expression at
the mRNA, protein and activity levels, and decreased by Nox1 knockdown.
MMP-2 promoter activity was also regulated by Nox1 knockdown. In
addition, stable clones over-expressing Nox1 exhibited an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as examined by cell morphology
and EMT markers; knockdown or inhibiting Nox1 led to a reversal of EMT.
Supplementing MMP-2 to culture media did not induce EMT, suggesting that
EMT induction by Nox1 was not through MMP-2 up-regulation. In summary,
Nox1 was over-expressed in all melanoma cell lines examined, and enhanced
cell invasion by MMP-2 up-regulation and EMT induction.

