Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of a novel FLT3 inhibitor in AML cell lines


Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematologic malignancy that is
characterized by increased myeloproliferation and a block in
differentiation of progenitor cells, leading to infiltration of immature
blasts in the bone marrow and peripheral blood. FMS-like tyrosine
kinase-3 (FLT3) is a receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Approximately 30% of AML cases harbor a mutation in the
FLT3 gene leading to constitutive activation of FLT3. The most commonly
observed mutation occurs in the juxtamembrane domain as an internal
tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) of variable length sequence repeats. In
addition, activating mutations in the kinase domain are observed in 7-10%
of patients. The presence of FLT3-ITD mutations confers a poor prognosis,
and thus many studies are directed at developing and testing novel FLT3
inhibitors for the treatment of AML. A number of clinical trials are now
underway studying tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) that target FLT3.
There have been limitations in the responses observed in patients on
these trials related to insufficient achievement of FLT3 inhibition and
the development of drug resistance through a variety of mechanisms. This
includes resistance conferring point mutations that appear in patients
following drug treatment, as well as selection for cells with activation
of parallel signaling pathways. Therefore, the search for novel TKIs that
overcome some of these mechanisms and the discovery of additional targets
for the treatment of AML are necessary to improve the cure rate of this
disease. TTT-3002 is a multi-targeted kinase inhibitor that has activity
against FLT3-ITD. Here we report the results of the characterization of
this compound in a panel of AML cell lines. TTT-3002 has potent activity
against FLT3 phosphorylation in FLT3-ITD cell lines at subnanomolar
concentrations and significantly decreases cell viability through the
induction of apoptosis. Interestingly, TTT-3002 is highly active against
cell lines with known activating or resistance mutations in the FLT3
gene, indicating the potential for broad clinical application.
Furthermore, through analysis of TTT-3002 potency in cell lines cultured
in human plasma preparations from healthy donors, we observed a 10-20
fold shift in IC50 values for FLT3 phosphorylation compared to cell
culture media. These results suggest that TTT-3002 has reasonable protein
binding, and may require lower doses than many other TKIs to achieve an
effective concentration of free drug in plasma. Finally, we have found
that 6 mg/kg bid in a solid dosing form is well tolerated in BALB/c mice,
and it is sufficient to eliminate luciferase expressing Ba/F3 cells
containing a FLT3-ITD mutation after 4 days of treatment. Continual
dosing with TTT-3002 significantly prolongs tumor free survival over
vehicle control treated mice (pAcute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a
hematologic malignancy that is characterized by increased
myeloproliferation and a block in differentiation of progenitor cells,
leading to infiltration of immature blasts in the bone marrow and
peripheral blood. FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) is a receptor
tyrosine kinase expressed in hematopoietic progenitor cells.
Approximately 30% of AML cases harbor a mutation in the FLT3 gene leading
to constitutive activation of FLT3. The most commonly observed mutation
occurs in the juxtamembrane domain as an internal tandem duplication
(FLT3-ITD) of variable length sequence repeats. In addition, activating
mutations in the kinase domain are observed in 7-10% of patients. The
presence of FLT3-ITD mutations confers a poor prognosis, and thus many
studies are directed at developing and testing novel FLT3 inhibitors for
the treatment of AML. A number of clinical trials are now underway
studying tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) that target FLT3. There have
been limitations in the responses observed in patients on these trials
related to insufficient achievement of FLT3 inhibition and the
development of drug resistance through a variety of mechanisms. This
includes resistance conferring point mutations that appear in patients
following drug treatment, as well as selection for cells with activation
of parallel signaling pathways. Therefore, the search for novel TKIs that
overcome some of these mechanisms and the discovery of additional targets
for the treatment of AML are necessary to improve the cure rate of this
disease. TTT-3002 is a multi-targeted kinase inhibitor that has activity
against FLT3-ITD. Here we report the results of the characterization of
this compound in a panel of AML cell lines. TTT-3002 has potent activity
against FLT3 phosphorylation in FLT3-ITD cell lines at subnanomolar
concentrations and significantly decreases cell viability through the
induction of apoptosis. Interestingly, TTT-3002 is highly active against
cell lines with known activating or resistance mutations in the FLT3
gene, indicating the potential for broad clinical application.
Furthermore, through analysis of TTT-3002 potency in cell lines cultured
in human plasma preparations from healthy donors, we observed a 10-20
fold shift in IC50 values for FLT3 phosphorylation compared to cell
culture media. These results suggest that TTT-3002 has reasonable protein
binding, and may require lower doses than many other TKIs to achieve an
effective concentration of free drug in plasma. Finally, we have found
that 6 mg/kg bid in a solid dosing form is well tolerated in BALB/c mice,
and it is sufficient to eliminate luciferase expressing Ba/F3 cells
containing a FLT3-ITD mutation after 4 days of treatment. Continual
dosing with TTT-3002 significantly prolongs tumor free survival over
vehicle control treated mice (p<0.0001, n=10). These findings demonstrate
the potential of TTT-3002 as a promising targeted therapeutic in the
treatment of AML.

