Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CpG island methylator phenotype in bladder cancer


DNA hypermethylation is a common epigenetic abnormality in cancer, and
some cancers are characterized by the presence of intense
hypermethylation at multiple loci, termed CpG island methylation
phenotype (CIMP). CIMP has not been fully characterized in bladder
cancer. In a pilot study, we examined the methylation status of 38 loci
in a panel of 26 bladder cancer and identified 14 genes whose methylation
was concordant, supporting the presence of CIMP. In an expanded series of
108 cancers, we found that a distinct subset displays concerted
hypermethylation at a large number of genes, confirming the existence of
CIMP in bladder cancer. Unsupervised hierarchical K-means clustering
identified three distinct DNA methylation groups of bladder cancers,
CIMP-N (negative), CIMP-L (low), and CIMP-H (high) representing 39%, 33%
and 28% of cancer overall. Compared to CIMP-N cases, CIMP-H cases were
more frequently current smokers (pDNA hypermethylation is a common
epigenetic abnormality in cancer, and some cancers are characterized by
the presence of intense hypermethylation at multiple loci, termed CpG
island methylation phenotype (CIMP). CIMP has not been fully
characterized in bladder cancer. In a pilot study, we examined the
methylation status of 38 loci in a panel of 26 bladder cancer and
identified 14 genes whose methylation was concordant, supporting the
presence of CIMP. In an expanded series of 108 cancers, we found that a
distinct subset displays concerted hypermethylation at a large number of
genes, confirming the existence of CIMP in bladder cancer. Unsupervised
hierarchical K-means clustering identified three distinct DNA methylation
groups of bladder cancers, CIMP-N (negative), CIMP-L (low), and CIMP-H
(high) representing 39%, 33% and 28% of cancer overall. Compared to
CIMP-N cases, CIMP-H cases were more frequently current smokers (p<0.05),
had more H-RAS and K-RAS mutation (15% vs. 0 %, PDNA hypermethylation is
a common epigenetic abnormality in cancer, and some cancers are
characterized by the presence of intense hypermethylation at multiple
loci, termed CpG island methylation phenotype (CIMP). CIMP has not been
fully characterized in bladder cancer. In a pilot study, we examined the
methylation status of 38 loci in a panel of 26 bladder cancer and
identified 14 genes whose methylation was concordant, supporting the
presence of CIMP. In an expanded series of 108 cancers, we found that a
distinct subset displays concerted hypermethylation at a large number of
genes, confirming the existence of CIMP in bladder cancer. Unsupervised
hierarchical K-means clustering identified three distinct DNA methylation
groups of bladder cancers, CIMP-N (negative), CIMP-L (low), and CIMP-H
(high) representing 39%, 33% and 28% of cancer overall. Compared to
CIMP-N cases, CIMP-H cases were more frequently current smokers (p<0.05),
had more H-RAS and K-RAS mutation (15% vs. 0 %, P< 0.05), had less FGFR3
mutations (8% vs. 32 %, PDNA hypermethylation is a common epigenetic
abnormality in cancer, and some cancers are characterized by the presence
of intense hypermethylation at multiple loci, termed CpG island
methylation phenotype (CIMP). CIMP has not been fully characterized in
bladder cancer. In a pilot study, we examined the methylation status of
38 loci in a panel of 26 bladder cancer and identified 14 genes whose
methylation was concordant, supporting the presence of CIMP. In an
expanded series of 108 cancers, we found that a distinct subset displays
concerted hypermethylation at a large number of genes, confirming the
existence of CIMP in bladder cancer. Unsupervised hierarchical K-means
clustering identified three distinct DNA methylation groups of bladder
cancers, CIMP-N (negative), CIMP-L (low), and CIMP-H (high) representing
39%, 33% and 28% of cancer overall. Compared to CIMP-N cases, CIMP-H
cases were more frequently current smokers (p<0.05), had more H-RAS and
K-RAS mutation (15% vs. 0 %, P< 0.05), had less FGFR3 mutations (8% vs.
32 %, P<0.05) and more RB1 loss (35% vs. 10%, PDNA hypermethylation is a
common epigenetic abnormality in cancer, and some cancers are
characterized by the presence of intense hypermethylation at multiple
loci, termed CpG island methylation phenotype (CIMP). CIMP has not been
fully characterized in bladder cancer. In a pilot study, we examined the
methylation status of 38 loci in a panel of 26 bladder cancer and
identified 14 genes whose methylation was concordant, supporting the
presence of CIMP. In an expanded series of 108 cancers, we found that a
distinct subset displays concerted hypermethylation at a large number of
genes, confirming the existence of CIMP in bladder cancer. Unsupervised
hierarchical K-means clustering identified three distinct DNA methylation
groups of bladder cancers, CIMP-N (negative), CIMP-L (low), and CIMP-H
(high) representing 39%, 33% and 28% of cancer overall. Compared to
CIMP-N cases, CIMP-H cases were more frequently current smokers (p<0.05),
had more H-RAS and K-RAS mutation (15% vs. 0 %, P< 0.05), had less FGFR3
mutations (8% vs. 32 %, P<0.05) and more RB1 loss (35% vs. 10%, P<0.05).
Genome wide analysis of 85 bladder cancers by MCAM (methylated CpG island
amplification microarray) showed an average of 12.4 % of genes
hypermethylated in CIMP-H, 6.5 % in CIMP-L and 4.4 % in CIMP-N (CIMP-N
vs. CIMP-L, p=0.0006 and CIMP-L vs. CIMP-H, pDNA hypermethylation is a
common epigenetic abnormality in cancer, and some cancers are
characterized by the presence of intense hypermethylation at multiple
loci, termed CpG island methylation phenotype (CIMP). CIMP has not been
fully characterized in bladder cancer. In a pilot study, we examined the
methylation status of 38 loci in a panel of 26 bladder cancer and
identified 14 genes whose methylation was concordant, supporting the
presence of CIMP. In an expanded series of 108 cancers, we found that a
distinct subset displays concerted hypermethylation at a large number of
genes, confirming the existence of CIMP in bladder cancer. Unsupervised
hierarchical K-means clustering identified three distinct DNA methylation
groups of bladder cancers, CIMP-N (negative), CIMP-L (low), and CIMP-H
(high) representing 39%, 33% and 28% of cancer overall. Compared to
CIMP-N cases, CIMP-H cases were more frequently current smokers (p<0.05),
had more H-RAS and K-RAS mutation (15% vs. 0 %, P< 0.05), had less FGFR3
mutations (8% vs. 32 %, P<0.05) and more RB1 loss (35% vs. 10%, P<0.05).
Genome wide analysis of 85 bladder cancers by MCAM (methylated CpG island
amplification microarray) showed an average of 12.4 % of genes
hypermethylated in CIMP-H, 6.5 % in CIMP-L and 4.4 % in CIMP-N (CIMP-N
vs. CIMP-L, p=0.0006 and CIMP-L vs. CIMP-H, p<0.0001). Affected genes
were enriched for PcG targets, and gene ontology analysis showed
clustering at Homeobox and voltage-gated cation channel based on gene
expression of CIMP targets. Our study suggests that CIMP is an important
molecular variable in bladder cancer heterogeneity.

