Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes activates natural killer cells and
enhances anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody-mediated antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity in vitro and in vivo


Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) plays an important role
in the efficacy of therapeutic anti-cancer monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).
Natural killer (NK) cell is the major effector lymphocytes in mediating
ADCC through Fc receptor (FcR). Indeed, the use of cytokine such as IL2
and GM-CSF to improve the mAbs-mediated ADCC has been studied. Recently,
interleukin-15 (IL-15) or IL-15/IL-15 receptor (IL-15R) complexes have
been shown to enhance the cytotoxicity of NK cells but their effects on
ADCC mediated by NK cells have not been well-investigated. Here, we
evaluated the effects of in vivo stimulation with IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R
complexes on the ADCC activity of NK cells mediated by anti-GD2 mAb
(14G2a). Fresh DX5+ NK cells from PBS-treated mice were ineffective in
inducing 14G2a-coated apoptosis of a relatively NK cell-resistant
lymphoma, EL4, with 19.6% and 17.3% for EL4+14G2a compared with EL4,
respectively. Upon daily injection of murine IL-15 for 3 or 5 days, a
significant and persistent ADCC activity of NK cells (49.050.8%, P
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) plays an important role
in the efficacy of therapeutic anti-cancer monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).
Natural killer (NK) cell is the major effector lymphocytes in mediating
ADCC through Fc receptor (FcR). Indeed, the use of cytokine such as IL2
and GM-CSF to improve the mAbs-mediated ADCC has been studied. Recently,
interleukin-15 (IL-15) or IL-15/IL-15 receptor (IL-15R) complexes have
been shown to enhance the cytotoxicity of NK cells but their effects on
ADCC mediated by NK cells have not been well-investigated. Here, we
evaluated the effects of in vivo stimulation with IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R
complexes on the ADCC activity of NK cells mediated by anti-GD2 mAb
(14G2a). Fresh DX5+ NK cells from PBS-treated mice were ineffective in
inducing 14G2a-coated apoptosis of a relatively NK cell-resistant
lymphoma, EL4, with 19.6% and 17.3% for EL4+14G2a compared with EL4,
respectively. Upon daily injection of murine IL-15 for 3 or 5 days, a
significant and persistent ADCC activity of NK cells (49.050.8%, P <
0.001) was observed from day 3 to 5. In addition, a single administration
of IL-15/IL-15R complexes on day 0 induced a peak ADCC activity at day 2
(59.8%, P Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) plays an
important role in the efficacy of therapeutic anti-cancer monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs). Natural killer (NK) cell is the major effector
lymphocytes in mediating ADCC through Fc receptor (FcR). Indeed, the use
of cytokine such as IL2 and GM-CSF to improve the mAbs-mediated ADCC has
been studied. Recently, interleukin-15 (IL-15) or IL-15/IL-15 receptor
(IL-15R) complexes have been shown to enhance the cytotoxicity of NK
cells but their effects on ADCC mediated by NK cells have not been
well-investigated. Here, we evaluated the effects of in vivo stimulation
with IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes on the ADCC activity of NK cells
mediated by anti-GD2 mAb (14G2a). Fresh DX5+ NK cells from PBS-treated
mice were ineffective in inducing 14G2a-coated apoptosis of a relatively
NK cell-resistant lymphoma, EL4, with 19.6% and 17.3% for EL4+14G2a
compared with EL4, respectively. Upon daily injection of murine IL-15 for
3 or 5 days, a significant and persistent ADCC activity of NK cells
(49.050.8%, P < 0.001) was observed from day 3 to 5. In addition, a
single administration of IL-15/IL-15R complexes on day 0 induced a peak
ADCC activity at day 2 (59.8%, P < 0.001) and then slightly decreased at
day 3 (37.8%, P Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) plays an
important role in the efficacy of therapeutic anti-cancer monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs). Natural killer (NK) cell is the major effector
lymphocytes in mediating ADCC through Fc receptor (FcR). Indeed, the use
of cytokine such as IL2 and GM-CSF to improve the mAbs-mediated ADCC has
been studied. Recently, interleukin-15 (IL-15) or IL-15/IL-15 receptor
(IL-15R) complexes have been shown to enhance the cytotoxicity of NK
cells but their effects on ADCC mediated by NK cells have not been
well-investigated. Here, we evaluated the effects of in vivo stimulation
with IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes on the ADCC activity of NK cells
mediated by anti-GD2 mAb (14G2a). Fresh DX5+ NK cells from PBS-treated
mice were ineffective in inducing 14G2a-coated apoptosis of a relatively
NK cell-resistant lymphoma, EL4, with 19.6% and 17.3% for EL4+14G2a
compared with EL4, respectively. Upon daily injection of murine IL-15 for
3 or 5 days, a significant and persistent ADCC activity of NK cells
(49.050.8%, P < 0.001) was observed from day 3 to 5. In addition, a
single administration of IL-15/IL-15R complexes on day 0 induced a peak
ADCC activity at day 2 (59.8%, P < 0.001) and then slightly decreased at
day 3 (37.8%, P < 0.001). Moreover, IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R
complexes-induced ADCC activities of NK cells could be eliminated by
NKG2D blockade. FACS analysis of murine splenocytes showed that IL-15 or
IL-15/IL-15R complexes administrations significantly increased the
percentage of FcR-positive NK cells from resting stage 75% to 85% and
92%, respectively, and also slightly enhanced the surface expression of
FcR on NK cells. Furthermore, IL-15/IL-15R complexes rapidly induced the
expression of CD69 on FcR-expressed NK cells from 14.5% to 92.6% at 24h,
followed by returning to baseline at day 3. However, sustained IL-15
treatment maintained the expression of CD69 on FcR-positive NK cells but
the maximal expression of CD69 was only 52.5% at day 5. These results
demonstrated that IL-15 and IL-15/IL-15R complexes exhibit different
potency or time kinetics on the activation of FcR-expressing NK cells.
Based on these in vitro data, we evaluated the in vivo anti-cancer
efficacy of 14G2a in syngeneic EL4 murine model in combination with timed
sequential treatments of IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes. Both sustained
IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes effectively and equally prolonged the
survival of EL4-bearing mice compared with 14G2a only (P
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) plays an important role
in the efficacy of therapeutic anti-cancer monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).
Natural killer (NK) cell is the major effector lymphocytes in mediating
ADCC through Fc receptor (FcR). Indeed, the use of cytokine such as IL2
and GM-CSF to improve the mAbs-mediated ADCC has been studied. Recently,
interleukin-15 (IL-15) or IL-15/IL-15 receptor (IL-15R) complexes have
been shown to enhance the cytotoxicity of NK cells but their effects on
ADCC mediated by NK cells have not been well-investigated. Here, we
evaluated the effects of in vivo stimulation with IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R
complexes on the ADCC activity of NK cells mediated by anti-GD2 mAb
(14G2a). Fresh DX5+ NK cells from PBS-treated mice were ineffective in
inducing 14G2a-coated apoptosis of a relatively NK cell-resistant
lymphoma, EL4, with 19.6% and 17.3% for EL4+14G2a compared with EL4,
respectively. Upon daily injection of murine IL-15 for 3 or 5 days, a
significant and persistent ADCC activity of NK cells (49.050.8%, P <
0.001) was observed from day 3 to 5. In addition, a single administration
of IL-15/IL-15R complexes on day 0 induced a peak ADCC activity at day 2
(59.8%, P < 0.001) and then slightly decreased at day 3 (37.8%, P <
0.001). Moreover, IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes-induced ADCC activities
of NK cells could be eliminated by NKG2D blockade. FACS analysis of
murine splenocytes showed that IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes
administrations significantly increased the percentage of FcR-positive NK
cells from resting stage 75% to 85% and 92%, respectively, and also
slightly enhanced the surface expression of FcR on NK cells. Furthermore,
IL-15/IL-15R complexes rapidly induced the expression of CD69 on
FcR-expressed NK cells from 14.5% to 92.6% at 24h, followed by returning
to baseline at day 3. However, sustained IL-15 treatment maintained the
expression of CD69 on FcR-positive NK cells but the maximal expression of
CD69 was only 52.5% at day 5. These results demonstrated that IL-15 and
IL-15/IL-15R complexes exhibit different potency or time kinetics on the
activation of FcR-expressing NK cells. Based on these in vitro data, we
evaluated the in vivo anti-cancer efficacy of 14G2a in syngeneic EL4
murine model in combination with timed sequential treatments of IL-15 or
IL-15/IL-15R complexes. Both sustained IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes
effectively and equally prolonged the survival of EL4-bearing mice
compared with 14G2a only (P <0.001). In conclusion, these data show that
IL-15 or IL-15/IL-15R complexes may enhance the therapeutic potential of
anti-glycan or other therapeutic mAbs currently used clinically for
patients with malignancies.

