Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PTEN nucleo-cytoplasmic protein compartmentalization and gene
status are correlated with aggressiveness of pulmonary neuroendocrine
tumors


Introduction: Lung neuroendocrine tumors (NET) comprise typical (TC) and
atypical carcinoid (AC), large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) and
small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC). Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)
protein is a known cytosolic tumor suppressor with recently described
novel nuclear functions. We investigated this differential PTEN protein
compartmentalization together with its genomic status in pulmonary NETs.
Patients and Methods: A retrospective multicenter cohort of 192 patients
with lung NET was investigated on a tissue microarray (TMA, surgical
resections = 183/autopsies = 9) by immunohistochemistry (IHC, cytoplasm
and nucleus) and fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH, nucleus).
Results were correlated with markers of neuroendocrine differentiation
(synaptophysin, chromogranin A), proliferation (mib-1), cell cycle (p27,
cyclin D1) and survival data. Results: The histotypes represented were TC
in 58 patients, AC in 42, LCNEC in 32 and SCLC in 60. All NETs showed
higher PTEN immunoreactivity in the cytoplasm than in the nucleus,
whereby the greatest nucleo-cytoplasmic difference was found for SCLC. In
both compartments, immunoreactivity was higher in the carcinoids than in
LCNEC and SCLC. Loss of cytosolic or nuclear PTEN protein was correlated
with increased mitotic rate, with low synaptophysin or chromogranin A and
with PTEN genomic deletion. Loss of nuclear PTEN protein correlated with
high nuclear TTF1, whereas loss of cytosolic protein correlated with low
p27 and low cyclin D1 (all p-values Introduction: Lung neuroendocrine
tumors (NET) comprise typical (TC) and atypical carcinoid (AC), large
cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) and small cell lung carcinoma
(SCLC). Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) protein is a known
cytosolic tumor suppressor with recently described novel nuclear
functions. We investigated this differential PTEN protein
compartmentalization together with its genomic status in pulmonary NETs.
Patients and Methods: A retrospective multicenter cohort of 192 patients
with lung NET was investigated on a tissue microarray (TMA, surgical
resections = 183/autopsies = 9) by immunohistochemistry (IHC, cytoplasm
and nucleus) and fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH, nucleus).
Results were correlated with markers of neuroendocrine differentiation
(synaptophysin, chromogranin A), proliferation (mib-1), cell cycle (p27,
cyclin D1) and survival data. Results: The histotypes represented were TC
in 58 patients, AC in 42, LCNEC in 32 and SCLC in 60. All NETs showed
higher PTEN immunoreactivity in the cytoplasm than in the nucleus,
whereby the greatest nucleo-cytoplasmic difference was found for SCLC. In
both compartments, immunoreactivity was higher in the carcinoids than in
LCNEC and SCLC. Loss of cytosolic or nuclear PTEN protein was correlated
with increased mitotic rate, with low synaptophysin or chromogranin A and
with PTEN genomic deletion. Loss of nuclear PTEN protein correlated with
high nuclear TTF1, whereas loss of cytosolic protein correlated with low
p27 and low cyclin D1 (all p-values <0.05). Patients with PTEN genomic
deletion or low PTEN immunoreactivity had poorer survivals. Conclusion:
PTEN genomic deletion or PTEN protein loss is linked to dedifferentiation
and poor prognosis of lung NET. Nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling of PTEN
protein could play a role in the different PTEN inactivation mechanisms.

