Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Functional effects of SNPs in non-coding RNAs at the 3q25 ovarian
cancer susceptibility locus


Genome-wide association studies have identified six common, low
penetrance susceptibility loci for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). The
functional mechanisms underlying disease susceptibility at these loci are
unknown. SNPs at the 3q25 locus confer a 1.2-fold risk of serous EOC
(P=7.1x10-8). To identify causal SNP(s) we used the 1000 genomes project
to identify 952 correlated SNPs within a 884kb linkage disequilibrium
region. Of these, 786 tagging SNPs were genotyped in 20,000 invasive EOC
cases and 20,000 controls. Fine mapping limited the size of the risk
region to 130kb and 43 possible causal SNPs. This region contains four
protein-coding genes; none of the 43 SNPs was predicted to have a
functional effect on the translated protein. Genomic profiling data from
The Cancer Genome Atlas analysis of 500 serous EOCs indicated one gene in
the region (TIPARP) was significantly down regulated compared to normal
tissues (P=0.005). Using RT-PCR expression analysis, we found
significantly lower TIPARP expression in EOC cell lines (N=37) compared
to normal ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) and fallopian tube epithelial
(FTE) cell lines (N=39) (P=1.57x10-8). TIPARP was also significantly
downregulated in an in vitro model of early stage transformation of OSE
cells (P=0.0003). Collectively, these data suggest that TIPARP is a novel
tumor suppressor gene (TSG) in EOC development. TIPARP is a
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase known to catalyze histone ribosylation, an
epigenetic modification that plays a role in DNA repair. We evaluated its
functional significance in more detail using stable lentiviral-mediated
shRNA knockdown of TIPARP in normal OSE/FTE cells. TIPARP knockdown
induced cellular senescence similar to the effects of many classical TSG
knockdowns in normal cells. We hypothesized that TIPARP may be involved
in cellular response to DNA damage; when normal OSE/FTE cells were
exposed to -irradiation TIPARP was significantly upregulated in a
dose-dependent manner. We examined the functional link between
susceptibility SNPs and TiPARP expression. Of 43 putative causal SNPs,
four fell within two non-coding RNAs- LOC730091 and TIPARP-AS1. There is
no homology between LOC730091 and genes at the 3q25 locus; but TIPARP-ASI
is a non-coding RNA with antisense sequence similarity to exon 1 of
TIPARP. LOC730091 and TIPARP-AS1 were variably expressed in both normal
ovarian and EOC cell lines. We found no correlation between LOC730091 and
TIPARP expression; but cell lines expressing TIPARP-AS1 showed
significantly reduced TIPARP expression. In summary, fine mapping at the
3q25 has identified multiple possible causal SNPs. Functional studies
implicate TIPARP as a plausible target TSG in this region. EOC risk
associated SNPs were located in a non-coding RNA that causes reduced
expression of TIPARP suggesting a mechanism by which susceptibility SNPs
may confer neoplastic transformation of ovarian epithelial cells.

