Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: In vivo effects of ICA-1 on breast cancer and glioma xenografts


High grade breast cancer and gliomas are highly lethal tumors for which
novel therapies are necessary. PKC-iota (PKC-), an atypical protein
kinase C isoform confers resistance to drug-induced apoptosis in cancer
cells (J. Biol. Chem. 272; 44: 27521-27524). This research focuses on the
in-vivo effects of the novel PKC- inhibitor [1H-imidazole-4-carboxamide,
5-amino-1-[2,3-dihydroxy-4-[(phosphonooxy) methyl] cyclopentyl]-[1R-(1,
2, 3 , 4 )] (ICA-1; The Inter. J. Biochem. & Cell Biol. 43:784-794) on
breast cancer and glioma xenografts. ICA-1 targets a unique sequence
(amino acid residues 469-475) in the catalytic domain of PKC-. The breast
cancer xenograft study evaluated 12 athymic nude mice while the glioma
xenograft study was comprised of 6 female athymic nude mice. The breast
cancer xenografts were divided into saline control (n= 4) and xenografts
injected with ICA-1 (20mg/kg; 5 M; every other day, n = 8). The six
glioma nude mice were divided into two groups consisting of saline
controls (n = 3) and xenografts injected with ICA-1(80 mg/kg; 20 M; every
other day) when the tumor reached 100 mm3 on day 5 post implantation (n =
3). MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells were injected subcutaneously (2 x106
cells/ flank in 0.2 ml PBS) while the human glioblastoma cell line U-87
MG was also injected into different mice subcutaneously in the right
flank (1x106 cells/flank in 0.1 ml PBS). Tumor volume was calculated
using formula: length x width x width x . Results showed that ICA-1
prevented glioma tumor growth even after stopping dosing at day 9 and
continuing to monitor tumor growth for an additional nine days. Glioma
tumor volume in these ICA-1 treated mice decreased by 51% compared to
controls. ICA-1 was also effective in decreasing breast cancer xenograft
growth by 50%. The weight of either ICA-1 treated breast cancer or glioma
xenograft mice did not decrease compared to controls. These results
indicate that ICA-1 is effective in preventing the growth of breast
cancer and glioma xenografts. Future studies will establish toxicity data
and optimize the dose and frequency of ICA-1 treatment for potential
anti-PKC- therapy.

