Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of vHL and REDD1 in predicting sensitivity to targeted
therapies in renal cell carcinoma


There are currently 6 FDA approved therapies in metastatic renal cell
carcinoma and their introduction has improved both time to progression
and survival in these patients. Despite treatment with targeted therapies
approximately 20% of patients do not respond and the remaining patients
will most likely develop resistance during the first 18 months of
treatment. The aim of this study was to identify a link between
differences in sensitivity to targeted therapies, the vHL status and the
expression of genes involved in the mTOR pathway in both historic and
primary renal cancer cell lines. Drug sensitivity and gene expression
data was analysed in 6 historic and 10 primary renal cancer cell lines
obtained from nephrectomy specimens. Gene expression data was also
available from an additional 68 renal tumours. We found that cell lines
with mutated or absent vHL showed increased sensitivity to rapamycin
(pThere are currently 6 FDA approved therapies in metastatic renal cell
carcinoma and their introduction has improved both time to progression
and survival in these patients. Despite treatment with targeted therapies
approximately 20% of patients do not respond and the remaining patients
will most likely develop resistance during the first 18 months of
treatment. The aim of this study was to identify a link between
differences in sensitivity to targeted therapies, the vHL status and the
expression of genes involved in the mTOR pathway in both historic and
primary renal cancer cell lines. Drug sensitivity and gene expression
data was analysed in 6 historic and 10 primary renal cancer cell lines
obtained from nephrectomy specimens. Gene expression data was also
available from an additional 68 renal tumours. We found that cell lines
with mutated or absent vHL showed increased sensitivity to rapamycin
(p<0.01) but not to other therapies. Gene expression data showed that the
expression of REDD1 (regulated in development and DNA damage responses
1), a known HIF1 target gene which inhibits the mTORC1 pathway in
response to hypoxic stress correlates with rapamycin sensitivity
(R-squared = 0.64, p=0.05). REDD1 expression was also higher in renal
tumours when compared with matched normal tissue (pThere are currently 6
FDA approved therapies in metastatic renal cell carcinoma and their
introduction has improved both time to progression and survival in these
patients. Despite treatment with targeted therapies approximately 20% of
patients do not respond and the remaining patients will most likely
develop resistance during the first 18 months of treatment. The aim of
this study was to identify a link between differences in sensitivity to
targeted therapies, the vHL status and the expression of genes involved
in the mTOR pathway in both historic and primary renal cancer cell lines.
Drug sensitivity and gene expression data was analysed in 6 historic and
10 primary renal cancer cell lines obtained from nephrectomy specimens.
Gene expression data was also available from an additional 68 renal
tumours. We found that cell lines with mutated or absent vHL showed
increased sensitivity to rapamycin (p<0.01) but not to other therapies.
Gene expression data showed that the expression of REDD1 (regulated in
development and DNA damage responses 1), a known HIF1 target gene which
inhibits the mTORC1 pathway in response to hypoxic stress correlates with
rapamycin sensitivity (R-squared = 0.64, p=0.05). REDD1 expression was
also higher in renal tumours when compared with matched normal tissue
(p<0.01) and was found to correlate with CAIX expression (R-squared =
0.47, pThere are currently 6 FDA approved therapies in metastatic renal
cell carcinoma and their introduction has improved both time to
progression and survival in these patients. Despite treatment with
targeted therapies approximately 20% of patients do not respond and the
remaining patients will most likely develop resistance during the first
18 months of treatment. The aim of this study was to identify a link
between differences in sensitivity to targeted therapies, the vHL status
and the expression of genes involved in the mTOR pathway in both historic
and primary renal cancer cell lines. Drug sensitivity and gene expression
data was analysed in 6 historic and 10 primary renal cancer cell lines
obtained from nephrectomy specimens. Gene expression data was also
available from an additional 68 renal tumours. We found that cell lines
with mutated or absent vHL showed increased sensitivity to rapamycin
(p<0.01) but not to other therapies. Gene expression data showed that the
expression of REDD1 (regulated in development and DNA damage responses
1), a known HIF1 target gene which inhibits the mTORC1 pathway in
response to hypoxic stress correlates with rapamycin sensitivity
(R-squared = 0.64, p=0.05). REDD1 expression was also higher in renal
tumours when compared with matched normal tissue (p<0.01) and was found
to correlate with CAIX expression (R-squared = 0.47, p<0.01). CAIX
expression is associated with reduced survival in renal cell carcinoma
and so further analysis is being performed to establish a potential role
of REDD1 as a prognostic marker. Our findings suggest that vHL status and
the levels of REDD1 expression in renal cancer cell lines can predict
sensitivity to rapamycin.

