Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of RAD51 promotes brain metastases from breast
cancer


Overexpression of the DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair gene RAD51 was
identified as part of a 13-gene signature predictive of rapid brain
metastasis development (3 years vs. >3 years after diagnosis, HR=3.03,
p=0.0008) in primary tumors of chemotherapy-nave HER2+ metastatic breast
cancer patients. We also found RAD51 mRNA overexpressed (1.5-fold,
p=0.001) in resected brain metastases compared to primary breast tumors
from the same patients. In addition, RAD51 expression was significantly
higher (1.4-fold, p=0.008,) in brain metastases compared to systemic
(bone/lung) metastases. We therefore hypothesize that RAD51 promotes
brain metastasis development in breast cancer patients. Given the known
role of RAD51 in homologous recombination, important for the repair of
DNA DSBs, it was unknown whether RAD51 would promote brain metastasis of
breast cancer only in the presence of DNA-damaging chemotherapy or,
alternatively, have endogenous biological functions in tumor cells. To
functionally evaluate whether RAD51 promotes brain metastases, RAD51 was
overexpressed at physiologically relevant levels in a brain-metastatic
variants of triple-negative MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma (231-BR) cells.
In vitro, this resulted in a 30% increase in clonogenic colony formation
(p=0.004), without affecting cell proliferation rates. RAD51
overexpression also conferred chemoresistance to DNA DSB inducing agents
such as 25uM carboplatin (p=0.03) and 25nM doxorubicin (p=0.02), but not
to agents that do not cause DNA DSBs, such as 2.5nM paclitaxel. In vivo,
overexpression of RAD51 in 231-BR cells increased formation of large
brain metastases, the equivalent of clinically detectable lesions, (4.0
and 3.3-fold, p=0.01 and p=0.005) and micro-metastases (3.1 and 3.5-fold,
p=0.01 and p=0.001) in two independent xenograft experiments.
Importantly, this brain-metastasis promoting effect occurred without
drugs to induce DSB. This effect was recapitulated in a second animal
model based on a brain-metastatic subline of 4T1 murine mammary carcinoma
cells (4T1-BR). In this model, RAD51 overexpression increased large brain
metastases (3.3-fold, p=0.02) and micro-metastases (2.0-fold, p=0.04)
compared to vector control. ShRNA-mediated RAD51 knockdown in 4T1-BR
cells resulted in the opposite effect, reducing large brain metastases
(1.8-fold, p=0.1) and micro-metastases (2.5-fold, p=0.04). Together these
data suggest a driving role for RAD51 in the development of brain
metastases from breast cancer.

