Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systematic in vivo analysis of PI3K pathway aberrations in a mouse
model for invasive lobular carcinoma


Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is a form of breast cancer that develops
in the milk-producing glands (lobules) of the breast. ILC is an
aggressive form of breast cancer due to its ability to spread to other
parts of the body, both by bloodstream as well as lymphatic system. One
of the key features found in ILC is loss of E-cadherin, encoding CDH1.
Mammary-gland specific deletion of E-cadherin does not lead to tumour
formation indicating that other factors are involved in the induction of
ILC. Indeed, combined tissue-specific inactivation of E-cadherin and p53
induces development of invasive and metastatic mammary tumours resembling
human ILC. However, a limitation of the current conditional mouse models
is that human ILCs rarely contain p53 mutations. In contrast, PI3K
pathway mutations are frequently found in human ILCs. Currently we are
developing novel mouse ILC models to systematically examine the
contribution of PI3K pathway components such as PIK3CA, AKT and PTEN to
ILC development. To reduce time spent on generating a genetically
engineered mouse (GEM) tumour cohort expressing three or more transgenes
we set-up embryonic stem (ES) cell derivation and targeting of ES cells
from validated GEM models, the so-called GEMM-ESC strategy.
WapCre-Cdh1F/F ES cells targeted with PIK3CA or AKT mutants are now being
used to generate the elaborate PI3K pathway tumour cohort. These advanced
models will allow us to study the role of the PI3K pathway in the
pathogenesis of ILC. Moreover, we can use these advanced mouse models
which recapitulate key hallmarks of human ILC to perform refined and
realistic preclinical prevention and intervention studies for ILC.

