Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interaction of microRNAs and target genes in bladder cancer
metastasis


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene
expression through base pairing with other mRNA transcripts. MiRNA
expression signatures have characterized many phenotypes in bladder
cancer, including grade, stage, and metastasis. However, simultaneous
mRNA changes accompanying the miRNA profile, along with the miRNA:mRNA
interaction, were not systematically studied in these phenotypes. To gain
insights into the miRNA regulatory network in bladder cancer metastasis,
we profiled miRNA and mRNA expressions in two pairs of metastatic and
non-metastatic cell lines. Interactions between differentially expressed
miRNAs and mRNAs were predicted using six software. We identified 194
miRNA:mRNA pairs between 18 up-regulated miRNAs and 66 down-regulated
genes in metastatic cells; while the down-regulation of miRNAs and the
increased expression of target genes were rare. The overexpression of one
of the miRNAs, hsa-miR-146a, is confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR in
metastatic cell lines. The 66 potential target genes are enriched in
cytoskeleton organization and actin binding, underlining the importance
of cell motility in cancer metastasis. Analysis of microarray data from
two patient cohorts indicated lower expression of the 66 miRNA target
genes in tumors than in normal bladder tissues. Our results suggest the
significance of miRNA regulatory network in cancer metastasis and provide
a list of potential miRNA:mRNA pairs for further investigation.

