Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Healthcare utilization by race and sex among a nationally
representative sample of adults with and without a personal history of
cancer


Background: Men and minorities suffer higher burdens from cancer.
Healthcare utilization differences may contribute to this major public
health problem. Aim: To compare utilization of healthcare services by
race and sex among adults with and without a history of cancer as
measured by having at least one doctor's visit within the last 12 months.
Methods: We analyzed data from 7,229 responders to the 2007 Health
Information and National Trends Survey (HINTS). We identified
participants with and without a personal history of cancer and compared
them by race and sex with having a doctor's visit within the previous 12
months. We used logistic regression models to calculate Odd Ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Results: The mean age of respondents
was 54.1 years, 38.8% males, 76.1% whites, 9.4% blacks, and 8.6%
Hispanics. Of the respondents, 88.8% had health insurance (92.5% whites,
78.9% blacks, and 69.1% Hispanics; P value Background: Men and minorities
suffer higher burdens from cancer. Healthcare utilization differences may
contribute to this major public health problem. Aim: To compare
utilization of healthcare services by race and sex among adults with and
without a history of cancer as measured by having at least one doctor's
visit within the last 12 months. Methods: We analyzed data from 7,229
responders to the 2007 Health Information and National Trends Survey
(HINTS). We identified participants with and without a personal history
of cancer and compared them by race and sex with having a doctor's visit
within the previous 12 months. We used logistic regression models to
calculate Odd Ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Results: The
mean age of respondents was 54.1 years, 38.8% males, 76.1% whites, 9.4%
blacks, and 8.6% Hispanics. Of the respondents, 88.8% had health
insurance (92.5% whites, 78.9% blacks, and 69.1% Hispanics; P value
<0.001). Although there was no difference in health insurance coverage by
sex (P value = 0.506), men were less likely to have seen a doctor within
the previous 12 months (OR=0.40; 95% CI: 0.31-0.51). Cancer survivors
were more likely to have seen a doctor (OR=2.70; 95% CI: 1.68-4.36), but
there was no difference by race. After adjusting for age, education,
race, income and insurance status, men were less likely to have seen a
doctor if they did not have a personal history of cancer (Table).
Conclusion: Our study suggests that men improve in their compliance to
doctors visits only after cancer diagnosis. Targeted interventions to
promote use of preventive care services by men are needed. Table:
Comparison of doctors visit within the previous 12 months by personal
history of cancer


