Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: P53 is potential predictive biomarker for combination therapy of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and MET inhibitors in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with wild-type EGFR


Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) systems, such as hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF) and its receptor MET and epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its
receptor EGFR, are known to be expressed in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) and play an important role in the progression of NSCLC. Recent
research shows that co-inhibition of MET and EGFR signaling results in
more robust antitumor activity, relative to either alone, although the
mechanisms of this synergism are not clear. P53, a tumor suppressor gene,
is a potent regulator of apoptosis which is induced by DNA damage. The
dysregulation of p53 protein is related to both oncogenesis and drug
resistance. The purpose of this study was to investigate the mechanisms
of synergistic antitumor effects of an EGFR inhibitor (gefitinib) and two
different MET inhibitors (SU11274 and tivantinib [ARQ 197]) and to
potentially define the role of P53 function as a predictive biomarker for
the observed synergy. P53 wild-type (A549 and H460) cells and P53
null-type (H358 and H1299) cells without met gene amplification or EGFR
mutation were used. Combined gefitinib and SU11274 or tivantinib induced
profound growth inhibitory effects and apoptosis in cell lines harboring
wild-type P53, but not in cells harboring null P53. SU11274 or tivantinib
appeared to abrogate the P53/Mdm2 interaction, concomitantly reducing
P53-ubiquitination followed by protein stabilization. Treatment with
gefitinib resulted in the translocation of P53 from cytosol to nucleus.
In P53 wild-type cells, the combination treatment of SU11274 or ARQ197
with gefitinib induced more robust apoptosis than single agent treatment,
presumably through up-regulation of p53 target genes (FAS, Bax and PUMA).
Furthermore, inhibition of P53 expression in A549 cells using siRNA
significantly reduced apoptosis and downregulated mRNA and protein
expression of FAS, PUMA and Bax upon combined treatment with gefitinib
and SU11274. Overexpression of wild-type P53 in H1299 cells enhanced
growth inhibition and apoptosis by combined gefitinib and SU11274
treatment through up-regulation of FAS, PUMA and Bax and restoration of
caspase activation. In an A549 xenograft model, the combination of
gefitinib and SU11274 (or tivantinib) effectively shrunk tumor volume and
also induced apoptosis more effectively than either treatment alone. In
conclusion, P53 plays an essential role in determining synergistic
efficacy of combination therapy with pharmacological EGFR and MET
inhibition in NSCLC with wild type EGFR. The validation of the predictive
value of P53 mutation is warranted in appropriate ongoing clinical trials
of combination therapy in advanced NSCLC patients with wild-type EGFR.

