Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical dose scheduling studies of LOR-253, a novel anticancer
drug, in combination with chemotherapeutics in lung and colon cancers


LOR-253 is an anticancer small molecule that is currently in a Phase I
clinical study in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors.
LOR-253 has a novel anticancer mechanism based on chelation of
intracellular labile zinc, leading to inhibition of angiogenesis as well
as G1/S cell cycle arrest due to induction of the tumor suppressor
Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4). In preclinical studies, LOR-253 has shown
potent antitumor activity against several cancers, including non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and colon cancer, without significant toxicity.
To support the clinical development of LOR-253 in combination with
chemotherapeutics, we investigated the effect of dose scheduling of
LOR-253 plus chemotherapy agents on anticancer activity in NSCLC (H226)
and colon cancer (SW620) cell lines. Treatment of H226 cells in vitro
with docetaxel, paclitaxel, or cisplatin for two days followed by
increasing doses of LOR-253 resulted in significantly higher
anti-proliferative activity than either agent alone. Assessment of drug
interactions by determination of the combination index (D) (Berenbaum MC,
Adv Cancer Res., 1981; 35:269-335) showed that the anticancer activities
of the combination of LOR-253 with these chemotherapy agents were
synergistic (D LOR-253 is an anticancer small molecule that is currently
in a Phase I clinical study in patients with advanced or metastatic solid
tumors. LOR-253 has a novel anticancer mechanism based on chelation of
intracellular labile zinc, leading to inhibition of angiogenesis as well
as G1/S cell cycle arrest due to induction of the tumor suppressor
Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4). In preclinical studies, LOR-253 has shown
potent antitumor activity against several cancers, including non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and colon cancer, without significant toxicity.
To support the clinical development of LOR-253 in combination with
chemotherapeutics, we investigated the effect of dose scheduling of
LOR-253 plus chemotherapy agents on anticancer activity in NSCLC (H226)
and colon cancer (SW620) cell lines. Treatment of H226 cells in vitro
with docetaxel, paclitaxel, or cisplatin for two days followed by
increasing doses of LOR-253 resulted in significantly higher
anti-proliferative activity than either agent alone. Assessment of drug
interactions by determination of the combination index (D) (Berenbaum MC,
Adv Cancer Res., 1981; 35:269-335) showed that the anticancer activities
of the combination of LOR-253 with these chemotherapy agents were
synergistic (D < 1). In studies with LOR-253 and docetaxel, synergistic
anticancer activity against H226 was maintained with either concurrent or
sequential treatments of each agent. Anticancer synergy was also seen in
SW620 cells treated with LOR-253 in combination with oxaliplatin, CPT-11,
or Fluorouracil. The effects of dose scheduling on activity of LOR-253
and docetaxel in vivo was also examined. Nude mice with H226 tumor
xenografts were treated with repeat cycles of docetaxel once per week,
followed two days later by treatment with LOR-253 for three consecutive
days. Docetaxel was administered at an experimentally-determined ED50
dose level (defined as the effective dose at which 50% of mice showed
tumor growth inhibition), while LOR-253 was given at its maximum
efficacious dose in this model (10 mg/kg) or sub-optimal dose (5 mg/kg).
Sequential administration of docetaxel followed by LOR-253 showed
significant antitumor activity when docetaxel was given at either ED50 or
sub-ED50 doses plus 10 mg/kg of LOR-253, compared to either agent alone
given at the same dose, or with concurrent administration of LOR-253 and
docetaxel at these dose levels. Preliminary results also show significant
antitumor activity of LOR-253 plus docetaxel against H226 tumors in mice
treated with repeat cycles of the reverse order of these treatments
(LOR-253 for three days, followed by docetaxel 1X/week). In summary, dose
scheduling studies with LOR-253 plus chemotherapy drugs demonstrate
strong anticancer activities in NSCLC and colon cancer, providing support
for the design of LOR-253 combination strategies for treatment of these
cancers.

