Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Activation status and function of the canonical Wnt pathway in
murine mammary tumor cells reexpressing Glypican-3 (GPC3)


GPC3 is a proteoglycan downregulated in breast cancer cells. We
previously demonstrated that GPC3 reexpression inhibits in vivo
metastatic potential of LM3 murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells. This
event was associated in vitro with a lower motility and an increased
aggregation, as well as with an enhanced senescence and apoptosis. We
have previous evidence indicating that the canonical Wnt pathway is
inhibited in LM3-GPC3 cells. The aim of this work was to validate the
inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling in GPC3 reexpressing cells and to
investigate whether differences in cell behavior are due to the
regulation of GPC3 on this pathway. By means of western blots (WB) we
established that LM3-GPC3 cells have 5-10 folds less phosphorylated
GSK3B. Using cytoplasmic protein extracts and WB we also determined that
GPC3 reexpressing cells present lower levels of cytoplasmic B-Catenin.
This was further studied by immunofluorescence (IF), where it was found
that while LM3-vector cells show positive signal for B-catenin mainly in
nucleus and cytoplasm, this staining is restricted to the membrane and
cytoplasm in LM3-GPC3 cells. In addition, a gene reporter assay employing
OT/OF plasmids confirmed the canonical Wnt pathway inhibition induced by
GPC3. To determine whether cell properties modulated by GPC3 are mediated
by the canonical Wnt pathway, we treated cells with its activator LiCl
(or NaCl as control). LiCl treatment increases 10-fold the
phosphorylation of GSK3B, as compared to LM3-GPC3 cells treated with
NaCl, and induces an enhance of about 50% of the canonical Wnt
transcriptional activity (gene reporter assay). We confirm that although
LiCl partially reverted senescence induced by GPC3 reexpression
(Senescent X-Gal positive cells: LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 85% vs. LM3-GPC3+LiCl=
65%, pGPC3 is a proteoglycan downregulated in breast cancer cells. We
previously demonstrated that GPC3 reexpression inhibits in vivo
metastatic potential of LM3 murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells. This
event was associated in vitro with a lower motility and an increased
aggregation, as well as with an enhanced senescence and apoptosis. We
have previous evidence indicating that the canonical Wnt pathway is
inhibited in LM3-GPC3 cells. The aim of this work was to validate the
inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling in GPC3 reexpressing cells and to
investigate whether differences in cell behavior are due to the
regulation of GPC3 on this pathway. By means of western blots (WB) we
established that LM3-GPC3 cells have 5-10 folds less phosphorylated
GSK3B. Using cytoplasmic protein extracts and WB we also determined that
GPC3 reexpressing cells present lower levels of cytoplasmic B-Catenin.
This was further studied by immunofluorescence (IF), where it was found
that while LM3-vector cells show positive signal for B-catenin mainly in
nucleus and cytoplasm, this staining is restricted to the membrane and
cytoplasm in LM3-GPC3 cells. In addition, a gene reporter assay employing
OT/OF plasmids confirmed the canonical Wnt pathway inhibition induced by
GPC3. To determine whether cell properties modulated by GPC3 are mediated
by the canonical Wnt pathway, we treated cells with its activator LiCl
(or NaCl as control). LiCl treatment increases 10-fold the
phosphorylation of GSK3B, as compared to LM3-GPC3 cells treated with
NaCl, and induces an enhance of about 50% of the canonical Wnt
transcriptional activity (gene reporter assay). We confirm that although
LiCl partially reverted senescence induced by GPC3 reexpression
(Senescent X-Gal positive cells: LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 85% vs. LM3-GPC3+LiCl=
65%, p<0.05), it had no effects on apoptosis. We established by wound
healing assays that LM3-GPC3 cells +LiCl recover their ability to migrate
(Coverage of the wound: LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 15% vs LM3-GPC3+LiCl= 75%, pGPC3
is a proteoglycan downregulated in breast cancer cells. We previously
demonstrated that GPC3 reexpression inhibits in vivo metastatic potential
of LM3 murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells. This event was associated in
vitro with a lower motility and an increased aggregation, as well as with
an enhanced senescence and apoptosis. We have previous evidence
indicating that the canonical Wnt pathway is inhibited in LM3-GPC3 cells.
The aim of this work was to validate the inhibition of canonical Wnt
signaling in GPC3 reexpressing cells and to investigate whether
differences in cell behavior are due to the regulation of GPC3 on this
pathway. By means of western blots (WB) we established that LM3-GPC3
cells have 5-10 folds less phosphorylated GSK3B. Using cytoplasmic
protein extracts and WB we also determined that GPC3 reexpressing cells
present lower levels of cytoplasmic B-Catenin. This was further studied
by immunofluorescence (IF), where it was found that while LM3-vector
cells show positive signal for B-catenin mainly in nucleus and cytoplasm,
this staining is restricted to the membrane and cytoplasm in LM3-GPC3
cells. In addition, a gene reporter assay employing OT/OF plasmids
confirmed the canonical Wnt pathway inhibition induced by GPC3. To
determine whether cell properties modulated by GPC3 are mediated by the
canonical Wnt pathway, we treated cells with its activator LiCl (or NaCl
as control). LiCl treatment increases 10-fold the phosphorylation of
GSK3B, as compared to LM3-GPC3 cells treated with NaCl, and induces an
enhance of about 50% of the canonical Wnt transcriptional activity (gene
reporter assay). We confirm that although LiCl partially reverted
senescence induced by GPC3 reexpression (Senescent X-Gal positive cells:
LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 85% vs. LM3-GPC3+LiCl= 65%, p<0.05), it had no effects on
apoptosis. We established by wound healing assays that LM3-GPC3 cells
+LiCl recover their ability to migrate (Coverage of the wound:
LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 15% vs LM3-GPC3+LiCl= 75%, p<0.05). Finally, LiCl
treatment reduced LM3-GPC3 homotypic cell aggregation, reaching similar
levels to LM3-vector clones (pGPC3 is a proteoglycan downregulated in
breast cancer cells. We previously demonstrated that GPC3 reexpression
inhibits in vivo metastatic potential of LM3 murine mammary
adenocarcinoma cells. This event was associated in vitro with a lower
motility and an increased aggregation, as well as with an enhanced
senescence and apoptosis. We have previous evidence indicating that the
canonical Wnt pathway is inhibited in LM3-GPC3 cells. The aim of this
work was to validate the inhibition of canonical Wnt signaling in GPC3
reexpressing cells and to investigate whether differences in cell
behavior are due to the regulation of GPC3 on this pathway. By means of
western blots (WB) we established that LM3-GPC3 cells have 5-10 folds
less phosphorylated GSK3B. Using cytoplasmic protein extracts and WB we
also determined that GPC3 reexpressing cells present lower levels of
cytoplasmic B-Catenin. This was further studied by immunofluorescence
(IF), where it was found that while LM3-vector cells show positive signal
for B-catenin mainly in nucleus and cytoplasm, this staining is
restricted to the membrane and cytoplasm in LM3-GPC3 cells. In addition,
a gene reporter assay employing OT/OF plasmids confirmed the canonical
Wnt pathway inhibition induced by GPC3. To determine whether cell
properties modulated by GPC3 are mediated by the canonical Wnt pathway,
we treated cells with its activator LiCl (or NaCl as control). LiCl
treatment increases 10-fold the phosphorylation of GSK3B, as compared to
LM3-GPC3 cells treated with NaCl, and induces an enhance of about 50% of
the canonical Wnt transcriptional activity (gene reporter assay). We
confirm that although LiCl partially reverted senescence induced by GPC3
reexpression (Senescent X-Gal positive cells: LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 85% vs.
LM3-GPC3+LiCl= 65%, p<0.05), it had no effects on apoptosis. We
established by wound healing assays that LM3-GPC3 cells +LiCl recover
their ability to migrate (Coverage of the wound: LM3-GPC3+NaCl= 15% vs
LM3-GPC3+LiCl= 75%, p<0.05). Finally, LiCl treatment reduced LM3-GPC3
homotypic cell aggregation, reaching similar levels to LM3-vector clones
(p<0.05). In summary, we confirm by a new methodological approach that
GPC3 inhibits the canonical Wnt signaling. Our results suggest that GPC3
would be modulating senescence, migration and cell aggregation of mammary
tumor cells through this pathway inhibition.

