Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nuclear translocalization of DICER correlates with high-risk
clinical/histologic features in melanoma


Melanoma is an aggressive malignancy with a relatively high metastatic
rate, responsible for almost 60% of lethal skin tumors. Despite numerous
efforts, there is still a need to better understand the molecular
pathways involved in malignant melanoma metastasis. In recent years,
there have been several studies highlighting the role of deregulated
microRNAs (miRNAs) expression in tumor progression and metastasis. DICER
is a central regulator of miRNA maturation and recently, has been shown
to be upregulated in cutaneous melanoma at both protein and mRNA level.
Arur et al. [1], reported DICER to be one of the ERK substrate, and this
activation results in its nuclear translocalization (personal
communication). However, it is unknown whether differential cellular
expression of DICER contributes to the pathogenesis of melanoma. In order
to test the hypothesis that aberrant nucleo-cytoplasmic expression of
DICER plays a significant role in melanoma progression, we have performed
semiquantitative immunohistochemical analysis of DICER in benign nevi
(n=17), primary melanomas without metastasis (n=38) and with metastasis
(n=27), and melanoma metastases (n=34 cases). A significant positive
correlation was observed between the percentage of positive cells
(p=0.003) and staining intensity (p=0.01) for nuclear DICER with
progression from benign nevi to primary melanoma. Interestingly,
primaries without metastasis had significantly higher levels of DICER
immunopositivity in tumor cells than primaries with metastasis (p=0.02).
Furthermore, metastatic melanomas showed significantly larger number of
cells having intense immunoreactivity for DICER protein in nucleus than
the primary melanomas (p=0.02). Significantly larger percentage of tumor
cells showing DICER expression in the nucleus were observed in those
lesions having ulceration (p=0.007) and vertical growth phase, which are
well-established markers of poor clinical outcomes in patients with
cutaneous melanoma. On the other hand, lesions showing no vascular
invasion expressed higher levels of DICER in the cytoplasm (pMelanoma is
an aggressive malignancy with a relatively high metastatic rate,
responsible for almost 60% of lethal skin tumors. Despite numerous
efforts, there is still a need to better understand the molecular
pathways involved in malignant melanoma metastasis. In recent years,
there have been several studies highlighting the role of deregulated
microRNAs (miRNAs) expression in tumor progression and metastasis. DICER
is a central regulator of miRNA maturation and recently, has been shown
to be upregulated in cutaneous melanoma at both protein and mRNA level.
Arur et al. [1], reported DICER to be one of the ERK substrate, and this
activation results in its nuclear translocalization (personal
communication). However, it is unknown whether differential cellular
expression of DICER contributes to the pathogenesis of melanoma. In order
to test the hypothesis that aberrant nucleo-cytoplasmic expression of
DICER plays a significant role in melanoma progression, we have performed
semiquantitative immunohistochemical analysis of DICER in benign nevi
(n=17), primary melanomas without metastasis (n=38) and with metastasis
(n=27), and melanoma metastases (n=34 cases). A significant positive
correlation was observed between the percentage of positive cells
(p=0.003) and staining intensity (p=0.01) for nuclear DICER with
progression from benign nevi to primary melanoma. Interestingly,
primaries without metastasis had significantly higher levels of DICER
immunopositivity in tumor cells than primaries with metastasis (p=0.02).
Furthermore, metastatic melanomas showed significantly larger number of
cells having intense immunoreactivity for DICER protein in nucleus than
the primary melanomas (p=0.02). Significantly larger percentage of tumor
cells showing DICER expression in the nucleus were observed in those
lesions having ulceration (p=0.007) and vertical growth phase, which are
well-established markers of poor clinical outcomes in patients with
cutaneous melanoma. On the other hand, lesions showing no vascular
invasion expressed higher levels of DICER in the cytoplasm (p<0.0001).
Disease-specific survival was significantly shorter in patients with
increased nuclear expression of DICER (p=0.04). Thus, differential
cellular localization of miRNA-regulating DICER protein correlates with
disease progression and high-risk clinical and histologic features in
melanoma. Therefore, it will be interesting to further delineate the role
of nuclear DICER in melanoma. References 1. Arur S, Ohmachi M, Nayak S,
et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar4;106(12):4776-81.

