Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The combination of the dual mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor AZD2014 and
paclitaxel in human ovarian cancer models


Background Weekly administration of paclitaxel is increasingly used to
treat patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. We have previously
reported that activation of the phosphatidylinositide-3-kinase pathway as
measured by p-p70S6K is associated with resistance to chemotherapy in
studies using ovarian cancer cells isolated from ascites (Carden et al,
101st AACR Annual Meeting, 2010; Abstract no. 788). We thus set out to
explore the combination of paclitaxel and an inhibitor of the mTORC1/2
complex, AZD2014, in ovarian cancer cell line models. Purpose We aimed to
study the effects of combining paclitaxel and the mTORC1/2 inhibitor
AZD2014 on growth inhibition in a panel of human ovarian cancer cell
lines. We also studied the effects of drug administration schedule on
growth inhibition. Methods A panel of 5 human ovarian cell lines was
studied: A2780, CH1, SKOV3, IGROV and OVCAR-3. The effects of paclitaxel
and AZD2014 administered concomitantly on cell growth were studied using
96hr sulforhodamine B assays. Combination indices (CI) were calculated
using median effect analysis and a one-sided t-test was performed to
calculate significant differences from a hypothetical value of 1
(indicating additivity). All experiments were carried out in triplicate.
Results The combination was additive when drugs were administered
concomitantly. In addition, in A2780 and SKOV3 cell lines exposed to
paclitaxel followed by AZD2014 the combination indices were 1.112 and
1.099 respectively. Conclusion AZD2014, a novel mTORC1/2 inhibitor, and
paclitaxel have additive growth inhibitory effects in a panel of ovarian
cancer cell lines when administered concomitantly. Further experiments to
understand the effects of this combination on apoptosis and signal
transduction are ongoing. The combination of AZD2014 and paclitaxel has
potential applications in the treatment of ovarian cancer.


