Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pyridylthiazole-based ureas as inhibitors of Rho-associated
protein kinases


Rho GTPase is a small G-protein which plays a critical role in signaling
pathways and controls cell growth and division. Rho-associated protein
kinase (known as ROCK or Rho kinase) is a Ser/Thr protein kinase
activated by GTP-bound Rho and phosphorylates target proteins involved in
various signal transduction pathways. Rho and the Rho-kinase signalling
pathways are implicated in cell morphology, motility, smooth muscle
contraction, formation of stress fibres, focal adhesion and cell
transformation. ROCKs have been subject to growing attention, having been
implicated in a range of therapeutic areas including cardiovascular
diseases, CNS disorders, and cancer. Further, the pharmacological
inhibition of ROCKs has been suggested as a promising strategy in the
prevention of cell invasion, a central event in the process of
metastasis. Potent ROCK inhibitors of a new class of
1-benzyl-3-(4-pyridylthiazol-2-yl)ureas have been identified. Remarkable
differences in activity were observed for ureas bearing a benzylic
stereogenic center. Derivatives with hydroxy, methoxy and amino groups at
the meta position of the phenyl ring give rise to the most potent
inhibitors (low nM). Substitutions at the para position result in
substantial loss of potency. Changes at the benzylic position are
tolerated resulting in significant potency in the case of methyl and
methylenehydroxy groups. X-ray crystallography was used to establish the
binding mode of this class of inhibitors and provides an explanation for
the observed differences of the enantiomer series. Potent inhibition of
ROCK in human lung cancer cells was shown by suppression of the
phosphorylation levels of the ROCK substrate MYPT-1. One of the series,
RKI-1447 inhibits migration, invasion and anchorage-independent tumor
growth of breast cancer cells and is discussed in an accompanying poster.

