Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DDB2 and XPC influence ATR and ATM recruitment and regulate DNA
damage response upon UV irradiation


DNA damage response (DDR) pathways control the activation of DNA repair
mechanisms, the activation and eventual release of cell cycle checkpoints
to prevent replication of damaged DNA, and apoptosis as a last resort.
These processes suggest the coordination of numerous proteins required to
preserve genomic integrity. ATR and ATM kinases are central to checkpoint
activation in response to DNA damage and replication stress. Activated
ATR and ATM phosphorylate several proteins involved in DNA repair and
cell cycle arrest. The nature of the signal, which activates ATR and ATM
in response to UV damage, is not clear. Here, we showed that DDB2 and
XPC, two early damage recognition factors, promote ATR and ATM
recruitment and phosphorylation. ATR and ATM localize to the damage site
and physically interact with XPC and DDB2. ATR and ATM recruitment and
their phosphorylation are affected in cells defective in DDB2 and XPC
function. In contrast, ATR- and ATM-deficiency do not regulate DDB2 and
XPC recruitment to the damage site. Consequently, phosphorylation of ATR
and ATM substrates Chk1, Chk2, H2AX, and BRCA1 was significantly reduced
or abrogated in mutated cells, indicating that defective DDB2 and XPC
function impair checkpoint signal transduction cascade in response to UV
damage. Furthermore, DDB2 and XPC also regulate BRCA1 and Rad51
recruitment to the damage site, implicating their role in homologous
recombination-mediated DNA repair pathway. Collectively, these data
showed that ATR and ATM are present in the preincision complex with XPC,
and influence DNA repair and checkpoint signaling pathways. In support of
this, we revealed that depletion of ATR and ATM influence NER efficiency.
These results are consistent with a model in which DDB2 and XPC
cross-talk with ATR and ATM during maintenance of genomic integrity.

