Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of NRF2 target genes in human cells: Aldoketo
reductases as a potential biomarker for NRF2 activity


The transcription factor NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2) plays a critical
role in cellular defense system by up-regulating multiple antioxidant
genes. Therefore, the identification of biomarker genes reflecting NRF2
activity would be important for the prediction of high-risk populations
to environmental stresses. In the current study, we have investigated
human genes of which expression is highly dependent on NRF2 to establish
biomarker genes for NRF2 activity. For this purpose, NRF2-specific
interfering RNA was stably introduced in normal human renal epithelial
cells (HK-2) and human bronchial epithelial cells (NL-20), and changes in
inducible genes were determined following treatment with 4 types of NRF2
activators: thiol-reacting sulforaphane, free-radical generating
tert-butylhydroquinone, Michael acceptor cinnamic aldehyde and
pro-oxidant hydrogen peroxide. These treatments showed relatively common
alterations in gene expression, and among these, the expression of
aldoketo reductase (AKR) 1C1 was highly inducible by all of these
treatments in an NRF2-depedent manner. The levels for AKRs were found to
be constitutively high in renal carcinoma A498 cells, of which NRF2
activity is elevated compared to normal renal epithelial HK-2 cells. In
addition, the expression of AKRs was greatly enhanced by NRF2 activator
treatments in human monocytes (U937), implying the potential utility of
AKRs as a peripheral NRF2 marker. In conclusion, our results indicate
that the expression of AKRs is highly dependent on NRF2 in human cells;
therefore AKRs can be an effective biomarker for predicting NRF2 activity
in human cells.

