Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of Ezh2 expression correlates with higher tumor
proliferation and grade in non-Hodgkin's B- and T-cell lymphoma


Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are involved in regulation of
hematopoiesis, which include two main members Ezh2 and Bmi-1. Reports on
their expression levels in different subtypes of malignant lymphoma and
role in lymphomagensis and tumor progression are rather limited. To
address this issue, we analyzed a total of 197 patient samples including
10 samples of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), 109 of B-cell lymphoma (BCL) and 78
of T-cell lymphoma (TCL) by immunohistochemistry. The results showed
overall expression in HL, BCL and TCL to be 90%, 56.9% and 84.6% for Ezh2
and 90%, 82.5% and 84.6% for Bmi-1 respectively. Among BCL, highest Ezh2
positivity was seen in Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) followed by high-grade
follicular lymphoma (FL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). In
TCL, Ezh2 expression was observed in all subtypes and seemed more
homogenous. Difference in its expression between aggressive and indolent
subtypes of BCL was statistically significant (p= 0.0000.010). On the
other hand, Bmi-1 was rather more consistently expressed in both BCL and
TCL up to 100% in 7 subtypes. Difference in its expression between
aggressive and indolent subtypes was statistically insignificant. Ki67
showed strong positive correlation with Ezh2 in BCL (Correlation
coefficient (Co) =0.983, p= 0.000) and moderate correlation in TCL (Co=0
.629, p= 0.000). This correlation could not be detected in case of Bmi1.
These data suggest that out of the two Polycomb group (PcG) proteins,
only Ezh2 correlates with tumor proliferation and signals a more
aggressive nature.

