Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitomycin C potentiates TRAIL-induced apoptosis through
p53-independent upregulation of death receptors: Evidence for the role of
C-Jun N-terminal kinase activation


Discovery of the molecular targets of chemotherapeutic medicines and
their chemical footprints can validate and improve the use of such
medicines. In the present study, we investigated the effect of mitomycin
C (MMC), a well-known chemotherapeutic agent on cancer cell apoptosis
induced by TRAIL. We found that MMC not only potentiated TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in HCT116 (p53-/-) colon cancer cells but also sensitized
TRAIL-resistant colon cancer cells HT-29 to the pro-apoptotic cytokine.
MMC also improved the pro-apoptotic effects of two TRAIL receptor
agonists, the antibodies mapatumumab and lexatumumab. At a mechanistic
level, MMC downregulated cell survival proteins including Bcl2, Mcl-1 and
Bcl-XL, upregulated cell pro-apoptotic proteins including Bax and Bim,
and induced the cell surface expression of TRAIL death receptors DR4 and
DR5. Gene silencing of DR5 by short hairpin RNA reduced the apoptosis
induced by combination treatment of MMC and TRAIL. Induction of DR4 and
DR5 was independent of p53, Bax and Bim, but was dependent on c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) as JNK pharmacologic inhibition and the JNK siRNA
abolished the induction of the TRAIL receptors by MMC. The results
provide insights into strategies for the development of novel
combinatorial cancer therapy combinations that may be further tested in
the clinic.

