Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Jagged 2 signalling is active in Langerhans cell histiocytosis and
confers pathognomonic features on dendritic cells


Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is an enigmatic disease defined by
the accumulation of eponymous Langerhans-cell-like cells of unknown
origin. It is a rare disease that may affect any age group, although its
most severe clinical course affects predominantly young children. The
clinical manifestations range from single lesions that can resolve
spontaneously to systemic disease that requires intensive chemotherapy
and bone marrow transplantation. Here we demonstrate that LCH cells
exhibit a unique transcription profile that clearly separates them from
indigenous dendritic cells (DCs), i.e. Langerhans cells, myeloid
dendritic cells, and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, indicating a distinct
DC entity that occurs under pathologic conditions. Molecular analysis
revealed that LCH cells selectively expressed NOTCH ligand Jagged 2
(JAG2) and were the only DCs that coexpressed both NOTCH ligand and
receptor. In line, activated NOTCH was detected in LCH but not control
biopsies. Furthermore, we show that JAG2 signalling induces key LCH
markers CD1a and Langerin on MoDCs, suggesting a role of NOTCH signalling
in LCH ontogenesis. Interestingly, JAG2 also strongly induced
matrix-metalloproteinase (MMP) 1 in MoDCs, which is highly expressed in
LCH lesions and mediates massive tissue destruction and remodelling. The
MMP induction by JAG2 was selective for DCs and not recapitulated in
monocytes. Together these findings strongly suggest that Jagged2 mediated
NOTCH activation confers phenotypic and functional aspects of LCH to DCs.
Thus, interference with NOTCH signalling may prove an attractive target
to combat this disease.

