Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Administration of omega-3 fatty acids and raloxifene individually
and in combination to women at high risk of breast cancer: Interim
feasibility data and biomarker analysis from a randomized clinical trial


The antiestrogen, Raloxifene (Ral), is an effective breast cancer
chemopreventive agent. Literature data appears to support a protective
role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3FA) against mammary carcinogenesis. On
the basis of their mechanisms of action, this trial tests for the first
time the hypothesis that a combination of antiestrogens and n-3FA may be
superior in reducing select biomarkers of breast cancer risk in women.
This combination with n-3FA may also allow a lower dose of Ral to be
effective with less adverse events. Healthy postmenopausal women at
increased risk for breast cancer (based on breast density 25%) were
randomized into five groups: 1) No intervention; 2) Ral 60 mg; 3) Ral 30
mg; 4) n-3FA (Lovaza) 4 gm; and 5) Lovaza 4 gm + Ral 30 mg for two years.
While the primary endpoint of our clinical trial is a reduction in breast
density, an established risk factor for breast cancer, we are also
examining the effects of the individual and combined administration of
Ral and n-3FA on several biomarkers thought to be potentially involved in
mammary carcinogenesis. We report preliminary data on the first 46 women
who complete one year of the study for feasibility, compliance, and
changes in secondary endpoints related to IGF-I signaling (IGF-1,
IGF-BP3), estrogen metabolism (2OHE1, 16OH1), oxidative stress (8-OH-dG,
GSH, 8-isoprostane) and inflammation (IL-6, CRP). Anthropometric
measurements (including weight, BMI and waist to hip ratio) were followed
at each visit. Dietary and physical activity data were monitored with
food frequency and physical activity questionnaires. Plasma fatty acid
analysis in the Lovaza groups were compared to the control group to
ensure compliance; lipid analysis was also performed. All interventions
were well tolerated with excellent compliance (96 1% overall) by pill
count and also supported by the expected rise at twelve months in both
serum n-3FA and n-3FA/n-6FA ratio (48% and 40%, respectively) in both
groups receiving Lovaza (pThe antiestrogen, Raloxifene (Ral), is an
effective breast cancer chemopreventive agent. Literature data appears to
support a protective role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3FA) against mammary
carcinogenesis. On the basis of their mechanisms of action, this trial
tests for the first time the hypothesis that a combination of
antiestrogens and n-3FA may be superior in reducing select biomarkers of
breast cancer risk in women. This combination with n-3FA may also allow a
lower dose of Ral to be effective with less adverse events. Healthy
postmenopausal women at increased risk for breast cancer (based on breast
density 25%) were randomized into five groups: 1) No intervention; 2) Ral
60 mg; 3) Ral 30 mg; 4) n-3FA (Lovaza) 4 gm; and 5) Lovaza 4 gm + Ral 30
mg for two years. While the primary endpoint of our clinical trial is a
reduction in breast density, an established risk factor for breast
cancer, we are also examining the effects of the individual and combined
administration of Ral and n-3FA on several biomarkers thought to be
potentially involved in mammary carcinogenesis. We report preliminary
data on the first 46 women who complete one year of the study for
feasibility, compliance, and changes in secondary endpoints related to
IGF-I signaling (IGF-1, IGF-BP3), estrogen metabolism (2OHE1, 16OH1),
oxidative stress (8-OH-dG, GSH, 8-isoprostane) and inflammation (IL-6,
CRP). Anthropometric measurements (including weight, BMI and waist to hip
ratio) were followed at each visit. Dietary and physical activity data
were monitored with food frequency and physical activity questionnaires.
Plasma fatty acid analysis in the Lovaza groups were compared to the
control group to ensure compliance; lipid analysis was also performed.
All interventions were well tolerated with excellent compliance (96 1%
overall) by pill count and also supported by the expected rise at twelve
months in both serum n-3FA and n-3FA/n-6FA ratio (48% and 40%,
respectively) in both groups receiving Lovaza (p<0.05). Despite normal
lipid values at baseline, Lovaza decreased serum triglycerides (15% in
group 4 and 22% in group 5; pThe antiestrogen, Raloxifene (Ral), is an
effective breast cancer chemopreventive agent. Literature data appears to
support a protective role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3FA) against mammary
carcinogenesis. On the basis of their mechanisms of action, this trial
tests for the first time the hypothesis that a combination of
antiestrogens and n-3FA may be superior in reducing select biomarkers of
breast cancer risk in women. This combination with n-3FA may also allow a
lower dose of Ral to be effective with less adverse events. Healthy
postmenopausal women at increased risk for breast cancer (based on breast
density 25%) were randomized into five groups: 1) No intervention; 2) Ral
60 mg; 3) Ral 30 mg; 4) n-3FA (Lovaza) 4 gm; and 5) Lovaza 4 gm + Ral 30
mg for two years. While the primary endpoint of our clinical trial is a
reduction in breast density, an established risk factor for breast
cancer, we are also examining the effects of the individual and combined
administration of Ral and n-3FA on several biomarkers thought to be
potentially involved in mammary carcinogenesis. We report preliminary
data on the first 46 women who complete one year of the study for
feasibility, compliance, and changes in secondary endpoints related to
IGF-I signaling (IGF-1, IGF-BP3), estrogen metabolism (2OHE1, 16OH1),
oxidative stress (8-OH-dG, GSH, 8-isoprostane) and inflammation (IL-6,
CRP). Anthropometric measurements (including weight, BMI and waist to hip
ratio) were followed at each visit. Dietary and physical activity data
were monitored with food frequency and physical activity questionnaires.
Plasma fatty acid analysis in the Lovaza groups were compared to the
control group to ensure compliance; lipid analysis was also performed.
All interventions were well tolerated with excellent compliance (96 1%
overall) by pill count and also supported by the expected rise at twelve
months in both serum n-3FA and n-3FA/n-6FA ratio (48% and 40%,
respectively) in both groups receiving Lovaza (p<0.05). Despite normal
lipid values at baseline, Lovaza decreased serum triglycerides (15% in
group 4 and 22% in group 5; p<0.05) and increased HDL cholesterol (7% in
group 4 and 14% in group 5; pThe antiestrogen, Raloxifene (Ral), is an
effective breast cancer chemopreventive agent. Literature data appears to
support a protective role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3FA) against mammary
carcinogenesis. On the basis of their mechanisms of action, this trial
tests for the first time the hypothesis that a combination of
antiestrogens and n-3FA may be superior in reducing select biomarkers of
breast cancer risk in women. This combination with n-3FA may also allow a
lower dose of Ral to be effective with less adverse events. Healthy
postmenopausal women at increased risk for breast cancer (based on breast
density 25%) were randomized into five groups: 1) No intervention; 2) Ral
60 mg; 3) Ral 30 mg; 4) n-3FA (Lovaza) 4 gm; and 5) Lovaza 4 gm + Ral 30
mg for two years. While the primary endpoint of our clinical trial is a
reduction in breast density, an established risk factor for breast
cancer, we are also examining the effects of the individual and combined
administration of Ral and n-3FA on several biomarkers thought to be
potentially involved in mammary carcinogenesis. We report preliminary
data on the first 46 women who complete one year of the study for
feasibility, compliance, and changes in secondary endpoints related to
IGF-I signaling (IGF-1, IGF-BP3), estrogen metabolism (2OHE1, 16OH1),
oxidative stress (8-OH-dG, GSH, 8-isoprostane) and inflammation (IL-6,
CRP). Anthropometric measurements (including weight, BMI and waist to hip
ratio) were followed at each visit. Dietary and physical activity data
were monitored with food frequency and physical activity questionnaires.
Plasma fatty acid analysis in the Lovaza groups were compared to the
control group to ensure compliance; lipid analysis was also performed.
All interventions were well tolerated with excellent compliance (96 1%
overall) by pill count and also supported by the expected rise at twelve
months in both serum n-3FA and n-3FA/n-6FA ratio (48% and 40%,
respectively) in both groups receiving Lovaza (p<0.05). Despite normal
lipid values at baseline, Lovaza decreased serum triglycerides (15% in
group 4 and 22% in group 5; p<0.05) and increased HDL cholesterol (7% in
group 4 and 14% in group 5; p<0.05) compared to control. Ral reduced
serum IGF-1 (6.5% in group 3 and 26% in group 2; pThe antiestrogen,
Raloxifene (Ral), is an effective breast cancer chemopreventive agent.
Literature data appears to support a protective role of omega-3 fatty
acids (n-3FA) against mammary carcinogenesis. On the basis of their
mechanisms of action, this trial tests for the first time the hypothesis
that a combination of antiestrogens and n-3FA may be superior in reducing
select biomarkers of breast cancer risk in women. This combination with
n-3FA may also allow a lower dose of Ral to be effective with less
adverse events. Healthy postmenopausal women at increased risk for breast
cancer (based on breast density 25%) were randomized into five groups: 1)
No intervention; 2) Ral 60 mg; 3) Ral 30 mg; 4) n-3FA (Lovaza) 4 gm; and
5) Lovaza 4 gm + Ral 30 mg for two years. While the primary endpoint of
our clinical trial is a reduction in breast density, an established risk
factor for breast cancer, we are also examining the effects of the
individual and combined administration of Ral and n-3FA on several
biomarkers thought to be potentially involved in mammary carcinogenesis.
We report preliminary data on the first 46 women who complete one year of
the study for feasibility, compliance, and changes in secondary endpoints
related to IGF-I signaling (IGF-1, IGF-BP3), estrogen metabolism (2OHE1,
16OH1), oxidative stress (8-OH-dG, GSH, 8-isoprostane) and inflammation
(IL-6, CRP). Anthropometric measurements (including weight, BMI and waist
to hip ratio) were followed at each visit. Dietary and physical activity
data were monitored with food frequency and physical activity
questionnaires. Plasma fatty acid analysis in the Lovaza groups were
compared to the control group to ensure compliance; lipid analysis was
also performed. All interventions were well tolerated with excellent
compliance (96 1% overall) by pill count and also supported by the
expected rise at twelve months in both serum n-3FA and n-3FA/n-6FA ratio
(48% and 40%, respectively) in both groups receiving Lovaza (p<0.05).
Despite normal lipid values at baseline, Lovaza decreased serum
triglycerides (15% in group 4 and 22% in group 5; p<0.05) and increased
HDL cholesterol (7% in group 4 and 14% in group 5; p<0.05) compared to
control. Ral reduced serum IGF-1 (6.5% in group 3 and 26% in group 2;
p<0.05) and the ratio of IGF-1/IGF-BP3 (14% in group 3, 23% in group 2;
pThe antiestrogen, Raloxifene (Ral), is an effective breast cancer
chemopreventive agent. Literature data appears to support a protective
role of omega-3 fatty acids (n-3FA) against mammary carcinogenesis. On
the basis of their mechanisms of action, this trial tests for the first
time the hypothesis that a combination of antiestrogens and n-3FA may be
superior in reducing select biomarkers of breast cancer risk in women.
This combination with n-3FA may also allow a lower dose of Ral to be
effective with less adverse events. Healthy postmenopausal women at
increased risk for breast cancer (based on breast density 25%) were
randomized into five groups: 1) No intervention; 2) Ral 60 mg; 3) Ral 30
mg; 4) n-3FA (Lovaza) 4 gm; and 5) Lovaza 4 gm + Ral 30 mg for two years.
While the primary endpoint of our clinical trial is a reduction in breast
density, an established risk factor for breast cancer, we are also
examining the effects of the individual and combined administration of
Ral and n-3FA on several biomarkers thought to be potentially involved in
mammary carcinogenesis. We report preliminary data on the first 46 women
who complete one year of the study for feasibility, compliance, and
changes in secondary endpoints related to IGF-I signaling (IGF-1,
IGF-BP3), estrogen metabolism (2OHE1, 16OH1), oxidative stress (8-OH-dG,
GSH, 8-isoprostane) and inflammation (IL-6, CRP). Anthropometric
measurements (including weight, BMI and waist to hip ratio) were followed
at each visit. Dietary and physical activity data were monitored with
food frequency and physical activity questionnaires. Plasma fatty acid
analysis in the Lovaza groups were compared to the control group to
ensure compliance; lipid analysis was also performed. All interventions
were well tolerated with excellent compliance (96 1% overall) by pill
count and also supported by the expected rise at twelve months in both
serum n-3FA and n-3FA/n-6FA ratio (48% and 40%, respectively) in both
groups receiving Lovaza (p<0.05). Despite normal lipid values at
baseline, Lovaza decreased serum triglycerides (15% in group 4 and 22% in
group 5; p<0.05) and increased HDL cholesterol (7% in group 4 and 14% in
group 5; p<0.05) compared to control. Ral reduced serum IGF-1 (6.5% in
group 3 and 26% in group 2; p<0.05) and the ratio of IGF-1/IGF-BP3 (14%
in group 3, 23% in group 2; p<0.05) compared to control in a
dose-dependent fashion. Lovaza had no effect on IGF-1 or IGF-BP3. None of
the other biomarkers were affected by our treatment. These results
suggest that the combination of n-3 FA and Ral is a feasible strategy
that may be recommended in future breast cancer chemoprevention trials.
(Work supported by Susan G. Komen for the Cure Grant no. KG081632)

