Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Healthy and cancerous serum RNA profiling by the novel RNA
extraction reagent and highly sensitive DNA chip


Proteins, metabolites and DNA are already known as components of serum or
plasma biomarkers, however RNA has not been a strong biomarker candidate
because of its instability. Exosomes that are small vesicles secreted by
various cells are recently reported to play important roles in
intercellular communications by transferring proteins, DNA and also RNA
to distant cells through circulatory system. Surprisingly, the exosomal
RNA in serum preserves its integrity and thus holds a potential to be a
new blood biomarkers. In this report, we show the exhaustive analysis of
miRNA and mRNA in serum by DNA chip for the highly purified RNA extracted
with a novel reagent. Serum contains various types of nucleic acids,
mainly small RNA, mRNA, and also short DNA fragment. We suppose that the
contamination of DNA to the extracted RNA often causes a discrepancy
between the DNA chip analysis and qRT-PCR validation. The novel reagent
was able to extract RNA from serum without contamination of short DNA
fragment, resulting in better RNA quantification and decreasing
DNA-related noise outputs. Using this novel RNA extraction reagent and
the highly sensitive DNA chip 3D-Gene, we analyzed healthy and cancerous
serum miRNA profiles. Over 500 miRNAs are detected in healthy and
cancerous sera reproducibly, and some miRNAs were detected specifically
in cancerous sera, such as breast, gastric, cervix cancer. In addition,
we detected over 19,000 mRNAs from amplified RNA which were similarly
extracted from healthy serum and detected by the DNA chip. This indicates
that not only serum miRNA but also serum mRNA have a potential capability
to be a biomarker.

