Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transcriptional profiling in clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(ccRCC). Focus on Czech Republic


Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a poorly documented cancer, although time
trends and geographical variations in incidence are intriguing. In
addition to the frequent VHL mutation, recent studies have identified
novel somatic alterations involved in RCC pathogenesis. Microarray and
next generation sequencing efforts have been mostly performed on North
American and Western European populations, while the highest incidence
rates are found in Central/Eastern Europe. Our project has focused on the
delineation of gene expression patterns specific to the Czech Republic
population, where the incidence rates are the highest in the world. As a
feasibility study, we performed whole genome expression profiling on 12
pairs of fresh frozen conventional clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tumors and
adjacent non-tumor renal tissue using the Illumina HumanHT-12 v4
Expression BeadChips. To identify genes differentially expressed in ccRCC
tumor versus normal tissue samples, the Significance Analysis of
Microarrays (SAM) was used. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) software
was used for analysis of differentially expressed BioCarta categories and
pathways associated with ccRCC pathogenesis. Following initial analyses a
signature composed of 994 downregulated and 872 upregulated genes was
found in ccRCC compared with normal tissue (FDRRenal cell carcinoma (RCC)
is a poorly documented cancer, although time trends and geographical
variations in incidence are intriguing. In addition to the frequent VHL
mutation, recent studies have identified novel somatic alterations
involved in RCC pathogenesis. Microarray and next generation sequencing
efforts have been mostly performed on North American and Western European
populations, while the highest incidence rates are found in
Central/Eastern Europe. Our project has focused on the delineation of
gene expression patterns specific to the Czech Republic population, where
the incidence rates are the highest in the world. As a feasibility study,
we performed whole genome expression profiling on 12 pairs of fresh
frozen conventional clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tumors and adjacent non-tumor
renal tissue using the Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 Expression BeadChips. To
identify genes differentially expressed in ccRCC tumor versus normal
tissue samples, the Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) was used.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) software was used for analysis of
differentially expressed BioCarta categories and pathways associated with
ccRCC pathogenesis. Following initial analyses a signature composed of
994 downregulated and 872 upregulated genes was found in ccRCC compared
with normal tissue (FDR<0.0001). Interestingly, approximately 25% of
significantly downregulated genes were involved in cellular transport and
homeostasis, these included aquaporins and solute carrier family of genes
responsible for electrolyte, glucose, amino acid and fatty acid
transport. In addition, several major proteins involved in renal
development were found to be downregulated. The genes upregulated in
ccRCC were involved in immune response, such as T-cell receptor (TCR),
inflammatory and Toll-like receptor signaling as well as cell cycle
regulation and NF-B activation. Consistently with the results as outlined
above, GSEA analysis demonstrated TCR, IL12, IL10, CTLA4, ATM, NFKB, VEGF
pathway enrichment in the ccRCC as compared to normal kidney tissue
(FDRRenal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a poorly documented cancer, although
time trends and geographical variations in incidence are intriguing. In
addition to the frequent VHL mutation, recent studies have identified
novel somatic alterations involved in RCC pathogenesis. Microarray and
next generation sequencing efforts have been mostly performed on North
American and Western European populations, while the highest incidence
rates are found in Central/Eastern Europe. Our project has focused on the
delineation of gene expression patterns specific to the Czech Republic
population, where the incidence rates are the highest in the world. As a
feasibility study, we performed whole genome expression profiling on 12
pairs of fresh frozen conventional clear cell RCC (ccRCC) tumors and
adjacent non-tumor renal tissue using the Illumina HumanHT-12 v4
Expression BeadChips. To identify genes differentially expressed in ccRCC
tumor versus normal tissue samples, the Significance Analysis of
Microarrays (SAM) was used. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) software
was used for analysis of differentially expressed BioCarta categories and
pathways associated with ccRCC pathogenesis. Following initial analyses a
signature composed of 994 downregulated and 872 upregulated genes was
found in ccRCC compared with normal tissue (FDR<0.0001). Interestingly,
approximately 25% of significantly downregulated genes were involved in
cellular transport and homeostasis, these included aquaporins and solute
carrier family of genes responsible for electrolyte, glucose, amino acid
and fatty acid transport. In addition, several major proteins involved in
renal development were found to be downregulated. The genes upregulated
in ccRCC were involved in immune response, such as T-cell receptor (TCR),
inflammatory and Toll-like receptor signaling as well as cell cycle
regulation and NF-B activation. Consistently with the results as outlined
above, GSEA analysis demonstrated TCR, IL12, IL10, CTLA4, ATM, NFKB, VEGF
pathway enrichment in the ccRCC as compared to normal kidney tissue
(FDR<0.2). Molecular analysis of ccRCC, facilitated by the comparison
with normal renal tissue, highlighted the involvement of biological
pathways not previously described in kidney carcinogenesis. Analysis of a
larger set of 100 tumor/normal pairs from Czech ccRCC patients is
underway. Further comparison of the identified gene expression signature
characteristic for Czech ccRCC patients with expression profiles of other
European and American series will identify possible novel genes and
pathways involved in ccRCC pathogenesis.

