Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Raster-image-correlation spectroscopy of paxillin-GFP-expressing
breast cancer cell in vitro and in vivo


Raster-image-correlation spectroscopy (RICS) is a noninvasive technique
to detect and quantify events in the living cell, including
concentrations of molecules and their diffusion coefficients. Any cell
containing a fluorophore that can be imaged with a laser scanning
microscope can be analyzed with RICS. We obtained RICS images with an
Olympus FluoView FV1000 confocal microscope using Olympus FluoView
software to acquire data and SimFCS software to perform RICS analysis.
Paxillin is involved in the assembly of focal adhesions, which was linked
to green fluorescent protein (GFP) for the current study. In this study,
we describe RICS of paxillin-GFP expression in breast cancer cells
(MDA-MB-231) in vitro and in vivo. Slow-moving membrane-bound paxillin
proteins were measured in live breast cancer cells in vitro.
Paxillin-GFP-expressing breast cancer cells (1106) were injected in the
epigastric cranials vein of the nude mouse. Paxillin-GFP-expressing
breast cancer cells became attached to the inner vessel wall within 3
hours after injection. Rapidly-moving cytosolic paxillin-GFP molecules
were imaged with RICS. With the ability to measure the molecular dynamics
of paxillin in cancer cells in vitro and in vivo by RICS, we are now
capable of studying the role of both slow-moving paxillin in the cell
membrane and rapidly-moving cytosolic paxillin in cancer-cell behavior.

