Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased mortality in patients with pituitary adenomas


Purpose: To evaluate mortality rate and causes of death in patients with
pituitary adenomas. Material & Methods: Five hundred seventy-two patients
with pituitary adenomas were identified in the Regional Cancer Registry
in Ume in northern Sweden between 1958 and 2007. Four hundred eighty-nine
patients with a follow-up time 12 months from diagnosis of pituitary
adenoma were included. Patients were followed until time of death, or the
end of year 2007 through connection with the Swedish Population Register.
During follow-up 228 patients (47 %) died. The primary causes of death
were identified from the Swedish National Board of Health and Welfare's
Cause of Death Register. The person-years at risk were calculated from
the time of diagnosis of the pituitary adenoma until time of death.
Standard mortality ratios (SMR) between observed and expected causes of
death were calculated. Results: Two hundred twenty-eight patients (138
men, 90 women) died during follow-up. The expected number of deaths were
103, SMR = 2.22 (CI 1.94-2.52). Increased mortality was seen both in men,
SMR = 1.98 (CI 1.66-2.34) and women, SMR = 2.71 (CI 2.18-3.33). The
median age of death was 77 years (range, 14-94). The median follow-up was
13 years (range, 1-47), giving a total of 3 439 person-years. One hundred
forty-eight patients had non-secreting adenomas, 41 patients had
hormonally secreting adenomas and in 39 patients the type of adenoma was
unknown. One hundred sixty-eight patients had their pituitary adenoma
surgically resected, 158 patients received radiotherapy to the pituitary
and 2 patients received neither surgery or radiotherapy. In 28 patients
the treatment was unknown. One hundred twenty-two patients died in
disorders of the circulatory system. The expected number of patients was
54, SMR = 2.26 (CI 1.88-2.70). Sixteen patients died in disorders of the
respiratory system, 7 expected, SMR = 2.20 (CI 1.26-3.57). Seven patients
died in disorders of the nervous system, 1 expected, SMR = 4.85 (CI
1.94-10.00). Six patients died in infectious diseases, 1 expected, SMR =
6.98 (CI 2.55-15.20). No increased mortality rate was seen in 28 patients
who died from malignant tumours. The expected number was 24, SMR = 1.17
(CI 0.78-1.70). An increased mortality rate in cerebrovascular disorders
was seen in both men and women who received radiotherapy to the
pituitary. Twenty-nine patients (15 men and 14 women) who received
radiotherapy died of cerebrovascular disorders. The expected number of
patients was 6, SMR = 4,56 (CI 3.05-6.55). In patients who did not
receive radiotherapy, the cerebrovascular mortality did not differ from
the general population. Conclusions: Patients with pituitary adenomas had
a two-fold increased mortality rate, compared to the general population.
Patients who received radiotherapy to the pituitary had an increased
mortality rate in cerebrovascular disorders compared to the general
population and compared to patients who did not receive radiotherapy.

