Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Angiogenic switch: novel therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer


Background: Despite research efforts directed at early detection and
treatment of pancreatic cancer (PC), the outlook for patients affected by
this disease remains dismal. Angiogenesis is required for progression and
metastasis of PC. An angiogenic switch, a shift of balance between
pro-angiogenic and angiogenic state is a hallmark of cancer progression.
The objective of this study was to investigate whether increased
angiogenesis could be a predictor of PC occurrence and progression.
Combinations of cytotoxic drugs led to increased activity and minimized
resistance compared to single agents in tumor therapy. Thus, we
investigated whether antiangiogenic treatment could be improved by
combinations targeting different pathways using a combination of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors sorafenib and erlotinib. Methods: We performed
immunoblotting, flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry
and quantification of sub-cellular protein expression to quantitatively
assesses protein expression of angiogenesis associated markers such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF receptor 1 (FLT-1), VEGF
receptor 2 (FLK-1), VEGF receptor 3 (R3), neuropilin (NP-1), epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 2 and 9
during development and progression of PC and examined their correlations
with chosen clinico-pathological parameters. Tissues, tumor lysates and
sera from 1) a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA) and 2) from a cohort of 80 human PC patients at various stages of
PC and suitably matched control. Two human PC cell lines Panc-1 and
MiaPaca-2 were used to study drug effects. Statistical analyses were
performed using SAS version 9.2. Results: Disease stage was highly
prognostic for outcome. A significant association was found between high
expressions of MMP-2 (p Background: Despite research efforts directed at
early detection and treatment of pancreatic cancer (PC), the outlook for
patients affected by this disease remains dismal. Angiogenesis is
required for progression and metastasis of PC. An angiogenic switch, a
shift of balance between pro-angiogenic and angiogenic state is a
hallmark of cancer progression. The objective of this study was to
investigate whether increased angiogenesis could be a predictor of PC
occurrence and progression. Combinations of cytotoxic drugs led to
increased activity and minimized resistance compared to single agents in
tumor therapy. Thus, we investigated whether antiangiogenic treatment
could be improved by combinations targeting different pathways using a
combination of tyrosine kinase inhibitors sorafenib and erlotinib.
Methods: We performed immunoblotting, flow cytometry,
immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry and quantification of
sub-cellular protein expression to quantitatively assesses protein
expression of angiogenesis associated markers such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF receptor 1 (FLT-1), VEGF receptor
2 (FLK-1), VEGF receptor 3 (R3), neuropilin (NP-1), epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 2 and 9 during
development and progression of PC and examined their correlations with
chosen clinico-pathological parameters. Tissues, tumor lysates and sera
from 1) a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA) and 2) from a cohort of 80 human PC patients at various stages of
PC and suitably matched control. Two human PC cell lines Panc-1 and
MiaPaca-2 were used to study drug effects. Statistical analyses were
performed using SAS version 9.2. Results: Disease stage was highly
prognostic for outcome. A significant association was found between high
expressions of MMP-2 (p < 0.04) and NP-1 (p Background: Despite research
efforts directed at early detection and treatment of pancreatic cancer
(PC), the outlook for patients affected by this disease remains dismal.
Angiogenesis is required for progression and metastasis of PC. An
angiogenic switch, a shift of balance between pro-angiogenic and
angiogenic state is a hallmark of cancer progression. The objective of
this study was to investigate whether increased angiogenesis could be a
predictor of PC occurrence and progression. Combinations of cytotoxic
drugs led to increased activity and minimized resistance compared to
single agents in tumor therapy. Thus, we investigated whether
antiangiogenic treatment could be improved by combinations targeting
different pathways using a combination of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
sorafenib and erlotinib. Methods: We performed immunoblotting, flow
cytometry, immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry and quantification
of sub-cellular protein expression to quantitatively assesses protein
expression of angiogenesis associated markers such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF receptor 1 (FLT-1), VEGF receptor
2 (FLK-1), VEGF receptor 3 (R3), neuropilin (NP-1), epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 2 and 9 during
development and progression of PC and examined their correlations with
chosen clinico-pathological parameters. Tissues, tumor lysates and sera
from 1) a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA) and 2) from a cohort of 80 human PC patients at various stages of
PC and suitably matched control. Two human PC cell lines Panc-1 and
MiaPaca-2 were used to study drug effects. Statistical analyses were
performed using SAS version 9.2. Results: Disease stage was highly
prognostic for outcome. A significant association was found between high
expressions of MMP-2 (p < 0.04) and NP-1 (p < 0.0001) at earlier stage in
tissue and serum both. VEGFR-3 showed higher expression in primary PC.
EGFR was significantly higher in patients with distant metastases
compared to non distant metastases and primary cancer (p Background:
Despite research efforts directed at early detection and treatment of
pancreatic cancer (PC), the outlook for patients affected by this disease
remains dismal. Angiogenesis is required for progression and metastasis
of PC. An angiogenic switch, a shift of balance between pro-angiogenic
and angiogenic state is a hallmark of cancer progression. The objective
of this study was to investigate whether increased angiogenesis could be
a predictor of PC occurrence and progression. Combinations of cytotoxic
drugs led to increased activity and minimized resistance compared to
single agents in tumor therapy. Thus, we investigated whether
antiangiogenic treatment could be improved by combinations targeting
different pathways using a combination of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
sorafenib and erlotinib. Methods: We performed immunoblotting, flow
cytometry, immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry and quantification
of sub-cellular protein expression to quantitatively assesses protein
expression of angiogenesis associated markers such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF receptor 1 (FLT-1), VEGF receptor
2 (FLK-1), VEGF receptor 3 (R3), neuropilin (NP-1), epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 2 and 9 during
development and progression of PC and examined their correlations with
chosen clinico-pathological parameters. Tissues, tumor lysates and sera
from 1) a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA) and 2) from a cohort of 80 human PC patients at various stages of
PC and suitably matched control. Two human PC cell lines Panc-1 and
MiaPaca-2 were used to study drug effects. Statistical analyses were
performed using SAS version 9.2. Results: Disease stage was highly
prognostic for outcome. A significant association was found between high
expressions of MMP-2 (p < 0.04) and NP-1 (p < 0.0001) at earlier stage in
tissue and serum both. VEGFR-3 showed higher expression in primary PC.
EGFR was significantly higher in patients with distant metastases
compared to non distant metastases and primary cancer (p < 0.0001).
Sorafenib reduced cell viability in a dose and time-dependent manner,
induced apoptosis and reduced expression of VEGF, FLK-1, c-raf and NP-1.
The combination treatment showed synergistic effects on EGFR.
Conclusions: Significantly higher expression of MMP-2 at earlier stage VS
normal in tissue and serum, suggests that tumor expression of MMP2 is a
marker of highly aggressive disease. However, higher expression of
VEGF-R3 was seen on primary lesions, potentially implicating this
receptor in initiation of lymphatic tumor spread. Combination therapies
targeting multiple angiogenic pathways have synergistic activity and
could help to avoid resistance to single inhibitors in tumor treatment.
Further studies of the functional and clinical importance of these
findings are warranted.

