Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of proteasome deubiquitinating activity as a novel
cancer therapy


Tumor cells display enhanced sensitivity to disruptions in the
ubiquitin-proteasome system making this an attractive target for the
development of anti-cancer therapies. Ubiquitin-tagged substrates are
degraded by the 26S proteasome; a multisubunit complex comprising a
proteolytic 20S core particle (20S CP) capped by 19S regulatory particles
(19S RP). The 20S CP has evolved as an important target for anti-cancer
drug development, resulting in the approval of bortezomib (Velcade) for
the treatment of multiple myeloma. We have identified the small molecule
b-AP15 as a novel class of proteasome inhibitor that functions by
abrogating the deubiquitinating (DUB) activity of the 19S RP (D'Arcy,
Brnjic et al., Nature Medicine Epub Nov 6 2011). b-AP15 inhibits the
activity of two 19S RP-associated DUBs, UCHL5 and USP14. Consistent with
DUB inhibition, treatment with b-AP15 caused the accumulation of
polyubiquitinated proteins with higher molecular weight compared to
bortezomib treatment and induced a stronger proteotoxic response. Short
exposures were sufficient for induction of apoptosis by the compound.
Importantly, apoptosis induction by b-AP15 differed from that of
bortezomib by being insensitive to disruptions of the p53 tumor
suppressor and insensitive to overexpression of the intrinsic apoptotic
suppressor Bcl-2. b-AP15 shows strongest activity on colon and glioma
tumor cell lines and is less active on non-transformed cells. Treatment
with b-AP15 inhibited tumor progression in human and mouse tumor in vivo
models of breast, lung, colon, head & neck carcinoma and inhibited organ
infiltration in an acute myeloid leukemia (AML) model. Our results
suggest that inhibiting the DUB activity of the 19S RP may be a novel
target for the treatment of cancer.

