Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein kinase C b1 (PKCb1) inhibits the malignant phenotype of
the human pancreatic tumor-derived cell line PANC1


Pancreatic cancer is a deadly disease with a 5% overall survival after
five years. Different members of the PKC family have been described as
modulators of pancreatic cancer progression but, till nowadays, the
relevance of each PKC isoform in this process is unclear. The aim of the
present work was to study the effect of PKCb1 overexpression, on several
critical determinants of tumor progression using the human pancreatic
tumor-derived cell line PANC1. Cells were stably transfected with an
expression vector containing the full-length PKCb1 gene (PKCb1-PANC1) or
with the empty vector, as control (pMTH-PANC1). While no morphologic
alterations could be detected in vitro, PKCb1 overexpression induced a
significant reduction in the proliferative capacity of PANC1 cells. The
reduction in this capacity could be associated with a decrease in Cyclin
D1, Cyclin E and phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels, and an increase in p21
expression levels, as measured by Western blot. In addition PKCb1-PANC1
cells showed an increased resistance to cell death induced by serum
starvation (% viability: 58.544.1 vs 39.294.2 in pMTH-PANC1, pPancreatic
cancer is a deadly disease with a 5% overall survival after five years.
Different members of the PKC family have been described as modulators of
pancreatic cancer progression but, till nowadays, the relevance of each
PKC isoform in this process is unclear. The aim of the present work was
to study the effect of PKCb1 overexpression, on several critical
determinants of tumor progression using the human pancreatic
tumor-derived cell line PANC1. Cells were stably transfected with an
expression vector containing the full-length PKCb1 gene (PKCb1-PANC1) or
with the empty vector, as control (pMTH-PANC1). While no morphologic
alterations could be detected in vitro, PKCb1 overexpression induced a
significant reduction in the proliferative capacity of PANC1 cells. The
reduction in this capacity could be associated with a decrease in Cyclin
D1, Cyclin E and phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels, and an increase in p21
expression levels, as measured by Western blot. In addition PKCb1-PANC1
cells showed an increased resistance to cell death induced by serum
starvation (% viability: 58.544.1 vs 39.294.2 in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05).
Using flow cytometry we could determine that serum deprivation promoted
PKCb1-PANC1 arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (cells in G0/G1:
86.71.0% vs 45.50.8% in pMTH-PANC1, pPancreatic cancer is a deadly
disease with a 5% overall survival after five years. Different members of
the PKC family have been described as modulators of pancreatic cancer
progression but, till nowadays, the relevance of each PKC isoform in this
process is unclear. The aim of the present work was to study the effect
of PKCb1 overexpression, on several critical determinants of tumor
progression using the human pancreatic tumor-derived cell line PANC1.
Cells were stably transfected with an expression vector containing the
full-length PKCb1 gene (PKCb1-PANC1) or with the empty vector, as control
(pMTH-PANC1). While no morphologic alterations could be detected in
vitro, PKCb1 overexpression induced a significant reduction in the
proliferative capacity of PANC1 cells. The reduction in this capacity
could be associated with a decrease in Cyclin D1, Cyclin E and
phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels, and an increase in p21 expression levels,
as measured by Western blot. In addition PKCb1-PANC1 cells showed an
increased resistance to cell death induced by serum starvation (%
viability: 58.544.1 vs 39.294.2 in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). Using flow
cytometry we could determine that serum deprivation promoted PKCb1-PANC1
arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (cells in G0/G1: 86.71.0% vs
45.50.8% in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). Moreover, the overexpression of PKCb1
reduced the in vitro invasive capacity using Matrigel coated transwells
(cells x 10 microscopic x400 fields: 2.220.9 vs 10.102.6 in pMTH-PANC1,
pPancreatic cancer is a deadly disease with a 5% overall survival after
five years. Different members of the PKC family have been described as
modulators of pancreatic cancer progression but, till nowadays, the
relevance of each PKC isoform in this process is unclear. The aim of the
present work was to study the effect of PKCb1 overexpression, on several
critical determinants of tumor progression using the human pancreatic
tumor-derived cell line PANC1. Cells were stably transfected with an
expression vector containing the full-length PKCb1 gene (PKCb1-PANC1) or
with the empty vector, as control (pMTH-PANC1). While no morphologic
alterations could be detected in vitro, PKCb1 overexpression induced a
significant reduction in the proliferative capacity of PANC1 cells. The
reduction in this capacity could be associated with a decrease in Cyclin
D1, Cyclin E and phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels, and an increase in p21
expression levels, as measured by Western blot. In addition PKCb1-PANC1
cells showed an increased resistance to cell death induced by serum
starvation (% viability: 58.544.1 vs 39.294.2 in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05).
Using flow cytometry we could determine that serum deprivation promoted
PKCb1-PANC1 arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (cells in G0/G1:
86.71.0% vs 45.50.8% in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). Moreover, the overexpression
of PKCb1 reduced the in vitro invasive capacity using Matrigel coated
transwells (cells x 10 microscopic x400 fields: 2.220.9 vs 10.102.6 in
pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). This behavior could be associated with a significant
inhibition of secreted proteases activity (uPA: 4.110.8 vs 12.324.1
IU/mg/24h in pMTH-PANC1, pPancreatic cancer is a deadly disease with a 5%
overall survival after five years. Different members of the PKC family
have been described as modulators of pancreatic cancer progression but,
till nowadays, the relevance of each PKC isoform in this process is
unclear. The aim of the present work was to study the effect of PKCb1
overexpression, on several critical determinants of tumor progression
using the human pancreatic tumor-derived cell line PANC1. Cells were
stably transfected with an expression vector containing the full-length
PKCb1 gene (PKCb1-PANC1) or with the empty vector, as control
(pMTH-PANC1). While no morphologic alterations could be detected in
vitro, PKCb1 overexpression induced a significant reduction in the
proliferative capacity of PANC1 cells. The reduction in this capacity
could be associated with a decrease in Cyclin D1, Cyclin E and
phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels, and an increase in p21 expression levels,
as measured by Western blot. In addition PKCb1-PANC1 cells showed an
increased resistance to cell death induced by serum starvation (%
viability: 58.544.1 vs 39.294.2 in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). Using flow
cytometry we could determine that serum deprivation promoted PKCb1-PANC1
arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (cells in G0/G1: 86.71.0% vs
45.50.8% in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). Moreover, the overexpression of PKCb1
reduced the in vitro invasive capacity using Matrigel coated transwells
(cells x 10 microscopic x400 fields: 2.220.9 vs 10.102.6 in pMTH-PANC1,
p<0.05). This behavior could be associated with a significant inhibition
of secreted proteases activity (uPA: 4.110.8 vs 12.324.1 IU/mg/24h in
pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05 and MMP-9: 15.240.03 vs 24.892.6 AU/mg in pMTH-PANC1,
pPancreatic cancer is a deadly disease with a 5% overall survival after
five years. Different members of the PKC family have been described as
modulators of pancreatic cancer progression but, till nowadays, the
relevance of each PKC isoform in this process is unclear. The aim of the
present work was to study the effect of PKCb1 overexpression, on several
critical determinants of tumor progression using the human pancreatic
tumor-derived cell line PANC1. Cells were stably transfected with an
expression vector containing the full-length PKCb1 gene (PKCb1-PANC1) or
with the empty vector, as control (pMTH-PANC1). While no morphologic
alterations could be detected in vitro, PKCb1 overexpression induced a
significant reduction in the proliferative capacity of PANC1 cells. The
reduction in this capacity could be associated with a decrease in Cyclin
D1, Cyclin E and phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels, and an increase in p21
expression levels, as measured by Western blot. In addition PKCb1-PANC1
cells showed an increased resistance to cell death induced by serum
starvation (% viability: 58.544.1 vs 39.294.2 in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05).
Using flow cytometry we could determine that serum deprivation promoted
PKCb1-PANC1 arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle (cells in G0/G1:
86.71.0% vs 45.50.8% in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). Moreover, the overexpression
of PKCb1 reduced the in vitro invasive capacity using Matrigel coated
transwells (cells x 10 microscopic x400 fields: 2.220.9 vs 10.102.6 in
pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). This behavior could be associated with a significant
inhibition of secreted proteases activity (uPA: 4.110.8 vs 12.324.1
IU/mg/24h in pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05 and MMP-9: 15.240.03 vs 24.892.6 AU/mg in
pMTH-PANC1, p<0.05). When control and PANC1-PKCb1 cells were s.c.
inoculated into nude mice it was observed that PKCb1 cells were almost
unable to grow and form tumors while vector-transfected cells retained
this ability. In sum, our results suggest that PKCb1 overexpression in
human pancreatic tumor cells PANC1 induced a less malignant phenotype
both in vivo and in vitro.

