Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of FGFR2 in invasion and metastasis through different
activation of downstream signaling in gastric cancer


Activation of fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), the family of
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), initiates intracellular signaling
networks for key cellular processes. Previous reports show that FGFR2
amplification induces activation of downstream signaling in gastric
cancer influencing cell proliferation and survival. In this study, we
evaluated activation of FGFRs and related downstream pathways, and also
determine the effect of FGFRs in tumor invasion and metastasis in gastric
cancer. First, we performed phospho-RTK array in 25 gastric cancer cell
lines and found that FGFR2 and FGFR3 were more frequently phosphorylated
than FGFR1 or FGFR4 in gastric cancer. Next, we observed genomic
amplification status and phosphorylation level of FGFR2 using real-time
PCR and Western blot. KATO III and SNU-16 with higher expression of FGFR2
showed high correlation between DNA amplification and phosphorylation
status. Then, using invasion assay, cells with higher FGFR3 showed higher
invasiveness compare to cells with FGFR2 overexpression. When we observed
the activation status of downstream signaling molecules, cells with
higher FGFR2 were more dependent on PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway, while cells
with higher FGFR3 were more dependent on ERK pathway. In conclusion,
FGFRs have various biological roles through different signaling pathways
in gastric cancer, suggesting that FGFRs are the potential molecular
targets in gastric cancer.

