Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A pilot study of physical activity and breast cancer risk in Africa


Background: As a modifiable risk factor, physical activity (PA) has been
linked to breast cancer, and there is cumulative evidence for a
beneficial effect of PA on breast cancer risk. However, most of the
studies were conducted in developed countries, with little knowledge on
PA level and its relation to breast cancer risk among indigenous African
populations, where breast cancer may have unique etiology. Methods: We
used preliminary data from the African Breast Cancer Study (ABCS), a
recently launched, multicenter case-control study, conducted in Cameroon,
Nigeria, and Uganda in Africa. After consulting with native investigators
in Africa, we developed a physical activity questionnaire to assess the
type, frequency, intensity, and duration of various activities. Based on
the questionnaire, we calculated sub-scores of housework PA, occupational
PA, and leisure PA, as well as a total PA score estimating daily energy
expenditure (MET-hours/day). Multivariate linear regression was used to
examine the relationship between the total score and sub-scores of PA and
case-control status, age, and study sites. Results: To date, 98 cases and
120 controls have been enrolled and the PA questionnaires were
administered. The mean age was 48.6 years, ranging from 19-84 years. The
overall PA score averaged at 29.6 MET-hours/day, mainly composed by
housework PA (an average of 20.5 MET-hours/day) and occupational PA (an
average of 16.2 MET-hours/day), with relatively low level of leisure PA
(an average of 1.3 MET-hours/day). PA scores were the highest in the
Cameroon study site, and the lowest in the Nigerian study site. PA score
varied by age, but there was no clear trend. In the multivariable
regression model, case-control status was significantly associated with
the total PA score: cases were estimated to have 14.0 MET-hours/day lower
PA compared to controls, after adjusting for age and study site
(pBackground: As a modifiable risk factor, physical activity (PA) has
been linked to breast cancer, and there is cumulative evidence for a
beneficial effect of PA on breast cancer risk. However, most of the
studies were conducted in developed countries, with little knowledge on
PA level and its relation to breast cancer risk among indigenous African
populations, where breast cancer may have unique etiology. Methods: We
used preliminary data from the African Breast Cancer Study (ABCS), a
recently launched, multicenter case-control study, conducted in Cameroon,
Nigeria, and Uganda in Africa. After consulting with native investigators
in Africa, we developed a physical activity questionnaire to assess the
type, frequency, intensity, and duration of various activities. Based on
the questionnaire, we calculated sub-scores of housework PA, occupational
PA, and leisure PA, as well as a total PA score estimating daily energy
expenditure (MET-hours/day). Multivariate linear regression was used to
examine the relationship between the total score and sub-scores of PA and
case-control status, age, and study sites. Results: To date, 98 cases and
120 controls have been enrolled and the PA questionnaires were
administered. The mean age was 48.6 years, ranging from 19-84 years. The
overall PA score averaged at 29.6 MET-hours/day, mainly composed by
housework PA (an average of 20.5 MET-hours/day) and occupational PA (an
average of 16.2 MET-hours/day), with relatively low level of leisure PA
(an average of 1.3 MET-hours/day). PA scores were the highest in the
Cameroon study site, and the lowest in the Nigerian study site. PA score
varied by age, but there was no clear trend. In the multivariable
regression model, case-control status was significantly associated with
the total PA score: cases were estimated to have 14.0 MET-hours/day lower
PA compared to controls, after adjusting for age and study site (p<0.05).
Conclusion: African women's physical activity mainly consists of
housework activities and work-related activities, with little activities
conducted for recreational purposes. The preliminary data show physical
activity may be significantly associated with reduced breast cancer risk,
but further investigation and a larger sample size are to be followed.

