Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Preclinical activity of INK128, a TORC1/2 inhibitor, in triple
negative breast cancer: A combination of PARP inhibitor with PI3K-mTOR
pathway-targeted inhibitor


Introduction: Recent understanding of the biology of Triple Negative (TN)
tumor cells has resulted in the recognition of following molecular
targets for the development of novel therapeutics, (1) cell surface
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs, e.g. EGFR, IGFR, c-MET, FGFR), (2)
intracellular signaling pathway(s) (PI3K-AKT-mTOR, RAS-MAPK-ERK), and (3)
DNA-damage (chemo- or radiotherapy) repair pathway. INK128 is an orally
bioavailable, potent and selective ATP site kinase inhibitor of mTOR
complexes TORC1 and TORC2 that together play a crucial role in regulating
tumor cell growth, metabolism and motility. INK128 is structurally and
mechanistically distinct from allosteric rapamycin-based mTOR inhibitors
such as RAD001. Methods: We tested effects of INK128 (alone or in
combination with carboplatin and ABT888) on, (a) cell
survival/proliferation, (b) cell signaling marker(s) of proliferation,
(c) fibronectin-mediated migration, (d) fibronectin-directed
matrigel-invasion, and (e) clonogenic survival (3D-ON-TOP assay) in
different TNBT cell lines with high expression of EGFR (MDA-MB468,
SUM149), BRCA mutations (HCC1937, SUM149) no expression of PTEN protein
(HCC70, HCC1937, MDA-MB468, SUM149), PIK3CA mutation (BT20) and RAS/RAF
mutation (MDA-MB231). Results: Data showed that, (1) although the range
of EC50s for INK128 varied from 50 nM-500 nM in different TNBT cells, the
PTEN-null cells exhibited favorable EC50s compared to the rest of the
cell lines (with exception to HCC1937), (2) inhibition of phosphorylation
of AKT (S473), S6RP, and 4EBP1 was observed following INK128 treatment
(100 nM and 200 nM) as early as 6 hours, (3) treatment with 200 nM INK128
for 24 hours differentially blocked pERK in PTEN-null MDA-MB468 as
compared to MDA-MB231 cells, (4) INK128 treatment (100 nM) inhibited
migration of different TNBT cells (as compared to 2 uM RAD001,
allosteric, partial TORC1 inhibitor)) and the inhibition was
differentially pronounced in PTEN-null TNBT cells lines, (5) INK128
treatment (100 nM) also blocked invasion of MDA-MB468 cells, and (6)
INK128 dose-dependently blocked clonogenic growth of TNBT cells. This
effect was potentiated in the presence of ABT888 (10uM; small molecule
PARP inhibitor) plus carboplatin (10uM; chemotherapeutic agent).
Conclusion: INK128 (alone or in combination with carboplatin and ABT888)
has anti-proliferative effect on TNBT cells. INK128 has anti-migratory
and anti-invasive effects on TNBT cells. Interestingly, the
anti-migratory effect of INK128 was most prominent in PTEN-null TNBT
cells. We are currently pursuing studies to test the effect of INK128 on
the endothelial cells, the results of which will be presented in the
meeting.

