Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High levels of Wee1 are associated with malignancy and has
potential as a therapeutic target in malignant melanoma


Malignant melanoma is the most increasing form of cancer worldwide, in
addition to being the second most common cancer in young adults. Whereas
the prognosis is good when detected early, there are no curative
treatments once the cancer has spread (stage IV). Thus, there is a
precarious need for new and more effective treatment options. Since the
G1/S checkpoint of the cell cycle is dysfunctional in the majority of
human cancers, the G2/M transition has been a focus of attention for
targeted therapy the recent years. The Wee1 kinase is a major regulator
of the G2/M checkpoint, and may halt the cell cycle by adding a negative
phosphorylation on CDK1 (Tyr15). Additionally, Wee1 has a function in
safeguarding the genome integrity during DNA synthesis. To assess the
role of Wee1 in the progression of malignant melanoma we examined its
expression in a panel of paraffin-imbedded patient derived tissues of
benign nevi, primary- and metastatic melanoma. We found that Wee1
expression increased in the direction of malignancy, and had a strong,
positive correlation with known markers of proliferation: Cyclin A
(pMalignant melanoma is the most increasing form of cancer worldwide, in
addition to being the second most common cancer in young adults. Whereas
the prognosis is good when detected early, there are no curative
treatments once the cancer has spread (stage IV). Thus, there is a
precarious need for new and more effective treatment options. Since the
G1/S checkpoint of the cell cycle is dysfunctional in the majority of
human cancers, the G2/M transition has been a focus of attention for
targeted therapy the recent years. The Wee1 kinase is a major regulator
of the G2/M checkpoint, and may halt the cell cycle by adding a negative
phosphorylation on CDK1 (Tyr15). Additionally, Wee1 has a function in
safeguarding the genome integrity during DNA synthesis. To assess the
role of Wee1 in the progression of malignant melanoma we examined its
expression in a panel of paraffin-imbedded patient derived tissues of
benign nevi, primary- and metastatic melanoma. We found that Wee1
expression increased in the direction of malignancy, and had a strong,
positive correlation with known markers of proliferation: Cyclin A
(p<0.0001), Ki67 (pMalignant melanoma is the most increasing form of
cancer worldwide, in addition to being the second most common cancer in
young adults. Whereas the prognosis is good when detected early, there
are no curative treatments once the cancer has spread (stage IV). Thus,
there is a precarious need for new and more effective treatment options.
Since the G1/S checkpoint of the cell cycle is dysfunctional in the
majority of human cancers, the G2/M transition has been a focus of
attention for targeted therapy the recent years. The Wee1 kinase is a
major regulator of the G2/M checkpoint, and may halt the cell cycle by
adding a negative phosphorylation on CDK1 (Tyr15). Additionally, Wee1 has
a function in safeguarding the genome integrity during DNA synthesis. To
assess the role of Wee1 in the progression of malignant melanoma we
examined its expression in a panel of paraffin-imbedded patient derived
tissues of benign nevi, primary- and metastatic melanoma. We found that
Wee1 expression increased in the direction of malignancy, and had a
strong, positive correlation with known markers of proliferation: Cyclin
A (p<0.0001), Ki67 (p<0.0001), Cyclin D3 (pMalignant melanoma is the most
increasing form of cancer worldwide, in addition to being the second most
common cancer in young adults. Whereas the prognosis is good when
detected early, there are no curative treatments once the cancer has
spread (stage IV). Thus, there is a precarious need for new and more
effective treatment options. Since the G1/S checkpoint of the cell cycle
is dysfunctional in the majority of human cancers, the G2/M transition
has been a focus of attention for targeted therapy the recent years. The
Wee1 kinase is a major regulator of the G2/M checkpoint, and may halt the
cell cycle by adding a negative phosphorylation on CDK1 (Tyr15).
Additionally, Wee1 has a function in safeguarding the genome integrity
during DNA synthesis. To assess the role of Wee1 in the progression of
malignant melanoma we examined its expression in a panel of
paraffin-imbedded patient derived tissues of benign nevi, primary- and
metastatic melanoma. We found that Wee1 expression increased in the
direction of malignancy, and had a strong, positive correlation with
known markers of proliferation: Cyclin A (p<0.0001), Ki67 (p<0.0001),
Cyclin D3 (p<0.001), p21Cip1/WAF1 (p=00.3), p53 (pMalignant melanoma is
the most increasing form of cancer worldwide, in addition to being the
second most common cancer in young adults. Whereas the prognosis is good
when detected early, there are no curative treatments once the cancer has
spread (stage IV). Thus, there is a precarious need for new and more
effective treatment options. Since the G1/S checkpoint of the cell cycle
is dysfunctional in the majority of human cancers, the G2/M transition
has been a focus of attention for targeted therapy the recent years. The
Wee1 kinase is a major regulator of the G2/M checkpoint, and may halt the
cell cycle by adding a negative phosphorylation on CDK1 (Tyr15).
Additionally, Wee1 has a function in safeguarding the genome integrity
during DNA synthesis. To assess the role of Wee1 in the progression of
malignant melanoma we examined its expression in a panel of
paraffin-imbedded patient derived tissues of benign nevi, primary- and
metastatic melanoma. We found that Wee1 expression increased in the
direction of malignancy, and had a strong, positive correlation with
known markers of proliferation: Cyclin A (p<0.0001), Ki67 (p<0.0001),
Cyclin D3 (p<0.001), p21Cip1/WAF1 (p=00.3), p53 (p<0.025), thicker
primary tumours (p=0.001), ulceration (p=0.005) and poor disease-free
survival (p=0.008). Transfections using siWee1 in three metastatic
melanoma cell lines; WM239WTp53, WM45.1MUTp53 and LOXWTp53, further
support our hypothesis of a tumour promoting role of Wee1 in melanomas.
Whereas no effect was observed in LOX cells, transfection with siWee1 led
to accumulation of cells in G1/S and S phase of the cell cycle in WM239
and WM45.1 cells, respectively. Both latter cell lines displayed reduced
viability (MTS analysis), DNA damage (-H2AX) and induction of apoptosis
(DNA fragmentation, caspase 3- and PARP-cleavages), in the absence of
Wee1. Thus, the effect of silencing Wee1 may not be solely dependent of
the p53 status of the cells. Moreover, our preliminary results have
demonstrated that combined inhibition of Wee1 using (Wee1 inhibitor
II/681641) and MAPK/ERK signalling (PD98059) further enhanced the
therapeutic effect, as compared to Wee1 silencing alone. Together these
results reveal the importance of Wee1 as a prognostic biomarker in
melanomas and indicate that targeting Wee1 alone or in combination with
other targeted therapies or conventional radio- or chemotherapy may be a
promising approach in the treatment of melanoma patients.

