Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ApoStreamtm, an antibody independent platform, captures
circulating tumor cells in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma


Biopsies of HCC can be technically difficult, given the vascular nature
of the liver and underlying liver disease. Many HCC patients do not get
biopsies, and molecular characterization of these tumors is not possible.
Capture of CTCs from blood allows for analysis of cancer cells in
metastatic dissemination. The use of EpCAM-based enrichment platforms
limits the type of tumor cells that can be recovered, as it selects only
for cells which express the antigen of interest. Nonselective methods of
CTC analysis are needed. An ongoing study is evaluating the recovery of
CTCs in HCC patients with elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) using
the novel antibody-independent ApoStream platform, which utilizes the
principle of dielectrophoretic field-flow fractionation to position cells
in a hydrodynamic flow profile for sorting. Paired blood samples from HCC
patients were analyzed by CellSearch and ApoStream. Collected cells were
immunophenotyped using antibodies against Cytokeratin (CK), CD45, DAPI,
and AFP, and analyzed by quantitative laser scanning cytometry. In
comparison with the CellSearch platform, ApoStream isolated higher number
of CK+/CD45-/DAPI+ CTCs in HCC cancer patients. A majority of the
CK+/CD45-/DAPI+ CTCs enriched by the ApoStream platform (62-98%) were
AFP+. ApoStreamTM also isolated AFP+, putative CTCs with the
CK-/CD45-/DAPI+ phenotype (9-85 cells), and cells with CK+/CD45+/DAPI+
phenotype (1-978 cells). Conclusion: The ApoStreamTM CTC enrichment
platform successfully isolated a greater number of CTCs from HCC
patients. ApoStream CTC analysis is also being used for pharmacodynamic
analysis in an ongoing phase I study of the combination of sorafenib and
vorinostat in patients with advanced HCC. In preclinical models, the
combination synergistically induces tumor cell death through activation
of CD95. In this study, CTC analysis will compare the expression of CD95
and other markers prior to and after drug combination exposure.


