Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genomic deletions and point mutations in the STK11 gene in
Peutz-Jeghers Chilean families


Background: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant
hereditary disease characterized by mucocutaneous pigmentation and
gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis. Individuals with PJS are at
increased risk for development of various neoplasms. The genetic
susceptibility for PJS has been associated with germline mutation in the
serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11) gene. The aim of the present study was
to characterize the genotype and phenotype of Chilean PJS patients.
Methods: Mutation screening of 13 patients from 8 PJS families was
performed by using single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
analysis and DNA sequencing, covering the entire coding region and the
splice-site boundaries. In addition, multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) assay was used for the identification of large
exonic deletions or duplications. Results: We identified seven different
pathogenic mutations in STK11 gene in 7 unrelated families. Point
mutations correspond to a small deletion (c.109delC) in exon 1 that
generates a premature stop codon and two intronic mutations localized in
splice site of intron 4 (c.597+2 T>A) and intron 6 (c.862-2 A>G). The
pathogenic effect on splicing of intronic changes was demonstrated in
mRNA of STK11 from lymphocytes of patients. By MLPA, we identified four
large deletions ranging from one exon to the whole gene. Breakpoints were
identified in two of these patients. Three point mutations (43%, 3/7) may
be considered as novel. Conclusions: Different germline mutations in
STK11 were detected. A combination of sensitive techniques may improve a
high STK11 mutation detection frequency (88%) in PJS Chilean families.
Funded by Clinica Las Condes

