Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The role of Notch signaling in esophageal adenocarcinoma


Background: The Notch signaling pathway plays a critical role in
embryonic development and carcinogenesis. Aberrant Notch signaling has
been linked to a wide variety of cancers. Activation of Notch pathway can
either suppress or promote tumors depending on the cell type and context.
However, the role of the Notch pathway in the pathogenesis and
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is poorly understood.
Objective: Elucidate the role of NOTCH signaling pathway in EAC.
Methodology: In this study, the expression of Notch components in EAC
tissues, matched non-tumor esophageal mucosa and normal esophagus
tissues, EAC cell lines (FLO-1, JH-EsoAd1, OE19 and OE33) and 3 primary
esophageal normal epithelial cells were assessed by quantitative RT- PCR,
western blot analysis, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. The
effect of blocking as well as ectopic activation of the Notch pathway on
the proliferation, colony formation, and gene expression were also
characterized. Results: The aberrant activation of Notch signaling was
observed in human EAC clinical samples. Expression of most Notch pathway
components was elevated in EAC. The expression of activated NOTCH1 also
associated with the differentiation grade of EAC. We found that blocking
Notch activity by gamma-secretase inhibitors(GSI) affects the
proliferation and/or survival of EAC cell lines and human EAC samples ex
vivo cultures. In contrast, this effect was not observed in human
esophageal epithelial cell line, Het-1A. However, we observed that
activation of Notch signaling by NOTCH1icd could promote colony formation
in Het-1A cells. Conclusions: Our results showed that Notch signaling
promotes the growth and pathogenesis of EAC. Therefore, Notch signaling
pathway could be a promising therapeutic target for treatment of human
EAC.

