Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Caveolin-1 silencing arrests the proliferation of glioblastoma
cells by inhibition of STAT3 signalling


Caveolin-1 is an essential structural constituent of caveolae implicated
in mitogenic signalling, oncogenesis, angiogenesis, neurodegenerative
diseases and senescence. Its role as a tumor suppressor gene or as a
tumor promoter seems to strictly depend on cell type and tumor
stage/grade. The high expression of caveolin-1 in some tumors in vivo is
associated with increased tumor aggressiveness, metastatic potential and
suppression of apoptosis. In the present study we investigated the role
of Caveolin-1 in human glioblastoma cells proliferation, in which we
found cav-1 expressed at high levels (A172, CRS-A2, LI). Results show
that siRNA-mediated down-regulation of Cav-1 caused stable arrest of
proliferation in each cell line. A marked reduction of cyclin D1 and of
CDK4 expression was evident in the cells transfected with Cav-1 siRNA and
consequently of phosphoRb. Furthermore, a significant decrease of the
expression of Src and p38 and of their down-stream effector STAT3 was
evident. Together, these findings indicate that Cav-1 silencing induces
an arrest of tumor cells proliferation in vitro by a new inhibitory
pathway in glioblastoma multiforme, the most aggressive of the primary
central nervous system tumors, and provide new insights into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the pro-survival and tumor-promoting
functions of Cav-1. Grants from MIUR (RFO, PRIN), Roberto Pallotti's
Legacy for Cancer Research, Cornelia Pallotti's Legacy for Cancer
Research, University of Bologna, Italy

