Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The AKT inhibitor MK-2206 promotes apoptosis in acute myeloid
leukemia cells


The need for improved therapies for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is
urgent as the disease is still highly fatal. Protein Kinase B (AKT)
activation has been shown to predict poor clinical outcome for patients
with AML. In 253 newly diagnosed AML cases, we have found that AKT
phosphorylation on Thr308 analyzed by reverse-phase protein arrays was
significantly higher in patients with unfavorable cytogenetics (p=0.037).
The adverse prognostic factor of high levels of pAKT was observed among
patients with intermediate-risk cytogenetics (p=0.013), as it was
associated with an inferior survival (median survival 44.2 weeks)
compared to patients with low or intermediate pAKT (78.7 weeks).
Recently, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. has developed a compound, MK-2206,
that is a highly specific allosteric inhibitor for all three AKT
isoforms. In the current study, we have determined that MK-2206 as a
single agent used at clinically achievable concentrations suppresses cell
growth of a variety of AML derived cell lines including OCI-AML3, U937,
and MOLM13. MK-2206 can also induce apoptosis in blast cells derived from
AML patients. Consistent with its role as an AKT inhibitor, the drug
suppresses phosphorylation of AKT at serine 473 and inhibits
phosphorylation of AKT downstream targets including S6 ribosomal protein,
4-EBP1, and PRAS40 in the AML cells. We recently identified that low
expression of the PP2A isoform that acts as the AKT phosphatase (i.e. the
one containing the B55 subunit) in AML negatively correlates with AKT
T308 phosphorylation and activation in a cohort of 511 AML patients
(Ruvolo et al Leukemia, 2011). Patients with low B55 expression exhibited
shorter complete remission duration. We suppressed B55 expression by
shRNA in OCI-AML3 cells to determine if loss of the AKT phosphatase
promotes AKT activation and chemoresistance. Cells with reduced B55
exhibited higher levels of AKT phosphorylation and were more resistant to
killing by the conventional chemotherapy agent AraC. OCI-AML3 B55 shRNA
transductant cells were also more resistant to MK-2206 compared to cells
expressing control non-specific shRNA. These results suggest that AKT
phosphatase activity in AML may affect response to MK-2206. A recent
study in liver cancer demonstrated that MK-2206 synergized with the
multi-kinase inhibitor Sorafenib. Since Sorafenib targets the Fms-like
tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) and mutations that activate the kinase in AML
confer poor prognosis, we examined if MK-2206 could synergize with
Sorafenib to kill leukemia cells with mutation of FLT3 internal tandem
duplication (ITD) mutation. The combination of MK-2206 and Sorafenib was
effective at killing MOLM13 cells and AML blast cells with the FLT3-ITD.
Taken together, these findings suggest that MK-2206 may be effective to
block AKT signaling pathways and could be beneficial as a therapeutic
agent perhaps as a single agent or in combination with a drug such as
Sorafenib in the therapy of AML.

