Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: miR-10b mediates melanoma progression induced by BRAFV600E


The protein kinase BRaf plays an important role in the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway initiated by Ras. Raf, after activated by
Ras activates Erk and its downstream effectors to carry out normal
cellular functions, which include differentiation, proliferation,
survival and senescence. BRafV600E mutation has been implicated in 50-60%
of all melanoma cases. It is a constitutively active mutation that has
been linked to the progression of melanoma. Many microRNAs have been
implicated in cancer proliferation and metastasis. Of special interest is
the miR-10b, which is known to play a crucial role in tumor invasion and
metastasis as previously observed in a mouse mammary tumor model. Our
preliminary data show that miR-10b was upregulated in melanoma cell-lines
that carried either N-Ras gain-of-function mutation or BRafV600E.
BRafV600E knockdown in melanoma cell lines reduces the expression of
TWIST, a transcriptional activator of miR-10b, as well as the expression
of miR-10b. Further, BrafV600E is known to mediate senescence through
several factors including the transcriptional regulator DMTF1.
Concordantly, we detected an increase in the expression of DMTF1 on
BRafV600E knockdown. Thus, we hypothesize that in melanoma, BRafV600E
activates the expression of TWIST which then activates miR-10b, leading
to inhibition of DMTF1 and ultimately a failure to bring about cell-cycle
arrest.

