Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human epidermal growth factor 3 (HER3) blockade with
U3-1287/AMG888 modulates radiosensitivity in the lung and head and neck
carcinomas


The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family consists of four
members including HER1 (EGFR), HER2 (ErbB2), HER3 (ErbB3) and HER4
(ErbB4). Collectively this family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
play critical roles in the etiology of several human cancers as well as a
role in resistance to radiation therapy. In 2006, a study in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) indicated that using the anti-EGFR
antibody cetuximab in combination with radiation resulted in a 10%
advantage of 3-year overall survival rate when compared to radiotherapy
alone. This study highlighted the therapeutic utility of RTK blockade in
combination with radiation. Studies investigating the role of HER3 in
radiation response are limited. In the present study, we investigated
whether or not HER3 blockade could enhance radiation therapy using the
HER3 antibody U3-1287/AMG888. We screened a battery of cell lines from
lung, HNSCC and colorectal tumor lines for HER3 expression. The results
indicated that all 15 cell lines tested showed expression of HER3. In
addition, U3-1287/AMG888 was able to block basal HER3 activity and
radiation induced HER3 activation. Further, proliferation assays, using
U3-1287/AMG888, indicated that HER3 blockade could block proliferation in
SCC6, SCC1483, H226 cell lines, highlighting the importance of HER3 in
these tumor cells. Clonogenic assays showed that U3-1287/AMG888 could
sensitize these lines to radiation. Furthermore, -H2AX analyses, detected
by immunofluorescence, lead to a statistically significant increase in
apoptotic cells. Cell cycle analysis, 24 and 48 hours after
U3-1287/AMG888 and radiation treatments resulted in a significant G1 and
G2 cell cycle arrest. Annexin-V binding assays showed a significant
increase in apoptosis in the U3-1287/AMG888 plus radiation group as
compared to either agent alone. To determine if HER3 blockade using
U3-1287/AMG888 could enhance radiation therapy in vivo we performed tumor
growth delay experiments using SCC6, SCC1483 and H226 xenografts in nude
mice. Mice were inoculated and treated with 1) IgG, 2) U3-1287/AMG888, 3)
radiation or 4) the combination. The results of these experiments
indicated that the combination of U3-1287/AMG888 and radiation had a
strong impact on tumor growth in studies using single dose or
fractionated dosing. Tumor analysis indicated that radiation treatment
activated HER3 in vivo and U3-1287/AMG888 could abrogate this activation.
Collectively our findings in vitro and in vivo suggest that
U3-1287/AMG888 in combination with radiation has an impact on cell and
tumor growth by impacting cell cycle progression, increasing apoptosis
and increasing DNA damage. These findings suggest that HER3 may play a
critical role in response to radiation therapy and blocking its activity
may be of strong therapeutic benefit in human tumors.

