Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Deguelin as a novel therapeutic agent for Herceptin resistant
breast cancers


Human breast cancers overexpressing HER-2 are generally highly
aggressive. Current therapeutic strategies to target HER-2 signaling
pathway with antibodies or small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors have
shown impressive success in the management of these tumor types, although
most women exhibit short term response to these therapies. Acquired
resistance to HER-2 target drugs, especially Herceptin is a major
challenge to clinicians. Patients receiving Herceptin therapy invariably
recur and most often with highly aggressive tumors. Thus identifying new
drugs which target multiple molecular pathways is desired to treat
Herceptin resistant breast cancer. Using paired HER-2 overexpressing
parental Herceptin responsive (BT-474) and its Herceptin resistant
variant cells (BT-474HR) we showed that acquired resistance to Herceptin
is associated with enhanced expression of HER-2, EGFR, CyclinD1, P-AKT
(Ser-473), PI-3K, JAB1 proteins and decreased expression of nuclear pten
and p27 proteins. These results are similar to those observed in
recurrent breast tumors in patients following Herceptin treatment.
Deguelin, a natural product derivative of rotenoids and has been shown to
inhibit growth of diverse cancer types. Deguelin is a known AKT
inhibitor, however its efficacy is never tested in breast cancers
resistant to Herceptin which express high levels of p-AKT. We examined
effect of Deguelin on HER-2 overexpressing BT-474 BT-474-HRcells.
Deguelin inhibited growth of both, BT-474 and BT-474HR cells in
concentration (0-250nM) and time dependent (24-72h) manner. There was a
40-50%- inhibition of both BT474and BT-474HR cells at 25nM Deguelin
treatment at 72h. Deguelin decreased cell surface expression of HER-2 in
both these cell lines. In parental BT-474 cells both Herceptin 5-10ug/ml
and Deguelin down regulated HER-2 expression, but only Deguelin reduced
HER-2 (125-250nM) over expression in both BT-474 and BT-474HR cells. Down
regulation of HER-2 following Deguelin treatment was associated with
simultaneous down regulation of nuclear accumulation of cyclin D1, and
JAB1, and p-AKT (Ser-473) proteins and up regulation of nuclear p27 and
p53in both BT-474 and BT474 HR cells. These results suggest that Deguelin
inhibits growth of both HER-2 overexpressing and those resistant to
Herceptin therapy breast cancer cells. Effect of Deguelin appears to be
mediated through down regulation of HER-2, PI3K AKT, JAB1, Cyclin D1, and
p27 pathway. Our preliminary results warrant further investigation into
Deguelin as a potential therapeutic agent for Herceptin resistant breast
cancers. (This work was supported by NCI CA140321.)

