Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting KRAS lung cancer in vivo by pulmonary
surfactant-mediated gene transfer


Pulmonary surfactant has been used as a carrier to deliver a therapeutic
virus to dysfunctional lung cells that reside within an intricate lung
structure. To investigate whether pulmonary surfactant enhances the
efficacy of intratracheal instillation of a therapeutic virus to target
KRAS lung cancer in vivo, we developed a recombinant adenovirus that
induces cell death only in lung cancer cells and injected the adenovirus
into a KRAS lung cancer model mouse intratracheally with or without
surfactant. A therapeutic adenovirus that induces cell death only in lung
cancer cells was constructed by combining a cancer specific hTERT
promoter fused to CEBP with a modified lung specific CC10 promoter fused
to cytotoxic E1A. CEBP is induced only in cancer cells and activates the
CC10 promoter, which in turn induces cytotoxic E1A, and causes cell death
only in lung cancer cells in vitro. This adenovirus was intratracheally
injected into the KRAS lung cancer model mice
(CCSP-rtTA/Tet-op-K-Ras4bG12D bitransgenic mice) in the presence/absence
of pulmonary surfactant. Intratracheally-injected therapeutic adenovirus
with pulmonary surfactant spread to airways as well as to the alveolar
region of the lung and caused reduction of lung tumors developed in the
KRAS lung cancer model mouse. The therapeutic adenovirus without
pulmonary surfactant spread only to airways and had ten times less
effectiveness in tumor reduction. Here, we demonstrate that pulmonary
surfactant is an efficient tool to intratracheally deliver a therapeutic
virus to treat KRAS lung cancer in vivo.

