Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Extracellular matrix density and acinus formation in breast cancer


The extracellular matrix (ECM) contributes to the generation and dynamic
of normal breast tissue, in particular the generation of polarized acinar
and ductal structures. In vitro 3D cultures conditions mimic the
formation and function of breast structures. Variations in the
composition of the ECM have been shown to directly influence the
formation and organization of acinus-like and duct-like structures.
Furthermore, the density of the extracellular matrix appears also to play
a role in normal mammary tissue development and in tumor formation. Here
we show that the density of the ECM directly influences the number and
the organization of the acini. Briefly, MCF10A cells were incubated in
increasing densities of a combination Matrigel/Collagen I matrix.
Following a week incubation, the moduli distant from and close to the
acinus-like formations were measured by atomic force microscopy.
Additionally, the number of acinus-like structures was determined. To
investigate the acinus organization, expressions of E-cadherin and
laminin were estimated by immunochemistry. Results indicate that the
modulus of the ECM was increased near the acinus-like structures. Also,
the number of acinus-like structures decreased with the increase in
Matrigel/ collagen I density (pThe extracellular matrix (ECM) contributes
to the generation and dynamic of normal breast tissue, in particular the
generation of polarized acinar and ductal structures. In vitro 3D
cultures conditions mimic the formation and function of breast
structures. Variations in the composition of the ECM have been shown to
directly influence the formation and organization of acinus-like and
duct-like structures. Furthermore, the density of the extracellular
matrix appears also to play a role in normal mammary tissue development
and in tumor formation. Here we show that the density of the ECM directly
influences the number and the organization of the acini. Briefly, MCF10A
cells were incubated in increasing densities of a combination
Matrigel/Collagen I matrix. Following a week incubation, the moduli
distant from and close to the acinus-like formations were measured by
atomic force microscopy. Additionally, the number of acinus-like
structures was determined. To investigate the acinus organization,
expressions of E-cadherin and laminin were estimated by immunochemistry.
Results indicate that the modulus of the ECM was increased near the
acinus-like structures. Also, the number of acinus-like structures
decreased with the increase in Matrigel/ collagen I density (p<0.05).
Finally, based on the expression of the basement membrane protein
laminin, the organization of the acinus-like structures presence was
altered as the density of the ECM increased (pThe extracellular matrix
(ECM) contributes to the generation and dynamic of normal breast tissue,
in particular the generation of polarized acinar and ductal structures.
In vitro 3D cultures conditions mimic the formation and function of
breast structures. Variations in the composition of the ECM have been
shown to directly influence the formation and organization of acinus-like
and duct-like structures. Furthermore, the density of the extracellular
matrix appears also to play a role in normal mammary tissue development
and in tumor formation. Here we show that the density of the ECM directly
influences the number and the organization of the acini. Briefly, MCF10A
cells were incubated in increasing densities of a combination
Matrigel/Collagen I matrix. Following a week incubation, the moduli
distant from and close to the acinus-like formations were measured by
atomic force microscopy. Additionally, the number of acinus-like
structures was determined. To investigate the acinus organization,
expressions of E-cadherin and laminin were estimated by immunochemistry.
Results indicate that the modulus of the ECM was increased near the
acinus-like structures. Also, the number of acinus-like structures
decreased with the increase in Matrigel/ collagen I density (p<0.05).
Finally, based on the expression of the basement membrane protein
laminin, the organization of the acinus-like structures presence was
altered as the density of the ECM increased (p<0.05). These observations
highlight the role of ECM density in the dynamic remodeling of breast
tissues. (This works is supported by grants from the Department of
Defense Era of Hope research program (BC044778) and the National Science
Foundation EFRI program (CBE0736007).

