Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Structural studies of human glioma pathogenesis-related protein
1(GLIPR1)


Human glioma pathogenesis-related protein 1 (GLIPR1) is a membrane
protein that is highly upregulated in brain cancers but barely detectable
in normal brain tissue. GLIPR1 is composed of a signal peptide, to direct
its secretion, a conserved cysteine-rich CAP (cysteine-rich secretory
protein, antigen 5, pathogenesis related-1) domain, and a transmembrane
domain. Phase I/II clinical trial involving direct injection of
neoadjuvant GLIPR1 prior to radical prostatectomy are underway (IND
#13033). GLIPR1 gene therapy has been shown to be anti-metastatic in an
orthotopic mouse model of prostate cancer. GLIPR1 is also currently being
investigated for glioblastoma targeted therapy. We present here crystal
structures of a truncated soluble domain of the human GLIPR1 protein,
sGLIPR1, solved by molecular replacement (MR) using a truncated
polyalanine model of the CAP domain of stecrisp, a snake venom CRISP
(cysteine-rich secretory protein), in PHASER. The correct MR solution
could only be obtained by removing all loops in the search model. While,
the native structure was refined to 1.85 , that of the Zn2+ complex was
refined to 2.2 . The latter structure reveals that the putative binding
cavity coordinates Zn2+ similarly to snake venom CRISPs which are
involved in Zn2+-dependent mechanisms of inflammatory modulation. Both
sGLIPR1 structures have extensive flexible loop / turn regions and unique
charge distributions that were not observed in any of the previously
reported CAP protein structures. We also propose a model for the
structure of the full-length, membrane-bound GLIPR1.

