Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of DUSP4/MKP2 increases cell growth in colorectal
cancer (CRC) cells and is associated with MSI-H phenotype in CRC


DUSP4, also termed MKP2 is a member of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphatase (MKP) family which negatively regulates the MAPKs
(Mitogen-activated protein kinases) ERK, p38 and JNK. Using microarray
analyses we found previously DUSP4 frequently overexpressed in high
frequent microsatellite unstable (MSI-H) colorectal cancer CRC. Here we
analysed DUSP4 expression on mRNA level in 38 CRC (19 MSI-H and 19 MSS)
compared to matched normal tissue as well as in CRC cell lines by
RT-qPCR. All 19 MSI-H tumors (100%) and 14/19 (73.7%) MSS tumors showed
overexpressed DUSP4. However, median expression levels in MSI-H tumors
were significantly higher than in MSS-tumors (pDUSP4, also termed MKP2 is
a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase (MKP) family
which negatively regulates the MAPKs (Mitogen-activated protein kinases)
ERK, p38 and JNK. Using microarray analyses we found previously DUSP4
frequently overexpressed in high frequent microsatellite unstable (MSI-H)
colorectal cancer CRC. Here we analysed DUSP4 expression on mRNA level in
38 CRC (19 MSI-H and 19 MSS) compared to matched normal tissue as well as
in CRC cell lines by RT-qPCR. All 19 MSI-H tumors (100%) and 14/19
(73.7%) MSS tumors showed overexpressed DUSP4. However, median expression
levels in MSI-H tumors were significantly higher than in MSS-tumors
(p<0.001). Likewise, MSI-H CRC cell lines showed 5.1-fold higher DUSP4
mRNA levels than MSS cell lines. Using quantitative methylation analysis
(MethyQESD) we did not find DUSP4 expression regulated by promoter
methylation in CRC cell lines as well as in tumor samples. DUSP4
overexpression in CRC cell lines through DUSP4 transfection caused
increased expression of the MAPK targets CDC25A, CCND1, EGR1, MYC and
CDKN1A in HCT116 cells as well as downregulation of the mismatch repair
gene MSH2 in SW480 cells. Furthermore, DUSP4 overexpression caused
increased proliferation in CRC cells using Real Time Cell Analysis (RTCA)
system. Our findings suggest that DUSP4 plays as an important role in
regulating cell growth within the MAPK pathway and causes enhanced cell
growth in MSI-H colorectal cancer.

