Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ada3, a component of STAGA HAT complex, controls cell cycle by
regulating c-myc


The human homologue of the yeast Ada3 (alteration/deficiency in
activation) protein is an essential component of various Histone acetyl
transferase complexes (HATs). To gain insight into the physiological
importance of Ada3, we established a conditional knockout mouse model and
showed that loss of Ada3 led to embryonic lethality at an early stage of
development. Using the derived Ada3lox/lox mouse embryonic fibroblast
(MEF) cell lines we show that Ada3 deletion causes defects in histone
acetylation. Also we show that Ada3 enhances catalytic activity of p300
HAT. We further showed that Ada3 plays an important role in cell
proliferation; depletion of Ada3 from cells caused cell lethality. This
proliferation defect was reversed by introduction of human Ada3 in Ada3
null MEFs. Ada3 null MEFs also showed delay in transition from G0-G1
phase of the cell cycle to the S phase. These cells also manifested
decreased hyperphosphorylation of Retinoblastoma protein (Rb); an
increased protein half life of CDK inhibitor p27Kip1 and decrease in Cdk2
kinase activity. The increase in p27 protein was a result of decreased
Skp2 protein and mRNA levels which is a direct target of c-myc oncogene.
We further show that mRNA levels of c-myc, a direct transcriptional
target of Ada3 containing STAGA HAT complex, are reduced on deletion of
Ada3. These data suggest an Ada3-myc-skp2-p27 pathway that controls
mammalian cell cycle. Taken together, our data suggests an essential role
of Ada3 in embryonic development and cell cycle progression.

