Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: YM155 potentiates chemosensitivity to gemcitabine in human
pancreatic cancer cell line, MiaPaCa-2


Pancreatic cancer is a highly aggressive malignancy with a median overall
survival of less than 1 year. Although gemcitabine is a standard
chemotherapeutic agent, response rates range only from 20% to 40% and
ultimately all patients acquire resistance to the chemotherapy. In this
study, we evaluated the potential efficacy of YM155, a selective survivin
suppressant, in pancreatic cancer cell line, MiaPaCa-2 showing resistance
to gemcitabine. YM155 inhibited the expression of survivin in the
pancreatic cancer cell line and gemcitabine upregulated survivin on the
contrary. However, YM155 enhanced chemosensitivity to gemcitabine
resulting in apoptotic cell death, which accompanied a decrease in
survivin expression. Knockdown of endogenous survivin via RNA
interference also enhanced sensitivity to gemcitabine. In addition, YM155
potentiated the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine in the xenograft tumors
of MiaPaCa-2. While gemcitabine induced cell cycle arrest at S-phase,
co-treatment of YM155 bypassed the cell cycle arrest resulting in
apoptotic cell death. Therefore, our results suggest that YM155
potentiates chemosensitivity to gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells
through suppression of survivin, which is induced by gemcitabine.
Combination of gemcitabine and YM155 might be a potential therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of pancreatic cancer to be explored in
clinical investigation.

