Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) downregulation is associated with
androgen-independent and aggressive phenotypes in prostate cancer


First line of therapy for advanced prostate cancer (PCa) is
androgen-deprivation through surgical or chemical castration; however, in
majority of cases, tumors relapse in an androgen-independent (AI) form.
Once the PCa has recurred in AI form, it progresses to a highly
aggressive disease with frequent metastasis and poses an increased risk
of morbidity and death. Previously, we demonstrated that PPP2CA, which
encodes for alpha-isoform of the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) catalytic
subunit, is downregulated in prostate cancer. Furthermore, we showed that
PP2A activity is inversely associated with AI growth of PCa cells through
a novel mechanism, whereby loss of PP2A-mediated checkpoints leads to the
activation of Akt and ERK and partially sustains androgen receptor (AR)
signaling under steroid-deprived condition. Since AI phenotype of PCa is
associated with enhanced metastatic potential, we have investigated, in
this study, a role of PPP2CA in the aggressive behavior of the PCa cells.
For this, we overexpressed PPP2CA in AI (C4-2 and PC-3) PCa cells, while
silenced its expression in AD (LNCaP) PCa cells. We observed that
overexpression of PPP2CA in C4-2 and PC-3 cells not only decreased their
AI growth and clonogenic ability, but also led to reduced motility and
invasion and enhanced cell-cell interaction. Conversely, we observed
increased cell motility and invasion and decreased cell-cell interaction
upon PPP2CA silencing in LNCaP cells. Immunoblot analyses demonstrated
gain of epithelial and loss of mesenchymal markers in
PPP2CA-overexpressing PCa cells or vice versa indicating a role of PP2A
in opposing epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Altogether, these
studies provide evidence for a functional role of PPP2CA in aggressive
behavior of AI PCa cells.

