Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary energy balance impacts spontaneous development of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in the KrasG12D/INK4A transgenic model
of pancreatic cancer


Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in both men
and women in the United States. Obesity, which has increased dramatically
over the past 40 years, has emerged as an important risk factor for
pancreatic cancer, although the mechanisms underlying the
obesity-pancreatic cancer association have not been fully identified. We
have reported that calorie restriction (CR), a dietary strategy for
preventing or reversing obesity, has significant anticancer effects in
several mouse models of pancreatic and other cancers, including a model
of pancreatitis-induced pancreatic dysplasia. However, it is unknown if
energy balance modulation, including CR and diet-induced obesity (DIO)
exerts anticancer effects in a transgenic mouse model of invasive
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma induced by the most common genetic
alterations associated with human pancreatic cancers (KrasG12D/INK4A). We
hypothesized that KrasG12D/INK4A mice administered CR diet would develop
fewer invasive tumors than mice on a control diet, while a DIO diet would
enhance invasive tumors development. To test this, we placed 30 4-6 week
old male KrasG12D/INK4A transgenic mice on one of three diets for 10
weeks (n=10 mice/group): CR diet (70% of weekly control intake; fed in
daily aliquots), control diet (AIN-76A diet, fed ad libitum), or a DIO
regimen (modified AIN-76A diet with 60kcal % fat; fed ad libitum). Mice
were palpated daily and body composition was assessed by magnetic
resonance imaging at week 8 to ensure effectiveness of diet regimens.
Levels of energy balance-sensitive hormones were assayed using serum
collected at study termination. CR mice had a significantly lower percent
body fat (12.29% 0.03%; pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of
cancer death in both men and women in the United States. Obesity, which
has increased dramatically over the past 40 years, has emerged as an
important risk factor for pancreatic cancer, although the mechanisms
underlying the obesity-pancreatic cancer association have not been fully
identified. We have reported that calorie restriction (CR), a dietary
strategy for preventing or reversing obesity, has significant anticancer
effects in several mouse models of pancreatic and other cancers,
including a model of pancreatitis-induced pancreatic dysplasia. However,
it is unknown if energy balance modulation, including CR and diet-induced
obesity (DIO) exerts anticancer effects in a transgenic mouse model of
invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma induced by the most common
genetic alterations associated with human pancreatic cancers
(KrasG12D/INK4A). We hypothesized that KrasG12D/INK4A mice administered
CR diet would develop fewer invasive tumors than mice on a control diet,
while a DIO diet would enhance invasive tumors development. To test this,
we placed 30 4-6 week old male KrasG12D/INK4A transgenic mice on one of
three diets for 10 weeks (n=10 mice/group): CR diet (70% of weekly
control intake; fed in daily aliquots), control diet (AIN-76A diet, fed
ad libitum), or a DIO regimen (modified AIN-76A diet with 60kcal % fat;
fed ad libitum). Mice were palpated daily and body composition was
assessed by magnetic resonance imaging at week 8 to ensure effectiveness
of diet regimens. Levels of energy balance-sensitive hormones were
assayed using serum collected at study termination. CR mice had a
significantly lower percent body fat (12.29% 0.03%; p<0.0001) and DIO
mice had a significantly higher percent body fat (30.14% 0.07%;
pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in both
men and women in the United States. Obesity, which has increased
dramatically over the past 40 years, has emerged as an important risk
factor for pancreatic cancer, although the mechanisms underlying the
obesity-pancreatic cancer association have not been fully identified. We
have reported that calorie restriction (CR), a dietary strategy for
preventing or reversing obesity, has significant anticancer effects in
several mouse models of pancreatic and other cancers, including a model
of pancreatitis-induced pancreatic dysplasia. However, it is unknown if
energy balance modulation, including CR and diet-induced obesity (DIO)
exerts anticancer effects in a transgenic mouse model of invasive
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma induced by the most common genetic
alterations associated with human pancreatic cancers (KrasG12D/INK4A). We
hypothesized that KrasG12D/INK4A mice administered CR diet would develop
fewer invasive tumors than mice on a control diet, while a DIO diet would
enhance invasive tumors development. To test this, we placed 30 4-6 week
old male KrasG12D/INK4A transgenic mice on one of three diets for 10
weeks (n=10 mice/group): CR diet (70% of weekly control intake; fed in
daily aliquots), control diet (AIN-76A diet, fed ad libitum), or a DIO
regimen (modified AIN-76A diet with 60kcal % fat; fed ad libitum). Mice
were palpated daily and body composition was assessed by magnetic
resonance imaging at week 8 to ensure effectiveness of diet regimens.
Levels of energy balance-sensitive hormones were assayed using serum
collected at study termination. CR mice had a significantly lower percent
body fat (12.29% 0.03%; p<0.0001) and DIO mice had a significantly higher
percent body fat (30.14% 0.07%; p<0.0001) than control mice (22.27%
0.06%). Circulating levels of insulin, leptin and IGF-1, were
significantly lower in CR mice (pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading
cause of cancer death in both men and women in the United States.
Obesity, which has increased dramatically over the past 40 years, has
emerged as an important risk factor for pancreatic cancer, although the
mechanisms underlying the obesity-pancreatic cancer association have not
been fully identified. We have reported that calorie restriction (CR), a
dietary strategy for preventing or reversing obesity, has significant
anticancer effects in several mouse models of pancreatic and other
cancers, including a model of pancreatitis-induced pancreatic dysplasia.
However, it is unknown if energy balance modulation, including CR and
diet-induced obesity (DIO) exerts anticancer effects in a transgenic
mouse model of invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma induced by the
most common genetic alterations associated with human pancreatic cancers
(KrasG12D/INK4A). We hypothesized that KrasG12D/INK4A mice administered
CR diet would develop fewer invasive tumors than mice on a control diet,
while a DIO diet would enhance invasive tumors development. To test this,
we placed 30 4-6 week old male KrasG12D/INK4A transgenic mice on one of
three diets for 10 weeks (n=10 mice/group): CR diet (70% of weekly
control intake; fed in daily aliquots), control diet (AIN-76A diet, fed
ad libitum), or a DIO regimen (modified AIN-76A diet with 60kcal % fat;
fed ad libitum). Mice were palpated daily and body composition was
assessed by magnetic resonance imaging at week 8 to ensure effectiveness
of diet regimens. Levels of energy balance-sensitive hormones were
assayed using serum collected at study termination. CR mice had a
significantly lower percent body fat (12.29% 0.03%; p<0.0001) and DIO
mice had a significantly higher percent body fat (30.14% 0.07%; p<0.0001)
than control mice (22.27% 0.06%). Circulating levels of insulin, leptin
and IGF-1, were significantly lower in CR mice (p<0.05) and significantly
higher in DIO mice (pPancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of
cancer death in both men and women in the United States. Obesity, which
has increased dramatically over the past 40 years, has emerged as an
important risk factor for pancreatic cancer, although the mechanisms
underlying the obesity-pancreatic cancer association have not been fully
identified. We have reported that calorie restriction (CR), a dietary
strategy for preventing or reversing obesity, has significant anticancer
effects in several mouse models of pancreatic and other cancers,
including a model of pancreatitis-induced pancreatic dysplasia. However,
it is unknown if energy balance modulation, including CR and diet-induced
obesity (DIO) exerts anticancer effects in a transgenic mouse model of
invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma induced by the most common
genetic alterations associated with human pancreatic cancers
(KrasG12D/INK4A). We hypothesized that KrasG12D/INK4A mice administered
CR diet would develop fewer invasive tumors than mice on a control diet,
while a DIO diet would enhance invasive tumors development. To test this,
we placed 30 4-6 week old male KrasG12D/INK4A transgenic mice on one of
three diets for 10 weeks (n=10 mice/group): CR diet (70% of weekly
control intake; fed in daily aliquots), control diet (AIN-76A diet, fed
ad libitum), or a DIO regimen (modified AIN-76A diet with 60kcal % fat;
fed ad libitum). Mice were palpated daily and body composition was
assessed by magnetic resonance imaging at week 8 to ensure effectiveness
of diet regimens. Levels of energy balance-sensitive hormones were
assayed using serum collected at study termination. CR mice had a
significantly lower percent body fat (12.29% 0.03%; p<0.0001) and DIO
mice had a significantly higher percent body fat (30.14% 0.07%; p<0.0001)
than control mice (22.27% 0.06%). Circulating levels of insulin, leptin
and IGF-1, were significantly lower in CR mice (p<0.05) and significantly
higher in DIO mice (p<0.05) relative to control mice. Pancreatic tumor
incidence was reduced in CR mice (2/10) and increased in DIO mice (7/10)
as compared to control mice (5/10). Consistent with this trend, whole
pancreas from CR mice weighed (0.22g 0.05g; p=0.03) significantly less on
average than control mice (0.31g 0.11g), and pancreas from DIO mice
weighed significantly more (0.54g 0.27g; p=0.001). Presence of liver
macrometastases was also enhanced with the higher calorie diets (CR=1,
control=3, and DIO=4). Using a mouse model of pancreatic cancer that
closely mimics human histological disease progression, our findings
indicate that dietary energy balance modulation can alter the development
of pancreatic cancer. This could have direct implications for the
prevention and control of pancreatic tumors due to obesity and
obesity-related conditions such as diabetes.

