Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lamin A/C a novel potential prognostic marker in early operable
primary breast cancer


Background Lamins A/C, a major component of the nuclear lamina of highly
differentiated mammalian cells is encoded by LMNA gene. Its involvement
in tumorignesis is of interest due to its role in maintaining the nuclear
integrity, regulation of gene expression, cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Reduced lamin A/C expression in cancer has been reported to be
a sign of poor prognosis. However there is few data on its clinical
significance in breast cancer. This study aimed to evaluate expression of
lamin A/C in a large series of patients with early operable invasive
breast cancer; we analyzed the association of lamin A/C expression with
clinicopathological parameters and long term clinical outcome. Methods
Using immunohistochemistal staining of tissue microarrays, expression of
Lamin A/C was evaluated in a large well characterized series of early
operable invasive breast carcinoma patients (n=938) obtained from
Nottingham Tenovus Primary Breast Carcinoma Series between the period of
1988 and 1998 who underwent primary surgery. All patients were managed
following a standard management guidelines by a single team of clinicians
and the decision of adjuvant systemic therapy was made on the basis of
Nottingham prognostic Index (NPI) score and hormonal status. Using X-tile
bioinformatics software a positivity cut-off of H-score >150 was found to
be most informative. The expression was then correlated with
clinicopathological parameters (age, tumour grade, tumour stage, tumour
size, nodal status, vascular invasion, and NPI) using Chi-squared
analyses. Association of lamin A/C expression with prognosis
[loco-regional recurrence, distant metastasis and breast cancer specific
survival (BCSS)] was evaluated by Kaplan Meier survival analysis and Cox
proportional hazards model was used to assess the statistical
independence and significance of the marker on BCSS. Results The median
follow-up of patients was 146 months. Positive expression rate of Lamin
A/C was 42.2%. (n=398). Lamin A/C expression was significantly associated
with low histological grade (pBackground Lamins A/C, a major component of
the nuclear lamina of highly differentiated mammalian cells is encoded by
LMNA gene. Its involvement in tumorignesis is of interest due to its role
in maintaining the nuclear integrity, regulation of gene expression, cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Reduced lamin A/C expression in cancer has
been reported to be a sign of poor prognosis. However there is few data
on its clinical significance in breast cancer. This study aimed to
evaluate expression of lamin A/C in a large series of patients with early
operable invasive breast cancer; we analyzed the association of lamin A/C
expression with clinicopathological parameters and long term clinical
outcome. Methods Using immunohistochemistal staining of tissue
microarrays, expression of Lamin A/C was evaluated in a large well
characterized series of early operable invasive breast carcinoma patients
(n=938) obtained from Nottingham Tenovus Primary Breast Carcinoma Series
between the period of 1988 and 1998 who underwent primary surgery. All
patients were managed following a standard management guidelines by a
single team of clinicians and the decision of adjuvant systemic therapy
was made on the basis of Nottingham prognostic Index (NPI) score and
hormonal status. Using X-tile bioinformatics software a positivity
cut-off of H-score >150 was found to be most informative. The expression
was then correlated with clinicopathological parameters (age, tumour
grade, tumour stage, tumour size, nodal status, vascular invasion, and
NPI) using Chi-squared analyses. Association of lamin A/C expression with
prognosis [loco-regional recurrence, distant metastasis and breast cancer
specific survival (BCSS)] was evaluated by Kaplan Meier survival analysis
and Cox proportional hazards model was used to assess the statistical
independence and significance of the marker on BCSS. Results The median
follow-up of patients was 146 months. Positive expression rate of Lamin
A/C was 42.2%. (n=398). Lamin A/C expression was significantly associated
with low histological grade (p<0.001), tumour size Background Lamins A/C,
a major component of the nuclear lamina of highly differentiated
mammalian cells is encoded by LMNA gene. Its involvement in tumorignesis
is of interest due to its role in maintaining the nuclear integrity,
regulation of gene expression, cell proliferation and apoptosis. Reduced
lamin A/C expression in cancer has been reported to be a sign of poor
prognosis. However there is few data on its clinical significance in
breast cancer. This study aimed to evaluate expression of lamin A/C in a
large series of patients with early operable invasive breast cancer; we
analyzed the association of lamin A/C expression with clinicopathological
parameters and long term clinical outcome. Methods Using
immunohistochemistal staining of tissue microarrays, expression of Lamin
A/C was evaluated in a large well characterized series of early operable
invasive breast carcinoma patients (n=938) obtained from Nottingham
Tenovus Primary Breast Carcinoma Series between the period of 1988 and
1998 who underwent primary surgery. All patients were managed following a
standard management guidelines by a single team of clinicians and the
decision of adjuvant systemic therapy was made on the basis of Nottingham
prognostic Index (NPI) score and hormonal status. Using X-tile
bioinformatics software a positivity cut-off of H-score >150 was found to
be most informative. The expression was then correlated with
clinicopathological parameters (age, tumour grade, tumour stage, tumour
size, nodal status, vascular invasion, and NPI) using Chi-squared
analyses. Association of lamin A/C expression with prognosis
[loco-regional recurrence, distant metastasis and breast cancer specific
survival (BCSS)] was evaluated by Kaplan Meier survival analysis and Cox
proportional hazards model was used to assess the statistical
independence and significance of the marker on BCSS. Results The median
follow-up of patients was 146 months. Positive expression rate of Lamin
A/C was 42.2%. (n=398). Lamin A/C expression was significantly associated
with low histological grade (p<0.001), tumour size <1.5 cm (p=0.004),
good NPI score (pBackground Lamins A/C, a major component of the nuclear
lamina of highly differentiated mammalian cells is encoded by LMNA gene.
Its involvement in tumorignesis is of interest due to its role in
maintaining the nuclear integrity, regulation of gene expression, cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Reduced lamin A/C expression in cancer has
been reported to be a sign of poor prognosis. However there is few data
on its clinical significance in breast cancer. This study aimed to
evaluate expression of lamin A/C in a large series of patients with early
operable invasive breast cancer; we analyzed the association of lamin A/C
expression with clinicopathological parameters and long term clinical
outcome. Methods Using immunohistochemistal staining of tissue
microarrays, expression of Lamin A/C was evaluated in a large well
characterized series of early operable invasive breast carcinoma patients
(n=938) obtained from Nottingham Tenovus Primary Breast Carcinoma Series
between the period of 1988 and 1998 who underwent primary surgery. All
patients were managed following a standard management guidelines by a
single team of clinicians and the decision of adjuvant systemic therapy
was made on the basis of Nottingham prognostic Index (NPI) score and
hormonal status. Using X-tile bioinformatics software a positivity
cut-off of H-score >150 was found to be most informative. The expression
was then correlated with clinicopathological parameters (age, tumour
grade, tumour stage, tumour size, nodal status, vascular invasion, and
NPI) using Chi-squared analyses. Association of lamin A/C expression with
prognosis [loco-regional recurrence, distant metastasis and breast cancer
specific survival (BCSS)] was evaluated by Kaplan Meier survival analysis
and Cox proportional hazards model was used to assess the statistical
independence and significance of the marker on BCSS. Results The median
follow-up of patients was 146 months. Positive expression rate of Lamin
A/C was 42.2%. (n=398). Lamin A/C expression was significantly associated
with low histological grade (p<0.001), tumour size <1.5 cm (p=0.004),
good NPI score (p<0.001), absence of vascular invasion (p=0.014) and
absence of distant metastasis (p = 0.027). No association was found
between cells expressing lamin A/C and lymph node stage, distant
metastases, loco-regional recurrence and patient age. Survival analysis
showed that lamin A/C positivity was significantly associated with a
longer breast cancer specific survival (p = 0.008) but it was not
independent of tumour stage, grade or size for predicting BCSS (p=0.304).
Conclusion This study suggests lamin A/C expression as a potential
prognostic biomarker for early operable invasive breast cancer. Our
findings indicate that lamin A/C expressing tumours are associated with
better breast cancer specific survival.

