Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Importance of sticking together; Cdh1 loss in the gastric
zymogenic lineage


Stomach Cancer is the second leading cause of cancer related death
worldwide. The adult stomach is a renewing system with cells
simultaneously differentiating and migrating along invaginations termed
gastric units. One such lineage is the zymogenic lineage in which neck
cells differentiate to form mature zymogenic cells at the base of the
gastric units. The transcription factor Mist1 plays a key role in this
differentiation and is lost in the formation of precancerous metaplasia.
Another important protein in proper zymogenic cell formation is the
cellular adhesion protein Cdh1. Cdh1 has been characterized as a tumor
suppressor protein and is often lost in cancer cells allowing for
metastasis. In some forms of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer, loss of
Cdh1 is thought to be an initiating event in tumor formation. I have
genetically engineered mice in which I can temporally knock out Cdh1
within zymogenic cells both in the presence and absence of Mist1. It is
my hypothesis that cells lacking both of these tumor suppressors will be
more likely to develop gastric tumors. Preliminary immune-fluorescence
analysis of these stomachs indicates that in absence of both MIST1 and
CDH1, fully differentiated and normally post mitotic zymogenic cells show
greatly reduced size and increased re-entry into the cell cycle. This
data suggests that deletion of both MIST1 and CDH1 disrupts the terminal
differentiation program of zymogenic cells and promotes metaplastic
growth in a manner that could resemble the origins of gastric cancer.

