Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Plasma pharmacokinetics of fluorodeoxycytidine, downstream
metabolites, and tetrahydrouridine after combined administration to
cynomolgus monkeys


Introduction: 5-Fluoro-2-deoxycytidine (FdCyd; NSC48006) is a
fluoropyrimidine nucleoside inhibitor of DNA methylation that is degraded
by cytidine deaminase (CD) and has better aqueous stability than
decitabine or azacytidine. A toxicokinetic study was carried out to
support a phase I study of the PO combination of FdCyd and the CD
inhibitor tetrahydrouridine (THU; NSC112907). We examined the
pharmacokinetics of THU, FdCyd, and its downstream metabolites in
cynomolgus monkeys. Methods: Monkeys were treated and plasma samples,
collected between 15 min and 24 h after FdCyd administration, were
analyzed. For IV administration, 20% of the THU dose was administered as
a bolus followed by FdCyd (4, 8 or 16 mg/kg to two monkeys each)
concomitantly with 80% of the THU dose of 30 mg/kg as a 3 h infusion. For
PO administration, FdCyd was administered at 10 mg/kg as a single agent
and at 10, 15 or 20 mg/kg 1 h after administration of 150 mg/kg THU or at
0.1, 1.0 or 10 mg/kg 1h after a dose of 500 mg/kg THU (2
monkeys/sex/group). The concentrations of FdCyd, and its downstream
metabolites, fluorodeoxyuridine (FdUrd) and fluorouracil (FU), and THU
were quantitated by validated LC-MS/MS assays. Data were modeled
non-compartmentally using PK Solutions. Results: When FdCyd and THU were
administered IV, FdCyd Cmax and AUC increased with dose, while the latter
appeared more than dose-proportional. The half-life of FdCyd ranged
between 22 and 56 min and the AUC0-inf increased from 0.28 to 2.99
mgmin/L after doses of 4 to 16 mg/kg. FdUrd/FdCyd Cmax and AUC0-infratios
were less than 13% suggesting inhibition of CD at 30 mg/kg IV THU. In
monkeys receiving 0.1 or 10 mg/kg FdCyd alone PO, no FdCyd nor any
downstream metabolites were detectable. When FdCyd was administered 1 h
after 150 or 500 mg/kg THU, PO FdCyd concentrations increased with doses
of FdCyd. FdCyd PO bioavailability after THU appeared to range between 12
and 30% and did not clearly increase with increasing THU dose.
FdUrd/FdCyd Cmax and AUC0-inf ratios after PO administration were higher
than after IV administration and much more variable between monkeys. THU
Cmax and AUC0-inf were proportional with THU dose and were not affected
by FdCyd dose. PO bioavailability of THU was approximately 3.5%, but did
result in plasma concentrations associated with inhibition of its target
cytidine deaminase. Conclusion: Administration of THU with FdCyd
increased the exposure to FdCyd and improved PO FdCyd bioavailability
from 12%. Concentrations of THU and FdCyd achieved after PO
administration are associated with inhibition of CD and hypomethylation,
respectively. The phase I study of PO FdCyd and THU is under development.
Support: N01-CM-52202, N01-CM-42202, U01-CA099168, P30-CA47904

