Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Synergism of polyamine synthesis inhibition and AMP kinase
activation on human melanoma proliferation and migration


Introduction: Metformin has been shown to inhibit human cancer cell
growth via activation of MAP kinase with resultant inhibition of mTOR
signaling pathway. We have reported the over-expression of ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC) in human melanoma cell lines. ODC is a key enzyme in
polyamine biosynthesis. We determined the effect of metformin in
combination with DMFO, an ODC inhibitor, on tumor proliferation and
migration, and the possible mechanisms, using human melanoma cells.
Methods: Human melanoma cells were treated with Metformin, DFMO, or
combination. Cell proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue
proliferation assay. Cell migration assay was performed by seeding
melanoma cells in 24-well plate. After overnight incubation, an
artificial homogenous wound was created onto the monolayer with a plastic
micropipette tip. After wounding, the migration of cells into the wound
was observed at 0- and 48-hour time points. Quantitative RT-PCR for ODC1
detection was performed using Assay-on-Demand Hs00159739-ml. GAPDH served
as housekeeping control. Western blotting was performed to determine the
expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1, Raf-1 and Raf-B. Data
were presented as means SD for the three separate experiments. For
comparison between groups, the student's t test was used and
pIntroduction: Metformin has been shown to inhibit human cancer cell
growth via activation of MAP kinase with resultant inhibition of mTOR
signaling pathway. We have reported the over-expression of ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC) in human melanoma cell lines. ODC is a key enzyme in
polyamine biosynthesis. We determined the effect of metformin in
combination with DMFO, an ODC inhibitor, on tumor proliferation and
migration, and the possible mechanisms, using human melanoma cells.
Methods: Human melanoma cells were treated with Metformin, DFMO, or
combination. Cell proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue
proliferation assay. Cell migration assay was performed by seeding
melanoma cells in 24-well plate. After overnight incubation, an
artificial homogenous wound was created onto the monolayer with a plastic
micropipette tip. After wounding, the migration of cells into the wound
was observed at 0- and 48-hour time points. Quantitative RT-PCR for ODC1
detection was performed using Assay-on-Demand Hs00159739-ml. GAPDH served
as housekeeping control. Western blotting was performed to determine the
expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1, Raf-1 and Raf-B. Data
were presented as means SD for the three separate experiments. For
comparison between groups, the student's t test was used and p< 0.05 was
considered to be statically significant. Results: There was
dose-dependent inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation and migration
with either metformin or DFMO. Synergistic inhibition was observed with
the combination treatment on both cell migration and proliferation. There
was synergistic inhibition of ODC expression with the combined treatment
compared with DFMO alone (pIntroduction: Metformin has been shown to
inhibit human cancer cell growth via activation of MAP kinase with
resultant inhibition of mTOR signaling pathway. We have reported the
over-expression of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) in human melanoma cell
lines. ODC is a key enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis. We determined the
effect of metformin in combination with DMFO, an ODC inhibitor, on tumor
proliferation and migration, and the possible mechanisms, using human
melanoma cells. Methods: Human melanoma cells were treated with
Metformin, DFMO, or combination. Cell proliferation assay was performed
using Cell Titer Blue proliferation assay. Cell migration assay was
performed by seeding melanoma cells in 24-well plate. After overnight
incubation, an artificial homogenous wound was created onto the monolayer
with a plastic micropipette tip. After wounding, the migration of cells
into the wound was observed at 0- and 48-hour time points. Quantitative
RT-PCR for ODC1 detection was performed using Assay-on-Demand
Hs00159739-ml. GAPDH served as housekeeping control. Western blotting was
performed to determine the expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and
4E-BP1, Raf-1 and Raf-B. Data were presented as means SD for the three
separate experiments. For comparison between groups, the student's t test
was used and p< 0.05 was considered to be statically significant.
Results: There was dose-dependent inhibition of melanoma cell
proliferation and migration with either metformin or DFMO. Synergistic
inhibition was observed with the combination treatment on both cell
migration and proliferation. There was synergistic inhibition of ODC
expression with the combined treatment compared with DFMO alone (p<0.01).
The combination treatment also lead to significant enhancement of AMPK
activation and increased phosphorylation of AMPK at Thr-172 compared with
metformin alone (pIntroduction: Metformin has been shown to inhibit human
cancer cell growth via activation of MAP kinase with resultant inhibition
of mTOR signaling pathway. We have reported the over-expression of
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) in human melanoma cell lines. ODC is a key
enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis. We determined the effect of metformin
in combination with DMFO, an ODC inhibitor, on tumor proliferation and
migration, and the possible mechanisms, using human melanoma cells.
Methods: Human melanoma cells were treated with Metformin, DFMO, or
combination. Cell proliferation assay was performed using Cell Titer Blue
proliferation assay. Cell migration assay was performed by seeding
melanoma cells in 24-well plate. After overnight incubation, an
artificial homogenous wound was created onto the monolayer with a plastic
micropipette tip. After wounding, the migration of cells into the wound
was observed at 0- and 48-hour time points. Quantitative RT-PCR for ODC1
detection was performed using Assay-on-Demand Hs00159739-ml. GAPDH served
as housekeeping control. Western blotting was performed to determine the
expression of AMP kinase, mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1, Raf-1 and Raf-B. Data
were presented as means SD for the three separate experiments. For
comparison between groups, the student's t test was used and p< 0.05 was
considered to be statically significant. Results: There was
dose-dependent inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation and migration
with either metformin or DFMO. Synergistic inhibition was observed with
the combination treatment on both cell migration and proliferation. There
was synergistic inhibition of ODC expression with the combined treatment
compared with DFMO alone (p<0.01). The combination treatment also lead to
significant enhancement of AMPK activation and increased phosphorylation
of AMPK at Thr-172 compared with metformin alone (p<0.01). The
combination treatment resulted in inhibition of mTOR signaling with
decreased phosphorylation of mTOR, p70S6K and 4E-BP1, Raf-1 and Raf-B in
treated cancer cells, when compared with individual drug treatments.
Conclusion: We have observed a synergistic effect of AMP kinase
activation and polyamine synthesis inhibition on suppressing human
melanoma proliferation and migration. The synergism is due to enhanced
inhibition of both polyamine synthesis and mTOR signaling pathways.

