Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Adiponectin receptor 2 is negatively associated with lymph node
metastasis of colorectal cancer


[Background] Adiponectin is a hormone secreted by the adipose tissue. Two
receptors of adiponectin, namely AdipoR1 and AdipoR2, are known, but
their expression and function in tumor tissue are not yet well
characterized. It is proverbial that under hypoxic condition, cancer
cells acquire invasive and metastatic potentials and also resistance to
therapy. Although adiponectin is reported to exert inhibitory effect on
various cancer types, the regulation of AdipoRs by the hypoxic
environment, nor on the effect of hypoxia on the inhibitory effect of
adiponectin on cancer cells were investigated. Thus, we aimed to
investigate the expression of adiponectin receptors in colorectal cancer
tissues, and their clinicopathological implications. Moreover, we
investigated on the mechanism underlying the regulation of AdipoRs by the
hypoxic stress in colon cancer cells. [Methods] Surgically resected
specimens from 48 patients with colorectal cancer, receiving surgical
operation in the period between November 2008 and July 2009, were
analyzed. The study was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of the
University of Tokyo. The mRNA expressions of AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 were
evaluated by real-time RT-PCR in cancer tissues and the matched normal
counterparts. For the in vitro experiments, the human colon cancer cell
line DLD-1 was cultured either under normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia (1%
O2), and the changes in the expression of AdipoRs were evaluated. Also,
the effect of adiponectin on the proliferative activity of DLD-1 was
assessed by the MTS assay. [Results] The mean age of the patients was
66.7911.85 years. The levels of expression of both AdipoR1/AdipoR2 were
significantly lower in cancer specimens compared with normal mucosa
(0.9660.392, vs1.3660.408, p[Background] Adiponectin is a hormone
secreted by the adipose tissue. Two receptors of adiponectin, namely
AdipoR1 and AdipoR2, are known, but their expression and function in
tumor tissue are not yet well characterized. It is proverbial that under
hypoxic condition, cancer cells acquire invasive and metastatic
potentials and also resistance to therapy. Although adiponectin is
reported to exert inhibitory effect on various cancer types, the
regulation of AdipoRs by the hypoxic environment, nor on the effect of
hypoxia on the inhibitory effect of adiponectin on cancer cells were
investigated. Thus, we aimed to investigate the expression of adiponectin
receptors in colorectal cancer tissues, and their clinicopathological
implications. Moreover, we investigated on the mechanism underlying the
regulation of AdipoRs by the hypoxic stress in colon cancer cells.
[Methods] Surgically resected specimens from 48 patients with colorectal
cancer, receiving surgical operation in the period between November 2008
and July 2009, were analyzed. The study was approved by the Human Ethics
Committee of the University of Tokyo. The mRNA expressions of AdipoR1 and
AdipoR2 were evaluated by real-time RT-PCR in cancer tissues and the
matched normal counterparts. For the in vitro experiments, the human
colon cancer cell line DLD-1 was cultured either under normoxia (21% O2)
or hypoxia (1% O2), and the changes in the expression of AdipoRs were
evaluated. Also, the effect of adiponectin on the proliferative activity
of DLD-1 was assessed by the MTS assay. [Results] The mean age of the
patients was 66.7911.85 years. The levels of expression of both
AdipoR1/AdipoR2 were significantly lower in cancer specimens compared
with normal mucosa (0.9660.392, vs1.3660.408, p<0.001 and 0.9180.309
vs1.5960.459, P[Background] Adiponectin is a hormone secreted by the
adipose tissue. Two receptors of adiponectin, namely AdipoR1 and AdipoR2,
are known, but their expression and function in tumor tissue are not yet
well characterized. It is proverbial that under hypoxic condition, cancer
cells acquire invasive and metastatic potentials and also resistance to
therapy. Although adiponectin is reported to exert inhibitory effect on
various cancer types, the regulation of AdipoRs by the hypoxic
environment, nor on the effect of hypoxia on the inhibitory effect of
adiponectin on cancer cells were investigated. Thus, we aimed to
investigate the expression of adiponectin receptors in colorectal cancer
tissues, and their clinicopathological implications. Moreover, we
investigated on the mechanism underlying the regulation of AdipoRs by the
hypoxic stress in colon cancer cells. [Methods] Surgically resected
specimens from 48 patients with colorectal cancer, receiving surgical
operation in the period between November 2008 and July 2009, were
analyzed. The study was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of the
University of Tokyo. The mRNA expressions of AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 were
evaluated by real-time RT-PCR in cancer tissues and the matched normal
counterparts. For the in vitro experiments, the human colon cancer cell
line DLD-1 was cultured either under normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia (1%
O2), and the changes in the expression of AdipoRs were evaluated. Also,
the effect of adiponectin on the proliferative activity of DLD-1 was
assessed by the MTS assay. [Results] The mean age of the patients was
66.7911.85 years. The levels of expression of both AdipoR1/AdipoR2 were
significantly lower in cancer specimens compared with normal mucosa
(0.9660.392, vs1.3660.408, p<0.001 and 0.9180.309 vs1.5960.459, P<0.001,
respectively for AdipoR1 and AdipoR2). The mRNA levels of AdipoR1 and
AdipoR2 showed a tendency of decrease in tumors with nodal metastases and
the difference was significant with AdipoR2 (p[Background] Adiponectin is
a hormone secreted by the adipose tissue. Two receptors of adiponectin,
namely AdipoR1 and AdipoR2, are known, but their expression and function
in tumor tissue are not yet well characterized. It is proverbial that
under hypoxic condition, cancer cells acquire invasive and metastatic
potentials and also resistance to therapy. Although adiponectin is
reported to exert inhibitory effect on various cancer types, the
regulation of AdipoRs by the hypoxic environment, nor on the effect of
hypoxia on the inhibitory effect of adiponectin on cancer cells were
investigated. Thus, we aimed to investigate the expression of adiponectin
receptors in colorectal cancer tissues, and their clinicopathological
implications. Moreover, we investigated on the mechanism underlying the
regulation of AdipoRs by the hypoxic stress in colon cancer cells.
[Methods] Surgically resected specimens from 48 patients with colorectal
cancer, receiving surgical operation in the period between November 2008
and July 2009, were analyzed. The study was approved by the Human Ethics
Committee of the University of Tokyo. The mRNA expressions of AdipoR1 and
AdipoR2 were evaluated by real-time RT-PCR in cancer tissues and the
matched normal counterparts. For the in vitro experiments, the human
colon cancer cell line DLD-1 was cultured either under normoxia (21% O2)
or hypoxia (1% O2), and the changes in the expression of AdipoRs were
evaluated. Also, the effect of adiponectin on the proliferative activity
of DLD-1 was assessed by the MTS assay. [Results] The mean age of the
patients was 66.7911.85 years. The levels of expression of both
AdipoR1/AdipoR2 were significantly lower in cancer specimens compared
with normal mucosa (0.9660.392, vs1.3660.408, p<0.001 and 0.9180.309
vs1.5960.459, P<0.001, respectively for AdipoR1 and AdipoR2). The mRNA
levels of AdipoR1 and AdipoR2 showed a tendency of decrease in tumors
with nodal metastases and the difference was significant with AdipoR2
(p<0.05). Culture under hypoxia resulted in a significant upregulation of
the expression levels of both adiponectin receptors on DLD-1. Also, the
inhibitory effect of adiponectin on the proliferative activity of DLD-1
was potentiated under hypoxia, compared to normoxia. [Conclusion] In
colorectal cancer tissue, the expression levels of both adiponectin
receptors were downregulated, and the expression of AdipoR2 was
associated with nodal metastases. The hypoxic environment caused
up-regulation of the expression of both adiponectin receptors on colon
cancer cells, consequently potentiating the inhibitory effect of
adiponectin. Taking these facts, we hypothesized that, under hypoxic
condition, through up-regulation of adiponectin receptor, colon cancer
cells become more sensitive to adiponectin, and those cells that do not
up-regulate the expression of these receptors, are more aggressive, with
higher metastatic potential.

