Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are increased and
correlated with immune suppression and chronic inflammation in patients
with cancer


Chronic inflammation plays a key role in the progress of malignant
diseases and has been reported to relate with immune suppression seen in
patients with advanced diseases. MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cells
found as a new type of immune suppressor cells are enhanced by
inflammation and have been reported to be present in blood circulation,
lymphnodes and tumor tissues in patients with cancer. The suppression of
immune function via depleting arginine and producing immune-suppressing
cytokines including IL-10 has also been reported. In order to investigate
MDSC in patients, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were
collected from 18 normal healthy volunteers, 53 patients with
gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with breast cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer,
and 5 with ovarian cancer. These cells were used for the detection of
MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow cytometry. PBMC was also used for the
PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes which is a marker of cell mediated
immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and for the production assay of
cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC (%PBMC) of whole patients (5.68
+ 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal cancer patients (3.76 + 4.90%) and
those of breast cancer patients (2.92 + 4.13%) were significantly higher
than those of normal volunteers (pChronic inflammation plays a key role
in the progress of malignant diseases and has been reported to relate
with immune suppression seen in patients with advanced diseases. MDSC:
myeloid-derived suppressor cells found as a new type of immune suppressor
cells are enhanced by inflammation and have been reported to be present
in blood circulation, lymphnodes and tumor tissues in patients with
cancer. The suppression of immune function via depleting arginine and
producing immune-suppressing cytokines including IL-10 has also been
reported. In order to investigate MDSC in patients, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were collected from 18 normal healthy
volunteers, 53 patients with gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with breast
cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer, and 5 with ovarian cancer. These cells
were used for the detection of MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow cytometry.
PBMC was also used for the PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes which is a
marker of cell mediated immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and for the
production assay of cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC (%PBMC) of
whole patients (5.68 + 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal cancer patients
(3.76 + 4.90%) and those of breast cancer patients (2.92 + 4.13%) were
significantly higher than those of normal volunteers (p<0.005, p=0.05,
pChronic inflammation plays a key role in the progress of malignant
diseases and has been reported to relate with immune suppression seen in
patients with advanced diseases. MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cells
found as a new type of immune suppressor cells are enhanced by
inflammation and have been reported to be present in blood circulation,
lymphnodes and tumor tissues in patients with cancer. The suppression of
immune function via depleting arginine and producing immune-suppressing
cytokines including IL-10 has also been reported. In order to investigate
MDSC in patients, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were
collected from 18 normal healthy volunteers, 53 patients with
gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with breast cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer,
and 5 with ovarian cancer. These cells were used for the detection of
MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow cytometry. PBMC was also used for the
PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes which is a marker of cell mediated
immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and for the production assay of
cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC (%PBMC) of whole patients (5.68
+ 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal cancer patients (3.76 + 4.90%) and
those of breast cancer patients (2.92 + 4.13%) were significantly higher
than those of normal volunteers (p<0.005, p=0.05, p<0.05, respectively,
vs 1.59 + 1.08%). MDSC were inversely correlated with the SI (r=0.271,
pChronic inflammation plays a key role in the progress of malignant
diseases and has been reported to relate with immune suppression seen in
patients with advanced diseases. MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cells
found as a new type of immune suppressor cells are enhanced by
inflammation and have been reported to be present in blood circulation,
lymphnodes and tumor tissues in patients with cancer. The suppression of
immune function via depleting arginine and producing immune-suppressing
cytokines including IL-10 has also been reported. In order to investigate
MDSC in patients, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were
collected from 18 normal healthy volunteers, 53 patients with
gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with breast cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer,
and 5 with ovarian cancer. These cells were used for the detection of
MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow cytometry. PBMC was also used for the
PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes which is a marker of cell mediated
immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and for the production assay of
cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC (%PBMC) of whole patients (5.68
+ 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal cancer patients (3.76 + 4.90%) and
those of breast cancer patients (2.92 + 4.13%) were significantly higher
than those of normal volunteers (p<0.005, p=0.05, p<0.05, respectively,
vs 1.59 + 1.08%). MDSC were inversely correlated with the SI (r=0.271,
p<0.05) in patients with gastrointestinal cancer and positively
correlated with IL-6 production in whole patients(r=0.287, p=0.05) and
with IL-10 production in patients with breast cancer (r=0.363, pChronic
inflammation plays a key role in the progress of malignant diseases and
has been reported to relate with immune suppression seen in patients with
advanced diseases. MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cells found as a new
type of immune suppressor cells are enhanced by inflammation and have
been reported to be present in blood circulation, lymphnodes and tumor
tissues in patients with cancer. The suppression of immune function via
depleting arginine and producing immune-suppressing cytokines including
IL-10 has also been reported. In order to investigate MDSC in patients,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were collected from 18 normal
healthy volunteers, 53 patients with gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with
breast cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer, and 5 with ovarian cancer. These
cells were used for the detection of MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow
cytometry. PBMC was also used for the PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes
which is a marker of cell mediated immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and
for the production assay of cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC
(%PBMC) of whole patients (5.68 + 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal
cancer patients (3.76 + 4.90%) and those of breast cancer patients (2.92
+ 4.13%) were significantly higher than those of normal volunteers
(p<0.005, p=0.05, p<0.05, respectively, vs 1.59 + 1.08%). MDSC were
inversely correlated with the SI (r=0.271, p<0.05) in patients with
gastrointestinal cancer and positively correlated with IL-6 production in
whole patients(r=0.287, p=0.05) and with IL-10 production in patients
with breast cancer (r=0.363, p<0.05). They were also significantly
correlated to neutrophil counts (r=0.287, pChronic inflammation plays a
key role in the progress of malignant diseases and has been reported to
relate with immune suppression seen in patients with advanced diseases.
MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cells found as a new type of immune
suppressor cells are enhanced by inflammation and have been reported to
be present in blood circulation, lymphnodes and tumor tissues in patients
with cancer. The suppression of immune function via depleting arginine
and producing immune-suppressing cytokines including IL-10 has also been
reported. In order to investigate MDSC in patients, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were collected from 18 normal healthy
volunteers, 53 patients with gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with breast
cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer, and 5 with ovarian cancer. These cells
were used for the detection of MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow cytometry.
PBMC was also used for the PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes which is a
marker of cell mediated immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and for the
production assay of cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC (%PBMC) of
whole patients (5.68 + 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal cancer patients
(3.76 + 4.90%) and those of breast cancer patients (2.92 + 4.13%) were
significantly higher than those of normal volunteers (p<0.005, p=0.05,
p<0.05, respectively, vs 1.59 + 1.08%). MDSC were inversely correlated
with the SI (r=0.271, p<0.05) in patients with gastrointestinal cancer
and positively correlated with IL-6 production in whole patients(r=0.287,
p=0.05) and with IL-10 production in patients with breast cancer
(r=0.363, p<0.05). They were also significantly correlated to neutrophil
counts (r=0.287, p<0.05) and neutrophil/lymphocyte ratios (NLR, r=0.623,
p=0.05), and inversely correlated to lymphocyte counts (r=0.251, pChronic
inflammation plays a key role in the progress of malignant diseases and
has been reported to relate with immune suppression seen in patients with
advanced diseases. MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cells found as a new
type of immune suppressor cells are enhanced by inflammation and have
been reported to be present in blood circulation, lymphnodes and tumor
tissues in patients with cancer. The suppression of immune function via
depleting arginine and producing immune-suppressing cytokines including
IL-10 has also been reported. In order to investigate MDSC in patients,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were collected from 18 normal
healthy volunteers, 53 patients with gastrointestinal cancer, 65 with
breast cancer, 8 with thyroid cancer, and 5 with ovarian cancer. These
cells were used for the detection of MDSC (CD11b+CD14CD33+) by flow
cytometry. PBMC was also used for the PHA-blastogenesis of lymphocytes
which is a marker of cell mediated immunity (stimulation indices: SI) and
for the production assay of cytokines including IL-6 and IL-10. MDSC
(%PBMC) of whole patients (5.68 + 5.92%), those of gastrointestinal
cancer patients (3.76 + 4.90%) and those of breast cancer patients (2.92
+ 4.13%) were significantly higher than those of normal volunteers
(p<0.005, p=0.05, p<0.05, respectively, vs 1.59 + 1.08%). MDSC were
inversely correlated with the SI (r=0.271, p<0.05) in patients with
gastrointestinal cancer and positively correlated with IL-6 production in
whole patients(r=0.287, p=0.05) and with IL-10 production in patients
with breast cancer (r=0.363, p<0.05). They were also significantly
correlated to neutrophil counts (r=0.287, p<0.05) and
neutrophil/lymphocyte ratios (NLR, r=0.623, p=0.05), and inversely
correlated to lymphocyte counts (r=0.251, p<0.01). Thus MDSC were
successfully detected in peripheral blood and were significantly higher
in patients with cancer. There were strong relationships among the
inhibition of cell-mediated immunity, production of type 2 cytokines and
inflammatory markers such as NLR. Therefore, MDSC seemed to work as a
suppressor of immune reaction and may be an important marker of chronic
inflammation in patients with cancer.

