Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Endoglin suppresses prostate cancer invasion through two distinct
type II TGF- receptors


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common cancer of American men and the
second leading cause of cancer-related death. Death from PCa results from
the development of metastatic disease, yet the processes underlying
progression from localized to invasive and ultimately metastatic disease
remain poorly understood. Our group has previously shown that endoglin,
an auxiliary TGF- superfamily receptor, is lost with PCa progression.
Restoration of endoglin expression inhibits PCa cell migration, invasion,
and metastasis in pre-clinical models. Endoglin-mediated suppression of
PCa invasion (EMSI) is mediated through the type I TGF- receptor ALK2 and
the downstream effector Smad1. Given that TGF- signaling minimally
requires both a type I and a type II TGF- receptor (RII), we sought to
determine the RII(s) involved in EMSI. We now show that silencing of
either the type IIA activin receptor (ActRII) or the type II bone
morphogenic protein receptor (BMPRII) abrogates endoglin's invasion
suppressive effects. Surprisingly, ActRII and BMPR2 have opposite effects
on downstream Smad1 signaling: ActRII promotes basal and
endoglin-mediated Smad1 transcriptional activity dependent on its kinase
domain, while BMPR2 suppresses Smad1 transcriptional activity independent
of its kinase domain but dependent on its cytoplasmic tail. Moreover, we
show that engagement of distinct BMP-responsive R-Smads (i.e. Smad1,
Smad5, & Smad8) does not account for differential signaling and confirm
that Smad1 is the main mediator downstream of endoglin. We posit the
existence of two parallel pathways that are required for EMSI: an ActRII
/ ALK2 / Smad1 pathway and a second, as-yet-uncharacterized pathway
involving BMPR2.

