Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Integrative genomic and transcriptomic analysis of metaplastic
carcinomas of the breast


Background Metaplastic breast carcinomas (MBCs) are characterised by
neoplastic cells that display differentiation towards squamous epithelium
or mesenchymal elements. These tumours are of triple-negative phenotype
and have an aggressive clinical behaviour. The aims of this study were to
characterise a series of MBCs at the genomic and transcriptomic level to
identify potential drivers of this breast cancer special type. Design
Twenty-five frozen MBCs and two MBC cell lines (HCC1569 and Hs578T) were
subjected to genotyping (Affymetrix SNP6), 32K BAC microarray comparative
genomic hybridisation (aCGH), microarray gene expression profiling
(Illumina HT12) and massively parallel mRNA-sequencing (RNA-seq, Illumina
GAII). Novel chimaeric transcripts were identified using Chimerascan
v0.4.3. 10 cases with available germline DNA were subjected to targeted
exomic sequencing (Illumina HiSeq). Somatic variants were called using
the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) using best practice guidelines. Fusion
genes and mutations were validated using (RT)-PCR and Sanger sequencing,
respectively. Results MBCs displayed a complex pattern of gene copy
number aberrations, with multiple copy number gains and losses throughout
the genome. Recurrent amplifications/ high-level gains at 3q25.2-q27.1,
8p11.21-q24.3 and 12p13.33 and recurrent homozygous deletions on 9p21.3
(CDKN2A/2B) and 10q23.31 (PTEN) were found. Unsupervised clustering of
gene expression showed that MBCs associated with chondroid
differentiation separated into a distinct cluster, whereas MBC's with
spindle and epithelial morphology did not cluster apart. Integration of
SNP6 copy number and gene expression data identified 198 genes
overexpressed when amplified. RNA-seq revealed 1025 unique nominated
fusion gene events (43-119 per tumour), including 254 fusions predicted
to be in-frame. These included a promoter swap involving TBXLR1 fused to
PIK3CA and a recurrent promoter swap involving NF1 that was also seen in
the MBC cell line Hs578T. Targeted exome sequencing identified 402
somatic coding variants (12-96 per tumour), including recurrent mutations
in TP53 (5/10) and genes involved in PI3K signaling. Conclusion Our
results demonstrate that MBCs have complex genomes and are heterogeneous
at both the genomic and transcriptomic levels. TP53, CDKN2A/2B and PTEN
mutations and/ or homozygous deletions, and activation of the PI3K
pathway are recurrent events in these tumours.

