Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PROX1 expression and function in malignant gliomas


The PROX1 transcription factor, also known as Prospero in flies, plays a
critical role in the development of various organs especially the
lymphatic and central nervous systems. Mutations in Prospero induce brain
tumor development in flies due to the lack of normal asymmetric neural
stem cell division. Less is known about the expression and function of
PROX1 in human brain tumors. First, we investigated expression of PROX1
using immunohistochemistry in 56 human astrocytic gliomas of different
grades. PROX1 was found to be overexpressed in the majority of high grade
tumors but not in grade I tumors or control tissue. Secondly, we
addressed the prognostic value of PROX1 in a clinical cohort of patients
with grade II gliomas (n=116). The number of PROX1 immunoreactive cells
was used as a variable in survival analysis. Patients with tumors showing
high PROX1 protein expression had poor outcome in the univariate analysis
as well as in the multivariate analysis compared to those with low PROX1
expression. Thirdly, we found that PROX1 was expressed in glioma cell
lines and we noted an apparent positive correlation between expression of
PROX1 and the pluripotency factor SOX2. Depletion of SOX2 using siRNA
inhibited glioma cell proliferation and reduced the levels of PROX1.
Acute loss of PROX1 did not impair glioma cell proliferation in vitro. We
conclude that PROX1 may constitute a useful tool for diagnosing and
grading of astrocytic glioma distinguishing grade III and IV tumors from
grade I and II tumors. PROX1 is also a novel predictor of survival for
grade II gliomas.

