Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeted-deletion of Ptp4a3 suppresses murine colon tumorigenesis


Protein tyrosine phosphatase 4a3 (Ptp4a3, PRL-3) is a small, prenylated,
4a-family phosphatase that is highly conserved throughout mammalian
species. Elevated expression levels commonly seen in human cancers,
particularly metastatic colorectal cancer, suggest that Ptp4a3 may serve
as a target for novel anticancer therapeutics. Ectopic overexpression of
Ptp4a3 in cell culture models often enhances the cellular properties of
migration and invasion. While Ptp4a3 has historically been associated
with late-stage disease and metastatic progression, we observed increases
in Ptp4a3 mRNA in the colon immediately following treatment with the
colon pro-carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM). In the AOM colon cancer model,
wildtype C57BL/6 mice develop approximately 7-10 tumors per mouse in the
distal colon. The resulting tumors exhibit an average of 4-fold
upregulation of Ptp4a3 mRNA relative to normal colon epithelium, as well
as positive immunohistochemical staining indicating the presence of
PTP4A3 protein. To further understand this promising target, we have
created the first Ptp4a3 knockout mouse model. Ptp4a3 knockout mice are
viable and appear normal, although male mice appear to have a slightly
reduce body mass index. Interestingly, Ptp4a3 knockout mice developed
fewer colon tumors than wildtype mice with the AOM model, suggesting that
Ptp4a3 may have a role in colon tumorigenesis and the cellular response
to genotoxic stress.

