Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene expression profiling of MCF10A series of Ha-Ras transformed
human breast epithelial cells: Gene expression involved in EMT pathway


MCF10A series (10A, 10AT, 10ATG3B, 10CA1h and 10CA1a) of breast
epithelial cells were examined for gene expression involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. This model represents a
unique system for examining early and progressive alterations that occur
in cells. Microarray analysis showed more than 720 genes are highly
expressed (>2 fold, PMCF10A series (10A, 10AT, 10ATG3B, 10CA1h and
10CA1a) of breast epithelial cells were examined for gene expression
involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. This model
represents a unique system for examining early and progressive
alterations that occur in cells. Microarray analysis showed more than 720
genes are highly expressed (>2 fold, P<0.05) but over 870 genes
significantly decreased (MCF10A series (10A, 10AT, 10ATG3B, 10CA1h and
10CA1a) of breast epithelial cells were examined for gene expression
involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. This model
represents a unique system for examining early and progressive
alterations that occur in cells. Microarray analysis showed more than 720
genes are highly expressed (>2 fold, P<0.05) but over 870 genes
significantly decreased (<0.5 fold, PMCF10A series (10A, 10AT, 10ATG3B,
10CA1h and 10CA1a) of breast epithelial cells were examined for gene
expression involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process.
This model represents a unique system for examining early and progressive
alterations that occur in cells. Microarray analysis showed more than 720
genes are highly expressed (>2 fold, P<0.05) but over 870 genes
significantly decreased (<0.5 fold, P<0.05) compared to control 10A.
Ontology analysis of 759 highly expressed genes in malignant 10CA1a
showed genes involved in metabolism were the greatest. 72 genes
progressively increased and 392 genes gradually decreased with the
tumorigenicity. 12 genes in EMT were significantly reduced (MCF10A series
(10A, 10AT, 10ATG3B, 10CA1h and 10CA1a) of breast epithelial cells were
examined for gene expression involved in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process. This model represents a unique system for
examining early and progressive alterations that occur in cells.
Microarray analysis showed more than 720 genes are highly expressed (>2
fold, P<0.05) but over 870 genes significantly decreased (<0.5 fold,
P<0.05) compared to control 10A. Ontology analysis of 759 highly
expressed genes in malignant 10CA1a showed genes involved in metabolism
were the greatest. 72 genes progressively increased and 392 genes
gradually decreased with the tumorigenicity. 12 genes in EMT were
significantly reduced (<0.5 fold, P2 fold, P2 fold, P<0.05) from
microarray and 12 genes significantly decreased (P2 fold, P<0.05) from
microarray and 12 genes significantly decreased (P<0.01) and 18 genes
were highly expressed (P2 fold, P<0.05) from microarray and 12 genes
significantly decreased (P<0.01) and 18 genes were highly expressed
(P<0.01) from PCR array. Based on two analyses, BMP7, COL5A2, DSC2,
GSK3B, RGS2, TSPAN13 and VIM were highly expressed but MAP1B, TIMP1 and
WNT5A significantly decreased. Collectively, altered gene levels in EMT
process may correlate with increasing risk of tumorigenicity and these
genes may serve as an early prognostic indicator of tumorigenic
potential. Supported by grant from NRF (R-2009-006-6765).

