Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development and validation of risk predictive models for
cervical low-grade and high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions


Aim To develop and validate a risk predictive model for cervical
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HGSIL; CIN2/CIN3). Materials
and Methods Study women were from a community survey network for cervical
cytological screening to evaluate and develop a simplified risk-score
system (Jan., 2003-Feb., 2009, Kaohsiung county). Two other series of
study participants obtained, respectively, from a follow-up of
disease-free women in the community (followed from Apr., 2004-Feb., 2010)
and from a hospital screening (Nov., 2008-Aug. 2011, KMUH) for cervical
lesions were used to validate the risk-score system. Kaplan-Meier failure
functions and the Cox proportional hazards model were used to evaluate
the cervical precancerous risk for women with high-risk scores. Results
Women who have a risk score of 5 obtained from the HGSIL model were
defined as high risk subjects for the cervical lesion. The sensitivity
and specificity of the risk-score system were 76.3% and 88.1%. The
results of validation showed that the HGSIL model had high sensitivity
and specificity (100% and 89.6%) for the community follow-up samples. We
also evaluated the incidences of HGSIL among women with a high risk-score
using the community follow-up cohort. The first and second-year
cumulative incidences of HGSIL among women with the score of 5 were 1.05%
and 3.63%, respectively. Conclusion With an acceptable accuracy, our data
suggest that the HGSIL risk predictive model can be used to assist the
screening of HGSIL.

