Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Post-GWAS genetic and functional studies for bladder cancer: An
uncommon protective synonymous coding variant within the UGT1A6 gene
explains the GWAS signal and affects cellular detoxification


Background: A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) of bladder
cancer identified a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs11892031,
within the UGT1A gene cluster on chromosome 2q37.1, as a novel risk
factor. UGT1A locus encodes nine UGT proteins that belong to phase II
cellular detoxification system. UGTs are functionally important for
detoxification of aromatic amines, which are known risk factors for
bladder cancer found in industrial chemicals and tobacco smoke. UGTs are
composed of shared exons 2-5 and individual alternative first exons that
define enzymatic activity and substrate specificity. Materials and
results: We sequenced all nine highly similar alternative first exons of
UGT genes in more than 2,000 individuals and identified 27 non-synonymous
and 19 synonymous known coding variants, but no novel variants.
Imputation based on the GWAS dataset, a combined reference panel of
HapMap 3 and 1000 Genomes Projects, and a subset of GWAS samples
genotyped for all the identified coding variants, generated data for
1,170 SNPs within the whole UGT region. Of these markers, the strongest
association was detected for an uncommon (MAFBackground: A recent
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of bladder cancer identified a
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs11892031, within the UGT1A gene
cluster on chromosome 2q37.1, as a novel risk factor. UGT1A locus encodes
nine UGT proteins that belong to phase II cellular detoxification system.
UGTs are functionally important for detoxification of aromatic amines,
which are known risk factors for bladder cancer found in industrial
chemicals and tobacco smoke. UGTs are composed of shared exons 2-5 and
individual alternative first exons that define enzymatic activity and
substrate specificity. Materials and results: We sequenced all nine
highly similar alternative first exons of UGT genes in more than 2,000
individuals and identified 27 non-synonymous and 19 synonymous known
coding variants, but no novel variants. Imputation based on the GWAS
dataset, a combined reference panel of HapMap 3 and 1000 Genomes
Projects, and a subset of GWAS samples genotyped for all the identified
coding variants, generated data for 1,170 SNPs within the whole UGT
region. Of these markers, the strongest association was detected for an
uncommon (MAF<0.03) protective genetic variant rs17863783 (OR=0.55,
95%CI=0.44-0.69, p=3.3x10-7 in 4,035 cases and 5, 284 controls; D=0.96,
r2=0.23 with rs11892031). No residual association in this region was
detected after adjustment for rs17863783. Rs17863783 is a synonymous
coding variant Val209Val within the functional UGT1A6.1 splicing form,
strongly expressed in the liver, kidney and bladder. We found the
protective T allele of rs17863783 to be associated with increased mRNA
expression of UGT1A6.1 in in-vitro exontrap assays and in human liver
tissue samples. We suggest rs17863783 may protect from bladder cancer by
increasing the removal of carcinogens from bladder epithelium by the
UGT1A6.1 protein. Conclusions: Our study shows an example of genetic and
functional role of an uncommon protective genetic variant in a complex
human disease such as bladder cancer.

