Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical efficacy and safety of bevacizumab monotherapy in
patients with metastatic melanoma: predictive importance of induced early
hypertension in a single-arm Phase II study


Purpose VEGF driven angiogenesis plays a key role in tumor growth. We
determined clinical efficacy of bevacizumab monotherapy in unselected
patients with metastatic melanoma. Patients and methods Thirty-five
patients with metastatic melanoma in progression were enrolled in this
phase II, single arm clinical trial. Each patient received bevacizumab
monotherapy 10 mg/kg q14 d until intolerable toxicity or disease
progression occurred. Clinical efficacy was evaluated by measuring
objective response (OR), disease control (DC), and survival. We also
evaluated potential predictive value of clinical parameters and BRAF/NRAS
mutational status. Results We observed one complete (CR, 3%) and 5
partial (PR, 14%) responses. In addition, 5 patients experienced stable
disease > 6 months (SD, 14%), while 24 patients had progressive disease
(PD, 69%), corresponding to a total disease control (DC) at 6 months in
11 out of 35 patients (31 %). Median progression free survival (PFS) was
2.14 months and median overall survival (OS) was 9 months (1.12-49).
Seven of the 11 patients experiencing DC developed early hypertension
(Purpose VEGF driven angiogenesis plays a key role in tumor growth. We
determined clinical efficacy of bevacizumab monotherapy in unselected
patients with metastatic melanoma. Patients and methods Thirty-five
patients with metastatic melanoma in progression were enrolled in this
phase II, single arm clinical trial. Each patient received bevacizumab
monotherapy 10 mg/kg q14 d until intolerable toxicity or disease
progression occurred. Clinical efficacy was evaluated by measuring
objective response (OR), disease control (DC), and survival. We also
evaluated potential predictive value of clinical parameters and BRAF/NRAS
mutational status. Results We observed one complete (CR, 3%) and 5
partial (PR, 14%) responses. In addition, 5 patients experienced stable
disease > 6 months (SD, 14%), while 24 patients had progressive disease
(PD, 69%), corresponding to a total disease control (DC) at 6 months in
11 out of 35 patients (31 %). Median progression free survival (PFS) was
2.14 months and median overall survival (OS) was 9 months (1.12-49).
Seven of the 11 patients experiencing DC developed early hypertension (<
2 months) after commencing bevacizumab compared to 3/24 of patients with
PD (P= 0.001), and hypertension was associated with improved progression
free survival (P= 0.005) and overall survival (P= 0.013). No correlation
between BRAF and NRAS mutation status and response was recorded.
Conclusion Bevacizumab monotherapy demonstrated promising clinical
efficacy in patients with metastatic melanoma with disease control in 31%
of the patients. The activity of the drug seemed particularly pronounced
in patients developing by hypertension early during.

