Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCN6 downregulation in invasive breast carcinomas: In situ
characterization of changes in EMT proteins and metastatic disease


Background: The recognized heterogeneity of invasive breast carcinomas is
a result of intrinsic characteristics of the tumor cells and their
interaction with the microenvironment. CCN6, an extracellular
matricellular protein involved in cell communication and
epithelial-stromal interactions has a tumor suppressor role in breast
cancer. CCN6 downregulation in benign breast cells induces an epithelial
to mesenchymal transition marked by downregulation of E-cadherin and
increased levels of the transcriptional regulators ZEB1 and Snai1.
However, the relevance of these studies to human breast cancer needs
further investigation. We hypothesized that CCN6 mRNA and protein levels
in samples of breast cancer patients may be associated with metastasis
and features of EMT. Methods: Forty clinical samples of invasive
carcinoma and surrounding normal breast, frozen at the time of operation
were collected. We extracted mRNA and protein from each sample and
performed real time RT-PCR and Western blots for CCN6, respectively. All
frozen samples were immunostained with antibodies against E-cadherin (BD
Biosciences, 1:4000), ZEB1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 1:400) and
Snai1(Cell Signaling, 1:800). E-cadherin was analyzed as aberrant or
normal. ZEB1 and Snai1 proteins were scored as positive or negative,
either in the cancer or stromal cells. Results: Of the 40 frozen samples
of breast cancer, 23 had high quality RNA and protein for further study.
CCN6 mRNA and protein were both decreased in 18/23 (78%). Five of 23
(22%) samples exhibited normal or high expression. Low CCN6 was
associated with the presence of distant metastasis. Four of 18 (22%)
invasive carcinomas with low CCN6 had distant metastasis compared to none
of the normal CCN6 expressing tumors (pBackground: The recognized
heterogeneity of invasive breast carcinomas is a result of intrinsic
characteristics of the tumor cells and their interaction with the
microenvironment. CCN6, an extracellular matricellular protein involved
in cell communication and epithelial-stromal interactions has a tumor
suppressor role in breast cancer. CCN6 downregulation in benign breast
cells induces an epithelial to mesenchymal transition marked by
downregulation of E-cadherin and increased levels of the transcriptional
regulators ZEB1 and Snai1. However, the relevance of these studies to
human breast cancer needs further investigation. We hypothesized that
CCN6 mRNA and protein levels in samples of breast cancer patients may be
associated with metastasis and features of EMT. Methods: Forty clinical
samples of invasive carcinoma and surrounding normal breast, frozen at
the time of operation were collected. We extracted mRNA and protein from
each sample and performed real time RT-PCR and Western blots for CCN6,
respectively. All frozen samples were immunostained with antibodies
against E-cadherin (BD Biosciences, 1:4000), ZEB1 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, 1:400) and Snai1(Cell Signaling, 1:800). E-cadherin was
analyzed as aberrant or normal. ZEB1 and Snai1 proteins were scored as
positive or negative, either in the cancer or stromal cells. Results: Of
the 40 frozen samples of breast cancer, 23 had high quality RNA and
protein for further study. CCN6 mRNA and protein were both decreased in
18/23 (78%). Five of 23 (22%) samples exhibited normal or high
expression. Low CCN6 was associated with the presence of distant
metastasis. Four of 18 (22%) invasive carcinomas with low CCN6 had
distant metastasis compared to none of the normal CCN6 expressing tumors
(p<0.05). Seventeen of 18 (94%) of invasive carcinomas with low CCN6 had
aberrant E-cadherin protein expression. We noted that in the tumors with
aberrant E-cadherin protein, the expression of ZEB1 or Snai1 was mutually
exclusive in all cases (pBackground: The recognized heterogeneity of
invasive breast carcinomas is a result of intrinsic characteristics of
the tumor cells and their interaction with the microenvironment. CCN6, an
extracellular matricellular protein involved in cell communication and
epithelial-stromal interactions has a tumor suppressor role in breast
cancer. CCN6 downregulation in benign breast cells induces an epithelial
to mesenchymal transition marked by downregulation of E-cadherin and
increased levels of the transcriptional regulators ZEB1 and Snai1.
However, the relevance of these studies to human breast cancer needs
further investigation. We hypothesized that CCN6 mRNA and protein levels
in samples of breast cancer patients may be associated with metastasis
and features of EMT. Methods: Forty clinical samples of invasive
carcinoma and surrounding normal breast, frozen at the time of operation
were collected. We extracted mRNA and protein from each sample and
performed real time RT-PCR and Western blots for CCN6, respectively. All
frozen samples were immunostained with antibodies against E-cadherin (BD
Biosciences, 1:4000), ZEB1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 1:400) and
Snai1(Cell Signaling, 1:800). E-cadherin was analyzed as aberrant or
normal. ZEB1 and Snai1 proteins were scored as positive or negative,
either in the cancer or stromal cells. Results: Of the 40 frozen samples
of breast cancer, 23 had high quality RNA and protein for further study.
CCN6 mRNA and protein were both decreased in 18/23 (78%). Five of 23
(22%) samples exhibited normal or high expression. Low CCN6 was
associated with the presence of distant metastasis. Four of 18 (22%)
invasive carcinomas with low CCN6 had distant metastasis compared to none
of the normal CCN6 expressing tumors (p<0.05). Seventeen of 18 (94%) of
invasive carcinomas with low CCN6 had aberrant E-cadherin protein
expression. We noted that in the tumors with aberrant E-cadherin protein,
the expression of ZEB1 or Snai1 was mutually exclusive in all cases
(p<0.05). We noted that 80% of the tumors exhibited ZEB1protein in the
stromal cells. Conclusions: Our results show a direct link between levels
of CCN6 mRNA and protein in breast carcinoma patient samples. A decrease
in CCN6 expression in the primary breast cancer is associated with
distant metastasis and decreased E-cadherin. We uncover a novel inverse
relationship between ZEB1 and Snai1 proteins in breast cancer, which is
under further investigation.

