Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Can histologic patterns of pulmonary adenocarcinoma reflect
histologic grade, one of the most important factors of cancer prognosis?


Background: Pulmonary adenocarcinoma shows highly heterogeneous
histologic pattern. Histologic pattern is suggested to be an important
prognostic factor, therefore predominant histologic pattern is emphasized
in 2010 IASLC/ATS/ERS classification of pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
However, there are a few papers on the prognosis of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma according to histologic patterns, especially in various
stages. The aim of this study is to evaluate prognosis according to
histologic patterns in pulmonary adenocarcinoma with various stages.
Methods: We examined 125 cases of surgically resected pulmonary
adenocarcinomas with various stages from January 1998 to December 2007.
Invasive adenocarcinomas were classified into histologic subtypes which
are lepidic, papillary, acinar, solid and micropapillary patterns by 2010
IASLC/ATS/ERS classification. Invasive adenocarcinoma was divided into
2010 classification (I), predominant and second predominant pattern (II),
predominant and the worst pattern (III), and modified predominant pattern
(IV). Results: Proportions of predominant lepidic, papillary, acinar,
solid and micropapillary patterns were 11 (9.3%), 8 (6.8%), 54 (45.8%),
38 (32.2%) and 7 (5.9%), respectively. All histologic classification
systems were not correlated with clinical manifestations including age,
tumor size, T stage, N stage or recurrence. However, all histologic
classification systems were significantly correlated with overall
survival rates (p=0.010, 0.044, 0.001, and 0.013) by Kaplan-Meier
survival test. In Cox proportional hazard model, histologic pattern was
independent factor of prognosis on classification according to I, III, IV
(p=0.017, 0.006 and 0.023). Conclusion: Histologic pattern is an
independent prognostic factor in pulmonary adenocarcinoma with various
stages and histologic patterns of pulmonary adenocarcinoma reflect the
degree of histologic differentiation, one of the most important
prognostic factor.

