Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Soluble epoxide hydrolase gene deficiency attenuates
colitis-induced carcinogenesis in IL-10 knockout mice


Soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) can quickly inactivate
epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) anti-inflammatory function via
converting it to dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acid (DHETs). Inhibition of sEH
has shown effects against inflammation. But little is studied about the
effect of sEH on colitis-induced carcinogenesis. In this study, we
determined the role of sEH gene deficiency in suppressing the development
of colitis-induced tumor using chronic colitis mouse model in IL-10
knockout mice combined with sEH gene deficiency. Tumor formation in the
bowel was examined at age of 25 weeks for male mice and 35 weeks for
female mice. Our results showed that sEH (-/-)/IL-10 (-/-) mice exhibited
a significant decrease of tumor multiplicity (2 tumor/mouse vs. 1
tumor/mouse) and tumor size (344.5571.73 vs. 126.9423.18 mm3, p=0.028) as
compared to IL-10(-/-) mice. But no difference was observed for tumor
incidence. Colitis-induced dysplasia was further identified by
Ki67-labeled luminal surface epithelial cell proliferation combined with
morphologic features and revealed that the number of dysplasia was
significantly decreased in sEH (-/-)/IL-10 (-/-) mice. Histopathological
analysis of inflammatory activity in the bowel showed the significantly
lower inflammation scores, including inflammation-involved area (1.40.18
vs. 0.700.16, P=0.007), ulcer (2.150.18 vs. 1.550.35, P=0.032), and
myeloperoxidase-labeled inflammatory cell infiltrates in sEH (-/-)/
IL-10(-/-) mice compared to IL-10(-/-) mice. qPCR and western blotting
assays showed a downregulation of inflammatory cytokines and NF-kB
signals. Analysis of eicsanoid acid metabolic profile confirmed sEH
functional deficiency and showed a significant increase in the ratios of
EETs/DHET and EpOME/DiOME in sEH (-/-)/IL-10 (-/-) mice compared to
IL-10(-/-) mice. The results indicate that sEH gene plays an important
role in the development of chronic colitis-induced carcinoma and could
serve as a crucial target of cancer chemoprevention. (Supported by NIH
R01 grant CA137467)

