Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SAHA downregulation of HuR expression is responsible for reduction
of cyclin D1 mRNA stability and cell transformation by EGF in Cl41 cells


Previous studies have reported that anti-cancer activity of
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is associated with its
downregulation of cyclin D1 protein expression at transcription and
translation levels. In current studies, we demonstrated that SAHA
downregulation of cyclin D1 expression mainly via modulation of cyclin D1
mRNA stability in EGF-induced mouse epidermal Cl41 cell transformation
(anchorage-independent colony formation) model. We found that SAHA
treatment resulted in dramatic inhibition of EGF-induced cell
transformation and cyclin D1 expression. Further studies showed that SAHA
downregulation of cyclin D1 expression was only observed in endogenous
cyclin D1, but not in reconstitutional cyclin D1 in same cells, excluding
the possibility of SAHA regulation of cyclin D1 expression at levels of
protein degradation. Moreover, we found that SAHA was able to inhibit
EGF-induced cyclin D1 mRNA expression, whereas it did not show any
inhibitory effect on cyclin D1 promoter-deriven luciferase reporter
activity under same experimental conditions, suggesting that SAHA might
downregulate cyclin D1 mRNA stability. This notion was greatly supported
by the results showing that co-treatment of cells with SAHA and
actinomycin D increased the cyclin D1 mRNA degradation in comparison to
that in cells treated with actinomycin D alone. Consistent with
downregulation of cyclin D1 mRNA stability, SAHA treatment also
attenuated HuR protein expression, which is a well-characterized cyclin
D1 mRNA-binding protein. Taken together, our results demonstrated that
SAHA treatment resulted in downregulation of cyclin D1 expression by
inhibition of HuR expression, which led to reduction of cyclin D1 mRNA
stability and protein expression, and further in turn caused the
inhibition of EGF-induced cell transformation in Cl41 cells.

