Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: An oral therapeutic vaccine for colorectal cancer effectively
eradicates intestinal tumors independently of target tumor-antigen
specific immunities in APCMin/+ hCEA mice


Colorectal cancer is among the leading cause of cancer-related death in
patients worldwide, and the requirement of an effective vaccine is
urgent. Here, we designed a pseudovirus-based therapeutic vaccine for
colorectal cancer, which is comprised of a plasmid encoding a colorectal
tumor-associated antigen (human CEA) packaged inside the bovine
papillomavirus like particles (VLP-CEA vaccine). Oral immunization of
APCMin/+ hCEA mice (a mouse model of human colorectal cancer) with
VLP-CEA vaccine greatly reduced the tumor number compared with those
received PBS. More importantly, the APCMin/+ hCEA mice that received
pseudovirus vaccine had dramatically enhanced survival rates than those
only received PBS. Surprisingly, CEA-specific adaptive immunities are
dispensible for tumor elimination as similar tumor number reductions are
seen in the APCMin/+ or APCMin/+ hCEA mice that are immunized with either
VLP-CEA or VLP-GFP (VLPs packaging a GFP-containing plasmid).
Consistently, we found that CTL responses are not required for tumor
eradication since depleting CD8 T cells prior to vaccinations didn't
impair the vaccine efficacy. Finally, we found that VLP-CEA and VLP-GFP
are both able to activate the inflammasome which might directly induce
tumor cell death. Thus, our data indicate that independent of the target
tumor-antigen specific adaptive immunity, our pseudovirus-based
therapeutic vaccine for colorectal cancer effectively eliminates already
established intestinal tumors in an animal model, and the understanding
of the immune mechanism by which pseudovirus vaccines eradicate
colorectal tumorigenesis will further our knowledge for designing
vaccines for other cancers.

