Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mutations to the GSK3 regulatory region of CTNNB1 increase TCF
transcription activity and are resistant to degradation by GSK3


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is currently the third most common cause
of cancer related mortality worldwide. As with many cancers, aberrant
activation of Wnt/-catenin signaling plays a critical pathogenic role in
the disease. Somatic mutations in genes of the Wnt pathway are widely
observed in tumor tissue, where it has been estimated that 15-20% of
tumors possess activating mutations in beta-catenin (CTNNB1). The
turnover of CTNNB1 protein is tightly regulated in cells by the
degradation complex which includes the CK1 and GSK3 kinases in a complex
with Axin and APC. Mutations within the CTNNB1 gene at the CK1
phosphorylation site (Ser45) and GSK3 phosphorylation sites (Ser33,
Ser37, Thr41) are observed clinically and result in CTNNB1 protein
accumulation and enhanced transcription of Wnt target genes. The goal of
this study is to characterize additional clinically observed CTNNB1
mutations in HCC. It is hypothesized that mutations within the
phosphorylation domain in exon 3 will impact the phosphorylation of these
key regulatory sites of CTNNB1. To assess the impact of three observed
CTNNB1 mutations (H36P, I35S and S23R) on Wnt signaling activity, mutant
CTNNB1 constructs were first created and their impact on Wnt signaling
was measured using a luciferase-based Wnt reporter assay in transfected
HEK293T cells. Compared to the wild type CTNNB1 control, Wnt
transcription activity in the presence of H36P, I35S, and S23R mutants
were increased by 6.55 2.08, 6.76 2.44, and 2.36 1.01 fold, respectively.
This compared to a 5.91 1.38 fold increase observed with the
phosphorylation mutant S45P. To evaluate if these mutations had a
measurable impact on GSK3 regulation of CTNNB1 levels, each mutant was
coexpressed with a GSK3 expression vector and evaluated using the same
Wnt reporter system. As anticipated, GSK3 coexpression reduced Wnt
reporter activity of the CTNNB1 control by 3.6 fold .33 where the S45P
mutant was not affected. Coexpression of GSK3 did not attenuate increased
Wnt activity observed with the mutants H36P and I35S, however it did
decrease activity observed with the S23R by a similar magnitude of the
wild type CTNNB1 control (2.27 fold .93). These results describe the
activating nature of H36P, S45P, and I35S which likely mediate their
effect via impaired CTNNB1 phosphorylation. To a lesser extent, S23R
activated Wnt activity, however, is subject to attenuation by GSK3
phosphorylation.

