Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interleukin-4 receptor regulates metastasis of mammary epithelial
cancer cells


Interleukin-4 (IL-4), a cytokine produced mainly by immune cells, may
promote cancer cell survival by mediating apoptosis resistance in
epithelial tumors. The IL-4 Receptor (IL-4R) is overexpressed in a
variety of human solid cancer cell lines and primary cell lines, and may
be a promising target for anti-tumor therapy. Here, we show that loss of
IL-4R, a component of the IL-4 receptor, in two murine mammary tumor cell
lines (R221A and 4T1), reduces tumor cell survival and results in
attenuated metastatic growth in secondary sites. Proliferation and direct
cell counting analyses, following knockdown of IL-4R with RNA
interference, show that R221A clones with reduced IL-4R expression
proliferate at a comparable rate to control clones, but the number of
cells is significantly reduced. This data correlates with the finding
that reduced IL-4R expression in R221A cells almost completely abolishes
tumor take after orthotopic mammary injection in vivo. Furthermore,
reduced IL-4R expression in R221A and 4T1 cell lines results in a
decrease [2.4 fold] in lung metastatic growth in vivo. Reduced expression
of IL-4R in 4T1 cells results in a similar decrease of liver metastasis.
In support of this data, proliferation assays following serum starvation
and a modified clonogenic survival assay show that both 4T1 and R221A
knockdown clones have a decrease [2 fold] in survival ability in
comparison to control clones. Taken together, our results indicate that
the IL-4 receptor promotes survival of breast cancer cells at metastatic
sites, and suggests that drugs targeting this pathway, currently in
clinical trials for respiratory ailments, may have potential for limiting
metastatic disease.

