Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antitumor activity of the MDM2 antagonist, RG7112


The p53 tumor suppressor is a transcription factor which plays a central
role in prevention of tumor development by inducing cell cycle arrest or
apoptosis in response to diverse stresses. In unstressed cells, p53 level
is tightly controlled by MDM2 which binds p53 and negatively regulates
its activity and stability. MDM2 is overproduced in many human cancers as
a mechanism to impair p53 function. Antagonists of p53-MDM2 interaction
could reactivate p53 and may offer a novel approach to cancer therapy.
The first potent and selective small-molecule inhibitors of p53-MDM2
binding, the Nutlins, provided preclinical proof-of-concept for MDM2
antagonists as a new therapeutic option for patients with tumors
expressing wild-type p53. RG7112 is a member of the Nutlin family of MDM2
antagonists with improved potency, selectivity and pharmacological
properties which is currently in Ph1 clinical evaluation. Here, we
describe its biological activity in models of human cancer in vitro and
in vivo. RG7112 binds to MDM2 with high affinity in vitro (KD 11 nM) and
effectively blocks its interaction with p53. Crystal structures of
RG7112-MDM2 complexes revealed that this imidazoline molecule interact
with the p53-binding pocket of MDM2 by projecting functional groups that
mimic critical amino acid residues from the p53 molecule. Treatment of
cancer cells expressing wild-type p53 with RG7112 stabilized p53 and
activated the p53 pathway as revealed by the induction of multiple
p53-regulated genes. This led to cell cycle arrest in G1 and G2 phases
followed by apoptosis. It showed potent antitumor activity in vitro
against a panel of solid tumor and leukemia cells expressing wild-type
p53 with EC50 in the 0.2 - 2.2 M range. The overall selectivity between
the panels of seven mutant and fifteen wild-type p53 lines, expressed as
fold difference in the average EC50 values was 14-fold. As previously
shown with nutlin-3, RG7112 demonstrated variable apoptotic activity in a
panel of solid tumor cells with the best apoptotic response in cells with
mdm2 gene amplification. Interestingly, inhibition of caspase activity
did not change the kinetics of p53-induced cell death. Oral
administration of RG7112 to nude mice bearing established human tumor
xenografts caused dose-dependent tumor inhibition and tumor regression at
non-toxic concentration. The in vivo mode of action was confirmed by
pharmacodynamic markers, indicating p53 pathway activation and induction
of growth arrest and apoptosis in tumor tissues. Our results showed that
RG7112 is a potent p53 activator and antitumor agent in vitro and in vivo
that may have therapeutic utility in the treatment of solid tumors and
leukemia with wild-type p53.

