Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The RRas2/TC21 GTPase is essential for breast tumorigenesis and
lung metastasis


Rras2/TC21 is a Ras superfamily GTPase with still unknown functions in
vivo. Several observations suggest that this protein may be involved in
tumorigenic processes. Thus, it has been shown that the expression of
constitutively active RRas2 mutants leads to high levels of cell
transformation in vitro. Moreover, this GTPase has been found
overexpressed in a number of tumors, including lymphomas, oral and
esophageal carcinoma, and breast cancer. To address the role of this
protein in epithelial tumors, we have carried out an extensive
characterization of this GTPase using RRas2 knockout mice and shRNA
knockdown tumor cells. These studies revealed that RRas2 is not important
for the development and/or malignant progression of skin and oral
squamous cell carcinoma. Instead, we have observed that the RRas2
deficiency severily impairs breast cancer tumorigenesis and the tropism
of metastatic cancer cells to the lung. The characterization of the role
of RRas2 in primary tumorigenesis indicates that this GTPase is important
for the proliferation and angiogenesis of tumors. In the case of
metastasis, RRas2 is important for the survival and proliferation of
cancer cells in the lung parenchyma. By contrast, this GTPase is not
required for the lymph node infiltration, intravasation, or extravasation
of cancer cells. Interestingly, the requirement of RRas2 is still
maintained in breast cancer cells that express active mutants of K-Ras,
indicating that RRas2 plays essential roles downstream of both Her2 and
K-Ras. Signaling experiments indicate that RRas2 contributes to those
processes by modulating the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
and downstream targets such as Akt, FoxO1/FoxO3 and S6 ribosomal protein.

