Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Elesclomol (STA-4783) is a potent inhibitor of topoisomerase II


Elesclomol (STA-4783; N1, N3-dimethyl-N1, N3-
bis(phenylcarbonothioyl)propanedihydrazide) is an anticancer drug that
has received both fast track and orphan drug status from the FDA and is
currently undergoing clinical trials. Elesclomol forms a strong 1:1
complex with copper(II) and may exert its anticancer activity through the
induction of oxidative stress. In the studies reported here elesclomol
was assessed for its ability to inhibit: 1) the growth of the human
erythroleukemic K562 cell line and an etoposide-resistant K/VP.5 cell
line; 2) the decatenation activity of DNA topoisomerase II; and 3) the
relaxation activity of DNA topoisomerase I. Elesclomol was also evaluated
for its ability to induce topoisomerase II-mediated double strand
cleavage of pBR322 DNA and to form topoisomerase II-DNA covalent adducts
in the cell-based ICE assay. Elesclomol inhibited K562 cell growth in the
submicromolar concentration range. However, K/VP.5 cells were not
cross-resistant. Elesclomol also strongly inhibited the decatenation
activity of topoisomerase II in the low micromolar concentration range.
Elesclomol may also act as topoisomerase II poison because it induced
formation of linear DNA, though not as strongly as etoposide. In
conclusion, these results show that elesclomol may, in part, inhibit cell
growth through the targeting of topoisomerase II. Support: CIHR, a Canada
Research Chair in Drug Development to B.B.H., a National Institutes of
Health grant CA090787 to J.C.Y.

