Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Grape seed extract induces irreparable DNA damage causing G2/M
arrest and apoptosis selectively in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
cells: Potential involvement of reactive oxygen species


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) accounts for 6% of all
cancers in the United States, and unfortunately, the recurrence of
secondary primary tumors, resistance and/or toxicity associated with
conventional treatments decrease the overall 5-year survival rate in
HNSCC patient. These limitations associated with therapies suggest that
additional strategies are needed for the prevention/intervention of both
primary as well as secondary primary tumors post HNSCC therapy. One such
class of non-toxic agents is polyphenolic phytochemicals present in diet
or those consumed as supplements. Grape seed extract (GSE) is one such
dietary supplement that has received enormous attention in recent years
due to its strong anti-cancer and chemopreventive potentials in several
in vitro and in vivo studies. Here, for the first time, we investigated
GSE efficacy employing human HNSCC Detroit 562 and FaDu cells as well as
normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) both in vitro and in vivo.
Our study showed that GSE selectively inhibited the growth and increased
death in both HNSCC cell lines in a dose- and a time-dependent manner.
GSE treatment (40 g/ml for12-72 h) resulted in 18-80% (pHead and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) accounts for 6% of all cancers in the
United States, and unfortunately, the recurrence of secondary primary
tumors, resistance and/or toxicity associated with conventional
treatments decrease the overall 5-year survival rate in HNSCC patient.
These limitations associated with therapies suggest that additional
strategies are needed for the prevention/intervention of both primary as
well as secondary primary tumors post HNSCC therapy. One such class of
non-toxic agents is polyphenolic phytochemicals present in diet or those
consumed as supplements. Grape seed extract (GSE) is one such dietary
supplement that has received enormous attention in recent years due to
its strong anti-cancer and chemopreventive potentials in several in vitro
and in vivo studies. Here, for the first time, we investigated GSE
efficacy employing human HNSCC Detroit 562 and FaDu cells as well as
normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) both in vitro and in vivo.
Our study showed that GSE selectively inhibited the growth and increased
death in both HNSCC cell lines in a dose- and a time-dependent manner.
GSE treatment (40 g/ml for12-72 h) resulted in 18-80% (p<0.001) and
25-90% (pHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) accounts for 6% of
all cancers in the United States, and unfortunately, the recurrence of
secondary primary tumors, resistance and/or toxicity associated with
conventional treatments decrease the overall 5-year survival rate in
HNSCC patient. These limitations associated with therapies suggest that
additional strategies are needed for the prevention/intervention of both
primary as well as secondary primary tumors post HNSCC therapy. One such
class of non-toxic agents is polyphenolic phytochemicals present in diet
or those consumed as supplements. Grape seed extract (GSE) is one such
dietary supplement that has received enormous attention in recent years
due to its strong anti-cancer and chemopreventive potentials in several
in vitro and in vivo studies. Here, for the first time, we investigated
GSE efficacy employing human HNSCC Detroit 562 and FaDu cells as well as
normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) both in vitro and in vivo.
Our study showed that GSE selectively inhibited the growth and increased
death in both HNSCC cell lines in a dose- and a time-dependent manner.
GSE treatment (40 g/ml for12-72 h) resulted in 18-80% (p<0.001) and
25-90% (p<0.001) decrease in live cell number, increased cell death by
8-49% and 9-40% (pHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) accounts
for 6% of all cancers in the United States, and unfortunately, the
recurrence of secondary primary tumors, resistance and/or toxicity
associated with conventional treatments decrease the overall 5-year
survival rate in HNSCC patient. These limitations associated with
therapies suggest that additional strategies are needed for the
prevention/intervention of both primary as well as secondary primary
tumors post HNSCC therapy. One such class of non-toxic agents is
polyphenolic phytochemicals present in diet or those consumed as
supplements. Grape seed extract (GSE) is one such dietary supplement that
has received enormous attention in recent years due to its strong
anti-cancer and chemopreventive potentials in several in vitro and in
vivo studies. Here, for the first time, we investigated GSE efficacy
employing human HNSCC Detroit 562 and FaDu cells as well as normal human
epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) both in vitro and in vivo. Our study
showed that GSE selectively inhibited the growth and increased death in
both HNSCC cell lines in a dose- and a time-dependent manner. GSE
treatment (40 g/ml for12-72 h) resulted in 18-80% (p<0.001) and 25-90%
(p<0.001) decrease in live cell number, increased cell death by 8-49% and
9-40% (p<0.001) in Detroit 562 and FaDu cells compared to control,
respectively. We found that GSE (20 and 40 g/ml) resulted in increased
accumulation of cells in G2/M-phase in dose- and time-dependent manner in
both the cells lines. We also observed that GSE treatment for 24-72h
resulted in significant increase in apoptotic cell death in both Detroit
562 and FaDu cells by activating DNA damage checkpoint cascade including
ATM/ATR-Chk1/2-Cdc25C as well as caspases 8, 9 and 3. Consistent with
this, GSE treatment also resulted in a strong DNA damage as indicated by
increased phosphorylation of -H2AX and decreased the levels of DNA repair
molecules Brca1 and Rad51 as well as the DNA repair foci, thereby;
possibly sensitizing these cells towards GSE induced cell death.
Furthermore, our study also showed that GSE caused accumulation of
intra-cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) was identified as a major
mechanism of its effect for growth inhibition, DNA damage and apoptosis,
which was remarkably reversed by thiol antioxidant N-acetylcysteine
(NAC). GSE feeding to nude mice decreased Detroit 562 and FaDu xenograft
tumor growth by 67% and 65% (pHead and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) accounts for 6% of all cancers in the United States, and
unfortunately, the recurrence of secondary primary tumors, resistance
and/or toxicity associated with conventional treatments decrease the
overall 5-year survival rate in HNSCC patient. These limitations
associated with therapies suggest that additional strategies are needed
for the prevention/intervention of both primary as well as secondary
primary tumors post HNSCC therapy. One such class of non-toxic agents is
polyphenolic phytochemicals present in diet or those consumed as
supplements. Grape seed extract (GSE) is one such dietary supplement that
has received enormous attention in recent years due to its strong
anti-cancer and chemopreventive potentials in several in vitro and in
vivo studies. Here, for the first time, we investigated GSE efficacy
employing human HNSCC Detroit 562 and FaDu cells as well as normal human
epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK) both in vitro and in vivo. Our study
showed that GSE selectively inhibited the growth and increased death in
both HNSCC cell lines in a dose- and a time-dependent manner. GSE
treatment (40 g/ml for12-72 h) resulted in 18-80% (p<0.001) and 25-90%
(p<0.001) decrease in live cell number, increased cell death by 8-49% and
9-40% (p<0.001) in Detroit 562 and FaDu cells compared to control,
respectively. We found that GSE (20 and 40 g/ml) resulted in increased
accumulation of cells in G2/M-phase in dose- and time-dependent manner in
both the cells lines. We also observed that GSE treatment for 24-72h
resulted in significant increase in apoptotic cell death in both Detroit
562 and FaDu cells by activating DNA damage checkpoint cascade including
ATM/ATR-Chk1/2-Cdc25C as well as caspases 8, 9 and 3. Consistent with
this, GSE treatment also resulted in a strong DNA damage as indicated by
increased phosphorylation of -H2AX and decreased the levels of DNA repair
molecules Brca1 and Rad51 as well as the DNA repair foci, thereby;
possibly sensitizing these cells towards GSE induced cell death.
Furthermore, our study also showed that GSE caused accumulation of
intra-cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) was identified as a major
mechanism of its effect for growth inhibition, DNA damage and apoptosis,
which was remarkably reversed by thiol antioxidant N-acetylcysteine
(NAC). GSE feeding to nude mice decreased Detroit 562 and FaDu xenograft
tumor growth by 67% and 65% (p<0.001), respectively. In IHC analysis,
xenografts from GSE-fed groups showed decreased proliferation but
increased DNA damage and apoptosis. Together, these findings show that
GSE targets both DNA damage and repair, and provide mechanistic insights
for its efficacy selectively against HNSCC both in cell culture and mouse
xenograft; supporting its translational potential against HNSCC.

