Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of mitochondrial DNA G10398A polymorphism in Iranian
breast cancer patients


Introduction: The role of mtDNA alteration is already recognized as being
in carcinogenesis, tumor progression and prognosis in all type of
cancers. mtDNA alteration in complex I have been reported in different
cancers. An A to G polymorphism at nucleotide position 10398 caused a
nonconservative amino acid substitution from threonine to alanine within
the NADH dehydrogenase (ND3) subunit of Complex I. The mitochondrial DNA
10398 polymorphism G10398A within ND3 subunit of Complex I has been
suggested to alter the mitochondrial subunit of electron transfer chain
and has been associated with several neurodegenerative disorders and
cancers. It has been also shown that mtDNA alteration G10398A within ND3
subunit of Complex I in breast cancer patients correlated with increased
breast cancer risks in the Indian and African-American populations
however, the 10398A allele was not increase breast cancer risk for
Caucasian women. Interestingly, G10398A in Chinese population were shown
correlated with breast cancer metastasis. The aim of this study was on
the association of mtDNA G10398 A polymorphism in Iranian breast cancer
patients. Materials and Methods: Patients and tissue specimens: 27 paired
Fresh tumor and adjacent normal samples were obtained from consecutive
patients with BC (age range, 33-74years; with median age of 49.16 years)
who underwent surgery for a partial and or whole mama mastroctomy between
October 2007 and Nov 2009 from IRANIAN National Tumor Bank, National
Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital Complexes, Medical Tehran
University, Tehran, Iran. Histopathological examinations were performed
by two expert's pathologists. Mutational analysis of mtDNA G10398A in
tumor samples: fresh tumors and their adjacent were extracted for genomic
DNA using the QIAamp Mini Kit (Qiagen in accordance with the manufactures
instructions. We searched for 10398 Polymorphism in within ND3 subunit of
Complex I by means of PCR sequencing. Result and conclusion:patient had
histopathological grade I, II, and III with 66.6%, 25.9% and 7.4%
respectively. The frequency of mtDNA G10398A polymorphism 44.440%(12 of
27).The Iranian women with G10398A variant showed a significantly
increased risk of breast cancer (pIntroduction: The role of mtDNA
alteration is already recognized as being in carcinogenesis, tumor
progression and prognosis in all type of cancers. mtDNA alteration in
complex I have been reported in different cancers. An A to G polymorphism
at nucleotide position 10398 caused a nonconservative amino acid
substitution from threonine to alanine within the NADH dehydrogenase
(ND3) subunit of Complex I. The mitochondrial DNA 10398 polymorphism
G10398A within ND3 subunit of Complex I has been suggested to alter the
mitochondrial subunit of electron transfer chain and has been associated
with several neurodegenerative disorders and cancers. It has been also
shown that mtDNA alteration G10398A within ND3 subunit of Complex I in
breast cancer patients correlated with increased breast cancer risks in
the Indian and African-American populations however, the 10398A allele
was not increase breast cancer risk for Caucasian women. Interestingly,
G10398A in Chinese population were shown correlated with breast cancer
metastasis. The aim of this study was on the association of mtDNA G10398
A polymorphism in Iranian breast cancer patients. Materials and Methods:
Patients and tissue specimens: 27 paired Fresh tumor and adjacent normal
samples were obtained from consecutive patients with BC (age range,
33-74years; with median age of 49.16 years) who underwent surgery for a
partial and or whole mama mastroctomy between October 2007 and Nov 2009
from IRANIAN National Tumor Bank, National Cancer Institute, Imam
Khomeini Hospital Complexes, Medical Tehran University, Tehran, Iran.
Histopathological examinations were performed by two expert's
pathologists. Mutational analysis of mtDNA G10398A in tumor samples:
fresh tumors and their adjacent were extracted for genomic DNA using the
QIAamp Mini Kit (Qiagen in accordance with the manufactures instructions.
We searched for 10398 Polymorphism in within ND3 subunit of Complex I by
means of PCR sequencing. Result and conclusion:patient had
histopathological grade I, II, and III with 66.6%, 25.9% and 7.4%
respectively. The frequency of mtDNA G10398A polymorphism 44.440%(12 of
27).The Iranian women with G10398A variant showed a significantly
increased risk of breast cancer (p< 0.05). Derived from these findings,
mtDNA G10398A polymorphism may be a potential risk marker of breast
cancerk in Iranian population.

