Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Implication of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
pancreatic cancer prognosis


[Background] In recent years, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
has been shown to play an important role during cancer invasion and
metastasis, and is now being actively studied in various cancers.
Moreover, EMT is thought to be involved in resistance to chemotherapy and
this elucidation could contribute to improved therapeutic effect. A
thorough examination of EMT in pancreatic cancer, especially using
resected surgical specimens, has not been conducted to date. [Methods]
Between April 2004 and March 2010, 174 patients who underwent the
resection of their pancreatic cancers were used for this study.
Immunohistochemistry of E-cadherin and Vimentin were performed on their
resected specimens, and the results of the staining were graded as
follows; grade 1: negative, grade 2: positive, grade 3: strong positive.
V/E ratio (Vimentin grade/E-cadherin grade) was determined and the
patients were categorized into three group as follows: Epithelial(E)1.
The correlation between EMT status and clinicopathological factors were
analyzed. [Results] 1. Of the 174 cases, EMT status was determined as 37
Epithelial, 48 Borderline and 89 Mesenchymal. We found a significant
correlation between EMT status and washing cytology (P = 0.025), tumor
size (P = 0.014), portal vein invasion (P = 0.038) and lymphatic invasion
(P = 0.047). 2. The median survival was 40.2 months in E, 63.1 months in
B, and 13.7 months in M, respectively. There was a significant difference
between M and E, and M and B (P [Background] In recent years,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been shown to play an
important role during cancer invasion and metastasis, and is now being
actively studied in various cancers. Moreover, EMT is thought to be
involved in resistance to chemotherapy and this elucidation could
contribute to improved therapeutic effect. A thorough examination of EMT
in pancreatic cancer, especially using resected surgical specimens, has
not been conducted to date. [Methods] Between April 2004 and March 2010,
174 patients who underwent the resection of their pancreatic cancers were
used for this study. Immunohistochemistry of E-cadherin and Vimentin were
performed on their resected specimens, and the results of the staining
were graded as follows; grade 1: negative, grade 2: positive, grade 3:
strong positive. V/E ratio (Vimentin grade/E-cadherin grade) was
determined and the patients were categorized into three group as follows:
Epithelial(E)1. The correlation between EMT status and
clinicopathological factors were analyzed. [Results] 1. Of the 174 cases,
EMT status was determined as 37 Epithelial, 48 Borderline and 89
Mesenchymal. We found a significant correlation between EMT status and
washing cytology (P = 0.025), tumor size (P = 0.014), portal vein
invasion (P = 0.038) and lymphatic invasion (P = 0.047). 2. The median
survival was 40.2 months in E, 63.1 months in B, and 13.7 months in M,
respectively. There was a significant difference between M and E, and M
and B (P < .0001). 3. According to univariate analysis, tumor location
(head), CA19-9 level, tumor size ( 2cm), anterior tumor invasion, bile
duct invasion, duodenal invasion, portal vein invasion, lymphatic or
vascular invasion, positive perineural invasion, lymph node metastasis
and EMT status (B M / E) were found to be significant prognostic factors.
Multivariate analysis showed perineural invasion (P = 0.024), lymph node
metastasis (P = 0.033) and EMT status (P [Background] In recent years,
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been shown to play an
important role during cancer invasion and metastasis, and is now being
actively studied in various cancers. Moreover, EMT is thought to be
involved in resistance to chemotherapy and this elucidation could
contribute to improved therapeutic effect. A thorough examination of EMT
in pancreatic cancer, especially using resected surgical specimens, has
not been conducted to date. [Methods] Between April 2004 and March 2010,
174 patients who underwent the resection of their pancreatic cancers were
used for this study. Immunohistochemistry of E-cadherin and Vimentin were
performed on their resected specimens, and the results of the staining
were graded as follows; grade 1: negative, grade 2: positive, grade 3:
strong positive. V/E ratio (Vimentin grade/E-cadherin grade) was
determined and the patients were categorized into three group as follows:
Epithelial(E)1. The correlation between EMT status and
clinicopathological factors were analyzed. [Results] 1. Of the 174 cases,
EMT status was determined as 37 Epithelial, 48 Borderline and 89
Mesenchymal. We found a significant correlation between EMT status and
washing cytology (P = 0.025), tumor size (P = 0.014), portal vein
invasion (P = 0.038) and lymphatic invasion (P = 0.047). 2. The median
survival was 40.2 months in E, 63.1 months in B, and 13.7 months in M,
respectively. There was a significant difference between M and E, and M
and B (P < .0001). 3. According to univariate analysis, tumor location
(head), CA19-9 level, tumor size ( 2cm), anterior tumor invasion, bile
duct invasion, duodenal invasion, portal vein invasion, lymphatic or
vascular invasion, positive perineural invasion, lymph node metastasis
and EMT status (B M / E) were found to be significant prognostic factors.
Multivariate analysis showed perineural invasion (P = 0.024), lymph node
metastasis (P = 0.033) and EMT status (P <0.0001) were significant
prognostic factors. 4. Adjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine or S-1)
improved the median survival from 19.9 to 63.1 months in group B, from
10.8 to 16.1 months in group M (P = 0.034, P = 0.002, respectively),
however, no significant difference was seen in group E. [Discussion] EMT
status was found to be one of the most important prognostic factors in
pancreatic cancer and suspected to be associated with cancer invasion and
metastasis. Further studies are needed to validate these results, but
chemotherapy strategies targeted to epithelial and mesenchymal tumors
might improve the outcomes of this disease by increasing the effect of
chemotherapy.

