Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Human anti-nucleolin antibodies with broad spectrum anticancer
activity


Extensive preclinical studies have validated nucleolin as a new
therapeutic target in oncology. Confocal microscopy,
immunohistochemistry, and cell fractionation studies have shown that this
protein is highly overexpressed in the plasma membrane and cytoplasm of a
wide variety of human hematological and solid tumor cells, but is usually
undetectable on the cell surface or in the cytoplasm of the corresponding
normal cells. We have utilized our licensed platform technology to
generate a first-in-class panel of eight fully human monoclonal IgG1
antibodies (HuMAbs). These antibodies bind specifically to nucleolin on
the tumor cell surface, which in turn elicits potent cytotoxicity to a
variety of human tumor cell lines. One such example is CP101, which
killed MV4-11 (AML), MCF-7 (breast), DU145 (prostate), PANC-1 and MIA
PaCa-2 (pancreas) tumor cell lines with IC50 values ranging from (0.5-2.0
g/ml; 3-12 nM) following exposure to the HuMAb for 96 hrs. These in vitro
assays were performed in the absence of human complement and immune
effector cells required for complement-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(CDCC) and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), respectively.
These results are consistent with published observations that
anti-nucleolin HuMAbs can exploit the known shuttling function of cell
surface nucleolin to gain intracellular access and induce direct tumor
cytotoxicity. In contrast to its cytocidal effects on tumor cells, CP101
had no effect on the viability of either MCF-10A normal human breast
epithelial cells or normal human CD19+ B cells, neither of which
expresses nucleolin on the cell surface. In summary, the results suggest
that anti-nucleolin HuMAbs are unique in that they can exert broad
spectrum antitumor activity independently of the immune mechanism of CDCC
and ADCC, while having no detectable effects on the viability of the
corresponding normal cells.

