Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Rab25 cooperates with RIN1 to suppress p21 Ras


Introduction: Our previous work has shown that the loss of Rab25 occurs
in estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) negative breast
cancer cell lines and human tumor samples and seems to correlate with an
active Ras pathway. Loss of Rab25 cooperates with mutant Ras to promote
tumorigenesis. RIN1 is a protein inhibitor of Ras, and our current works
confirms that Rab25 binds to RIN1 and cooperates to inhibit Ras. Rab25
also has multiple effects on microRNAs. Materials and Methods: Cell
culture -RAO-1-4 cell lines was grown in DFCI-1 medium.
Immunoprecipitation- Protein extracts from RAO-1, RAO-2, and RAO-3/Rab25
were tested for RIN1expression. Immunoprecipitated extracts were then
assayed by western blot for RAB25 expression. Chemiluminescence Assay-
Cell extract from MDA-MB-231 cells with shRIN1 was used. These cells
contained no Rab25 as well. Recombinant RIN1 and recombinant Rab25 were
tested in various combinations for ras inhibition using the Active Motif
kit. MicroRNA assay- RNA was extracted from RAO-2, RAO-4, and RAO-4/Rab25
and sent to Phalanx Biotech for microRNA profiling. Results: 1. Rab25
binds to RIN1 in a ternary complex with Ras. 2. Rab25 coopeates with RIN1
in an additive manner to inhibit Ras. 3. Rab25 expression impacts several
microRNAs including 29b, 100, 138, 146a, 205, 524-5p, 762, 1246, 1260b,
1307, 1826, 3172, 3175, and 3178. Conclusions: 1. Rab25 is a tumor
modulator. It can regulate tumor growth and angiogenesis through
inhibition of ras in cooperation with RIN1. 2. Our data previous
indicated that Rab25 could localize to the nucleus, and it appears to
effect the expression of several microRNAs.

