Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of polymorphisms and haplotypes in the insulin-like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) gene with breast cancer in Korean women


Abstract The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling axis plays an
important role in cancer biology. The insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor (IGF1R) is a tyrosine kinase growth factor receptor that plays
important roles in numerous cellular functions and signal transduction
pathways. IGF1R may also play a role in the initiation and progression of
breast cancer. However, studies of common variation in the IGF1R gene,
involved in steroid hormone and IGF-1 metabolism, have yet to provide
convincing evidence that such variants predict breast cancer risk. We
genotyped 384 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1026
cases of breast cancer and 392 age-matched control in a population of
Korean women. Of the 384 SNPs, fifty one SNPs in the IGF1R gene were
examined for association with breast cancer in the study. All the SNPs
investigated were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. These SNPs tested were
significantly associated with breast cancer risk, after correction for
multiple comparisons stratified by adjusting for age at diagnosis, BMI,
age at menarche, and age at first parturition. Among 51 IGF1R SNPs, three
intron located SNPs (rs8032477, rs11635251, and rs12916884) with
homozygous genotype (variant genotype) had increased risk of breast
cancer (OR(CI 95%): 0.66(0.44-0.99), 0.54(0.37-0.80), and
0.59(0.37-0.94)). Seven of the 51 IGF1R SNPs were in LD and in one
haplotype block, and were likely to be associated with breast cancer
risk. Overall, this comprehensive case-control study found statistically
significant associations between breast cancer risk and polymorphisms in
IGF1R gene. Taking the status of the IGF1R polymorphism into
consideration, our results may help in improving the ability to develop
effective treatment modalities for those conditions in which IGF1R is
involved. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to
demonstrate the association between IGF1R polymorphisms with the risk of
breast cancer.

