Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prognostic significance of nuclear factor kappa B expression in
human papillomavirus-associated oropharyngeal cancer


Nuclear factor kappa B (NFB) has been implicated in the development of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) from premalignant changes
to tumor progression and recurrence. However, the prognostic significance
of cytoplasmic or nuclear localization of NFB expression in human
papillomavirus (HPV)-associated HNSCC has not been investigated largely
due to limited patient samples. We hypothesized that cytoplasmic and/or
nuclear expression of NFB may be a poor prognostic factor for tumor
recurrence and overall survival (OS) regardless of p16 status. We
conducted a retrospective study with archival formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor biopsies collected from 188 patients with
oropharyngeal SCC between October 1994 and February 2008 from Emory
University Department of Pathology. Median follow-up was 21.7 and 58.0
months for p16- and p16+ patients, correspondingly. Tumors were evaluated
for p16 expression (a surrogate marker for HPV) by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Cytoplasmic expression of NFBp65 by IHC or total expression
combining cytoplasmic and nuclear localization were significantly greater
in p16- patients (N=58) than p16+ patients (N=130), pNuclear factor kappa
B (NFB) has been implicated in the development of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) from premalignant changes to tumor progression and
recurrence. However, the prognostic significance of cytoplasmic or
nuclear localization of NFB expression in human papillomavirus
(HPV)-associated HNSCC has not been investigated largely due to limited
patient samples. We hypothesized that cytoplasmic and/or nuclear
expression of NFB may be a poor prognostic factor for tumor recurrence
and overall survival (OS) regardless of p16 status. We conducted a
retrospective study with archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor
biopsies collected from 188 patients with oropharyngeal SCC between
October 1994 and February 2008 from Emory University Department of
Pathology. Median follow-up was 21.7 and 58.0 months for p16- and p16+
patients, correspondingly. Tumors were evaluated for p16 expression (a
surrogate marker for HPV) by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Cytoplasmic
expression of NFBp65 by IHC or total expression combining cytoplasmic and
nuclear localization were significantly greater in p16- patients (N=58)
than p16+ patients (N=130), p<0.05. High cytoplasmic expression of NFBp65
was significantly associated with poor OS (p=0.0276) and the total
expression was associated with recurrence (p=0.0081) by log rank test,
whereas nuclear NFBp65 displayed weak association. Positive nuclear
expression significantly correlated with smoking history (p=0.025). In
conclusion, p16+ and low total NFBp65 expression is associated with the
best while p16- and high total NFBp65 is associated with the worst OS in
this patient cohort (Table I). (The study was supported by Head and Neck
SPORE Grant P50CA128613).


