Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chronic inflammation and gastric carcinogenesis: the role of CD44
variant expression


CD44 is a marker of tumor-initiating cells in gastric cancer. Recently,
we have reported that a CD44 variant (CD44v) interacts with xCT, a
glutamate-cystine transporter, and manifests enhanced protection against
reactive oxygen species (ROS), contributing to tumor growth and
resistance to chemo- or radiotherapy. Although an inflammation related
metaplasia and/or dysplasia of gastric epithelium is considered as key
events in gastric carcinogenesis, the cause or process of these phenomena
is not known. We investigated the relationship between CD44v expression
and gastric carcinogenesis, using three lineages of gastric cancer mouse
models, K19-Wnt1, K19-C2mE, and K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. We also used CD44-/-
K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice and Helicobacter. felis-infected C57BL/6 mice. Chronic
inflammation triggered by Helicobactor infection played a major role in
CD44v related gastric carcinogenesis. CD44v expression and nuclear
factor-kappa B (NF-B) activation were promoted by inflammatory cytokines,
IL-1 and TNF-, in gastric cancer cell lines. Thus, CD44v+ tumor cell
expansion induced by inflammation via NF-B pathway might contribute to
tumor development. Finally, an xCT inhibitor sulfasalazine treatment
significantly suppressed tumor growth in K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice. These
findings suggest a significant role of CD44v in inflammation-mediated
gastric carcinogenesis via ROS defense.

