Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Serine phosphorylation of vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein
defines the malignant cell phenotype in colon cancer


Metastasis is the principal pathological process underlying mortality for
colorectal cancer, the third deadly cancer worldwide. During tumor
invasion, cancer cells assume a mesenchymal morphology that confers
migratory and proliferative advantages. One of the mechanisms regulating
malignant cell shape is the activity of the vasodilator-stimulated
phosphoprotein (VASP) on the actin cytoskeleton. Here, human colon
carcinoma cells were treated with cell permeant analogs of cAMP or cGMP,
to preferentially induce VASP Ser157 (pVASP-Ser157) or Ser239
(pVASP-Ser239) phosphorylation, and examined by confocal microscopy,
western blotting and colony formation. Confirming previous results,
cancer dynamic membrane regions formed by the actin cytoskeleton were
differentially modulated by VASP Ser phosphorylation. However, treatments
with cAMP, which promoted a mesenchymal cell phenotype, reduced
E-cadherin at tumor cell-cell junctions and enhanced vimentin and
vinculin levels. In contrast cGMP induced an opposite cell morphology
with increased E-cadherin-rich cell-cell contacts and decreased cellular
vimentin and vinculin. Moreover, the cAMP-dependent phenotype increased
the cancer cell ability to form tumor colonies, while cGMP compromised
that metastatic potential. Importantly, cyclic nucleotide effects were
mediated by selective VASP Ser phosphorylation, because VASP
phosphomutants at Ser157 and Ser239 blocked cAMP or cGMP actions,
respectively. Together, these findings suggest that in colon cancer cells
pVASP-Ser157 and pVASP-Ser239 are critical determinants of the malignant
phenotype, which define the function of actin cytoskeletal regulators,
invasive cell morphology and tumorigenic potential.

