Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Monotherapy with a tumor-targeting mutant of Salmonella
typhimurium inhibits human glioma in an orthotopic model in nude mice


Malignant glioma tumors are the most common primary central nervous
system tumors. Despite the multidisciplinary approach to treatment,
prognosis remains poor. In this study, we demonstrated that the
Salmonella typhimurium A1-R tumor-targeting strain can inhibit and
eradicate human glioma in an orthotopic nude mouse model. S. typhimuirum
A1-R was administered by injection through a craniotomy open-window or
intravenously in nude mice. To establish the model, 2105 U87-RFP human
glioma cells were injected stereotactically into the mouse brain through
the craniotomy open window. Two weeks after glioma-cell implantation,
mice were treated with S. typhimurium A1-R (2107 CFU / 200 l intravenous
injection [i.v.] or 1106 CFU / 1 l intracranial injection [i.c.]) once a
week for 3 weeks. Brain tumors were observed by fluorescence imaging
through the craniotomy open window over time. S. typhimurium A1-R,
administered i.c., inhibited brain tumor growth 7.6-fold compared with
untreated mice (p = 0.009) and improved survival 73% (p = 0.001). Two of
ten mice appeared to have their tumors eradicated. In contrast,
intravenous administration of S. typhimurium A1-R was not effective. The
craniotomy open window enabled observation of tumor growth in the brain
in real time in both treated and untreated mice. The results of the
present study demonstrate that bacterial therapy of brain cancer is a
novel, effective and safe treatment strategy in a highly
treatment-resistance cancer.

