Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HDM2 inhibition augments the antitumor and antiangiogenic effects
of sunitinib by suppressing sunitinib-induced SDF-1 expression and tumor
recruitment of CD11b/Gr1+ MDSC in RCC xenografts


The VEGFR2 inhibitor sunitinib induces transient growth arrest of 786-0
RCC xenografts during which p53 as well as several p53-dependent genes
(e.g. p21, HDM2, and collagen prolyl hydroxylase) are induced. Within a
short period of time tumor growth resumes despite continued
administration of the sunitinib. However, the development of resistance
to sunitinib is associated with continued expression of p53 but the loss
of p53 transcriptional activity as determined by the suppressed
expression of the above target genes and the increased expression of the
p53 transcriptional inhibitor hdmx. Recently, several small molecule
antagonists of the p53 negative regulator hdm2 have been developed which
stabilize p53 expression. One of these, MI-319 (Sanofi-Aventis), in
addition to inhibiting hdm2 also inhibits hdmx. We have combined MI-319
with sunitinib in two separate xenograft model of RCC resistance. The
addition of MI-319 prevents the development of resistance to sunitinib.
The enhanced antitumor activity of the drug combination is associated
with enhanced suppression of the vasculature and increased evidence of
apoptosis relative to sunitinib alone. The addition of MI-319 to
sunitinib reestablishes p53 activity in 786-0 and A498 xenografts as
determined by p21 and hdm2 expression. Furthermore, whereas sunitinib
alone results in increased expression of SDF-1 and the recruitment of
CD11b, GR-1 myeloid suppressor cells, the addition of MI-319 to the
sunitinib decreases expression of SDF-1 and suppresses the recruitment of
the myeloid suppressor cells.

