Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Image-guided transcatheter intraarterial drug delivery of
doxorubicin encapsulated iron oxide nanoparticles to liver tumors: Safety
and feasibility


Purpose To investigate the feasibility and safety of transcatheter
intraarterial drug delivery of novel doxorubicin encapsulated iron oxide
nanoparticles to the VX-2 rabbit liver tumor model. Materials and Methods
Paramagnetic iron oxide (IO) nanoparticles (core and hydrodynamic size of
10 and 23 nm) coated with amphiphilic polymers were mixed with
hydrophobic doxorubicin molecules, and their presence within the
nanoparticles was confirmed by optical absorption spectrum. 16 New
Zealand White rabbits with VX-2 tumors implanted in the liver were
treated when a 2.0 cm lesion was visible on MRI. The rabbits were placed
into 4 treatment groups, each receiving doxorubicin at a concentration of
1.0 mg/ kg. Group A received image-guided intraarterial (IA)
transcatheter delivery of doxorubicin encapsulated IO nanoparticles to
the hepatic artery; Group B received intravenous (IV) injection of
doxorubicin encapsulated IO nanoparticles through the marginal ear vein;
Group C received intraarterial injection of doxorubicin alone; Group D
received intravenous injection of doxorubicin alone. Rabbits were closely
monitored for toxicity or any complications for the entire study
duration. Blood was collected before treatments and at 1 hour, 24 hours,
and 7 days post treatment to analyze liver function and follow post
treatment response by quantitative determinations of alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), albumin (ALB), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bile
acids (BA), total bilirubin (TBIL), total cholesterol (CHOL), gamma
glutamyl transferase (GGT), and blood urea nitrogen (BUN). Results There
were no significant changes in the baseline pretreatment levels of the
mammalian liver profile and biomarkers at the 1 hour, 24 hour, and 7 day
time points in comparison to rabbits receiving IA doxorubicin
nanoparticle or doxorubicin therapy (Groups A and C) versus IV
doxorubicin nanoparticle or doxorubicin therapy (Groups B and D). Group A
median pretreatment 1 hour, 24 hour, and 7 day ALP levels were as
follows: 57, 51.8, 59.2, & 29 U/L; Group B was 73.5, 72.25, 54.25, & 45.5
U/L; Group C was 51, 35, 40, & 37 U/L; Group D was 48.8, 49.3, 47.2, &
47.5 U/L (p=Purpose To investigate the feasibility and safety of
transcatheter intraarterial drug delivery of novel doxorubicin
encapsulated iron oxide nanoparticles to the VX-2 rabbit liver tumor
model. Materials and Methods Paramagnetic iron oxide (IO) nanoparticles
(core and hydrodynamic size of 10 and 23 nm) coated with amphiphilic
polymers were mixed with hydrophobic doxorubicin molecules, and their
presence within the nanoparticles was confirmed by optical absorption
spectrum. 16 New Zealand White rabbits with VX-2 tumors implanted in the
liver were treated when a 2.0 cm lesion was visible on MRI. The rabbits
were placed into 4 treatment groups, each receiving doxorubicin at a
concentration of 1.0 mg/ kg. Group A received image-guided intraarterial
(IA) transcatheter delivery of doxorubicin encapsulated IO nanoparticles
to the hepatic artery; Group B received intravenous (IV) injection of
doxorubicin encapsulated IO nanoparticles through the marginal ear vein;
Group C received intraarterial injection of doxorubicin alone; Group D
received intravenous injection of doxorubicin alone. Rabbits were closely
monitored for toxicity or any complications for the entire study
duration. Blood was collected before treatments and at 1 hour, 24 hours,
and 7 days post treatment to analyze liver function and follow post
treatment response by quantitative determinations of alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), albumin (ALB), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bile
acids (BA), total bilirubin (TBIL), total cholesterol (CHOL), gamma
glutamyl transferase (GGT), and blood urea nitrogen (BUN). Results There
were no significant changes in the baseline pretreatment levels of the
mammalian liver profile and biomarkers at the 1 hour, 24 hour, and 7 day
time points in comparison to rabbits receiving IA doxorubicin
nanoparticle or doxorubicin therapy (Groups A and C) versus IV
doxorubicin nanoparticle or doxorubicin therapy (Groups B and D). Group A
median pretreatment 1 hour, 24 hour, and 7 day ALP levels were as
follows: 57, 51.8, 59.2, & 29 U/L; Group B was 73.5, 72.25, 54.25, & 45.5
U/L; Group C was 51, 35, 40, & 37 U/L; Group D was 48.8, 49.3, 47.2, &
47.5 U/L (p=<0.001). ALT median levels were as follows: Group A was 24.4,
25, 104, Group B was 28.8, 15.5, & 61, Group C was 21, 14, and 233, Group
d was 25.5, 24, & 29.8 U/L (p=Purpose To investigate the feasibility and
safety of transcatheter intraarterial drug delivery of novel doxorubicin
encapsulated iron oxide nanoparticles to the VX-2 rabbit liver tumor
model. Materials and Methods Paramagnetic iron oxide (IO) nanoparticles
(core and hydrodynamic size of 10 and 23 nm) coated with amphiphilic
polymers were mixed with hydrophobic doxorubicin molecules, and their
presence within the nanoparticles was confirmed by optical absorption
spectrum. 16 New Zealand White rabbits with VX-2 tumors implanted in the
liver were treated when a 2.0 cm lesion was visible on MRI. The rabbits
were placed into 4 treatment groups, each receiving doxorubicin at a
concentration of 1.0 mg/ kg. Group A received image-guided intraarterial
(IA) transcatheter delivery of doxorubicin encapsulated IO nanoparticles
to the hepatic artery; Group B received intravenous (IV) injection of
doxorubicin encapsulated IO nanoparticles through the marginal ear vein;
Group C received intraarterial injection of doxorubicin alone; Group D
received intravenous injection of doxorubicin alone. Rabbits were closely
monitored for toxicity or any complications for the entire study
duration. Blood was collected before treatments and at 1 hour, 24 hours,
and 7 days post treatment to analyze liver function and follow post
treatment response by quantitative determinations of alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), albumin (ALB), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bile
acids (BA), total bilirubin (TBIL), total cholesterol (CHOL), gamma
glutamyl transferase (GGT), and blood urea nitrogen (BUN). Results There
were no significant changes in the baseline pretreatment levels of the
mammalian liver profile and biomarkers at the 1 hour, 24 hour, and 7 day
time points in comparison to rabbits receiving IA doxorubicin
nanoparticle or doxorubicin therapy (Groups A and C) versus IV
doxorubicin nanoparticle or doxorubicin therapy (Groups B and D). Group A
median pretreatment 1 hour, 24 hour, and 7 day ALP levels were as
follows: 57, 51.8, 59.2, & 29 U/L; Group B was 73.5, 72.25, 54.25, & 45.5
U/L; Group C was 51, 35, 40, & 37 U/L; Group D was 48.8, 49.3, 47.2, &
47.5 U/L (p=<0.001). ALT median levels were as follows: Group A was 24.4,
25, 104, Group B was 28.8, 15.5, & 61, Group C was 21, 14, and 233, Group
d was 25.5, 24, & 29.8 U/L (p=<0.001). GGT, BA, TBIL, ALB, BUN, and CHOL
levels for all treatment groups were within normal reference ranges, and
did not differ significantly from each other. Conclusion Novel
doxorubicin encapsulated iron oxide nanoparticles can be safely delivered
intraarterially to the VX-2 rabbit liver cancer model at a dose of 1.0
mg/kg of doxorubicin.

