Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Intratumoral chitosan/interleukin-12 immunotherapy reduces breast
cancer metastasis


Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a potent antitumor cytokine that exhibits
significant clinical toxicities after systemic administration. Local
delivery of IL-12 has been shown to significantly reduce this threat. Our
lab has recently shown that local delivery of IL-12 with the biopolymer
chitosan can eliminate aggressive murine tumors while minimizing the
chances for toxicity. In addition to eliminating the tumors, our lab has
demonstrated that local chitosan/IL-12 immunotherapy can lead to the
activation and expansion of CD8+ T cells and natural killer cells,
increased production of interferon-gamma, and activation of dendritic
cells that can recognize and attack these tumor cells. This immune
response was evaluated for efficacy in preventing tumor metastasis. Mice
bearing 4T1 tumors were treated with DPBS, IL-12, chitosan, or
chitosan-IL-12 prior to surgical resection of the primary tumor. Survival
analysis returned survival rates of 0%, 25%, 0%, and 40% respectively. In
a separate study, lungs were examined for metastatic nodules revealing
that mice treated with chitosan/IL-12 displayed significantly fewer
nodules than other treatment groups. Based on the data obtained thus far,
chitosan/IL-12 shows promising potential as an immunotherapy to reduce
metastatic disease.

