Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comparison of copy number variation using exome sequencing and
affymetrix SNP6.0 genotype array in human cancer cell lines


Whole exome sequencing has been used successfully as a cost effective and
unbiased method in the detection of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in
the coding regions of the human genome. Its application in identifying
another class of genetic variability - copy number variation (CNV) - has
been hindered by numerous factors including inconsistent exome capture
probe specificity and efficiency for the target regions, discontinuous
targets, and variable exon lengths etc. In the current work, we applied
ExomeCNV, a depth-of-coverage based statistical analysis method developed
by Sathirapongsauti et. al., to exome NGS data from a larger collection
of cancer cell lines. The exomes were captured using Agilent SureSelect
Human All Exon Kit and sequenced on the average depth of 70x using the
Illumina HiSeq platform. To control for sequence coverage biases
introduced by the capture technology, CNVs for each cancer cell line are
presented as a ratio to a baseline control constructed using pooled
samples processed in the same manner. Genotyping arrays are standard
methods of choice for CNV discovery in cancer cell lines from the Cancer
Genome Project by the Sanger Institute and the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia project by the Broad Institute. We obtained Affymetrix
SNP6.0 genotype data for the cancer cell lines from these two sources.
CNVs detected from exome sequencing were compared with those discovered
from genotyping arrays in the same set of cancer cell lines. We present
here a comprehensive comparison of the cancer cell line gene copy number
determination from exome sequencing and genotyping methods. Our results
indicate that, with sufficient exome coverage and properly constructed
controls, copy number detection using exome data is a valuable
alternative to genotype based approach.

