Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A synthetic-lethal screen identifies novel Mcl1 regulators in
neuroblastoma


Neuroblastoma (NB) is a lethal pediatric tumor. Despite multimodal
therapy survival remains poor due to emergent chemoresistance governed by
Bcl2-homology (BH) proteins. Agents that antagonize BH proteins, such as
ABT-737, are in clinical development. ABT-737 does not antagonize Mcl1, a
Bcl2-homologue correlated with ABT-737 resistance in many tumors. We
defined the survival bias present in NBs using functional mitochondrial
profiling in response to diverse BH3 death-domain peptides. Those with a
functional Bcl2-dependence were exquisitely sensitive to ABT-737 in vitro
and in vivo. Those with an Mcl1-dependence were relatively ABT-737
resistant (3-5 uM IC50s), yet Mcl1 knock-down restored ABT-737 activity
in this subset (nM IC50s). We therefore undertook a synthetic-lethal
screen for Mcl1 regulators using siRNA against deubiquitinating enzymes
(DUBs), as Mcl1 is highly regulated with a short half-life due to
ubiquitin-mediated degradation and this genomic space has many plausible
druggable targets. We treated Mcl1-dependent NB cell lines (IMR5 and NLF)
with siRNA targeting DUBs and ABT-737 at a sublethal concentration (200
nM). This screen identified 5 targets (of 98) demonstrating synthetic
lethality (Z10-fold decrease in IC50 for 4 of 5 targets. Three further
demonstrated a >10-fold decrease in ABT-737 IC50 with multiple
independent siRNA supporting these as on-target effects (4/4 for PSMD14,
3/4 for PRPF8, and 2/4 for UBL5). We show that we can rescue the PSMD14
and UBL5 knock-down phenotypes by expression of an siRNA-resistant
expression plasmid. While knock-down of all three targets decreases Mcl1
function, only knock-down of UBL5 (downregulates) and PSMD14
(upregulates) alter Mcl1 protein expression. We hypothesize that
knock-down of PSMD14 and PRPF8 decrease Mcl1 activity through inhibitory
post-translational modifications despite paradoxical or absent effects on
Mcl1 protein expression, while UBL5 stabilizes Mcl1 as a ubiquitin-like
PTM. Thus, we have demonstrated the robustness of a novel synthetic
lethal screen to identify modulators of Mcl1 activity in vitro and
identified three novel therapeutic targets regulating Mcl1 activity in NB.

