Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: DNA ploidy in tumor correlates with age, and explains some of the
poor prognostic impact of age in endometrial carcinomas


Background: Endometrial cancer incidence is increasing in industrialized
countries, and the demand for better prognostic markers in order to
individualize treatment is emerging. DNA ploidy has previously shown
independent prognostic impact in smaller studies. In this study, we
wanted to investigate the prognostic impact of ploidy in primary
endometrial tumors, and the link between DNA ploidy and patient age at
diagnosis in relation to traditional clinicopathologic prognostic
variables. Study design: 663 patients treated for endometrial carcinoma
at Haukeland University Hospital, Norway, from 1981 through 2010 were
included. DNA ploidy in fresh tumor specimens was measured by
flow-cytometry. Comprehensive clinical and histopathologic data,
treatment and complete follow-up were collected. The software
PASWStatistics18 was used for statistical analysis. Results: DNA
aneuploidy was significantly correlated to high patient age at diagnosis
(pBackground: Endometrial cancer incidence is increasing in
industrialized countries, and the demand for better prognostic markers in
order to individualize treatment is emerging. DNA ploidy has previously
shown independent prognostic impact in smaller studies. In this study, we
wanted to investigate the prognostic impact of ploidy in primary
endometrial tumors, and the link between DNA ploidy and patient age at
diagnosis in relation to traditional clinicopathologic prognostic
variables. Study design: 663 patients treated for endometrial carcinoma
at Haukeland University Hospital, Norway, from 1981 through 2010 were
included. DNA ploidy in fresh tumor specimens was measured by
flow-cytometry. Comprehensive clinical and histopathologic data,
treatment and complete follow-up were collected. The software
PASWStatistics18 was used for statistical analysis. Results: DNA
aneuploidy was significantly correlated to high patient age at diagnosis
(p<0.001). It was also correlated to non-endometrioid histology and
high-grade tumors (pBackground: Endometrial cancer incidence is
increasing in industrialized countries, and the demand for better
prognostic markers in order to individualize treatment is emerging. DNA
ploidy has previously shown independent prognostic impact in smaller
studies. In this study, we wanted to investigate the prognostic impact of
ploidy in primary endometrial tumors, and the link between DNA ploidy and
patient age at diagnosis in relation to traditional clinicopathologic
prognostic variables. Study design: 663 patients treated for endometrial
carcinoma at Haukeland University Hospital, Norway, from 1981 through
2010 were included. DNA ploidy in fresh tumor specimens was measured by
flow-cytometry. Comprehensive clinical and histopathologic data,
treatment and complete follow-up were collected. The software
PASWStatistics18 was used for statistical analysis. Results: DNA
aneuploidy was significantly correlated to high patient age at diagnosis
(p<0.001). It was also correlated to non-endometrioid histology and
high-grade tumors (p<0.001) and high FIGO stage (p=0.012). In univariate
survival analysis (Kaplan Meier), the 5-year disease specific survival of
patients with diploid tumors was 89%, versus 65% for aneuploid tumors
(pBackground: Endometrial cancer incidence is increasing in
industrialized countries, and the demand for better prognostic markers in
order to individualize treatment is emerging. DNA ploidy has previously
shown independent prognostic impact in smaller studies. In this study, we
wanted to investigate the prognostic impact of ploidy in primary
endometrial tumors, and the link between DNA ploidy and patient age at
diagnosis in relation to traditional clinicopathologic prognostic
variables. Study design: 663 patients treated for endometrial carcinoma
at Haukeland University Hospital, Norway, from 1981 through 2010 were
included. DNA ploidy in fresh tumor specimens was measured by
flow-cytometry. Comprehensive clinical and histopathologic data,
treatment and complete follow-up were collected. The software
PASWStatistics18 was used for statistical analysis. Results: DNA
aneuploidy was significantly correlated to high patient age at diagnosis
(p<0.001). It was also correlated to non-endometrioid histology and
high-grade tumors (p<0.001) and high FIGO stage (p=0.012). In univariate
survival analysis (Kaplan Meier), the 5-year disease specific survival of
patients with diploid tumors was 89%, versus 65% for aneuploid tumors
(p<0.001). In Cox regression analysis, aneuploidy was significantly
associated with poor survival (HR=2.4, 95%CI 1.6 - 3.8, pBackground:
Endometrial cancer incidence is increasing in industrialized countries,
and the demand for better prognostic markers in order to individualize
treatment is emerging. DNA ploidy has previously shown independent
prognostic impact in smaller studies. In this study, we wanted to
investigate the prognostic impact of ploidy in primary endometrial
tumors, and the link between DNA ploidy and patient age at diagnosis in
relation to traditional clinicopathologic prognostic variables. Study
design: 663 patients treated for endometrial carcinoma at Haukeland
University Hospital, Norway, from 1981 through 2010 were included. DNA
ploidy in fresh tumor specimens was measured by flow-cytometry.
Comprehensive clinical and histopathologic data, treatment and complete
follow-up were collected. The software PASWStatistics18 was used for
statistical analysis. Results: DNA aneuploidy was significantly
correlated to high patient age at diagnosis (p<0.001). It was also
correlated to non-endometrioid histology and high-grade tumors (p<0.001)
and high FIGO stage (p=0.012). In univariate survival analysis (Kaplan
Meier), the 5-year disease specific survival of patients with diploid
tumors was 89%, versus 65% for aneuploid tumors (p<0.001). In Cox
regression analysis, aneuploidy was significantly associated with poor
survival (HR=2.4, 95%CI 1.6 - 3.8, p<0.001), adjusted for FIGO stage,
age, grade, and histologic subtype. Interestingly, the prognostic impact
of patient age diminished when ploidy status was included in the Cox
analysis. Conclusion: DNA ploidy estimation in endometrial carcinoma
tumor tissue is highly associated with patient age at diagnosis, as well
as prognosis. The prognostic impact of age decreases when adjusting for
ploidy status in tumor.

