Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A single phosphorylation site mutant of the Retinoblastoma protein
blocks apoptosis induced by UV


The Retinoblastoma protein (Rb) is important in the control of cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Its activity is controlled by reversible
phosphorylation on several serine and threonine residues. When Rb is
hypophosphorylated, it inhibits proliferation by preventing passage
through the G1- S phase transition. Hyperphosphorylated Rb promotes cell
cycle progression. The role of Rb phosphorylation in the control of
apoptosis is largely unknown, although several apoptotic stimuli result
in dephosphorylation of Rb. It may be the case that dephosphorylation of
specific amino acids may signal apoptosis versus cell cycle arrest. Using
glutamic acid mutagenesis, we have generated 15 single phosphorylation
site mutants from serine/threonine to glutamic acid, to mimic the
phosphorylated state. By calcium phosphate transfection mutant plasmids
were introduced into C33A Rb-null cells and apoptosis was induced using
UV. Apoptosis was measured by ELISA detection of degraded DNA and by
immunoblotting to assess proteolytic cleavage of PARP. We found that only
threonine-821 when mutated to glutamic acid blocked apoptosis by 50%
whereas other sites tested had little effect. In addition, endogenous Rb
is dephosphorylated on threonine-821 when cells are undergoing apoptosis.
Experiments to determine the effect of this mutation in response to
additional apoptotic stimuli are underway.

