Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting nucleotide excision repair: Chemical synthetic lethality
and biology-based combination therapy


As DNA repair defects in cancer can be exploited for therapeutic benefit
via synthetic lethality, new DNA repair targets and compounds to inhibit
them will expand the armamentarium against cancer. While most targeted
therapies involve disrupting enzyme-substrate interactions we have
pursued targeting protein-DNA interactions to validate an entire new
class of molecular interactions that can be targeted with small molecule
drugs. We have focused on the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway
and two proteins, the single-stranded DNA binding protein, replication
protein A (RPA) and the xeroderma pigmentosum group A (XPA) protein. We
have identified and developed small molecule inhibitors (SMIs) of each
target. In vitro analysis of XPA SMI has led to a 50-fold increase in
potency and revealed structure-activity relationships that define the
important pharmacophores for XPA interaction. Both reversible and
irreversible SMIs of RPA have been identified and cellular analysis of
irreversible RPA SMI's revealed single agent anticancer activity at
sub-micro-molar concentrations. The degree of the anticancer effect of
cellular RPA inhibition varied among cancer types and was dependent on
the DNA repair phenotype. Synergy between NER inhibition and cisplatin
will be presented and as a function of DNA repair phenotype. These data
demonstrate the ability to develop SMI of protein-DNA interactions that
impact DNA repair and can be employed to increase the sensitivity of
repair deficient tumors to DNA damaging therapeutics. This works was
supported by NIH grant R01-CA82741 to JJT

