Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of a phospho-signature predicting response to dasatinib
in non-small cell lung cancer


Since targeted drugs selectively block molecular pathways that are
typically over-activated in tumour cells, they are more precise and show
fewer adverse effects than traditional chemotherapeutic agents. At the
same time the proportion of patients that benefit from targeted drugs is
smaller. Therefore, predictive molecular markers are needed to
confidently predict the patient's response to a specific therapy. Such
markers would facilitate therapy personalization, where the selected
therapy is based on the molecular profile of the patient. We sought to
identify a signature of protein phosphorylations that predicts the
response to dasatinb in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. A panel of
cell lines were profiled in a global, unbiased, phosphoproteomics study
yielding quantitative information for roughly 25,000 phosphorylation
sites. The identical cell lines were tested for their response to
dasatinib. From the phosphoproteome profiles, we identified a signature
of twelve phosphorylation sites that can accurately predict dasatinib
sensitivity. Four of the phosphorylation sites belong to integrin 4, a
protein that mediates cell-matrix or cell-cell adhesion. We evaluated the
performance of this signature in a cross-validation set-up and
investigated the robustness of the selected predictive features. Finally,
we confirmed the predictive power of the signature in an independent set
of breast cancer cell lines. We showed that the phosphorylations of
integrin 4 as well as eight further proteins are candidate biomarkers for
predicting response to dasatinib in solid tumours. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that identifying predictive phosphorylation signatures from
global, quantitative phosphoproteomic data is possible, and opens a new
path to discovering molecular markers for response prediction.

