Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Multi-layer and integrative analysis of the whole transcriptome in
Asian gastric cancer: AMPK modulation in cancer progression


We performed whole-transcriptome profiling of gastric cancer_the most
common cancer in developing countries and the second leading cause of
cancer deaths in the world. Applying a innovative SOLiD RNA-Seq approach
to 24 gastric tumor samples and 6 noncancerous samples, we generated 3.0
billion short reads to quantitatively measure the abundance of mRNAs and
small non-coding RNAs. We then developed a multi-layer analysis to
identify differentially expressed mRNAs and microRNAs, and novel
single-nucleotide mutations candidates associated with gastric cancer.
With the insights from the multi-layer analysis, we experimentally
demonstrated a critical role for AMPK modulation in gastric cancer
progression. This work provides a multi-faceted portrait of the Asian
gastric cancer transcriptome, which facilitates the elucidation of
molecular mechanisms of gastric carcinogenesis and the development of
targeted therapies. By integrating data obtained on the expression of
both mRNa and miRNa molecules, we were able to identify certain gene
signatures uniquely expressed in gastric cancer. This gene signatures
along with gastric cancer-related therapeutic target gene signature,
showed molecular changes as robust biological markers. Integration of
differentially expressed mRNAs and microRNA profiles allowed us to
identify potential miRNA drivers of disease progression. We demonstrated
the translational relevance of AMPK as a potential therapeutic target for
treatment and for prediction of early stage gastric cancer. This work
lays a critical foundation for the identification of molecular mechanisms
of gastric carcinogenesis and the development of related targeted
therapies.

