Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular determinants for the bone-metastatic potential of
prostate cancer cells


Skeletal metastasis is the major cause of morbidity and death in patients
with advanced prostate cancer (PCa). The propensity of cancer cells to
progress into macroscopic lesions at secondary sites relies on the
successful adaptation of Disseminated Tumor Cells (DTCs) to the new
microenvironment. This requirement explains the predilection of most
tumors to produce clinical metastases in selected organs although they
can seed malignant cells also in several other tissues. It seems
plausible that the metastatic fate of DTCs is dictated by the pleiotropic
effects of specific genes and their encoded products establishing
functional interactions with the surrounding stroma. The main objective
of this study was to identify these molecular mediators of cell survival
and growth in the bone with the ultimate goal of identifying effective
therapeutic targets to counteract PCa metastases. Using a pre-clinical
animal model of experimental metastasis, we have recently shown that
exogenous over-expression of PDGFR in non-metastatic prostate phenotypes
conferred bone-metastatic potential and a monoclonal antibody targeting
the receptor reduced bone metastatic tumors by more than 70%. Here we
report that comparative gene-expression analyses conducted with PCa cells
showing different intrinsic metastatic potential, as well as prostate
phenotypes that fail to increase their metastatic behavior upon PDGFR
expression, resulted in a bone-metastatic gene signature including three
genes encoding for soluble, secreted proteins. This suggests that DTCs
with aggressive metastatic behavior modify the bone microenvironment in
their favor, not only coercing the stroma to support their own survival,
but also allowing other malignant phenotypes, that would otherwise fail
to thrive, to grow into macroscopic tumors. We are currently testing this
cell-cooperation in metastasis as well as functionally validating our
three-gene signature by stably silencing or over-expressing each of the
three newly identified genes in bone-metastatic and non-metastatic PCa
cells, respectively.

