Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Peritoneal mechanobiology and metastatic success in epithelial
ovarian cancer


Less than 30% of women diagnosed with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
survive for 5 years due to metastatic disease. EOC progression is
accompanied by accumulation of ascites (up to 4 liters), changing
intraperitoneal (i.p.) fluid pressure from subatmospheric (-5 mmHg) to
>20 mmHg with tense ascites. The overall consequence of altered
peritoneal mechanobiology on EOC metastatic success is currently unknown.
Due to altered i.p. fluid dynamics the peritoneal mesothelium, an elastic
soft tissue, may be modified by exposure to tensional force (strain).
Mechanical strain (stretching) on intact murine mesothelial explants
causes increased tissue stiffness, as determined by atomic force
microscopy, and enhances ovarian tumor cell adhesion. To approximate the
compressive force environment on EOC cells in tense ascites, cells were
seeded in suspension in polystyrene bags and cultured under a compressive
load (Instron, 25mmHg, 8h). Increased fluid pressure enhances
proliferation in multiple cell lines and increases expression of
N-cadherin, a mesenchymal marker, in Dov13 cells. These data suggest that
ascites-induced changes in peritoneal mechanobiology may potentiate EOC
metastatic success. Support: NIH-R01CA109545, NIH R01CA086984, NIH F31
R01CA086984-12S1.

