Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Retrospective study of clinicopathologic factors associated with
ALK rearrangement and survival outcome in Chinese patients with NSCLC


Background: ALK rearrangement and EGFR mutation are significant molecular
subtypes of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) that are targets for
different tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We tested a large cohort of
NSCLC patients for ALK, EGFR and KRAS abnormalities and correlated
clinical factors with the ALK fusion gene and overall survival (OS).
Methods: ALK status was detected by RACE sequencing; EGFR and KRAS status
were also detected by direct DNA sequencing. OS was estimated by the
Kaplan-Meier method. Results: 294 consecutive, unselected, banked NSCLC
cases were tested; 27 (9.2%), 79 (29.2%) and 26 (9.6%) patients were
ALK-, EGFR- and KRAS-positive, respectively. ALK rearrangement and EGFR
mutation were largely exclusive (r=0.15, P=0.007) although two cases were
both ALK- and EGFR-positive. In non-parametric tests, ALK-positivity was
associated with female gender (2=5.189; P=0.023), non/light-smoking
(2=6.067; P=0.014) and adenocarcinoma (2=4.301; P=0.038). The ALK fusion
partner was EML4 in all 27 cases; EML4-ALK fusion variants V1, V2 and V3
(V3a/V3b/V3c) made up the majority (24/27) of EML4-ALK fusions. There
were no significant OS differences between ALK-positive, EGFR-mutant,
KRAS-mutant and triple-negative groups, between ALK-positive and
-negative patients, or when ALK-positive cases were matched 1:2 or 1:1
with (non-TKI-treated) controls balancing for disease stage, gender,
histology and EGFR/KRAS status. In ALK-positive patients, bivariate
analysis found that non- or light-smoking status (P=0.016) and prior
surgery (P=0.024) were associated with increased OS and a multivariate
Cox regression model found that disease stage and surgical treatment were
prognostic for OS. In a multivariate logistic regression model, female
gender (HR=2.793; P=0.041), wild type EGFR (HR=15.147; P=0.001),
non/light-smoking (HR=3.572; P=0.020) and adenocarcinoma (HR=5.713;
P=0.024) were significantly associated with ALK-rearrangement.
Conclusion: Overall, the ALK fusion gene occurred in 9.2% of NSCLC
patients, and was associated with non/light-smoking history,
adenocarcinoma histology and female gender. ALK fusion variants were
mostly V1-3, which may inform ALK screening by RT-PCR. ALK rearrangement
was not a favorable prognostic factor in NSCLC, although smoking history
may influence OS in ALK-positive patients. A TKI (crizotinib) now exists
for ALK-positive NSCLC and may improve OS in these patients.

