Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SRT1 activation enhances HDAC inhibition-mediated upregulation of
GADD45G by repressing the binding of NF-kB/STAT3 complex to its promoter
in malignant lymphoid cells


SIRT1 is an NAD+-dependent class III histone deacetylase, which is not
affected directly by HDAC inhibitors (HDACi). It remains controversial
whether inhibition of SIRT1 or its activation is more efficacious in
anticancer therapy. We have previously reported that the antitumor
activity of the HDAC inhibitor LBH589 in pre-B acute leukemia cells is
partly mediated by upregulation of the growth arrest and DNA damage
response gene GADD45G, associated with histone hyperacetylation at the
promoter level. In the present study we explored the activity of SIRT1
activators (SRT501 and SRT2183) alone and in combination with LBH589 in a
panel of malignant lymphoid cell lines in terms of biological and gene
expression responses. SRT501 and SRT2183 induced growth arrest and
apoptosis (10-100 uM and 1-20 uM, respectively), concomitant with
deacetylation of STAT3 and NF-kB, and reduction of c-Myc protein levels.
PCR arrays revealed that SRT2183 leads to increased mRNA levels of
pro-apoptosis and DNA damage response genes, accompanied by accumulation
of phospho-H2A.X levels. Next, ChIP assays revealed that SRT2183 reduces
the DNA binding capacity of both NF-kB and STAT3 to the promoter of
GADD45G, which is one of the most upregulated genes following SRT2183
treatment. Combination of SRT2183 with LBH589 enhanced the anti-growth
and anti-survival effects mediated by either compound alone. Q-PCR
confirmed that the LBH589 plus SRT2183 combination leads to significantly
higher expression of GADD45G than the single agents. Enhanced
upregulation of GADD45G was validated also for the combination of LBH589
with either SRT501 or resveratrol. LBH589 plus SRT2183 in combination
showed greater inhibition of c-Myc protein levels and phosphorylation of
H2A.X, and increased acetylation of p53. Furthermore, EMSA revealed that
NF-kB binds directly to the GADD45G promoter, while STAT3 binds
indirectly in complexes with NF-kB. Moreover, the binding of NF-kB/STAT3
complexes to the GADD45G promoter is inhibited following LBH589, SRT501
or resveratrol treatment. In addition, the combination of LBH589 with
SRT2183, SRT501 or resveratrol induces a greater binding repression than
either agent alone. In summary, SRT501 and SRT2183 show growth inhibitory
and pro-apoptotic activity in malignant lymphoid cells alone and further
enhanced activity in combination with LBH589. At least one of the
mechanisms of action, which explains the combination effect, is mediated
through enhanced upregulation of GADD45G as a result of the repressed
binding of NF-kB/STAT3 complex to the GADD45G promoter together with
hyperacetylation of the promoter. Thus, this study validates for the
first time STAT3 as a corepressor of GADD45G and provides in vitro
proof-of-concept that the combination of HDACi with SIRT1 activators is a
potential new strategy for therapy of lymphoid malignancies.

