Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mechanisms of p53 activation by NIAM, nuclear interactor of ARF
and MDM2


Nuclear interactor of ARF and Mdm2, NIAM, is a novel regulator of the
ARF-Mdm2-p53 tumor suppressor pathway. It collaborates with ARF, promotes
p53 transcriptional activity, and is negatively regulated by
Mdm2-mediated ubiquitination and proteasome degradation. How NIAM
activates p53 is not known, however its ability to do so in ARF-null
cells reveals it is an ARF-independent process. Our preliminary data
suggest that NIAM could activate p53 by either competing Mdm2 away from
p53-Mdm2 complexes and/or by inducing lysine 120 acetylation of p53 via
the Tip60 acetyltransferase. p53 acetylation at K120 is known to be
regulated by two different histone acetyltransferases, Tip60 and MOF, and
to promote the specific upregulation of apoptotic genes by p53. Our
preliminary data show that NIAM interacts with Tip60 and strongly
promotes p53 acetylation of K120, suggesting a functional NIAM-Tip60
interaction in vivo. Tip60 is an established chromatin modifying protein
that influences chromatin structure and cancer gene expression.
Consistent with these characteristics of Tip60, we discovered that NIAM
is a chromatin-associated protein that binds to transcriptionally active
regions of the genome. Other findings connect Tip60 and NIAM. Tip60 acts
through p53, ARF and Myc to control transcription and promote the DNA
damage checkpoint response. We found that NIAM, like Tip60, localizes to
sites of DNA repair in response to DNA damage and it is already
established that the absence of either protein leads to chromosomal
instability. These compelling observations link NIAM with chromatin
regulation and DNA damage repair, potentially via Tip60 signaling, all of
which are important for the maintenance of chromosomal stability and
prevention of cancer.

