Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Radiotherapy-induced plasma cytokine changes and skin toxicity in
breast cancer patients


Breast cancer is the most common neoplasm and the second leading cause of
cancer death in American women. Radiotherapy (RT) is an effective
adjuvant treatment after breast-conserving surgery for early-stage breast
cancer. However, the majority of breast cancer patients undergoing RT
develop acute skin reactions. We pilot tested the effects of RT on immune
system and inflammatory cytokines in 12 breast cancer patients (6 with
high and 6 with low skin toxicity). Using the Human Cytokine ELISA Plate
Array I (Signosis Inc., Sunnyvale, CA), we evaluated 31 plasma cytokines
in RT-related skin toxicity. The National Cancer Institute Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Effects (version 3.0) was used to
evaluate skin toxicity grade. Our data showed that RT induced epidermal
growth factor (EGF); at baseline EFG was not detectable while post
RT-treatment significant levels of EFG was observed (mean+SD: 395620.4,
p=0.0496). Interleukin (IL)-2 was significantly elevated by RT
(6.5x1061.01x106 vs. 4.85x1061.44x106, p=0.0004). Adiponectin was
significantly higher at post RT (3.09x1061.31x106) than pre RT
(1.77x1061.52x106, p=0.0002). RT-related changes of IL-4 was
significantly associated with skin toxicity at week 3 (p=0.018); IL-4 was
decreased in patients without toxicity (-668.31691.5) and increased in
patients with grade 2 toxicity (1830.01365.4). IL-12 showed similar trend
but with marginal significance (p=0.076). RT-related changes of EGF was
significantly associated with skin toxicity at week 6 (p=0.045); EGF was
not changed in patients with no or low toxicity (grade 0/1) and increased
in patients with grade 2/3 toxicity (592.5686.4). In summary, our pilot
data suggest that RT induces EGF, IL-2, and adiponectin. RT-related
changes of IL-4 and EGF were associated with skin toxicity. Our ongoing
study with a targeted sample size of 1,000 may shed light on the
molecular mechanisms of cytokines in RT-related skin toxicity of breast
cancer patients.

