Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selection vs modification in cancer


Tumors differ from normal tissues by a distinct pattern of up- and
down-regulated genes. A difference in gene expression profiles between
normal and tumorous tissues can be (1) a result of the selection of
preexisting variation in gene expression or (2) a modification of
expression. In the simplest scenario, for genes fitting the selection
model (SM genes), one can expect to find bimodal distribution of the
expression values in normal tissue with only 1 peak in the tumor tissue.
For genes fitting the modification model (MM genes), one can expect
significant differences in mean gene expression values, with a similar
expected variance in normal and tumorous tissues. Using these criteria
and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data, we have identified 200 SM genes
and 200 MM genes. To identify SM and MM genes, we analyzed the
distribution of gene expression values in normal prostate tissue derived
from prostate free of any pathologic alterations (NP), normal-appearing
prostate tissue adjacent to tumor (NA), primary prostate tumor (PT), and
prostate tumor metastasis (MPT). We identified 3 sets of SM genes: (1)
bimodal distribution in NP and unimodal in PT, (2) bimodal distribution
in NA and unimodal in PT, and (3) bimodal distribution in PT and unimodal
in MPT. Similarly, we identified 3 sets of MM genes. We found that SM
genes are enriched by actin cytoskeleton genes for all 3 sets of genes:
for set 1, PTumors differ from normal tissues by a distinct pattern of
up- and down-regulated genes. A difference in gene expression profiles
between normal and tumorous tissues can be (1) a result of the selection
of preexisting variation in gene expression or (2) a modification of
expression. In the simplest scenario, for genes fitting the selection
model (SM genes), one can expect to find bimodal distribution of the
expression values in normal tissue with only 1 peak in the tumor tissue.
For genes fitting the modification model (MM genes), one can expect
significant differences in mean gene expression values, with a similar
expected variance in normal and tumorous tissues. Using these criteria
and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data, we have identified 200 SM genes
and 200 MM genes. To identify SM and MM genes, we analyzed the
distribution of gene expression values in normal prostate tissue derived
from prostate free of any pathologic alterations (NP), normal-appearing
prostate tissue adjacent to tumor (NA), primary prostate tumor (PT), and
prostate tumor metastasis (MPT). We identified 3 sets of SM genes: (1)
bimodal distribution in NP and unimodal in PT, (2) bimodal distribution
in NA and unimodal in PT, and (3) bimodal distribution in PT and unimodal
in MPT. Similarly, we identified 3 sets of MM genes. We found that SM
genes are enriched by actin cytoskeleton genes for all 3 sets of genes:
for set 1, P<10E-13; for set 2, PTumors differ from normal tissues by a
distinct pattern of up- and down-regulated genes. A difference in gene
expression profiles between normal and tumorous tissues can be (1) a
result of the selection of preexisting variation in gene expression or
(2) a modification of expression. In the simplest scenario, for genes
fitting the selection model (SM genes), one can expect to find bimodal
distribution of the expression values in normal tissue with only 1 peak
in the tumor tissue. For genes fitting the modification model (MM genes),
one can expect significant differences in mean gene expression values,
with a similar expected variance in normal and tumorous tissues. Using
these criteria and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data, we have identified
200 SM genes and 200 MM genes. To identify SM and MM genes, we analyzed
the distribution of gene expression values in normal prostate tissue
derived from prostate free of any pathologic alterations (NP),
normal-appearing prostate tissue adjacent to tumor (NA), primary prostate
tumor (PT), and prostate tumor metastasis (MPT). We identified 3 sets of
SM genes: (1) bimodal distribution in NP and unimodal in PT, (2) bimodal
distribution in NA and unimodal in PT, and (3) bimodal distribution in PT
and unimodal in MPT. Similarly, we identified 3 sets of MM genes. We
found that SM genes are enriched by actin cytoskeleton genes for all 3
sets of genes: for set 1, P<10E-13; for set 2, P<10E-11; and for set 3,
PTumors differ from normal tissues by a distinct pattern of up- and
down-regulated genes. A difference in gene expression profiles between
normal and tumorous tissues can be (1) a result of the selection of
preexisting variation in gene expression or (2) a modification of
expression. In the simplest scenario, for genes fitting the selection
model (SM genes), one can expect to find bimodal distribution of the
expression values in normal tissue with only 1 peak in the tumor tissue.
For genes fitting the modification model (MM genes), one can expect
significant differences in mean gene expression values, with a similar
expected variance in normal and tumorous tissues. Using these criteria
and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data, we have identified 200 SM genes
and 200 MM genes. To identify SM and MM genes, we analyzed the
distribution of gene expression values in normal prostate tissue derived
from prostate free of any pathologic alterations (NP), normal-appearing
prostate tissue adjacent to tumor (NA), primary prostate tumor (PT), and
prostate tumor metastasis (MPT). We identified 3 sets of SM genes: (1)
bimodal distribution in NP and unimodal in PT, (2) bimodal distribution
in NA and unimodal in PT, and (3) bimodal distribution in PT and unimodal
in MPT. Similarly, we identified 3 sets of MM genes. We found that SM
genes are enriched by actin cytoskeleton genes for all 3 sets of genes:
for set 1, P<10E-13; for set 2, P<10E-11; and for set 3, P<10E-2. MM
genes were enriched by the genes from cancer-related pathways (PTumors
differ from normal tissues by a distinct pattern of up- and
down-regulated genes. A difference in gene expression profiles between
normal and tumorous tissues can be (1) a result of the selection of
preexisting variation in gene expression or (2) a modification of
expression. In the simplest scenario, for genes fitting the selection
model (SM genes), one can expect to find bimodal distribution of the
expression values in normal tissue with only 1 peak in the tumor tissue.
For genes fitting the modification model (MM genes), one can expect
significant differences in mean gene expression values, with a similar
expected variance in normal and tumorous tissues. Using these criteria
and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data, we have identified 200 SM genes
and 200 MM genes. To identify SM and MM genes, we analyzed the
distribution of gene expression values in normal prostate tissue derived
from prostate free of any pathologic alterations (NP), normal-appearing
prostate tissue adjacent to tumor (NA), primary prostate tumor (PT), and
prostate tumor metastasis (MPT). We identified 3 sets of SM genes: (1)
bimodal distribution in NP and unimodal in PT, (2) bimodal distribution
in NA and unimodal in PT, and (3) bimodal distribution in PT and unimodal
in MPT. Similarly, we identified 3 sets of MM genes. We found that SM
genes are enriched by actin cytoskeleton genes for all 3 sets of genes:
for set 1, P<10E-13; for set 2, P<10E-11; and for set 3, P<10E-2. MM
genes were enriched by the genes from cancer-related pathways (P<10E-6)
in set 1 and regulation of cell proliferation (PTumors differ from normal
tissues by a distinct pattern of up- and down-regulated genes. A
difference in gene expression profiles between normal and tumorous
tissues can be (1) a result of the selection of preexisting variation in
gene expression or (2) a modification of expression. In the simplest
scenario, for genes fitting the selection model (SM genes), one can
expect to find bimodal distribution of the expression values in normal
tissue with only 1 peak in the tumor tissue. For genes fitting the
modification model (MM genes), one can expect significant differences in
mean gene expression values, with a similar expected variance in normal
and tumorous tissues. Using these criteria and Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) data, we have identified 200 SM genes and 200 MM genes. To identify
SM and MM genes, we analyzed the distribution of gene expression values
in normal prostate tissue derived from prostate free of any pathologic
alterations (NP), normal-appearing prostate tissue adjacent to tumor
(NA), primary prostate tumor (PT), and prostate tumor metastasis (MPT).
We identified 3 sets of SM genes: (1) bimodal distribution in NP and
unimodal in PT, (2) bimodal distribution in NA and unimodal in PT, and
(3) bimodal distribution in PT and unimodal in MPT. Similarly, we
identified 3 sets of MM genes. We found that SM genes are enriched by
actin cytoskeleton genes for all 3 sets of genes: for set 1, P<10E-13;
for set 2, P<10E-11; and for set 3, P<10E-2. MM genes were enriched by
the genes from cancer-related pathways (P<10E-6) in set 1 and regulation
of cell proliferation (P<10E-1) in set 2; no specific enrichment was
found in set 3. We have also estimated an overlap between candidate genes
for prostate cancer identified in genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
and SM genes. GWAS candidates were overrepresented among the first set
selection genes (10 vs expected 0.003 0.002) and in the second set of
genes (4 vs expected 0.003 0.003), but for the third set of the genes,
there was no indication of the enrichment (0 vs expected 0.0030.002). For
the MM genes, there was no indication of GWAS candidate enrichment. Taken
together, our results suggest that selection of the preexisting variation
in gene expression is important for early stages of carcinogenesis,
whereas modification of gene expression is more important for cancer
progression.

