Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Real-time molecular imaging of targeted therapies in
patient-derived tumor cells by quantitative immunofluorescence microscopy


Serial radiographic imaging is the primary means for determining the
efficacy of cancer treatments. However, a long time interval is required
before changes are appreciated, and the direct effects of therapy on
tumor cells cannot be measured. We have utilized highly multiplexed,
quantitative immunofluorescence microscopy to monitor multiple signaling
proteins simultaneously in direct tumor biopsies and circulating tumor
cells obtained serially from patients with BRAF- and PIK3CA-mutant solid
cancers undergoing treatment with agents that target these mutated
oncogenes. Changes in signaling that accurately predict subsequent
clinical response can be determined from small numbers (100) of tumor
cells and are apparent within days of the first dose of therapy, and
weeks before radiographic determination of response. Preliminary results
suggest that therapeutic efficacy (or lack thereof) is correlated with
both the degree and rapidity of downregulation of tumor cell signaling.
The ability to measure the effects of therapy directly in patient-derived
tumor cells may permit real time information about efficacy (or lack
thereof) to be rapidly incorporated into the decision to continue an
ongoing therapy or to switch to a new one, or in the identification of
patient populations most likely to respond to a novel class of agents.

