Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Contrasting effects of VEGF pathway inhibitors in primary and
metastatic disease using perioperative neoadjuvant mouse models


Recent clinical trial failures with antiangiogenic therapy in patients
with early-stage disease have raised the possibility that drug efficacy
in preclinical studies, typically involving models of localized primary
grown tumors, may not always predict for efficacy in treating metastatic
disease, which is the most common cause of mortality in patients.
Moreover, depending on disease stage and treatment circumstances, the
efficacy of VEGF-pathway inhibitors administered as monotherapies may be
offset in certain settings by increased aggressive invasiveness and
augmented metastatic potential. Thus, with hundreds of trials underway in
neoadjuvant and adjuvant settings to evaluate the efficacy of
antiangiogenic therapy in blocking or slowing micrometastatic disease and
eventual tumor recurrence, there is an urgent need clarify the utility of
such drugs in all stages of tumor progression. Herein we describe a novel
preclinical neoadjuvant therapeutic methodology used to compare the
effects of short-term VEGF pathway inhibition in highly metastatic human
breast, melanoma, and kidney tumor cells grown orthotopically in SCID
mice before and after surgical resection. While cytotoxic chemotherapy
administered in the maximum tolerated dose could slow tumor growth and
lead to a prolongation of survival after resection, similar significant
benefits by various VEGF inhibitors in primary tumor inhibition did not
consistently translate into significant prevention of recurrent local and
distant metastasis after treatment cessation. Furthermore, reductions in
primary tumor growth by neutralizing antibodies to VEGF or VEGFR-2 were
more predictive of modest survival benefits after tumor resection,
compared to the VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) sunitinib, which
had either no effect or decreased survival compared to control - despite
significant reductions in primary tumor growth after neoadjuvant
treatment. Potential tumor-independent host drug responses could account
for this difference as short-term treatment of immunocompromised nu/nu
mice prior to intravenous tumor inoculation lead to modest or negligible
benefits with VEGF or VEGFR2 antibodies compared to worse outcomes in
VEGFR TKI pre-treated animals. Taken together, preclinical neoadjuvant
therapy allows for the distinction of anti-primary and anti-metastatic
effects and may serve as a predictive tool to model ongoing clinical
trials as well as indicate potential drug combinations which may be used
to overcome limitations when such drugs are used as a monotherapy.

