Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A2 in the sustained induction of
CYP1A1 by the carcinogen, 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) in mouse heptoma
cells (hepa-1)


Humans are constantly exposed to environmental carcinogenic polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) through cigarette smoke, diesel exhausts,
charcoal-broiled meats, etc. Cytochrome P4501A (CYP1A) enzymes play
important roles in the activation of PAHs such as 3-methylcholanthrene
(MC) to carcinogenic DNA-binding metabolites. We reported earlier that MC
causes persistent induction of hepatic and pulmonary CYP1A1 in mice for
several weeks after MC ithdrawal, and that the phenomenon of sustained
hepatic CYP1A1 induction is lost in Cyp1a2-null mice. In this study, we
tested the hypothesis that MC elicits induction of persistent CYP1A1
nduction in hepa-1 cells, and that CYP1A2 contributes mechanistically to
this henomenon. Hepa-1 cells were treated ith the MC (2.5 M), or
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) as control, and at selected ime points, CYP1A1
promoter activity, CYP1A1 enzyme activities, contents, and CYP1A1 mRNA
levels were studied. We fund that MC markedly and persistently induced
CYP1A1 promoter activity, transcription, apoprotein expression, and the
CYP1A1 associated ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD) activities for up
to 5 days. Transfection of CYP1A2 siRNA resulted in knockdown of CYP1A2
mRNA by 70%, but a statistically significant increase of basal CYP1A1
mRNA by 35-40%. The induction of CYP1A1 promoter ctivity, CYP1A1 mRNA,
CYP1A1 protein, and EROD activity by MC were not affected by CYP1A2 siRNA
at the 24 h time point, but was significantly ttenuated by Cyp1a2 siRNA
on day 5. These results suggest that CYP1A2, possibly via a metabolite,
contributes to the sustained induction of CYP1A1 by MC in hepa-I cells.
Further investigations into the mechanisms of persistent induction of
CYP1A1 by MC could lead to novel preventative/therapeutic strategies
against PAH-mediated carcinogenesis in humans. (Supported in part by 2R01
ES009132.)

