Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A new mode of integrinEcadherin cross talk that modulates invasion
and metastasis


Cellular interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) are mediated by
transmembrane receptors of the integrin family. These interactions
coordinate signal transduction cascades impinging on cell survival,
proliferation, and migration. Ablation of the 1 integrin gene attenuates
initiation and growth of breast and skin cancers and 1 antibodies
sensitize breast tumors in mice to radiotherapy. However, the role of 1
integrins in breast cancer progression from a localized tumor to
metastatic disease is unknown. We show that peptide blocking or gene
silencing of 1 integrins can cause a shift from cohesive multicellular
strand invasion to individual cell migration, which acts pro-metastatic
in breast cancer cells. While tumor growth of 1 integrin-depleted breast
cancer cells is reduced, intravasation and lung metastasis of cells from
these small tumors in an orthotopic mouse model is dramatically enhanced,
as is migration in a zebrafish xenograft model. Depletion of 1 integrins
alters the balance between miR-200 miRNAs and ZEB transcriptional
repressors leading to a transcriptional downregulation of E-cadherin,
which is essential for the induction of individual cell migration and
enhanced metastasis. These findings demonstrate that disturbed
integrin-mediated interactions with the ECM in cancer cells can alter
cell migration strategies and metastatic potential through a
miRNA-transcription factor network that controls cell-cell adhesion.

