Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of the role of KLF9 transcription factor in
breast cancer estrogen response


Kruppel-like factor 9 (KLF9) is a member of the KLF family of
transcription factors. Previous studies report significant KLF member
involvement in breast cancer estrogen response, notably KLF4 [1, 2] and
KLF5 [3, 4]. KLF9 has been shown in uterine cancer cells to function as
an estrogen-dependent regulator of the estrogen response pathway [5]. We
aim to evaluate the role of KLF9 in breast cancer cell estrogen response.
We have performed studies demonstrating that KLF9 exhibits an
early-activated estrogen response. Five sites have been identified
upstream of the KLF9 gene that interact with estrogen receptor alpha (ER)
[6-8]; we observe ER enrichment at three of these sites that is
estradiol-dependent. Though KLF9 has been shown to act as an essential
element in estrogen response in the uterus, KLF9 response in breast
cancer cells has yet to be characterized. To study the role of KLF9 in
estrogen-mediated responses in transcriptional and proliferative
activity, we have manipulated the level of KLF9 expression in MCF-7
breast cancer cells. These cells have been shown to exhibit a clear
transcriptional response to estradiol in luciferase reporter assays. We
have optimized RNAi conditions to achieve significant knockdown of the
KLF9 gene in MCF-7 cells. Additionally, we have produced and tested a
KLF9 overexpression vector construct that significantly upregulates
expression of KLF9 in this cell line. These tools will be used to more
extensively characterize the role of KLF9 in MCF7 cell
estrogen-stimulated transcription and proliferation. We are measuring
transcriptional response to estrogen signaling with luciferase reporter
assays and estrogen stimulated cell proliferation with BrdU proliferation
assays. Elucidating KLF9 involvement in E2-mediated breast cancer cell
signaling and response, therefore, is an important component of
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms behind estrogen response in
breast cancer. 1. Akaogi K et al. (2009). Oncogene 28(32): 2894. 2.
Quintana AM et al. (2011). BMC Cancer 11: 30. 3. Guo P et al. (2010).
International Journal of Cancer 126(1): 81. 4. Zhao KW et al. (2011).
Biochemical Journal 437(2): 323. 5. Velarde MC et al. (2007). Molecular
Endocrinology 21(12): 2988. 6. Carroll JS et al. (2006). Nature Genetics
38(11): 1289. 7. Hua S et al. (2008). Molecular Systems Biology 4:188. 8.
Fullwood MJ et al. (2009). Nature 462(7269): 58.

