Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Chromosomal instability in BRAF mutant, microsatellite stable
colorectal cancers


BRAF mutant colorectal cancers can be stratified according to the
presence of microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI cancers with a BRAF
mutation are associated with an excellent patient prognosis. By contrast,
in microsatellite stable (MSS) cancers, a BRAF mutation confers a very
poor patient prognosis. The causes of such a detrimental outcome are yet
to be thoroughly determined. We have previously reported that BRAF
mutant, MSS cancers (BRAFmut/MSS) have a significantly higher rate of p53
mutation and present at more advanced stages than MSI cancers.
Frequencies of these features in the BRAFmut/MSS cancers are similar to
those observed in BRAF wild type, MSS cancers (BRAFwt/MSS). Chromosomal
instability (CIN) is a dominant feature of BRAFwt/MSS cancers, whilst MSI
cancers are considered to be diploid. In MSS cancers, CIN has been
associated with a worse prognosis. We therefore hypothesised that CIN
would be common in BRAF mutant/MSS cancers. BRAFmut/MSS (n=60), and
BRAFwt/MSS cancers (n=90) were investigated for CIN using Loss of
Heterozygosity (LOH) analysis over 12 loci encompassing chromosomal
regions 5q, 8p, 17p and 18q. CIN was assigned if at least 1 marker was
positive for LOH, and a cancer was reported as showing no loss if at
least 5 markers were informative and none demonstrated LOH. CIN was
frequently found in BRAFmut/MSS cancers (41/57, 72%), and this rate was
comparable to that observed in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (74/90, 82%). The
greatest rate of CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers occurred at 8p (26/44, 59%),
and the least at 5q (19/49, 39%). BRAFwt/MSS cancers showed most CIN at
17p (43/65, 66.2%), and the least at 5q (43/80, 53.8%). Within the
BRAFmut/MSS cancer subgroup, CIN was highly correlated with the CpG
Island Methylator Phenotype (17/23, 74%). CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers was
significantly predominant in those at advanced (15/17, 88%), compared to
early AJCC stages of presentation (6/13, 46%) (p=0.02). BRAFmut/MSS
cancers with CIN at 18q and 8p significantly associated with worse
survival compared to those with no loss (p=0.003, pBRAF mutant colorectal
cancers can be stratified according to the presence of microsatellite
instability (MSI). MSI cancers with a BRAF mutation are associated with
an excellent patient prognosis. By contrast, in microsatellite stable
(MSS) cancers, a BRAF mutation confers a very poor patient prognosis. The
causes of such a detrimental outcome are yet to be thoroughly determined.
We have previously reported that BRAF mutant, MSS cancers (BRAFmut/MSS)
have a significantly higher rate of p53 mutation and present at more
advanced stages than MSI cancers. Frequencies of these features in the
BRAFmut/MSS cancers are similar to those observed in BRAF wild type, MSS
cancers (BRAFwt/MSS). Chromosomal instability (CIN) is a dominant feature
of BRAFwt/MSS cancers, whilst MSI cancers are considered to be diploid.
In MSS cancers, CIN has been associated with a worse prognosis. We
therefore hypothesised that CIN would be common in BRAF mutant/MSS
cancers. BRAFmut/MSS (n=60), and BRAFwt/MSS cancers (n=90) were
investigated for CIN using Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) analysis over 12
loci encompassing chromosomal regions 5q, 8p, 17p and 18q. CIN was
assigned if at least 1 marker was positive for LOH, and a cancer was
reported as showing no loss if at least 5 markers were informative and
none demonstrated LOH. CIN was frequently found in BRAFmut/MSS cancers
(41/57, 72%), and this rate was comparable to that observed in BRAFwt/MSS
cancers (74/90, 82%). The greatest rate of CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers
occurred at 8p (26/44, 59%), and the least at 5q (19/49, 39%). BRAFwt/MSS
cancers showed most CIN at 17p (43/65, 66.2%), and the least at 5q
(43/80, 53.8%). Within the BRAFmut/MSS cancer subgroup, CIN was highly
correlated with the CpG Island Methylator Phenotype (17/23, 74%). CIN in
BRAFmut/MSS cancers was significantly predominant in those at advanced
(15/17, 88%), compared to early AJCC stages of presentation (6/13, 46%)
(p=0.02). BRAFmut/MSS cancers with CIN at 18q and 8p significantly
associated with worse survival compared to those with no loss (p=0.003,
p<0.05) when adjusted for stage. CIN at 5q, 8p and 18q in BRAFmut/MSS
compared to BRAFwt/MSS cancers significantly correlated with poorer
survival (p=0.002, pBRAF mutant colorectal cancers can be stratified
according to the presence of microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI
cancers with a BRAF mutation are associated with an excellent patient
prognosis. By contrast, in microsatellite stable (MSS) cancers, a BRAF
mutation confers a very poor patient prognosis. The causes of such a
detrimental outcome are yet to be thoroughly determined. We have
previously reported that BRAF mutant, MSS cancers (BRAFmut/MSS) have a
significantly higher rate of p53 mutation and present at more advanced
stages than MSI cancers. Frequencies of these features in the BRAFmut/MSS
cancers are similar to those observed in BRAF wild type, MSS cancers
(BRAFwt/MSS). Chromosomal instability (CIN) is a dominant feature of
BRAFwt/MSS cancers, whilst MSI cancers are considered to be diploid. In
MSS cancers, CIN has been associated with a worse prognosis. We therefore
hypothesised that CIN would be common in BRAF mutant/MSS cancers.
BRAFmut/MSS (n=60), and BRAFwt/MSS cancers (n=90) were investigated for
CIN using Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) analysis over 12 loci encompassing
chromosomal regions 5q, 8p, 17p and 18q. CIN was assigned if at least 1
marker was positive for LOH, and a cancer was reported as showing no loss
if at least 5 markers were informative and none demonstrated LOH. CIN was
frequently found in BRAFmut/MSS cancers (41/57, 72%), and this rate was
comparable to that observed in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (74/90, 82%). The
greatest rate of CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers occurred at 8p (26/44, 59%),
and the least at 5q (19/49, 39%). BRAFwt/MSS cancers showed most CIN at
17p (43/65, 66.2%), and the least at 5q (43/80, 53.8%). Within the
BRAFmut/MSS cancer subgroup, CIN was highly correlated with the CpG
Island Methylator Phenotype (17/23, 74%). CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers was
significantly predominant in those at advanced (15/17, 88%), compared to
early AJCC stages of presentation (6/13, 46%) (p=0.02). BRAFmut/MSS
cancers with CIN at 18q and 8p significantly associated with worse
survival compared to those with no loss (p=0.003, p<0.05) when adjusted
for stage. CIN at 5q, 8p and 18q in BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers significantly correlated with poorer survival (p=0.002, p<0.001,
pBRAF mutant colorectal cancers can be stratified according to the
presence of microsatellite instability (MSI). MSI cancers with a BRAF
mutation are associated with an excellent patient prognosis. By contrast,
in microsatellite stable (MSS) cancers, a BRAF mutation confers a very
poor patient prognosis. The causes of such a detrimental outcome are yet
to be thoroughly determined. We have previously reported that BRAF
mutant, MSS cancers (BRAFmut/MSS) have a significantly higher rate of p53
mutation and present at more advanced stages than MSI cancers.
Frequencies of these features in the BRAFmut/MSS cancers are similar to
those observed in BRAF wild type, MSS cancers (BRAFwt/MSS). Chromosomal
instability (CIN) is a dominant feature of BRAFwt/MSS cancers, whilst MSI
cancers are considered to be diploid. In MSS cancers, CIN has been
associated with a worse prognosis. We therefore hypothesised that CIN
would be common in BRAF mutant/MSS cancers. BRAFmut/MSS (n=60), and
BRAFwt/MSS cancers (n=90) were investigated for CIN using Loss of
Heterozygosity (LOH) analysis over 12 loci encompassing chromosomal
regions 5q, 8p, 17p and 18q. CIN was assigned if at least 1 marker was
positive for LOH, and a cancer was reported as showing no loss if at
least 5 markers were informative and none demonstrated LOH. CIN was
frequently found in BRAFmut/MSS cancers (41/57, 72%), and this rate was
comparable to that observed in BRAFwt/MSS cancers (74/90, 82%). The
greatest rate of CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers occurred at 8p (26/44, 59%),
and the least at 5q (19/49, 39%). BRAFwt/MSS cancers showed most CIN at
17p (43/65, 66.2%), and the least at 5q (43/80, 53.8%). Within the
BRAFmut/MSS cancer subgroup, CIN was highly correlated with the CpG
Island Methylator Phenotype (17/23, 74%). CIN in BRAFmut/MSS cancers was
significantly predominant in those at advanced (15/17, 88%), compared to
early AJCC stages of presentation (6/13, 46%) (p=0.02). BRAFmut/MSS
cancers with CIN at 18q and 8p significantly associated with worse
survival compared to those with no loss (p=0.003, p<0.05) when adjusted
for stage. CIN at 5q, 8p and 18q in BRAFmut/MSS compared to BRAFwt/MSS
cancers significantly correlated with poorer survival (p=0.002, p<0.001,
p<0.001) when adjusted for stage. This study confirms that CIN is common
in BRAFmut/MSS colorectal cancers, and indicates that extensive array
based analyses of BRAF mutant cancers would be warranted. Moreover, it
shows that CIN predominantly occurs in advanced BRAFmut/MSS cancers where
it may contribute to poorer survival, and further highlights molecular
similarities occurring between these and BRAFwt/MSS colorectal cancers.

