Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) profiles predict oral cancer
recurrence in the Oral Cancer Recurrence Prediction Cohort


Oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has a poor prognosis with local
recurrence occurring in up to 30% of cases. Oral mucosal changes are
common at previously treated cancer sites; however, despite close
follow-up, they often develop into recurrent tumor. LOH analysis has been
shown to predict cancer recurrence in lesions at former tumour sites in
retrospective studies. Objective: To determine the value of specific LOH
markers in predicting oral cancer recurrence in samples from an ongoing
longitudinal study. Design: Data were collected from 365 oral cancer
patients enrolled in the Oral Cancer Recurrence Prediction Cohort.
Methods: The study selection criteria included: 1) Patients originally
diagnosed with carcinoma in situ (CIS) or SCC and treated with a curative
intent (mostly Stage 0/I/II); 2) Appearance of a lesion at the tumor site
during follow-up with biopsy histologically diagnosed as hyperplasia or
low-grade (mild/moderate dysplasia) (higher diagnoses went to treatment);
3) Continued follow-up of patient; 4) Sufficient tissue in biopsy for LOH
analysis. 71 patients met these criteria. Recurrence outcome was defined
as development of severe dysplasia, CIS or SCC at the target site.
Timeline was calculated from target date to outcome for recurring group
or last follow-up date for non-recurring group. Target biopsies were
analyzed using 19 microsatellite loci on 7 chromosome arms (3p, 4q, 8p,
9p, 11q, 13q, and 17p). Univariant Cox analysis was used to determine the
prognostic value of clinical and microsatellite markers. Recursive
partitioning trees and Kaplan Meier curves were constructed to create
molecular models for both 9p and 3p. Results: Recurrence occurred in 26
or the 71 patients (36.6%) with 18 months median follow-up time (compared
with 33 months in non-recurring patients). There were no differences
between recurrent and non-recurrent groups for gender, ethnicity, tobacco
habit, original diagnosis before treatment and histology of target biopsy
(P>0.05). RR was significantly increased for cases with LOH at 9p, 3p,
8p, 13q and 17p (POral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has a poor prognosis
with local recurrence occurring in up to 30% of cases. Oral mucosal
changes are common at previously treated cancer sites; however, despite
close follow-up, they often develop into recurrent tumor. LOH analysis
has been shown to predict cancer recurrence in lesions at former tumour
sites in retrospective studies. Objective: To determine the value of
specific LOH markers in predicting oral cancer recurrence in samples from
an ongoing longitudinal study. Design: Data were collected from 365 oral
cancer patients enrolled in the Oral Cancer Recurrence Prediction Cohort.
Methods: The study selection criteria included: 1) Patients originally
diagnosed with carcinoma in situ (CIS) or SCC and treated with a curative
intent (mostly Stage 0/I/II); 2) Appearance of a lesion at the tumor site
during follow-up with biopsy histologically diagnosed as hyperplasia or
low-grade (mild/moderate dysplasia) (higher diagnoses went to treatment);
3) Continued follow-up of patient; 4) Sufficient tissue in biopsy for LOH
analysis. 71 patients met these criteria. Recurrence outcome was defined
as development of severe dysplasia, CIS or SCC at the target site.
Timeline was calculated from target date to outcome for recurring group
or last follow-up date for non-recurring group. Target biopsies were
analyzed using 19 microsatellite loci on 7 chromosome arms (3p, 4q, 8p,
9p, 11q, 13q, and 17p). Univariant Cox analysis was used to determine the
prognostic value of clinical and microsatellite markers. Recursive
partitioning trees and Kaplan Meier curves were constructed to create
molecular models for both 9p and 3p. Results: Recurrence occurred in 26
or the 71 patients (36.6%) with 18 months median follow-up time (compared
with 33 months in non-recurring patients). There were no differences
between recurrent and non-recurrent groups for gender, ethnicity, tobacco
habit, original diagnosis before treatment and histology of target biopsy
(P>0.05). RR was significantly increased for cases with LOH at 9p, 3p,
8p, 13q and 17p (P<0.05) but not with 4q or 11q. Chromosomal loss of 3 or
more arms had a 6.2-fold increase in recurrence risk. LOH at 9p and 3p
increased the risk by 4.2- and 3.8-fold, respectively (P0.001) with LOH
at both 9p and 3p having a RR of 7.1-fold (P0.001). 9p retention was the
best independent negative predictor for disease recurrence. Conclusion:
The study confirmed the value of microsatellite LOH markers in predicting
oral cancer recurrence. The microsatellite markers could serve as an
additional prognostic tool to better categorize future oral cancer
patients into various risk groups. (Sponsored by NIH/NIDCR grants
R01DE13124 and R01DE17013)

