Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Autoantibodies in infertility are associated with ovarian cancer


Epidemiological studies show women with infertility have increased
ovarian cancer (OvCa) risk, but biomarkers indicating which women are at
increased risk are unavailable. We showed autoantibodies (Abs) are
associated with infertility suggesting an autoimmune etiology in some
women. While CA125 remains the most frequently used OvCa biomarker, it
has limited sensitivity and specificity, and additional biomarkers
predicting early OvCa remain to be determined. We sought to determine if
Abs to Selenium Binding Protein 1 (SBP1) associated with infertility are
also found in OvCa; if Abs to mesothelin (MSLN), a well characterized
circulating OvCa tumor antigen, occur in infertility; and if these Abs
differed from CA125. CA125 was measured by an established bead-based
assay and anti-MSLN and anti-SBP1 Abs were measured by immunoassay using
sera from OvCa patients (n=28), women with infertility (n=109; including
endometriosis, ovulatory dysfunction, unexplained infertility and
Premature Menopause (POF), benign ovarian tumors or cysts (n=24), healthy
women (n=152) and assay controls (n=16). CA125 was significantly higher
in early (p=0.039) and late OvCa (P=0.003) compared to controls. CA125
was also elevated in some women with endometriosis and unexplained in
fertility but overall was not significantly different from controls.
Anti-MSLN Abs were significantly more frequent in women with prematurely
reduced ovarian function including ovulatory dysfunction (65%), POF (52%)
and unexplained infertility (32%) compared to controls. Women with
endometriosis, who also have a high OvCa risk, did not have anti-MSLN
Abs. Anti-SBP1 Abs were significantly higher and more frequent in the
same categories of infertility that were positive for anti-MSLN Abs, but
not in the same women. SBP1 Abs occurred in ovulatory dysfunction (50%),
POF (27%) and unexplained infertility (32%) compared to healthy controls.
Anti-MSLN Abs occurred in early (14%) and late (9%) OvCa and anti-SBP Abs
occurred in early (17%) and late (20%) OvCa. Anti-MSLN and anti-SBP were
not correlated (Spearman's correlation coefficient, 0.14, p=0.12)
suggesting they might complement each other. CA125 was correlated with
MSLN (0.27, p=0.001) overall and within cancer only (0.50, p=0.015), but
was not correlated with anti-MSLN (all: 0.036, p=0.65, OvCa: 0.3, p=0.13)
or anti-SBP (all: 0.01, p=0.92, OvCa: 0.10, p=0.61), which suggests they
might complement CA125 in a panel for detection of early OvCa detection.
We demonstrate for the first time that antibodies to MSLN and SBP1 occur
in both infertility and OvCa suggesting these biomarkers may indicate
OvCa risk. The results also suggest autoantibodies may complement
measurement of CA125. Thus, identification of antibody biomarkers in a
high risk, pre-diagnostic group may provide novel biomarkers for early
OvCa. Support: DOD OC073325 (JL), NIH R01 CA134487 (IH&JL) and P50
CA083636 (NU).

