Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Construction and characterization of completely human serine
protease therapeutics targeting Her2/neu


The serine protease granzyme B (GrB) is a powerful enzymatic inducer of
apoptosis via a multi-modal intracellular mechanism including direct
activation of the caspase cascade, damaging mitochondria resulting in the
release of cytochrome C, and damaging nuclear matrix. We developed a
novel recombinant immunotoxin linking GrB to a humanized
Herceptin-derived scFv (4D5) specific for the Her2/neu cell-surface
domain. The GrB/4D5 fusion constructs were efficiently expressed in HEK
293T mammalian cells as active glycosylated molecules and purified by
immobilized cobalt affinity chromatography. In vitro studies demonstrated
that GrB/4D5 retained the affinity and specificity of the original
Herceptin antibody with a Kd of 0.24nM, as well as the biological
activity of GrB (BAADT assay, enzymatic activity of 2.08105U/M, vs
1.39105U/M for free GrB). Target cell-specific activity was observed with
IC50 of 10 to 50nM against a panel of Her2/neu positive tumor cells. In
addition, the rapid induction of apoptosis in cells was confirmed by
Annexin V staining and detection of activated caspase-3 in the cytosol.
GrB/4D5 was active against BT474 M1 parental cells as well as
Herceptin-resistant cells, despite the fact that these cells were more
than 150 fold resistant to Herceptin. Addition of EGF or NRG-1 had no
inhibitory effect on the cytotoxicity of the fusion construct against
BT474 M1 cells. This is the first report of GrB-based immunotoxins having
the potential to overcome Herceptin resistance arising in breast tumor
cells. Further in vitro characterization against Her2/neu positive cancer
cells expressing MDR or MRP-related proteins and in vivo xenograft model
studies are ongoing. Research conducted, in part, by the Clayton
Foundation for Research.

