Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition confers resistance to
complement-dependent cytotoxicity in lung cancer cells


Recent studies have implicated Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
conferring several clinically relevant properties to cancer cells, in
addition to initiating tumor metastasis. These include stem-cell like
properties, resistance to targeted therapies and ability to evade immune
surveillance. Pathway analysis of gene expression changes in TGF- induced
EMT identified the complement cascade as one of the significantly
enriched pathway. Further analysis of the genes in the complement pathway
revealed EMT-induced expression of complement inhibitors and decrease in
expression of proteins essential for complement activity, suggesting
resistance to complement dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) during EMT. We
found lung cancer cells that undergo EMT showed marked decrease in C3
deposition and concomitant resistance to apoptosis by CDC as measured by
7-Aminoactinomycin D staining. Flow cytometric and RT-PCR analysis showed
a significant increase in the CD59 expression on the surface of cells
undergoing EMT, which is a potent inhibitor of formation of membrane
attack complex that mediates complement dependent cell lysis.
Furthermore, CD59 inhibition by siRNA mediated knock-down overcame the
EMT-induced resistance to anti-EGFR antibody (Cetuximab) mediated CDC.
The increase in CD59 was abrogated on disruption of TGF- signaling as
revealed by TGF- Receptor kinase inhibitor and is dependent on Smad3
signaling. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed increased
occupancy of Smad3 on CD59 promoter, suggesting a direct regulation by
Smad3. These results demonstrate that TGF--induced EMT confers another
novel immune evasive mechanism to tumor cells that facilitates tumor
progression and CD59 as a potential therapeutic target for enhancing the
efficacy of anti-EGFR Antibody therapies and against tumor metastasis.

