Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Abnormal abundance of senescent fibroblasts in the tumor stroma of
non-small cell lung cancer patients


Although permanent cell cycle arrest through senescence has been
previously regarded as a protective mechanism against tumor growth, there
is growing evidence that the abnormal abundance of senescent cells
observed in the stroma of some types of cancer may support cancer
progression. However, the presence of senescent cells in the tumor stroma
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which is a major cause of cancer
death in western countries, remains poorly defined. To fill this gap of
knowledge, we set up a bank of primary human lung fibroblasts isolated
from both tumor-free regions and tumors of NSCLC patients diagnosed with
adenocarcinoma (ADC, n=5), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC, n=5) or large
cell carcinoma (LCC, n=2) histological subtypes. Tumor-associated
fibroblasts (TAFs) or patient-matched control fibroblasts (NTAFs) were
seeded in collagen-coated culture dishes in culture media supplemented
with 10% serum for 3 days. The presence of senescent cells was assessed
by examining senescent associated signatures including increased
spreading, decreased proliferation, and the positive response to the
beta-galactosidase (beta-gal) assay. The beta-gal assay was negative in
>90% of NTAFs (11/12). Likewise, TAFs from either ADC or SCC were
negative for beta-gal assay in 80% of the patients examined (4/5),
whereas Although permanent cell cycle arrest through senescence has been
previously regarded as a protective mechanism against tumor growth, there
is growing evidence that the abnormal abundance of senescent cells
observed in the stroma of some types of cancer may support cancer
progression. However, the presence of senescent cells in the tumor stroma
of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which is a major cause of cancer
death in western countries, remains poorly defined. To fill this gap of
knowledge, we set up a bank of primary human lung fibroblasts isolated
from both tumor-free regions and tumors of NSCLC patients diagnosed with
adenocarcinoma (ADC, n=5), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC, n=5) or large
cell carcinoma (LCC, n=2) histological subtypes. Tumor-associated
fibroblasts (TAFs) or patient-matched control fibroblasts (NTAFs) were
seeded in collagen-coated culture dishes in culture media supplemented
with 10% serum for 3 days. The presence of senescent cells was assessed
by examining senescent associated signatures including increased
spreading, decreased proliferation, and the positive response to the
beta-galactosidase (beta-gal) assay. The beta-gal assay was negative in
>90% of NTAFs (11/12). Likewise, TAFs from either ADC or SCC were
negative for beta-gal assay in 80% of the patients examined (4/5),
whereas <10% of cells were positive for the beta-gal assay in the
remaining 20% of patients. In contrast, beta-gal positive TAFs were
observed in 100% of LCC patients (2/2), with an average of 50% positive
TAFs per patient. In agreement with these findings, LCC TAFs were poorly
or non-responsive to serum stimulation in terms of cell cycle progression
as assessed by flow cytometry, unlike patient-matched LCC NTAFs.
Moreover, LCC TAFs exhibited a high percentage of largely spread
fibroblasts, which is commonly associated with the senescent phenotype.
These preliminary results strongly suggest that the senescent phenotype
is absent in normal fibroblasts, and abnormally and specifically present
in lung fibroblasts from the tumor stroma of LCC patients, therefore
revealing the presence of NSCLC-subtype specific alterations in the tumor
microenvironment.

