Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GLI2 is a significant determinant of HH-GLI pathway activaton in
Ewing sarcoma


Ewing Sarcoma is an aggressive bone and soft tissue malignancy of
children, adolescents and young adults. Non-canonical activation of the
Hedgehog-GLI pathway by the Ewing specifc EWS/FLI1 transcription factor
has been shown to mediate important aspects of tumor phenotype. While
evidence regarding the role of EWS/FLI1 in direct activation has been
published, no one has yet investigated the role of other pathway
components in Ewing tumors. Physiologically, GLI2 is the principal
transcriptional activator of GLI1 and substantial amounts of GLI2 can be
demonstrated in Ewing tumors and cell lines. So we hypothesized that GLI2
may also function in Ewing cells to help to regulate GLI1 and
Hedgehog-GLI pathway activaton. Since GLI2 can be targeted by
pharmacologic means, understanding its role in Ewing tumors is of
potential significance. We demonstrate that GLI2 is expressed at
significant levels in Ewing tumors. Furthermore, we show by
overexpression studies, that GLI2 overexpression augments expression of
both GLI1 and other pathway targets in Ewing cell lines. By using shRNA,
we also demonstrate that knockdown of GLI2 expression has the expected
effect of diminishing GLI 1 expression in Ewing lines. Finally, we show
that treatment with GLI inhibitors also diminishes GLI2 activation of
GLI1. Overall, these data indicate that GLI2 in Ewing cells exists in an
activator state in Ewing cells and that pharmacologic means of targeting
GLI2 may be an effective strategy for targeted therapy.

