Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targetome profiling and genetic association analyses implicate
miR-202 in follicular lymphomagenesis


Complex etiologic heterogeneity among non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL)
subtypes has made it difficult to identify risk factors for this disease.
However, recent genetic association analyses, including two genome-wide
association studies, suggest that genetic susceptibility to NHL may be
strongest for the follicular lymphoma subtype. As recent studies have
demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) may be important in the etiology of
many cancer types, including NHL, we performed a population-based genetic
association study which identified a polymorphism in the precursor of
miR-202 that is strongly associated with follicular lymphoma risk
(rs12355840 in miR-202: PTREND = 0.006). An in vitro functional genetics
assay demonstrated that the polymorphism is biologically active, and
operates by altering the processing efficiency of the miR-202 precursor
to the mature effector miRNA species. A ribonucleoprotein
immunoprecipitation-microarray (RIP-Chip) assay, performed with an
anti-AGO2 antibody followed by a whole-genome array, was used to
characterize the miR-202 targetome, and selected targets were confirmed
using a 3UTR luciferase assay. Among the identified targets were several
transcripts with relevance for tumorigenesis, including the miRNA
biogenesis gene DICER1 and the lymphoma-associated cell cycle regulator
and proto-oncogene SKP2. Both of these genes have been shown to be
upregulated in lymphomas, which is consistent with our data, which show
that the miR-202 risk allele is associated with diminished mature miR-202
levels in vitro. Taken together, these findings suggest that rs12355840
may represent a novel risk biomarker for follicular lymphoma, and
implicate miR-202 in follicular lymphomagenesis.

