Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel berbamine derivative induces apoptosis of
chemotherapy-resistant human osteosarcoma cells through activation of
ROS/JNK signaling


Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone tumor in children and
adolescence. There is a critical need to find more potent drugs for
patients with metastatic or recurrent disease. Berbamine (BBM) is a
natural compound derived from the Berberis amurensis plants. BBM and its
derivatives have been shown to have anti-tumor effects in several
cancers. Here, we report that a new berbamine derivative, BBMD3 (5 M),
induces apoptosis of human osteosarcoma cells, which are resistant or
insensitive to conventional chemotherapy including cisplatin, doxorubicin
and methotrexate. BBMD3 inhibited cell viability and induced apoptosis of
G292, KHOS and MG-63 human osteosarcoma cells in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. BBMD3 activated caspase-3, and cleaved
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Caspase inhibitor (Z-VAD-FMK) could
rescue tumor cells from the cytotoxic effects of BBMD3 on cell survival.
Importantly, BBMD3 increased phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) in these tumor cells, resulting in activation of its substrates,
c-Jun and c-Fos. Moreover, reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger,
N-acetylcysteine (NAC), blocked the phosphorylation of JNK and c-Jun
induced by BBMD3. However, Z-VAD-FMK treatment did not inhibit the
induction of phosphorylated JNK and c-Jun by BBMD3, suggesting that
phosphorylation of JNK and c-Jun occurred before activation of caspases.
BBMD3 increased the expression of the pro-apototic gene Bad, associated
with apoptosis induction. Finally, BBMD3 also decreased the expression of
cyclin D1, a positive cell cycle regulator, which is correlated with
growth suppression in osteosarcoma cells. Collectively, these findings
indicate that BBMD3 is a potentially promising drug for the treatment of
chemotherapy-resistant osteosarcomas.

