Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Development of a highly potent and non-invasive optical imaging
agent for glioblastoma


Using the one-bead one-compound (OBOC) combinatorial library approach, we
have previously identified a peptide ligand LXY1, cyclic
c-d-G-L-G-Hyp-N-c, that targets the 31 integrin of U87MG glioblastoma
cells. Very recently, we have further optimized LXY1 using the OBOC
focused library approach, and subsequently traditional medicinal
chemistry. Three focused OBOC peptide libraries have been designed by
fixing the motif c-d-G_G_ _c, randomizing the other positions with a
large number of D- and other unnatural amino acids, and extending with
1-2 random amino acids at the N-terminus and/or C-terminus of LXY1. The
bead libraries have been screened against U87MG cells using an on-bead
cell binding assay. Three out of the twelve positive ligands have an
additional L-amino acid at the C-terminus of LXY1. However, none of the
positive beads has an extension of additional residues at the N-terminus.
A series of new ligands has been designed based on the screening results,
and extensive structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies have been
performed. Several ligands have shown more potent in vitro binding to
U87MG cells, and better in vivo tumor uptake than LXY1. Among them, LXY30
[cyclic c-d-G-Phe(3,5-diF)-G-Hyp-N-c-R] is the most promising ligand.
Optical imaging of LXY30, using LXY30-biotin/streptavidin-Cy5.5
conjugate, in both subcutaneous and orthotopic U87MG glioblastoma mouse
models, will be presented. LXY30 could be used as an efficient vehicle
for the delivery of imaging probes and therapeutic agents against
glioblastoma and other tumors with a high expression of the 31 integrin.

