Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Apoptosis-associated genes related to photodynamic therapy in
breast carcinomas


Breast carcinoma is a heterogeneous disease with different molecular
subtypes being characterized by distinct morphological appearances,
genetic alterations, and clinical presentation. This heterogeneity is the
major challenge in its diagnosis and treatment. Photodynamic therapy
(PDT) has been used as an alternative treatment to the conventional
therapies, and it is becoming accepted as a therapeutic modality in
oncology. PDT is based on the incorporation of photosensitizing molecules
into tumors and, after excitation with light, induces direct tumor cell
death as well as indirect effects on the tumor microenvironment. Cellular
apoptosis is the main event found in all tumor tissues treated by PDT. To
date, metabolic pathways influenced by PDT have not been fully
elucidated, and studies involving gene expression analysis in mammary
tumors after PDT are scarce. Therefore, the aim of this study was to find
molecular markers involved in the apoptosis pathways that may be related
to the effect of PDT in breast carcinomas. To this end, global gene
expression profiles were obtained from primary breast tumors samples
induced in 20 female rats Sprague-Dawley, being 10 from untreated tumor
samples (group 1 or control group) and 10 breast tumors samples submitted
to PDT (group 2 or treatment group). These samples were investigated by
quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) using the Rat Apoptosis RT2 Profiler
PCR Array platform (Super-Array, USA) that consists of 84 genes of
interest involved in the modulation of cellular apoptosis. A set of 11
genes presented different expression when comparing the groups. The HRK,
BIK, CASP14, CIDEA, GADD45a, TNF, CASP1 genes showed up regulation
significance at treatment group compared with the control group
(Student's t-test, PBreast carcinoma is a heterogeneous disease with
different molecular subtypes being characterized by distinct
morphological appearances, genetic alterations, and clinical
presentation. This heterogeneity is the major challenge in its diagnosis
and treatment. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been used as an alternative
treatment to the conventional therapies, and it is becoming accepted as a
therapeutic modality in oncology. PDT is based on the incorporation of
photosensitizing molecules into tumors and, after excitation with light,
induces direct tumor cell death as well as indirect effects on the tumor
microenvironment. Cellular apoptosis is the main event found in all tumor
tissues treated by PDT. To date, metabolic pathways influenced by PDT
have not been fully elucidated, and studies involving gene expression
analysis in mammary tumors after PDT are scarce. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to find molecular markers involved in the apoptosis
pathways that may be related to the effect of PDT in breast carcinomas.
To this end, global gene expression profiles were obtained from primary
breast tumors samples induced in 20 female rats Sprague-Dawley, being 10
from untreated tumor samples (group 1 or control group) and 10 breast
tumors samples submitted to PDT (group 2 or treatment group). These
samples were investigated by quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) using
the Rat Apoptosis RT2 Profiler PCR Array platform (Super-Array, USA) that
consists of 84 genes of interest involved in the modulation of cellular
apoptosis. A set of 11 genes presented different expression when
comparing the groups. The HRK, BIK, CASP14, CIDEA, GADD45a, TNF, CASP1
genes showed up regulation significance at treatment group compared with
the control group (Student's t-test, P<0,05). These genes play a role of
induction of apoptosis among other functions. TNF-tumor necrosis factor
gene, for example, plays a role in the regulation of cell proliferation,
induction of apoptosis, and inflammatory response. The GADD45a may
mediate a delay in G2 to M cell cycle progression, which could induce DNA
repair. The BIRC5, CASP6, TNFRSF11b, TP53 genes showed down expression
significance in the treatment group compared with the control (Student's
t-test, PBreast carcinoma is a heterogeneous disease with different
molecular subtypes being characterized by distinct morphological
appearances, genetic alterations, and clinical presentation. This
heterogeneity is the major challenge in its diagnosis and treatment.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been used as an alternative treatment to
the conventional therapies, and it is becoming accepted as a therapeutic
modality in oncology. PDT is based on the incorporation of
photosensitizing molecules into tumors and, after excitation with light,
induces direct tumor cell death as well as indirect effects on the tumor
microenvironment. Cellular apoptosis is the main event found in all tumor
tissues treated by PDT. To date, metabolic pathways influenced by PDT
have not been fully elucidated, and studies involving gene expression
analysis in mammary tumors after PDT are scarce. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to find molecular markers involved in the apoptosis
pathways that may be related to the effect of PDT in breast carcinomas.
To this end, global gene expression profiles were obtained from primary
breast tumors samples induced in 20 female rats Sprague-Dawley, being 10
from untreated tumor samples (group 1 or control group) and 10 breast
tumors samples submitted to PDT (group 2 or treatment group). These
samples were investigated by quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) using
the Rat Apoptosis RT2 Profiler PCR Array platform (Super-Array, USA) that
consists of 84 genes of interest involved in the modulation of cellular
apoptosis. A set of 11 genes presented different expression when
comparing the groups. The HRK, BIK, CASP14, CIDEA, GADD45a, TNF, CASP1
genes showed up regulation significance at treatment group compared with
the control group (Student's t-test, P<0,05). These genes play a role of
induction of apoptosis among other functions. TNF-tumor necrosis factor
gene, for example, plays a role in the regulation of cell proliferation,
induction of apoptosis, and inflammatory response. The GADD45a may
mediate a delay in G2 to M cell cycle progression, which could induce DNA
repair. The BIRC5, CASP6, TNFRSF11b, TP53 genes showed down expression
significance in the treatment group compared with the control (Student's
t-test, P<0,05). BIRC5 gene act as an inhibitor of programmed cell death
preventing or reducing the activity of caspases in any cysteine proteases
groups involved in the apoptosis. These results showed that these
apoptosis-associated genes could explain the rapid elimination of tumor
that occurs after PDT applications in breast carcinomas, and may thus
contribute to better understanding of both the breast carcinogenesis and
the PDT action mechanism.

