Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Molecular changes in breast tumors following bevacizumab-based
treatment: Final analysis of a randomized neoadjuvant study of
bevacizumab or placebo, followed by chemotherapy with or without
bevacizumab, in patients with stage II or III breast cancer


Background: Bevacizumab (bev) has been widely studied in breast cancer
(BC), yet no randomized trial in BC has reported in vivo molecular
effects of bev on human tumor tissue. We conducted a trial to evaluate
the safety, clinical & molecular effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus
bev for locally advanced BC. Methods: 90 pts were randomized (2:1:2:1) to
1 of 4 arms: Arm A: TAC (docetaxel, T: 75 mg/m2, doxorubicin, A: 50
mg/m2, cyclophosphamide, C: 500 mg/m2) + low dose bev (7.5 mg/kg); Arm B:
TAC + low dose placebo (P); Arm C: TAC + standard dose bev (15 mg/kg);
Arm D: TAC + Std-P. A run-in cycle of bev or P was followed by 6 cycles
of TAC plus P or bev. Tumor biopsies pre- and 7-10 days post-run-in with
bev or P were taken. Unblinding occurred post surgery (Sx): Arms A/C
received maintenance bev to complete 52 wks, Arms B/D received no further
P. Eligible patients were females with >3 cm, HER2(-) BC. Endpoints
included safety and pathologic complete response (pCR) in breast & lymph
nodes. To assess the effects of VEGF pathway inhibition on tumor
vasculature, PCR analysis using the fluidigm array platform was performed
on RNA from the pre- and post-run in samples to evaluate expression of 67
genes known to play a defined role in VEGF signaling. Results: 28 pts
were assigned to Arm A, 30 to Arm C, and 32 to Arms B/D. 12 pts came off
Tx before surgery (Arm A:2, Arm C:6, Arms B/D:4) and 78 received all Tx,
underwent Sx and are evaluable for pCR. Two pts (6%) in Arms B/D, 5 pts
(18%) in Arm A and 10 pts (33%) in Arm C had wound healing complications.
17% of pts in Arm C had Gr 3 (N=4) or Gr 4 (N=1) heart failure, none in
Arms A/B/D. The pCR rate in evaluable patients was 18% (14/78): 5 (19%)
Arm A, 3 (13%) Arm C, 6 (21%) Arms B/D. 45 samples (20 from Arms B/D and
25 from bev arms) were included in the pair-wise analysis to identify 6
genes that were differentially expressed. Bev resulted in a decrease in
expression of Dll4, Cox2, Fibronectin (FN_EIIIB), angiopoietin 2 (Angpt2)
and ESM1. In addition, upregulation of the cytokine, stromal derived
growth factor (SDF1) was observed. Notably, genes such as CD31 or
VE-cadherin were not appreciably differentially expressed. Of the genes
that were downregulated, Dll4 and Angpt2 represent genes enriched in
endothelial tip cells, which guide the migration of newly formed blood
vessels. The decrease in these genes likely represents the effect of bev
on reducing immature, growing vasculature in the tumor. Conclusions: This
trial enabled the clinical and molecular evaluation of breast cancer
tumor tissue pre and post-bev. Clinically, bev was associated with more
wound healing and heart failure events and similar pCR rates compared to
P. Tumor expression analysis for genes in the angiogenesis pathway
supports the preclinical hypothesis that bev may primarily target
immature tumor vasculature.

