Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Selective inhibition of cancer metastasis with a novel small
therapeutic molecule


Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common cause of cancer death in
US males. Death is typically caused by metastasis. Naturally occurring
isoflavanones have been reported to be a class of compounds that
effectively inhibit PCa motility and metastasis. This led us to use these
compounds as a synthetic scaffold starting point. By integrating
fragment-based diversification synthesis with chemi-driven biological
selection, we discovered novel small molecule therapeutics with increased
selectivity and potent efficacy. We thereby efficiently synthesized a new
class of bioactive compounds that inhibit cell motility in vitro and
inhibit human PCa metastasis in a murine model at low nanomolar
concentrations. Extensive investigations indicate high specificity at the
molecular and cellular levels, and failed to identify toxicity, even at
high doses administered over extended periods. Importantly, efficacy
against several cancer types was also demonstrated. Target validation
studies used our lead as a chemical probe, and point to inhibition of
ATM/ATR interaction with specific substrate proteins as important.
Together, these studies indicate that we have successfully discovered a
novel compound, acting upon a novel pharmacologic target, which
selectively inhibits human PCa metastasis. Taken with our favorable
preclinical toxicological data, these findings support movement of our
lead compound into early phase human trials.

