Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Common genetic variants in the vitamin D pathway including
genome-wide associated variants in relation to glioma risk and outcome


Experimental and clinical evidence suggest that vitamin D protects
against several types of cancer by promoting cell differentiation and
apoptosis and by inhibiting cell proliferation and angiogenesis. In vitro
evidence supports a similar protective function in glioma; however, no
study has examined whether common genetic variants in the vitamin D
pathway are related to glioma risk or patient outcome. We evaluated these
potential associations in a clinic-based case-control study conducted at
medical centers in the southeastern US. Genotyping was performed in 623
newly diagnosed (eg. nonrecurrent) glioma cases (including 343 WHO grade
IV glioblastomas (GBM); 148 WHO grade II or III astrocytomas, 95
oligoastrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas, and 37 gliomas with unspecified
histology) and 631 healthy controls with no history of brain tumors. A
total of 7 candidate tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
genotyped in the vitamin D receptor (VDR at 12q13) including rs2107301,
rs2238135, rs4516035, rs731236 (Taq1), rs1544410 (Bsm1), rs11568820
(Cdx2), and rs2228570 (Fok1). SNPs associated with serum concentrations
of 25-hydroxy vitamin D in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) were
also evaluated including rs1155563, rs12512631, rs2282679, and rs7041 in
GC (4q12-q13), rs10741657 in CYP2R1 (11p15), rs6013897 in CYP24A1
(20q13), rs3829251 in NADSYN1 (11q13), and rs6599638 at C10orf88 (10q26).
Genotyping was performed in oral DNA samples using Illumina GoldenGate
and Taqman OpenArray assays. Logistic regression was used to estimate age
and gender-adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI)
for glioma risk according to vitamin D genotypes. Proportional hazards
regression was used to estimate age and gender-adjusted hazard ratios
(HR) for glioma-related death among 439 patients with high grade tumors
including GBM and high grade astrocytomas (331 deaths; median
Kaplan-Meier survival: 15.0 months). GWAS SNPs in NADSYN1, GC, and
C10ORF88 were not associated with glioma risk or patient survival. Risk
associations limited to GBM were observed for rs2238135 in the VDR (G>C;
minor allele frequency (MAF) = 0.20) (per variant allele OR = 1.31; 95%
CI: 1.01 to 1.71; p for trend = 0.04) and for GWAS SNP rs10741657 located
near CYP2R1 (G>A; MAF = 0.40) (per variant allele OR = 0.79; 95% CI: 0.63
to 0.98; p for trend = 0.03). The variant allele in CYP24A1 rs6013897
(T>A; MAF = 0.20) was associated with prolonged survival among patients
with high grade tumors (per variant allele HR = 0.79; 95% CI: 0.59 to
0.97; p for trend = 0.03) in patients uniformly treated with the current
standard of care (surgery, radiation and temozolomide). To our knowledge
this is the first report suggesting that genetic variation in vitamin D
related genes may be a determinant of glioma risk and outcome. Further
studies are needed to confirm these results and identify the putative
causal variant.

