Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ALDH1 and hypoxia inducible factors in locally advanced breast
cancer patients subjected to neoadjuvant chemotherapy


The presence of stem-like cells within malignant tumors has been reported
as a prognostic factor in patients with solid tumors. Recent studies
suggest that hypoxia promotes tumor stemness. This mechanism can be
regulated by hypoxia inducible factors such as HIF1A and HIF2A. In breast
carcinomas, the aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) was identified as a
potential stem-like cell marker and prognostic factor. However, the
association of HIFs and ALDH1 expressions in breast cancer patients
subjected to neoadjuvant treatment has not been studied yet. Methods: we
retrospectively analyzed the expression of ALDH1, HIF1A and HIF2A
proteins in 80 tumors from patients with histologically confirmed stage
II and III breast carcinomas treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the
Hospital das Clnicas of the University of So Paulo from 2000 to 2005
[stage IIa: 12 patients (14%); stage IIb: 30 patients (35.5%); stage
IIIa: 15 patients (17.5%) and stage IIIb: 28 patients (33%)]. The
patients mean age was 48.9 11.7 years old with a mean follow-up of 100
months. The ER, PgR and HER2 positive expression rates were 63%, 43% and
32%, respectively. The immunohistochemistry for ALDH1, HIF1A and HIF2A
was performed in tumors samples before and after neoadjuvant treatment.
We analyzed the influence of clinical and pathological features on
clinical and pathological response, disease free survival and overall
survival. Results: the objective clinical response (partial and complete
response) to neoadjuvant therapy was 80% with 12% of complete
pathological response. Among all clinical and pathological parameters,
only HIF1A expression was associated with pathological response (21% of
complete pathological response in HIF1A positive vs 5% in HIF1A negative;
p= 0.04). There was a positive association between ALDH1 and HIF1A
expression before and after chemotherapy (p= 0.038 and p= 0.03,
respectively). The ALDH1 expression was associated with HIF2A expression
in tumors after neoadjuvant treatment (p= 0.01). In univariate analysis,
the prognostic was influenced by age (p= 0.01), pathological response (p=
0.01), metastasis to axillary lymph nodes after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
(p= 0.006), HER2 overexpression (p= 0.03) and by the presence of ALDH1+
cells within the primary tumor after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (p= 0.01).
In multivariate analysis, only the presence of ALDH1+ cells after
chemotherapy and age were associated with reduced overall survival (p=
0.04 and p= 0.01, respectively). Conclusion: the presence of ALDH1
positive cells within the residual tumor after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
is associated with and increase in HIF2A expression and poor prognostic
in patients with locally advanced breast cancer. There is a association
between ALDH1 expression in tumor cells and the expression of HIF1A in
locally advanced breast carcinomas.

