Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combination of temozolomide and O6- benzylguanine inhibits breast
cancer growth


O6 methylguanine DNA methyltransferease (MGMT) is over expressed in
breast cancer cells. A number of cytotoxic agents utilized in the
treatment of cancer directly or indirectly damage DNA, thus initiating a
cascade of events which finalizes in cell death. MGMT has received
significant focus for its role in the repair of DNA damage caused by a
number of chemotherapeutics including alkylating agents, chlorethylating
and methylating agents. In the present study, we tested the
administration of the MGMT inhibitor [O6-benzylguanine (BG)] at non-toxic
doses in combination with MGMT alkylator (temozolomide) on breast cancer
cells in cell culture and xenograft models. Here, we report that
temozolomide in combination with BG effectively inhibits breast cancer
cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Here, we also report that BG either
alone or in combination with temozolomide inhibits gene expressions which
are involved in breast tumorigenesis and cell division process (CDC20,
TOP2A, AURKB, BIRC5) and induces the expression of p21cip1 cell cycle
inhibitor. The combination also enhanced PARP cleavage, indicative of
apoptosis. In breast cancer xenograft models, BG alone or in combination
with temozolomide caused marked delay in tumor growth. These findings
suggest that MGMT inhibition may provide a novel and effective approach
for breast cancer growth inhibition. Furthermore, the combination of MGMT
inhibitors and MGMT alkylators can provide alternative therapeutic
approaches to treat breast cancer.

