Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CCL3 autocrine signaling regulate retention of metastasis
associated macrophages and promote breast cancer metastasis


Macrophages abundantly found in the tumor microenvironment enhance
malignancy. At metastatic sites a distinct population of metastasis
associated macrophages (MAMs) promotes tumor cell extravasation, seeding
and persistent growth. These macrophages are derived from circulating
inflammatory monocytes recruited by CCL2/CCR2 chemokine signaling. Our
current study identified a distinct gene expression signature of the MAMs
in comparison with resident macrophages in lung and spleen. Majority of
these genes encodes cell surface proteins and secreted factors which
mediate MAM's interaction with the metastatic microenvironment.
Interestingly, we identified another chemokine, CCL3, is highly expressed
by MAMs in a CCL2/CCR2 dependent manner. This indicates that CCL2 not
only regulate MAM recruitment but also its function. RNA interference
mediated CCL3 knockdown significantly reduced their potential in
promoting tumor cell extravasation in vitro. Anti-CCL3 antibody and
genetic ablation of CCL3 significantly reduced tumor cell metastatic
potential in vivo. Importantly, MAM also express high level of CCR1 and
CCR5, receptors for CCL3, upon differentiation. Anti-CCL3 inhibitory
antibody significantly reduced MAM retention in pulmonary metastasis.
Together, our data indicates an autocrine signaling via CCL3 regulated by
CCL2/CCR2 controls MAM retention and promote breast tumor lung metastasis
which identified a novel therapeutic target for treating metastatic
breast disease.

