Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Silencing of TIMELESS induces growth suppression, apoptosis and
enhanced cytotoxicity of cisplatin in H157 lung cancer cells


Background: TIMELSS (TIM) is a circadian clock gene in Drosophila, but
its role in mammals in circadian clock systems is not well-understood.
Mammalian TIM is involved in Chk1 activation and intra-S checkpoint
through genotoxic stress (Unsal-Kamaz et.al, Molecular and Cellular
Biology, 27(8), 3131-3142(2007)). TIM is also associated with
doxorubicin-induced G2/M cell cycle arrest and TIM depletion sensitizes
HCT116 colon cancer cells to doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity (Yang
et.al, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 285(5), 3030-3034(2010)).
Mutations in TIM in breast cancer were reported (Sjblom et.al, Science,
314(5797), 268-274(2006)). Methods and Findings: The mRNA expression
levels of TIM in 17 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and 4
small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines were analyzed by reverse
transcriptase PCR. HCC44, H460, H157 (NSCLC), H146 and H740 (SCLC)
expressed higher levels of TIM than cdk4/hTERT-immortalized normal human
bronchial epithelial cell line HBEC4. Sequencing analysis of TIM revealed
no mutation in 21 lung cancer cell lines. RNAi-mediated knockdown of TIM
in H157 suppressed proliferation in WST-1 assay and clonogenic growth in
liquid colony formation assay. Western blot analysis revealed increased
level of cleaved caspase-3 after TIM-knockdown, suggesting that apoptosis
was involved in growth inhibition. TIM-knockdown induced increased
sensitivity to cisplatin in drug sensitivity assay using WST-1 (IC50 were
1.70M and 0.91M in TIM-knocked down H157 compared to 4.87M in control).
Conclusions: TIM inhibition causes growth suppression, apoptosis and
enhanced cytotoxicity of cisplatin. Our results suggest that TIM
inhibition has a potential utility in the treatment of lung cancer.

