Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: NT5E promoter methylation is a favorable breast cancer epigenetic
biomarker


Despite the recent introduction of advanced microarray-based gene
expression profiling strategies, relapse risk assessment and individual
treatment recommendations remain suboptimal for breast cancer patients.
DNA methylation emerges as a novel source of epigenetic biomarkers that
can help improve individualised breast cancer therapy. In the light of
existing preclinical and clinical data we studied NT5E (5-nucleotidase,
ecto) expression and NT5E promoter methylation (NPM) in 14 breast cancer
cell lines and 259 breast cancer clinical cases. In vitro, NT5E promoter
methylation (as determined by MSP and pyrosequencing) was inversely
associated with NT5E expression (as determined by qRT-PCR) and
azacytidine produced an increase in NT5E mRNA levels in cell lines with
methylated the NT5E promoter CpG. In clinical series, patients whose
resected primary tumours were found to have NT5E promoter methylation,
were less likely to develop metastasis (p=0.003, OR=0.34, 95% CI
0.17-0.69). Moreover in 3 out of 4 paired samples, NT5E promoter was
found methylated in primary tumours and demethylated in CNS metastases.
Regarding metastatic profile, patients that progressed to non-visceral
metastases were more likely to have NT5E promoter methylated in primary
tumours as compared to visceral metastatic disease (p=0.01, OR=11.8).
NT5E promoter CpG island was densely methylated in 16 of 21 patients who
developed non-visceral metastatic disease (76%) and in 6/28 cases (21%)
with visceral metastases. In time-dependent endpoints analysis, patients
with tumours lacking detectable NT5E methylation had increased risk for
shorter DFS (p=0.001, HR 2.7) and OS (p=0.001, HR=3). The favourable
prognostic value of NT5E methylation was confirmed in ER negative
(p=0.011, HR=3.27, 95% CI 1.31-8.12) and in triple negative cases
(p=0.004; HR=6.2, 95% CI 1.9-20). Moreover we observed a strikingly
favourable outcome to adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with tumours
profiled as NT5E promoter methylated regarding DFS (p=0.0016, HR 5.1, 95%
CI 1.8-14.37) and OS (p=0.0005, HR 7.4, 95% CI 2.416 23.08), which allows
speculations that NPM may convey breast cancers more amenable to
chemotherapy, possibly though pro-apoptotic mechanism. We suggest that
NT5E promoter CpG island methylation may serve as a promising favourable
breast cancer epigenetic biomarker. Our results warrant independent
confirmation by other groups before considering its investigation as a
metastasis predictor in clinical trials of adjuvant breast cancer
therapies.

