Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNAs and their targets genes promote cisplatin resistance in
epithelial ovarian cancer cells


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 21-25 nucleotides regulatory involved in silencing
mRNAs in a sequence specific manner. Accumulated data has established the
central role of various microRNAs in tumor initiation and progression.
Furthermore, recent studies revealed that microRNAs participate in the
resistance of cancer cells to different chemotherapeutic agents. In
ovarian carcinoma, the fifth cause of cancer deaths in US, it has been
shown that several miRNAs contribute to drug resistance. However, the
role of these miRNAs in the cisplatin resistance of ovarian cancer cells
is unclear. In a microarray study, we found that miR-21, miR27b and
miR-622 were upregulated in the A2780CP20 cisplatin resistant ovarian
cancer cells compared with the A2780PAR cells, which are sensitive to
cisplatin treatment. Real-time PCR studies confirmed these findings.
Opposite, the c-Jun transcription factor was upregulated in this
microarray analysis. Then, we used TargetScan and miRBase tools to
identify miR-21, miR-27b and miR-622- target genes. Interestingly,
several of these miRNA-target genes were identified as downregulated in
our microarray study. These results were corroborated by Western blot
analysis. Moreover, cell survival experiments in the presence of a miR-21
mimic, made A2780PAR cells more resistant to cisplatin treatment. These
results indicate that dysregulation of various miRNAs and their target
genes contribute to the cisplatin resistance of ovarian cancer cells.

