Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Increased expression of RecQ helicases in sporadic primary
colorectal cancers


The RecQ helicase family of enzymes regulate nucleic acid metabolism
through the major activity of unwinding double stranded nucleic acids.
Heritable loss of RECQ helicase expression results in human syndromes
associated with an elevated risk of cancers including colorectal cancer
(CRC). In vitro studies have shown that loss of function of WRN and/or
BLM increases sensitivity to killing by DNA damaging chemotherapeutic
agents. Thus, over-expression of these helicases may mediate tumor
resistance to DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents, whereas
under-expression may identify a population of tumors that may be more
susceptible. Currently, the literature with regards to the expression
status of these enzymes in CRC is sparse. In this study, we assess the
expression of all five members of the RECQ helicase family (WRN, BLM,
RECQL, RECQL4 and RECQL5) in 32 sporadic primary colorectal cancer cases
with matched normal colonic mucosa using quantitative real-time PCR. The
results show a significant increase in the fold change of RECQ helicase
expression in tumor as compared to the matched normal mucosa, using the
Wilcoxon Signed Rank test with a theoretical median of 1. The results are
as follows: WRN median=1.191, mean=1.347, SD=0.6189, p-value=0.0043; BLM
median=4.146, mean=12.88, SD=24.86, p-value The RecQ helicase family of
enzymes regulate nucleic acid metabolism through the major activity of
unwinding double stranded nucleic acids. Heritable loss of RECQ helicase
expression results in human syndromes associated with an elevated risk of
cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC). In vitro studies have shown
that loss of function of WRN and/or BLM increases sensitivity to killing
by DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents. Thus, over-expression of these
helicases may mediate tumor resistance to DNA damaging chemotherapeutic
agents, whereas under-expression may identify a population of tumors that
may be more susceptible. Currently, the literature with regards to the
expression status of these enzymes in CRC is sparse. In this study, we
assess the expression of all five members of the RECQ helicase family
(WRN, BLM, RECQL, RECQL4 and RECQL5) in 32 sporadic primary colorectal
cancer cases with matched normal colonic mucosa using quantitative
real-time PCR. The results show a significant increase in the fold change
of RECQ helicase expression in tumor as compared to the matched normal
mucosa, using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test with a theoretical median of
1. The results are as follows: WRN median=1.191, mean=1.347, SD=0.6189,
p-value=0.0043; BLM median=4.146, mean=12.88, SD=24.86, p-value <
0.0001;RecQL median=1.638, mean=1.806, SD=1.145, p-value=0.0002;RecQL4
median=4.384, mean=4.745, SD=4.167, p-value The RecQ helicase family of
enzymes regulate nucleic acid metabolism through the major activity of
unwinding double stranded nucleic acids. Heritable loss of RECQ helicase
expression results in human syndromes associated with an elevated risk of
cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC). In vitro studies have shown
that loss of function of WRN and/or BLM increases sensitivity to killing
by DNA damaging chemotherapeutic agents. Thus, over-expression of these
helicases may mediate tumor resistance to DNA damaging chemotherapeutic
agents, whereas under-expression may identify a population of tumors that
may be more susceptible. Currently, the literature with regards to the
expression status of these enzymes in CRC is sparse. In this study, we
assess the expression of all five members of the RECQ helicase family
(WRN, BLM, RECQL, RECQL4 and RECQL5) in 32 sporadic primary colorectal
cancer cases with matched normal colonic mucosa using quantitative
real-time PCR. The results show a significant increase in the fold change
of RECQ helicase expression in tumor as compared to the matched normal
mucosa, using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test with a theoretical median of
1. The results are as follows: WRN median=1.191, mean=1.347, SD=0.6189,
p-value=0.0043; BLM median=4.146, mean=12.88, SD=24.86, p-value <
0.0001;RecQL median=1.638, mean=1.806, SD=1.145, p-value=0.0002;RecQL4
median=4.384, mean=4.745, SD=4.167, p-value <0.0001; RecQL5 median=1.087,
mean=1.293, SD=0.7853, p-value=0.0487. Subgroup analyses of the
expression of each RECQ helicase by stage using the Kruskal-Wallis test
show no significant difference between stages I-IV of CRC. However, the
data show that 12/32 cases had an increase in the expression of all RECQ
helicases, whereas only one case had a decrease in all five RECQ
helicases as compared to the matched normal colonic mucosa. Cluster
analyses using both the Ward Algorithm and Complete Linkage with the
Furthest Neighbor method revealed two distinct clusters that are similar
in their pattern of RECQ Helicase expression. These distinct clusters may
represent molecular subgroups of colorectal cancers [e.g. microsatellite
unstable (MSI), microsatellite stable (MSS), or CpG Island Methylator
Phenotype (CIMP)], which is the subject of future investigation. These
data show an increase in RECQ helicase expression in CRC as compared to
normal, suggesting that deregulation of RECQ helicase activity may play a
role in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. Although the functional
significance of the magnitude of expression has yet to be determined, the
wide range in fold change values seen with BLM and RECQL4 suggest the
expression of status of one or more of these RECQ helicases may prove as
a predictive marker for responsiveness to therapy with DNA damaging
agents, which could be used to personalize cancer therapy.

