Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Immune biology drives cancer specific methylation profiles in blood


Blood leukocytes from patients with solid tumors exhibit complex and
distinct cancer-associated patterns of DNA methylation. However, the
biological mechanisms underlying these patterns remain poorly understood.
Since epigenetic biomarkers offer significant clinical potential for
cancer detection, we sought to address a mechanistic gap in recently
published works, hypothesizing that this variation is in large part due
to shifts in leukocyte populations. To discern differentially methylated
regions (DMRs) among leukocyte subtypes, we assessed epigenome-wide DNA
methylation in sorted, purified, healthy human peripheral blood leukocyte
subtypes. Performing a targeted analysis of leukocyte DMRs from
epigenome-wide blood methylation data in three independent case-control
studies of different cancers revealed that leukocyte DMRs predict case
status with a high degree of accuracy (area under the curve = 0.82, 0.83,
and 0.67, forhead and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), ovarian, and
bladder cancer, respectively). These results demonstrate that
blood-derived differences in DNA methylation patterns in patients with
solid tumors are largely attributable to systematic differences in the
DMRs that define specific, known leukocyte sub-populations, suggesting
that the unique epigenetic signatures in blood from solid tumor patients
arise as a result of immune responses represented by shifts in leukocyte
populations.

