Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: 131I-CLR1404 and CLR1404: Broad spectrum, cancer-targeted
molecular radio- and chemotherapeutic phospholipid ether analogs


The effectiveness of current approaches to cancer therapy is often
limited by off-target toxicity or, if relatively selective, by lack of
drug target expression in tumors. To address these shortcomings,
structure-activity relationship studies were undertaken and identified a
series of iodophenyl-containing phospholipid ether (PLE) analogs that
selectively accumulate in cancer cells/cancer stem cells compared to
normal cells/stem cells, in vitro and in vivo. Isosteric iodine
substitution in CLR1404 affords either a diagnostic/imaging agent (e.g.
using 124I for cancer-selective PET imaging) or a molecular
radiotherapeutic agent (e.g. using 131I for cancer-selective
cytotoxicity), both of which are in clinical development. We suggest the
term diapeutic to describe such drugs which can be used in one form to
identify and characterize patients who will benefit from a specific
therapy and, in another form, to effect that therapy. Here we describe
the broad-spectrum efficacy of the 131I-labeled homolog of one such
diapeutic compound (CLR1404) in human tumor xenograft models in mice
including Caki-2 (renal; clear cell carcinoma), HCT-116 (colorectal
carcinoma), Ovcar-3 (ovarian adenocarcinoma), MDA-MB-231 (triple negative
mammary gland adenocarcinoma, MES-SA/Dx5 (uterine sarcoma), U87 (glioma),
Mia Paca-2 (pancreatic carcinoma) and PC-3 (prostate carcinoma). In these
models, a single i.v. injection of 131I-CLR1404 (100 Ci, 3.8 g/mouse)
resulted in significant tumor growth suppression and extension of
survival. A separate radiotoxicology study in normal rats followed for
six months or until death after a single dose of 131I-CLR1404 did not
find significant radiation toxicity below 5 mCi suggesting that
131I-CLR1404 may display an acceptable therapeutic index in man. At
100-fold higher mass dose (380 g/mouse, i.v.) CLR1404, the
non-radioactive, 127I-containing homolog, was also highly efficacious in
human tumor mouse xenograft models including MDA-MB-231 (triple negative
breast cancer) and A549 (non-small cell lung cancer). CLR1404 inhibited
proliferation of multiple human cancer cell lines in vitro with an IC50
of 5 M compared to 50 M for growth suppression of normal fibroblasts.
Similar concentrations inhibited the PI3K/Akt cell signaling pathway and
stimulated pro-apoptotic caspases in human cancer cell lines but not in
normal fibroblasts. Thus, 131I-CLR1404 and CLR1404 each combine
wide-ranging, cancer cell-selective targeting with cytotoxicity
mechanisms known be broadly effective (intracellular radiation or
PI3K/Akt inhibition, respectively). As such, both agents have the
potential to provide effective, well-tolerated therapy across numerous
cancer types.

