Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transgenic mouse model of Twist1-induced metastasis reveals genes
highly prognostic for human hepatocellular carcinoma


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a top global cancer health concern due
to its high rate of mortality and increasing incidence. HCC lethality is
largely attributable to its poor response to existing therapy and
frequent diagnosis at late stage of disease, consequently resulting in
HCC that progresses to local invasion and distant metastasis. Expression
of Twist1 has been correlated with cancer invasion and metastasis, but a
causal role has yet to be established for autochthonous tumors. Here, we
report a new conditional transgenic mouse model of Twist1- and
MYC-induced primary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Expression of MYC
alone produced primary tumors, but failed to induce metastasis, while
Twist1 co-expression with MYC caused extra-hepatic metastases to the
lymph nodes, spleen, peritoneum, and lungs. Moreover, Twist1 expression
caused an increase in circulating tumor cells (CTCs). Combined Twist1 and
MYC inactivation resulted in sustained regression of both primary and
metastatic HCC as shown by X-ray computed tomography (micro-CT) and
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and the suppression of metastasis as
measured by a loss of CTCs. Importantly, gene expression profiling
illustrated that our mouse model of Twist1/MYC-induced liver cancer was
representative of human HCC. Moreover, we exploited the Twist1-induced
progression to identify a gene signature in Twist1/MYC tumors that is
highly predictive of metastasis in human HCC patients, as well as
prognostic for overall survival. Hence, we show that Twist1 expression
can causally induce stepwise disease progression to metastasis in primary
HCC, allowing for the identification of a gene signature that is highly
predictive of clinical outcome in human liver cancer.

