Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differential role of JAK1/2-STAT3 pathway in drug response and
survival of oncogenic Kras colorectal cancer


Mutations in the Kras proto-oncogene are found in 40%-45% of colorectal
cancer (CRC) patients and confer resistance to EGFR monoclonal antibody
(mAb) therapies. The identification of druggable targets uniquely
required by KrasMT CRC tumours has the potential to fill a gap in the
therapeutic armamentarium of advanced CRC. We carried out microarray
profiling of isogenic Kras wild type (WT) and mutant (MT) in vivo CRC
models, KrasMT/WT primary colon tumours, pre-treatment metastatic CRC
liver biopsies and drug resistant and sensitive CRC cell lines. We have
used systems biology approach incorporating pathway analyses of the
microarray data followed by siRNA screening to identify novel
targets/pathways which are critical for the survival of KrasMT tumours,
both basally and following chemotherapy treatment. We found that
JAK1/2-STAT3 signaling was essential for the survival of KrasMT CRC
cells. Moreover, suppression of JAK1/2-STAT3 activity using RNAi or small
molecule inhibitors resulted in more potent increase in apoptosis in
KrasMT CRC cells. In addition, treatment with chemotherapy and MEK1/2
inhibition resulted in significant increases in JAK2 and STAT3 activity
and this was associated with strong increase in apoptosis when
JAK1/2-STAT3 RNAi or small molecule inhibitors were combined with
chemotherapy and MEK1/2 inhibition, especially in KrasMT cells. Moreover,
we found that these effects were not drug- or cell line-specific.
Collectively, using a systems biology approach, we have identified an
essential role of JAK1/2-STAT3 signalling in survival of KrasMT CRC
models. These findings support the further clinical investigation of
JAK/STAT3 inhibitors in conjunction with chemotherapy or MEK inhibition
in KrasMT CRC tumours.

