Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The association of body mass index with risk of endometrial cancer
subtypes: Pooled analysis in E2C2


Excess body weight is a known risk factor for endometrial cancer but
whether it differentially affects histological subtypes of endometrial
cancer is unclear. The two proposed main subtypes are the
estrogen-dependent Type I and non estrogen-dependent and clinically
aggressive Type II. Little is known about risk factors for Type II tumors
mainly because most epidemiologic studies lack sufficient cases to study
these rare tumors separately. Here we examined the association between
recent adult body mass index (BMI) and endometrial tumor subtypes in a
pooled analysis of 25 studies in the Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer
Consortium (E2C2). Individual-level data from 10 cohort studies and 15
case-control studies provided a total of 14,409 endometrial cancer cases
and 35,950 controls for this analysis. Cohort studies were analyzed using
a nested case-control design. The majority of women were white (86%) and
postmenopausal (83%). Endometrial cancer cases were classified into two
subtypes: Type I (endometrioid adenocarcinomas, adenocarcinoma tubular,
papillary adenocarcinomas, mucinous adenocarcinomas, adenocarcinomas with
squamous metaplasia, n=13,286) and Type II (serous, squamous cell, small
cell, mixed cell, n=1,123). The associations of BMI with the risk of
tumor subtypes were evaluated by calculating odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI) using polytomous logistic regression
models. Potential confounders included in the analysis were age, race,
parity, age at menarche, oral contraceptive (OC) use, menopausal hormone
(PMH) use, and smoking status. BMI was positively associated with both
Type I and Type II tumors, but the association was stronger for Type I
than for Type II tumors (P value for the difference in OR between Type I
and Type II was Excess body weight is a known risk factor for endometrial
cancer but whether it differentially affects histological subtypes of
endometrial cancer is unclear. The two proposed main subtypes are the
estrogen-dependent Type I and non estrogen-dependent and clinically
aggressive Type II. Little is known about risk factors for Type II tumors
mainly because most epidemiologic studies lack sufficient cases to study
these rare tumors separately. Here we examined the association between
recent adult body mass index (BMI) and endometrial tumor subtypes in a
pooled analysis of 25 studies in the Epidemiology of Endometrial Cancer
Consortium (E2C2). Individual-level data from 10 cohort studies and 15
case-control studies provided a total of 14,409 endometrial cancer cases
and 35,950 controls for this analysis. Cohort studies were analyzed using
a nested case-control design. The majority of women were white (86%) and
postmenopausal (83%). Endometrial cancer cases were classified into two
subtypes: Type I (endometrioid adenocarcinomas, adenocarcinoma tubular,
papillary adenocarcinomas, mucinous adenocarcinomas, adenocarcinomas with
squamous metaplasia, n=13,286) and Type II (serous, squamous cell, small
cell, mixed cell, n=1,123). The associations of BMI with the risk of
tumor subtypes were evaluated by calculating odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI) using polytomous logistic regression
models. Potential confounders included in the analysis were age, race,
parity, age at menarche, oral contraceptive (OC) use, menopausal hormone
(PMH) use, and smoking status. BMI was positively associated with both
Type I and Type II tumors, but the association was stronger for Type I
than for Type II tumors (P value for the difference in OR between Type I
and Type II was <0.0001). The OR associated with each five kg/m2 increase
in BMI (OR5) was 1.58 (95% CI: 1.55, 1.62) for Type I and 1.35 (95% CI:
1.28, 1.42) for Type II. In the analysis of individual histologic types,
the OR5 was lowest for serous tumors (1.28), moderate for mixed cell and
clear cell (1.33-1.37), and highest for endometrioid tumors (1.60) and
various adenocarcinoma groups (1.54-1.58). The associations of BMI with
both Type I and II tumors were greater among postmenopausal women who
never used PMH [OR5 = 1.84 (95% CI: 1.78, 1.89) for Type I and 1.48 (95%
CI: 1.38, 1.58) for Type II] than among estrogen-only users [OR5 = 1.20
(95% CI: 1.13, 1.28) for Type I and 1.05 (95% CI: 0.87, 1.26) for Type
II] or among estrogen-progestin users [OR5 = 1.33 (95% CI: 1.25, 1.41)
for Type I and 1.12 (95% CI: 0.95, 1.33) for Type II]. Other known
endometrial cancer risk factors such as OC use, parity, and smoking did
not appear to modify the association between BMI and tumor subtype. In
this large pooled analysis, we observed that BMI is a risk factor for all
types of endometrial cancer, although, the association is consistently
stronger for Type I than for Type II tumors.

