Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A TLR4-interacting peptide (SPA4) reduces the
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated NF-kappaB signaling, cytokines and
migration of colon cancer cells


Persistent inflammation in patients with colitis can lead to cancer.
However, molecular mechanisms responsible for inflammation-induced cancer
are not understood. Activation of TLR4-NF-kappaB signaling is associated
with inflammation. Thus, we hypothesized that inhibition of
TLR4-NF-kappaB signaling will help reduce inflammatory response and
inflammation-induced cancer progression. In this work, we studied the
effects of a TLR4-interacting surfactant protein-A-derived (SPA4) peptide
on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced TLR4-NF-kappaB signaling and cancer
progression in colon adenocarcinoma SW480 cells. The SW480 cells were
challenged with Escherichia coli-derived LPS. Cells were then treated
with varying amounts of SPA4 peptide. Any changes in the expression of
TLR4, intracellular-signaling molecules (IKBalpha, p65, phosphorylated
IKBalpha, phosphorylated p65, RelB, Cox-2) and cytokines (IL-1beta,
IL-6), and activity of NF-kappaB were studied by immunocytochemistry,
immunoblotting and NF-kappaB reporter assay, respectively.
Simultaneously, cell cycle progression, viability and migratory pattern
of SW480 cells were followed. We found that the binding of SPA4 peptide
to TLR4 inhibits the LPS-induced expression of TLR4, phosphorylated p65,
Cox-2, IL-1beta and IL-6, activity of NF-kappaB and migration of SW480
cells. Although there was no significant change in cell cycle
progression, the SPA4 peptide significantly inhibited the viability of
SW480 cells. In conclusion, our preliminary results suggest that the
inhibition of TLR4-NF-kappaB signaling by SPA4 peptide may be useful in
prevention and treatment of inflammation and inflammation-induced cancer
in patients with colitis.

