Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Calcium blockers decrease the bortezomib resistance in mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) via manipulation of tissue transglutaminase activities.


Although bortezomib is clinically approved for the treatment of Mantle
Cell Lymphoma (MCL), only limited effects have been demonstrated. To
improve outcomes for bortezomib resistant patient groups, it is necessary
to introduce the new therapeutic strategies. In this report, we utilized
biochemical and molecular methodologies to demonstrate tissue
transglutaminase (TG) activates downstream NF-kB signaling pathways. The
signaling axis from TG to NF-kB could be a new therapeutic target to
overcome bortezomib resistance in MCL. TG2 is a calcium-dependent protein
crosslinking enzyme, and was reported to over-expressed in various cancer
cells. MCL expressed elevated levels of TG2, and the modification of TG2
activities altered NF-B expression and downstream signaling in MCL cells.
When the TG2 signaling was inhibited via calcium blockers, the
combination of a calcium blocker perillyl alcohol (POH) with bortezomib
suppressed NF-B expression and improved the cytotoxicity of bortezomib in
MCL cells. Our study is the first to show the expression of TG2 and the
contribution of TG2 to NF-B signaling in MCL. TG2 inhibition can be an
alternative target as anti-MCL therapy, and calcium blockers could be
effective combinatory drugs with bortezomib to overcome the bortezomib
resistance of MCL.

