Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of apoptosis-regulating miRNAs and target mRNAs in oral
squamous cell carcinoma


Apoptosis is a genetically programmed form of cell death, which primarily
functions to eliminate senescent or altered cells that are useless or
harmful for the multicellular organism. In contrast, aberrations of the
apoptotic mechanisms that cause excessive or deficient programmed cell
death have been linked to a wide array of pathologic conditions.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are approximately 22 nucleotide non-coding RNA
molecules that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally and recent
studies have indicated the dysregulation of miRNAs involved in apoptosis.
In this study, using Real Time RT-PCR we have analyzed the expression of
apoptosis-regulating miRNAs (miR-15a, miR-16, miR-29a, miR-34a,
miR-17-5p, miR20a, miR21) in a series of 20 oral squamous cell carcinoma
samples and a pool of 5 normal oral mucosa tissue samples. Using
TargetScan algorithms, target genes of these miRNAs were identified and
the expression of mRNA transcripts of these target genes was also
evaluated (Bcl-2, Caspase-2, Caspase-7, Bid, SMAC/DIABLO) in a series of
50 oral squamous cell carcinoma samples and a pool of 10 normal oral
mucosa tissue samples. Considering up- or down-regulation as a 2-fold
difference in expression relative to the normal tissue, we observed
down-regulation of miR-15a, miR29a and miR34a in 50%, 75% and 70% of the
samples, respectively. Normal-like expression was observed for miR-16,
miR-17-5p, miR-20a and miR-21 in 80%, 75%, 90% and 60% of the samples,
respectively. Down-regulation of the BCL-2 transcripts was observed in
60% of the samples and normal-like expression was observed for BID,
CASPASE-2, CASPASE-7 and SMAC/DIABLO transcripts in 66%, 82%, 68% and 60%
of the samples, respectively. Expression of BID, CASPASE-2 and CASPASE-7
might be regulated by miR-17-5p and miR-20a and we found no alteration in
expression of both mRNAs and miRNAs. Expression of BCL-2 might be
regulated by miR-15a, miR-16, miR-21 and miR-34. We found down-regulation
of BCL-2 transcripts and miRNAs-15a and -34, suggesting that other
mechanisms might be involved in the regulation of BCL-2. Expression of
SMAC/DIABLO might be regulated by miR-29 and we found normal-like
expression of SMAC/DIABLO transcripts and down-regulation of miRNA-29
also suggesting that other mechanisms might be involved in the regulation
of SMAC/DIABLO. Our study provides evidence of alterations in the
expression of apoptosis-regulating miRNAs and alterations in the
expression of genes involved in the apoptotic pathway demonstrating that
regulation of apoptosis is an important feature in OSCC behavior. FAPESP
research grants 98/14335-2 and 07/50608-4.

