Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification and characterization of novel MELK (maternal
embryonic leucine zipper kinase) substrates in breast cancer cells


Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide.
Treatment for breast cancer acting on molecular targets in critical
signaling pathways in cancer cells have successfully reduced the motility
rate in a subset of breast cancer patients, but a significant portion of
patients cannot expect to have benefits from these treatments. Therefore,
development of new therapeutics for those patients urgently required.
Toward the goal of cancer-specific drug development, we previously
identified MELK (maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase) as a target
for development of novel breast cancer therapy through genome-wide
expression profile analysis. MELK was over-expressed in the great
majority of breast cancer cells, particularly in TN breast cancer cells,
and knockdown of MELK significantly suppressed the growth of breast
cancer cells. Concordantly, the cells, which were transiently induced
MELK, promoted its proliferation. Furthermore, cells in which
over-expression of MELK were likely to increase the proportion of breast
cancer-initiating stem cells more than those transfected with mock vector
or kinase-dead MELK mutant plasmid. Although several substrates of MELK
were reported, we are still not fully understood how MELK contributes to
breast cancer development or progression. To elucidate the MELK signaling
pathway in breast cancer cells, we examined 2D-PAGE and mass
spectrometric analysis. Finally, we successfully identified two novel
substrates of MELK. We confirmed the phosphorylation of these substrates
by MELK via in vitro kinase assay and identified phosphorylation sites on
each substrate by mass spectrometry. These results provide new
information for better understanding of the biological role of MELK.

