Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ABT-737 synergizes with bortezomib to induce apoptosis: Activation
of Bid, Bak, and Bax in the apoptotic response in malignant human glioma
cells


Glioblastomas are invasive tumors with poor prognosis despite current
therapies. ABT-737 has monotherapeutic toxicity against leukemia,
lymphoma and other malignancies, and we and others have noted some
antiglioma activity, although insufficient to warrant use as monotherapy.
We have recently demonstrated that proteasome inhibitors, such as
bortezomib, dramatically sensitized highly resistant glioma cells to
apoptosis induction, suggesting that proteasomal inhibition may be a
promising combination strategy for glioma therapeutics. In this study, we
examined whether bortezomib could enhance response to ABT-737 inhibition
in glioma cells. Although primary cells from glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) patients and established glioma cell lines did not show significant
induction of apoptosis with ABT-737 treatment alone, the combination of
ABT-737 plus bortezomib, significantly enhanced apoptosis. The enhanced
efficacy was due to proapoptotic mitochondrial injury and increased
generation of reactive oxygen species. Our results also revealed that
combination of bortezomib/ABT-73 enhanced apoptosis by increasing Bid
cleavage, Noxa upregulation, Bak, Bax activation, and cytochrome c
release. Further downregulation of Mcl-1 using shRNA enhanced cell
killing by the bortezomib/ABT-737 combination. The significantly enhanced
antitumor activity that results from the combination of bortezomib and
ABT-737 offers promise as a novel treatment for glioma patients.

