Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Sulfasalazine sensitizes glioblastoma cells to radiation treatment


Glioblastoma (GBM) is a lethal cancer with a limited response to ionizing
radiation. Recent studies suggest that Sulfasalazine (SAS), a drug used
to treat inflammatory bowel disease, inhibits the Xc- antiporter system
in glioma cells, thereby blocking their uptake of cystein. Since the
availability of cystein is a rate limiting step in intracellular
antioxidant production, we wanted to investigate whether sulfasalazine
sensitizes glioma cells to radiation. Expression of xCT, the catalytic
subunit of system Xc-, was found in 30 patient GBM biopsies. SAS effect
on glioma cell growth was investigated using an electric cell substrate
impedance sensing (ECIS) instrument. All glioma cell lines showed altered
growth curves in response to SAS treatment. To assess the effect of
blocking the antiporter, intracellular levels of the antioxidant
glutathione were measured. With increasing doses of SAS, glutathione
levels decreased in a dose response manner. In addition, cysteine was
added to the medium to see if the cells could survive high doses of SAS.
U251 glioma cells were treated with escalating doses of SAS, alone or in
combination with radiation (8 Gy). Nuclear integrity was evaluated to
estimate cell death following treatment, as well as the presence of
double stranded breaks. In addition, cell death and viability were
investigated using live/dead staining and the MTS assay. All treatment
groups exhibited increased rates of cell death compared to untreated
controls. A combination of SAS and radiation resulted in higher levels of
cell death, than radiation or SAS administered alone. In order to assess
whether this can be exploited therapeutically, we are preparing to treat
nude rats harbouring glioblastoma biopsy xenografts with SAS, alone or in
combination with gamma knife radiation.

