Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cigarette smoking, race, and genetic ancestry in association with
plasma vitamin D-binding protein (VDBP) in healthy African Americans (AA)
and Caucasian Americans (CA)


Vitamin D and VDBP affect several pathways involved in inflammation,
tumor growth, and immune surveillance relevant to carcinogenesis. In a
previous pilot study (Bortner et al., 2010), using a proteomics approach,
VDBP was down-regulated in the plasma of chronic cigarette smokers by as
much as 3-fold. Therefore, using an existing study of healthy AA and CA
participants, we conducted an investigation of the differences in VDBP
between 39 current smokers and 82 never smokers, frequency matched on
age, sex and race/ethnicity. VDBP plasma concentrations were determined
in duplicate using the Quantikine Human VDBP ELISA (CV%, 5.6%).
Genotyping was conducted for a set of 112 previously validated Ancestry
Informative Markers for the percent West African and European genetic
ancestry, and VDBP coding region changes via rs7041 (Asp416Glu, T/G) and
rs4588 (Thr420Lys, C/A). Vitamin D metabolites (25OHD3 and 24,25(OH)2D3)
were determined using LC-MS/MS (CV% 2.7 and 6.3, respectively). T-test,
Chi-Square, Fisher's Exact, and Spearman's correlation coefficients were
used to determine statistically significant bivariate differences.
Multiple logistic regression was used to adjust for multiple factors
using the log-normal transformation of VDBP concentration with the
Cochran-Armitage test for trend for VDBP genotype. Multiplicative
interaction terms were tested along with their main-effects, adjusted for
co-variates. There were no significant differences between current
smokers and never smokers by age, VDBP genotype, body mass index, vitamin
D metabolites, or genetic ancestry. VDBP concentrations were
significantly negatively correlated with body mass index (BMI, r=0.19,
p=0.033), West African ancestry (r=0.66, pVitamin D and VDBP affect
several pathways involved in inflammation, tumor growth, and immune
surveillance relevant to carcinogenesis. In a previous pilot study
(Bortner et al., 2010), using a proteomics approach, VDBP was
down-regulated in the plasma of chronic cigarette smokers by as much as
3-fold. Therefore, using an existing study of healthy AA and CA
participants, we conducted an investigation of the differences in VDBP
between 39 current smokers and 82 never smokers, frequency matched on
age, sex and race/ethnicity. VDBP plasma concentrations were determined
in duplicate using the Quantikine Human VDBP ELISA (CV%, 5.6%).
Genotyping was conducted for a set of 112 previously validated Ancestry
Informative Markers for the percent West African and European genetic
ancestry, and VDBP coding region changes via rs7041 (Asp416Glu, T/G) and
rs4588 (Thr420Lys, C/A). Vitamin D metabolites (25OHD3 and 24,25(OH)2D3)
were determined using LC-MS/MS (CV% 2.7 and 6.3, respectively). T-test,
Chi-Square, Fisher's Exact, and Spearman's correlation coefficients were
used to determine statistically significant bivariate differences.
Multiple logistic regression was used to adjust for multiple factors
using the log-normal transformation of VDBP concentration with the
Cochran-Armitage test for trend for VDBP genotype. Multiplicative
interaction terms were tested along with their main-effects, adjusted for
co-variates. There were no significant differences between current
smokers and never smokers by age, VDBP genotype, body mass index, vitamin
D metabolites, or genetic ancestry. VDBP concentrations were
significantly negatively correlated with body mass index (BMI, r=0.19,
p=0.033), West African ancestry (r=0.66, p<0.001), vitamin D metabolites
(p-valuesVitamin D and VDBP affect several pathways involved in
inflammation, tumor growth, and immune surveillance relevant to
carcinogenesis. In a previous pilot study (Bortner et al., 2010), using a
proteomics approach, VDBP was down-regulated in the plasma of chronic
cigarette smokers by as much as 3-fold. Therefore, using an existing
study of healthy AA and CA participants, we conducted an investigation of
the differences in VDBP between 39 current smokers and 82 never smokers,
frequency matched on age, sex and race/ethnicity. VDBP plasma
concentrations were determined in duplicate using the Quantikine Human
VDBP ELISA (CV%, 5.6%). Genotyping was conducted for a set of 112
previously validated Ancestry Informative Markers for the percent West
African and European genetic ancestry, and VDBP coding region changes via
rs7041 (Asp416Glu, T/G) and rs4588 (Thr420Lys, C/A). Vitamin D
metabolites (25OHD3 and 24,25(OH)2D3) were determined using LC-MS/MS (CV%
2.7 and 6.3, respectively). T-test, Chi-Square, Fisher's Exact, and
Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to determine statistically
significant bivariate differences. Multiple logistic regression was used
to adjust for multiple factors using the log-normal transformation of
VDBP concentration with the Cochran-Armitage test for trend for VDBP
genotype. Multiplicative interaction terms were tested along with their
main-effects, adjusted for co-variates. There were no significant
differences between current smokers and never smokers by age, VDBP
genotype, body mass index, vitamin D metabolites, or genetic ancestry.
VDBP concentrations were significantly negatively correlated with body
mass index (BMI, r=0.19, p=0.033), West African ancestry (r=0.66,
p<0.001), vitamin D metabolites (p-values<0.001), VDBP rs4588-A and
rs7041-T alleles (VDBP genotypes were 100% correlated). VDBP genotypes
coding Asp416Asp and Lys420Lys were at least 3.3-fold lower, compared
with Glu416Glu and Thr420Thr, respectively, and this was regardless of
smoking status (p-trendVitamin D and VDBP affect several pathways
involved in inflammation, tumor growth, and immune surveillance relevant
to carcinogenesis. In a previous pilot study (Bortner et al., 2010),
using a proteomics approach, VDBP was down-regulated in the plasma of
chronic cigarette smokers by as much as 3-fold. Therefore, using an
existing study of healthy AA and CA participants, we conducted an
investigation of the differences in VDBP between 39 current smokers and
82 never smokers, frequency matched on age, sex and race/ethnicity. VDBP
plasma concentrations were determined in duplicate using the Quantikine
Human VDBP ELISA (CV%, 5.6%). Genotyping was conducted for a set of 112
previously validated Ancestry Informative Markers for the percent West
African and European genetic ancestry, and VDBP coding region changes via
rs7041 (Asp416Glu, T/G) and rs4588 (Thr420Lys, C/A). Vitamin D
metabolites (25OHD3 and 24,25(OH)2D3) were determined using LC-MS/MS (CV%
2.7 and 6.3, respectively). T-test, Chi-Square, Fisher's Exact, and
Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to determine statistically
significant bivariate differences. Multiple logistic regression was used
to adjust for multiple factors using the log-normal transformation of
VDBP concentration with the Cochran-Armitage test for trend for VDBP
genotype. Multiplicative interaction terms were tested along with their
main-effects, adjusted for co-variates. There were no significant
differences between current smokers and never smokers by age, VDBP
genotype, body mass index, vitamin D metabolites, or genetic ancestry.
VDBP concentrations were significantly negatively correlated with body
mass index (BMI, r=0.19, p=0.033), West African ancestry (r=0.66,
p<0.001), vitamin D metabolites (p-values<0.001), VDBP rs4588-A and
rs7041-T alleles (VDBP genotypes were 100% correlated). VDBP genotypes
coding Asp416Asp and Lys420Lys were at least 3.3-fold lower, compared
with Glu416Glu and Thr420Thr, respectively, and this was regardless of
smoking status (p-trend<0.001). There was no association between VDBP
concentration and age or smoking status. In multiple regression models,
serum vitamin D metabolites, self-reported race/ethnicity, West African
ancestry and GC genotypes remained significantly associated with VDBP
concentration. The magnitude of difference in these variables was similar
among current and never smokers, although BMI remained significantly
negatively associated with VDBP concentrations among never smokers
(p-interaction =0.028). Smoking status was not highly correlated with
VDBP plasma concentration, although may have some interactive effect with
BMI. Future studies will need to account for the strong correlations with
VDBP genotype and genetic ancestry. Support: 1K22CA120092-01A2 and
3K22CA120092-02S1.

