Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PET imaging of antitumor responses with anti-4-1BB (anti-CD137)


Agonistic antibodies to 4-1BB (CD137), a member of the tumor necrosis
factor family expressed on activated T cells, are being tested for
immunotherapy in patients with advanced cancers. Being able to study the
mechanism of 4-1BB action in vivo using non-invasive approaches would
help guiding its clinical development. We used positron emitting
tomography (PET) with [18F]FDG to study how 4-1BB mAb modulates the
immune system in a mouse model for cancer treatment. The administration
of 1mg/kg of the 4-1BB mAb to Balb/c mice induced reproducible CT26 tumor
regressions and improved survival (n=8 mice per group, p = 0.006 for
survival by log rank test). The mean tumor size (mm) was also strikingly
different (5.8 0.20 4-1BB mAb group vs 8.3 0.19 control, on day 7 after
4-1BB mAb; p Agonistic antibodies to 4-1BB (CD137), a member of the tumor
necrosis factor family expressed on activated T cells, are being tested
for immunotherapy in patients with advanced cancers. Being able to study
the mechanism of 4-1BB action in vivo using non-invasive approaches would
help guiding its clinical development. We used positron emitting
tomography (PET) with [18F]FDG to study how 4-1BB mAb modulates the
immune system in a mouse model for cancer treatment. The administration
of 1mg/kg of the 4-1BB mAb to Balb/c mice induced reproducible CT26 tumor
regressions and improved survival (n=8 mice per group, p = 0.006 for
survival by log rank test). The mean tumor size (mm) was also strikingly
different (5.8 0.20 4-1BB mAb group vs 8.3 0.19 control, on day 7 after
4-1BB mAb; p < 0.0009). All mice responded to the treatment and complete
tumor shrinkage was achieved in 75% of cases, 14 days after 4-1BB mAb
administration. Using microPET imaging there was markedly increased mean
signal (% ID/g) of [18F]FDG at the tumor site and draining lymph nodes
(18.4 1.6 4-1BB mAb group vs. 10.3 0.418 control group). Due to the
shrinkage of the tumor in the treated group, we hypothesized this higher
PET signal is the result of higher activity of immune cells in the site.
In a metabolic probe in vitro uptake assay, there was a 7-fold increase
in uptake of [3H]DDG in lymphocytes extracted from tumor-draining lymph
nodes and a 2-fold increase in tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILS) of
mice treated with 4-1BB mAb compared to untreated mice, supporting the in
vivo PET data. In conclusion, increased uptake of [18F]FDG by PET scans
visualizes 4-1BB mAB-induced anti-tumor immune responses and can be used
as a pharmacodynamic readout to guide the development of this class of
antibodies in the clinic.

