Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association between obesity, body composition and risk of female
thyroid cancer


Obesity increases the risk of many cancers, including endometrial,
colorectal, kidney, and postmenopausal breast cancer. Some reported a
positive association between obesity measured in body mass index (BMI,
kg/m2) and risk of thyroid cancer, but others observed no association. We
aimed to examine the association between various obesity and body
composition measures and the risk of female thyroid cancer in Korea. A
total of 158 incident papillary thyroid cancer and 144 non-cancer
controls from one university hospital in Seoul were interviewed on their
life-style factors between April, 2006 and December, 2007. Controls
included patients with incidental benign thyroid nodules, goiter, and
other minor surgical conditions. Weight, height, and BMI were measured.
Among the total participants, 93 patients and 102 controls agreed to be
measured for their body composition using In-Body 3.0 (BioSpace).
Diagnostic procedural thyroid stimulating hormones (TSH) levels were
abstracted from the clinical records of 155 cases and 138 controls. Odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of thyroid cancer were
calculated using logistic regression adjusted for age, physical exercise
(total MET value), smoking, alcohol intake amount, menopausal status, and
serum TSH levels. The level of obesity was not high in this population.
The range of BMI was 16.6 - 36.8 kg/m2, with the mean of 23.4 3.0 kg/m2.
There were no differences in means of BMI, weight, height, and WC between
cases and controls. The proportion of participants with BMI >= 27.5 kg/m2
was 9.5 % in cases and 6.9% in controls. The OR of thyroid cancer for
BMI>=27.5 kg/m2 compared to 20Obesity increases the risk of many cancers,
including endometrial, colorectal, kidney, and postmenopausal breast
cancer. Some reported a positive association between obesity measured in
body mass index (BMI, kg/m2) and risk of thyroid cancer, but others
observed no association. We aimed to examine the association between
various obesity and body composition measures and the risk of female
thyroid cancer in Korea. A total of 158 incident papillary thyroid cancer
and 144 non-cancer controls from one university hospital in Seoul were
interviewed on their life-style factors between April, 2006 and December,
2007. Controls included patients with incidental benign thyroid nodules,
goiter, and other minor surgical conditions. Weight, height, and BMI were
measured. Among the total participants, 93 patients and 102 controls
agreed to be measured for their body composition using In-Body 3.0
(BioSpace). Diagnostic procedural thyroid stimulating hormones (TSH)
levels were abstracted from the clinical records of 155 cases and 138
controls. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of thyroid
cancer were calculated using logistic regression adjusted for age,
physical exercise (total MET value), smoking, alcohol intake amount,
menopausal status, and serum TSH levels. The level of obesity was not
high in this population. The range of BMI was 16.6 - 36.8 kg/m2, with the
mean of 23.4 3.0 kg/m2. There were no differences in means of BMI,
weight, height, and WC between cases and controls. The proportion of
participants with BMI >= 27.5 kg/m2 was 9.5 % in cases and 6.9% in
controls. The OR of thyroid cancer for BMI>=27.5 kg/m2 compared to
20<=BMIObesity increases the risk of many cancers, including endometrial,
colorectal, kidney, and postmenopausal breast cancer. Some reported a
positive association between obesity measured in body mass index (BMI,
kg/m2) and risk of thyroid cancer, but others observed no association. We
aimed to examine the association between various obesity and body
composition measures and the risk of female thyroid cancer in Korea. A
total of 158 incident papillary thyroid cancer and 144 non-cancer
controls from one university hospital in Seoul were interviewed on their
life-style factors between April, 2006 and December, 2007. Controls
included patients with incidental benign thyroid nodules, goiter, and
other minor surgical conditions. Weight, height, and BMI were measured.
Among the total participants, 93 patients and 102 controls agreed to be
measured for their body composition using In-Body 3.0 (BioSpace).
Diagnostic procedural thyroid stimulating hormones (TSH) levels were
abstracted from the clinical records of 155 cases and 138 controls. Odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of thyroid cancer were
calculated using logistic regression adjusted for age, physical exercise
(total MET value), smoking, alcohol intake amount, menopausal status, and
serum TSH levels. The level of obesity was not high in this population.
The range of BMI was 16.6 - 36.8 kg/m2, with the mean of 23.4 3.0 kg/m2.
There were no differences in means of BMI, weight, height, and WC between
cases and controls. The proportion of participants with BMI >= 27.5 kg/m2
was 9.5 % in cases and 6.9% in controls. The OR of thyroid cancer for
BMI>=27.5 kg/m2 compared to 20<=BMI<25 was 2.67 (95%CI= 0.89- 6.83,
ptrend = 0.01). When we separated body composition into lean mass and fat
mass, lean mass increased (q5 vs. q1, OR = 4.05, 95%CI= 1.48 - 11.10,
ptrend Obesity increases the risk of many cancers, including endometrial,
colorectal, kidney, and postmenopausal breast cancer. Some reported a
positive association between obesity measured in body mass index (BMI,
kg/m2) and risk of thyroid cancer, but others observed no association. We
aimed to examine the association between various obesity and body
composition measures and the risk of female thyroid cancer in Korea. A
total of 158 incident papillary thyroid cancer and 144 non-cancer
controls from one university hospital in Seoul were interviewed on their
life-style factors between April, 2006 and December, 2007. Controls
included patients with incidental benign thyroid nodules, goiter, and
other minor surgical conditions. Weight, height, and BMI were measured.
Among the total participants, 93 patients and 102 controls agreed to be
measured for their body composition using In-Body 3.0 (BioSpace).
Diagnostic procedural thyroid stimulating hormones (TSH) levels were
abstracted from the clinical records of 155 cases and 138 controls. Odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of thyroid cancer were
calculated using logistic regression adjusted for age, physical exercise
(total MET value), smoking, alcohol intake amount, menopausal status, and
serum TSH levels. The level of obesity was not high in this population.
The range of BMI was 16.6 - 36.8 kg/m2, with the mean of 23.4 3.0 kg/m2.
There were no differences in means of BMI, weight, height, and WC between
cases and controls. The proportion of participants with BMI >= 27.5 kg/m2
was 9.5 % in cases and 6.9% in controls. The OR of thyroid cancer for
BMI>=27.5 kg/m2 compared to 20<=BMI<25 was 2.67 (95%CI= 0.89- 6.83,
ptrend = 0.01). When we separated body composition into lean mass and fat
mass, lean mass increased (q5 vs. q1, OR = 4.05, 95%CI= 1.48 - 11.10,
ptrend <0.001) while fat mass decreased (q5 vs. q1, OR = 0.32, 95%CI=
0.11 - 0.98, ptrend = 0.01) the risk of thyroid cancer. In correlation
analysis, BMI was more strongly correlated with fat mass (r=0.80) than
with lean mass (r=0.46). The association between BMI and risk of thyroid
cancer seemed slightly stronger among premenopausal than postmenopausal
women and non-alcohol drinkers than alcohol drinkers. However, the
increased risk by lean mass and decreased risk by fat mass were stronger
among postmenopausal than premenopausal women and alcohol drinkers than
non-drinkers. In conclusion, lean mass may increase the risk of thyroid
cancer. A larger, confirmatory study is warranted. Independent roles of
lean and fat body mass should be considered when evaluating the
association between obesity and risk of thyroid cancer, at least among a
population with low grade of obesity.

