Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Forced activation of Cdk1 via Wee-1 inhibition impairs homologous
recombination in breast cancer cells


In response to DNA breaks, the so-called DNA damage response provokes a
cell cycle arrest to facilitate DNA repair. Recent findings have
indicated that cells can respond to DNA damage throughout the cell cycle,
except during mitosis. Specifically, various mitotic kinases, including
Cdk1, Aurora A and Plk1, were shown to inactivate key DNA damage
checkpoint proteins, including 53BP1. As a consequence, aberrant
expression of mitotic kinases during interphase might modulate cellular
responses to DNA damage. In this study we analyzed how aberrant
activation of Cdk1 affects the cellular responses to DNA damage in breast
cancer cells. We used Wee1 inhibition to enforce Cdk1 activation, which
did not cause cytotoxicity in non-transformed cells. In contrast, Wee1
inhibition accelerated mitotic entry and caused radio-sensitization in
p53-defective, but not p53-proficient breast cancer cells. Interestingly,
we could show that Wee1 inhibition leads to elevation of Cdk1 activity in
interphase breast cancer cells. When we subsequently analyzed DNA damage
responses in cells with forced Cdk1 activation, we observed a marked
reduction of the repair protein 53BP1 at the sites of DNA damage. In
addition, Wee1 inhibition resulted in an increase in the number of -H2AX
foci after irradiation, indicative of defective DNA repair. Indeed, when
DNA repair was analyzed using in vivo endonuclease-induced recombination
assays, compromised DNA repair after Wee1 inhibition was confirmed. Taken
together, our data show that Wee1 inhibition leads to forced Cdk1
activation in interphase cells and that this interferes with normal DNA
damage responses.

