Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: GSK3 plays a significant role in Ras driven tumors potentially
through an upstream effect on AKT


Pancreatic cancer is a highly aggressive cancer that is resistant to most
drug therapies. Lung cancer is the number one cause of cancer deaths in
the US and worldwide. Both of these tumors are known to have high levels
of Ras oncogenic mutations (50 and 90% respectively). AKT is known to
phosphorylate and inactive Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 (GSK3).
Additionally, GSK3 has been shown to play a role in oncogenesis in
pancreatic cancer and lung cancer. Given the high level of AKT activity
in transformed cells these two processes would appear to be at odds.
However, much of the work on GSK3 has focused on the beta subunit. We
have found that the alpha subunit plays a role in tumor proliferation and
AKT activity. We see a significant effect of knockdown of GSK3 in Ras
transformed pancreatic (Panc1, MiaPaca) and lung cancer (A549) cell lines
in proliferation assays, with an approximately 70% decrease in growth
compared to siControl cells. In contrast, the knockdown of the GSK3
subunit resulted in no decrease in cell proliferation in A549 cells
compared to a 45% decrease in Panc 1 cells. Additionally, knockdown of
GSK3 resulted in decreased levels of AKT activity by Western blot
analysis as compared to siControl and GSK3. Previous studies have focused
on the role of the beta subunit of GSK3 in oncogenesis. Additionally, AKT
has been studied as an upstream regulator rather than a downsteam target
of GSK3. Our early studies suggest that the GSK3 subunit may play a
significant role in the growth of Ras driven tumors cell lines upstream
of AKT, and should be a potential target for therapeutic strategies.

