Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CYP1B1 gene polymorphisms in anticancer drug cytotoxicity
as studied on isogenic cell lines


Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) is found in tumour tissue and is suspected
to play a role in oncogenesis and drug resistance. CYP1B1 gene
polymorphisms have been associated with the risk of developing lung and
other cancers. We have recently shown that one of them (rs1056836,
1697C>G, L432V) was significantly associated with the cytotoxicity of
DNA-damaging anticancer drugs in two independent panels of tumour cell
lines, the NCI-60 panel and the JFCR-45 panel (Mol Cancer Ther 2010; 9:
3315-21). The present study was aimed at identifying the molecular
mechanisms involved in anticancer drug resistance associated with this
polymorphic variation. We have cloned the wild-type human CYP1B1 cDNA
(1697C) in a lentiviral vector pDesti-pGK and obtained the variant cDNA
(1697G) by directed mutagenesis. The two polymorphic variants were then
used for the generation of viruses and the infection of cell lines. The
CYP1B1 viruses were produced by cotransfection of 293T cells with viral
plasmid DNA and either pER51CYP1B1WT-pGK or pER51CYP1B1VAR-pGK plasmid
DNA in the presence of calcium phosphate. Cell supernatants containing
the virus were harvested 24 h after transfection, filtered through a 0.45
m membrane and stored at 80C. Five different cell lines devoid of CYP1B1
expression were infected (COS-1 [Fibroblastic cell line], SW620
[colorectal cancer cell line], CAL27, CAL33 and SQ20B [HNSCC cell
lines]). We thus generated five pairs of isogenic cell lines differing
only by the polymorphic status of one nucleotide in the CYP1B1 gene. mRNA
and protein expression were evaluated by qRT-PCR and western blotting,
respectively. The cytotoxicity of a panel of anticancer drugs was
evaluated on these cell lines (cisplatin, oxaliplatin, gemcitabine,
doxorubicin, etoposide, camptothecin, irinotecan and its active
metabolite [SN38]). A systematically higher IC50 was noticed for the cell
lines harbouring the variant cDNA as compared to those harbouring the
wild-type cDNA, the variant cell lines being 2-3-fold resistant to all
agents. These results obtained on isogenic cell lines were in perfect
agreement with what could be expected from the study of the cell line
panels. The catalytic activity of the two CYP1B1 variants is being
studied using ethoxyresorufine O-deethylation. A population of 125
head-and-neck cancer patients treated by chemotherapy in the palliative
setting has been prospectively constituted and will be used for the
clinical validation of the interest of CYP1B1 genotyping for predicting
anticancer drug activity.

