Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: ZNF516 and FKBP6 promoter hypermethylation as a potential
companion diagnostic panel for HPV-positive and inconclusive-Pap women


New biomarkers are needed to improve cervical cancer screening
technologies, which are mostly based on cytological examination since the
1940's. HPV testing has been adopted for the triage of patients after a
cervical cytology-screening test. HPV testing is now also increasingly
used for screening in conjunction with cervical cytology. However, a
percentage of HPV-positive and inconclusive-Pap women have negative
biopsies when refered to colposcopy clinics. The aim of this study was to
use a genome-wide discovery approach to identify novel epigenetic
biomarkers for cervical cancer, which could be used as companion
diagnostic panels to HPV and PAP. DNA from twelve normal and seven
cervical cancer samples was enriched with Methylated DNA
Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP), hybridized to Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands
plus Promoter arrays and validated by quantitative Methylation Specific
PCR in discovery (n=49) and prevalence cohorts (n=108). After correction
and normalization performed using Nimblegen algorithms genes methylated
in tumor and not in normal samples were ranked by methylation peak values
and sequence homology. The most significant loci were verified against a
report by Ongenaert et al. (BMC Med Genomics, 2008) that uses a
relaxation ranking algorithm to identify re-expressed genes in cervical
cancer cell lines after treatment with demethyalting agents. Two genes,
ZNF516 and FKBP6, were identified as candidate epigenomic biomarkers
after rigourous bioinformatics and in-silico analyses. These genes were
also found to be re-expressed by Ongenaert et al. Using the most optimal
cut-off as determined by ROC, ZNF516 promoter methylation had 90%
sensitivity and 95% specificity (AUC=0.95) in the discovery cohort. FKBP6
promoter methylation had a sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 79% in
the same cohort. Promoter methylation of FKBP6 (OR=4.51,
95%C.I.=2.04-9.97, PNew biomarkers are needed to improve cervical cancer
screening technologies, which are mostly based on cytological examination
since the 1940's. HPV testing has been adopted for the triage of patients
after a cervical cytology-screening test. HPV testing is now also
increasingly used for screening in conjunction with cervical cytology.
However, a percentage of HPV-positive and inconclusive-Pap women have
negative biopsies when refered to colposcopy clinics. The aim of this
study was to use a genome-wide discovery approach to identify novel
epigenetic biomarkers for cervical cancer, which could be used as
companion diagnostic panels to HPV and PAP. DNA from twelve normal and
seven cervical cancer samples was enriched with Methylated DNA
Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP), hybridized to Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands
plus Promoter arrays and validated by quantitative Methylation Specific
PCR in discovery (n=49) and prevalence cohorts (n=108). After correction
and normalization performed using Nimblegen algorithms genes methylated
in tumor and not in normal samples were ranked by methylation peak values
and sequence homology. The most significant loci were verified against a
report by Ongenaert et al. (BMC Med Genomics, 2008) that uses a
relaxation ranking algorithm to identify re-expressed genes in cervical
cancer cell lines after treatment with demethyalting agents. Two genes,
ZNF516 and FKBP6, were identified as candidate epigenomic biomarkers
after rigourous bioinformatics and in-silico analyses. These genes were
also found to be re-expressed by Ongenaert et al. Using the most optimal
cut-off as determined by ROC, ZNF516 promoter methylation had 90%
sensitivity and 95% specificity (AUC=0.95) in the discovery cohort. FKBP6
promoter methylation had a sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 79% in
the same cohort. Promoter methylation of FKBP6 (OR=4.51,
95%C.I.=2.04-9.97, P<0.001) and ZNF516 (OR=11.84, 95%C.I.=4.59-30.57,
PNew biomarkers are needed to improve cervical cancer screening
technologies, which are mostly based on cytological examination since the
1940's. HPV testing has been adopted for the triage of patients after a
cervical cytology-screening test. HPV testing is now also increasingly
used for screening in conjunction with cervical cytology. However, a
percentage of HPV-positive and inconclusive-Pap women have negative
biopsies when refered to colposcopy clinics. The aim of this study was to
use a genome-wide discovery approach to identify novel epigenetic
biomarkers for cervical cancer, which could be used as companion
diagnostic panels to HPV and PAP. DNA from twelve normal and seven
cervical cancer samples was enriched with Methylated DNA
Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP), hybridized to Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands
plus Promoter arrays and validated by quantitative Methylation Specific
PCR in discovery (n=49) and prevalence cohorts (n=108). After correction
and normalization performed using Nimblegen algorithms genes methylated
in tumor and not in normal samples were ranked by methylation peak values
and sequence homology. The most significant loci were verified against a
report by Ongenaert et al. (BMC Med Genomics, 2008) that uses a
relaxation ranking algorithm to identify re-expressed genes in cervical
cancer cell lines after treatment with demethyalting agents. Two genes,
ZNF516 and FKBP6, were identified as candidate epigenomic biomarkers
after rigourous bioinformatics and in-silico analyses. These genes were
also found to be re-expressed by Ongenaert et al. Using the most optimal
cut-off as determined by ROC, ZNF516 promoter methylation had 90%
sensitivity and 95% specificity (AUC=0.95) in the discovery cohort. FKBP6
promoter methylation had a sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 79% in
the same cohort. Promoter methylation of FKBP6 (OR=4.51,
95%C.I.=2.04-9.97, P<0.001) and ZNF516 (OR=11.84, 95%C.I.=4.59-30.57,
P<0.001) was associated to HPV infection in the prevalence cohort. FKBP6
(OR=7.15, 95%C.I.=1.45-35.34, P=0.01) and ZNF516 (OR=26.72,
95%C.I.=2.61-273.05, P New biomarkers are needed to improve cervical
cancer screening technologies, which are mostly based on cytological
examination since the 1940's. HPV testing has been adopted for the triage
of patients after a cervical cytology-screening test. HPV testing is now
also increasingly used for screening in conjunction with cervical
cytology. However, a percentage of HPV-positive and inconclusive-Pap
women have negative biopsies when refered to colposcopy clinics. The aim
of this study was to use a genome-wide discovery approach to identify
novel epigenetic biomarkers for cervical cancer, which could be used as
companion diagnostic panels to HPV and PAP. DNA from twelve normal and
seven cervical cancer samples was enriched with Methylated DNA
Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP), hybridized to Nimblegen 385K CpG Islands
plus Promoter arrays and validated by quantitative Methylation Specific
PCR in discovery (n=49) and prevalence cohorts (n=108). After correction
and normalization performed using Nimblegen algorithms genes methylated
in tumor and not in normal samples were ranked by methylation peak values
and sequence homology. The most significant loci were verified against a
report by Ongenaert et al. (BMC Med Genomics, 2008) that uses a
relaxation ranking algorithm to identify re-expressed genes in cervical
cancer cell lines after treatment with demethyalting agents. Two genes,
ZNF516 and FKBP6, were identified as candidate epigenomic biomarkers
after rigourous bioinformatics and in-silico analyses. These genes were
also found to be re-expressed by Ongenaert et al. Using the most optimal
cut-off as determined by ROC, ZNF516 promoter methylation had 90%
sensitivity and 95% specificity (AUC=0.95) in the discovery cohort. FKBP6
promoter methylation had a sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 79% in
the same cohort. Promoter methylation of FKBP6 (OR=4.51,
95%C.I.=2.04-9.97, P<0.001) and ZNF516 (OR=11.84, 95%C.I.=4.59-30.57,
P<0.001) was associated to HPV infection in the prevalence cohort. FKBP6
(OR=7.15, 95%C.I.=1.45-35.34, P=0.01) and ZNF516 (OR=26.72,
95%C.I.=2.61-273.05, P <0.01) promoter methylation was associated with
histological diagnosis of cervical cancer in the overall cohort, after
controlling for age and HPV infection. Promoter methylation of ZNF516 and
FKBP6 performed better than HPV at identifying normal from tumor tissue
in the overall cohort. Our results suggest that a genome-wide approach
using MeDIP-Chip and qMSP is useful for identifying novel screening and
diagnostic markers. ZNF516 and FKBP6 were identified as a potential
companion diagnostic panel for HPV-positive and inconclusive-Pap women.
Examination of these biomarkers in a larger, independent cohort is
warranted.

