Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Localization of mitochondrial targeted GS-nitroxide JP4-039 BODIPY
FL conjugate during radioprotection and mitigation in vivo


JP4-039 is a mitochondrial targeted GS nitroxide, which protects and
mitigates against ionizing irradiation damage. Using a JP4-039 BODOIPY FL
conjugate (BODIPYJP4-039) we have demonstrated that BODIPYJP4-039
co-localizes with MitoTracker stained mitochondria in cells in vitro and
that when delivered by swallow in F15 emulsion, JP4-039 protects the
esophagus from single dose or fractionated irradiation and is rapidly
detected in excised esophagus. In vitro testing demonstrated that
addition of BODIPY FL to JP4-039 did not alter radioprotection or
mitigation of 32Dcl3 murine hematopoietic cells in clonogenic survival
curve assays and that mitochondrial targeting of BODIPY JP4-039 was
preserved in co-localization experiments with MitoTracker dye. In vitro
irradiation survival curves were performed comparing JP4-039 to BODIPY
JP4-039. 32D cells were incubated with 10 M JP4-039 or BODIPY JP4-039
either pre or post irradiation and irradiated to doses from 0 to 8 Gy and
plated in methylcellulose-containing medium. Colonies of greater than 50
cells were counted on day 7. The use of JP4-039 or BODIPY JP4-039 before
irradiation resulted in an increase in Do and from 1.3 0.1 to 2.3 0.3 for
JP4-039 and to 2.6 + 0.3 Gy for BODIPY JP4-039 (p = 0.0433 and 0.0254,
respectively). When used post irradiation, there was also an increase in
the from 1.1 + 0.1 to 3.5 + 0.2 for JP4-039 and to 4.5 + 1.1 for
BODIPYJP4-039 (p = 0.0001 and 0.0258, respectively). Co-localization of
BODIPY JP4-039 and MitoTracker demonstrated that drug targeted
mitochondria. BODIPYJP4-039 in F15 liposomes was administered by swallow
to C57BL/6NHsd mice. Ten minutes post swallow, the esophagus, liver,
lungs, and brain removed and frozen sections observed using fluorescence
microscopy. In other experiments relative fluorescent units (RFUs) per mg
of tissue were measured in excised organs (esophagus, liver, lung, brain)
and in isolated mitochondria. The mitochondria had a 6 fold RFU increase
over control compared to 1.3 for cytosol. Esophagus samples showed a 3
fold RFU increase over control. Additional in vivo experiments esophagus
was excised 10 minutes post BODIPY JP4-039 swallow and a single cell
suspension prepared for flow cytometric sorting of side population (SP)
stem cells. Sorted SP and non-side population (nSP) cells were stained
with MitoTracker dye. BODIPY JP4-039 localized to mitochondria in both
sorted SP and nSP cells. BODIPYJP4-039 targets mitochondria of stem cell
and non stem cell populations in the esophagus in vivo and is rapidly
detected. Therefore, BODIPY JP4-039 should be a useful tool for
determining the pharmacokinetics of radioprotection by JP4-039. Supported
by NIH/UAID U19A168021 and NIH RO1CA83876

