Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Regulation of p16Ink4a - Rb pathway by Cyclin D1- Dmp1 interaction


Cyclin D1 is a crucial regulator in mammalian cell cycle that binds to
and activates CDK4/6, which is an kinase that drives cells to enter S
phase. It has an important oncogenic role in breast cancer because the
CCND1 gene is amplified in 15% of cases and its protein expression is
elevated in up to 50% of cases. Previous studies demonstrate that cyclin
D1 overexpression can cause pRb hyper-phosphorylation and therefore
induce cell hyperproliferation, which can result in the development of
mammary adenocarcinoma. In addition, cyclin D1 is found to contribute to
tumorigenesis by affecting the activity of transcriptional factors via
physical interaction. One of the affected transcriptional factors is
called Dmp1, which acts as a tumor suppressor when receiving oncogenic
signals. It activates Arf by binding to its promoter region, therefore
causing Arf, p53-dependent cell cycle arrest in normal cells. Our recent
study in MMTV-neu mice showed that loss of Dmp1 significantly accelerates
mammary carcinogenesis. Although both Dmp1 and cyclin D1 play vital roles
in breast cancer prevention and development respectively, the biological
functions and significance of Dmp1-cyclin D1 interaction remains to be
explored. To identify the impact of their interaction on the activation
of p16Ink4a/ p19Arf promoters induced by cyclin D1, MEFs were
overexpressed cyclin D1 and we found the endogenous p16Ink4a and p19Arf
transcripts were increased up to 7 fold. However, their transcription
level was not affected in Dmp1-null MEFs. Moreover, cyclin D1 mutant
142-253 that cannot bind to Dmp1could not fully activate the
p16Ink4a/p19Arf promoters, indicating the activation of p16Ink4a/p19Arf
promoters by cyclin D1 is dependent on Dmp1, and loss of Dmp1-cyclin D1
interaction will attenuate this effect. To identify the potential
regulation of p16Ink4a by Dmp1, we performed EMSA and luciferase reporter
assay, and we found that Dmp1 activates the p16Ink4a promoter by directly
binding to its promoter. Moreover, the p16Ink4a mRNA and protein level
were increased upon Dmp1 overexpression. The above results suggest that
Dmp1 is a physiological regulator of p16Ink4a. To explore the effect of
Dmp1 on Cdk4 kinase activity, 293T cells were overexpressed cyclin D1
alone or together with Dmp1, and we found there was less cyclin D1
associated with CDK4 after CDK4 immunoprecipitation. As a consequence,
pRb phosphorylation was decreased in CDK4 kinase assay. These results
suggest that Dmp1 decreases CDK4 kinase activity by impairing cyclin
D1-CDK4 interaction. Taken together, our data suggest that Dmp1 decreases
pRb phosphorylation in two ways: one is to directly bind to and activate
p16INK4a, and the other one is to block the CDK4 kinase activity by
binding to cyclin D1. In addition, cyclin D1-Dmp1 interaction is
indispensible in activation of p16Ink4a/p19Arf promoters induced by
cyclin D1.

