Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The effects of microRNA transfections on global patterns of gene
expression are functionally coordinated


A current challenge in the application of miRNAs in cancer therapeutics
is the inability to accurately predict the functional consequences of
exogenous perturbations in the levels of potentially therapeutic miRNAs.
To systematically address this issue, two miRNAs (miR-7 and miR-128) were
separately transfected into a well characterized ovarian cancer cell line
(HEY) and global changes in levels of gene expression were monitored.
While 20% of the changes in expression patterns of hundreds to thousands
of genes could be attributed to direct miRNA-mRNA interactions, the
majority of the changes were indirect, involving the downstream
consequences of miRNA-mediated changes in regulatory gene expression. The
pathways most significantly affected by miR-7 transfection are involved
with cell adhesion and other developmental networks previously associated
with epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) and other processes linked
with metastasis. In contrast, the pathways most significantly affected by
miR-128 transfection are more focused on cell cycle control and other
processes commonly linked with cellular replication. These computational
predictions were experimentally verified. Our results indicate that
changes in patterns of gene expression induced by exogenous expression of
miRNAs are not random but functionally coordinated and that different
families of miRNAs may regulate distinct cellular functions related to
cancer. Our findings suggest that miRNAs may be of unique therapeutic
value by providing clinicians with a strategy to treat cancer from a
systems rather than a single gene perspective.

