Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Smad interacting protein 1 (SIP1) is associated with peritoneal
carcinomatosis in intestinal type gastric cancer


Purpose. Smad interacting protein 1 (SIP1) encodes a transcription factor
and is one of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducible genes
that play a key role in tumor progression in various cancers. The aim of
this study is to clarify the clinical significance of SIP1 expression in
gastric cancer patients, and to clarify its biological function
especially in intestinal type gastric cancer. Methods. We studied one
hundred thirty-four patients undergoing surgery for gastric cancer. We
analyzed SIP1 mRNA levels by real-time reverse transcription PCR in
gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal mucosa, and in gastric cancer
cell lines. SIP1 protein expression in primary cancer and in peritoneal
dissemination samples was measured using immunohistochemical analysis.
Knockdown of the SIP1 gene by siRNA transfection was performed to
evaluate SIP1 function in gastric cancer cell. Results. Expression of the
SIP1 gene was significantly higher in cancerous tissue than in adjacent
normal mucosa (pPurpose. Smad interacting protein 1 (SIP1) encodes a
transcription factor and is one of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducible genes that play a key role in tumor progression in
various cancers. The aim of this study is to clarify the clinical
significance of SIP1 expression in gastric cancer patients, and to
clarify its biological function especially in intestinal type gastric
cancer. Methods. We studied one hundred thirty-four patients undergoing
surgery for gastric cancer. We analyzed SIP1 mRNA levels by real-time
reverse transcription PCR in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal
mucosa, and in gastric cancer cell lines. SIP1 protein expression in
primary cancer and in peritoneal dissemination samples was measured using
immunohistochemical analysis. Knockdown of the SIP1 gene by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate SIP1 function in gastric cancer
cell. Results. Expression of the SIP1 gene was significantly higher in
cancerous tissue than in adjacent normal mucosa (p<0.05). Increased SIP1
expression was significantly associated with peritoneal dissemination
(pPurpose. Smad interacting protein 1 (SIP1) encodes a transcription
factor and is one of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducible genes that play a key role in tumor progression in
various cancers. The aim of this study is to clarify the clinical
significance of SIP1 expression in gastric cancer patients, and to
clarify its biological function especially in intestinal type gastric
cancer. Methods. We studied one hundred thirty-four patients undergoing
surgery for gastric cancer. We analyzed SIP1 mRNA levels by real-time
reverse transcription PCR in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal
mucosa, and in gastric cancer cell lines. SIP1 protein expression in
primary cancer and in peritoneal dissemination samples was measured using
immunohistochemical analysis. Knockdown of the SIP1 gene by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate SIP1 function in gastric cancer
cell. Results. Expression of the SIP1 gene was significantly higher in
cancerous tissue than in adjacent normal mucosa (p<0.05). Increased SIP1
expression was significantly associated with peritoneal dissemination
(p<0.05), and was an independent prognostic factor (risk ratio, 2.17; 95%
confidence interval, 1.26-3.74; pPurpose. Smad interacting protein 1
(SIP1) encodes a transcription factor and is one of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducible genes that play a key
role in tumor progression in various cancers. The aim of this study is to
clarify the clinical significance of SIP1 expression in gastric cancer
patients, and to clarify its biological function especially in intestinal
type gastric cancer. Methods. We studied one hundred thirty-four patients
undergoing surgery for gastric cancer. We analyzed SIP1 mRNA levels by
real-time reverse transcription PCR in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent
normal mucosa, and in gastric cancer cell lines. SIP1 protein expression
in primary cancer and in peritoneal dissemination samples was measured
using immunohistochemical analysis. Knockdown of the SIP1 gene by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate SIP1 function in gastric cancer
cell. Results. Expression of the SIP1 gene was significantly higher in
cancerous tissue than in adjacent normal mucosa (p<0.05). Increased SIP1
expression was significantly associated with peritoneal dissemination
(p<0.05), and was an independent prognostic factor (risk ratio, 2.17; 95%
confidence interval, 1.26-3.74; p<0.05). Logistic regression analysis
revealed that increased SIP1 expression was an independent risk factor
for peritoneal dissemination (odds ratio, 3.43; 95% confidence interval,
1.25-9.43; pPurpose. Smad interacting protein 1 (SIP1) encodes a
transcription factor and is one of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducible genes that play a key role in tumor progression in
various cancers. The aim of this study is to clarify the clinical
significance of SIP1 expression in gastric cancer patients, and to
clarify its biological function especially in intestinal type gastric
cancer. Methods. We studied one hundred thirty-four patients undergoing
surgery for gastric cancer. We analyzed SIP1 mRNA levels by real-time
reverse transcription PCR in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent normal
mucosa, and in gastric cancer cell lines. SIP1 protein expression in
primary cancer and in peritoneal dissemination samples was measured using
immunohistochemical analysis. Knockdown of the SIP1 gene by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate SIP1 function in gastric cancer
cell. Results. Expression of the SIP1 gene was significantly higher in
cancerous tissue than in adjacent normal mucosa (p<0.05). Increased SIP1
expression was significantly associated with peritoneal dissemination
(p<0.05), and was an independent prognostic factor (risk ratio, 2.17; 95%
confidence interval, 1.26-3.74; p<0.05). Logistic regression analysis
revealed that increased SIP1 expression was an independent risk factor
for peritoneal dissemination (odds ratio, 3.43; 95% confidence interval,
1.25-9.43; p<0.05). Especially in intestinal type gastric cancer,
elevated SIP1 expression was significantly correlated with peritoneal
dissemination and poor prognosis (pPurpose. Smad interacting protein 1
(SIP1) encodes a transcription factor and is one of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-inducible genes that play a key
role in tumor progression in various cancers. The aim of this study is to
clarify the clinical significance of SIP1 expression in gastric cancer
patients, and to clarify its biological function especially in intestinal
type gastric cancer. Methods. We studied one hundred thirty-four patients
undergoing surgery for gastric cancer. We analyzed SIP1 mRNA levels by
real-time reverse transcription PCR in gastric cancer tissue and adjacent
normal mucosa, and in gastric cancer cell lines. SIP1 protein expression
in primary cancer and in peritoneal dissemination samples was measured
using immunohistochemical analysis. Knockdown of the SIP1 gene by siRNA
transfection was performed to evaluate SIP1 function in gastric cancer
cell. Results. Expression of the SIP1 gene was significantly higher in
cancerous tissue than in adjacent normal mucosa (p<0.05). Increased SIP1
expression was significantly associated with peritoneal dissemination
(p<0.05), and was an independent prognostic factor (risk ratio, 2.17; 95%
confidence interval, 1.26-3.74; p<0.05). Logistic regression analysis
revealed that increased SIP1 expression was an independent risk factor
for peritoneal dissemination (odds ratio, 3.43; 95% confidence interval,
1.25-9.43; p<0.05). Especially in intestinal type gastric cancer,
elevated SIP1 expression was significantly correlated with peritoneal
dissemination and poor prognosis (p<0.05). Immunohistochemical analysis
indicated that SIP1 was intensely expressed in both primary cancer and
peritoneal dissemination samples. In vitro, cell proliferation, migration
and invasion were inhibited by SIP1 knockdown, while resistance to
anoikis was decreased after knockdown of SIP1 in the intestinal type
gastric cancer cell line MKN7. Conclusion: High SIP1 expression is
associated with poor prognosis especially in intestinal type gastric
cancer patients and enhanced malignant potential in terms of
proliferation, migration, invasion and anoikis inhibition in intestinal
type gastric cacner cell. These results indicate that SIP1 plays an
important role in progression to peritoneal carcinomatosis in intestinal
type gastric cancer.

