Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A comparative study of the interaction of the maytansinoid,
DM1-Me, vinblastine, and taxol with human cells


The current interest in antimitotic compounds that interact with
microtubules is caused, in part, by their clinical importance in
oncology. Several microtubule-binding compounds, including Vinca
alkaloids, taxanes, maytansinoids, and auristatins, are in clinical use,
some additionally being evaluated as antibody conjugates. To better
understand the factors that determine the potency of
antibody-maytansinoid conjugates in killing cells, we examined the
interaction of the maytansinoid, DM1-Me, with MCF7 cells, in comparison
with vinblastine and taxol. DM1-Me was more potent in arresting mitosis
than vinblastine or taxol (5- and 13-fold, respectively). We compared the
levels of accumulation of these three compounds by MCF7 cells following a
24 hour exposure at the mitotic IC50 concentration and found that, at
this concentration, cells accumulated comparable amounts of vinblastine
and DM1-Me, but required more than a 10-fold greater concentration of
taxol to achieve a similar effect. Additionally, cells exposed to each
compound for 2 hours prior to being washed into drug free medium,
retained most of the accumulated DM1-Me or taxol for at least 24 h, while
most vinblastine was released into the medium within the first 2 h.
DM1-Me and taxol had similar affinities for MCF7 cells, while that of
vinblastine was 4-6-fold lower. These properties of DM1-Me, vinblastine
and taxol suggest that maytansinoids are a better choice for antibody
conjugates than vinblastine or taxol, a conclusion which is consistent
with the experimental data and clinical experience with antibody
conjugates made with compounds of these three classes.

