Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CYLD downregulation induces aerobic glycolysis via mTOR pathway in
human oral squamous cell carcinoma cells


The hypermetabolic nature of cancer cells and their increased reliance on
aerobic glycolysis, as originally described by Otto Warburg et al, are
considered metabolic hallmarks of cancer cells including oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. However, its precise mechanisms remain
unknown. Cylindromatosis (CYLD) is recognized as a tumor suppressor gene
whereas little is available about its impact on cancer progression. Our
unpublished data showed that lower CYLD expression was associated with
poor prognosis in OSCC patients. The objective of our study was to
address specific contributions of CYLD to the signature metabolic
features of cancer cells, including the so-called Warburg effect. We
investigated effects of CYLD knockdown by siRNA on aerobic glycolysis in
human OSCC cell lines. As the result of CYLD knockdown, both glucose
consumption and lactate production significantly increased in several
OSCC cell lines with increased expression of LDHA which is known to be
important for glycolysis. Consistently, culture medium became more acidic
after CYLD knockdown compared with the control. Repression of CYLD
expression induced Akt phosphorylation. Importantly, the increase in
aerobic glycolysis induced by CYLD repression was completely blocked by
an mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin as well as a PIK inhibitor, LY294002. Our
study indicats that dysfunction of CYLD contributs to the Warburg effect
through Akt-mTOR pathway in OSCC. Further investigation on the advantage
of such increased glycolysis and the change in metabolome profiling may
lead to development of effective therapeutic strategies for OSCC and
other malignancies.

