Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CDKN2A/p16INK4a 5UTR variants in melanoma predisposition: Lost in
translation, somewhere


The CDKN2A gene is the most common high penetrance susceptibility gene
identified to date in melanoma families. While functional tests for
determining the pathogenicity of missense germline mutations in the
CDKN2A coding region have been developed, rare polymorphisms or sequence
variants at the CDKN2A/ p16INK4a 5UTR, encountered during routine
screening, are usually defined as variants with unknown significance
after determining their frequency in control population and the
cosegregation analysis in the family, when possible. We recently
developed reporter assays to study a panel of p16INK4a 5UTR variants
identified as heterozygous changes in patients from a hospital-based
series of melanoma cases (c.-21C>T; c.-25C>T&c.-180G>A; c.-56G>T;
c.-67G>C). Monocistronic as well as bicistronic luciferase-based reporter
vectors were developed and used to test wild type and variant p16INK4a
5UTR activity upon transient transfection in melanoma-derived cells
(WM266-4, G361 and SK-Mel-5) and in the breast cancer-derived MCF7 cells.
Results revealed that the c.-21C>T variant had a strong negative impact
on the reporter activity, similar to that of the known
melanoma-predisposing mutation c.-34G>T, included as a control. The
variants at 56 and at 25&-180 exhibited a milder impact, while results
with c.-67G>C were dependent on the type of reporter vector.
Quantification of the luciferase mRNA conducted in parallel with the
luciferase assay indicated that the impact of the variants was mainly
post-transcriptional. We also applied a polysomal profiling technique to
measure allelic imbalance starting from heterozygous patient-derived cell
lines and found that the c.-21C>T variant but also c.-56T>G and c.-67G>C
exhibited lower association with the polysomes suggestive of reduced mRNA
translation efficiency. A panel of eleven additional germline variants in
the 5UTR of p16INK4a is being investigated. In particular we are focusing
on the functional interactions between wild type and variant p16INK4a 5-
and 3-UTR sequences and on the impact the variants can have on the
targeting of the p16INK4a mRNA by microRNAs (including mir-346, -636,
-639, -935) or RNA binding proteins (including YB-1).

