Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SNP markers in the FGF9 and MAP3K1 region associate with
testicular germ cell tumor susceptibility


Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are the most common cancers in young
men, and several lines of evidence point to their substantial genetic
component. To date, genome-wide association (GWA) studies have uncovered
six TGCT susceptibility loci. Together these loci account for 11-16% of
TGCT disease risk to first degree relatives, arguing that additional
genetic variation contributing to TGCT susceptibility must exist.
Recently we and others indentified variation at DMRT1 associated with
TGCT risk. DMRT1 is highly conserved across many species and plays a
crucial role in male gonadal development and sex determination. Deletions
in DMRT1 lead to male to female (XY) sex reversal. Therefore, we
undertook a targeted pathway-based analysis of genes influencing XY sex
reversal to identify associations with TGCT risk. Through review of the
literature, we identified 27 additional genes in which mutations or
deletions are associated with XY sex reversal. Using our existing GWA
data in 349 cases and 919 controls, 570 risk markers in the 28 candidate
loci were evaluated for replication based on a significance threshold of
p Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are the most common cancers in young
men, and several lines of evidence point to their substantial genetic
component. To date, genome-wide association (GWA) studies have uncovered
six TGCT susceptibility loci. Together these loci account for 11-16% of
TGCT disease risk to first degree relatives, arguing that additional
genetic variation contributing to TGCT susceptibility must exist.
Recently we and others indentified variation at DMRT1 associated with
TGCT risk. DMRT1 is highly conserved across many species and plays a
crucial role in male gonadal development and sex determination. Deletions
in DMRT1 lead to male to female (XY) sex reversal. Therefore, we
undertook a targeted pathway-based analysis of genes influencing XY sex
reversal to identify associations with TGCT risk. Through review of the
literature, we identified 27 additional genes in which mutations or
deletions are associated with XY sex reversal. Using our existing GWA
data in 349 cases and 919 controls, 570 risk markers in the 28 candidate
loci were evaluated for replication based on a significance threshold of
p < 2 x 105 for at least two SNP markers. Two markers that mapped near to
MAP3K1 and FGF9 meet these criteria. We genotyped the most statistically
significant SNP markers in the MAP3K1 (rs252906; p = 1.89 x 105) and FGF9
(rs628137; p = 1.66 x 105) region in two independent replication sample
sets, consisting of 439 cases of TGCT and 960 controls and of 768 cases
and 674 controls respectively. In combined analysis, TGCT cases had
elevated odds of carriage of the rs252906 major T allele [per-allele odds
ratio (OR) = 1.24, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.16, 1.377; P = 5.87
105] and the rs628137 major G allele (per allele OR = 1.20, 95% CI 1.08,
1.34, P = 5.28 x 104 compared with controls. Similarly to KITLG, the
susceptibility locus most strongly associated with TGCT risk, FGF9 is
associated with proliferation, migration and survival of primordial germ
cells, the progenitor cells for human TGCT. MAP3K1 and FGF9 play a
crucial role in normal testes development. These finding strengthen the
supposition that variation in genes influencing sex determination, and
male germ cell development and differentiation play an important role in
inherited TGCT susceptibility.

