Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Prospective stratification using gene expression arrays in a
randomised trial of R-CHOP +/ Bortezomib in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBL): The UK NCRI REMoDL-B study, ISRCTN 51837425


DLBL subtypes are recognised by patterns of gene expression,
corresponding to Germinal Center (GCB) or activated peripheral blood
(ABC) B-cells. They differ in frequency of mutation in the B-cell
receptor signalling pathway and levels of expression of NF-kB target
genes. Results of treatment with standard (R-CHOP) therapy are inferior
for ABC type, and this study tests the use of bortezomib to downregulate
NF-kB and reverse the deficit. This trial is the first to use gene
expression profiling (GEP) to stratify cases into GCB and ABC at entry,
with adaptive statistical design to analyse the outcome by subtype at
predefined timepoints. Patients (pts) newly diagnosed with DLBL undergo
staging and commence R-CHOP. During the first 3 week cycle formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue undergoes extraction of messenger RNA for
GEP of 24 000 probe sets using Illumina cDNA-mediated Annealing,
Selection, extension, and Ligation (DASL) array at the central
laboratory. Cases are allocated to GCB, ABC or other type before the 2nd
cycle. Thereafter, all pts are randomized to continue conventional R-CHOP
or to add bortezomib 1.3mg/m2 days 1 + 8. The study will randomize a
minimum 260 ABC type, to detect a difference in progression free survival
(PFS) of 10% with bortezomib, with two-sided significance 5% & 90% power.
The design allows closure of randomization for GCB cases if 6 month PFS
is DLBL subtypes are recognised by patterns of gene expression,
corresponding to Germinal Center (GCB) or activated peripheral blood
(ABC) B-cells. They differ in frequency of mutation in the B-cell
receptor signalling pathway and levels of expression of NF-kB target
genes. Results of treatment with standard (R-CHOP) therapy are inferior
for ABC type, and this study tests the use of bortezomib to downregulate
NF-kB and reverse the deficit. This trial is the first to use gene
expression profiling (GEP) to stratify cases into GCB and ABC at entry,
with adaptive statistical design to analyse the outcome by subtype at
predefined timepoints. Patients (pts) newly diagnosed with DLBL undergo
staging and commence R-CHOP. During the first 3 week cycle formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue undergoes extraction of messenger RNA for
GEP of 24 000 probe sets using Illumina cDNA-mediated Annealing,
Selection, extension, and Ligation (DASL) array at the central
laboratory. Cases are allocated to GCB, ABC or other type before the 2nd
cycle. Thereafter, all pts are randomized to continue conventional R-CHOP
or to add bortezomib 1.3mg/m2 days 1 + 8. The study will randomize a
minimum 260 ABC type, to detect a difference in progression free survival
(PFS) of 10% with bortezomib, with two-sided significance 5% & 90% power.
The design allows closure of randomization for GCB cases if 6 month PFS
is <80% after 55 receive R-CHOP-B. A second analysis for futility in GCB
is planned after 73 treated with R-CHOP-B are followed for one year: if
PFS is DLBL subtypes are recognised by patterns of gene expression,
corresponding to Germinal Center (GCB) or activated peripheral blood
(ABC) B-cells. They differ in frequency of mutation in the B-cell
receptor signalling pathway and levels of expression of NF-kB target
genes. Results of treatment with standard (R-CHOP) therapy are inferior
for ABC type, and this study tests the use of bortezomib to downregulate
NF-kB and reverse the deficit. This trial is the first to use gene
expression profiling (GEP) to stratify cases into GCB and ABC at entry,
with adaptive statistical design to analyse the outcome by subtype at
predefined timepoints. Patients (pts) newly diagnosed with DLBL undergo
staging and commence R-CHOP. During the first 3 week cycle formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue undergoes extraction of messenger RNA for
GEP of 24 000 probe sets using Illumina cDNA-mediated Annealing,
Selection, extension, and Ligation (DASL) array at the central
laboratory. Cases are allocated to GCB, ABC or other type before the 2nd
cycle. Thereafter, all pts are randomized to continue conventional R-CHOP
or to add bortezomib 1.3mg/m2 days 1 + 8. The study will randomize a
minimum 260 ABC type, to detect a difference in progression free survival
(PFS) of 10% with bortezomib, with two-sided significance 5% & 90% power.
The design allows closure of randomization for GCB cases if 6 month PFS
is <80% after 55 receive R-CHOP-B. A second analysis for futility in GCB
is planned after 73 treated with R-CHOP-B are followed for one year: if
PFS is <85%, further exploration of bortezomib in this group is not
warranted. Prior to trial opening, FFPE material from 200 pts with DLBL
was analysed by DASL protocol. Of 27 genes in a published (LLMPP)
classification, 20 are present on the platform. Array data were
standardised by converting to z-score. Four decision tree machine
learning tools were trained on LLMPP data and combined into a
meta-classifier using the Vote scheme with average of probabilities. This
showed DLBL reproducibly classified using this platform with outcomes
similar to those previously reported. Additional analyses of DNA
extracted from tumour material will detect mutations in NF-kB pathway
genes by combining the Fluidigm Access Array PCR System with next
generation sequencing. Since trial opening in 2011, samples have been
analysed from 39 pts. 30 (77%) biopsies were successfully classified; 3
cases had poor quality of RNA and in 6 there was insufficient tumour in
the block. Cases classified include both surgical and needle core
biopsies. Maximum laboratory turnround time was 12 working days. This
study demonstrates it is possible to carry out GEP at diagnosis in a
multicenter trial. It will address the relationship between response to
treatment and molecular biomarkers, and serve as a model for future study
design.

