Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Changes in apoptotic gene expression in human leukemia cells
treated with the anticancer drug Laromustine


Laromustine is an experimental anticancer drug that has been tested in
the clinic against acute myelogenous leukemia and glioblastoma
multiforme. In the body, Laromustine's cytotoxic effects are a result of
two cogenerated electrophiles, a 2-chloroethylating species that can
cause lethal DNA damage and methylisocyanate, which carbamoylates
sulfydryl groups in proteins. The mechanism by which Laromustine kills
cancer cells likely includes apoptosis. In order to further investigate
this phenomenon, the extent to which Laromustine affects cultured human
promyelocytic (HL-60) cells use of 88 genes relating to this cell death
pathway was examined using quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase
PCR. Cultured cells were treated with drug for six hours before
harvesting mRNA for analysis. The expression of a subset of the tested
genes emerged as significantly different in cells treated with
Laromustine as compared to control cells. Included among these genes are:
TNFRSF10D, TNFRSF17, CD40LG, TRAF4, and BAG3. The expression of BAG3,
whose encoded protein is also known as CAIR-1 or Bis, was increased by
more than two orders of magnitude in HL-60 cells exposed to Laromustine.
By forming a complex with heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), it is thought
that BAG3 promotes anti-apoptotic activity by interfering with protein
chaperoning and cytochrome-c release. It is possible that a pathway
involving BAG3 could be a mechanism by which cells attempt to counter the
effects of Laromustine exposure. Other apoptotic markers are also
reported, including activation of caspase-3 and caspase-7, cleavage of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and staining of annexin V.

