Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Comprehensive molecular oncogenomic profiling & miRNA analysis of
prostate cancer


Background: Comprehensive molecular oncogenomic and microRNA (miRNA)
profiling of tumors can provide tumor specific oncogenomic and miRNA
signatures which can be useful to improve diagnostic accuracy, refine
prognostic and predictive capabilities, and may serve as therapeutic
targets. In prostate cancer (PCa) such a comprehensive analysis has not
been reported. Design: DNA and RNA obtained from scant amounts of fresh
frozen PCa tumor tissue samples (n=36) were profiled by (1) Mutation
analysis: Sequenom Massarray & OncoCarta VI panel that profiles 238
common cancer mutations in 19 oncogenes (known predictors of response or
resistance to targeted therapies);(2) Whole-genome gene expression
Microarrays: Illumina Chip;(3) Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) with
genome-wide coverage:Illumina Omni microarrays. (4)miRNA analysis was
done on RNA from FFPE PCa tumor tissues (n=126) using RT-PCR. Data was
statistically analyzed & correlated with clinical & pathologic variables.
Results: Massarray analysis identified a MET oncogene mutation, variant
T992I, in a 49 year old patient with Gleason score 7 (4+3) tumor. Of the
47,224 genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays, 74 genes were
significant predictors of high tumor grade by ordinal regression analysis
(pBackground: Comprehensive molecular oncogenomic and microRNA (miRNA)
profiling of tumors can provide tumor specific oncogenomic and miRNA
signatures which can be useful to improve diagnostic accuracy, refine
prognostic and predictive capabilities, and may serve as therapeutic
targets. In prostate cancer (PCa) such a comprehensive analysis has not
been reported. Design: DNA and RNA obtained from scant amounts of fresh
frozen PCa tumor tissue samples (n=36) were profiled by (1) Mutation
analysis: Sequenom Massarray & OncoCarta VI panel that profiles 238
common cancer mutations in 19 oncogenes (known predictors of response or
resistance to targeted therapies);(2) Whole-genome gene expression
Microarrays: Illumina Chip;(3) Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) with
genome-wide coverage:Illumina Omni microarrays. (4)miRNA analysis was
done on RNA from FFPE PCa tumor tissues (n=126) using RT-PCR. Data was
statistically analyzed & correlated with clinical & pathologic variables.
Results: Massarray analysis identified a MET oncogene mutation, variant
T992I, in a 49 year old patient with Gleason score 7 (4+3) tumor. Of the
47,224 genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays, 74 genes were
significant predictors of high tumor grade by ordinal regression analysis
(p<0.0001). TGIF1 was the most significant gene. Of the 731,442 SNP's
analyzed, 638 significantly predicted high tumor grade by logistic
regression analysis (pBackground: Comprehensive molecular oncogenomic and
microRNA (miRNA) profiling of tumors can provide tumor specific
oncogenomic and miRNA signatures which can be useful to improve
diagnostic accuracy, refine prognostic and predictive capabilities, and
may serve as therapeutic targets. In prostate cancer (PCa) such a
comprehensive analysis has not been reported. Design: DNA and RNA
obtained from scant amounts of fresh frozen PCa tumor tissue samples
(n=36) were profiled by (1) Mutation analysis: Sequenom Massarray &
OncoCarta VI panel that profiles 238 common cancer mutations in 19
oncogenes (known predictors of response or resistance to targeted
therapies);(2) Whole-genome gene expression Microarrays: Illumina
Chip;(3) Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) with genome-wide
coverage:Illumina Omni microarrays. (4)miRNA analysis was done on RNA
from FFPE PCa tumor tissues (n=126) using RT-PCR. Data was statistically
analyzed & correlated with clinical & pathologic variables. Results:
Massarray analysis identified a MET oncogene mutation, variant T992I, in
a 49 year old patient with Gleason score 7 (4+3) tumor. Of the 47,224
genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays, 74 genes were significant
predictors of high tumor grade by ordinal regression analysis (p<0.0001).
TGIF1 was the most significant gene. Of the 731,442 SNP's analyzed, 638
significantly predicted high tumor grade by logistic regression analysis
(p<0.0001). There was significant interaction between gene and SNPs in
531 SNP/gene pairs (pBackground: Comprehensive molecular oncogenomic and
microRNA (miRNA) profiling of tumors can provide tumor specific
oncogenomic and miRNA signatures which can be useful to improve
diagnostic accuracy, refine prognostic and predictive capabilities, and
may serve as therapeutic targets. In prostate cancer (PCa) such a
comprehensive analysis has not been reported. Design: DNA and RNA
obtained from scant amounts of fresh frozen PCa tumor tissue samples
(n=36) were profiled by (1) Mutation analysis: Sequenom Massarray &
OncoCarta VI panel that profiles 238 common cancer mutations in 19
oncogenes (known predictors of response or resistance to targeted
therapies);(2) Whole-genome gene expression Microarrays: Illumina
Chip;(3) Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) with genome-wide
coverage:Illumina Omni microarrays. (4)miRNA analysis was done on RNA
from FFPE PCa tumor tissues (n=126) using RT-PCR. Data was statistically
analyzed & correlated with clinical & pathologic variables. Results:
Massarray analysis identified a MET oncogene mutation, variant T992I, in
a 49 year old patient with Gleason score 7 (4+3) tumor. Of the 47,224
genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays, 74 genes were significant
predictors of high tumor grade by ordinal regression analysis (p<0.0001).
TGIF1 was the most significant gene. Of the 731,442 SNP's analyzed, 638
significantly predicted high tumor grade by logistic regression analysis
(p<0.0001). There was significant interaction between gene and SNPs in
531 SNP/gene pairs (p<0.05). Ingenuity Pathway analysis revealed the
significant predictor genes (pBackground: Comprehensive molecular
oncogenomic and microRNA (miRNA) profiling of tumors can provide tumor
specific oncogenomic and miRNA signatures which can be useful to improve
diagnostic accuracy, refine prognostic and predictive capabilities, and
may serve as therapeutic targets. In prostate cancer (PCa) such a
comprehensive analysis has not been reported. Design: DNA and RNA
obtained from scant amounts of fresh frozen PCa tumor tissue samples
(n=36) were profiled by (1) Mutation analysis: Sequenom Massarray &
OncoCarta VI panel that profiles 238 common cancer mutations in 19
oncogenes (known predictors of response or resistance to targeted
therapies);(2) Whole-genome gene expression Microarrays: Illumina
Chip;(3) Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) with genome-wide
coverage:Illumina Omni microarrays. (4)miRNA analysis was done on RNA
from FFPE PCa tumor tissues (n=126) using RT-PCR. Data was statistically
analyzed & correlated with clinical & pathologic variables. Results:
Massarray analysis identified a MET oncogene mutation, variant T992I, in
a 49 year old patient with Gleason score 7 (4+3) tumor. Of the 47,224
genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays, 74 genes were significant
predictors of high tumor grade by ordinal regression analysis (p<0.0001).
TGIF1 was the most significant gene. Of the 731,442 SNP's analyzed, 638
significantly predicted high tumor grade by logistic regression analysis
(p<0.0001). There was significant interaction between gene and SNPs in
531 SNP/gene pairs (p<0.05). Ingenuity Pathway analysis revealed the
significant predictor genes (p<0.05) were involved in biological pathways
for Gene Expression, Cell Cycle, Cancer, Inflammatory Response, Cell
Death, Infection Mechanism & Cellular Assembly, Organization, Gene
Expression, Cancer. P53 gene was found to be at the center hub of
significant predicting pathways. Loss of miR-34a expression was found in
PCa tissues consistent with the central role of p53. Conclusions: Using
high throughput genomic profiling & miRNA analysis of small amounts of
fresh-frozen and FFPE PCa tumor samples, we identified clinically
relevant hot spot mutation in MET oncogene and several significant genes
& SNPs to predict tumor grade. P53 gene is at the center hub of all
significant pathways. Loss of miR-34a was consistent with p53 function in
PCa. MET oncogene mutation is a novel finding, not previously reported in
PCa against which small molecule inhibitors are under development. These
molecular signatures may have a significant clinical impact on improving
diagnostic and predictive capabilities & in designing targeted therapies
to achieve the goal of personalized medicine.

