Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Laminin alpha 2 enables glioblastoma stem cell growth


Glioblastomas (GBMs) are lethal cancers that display a cellular hierarchy
parallel to the normal brain and are resistant to conventional therapies.
It has been suggested that interaction between GSCs and their adjacent
perivascular niche plays the critical roles to maintain their malignancy
and self-renewal. Extracellular matrix (ECM) cues instruct stem cell
behavior in many niches and the objective of our study was to elucidate
its composition and contribution to GSC maintenance in the perivascular
niche. We utilized human tumor tissue for immunofluorescence analysis and
derived GSC for subsequent functional studies from tumor tissues. We find
that laminin family of ECM proteins are located in the perivascular GBM
niche and are negative prognostic indicators of patient survival. To
identify the source of laminins, we characterized cellular elements
within the niche and found that key laminins were expressed by non-stem
tumor cells and tumor-derived endothelial cells (ECs). Targeting the
laminin alpha 2 chain by RNA interference inhibited GSC growth and
self-renewal. In co-culture studies of GSCs and non-stem tumor cells,
laminin alpha 2 knockdown in non-stem tumor cells resulted in decreased
GSC growth. These findings indicate that growth/proliferation of GSCs
depends on the direct connection between extrinsic laminin alpha 2 and
environmental matrix. Our studies highlight the contribution of non-stem
tumor cell-derived laminin juxtracrine signaling. As laminin alpha 2 has
recently been identified as a molecular marker of aggressive ependymoma,
we propose that the brain vascular ECM promotes tumor malignancy through
maintenance of the GSC compartment providing not only a molecular
fingerprint but also a possible therapeutic target.

