Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Response post first autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT)
for multiple myeloma identify patients who may benefit from tandem
transplants: A single center prospective phase II study


The role of tandem transplants as well as a later salvage second
transplant has been in the center of interest for many myeloma
investigators. Also, the need for tandem ASCT in patients (pts) achieving
very good partial remission (VGPR) or complete remission has not been
studied prospectively. We conducted a prospective phase II clinical trial
in which enrolled myeloma pts are assessed after the first ASCT and
offered either 2nd tandem ASCT if they achieve PR or maintenance if they
achieve VGPR. These latter pts received 2nd salvage transplant after
relapse. The conditioning regimens used were different for the two ASCT:
Busulfan 0.75 mg/kg PO q 6 hr days 8 through 5, Cyclophosphamide (CP) 60
mg/kg IV days 3 and 2, and Etoposide 10 mg/kg IV days 4 to 2 for the
first ASCT, and 96 hr (days 6 to 3) continuous IV CP 6 gr/m2 and total
body irradiation (TBI) 600 cGy (days 2 and 1) for the second ASCT.
Etoposide was omitted if pts were 65 year old, and TBI was substituted by
melphalan 140 mg/m2 if prior radiation did not allow TBI. Between the
years 2001-2009, 76 pts were enrolled. Of the 31 pts planned to have
tandem ASCT, 20 received tandem ASCT, 2 additional pts had tandem
auto-allo transplants and one patient had progressive disease. The
primary reasons for not receiving the planned tandem ASCT were lack of
socioeconomic resources and physical co-morbidities. Maintenance
treatment was offered to both groups of pts. There were no treatment
related mortalities in the ASCT pts. We compared the progression-free
(PFS) and overall (OS) survival following the first ASCT between pts who
received tandem ASCT (n=20) and pts who received single ASCT (n=54). The
median PFS for tandem pts was 27 mo (range, 10-93) versus 28 mo for
single ASCT (range, 4-99) (P=0.889); the OS was 38 mo (range, 11-120)
versus 72 mo (range, 5-136), respectively (P=0.293). At the present time,
a total of 7 (35%) and 30 (55%) pts are still alive in the tandem and
single ASCT groups, respectively. Among the tandem pts, 2 underwent
salvage ASCT and one non-myeloablative allogeneic transplant (allo-SCT);
while in the single ASCT group 6 had salvage ASCT and 6 had allo-SCT. All
salvage transplants were done at a median of 37 mo (range, 8-91) from 1st
ASCT. In conclusion, pts who achieve VGPR after 1st ASCT have similar PFS
and may be better OS than pts who had tandem ASCT. Thus, the use of such
response criteria may identify a group of lower risk pts that will do
well without the upfront tandem ASCT.

