Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correlation of PERK activation with increased GRP78-binding in
UVB-irradiated HaCaT cells


Ultraviolet (UV) light has been shown to be a potential human carcinogen,
and it is widely accepted that UV exposure can impact protein expression
via both transcriptional and translational regulation. PERK is one of the
eIF2 kinases that is activated and inhibits protein synthesis upon UV
irradiation. However, the mechanism for UV-induced PERK activation is not
fully elucidated. In this study, we evaluated the role of GRP78/BiP, an
inhibitory PERK-binding protein, in the regulation of PERK activity in
UVB irradiated cells. Our data showed that while PERK expression was
reduced in both human keratinocytes (HaCaT) and mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEF) cells, GRP78/BiP expression remained steady in HaCaT
and slightly increased in MEF cells after UVB irradiation. Our data also
showed that the Tyr phosphorylation of PERK, an indication of activation,
was increased after UVB irradiation, which confirmed the role of PERK in
UV-induced translational regulation. Unexpectedly, a
co-immunoprecipitation analysis indicated PERK activation was accompanied
with an increase in PERK-bound GRP78/BiP in the irradiated HaCaT cells.
Based on these results, we propose that UV-induced PERK activation might
be GRP78/BiP-independent, and its activation pathway in HaCaT cells may
be unique from other cell lines.

