Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pulsatilla saponin D suppresses angiogenesis and induces apoptosis
via inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway in hepatocellular
carcinoma


Constitutive activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway has been shown
in hepatocellular carcinoma, which plays a central role in promoting
survival, proliferation, and angiogenesis. Here, we assessed efficacy of
Pulsatilla saponin D (designated SB365) on the progression of HCC and
regulation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling. SB365 strongly suppressed the
growth of HCC cells in a dose-dependent manner. Also, SB365 induced
apoptosis by increasing the proportion of sub-G1 apoptotic cells from 8%
to 21% through induction of expression of Bax and cleaved-caspase-3. In
vivo study showed that SB365 significantly inhibited tumor growth in HCC
xenograft model, inducing apoptosis by increasing the expression of the
cleaved caspase-3 and DNA fragmentation. In addition, SB365 showed a
potent anti-angiogenic activity to decrease the expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and its target gene, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) known as a key molecule for tumoric
angiogenesis. Furthermore, SB365 suppressed tube formation and migration
of HUVECs, and in vivo neovascularization in a mouse Matrigel plug assay
as well. The expressions of VEGF and CD34 in the tumor tissue were
decreased by SB365 treatment. In a mechanism study, we also found that
SB365 effectively suppressed the phosphorylation of PI3K downstream
factors such as Akt, mTOR, and p70S6K both in vitro and in vivo. Taken
together, our study demonstrates that SB365 not only induces apoptosis
but also inhibits cell growth/proliferation and angiogenesis through
modulation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in human HCC. We suggest that SB365
may be a new chemotherapeutic candidate against HCC. Keywords: SB365;
HCC; Apoptosis; Angiogenesis; PI3K

