Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Relative distribution of folate species is associated with global
DNA methylation in human colorectal mucosa


Folate, an important cellular methyl donor, exists as functionally
diverse species within cells. Folate deficiency is thought to contribute
to DNA hypomethylation in colorectal cancer (CRC) however findings on the
relationship between total folate concentration and global DNA
methylation have been inconsistent. The aim of this study was to
determine if global DNA methylation in blood and colorectal mucosa from
healthy and CRC patients is related to folate species distribution. Blood
and colorectal mucosa was collected from 112 CRC patients, 114 healthy
individuals and 82 low folate individuals. Global methylation and folate
was determined using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and
repeat element methylation was determined using end-specific polymerase
chain reaction. In colorectal mucosa mean global methylation was 8% lower
compared to blood while LINE-1 and Alu elements were 3.3-fold and
1.9-fold hypomethylated respectively (P Folate, an important cellular
methyl donor, exists as functionally diverse species within cells. Folate
deficiency is thought to contribute to DNA hypomethylation in colorectal
cancer (CRC) however findings on the relationship between total folate
concentration and global DNA methylation have been inconsistent. The aim
of this study was to determine if global DNA methylation in blood and
colorectal mucosa from healthy and CRC patients is related to folate
species distribution. Blood and colorectal mucosa was collected from 112
CRC patients, 114 healthy individuals and 82 low folate individuals.
Global methylation and folate was determined using liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry and repeat element methylation was determined
using end-specific polymerase chain reaction. In colorectal mucosa mean
global methylation was 8% lower compared to blood while LINE-1 and Alu
elements were 3.3-fold and 1.9-fold hypomethylated respectively (P
<0.0001). After adjusting for age and smoking, statistically significant
but small (2.2%) differences in global but not repeat methylation were
found in normal colorectal mucosa from CRC patients compared to healthy
individuals. Low folate patients had 18% lower blood
5-methyltetrahydrofolate distribution (P Folate, an important cellular
methyl donor, exists as functionally diverse species within cells. Folate
deficiency is thought to contribute to DNA hypomethylation in colorectal
cancer (CRC) however findings on the relationship between total folate
concentration and global DNA methylation have been inconsistent. The aim
of this study was to determine if global DNA methylation in blood and
colorectal mucosa from healthy and CRC patients is related to folate
species distribution. Blood and colorectal mucosa was collected from 112
CRC patients, 114 healthy individuals and 82 low folate individuals.
Global methylation and folate was determined using liquid chromatography
tandem mass spectrometry and repeat element methylation was determined
using end-specific polymerase chain reaction. In colorectal mucosa mean
global methylation was 8% lower compared to blood while LINE-1 and Alu
elements were 3.3-fold and 1.9-fold hypomethylated respectively (P
<0.0001). After adjusting for age and smoking, statistically significant
but small (2.2%) differences in global but not repeat methylation were
found in normal colorectal mucosa from CRC patients compared to healthy
individuals. Low folate patients had 18% lower blood
5-methyltetrahydrofolate distribution (P <0.0001) and global (P =0.001)
and LINE-1 demethylation (P Folate, an important cellular methyl donor,
exists as functionally diverse species within cells. Folate deficiency is
thought to contribute to DNA hypomethylation in colorectal cancer (CRC)
however findings on the relationship between total folate concentration
and global DNA methylation have been inconsistent. The aim of this study
was to determine if global DNA methylation in blood and colorectal mucosa
from healthy and CRC patients is related to folate species distribution.
Blood and colorectal mucosa was collected from 112 CRC patients, 114
healthy individuals and 82 low folate individuals. Global methylation and
folate was determined using liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry and repeat element methylation was determined using
end-specific polymerase chain reaction. In colorectal mucosa mean global
methylation was 8% lower compared to blood while LINE-1 and Alu elements
were 3.3-fold and 1.9-fold hypomethylated respectively (P <0.0001). After
adjusting for age and smoking, statistically significant but small (2.2%)
differences in global but not repeat methylation were found in normal
colorectal mucosa from CRC patients compared to healthy individuals. Low
folate patients had 18% lower blood 5-methyltetrahydrofolate distribution
(P <0.0001) and global (P =0.001) and LINE-1 demethylation (P <0.0001)
compared to healthy individuals. The colorectal mucosa from cancer and
healthy patients had an altered distribution of folate species (lower
5-methyltetrahydrofolate) similar to the folate distribution found in the
blood of low folate individuals. On a background of tissue specific
hypomethylation, global methylation of the normal mucosa of CRC patients
is similar to healthy individuals. The level of global and repeat element
hypomethylation may reflect the underlying distribution of folate species
rather than total folate concentration. Future studies on the
relationship between methylation and folate should consider folate
species distribution, and how genetic or other factors may alter this
balance in different tissue types and in neoplasia.

