Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Arsenic hexaoxide (As4O6) shows anticancer effects on human colon
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo


Arsenic hexaoxide (As4O6) has been used as a folk remedy for the
treatment of cancer since the late 1980's in Korea, and evidence suggests
that As4O6-induced cell death pathway was different from that of As2O3.
Here, we investigated the anticancer activities of As4O6 on SW620 human
colon cancer cells. As4O6 induced cell death in a dose-dependent manner.
The cell death was caspase-independent. In addition, the apoptosis was
associated with suppression of p-Akt and activation of p-P38. As4O6
suppressed TNF-induced NF-B activation through suppression of
phosphorylation of IB. As4O6 also suppressed NF-B-regulated genes (Bcl-2,
XIAP, and Bcl-xL) which are involved in anti-apoptosis. In animal
experiments, As4O6 inhibited tumorigenicity of SW620 cells in a xenograft
mouse model without showing any harmful effects on mice. As4O6
significantly inhibited intratumoral microvessel density. However, the
inhibitory effects of As4O6 on NF-B was minimal. In summary, in vitro
study indicates that the As4O6 have anti-cancer effects on SW620 human
colon cancer cells through inducing apoptosis by inhibiting
anti-apoptotic molecules and in vivo study suggested that As4O6 should
have additional anti-angiogenic activity. This study provides the
evidence that As4O6 might be useful in the treatment of human colon
cancer. [This study was supported by a grant from the National R&D
Program for Cancer Control, Ministry for Health, Welfare & Family
Affairs, Republic of Korea (0820050), and National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No.
2011-0007389)]

