Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of differentially methylated genes associated with
cetuximab and erlotinib resistance


Anti-EGFR therapy is among the most promising molecular targeted
therapies against cancer developed in the past decade. Two classes of
EGFR-directed therapeutic inhibitors are currently in clinical use:
anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies, such as cetuximab, and small-molecule
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) of EGFR, such as erlotinib. Although
both classes of drugs are capable of inducing an initial therapeutic
response, primary as well as acquired drug resistance is frequently
observed. Emerging evidence has linked epigenetic changes, such as DNA
methylation at CpG islands, to the development of cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic drug resistance. To identify genes that are specifically
methylated during the evolution of resistance to anti-EGFR therapeutic
agents, we employed two parental NSCLC and HNSCC cell lines and their
resistant derivatives to either erlotinib or cetuximab. DNA from each
pair was used for methylation-specific array containing a panel of 64
genes that are commonly known to be regulated through promoter
methylation. We found that death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) was
hypermethylated in drug resistant cells generated from both parental cell
lines. Restoration of DAPK1 into the resistant cells by stable
transfection re-sensitized the cells to both erlotinib and cetuximab.
Conversely, siRNA-mediated knockdown of DAPK1 induced resistance in the
parental sensitive cells. These results demonstrate that DAPK1 plays an
important role in both cetuximab and erlotinib resistance in NSCLC and
HNSCC cancer cells, and that promoter methylation of its gene frequently
occurs during the chronic treatment of anti-EGFR agents. In conclusion,
DAPK1 could be a novel target for the improvement of therapeutic benefit
of anti-EGFR therapy.

