Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Genetic variants in human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)
family gene predict tumor recurrence in breast cancer


Background: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR or HER) family is
composed of 4 members: HER1 (EGFR), HER2 (neu), HER3 and HER4. In breast
cancer, besides HER2, other HER family members may also overexpressed and
their dimerization may contribute to chemo-resistance. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in HER family genes have been associated with breast
cancer risk and outcome. We tested 7 functional SNPs in HER family genes
(HER1-4) (HER1 rs2227983, HER2 rs1136201, HER3 rs2271189 and HER4
rs4673628, rs839523, rs707284, rs6735267) in a cohort of Estrogen
receptor (ER) positive breast cancer patients to determine their
association with clinical outcome. Method: Tissue samples of 221 patients
with ER positive primary invasive breast cancer (median age=56 years;
range=28-90 years), who had undergone surgery at Charing Cross Hospital,
London, UK between 1981 and 2003, were analyzed. The median follow-up was
6.5 years and 96 of 221 patients (43%) had tumor recurrence with a 5-year
probability of recurrence of 40%. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin
fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples and SNPs were analyzed
using direct DNA-sequencing or PCR-RFLP. Results: In univariable
analysis, EGFR R497K (rs2227983), and HER2 I655V (rs1136201) were
associated with time to tumor recurrence (TTR)(log-rank P=0.007 and
0.041, respectively). In multivariable analysis, EGFR R(G)497K(A)
remained significantly associated with TTR. Patients with EGFR 497 AA
genotype (n=15) had a shorter median TTR 4.8 years (95%C.I 0.9-6.3 years)
compared to those harboring AG or GG genotype (n=201), had median TTR=6.9
years (95%C.I 5.3-8.4 years). (Wald test p value = 0.041 in the Cox model
adjusting for lymph node status, tumor size and HER2 staining).
Conclusion: Genetic variants in the HER family gene may be potential
molecular markers to predict tumor recurrence in advanced ER positive
breast cancer. Further large, prospective trials are needed to confirm
our preliminary findings.

