Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 decreases prostate
cancer growth and metastasis


FGFR4 up-regulation occurs in advanced prostate cancers. Multiple FGFs
have been found upregulated in prostate cancers, including FGF1, FGF2,
FGF6, FGF8 and FGF17, all of which can activate FGFR4. Furthermore, a SNP
changing the sense codon 388 from glycine to arginine in the
transmembrane domain of the human FGFR4 gene has been linked to prostate
cancer initiation, progression and poor prognosis. In this study, we
determined whether downregulation of FGFR4 expression using small hairpin
RNA (shRNA) against FGFR4 inhibits prostate cancer progression in vitro
and in vivo. We used two well-characterized prostate adenocarcinoma cell
lines, PC3 and LNCaP to derive prostate cancer cells stably expressing a
shRNA targeting FGFR4 (PC3-sh-FGFR4 and LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) by using
lentivirus vector infection. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR shows that
FGFR4 mRNA expression was decreased by 87% (PC3-sh-FGFR4) and 78%
(LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) compared to scramble control shRNA cells PC3-shV and
LNCaP-shV, respectively. In vitro analysis showed that the targeted
knockdown of FGFR4 gene in PC3 and LNCaP cells with sh-FGFR4 resulted in
significantly inhibited cell proliferation and invasion. The reduction of
Akt phosphorylation on both Ser473 and Thr-308 sites detected by western
blot suggests that FGFR4 signaling is implicated in Akt activation. The
upregulated expression of Caspase 8 and activated Caspase 3 in FGFR4
knockdown cells measured with immunoblot indicates that FGFR4 signaling
inhibits prostate cancer cell apoptosis. The prostate cancer orthotopic
xenograft models established with PC3-sh-FGFR4 and scramble shRNA control
PC3 cells reveal that FGFR-4 knockdown significantly inhibited
tumorigenicity in this model (P=0.01). In mice with pathologically
confirmed primary tumors, primary tumor weight was decreased 63% in
PC3-shFRGR-4 tumors (pFGFR4 up-regulation occurs in advanced prostate
cancers. Multiple FGFs have been found upregulated in prostate cancers,
including FGF1, FGF2, FGF6, FGF8 and FGF17, all of which can activate
FGFR4. Furthermore, a SNP changing the sense codon 388 from glycine to
arginine in the transmembrane domain of the human FGFR4 gene has been
linked to prostate cancer initiation, progression and poor prognosis. In
this study, we determined whether downregulation of FGFR4 expression
using small hairpin RNA (shRNA) against FGFR4 inhibits prostate cancer
progression in vitro and in vivo. We used two well-characterized prostate
adenocarcinoma cell lines, PC3 and LNCaP to derive prostate cancer cells
stably expressing a shRNA targeting FGFR4 (PC3-sh-FGFR4 and
LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) by using lentivirus vector infection. Real-time
quantitative RT-PCR shows that FGFR4 mRNA expression was decreased by 87%
(PC3-sh-FGFR4) and 78% (LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) compared to scramble control
shRNA cells PC3-shV and LNCaP-shV, respectively. In vitro analysis showed
that the targeted knockdown of FGFR4 gene in PC3 and LNCaP cells with
sh-FGFR4 resulted in significantly inhibited cell proliferation and
invasion. The reduction of Akt phosphorylation on both Ser473 and Thr-308
sites detected by western blot suggests that FGFR4 signaling is
implicated in Akt activation. The upregulated expression of Caspase 8 and
activated Caspase 3 in FGFR4 knockdown cells measured with immunoblot
indicates that FGFR4 signaling inhibits prostate cancer cell apoptosis.
The prostate cancer orthotopic xenograft models established with
PC3-sh-FGFR4 and scramble shRNA control PC3 cells reveal that FGFR-4
knockdown significantly inhibited tumorigenicity in this model (P=0.01).
In mice with pathologically confirmed primary tumors, primary tumor
weight was decreased 63% in PC3-shFRGR-4 tumors (p<0.05) and the
proportion of mice with lymph node metastasis was decreased from 93.3% to
50% (pFGFR4 up-regulation occurs in advanced prostate cancers. Multiple
FGFs have been found upregulated in prostate cancers, including FGF1,
FGF2, FGF6, FGF8 and FGF17, all of which can activate FGFR4. Furthermore,
a SNP changing the sense codon 388 from glycine to arginine in the
transmembrane domain of the human FGFR4 gene has been linked to prostate
cancer initiation, progression and poor prognosis. In this study, we
determined whether downregulation of FGFR4 expression using small hairpin
RNA (shRNA) against FGFR4 inhibits prostate cancer progression in vitro
and in vivo. We used two well-characterized prostate adenocarcinoma cell
lines, PC3 and LNCaP to derive prostate cancer cells stably expressing a
shRNA targeting FGFR4 (PC3-sh-FGFR4 and LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) by using
lentivirus vector infection. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR shows that
FGFR4 mRNA expression was decreased by 87% (PC3-sh-FGFR4) and 78%
(LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) compared to scramble control shRNA cells PC3-shV and
LNCaP-shV, respectively. In vitro analysis showed that the targeted
knockdown of FGFR4 gene in PC3 and LNCaP cells with sh-FGFR4 resulted in
significantly inhibited cell proliferation and invasion. The reduction of
Akt phosphorylation on both Ser473 and Thr-308 sites detected by western
blot suggests that FGFR4 signaling is implicated in Akt activation. The
upregulated expression of Caspase 8 and activated Caspase 3 in FGFR4
knockdown cells measured with immunoblot indicates that FGFR4 signaling
inhibits prostate cancer cell apoptosis. The prostate cancer orthotopic
xenograft models established with PC3-sh-FGFR4 and scramble shRNA control
PC3 cells reveal that FGFR-4 knockdown significantly inhibited
tumorigenicity in this model (P=0.01). In mice with pathologically
confirmed primary tumors, primary tumor weight was decreased 63% in
PC3-shFRGR-4 tumors (p<0.05) and the proportion of mice with lymph node
metastasis was decreased from 93.3% to 50% (p<0.01). The Ki67
immunohistochemistry showed a significant decrease of Ki67 positive cell
percentage in PC3-sh-FGFR4 xenograft tumors (19.85%) compared to control
group (35.93%, pFGFR4 up-regulation occurs in advanced prostate cancers.
Multiple FGFs have been found upregulated in prostate cancers, including
FGF1, FGF2, FGF6, FGF8 and FGF17, all of which can activate FGFR4.
Furthermore, a SNP changing the sense codon 388 from glycine to arginine
in the transmembrane domain of the human FGFR4 gene has been linked to
prostate cancer initiation, progression and poor prognosis. In this
study, we determined whether downregulation of FGFR4 expression using
small hairpin RNA (shRNA) against FGFR4 inhibits prostate cancer
progression in vitro and in vivo. We used two well-characterized prostate
adenocarcinoma cell lines, PC3 and LNCaP to derive prostate cancer cells
stably expressing a shRNA targeting FGFR4 (PC3-sh-FGFR4 and
LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) by using lentivirus vector infection. Real-time
quantitative RT-PCR shows that FGFR4 mRNA expression was decreased by 87%
(PC3-sh-FGFR4) and 78% (LNCaP-sh-FGFR4) compared to scramble control
shRNA cells PC3-shV and LNCaP-shV, respectively. In vitro analysis showed
that the targeted knockdown of FGFR4 gene in PC3 and LNCaP cells with
sh-FGFR4 resulted in significantly inhibited cell proliferation and
invasion. The reduction of Akt phosphorylation on both Ser473 and Thr-308
sites detected by western blot suggests that FGFR4 signaling is
implicated in Akt activation. The upregulated expression of Caspase 8 and
activated Caspase 3 in FGFR4 knockdown cells measured with immunoblot
indicates that FGFR4 signaling inhibits prostate cancer cell apoptosis.
The prostate cancer orthotopic xenograft models established with
PC3-sh-FGFR4 and scramble shRNA control PC3 cells reveal that FGFR-4
knockdown significantly inhibited tumorigenicity in this model (P=0.01).
In mice with pathologically confirmed primary tumors, primary tumor
weight was decreased 63% in PC3-shFRGR-4 tumors (p<0.05) and the
proportion of mice with lymph node metastasis was decreased from 93.3% to
50% (p<0.01). The Ki67 immunohistochemistry showed a significant decrease
of Ki67 positive cell percentage in PC3-sh-FGFR4 xenograft tumors
(19.85%) compared to control group (35.93%, p<0.001) indicating that the
reduced primary tumor size was associated with the decreased cell
proliferation. The orthotopic xenograft tumors produced with
LNCaP-shFGFR4 showed 67.5% decreased weight compared to the tumors of
control LNCaP-shV cells (p=0.0157). Our data indicated that FGFR4 can be
a promising target in prostate cancer therapy.

