Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Docosahexaenoic acid-induced cell death may be related to
inhibition of mTOR through AMPK activation and PI3K/Akt inhibition in
human non-small cell lung cancer cells


Over 80% of the lung cancer patients have non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Although the anticancer mechanisms of omega-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids (3-PUFAs) have been reported in several cancers, it is still
unclear in lung cancer. In this study, we have identified a novel
anticancer effect of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a 3-PUFAs, on NSCLC. DHA
induced cytotoxicity and morphology change in A549 and H1299 NSCLC cells
and was confirmed that apoptosis and autophagy are responsible for the
cytotoxicity induced by DHA. DHA increased AMPK activity and inhibited
PI3K/Akt signaling as well as mTOR signaling molecules. Knockdown AMPK
using small interfering RNAs specific for AMPK and overexpression Akt
significantly enhanced the mTOR activity and attenuated the cell death
caused by DHA treatment, indicating that DHA induces NSCLC cell death via
the AMPK- and Akt-regulated mTOR inactivation. We also confirmed this
effect of 3-PUFAs in vivo using Fat-1 transgenic mice that are capable of
producing 3-PUFAs. When mouse lung cancer LLC cells were subcutaneously
implanted into Fat-1 mice, the growth of tumor was markedly inhibited
with decrease the level of p-Akt as well as increases in TUNEL-positive
staining cells and autophagic levels, compared to wild-type mice. Taken
together, these data suggest that the apoptosis and autophagy induced by
DHA may be related to mTOR inhibition through AMPK activation and
PI3K/Akt inhibition in NSCLC. Therefore, utilization of DHA may represent
a potential effective therapy for the chemoprevention and treatment of
human non-small cell lung cancer. [This work was supported by the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ministry
of Education, Science and Technology (2011-0013263 and 2011-0006232)]

