Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CD44 V6 and V9 isoforms act in resistance to Fas-mediated
apoptosis in breast cancer initiating cells


Breast cancer initiating cells (BCIC) are CD44+/CD24 low/ESA+ cells
derived from breast tumors that highly tumorigenic and resistant to
apoptosis and to chemotherapy. To determine anti-apoptotic mediator (s)
to both Fas death receptor signaling and chemotherapeutic agents induced
apoptosis in BCIC, we detest the expression of V5, V6 and V9 of CD44
isoforms in BCIC derived from breast cancer cell lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231,
SUM159 and SUM1315, and assess their effects on both Fas death receptor
signaling and chemotherapeutic agents induced apoptosis. Methods: 1). We
measured relative expression of the various CD44 isoforms in parental and
BCIC populations using quantitative real time-PCR. 2).We then determined
which CD44 isoforms play a role in BCIC's resistance to apoptosis. SUM159
was chosen to use due to the overexpression of all CD44 isoforms. 3).
After isolation of cells expressing the BCIC markers from SUM159 cells
(CD44+/CD24 low/ESA+), we knocked down CD44 V5, V6 and V9 by siRNA in
SUM159 BCIC cells and challenged them with increasing doses of the
chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin and FasL. 4).Tissue microarrays of
human breast cancer (www.tissue-array.com) were also employed to assess
association between the CD44 V9 expression and clinical parameters such
as nodal metastasis, histological status, ER status, PgR status, HER2
status and survival in 40 cases of primary breast cancers. Results:
1).CD44 isoforms V5, V6 and V9 are differentially expressed in BCIC
compared to their parental cell lines. V9 is markedly overexpressed in
all 4 BCIC tested. 2). BCIC cells treated with siRNA targeting isoforms
V5, V6 and V9 demonstrated no significant effect on doxorubicin IC50 when
compared to controls. The existence of CD44 V9 and CD44 V6 in breast
cancer cells confer resistance to apoptosis induced by FasL, knockdown of
CD44 V6 resulted in 39% increase in caspase 3/7 activity when compared to
controls while knockdown of CD44V9 caused a 49% increase. Further study
showed that this is through the inhibition of the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway by suppressing caspases-8 activation, thereby blocking downstream
apoptotic events. 3). 40 cases of primary breast cancers provided
assessable cores paired with corresponding uninvolved tissue from the
same patient. The analysis showed a tendency between CD44V6 expression
and HER2 status. We found that approximately 72.8% of HER2-positive
patients express CD44V9 compared to 48.3% of HER2-negative patients
expressing CD44V9. It did not reach statistically significance probably
because of small size of samples. Conclusions: Loss of expression of the
V6 and V9 but not V5 isoforms in SUM159 BCIC resulted in an increased
sensitivity to apoptosis in response to the Fas L but not to the
chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin. These findings establish a role for
CD44 V6 and V9 isoforms in aptoptotic resistance of BCIC and suggest that
they may serve as targets for therapeutic intervention.

