Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Role of CYP2A13 in NNK bioactivation and lung tumorigenesis: In
vivo studies using a CYP2A13-humanized mouse model


The tobacco-specific nitrosamine
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) is a potent lung
procarcinogen. Previously, we have demonstrated that NNK-induced lung
tumorigenesis depends on target tissue bioactivation by pulmonary P450
enzymes (Weng et al., 2007, Cancer Res 67:7825-7832). However, the
specific P450 enzyme(s) responsible for NNK bioactivation in the lung
have not been identified. The aim of the present study was to test the
hypotheses that 1) mouse CYP2A5 plays an essential role in NNK
bioactivation and tumorigenesis in mouse lung, and 2) transgenic
expression of human CYP2A13, known to be selectively expressed in the
respiratory tract and be the most efficient enzyme for NNK bioactivation
in vitro, can increase the rates of NNK bioactivation and incidence of
tumorigenesis in the mouse lung. Kinetic parameters of microsomal NNK
bioactivation in vitro, tissue levels of O6-methylguanine (O6-mG) DNA
adducts formed in vivo, and incidence of NNK-induced lung tumors were
determined for wild-type, Cyp2a5-null, and CYP2A13-humanized
(CYP2A13-transgenic/Cyp2a5-null) mice. The results indicated that, in
both liver and lung microsomes, the loss of CYP2A5 resulted in
significant increases in the Km value for the formation of
4-oxo-4-(3-pyridyl)-butanal (OPB), which represents the reactive
intermediate that can lead to the formation of O6-mG DNA adducts; but,
the gain of CYP2A13 led to recovery of the activity in the lung, but not
in the liver. The levels of O6-mG, the DNA adduct highly correlated with
lung tumorigenesis, were significantly higher in the lungs of the
wild-type mice and CYP2A13-humanized mice, than in the Cyp2a5-null mice.
Furthermore, lung tumor bioassays, performed for the three mouse strains
on A/J background, and using NNK at various doses (30 -200 mg/kg; single
i.p. dose), revealed that lung tumor multiplicity determined at 4 months
post-treatment was significantly greater in wild-type and
CYP2A13-humanized mice than in Cyp2a5-null mice, for all NNK doses
tested. The difference in lung tumor multiplicity between
CYP2A13-humanized mice and Cyp2a5-null mice was greater at low (30 mg/kg)
NNK dose (70%) than at high (200 mg/kg) NNK dose (30%). In control
experiments, rates of systemic clearance of NNK and its major circulating
metabolite, NNAL, were confirmed to be not different among the three
mouse strains. These results indicated that CYP2A13 is a low-Km enzyme in
catalyzing NNK bioactivation in vivo, and they provide strong support for
the idea that genetic polymorphisms of CYP2A13 can influence the risks of
tobacco-induced lung tumorigenesis in humans. Moreover, the
CYP2A13-humanized mouse model will be valuable for testing new,
CYP2A13-targeted chemopreventive agents for lung carcinogenesis.
(Supported in part by NIH grant CA092596)

