Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Metformin potently inhibits cell proliferation, adhesion and
invasion in ovarian cancer cells


ABSTRACT Objectives: Metformin is an anti-diabetic drug that has been
shown to have anti-tumorgenic effects by behaving as a novel mTOR
inhibitor. Metformin has been shown to suppress cancer cell growth, but
little is known of its potential to halt metastatic spread. Thus, our
goal was to assess the effect of metformin on proliferation, adhesion and
invasion in ovarian cancer cell lines. Methods: Four ovarian cancer cell
lines, SKOV3, CAOV3, OVCAR3 and IGROV1 were used. Cell proliferation was
assessed by MTT assay after exposure to metformin. Cell cycle progression
was evaluated by flow cytometry. Apoptosis was assessed by Annexin V-FITC
assay. hTERT expression was determined by real-time RT-PCR. Western
immunoblotting was performed to determine the expression of the
downstream targets of metformin, including AMPK and the ribosomal protein
S6. Inhibition of adhesion and invasion by metformin was assessed by in
vitro adhesion assay and ChemoTx invasion assay. Results: Metformin
potently inhibited growth in a dose-dependent manner in all four ovarian
cancer cell lines (IC50 of 0.1-1 mM) (p=0.00001-0.0121). Treatment with
metformin resulted in G1 arrest, induction of apoptosis and decreased
hTERT expression. Western immunoblot analysis demonstrated that metformin
induced phosphorylation of AMPK, its immediate downstream mediator, and
decreased phosphorylation of the S6 protein, a key target of the mTOR
pathway, within 24 hours of exposure. Metformin inhibited cellular
adhesion in the ovarian cancer cell lines by 10-23% at 1 mM
(p=0.04-0.00001) and 25-35% at 10 mM (p=0.05-0.00001). In addition,
metformin decreased invasion by 7-21% at 1 mM (p=0.03-0.0009) and 29-42%
at 10 mM (p=0.03-0.0012). Conclusions: We report that metformin is a
potent inhibitor of cell proliferation and exhibits anti-metastatic
effects in ovarian cancer cells. Thus, metformin may have potential as a
targeted chemotherapeutic agent in the treatment of ovarian cancer. More
work is needed to determine if metformin will be universally beneficial
in all ovarian cancer patients versus selectively efficacious in a subset
of ovarian cancer patients, such as those women who are obese and/or
diabetic.

