Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Expression of fibroblast growth factor-9 is associated with poor
prognosis of resected non-small cell lung cancer patients


Background: Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-9 is a member of the FGF
family, which modulates cell proliferation, differentiation and motility.
Recent studies show that activation of FGF signals including FGF-9 is
associated with pathogenesis of several cancers, however its
clinicopathological and biological significance in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) is unclear. The purpose of this study is to clarify the
characteristics of FGF-9-expressing NSCLC. Methods: We evaluated
expression of FGF-9 in completely resected NSCLC and corresponding
non-tumorous lung samples using cDNA microarray combining with
quantitative RT-PCR for confirmation, and compared with clinical
pathological parameters and survival. We also evaluated altered gene
expression patterns between FGF-9-high and -low NSCLCs. Results: The
expression of FGF-9 increased compared with the corresponding
non-cancerous lung tissues in 13 (13.2%) of 98 NSCLCs. Histologically, 10
out of 13 FGF9-high NSCLC were adenocarcinoma, while none of them were
squamous cell carcinoma. The relationship between FGF-9 expression and
sex, smoking history or clinical stage was not observed. On the other
hand, postoperative recurrence rates and 3-year survival rates were 40%
vs. 21% and 54% vs. 92% (p=0.002) for FGF9-high vs. -low NSCLC patients,
respectively. The overall survival rate was also significantly worse in
FGF9-high NSCLC (p=0.023). The specific gene expression pattern of
FGF-9-high NSCLC will be also presented. Conclusion: Our data indicate
that FGF-9 may be a novel unfavorable prognostic indicator and a
candidate for therapeutic targets of NSCLC.

