Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of breast cancer metastasis by deguelin in an
experimental model


Breast cancer is a second leading cause of cancer related deaths in
women. Cancer related deaths in breast cancer patients are due to
metastasis of disease. Thus new drugs which could successfully inhibit
metastatic disease spread are highly desired. However till date there are
only a few experimental models available to study metastatic progression
of breast cancer. Murine 4T1 mammary breast cancer cells when
transplanted s.c./or into mammary gland metastasizes to lungs, liver and
bone similar to that observed in women with stage IV metastatic disease.
Thus this model is highly appropriate for studies related to breast
cancer metastasis. Previously we have shown that Deguelin, originally
isolated from an African plant Mundulea sericea significantly inhibits
the growth of triple negative breast cancer and that the Deguelin effect
is mediated through inhibition of WNT signaling pathway. However their
therapeutic effect in vivo is still unexplored. We evaluated the effects
of Deguelin on growth (in vitro and in vivo) and lung metastasis of 4T1
cells. In vitro, Deguelin inhibited growth of 4T1 cells in time and
concentration depended manner; optimum growth inhibition was obtained at
250nM Deguelin concentration after 72 hr. treatment. Toxicity study
performed in 4-6 weeks old female BALB/c mice suggested that Deguelin
administered as a suspension (saline/gum Arabic/Deguelin) daily for two
weeks by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection was well tolerated up to
16mg/kg body weight, and no toxicity (loss of appetite, body weight loss,
mobility, morbidity, death) was observed in Deguelin treated animals. In
vivo, as compared to vehicle treated animals, Deguelin (2 or 6mg/kg body
weight) administered daily for 21 days i.p significantly (PBreast cancer
is a second leading cause of cancer related deaths in women. Cancer
related deaths in breast cancer patients are due to metastasis of
disease. Thus new drugs which could successfully inhibit metastatic
disease spread are highly desired. However till date there are only a few
experimental models available to study metastatic progression of breast
cancer. Murine 4T1 mammary breast cancer cells when transplanted s.c./or
into mammary gland metastasizes to lungs, liver and bone similar to that
observed in women with stage IV metastatic disease. Thus this model is
highly appropriate for studies related to breast cancer metastasis.
Previously we have shown that Deguelin, originally isolated from an
African plant Mundulea sericea significantly inhibits the growth of
triple negative breast cancer and that the Deguelin effect is mediated
through inhibition of WNT signaling pathway. However their therapeutic
effect in vivo is still unexplored. We evaluated the effects of Deguelin
on growth (in vitro and in vivo) and lung metastasis of 4T1 cells. In
vitro, Deguelin inhibited growth of 4T1 cells in time and concentration
depended manner; optimum growth inhibition was obtained at 250nM Deguelin
concentration after 72 hr. treatment. Toxicity study performed in 4-6
weeks old female BALB/c mice suggested that Deguelin administered as a
suspension (saline/gum Arabic/Deguelin) daily for two weeks by
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection was well tolerated up to 16mg/kg body
weight, and no toxicity (loss of appetite, body weight loss, mobility,
morbidity, death) was observed in Deguelin treated animals. In vivo, as
compared to vehicle treated animals, Deguelin (2 or 6mg/kg body weight)
administered daily for 21 days i.p significantly (P<0.05) inhibited
growth of 4T1 cells (0.5 million cells/mouse) transplanted s.c. in to 4-6
weeks old female BALB/c mice. Similarly Deguelin also reduced (27-33%,
PBreast cancer is a second leading cause of cancer related deaths in
women. Cancer related deaths in breast cancer patients are due to
metastasis of disease. Thus new drugs which could successfully inhibit
metastatic disease spread are highly desired. However till date there are
only a few experimental models available to study metastatic progression
of breast cancer. Murine 4T1 mammary breast cancer cells when
transplanted s.c./or into mammary gland metastasizes to lungs, liver and
bone similar to that observed in women with stage IV metastatic disease.
Thus this model is highly appropriate for studies related to breast
cancer metastasis. Previously we have shown that Deguelin, originally
isolated from an African plant Mundulea sericea significantly inhibits
the growth of triple negative breast cancer and that the Deguelin effect
is mediated through inhibition of WNT signaling pathway. However their
therapeutic effect in vivo is still unexplored. We evaluated the effects
of Deguelin on growth (in vitro and in vivo) and lung metastasis of 4T1
cells. In vitro, Deguelin inhibited growth of 4T1 cells in time and
concentration depended manner; optimum growth inhibition was obtained at
250nM Deguelin concentration after 72 hr. treatment. Toxicity study
performed in 4-6 weeks old female BALB/c mice suggested that Deguelin
administered as a suspension (saline/gum Arabic/Deguelin) daily for two
weeks by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection was well tolerated up to
16mg/kg body weight, and no toxicity (loss of appetite, body weight loss,
mobility, morbidity, death) was observed in Deguelin treated animals. In
vivo, as compared to vehicle treated animals, Deguelin (2 or 6mg/kg body
weight) administered daily for 21 days i.p significantly (P<0.05)
inhibited growth of 4T1 cells (0.5 million cells/mouse) transplanted s.c.
in to 4-6 weeks old female BALB/c mice. Similarly Deguelin also reduced
(27-33%, P< 0.02) the number of metastatic lesions in the lungs
subsequent to i.v. injection of 7500 to 10,000 4T1 cells in syngeneic
mice as compared to vehicle treated control group. Immunohistochemical
analysis of control/Deguelin treated 4T1 cells, and lung metastatic
lesions suggest that Deguelin inhibited Ki67 expression suggesting its
antiproliferative action in this model. In addition, phospho AKT, cyclin
D1, Cox-2 and Hif-1 protein expressions were down regulated. Our results
suggest that Deguelin effect on the growth and metastasis may be mediated
by targeting signaling molecules involved in pAKT, HIF-1, Cox-2 pathway.
These results provide a promising lead for a potential therapeutic agent
to treat metastatic breast cancer. This work was supported in part by the
National Cancer Institute grant CA140321.

