Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Translation initiation factor eIF3b expression and its role in
cancer cell growth and metastases


The initiation of translation in eukaryotes is promoted by multi-protein
eukaryotic initiation factor complexes (eIFs). While several eIF subunits
are overexpressed in cancer, very few have been conclusively implicated
as drivers of human cancer phenotypes. Through a transcriptomic analysis
of human bladder cancer our studies suggested that eIF3b, considered to
be the major scaffolding subunit within the eIF3 complex, is elevated
compared to normal urothelium. We went on to functionally evaluate eIF3b
in human bladder cancer by siRNA depletion in UMUC3 and lul2 human
bladder cancer lines. This reveled that expression of eIF3b was important
for anchorage dependent and independent cell growth and G1 to S cell
cycle transition. Depletion of eIF3b also inhibited cell migration in
vitro and this was associated with disruption of actin cytoskeleton
organization and focal adhesion formation through integrin [[Unsupported
Character - Symbol Font ?]]5, which in turn decreased FAK phosphorylation
and downstream Akt phosphorylation. We also observed the similar results
from PC3 prostate cancer cells. In vivo, UMUC3 and lul2 cells depleted of
eIF3b formed smaller tumors that grew more slowly following subcutaneous
inoculation and these cells formed fewer lung metastases following
intravenous inoculation. This data provides the first demonstration of a
causal role of eIF3b in human cancer cell phenotypes in vitro and in vivo.

