Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: TIMP-1 inhibits apoptosis in lung adenocarcinoma cells via Bcl-2
interaction


Tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases have multifunctional
properties, orchestrating diverse biological activities. Previous studies
revealed a novel function of TIMP-1 as an inhibitor of apoptosis in
mammalian cells. However, the mechanisms by which TIMP-1 exerts its
anti-apoptotic effect are not completely understood. The antiapoptotic
effect has been correlated with higher levels of Bcl-Xl. Our earlier
studies in a CNS model of metastasis, using HB-1, a TIMP-1 overexpressing
lung adenocarcinoma cell line (H2009), resulted in more aggressive tumor
kinetics and increased vasculature. The present study was undertaken to
elucidate the role of TIMP-1 in apoptosis in our model. Utilizing an
apoptosis -specific gene array, we found that TIMP-1 overexpression
results in 3-fold increased expression of Bcl-2. H2009 and the TIMP1
over-expressing clone - HB1 were treated with staurosporine to induce
apoptosis, followed by analysis for poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP)
cleavage. HB1 showed marked reduction in PARP cleavage in comparison to
the controls. Treatment of HB1 cells with ABT737, an inhibitor of Bcl-2,
restored apoptosis resulting in PARP cleavage in this clone. To further
confirm this mechanism, we induced transient inhibition of Bcl-2 with
siRNA, which also restored PARP cleavage in the HB-1 clone. Thus both
chemical and biological inhibition resulted in increased apoptosis.
Additionally, immunoprecipitation of Bcl-2 from cell lysate
co-immunoprecipitated TIMP-1 suggesting a direct interaction between
TIMP-1 and Bcl-2. These investigations identify a relationship between
TIMP-1 and Bcl-2 in apoptosis inhibition, contributing to aggressive
tumor kinetics, utilizing non-MMP dependent mechanisms.

