Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Indoor tanning and risk of early-onset basal cell carcinoma


Background: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common cancer in the
United States, with more than two million BCCs diagnosed annually. In
recent decades, incidence of BCC has been increasing, particularly among
adults under age 40 and especially in young women. Parallel to this
incidence trend has been an increase in the popularity of indoor tanning.
Although the International Agency for Research on Cancer recently
concluded there was convincing evidence to support a causal association
between indoor tanning and melanoma and squamous cell skin cancer, there
was only very limited and inconsistent data for BCC. Methods: We examined
indoor tanning in relation to early-onset BCC in the Yale Study of Skin
Health in Young People. BCC cases (n=376) and controls with minor benign
skin conditions (n=390) under age 40 were identified through Yale
Dermatopathology between 2006 and 2010. Approximately two-thirds of
dermatologists in Connecticut send their biopsied tissue to Yale
dermatopathologists for diagnosis. Controls were frequency matched to
cases on age, gender, and body site of biopsy. Participants provided
information on ever indoor tanning, age of initiation, frequency,
duration, burns while tanning, and type of tanning device during an
in-person interview. We calculated odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) using multivariate logistic regression with never indoor
tanners as the referent group. Results: Ever indoor tanning was
associated with a 69% increased risk of early-onset BCC (95% CI =
1.15-2.48); this association was stronger among women (OR = 2.14, 95% CI
= 1.31-3.47). The risk from indoor tanning was largely confined to BCCs
on the trunk and extremities (OR = 2.81, 95% C I= 1.57-5.02) as opposed
to BCCs on the head/neck (OR = 1.11, 95% CI = 0.66-1.86). Indoor tanning
was also more strongly associated with multiple BCC (two or more BCCs;
37% of cases) case status (OR = 2.16, 95% CI = 1.26-3.70) than single BCC
case status (OR = 1.46, 95% CI = 0.96-2.22). Risk increased
dose-dependently with years used regular indoor tanning devices (p-trend
= 0.003), number of overall burns (p-trend = Background: Basal cell
carcinoma (BCC) is the most common cancer in the United States, with more
than two million BCCs diagnosed annually. In recent decades, incidence of
BCC has been increasing, particularly among adults under age 40 and
especially in young women. Parallel to this incidence trend has been an
increase in the popularity of indoor tanning. Although the International
Agency for Research on Cancer recently concluded there was convincing
evidence to support a causal association between indoor tanning and
melanoma and squamous cell skin cancer, there was only very limited and
inconsistent data for BCC. Methods: We examined indoor tanning in
relation to early-onset BCC in the Yale Study of Skin Health in Young
People. BCC cases (n=376) and controls with minor benign skin conditions
(n=390) under age 40 were identified through Yale Dermatopathology
between 2006 and 2010. Approximately two-thirds of dermatologists in
Connecticut send their biopsied tissue to Yale dermatopathologists for
diagnosis. Controls were frequency matched to cases on age, gender, and
body site of biopsy. Participants provided information on ever indoor
tanning, age of initiation, frequency, duration, burns while tanning, and
type of tanning device during an in-person interview. We calculated odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using multivariate logistic
regression with never indoor tanners as the referent group. Results: Ever
indoor tanning was associated with a 69% increased risk of early-onset
BCC (95% CI = 1.15-2.48); this association was stronger among women (OR =
2.14, 95% CI = 1.31-3.47). The risk from indoor tanning was largely
confined to BCCs on the trunk and extremities (OR = 2.81, 95% C I=
1.57-5.02) as opposed to BCCs on the head/neck (OR = 1.11, 95% CI =
0.66-1.86). Indoor tanning was also more strongly associated with
multiple BCC (two or more BCCs; 37% of cases) case status (OR = 2.16, 95%
CI = 1.26-3.70) than single BCC case status (OR = 1.46, 95% CI =
0.96-2.22). Risk increased dose-dependently with years used regular
indoor tanning devices (p-trend = 0.003), number of overall burns
(p-trend = <0.001) and burns to biopsy site (p-trend = Background: Basal
cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common cancer in the United States, with
more than two million BCCs diagnosed annually. In recent decades,
incidence of BCC has been increasing, particularly among adults under age
40 and especially in young women. Parallel to this incidence trend has
been an increase in the popularity of indoor tanning. Although the
International Agency for Research on Cancer recently concluded there was
convincing evidence to support a causal association between indoor
tanning and melanoma and squamous cell skin cancer, there was only very
limited and inconsistent data for BCC. Methods: We examined indoor
tanning in relation to early-onset BCC in the Yale Study of Skin Health
in Young People. BCC cases (n=376) and controls with minor benign skin
conditions (n=390) under age 40 were identified through Yale
Dermatopathology between 2006 and 2010. Approximately two-thirds of
dermatologists in Connecticut send their biopsied tissue to Yale
dermatopathologists for diagnosis. Controls were frequency matched to
cases on age, gender, and body site of biopsy. Participants provided
information on ever indoor tanning, age of initiation, frequency,
duration, burns while tanning, and type of tanning device during an
in-person interview. We calculated odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) using multivariate logistic regression with never indoor
tanners as the referent group. Results: Ever indoor tanning was
associated with a 69% increased risk of early-onset BCC (95% CI =
1.15-2.48); this association was stronger among women (OR = 2.14, 95% CI
= 1.31-3.47). The risk from indoor tanning was largely confined to BCCs
on the trunk and extremities (OR = 2.81, 95% C I= 1.57-5.02) as opposed
to BCCs on the head/neck (OR = 1.11, 95% CI = 0.66-1.86). Indoor tanning
was also more strongly associated with multiple BCC (two or more BCCs;
37% of cases) case status (OR = 2.16, 95% CI = 1.26-3.70) than single BCC
case status (OR = 1.46, 95% CI = 0.96-2.22). Risk increased
dose-dependently with years used regular indoor tanning devices (p-trend
= 0.003), number of overall burns (p-trend = <0.001) and burns to biopsy
site (p-trend = <0.001) from indoor tanning. Approximately 27% of total
early-onset BCC cases (or 43% among women) could be prevented if
individuals never tanned indoors. Conclusions: Indoor tanning was a
strong risk factor for early-onset BCC, particularly among women. While
replication in other populations is necessary to confirm the positive
association we observed between indoor tanning and early-onset BCC, our
results fulfill many of the criteria for causality including biologic
plausibility, strength of the association, dose-response effects,
specificity to body sites most uniquely exposed to indoor tanning, and
coherent findings with melanoma studies. Indoor tanning should continue
to be targeted by both policy-based and behavioral interventions, as the
impact on BCC-associated morbidity may be substantial.

