Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reeducate the tumor microenvironment to improve the anticancer
efficacy of adoptive T-cell therapy


The hostile tumor microenvironment interferes with the function of
efficient antitumor immune cells and constitutes a major obstacle for
cancer immunotherapies. Here, we provide evidence that the
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment can be reeducated by an
antiangiogenic agent to favor the development of adaptive antitumor
immunity and to improve the efficacy of adoptive T cell therapy. Our
results demonstrate that treatment with Brivanib, a novel small-molecule
kinase inhibitor of VEGFRs and FGFRs, significantly enhanced the
frequency and effector function of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells in
tumor-bearing mice associated with significant reduction of tumor burden.
Enhanced intratumoral infiltration of CD8+ T cells induced by Brivanib
was associated with increased expression of chemokines (e.g., ccl3, ccl5,
ccl11 and cxcl9) that regulates T cell trafficking and cell adhesion
molecules (VCAM-1 and ICAM-1) on endothelial cells in the tumor
microenvironment. Moreover, Brivanib treatment skewed the polarization of
tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) away from the tumor-supporting M2
phenotype and restored the antigen presenting function of macrophages.
Finally, Pretreatment of tumor-bearing animals with Brivanib prior to
adoptive T cell transfer promotes in vivo proliferation, intratumoral
infiltration and effector function of infused CD8+ T cells, resulting in
better antitumor activity than either treatment alone. These findings
indicate that Brivanib can be used to modulate the immunosuppressive
microenvironment and as a potential adjuvant for enhancing the efficacy
of cell-based cancer immunotherapy for cancer treatment.

