Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A gene signature for predicting outcome in patients with
basal-like breast cancer


Basal-like breast cancer is a molecular subtype of breast cancer
generally thought to have a universally poor prognosis. Subsequent
studies examining the long-term outcome in thousands of patients with
basal-like breast cancer have shown that these patients can be separated
into two clinically distinct groups: those likely to experience a
systemic recurrence and succumb to their disease within the first 5 years
and those expected to show excellent long term survival. The ability to
distinguish between these two sub-groups (good and poor prognosis) of
basal-like breast cancer patients at the time of initial diagnosis would
permit tailoring more aggressive therapeutic regimens to those patients
with an inherently poorer prognosis and conversely to avoid such therapy
in patients with a more indolent course. We aimed to identify a gene
signature that could predict the clinical outcome of basal-like breast
cancer patients. To this end we mined publicly available human breast
tumor gene expression profiling data and identified patients with
basal-like breast cancer. We divided these patients into training and
validation sets to identify and confirm the accuracy of a prognostic
signature. We identified 137 basal-like breast tumors among 995 breast
tumor gene expression profiles. We used 85 of these samples as a training
group and identified an optimal 14-gene signature, which accurately
identified patients that experienced poor and good long-term survival. We
confirmed the accuracy of our gene signature on a 49 patient independent
validation set. Importantly, we also confirmed the capacity of our
signature to predict outcome in a chemotherapy nave 27 patient sub-set of
the 49 patients validation set.

