Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of lifestyle modification on global DNA methylation in
minority breast cancer survivors


Changes in global DNA methylation are hypothesized to be a common
biological mechanism in several diseases, including cancer. Specifically,
measurements of global DNA methylation in peripheral tissues such as
white blood cells are associated with an increased risk of several cancer
types, asthma, autoimmune diseases and neurological disorders. Global DNA
methylation biomarkers have been shown to respond to environmental and
dietary exposures. Certain heavy metals, air pollutants, toxins, and
lifestyle factors, such as alcohol consumption, diet, BMI and exercise,
are associated with DNA methylation levels in blood. It has been
hypothesized that DNA methylation is a biological mechanism by which
alterations of lifestyle characteristics may modify cancer risk. In this
study, we explored associations between three separate epigenetic
biomarkers in peripheral blood and lifestyle modifications (diet,
physical activity, weight loss, metabolic markers). Study participants
were minority overweight and sedentary female breast cancer survivors
(n=24) who participated in a larger randomized, crossover, pilot study of
a 6-month dietary change, physical activity and weight loss intervention.
Clinic visits were conducted at baseline, 6 months and 12 months with the
following activities: fasting morning blood draw, anthropometric measures
(height, weight), and completion of a food frequency questionnaire.
Plasma samples were analyzed for metabolic markers (insulin, glucose).
Percent DNA methylation was measured using the Luminometric methylation
assay (LUMA), the MethylLight assay to determine Sat2 methylation, and
pyrosequencing for LINE-1. Levels of LINE-1 DNA methylation were
statistically significantly elevated at 6 months (75.5% vs. 78.5%
[pChanges in global DNA methylation are hypothesized to be a common
biological mechanism in several diseases, including cancer. Specifically,
measurements of global DNA methylation in peripheral tissues such as
white blood cells are associated with an increased risk of several cancer
types, asthma, autoimmune diseases and neurological disorders. Global DNA
methylation biomarkers have been shown to respond to environmental and
dietary exposures. Certain heavy metals, air pollutants, toxins, and
lifestyle factors, such as alcohol consumption, diet, BMI and exercise,
are associated with DNA methylation levels in blood. It has been
hypothesized that DNA methylation is a biological mechanism by which
alterations of lifestyle characteristics may modify cancer risk. In this
study, we explored associations between three separate epigenetic
biomarkers in peripheral blood and lifestyle modifications (diet,
physical activity, weight loss, metabolic markers). Study participants
were minority overweight and sedentary female breast cancer survivors
(n=24) who participated in a larger randomized, crossover, pilot study of
a 6-month dietary change, physical activity and weight loss intervention.
Clinic visits were conducted at baseline, 6 months and 12 months with the
following activities: fasting morning blood draw, anthropometric measures
(height, weight), and completion of a food frequency questionnaire.
Plasma samples were analyzed for metabolic markers (insulin, glucose).
Percent DNA methylation was measured using the Luminometric methylation
assay (LUMA), the MethylLight assay to determine Sat2 methylation, and
pyrosequencing for LINE-1. Levels of LINE-1 DNA methylation were
statistically significantly elevated at 6 months (75.5% vs. 78.5%
[p<0.00001]) and 12 months (75.5% vs. 77.7% [pChanges in global DNA
methylation are hypothesized to be a common biological mechanism in
several diseases, including cancer. Specifically, measurements of global
DNA methylation in peripheral tissues such as white blood cells are
associated with an increased risk of several cancer types, asthma,
autoimmune diseases and neurological disorders. Global DNA methylation
biomarkers have been shown to respond to environmental and dietary
exposures. Certain heavy metals, air pollutants, toxins, and lifestyle
factors, such as alcohol consumption, diet, BMI and exercise, are
associated with DNA methylation levels in blood. It has been hypothesized
that DNA methylation is a biological mechanism by which alterations of
lifestyle characteristics may modify cancer risk. In this study, we
explored associations between three separate epigenetic biomarkers in
peripheral blood and lifestyle modifications (diet, physical activity,
weight loss, metabolic markers). Study participants were minority
overweight and sedentary female breast cancer survivors (n=24) who
participated in a larger randomized, crossover, pilot study of a 6-month
dietary change, physical activity and weight loss intervention. Clinic
visits were conducted at baseline, 6 months and 12 months with the
following activities: fasting morning blood draw, anthropometric measures
(height, weight), and completion of a food frequency questionnaire.
Plasma samples were analyzed for metabolic markers (insulin, glucose).
Percent DNA methylation was measured using the Luminometric methylation
assay (LUMA), the MethylLight assay to determine Sat2 methylation, and
pyrosequencing for LINE-1. Levels of LINE-1 DNA methylation were
statistically significantly elevated at 6 months (75.5% vs. 78.5%
[p<0.00001]) and 12 months (75.5% vs. 77.7% [p<0.00001]), compared to
baseline. DNA methylation measured by LUMA and levels of Sat2 DNA
methylation did not differ by timepoint. LUMA DNA methylation levels at
baseline and 6 months were 69.6% and 70.7% (p=0.14), respectively; and
Sat2 DNA methylation at baseline and 6 months was 91.3% and 103.3%
(p=0.53), respectively. Generalized estimated equation models showed
associations between increases in DNA methylation levels as measured by
LUMA with increases in fruit/vegetable, fat and protein intake (=0.0118
[95% CI= 0.0018-0.0219], =0.0469 [95% CI= 0.0024-0.0914], and =0.0410
[95% CI= 0.0119-0.0702], respectively). A positive association was also
found between LUMA DNA methylation and caloric intake and glucose levels
(0.2371 [95% CI= 0.0356-0.4387] and 0.2371 [95% CI= 0.0356-0.4387],
respectively). Overall our exploratory findings suggest that lifestyle
interventions to change diet and metabolic markers may have measureable
effects on blood DNA methylation levels.

