Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reliability of biomarkers of inflammation from repeated measures
in healthy individuals


Biomarkers of low-grade systemic inflammation are used to study the
associations of inflammation with chronic diseases, including cancers.
However, little is known about the reliability (i.e., intraindividual
variability) of most of these measures. Fasting (12-hour) serum samples,
which were collected at the end of 3 week washout periods in a 4-diet
crossover feeding trial, were used to measure the inflammatory markers
hsCRP, IL-6, TNF-, IL-8 and sTNFRI and II. Participants included 32 men
and 31 women (5 men and 2 women were missing from analyses of IL-8, TNF-,
and sTNFR I and II), aged 20-40, who were free of factors known to
influence inflammation, e.g., chronic disease, medication use, heavy
alcohol use, smoking and obesity (body mass index >30 kg/m2). Intraclass
correlations (ICC) were estimated using random effects analysis of
variance, across all 4 time points (5 weeks apart). For TNF- and sTNFRI &
II, the ICCs were very high (ICC= 0.92, 95% CI: 0.89 - 0.96; 0.92, 95%
CI: 0.88 - 0.95; and 0.90, 95% CI: 0.85 - 0.94, respectively). The ICCs
for IL-8 and hsCRP were 0.73 (95% CI: 0.63-0.83 and 0.68 (95% CI:
0.58-0.78), respectively. The ICC for IL-6 was considerably lower, (ICC =
0.48, 95% CI: 0.36-0.62). With the exception of IL-6, reliability of all
inflammatory markers in our panel over 4 time points was high, suggesting
that a single measure accurately captures the variability within an
individual and is a good measure for use in epidemiologic studies.

