Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and
radiosensitivity by knockdown of ZEB1 in NSCLC


The transcriptional repressor zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox 1
protein (ZEB1) governs epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
various human tumors by suppressing the expression of epithelial markers
such as E-cadherin and upregulating the expression of Vimentin, thereby
promoting invasion and metastasis of tumor cells such as colon and breast
cancer. ZEB1 is associated with resistance to conventional chemotherapy
in pancreatic cancer and potentially has a predominant role in inducing
EMT in NSCLC. However, very little is known about its functional role in
the radio-response of NSCLC. We have selected three NSCLC cell lines with
high ZEB1 expression (H460, H1299, and Calu-6) and established three
matched pair of stable cell lines with and without Zeb1 knockdown
(H460/shZeb1 and H460shCV, H1299/shZeb1 and H1299/shCV, Calu6/shZeb1 and
Calu6/shCV) using shRNA. The expression of Zeb1, E-cadherin, and vimentin
were assessed by western blot analysis, morphological changes associated
with EMT phenotype were assessed, and the Zeb1 knocked down cells were
tested for radiosensitivity by clonogenic cell survival. Intracellular
level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and subG1-G0 were measured by
FACS. The results showed that clear suppression of ZEB1 protein was
obtained and reexpression of E-cadherin protein was evident in three
stable cell lines with Zeb1 knockdown. Vimentin protein expression were
reduced in three stable cell lines with Zeb1 knockdown compared with
their non-targeting vector control cell lines respectively. By phase
contrast microscopy, Zeb1 knockdown stable cell lines illustrated loss of
mesenchymal morphology and restitution of epithelial phenotype. The Zeb1
knocked down cells were substantially radiosensitized compared to the
non-targeting vector control cells: the surviving fraction at 2 Gy (SF2)
values was reduced from 0.65+/0.03 in H460/shCV to 0.42+/0.06 in
H460shZeb1 (p=0.02), the SF2 was reduced from 0.70+/0.03 in Calu6/shCV to
0.52+/0.02 in Calu6/shZeb1 (p=0.05), and the SF4 was reduced from
0.50+/0.02 in H1299shCV to 0.32 +/0.04 in H1299/shZeb1 (p=0.04).
H460/shZeb1 and H1299/shZeb1 displayed higher ROS level than H460/shCV
and H1299shCV respectively (PThe transcriptional repressor zinc-finger
E-box binding homeobox 1 protein (ZEB1) governs epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in various human tumors by suppressing the expression of
epithelial markers such as E-cadherin and upregulating the expression of
Vimentin, thereby promoting invasion and metastasis of tumor cells such
as colon and breast cancer. ZEB1 is associated with resistance to
conventional chemotherapy in pancreatic cancer and potentially has a
predominant role in inducing EMT in NSCLC. However, very little is known
about its functional role in the radio-response of NSCLC. We have
selected three NSCLC cell lines with high ZEB1 expression (H460, H1299,
and Calu-6) and established three matched pair of stable cell lines with
and without Zeb1 knockdown (H460/shZeb1 and H460shCV, H1299/shZeb1 and
H1299/shCV, Calu6/shZeb1 and Calu6/shCV) using shRNA. The expression of
Zeb1, E-cadherin, and vimentin were assessed by western blot analysis,
morphological changes associated with EMT phenotype were assessed, and
the Zeb1 knocked down cells were tested for radiosensitivity by
clonogenic cell survival. Intracellular level of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and subG1-G0 were measured by FACS. The results showed that clear
suppression of ZEB1 protein was obtained and reexpression of E-cadherin
protein was evident in three stable cell lines with Zeb1 knockdown.
Vimentin protein expression were reduced in three stable cell lines with
Zeb1 knockdown compared with their non-targeting vector control cell
lines respectively. By phase contrast microscopy, Zeb1 knockdown stable
cell lines illustrated loss of mesenchymal morphology and restitution of
epithelial phenotype. The Zeb1 knocked down cells were substantially
radiosensitized compared to the non-targeting vector control cells: the
surviving fraction at 2 Gy (SF2) values was reduced from 0.65+/0.03 in
H460/shCV to 0.42+/0.06 in H460shZeb1 (p=0.02), the SF2 was reduced from
0.70+/0.03 in Calu6/shCV to 0.52+/0.02 in Calu6/shZeb1 (p=0.05), and the
SF4 was reduced from 0.50+/0.02 in H1299shCV to 0.32 +/0.04 in
H1299/shZeb1 (p=0.04). H460/shZeb1 and H1299/shZeb1 displayed higher ROS
level than H460/shCV and H1299shCV respectively (P<0.05). More
importantly, the ROS level of H460/shZeb1 and H1299/shZeb1 at 24 hour
after radiation 6Gy were significantly higher than of H460/shCV and
H1299shCV after radiation respectively (2.8 fold in H460/shZeb1 to
H460/shCV and 2 fold in H1299/shZeb1 to H1299shCV). Moreover, the
percentage of subG1-G0 in H460/shZeb1 after radiation (30.9%) was
significantly elevated compared to H460/shCV after radiation (11.8%). In
conclusion, we have shown that knockdown of ZEB1 is correlated with
restoration of the epithelial phenotype and radiation sensitivity in
NSCLC through enhanced level of ROS and apoptosis. These results suggest
that ZEB1 is a promising therapeutic target for lung cancer.

