Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of SDF-1 (CXCL12) using the Spiegelmer NOX-A12 markedly
delays the recurrence of ENU-induced rat brain tumors following
irradiation


We have previously shown that the post-irradiation recurrence of human
glioblastomas implanted intracranially in the mouse brain can be delayed
or prevented by inhibiting the interaction of the chemokine receptor
CXCR4 with its ligand SDF-1 (CXCL12)1. This effect is due to inhibition
of the post-irradiation recovery of the tumor vasculature from
circulating cells, a process known as vasculogenesis. However, SDF-1 has
a second receptor, CXCR7, which has been implicated in endothelial cell
migration2, is present on tumor vasculature2, and is potentially also
able to activate vasculogenesis. Therefore we investigated the efficacy
of the SDF-1 inhibitor NOX-A12, an L-enantiomeric RNA oligonucleotide
(Spiegelmer), on brain tumor recurrences after irradiation. NOX-A12
inhibits SDF-1 with subnanomolar affinity and should therefore inhibit
SDF-1 mediated activation of both receptors, CXCR4 and CXCR7. In this
study we used ENU-induced brain tumors in the Sprague-Dawley rat, a model
that has proved extremely resistant to anticancer therapy in prior
studies by a variety of investigators. Pregnant rats were injected with
the carcinogen ethylnitrosourea (50mg/kg) on day 17 of gestation. In this
model the pups appear normal at birth but begin to die of brain tumors
from approximately 120 days of age. We delivered a single dose of whole
brain irradiation (20 Gy) on day 115 of age and began treatment with
NOX-A12 immediately following irradiation and continued every 2 days with
either 5 or 20 mg/kg injected subcutaneously for either 4 or 8 weeks.
These doses and times were chosen as equivalent to human doses and times
that based on existing data have been found to be safe and well tolerated
in human volunteers and which are effective in inhibiting the action of
SDF-1. We found that neither 20 Gy nor NOX-A12 alone prolonged the
lifespan of the tumor-bearing rats. However, the addition of NOX-A12 to
20 Gy prolonged the lifespan of the rats particularly at the highest dose
and for the longer treatment period of 8 weeks (median lifespans of 20 Gy
alone and 20 Gy + 5 and 20 mg/kg of NOX-A12 were 196, 291 and 349 days
respectively with p values for NOX-A12 treated rats We have previously
shown that the post-irradiation recurrence of human glioblastomas
implanted intracranially in the mouse brain can be delayed or prevented
by inhibiting the interaction of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 with its
ligand SDF-1 (CXCL12)1. This effect is due to inhibition of the
post-irradiation recovery of the tumor vasculature from circulating
cells, a process known as vasculogenesis. However, SDF-1 has a second
receptor, CXCR7, which has been implicated in endothelial cell
migration2, is present on tumor vasculature2, and is potentially also
able to activate vasculogenesis. Therefore we investigated the efficacy
of the SDF-1 inhibitor NOX-A12, an L-enantiomeric RNA oligonucleotide
(Spiegelmer), on brain tumor recurrences after irradiation. NOX-A12
inhibits SDF-1 with subnanomolar affinity and should therefore inhibit
SDF-1 mediated activation of both receptors, CXCR4 and CXCR7. In this
study we used ENU-induced brain tumors in the Sprague-Dawley rat, a model
that has proved extremely resistant to anticancer therapy in prior
studies by a variety of investigators. Pregnant rats were injected with
the carcinogen ethylnitrosourea (50mg/kg) on day 17 of gestation. In this
model the pups appear normal at birth but begin to die of brain tumors
from approximately 120 days of age. We delivered a single dose of whole
brain irradiation (20 Gy) on day 115 of age and began treatment with
NOX-A12 immediately following irradiation and continued every 2 days with
either 5 or 20 mg/kg injected subcutaneously for either 4 or 8 weeks.
These doses and times were chosen as equivalent to human doses and times
that based on existing data have been found to be safe and well tolerated
in human volunteers and which are effective in inhibiting the action of
SDF-1. We found that neither 20 Gy nor NOX-A12 alone prolonged the
lifespan of the tumor-bearing rats. However, the addition of NOX-A12 to
20 Gy prolonged the lifespan of the rats particularly at the highest dose
and for the longer treatment period of 8 weeks (median lifespans of 20 Gy
alone and 20 Gy + 5 and 20 mg/kg of NOX-A12 were 196, 291 and 349 days
respectively with p values for NOX-A12 treated rats <0.05 vs radiation or
controls alone). We believe that these encouraging data justify a human
trial in first line glioblastoma patients. 1. Kioi M, Vogel H, Schultz G,
Hoffman RM, Harsh GR, Brown JM: Inhibition of vasculogenesis, but not
angiogenesis, prevents the recurrence of glioblastoma after irradiation
in mice. J Clin Invest 120:694-705, 2010 2. Miao Z, Luker KE, Summers BC,
Berahovich R, Bhojani MS, Rehemtulla A, et al: CXCR7 (RDC1) promotes
breast and lung tumor growth in vivo and is expressed on tumor-associated
vasculature. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:15735-15740, 2007

