Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lack of correlation between in silico projection of function for
CYP19A1 and NFB1 SNPs and qRT-PCR-determined gene expression levels in
colon tissue


The ability to link functional genetic variants with disease risk leads
to advances in diagnostics and therapeutics. There are an estimated 10
million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized
projection programs that predict SNP-based alterations in functionality
are used for genotyping experiments. We explored if projection programs
could accurately predict functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were
identified for the CYP19A1 and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue
samples were genotyped for the tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene
expression assays. Associations between SNPs and gene expression were
noted and compared with projected outcomes from FastSNP (Academia
Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for analysis, 10 were predicted to
have no effect, 14 to alter transcription factor (TF) binding sites, and
1 to have a sense/synonymous coding change. Of those that were predicted
to have no effect, one (rs17523880) showed significant changes in CYP19A1
expression levels (p=0.05 when adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of
the SNPs predicted to alter TF binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a
change in expression levels (pThe ability to link functional genetic
variants with disease risk leads to advances in diagnostics and
therapeutics. There are an estimated 10 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized projection programs that predict
SNP-based alterations in functionality are used for genotyping
experiments. We explored if projection programs could accurately predict
functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were identified for the CYP19A1
and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue samples were genotyped for the
tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene expression assays. Associations
between SNPs and gene expression were noted and compared with projected
outcomes from FastSNP (Academia Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for
analysis, 10 were predicted to have no effect, 14 to alter transcription
factor (TF) binding sites, and 1 to have a sense/synonymous coding
change. Of those that were predicted to have no effect, one (rs17523880)
showed significant changes in CYP19A1 expression levels (p=0.05 when
adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of the SNPs predicted to alter TF
binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a change in expression levels
(p<=0.01), and there was no expression change in the SNP with synonymous
coding change. In a case-control study exploring genetic associations in
colon cancer and utilizing the same SNPs, three of the SNPs that were
predicted to have no change (rs1961177, rs17523880, rs3751591) were found
to be significantly associated with colon cancer (pThe ability to link
functional genetic variants with disease risk leads to advances in
diagnostics and therapeutics. There are an estimated 10 million single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized projection programs
that predict SNP-based alterations in functionality are used for
genotyping experiments. We explored if projection programs could
accurately predict functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were
identified for the CYP19A1 and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue
samples were genotyped for the tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene
expression assays. Associations between SNPs and gene expression were
noted and compared with projected outcomes from FastSNP (Academia
Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for analysis, 10 were predicted to
have no effect, 14 to alter transcription factor (TF) binding sites, and
1 to have a sense/synonymous coding change. Of those that were predicted
to have no effect, one (rs17523880) showed significant changes in CYP19A1
expression levels (p=0.05 when adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of
the SNPs predicted to alter TF binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a
change in expression levels (p<=0.01), and there was no expression change
in the SNP with synonymous coding change. In a case-control study
exploring genetic associations in colon cancer and utilizing the same
SNPs, three of the SNPs that were predicted to have no change (rs1961177,
rs17523880, rs3751591) were found to be significantly associated with
colon cancer (p<0.01, p=0.015, pThe ability to link functional genetic
variants with disease risk leads to advances in diagnostics and
therapeutics. There are an estimated 10 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized projection programs that predict
SNP-based alterations in functionality are used for genotyping
experiments. We explored if projection programs could accurately predict
functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were identified for the CYP19A1
and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue samples were genotyped for the
tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene expression assays. Associations
between SNPs and gene expression were noted and compared with projected
outcomes from FastSNP (Academia Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for
analysis, 10 were predicted to have no effect, 14 to alter transcription
factor (TF) binding sites, and 1 to have a sense/synonymous coding
change. Of those that were predicted to have no effect, one (rs17523880)
showed significant changes in CYP19A1 expression levels (p=0.05 when
adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of the SNPs predicted to alter TF
binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a change in expression levels
(p<=0.01), and there was no expression change in the SNP with synonymous
coding change. In a case-control study exploring genetic associations in
colon cancer and utilizing the same SNPs, three of the SNPs that were
predicted to have no change (rs1961177, rs17523880, rs3751591) were found
to be significantly associated with colon cancer (p<0.01, p=0.015,
p<0.01). Of those, one (rs17523880) was associated with change in
expression in our samples (p=0.05). In the case-control study,
significant interactions between CYP19A1 and NFB1 SNPs and colon cancer
were reported. Thus, we also examined 11 NFB1 SNPs, five of which were
predicted to have no functional effect, and six of which were predicted
to alter TF binding sites. Of the SNPs with no predicted functional
consequences, three (rs3821958, rs1801, rs3774964) were associated with
significant changes in gene expression (pThe ability to link functional
genetic variants with disease risk leads to advances in diagnostics and
therapeutics. There are an estimated 10 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized projection programs that predict
SNP-based alterations in functionality are used for genotyping
experiments. We explored if projection programs could accurately predict
functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were identified for the CYP19A1
and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue samples were genotyped for the
tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene expression assays. Associations
between SNPs and gene expression were noted and compared with projected
outcomes from FastSNP (Academia Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for
analysis, 10 were predicted to have no effect, 14 to alter transcription
factor (TF) binding sites, and 1 to have a sense/synonymous coding
change. Of those that were predicted to have no effect, one (rs17523880)
showed significant changes in CYP19A1 expression levels (p=0.05 when
adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of the SNPs predicted to alter TF
binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a change in expression levels
(p<=0.01), and there was no expression change in the SNP with synonymous
coding change. In a case-control study exploring genetic associations in
colon cancer and utilizing the same SNPs, three of the SNPs that were
predicted to have no change (rs1961177, rs17523880, rs3751591) were found
to be significantly associated with colon cancer (p<0.01, p=0.015,
p<0.01). Of those, one (rs17523880) was associated with change in
expression in our samples (p=0.05). In the case-control study,
significant interactions between CYP19A1 and NFB1 SNPs and colon cancer
were reported. Thus, we also examined 11 NFB1 SNPs, five of which were
predicted to have no functional effect, and six of which were predicted
to alter TF binding sites. Of the SNPs with no predicted functional
consequences, three (rs3821958, rs1801, rs3774964) were associated with
significant changes in gene expression (p<0.01 to p=0.04), and of those
with projected TF binding site alterations, two were associated with a
significant change in expression levels (rs4648090, pThe ability to link
functional genetic variants with disease risk leads to advances in
diagnostics and therapeutics. There are an estimated 10 million single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized projection programs
that predict SNP-based alterations in functionality are used for
genotyping experiments. We explored if projection programs could
accurately predict functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were
identified for the CYP19A1 and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue
samples were genotyped for the tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene
expression assays. Associations between SNPs and gene expression were
noted and compared with projected outcomes from FastSNP (Academia
Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for analysis, 10 were predicted to
have no effect, 14 to alter transcription factor (TF) binding sites, and
1 to have a sense/synonymous coding change. Of those that were predicted
to have no effect, one (rs17523880) showed significant changes in CYP19A1
expression levels (p=0.05 when adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of
the SNPs predicted to alter TF binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a
change in expression levels (p<=0.01), and there was no expression change
in the SNP with synonymous coding change. In a case-control study
exploring genetic associations in colon cancer and utilizing the same
SNPs, three of the SNPs that were predicted to have no change (rs1961177,
rs17523880, rs3751591) were found to be significantly associated with
colon cancer (p<0.01, p=0.015, p<0.01). Of those, one (rs17523880) was
associated with change in expression in our samples (p=0.05). In the
case-control study, significant interactions between CYP19A1 and NFB1
SNPs and colon cancer were reported. Thus, we also examined 11 NFB1 SNPs,
five of which were predicted to have no functional effect, and six of
which were predicted to alter TF binding sites. Of the SNPs with no
predicted functional consequences, three (rs3821958, rs1801, rs3774964)
were associated with significant changes in gene expression (p<0.01 to
p=0.04), and of those with projected TF binding site alterations, two
were associated with a significant change in expression levels
(rs4648090, p<0.01; rs3755867, p=0.04). Further, of two NFB1 SNPs that
interacted with CYP19A1 SNPs in the case control study, both were
projected to have no effect on function, but were significantly
associated with expression in our samples ((rs3821958, rs3774964; pThe
ability to link functional genetic variants with disease risk leads to
advances in diagnostics and therapeutics. There are an estimated 10
million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), thus computerized
projection programs that predict SNP-based alterations in functionality
are used for genotyping experiments. We explored if projection programs
could accurately predict functionality in colon samples. TagSNPs were
identified for the CYP19A1 and NFB1 genes, and normal colon tissue
samples were genotyped for the tagSNPs and phenotyped using Taqman gene
expression assays. Associations between SNPs and gene expression were
noted and compared with projected outcomes from FastSNP (Academia
Sinica). Of 25 CYP19A1 SNPs chosen for analysis, 10 were predicted to
have no effect, 14 to alter transcription factor (TF) binding sites, and
1 to have a sense/synonymous coding change. Of those that were predicted
to have no effect, one (rs17523880) showed significant changes in CYP19A1
expression levels (p=0.05 when adjusted for age, sex, and race). Two of
the SNPs predicted to alter TF binding (rs1902584, rs6493497) showed a
change in expression levels (p<=0.01), and there was no expression change
in the SNP with synonymous coding change. In a case-control study
exploring genetic associations in colon cancer and utilizing the same
SNPs, three of the SNPs that were predicted to have no change (rs1961177,
rs17523880, rs3751591) were found to be significantly associated with
colon cancer (p<0.01, p=0.015, p<0.01). Of those, one (rs17523880) was
associated with change in expression in our samples (p=0.05). In the
case-control study, significant interactions between CYP19A1 and NFB1
SNPs and colon cancer were reported. Thus, we also examined 11 NFB1 SNPs,
five of which were predicted to have no functional effect, and six of
which were predicted to alter TF binding sites. Of the SNPs with no
predicted functional consequences, three (rs3821958, rs1801, rs3774964)
were associated with significant changes in gene expression (p<0.01 to
p=0.04), and of those with projected TF binding site alterations, two
were associated with a significant change in expression levels
(rs4648090, p<0.01; rs3755867, p=0.04). Further, of two NFB1 SNPs that
interacted with CYP19A1 SNPs in the case control study, both were
projected to have no effect on function, but were significantly
associated with expression in our samples ((rs3821958, rs3774964;
p<0.01). Future studies will include protein expression and enzymatic
activity in these samples, and exploration in other tissues. In summary,
while prediction programs are useful for choosing candidate SNPs for
large scale assays, they cannot be relied on for accuracy, and functional
effects of significant SNPs in disease association studies should be
confirmed empirically in order to design treatment and prevention
strategies.

