Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Treatment and mortality in men with localized prostate cancer: A
population-based study in California


Purpose: To provide patients and physicians with population-based
estimates of mortality from prostate cancer or other causes depending
upon the primary treatment modality, stratified by patient age, tumor
stage and grade. Patients and Methods: We conducted a 10-year
competing-risk analysis of 45,440 men diagnosed with clinically localized
(T1 or T2) prostate cancer in California during 1995-1998. Information on
patient demographics, tumor characteristics, primary treatment and causes
of death was obtained from the California Cancer Registry. Results: In
this population-based observational cohort, the most common primary
treatment was surgery (40.4%), followed by radiotherapy (29.1%), active
surveillance (20.8%), and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) monotherapy
(9.8%). Prostate cancer mortality differed significantly (p Purpose: To
provide patients and physicians with population-based estimates of
mortality from prostate cancer or other causes depending upon the primary
treatment modality, stratified by patient age, tumor stage and grade.
Patients and Methods: We conducted a 10-year competing-risk analysis of
45,440 men diagnosed with clinically localized (T1 or T2) prostate cancer
in California during 1995-1998. Information on patient demographics,
tumor characteristics, primary treatment and causes of death was obtained
from the California Cancer Registry. Results: In this population-based
observational cohort, the most common primary treatment was surgery
(40.4%), followed by radiotherapy (29.1%), active surveillance (20.8%),
and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) monotherapy (9.8%). Prostate
cancer mortality differed significantly (p < 0.0001) across treatment
groups among patients Purpose: To provide patients and physicians with
population-based estimates of mortality from prostate cancer or other
causes depending upon the primary treatment modality, stratified by
patient age, tumor stage and grade. Patients and Methods: We conducted a
10-year competing-risk analysis of 45,440 men diagnosed with clinically
localized (T1 or T2) prostate cancer in California during 1995-1998.
Information on patient demographics, tumor characteristics, primary
treatment and causes of death was obtained from the California Cancer
Registry. Results: In this population-based observational cohort, the
most common primary treatment was surgery (40.4%), followed by
radiotherapy (29.1%), active surveillance (20.8%), and androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT) monotherapy (9.8%). Prostate cancer mortality
differed significantly (p < 0.0001) across treatment groups among
patients <80 years at diagnosis with moderately or poorly differentiated
disease. In these patients, the 10-year disease-specific mortality rates
were generally lowest for men treated with surgery, ranging from 1.2%
(95% CI, 0.8-1.7%) to 11.0% (95% CI, 8.4-14.2%); and highest for men
treated with ADT monotherapy, ranging from 3.3% (95% CI, 0.8-12.5%) to
53.8% (95% CI, 34.4-72.2%). Conclusion: Use of ADT monotherapy for
localized prostate cancer is not uncommon and should be reconsidered in
light of the poor outcomes found in this study, lack of supportive
evidence from clinical trials, and potential side effects. Although
comparisons of treatment effects based on observational data are subject
to confounding by indication, the cause-specific mortality estimates
provided in this population-based study can help patients and physicians
make management decisions based upon expected outcomes and practice
patterns in the general population.

