Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Roles of the primary bile acid receptor FXR in liver repair and
tumorigenesis


Bile acids promote processing of dietary fat and regulate glucose
homeostasis in liver through its receptor, FXR. In our study, we
demonstrate that bile acid/FXR signaling also plays a role in the tissue
homeostasis and repair as well as hepatocarcinogenesis. Either decreased
bile acid level or loss of FXR leads to impaired liver regeneration after
carbon tetrachloride-induced liver injury or 70% partial hepatectomy,
which indicates that FXR is an essential liver protector by regulating
liver cell proliferation and death. Indeed, FXR-/- mice spontaneously
develop liver cancer when they are aged due to their chronic liver injury
and deregulated repair. In addition, FXR expression is down-regulated in
human liver tumors compared with non-tumor regions, and the
hepatocarcinogenesis in FXR-/- mice can recapitulate the process of human
liver cancer initiation and progression. Therefore, FXR-/- mice provide a
unique animal model for liver cancer study. For instance, we generated
IFN-/-FXR-/- mice to clarify the tumor suppressor role of the cytokine
IFN, the function of which was ever under debate. FXR-/- mice can be also
used to identify or predict more differentially expressed genes in human
liver cancer. For example, we found that one liver-rich miRNA, miR-194,
which is down-regulated in the liver tumors of FXR-/- mice, is an
important liver epithelial cell marker and prevents cancer metastasis,
which has not been described before. In conclusion, ablation of FXR
increases susceptibility to liver injury and tumorigenesis, and the
FXR-/- mice provide a unique animal model for human liver cancer study.

