Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical efficacious combined chemo/immunotherapy differently
activates AKT pathway and functionality of gp100 and Melan-A specific T
cell clones


A phase II randomized clinical study is ongoing in our Institution to
prove the clinical efficacy of dacarbazine (DTIC) one day before
peptide-vaccination (Melan-A and NY-ESO-1) in the prevention of melanoma
relapse in clinically disease-free HLA-A2 patients. In a previous pilot
study, this combination therapy (using Melan-A and gp100 peptides)
increased the number of tumor-reactive long-lasting effector-memory CD8+
lymphocytes. To identify the mechanisms enhancing the immune response,
induced by DTIC combined with peptide-vaccination, we analyzed the
endogenous and treatment-induced antigen specific CD8 T-cell response at
the clonal level. We analyzed the sequence of the TCR -chain of these
clones and the molecular results were correlated with the expression of
CD27/CD28 co-stimulatory molecule, AKT activation and anti-tumor lytic
activity. The combination of chemo/immunotherapy elicited in
Melan-A-specific, but not in gp100 clones, a renewal of
high-avidity/tumor-reactive T-cell clones, with a broadening TCR
diversity in long-surviving patients, suggesting that the selection of
immune-resistant tumor variants may be circumvented by this combination,
and thus prevent tumor recurrence in melanoma. In gp100 clones, AKT
activation (pSer473-AKT) canonically correlates with CD28 and/or CD27
expression, independent of the treatment while in Melan-A clones, lacking
CD27 and CD28 expression, non-canonical AKT activation was only observed
after the combination therapy. The identification of the extracellular
stimuli and signaling pathway responsible for DTIC-mediated activation of
the AKT signaling are currently under investigation.

