Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Combined inhibition of Wee1 and PARP1 sensitizes pancreatic cancer
cells to radiation


PARP1 [poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1] inhibitors are maximally effective
in cells with HRR (homologous recombination repair) defects, a concept
known as synthetic lethality. We have previously shown that inhibition of
HRR and the G2 checkpoint by small molecule inhibitors of Chk1
(checkpoint kinase 1), can induce synthetic lethality by increasing PARP1
inhibitor-mediated radiosensitization selectively in tumor cells and
preferentially in tumor cells with p53 mutations. In order to begin to
determine whether other inhibitors of the DNA damage response might
induce synthetic lethality in combination with PARP1 inhibition and
radiation, we evaluated MK-1775, a Wee1 kinase inhibitor. Wee1 regulates
the G2 checkpoint by phosphorylation of Cdk1, thus preventing entry into
mitosis in the presence of DNA damage, while its influence on HRR is not
clear. To determine whether inhibition of Wee1 might synergistically
radiosensitize in combination with PARP1 inhibition, we treated
pancreatic cancer cells with MK-1775 (100-200nM) and the PARP1 inhibitor,
olaparib (1uM) and assessed radiosensitization by clonogenic survival. We
found that the combination of MK-1775 with olaparib induced marked
radiosensitization in MiaPaCa-2 (RER: 1.9) and AsPC-1 (RER: 1.7)
pancreatic cancer cells, which was greater than the radiosensitization
produced by either agent alone. In order to determine the mechanism(s) by
which Wee1 and PARP1 inhibitors interact to produce radiosensitization,
we investigated the G2 checkpoint as well as HRR. In response to
radiation, MK-1775 abrogated the G2 checkpoint while olaparib treatment
resulted in increased G2 accumulation which was associated with increased
H2AX, suggesting the presence of unrepaired DNA double strand breaks.
Abrogation of the olaparib+radiation-mediated G2 checkpoint, by MK-1775
resulted in even greater DNA damage as assessed by H2AX expression. Given
the efficacy of PARP1 inhibitors in HRR defective cells, we also
investigated the effect of MK-1775 on HRR. We found that MK-1775
inhibited homology-directed repair of an I-SceI endonuclease-induced DNA
double strand break in MiaPaCa-2 cells (Control 5.2% versus MK-1775 3.3%,
PPARP1 [poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1] inhibitors are maximally
effective in cells with HRR (homologous recombination repair) defects, a
concept known as synthetic lethality. We have previously shown that
inhibition of HRR and the G2 checkpoint by small molecule inhibitors of
Chk1 (checkpoint kinase 1), can induce synthetic lethality by increasing
PARP1 inhibitor-mediated radiosensitization selectively in tumor cells
and preferentially in tumor cells with p53 mutations. In order to begin
to determine whether other inhibitors of the DNA damage response might
induce synthetic lethality in combination with PARP1 inhibition and
radiation, we evaluated MK-1775, a Wee1 kinase inhibitor. Wee1 regulates
the G2 checkpoint by phosphorylation of Cdk1, thus preventing entry into
mitosis in the presence of DNA damage, while its influence on HRR is not
clear. To determine whether inhibition of Wee1 might synergistically
radiosensitize in combination with PARP1 inhibition, we treated
pancreatic cancer cells with MK-1775 (100-200nM) and the PARP1 inhibitor,
olaparib (1uM) and assessed radiosensitization by clonogenic survival. We
found that the combination of MK-1775 with olaparib induced marked
radiosensitization in MiaPaCa-2 (RER: 1.9) and AsPC-1 (RER: 1.7)
pancreatic cancer cells, which was greater than the radiosensitization
produced by either agent alone. In order to determine the mechanism(s) by
which Wee1 and PARP1 inhibitors interact to produce radiosensitization,
we investigated the G2 checkpoint as well as HRR. In response to
radiation, MK-1775 abrogated the G2 checkpoint while olaparib treatment
resulted in increased G2 accumulation which was associated with increased
H2AX, suggesting the presence of unrepaired DNA double strand breaks.
Abrogation of the olaparib+radiation-mediated G2 checkpoint, by MK-1775
resulted in even greater DNA damage as assessed by H2AX expression. Given
the efficacy of PARP1 inhibitors in HRR defective cells, we also
investigated the effect of MK-1775 on HRR. We found that MK-1775
inhibited homology-directed repair of an I-SceI endonuclease-induced DNA
double strand break in MiaPaCa-2 cells (Control 5.2% versus MK-1775 3.3%,
P<0.05) as well as impaired Rad51 focus formation in response to
radiation. Taken together, these results suggest that inhibition of HRR
and the G2 checkpoint by inhibition of Wee1 can induce synthetic
lethality with PARP1 inhibitors in combination with radiation by
increasing unrepaired DNA double strand breaks. These studies support the
continued investigation of combined molecularly targeted agents such as
Wee1 and PARP1 inhibitors with radiation, to induce synthetic lethality
selectively in tumor cells.

