Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of cyr61/ccn1 expression in human cell lines by the
polyphenolic compound resveratrol


Resveratrol is the active compound in red grape skin believed to
contribute to the protective effects of red wine in heart disease and has
been implicated in the modulation of certain cancers. The matricellular
protein CCN1/Cyr61 is involved in the regulation of cellular activities
that control growth, programmed cell death, cellular motility and cell
adhesion. Interestingly, many of the regulatory pathways that affect
CCN1/Cyr61 expression are also affected by resveratrol action. In order
to examine the possible link between CCN1/Cyr61 action and resveratrol's
effects, human cell lines were used to analyze resveratrol's effects on
CCN1/Cyr61 expression and function. Increased levels of CCN1/Cyr61
expression were observed in cells treated with resveratrol alone or
combined with the stimulatory agents phorbol ester and epidermal growth
factor (EGF). Analysis of CCN1/Cyr61 protein expression and cellular
functions also revealed modulatory effects of reseveratrol treatment,
however the role of upstream regulatory pathways in mediating
reseveratrol action has yet to be addressed. Nevetheless, these studies
offer preliminary evidence for the regulation of CNN1/Cyr61 expression by
a putative modulator of cellular processes involved in heart disease and
cancer.

