Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Predictors of bloodstream infection associated with permanently
implantable venous port in solid cancer patients


Background There is no literature for stratification of permanent
implantable venous ports (Port-A) related bloodstream infection (BSI) in
solid cancer patients. We conduct this study to characterize the risk
factors of BSI associated with the use of Port-A (PABSI) in solid cancer
patients. Methods The study is done in a teaching hospital in Taiwan.
Solid cancer patients who were implanted with a Port-A for systemic
anti-cancer therapies were prospectively followed for the occurrence of
PABSI, defined as BSI without other identifiable infection foci. Patients
with PABSI during the follow-up period constitute the case cohort (N =
58) and 174 patients were randomly selected from those without BSI as the
control cohort. PABSI risk score was developed by Cox proportional
hazards model. Results 416 patients were registered (Table 1).
Eighty-eight PABSI episodes occurred in 58 patients, with an incidence of
1.05 per 1000 catheter-days. All but one patient had stage 4 cancer.
Independent predictors of PABSI occurrence included neutropenia (HR =
3.86, 95% CI = 1.75-8.50), total parental nutrition (TPN) (HR = 3.51, 95%
CI = 1.86-6.63), chronic steroid use (HR = 7.01, 95% CI = 2.78-17.65),
invasive procedure (HR = 3.00, 95% CI = 1.29-6.98), postoperative
antibiotics (HR = 2.61, 95% CI = 1.43-4.75), and preoperative antibiotics
(HR = 0.38, 95% CI = 0.17-0.83). A PABSI risk score, with a cut-off value
of 0 (sensitivity 88.5%, specificity 64.3%), was defined for stage 4
cancer patients as follows: neutropenia, +1.350; TPN, +1.256; chronic
steroid use, +1.947; preoperative antibiotics, 0.970; postoperative
antibiotics, +0.959; and invasive procedure, +1.098. The median
PABSI-free survival was 4.47 months for patients with score 0 but not
reached for patients with score Background There is no literature for
stratification of permanent implantable venous ports (Port-A) related
bloodstream infection (BSI) in solid cancer patients. We conduct this
study to characterize the risk factors of BSI associated with the use of
Port-A (PABSI) in solid cancer patients. Methods The study is done in a
teaching hospital in Taiwan. Solid cancer patients who were implanted
with a Port-A for systemic anti-cancer therapies were prospectively
followed for the occurrence of PABSI, defined as BSI without other
identifiable infection foci. Patients with PABSI during the follow-up
period constitute the case cohort (N = 58) and 174 patients were randomly
selected from those without BSI as the control cohort. PABSI risk score
was developed by Cox proportional hazards model. Results 416 patients
were registered (Table 1). Eighty-eight PABSI episodes occurred in 58
patients, with an incidence of 1.05 per 1000 catheter-days. All but one
patient had stage 4 cancer. Independent predictors of PABSI occurrence
included neutropenia (HR = 3.86, 95% CI = 1.75-8.50), total parental
nutrition (TPN) (HR = 3.51, 95% CI = 1.86-6.63), chronic steroid use (HR
= 7.01, 95% CI = 2.78-17.65), invasive procedure (HR = 3.00, 95% CI =
1.29-6.98), postoperative antibiotics (HR = 2.61, 95% CI = 1.43-4.75),
and preoperative antibiotics (HR = 0.38, 95% CI = 0.17-0.83). A PABSI
risk score, with a cut-off value of 0 (sensitivity 88.5%, specificity
64.3%), was defined for stage 4 cancer patients as follows: neutropenia,
+1.350; TPN, +1.256; chronic steroid use, +1.947; preoperative
antibiotics, 0.970; postoperative antibiotics, +0.959; and invasive
procedure, +1.098. The median PABSI-free survival was 4.47 months for
patients with score 0 but not reached for patients with score < 0 (p
Background There is no literature for stratification of permanent
implantable venous ports (Port-A) related bloodstream infection (BSI) in
solid cancer patients. We conduct this study to characterize the risk
factors of BSI associated with the use of Port-A (PABSI) in solid cancer
patients. Methods The study is done in a teaching hospital in Taiwan.
Solid cancer patients who were implanted with a Port-A for systemic
anti-cancer therapies were prospectively followed for the occurrence of
PABSI, defined as BSI without other identifiable infection foci. Patients
with PABSI during the follow-up period constitute the case cohort (N =
58) and 174 patients were randomly selected from those without BSI as the
control cohort. PABSI risk score was developed by Cox proportional
hazards model. Results 416 patients were registered (Table 1).
Eighty-eight PABSI episodes occurred in 58 patients, with an incidence of
1.05 per 1000 catheter-days. All but one patient had stage 4 cancer.
Independent predictors of PABSI occurrence included neutropenia (HR =
3.86, 95% CI = 1.75-8.50), total parental nutrition (TPN) (HR = 3.51, 95%
CI = 1.86-6.63), chronic steroid use (HR = 7.01, 95% CI = 2.78-17.65),
invasive procedure (HR = 3.00, 95% CI = 1.29-6.98), postoperative
antibiotics (HR = 2.61, 95% CI = 1.43-4.75), and preoperative antibiotics
(HR = 0.38, 95% CI = 0.17-0.83). A PABSI risk score, with a cut-off value
of 0 (sensitivity 88.5%, specificity 64.3%), was defined for stage 4
cancer patients as follows: neutropenia, +1.350; TPN, +1.256; chronic
steroid use, +1.947; preoperative antibiotics, 0.970; postoperative
antibiotics, +0.959; and invasive procedure, +1.098. The median
PABSI-free survival was 4.47 months for patients with score 0 but not
reached for patients with score < 0 (p < 0.0001). Conclusions The PABSI
risk score can help define high-risk groups in solid cancer patients and
may help design future preventive strategies. Presence of any risk factor
would render patients as high risk.


