Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The synergistic effect of Cucurbitacin B and radiation treatment


Cucurbitacin B (CB), a small molecule purified from Trichosanthes
kirilowii Maximowicz, possesses a potent antitumor effect. In this study,
we investigated the combined effect of CB and ionizing radiation (IR) on
aggressive 4T1 breast cancer cells. In a clonogenic assay, different
doses of CB (0, 1.7, or 5 nM) and IR (0, 2, 4, or 6 Gy) were applied to
4T1 cells either in a single regimen or in combination. The surviving
fraction at 2 Gy was greatly reduced with the increased doses of CB. The
results calculated with CompuSyn program indicated that the combination
index (CI) was 1, suggesting that the combination of CB and IR has a
synergistic effect against cancer cells. Our studies of the underlying
mechanism revealed that: 1) CB enhanced IR-induced loss of mitochondria
potential, as evidenced by a 10-20% increase in the transition of
aggregative JC-1 (representing healthy cells) into monomeric JC-1
(representing early apoptotic cells); 2) cell-cycle analysis revealed
that although samples treated with CB or 3 Gy alone had 38% or 29% of
cells, respectively, in the G2-M phase as compared to 23% of the vehicle
control, the combined treatment encouraged 51% of cells to accumulate in
the G2-M phase; and 3) the Western blot assay indicated that
survival-related molecules (e.g., phosphorylated Stat 3, c-Myc, Bcl-2,
and Bcl-xL) were downregulated, while apoptosis-related molecules (e.g.,
caspase-9, p21, and p53) were upregulated in the combined treatment
group. The data reveal that the systemic administration of CB will not
only stop the spread of micrometastases but also enhance local tumor
control, which will result in better treatment outcomes. The clinical
value of CB should be further explored.

