Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SOD2 enhances cell migration and invasion of tongue squamous cell
carcinoma via H2O2-dependent Snail signaling


In previous studies, we demonstrated that dysregulation of manganese
superoxide dismutase (SOD2) is a frequent event in tongue squamous cell
carcinoma (TSCC) and is associated with lymph node metastasis. Here, we
further investigated the mechanism of SOD2-mediated cell migration and
invasion in paired TSCC cell lines with different metastatic potential.
The UM1 and UM2 are paired cell lines from a single TSCC patient, where
UM1 is more aggressive than UM2 in term of cell migration and invasion.
Compared to UM2 cells, UM1 cells exhibited significantly higher SOD2
activity, increased intracellular H2O2 and higher levels of Snail, MMP-1
and pERK1/2 protein, and lower level of E-cadtherin protein. Upon
knockdown of SOD2 by RNA interference, UM1 cells displayed significantly
reduced cell migration and invasion abilities. This is accompanied by
reductions in SOD2 activities, intracellular H2O2, levels of Snail, MMP-1
and pERK1/2 proteins, as well as increase in the level of E-cadtherin
protein. Cell migration and invasion of the UM2 and the SOD2
shRNA-treated UM1 cells were enhanced by H2O2 treatment. This
H2O2-mediated cell migration and invasion is accompanied by increased
levels of Snail, MMP-1 and pERK1/2 protein, and decreased level of
E-cadtherin protein. Thus, we conclude that the SOD2-dependent production
of H2O2 contributes to both cell migration and invasion of TSCC via the
Snail signaling pathway through increased Snail, MMP-1 and pERK1/2
expression, and the repression of the E-cadtherin.

