Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -Mangostin, a dietary xanthone, inhibits ectopic xenograft growth
of pancreatic cancer cells in an athymic nude mice


Pancreatic cancer (PC), the most aggressive malignant disease, ranks
fourth most leading cause of cancer related death among men and woman in
United States. Therefore, it is necessary to intensify our efforts for a
better understanding of this disease and for the development of novel
therapeutic strategies for its prevention and treatment. One approach to
control this malignancy is to slow its progression through the use of
natural agents present in the diet consumed by humans. -Mangostin (MG), a
xanthone constituent isolated from the pericarp of Mangosteen fruit
(Garcinia mangostana), possesses various health promoting benefits
including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-angiogenic and
anti-cancer properties. We have previously shown that MG treatment
induces apoptosis and inhibits growth of human PC cells via targeting
NF-kB, Stat3 and Hedgehog signalings. Here, we determined the anti-tumor
potential of MG against human PC in a xenograft mouse model. Highly
aggressive human PC ASPC1 cells (2X106) were injected subcutaneously into
the flanks of 14 athymic nude mice. Three days post-injection, mice were
randomly divided into two groups. One group of mice was administered with
MG (6 mg/kg body wt. i.p) in a 0.2 ml of PBS containing 25% polyethylene
glycol (PEG) for 7 weeks. Vehicle control group mice were administered
with 0.2 ml of PBS containing 25% PEG. Tumor volume of both group animals
was measured and their body weight recorded weekly. All the mice of both
groups were sacrificed when the tumor size of the control mice reached
1000 mm3. We observed that MG treatment inhibited the growth of ASPC1
cells in a xenograft mouse model as determined by significant
(PPancreatic cancer (PC), the most aggressive malignant disease, ranks
fourth most leading cause of cancer related death among men and woman in
United States. Therefore, it is necessary to intensify our efforts for a
better understanding of this disease and for the development of novel
therapeutic strategies for its prevention and treatment. One approach to
control this malignancy is to slow its progression through the use of
natural agents present in the diet consumed by humans. -Mangostin (MG), a
xanthone constituent isolated from the pericarp of Mangosteen fruit
(Garcinia mangostana), possesses various health promoting benefits
including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-angiogenic and
anti-cancer properties. We have previously shown that MG treatment
induces apoptosis and inhibits growth of human PC cells via targeting
NF-kB, Stat3 and Hedgehog signalings. Here, we determined the anti-tumor
potential of MG against human PC in a xenograft mouse model. Highly
aggressive human PC ASPC1 cells (2X106) were injected subcutaneously into
the flanks of 14 athymic nude mice. Three days post-injection, mice were
randomly divided into two groups. One group of mice was administered with
MG (6 mg/kg body wt. i.p) in a 0.2 ml of PBS containing 25% polyethylene
glycol (PEG) for 7 weeks. Vehicle control group mice were administered
with 0.2 ml of PBS containing 25% PEG. Tumor volume of both group animals
was measured and their body weight recorded weekly. All the mice of both
groups were sacrificed when the tumor size of the control mice reached
1000 mm3. We observed that MG treatment inhibited the growth of ASPC1
cells in a xenograft mouse model as determined by significant (P<0.01)
reduction in both the volume and weight of the tumors. Importantly, MG
treatment inhibited angiogenesis as determined by the reduced number and
size of blood capillaries at tumor sites. Vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor (VEGF) is one of the components involved in tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis. Immunohistochemistry (I.H.C) results
demonstrated that MG treatment significantly reduced the expression of
VEGF in xenograft tumors. Also, MG treatment inhibited markers of cell
proliferation (ki67 and PCNA) in the xenograft tumor tissues as
determined by I.H.C. No sign of toxicity was observed in any of the mice
administered with MG as determined by histopathological examination of
lungs, liver, kidneys and heart. One mouse from the control group showed
metastatic foci of PC cells in the lungs but none of the MG treated
animals showed any metastasis into any of the organs. These finding
suggest that MG may reduce the metastatic burden of human PC. Taken
together these results suggest that MG is a non-toxic dietary agent with
anti-tumor potential against human PC. MG could be used as a novel
dietary agent for the therapy of human PC. (Support: Department Pilot
Project).

