Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transforming growth factor (TGF) pathway and clinical outcome of
pancreatic cancer


Background: TGF acts both as a tumor suppressor or tumor promoter
depending upon cellular context and stage of tumor progression. TGF
exerts its effects through the TGFR1/ R2 receptors and the SMAD
transcription regulators. We investigated the prognostic value of TGF
signaling biomarkers in pancreatic cancer. Methods: We measured plasma
TGF1 level using Meso Scale Discovery Multi-array Human TGF1 Assay in 643
pancreatic cancer patients. TGFR2 (Novus) and SMAD4 (Proteintech) protein
expression were measured in 86 biopsies using immunohistochemisty (IHC).
IHC intensity was scored 0-3. Percentage IHC-positive cancer cells were
0-3 (0: 0%+, 1: 1-10%+, 2: 10-25%+, 3: >25%+). Final IHC score was
measured as intensity percentage. We also genotyped 3 SNPs of TGFB1 gene
using the Taqman assay. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests were used to
analyze overall survival (OS) by TGF1 level. Multivariate Cox
proportional hazards models with relevant clinical covariates were used
to assess the relationship between IHC score and OS. Results: In patients
with locally advanced and metastatic disease (n = 355), there was a
significant association of plasma TGF1 with OS. OS of the top quartile of
TGF1 levels (>19.05 ng/mL) vs. those with low level was 27.7 weeks vs. 40
weeks, respectively [log-rank p = 0.0125, adjusted for baseline CA 19-9
and performance status (PS)]. No significant association between plasma
TGF1 and OS was noted in surgical patients (n = 288). In the multivariate
Cox model, after adjusting for baseline stage, CA 19-9, PS, age and TGFR2
expression, complete loss of SMAD4 expression (IHC score 0) was
significantly associated with lower OS [HR (95% CI): 1.85 (1.06-3.23), p
= 0.03]. Progressive disease on gemcitabine-based therapy was more likely
in SMAD4 IHC 0 group as compared with higher score (46.5% vs. 38.1%
progressed; chi square p = 0.069). TGFB1 1346T>C CT/TT genotype
correlated with shorter OS [HR (95% CI): 1.21 (1.02-1.45), p = 0.03]
after adjusting for clinical variables. Conclusions: This large
retrospective study suggests an important stage-dependant role of the TGF
pathway in pancreatic cancer. Targeting this pathway in advanced
pancreatic cancer may have therapeutic relevance.

