Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Correction of metabolically sensitive histone epigenetic marks
mediates the drug sensitivity of MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells


Evidence is accumulating that epigenetic alterations are major
determinants of breast cancer progression. In a previous study we
demonstrated that specific patterns of histone modifications correlated
with changes in histone modifying enzymes in human breast cancer cells.
More importantly, these changes were metabolically sensitive and differed
between cells with epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes, suggesting that
they can be used as diagnostic and prognostic epigenetic biomarkers for
breast cancer progression. We have now investigated whether or not
metabolic targeting of the epigenome may be used for the treatment of
breast cancer. Exposure of breast cancer cells to Compound 968, an
allosteric inhibitor of glutaminase (GLS1), which we demonstrated
previously to increase global histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation levels in
mesenchymal MDA-MB-231 cells versus epithelial T-47D cells, resulted in a
marked inhibition of cancer cell growth, with the effects being more
prominent in mesenchymal MDA-MB-231 cells than epithelial T-47D cells.
The growth inhibitory effect of Compound 968 in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells was accompanied by modest changes in H4 lysine 16 acetylation and a
decreased level of histone H4 lysine 20 trimethylation at the promoter of
tumor suppressor genes (e.g., CDH1), with a concordant rise in expression
of the transcriptionally silenced CDH1 gene. Although, Compound 968 did
not restore fully CDH1 expression in MDA-MB-231 to the level observed in
epithelial T-47D cells, the observed increase in expression may lead to
formation of a less aggressive cancer phenotype in MDA-MB-231 cancer
cells and increase their sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. Indeed,
a combined treatment of Compound 968 and the conventional
chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin substantially increased the sensitivity
of MDA-MB-231 cells to cisplatin. These results indicate that correcting
of cancer-related metabolic disturbances may be an effective method for
the targeted treatment of the cellular epigenome in aggressive breast
cancer and may be useful for improving of the clinical management of
breast cancer.

