Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Characterization of HPV infection in Hispanic colorectal cancer
patients


Purpose: The association between Human Papillomavirus (HPV) infection and
the development of cervical cancer and anogenital cancer has been
established. Moreover, molecular studies have detected HPV DNA in tumor
tissues of head and neck cancer, esophageal cancer, and some skin
cancers. Viral genes expression and multiplication occur exclusively in
the nuclei of the infected cells and are tightly linked to the state of
differentiation of the cells. Integration of viral DNA into host genome
is essential for carcinogenesis since it promotes disruption of HPV E2
gene, leading to abnormal expression of E6 and E7 oncoproteins. Both E6
and E7 can form specific complexes with tumor suppressor gene p53 and pRB
respectively. However, the role of HPV infection in colorectal cancer
(CRC) and its mechanisms of carcinogenesis have not been properly
elucidated. Our objectives were to evaluate the presence of HPV infection
in patients with CRC; to probe the viral integrations status of HPV 16 in
CRC and its adjacent normal colonic mucosa, and to determine the mRNA
expression levels of the viral oncogenes HPV-16 E6 and HPV-16 E7.
Experimental Designs: To determine the association of HPV and CRC, we
conducted an age-and-gender matched case-control study using tumor and
tumor-adjacent colorectal tissues from patients with CRC (cases) and
without CRC (controls). Presence of L1, E2, and E6 genes was analyzed to
determine whether a full-length HPV genome existed in tumor and normal
tissue samples. Head-to-tail junctions of HPV-16 genomes were analyzed to
determine the integration the HPV-16 genome in the HPV-16 (+) cases.
Moreover, we determined the mRNA expression levels of E6 and E7 in the
HPV-16 (+) cases. Hypothesis testing was performed using Pearson
Chi-square analysis of proportions using SPSS 17. Results: A total of 45
(-actin+) CRC patients (mean age 61 11 years, 24 males) and 47 controls
(mean age was 60 9 years, 18 males) were evaluated. Tumors were located
in proximal colon (n=7) and distal colon (n=38). HPV DNA was identified
in 19 of 45 (42.2%) patients with CRC and in 2 of 47 (4.3%) controls (OR
= 16.4; 95% CI 3.5-76.3, p Purpose: The association between Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) infection and the development of cervical cancer and
anogenital cancer has been established. Moreover, molecular studies have
detected HPV DNA in tumor tissues of head and neck cancer, esophageal
cancer, and some skin cancers. Viral genes expression and multiplication
occur exclusively in the nuclei of the infected cells and are tightly
linked to the state of differentiation of the cells. Integration of viral
DNA into host genome is essential for carcinogenesis since it promotes
disruption of HPV E2 gene, leading to abnormal expression of E6 and E7
oncoproteins. Both E6 and E7 can form specific complexes with tumor
suppressor gene p53 and pRB respectively. However, the role of HPV
infection in colorectal cancer (CRC) and its mechanisms of carcinogenesis
have not been properly elucidated. Our objectives were to evaluate the
presence of HPV infection in patients with CRC; to probe the viral
integrations status of HPV 16 in CRC and its adjacent normal colonic
mucosa, and to determine the mRNA expression levels of the viral
oncogenes HPV-16 E6 and HPV-16 E7. Experimental Designs: To determine the
association of HPV and CRC, we conducted an age-and-gender matched
case-control study using tumor and tumor-adjacent colorectal tissues from
patients with CRC (cases) and without CRC (controls). Presence of L1, E2,
and E6 genes was analyzed to determine whether a full-length HPV genome
existed in tumor and normal tissue samples. Head-to-tail junctions of
HPV-16 genomes were analyzed to determine the integration the HPV-16
genome in the HPV-16 (+) cases. Moreover, we determined the mRNA
expression levels of E6 and E7 in the HPV-16 (+) cases. Hypothesis
testing was performed using Pearson Chi-square analysis of proportions
using SPSS 17. Results: A total of 45 (-actin+) CRC patients (mean age 61
11 years, 24 males) and 47 controls (mean age was 60 9 years, 18 males)
were evaluated. Tumors were located in proximal colon (n=7) and distal
colon (n=38). HPV DNA was identified in 19 of 45 (42.2%) patients with
CRC and in 2 of 47 (4.3%) controls (OR = 16.4; 95% CI 3.5-76.3, p <
0.001). HPV-16 was identified in 12 of 19 (63.2%) HPV (+) CRC patients
and in none (0%) HPV(+) controls. The twelve HPV-16 CRC cases showed
integration of HPV-16. Three of 12 (25%) HPV16 (+) cases expressed E6 and
E7 mRNA. Among the 12 CRC cases where both tumor and adjacent tissue was
available, 2 of 9 (16.7%) exhibited HPV-16 DNA in both tumor and
tumor-adjacent tissues.Conclusion: These results suggest that colorectal
HPV infection is common among patients with CRC. The presence of HPV in
tumors located proximal to the rectum suggests that this infection might
not result from direct spread from anogenital sites. Moreover, our
finding of highly frequent integration of viral DNA and the active
expression of E6 and E7 viral oncogenes in the host strongly suggests
that HPV oncoproteins may play a role in the pathogenesis of colorectal
carcinogenesis.

