Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The tumor suppressor CDC73/parafibromin is required for the
maintenance of histone 2B monoubiquitination both in vitro and in vivo


CDC73 (cell division cycle 73), also known as parafibromin, is a
ubiquitously expressed tumor suppressor that is mutated in the germline
of patients with the familial disorder Hyperparathyroidism Jaw Tumor
syndrome, as well as somatically mutated in sporadic parathyroid cancer.
Furthermore, CDC73 has been implicated in breast, gastric, renal and
colorectal tumorigenesis. CDC73 is a member of the PAF1 (RNA polymerase
II-associated factor 1) transcriptional complex (PAF1c), along with PAF1,
CTR9, LEO1, and SKI8. Consistent with roles in transcription, CDC73 is
localized to the nucleus, and has also been reported in the nucleolus.
This tumor suppressor has been shown to function as a negative regulator
of cell cycle progression and to promote apoptosis, as well as have a
role in the regulation of 3 processing of histone mRNA. We used CDC73 as
bait in a yeast two-hybrid assay and identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase
ring finger proteins RNF20 and RNF40 as CDC73 binding partners. RNF20 and
RNF40 exist in a heterodimeric complex that functions to monoubiquitinate
histone H2B at lysine 120 (H2B-K120). Monoubiquitination of H2B-K120 is
associated with transcription in undamaged cells, is induced after DNA
damage, and has a role in the maintenance of replication-dependent
histone mRNA 3 - end processing. We have confirmed the interaction of
CDC73 with both RNF20 and RNF40 in mammalian cells by
co-immunoprecipitation of overexpressed and endogenous proteins from
human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells. Down-regulation of endogenous
CDC73 by siRNA in HEK293 cells and the breast cancer cell line MCF7 led
to a significant reduction of monoubiquitinated H2B-K120. Furthermore, in
a series of eleven parathyroid carcinomas harboring mutations in CDC73
that led to loss of nuclear CDC73, monoubiquitinated H2B-K120 was either
absent or significantly reduced relative to benign parathyroid tumors
that expressed nuclear CDC73. siRNA down-regulation of other PAF1c
members in MCF7 cells also led to reduction in levels of
monoubiquitinated H2B-K120. Given that CDC73 is the only PAF1c member in
which cancer-associated mutations have been reported, the translational
significance of these findings are unclear. Loss of the CTR9 locus has
been reported in pancreatic cancer, as well as overexpression of PAF1.
PAF1c members may have a greater role in malignancy than previously
described. This is the first report to demonstrate pathogenic mutations
affecting monoubiquitination of a histone. We propose that loss of
H2B-K120 monoubiquitination is a major mechanism whereby CDC73 mutations
exert their tumorigenic effect.

