Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HCV core protein upregulates the expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor via the nuclear factor-/hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 axis under hypoxic conditions


Aim: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein critically contributes to
hepatocarcinogenesis, which is often observed in liver cirrhosis. Since
the liver cirrhosis microenvironment is affected by hypoxia, we focused
on the possible driving force of HCV core protein on signal relay from
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 to vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Methods: Human hepatocellular carcinoma cells stably
overexpressing HCV core (Core cells) and NS5A (NS5A cells) were
established; empty vector-transfected (EV) cells were used as controls.
Hypoxia was induced by oxygen deprivation or by using cobalt chloride
(CoCl2). YC-1 was used to inhibit HIF-1 expression. Protein analyses for
cultured cells and liver tissues obtained from CoCl2-treated HCV
core-transgenic (Core-Tg) mice were performed by Western blot and/or
immunocytochemistry. Cellular mRNA levels were evaluated by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. Results: Under hypoxia, the sustained expression of
HIF-1, but not HIF-2, was profoundly observed in Core cells but, was
faint in EV and NS5A cells. Immunocytochemistry revealed increased HIF-1
in the nucleus. HIF-1 mRNA levels were significantly higher in Core cells
than in EV cells under both normoxia and hypoxia. The HIF-1-targeted VEGF
and Bcl-xL expressions were increased in Core cells under hypoxia and
abolished by YC-1 treatment. Hypoxic liver samples of Core-Tg mice
indicated significant increases in both HIF-1 and VEGF expression
compared to the wild type. Conclusions: HCV core protein has the distinct
potential to transcriptionally upregulate and sustain HIF-1 expression
under hypoxia, thereby contributing to increased VEGF expression, a key
regulator in the hypoxic milieu of liver cirrhosis.

