Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Imaging sub-cellular dynamics of proliferating intra- and
extra-vascular cancer cells


In order to visualize nuclear-cytoplasmic dynamics during intravascular
cancer cell-proliferation and extravasation, green fluorescent protein
(GFP) was expressed in the cytoplasm of HT-1080 human fibrosarcoma cells,
and red fluorescent protein (m-Cherry), linked to histone H2B, was
expressed in the nucleus. Nuclear m-Cherry expression enabled
visualization of nuclear dynamics, whereas simultaneous cytoplasmic GFP
expression enabled visualization of nuclear-cytoplasmic ratios as well as
simultaneous cell and nuclear shape changes. Thus, total cellular
dynamics can be visualized in the living dual-color cells in real time.
The cell cycle position of individual living cells was readily visualized
by the nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio and nuclear morphology. Real-time
induction of apoptosis was observed by nuclear size changes and
progressive nuclear fragmentation. Intra- and extra-vascular mitotic
cells were visualized by imaging after injection of the cancer cells in
the epigastric cranials vein in an abdominal flap. After one hour, round
and elongated cancer cells were observed in the vessel. Three hours after
injection, invadopodia of the cancer cells was observed. Five hours after
injection, dual-color cancer cells began to divide within the vessel. By
10 hours, some intra-vascular cancer cells underwent apoptosis. Deformed
new blood vessels in the tumor were observed 10 days later. Extravascular
cancer cells were dividing in the tumor at day 14. The subcellular in
vivo imaging approach described here provides new visual targets for
trafficking, extravasating and invading cancer cells.

