Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Platelet derived growth factor receptors differentially inform
intertumoral and intratumoral heterogeneity


Growth factor-mediated proliferation and self-renewal maintains tissue
specific stem cells and is frequently dysregulated in cancers.
Platelet-derived growth factor ligands and receptors (PDGFRs) are
commonly overexpressed in gliomas and initiate tumors in genetically
engineered models. PDGFR alterations inform intertumoral heterogeneity
towards a proneural glioma subgroup. We interrogated the role of PDGFRs
in intratumoral heterogeneity with regards to differences in tumor cells.
We found that PDGFR is expressed only in a subset of gliomas while PDGFR
is more commonly expressed in tumors but largely restricted to
self-renewing tumorigenic glioma stem cells (GSCs). Targeting PDGFR
genetically or with specific inhibitors attenuated GSC self-renewal,
survival, tumor growth, and invasion. PDGFR targeting was associated with
decreased activation of the cancer stem cell signaling node STAT3, and
STAT3 activity rescued loss of PDGFR expression. These results
demonstrate that a growth factor receptor family can differentially
function to promote tumor heterogeneity. Our results may explain mixed
clinical responses of anti-PDGFR based approaches, and suggest the need
for integration of models of cancer as an organ system into development
of cancer therapies.

