Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Evaluation of maspin expression in primary tumors and metastasis
of melanoma patients: Evidences for prognostic significance


Background: Maspin is a member of the serpin family of protease
inhibitors that is thought to act as a tumor suppressor in several cancer
types, including melanoma. Recent studies have shown that maspin
sub-cellular distribution may impact its effect on disease outcome.
Similar studies are missing in melanoma. Methods: Using 3 different
tissue microarrays (TMA), Maspin expression was evaluated by two
pathologists in a blinded manner on 150 primary lesions and 106
metastasis obtained by melanoma patients. Maspin expression in nuclear
and cytoplasmic compartments were evaluated separately and correlated
with clinicopathological characteristics (logistic model) and
disease-free survival (Cox model) of patients included in the study.
Results: Maspin was expressed in nuclei of 52% and in cytoplasms of 17%
samples of primary melanomas. Nuclear maspin expression was significantly
associated with melanoma thickness (pBackground: Maspin is a member of
the serpin family of protease inhibitors that is thought to act as a
tumor suppressor in several cancer types, including melanoma. Recent
studies have shown that maspin sub-cellular distribution may impact its
effect on disease outcome. Similar studies are missing in melanoma.
Methods: Using 3 different tissue microarrays (TMA), Maspin expression
was evaluated by two pathologists in a blinded manner on 150 primary
lesions and 106 metastasis obtained by melanoma patients. Maspin
expression in nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments were evaluated
separately and correlated with clinicopathological characteristics
(logistic model) and disease-free survival (Cox model) of patients
included in the study. Results: Maspin was expressed in nuclei of 52% and
in cytoplasms of 17% samples of primary melanomas. Nuclear maspin
expression was significantly associated with melanoma thickness
(p<0.0001), mitotic rate (pBackground: Maspin is a member of the serpin
family of protease inhibitors that is thought to act as a tumor
suppressor in several cancer types, including melanoma. Recent studies
have shown that maspin sub-cellular distribution may impact its effect on
disease outcome. Similar studies are missing in melanoma. Methods: Using
3 different tissue microarrays (TMA), Maspin expression was evaluated by
two pathologists in a blinded manner on 150 primary lesions and 106
metastasis obtained by melanoma patients. Maspin expression in nuclear
and cytoplasmic compartments were evaluated separately and correlated
with clinicopathological characteristics (logistic model) and
disease-free survival (Cox model) of patients included in the study.
Results: Maspin was expressed in nuclei of 52% and in cytoplasms of 17%
samples of primary melanomas. Nuclear maspin expression was significantly
associated with melanoma thickness (p<0.0001), mitotic rate (p<0.0001),
ulceration (p=0.003), LN involvement (p=0.0005) and worse prognosis
(p=0.02). On the contrary, higher cytoplasmic expression was observed in
patients with thin lesions (p=0.007), with mitotic rate Background:
Maspin is a member of the serpin family of protease inhibitors that is
thought to act as a tumor suppressor in several cancer types, including
melanoma. Recent studies have shown that maspin sub-cellular distribution
may impact its effect on disease outcome. Similar studies are missing in
melanoma. Methods: Using 3 different tissue microarrays (TMA), Maspin
expression was evaluated by two pathologists in a blinded manner on 150
primary lesions and 106 metastasis obtained by melanoma patients. Maspin
expression in nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments were evaluated
separately and correlated with clinicopathological characteristics
(logistic model) and disease-free survival (Cox model) of patients
included in the study. Results: Maspin was expressed in nuclei of 52% and
in cytoplasms of 17% samples of primary melanomas. Nuclear maspin
expression was significantly associated with melanoma thickness
(p<0.0001), mitotic rate (p<0.0001), ulceration (p=0.003), LN involvement
(p=0.0005) and worse prognosis (p=0.02). On the contrary, higher
cytoplasmic expression was observed in patients with thin lesions
(p=0.007), with mitotic rate <1/mm2 (pBackground: Maspin is a member of
the serpin family of protease inhibitors that is thought to act as a
tumor suppressor in several cancer types, including melanoma. Recent
studies have shown that maspin sub-cellular distribution may impact its
effect on disease outcome. Similar studies are missing in melanoma.
Methods: Using 3 different tissue microarrays (TMA), Maspin expression
was evaluated by two pathologists in a blinded manner on 150 primary
lesions and 106 metastasis obtained by melanoma patients. Maspin
expression in nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments were evaluated
separately and correlated with clinicopathological characteristics
(logistic model) and disease-free survival (Cox model) of patients
included in the study. Results: Maspin was expressed in nuclei of 52% and
in cytoplasms of 17% samples of primary melanomas. Nuclear maspin
expression was significantly associated with melanoma thickness
(p<0.0001), mitotic rate (p<0.0001), ulceration (p=0.003), LN involvement
(p=0.0005) and worse prognosis (p=0.02). On the contrary, higher
cytoplasmic expression was observed in patients with thin lesions
(p=0.007), with mitotic rate <1/mm2 (p<0.005), no LN involvement
(p=0.012), and better prognosis (p=0.05). Metastatic samples showed
Maspin expression in the nuclei of 33% cases and in the cytoplasms of 10%
cases, showing a progressive lost of expression with disease spreading.
Conclusion: Our study shows a compartment-dependent effect of maspin
expression in primary and metastatic melanomas. Further studies will be
aimed to dissect the biological significance of maspin expression and
localization during disease progression.

