Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: MicroRNA 203 modulates glioma cell migration and invasion by
targeting ROBO1


MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate mRNA stability and protein expression, and
certain miRNAs have been demonstrated to act either as oncogenes or tumor
suppressors. A potential role for miRNAs in malignancy has been suggested
by the location of the genes for several miRNAs at sites of translocation
breakpoints or deletions linked to a specific neoplastic state. Allelic
deletion on chromosome 14q plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
GBM and was thought to harbor multiple tumor suppressor genes associated
with GBM, a region which also encodes mir-203. Real-time PCR and insitu
hybridization showed decreased levels of mir203 expression in anaplastic
astrocytoma and glioblastoma tissues and cell lines. Exogenous expression
of mir-203 using a plasmid expressing mir-203 precursor (pmir-203)
suppressed cell invasion and migration in SNB19 glioblastoma cell line
and 4910 xenograft cells. We determined that one relevant target of
miR-203 was ROBO1, since miR-203 expression decreased mRNA and protein
levels as determined by RT-PCR and western blot analysis. Moreover,
cotransfection experiments using luciferase-based transcription reporter
assay have shown direct regulation of ROBO1 3-UTR regions by miR-203
which was significantly abrogated when mutating the predicted miR-203
seed regions in the pMIR-REPORT UTR constructs, thereby validating the
direct interaction between miR-203 and the ROBO1 3-UTRs. Concordantly,
over expressing ROBO1 expression construct with no mir-203 binding site
blocked pmir-203 mediated suppression of migration and invasion. Taken
together these studies demonstrate that up regulation of Robo1 in
response to the decrease in mir-203 in glioma cells is responsible for
glioma tumor cell migration and invasion.

