Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A novel genome-wide assay identifies chromatin domains involved in
stem cell behavior


The activity of DNA regulatory elements are often controlled by chromatin
structure. Active regulatory elements are located within open or
accessible chromatin. If a regulatory element is in a closed or
inaccessible chromatin environment it is functionally silenced. We find
that when permeabilized cells are treated with nuclease in situ, small
DNA fragments, corresponding to accessible chromatin, can be readily
isolated. These small DNA fragments, when analyzed by next-generation
sequencing, provide a global map of active genomic regulatory domains. We
used this technology to identify chromatin domains involved in stem cell
behavior using NTera2 cells as a model system. By comparing
differentiated and undifferentiated NTera2 cells we identified more than
500 genomic regions that are accessible only in undifferentiated cells.
We then used these results, together with ENCODE data analyzing human
embryonic stem cells and human cancer cells, to identify genomic
regulatory regions that are active only in stem cells. Importantly, many
of these regions are proximal to genes that are associated with cell
stemness (NANOG and LIN28 are examples). In addition, several
uncharacterized genes that have RNA expression characteristics similar to
NANOG and LIN28 were identified. Interestingly, several stem-cell
specific active regulatory domains were found adjacent to previously
uncharacterized, stem-cell specific non-coding RNA transcript regions.
These findings demonstrate that this approach can serve as a new
discovery tool to identify chromatin regions that control stem cell
behavior. In addition, chromatin regions associated with other biological
or pathological states could also be identified using this approach.

