Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Higher doses of BAMLET may be required to induce cell death in
HPV16-infected cancer cells


Introduction: Recent experiments showed that BAMLET (Bovine Alpha
lactalbumin Made LEthal to Tumor cells), biochemically equivalent to
HAMLET, administered at doses shown to induce volume reduction and
clearance of cutaneous wart in humans was insufficient to clear
DMBA-induced skin papillomas in C57/Bl6 mice expressing HPV16 E7
transgene on a K14 promoter. Gustufsson et al., reported >75% subjects
and 96% of warts reduced lesion volume when 0.7 mM HAMLET solution was
topically administered. Thus, BAMLET's limited effect on papilloma
reduction led to an in vitro dose-response experiment evaluating
exponentially increasing doses of BAMLET on HPV16-infected CaSki cells, a
well described cancer cell line. Five doses were selected versus normal
saline controls and the cell viability was evaluated at 4, 24 and 72
hours using trypan blue exclusion assay. Methods: Caski cells were
cultured in 6-well plates, 2 x 105 cells/well were initialized and
allowed to grow to confluence. The initiating dose was based on published
data as the exposure dose for our initial mouse studies. Exponential
extrapolations of the baseline dose were evaluated: BAMLET administered
at 0, 17.5M (1.0-fold), 31.1M (1.8-fold), 55.3M (3.2-fold), 98.4M
(5.6-fold) and 175.0M (10-fold) at time 0 and allowed to grow. At 4, 24,
and 72 hours, cells were typsinized, pelleted, and resuspended in 1 ml
PBS. A 10L aliquot of Trypan-blue (0.4% v/v) was mixed with 10 L of
resuspended cells and incubated for 3 minutes. Duplicate specimens were
evaluated under microscopy (10X) using a hemocytometer. Viable (white)
and non-viable (blue) cells were counted and the average prevalence of
viable cells was estimated for each dose. Results: For 0, 17.5M, 31.1M
and 55.3M doses, viability at 4, 24, and 72 hours were closely
approximated: 74-92%, 81-91% and 67-88%, respectively. However, at 98.4M
and 175.0M doses, a significant reduction in viability was observed in a
time-dependent manner. Specifically, 95% vs. 91%, 68% vs. 0% and 6% vs.
2% viability were each observed at 4, 24 and 72 hours for these doses,
respectively. Conclusions: These data suggest that the sensitivity of
HPV16 infected cells to BAMLET may differ significantly from low-risk
viruses that often cause cutaneous warts. While these data sheds light on
the ineffectiveness of BAMLET in our ongoing animal experiment, they
should be similarly considered in trials of BAMLET in humans where more
pathogenic HPVs are the causal agent.

