Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Polymorphisms in the nucleotide excision repair genes, ERCC1 and
ERCC2/XPD and carcinogen DNA adducts in human lung


Objectives Excision repair cross-complementing group 1 (ERCC1) and
excision repair cross-complementing group 2/xeroderma pigmentosum group D
(ERCC2/XPD) in the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathways that removes
DNA damage caused by tobacco smoking carcinogen such as polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). However, no studies have examined their
role in DNA adducts in target human lung tissue, a dosimeter for lung
cancer risk. Therefore, we investigated whether the polymorphisms in SNPs
in NER pathways associated with the DNA adduct formation in human lung
tissue. We further analyzed these relationship divided by adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma, main type of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Methods The study population consisted of 135 lung cancer
patients from the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). Genotyping was
completed for SNPs in ERCC1 [C8092A (rs3212986) and C118T (rs11615)] and
ERCC2/XPD [Asp312Asn (rs1799793) and Lys751Gln (rs1052559)] using
PCR-RFLP method and the PCR with fluorescent allele-specific
oligonucleotide probes (TaqMan method). DNA adduct levels were measured
as relative adduct levels per 1010 nucleotides by 32P-postlabeling in the
lung. Multiple regression models were used to estimate adjusted percent
change in DNA adduct levels associated with genotypes of the NER genes
ERCC1 and ERCC2/XPD. Results After adjusting for potential confounders,
DNA adduct levels in lung increased by 73.5% [95% confidence interval
(CI), 22.6 to 288.9] for the ERCC2/XPD rs1799793AA genotype and by 43.7%
(95% CI, 30.0 to 194.6) for ERCC2/XPD rs1052559GG genotype compared with
their corresponding wild type homozygous genotypes in overall lung cancer
patients, but it did not reach statistical significance. We found that
DNA adducts levels in lung increased by 166.6% (95% CI, 5.0 to 648.3, P =
0.07) for ERCC2/XPD rs1799793AA genotype in patients with squamous cell
carcinoma and the trend was borderline significant (P for trend = 0.06).
Conclusions Polymorphisms of DNA repair genes, ERCC2/XPD Asp312Asn, may
affect increased level of DNA adducts in the lung. Further large scale
studies are needed to confirm our findings. Supported by NIH grants
CA074386, CA092824, and CA90578.

