Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Mitochondrial DNA copy number and colorectal cancer risk: Results
from the Shanghai Women's Health Study


Mitochondria play an important role in cellular energy metabolism, free
radical generation, and apoptosis. Cumulative evidence suggests that
mtDNA copy number may be a biomarker for cancer risk. Using a nested
case-control design, we evaluated mtDNA copy number in peripheral blood
cells in relation to colorectal cancer risk. Included in the study were
436 colorectal cancer cases and 881 matched controls identified from the
Shanghai Woman's Health Study, a population-based, prospective cohort
study conducted among Chinese women. Relative mtDNA copy number was
determined in triplicate by a quantitative real-time PCR assay using
peripheral blood cell DNA samples collected at the time of study
enrollment, prior to cancer diagnosis. Baseline levels of mtDNA copy
number were lower among women who subsequently developed colorectal
cancer (geometric mean = 0.271, 95% CI: 0.263-0.279) than those who
remained cancer-free (geometric mean = 0.281, 95% CI: 0.275-0.288)
(P=0.0274). Multivariate adjusted odds ratios were 1.15 (95% CI:
0.80-1.65), 1.12 (95% CI: 0.78-1.60) and 1.58 (95% CI: 1.10-2.26) for
third to the first quartile of mtDNA copy numbers, respectively,
comparing with the highest quartile (P for trend = 0.0135). The
association varied little by the interval between blood draw and cancer
diagnosis. To our knowledge, this is the first large prospective study
evaluating the association of mtDNA copy number with subsequent risk of
developing colorectal cancer. Our data suggests that decreased mtDNA copy
number may be associated with increased colorectal cancer risk, and mtDNA
copy number measured in peripheral blood cells may be a potential
biomarker useful for colorectal cancer risk assessment.

