Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Location matters: The impact of the location of CpG sites on the
specificity of methylation biomarkers for HCC


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second fastest growing cancer and
one of the top 10 causes of cancer deaths in the United States. The
5-year survival rate is 14%, ranging from 26% among early stage tumors to
only 2% in late stage HCC. The only available biomarker for screening,
serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), has a low sensitivity of detection
(40%-60%), so the need for a better detection method is urgent. Given the
heterogeneous nature of HCC, a panel of genetic and epigenetic biomarkers
would be needed to obtain high sensitivity for the early diagnosis of
HCC. In the course of assembling a panel of epigenetic markers for HCC,
we noticed variable HCC specificity of three extensively studied
potential methylation biomarkers, APC, GSTP1, and RASSF1A. We
hypothesized that the specificity of promoter methylation of the tumor
suppressor genes APC, GSTP1, and RASSF1A as a biomarker for HCC could
depend upon the location of the CpG sites analyzed. To test this
hypothesis, we used bisulfite-PCR sequencing to compare the methylation
status of the promoter region of these three genes in DNA isolated from
HCC, matched adjacent non-HCC, cirrhosis, hepatitis, and normal liver. We
identified HCC-specific CpG methylation sites and unique liver-specific
methylation patterns in the promoter region of the APC (Jain et. al,
PloSOne 2011) and GSTP1 genes and in a more HCC-specific promoter region
(p Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the second fastest growing cancer
and one of the top 10 causes of cancer deaths in the United States. The
5-year survival rate is 14%, ranging from 26% among early stage tumors to
only 2% in late stage HCC. The only available biomarker for screening,
serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), has a low sensitivity of detection
(40%-60%), so the need for a better detection method is urgent. Given the
heterogeneous nature of HCC, a panel of genetic and epigenetic biomarkers
would be needed to obtain high sensitivity for the early diagnosis of
HCC. In the course of assembling a panel of epigenetic markers for HCC,
we noticed variable HCC specificity of three extensively studied
potential methylation biomarkers, APC, GSTP1, and RASSF1A. We
hypothesized that the specificity of promoter methylation of the tumor
suppressor genes APC, GSTP1, and RASSF1A as a biomarker for HCC could
depend upon the location of the CpG sites analyzed. To test this
hypothesis, we used bisulfite-PCR sequencing to compare the methylation
status of the promoter region of these three genes in DNA isolated from
HCC, matched adjacent non-HCC, cirrhosis, hepatitis, and normal liver. We
identified HCC-specific CpG methylation sites and unique liver-specific
methylation patterns in the promoter region of the APC (Jain et. al,
PloSOne 2011) and GSTP1 genes and in a more HCC-specific promoter region
(p < 0.05 by Fisher's exact test) of the RASSF1A gene. Together, these
results proved our hypothesis and provided an interpretation for the
variability in the literature. Using PCR-based technology, we have
developed assays for a panel of genetic and epigenetic markers for liver
cancer screening. These assays were first tested in tissue to determine
their ability to distinguish HCC (n=120) from cirrhosis (n=35) and
hepatitis (n=35). The AUROC is 0.809 for mAPC, 0.756 for mGSTP1, 0.887
for mRASSF1, and 0.733 for TP53. When combined, this panel of DNA markers
had an AUROC of 0.931 and identified 90% of AFP-negative tumors. This
study clearly demonstrates (1) the importance of location of CpG site
methylation for HCC specificity and the way in which liver-specific DNA
methylation should be considered when an epigenetic DNA marker is studied
for detection of HCC and (2) the potential of a sensitive DNA test for
HCC screening. An analysis of the performance of this panel of markers in
peripherals (blood and urine) for HCC screening is in progress.

