Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Moderate calorie restriction activates autophagy during tumor
growth suppression


Multiple mouse models of pancreatic, colon, prostate, skin and breast
cancer have shown that calorie restriction (CR) prevents obesity and
suppresses tumor development and growth. In normal muscle, studies have
shown that mild CR attenuates the age-related impairment of autophagy,
cellular damage, and cell death. Autophagy is a survival response in
solid tumors that co-localizes with hypoxic regions, allowing tolerance
to metabolic stress. Autophagy also protects cells from genome damage and
limits both inflammation and cell death as possible means to tumor
suppression. Thus, we hypothesized that autophagy plays a major role in
CR-mediated tumor inhibition. To test this hypothesis, we utilized
immortalized baby mouse kidney epithelium (iBMK) tumor cell lines. iBMK
cells were first immortalized by E1A and dominant negative p53 (p54DD)
transfection, and rendered apoptosis-deficient by Bcl-2 overexpression.
They were then transfected with oncogenic Ras and EGFP-LC3 plasmids. Cell
lines were either autophagy deficient through knockout of the essential
autophagy gene Atg5 (Atg5 -/-) or were autophagy competent (Atg5 +/+).
Female nude mice were fed either control AIN-76A diet ad-libitum or a CR
regimen (isonutrient; 30% reduction in calories relative to control
group) for 8 weeks prior to subcutaneous flank injection of cell lines
(n=15 per group). CR mice were significantly lighter, had decreased body
fat percentage, and had lower fasting glucose levels (pMultiple mouse
models of pancreatic, colon, prostate, skin and breast cancer have shown
that calorie restriction (CR) prevents obesity and suppresses tumor
development and growth. In normal muscle, studies have shown that mild CR
attenuates the age-related impairment of autophagy, cellular damage, and
cell death. Autophagy is a survival response in solid tumors that
co-localizes with hypoxic regions, allowing tolerance to metabolic
stress. Autophagy also protects cells from genome damage and limits both
inflammation and cell death as possible means to tumor suppression. Thus,
we hypothesized that autophagy plays a major role in CR-mediated tumor
inhibition. To test this hypothesis, we utilized immortalized baby mouse
kidney epithelium (iBMK) tumor cell lines. iBMK cells were first
immortalized by E1A and dominant negative p53 (p54DD) transfection, and
rendered apoptosis-deficient by Bcl-2 overexpression. They were then
transfected with oncogenic Ras and EGFP-LC3 plasmids. Cell lines were
either autophagy deficient through knockout of the essential autophagy
gene Atg5 (Atg5 -/-) or were autophagy competent (Atg5 +/+). Female nude
mice were fed either control AIN-76A diet ad-libitum or a CR regimen
(isonutrient; 30% reduction in calories relative to control group) for 8
weeks prior to subcutaneous flank injection of cell lines (n=15 per
group). CR mice were significantly lighter, had decreased body fat
percentage, and had lower fasting glucose levels (p<0.001 for all).
Additionally, CR mice had lower serum levels of IGF-1 (pMultiple mouse
models of pancreatic, colon, prostate, skin and breast cancer have shown
that calorie restriction (CR) prevents obesity and suppresses tumor
development and growth. In normal muscle, studies have shown that mild CR
attenuates the age-related impairment of autophagy, cellular damage, and
cell death. Autophagy is a survival response in solid tumors that
co-localizes with hypoxic regions, allowing tolerance to metabolic
stress. Autophagy also protects cells from genome damage and limits both
inflammation and cell death as possible means to tumor suppression. Thus,
we hypothesized that autophagy plays a major role in CR-mediated tumor
inhibition. To test this hypothesis, we utilized immortalized baby mouse
kidney epithelium (iBMK) tumor cell lines. iBMK cells were first
immortalized by E1A and dominant negative p53 (p54DD) transfection, and
rendered apoptosis-deficient by Bcl-2 overexpression. They were then
transfected with oncogenic Ras and EGFP-LC3 plasmids. Cell lines were
either autophagy deficient through knockout of the essential autophagy
gene Atg5 (Atg5 -/-) or were autophagy competent (Atg5 +/+). Female nude
mice were fed either control AIN-76A diet ad-libitum or a CR regimen
(isonutrient; 30% reduction in calories relative to control group) for 8
weeks prior to subcutaneous flank injection of cell lines (n=15 per
group). CR mice were significantly lighter, had decreased body fat
percentage, and had lower fasting glucose levels (p<0.001 for all).
Additionally, CR mice had lower serum levels of IGF-1 (p<0.001), insulin
(pMultiple mouse models of pancreatic, colon, prostate, skin and breast
cancer have shown that calorie restriction (CR) prevents obesity and
suppresses tumor development and growth. In normal muscle, studies have
shown that mild CR attenuates the age-related impairment of autophagy,
cellular damage, and cell death. Autophagy is a survival response in
solid tumors that co-localizes with hypoxic regions, allowing tolerance
to metabolic stress. Autophagy also protects cells from genome damage and
limits both inflammation and cell death as possible means to tumor
suppression. Thus, we hypothesized that autophagy plays a major role in
CR-mediated tumor inhibition. To test this hypothesis, we utilized
immortalized baby mouse kidney epithelium (iBMK) tumor cell lines. iBMK
cells were first immortalized by E1A and dominant negative p53 (p54DD)
transfection, and rendered apoptosis-deficient by Bcl-2 overexpression.
They were then transfected with oncogenic Ras and EGFP-LC3 plasmids. Cell
lines were either autophagy deficient through knockout of the essential
autophagy gene Atg5 (Atg5 -/-) or were autophagy competent (Atg5 +/+).
Female nude mice were fed either control AIN-76A diet ad-libitum or a CR
regimen (isonutrient; 30% reduction in calories relative to control
group) for 8 weeks prior to subcutaneous flank injection of cell lines
(n=15 per group). CR mice were significantly lighter, had decreased body
fat percentage, and had lower fasting glucose levels (p<0.001 for all).
Additionally, CR mice had lower serum levels of IGF-1 (p<0.001), insulin
(p<0.001), leptin (pMultiple mouse models of pancreatic, colon, prostate,
skin and breast cancer have shown that calorie restriction (CR) prevents
obesity and suppresses tumor development and growth. In normal muscle,
studies have shown that mild CR attenuates the age-related impairment of
autophagy, cellular damage, and cell death. Autophagy is a survival
response in solid tumors that co-localizes with hypoxic regions, allowing
tolerance to metabolic stress. Autophagy also protects cells from genome
damage and limits both inflammation and cell death as possible means to
tumor suppression. Thus, we hypothesized that autophagy plays a major
role in CR-mediated tumor inhibition. To test this hypothesis, we
utilized immortalized baby mouse kidney epithelium (iBMK) tumor cell
lines. iBMK cells were first immortalized by E1A and dominant negative
p53 (p54DD) transfection, and rendered apoptosis-deficient by Bcl-2
overexpression. They were then transfected with oncogenic Ras and
EGFP-LC3 plasmids. Cell lines were either autophagy deficient through
knockout of the essential autophagy gene Atg5 (Atg5 -/-) or were
autophagy competent (Atg5 +/+). Female nude mice were fed either control
AIN-76A diet ad-libitum or a CR regimen (isonutrient; 30% reduction in
calories relative to control group) for 8 weeks prior to subcutaneous
flank injection of cell lines (n=15 per group). CR mice were
significantly lighter, had decreased body fat percentage, and had lower
fasting glucose levels (p<0.001 for all). Additionally, CR mice had lower
serum levels of IGF-1 (p<0.001), insulin (p<0.001), leptin (p<0.001), and
resistin (p=0.01), and higher serum adiponectin (p CR; p CR; p<0.001),
while autophagy deficient tumors were unaffected by CR (no difference
between control and CR tumors). In order to determine the effect of CR on
LC3 localization and activation of autophagy, we repeated the injections
in a separate cohort of control and CR mice (n=2 per timepoint). Tumors
were collected at 1, 3, 8, and 15 days post-injection. In CR mice
injected with autophagy competent cells, we saw LC3 translocate to the
autophagosomes, demonstrated by punctate perinuclear localization, as
early as 1d post-injection. In contrast, in control mice injected with
autophagy competent cells, and in all mice injected with autophagy
deficient cells, we saw a diffuse cytoplasmic LC3 localization. In
conclusion, we found that CR is capable of activating autophagy as a
mechanism of tumor growth suppression and increases LC3 autophagosome
localization in tumors. Taken together, these findings suggest that
autophagy may play a key role in the anticancer effects of CR and may be
an important intervention target for the prevention and treatment of
obesity-related cancer.

