Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of potential prostate cancer biomarkers associated
with TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and PTEN deletions


Background: ERG gene rearrangements and PTEN genomic deletions have been
shown to be associated with specific molecular subtype of prostate cancer
(PCA). It has been also suggested that tumors showing those two genetic
aberrations are associated with worse prognosis compared to tumors with
none of those genetic aberrations. In this study, we investigated gene
expression differences between those two classes of tumors to identify
potential genetic targets and pathways Material and Methods: 6144
informative genes belonging to 59 HRPCA samples were previously studied
using the DASL platform. We used Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), as
an effective method for analyzing gene expression data based on their ERG
and PTEN status. We used the normal prostate cell line RWPE-1 as well as
different prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, VCaP, DU145 and PC-3) to
validate the results of microarray expression profiling. We screened for
the expression of the different proteins by means of real time PCR and
western blot studies. Results: MMP1 and LEF1 protein expression was much
higher in VCaP cells and almost absent in RWPE-1 cells while MEIS2, CHD5
and Syntenin were expressed differently between cell lines and were not
specifically in VCaP which is only cell line that harbor the ERG fusion.
Conclusion: In this preliminary study we show that MPP1 and LEF-1 might
be associated with the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion since their expression was much
higher in VCaP cell line compared to other cell lines. However, further
studies are still needed to confirm these results in TMPRSS2-ERG
knockdown VCaP cells.

