Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Pre-clinical targeting of the metabolic phenotype of lymphoma by
AZD3965, a selective inhibitor of monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1)


Introduction - The metabolic phenotype of tumours (relative to most
normal tissues) is shifted from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic
(Warburg Effect) or anaerobic glycolysis. This enables tumours to meet
their energetic and biosynthetic demands even under conditions of low
nutrient and O2. The end-product of glycolysis is lactate, a metabolic
dead end, which if allowed to accumulate in the tumour cell may cause
feedback inhibition of glycolysis and intra-cellular acidification
resulting in inhibition of cell growth or survival. Experimental data -
We have studied the effects of a potent, selective and orally available
inhibitor of MCT1 in lymphoma cell lines and in vivo models. AZD3965 is a
small molecule inhibitor of MCT1 with a binding affinity of 1.6 nM, is 6
fold selective over MCT2 and does not inhibit MCT4 at 10 M. Both lactate
transport and cell growth are potently inhibited by AZD3965 in lymphoma
cell lines that preferentially express MCT1. Lactate transport inhibition
in some cell lines also induces a cytotoxic effect. In vitro combination
studies show that lactate transport inhibition can enhance the induction
of cell death by doxorubicin. Blocking lactate transport in vitro also
leads to a rapid inhibition of glucose uptake in the Raji Burkitt's
lymphoma cell line. In vivo, AZD3965 is well tolerated and induces a dose
and time dependent accumulation of lactate in the tumours, suppresses
tumour growth and in the Raji model potentiates the effects of Rituxan,
doxorubicin and bendamustine. Conclusions - Here we demonstrate that
selective inhibition of lactate transport by the MCT1 inhibitor AZD3965
offers an novel mechanism for targeting the metabolic phenotype in
tumours that preferentially express MCT1.

