Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Risk of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in solid organ transplant
recipients


Introduction: Solid organ transplants, while potentially life-saving
treatments, are associated with increased risk of non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(NHL) due to chronic immunosuppression, viral infection, and other
factors. Given the etiologic heterogeneity of NHL subtypes, we conducted
the first comprehensive evaluation among solid organ transplant
recipients of factors that may specifically impact risk for diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), a common and highly aggressive NHL subtype that
has been closely associated with immune perturbation. Materials and
Methods: Data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients
(SRTR) were linked to 14 population-based U.S. cancer registries by
probabilistic matching and manual review to identify a cohort of 178,522
transplant recipients for follow-up and ascertainment of incident DLBCL.
We calculated standardized incidence ratios (SIR = observed/expected
cases) to compare the relative risk of DLBCL in transplant recipients
with that expected in the general population. Differences between SIRs
among patient groups were evaluated in multivariable Poisson regression
models. Results: We identified 948 cases of DLBCL in the cohort,
accounting for more than half of the 1,617 NHLs diagnosed, compared with
70.0 cases expected in the general population (SIR = 13.5, 95% CI =
12.7-14.4). Kidney was the most commonly transplanted organ in the cohort
(59%, SIR = 11.0, 95% CI =10.0-12.1), but the SIR for DLBCL was highest
after lung (SIR = 39.5, 95% CI = 31.7-48.7) and pancreas or
kidney-pancreas transplants (SIR = 32.6, 95% CI = 24.6-42.5; Phomogeneity
Introduction: Solid organ transplants, while potentially life-saving
treatments, are associated with increased risk of non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(NHL) due to chronic immunosuppression, viral infection, and other
factors. Given the etiologic heterogeneity of NHL subtypes, we conducted
the first comprehensive evaluation among solid organ transplant
recipients of factors that may specifically impact risk for diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), a common and highly aggressive NHL subtype that
has been closely associated with immune perturbation. Materials and
Methods: Data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients
(SRTR) were linked to 14 population-based U.S. cancer registries by
probabilistic matching and manual review to identify a cohort of 178,522
transplant recipients for follow-up and ascertainment of incident DLBCL.
We calculated standardized incidence ratios (SIR = observed/expected
cases) to compare the relative risk of DLBCL in transplant recipients
with that expected in the general population. Differences between SIRs
among patient groups were evaluated in multivariable Poisson regression
models. Results: We identified 948 cases of DLBCL in the cohort,
accounting for more than half of the 1,617 NHLs diagnosed, compared with
70.0 cases expected in the general population (SIR = 13.5, 95% CI =
12.7-14.4). Kidney was the most commonly transplanted organ in the cohort
(59%, SIR = 11.0, 95% CI =10.0-12.1), but the SIR for DLBCL was highest
after lung (SIR = 39.5, 95% CI = 31.7-48.7) and pancreas or
kidney-pancreas transplants (SIR = 32.6, 95% CI = 24.6-42.5; Phomogeneity
<0.01). The very high SIR in recipients aged 0-19 at transplantation (SIR
= 378.9, 95% CI 318.3-447.6) dropped rapidly with advancing age
(PtrendIntroduction: Solid organ transplants, while potentially
life-saving treatments, are associated with increased risk of non-Hodgkin
lymphomas (NHL) due to chronic immunosuppression, viral infection, and
other factors. Given the etiologic heterogeneity of NHL subtypes, we
conducted the first comprehensive evaluation among solid organ transplant
recipients of factors that may specifically impact risk for diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), a common and highly aggressive NHL subtype that
has been closely associated with immune perturbation. Materials and
Methods: Data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients
(SRTR) were linked to 14 population-based U.S. cancer registries by
probabilistic matching and manual review to identify a cohort of 178,522
transplant recipients for follow-up and ascertainment of incident DLBCL.
We calculated standardized incidence ratios (SIR = observed/expected
cases) to compare the relative risk of DLBCL in transplant recipients
with that expected in the general population. Differences between SIRs
among patient groups were evaluated in multivariable Poisson regression
models. Results: We identified 948 cases of DLBCL in the cohort,
accounting for more than half of the 1,617 NHLs diagnosed, compared with
70.0 cases expected in the general population (SIR = 13.5, 95% CI =
12.7-14.4). Kidney was the most commonly transplanted organ in the cohort
(59%, SIR = 11.0, 95% CI =10.0-12.1), but the SIR for DLBCL was highest
after lung (SIR = 39.5, 95% CI = 31.7-48.7) and pancreas or
kidney-pancreas transplants (SIR = 32.6, 95% CI = 24.6-42.5; Phomogeneity
<0.01). The very high SIR in recipients aged 0-19 at transplantation (SIR
= 378.9, 95% CI 318.3-447.6) dropped rapidly with advancing age
(Ptrend<0.01) but was still markedly elevated among recipients aged 65 at
transplantation (SIR = 5.8, 95% CI 4.6-7.3). Females had higher SIRs for
DLBCL than males (15.8 vs. 12.6; Phomogeneity = 0.02). DLBCL risks were
particularly striking for recipients who were Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
seronegative at time of transplant (SIR = 43.7, 95% CI = 34.7-54.3)
compared with EBV seropositive recipients (SIR = 9.3, 95% CI = 7.6-11.1;
Phomogeneity Introduction: Solid organ transplants, while potentially
life-saving treatments, are associated with increased risk of non-Hodgkin
lymphomas (NHL) due to chronic immunosuppression, viral infection, and
other factors. Given the etiologic heterogeneity of NHL subtypes, we
conducted the first comprehensive evaluation among solid organ transplant
recipients of factors that may specifically impact risk for diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), a common and highly aggressive NHL subtype that
has been closely associated with immune perturbation. Materials and
Methods: Data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients
(SRTR) were linked to 14 population-based U.S. cancer registries by
probabilistic matching and manual review to identify a cohort of 178,522
transplant recipients for follow-up and ascertainment of incident DLBCL.
We calculated standardized incidence ratios (SIR = observed/expected
cases) to compare the relative risk of DLBCL in transplant recipients
with that expected in the general population. Differences between SIRs
among patient groups were evaluated in multivariable Poisson regression
models. Results: We identified 948 cases of DLBCL in the cohort,
accounting for more than half of the 1,617 NHLs diagnosed, compared with
70.0 cases expected in the general population (SIR = 13.5, 95% CI =
12.7-14.4). Kidney was the most commonly transplanted organ in the cohort
(59%, SIR = 11.0, 95% CI =10.0-12.1), but the SIR for DLBCL was highest
after lung (SIR = 39.5, 95% CI = 31.7-48.7) and pancreas or
kidney-pancreas transplants (SIR = 32.6, 95% CI = 24.6-42.5; Phomogeneity
<0.01). The very high SIR in recipients aged 0-19 at transplantation (SIR
= 378.9, 95% CI 318.3-447.6) dropped rapidly with advancing age
(Ptrend<0.01) but was still markedly elevated among recipients aged 65 at
transplantation (SIR = 5.8, 95% CI 4.6-7.3). Females had higher SIRs for
DLBCL than males (15.8 vs. 12.6; Phomogeneity = 0.02). DLBCL risks were
particularly striking for recipients who were Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
seronegative at time of transplant (SIR = 43.7, 95% CI = 34.7-54.3)
compared with EBV seropositive recipients (SIR = 9.3, 95% CI = 7.6-11.1;
Phomogeneity <0.01). This difference was even more pronounced for DLBCLs
occurring within 2 years of transplantation (SIR = 78.8 vs. 11.8 in EBV
seronegative vs. seropositive recipients). Conclusion: The risk of DLBCL,
a common and aggressive subtype of NHL, was found to be greatly increased
in solid organ transplant recipients compared with the general
population. Particularly high SIRs were observed for the youngest
recipients, as well as recipients who were EBV seronegative at time of
transplant, highlighting the importance of primary EBV infection
following transplant.

