Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reducing sequence artefacts from FFPE DNA for cancer diagnostics


Non-reproducible sequence artefacts have been frequently detected in DNA
extracted from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues.
Studies of ancient DNA reveal that deamination of cytosine to uracil is a
major cause of DNA damage. We hypothesised that similar lesions may occur
in FFPE DNA and examined the role of uracil lesions on generation of
transitional G:C to A:T artefacts in FFPE DNA by treatment with uracil
DNA glycosylase (UDG). High resolution melting (HRM)-based assays were
used for rapid and cost-effective screening of artefacts. The artefact
rate was assessed by limited copy number-HRM (LCN-HRM) in FFPE DNA
samples in which multiple G:C to A:T artefacts were found. The effect of
UDG treatment on detection of true sequence changes was examined by
testing mutational hotspots at the EGFR, KRAS and AKT1 genes. A high HRM
positive rate as judged by the formation of heteroduplexes was found in
FFPE DNA by LCN-HRM. This was markedly reduced after treatment with UDG.
UDG treatment specifically suppressed the formation of artefacts in FFPE
DNA and did not affect the detection of true KRAS codon 12 and EGFR exon
19 and 20 mutations. In conclusion, this study reports for the first time
that uracil lesions due to cytosine deamination is one of the major
causes of artefacts in FFPE DNA and the use of uracil-DNA-glycosylase
that removes uracil lesions on DNA can lead to a significant reduction of
artefacts. This finding will thus greatly improve biomarker studies using
DNA samples derived from FFPE tissues, which has immediate implications
especially to diagnostic settings.

