Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of FQIT: An imidazo[5,1-f][1,2,4]triazine derived dual
IGF-1R/IR inhibitor


Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) has been recognized as a
major target in cancer drug discovery due to its strong implications in
various stages of tumorigenesis based on accumulated preclinical data
over the years. Recent research on compensatory crosstalk between IGF-1R
and insulin receptor (IR) signaling pathways suggests that targeting both
receptors is critical to fully blocking the IGF signaling axis.
Therefore, inhibition of both receptors is anticipated to result in a
more therapeutically beneficial response than targeting IGF-1R alone
(e.g. IGF-1R specific antibodies). These findings provided the biological
rationale as well as set the foundation for the pursuit and ultimate
discovery of OSI-906 (linsitinib), a small molecule dual IGF-1R/IR
inhibitor currently in clinical development. As part of OSI's ongoing
investment in a small molecule drug discovery platform targeting IGF-1R
and IR, a new series of potent and selective
imidazo[5,1-f][1,2,4]triazine derived inhibitors of IGF-1R and IR have
been identified. Structure-activity relationships and optimization driven
by structure-based drug design (SBDD) leading to the discovery of FQIT, a
potent, highly selective, well-tolerated and orally bioavailable dual
inhibitor of IGF-1R and IR with in vivo efficacy in multiple tumor
xenograft models will be discussed.

