Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: PF-04449913 reverts multi drug resistance (MDR) by a strong
down-regulation of ABCA2 and BCL2 on leukemia stem cells in phase I acute
myeloid leukemia and chronic myeloid leukemia treated patients


PF-04449913 is a selective and potent inhibitor of the Hh pathway and
leukemia self-renewal and is currently being evaluated in Phase I
clinical trials. We studied leukemia stem cell population (CD34+
subpopulation) collected before and after 28 days treatment in a phase I
dose escalation protocol (Clinical Trial Gov. NTC00953758) enrolling
selected hematological malignancies including MF, MDS, CML, CMML and AML.
We collected and separated highly purified (98%) bone marrow
hematopoietic progenitor cells (CD34+ populations) in 5 AML, 1 MF and 2
CML patients, by immunomagnetic separation, and analyzed them for gene
expression profile (GEP) using Affimetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 platform. We
have observed that 1197 genes were differentially expressed between CD34+
cells collected before and after 28 days of PF-04449913 dose finding oral
therapy. We demonstrated a down regulation of Bcl2 (fold change 1.03004;
p value= 0.01), ABCA2 (fold change 1.08966; p value=0.03), Bcl2l13 (fold
change 1,04259; p-value=0,027642), Bcl2l2 (fold change 1,17214;
p-value=0,000768), Casp4 (fold change 1,06551; p-value=0,032428), Casp7
(fold change 1,01569; p-value=0,006688), Casp10 (fold-change 1,3076;
p-value=0,050431), ABCF1 (fold change 1,04999; p-value=0,07213). On the
contrary, ABCB1 (fold change 1,46592) and ABCG2 (fold change 1,16103) are
respectively up and down regulated, with a not statistically significant
p-value. Bcl2 (B-cell lymphoma 2), Bcl2l2 (Bcl2-like protein 2) and
Bcl2l13 (Bcl2-like 13) are the founding members of the Bcl-2 family of
apoptosis regulator proteins. Recent studies showed that Hh signals
upregulate Bcl2 to promote cellular survival. Casp 4,7,10 (Caspases) are
a family of cysteine proteases that play essential roles in apoptosis,
necrosis, and inflammation. ABCA2 (ATP-binding cassette sub-family A
member 2), ABCF1 (ATP-binding cassette sub-family F member 1), ABCB1
(ATP-binding cassette sub-family B member 1, MDR1), ABCG2 (ATP-binding
cassette sub-family G member 2) belong to the superfamily of adenosine
triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) transporters. One mechanism of MDR is
the increased expression of ABC drug transporters, resulting in low
intracellular drug concentrations. We evaluated Gli1 and Smo expression
by GEP, comparing data before and after 28 days of treatment with
PF-04449913 and we observed a down regulation of both genes (fold changes
1.0775 and 1.07702 respectively). PF-04449913 is able to revert MRD
mechanisms of LSC by a strong down regulation of genes (Bcl-2, Bcl-2l13,
Bcl-2l2, ABCA2, and ABCF1), which are critical for chemoresistance in
acute and chronic leukemia patients. Acknowledgments. Pfizer, European
LeukemiaNet, FIRB 2006, AIRC, AIL, COFIN, University of Bologna and
BolognAIL.

