Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: -mannosylceramide, a new NKT cell agonist, induces tumor immunity
without anergy induction in NKT cells


NKT cells are CD1d-restricted T cells recognizing lipid antigens. When
NKT cells are activated with a prototypic antigen, -galactosylceramide
(-GalCer), they induce strong tumor immunity. Strong preclinical evidence
for -GalCer's ability to induce tumor immunity through NKT
cell-activation led to translation into therapy of cancer patients.
However, so far minimal success has been achieved in patients. We
reasoned that having an -linked sugar moiety in the structure of -GalCer
can be a target for anti--linked galactose natural antibodies, which are
a cause of acute xenograft rejection, and which might abrogate the
biological activity of -GalCer. After testing multiple glycosylceramides
with potential agonistic activity for NKT cells, we discovered that
-mannosylceramide (-ManCer) has strong activity to induce tumor immunity
through a TNF-- and NOS-dependent mechanism that is distinct from the
IFN- dependent protection induced by -GalCer. Another downside of -GalCer
treatment is induction of long-lasting anergy in activated NKT cells.
Since we did not observe massive cytokine production with -ManCer, in
contrast to -GalCer, we asked whether this new compound activates NKT
cells without inducing long-lasting anergy in vivo. In contrast to
-GalCer, -ManCer did not induce long-lasting anergy of activated NKT
cells. This was correlated with the observation that -ManCer induced only
a short term expression of PD-1 on activated NKT cells, which has been
reported to be responsible for -GalCer-induced long-term anergy.
Furthermore, while prior treatment with -GalCer abrogated the protective
effect of either -GalCer or -ManCer against CT26 colon carcinoma tumor
challenge for at least two months, the pre-treatment with -ManCer had no
effect on the protection induced by either NKT cell agonist. Since
-ManCer can activate human NKT cells, this new NKT cell agonist may
provide a better opportunity for NKT cell targeted immunotherapy in
cancer.

