Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Transduction of tumors in vivo with choline kinase shRNA
downregulates breast cancer stem cell markers


Increased phosphocholine is one of the metabolic signatures of cancer,
and is closely associated with malignant transformation, invasion and
metastasis. Increased phosphocholine is primarily due to increased
expression of choline kinase, the enzyme that converts choline to the
membrane precursor phosphocholine. Stem-like breast cancer cells (SBCCs)
are drug resistant, invasive, and likely to lead to recurrence and
repopulation. High CD44 adhesion molecule expression and high expression
of the drug transporter ABCG2 are two markers associated with populations
enriched with SBCCs [1]. Here we have examined the relationship between
choline kinase and these two markers of SBCCs. We have determined the
relationship between choline kinase downregulation and two markers of
SBCCs, CD44 and ABCG2 in MDA-MB-231 breast cells in vitro and tumors in
vivo upon lentiviral transduction of shRNA targeting choline kinase [2].
CD44 and its variant isoforms CD44v6 and CD44v8, together with ABCG2
showed a significant reduction in mRNA (30% for CD44 total; 80% for CDv6
and v8, and 45% for ABCG2) and protein expression levels following
transduction of MDA-MB-231 cells with lentivirus expressing shRNA against
choline kinase. Similar decreases were also observed following systemic
intravenous injections of lentivirus expressing choline kinase shRNA
delivered over four weeks. These studies provide insight into potential
metabolic targeting of SBCCs. 1. Al-Hajj, M et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A, 2003. 2. Krishnamachary, B et al., Cancer Research, 2009. This work
was supported by NIH R01CA136576 and P50 CA103175.

