Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Discovery of potent dual inhibitors of both XIAP and cIAP1 using
fragment based drug discovery


XIAP and cIAP1 are members of the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein
family. Both proteins have the ability to attenuate apoptosis induced
through intrinsic and extrinsic stimuli via inhibition of caspase-3, -7,
-8 and -9. The defining feature of both XIAP and cIAP1 is the presence in
their protein sequence of 3 Baculoviral IAP Repeat (BIR) domains, which
are necessary for their antiapoptotic activity. The mitochondrial protein
SMAC uses its N-terminal region (AVPI) to interact with BIR domains and
deactivate the antiapoptotic function of IAPs. Several companies and
academic groups have active programs developing SMAC peptidomimetic
compounds based on the AVPI motif. In general, those compounds have the
tendency to be cIAP1 selective like their tetrapeptide progenitor (AVPI
IC50 values for XIAP-BIR3 and cIAP1-BIR3 are 0.3 uM and 0.016 uM
respectively). Using our fragment-based screening approach, PyramidTM, we
identified a non-peptidomimetic chemotype which binds with similar
potency to the BIR3 domain of both XIAP and cIAP1. Hit optimisation using
a structure based approach led to the discovery of potent true dual XIAP
and cIAP1 antagonists with good in vivo physico-chemical profile and no
P450 or hERG liabilities. Dual XIAP/cIAP1 inhibitors have potential for
more effective apoptosis and less toxicity associated with cytokine
production. Compounds were initially characterised in fluorescence
polarisation binding assays using XIAP-BIR3 or cIAP1-BIR3 domains. Robust
induction of apoptosis was observed in two sensitive breast cancer cell
lines (EC50s well below 0.1 uM in EVSA-T and MDA-MB-231); whilst HCT116
cells (colon cancer) were insensitive (unless exogenous TNF- was added).
This in vitro cell line killing was demonstrated to correlate closely
with cIAP1 antagonism and hence a parallel cell assay was established to
measure XIAP antagonism. An engineered HEK293 cell line was stably
co-transfected with full length FLAG-tagged human XIAP cDNA and full
length (untagged) human caspase-9 cDNA. Inhibition of caspase-9 binding
to XIAP was measured in immunoprecipitation assays. This gave us a
sensitive read-out for XIAP antagonism in cells which could be plotted
against the most sensitive cell killing read-out (from the EVSA-T cell
line) to establish relative XIAP vs cIAP1 selectivities and to select
dual antagonists of both IAPs. Potent compounds (HEK293-EC50 XIAP and
cIAP1 are members of the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein family.
Both proteins have the ability to attenuate apoptosis induced through
intrinsic and extrinsic stimuli via inhibition of caspase-3, -7, -8 and
-9. The defining feature of both XIAP and cIAP1 is the presence in their
protein sequence of 3 Baculoviral IAP Repeat (BIR) domains, which are
necessary for their antiapoptotic activity. The mitochondrial protein
SMAC uses its N-terminal region (AVPI) to interact with BIR domains and
deactivate the antiapoptotic function of IAPs. Several companies and
academic groups have active programs developing SMAC peptidomimetic
compounds based on the AVPI motif. In general, those compounds have the
tendency to be cIAP1 selective like their tetrapeptide progenitor (AVPI
IC50 values for XIAP-BIR3 and cIAP1-BIR3 are 0.3 uM and 0.016 uM
respectively). Using our fragment-based screening approach, PyramidTM, we
identified a non-peptidomimetic chemotype which binds with similar
potency to the BIR3 domain of both XIAP and cIAP1. Hit optimisation using
a structure based approach led to the discovery of potent true dual XIAP
and cIAP1 antagonists with good in vivo physico-chemical profile and no
P450 or hERG liabilities. Dual XIAP/cIAP1 inhibitors have potential for
more effective apoptosis and less toxicity associated with cytokine
production. Compounds were initially characterised in fluorescence
polarisation binding assays using XIAP-BIR3 or cIAP1-BIR3 domains. Robust
induction of apoptosis was observed in two sensitive breast cancer cell
lines (EC50s well below 0.1 uM in EVSA-T and MDA-MB-231); whilst HCT116
cells (colon cancer) were insensitive (unless exogenous TNF- was added).
This in vitro cell line killing was demonstrated to correlate closely
with cIAP1 antagonism and hence a parallel cell assay was established to
measure XIAP antagonism. An engineered HEK293 cell line was stably
co-transfected with full length FLAG-tagged human XIAP cDNA and full
length (untagged) human caspase-9 cDNA. Inhibition of caspase-9 binding
to XIAP was measured in immunoprecipitation assays. This gave us a
sensitive read-out for XIAP antagonism in cells which could be plotted
against the most sensitive cell killing read-out (from the EVSA-T cell
line) to establish relative XIAP vs cIAP1 selectivities and to select
dual antagonists of both IAPs. Potent compounds (HEK293-EC50 <0.01 uM and
EVSA-T-EC50 XIAP and cIAP1 are members of the inhibitor of apoptosis
(IAP) protein family. Both proteins have the ability to attenuate
apoptosis induced through intrinsic and extrinsic stimuli via inhibition
of caspase-3, -7, -8 and -9. The defining feature of both XIAP and cIAP1
is the presence in their protein sequence of 3 Baculoviral IAP Repeat
(BIR) domains, which are necessary for their antiapoptotic activity. The
mitochondrial protein SMAC uses its N-terminal region (AVPI) to interact
with BIR domains and deactivate the antiapoptotic function of IAPs.
Several companies and academic groups have active programs developing
SMAC peptidomimetic compounds based on the AVPI motif. In general, those
compounds have the tendency to be cIAP1 selective like their tetrapeptide
progenitor (AVPI IC50 values for XIAP-BIR3 and cIAP1-BIR3 are 0.3 uM and
0.016 uM respectively). Using our fragment-based screening approach,
PyramidTM, we identified a non-peptidomimetic chemotype which binds with
similar potency to the BIR3 domain of both XIAP and cIAP1. Hit
optimisation using a structure based approach led to the discovery of
potent true dual XIAP and cIAP1 antagonists with good in vivo
physico-chemical profile and no P450 or hERG liabilities. Dual XIAP/cIAP1
inhibitors have potential for more effective apoptosis and less toxicity
associated with cytokine production. Compounds were initially
characterised in fluorescence polarisation binding assays using XIAP-BIR3
or cIAP1-BIR3 domains. Robust induction of apoptosis was observed in two
sensitive breast cancer cell lines (EC50s well below 0.1 uM in EVSA-T and
MDA-MB-231); whilst HCT116 cells (colon cancer) were insensitive (unless
exogenous TNF- was added). This in vitro cell line killing was
demonstrated to correlate closely with cIAP1 antagonism and hence a
parallel cell assay was established to measure XIAP antagonism. An
engineered HEK293 cell line was stably co-transfected with full length
FLAG-tagged human XIAP cDNA and full length (untagged) human caspase-9
cDNA. Inhibition of caspase-9 binding to XIAP was measured in
immunoprecipitation assays. This gave us a sensitive read-out for XIAP
antagonism in cells which could be plotted against the most sensitive
cell killing read-out (from the EVSA-T cell line) to establish relative
XIAP vs cIAP1 selectivities and to select dual antagonists of both IAPs.
Potent compounds (HEK293-EC50 <0.01 uM and EVSA-T-EC50 <0.01 uM) were
further characterised in PKPD studies in mice bearing MDA-MB-231
xenografts. Compounds with good oral exposure achieved high concentration
in tumor over 24h periods which ensured excellent inhibition of both XIAP
and cIAP1 with consequent reduction of cIAP1 levels and induction of
apoptosis markers (PARP, Caspase-3). Finally, dual XIAP/cIAP1 inhibitors
have been investigated in xenograft models (melanoma, breast and
colorectal cancer) and have achieved significant efficacy at tolerated
doses.

