Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: High levels of CD109+ circulating endothelial cells and
progenitors as marker of response to bevacizumab and irinotecan in high
grade gliomas


Purpose: Bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF antibody, has shown significant
activity in high grade gliomas (HGG). Previous studies emphasized the
need for predictive markers of response. Experimental Design: We treated
63 recurrent HGG patients with poor prognostic factors with bevacizumab
(10 mg/kg) and irinotecan (125 or 340 mg/m2) every 2 weeks, and
investigated the predictive potential of circulating endothelial cells
(CECs) and their progenitors (CEPs). Results: After a median follow-up of
27 weeks, median OS and PFS were 33 and 18 weeks, respectively. PFS at 6
and 12 months were 32% and 12%. OS at 6 months was 60%. No complete
response but fourteen partial responses according to RANO criteria were
observed. Toxicity and side effects were mild. Patients with distant
intracerebral disease or leptomeningeal dissemination at baseline MRI had
shorter PFS (p=0.002; p=0.01) and OS (p=0.005; p=0.03). Baseline CEP over
32.8 cells/ml (1st quartile) or CD45dimCD34+CD133+ hematopoietic
committed progenitors over 27 cells/ml (1st quartile) were associated
with an increased PFS (p=0.01; p=0.001, respectively). Baseline CD109+
CECs over 47.5 cells/ml (2nd quartile) were associated with longer PFS
and OS (p= 0.001; p=0.02). Patients who progressed after 18 weeks of
therapy or more (n=22) had baseline levels of CD109+ CECs and
CD45dimCD34+VEGFR2+ cells significantly higher than others (p=0.008;
p=0.04, respectively). At progression no significant change in CEC and
CEP was detected. Conclusions: The data point to baseline CD109+ CECs,
CEP and CD45dimCD34+CD133+ hematopoietic committed progenitors as
promising markers for the selection of patients who could benefit from
bevacizumab in the treatment of HGG.

