Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Epigenetic silencing and biomarker potential of miR-224, miR-452
and their host gene GABRE in prostate cancer


Prostate cancer (PC) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second most frequent cause of cancer related death among men in the
Western world. Currently used methods for PC diagnosis and prognosis are
suboptimal and novel molecular biomarkers are urgently needed. This study
investigates the expression and biomarker potential of miR-224, miR-452
and their host gene gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor family
epsilon subunit (GABRE) in PC by transcriptional profiling and DNA
methylation analyses of the GABRE promoter associated CpG island.
Transcriptional expression of GABRE was determined by microarray analysis
of two independent clinical sample sets, including a total of 25
nonmalignant and 50 prostate cancer tissue samples. Expression of the
mature form of miR-224 and miR-452 was measured in a separate set of 27
nonmalignant and 80 PC tissue samples. The transcriptional analyses
revealed that miR-224, miR-452 and GABRE transcript levels were
significantly reduced in PC tissue compared to nonmalignant prostate
tissue samples (pProstate cancer (PC) is the most frequently diagnosed
cancer and the second most frequent cause of cancer related death among
men in the Western world. Currently used methods for PC diagnosis and
prognosis are suboptimal and novel molecular biomarkers are urgently
needed. This study investigates the expression and biomarker potential of
miR-224, miR-452 and their host gene gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A
receptor family epsilon subunit (GABRE) in PC by transcriptional
profiling and DNA methylation analyses of the GABRE promoter associated
CpG island. Transcriptional expression of GABRE was determined by
microarray analysis of two independent clinical sample sets, including a
total of 25 nonmalignant and 50 prostate cancer tissue samples.
Expression of the mature form of miR-224 and miR-452 was measured in a
separate set of 27 nonmalignant and 80 PC tissue samples. The
transcriptional analyses revealed that miR-224, miR-452 and GABRE
transcript levels were significantly reduced in PC tissue compared to
nonmalignant prostate tissue samples (p<0.001). Bisulfite sequencing of
11 nonmalignant and 21 PC tissue samples showed frequent promoter
hypermethylation of GABRE in PC compared to nonmalignant prostate tissue
(pProstate cancer (PC) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer and the
second most frequent cause of cancer related death among men in the
Western world. Currently used methods for PC diagnosis and prognosis are
suboptimal and novel molecular biomarkers are urgently needed. This study
investigates the expression and biomarker potential of miR-224, miR-452
and their host gene gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor family
epsilon subunit (GABRE) in PC by transcriptional profiling and DNA
methylation analyses of the GABRE promoter associated CpG island.
Transcriptional expression of GABRE was determined by microarray analysis
of two independent clinical sample sets, including a total of 25
nonmalignant and 50 prostate cancer tissue samples. Expression of the
mature form of miR-224 and miR-452 was measured in a separate set of 27
nonmalignant and 80 PC tissue samples. The transcriptional analyses
revealed that miR-224, miR-452 and GABRE transcript levels were
significantly reduced in PC tissue compared to nonmalignant prostate
tissue samples (p<0.001). Bisulfite sequencing of 11 nonmalignant and 21
PC tissue samples showed frequent promoter hypermethylation of GABRE in
PC compared to nonmalignant prostate tissue (p<0.001), suggesting
epigenetic silencing of the genomic GABRE locus in PC. This was validated
by quantitative methylation-specific PCR (MethyLight) in an independent
clinical sample set consisting of 35 nonmalignant and 249 PC tissue
samples: GABRE promoter methylation accurately distinguished nonmalignant
from PC tissue samples (pProstate cancer (PC) is the most frequently
diagnosed cancer and the second most frequent cause of cancer related
death among men in the Western world. Currently used methods for PC
diagnosis and prognosis are suboptimal and novel molecular biomarkers are
urgently needed. This study investigates the expression and biomarker
potential of miR-224, miR-452 and their host gene gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) A receptor family epsilon subunit (GABRE) in PC by transcriptional
profiling and DNA methylation analyses of the GABRE promoter associated
CpG island. Transcriptional expression of GABRE was determined by
microarray analysis of two independent clinical sample sets, including a
total of 25 nonmalignant and 50 prostate cancer tissue samples.
Expression of the mature form of miR-224 and miR-452 was measured in a
separate set of 27 nonmalignant and 80 PC tissue samples. The
transcriptional analyses revealed that miR-224, miR-452 and GABRE
transcript levels were significantly reduced in PC tissue compared to
nonmalignant prostate tissue samples (p<0.001). Bisulfite sequencing of
11 nonmalignant and 21 PC tissue samples showed frequent promoter
hypermethylation of GABRE in PC compared to nonmalignant prostate tissue
(p<0.001), suggesting epigenetic silencing of the genomic GABRE locus in
PC. This was validated by quantitative methylation-specific PCR
(MethyLight) in an independent clinical sample set consisting of 35
nonmalignant and 249 PC tissue samples: GABRE promoter methylation
accurately distinguished nonmalignant from PC tissue samples (p<0.001)
with a sensitivity of 95.2% and a specificity of 94.2%, thus potentially
allowing the detection of PC through GABRE methylation analysis.
Additionally, by univariate analysis, high GABRE methylation was
significantly associated with early PSA recurrence after radical
prostatectomy in two independent radical prostatectomy PC patient
cohorts, including 129 and 190 patients, respectively (p=0.022 and
p=0.034). Furthermore, in a multivariate model, GABRE methylation added
significant independent value to established prognostic factors in both
patient cohorts (p=0.048 and p=0.032). In conclusion, our results showed
that PC is associated with significant downregulation of miR-224, miR-452
and GABRE expression. Furthermore, we identified GABRE as a new promising
methylation marker candidate for PC detection and prognosis. We are
currently investigating the biomarker potential of GABRE protein
expression by immunohistochemical analysis of two PC tissue microarrays
including 400 PC patients. Moreover, initial functional studies in the PC
cell lines PC3 and DU145 suggest roles for miR-224 and miR-452 in
proliferation and invasion. Results from these additional studies will be
presented at the meeting.

