Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Systems biology identification of processes/pathways facilitating
the development of high-grade serous ovarian cancer


Previously, based on well-known stem cell phenotypes (sphere formation,
potent tumorigenicity, embryonic gene expression, and chemoresistance),
we used patient tumors to isolate high-grade serous (HGS) ovarian
cancer-initiating cells (OCICs) that express the cell surface markers
CD44 (a hyaluronate receptor) and CD117 (c-kit) (Zhang et al., 2008,
Cancer Res 68:4311). Here, to identify biological pathways that underlie
HGS ovarian tumorigenesis, including the specific role of OCICs in that
process, we performed integrated analyses of global gene expression, DNA
copy number, and DNA methylation patterns. To that end, OCICs and bulk
(i.e., disaggregated but unsorted) tumor cells were compared to primary
human normal ovarian surface epithelial (nOSE) cells that, along with
fallopian tube epithelial (FTE) cells, represent hypothesized
cells-of-origin for HGS pelvic cancers. Principle components analysis and
unsupervised hierarchical clustering revealed distinct DNA methylation
and gene expression profiles for replicate (n=3) samples of each cell
type (i.e., OCIC, bulk tumor, and nOSE). Gene ontology and additional
unsupervised analyses of gene expression signatures corresponding to the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (82 of 159 signature genes),
TGF-beta (47 of 86 genes), and Wnt (75 of 151 genes) pathways
demonstrated well-defined segregation of the three cell types, with
mesenchymal and Wnt signaling hierarchies being nOSE > OCIC > bulk tumor
cells. To examine early events in HGS ovarian tumorigenesis, previously
published (Tone et al., 2008, Clin Cancer Res 14:4067) gene expression
datasets were employed to show that nOSE, OCIC, and bulk ovarian tumor
cell transcriptomes distinctly segregate from normal (FTE) and malignant
fallopian epithelial transcriptomes. Interestingly, the largest
divergence was between the nOSE and FTE gene expression profiles.
Finally, DNA methylation and gene expression patterns were integrated,
implicating specific networks/circuits in ovarian carcinogenesis. Taken
together, these results support a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition
during ovarian tumorigenesis, reveal legitimate therapeutic targets (at
the pathway level), and raise uncertainty that surface epithelial cells
of the fallopian tube and ovary are reciprocal cells-of-origin for HGS
pelvic carcinomas.

