Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Targeting spatiotemporal expression of CD137 on tumor-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes as a novel strategy for agonistic antibody therapy


CD137 (4-1BB) is an important costimulatory ligand and a potent
stimulator of T-cell responses. It has been used therapeutically to
stimulate immunity against several solid malignancies as well as modulate
susceptibility to autoimmune disease and infection. However, the trial of
anti-CD137 agonistic antibody was currently suspended because of the
induction of severe hepatitis. In addition, the deleterious side effects
associated with anti-CD28 superagonist Ab have questioned the use of
reagents to costimulatory molecules in human therapy. To overcome this
problem, we combined adoptive transfer of tumor-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTL) and anti-CD137 Ab. C57BL/6 mice were challenged with
1x10*6 of B16F10 melanoma cells. CTL were prepared from Pmel-1 TCR
transgenic mice. On day 9, mice were left untreated or received CTL
(1x10*7) injection. Three days later (on day 12) mice received control
rat IgG or anti-CD137 Ab (100 g): (A) rat IgG, (B) anti-CD137 Ab, (C)
CTL+rat IgG, (D) CTL+ anti-CD137 Ab. Transferred CTL distributed all over
the body and infiltrated in the tumor. CTL were detected in the tumor on
day 1 after CTL transfer, peaked on day 3-5 and gradually decreased by
day 10. The CD137 expression was upregulated on CTL infiltrating in the
tumor, but not in other tissues. Eleven days after CTL transfer, the
tumor volumes were (A) 52801450 mm3, (B) 5600980 mm3, (C) 959571 mm3, (D)
220347 mm3, respectively. The intratumoral expressions of IFN-, perforin
and FasL mRNA were increased by CTL transfer and further increased by
combining anti-CD137 treatment. In the tumor, only transferred CTL, not
host derived T cells produced IFN-. IFN- production per cell was
augmented by andi-CD137 treatment. However, IFN- production was not
detected on CTL distributed in other tissues. Consistently, no organ
damage was observed by anti-CD137 treatment. CTL disappeared by day 9 in
anti-CD137 Ab treated animals, suggesting that anti-CD137 Ab did not
support the CTL survival in our adoptive transfer CTL model. Anti-CD137
Ab treatment augmented the anti-tumor activity of CTL. At the same time,
we have successfully prevented the nonspecific T cell activation by
anit-CD137 Ab and accompanying tissue damage because we could selectively
activate tumor-specific CTL within the tumor. This strategy based on the
spatiotemporal expression of CD137 on antigen-recognizing CTL. It is
important to administer anti-CD137 Ab 3 days after CTL transfer when CTL
accumulate in the tumor, recognize tumor antigens and upregulate CD137.
The CD137 signaling on adoptively transferred CTL contribute to the
acquisition of enhanced cytotoxic functions by CTL rather than the
regulation of T cell expansion. The tumor-specific CTL can guide
agonistic anti-CD137 Ab to the tumor and enhance thier activity.
Therefore, the CD137 Ab therapy can be revived by the combination of
tumor-specific CTL therapy.

