Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The addition of low dose 17-DMAG to BIBW-2992 effectively inhibits
lung cancer cells with acquired resistance by T790M mutation


The majority of acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) is caused by secondary T790M
mutation. We established gefitinib or erlotinib-resistant cells which
acquired different proportions of T790M from PC-9 cells with activating
EGFR mutation. Anti-cancer effects of EGFR modulation and strategies
overcoming resistance were investigated. The amount of T790M and EGFR
gene copy number were proportional to increase of resistance. BIBW-2992,
an irreversible EGFR-TKI, could suppress the growth and survival of cells
harboring lower level of T790M while it failed in cells with higher level
of T790M although p-EGFR was completely down-regulated in both,
suggesting blocking of phosphorylation of EGFR is not sufficient to
inhibit these cells. However, EGFR siRNA treatment could inhibit cell
growth regardless of T790M level and resistance showing that EGFR
dependency would be persistent. 17-DMAG, a HSP90 inhibitor, also
effectively controlled both resistant cells. Considering a report showing
that a HSP90 inhibitor was not clinically effective possibly because of
inadequate dose, the efficacy of low dose 17-DMAG was examined.
Interestingly, we found that combined treatment of BIBW-2992 with low
dose 17-DMAG was very effective even in cells with higher level of T790M
although either of both showed no activity in single treatment suggesting
it would be one of promising strategies with immediate clinical
implications overcoming T790M-mediated resistance. Further investigations
on exact mechanism should be pursued even though capability of HSP90
inhibitor to modulate NF-kB signaling can be one of possible explanations.

