Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Frequent genetic alteration in transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder by large scale exome sequencing


Bladder cancer is the ninth most common cancer worldwide, with TCC being
the predominant form (90%). We completed a preliminary research that
investigated into exomes of 9 TCCs and target genes of additional TCCs,
and discovered frequent aberrations of the chromatin remodeling genes.
Six genes, including UTX, MLL/MLL3, CREBBP/EP300, NCOR1, ARID1A and CHD6,
were identified in 59% of the 97 TCC patients. Here, in order to obtain a
more comprehensive genetic overview of TCC, we sequenced both exomes and
whole genomes for another 92 TCC samples. For exome sequencing, we had an
average coverage of 75.3x for targeted regions encompassing 38M of Refseq
census coding sequence, and >92% of the target bases were covered
sufficiently for variant calling (10). As for whole genome resequencing,
we achieved the average coverage at 3.8x. We analyzed the exome and
genome sequencing data of 92 TCC samples together with the 9 TCCs from
the preliminary study to identify the somatic mutations and copy number
variations (CNVs), and detected 11,143 non-sysnonymous point mutations,
1,041 small Indels in coding regions (Bladder cancer is the ninth most
common cancer worldwide, with TCC being the predominant form (90%). We
completed a preliminary research that investigated into exomes of 9 TCCs
and target genes of additional TCCs, and discovered frequent aberrations
of the chromatin remodeling genes. Six genes, including UTX, MLL/MLL3,
CREBBP/EP300, NCOR1, ARID1A and CHD6, were identified in 59% of the 97
TCC patients. Here, in order to obtain a more comprehensive genetic
overview of TCC, we sequenced both exomes and whole genomes for another
92 TCC samples. For exome sequencing, we had an average coverage of 75.3x
for targeted regions encompassing 38M of Refseq census coding sequence,
and >92% of the target bases were covered sufficiently for variant
calling (10). As for whole genome resequencing, we achieved the average
coverage at 3.8x. We analyzed the exome and genome sequencing data of 92
TCC samples together with the 9 TCCs from the preliminary study to
identify the somatic mutations and copy number variations (CNVs), and
detected 11,143 non-sysnonymous point mutations, 1,041 small Indels in
coding regions (<100bp) and 12,034 CNVs. A total of 12,216 genes were
found to be affected by these somatic genetic changes. Furthermore, 125
genes that harbored the confirmed non-silent mutations in at least five
other tumors types were observed to have a significantly higher
(likelihood test, pBladder cancer is the ninth most common cancer
worldwide, with TCC being the predominant form (90%). We completed a
preliminary research that investigated into exomes of 9 TCCs and target
genes of additional TCCs, and discovered frequent aberrations of the
chromatin remodeling genes. Six genes, including UTX, MLL/MLL3,
CREBBP/EP300, NCOR1, ARID1A and CHD6, were identified in 59% of the 97
TCC patients. Here, in order to obtain a more comprehensive genetic
overview of TCC, we sequenced both exomes and whole genomes for another
92 TCC samples. For exome sequencing, we had an average coverage of 75.3x
for targeted regions encompassing 38M of Refseq census coding sequence,
and >92% of the target bases were covered sufficiently for variant
calling (10). As for whole genome resequencing, we achieved the average
coverage at 3.8x. We analyzed the exome and genome sequencing data of 92
TCC samples together with the 9 TCCs from the preliminary study to
identify the somatic mutations and copy number variations (CNVs), and
detected 11,143 non-sysnonymous point mutations, 1,041 small Indels in
coding regions (<100bp) and 12,034 CNVs. A total of 12,216 genes were
found to be affected by these somatic genetic changes. Furthermore, 125
genes that harbored the confirmed non-silent mutations in at least five
other tumors types were observed to have a significantly higher
(likelihood test, p<0.01) non-silent mutation rate than the background.
We also analyzed the biological pathways by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis,
and discovered that the MAPK signaling pathway and the pathway of actin
cytoskeleton regulation were mutated in 76 and 75 TCC tumor samples,
respectively. Our studies gathered a large number of genetic data on
Bladder cancer by applying exome and whole genome sequencing, and
provided an unprecedented panoramic view of the genetic basis of TCC.

