Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Clinical evaluation of microRNA expression profiling in non-small
cell lung cancer


CONTEXT: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent a class of small non-coding RNAs
that regulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional level. miRNAs
play an important role in tumorigenesis since they have functions similar
to oncogene or tumor suppressors and represent a new class of powerful
tools for cancer prevention and therapeutics. Especially circulating
miRNAs in plasma seem to be very promising novel tumor biomarkers, since
their expression is correlated to diagnosis, prognosis and prediction of
response to treatment. OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to evaluate
mature miRNAs as novel tumor biomarkers in NSCLC, by exploring global
expression profile of miRNAs in NSCLC paired fresh tissues and
corresponding plasma samples. METHODS: FlexmiR bead array (Luminex) assay
was utilized for miRNA expression profiling in 21 surgically removed
NSCLC fresh tissues and their corresponding adjacent non-cancerous
tissues. According to our FlexmiR results, evaluated by three different
statistical approaches, 23 miRNAs were found to be differentially
expressed. Our FlexmiR experiments were validated for four of these
microRNAs in 40 paired NSCLC and matched corresponding adjacent
non-cancerous tissues by Taqman RT-qPCR microRNA assays (Applied
Biosystems). Moreover, total RNA was extracted from 37 corresponding
plasma samples and miR-21 expression was quantitated by RT-qPCR. RESULTS:
23 miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed in NSCLC by the
FlexmiR assay. Four of these, miR-21, miR-126*, miR-30d and miR-451, were
further evaluated by quantitative RT-qPCR. The expression level of miR-21
was significantly higher in NSCLC tissues than in adjacent normal tissues
(P=0.002); while miR-126* (P=0.000), miR-30d (P=0.000) and miR-451
(P=0.000) were down-regulated in NSCLC. Interestingly, high miR-21
expression and low miR-126* and miR-30d expression were associated with
disease free survival (P=0.027, P= 0.047 and P=0.048 respectively).
Levels of circulating miR-21 in plasma of NSCLC patients were
significantly higher in NSCLC than in healthy volunteers (P=0.003).
Circulating miR-21 in plasma was found to be an independent prognostic
factor for NSCLC (P=0.019).

