Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Differences in immune escape in HPV+ versus HPV- head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma


Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common
cancer worldwide and has not seen an improvement in survival in decades.
Current standard-of-care treatments including surgical resection,
chemotherapy and radiation still lead to high rates of recurrence and
loco-regional metastasis contributing to the poor prognosis in these
patients. It is well established that HNSCC are highly immune-modulatory
tumors and may therefore benefit from immunotherapy treatment regimens.
Better methods are therefore needed to match patients with the
appropriate immunotherapy. Recently, human papillomavirus (HPV) was
implicated in the etiology of a subset of HNSCC arising in younger
patients without a history of alcohol and tobacco use. Approximately 30%
of HNSCC tumors are HPV+ and despite late stage presentation, often have
a better prognosis and response to therapy. This study examines how host
immune recognition and response varies between HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC, with
the goal of identifying new targets for immunotherapy. The immune profile
and HPV infection status of 41 HNSCC patient tumor samples obtained from
surgical resection was characterized by qRT-PCR, PCR, and IHC techniques.
Tumor samples were analyzed for the expression of 40 genes involved in
immune activation and suppression in the tumor microenvironment to
generate an immune profile. Gene expression levels were normalized to
GAPDH and compared across HPV+, HPV- and normal tissue groups by ANOVA
and post-test pairwise analysis. HPV infectivity of tumor biopsies was
determined using HPV consensus primers (MY09/MY11 and GP5+/GP6+) and
confirmed with p16 immunohistochemistry. From these studies, eight of 41
(20%) HNSCC biopsies were HPV+ by PCR and IHC analysis. HPV+ tumors
demonstrated statistically significant increased expression of genes
related to immunosuppression including regulatory T (CD4, FoxP3, CTLA-4,
and FasL) and myeloid suppressor cell markers (CD11b and IL-6, an inducer
of these suppressor cells), as well as negative-regulators (SOCS1) (pHead
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common cancer
worldwide and has not seen an improvement in survival in decades. Current
standard-of-care treatments including surgical resection, chemotherapy
and radiation still lead to high rates of recurrence and loco-regional
metastasis contributing to the poor prognosis in these patients. It is
well established that HNSCC are highly immune-modulatory tumors and may
therefore benefit from immunotherapy treatment regimens. Better methods
are therefore needed to match patients with the appropriate
immunotherapy. Recently, human papillomavirus (HPV) was implicated in the
etiology of a subset of HNSCC arising in younger patients without a
history of alcohol and tobacco use. Approximately 30% of HNSCC tumors are
HPV+ and despite late stage presentation, often have a better prognosis
and response to therapy. This study examines how host immune recognition
and response varies between HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC, with the goal of
identifying new targets for immunotherapy. The immune profile and HPV
infection status of 41 HNSCC patient tumor samples obtained from surgical
resection was characterized by qRT-PCR, PCR, and IHC techniques. Tumor
samples were analyzed for the expression of 40 genes involved in immune
activation and suppression in the tumor microenvironment to generate an
immune profile. Gene expression levels were normalized to GAPDH and
compared across HPV+, HPV- and normal tissue groups by ANOVA and
post-test pairwise analysis. HPV infectivity of tumor biopsies was
determined using HPV consensus primers (MY09/MY11 and GP5+/GP6+) and
confirmed with p16 immunohistochemistry. From these studies, eight of 41
(20%) HNSCC biopsies were HPV+ by PCR and IHC analysis. HPV+ tumors
demonstrated statistically significant increased expression of genes
related to immunosuppression including regulatory T (CD4, FoxP3, CTLA-4,
and FasL) and myeloid suppressor cell markers (CD11b and IL-6, an inducer
of these suppressor cells), as well as negative-regulators (SOCS1)
(p<0.05). These tumors also demonstrated an increase in markers of immune
activation and infiltration, including evidence of T cells (CD4, Fas-L),
antigen presenting cells (CD80, CD83, CD1c), and inflammatory cytokines
and co-stimulatory molecules (IL-2, IL-12, IFN- , and OX40L) (pHead and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the 6th most common cancer
worldwide and has not seen an improvement in survival in decades. Current
standard-of-care treatments including surgical resection, chemotherapy
and radiation still lead to high rates of recurrence and loco-regional
metastasis contributing to the poor prognosis in these patients. It is
well established that HNSCC are highly immune-modulatory tumors and may
therefore benefit from immunotherapy treatment regimens. Better methods
are therefore needed to match patients with the appropriate
immunotherapy. Recently, human papillomavirus (HPV) was implicated in the
etiology of a subset of HNSCC arising in younger patients without a
history of alcohol and tobacco use. Approximately 30% of HNSCC tumors are
HPV+ and despite late stage presentation, often have a better prognosis
and response to therapy. This study examines how host immune recognition
and response varies between HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC, with the goal of
identifying new targets for immunotherapy. The immune profile and HPV
infection status of 41 HNSCC patient tumor samples obtained from surgical
resection was characterized by qRT-PCR, PCR, and IHC techniques. Tumor
samples were analyzed for the expression of 40 genes involved in immune
activation and suppression in the tumor microenvironment to generate an
immune profile. Gene expression levels were normalized to GAPDH and
compared across HPV+, HPV- and normal tissue groups by ANOVA and
post-test pairwise analysis. HPV infectivity of tumor biopsies was
determined using HPV consensus primers (MY09/MY11 and GP5+/GP6+) and
confirmed with p16 immunohistochemistry. From these studies, eight of 41
(20%) HNSCC biopsies were HPV+ by PCR and IHC analysis. HPV+ tumors
demonstrated statistically significant increased expression of genes
related to immunosuppression including regulatory T (CD4, FoxP3, CTLA-4,
and FasL) and myeloid suppressor cell markers (CD11b and IL-6, an inducer
of these suppressor cells), as well as negative-regulators (SOCS1)
(p<0.05). These tumors also demonstrated an increase in markers of immune
activation and infiltration, including evidence of T cells (CD4, Fas-L),
antigen presenting cells (CD80, CD83, CD1c), and inflammatory cytokines
and co-stimulatory molecules (IL-2, IL-12, IFN- , and OX40L) (p<0.05).
There were no statistically significant differences in gene expression
found between normal tissue and HPV- HNSCC tumors. These studies
demonstrate a general pattern of increased immunogenicity and concurrent
immunosuppression in patients with HPV+ versus HPV- HNSCC that could
potentially be used to inform immunotherapy treatment of HNSCC patients.
HPV+ tumors may be more effectively treated with a regimen that employs a
combination of immune stimulation and reversal of immune tolerance
mechanisms, while HPV- tumors may require greater immune stimulation to
activate endogenous anti-tumor immune responses.

