Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Detection of deoxyguanosine adducts in the oral tissues of mice
treated with the environmental carcinogen dibenzo[a, l]pyrene by LC-MS/MS


Oral cancer is the major form of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma,
which is the fifth most common cancer worldwide. Tobacco smoking is one
of the leading causes of oral cancer. Dibenzo[a, l]pyrene (DB[a, l]P) is
the most potent carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon found in
tobacco smoke. Our laboratory had developed a mouse model of oral cancer
induced by DB[a, l]P. Our working hypothesis is that the stereochemical
course of DB[a, l]P metabolism, the conformations of the DNA adducts
formed and their removal by mammalian DNA repair enzymes, and their
mutagenic properties if not removed in an error-free manner, all play
critical roles during the induction of oral carcinogenesis. As an initial
study to test our hypothesis, we have previously developed a liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method to detect and
quantify DB[a, l]PDE-N6-dA adducts in oral tissues of mice treated with
DB[a, l]P. We have shown that (-)-anti-cis- and (-)-anti-trans-DB[a,
l]PDE-N6-dA adducts were detected from oral tissues of mice treated with
DB[a, l]P. In the present study, to further test our hypothesis, we
report on the development of a LC-MS/MS method to detect DB[a,
l]PDE-N2-dG adducts in vivo. ()-anti-[15N5]-DB[a, l]PDE-N2-dG adducts
were synthesized as internal standards. The stereochemistry of adducts
were characterized. Following the addition of internal standards, DNA
isolated from oral tissues of mice treated with DB[a, l]P or DB[a, l]PDE
was enzymatically hydrolyzed to 2-deoxyribonucleosides and partially
purified by solid-phase extraction. The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out
by monitoring transitions m/z 620 [M+H]+ m/z 504 [(M+H)+2-deoxyribose]
for DB[a, l]PDE-N2-dG adducts and m/z 625 m/z 509 for the internal
standards. We have detected two N2-dG adducts from oral tissues of mice
treated with DB[a, l]P, and four N2-dG adducts from oral tissues of mice
treated with ()-anti-DB[a, l]PDE. Collectively, the in vivo detection of
dA and dG adducts indicated that DB[a, l]P is predominantly metabolized
to (-)-anti-DB[a, l]PDE in oral tissues of mice. This sensitive LC-MS/MS
method, is capable of simultaneously detecting both dA and dG adducts
derived from anti-DB[a, l]PDE. Our results indicated that levels of dA
adducts are significantly higher than dG adducts in vivo, which are
consistent with those reported in literature in organs other than oral
tissues, demonstrating that fjord region diol epoxide of DB[a, l]P
predominantly form dA adducts than dG adducts.

