Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Reductive tricarboxylic acid metabolism of glutamine mediates
lipogenesis under hypoxia


Acetyl coenzyme A (AcCoA) is the central biosynthetic precursor for fatty
acid synthesis and protein acetylation. In the conventional view of
mammalian cell metabolism, AcCoA is primarily generated from
glucose-derived pyruvate through the citrate shuttle and adenosine
triphosphate citrate lyase (ACL) in the cytosol. However, proliferating
cells that exhibit aerobic glycolysis and those exposed to hypoxia
convert glucose to lactate at near stoichiometric levels, directing
glucose carbon away from the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and fatty
acid synthesis. Although glutamine is consumed at levels exceeding that
required for nitrogen biosynthesis, the regulation and utilization of
glutamine metabolism in hypoxic cells is not well understood. Here we
show that human cells employ reductive metabolism of alpha-ketoglutarate
(aKG) to synthesize AcCoA for lipid synthesis. This isocitrate
dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) dependent pathway is active in most cell lines
under normal culture conditions, but cells grown under hypoxia rely
almost exclusively on the reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived
aKG for de novo lipogenesis. Furthermore, renal cell lines deficient in
the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor protein preferentially
utilize reductive glutamine metabolism for lipid biosynthesis even at
normal oxygen levels. These results identify a critical role for oxygen
in regulating carbon utilization in order to produce AcCoA and support
lipid synthesis in mammalian cells.

