Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The NCI Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) urinary PCA3
validation trial


INTRODUCTION: Widespread use of PSA screening has raised concerns of
overdiagnosis of low risk and underdiagnosis of high grade cancer. This
is primarily due to the low sensitivity and specificity of PSA. PCA3, a
non-coding large chain ribonucleic acid, is significantly over-expressed
in cancer tissue and quantitatively measured by a novel urinary assay.
The objective of this NCI EDRN trial was to conduct a comprehensive,
independent validation of the PROGENSA PCA3 Assay for the detection of
prostate cancer. METHODS: A prospective, PROBE-compliant NCI validation
trial was undertaken at 11 clinical sites to evaluate PCA3 positive
predictive value (PPV, PCA3 score >60) in the initial biopsy setting and
negative predictive value (NPV, PCA3 score 7), was compared to PCPT risk
calculator through ROC curve analysis. RESULTS: 880 eligible men (mean
age 62 years) were enrolled; 305 had a prior negative prostate biopsy.
99% had an informative PCA3 test. For the detection of any cancer, PPV
was 80% (95% CI: 0.72 - 0.86) in the initial biopsy group while NPV was
88% (95% CI: 0.81 - 0.93) in the repeat biopsy group. PCA3 performance
was superior to PCPT risk estimation and improved upon the detection of
any cancer (p 7), was compared to PCPT risk calculator through ROC curve
analysis. RESULTS: 880 eligible men (mean age 62 years) were enrolled;
305 had a prior negative prostate biopsy. 99% had an informative PCA3
test. For the detection of any cancer, PPV was 80% (95% CI: 0.72 - 0.86)
in the initial biopsy group while NPV was 88% (95% CI: 0.81 - 0.93) in
the repeat biopsy group. PCA3 performance was superior to PCPT risk
estimation and improved upon the detection of any cancer (p<0.006) and
high grade cancer (p 7), was compared to PCPT risk calculator through ROC
curve analysis. RESULTS: 880 eligible men (mean age 62 years) were
enrolled; 305 had a prior negative prostate biopsy. 99% had an
informative PCA3 test. For the detection of any cancer, PPV was 80% (95%
CI: 0.72 - 0.86) in the initial biopsy group while NPV was 88% (95% CI:
0.81 - 0.93) in the repeat biopsy group. PCA3 performance was superior to
PCPT risk estimation and improved upon the detection of any cancer
(p<0.006) and high grade cancer (p<0.02) when combined with the PCPT risk
model. CONCLUSIONS: PCA3 ability to detect prostate cancer was superior
to PCPT risk calculator in both the initial (p 7), was compared to PCPT
risk calculator through ROC curve analysis. RESULTS: 880 eligible men
(mean age 62 years) were enrolled; 305 had a prior negative prostate
biopsy. 99% had an informative PCA3 test. For the detection of any
cancer, PPV was 80% (95% CI: 0.72 - 0.86) in the initial biopsy group
while NPV was 88% (95% CI: 0.81 - 0.93) in the repeat biopsy group. PCA3
performance was superior to PCPT risk estimation and improved upon the
detection of any cancer (p<0.006) and high grade cancer (p<0.02) when
combined with the PCPT risk model. CONCLUSIONS: PCA3 ability to detect
prostate cancer was superior to PCPT risk calculator in both the initial
(p < 0.0001) and repeat biopsy setting (p=0.001)Independent validation of
PCA3 demonstrated a high PPV in the initial biopsy setting and a high NPV
in the repeat biopsy setting. Given the significant improvements in risk
estimation over PCPT, PCA3 is expected to greatly enhance clinical
decision making.

