Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of calcium and vitamin D on TGF and TGF1 expression in
rectal mucosa of sporadic colorectal adenoma patients: A randomized
controlled trial


Aim: To estimate the effects of supplemental calcium and vitamin D3 on
the expression of TGF and TGF1 (growth-promoting and -inhibiting
autocrine/paracrine growth factors, respectively) in the normal-appearing
colorectal mucosa in sporadic colorectal adenoma patients. Methods: We
conducted a pilot, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 2 x 2
factorial clinical trial (n = 92) of calcium 2 g and/or vitamin D3 800
IU/day versus placebo over 6 months. TGF and TGF1 expression was measured
in biopsies of normal-appearing rectal mucosa using automated
immunohistochemistry and quantitative image analysis at baseline and
6-months follow-up. Results: The mean overall expression of TGF1 in the
whole crypts increased by 14% (P = 0.25), 19% (P = 0.17), and 22% (P =
0.09) in the calcium, vitamin D, and calcium plus vitamin D groups,
respectively, relative to the placebo group. The increases in TGF1
appeared to be uniform along the full length of the crypts. While there
were no substantial changes in the overall expression of TGF in the whole
crypts, in the calcium, vitamin D, and calcium plus vitamin D groups, TGF
decreased by 14% (P = 0.35), 2% (P = 0.86), and 1% (P = 0.93),
respectively, in the upper 40% (differentiation zone) of the crypts, but
increased by 29% (P = 0.30), 38% (P = 0.17), and 25% (P = 0.32) in the
bottom 60% of the crypts (proliferative zone). Also, a TGF/TGF1 ratio was
created as an indicator of the balance between the growth-promoting and
-inhibiting factors; in the upper 40% of the crypts it was found to have
decreased by 35% (P = 0.24), 25% (P = 0.42), and 51% (P = 0.09) in the
calcium, vitamin D, and calcium plus vitamin D groups, respectively,
relative to the placebo group, but not to have changed substantially in
the whole or bottom 60% of the crypts. Conclusions: These preliminary
results suggest that supplemental calcium and vitamin D3 may increase the
expression of TGF1, shift the expression of TGF downward in the
colorectal crypts, and decrease the ratio of TGF to TGF1 in the upper 40%
(differentiation zone) of the crypts in the normal-appearing colorectal
mucosa of sporadic colorectal adenoma patients, and support further
investigation of calcium and vitamin D3 as chemopreventive agents against
colorectal neoplasms.

