Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Cryptotanshinone inhibits lymphatic endothelial cell tube
formation by suppressing VEGFR-3/ERK and small GTPase pathways


Cryptotanshinone (CPT), a natural compound isolated from the plant Salvia
miltiorrhiza Bunge, is a potential anticancer agent. However, the
underlying mechanism is not well understood. Here we show that CPT
inhibited the tube formation of mouse lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs)
in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. This effect was in part
associated with inhibition of VEGFR-3 expression, as overexpression of
VEGFR-3 conferred resistance to CPT inhibitory effect on tube formation
in LECs, whereas downregulation of VEGFR-3 mimicked the effect of CPT,
blocking the tube formation. Further study revealed that CPT inhibited
phosphorylation of the extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2),
a downstream effector of VEGFR-3. Overexpression of VEGFR-3 attenuated
CPT inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation, whereas downregulation of
VEGFR-3 inhibited ERK1/2 phosphorylation in LECs. Ectopic expression of
constitutively active MKK1 resulted in activation of ERK1/2, and
partially prevented CPT inhibition of LEC tube formation. In addition, we
also found that CPT inhibited protein expression and activities of Cdc42
and Rac1, but not RhoA. Downregulation of Cdc42 or Rac1 inhibited LEC
tube formation, mimicking the effect of CPT. However, expression of
constitutively active Cdc42 and Rac1 concurrently, but not Cdc42 or Rac1
alone, rendered resistance to CPT inhibition of LEC tube formation. The
results suggest that CPT inhibits LEC tube formation at least in part
through inhibiting VEGFR-3-mediated ERK and the small GTPase signaling
pathways.

