Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A role for heat-shock protein 40 YDJ1 in the protection from
anthracycline exposure


Doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic commonly used as an
antineoplastic agent for the treatment of both solid tumors and
hematological cancers. Although there is a dose-dependent response in the
use of anthracyclines, there is also a dose-related toxicity associated
to them, namely chronic cardiotoxicity. To increase our knowledge of the
pathways that protect cells from the cytotoxic effects of anthracyclines,
we carried out a genetic screening in the eukaryotic model organism S.
cerevisiae, to identify gene defects that generate cells hypersensitive
to doxorubicin. Our findings indicate that inactivation of the heat-shock
protein 40 encoded by the genes YDJ1 and ZUO1, as well as the heat-shock
protein 70 encoded by the gene SSZ1, render cells highly sensitive to the
toxicity of doxorubicin. Further analysis of the YDJ1 defective strain
revealed that it is also sensitive to daunorubicin and cisplatin, but not
to other DNA damaging agents such as alkylating agents, the topoI
inhibitor campthotecin or replication blocks from hydroxyurea. YDJ1
mutant displayed different sensitivity to DNA-double-strand breaks and
oxidative damage, both of which are generated by anthracyclines.
Complementation of the ydj1 mutation with the human DNAJA2 gene rescues
the sensitivity of the deletion strain, suggesting a potential role of
DNAJA2 in the protection to doxorubicin and implying that this mechanism
also applies to higher eukaryotes.

