Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A podophyllotoxin derivative, Adva-27a, is more potent at killing
multi-drug resistant breast cancer cells than etoposide


A novel non-ester GEM-difluorinated C-glycoside derivative of
podophyllotoxin, Adva-27a, had been designed and synthesized. The growth
inhibitory properties of this drug compared to the currently used
Topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide was evaluated in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells and in a multi-drug resistant (MDR) variant of this cell line.
These cells were cultured in the presence of the drugs at different
concentrations (0.1-100M) for various times (1-9 days) and analyzed for
viability using a mitochondrial metabolic activity dye, Alamar blue
versus solvent (DMSO) treated cells. The MCF-7 cells were sensitive to
Adva-27a and etoposide, resulting in an IC50 of less than 10M for
etoposide and 20M for Adva-27a, while the IC50 for the MDR MCF-7 cells
was 25M with Adva-27a, but greater than 100M for etoposide. The timing
for killing by Adva-27a of the MDR MCF-7 cells appeared significantly
different than for the MCF-7 parent cells. In this case, 100M drug
resulted in less than 50% of viability at day 3 for the MDR MCF-7 cells,
while the same concentration of drug required 5-6 days to cause the same
level of killing of the parent cells. To determine the mechanism of
action of the drug, we analyzed the Adva-27a treated cells by flow
cytometry using propidium iodide staining. We found that after 24 hours
with 30M of the drug, both MCF-7 and the MDR MCF-7 cells were
accumulating in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Both cells are
similarly killed after 7 days by this concentration of the drug.
Etoposide is known to cause accumulation of cells at a similar phase,
implying the Adva-27a has a similar drug target. Thus, the mechanism for
the difference in sensitivity of the MDR MCF-7 cells for Adva-27a
relative to etoposide is not yet understood, but will be explored in the
future.

