Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Overexpression of polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl
esterase in triple negative breast cancer


Lack of targeted, more effective therapies for triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) has necessitated the continuous search for protein
biomarkers and targets for novel therapeutic development.
Polyisoprenylated monomeric G-proteins such as Ras and Rab are
hyperactive in about 30% of cancers and have profound effects on cell
growth. Inhibition of polyisoprenylated methylated protein methyl
esterase (PMPMEase) causes the death of cancer cells thus suggesting that
hyperactivity of PMPMEase may result in cancers. The current studies were
to address the hypothesis that PMPMEase activity is elevated in breast
cancer. PMPMEase activity was determined in breast tumors and normal
adjacent tissues (NAT) in snap-frozen tissues from 10 breast cancer
cases. Five- to over 20-fold increases in PMPMEase activity compared to
the respective NATs were detected in 8 of the 10 cases. Specific
activities ranging from 0.25 0.02 to 1.58 0.07 nmol/h/mg were detected in
the tumors compared to 0.09 nmol/h/mg or less in the NATs. Breast cancer
tissue microarrays (TMAs) consisting of 125 independent breast cancer
cases and NATs were analyzed for PMPMEase expression by
immunohistochemistry and scored for their immunoreactive staining
intensities. Intermediate to very strong immunoreactivities were detected
in the breast cancer TMA core slices compared to only trace staining in
those of the NATs. The mean scores SEM ranged from 310 21, 290 7, 350 15,
360 18, 390 14, 360 29, 390 13, 275 10 to 65 10 for TNBC, ER(+),
ER(+)PR(+), ER(+)HER2(+), ER(+)PR(+)HER2(+), PR(+)HER2(+), HER2(+), PR(+)
and NATs, respectively. These results show that PMPMEase overexpression
in breast cancer may explain the increased enzymatic activity in the
tumors. PMPMEase enzymatic activity and/or immunoreactivity may serve as
diagnostic procedures for breast cancer. PMPMEase may also serve as valid
target for anticancer drug development.

