Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A triad of Brk, HER2 and STAT3 in regulating epithelial and
mesenchymal transition and survival of breast cancer cells


Breast tumor kinase (Brk) is a nonreceptor protein-tyrosine kinase
recently shown to be coexpressed with human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER2) at high levels in tumor specimens from patients with
invasive ductal breast cancer. Brk is associated with HER2 in breast
cancer cells and can directly phosphorylate signal transducers and
activators of transcription-3 (STAT3). However, the biological functions
of these interactions remain largely unknown. In current study, we
developed a subline from HER2-transfected MCF7 breast cancer cells
through in vivo selection in nude mice. Overexpression of HER2 led to a
higher level of Brk in MCF7 cells and the in vivo selection resulted in a
subline with markedly enhanced epithelial and mesenchymal transition
(EMT) phenotype and markedly increased migration potential. We named the
subline cells EMT1. Both the EMT phenotype and survival of the EMT1 cells
heavily depend on Brk, because knockdown of Brk through RNA interference
reversed the EMT phenotype, reduced cell migration potential and induced
cell death via apoptosis in the EMT1 cells. We further found that the
level of activation-specific phosphorylated STAT3 was markedly increased
in the EMT1 cells compared with control vector-transfected or
HER2-transfected MCF7 cells. Knockdown of Brk significantly reduced the
level of STAT3 phosphorylation in the EMT1 cells. Overexpression of a
constitutively active STAT3 counteracted Brk knockdown-induced inhibition
of cell migration potential and Brk knockdown-induced apoptosis in the
EMT1 cells. Together, these preliminary findings support a new paradigm
for regulating breast cancer cell EMT and survival that involves
interaction and coordination between Brk, HER2, and STAT3.

