Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor endothelial cells acquire drug resistance by MDR1
upregulation via VEGF signaling in tumor microenvironment


Tumor endothelial cells (TECs) are therapeutic targets in antiangiogenic
therapy. Contrary to the traditional assumption, it has been reported
that TECs can be genetically abnormal and might acquire drug resistance.
In this study, mouse TECs and normal ECs (NECs) were isolated to
investigate drug resistance of TECs and the mechanism by which it is
acquired. TECs were more resistant to paclitaxel with upregulation of
multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) mRNA, which encodes the P-glycoprotein,
compared to NECs. Normal human microvascular ECs (HMVECs) were cultured
in tumor-conditioned medium (tumor CM) and were found to become more
resistant to paclitaxel through MDR1 mRNA upregulation and nuclear
translocation of Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1), which is an MDR1
transcription factor. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor
2 (VEGFR2) and Akt were activated in HMVECs by tumor CM. We observed that
tumor CM contained a significantly high level of VEGF. A VEGF receptor
kinase inhibitor, Ki8751, and a PI3K/Akt inhibitor, LY294002, blocked
tumor CM-induced MDR1 upregulation. MDR1 upregulation via the VEGF/VEGFR
pathway in the tumor microenvironment is one of the mechanisms of drug
resistance acquired by TECs. We observed that VEGF secreted from tumors
upregulated MDR1 through VEGFR2 and Akt activation. This is a novel
mechanism of acquisition of drug resistance by TECs in a tumor
microenvironment.

