Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: HOXA10 expression profiles in prostate cancer


HOXA10 is a member of the homeobox gene family and is a transcription
factor primarily involved in embryonic development. Perturbed HOX gene
expression has been identified in numerous cancers and thus suggests that
these genes may play important roles in diagnosis and treatment of
cancer. We initially identified altered HOXA10 expression in prostate
tumors form prostate-specific PTEN conditional knockout mice. HOXA10 is
highly expressed in the normal prostate glands from wildtype and
PTEN-mutant mice and gradually decreases with tumor development and
decreased differentiation. However, focal expression of HOXA10 is
observed in poorly differentiated tumors and is highly expressed in
metastases. To determine clinical significance of HOXA10 in human
prostate cancer, we examined HOXA10 expression by immunohistochemistry in
matched normal and cancer specimens from prostatectomy cases. HOXA10
nuclear expression was measured according to intensity and distribution.
Our analysis shows that HOXA10 is strongly expressed in benign glands and
low expression is significantly correlated with Gleason grade (pHOXA10 is
a member of the homeobox gene family and is a transcription factor
primarily involved in embryonic development. Perturbed HOX gene
expression has been identified in numerous cancers and thus suggests that
these genes may play important roles in diagnosis and treatment of
cancer. We initially identified altered HOXA10 expression in prostate
tumors form prostate-specific PTEN conditional knockout mice. HOXA10 is
highly expressed in the normal prostate glands from wildtype and
PTEN-mutant mice and gradually decreases with tumor development and
decreased differentiation. However, focal expression of HOXA10 is
observed in poorly differentiated tumors and is highly expressed in
metastases. To determine clinical significance of HOXA10 in human
prostate cancer, we examined HOXA10 expression by immunohistochemistry in
matched normal and cancer specimens from prostatectomy cases. HOXA10
nuclear expression was measured according to intensity and distribution.
Our analysis shows that HOXA10 is strongly expressed in benign glands and
low expression is significantly correlated with Gleason grade (p<0.001),
tumor differentiation (pHOXA10 is a member of the homeobox gene family
and is a transcription factor primarily involved in embryonic
development. Perturbed HOX gene expression has been identified in
numerous cancers and thus suggests that these genes may play important
roles in diagnosis and treatment of cancer. We initially identified
altered HOXA10 expression in prostate tumors form prostate-specific PTEN
conditional knockout mice. HOXA10 is highly expressed in the normal
prostate glands from wildtype and PTEN-mutant mice and gradually
decreases with tumor development and decreased differentiation. However,
focal expression of HOXA10 is observed in poorly differentiated tumors
and is highly expressed in metastases. To determine clinical significance
of HOXA10 in human prostate cancer, we examined HOXA10 expression by
immunohistochemistry in matched normal and cancer specimens from
prostatectomy cases. HOXA10 nuclear expression was measured according to
intensity and distribution. Our analysis shows that HOXA10 is strongly
expressed in benign glands and low expression is significantly correlated
with Gleason grade (p<0.001), tumor differentiation (p<0.02),
pathological stage (pHOXA10 is a member of the homeobox gene family and
is a transcription factor primarily involved in embryonic development.
Perturbed HOX gene expression has been identified in numerous cancers and
thus suggests that these genes may play important roles in diagnosis and
treatment of cancer. We initially identified altered HOXA10 expression in
prostate tumors form prostate-specific PTEN conditional knockout mice.
HOXA10 is highly expressed in the normal prostate glands from wildtype
and PTEN-mutant mice and gradually decreases with tumor development and
decreased differentiation. However, focal expression of HOXA10 is
observed in poorly differentiated tumors and is highly expressed in
metastases. To determine clinical significance of HOXA10 in human
prostate cancer, we examined HOXA10 expression by immunohistochemistry in
matched normal and cancer specimens from prostatectomy cases. HOXA10
nuclear expression was measured according to intensity and distribution.
Our analysis shows that HOXA10 is strongly expressed in benign glands and
low expression is significantly correlated with Gleason grade (p<0.001),
tumor differentiation (p<0.02), pathological stage (p<0.001) and
PSA-failure (pHOXA10 is a member of the homeobox gene family and is a
transcription factor primarily involved in embryonic development.
Perturbed HOX gene expression has been identified in numerous cancers and
thus suggests that these genes may play important roles in diagnosis and
treatment of cancer. We initially identified altered HOXA10 expression in
prostate tumors form prostate-specific PTEN conditional knockout mice.
HOXA10 is highly expressed in the normal prostate glands from wildtype
and PTEN-mutant mice and gradually decreases with tumor development and
decreased differentiation. However, focal expression of HOXA10 is
observed in poorly differentiated tumors and is highly expressed in
metastases. To determine clinical significance of HOXA10 in human
prostate cancer, we examined HOXA10 expression by immunohistochemistry in
matched normal and cancer specimens from prostatectomy cases. HOXA10
nuclear expression was measured according to intensity and distribution.
Our analysis shows that HOXA10 is strongly expressed in benign glands and
low expression is significantly correlated with Gleason grade (p<0.001),
tumor differentiation (p<0.02), pathological stage (p<0.001) and
PSA-failure (p<0.001). Expression of HOXA10 was also evaluated in human
prostate cell lines and was strong in the benign prostatic hyperplasia
BPH-1 human prostate cell line and weak to absent in the malignant human
prostate cancer cell lines PC3, DU145 and LNCaP. These data show that
HOXA10 is related to tumorigenesis of prostate cancer prostate cancer and
warrants further investigation into the functional role of HOXA10 in
tumor development.

