Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: A mouse model of the most aggressive subgroup of human
medulloblastoma


Human medulloblastomas are molecularly classified into four major
subgroups. Among them, the MYC-subgroup, the most aggressive and the
least curable is characterized by amplification or overexpression of the
c-MYC gene. While mouse models for the human SHH-subgroup have advanced
the development of targeted treatments for this subgroup, the absence of
a preclinical model for the MYC-subgroup has severely limited our
understanding of its biology and treatment. We have now generated the
first mouse model of MYC-subgroup medulloblastoma that faithfully
recapitulate the transcriptome, histopathology, and clinical behavior of
the human disease. This mouse model was generated by orthotopic
transplantation of percoll-purified Myc-transduced cerebellar cells from
postnatal day 6-7 Trp53-deficient mice into the cortices or the
cerebellum of immunocompromised recipient animals. While >2 x 105 cells
from the mouse SHH-tumors are required to induce a tumor, 100 MYC-tumor
cells were sufficient, suggesting that most MYC-tumor cells are tumor
initiating cells. MYC-tumors can be passaged indefinitely as neurospheres
that express markers associated with stem cells, including Prom1, Lgr5,
Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2 and induce secondary medulloblastomas with similar
characteristics as the primary tumors, after orthotopic transplant into
the cortices of recipient mice. This novel medulloblastoma model should
significantly advance our efforts to develop new therapeutic modalities
and to determine the origin of this deadly childhood cancer.

