Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Has the expression of the Wnt-pathway in regard to cMYC and
-Catenin a predicitive influence on the kind of metastasis in colon cancer


Background: cMYC as well as -Catenin are downstream-targets of the
Wnt-pathway and both have an important early function within the
carcinogenesis and the progression of colon cancer. Additionally cMYC was
found to be associated with a worse prognosis in other neoplasms. The
goal of our investigations was the evaluation of the Wnt-pathway on
primary non-metastatic colon cancer compared to lymphatic, hepatic and
peritoneal metastasis in regard to the expression of cMYC and -Catenin.
Methods: 98 patients with adenocarcinom of the colon and a postoperative
pT2/3-status, who underwent surgical resection between 2006 and 2008 at
the University of Tbingen had been included within the study collective.
53 patients had no metastasis (control group), while 45 patients revealed
primary metastasis: lymphatic metastasis (n=20), hepatic spread (n=20)
and multiple metastasize (n=5). cMYC and -Catenin was coloured on a
Tissue-Micro-Array by immunohistochemistry with consecutive
semiquantitative analysis. Results: 17 of 98 patients (17%) had been
positive for cMYC. 5 out of these 17 (29%) revelaed metastasis. 16 out of
the 17 cMYC-positive patients showed a nuclear accumulation of -Catenin
(94%) (p=0.027). 40 out of 81 (49%) cMYC negative patients revealed
metastasis. No significant correlation between nuclear positive cMYC and
the rate or kind of metastasis was found (p=0.133). In 29 out of 81
cMYC-negative patients (36%) a strong expression of -Catenin was found.
Conclusion: cMYC is well known for a worse prognosis in case of an
overexpression in patients suffering from lymphoma. A correlation between
the expression of cMYC and the kind of metastasis and / or survival nor
prognosis in patients with colon cancer was not able to show (p=0.211).
Additonally no correlation between the nuclear exprimed -Catenin and
different ways of metastasis was found (p=0.202).

