Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Triptolide reduces activity of RNA polymerase II


Triptolide (TPL) possesses potent anticancer and anti-inflammatory
effects. Our previous study demonstrated that radiation-induced pulmonary
fibrosis in mice can be significantly reduced by TPL treatment (0.25
mg/kg/every 3 days for 1-3 months via intravenous injection). Treatment
was associated with the reduction of a panel of inflammation molecules,
as evidenced by a membrane array of 62 inflammatory molecules. We found
that TPL has a high level of biointeraction with RNA polymerase II (Pol
II). Pol II is a major enzyme complex responsible for the production of
mRNA and could explain improved tumor response and reduced normal tissue
toxicity. The mRNA of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1), tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF), IL-6, and Cox-2 were used as downstream products of
Pol II. Alpha-amanitin (a specific inhibitor of Pol II) and actinomycin D
(a pan Pol inhibitor) were used as positive controls. The results showed
that: 1) Pol II was suppressed as early as 1 hour after TPL was added to
cells; 2) TPL (effective at ng/ml levels) is more potent than -amanitin
and actinomycin D (effective at g/ml levels) at reducing housekeeping
genes L32 and S14; 3) the suppression of Pol II by TPL was dose
dependent; and 4) TPL inhibited radiation-induced mRNA of IL-1 and TNF at
3 hours after irradiation and IL-6 and Cox-2 at 8 hours after
irradiation. It is unknown whether these early effects of TPL on Pol II
impact either tumor response or normal tissue complications.

