Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Exploring effects of nanosecond and microsecond pulsed electric
field ablation in a rat orthotopic hepatocellular carcinoma model


Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cancer in the
world. A diagnosis of HCC carries a guarded prognosis, especially when
metastasis is documented. Reliable, curative treatment for very early,
early, and intermediate stages is still an inconsistent ideal. Nanosecond
(ns), or microsecond (s) pulsed electric fields (PEFs) that produce
irreversible electroporation (IRE) could be used to ablate local tumor
masses through minimal invasive or open surgery delivery. Both nsPEFs and
sPEFs induce permanent permeabilization of cells resulting in cell death
without any thermal effect. NsPEFs can also impact intracellular
organelles and induce apoptosis. Previous studies indicated under certain
condition, there was a protective tumor response following nsPEFs
treatment in mouse subcutaneous HCC model. In these studies, we
specifically test the efficacy of nsPEFs and sPEFs in an orthotopic HCC
rat tumor model. N1S1 cells stably transfected with luciferase were used
to generate tumors. Orthotropic insertion of transfected N1S1 HCC cells
in Sprague Dawley rat livers was used as the model. Different pulses
numbers, rise times and pulse durations were applied. The effect on
treated tumor tissue suggests that a single treatment of 500 or 1000
100ns pulses with either slow (50ns) or fast (10ns) rise times and 50
kV/cm can eliminate HCC tumors. Continuous delivery of eighty 100s
microsecond pulses at 2.5 kV/cm dramatically reverses lesion enlargement.
1000 pulses of 100 ns PEFs with fast rise times provoke an innate immune
response. Immune responses in this orthotopic HCC model are still under
investigation.

