Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Nonclinical safety and pharmacology of VX15/2503: a humanized IgG4
monoclonal antibody to SEMA4D


Vaccinex is developing VX15/2503, a humanized IgG4 anti-Semaphorin 4D
(SEMA4D; CD100) antibody with approximately 5 nM affinity, for the
treatment of patients with advanced solid tumors and for the treatment of
patients with multiple sclerosis. SEMA4D is an important mediator of
axonal growth cone guidance, angiogenesis, and T cell and B cell
activation. Cellular SEMA4D (cSEMA4D) is expressed most abundantly on T
cells and to a lesser extent on other lymphocytes as a 150 kDa
transmembrane protein. SEMA4D is less abundantly present in serum as a
240 kDa, homodimeric soluble protein (sSEMA4D). VX15/2503 recognizes a
discontinuous epitope in the homodimerzation domain of both the cellular
and soluble forms of SEMA4D. This epitope is also located on the margin
of the plexin B1 (PLXNB1) binding domain, the high affinity receptor of
SEMA4D. Binding of SEMA4D by VX15/2503 blocks the binding of SEMA4D to
PLXNB1 and reduces cSEMA4D by promoting internalization of approximately
60% over 24 hours. Evaluation of VX15/2503 or its murine progenitor (MAb
67-2) demonstrated that these anti-SEMA4D antibodies suppressed tumor
growth, metastases and angiogenesis in syngeneic, xenograft, and
transgenic tumor models. Single dose and one month toxicology studies
utilizing VX15/2503 were performed in Sprague Dawley rats and cynomolgus
macaques at doses of 0, 10, 30, or 100 mg/kg/dose. The no observed
adverse effect level (NOAEL) in each study was determined to be 100
mg/kg/dose. A pivotal 6-month chronic dose study in rats is ongoing. Rats
are being administered 26 weekly doses of VX15/2503 at 0, 30, 100, or 200
mg/kg/dose; data through 13 weeks have been analyzed. T cell associated
SEMA4D remained saturated throughout this phase in mid and high dose
animals. On average, high dose rats had a Cmax of 4,378 g/mL and exposure
of 330,878 ghr/mL (AUC0-168). Appetance, bodyweight, serum chemistry,
behavior, general condition, and ophthalmologic parameters were
unaffected by VX15/2503 administration. Treated animals mounted
appropriate IgG response; however, low and high dose females produced a
slight, but statistically significant lower IgM response than control
animals five days following KLH administration. A statistically
significant reduction of 33 to 80% was observed in circulating NK cell
levels; no similar reduction was observed with macaques dosed weekly X 5
at 100 mg/kg or in ongoing clinical analyses of NK cell levels.
Additionally, fewer splenic germinal centers and reduced lymphocyte
infiltrates in hepatic parenchyma were observed in the tissues from
high-dose animals. These pharmacologic effects did not result in frank
toxicity in these animals. A Phase I trial with VX15/2503 is currently
being conducted in adult patients with advanced solid tumors. A better
understanding of antibody-antigen interactions as well as the nonclinical
safety and pharmacology of this antibody will inform clinical development
of VX15/2503.

