Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Tumor-initiating cells in human glioblastoma are heterogeneous
populations which reside in distinct environmental niches


We previously demonstrated that it is possible to objectively interrogate
human glioblastoma (GBM) by using 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA), an
endogenous intermediate of the porphyrin biosynthesis pathway. It acts as
a prodrug that is metabolised intracellularly leading to the selective
accumulation of the fluorescent molecule protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) in
tumor cells. Tumor tissue resection is then performed on a
fluorescence-guided basis allowing direct visualization of tumor tissue
and diffusely infiltrative disease. This approach gave us the possibility
to identify and characterize tumor compartments in GBM. We have now
interrogated tumor compartments based on PpIX fluorescence. Our results
demonstrate that: 1) cells residing in the tumor margin do not resemble
the cancer stem cell phenotype but are tumorigenic to some extent, 2) the
margin tissue expresses markers of apoptosis, 3) fluorescence material is
present in the SVZ of 65% of our GBM (n=65 patients) and it is possible
to isolate TICs from these SVZs. These cells are phenotypically similar
to those isolated from the tumor mass and possess all the cancer stem
cell cardinal features, 4) SNP analysis of SVZ tissue samples reveals
distinct genetic aberrations, 5) TICs in the SVZ reside in a
pro-angiogenic environment. Further characterization of niches in tumor
edges and SVZ as well as response to chemotherapeutic agents is in
progress to highlight intra-tumoral heterogeneity of TICs.

