Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inhibition of mTOR and AKT as a potential strategy for the
treatment of basal-like breast cancer


Basal-like breast cancer is an aggressive disease, for which effective
targeted therapies are lacking. The frequent loss of phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN) and aberrant activation of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mTOR pathway in basal-like breast cancer make it an
attractive therapeutic strategy to target AKT and mTOR. To evaluate the
effect of PTEN loss on tumor cell sensitivity to mTOR inhibition, we
performed PTEN knockdown experiment in vitro using a basal-like breast
cancer cell line WU-BC3, which was derived from a patient with triple
negative breast cancer. A more dramatic reduction in cell proliferation
was observed in WU-BC3 siPTEN compared to that in WU-BC3 siControl
following 7 days of treatment with the mTOR inhibitor MK-8669
(pBasal-like breast cancer is an aggressive disease, for which effective
targeted therapies are lacking. The frequent loss of phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN) and aberrant activation of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mTOR pathway in basal-like breast cancer make it an
attractive therapeutic strategy to target AKT and mTOR. To evaluate the
effect of PTEN loss on tumor cell sensitivity to mTOR inhibition, we
performed PTEN knockdown experiment in vitro using a basal-like breast
cancer cell line WU-BC3, which was derived from a patient with triple
negative breast cancer. A more dramatic reduction in cell proliferation
was observed in WU-BC3 siPTEN compared to that in WU-BC3 siControl
following 7 days of treatment with the mTOR inhibitor MK-8669 (p<0.001).
We then tested MK-8669 and MK-2206 (an allosteric, selective pan-AKT
inhibitor), either alone or in combination, in 2 Human Tumor in Mouse
(HIM) models of basal-like breast cancer, WU-BC4 and WU-BC5, that are
deficient in PTEN expression in vivo. In both models, MK-8669 alone
significantly inhibited tumor growth (pBasal-like breast cancer is an
aggressive disease, for which effective targeted therapies are lacking.
The frequent loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and aberrant
activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mTOR pathway in
basal-like breast cancer make it an attractive therapeutic strategy to
target AKT and mTOR. To evaluate the effect of PTEN loss on tumor cell
sensitivity to mTOR inhibition, we performed PTEN knockdown experiment in
vitro using a basal-like breast cancer cell line WU-BC3, which was
derived from a patient with triple negative breast cancer. A more
dramatic reduction in cell proliferation was observed in WU-BC3 siPTEN
compared to that in WU-BC3 siControl following 7 days of treatment with
the mTOR inhibitor MK-8669 (p<0.001). We then tested MK-8669 and MK-2206
(an allosteric, selective pan-AKT inhibitor), either alone or in
combination, in 2 Human Tumor in Mouse (HIM) models of basal-like breast
cancer, WU-BC4 and WU-BC5, that are deficient in PTEN expression in vivo.
In both models, MK-8669 alone significantly inhibited tumor growth
(p<0.001). However, the combination of MK-8669 and MK-2206 was more
effective than either MK-8669 (pBasal-like breast cancer is an aggressive
disease, for which effective targeted therapies are lacking. The frequent
loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and aberrant activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mTOR pathway in basal-like
breast cancer make it an attractive therapeutic strategy to target AKT
and mTOR. To evaluate the effect of PTEN loss on tumor cell sensitivity
to mTOR inhibition, we performed PTEN knockdown experiment in vitro using
a basal-like breast cancer cell line WU-BC3, which was derived from a
patient with triple negative breast cancer. A more dramatic reduction in
cell proliferation was observed in WU-BC3 siPTEN compared to that in
WU-BC3 siControl following 7 days of treatment with the mTOR inhibitor
MK-8669 (p<0.001). We then tested MK-8669 and MK-2206 (an allosteric,
selective pan-AKT inhibitor), either alone or in combination, in 2 Human
Tumor in Mouse (HIM) models of basal-like breast cancer, WU-BC4 and
WU-BC5, that are deficient in PTEN expression in vivo. In both models,
MK-8669 alone significantly inhibited tumor growth (p<0.001). However,
the combination of MK-8669 and MK-2206 was more effective than either
MK-8669 (p<0.05) or MK-2206 (pBasal-like breast cancer is an aggressive
disease, for which effective targeted therapies are lacking. The frequent
loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and aberrant activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mTOR pathway in basal-like
breast cancer make it an attractive therapeutic strategy to target AKT
and mTOR. To evaluate the effect of PTEN loss on tumor cell sensitivity
to mTOR inhibition, we performed PTEN knockdown experiment in vitro using
a basal-like breast cancer cell line WU-BC3, which was derived from a
patient with triple negative breast cancer. A more dramatic reduction in
cell proliferation was observed in WU-BC3 siPTEN compared to that in
WU-BC3 siControl following 7 days of treatment with the mTOR inhibitor
MK-8669 (p<0.001). We then tested MK-8669 and MK-2206 (an allosteric,
selective pan-AKT inhibitor), either alone or in combination, in 2 Human
Tumor in Mouse (HIM) models of basal-like breast cancer, WU-BC4 and
WU-BC5, that are deficient in PTEN expression in vivo. In both models,
MK-8669 alone significantly inhibited tumor growth (p<0.001). However,
the combination of MK-8669 and MK-2206 was more effective than either
MK-8669 (p<0.05) or MK-2206 (p<0.01) alone. Biomarker studies indicated
that the combination therapy resulted in a more dramatic inhibition of
tumor cell proliferation (as assessed by Ki67) and angiogenesis (as
assessed by CD31 staining) than single agents alone in both models. In
addition, treatment with MK-2206 abolished the MK-8669-induced AKT
activation in vivo, suggesting the inhibition of the feedback loop
between mTOR and AKT being a potential underlying mechanism for the
enhanced anti-tumor effect observed with the combination therapy. Our
results provide a preclinical rationale for future clinical investigation
of this combination in basal-like breast cancer.

