Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CRLX301, a novel tumor-targeted taxane nanopharmaceutical


Docetaxel is one of the most commonly prescribed anticancer agents. While
efficacious, the therapeutic benefits of docetaxel are often compromised
by immunosuppression and neurotoxicity, incurring a discontinuation rate
of over 25%. Cerulean has developed a novel class of tumor-targeted
nanopharmaceuticals designed to enhance both efficacy and tolerability.
CRLX301, a self-assembling docetaxel nanopharmaceutical, possesses
significantly enhanced efficacy and improved pharmacokinetics compared to
the parent drug. IND-enabling toxicity studies for CRLX301 are currently
underway. Compared to docetaxel, CRLX301 showed a superior PK profile,
with a significantly longer half-life and a >20-fold higher drug
concentration in tumor tissue 7 days after a single administration. The
improved PK and biodistribution of CRLX301 docetaxel translated into
superior antitumor activity in murine syngeneic and human xenograft
models. In the murine B16.F10 tumor model, median survival at the MTD
exceeded 100 days for CRLX301 compared to 38 days for the parent drug
docetaxel. CRLX301 also demonstrated superior efficacy over docetaxel in
tumor models representative of other cancer types as well, including cure
rates between 50 and 83% in xenograft models representing triple-negative
breast and squamous non-small cell lung cancer tumors, compared to no
cures for docetaxel. Further, in the human prostate xenograft tumor model
DU-145, CRLX 301 achieved a 100% cure rate compared to a relatively poor
cure rate of 25% with docetaxel, 146 days after three weekly doses at the
MTD. In summary, CRLX301 represents a new and potent anticancer
therapeutic that has the potential to be a best-in-class taxane.

