Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Randomized phase 2 study of efatutazone in combination with
carboplatin and paclitaxel as first-line therapy for metastatic non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC)


Background: Efatutazone, a highly-selective peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR) agonist, has demonstrated
antitumor activity in multiple preclinical cancer models, including
NSCLC, and has shown anticancer effects and a favorable toxicity profile
in Phase 1 trials. The current study evaluated the safety and efficacy of
efatutazone in combination with carboplatin and paclitaxel as first-line
therapy for NSCLC. Methods: Patients with histologically/cytologically
confirmed, untreated metastatic NSCLC, with no significant pleural
effusion or pleural involvement from the tumor and an ECOG score of 0-1
participated in this 2-part, multinational study. Part 1 comprised a
single-arm portion evaluating safety; Part 2, a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized Phase 2 portion evaluating safety and
efficacy. Efatutazone (0.5 mg) or placebo was administered orally BID,
continuously. Carboplatin was administered at a projected AUC of 6
mg/ml*min and paclitaxel at 200 mg/m2. In Part 1, patients were evaluated
for treatment-related dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs). In Part 2, the
primary endpoint was the progression-free survival (PFS) rate at Week 18,
assessed by the investigators using RECIST. Results: 3 patients enrolled
in Part 1; no DLTs were observed. 108 patients were randomized into Part
2. Demographic characteristics were generally similar between treatment
arms with fewer patients in the efatutazone arm aged > 65 years (11% vs
28%), female (24% vs 32%), ECOG = 0 (30% vs 35%), and with squamous
histology (26% vs 37%). Efatutazone was associated with a lower PFS rate
at Week 18 vs placebo (41.1% [95% CI: 26.3, 55.3%] vs 64.9% [95% CI:
50.1, 76.3%]; P Background: Efatutazone, a highly-selective peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR) agonist, has demonstrated
antitumor activity in multiple preclinical cancer models, including
NSCLC, and has shown anticancer effects and a favorable toxicity profile
in Phase 1 trials. The current study evaluated the safety and efficacy of
efatutazone in combination with carboplatin and paclitaxel as first-line
therapy for NSCLC. Methods: Patients with histologically/cytologically
confirmed, untreated metastatic NSCLC, with no significant pleural
effusion or pleural involvement from the tumor and an ECOG score of 0-1
participated in this 2-part, multinational study. Part 1 comprised a
single-arm portion evaluating safety; Part 2, a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized Phase 2 portion evaluating safety and
efficacy. Efatutazone (0.5 mg) or placebo was administered orally BID,
continuously. Carboplatin was administered at a projected AUC of 6
mg/ml*min and paclitaxel at 200 mg/m2. In Part 1, patients were evaluated
for treatment-related dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs). In Part 2, the
primary endpoint was the progression-free survival (PFS) rate at Week 18,
assessed by the investigators using RECIST. Results: 3 patients enrolled
in Part 1; no DLTs were observed. 108 patients were randomized into Part
2. Demographic characteristics were generally similar between treatment
arms with fewer patients in the efatutazone arm aged > 65 years (11% vs
28%), female (24% vs 32%), ECOG = 0 (30% vs 35%), and with squamous
histology (26% vs 37%). Efatutazone was associated with a lower PFS rate
at Week 18 vs placebo (41.1% [95% CI: 26.3, 55.3%] vs 64.9% [95% CI:
50.1, 76.3%]; P < 0.001) and a shorter PFS (102 vs 142 days; HR = 1.62, P
= 0.04). There was no difference in overall survival (HR = 1.11, P =
0.71) at a median duration of follow-up of 6.7 months. Most adverse
events more frequent with efatutazone were consistent with fluid
retention, a known side effect of PPAR agonists, and included edema,
weight gain, pleural effusion, dyspnea, and anemia. In addition, a higher
incidence of febrile neutropenia, nausea, and pain in extremity occurred
in the efatutazone arm. Exploratory analyses are ongoing to try to
understand the reason for the unexpected negative effect on PFS. The
higher incidence of pleural effusion with efatutazone, which might be
related to a treatment side effect rather than tumor progression, may
provide some explanation: in some cases, pleural effusion was judged as
progressive disease, whereas other target lesions were stable; no
cytology was obtained in these cases. Interpretation: The efatutazone
safety profile in this trial was largely consistent with prior studies
and known effects of PPAR agonists. Efatutazone does not improve the
efficacy of carboplatin/paclitaxel as first-line therapy of unselected
patients with NSCLC.

