Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Oral SHP-1 inhibitor TPI-1a4 increases TILs in melanoma tumors and
interacts positively with CTLA4 antibody for melanoma cure in mice


SHP-1 phosphatase is a promising target for developing inhibitors as
novel cancer immune therapeutics given its key role in negative
regulation of immune cells. TPI-1a4 is a small molecule SHP-1 inhibitor
identified recently and demonstrated activity for melanoma and colon
cancer tumors in mice as a tolerated single oral agent. TPI-1a4 has been
further evaluated herein for mechanism of action and potential clinical
translation. Oral TPI-1a4 increased (up to 8x) in TILs in K1735 melanoma
tumors in syngeneic mice in a dose-dependent manner and in correlation
with tumor growth inhibition. The growth of 4-day established K1735
tumors (s.c.) in syngeneic C3H/HeJ mice was inhibited 44% (p SHP-1
phosphatase is a promising target for developing inhibitors as novel
cancer immune therapeutics given its key role in negative regulation of
immune cells. TPI-1a4 is a small molecule SHP-1 inhibitor identified
recently and demonstrated activity for melanoma and colon cancer tumors
in mice as a tolerated single oral agent. TPI-1a4 has been further
evaluated herein for mechanism of action and potential clinical
translation. Oral TPI-1a4 increased (up to 8x) in TILs in K1735 melanoma
tumors in syngeneic mice in a dose-dependent manner and in correlation
with tumor growth inhibition. The growth of 4-day established K1735
tumors (s.c.) in syngeneic C3H/HeJ mice was inhibited 44% (p < 0.05) by
TPI-1a4 at 0.4 mg/kg (5 d/wk, gavage) or 90% (p SHP-1 phosphatase is a
promising target for developing inhibitors as novel cancer immune
therapeutics given its key role in negative regulation of immune cells.
TPI-1a4 is a small molecule SHP-1 inhibitor identified recently and
demonstrated activity for melanoma and colon cancer tumors in mice as a
tolerated single oral agent. TPI-1a4 has been further evaluated herein
for mechanism of action and potential clinical translation. Oral TPI-1a4
increased (up to 8x) in TILs in K1735 melanoma tumors in syngeneic mice
in a dose-dependent manner and in correlation with tumor growth
inhibition. The growth of 4-day established K1735 tumors (s.c.) in
syngeneic C3H/HeJ mice was inhibited 44% (p < 0.05) by TPI-1a4 at 0.4
mg/kg (5 d/wk, gavage) or 90% (p < 0.01) at 0.8 mg/kg (5 d/wk, gavage)
during a treatment period of 4 wks. Evaluation of tumor histology (H.E.)
revealed increases (2x and 4x for the two treatments) of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL). Immunohistochemistry analyses of
the tumor samples demonstrate increases (3 and 6x) of CD45+ cells
(pan-leukocytes), CD3+ cells (T lineage), B220+ cells (B/NK lineages),
and Mac3+ cells (myeloid lineages). Oral TPI-1a4 interacted positively
with CTLA4 antibody for survival extension and cure in K1735 melanoma
tumor mice. TPI-1a4 (1 mg/kg, 5d/wk, gavage) or CTLA4 antibody (9H10, 100
ug x3, ip) as individual agents delayed tumor growth for 1-4 wks in
C3H/HeJ mice with 4-day established K1735 tumors (s.c.). Their
combination delayed tumor growth for 4-14 wks (4/5 mice) or completely
blocked tumor growth (1/5 mice) by 20th wk in association with resistance
to re-challenging with the melanoma tumor (s.c.). The combination was
more effective in C3H/HeJ mice with 1-day established K1735 tumors,
blocked tumor growth in most mice (4/5) comparing to mostly delayed tumor
growth for several wks by the individual agents. TPI-1a4 in drinking
water ad lib with weekly renewal was effective against the melanoma
tumors in mice, suggesting chemical stability. Indeed, mass spectrometry
verified structural integrity of TPI-1a4 stored as solid compound or in
solvent at room temperature for 2 months. These data provide further
evidences designate TPI-1a4 as a novel anti-cancer immune agent and a
promising candidate for clinical translation. Our studies demonstrate for
the first time the potential of TPI-1a4 to improve the clinical efficacy
of CTLA4 antibody and other related cancer therapeutics. Future studies
of TPI-1a4 analogs and derivatives are warranted and may lead to more
refined and effective SHP-1 inhibitors and immune cell activators.

