Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The Netrin-1 receptor UNC5C is a tumor suppressor in colorectal
malignancies


The Netrin-1 receptors UNC5A, B and C belong to the functional family of
dependence receptors that share the ability to induce apoptosis in the
absence of their ligands. Such a trait has been hypothesized to confer a
tumor suppressor activity to these receptors. Expression of one of these
dependence receptors at the surface of a tumor cell is thus speculated to
render this cell dependent on ligand for its survival, hence inhibiting
cell proliferation or migration outside the ligand availability zone.
Here we show that the expression of the UNC5C gene is down-regulated in
colorectal cancers, mainly because of tumor-associated specific promoter
methylation. In addition, inactivation of UNC5C in mice is associated
with increased intestinal tumor progression, demonstrating its tumor
suppressor role. Moreover, mutations in UNC5C that turn down the
pro-apoptotic activity of the receptor are found in patients with
familial form of colorectal cancer. This germline coding mutation in
UNC5C has been detected in five different families from France and USA
and co-segregates with the disease. We further, determine that this
anti-apoptotic mutation arose from a common founder. In summary, our
study strongly indicates that the genetic inactivation of the tumor
suppressor UNC5C may be a major promoter of familial predisposition to
colorectal tumorigenesis.

