Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of signaling pathways involved in the regulation of
let-7 in ovarian cancer


miRNAs represent a class of small non-coding RNAs that can regulate the
stability and translation of specific mRNA targets. Several members of
the let-7 miRNA family are down-regulated in ovarian and other cancers
and are thought to act as tumor suppressors, possibly through their
ability to target growth-promoting genes (RAS, HMGA2), cell cycle genes
(CDK6, CDK7, STK6, STK12), and anti-apoptotic genes (Bcl-2, casp3).
However, the exact mechanisms regulating their expression and activity
are not clearly known. In order to address this issue, we have developed
a reporter assay for let-7 activity. We have made several reporter
constructs containing the luciferase gene attached to different site
combinations and sequences of let-7 in its 3 UTR, and have identified a
reporter that is extremely sensitive to let-7 activity. Ovarian cancer
cell lines BG1 and UCI101 were transfected with the let-7 reporter and
treated with 80 different kinase inhibitors in order to identify upstream
pathways that can affect let-7 activity. We found nine inhibitors which
caused consistent, dose-dependent changes on endogenous let-7 activity.
The nine drugs can be categorized into three classes of inhibitors and
further validation is currently underway through knockdowns of specific
kinases. Our findings suggest novel molecular pathways involved in the
regulation of let-7 family and, considering the important role of let-7
family members in ovarian cancer, these pathways may further our
understanding of ovarian tumorigenesis and provide new targets for
therapy.

