Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Stim1 and Orai1 are critical regulators of melanoma invasion and
anoikis


Store-operated calcium (SOC) influx is the major calcium entry mechanism
in non-excitable cells regulating a plethora of physiological and
pathological processes. The internal store calcium sensor and plasma
membrane pore-forming unit are recently identified to be Stim1 and Orai1,
respectively. We were the first to demonstrate the critical roles of
Stim1 and Orai1 in breast tumor cell migration and metastasis (Cancer
Cell, 2009, 15:124). There are still a few important questions remained
to be answer: Whether Stim1 and Orai1 play a role in the dissemination of
other tumors? How do Stim1 and Orai1 dysregulate and reorganize actin
cytoskeleton to promote tumor cell invasion and metastasis? Do Stim1 and
Orai1 contribute to tumor progression in cancer patients? Our recent data
suggested that Stim1 and Orai1 were important regulators of tumor cell
migration and invasion in multiple tumors. SOC inhibitors block cell
migration and invasion in all the tumors tested. Stim1 and Orai1 promote
tumor cell invasion and degradation of extracellular matrix by promoting
the formation of invadopodia. Stim1 and Orai1 regulate invadopodia
formation through facilitating SOC calcium influx and activation of
non-receptor tyrosine kinase Src. The activation of Src by SOC influx
also contributes to anoikis resistance in tumor cells. We were able to
further demonstrate that the expression levels of Stim1 correlate with
tumor progression and metastasis in multiple solid tumors. Therefore, our
data suggested that Stim1 overexpression in tumors may promote tumor
metastasis through calcium influx and Src activation, which facilitate
extracellular matrix degradation and promote anchorage-independent growth.

