Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The development of 19-substituted benzoquinone ansamycins as
potential anticancer drugs


Benzoquinone ansamycins (BQA's) were the first class of Hsp90 inhibitors
developed but the use of the prototype agent geldanamycin was limited by
hepatotoxicity. One major mechanism of toxicity of the BQA class is
manifested via the electrophilic properties of the quinone and alkylation
of cellular nucleophiles at the 19-position. We developed novel
19-substituted BQA's in the geldanamycin (GA), 17-AAG and 17-DMAG series
as a means to prevent arylation of cellular nucleophiles. 19-substituted
BQA's inhibited recombinant Hsp90 and did not react with thiols at the
19-position while marked thiol reactivity could be detected using their
parent quinones. We examined the effects of different substitution
patterns at the 19-position on the ability of BQAs to inhibit Hsp90 and
induce growth inhibitory effects in breast cancer cell lines. We found
that both 19-phenyl and 19-methyl BQA's in the 17-AAG, 17-DMAG and GA
series were effective inhibitors of purified Hsp90 as demonstrated using
an ATPase assay particularly in the presence of NQO1 to generate the
hydroquinone ansamycin. Only 19-phenyl substituted BQAs were effective
growth inhibitory agents in breast cancer cell lines using an MTT assay
while 19-methyl substituted BQAs in the GA, 17-AAG and 17-DMAG series
demonstrated only modest growth inhibition. The growth inhibitory effects
of 19-phenyl BQAs were potentiated in cells containing high NQO1.
Notably, 19-phenyl DMAG had similar growth inhibitory and apoptotic
effects as its parent quinone, DMAG. These data demonstrate that the
19-phenyl BQAs had marked growth inhibitory, apoptotic, and client
protein expression effect in breast cancer cells compared to 19-methyl
BQAs (Supported by CA 51210).

