Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Modulation of p73 isoform expression regulates aggressive behavior
in NHL cell line model with 1p36 chromosomal disruption


Abnormalities of chromosome 1p36 locus are frequently detected in non
Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and are associated with aggressive clinical
behavior. TP73, a gene at 1p36 locus, is a member of the p53 tumor
suppressor gene family, and regulates many important cellular pathways.
TP73 gene function is controlled by a balance between two isoforms with
opposing functions, the full length TAp73 protein (pro-apoptotic) and the
NH2-terminally truncated Np73 protein (anti-apoptotic through
antagonizing both TAp73 and p53). Our previous work on diagnostic
specimens of NHL cases had shown a differential Np73 up-regulation and
increase in Np73:TAp73 expression ratio among NHL cases with 1p36
chromosomal disruption as compared to NHL cases without 1p36 disruption,
which correlates with decreased apoptosis, increased cellular
proliferation and increased angiogenesis. We hypothesized that modulated
expression of the p73 isoforms will alter the aggressive behavior of a
NHL cell line containing 1p36 disruption. We used a NHL cell line
(Granta-519) that has 1p36 disruption as a model. Granta-519 cells
express higher levels of Np73 isoform similar to what was observed in NHL
cases with 1p36 abnormality. Next, we stably transfected Granta-519 with
a TAp73 mammalian expression vector to modulate the Np73:TAp73 ratio.
Cell cycle analysis showed an increase in the percentage of G1 cells and
decrease in the percentage of S and G2 cells in TAp73-trasnfected
Granta-519 cells as compared to control vector-transfected cells. Serum
deprivation significantly inhibited the growth of Granta-519-TAp73- cells
as compared to control vector-transfected cells. Moreover, reconstitution
of TAp73 expression in Granta-519 cells significantly enhanced their
response to Doxorubicin. Together, these results provide an insight on
modulation of Np73:TAp73 as a novel therapeutic target in NHL with 1p36
abnormalities.

