Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Ultra-sensitive detection of rare mutants by droplet digital PCR
with conventional TaqMan assays


Molecular tests for genetic mutations play an important role in the
diagnosis of cancer. Somatic mutations that drive the pathological
features of most tumors have increasing promise as biomarkers for cancer
prognosis and therapeutic efficacy. The detection of somatic mutations
poses an analytical challenge due to the heterogeneous nature of most
samples, where a gene carrying a mutation may differ from the highly
abundant wild type sequence by only a single nucleotide. Although a
variety of methods exist for mutation analysis, many have poor
selectivity and fail to detect mutant sequence below 1 in 100 wildtype
sequences. Methods that provide better discrimination and quantitation of
somatic mutations are desirable. Here we present a simple strategy using
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) for the detection of somatic mutations with
high selectivity and sensitivity. Based on the simple principle of sample
partitioning into water-in-oil microdroplets, this ddPCR method increases
the abundance of a mutant DNA sequence up to 20,000 times compared to an
equivalent bulk PCR reaction. Using conventional TaqMan chemistries and
workflow, selectivities of up to 1/100,000 can readily be achieved in any
laboratory. Here we present results on the use of ddPCR for the detection
and quantitation of several clinically important mutations, including
KRAS, c-KIT D816V and JAK2 from clinical samples such as bone marrow
aspirates and FFPE. Results from ddPCR are compared to those of
conventional approaches including allele specific real-time PCR and
sequencing. This ddPCR method may play an important role in the earlier
detection of cancer, monitoring the progress of disease and response to
therapeutics.

