Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Effects of Src and IGF1R inhibition on acquired endocrine therapy
resistant breast cancer


Effective standard therapy for hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast
cancer targets the estrogen receptor (ER). However, a significant
proportion of women with HR+ breast cancer relapse. Furthermore, the
majority of women with metastatic HR+ breast cancer develop resistance to
endocrine therapy. Adaptive cross-talk between ER and growth factor
receptor pathways including IGF1R and Src is involved in acquired
endocrine therapy resistance. To determine effects of adding dasatinib
(D), Src inhibitor, and/or anti-IGF1R Ab MK0646 (M) to the ER antagonist
fulvestrant (F) in an acquired endocrine therapy resistant breast cancer,
we used long-term estrogen-deprived (LTED) derivative of ER+ breast
cancer cell lines, MCF-7/LTED and HCC-1428/LTED. Parental and LTED cells
were treated with variable combinations of F, D and M, followed by
determinations of drug effects on cell growth, migration, and invasion in
vitro and tumor growth in vivo. We demonstrated that LTED cells were
resistant to F alone, comparing parental cells (PEffective standard
therapy for hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer targets the
estrogen receptor (ER). However, a significant proportion of women with
HR+ breast cancer relapse. Furthermore, the majority of women with
metastatic HR+ breast cancer develop resistance to endocrine therapy.
Adaptive cross-talk between ER and growth factor receptor pathways
including IGF1R and Src is involved in acquired endocrine therapy
resistance. To determine effects of adding dasatinib (D), Src inhibitor,
and/or anti-IGF1R Ab MK0646 (M) to the ER antagonist fulvestrant (F) in
an acquired endocrine therapy resistant breast cancer, we used long-term
estrogen-deprived (LTED) derivative of ER+ breast cancer cell lines,
MCF-7/LTED and HCC-1428/LTED. Parental and LTED cells were treated with
variable combinations of F, D and M, followed by determinations of drug
effects on cell growth, migration, and invasion in vitro and tumor growth
in vivo. We demonstrated that LTED cells were resistant to F alone,
comparing parental cells (P<0.05) in cell growth, migration and invasion.
Addition of D to F appeared to be synergistic in all systems including
cell growth, cell migration and invasion. However, the addition of M to F
or to F+D appeared inhibition on cell growth in monolayer with low-serum
medium, but not to significantly add inhibitory effects on cell growth in
3D and cell migration and invasion. The effects of IGF-1R antibody,
MK0646, on cells growth in monolayer showed not consistent with 3D, which
might be due to growth factors in the matrigel, although we used growth
factors decreased matrigel. To verify the effects of the drugs on tumor
growth in vivo, we developed xenograft models using MCF-7/LTED cells and
treated the mice with F, D, and M along or variable combinations. The
study demonstrated that all the combinations of F+D+M, F+D, and F+M (from
PEffective standard therapy for hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast
cancer targets the estrogen receptor (ER). However, a significant
proportion of women with HR+ breast cancer relapse. Furthermore, the
majority of women with metastatic HR+ breast cancer develop resistance to
endocrine therapy. Adaptive cross-talk between ER and growth factor
receptor pathways including IGF1R and Src is involved in acquired
endocrine therapy resistance. To determine effects of adding dasatinib
(D), Src inhibitor, and/or anti-IGF1R Ab MK0646 (M) to the ER antagonist
fulvestrant (F) in an acquired endocrine therapy resistant breast cancer,
we used long-term estrogen-deprived (LTED) derivative of ER+ breast
cancer cell lines, MCF-7/LTED and HCC-1428/LTED. Parental and LTED cells
were treated with variable combinations of F, D and M, followed by
determinations of drug effects on cell growth, migration, and invasion in
vitro and tumor growth in vivo. We demonstrated that LTED cells were
resistant to F alone, comparing parental cells (P<0.05) in cell growth,
migration and invasion. Addition of D to F appeared to be synergistic in
all systems including cell growth, cell migration and invasion. However,
the addition of M to F or to F+D appeared inhibition on cell growth in
monolayer with low-serum medium, but not to significantly add inhibitory
effects on cell growth in 3D and cell migration and invasion. The effects
of IGF-1R antibody, MK0646, on cells growth in monolayer showed not
consistent with 3D, which might be due to growth factors in the matrigel,
although we used growth factors decreased matrigel. To verify the effects
of the drugs on tumor growth in vivo, we developed xenograft models using
MCF-7/LTED cells and treated the mice with F, D, and M along or variable
combinations. The study demonstrated that all the combinations of F+D+M,
F+D, and F+M (from P< 0.05 to Effective standard therapy for hormone
receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer targets the estrogen receptor (ER).
However, a significant proportion of women with HR+ breast cancer
relapse. Furthermore, the majority of women with metastatic HR+ breast
cancer develop resistance to endocrine therapy. Adaptive cross-talk
between ER and growth factor receptor pathways including IGF1R and Src is
involved in acquired endocrine therapy resistance. To determine effects
of adding dasatinib (D), Src inhibitor, and/or anti-IGF1R Ab MK0646 (M)
to the ER antagonist fulvestrant (F) in an acquired endocrine therapy
resistant breast cancer, we used long-term estrogen-deprived (LTED)
derivative of ER+ breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7/LTED and HCC-1428/LTED.
Parental and LTED cells were treated with variable combinations of F, D
and M, followed by determinations of drug effects on cell growth,
migration, and invasion in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. We
demonstrated that LTED cells were resistant to F alone, comparing
parental cells (P<0.05) in cell growth, migration and invasion. Addition
of D to F appeared to be synergistic in all systems including cell
growth, cell migration and invasion. However, the addition of M to F or
to F+D appeared inhibition on cell growth in monolayer with low-serum
medium, but not to significantly add inhibitory effects on cell growth in
3D and cell migration and invasion. The effects of IGF-1R antibody,
MK0646, on cells growth in monolayer showed not consistent with 3D, which
might be due to growth factors in the matrigel, although we used growth
factors decreased matrigel. To verify the effects of the drugs on tumor
growth in vivo, we developed xenograft models using MCF-7/LTED cells and
treated the mice with F, D, and M along or variable combinations. The
study demonstrated that all the combinations of F+D+M, F+D, and F+M (from
P< 0.05 to <0.001 in viable time points) show inhibited the tumor growth
comparing vehicle or F alone. The inhibitory effect of F+D+M is higher
than F+D and F+M. In summary, the addition of dasatinib to fulvestrant
appeared to be synergistic in all systems including cell growth, cell
migration and invasion and tumor growth in vivo. The addition of MK0646
to fulvestrant mildly inhibited MCF-7/LTED cell growth and xenografts
growth, but not cell migration and cell invasion.

