Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Aldose reductase inhibition prevents human colon cancer cells
growth by miR-21 and FOXO3a-mediated regulation of PTEN


We have shown earlier that the inhibition of aldose reductase (AR), a
NADPH-dependent aldo-keto reductase, prevents growth factor-induced
proliferation of colon cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Recent studies
indicate that changes in microRNA (miRNA) expression can contribute to
cancer by modulating the functional expression of critical genes involved
in cancer growth and metastasis. However, the molecular mechanism(s) by
which AR regulates miRNA expression and their dependent mitogenic effects
in cancer cells is not known. Therefore, we investigated how AR regulates
growth factor -induced expression of miRNAs in colon cancer cells. Our
results indicate that inhibition of AR significantly down-regulated
growth factor-induced miR-21 expression in HT29, SW480 and Caco-2 human
colon cancer cells. Further, AR inhibition also increased PTEN, a direct
target of miR-21 that contributes cancer cell growth and invasion.
Inhibition of AR also prevented the EGF-induced phosphorylation of PTEN
and FOXO3a, which prevents cell proliferation. Treatment of human colon
cancer cells with AR inhibitor, fidarestat, prevented the EGF-induced DNA
binding activity of AP1, phosphorylation of PI3K, AKT, c-Jun and c-Fos.
More importantly, in HT29 human colon adenocarcinoma xenograft tissues,
miR-21 expression was lower, and PTEN and FOXO3a levels were
significantly higher in AR inhibitor-treated mice compared to controls.
Collectively, these results show a novel role of AR in mediation of
growth factor-induced colon cancer cell proliferation by increasing
miR-21 expression and inactivating or decreasing PTEN and FOXO3a through
the ROS/PI3K/AKT/AP1 pathway, indicating that AR inhibitors could be used
for the prevention/therapy of colon carcinogenesis.

