Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Competitive inhibition of mTOR results in tumor specific
radiosensitization


Translational control of gene expression has been implicated as a
component of the cellular response to ionizing radiation (IR). The
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a critical kinase in the
regulation of translation. mTOR exists in two distinct complexes: mTORC1
and mTORC2. mTORC1 regulates 4E-BP1 and p70-s6k, whereas mTORC2 regulates
several AGC kinases including AKT. Most studies of mTOR have focused on
the use of the allosteric inhibitor rapamycin and its analogs, which
incompletely inhibit mTORC1 and do not inhibit mTORC2. In contrast, newly
developed competitive mTOR inhibitors (e.g. PP242) inhibit mTORC1 output
more completely and inhibit mTORC2. In the study described here, we
compared the effects of rapamycin and PP242 on cellular radiosensitivity
using a clonogenic assay. In two tumor cell lines originating from
different histologies, U251 and MDA-MB-231, PP242 treatment 1h before
irradiation increased radiosensitivity with DEFs (dose enhancement
factors at 0.1 surviving fraction) of 1.52 and 1.34 respectively, whereas
rapamycin had no effect. However, PP242 had no effect on the
radiosensitivity of the normal human fibroblast cell line, MRC9. PP242
treatment of U251 cells resulted in a dose-dependent increase in
radiosensitivity. Furthermore, addition of PP242 immediately, 1, or 6h
after IR resulted in increased radiosensitivity with DEFs of 1.60, 1.50,
and 1.26, respectively. To investigate the mechanism of this
radiosensitization U251 cells were treated with PP242, irradiated (2Gy)
and stained for H2AX, a marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). PP242
exposure significantly delayed the dispersal of radiation-induced H2AX
foci, consistent with an inhibition of DSB repair. Under conditions of
clonogenic survival, exposure of U251 or MDA-MB-231 cells to 2Gy resulted
in no detectable increase in mTOR output. PP242 treatment of both tumor
lines resulted in complete inhibition of mTORC1/2 output whereas
rapamycin only partially inhibited mTORC1 and did not inhibit mTORC2.
m7-GTP batch chromatography showed PP242 induced a decrease in cap-bound
eIF4G and an increase in cap-bound 4E-BP1, while rapamycin slightly
increased 4E-BP1 binding and had no effect on eIF4G binding. Consistent
with the effects on cap-complex formation, PP242 treatment caused a
considerably greater decrease in polysome abundance than rapamycin. These
results suggest that competitive inhibitors of mTOR, in contrast to
rapalogs, induce tumor selective radiosensitization. Moreover, the
mechanism appears to involve the inhibition of DSB repair and the
suppression of translation.

