Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Enhanced activity of fenretinide/-LYM-X-SORBTM (4-HPR/LXS) oral
powder in combination with ketoconazole and vincristine against recurrent
neuroblastoma xenografts


Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial solid tumor of
childhood. Survival from relapsed NB is low and novel therapies are
needed against recurrent NB, which often manifest loss of p53 function
and multidrug resistance. Fenretinide (4-HPR) is a synthetic retinoid
that achieved multiple complete responses in minimal disease in a phase I
clinical trial in recurrent neuroblastoma when formulated as an oral
powder using the LYM-X-SORBTM (LXS) organized lipid matrix (4-HPR/LXS).
We recently showed that ketoconazole (keto) increased 4-HPR plasma
concentrations in mice by > 2-fold over 4-HPR alone (P350 days with
4-HPR/LXS alone was 10% compared to 50% of mice treated with
4-HPR/LXS+keto (P 2-fold over 4-HPR alone (P 2-fold over 4-HPR alone
(P<0.02) and (P300 days with 4-HPR/LXS+keto+VCR was 50% vs 38% with
4-HPR/LXS+keto (P300 days with 4-HPR/LXS+keto+VCR was 50% vs 38% with
4-HPR/LXS+keto (P<0.01) and 10% for VCR alone (P90 days with
4-HPR+keto+VCR for 2/9 mice (22%) vs 0% for the other treatments (P60
days with 4-HPR/LXS+keto+VCR was 2/5 (40%) vs 0% for VCR or
4-HPR/LXS+keto alone. Toxicity of the combination regimens in mice
(assessed by body weight) was negligible. These data suggest that if an
ongoing phase I study of 4-HPR/LXS+keto is well-tolerated that a
subsequent clinical trial exploring that combination+VCR should be
undertaken in patients with recurrent NB. Supported by CPRIT RP10072.

