Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Opposite effects on proliferation and bone metastasis genes by
Estrogen Receptor B1 and Estrogen Receptor B2 in the prostate cancer cell
line PC3


The estrogen receptor 1 (ER1) is successively lost during cancer
progression while its splice variant estrogen receptor 2 (ER2) is still
expressed in advanced prostate cancer. The latter cancer often metastases
to bone. We wanted to investigate, if the loss of ER1 and/or expression
of its splice variant ER2 affect signaling pathways involved in bone
metastasis of prostate cancer. ER2 is a 495 amino acid long splice
variant of estrogen receptor ER1, which is 530 amino acids long. Using
PC3 cells stably expressing ER1, we found that ER1 represses expression
of the bone metastasis regulator Runx2 and its target gene Slug. On the
other hand, using PC3 cells stably expressing ER2 we found that the same
factors are up-regulated. In addition, the expression of Twist1, a factor
whose expression strongly correlates with high Gleason grade of prostate
carcinoma is increased by ER2. In agreement with increased Twist1
expression we find increased expression of DKK1, a factor which has been
shown to increase the RANKL/OPG ratio and enhance osteoclastogenesis
indicating that expression of ER2 can cause a cancer to be osteolytic.
Furthermore, we found that only ER1 and not ER2 inhibits proliferation
and expression of the proliferation markers ki67, cyclin E, c-Myc and
p45Skp2. In addition, nuclear -catenin and its mRNA levels are reduced by
ER1 expression. In conclusion we find that ER1 inhibits proliferation and
factors known to be involved in bone metastasis while ER2 increases
proliferation and up-regulates factors involved in bone metastasis. Thus,
ER2 has oncogenic abilities in strong contrast to the tumor suppressor
effect of ER1.

