Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Resistance to fluid shear stress is a conserved novel biophysical
property of malignant cells


During metastasis, cancer cells access distant tissues via the
circulation but how this fluid microenvironment influences cancer cell
biology is poorly understood. It has been suggested that physical
destruction of carcinoma cells due to exposure to hemodynamic forces
during circulation is a barrier to metastasis. Here we report that
transformed cells are remarkably resistant to fluid shear stress (FSS) in
a novel microfluidic protocol. When subjected to a series of millisecond
pulses of high FSS, transformed cells exhibit a biphasic decrease in
viability. Significantly, human red and white blood cells survived the
forces in this protocol. In stark contrast, non-transformed epithelial
cells are markedly more susceptible to death under FSS. Accordingly, we
show that FSS resistance is a property conferred by oncogenes. We reveal
FSS resistance to be a transient and adaptive response triggered by
plasma membrane damage and mediated by both extracellular calcium influx
and dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. This property of
malignant cancer cells may facilitate hematogenous metastasis and
indicates, contrary to expectations, that cancer cells are quite
resistant to FSS. Thus, destruction of circulating cancer cells by
hemodynamic shear is not likely to limit metastasis. Our data suggest
that FSS resistance is a biophysical biomarker which may be used to
rapidly discriminate between malignant and benign cells and, by virtue of
representing phenotypic integration of oncogenic transformation, may be
more tractable than conventional molecular biomarkers.

