Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Association of endometrial cancer risk factors and DNA methylation
in benign endometrial tissue


Background: Increased risk for endometrial cancer is related to factors
such as use of unopposed estrogen and obesity, and decreased risk is
associated with oral contraceptive use and smoking. However, little is
known about the molecular mechanisms by which these factors influence
cancer risk. DNA methylation of promoter regions in tumor suppressor
genes has been linked to endometrial cancer, suggesting DNA methylation
may mediate the effects of risk factors on normal endometrium, leading to
increased risk for cancer. Accordingly, we explored relationships between
risk factors for endometrial cancer and DNA methylation patterns assessed
in normal endometrial tissue. Materials and Methods: Formalin fixed
paraffin embedded endometrial tissues from 63 women aged 28-53 (median=
43) who underwent a hysterectomy for benign indications were studied. DNA
isolated from 1.0-mm cores was bisulfite treated and methylation profiles
were generated using Illumina's GoldenGate array which includes 1505 CpG
sites representing over 800 genes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering
analysis was used to identify groups of patients with similar methylation
patterns and class comparison analysis was employed to identify
differentially methylated genes based on predefined categories,
representing endometrial cancer risk factors. Results: Global changes in
DNA methylation, as measured by total or average methylation levels or
clustering analysis were not associated with age. However, methylation
levels of MT1A (p=0.0002) and CDH13 (p=0.0009) were increased and
methylation levels of PKD2 (p=0.0009) were decreased among older women.
Increased methylation of HS3ST2 (p=0.00006), MLF1 (p=0.0001), PLAUR
(p=0.0004), MLH3 (p=0.0007), ISL1 (p=0.0007), and RASSF1 (p=0.0009) was
related to women with a lifetime menstrual span of more than 30 years
compared to those who reported having menstruated for less than 15 years.
One gene (MMP3) was more methylated in women who had an older age at
menarche (14+ years old) compared to those who had a younger age at
menarche (Background: Increased risk for endometrial cancer is related to
factors such as use of unopposed estrogen and obesity, and decreased risk
is associated with oral contraceptive use and smoking. However, little is
known about the molecular mechanisms by which these factors influence
cancer risk. DNA methylation of promoter regions in tumor suppressor
genes has been linked to endometrial cancer, suggesting DNA methylation
may mediate the effects of risk factors on normal endometrium, leading to
increased risk for cancer. Accordingly, we explored relationships between
risk factors for endometrial cancer and DNA methylation patterns assessed
in normal endometrial tissue. Materials and Methods: Formalin fixed
paraffin embedded endometrial tissues from 63 women aged 28-53 (median=
43) who underwent a hysterectomy for benign indications were studied. DNA
isolated from 1.0-mm cores was bisulfite treated and methylation profiles
were generated using Illumina's GoldenGate array which includes 1505 CpG
sites representing over 800 genes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering
analysis was used to identify groups of patients with similar methylation
patterns and class comparison analysis was employed to identify
differentially methylated genes based on predefined categories,
representing endometrial cancer risk factors. Results: Global changes in
DNA methylation, as measured by total or average methylation levels or
clustering analysis were not associated with age. However, methylation
levels of MT1A (p=0.0002) and CDH13 (p=0.0009) were increased and
methylation levels of PKD2 (p=0.0009) were decreased among older women.
Increased methylation of HS3ST2 (p=0.00006), MLF1 (p=0.0001), PLAUR
(p=0.0004), MLH3 (p=0.0007), ISL1 (p=0.0007), and RASSF1 (p=0.0009) was
related to women with a lifetime menstrual span of more than 30 years
compared to those who reported having menstruated for less than 15 years.
One gene (MMP3) was more methylated in women who had an older age at
menarche (14+ years old) compared to those who had a younger age at
menarche (<12 years old, p=0.0008). Furthermore, unsupervised
hierarchical clustering suggested that age at menarche (p=0.05)
distinguished three groups of women who had distinct methylation
patterns. Conclusions: Our results suggest that DNA methylation patterns
at specific loci from normal tissue are related to attained age, age at
menarche and the lifetime menstrual span of women. In conjunction with
methylation profiling of endometrial cancer, these data may demonstrate
the importance of DNA methylation as a mechanism in the pathogenesis of
endometrial cancer and lead to potential biomarkers for early detection.

