Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Passive smoking facilitate the risk of CIN1 in high risk
HPV-positive women: Korean HPV Cohort Study


Cervical cancer is the second most common malignancy and the second most
common cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Recently, the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) of the World Health
Organization in France completed reviewing all published studies related
to cigarette smoke and cancer. Among several risk factors, tobacco
smoking has been less explored despite it being a well-established risk
factor for cervical precancer and cancer. The epidemiologic and
biological studies suggest the association of passive smoking on the risk
of cervical cancer; however, the evidence has been suggestive rather than
sufficient to implicate the role of passive smoking in the etiology of
cervical cancer among lifetime nonsmoking women. We investigated the
associations between passive smoking and risk of cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN), and cervical cancer in high risk HPV-positive women in
the Korean HPV cohort study (KHPV). The KHPV recruited 1,306 women, aged
18-65, including HPV-positive women with normal cytology (n=577), CIN1
(n=419), CIN2/3 (n=165), and cervical cancer (n=145) from March 2006 to
December 2009. Detailed information on passive smoking and other
lifestyle factors were collected by questionnaires. Multinomial logistic
analysis was performed to estimate multivariate-adjusted odds ratios. Ex-
and current smoker had an increased risk of CIN1 (OR = 1.81; 95% CI: 1.26
2.60) as compared to nonsmokers. The risk of CIN1 increased with
increasing exposure time of passive smoking regardless of smoking after
adjusting for potential confounder (OR = 2.09; 95% CI: 1.33 3.28, p for
trend = 0.0023). In non-smoker, the subject with passive smoking had an
increased of CIN1 (OR = 1.48; 94% CI: 1.04-2.10, p for trend = 0.0276)
after adjusting for potential confounder. In smoker, the effects of
passive smoking were not statistically significant. Both of exposure time
separated by two hours per day (p for trend = 0.0003), and 1 hour and 2
hours per day (p for trend = 0.0006) of passive smoking demonstrated
significant associations with development of CIN1. This is the first
study to demonstrate that passive smoking is an independent and combined
risk factor of CIN1. HPV viral load and alcohol synergize to increase the
risk of CIN1 among high-risk HPV-positive women.

