Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: EMP2 regulates the tumor microenvironment and is a novel
therapeutic target for triple negative breast cancer


Breast cancer remains the most common malignancy in women, with the
aggressive triple negative subtype accounting for nearly half of all
breast cancer deaths. In this abstract, we describe a novel tetraspan
protein, epithelial membrane protein-2 (EMP2) that is highly expressed in
the majority of breast cancer tumors examined compared to healthy mammary
epithelium. In particular, high levels of EMP2 were observed in over 70%
of triple negative breast cancer cases examined. In tumor cells, EMP2
altered the integrin expression profile as well as promoted endothelial
cell migration and tube formation through upregulation of VEGF. We
produced a fully human intact IgG1 to test their effect on EMP2
expressing breast cancer cell lines. In vitro treatment with anti-EMP2
IgG1 decreased Src and FAK activation and resulted in cell death.
Moreover, cultured supernatant from treated cells reduced endothelial
cell migration and capillary-like tube formation. To determine the in
vivo efficacy of EMP2 treatment, we first characterized potential
toxicity from systemic administration. Anti-EMP2 IgG1 produced no
observable toxicity (weight, CBC counts, tissue pathology) when
administered at 10mg/kg over 7 weeks. Using similar conditions in
preclinical xenograft and syngeneic mouse models, anti-EMP2 IgG1
decreased tumor growth with induction of necrosis. This effect was
specific as no difference in tumor size was observed in EMP2 negative
(Ramos) cell tumors. As in vitro and in vivo cytotoxicity was observed in
both triple negative cell lines as well as cells expressing estrogen and
progesterone receptors and/or Her-2/neu, these results present compelling
evidence that EMP2 is a novel therapeutic target in triple negative
breast cancers as well as other variants.

