Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Optimizing the flow cytometric analysis of cell signaling in
heterogeneous samples


Unlike conventional biochemical methods for cell signaling analysis,
analyzing protein levels by flow cytometry allows measurements to be made
at the single-cell level. Multiparameter flow cytometry provides a
powerful tool for the analysis of protein expression and phosphorylation
status within complex populations, such as those found in lymphoid
tissues or blood. However, different intracellular and cell surface
proteins often require different conditions for optimal detection,
creating challenges for analyzing multiple protein types in a single
sample. To facilitate the design of multiparameter staining panels for
analysis of intracellular and cell surface proteins, we tested over 250
fluorescently conjugated antibodies in cells fixed and permeabilized
under various conditions. Multiple fluorescent conjugates of each
antibody were tested in human PBMCs, human whole blood, mouse spleen,
and/or mouse bone marrow following fixation with BD Phosflow Lyse/Fix or
BD Cytofix Fixation Buffer and permeabilization with one of the four BD
Phosflow Perm buffers. These studies demonstrated that certain
intracellular epitopes required harsh permeabilization conditions for
optimal detection, whereas others were detectable under milder
conditions. Surface marker stains often required optimization,
particularly under harsh permeabilization conditions. Factors such as
antibody clone, fluorophore, and concentration had a considerable impact
on staining resolution, and alternative staining protocols were required
for optimal staining of some surface markers. To facilitate the
optimization of fixation, permeabilization, and staining conditions for
multiparameter flow cytometry, experimental data and protocols from this
study are available through an interactive database freely accessible at
www.cytobank.org/facselect.

