Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Acetaminophen enhances the chemotherapeutic effect of cisplatin
and paclitaxel on human ovarian carcinoma cells in vitro


Chemoresistance is commonly found in treating cancer patients.
Acetaminophen enhances the cytotoxicity of cisplatin in human liver
cancer cells by depleting glutathione and increasing production of toxic
metabolites in vitro. The objective of this study was to investigate
potential molecular mechanisms for chemoenhancement in non-hepatic cells.
Human ovarian carcinoma SKOV3 cells were treated with cisplatin or
paclitaxel with or without acetaminophen in vitro. Cellular mitochondrial
membrane potential and reactive oxygen species concentration was measured
by using JC-1 and DHR123 stain, respectively. Cellular platinum level was
analyzed using ICP-MS. Apoptosis and signaling pathways were examined by
immunoblotting and immunohistochemical analyses. A 2 h incubation with
acetaminophen (10 mM) decreased cellular glutathione levels and increased
mitochondrial membrane potential without affecting reactive oxygen
species. Overnight acetaminophen treatment increased reactive oxygen
species and enhanced both cisplatin- and paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. In
contrast, the combination of acetaminophen with cisplatin but not
paclitaxel blocked nuclear translocation of nrf2, a transcription factor
that has been implicated in regulation of the antioxidant response.
Pretreatment with acetaminophen for 2 h did not affect cellular platinum
uptake when compared to cisplatin alone. Regardless of different
oxidative stress pathways involved between cisplatin and paclitaxel, the
addition of acetaminophen enhanced the cytotoxic effects of both
chemotherapeutic drugs in human ovarian carcinoma cells. Our results
suggest that acetaminophen could be used as a chemoenhancing adjuvant for
conventional chemotherapy drugs in treating ovarian and other
malignancies.

