Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Identification of biomarker genes associated with endocrine
therapy responsiveness in patients with estrogen receptor positive IBC
and nIBC


Introduction: Endocrine therapy is a cornerstone in the treatment of
patients with Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive (+) breast cancer.
Nevertheless, resistance to endocrine treatment, either de novo or
acquired, irreversably develops. In this study, we build upon the
endocrine therapy resistant phenotype of patients with ER+ Inflammatory
Breast Cancer (IBC) to identify and validate predictive biomarkers of
endocrine therapy responsiveness. Materials and methods: Expression
profiles of 21 ER+ IBC and 42 non-stage matched ER+ nIBC samples were
compared using Prediction Analysis of Microarrays. The resulting gene
signature was applied onto expression datasets from ER+ nIBC patients
with documented intervals of relapse-free survival (RFS) for adjuvant
endocrine treatment (GSE17705; N=298) or of progression-free survival
(PFS) for first-line endocrine treatment (Jansen dataset (JCO, 2005),
N=101). The gene signature classified samples as IBC-like or nIBC-like
and Kaplan Meier and Cox regression analyses were performed. Robust
biomarkers for endocrine resistance were selected using permutation
analysis and validated using qRT-PCR on a series of samples from 225 ER+
nIBC patients with metastatic disease receiving first-line tamoxifen.
Results: We identified a gene signature of 139 unique genes able to
discriminate ER+ IBC from ER+ nIBC samples (sensitivity: 100%;
specificity: 87.5%). Application of this signature onto data sets of
patients with ER+ nIBC revealed significant associations with RFS
(HR=1.87, P=0.001) and PFS (HR=2.04, PIntroduction: Endocrine therapy is
a cornerstone in the treatment of patients with Estrogen Receptor (ER)
positive (+) breast cancer. Nevertheless, resistance to endocrine
treatment, either de novo or acquired, irreversably develops. In this
study, we build upon the endocrine therapy resistant phenotype of
patients with ER+ Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) to identify and
validate predictive biomarkers of endocrine therapy responsiveness.
Materials and methods: Expression profiles of 21 ER+ IBC and 42 non-stage
matched ER+ nIBC samples were compared using Prediction Analysis of
Microarrays. The resulting gene signature was applied onto expression
datasets from ER+ nIBC patients with documented intervals of relapse-free
survival (RFS) for adjuvant endocrine treatment (GSE17705; N=298) or of
progression-free survival (PFS) for first-line endocrine treatment
(Jansen dataset (JCO, 2005), N=101). The gene signature classified
samples as IBC-like or nIBC-like and Kaplan Meier and Cox regression
analyses were performed. Robust biomarkers for endocrine resistance were
selected using permutation analysis and validated using qRT-PCR on a
series of samples from 225 ER+ nIBC patients with metastatic disease
receiving first-line tamoxifen. Results: We identified a gene signature
of 139 unique genes able to discriminate ER+ IBC from ER+ nIBC samples
(sensitivity: 100%; specificity: 87.5%). Application of this signature
onto data sets of patients with ER+ nIBC revealed significant
associations with RFS (HR=1.87, P=0.001) and PFS (HR=2.04, P<0.001) under
endocrine therapy. Permutation analysis selected 6 genes robustly
discriminating ER+ IBC from ER+ nIBC samples: ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A,
ETS1, ITK1 and STC2. Expression analysis with qRT-PCR confirmed the
predictive value of ADAMDEC1 (HR=1.127, P=0.020), ABAT (HR=0.779,
PIntroduction: Endocrine therapy is a cornerstone in the treatment of
patients with Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive (+) breast cancer.
Nevertheless, resistance to endocrine treatment, either de novo or
acquired, irreversably develops. In this study, we build upon the
endocrine therapy resistant phenotype of patients with ER+ Inflammatory
Breast Cancer (IBC) to identify and validate predictive biomarkers of
endocrine therapy responsiveness. Materials and methods: Expression
profiles of 21 ER+ IBC and 42 non-stage matched ER+ nIBC samples were
compared using Prediction Analysis of Microarrays. The resulting gene
signature was applied onto expression datasets from ER+ nIBC patients
with documented intervals of relapse-free survival (RFS) for adjuvant
endocrine treatment (GSE17705; N=298) or of progression-free survival
(PFS) for first-line endocrine treatment (Jansen dataset (JCO, 2005),
N=101). The gene signature classified samples as IBC-like or nIBC-like
and Kaplan Meier and Cox regression analyses were performed. Robust
biomarkers for endocrine resistance were selected using permutation
analysis and validated using qRT-PCR on a series of samples from 225 ER+
nIBC patients with metastatic disease receiving first-line tamoxifen.
Results: We identified a gene signature of 139 unique genes able to
discriminate ER+ IBC from ER+ nIBC samples (sensitivity: 100%;
specificity: 87.5%). Application of this signature onto data sets of
patients with ER+ nIBC revealed significant associations with RFS
(HR=1.87, P=0.001) and PFS (HR=2.04, P<0.001) under endocrine therapy.
Permutation analysis selected 6 genes robustly discriminating ER+ IBC
from ER+ nIBC samples: ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK1 and STC2.
Expression analysis with qRT-PCR confirmed the predictive value of
ADAMDEC1 (HR=1.127, P=0.020), ABAT (HR=0.779, P<0.001) and STC2
(HR=0.866, PIntroduction: Endocrine therapy is a cornerstone in the
treatment of patients with Estrogen Receptor (ER) positive (+) breast
cancer. Nevertheless, resistance to endocrine treatment, either de novo
or acquired, irreversably develops. In this study, we build upon the
endocrine therapy resistant phenotype of patients with ER+ Inflammatory
Breast Cancer (IBC) to identify and validate predictive biomarkers of
endocrine therapy responsiveness. Materials and methods: Expression
profiles of 21 ER+ IBC and 42 non-stage matched ER+ nIBC samples were
compared using Prediction Analysis of Microarrays. The resulting gene
signature was applied onto expression datasets from ER+ nIBC patients
with documented intervals of relapse-free survival (RFS) for adjuvant
endocrine treatment (GSE17705; N=298) or of progression-free survival
(PFS) for first-line endocrine treatment (Jansen dataset (JCO, 2005),
N=101). The gene signature classified samples as IBC-like or nIBC-like
and Kaplan Meier and Cox regression analyses were performed. Robust
biomarkers for endocrine resistance were selected using permutation
analysis and validated using qRT-PCR on a series of samples from 225 ER+
nIBC patients with metastatic disease receiving first-line tamoxifen.
Results: We identified a gene signature of 139 unique genes able to
discriminate ER+ IBC from ER+ nIBC samples (sensitivity: 100%;
specificity: 87.5%). Application of this signature onto data sets of
patients with ER+ nIBC revealed significant associations with RFS
(HR=1.87, P=0.001) and PFS (HR=2.04, P<0.001) under endocrine therapy.
Permutation analysis selected 6 genes robustly discriminating ER+ IBC
from ER+ nIBC samples: ABAT, ADAMDEC1, CLEC7A, ETS1, ITK1 and STC2.
Expression analysis with qRT-PCR confirmed the predictive value of
ADAMDEC1 (HR=1.127, P=0.020), ABAT (HR=0.779, P<0.001) and STC2
(HR=0.866, P<0.001) in 225 patients with ER+ breast cancer treated with
Tamoxifen. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed an intricate network
linking each of the core genes with ER-, NFkB- and TGF-signalling.
Conclusion: In this study we identified and validated a gene signature
predictive of response to endocrine therapy in patients with breast
cancer by comparing ER+ IBC samples to ER+ nIBC samples. Within this gene
signature, ADAMDEC1, ABAT and STC2 were identified as robust markers for
endocrine therapy responsiveness.

