Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: SLX4 mutation in hereditary breast cancer


SLX4 is a DNA repair protein that serves as a docking platform for three
structure-specific endonucleases. Recent studies have reported mutations
in SLX4 in a new subtype of Fanconi Anemia (FA-P). Monoallelic defects in
several Fanconi Anemia genes are known to confer susceptibility to breast
and ovarian cancer. Therefore, we resequenced the entire SLX4 coding
region in 739 (288 Ashkenazi Jewish and 480 Non-Ashkenazi Jewish) breast
cancer patients with 3 or more family members affected by breast cancer
and no known BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations, to determine if SLX4 is involved in
breast cancer susceptibility. We found a novel nonsense (p.W823*)
mutation in one patient. We are sequencing the gene in the breast tumor
from the patient to determine the status of the wild-type allele. In
addition we also found 8 novel, 33 rare (MAF 0.5) missense variants, of
which 12 (5 novel and 10 rare) are predicted as damaging by Polyphen2.
Functional analysis of these missense mutations is being performed to
determine their role in the pathogenicity of the SLX4 gene.
Acknowlegements- This project was funded by The Starr Cancer Consotium
(Agata Smorgorzewska and Kenneth Offit), The Rita Allen Foundation
Scholars Program Grant (Agata Smorgorzewska) and Burroughs Wellcome Fund
Career Award for Medical Scientists (Agata Smorgorzewska). We would like
to thank the Geoffrey Beene Translational Oncology and Diagnostic
Molecular Genetics laboratories for their help with the study.

