Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Antibodies of the IgG and IgE classes against the
melanoma-associated antigen HMW-MAA: Investigating a new therapeutic
approach


Melanoma, the fastest rising cancer in the UK, is a major therapeutic
challenge and effective treatments are urgently needed. The human high
molecular weight melanoma associated antigen (HMW-MAA), a membrane-bound
protein over-expressed in > 90% of melanomas, is thought to contribute to
melanoma growth and metastasis. A number of studies indicate the merit of
blocking these tumor-promoting functions by antibodies. Most antibodies
for cancer therapy in clinical use belong to the IgG class, the most
prevalent class in blood. IgE antibodies, characterised for their role in
allergic responses and protection against parasites, function through
high-affinity Fc receptors. IgE antibodies, naturally reside in tissues
where they exert immunological surveillance, a different spectrum of
effector cells, and offer a novel therapeutic approach by targeting solid
tumors such as melanoma. Previous studies, suggest that IgE antibodies
are more effective than the corresponding IgGs in eliciting anti-tumural
immune responses, with our lead antibody candidate against the tumour
antigen Folate Receptor alpha (FRa) presently in clinical development. We
wished to elucidate whether this concept can be applied to the treatment
of melanoma. To test this, we engineered IgG1, IgG4 and IgE antibodies of
the same specificity against HMW-MAA and examined their functionality in
activating immune effector cells against cancer cells. IgG1 and IgE
antibodies induced significant tumor cell death by two mechanisms:
antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis and antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro, using patient-derived monocytes and
monocytes from healthy volunteers. These results suggest different
antibody classes may harbor complementary functional properties against
cancer cells, by activating different families of Fc receptors on immune
effector cells. Furthermore, we compared the therapeutic efficacy of
these antibodies in tumor-bearing NOD/SCID/IL-2 receptor chain-/- mice
engrafted with human lymphocytes. We demonstrate, that IgE antibodies are
superior compared to IgG1 (pMelanoma, the fastest rising cancer in the
UK, is a major therapeutic challenge and effective treatments are
urgently needed. The human high molecular weight melanoma associated
antigen (HMW-MAA), a membrane-bound protein over-expressed in > 90% of
melanomas, is thought to contribute to melanoma growth and metastasis. A
number of studies indicate the merit of blocking these tumor-promoting
functions by antibodies. Most antibodies for cancer therapy in clinical
use belong to the IgG class, the most prevalent class in blood. IgE
antibodies, characterised for their role in allergic responses and
protection against parasites, function through high-affinity Fc
receptors. IgE antibodies, naturally reside in tissues where they exert
immunological surveillance, a different spectrum of effector cells, and
offer a novel therapeutic approach by targeting solid tumors such as
melanoma. Previous studies, suggest that IgE antibodies are more
effective than the corresponding IgGs in eliciting anti-tumural immune
responses, with our lead antibody candidate against the tumour antigen
Folate Receptor alpha (FRa) presently in clinical development. We wished
to elucidate whether this concept can be applied to the treatment of
melanoma. To test this, we engineered IgG1, IgG4 and IgE antibodies of
the same specificity against HMW-MAA and examined their functionality in
activating immune effector cells against cancer cells. IgG1 and IgE
antibodies induced significant tumor cell death by two mechanisms:
antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis and antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro, using patient-derived monocytes and
monocytes from healthy volunteers. These results suggest different
antibody classes may harbor complementary functional properties against
cancer cells, by activating different families of Fc receptors on immune
effector cells. Furthermore, we compared the therapeutic efficacy of
these antibodies in tumor-bearing NOD/SCID/IL-2 receptor chain-/- mice
engrafted with human lymphocytes. We demonstrate, that IgE antibodies are
superior compared to IgG1 (p<0.05) and non-specific antibody controls
(pMelanoma, the fastest rising cancer in the UK, is a major therapeutic
challenge and effective treatments are urgently needed. The human high
molecular weight melanoma associated antigen (HMW-MAA), a membrane-bound
protein over-expressed in > 90% of melanomas, is thought to contribute to
melanoma growth and metastasis. A number of studies indicate the merit of
blocking these tumor-promoting functions by antibodies. Most antibodies
for cancer therapy in clinical use belong to the IgG class, the most
prevalent class in blood. IgE antibodies, characterised for their role in
allergic responses and protection against parasites, function through
high-affinity Fc receptors. IgE antibodies, naturally reside in tissues
where they exert immunological surveillance, a different spectrum of
effector cells, and offer a novel therapeutic approach by targeting solid
tumors such as melanoma. Previous studies, suggest that IgE antibodies
are more effective than the corresponding IgGs in eliciting anti-tumural
immune responses, with our lead antibody candidate against the tumour
antigen Folate Receptor alpha (FRa) presently in clinical development. We
wished to elucidate whether this concept can be applied to the treatment
of melanoma. To test this, we engineered IgG1, IgG4 and IgE antibodies of
the same specificity against HMW-MAA and examined their functionality in
activating immune effector cells against cancer cells. IgG1 and IgE
antibodies induced significant tumor cell death by two mechanisms:
antibody-dependent cell-mediated phagocytosis and antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro, using patient-derived monocytes and
monocytes from healthy volunteers. These results suggest different
antibody classes may harbor complementary functional properties against
cancer cells, by activating different families of Fc receptors on immune
effector cells. Furthermore, we compared the therapeutic efficacy of
these antibodies in tumor-bearing NOD/SCID/IL-2 receptor chain-/- mice
engrafted with human lymphocytes. We demonstrate, that IgE antibodies are
superior compared to IgG1 (p<0.05) and non-specific antibody controls
(p<0.001). Moreover, immunohistological and transcriptomic analyses
revealed an increased lymphocyte infiltrate within the treatment groups.
The data indicate, infiltrating immune cells interactions with the tumor
microenviroment to reduce tumor growth. We are currently undertaking
additional functional validation to identify the in vivo signaling
mechanisms involved.

