Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Natural product ginger promotes hematopoietic recovery


Introduction Pathological anemia is a hematologic disorder with a
decrease in the number of circulating erythrocytes, commonly associated
with cancer chemotherapy and renal disease. The only approved agents
available to treat anemia are erythropoietin (EPO) and its biologic
derivatives. Unfortunately, EPO therapy elicits unwanted side-effects,
including life-threatening cardiovascular complications. In addition, EPO
therapy is expensive and must be delivered by injection, warranting the
development of a more cost effective and non-peptide alternative for the
treatment of anemia. Erythropoiesis, the process by which red blood cells
differentiate, takes place in mesodermal cells during primitive
hematopoiesis and in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region (hemogenic
endothelium) during definitive hematopoiesis; these processes are
conserved in humans, mice and zebrafish. Methods and Results Here, we
used gata1:dsRed transgenic zebrafish embryos to investigate the
hematopoietic effect of a natural product, ginger, and we identified its
bioactive component, 10-gingerol (10-G). Using whole-mount in situ
hybridization, we confirmed that ginger or 10-G promote gata1 expression
in erythrocytes as well as the expression of the hematopoietic stem cell
markers cmyb and scl. Using an acute hemolytic zebrafish model and video
microscopy to quantitate the number of circulating erythrocytes in the
dorsal aorta, we demonstrated that ginger and 10-G can promote the
hematopoietic recovery (Student's t-test, N=25 embryos per group;
pIntroduction Pathological anemia is a hematologic disorder with a
decrease in the number of circulating erythrocytes, commonly associated
with cancer chemotherapy and renal disease. The only approved agents
available to treat anemia are erythropoietin (EPO) and its biologic
derivatives. Unfortunately, EPO therapy elicits unwanted side-effects,
including life-threatening cardiovascular complications. In addition, EPO
therapy is expensive and must be delivered by injection, warranting the
development of a more cost effective and non-peptide alternative for the
treatment of anemia. Erythropoiesis, the process by which red blood cells
differentiate, takes place in mesodermal cells during primitive
hematopoiesis and in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region (hemogenic
endothelium) during definitive hematopoiesis; these processes are
conserved in humans, mice and zebrafish. Methods and Results Here, we
used gata1:dsRed transgenic zebrafish embryos to investigate the
hematopoietic effect of a natural product, ginger, and we identified its
bioactive component, 10-gingerol (10-G). Using whole-mount in situ
hybridization, we confirmed that ginger or 10-G promote gata1 expression
in erythrocytes as well as the expression of the hematopoietic stem cell
markers cmyb and scl. Using an acute hemolytic zebrafish model and video
microscopy to quantitate the number of circulating erythrocytes in the
dorsal aorta, we demonstrated that ginger and 10-G can promote the
hematopoietic recovery (Student's t-test, N=25 embryos per group;
p<9.4x106). In addition, ginger treatment can also promote the
differentiation of erythrocytes from a mouse erythroblast cell line.
Mechanistically, using whole-mount in situ hybridization we demonstrated
that ginger and 10-G induced bmp7a and bmp2b expression, as well as the
downstream bmp effectors, gata2 and eve1, in zebrafish embryos. To
provide further evidence that the hematopoietic effect of ginger is
mediated via the Bmp/Smad signaling pathway, we demonstrated that a bmp
antagonist, dorsomorphin, can abolish the effect of ginger or 10-G in
hematopoietic recovery in the zebrafish anemia model. Future study will
extend the hematopoietic effect of ginger in CD-1 mice. Acute hemolytic
anemia will be produced by treating mice with phenylhydrazine for 1 or 2
days. Hematocrit, hemoglobin, and erythocytes levels will be determined.
The results of the initial studies of CD-1 mice with ginger will be
presented. Conclusions Our study using the zebrafish model provides a
foundation to evaluate ginger and its bioactive components in
hematopoiesis and demonstrated that the molecular mechanism is mediated
through bmp signaling pathway. This finding provides insight for future
study of the effect of ginger and its bioactive components in
hematopoiesis in mammalian models which will lead to development of novel
erythropoiesis promoting agents to treat anemia commonly associated with
cancer chemotherapy.

