Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Breast cancer risk factor associations with breast tissue
morphometry: results from the Komen for the Cure Tissue Bank


Little is known about the effects of many recognized breast cancer risk
factors on the normal breast. We hypothesize that risk factors affect the
number and morphometry of terminal ductal lobular units (TDLUs), the
microanatomical structure from which most breast cancers arise. To assess
this hypothesis, we evaluated relationships between breast cancer risk
factors and TDLU number, TDLU diameter, and acini per TDLU in breast
tissue donated by healthy volunteers. Subjects included 786 healthy women
ages 18-84 years without a personal history of any cancer, who provided a
risk factor questionnaire and donated a 10-guage needle core from the
upper outer breast quadrant. A pathologist, masked to subject data,
assessed TDLU number per section, TDLU diameter and acini per TDLU using
digitized images of hematoxylin and eosin stained sections of tissue.
Seventy-two randomly selected images were examined by two additional
pathologists. We generated ordered categorical variables for the number
of TDLUs per section (0-1, 2-8, 9+), median TDLU diameter (53-262,
263-377, 378-1375 microns) and median number of acini per TDLU (2-10,
11-20, 21+). We computed Spearman correlations between measures, and
intraobserver and interobserver agreement. Associations between breast
cancer risk factors and TDLU measures were assessed by estimating odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using ordinal logistic
regression models, adjusted for age. TDLU diameter and acini count were
highly correlated (rho =0.71); TDLU number per section was less strongly
related to the diameter (rho= 0.18) and acini measures (rho=0.20). Inter
and intraobserver agreement for TDLU measures were highly correlated (rho
range 0.68-0.98). All TDLU measurements were significantly lower among
women age 50 years and older compared with younger women. Compared with
Caucasians, African American women had more TDLUs per section
(ORadj=2.03, 95% CI= 1.06-3.89). Greater numbers of TDLUs were also
related to having a family history of two or more relatives with breast
cancer compared with none (ORadj=2.01, 95% CI=0.91-4.46); and for parous
compared with nulliparous women (ORadj=1.61, 95% CI=1.16-2.25). In
contrast, parity was associated with reduced median number of acini per
TDLU (ORadj=0.60, 95% CI = 0.40-0.90) and median diameter (ORadj=0.64,
95% CI = 0.42-0.96) compared with nulliparity. Our data suggest that
TDLUs are more frequent among women with a positive family history of
breast cancer or African Americans. Parity, an established protective
factor for breast cancer risk, was related to increased numbers of TDLUs,
but fewer acini per TDLU, suggesting that TDLUs may increase with
pregnancy and then involute. Our data, along with published results
linking TDLU involution with a reduction in breast cancer risk, suggest
TDLU morphometry may reflect early biologic changes marking breast cancer
susceptibility.

