Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Snapshot of MAP kinase and related signal transduction pathways
from biopsied cells using a novel non-optical assay technology - a proof
of concept study


Aberrant activity of the MAP and PI3 kinases is implicated in many forms
of cancer. The ability to gather quantifiable information on the
activation-state of these kinases from limited in-vitro and in-vivo tumor
samples would accelerate drug development and ultimately, the treatment
of cancer. Here non-optical, AMMP (acoustic membrane microparticle)
technology is used to quantitate the activity state of multiple kinases
including EGFR, c-RAF, MEK, ERK, AKT, p38 and JNK in a single assay
plate. Lysates from multiple unstimulated tumor cell lines were compared
with those from the same cell lines specifically stimulated with ligands
to several well-known surface receptors for expressed changes in their
phosphorylation states. The data show that the AMMP assay technology can
be used to monitor the MAP Kinase pathway activation from EGFR
stimulation through ERK phosphorylation following EGF stimulation.
Additionally, the activation states of PI3 kinase, p38 and JNK were
determined from the same lysate samples. Subsequently, assays were
developed to monitor kinase dimerization (e.g., MEK-ERK) by rearranging
the pairing of antibodies from the kinase activity assays described
above. Using fewer than 2000 cells per assessment, multiple kinases were
measured, in their native states, in a single assay using AMMP technology.

