Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: The oncometabolite (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate modulates stress-induced
caspase activity in glioma cells


Point mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1/2) are present
in the majority of WHO grade II and III gliomas, as well as secondary
grade IV glioblastomas. These are gain-of-function mutations resulting in
the neoenzymatic conversion of alpha-ketoglutarate into
R-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), which is present in high concentrations
(10-30 mM) in mutated gliomas. The mutation appears to be a favorable
prognostic marker, suggesting better response to stressors like adjuvant
radiation and chemotherapy; however, its effects on cell signaling and
glioma cell death are not fully understood. In this study we investigated
the impact of 2HG in glioma cell survival pathways. A single pulse of 2HG
(30mM) increased phosphorylated Erk (p-Erk 1/2), but not pAkt, in the
PTEN-intact glioma cell lines LN18 and LN229. Both p-Erk 1/2 and pAkt
were unchanged in the PTEN-deficient cell lines U87 and U138. A single
2HG pulse, followed by prolonged withholding of medium changes, also
enhanced caspase 3/7 activity in LN18 cells and LN229 cells, whereas it
actually suppressed caspase 3/7 activity in U87 and U138 cells.
Pretreatment with the MEK inhibitor UO126 prior to the 2HG pulse
suppressed caspase 3/7 activity in LN18 cells, but not in LN229 cells. In
U87 cells, the 2HG-induced suppression of caspase 3/7 activity was
reversed by UO126, while no change was observed in U138 cells. These data
indicate that 2HG can modulate stress-induced cell death in a
MAPK/ERK-dependent manner, but that such modulation may vary greatly
depending on the occurrence of other genetic aberrations in gliomas.
Ongoing studies are pursuing potential mechanisms via which 2HG exerts
such functionally divergent effects, aiming to develop better adjuvant
therapeutic approaches for IDH-mutant gliomas.

