Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: CHEK2 contribution to hereditary breast cancer in non-BRCA
famillies


Mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are responsible for only a part of
hereditary breast cancer (HBC). The origins of non BRCA HBC families may
be attributed in part to mutations in genes giving moderate risk, such as
CHEK2. We investigated the contribution of CHEK2mutations to non-BRCA HBC
by direct sequencing of its entire coding sequence. Fifteen mutations
were discovered among 507 non-BRCAHBC cases and four among 513 controls.
The frequency of CHEK2variants was significantly higher among cases (p=
0.0076), and gave an OR for breast cancer of 4.72 for deleterious
mutation carriers. We then used both in silico tools and in vitro kinase
activity to evaluate recombinant mutant proteins. Tumor characteristics
and tumor grade of paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from 8 CHEK2 mutated
patients were evaluated by histology. To further characterize those
tumors, breast cancer immunohistochemical markers such as hormone
receptors, HER2 and P53 were assessed. Because the mechanisms of
tumorigenesis in association with CHEK2 variants are still unclear, we
performed genetic and epigenetic analysis of those tumors. Three relevant
SNPs spanning the CHEK2 gene locus were used to determine loss of
heterozygosity (LOH). Also, the proximal CpG islands of the CHEK2 gene
were investigated for hypermethylation. Our results suggest a
contribution of CHEK2 mutations to non-BRCA HBC, though the usefulness of
moderate penetrance genes for genetic counseling remains controversial.

