Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Dietary flavonoid intake, black tea consumption, and prostate
cancer risk


Background: Flavonoids are natural antioxidants that may have
anticarcinogenic activity. These compounds are found in different foods
of plant origin. A major source of flavonoids is black tea. We
investigated associations between specific dietary flavonoid intakes,
black tea consumption, and risk of prostate cancer and prostate cancer
subgroups based on disease stage. Methods: We conducted a case-cohort
study among 58,279 men in the Netherlands Cohort Study. Cohort members
completed a baseline questionnaire on dietary habits and lifestyle.
Person-years at risk were estimated by a subcohort randomly sampled at
baseline. From 1986 to 2003, 3,451 prostate cancer patients were
identified including 781 patients with non-advanced cancer (Union for
International Cancer Control (UICC) stage I or II) and 1,196 patients
with advanced cancer (UICC stage III or IV). Of these advanced prostate
cancers, 753 were stage IV prostate cancers. Flavonoid contents in foods
and beverages were derived from food composition tables based on data
gathered in the Netherlands. We used Cox proportional hazards regression
to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). All
tests were two-sided. Results: Intakes of the flavonoids catechin,
kaempferol, and myricetin were inversely associated with risk of stage IV
prostate cancer. Intakes of epicatechin and gallates (catechins typical
of tea) and consumption of black tea were associated with a decreased
risk of both advanced and stage IV prostate cancer. None of these intakes
were associated with overall or non-advanced prostate cancer risk. Hazard
ratios of advanced and stage IV prostate cancer for the highest versus
the lowest category of black tea consumption (5 versus 1 cups per day)
were 0.73 (95% CI = 0.58-0.92) and 0.64 (95% CI = 0.49-0.85)
respectively. When adjusted for black tea consumption, associations
between specific flavonoid intakes and advanced and stage IV prostate
cancer risk were non-significant except for epicatechin intake. Hazard
ratios of advanced and stage IV prostate cancer for the highest versus
the lowest quartile of epicatechin intake were 0.79 (95% CI = 0.64-0.99)
and 0.71 (95% CI = 0.54-0.92) respectively. In analyses stratified by
smoking status we observed inverse associations between black tea
consumption (5 versus 1 cups per day) and risk of stage IV prostate
cancer among former smokers (HR = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.43-0.93) and current
smokers (HR = 0.41, 95% CI = 0.21-0.77) but not among never smokers.
Conclusions: This large prospective cohort study showed that epicatechin
intake and black tea consumption were associated with a decreased risk of
advanced and stage IV prostate cancer but not overall or non-advanced
prostate cancer.

