Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Up-regulation of mitochondrial chaperone TRAP1 in cancer
precursors associated with chronic inflammation


Chronic ulcerative colitis (UC) is an inflammatory bowel disease that
predisposes to colorectal cancer. In chronic UC patients, the colon
epithelium undergoes repeated cycles of inflammation and tissue repair,
resulting in oxidative stress and accumulation of reactive oxidative
species (ROS). Excessive ROS can cause oxidative stress, which may
subsequently lead to damage in DNA, proteins and lipids. Using proteomics
analysis of colonic mucosa from UC patients with neoplasia, we identified
TNF receptor-associated protein 1(TRAP1) in the UC cancer precursors.
TRAP1 is a mitochondrial chaperone which protects against oxidative
stress and apoptosis. We further investigated TRAP1 in the progression of
UC-associated colorectal cancer using immunohistochemistry and tissue
microarray. Quantification of protein oxidation in the colonic epithelia
revealed that oxidative stress was present in the colonic mucosa in both
UC patients with dysplasia/cancer (progressors) and UC patients without
dysplasia/cancer (non-progressors). However, TRAP1 was only up-regulated
in UC progressors, but not in the non-progressors. Moreover,
up-regulation of TRAP1 preceded the histological changes: it was present
in both the dysplastic and non-dysplastic tissue of the UC progressors.
We then investigated the cellular proteome changes underlying oxidative
stress, and found that up-regulation of TRAP1 could be induced by
oxidative stress. These results suggest that UC cancer arises in the
setting of oxidative stress. Such oxidative stress subsequently induces
the cytoprotective protein TRAP1. TRAP1 in turn appears to promote cancer
progression by preventing the oxidative-damaged epithelial cells from
undergoing apoptosis.

