Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Gene-specific methylation of leukocyte DNA in relation to
colorectal cancer among male smokers from a nested case-control study in
the ATBC Study


Gene-specific methylation of Leukocyte DNA in relation to colorectal
cancer among male smokers from a nested case-control study in the ATBC
Study Recent data suggest a link between leukocyte DNA methylation and
cancer risk. However, data on DNA methylation from a prospective study,
which may provide evidence for causality, are sparse. We explored the
association between methylation in leukocyte DNA and colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk in male smokers using the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene
(ATBC) Cancer Prevention Study. 221 incident CRC cases, and 219 controls,
frequency-matched on age and smoking intensity were included. DNA
methylation of 1505 CpG sites selected from 807 genes were evaluated
using Illumina GoldenGate Methylation Cancer Panel I in pre-diagnostic
blood leukocytes of study subjects. Tertiles of methylation level
classified according to the distribution in controls for each CpG site
were used to analyze the association between methylation level and CRC
risk with logistic regression. The time between blood draw to cancer
diagnosis (classifying cases according to latency) was incorporated in
further analyses using proportional odds regression. We found that
methylation changes of 30 CpG sites were associated with CRC risk at
PGene-specific methylation of Leukocyte DNA in relation to colorectal
cancer among male smokers from a nested case-control study in the ATBC
Study Recent data suggest a link between leukocyte DNA methylation and
cancer risk. However, data on DNA methylation from a prospective study,
which may provide evidence for causality, are sparse. We explored the
association between methylation in leukocyte DNA and colorectal cancer
(CRC) risk in male smokers using the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene
(ATBC) Cancer Prevention Study. 221 incident CRC cases, and 219 controls,
frequency-matched on age and smoking intensity were included. DNA
methylation of 1505 CpG sites selected from 807 genes were evaluated
using Illumina GoldenGate Methylation Cancer Panel I in pre-diagnostic
blood leukocytes of study subjects. Tertiles of methylation level
classified according to the distribution in controls for each CpG site
were used to analyze the association between methylation level and CRC
risk with logistic regression. The time between blood draw to cancer
diagnosis (classifying cases according to latency) was incorporated in
further analyses using proportional odds regression. We found that
methylation changes of 30 CpG sites were associated with CRC risk at
P<0.01 level. Taking the latency information into account strengthened
some associations, suggesting that the methylation levels of
corresponding sites might change over time with tumor progression. This
is the first prospective study for CRC risk focusing on gene-specific DNA
methylation to date. The results suggest that the methylation level of
some genes were associated with cancer susceptibility and some were
related to tumor development over time. Further studies are warranted to
confirm and refine our results.

