Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Inflammatory response as a novel prognostic parameter in patients
with metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated with pazopanib


Over sixty thousand patients were diagnosed with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC) in 2010, yet no tumor markers have been identified.
Standard prognostic systems only measure characteristics at baseline and
do not assess the potential benefit of therapeutic intervention. The
introduction of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors has significantly
changed the management of mRCC. Pazopanib, a selective, multi-targeted,
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was approved for mRCC in 2009. The
modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS), a prognostic system based on
inflammatory biomarkers (serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and albumin), has
been validated in the pre-treatment setting for mRCC treated with surgery
or cytokines. In this study, we present data demonstrating the
correlation of serial mGPS measurements with objective responses to
targeted therapy with pazopanib in patients with mRCC. We conducted a
retrospective chart review of patients seen at the Winship Cancer
Institute for whom serial CRP and albumin measurements as well as imaging
studies were available while taking pazopanib. In these patients we
assessed the correlation of pre- and post-treatment mGPS scores to
objective responses by imaging. Twenty patients met inclusion criteria.
Of these patients, 12 (60%) had progressive disease, and 8 (40%) had
clinical benefit response (defined as stable disease, partial response,
or complete response) by imaging. An elevated pre-treatment mGPS score
had 75% sensitivity (95% confidence interval 35.5%-95.5%; POver sixty
thousand patients were diagnosed with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC) in 2010, yet no tumor markers have been identified. Standard
prognostic systems only measure characteristics at baseline and do not
assess the potential benefit of therapeutic intervention. The
introduction of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors has significantly
changed the management of mRCC. Pazopanib, a selective, multi-targeted,
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was approved for mRCC in 2009. The
modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS), a prognostic system based on
inflammatory biomarkers (serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and albumin), has
been validated in the pre-treatment setting for mRCC treated with surgery
or cytokines. In this study, we present data demonstrating the
correlation of serial mGPS measurements with objective responses to
targeted therapy with pazopanib in patients with mRCC. We conducted a
retrospective chart review of patients seen at the Winship Cancer
Institute for whom serial CRP and albumin measurements as well as imaging
studies were available while taking pazopanib. In these patients we
assessed the correlation of pre- and post-treatment mGPS scores to
objective responses by imaging. Twenty patients met inclusion criteria.
Of these patients, 12 (60%) had progressive disease, and 8 (40%) had
clinical benefit response (defined as stable disease, partial response,
or complete response) by imaging. An elevated pre-treatment mGPS score
had 75% sensitivity (95% confidence interval 35.5%-95.5%; P<0.01) and
83.3% specificity (95% confidence interval 50.9%-97.1%; POver sixty
thousand patients were diagnosed with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
(mRCC) in 2010, yet no tumor markers have been identified. Standard
prognostic systems only measure characteristics at baseline and do not
assess the potential benefit of therapeutic intervention. The
introduction of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors has significantly
changed the management of mRCC. Pazopanib, a selective, multi-targeted,
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was approved for mRCC in 2009. The
modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS), a prognostic system based on
inflammatory biomarkers (serum C-reactive protein (CRP) and albumin), has
been validated in the pre-treatment setting for mRCC treated with surgery
or cytokines. In this study, we present data demonstrating the
correlation of serial mGPS measurements with objective responses to
targeted therapy with pazopanib in patients with mRCC. We conducted a
retrospective chart review of patients seen at the Winship Cancer
Institute for whom serial CRP and albumin measurements as well as imaging
studies were available while taking pazopanib. In these patients we
assessed the correlation of pre- and post-treatment mGPS scores to
objective responses by imaging. Twenty patients met inclusion criteria.
Of these patients, 12 (60%) had progressive disease, and 8 (40%) had
clinical benefit response (defined as stable disease, partial response,
or complete response) by imaging. An elevated pre-treatment mGPS score
had 75% sensitivity (95% confidence interval 35.5%-95.5%; P<0.01) and
83.3% specificity (95% confidence interval 50.9%-97.1%; P<0.01) for
disease progression at the end of treatment. On the other hand, an
elevated post-treatment mGPS score had 100% sensitivity (95% confidence
interval 59.8%-100%; POver sixty thousand patients were diagnosed with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) in 2010, yet no tumor markers have
been identified. Standard prognostic systems only measure characteristics
at baseline and do not assess the potential benefit of therapeutic
intervention. The introduction of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors has
significantly changed the management of mRCC. Pazopanib, a selective,
multi-targeted, receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was approved for mRCC
in 2009. The modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS), a prognostic
system based on inflammatory biomarkers (serum C-reactive protein (CRP)
and albumin), has been validated in the pre-treatment setting for mRCC
treated with surgery or cytokines. In this study, we present data
demonstrating the correlation of serial mGPS measurements with objective
responses to targeted therapy with pazopanib in patients with mRCC. We
conducted a retrospective chart review of patients seen at the Winship
Cancer Institute for whom serial CRP and albumin measurements as well as
imaging studies were available while taking pazopanib. In these patients
we assessed the correlation of pre- and post-treatment mGPS scores to
objective responses by imaging. Twenty patients met inclusion criteria.
Of these patients, 12 (60%) had progressive disease, and 8 (40%) had
clinical benefit response (defined as stable disease, partial response,
or complete response) by imaging. An elevated pre-treatment mGPS score
had 75% sensitivity (95% confidence interval 35.5%-95.5%; P<0.01) and
83.3% specificity (95% confidence interval 50.9%-97.1%; P<0.01) for
disease progression at the end of treatment. On the other hand, an
elevated post-treatment mGPS score had 100% sensitivity (95% confidence
interval 59.8%-100%; P<0.01) and 100% specificity (95% confidence
interval 69.9%-100%; POver sixty thousand patients were diagnosed with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) in 2010, yet no tumor markers have
been identified. Standard prognostic systems only measure characteristics
at baseline and do not assess the potential benefit of therapeutic
intervention. The introduction of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors has
significantly changed the management of mRCC. Pazopanib, a selective,
multi-targeted, receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, was approved for mRCC
in 2009. The modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS), a prognostic
system based on inflammatory biomarkers (serum C-reactive protein (CRP)
and albumin), has been validated in the pre-treatment setting for mRCC
treated with surgery or cytokines. In this study, we present data
demonstrating the correlation of serial mGPS measurements with objective
responses to targeted therapy with pazopanib in patients with mRCC. We
conducted a retrospective chart review of patients seen at the Winship
Cancer Institute for whom serial CRP and albumin measurements as well as
imaging studies were available while taking pazopanib. In these patients
we assessed the correlation of pre- and post-treatment mGPS scores to
objective responses by imaging. Twenty patients met inclusion criteria.
Of these patients, 12 (60%) had progressive disease, and 8 (40%) had
clinical benefit response (defined as stable disease, partial response,
or complete response) by imaging. An elevated pre-treatment mGPS score
had 75% sensitivity (95% confidence interval 35.5%-95.5%; P<0.01) and
83.3% specificity (95% confidence interval 50.9%-97.1%; P<0.01) for
disease progression at the end of treatment. On the other hand, an
elevated post-treatment mGPS score had 100% sensitivity (95% confidence
interval 59.8%-100%; P<0.01) and 100% specificity (95% confidence
interval 69.9%-100%; P<0.01) for disease progression at the end of
treatment. Although these data require prospective validation, they
suggest that serial measurements of serum inflammatory biomarkers may
improve the sensitivity and specificity of mGPS for response to therapy.
If confirmed, inflammatory response rates based on mGPS may become a
valuable and cost effective tool to guide patient care and drug
development for mRCC.

