Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Lumican and Versican predict good outcome in stage II and III
colon cancer


Background and Purpose: Tumor stroma plays an important role in the
progression and metastasis of colon cancer. The glycoproteins versican
and lumican are overexpressed in colon carcinomas and are associated with
the formation of tumor stroma. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the potential prognostic value of versican and lumican
expression in the epithelial and stromal compartment of stage II and III
colon cancer. Methods: Clinicopathological data and tissue samples were
collected from stage II (n=226) and stage III (n=160) colon cancer
patients. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed with cores taken
both from the center and the periphery of the tumor. These were
immunohistochemically stained for lumican and versican. Expression levels
were scored on digitized slides. Statistical evaluation was performed
using SPSS. Results: Versican expression by epithelial cells in the
periphery of the tumor, i.e., near the invasive front, was correlated to
a longer disease free survival (DFS) for the whole cohort (P=0.01), stage
III patients only (P=0.01), stage III patients with microsatellite
instable (MSI) tumors (P=0.04) and stage III patients with microsatellite
stable (MSS) tumors who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy (P=0.006).
Lumican expression in epithelial cells overall in the tumor was
correlated to a longer disease specific survival (DSS) in stage II
patients (P=0.05) and to a longer DFS and DSS in MSS stage II patients
(P=0.02 and P=0.004). Conclusion: In the present series, protein
expression of versican and lumican predicted good clinical outcome for
stage III and stage II colon cancer patients, respectively.

