Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Upregulation of UGT1A4 by fulvestrant: A potential elimination
mechanism of anastrazole in breast cancer treatment


The pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved for use
in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor
positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that the combination
of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide
therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor
alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and
Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored. The
role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p The pure antiestrogen,
fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved for use in the treatment of
postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor positive metastatic
disease. It has been postulated that the combination of an aromatase
inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide therapeutic advantages
over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor alone. The effect of
co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and Phase II metabolism (i.e.
glucuronidation) have not been explored. The role of pharmacogenetics in
clinical benefit and overall survival in patients receiving anastrozole
and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this study, we demonstrated that
fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)
1A, the major enzyme responsible for the direct conjugation and
subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous mRNA expression levels of
UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by fulvestrant treatment in
the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays using liver microsomal
specimens from individual subjects demonstrated 163 fold variability in
anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole glucuronodation was correlated
(r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine glucuronidation, a diagnostic
substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a significant correlation between
anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4 mRNA expression levels in these
HLMs (r = 0.978, p The pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been
approved for use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with
hormone-receptor positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that
the combination of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could
provide therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase
inhibitor alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase
I and Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored.
The role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36GThe
pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved for use in
the treatment of postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor positive
metastatic disease. It has been postulated that the combination of an
aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide therapeutic
advantages over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor alone. The
effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and Phase II
metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored. The role of
pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in patients
receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this study, we
demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 TThe pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been
approved for use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with
hormone-receptor positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that
the combination of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could
provide therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase
inhibitor alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase
I and Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored.
The role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36GThe pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved
for use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor
positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that the combination
of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide
therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor
alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and
Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored. The
role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36G<A and SNP 217 TThe pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has
been approved for use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with
hormone-receptor positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that
the combination of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could
provide therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase
inhibitor alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase
I and Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored.
The role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36G<A and SNP 217 T<G. On the other hand, microsomes from the
subjects with homozygous wild typeUGT1A4 promoter SNPs 219CThe pure
antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved for use in the
treatment of postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor positive
metastatic disease. It has been postulated that the combination of an
aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide therapeutic
advantages over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor alone. The
effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and Phase II
metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored. The role of
pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in patients
receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this study, we
demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36G<A and SNP 217 T<G. On the other hand, microsomes from the
subjects with homozygous wild typeUGT1A4 promoter SNPs 219C<T and SNPs
163GThe pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved for
use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor
positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that the combination
of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide
therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor
alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and
Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored. The
role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36G<A and SNP 217 T<G. On the other hand, microsomes from the
subjects with homozygous wild typeUGT1A4 promoter SNPs 219C<T and SNPs
163G<A exhibited significantly higher activity when compared with
microsomes from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter
SNPs 219CThe pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex) has been approved
for use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients with hormone-receptor
positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated that the combination
of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen could provide
therapeutic advantages over the administration of an aromatase inhibitor
alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs on Phase I and
Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been explored. The
role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall survival in
patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored. In this
study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression of UDP
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for the
direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36G<A and SNP 217 T<G. On the other hand, microsomes from the
subjects with homozygous wild typeUGT1A4 promoter SNPs 219C<T and SNPs
163G<A exhibited significantly higher activity when compared with
microsomes from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter
SNPs 219C<T and SNPs 163GThe pure antiestrogen, fulvestrant (Faslodex)
has been approved for use in the treatment of postmenopausal patients
with hormone-receptor positive metastatic disease. It has been postulated
that the combination of an aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen
could provide therapeutic advantages over the administration of an
aromatase inhibitor alone. The effect of co-administration of these drugs
on Phase I and Phase II metabolism (i.e. glucuronidation) have not been
explored. The role of pharmacogenetics in clinical benefit and overall
survival in patients receiving anastrozole and fulvestrant is unexplored.
In this study, we demonstrated that fulvestrant up-regulates expression
of UDP glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A, the major enzyme responsible for
the direct conjugation and subsequent elimination anastrozole. Endogenous
mRNA expression levels of UGT1A4 in HepG2 cells were induced 4.2-fold by
fulvestrant treatment in the ER-expressing cell line. In vitro assays
using liver microsomal specimens from individual subjects demonstrated
163 fold variability in anastrazole glucuronidation. Anastrazole
glucuronodation was correlated (r = 0.977, p <0.0001) with lamotrigine
glucuronidation, a diagnostic substrate for UGT1A4. We also found a
significant correlation between anastrazole glucuronidation and UGT1A4
mRNA expression levels in these HLMs (r = 0.978, p <0.0001). We also
examined whether UGT1A4 promoter SNPs were associated with the observed
interindividual variability in anastrozole glucuronidation. Microsomes
from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter SNPs 36G<A
and SNPs 217 T<G exhibited a significantly higher activity than the
microsomes from the subjects with homozygous wild type UGT1A4 promoter
SNP 36G<A and SNP 217 T<G. On the other hand, microsomes from the
subjects with homozygous wild typeUGT1A4 promoter SNPs 219C<T and SNPs
163G<A exhibited significantly higher activity when compared with
microsomes from the subjects with mutated heterozygous UGT1A4 promoter
SNPs 219C<T and SNPs 163G<A. These in vitro studies indicate that
fulvestrant administration could influence the disposition of anastrazole
in combination therapy of aromatase inhibitor with a pure antiestrogen by
up regulating the phase II metabolizing enzyme UGT1A4. Our data also
suggest that the UGT1A4 promoter polymorphisms may be associated with
altered rates glucuronidation and detoxification of anastrazole in vivo.
Further studies are needed to assess the complete effects of fulvestrant
administration on the disposition of drugs that are substrates of UGT1A4.

