Meeting: 2012 AACR Annual Meeting
Title: Interstitial protein delivery evaluated in multicellular layers
model


The limited efficacy of protein drugs is related to their poor
distribution in tumor tissue. We examined interstitial delivery of four
model proteins of different molecular size and bioaffinity as formulated
of non-formulated forms in multicellular layers (MCL) of human cancer
cells. Model proteins were tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-including ligand (TRAIL), cetuximab, RNase A, and IgG. MCLs
were cultured in Transwell inserts, exposed to drugs, then cryo-sectioned
for image acquisition using fluorescence microscopy (fluorescent
dye-labeled TRAIL, RNase A, IgG) or Immunohistochemistry (cetuximab).
TRAIL and cetuximab showed partial penetration into MCLs, whereas RNase A
and IgG showed little penetration. At 10-fold higher dose, a significant
increase in penetration was observed for IgG only, while cetuximab showed
an intense accumulation limited to the front layers. PEGylated TRAIL and
a heparin-Pluronic nanogel formulation of RNase A showed significantly
improved penetration that was attributed to increased stability and
extracellular matrix binding, respectively. IgG penetration was
significantly enhanced with PTX pretreatment as a penetration enhancer.
MCL culture was successfully used for the evaluation of protein movement
in the tumor interstitum. Four proteins showed limited interstitial
penetration in MCL cultures. Bioaffinity, rather than molecular size,
seems to have a positive effect on tissue penetration, although strong
binding affinity may lead to sequestration in the front layers.
Nanoformulations, such as PEGylation and heparin-Pluronic (HP) nanogel,
or penetration enhancers are potential strategies to increase
interstitial delivery of anticancer biologics.

